 Mechanisms of Psychiatric Illness
Using Neuroscience to Help Understand Fear and
Anxiety: A Two-System Framework
Joseph E. LeDoux, Ph.D., Daniel S. Pine, M.D.
Tremendous progress has been made in basic neuroscience
in recent decades. One area that has been especially suc-
cessful is research on how the brain detects and responds
to threats. Such studies have demonstrated comparable
patterns of brain-behavior relationships underlying threat
processing across a range of mammalian species, including
humans. This would seem to be an ideal body of information
foradvancingourunderstandingofdisordersinwhich altered
threat processing is a key factor, namely, fear and anxiety
disorders. But research on threat processing has not led to
significant improvements in clinical practice. The authors
propose that in order to take advantage of this progress for
clinical gain, a conceptual reframing is needed. Key to this
conceptual change is recognition of a distinction between
circuits underlying two classes ofresponses elicited by threats:
1) behavioral responses and accompanying physiological
changes in the brain and body and 2) conscious feeling states
reflected in self-reports of fear and anxiety. This distinction
leads to a “two systems” view of fear and anxiety. The authors
argue that failure to recognize and consistently emphasize
this distinction has impeded progress in understanding fear
andanxietydisordersandhinderedattemptstodevelopmore
effective pharmaceutical and psychological treatments. The
two-system view suggests a new way forward.
AmJPsychiatry2016;173:1083–1093;doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2016.16030353
Recent events in psychiatry highlight a growing chasm between
basic science and the clinic (1). Progress in understanding the
brainhasnotbeenmirroredinimprovedclinicaloutcomes.Most
current therapies with some efficacy emerged decades ago. Prom-
isingnewtreatments eitherhavenotturnedoutto be usefulwhen
tested with patients or exhibit potential adverse effects that limit
their applicability to severe, treatment-refractory disorders.
Research on brain mechanisms engaged during confronta-
tionswiththreats—stimuliwiththepotentialtoinflictharmtothe
organism—has shown high degrees of conservation across mam-
mals, likely reflecting evolutionary advantages of an efficiently
functioning threat-processing circuitry. This work provides a
unique opportunity for developing novel treatments for condi-
tions involving alterations in threat processing, especially the so-
called anxiety disorders. Nevertheless, research in this area has
been disappointing as a source of novel treatments (2). We argue
that this state of affairs reflects how fear and anxiety have been
conceived, and we offer a new framework to address the problem.
It has long been assumed that an innate “fear system”
exists in the mammalian brain and that this system, in the
presence of a threat, generates both the conscious feeling of
“fear” and the behavioral and physiological responses typical
of such experiences (Figure 1A). We propose instead a “two
systems” framework, with one set of circuits for generating
conscious feelings and a second set for controlling behavioral
and physiological responses to threats (Figure 1B). The first
systemprimarilyinvolvescorticalareas,andthesecondmostly
involves subcortical regions, such as the amygdala, although
certain cortical areas interact with and regulate processing
in these regions. While the first system generates conscious
feelings, the second largely operates nonconsciously. Confla-
tion of these circuits and their functions has hampered clin-
ical extension of basic research. While the actual circuitry is
considerably more complex than implied by the two-system
label, the framework represents a useful heuristic around
which to restructure translational efforts to achieve a deeper,
more nuanced understanding than currently exists about how
brainmechanismsgiverisetonormalandpathologicalfeelings
of fear and anxiety and the behavioral and physiological symp-
toms that accompany these subjective experiences.
A NOTE ON TERMINOLOGY
The terms “fear” and “anxiety” are used in many ways.
Consider fear. Most often it refers to a subjective state, a
feeling that one experiences when threatened. However, it
also describes behaviors, such as facial expressions, freezing,
flight, and avoidance, as well as physiological changes that
accompany such behaviors. Using the same term for both sub-
jective states and objective responses implies that they are
entwined in a common neural circuit. We and others argue
thatthis assumptionisincorrect—thatthedifferentprocesses
referredtobytheterm“fear”reflectdifferentmechanismsrather
than operations of one “fear center” or “fear circuit” (3–9).
Because precise terminology is essential for scientific
progress, we propose that the use of mental state terms, like
See related features: CME course (p. 1157) and AJP Audio (online)
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1083
This article addresses the Core Competency of Medical Knowledge
REVIEWS AND OVERVIEWS
 fear and anxiety, be limited to their primary, as opposed to
their extended, meanings, that is, to mental states—subjective
feelings of fear and anxiety. We further propose that these
mental state terms be avoided when referring to behavioral
and physiological responses that also may occur when one
feelsfearful oranxious.Accordingly,werefertobraincircuits
that detect and respond to threats as defensive circuits, to
behaviors that occur in response to threats as defensive be-
haviors, and to peripheral changes in physiology that support
defensive behaviors as defensive physiological adjustments.
Confusion also results from interchangeable use of the
terms fear and anxiety. To avoid such confusion, we propose
usingacommondistinctionconsistently—thatthementalstate
term fear be used to describe feelings that occur when the
source of harm, the threat, is either immediate or imminent,
and anxiety be used to describe feelings that occur when the
source of harm is uncertain or is distal in space or time.
THE INNATE FEAR CIRCUIT VIEW
Fear is often said to be an innate function of subcortical brain
areas. This view stems from the idea that humans inherited
from animals certain basic, universally expressed emotions
(10, 11), often described as products of the brain’s so-called
limbic system (12, 13). For example, fear is often said to be a
product of the limbic area called the amygdala, which is
frequentlysaidtobea“fearcenter,”or,inmorecontemporary
terminology, the hub of a “fear circuit” (13–22).
An immediately present threat activates the lateral nucleus
of the amygdala, which by way of connections to the central
nucleus of the amygdala ini-
tiates the expression of de-
fensive behavioral reactions,
such as freezing, and supports
defensive physiological reac-
tions(Figure2A).Andthrough
connections from the lateral
amygdala to the basal amyg-
dala, and from there to the
nucleus accumbens, defensive
actions such as avoidance are
controlled(5,23).Althoughkey
components of this circuitry
are subcortical, the ability of
the circuits to control defense
reactions and actions is mod-
ulatedbycertaincorticalareas.
For example, the extinction
of defensive responses eli-
cited by learned threats is reg-
ulatedbyconnectionsfromthe
ventral medial prefrontal cor-
tex and hippocampus to the
amygdala (24–27).
Findings in humans are
consistent with the animal
data. Thus, people with amygdala damage fail to exhibit
bodily reactions to threats (28, 29). Furthermore, functional
imaging studies show that threats activate the amygdala in
healthy people (28, 30) and induce exaggerated amygdala ac-
tivation in patients with anxiety disorders (31–34). In addition,
thenucleusaccumbenshasbeenimplicatedindefensiveactions
such as avoidance in humans (35, 36). Medial cortical areas
down-regulatetheamygdalainhealthyhumans(25,37),andthis
capacity is weakened in people with anxiety disorders (26, 27).
Such findings are commonly viewed as support for the idea that
the amygdala is a hub in an evolutionary conserved fear circuit
that,inthepresenceofathreat,controlsbothfeelingsoffearand
behavioral and physiological sequelae.
The assumption that in the presence of a threat the same
circuit controls conscious feelings of fear and behavioral
and physiological responses is expressed most forcefully by
Panksepp (13, 16). He notes that “fear is an aversive state of
mind” and that the major driving force for this “subjective
component of fear seems to be … a subcortical FEAR system”
(16). Since both the behavioral and physiological responses
and the subjective feelings of fear elicited by a threat are
viewed as products of the same circuit, it should be possible,
according to Panksepp, to identify the “feeling circuit” in
humans by studying behavioral and physiological responses
in animals or humans. But if, as we have argued, different
circuits underlie the two consequences of threat detection,
studying behavioralorphysiological responses willnotreveal
the circuits responsible for feelings.
Just as findings demonstrating that the amygdala detects
andcontrolsbehavioralandphysiologicalresponsestoimmediate
FIGURE 1. The Traditional “Fear Center” View Versus the “Two-System” View of “Fear”a
Threat
Fear responses
Defensive behavior
Physiological responses
Sensory
system
Threat
Sensory
system
A. The “Fear Center” Model
Defensive
survival
circuit
Fear circuit
Defensive responses
Behavior
Physiological responses
Cognitive
circuit
(working memory)
Fearful feelings
B. The Two-System Model
Fear
Fear
a In the traditional “fear center” model, the subjective experience of “fear” in the presence of a threat is innately
programmed in subcortical circuits that also control defensive behaviors and physiological responses. The two-
system framework views “fear” as a product of cortical circuits that underlie cognitive functions such as working
memory; subcortical circuits control defensive behaviors and physiological responses and only indirectly
contribute to conscious “fear.” The traditional view thus requires different mechanisms of consciousness in the
brain for emotional and nonemotional states, whereas in the two-system framework, both emotional and
nonemotional states of consciousness are treated as products of the same system. In the two-system
framework, what distinguishes an emotional from a nonemotional state of consciousness, and what distin-
guishes different kinds of emotional states of consciousness, are the input processes by the cortical con-
sciousness networks (see Figure 3).
1084
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
USING NEUROSCIENCE TO HELP UNDERSTAND FEAR AND ANXIETY
 threats have supported views
of the amygdala as fear-circuit
hub, other findings, about re-
sponses to uncertain threats,
have led to a view of the cir-
cuitry of anxiety. Thus, in re-
centyears,animalresearchhas
suggested the bed nucleus of
the stria terminalis (BNST) is
engaged when threats are un-
certain (38, 39), resulting in
behavioral inhibition and risk
assessment (40) (Figure 2B).
Imaging studies in healthy hu-
mans (41) and in humans with
anxiety disorders confirm the
contribution of the BNST in
processing uncertainty (42, 43).
The BNST has thus come to be
for anxiety what the amygdala
is for fear—a circuit hub out of
which anxious feelings emerge.
Proponents of subcortical
explanations do not all mean
the same thing when they use
the terms fear and anxiety.
For a number of contempo-
raryneuroscientists,emotions
arenotsubjectiveexperiences
but central physiological states
(“central states” for short) that
intervene between trigger
stimuli and behavioral and physiological responses (14, 17–19,
40, 44, 45). A strong version of the central state view of fear is
expressed by Fanselow and colleagues (45). Theyargue that a
goal of science should be to “replace inaccurate subjective
explanations … with more scientifically grounded explana-
tions.” This approach ignores subjective states to avoid the
scientific problems that result from attributing subjective
experiences to animals. But it does so at the expense of
making subjective experience off-limits as a scientific topic
in humans. This is a serious shortcoming of any approach
attempting to translate animal research to human clinical
problems.Subjectiveexperiencesoffearoranxietytypicallyare
the problems that lead people to seekhelp; moreover, therapies
are judged as successful largely on the basis of their capacity to
change these experiences. Softer versions of the central state
view that allow the central state to contribute to both feelings
of fear and bodily responses (19) are essentially “fear circuit”
views and are subject to the criticisms mentioned above.
PROBLEMS WITH THE SUBCORTICAL FEAR AND
ANXIETY CENTER/CIRCUIT VIEWS
That a brain area, like the amygdala, controls behavioral and
physiological responses to threats does not mean that the
experience of fear arises from this brain area. In other words,
it is an assumption, not a fact, that both consequences of
threat detection are products of a single circuit. And this
assumption is contradicted by several sets of findings.
First, it has long been known that subjective experiences
of fear and anxiety do not correlate well with measures of
behavioral and physiological responses (46–48). This should
not be the case if the same circuit controls all these conse-
quences of threat detection. Second, patients with amygdala
damage still can feel fear, panic, and pain (49–51). Earlier
reports of diminished feelings following amygdala damage
(52) may reflect the elimination of the indirect consequences
of amygdala activity on feelings (see below). Third, threats
presentedsubliminally increase amygdalaactivityandtrigger
peripheral physiological responses, even when one remains
unaware of the stimulus and lacks feelings of fear (28, 30,
53–59). Fourth, “blindsight” patients, who, as a result of
damage to the right visual cortex, lose the ability to con-
sciously experience stimuli presented to their left visual
hemifield (60), nevertheless exhibit threat-elicited amygdala
activity and defensive behavioral and physiological re-
sponses, all in the absence of conscious awareness of the
stimulus and without feeling fear (61–63). All four sets of
findings dissociate the circuitry underlying feelings from
FIGURE 2. Neural Control of Reactions and Actions Elicited by Present Versus Uncertain Threatsa
Threat
Sensory
system
LA
BA
CeA
Defensive reactions
(freezing, flight)
Defensive actions
(escape, avoidance)
(Amygdala)
(Striatum)
NAcc
A. Circuits Underlying Defensive Reactions and Actions
Threat
Sensory
system
LA
BA
Defensive reactions
(freezing, flight)
Defensive actions
(escape, avoidance)
NAcc
(Ventral
striatum)
BNST
(Extended
amygdala)
Threat present
Uncertain
threat
B. Processing Present Versus Uncertain Threats
CeA
(Amygdala)
a As shown in panel A, the amygdala is the central hub of circuits that control reactions and actions elicited by an
immediately present threat. The lateral amygdala (LA) receives sensory inputs about the threat. Connections
from LA to the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA) control reactions, whereas connections from LA to the
basal nucleus (BA), and from there to the ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens, NAcc), control the performance
of actions, such as escape and avoidance. As shown in panel B, when the threat is uncertain, and thus only a
possible outcome in the future, connections from the amygdala and hippocampus (not shown) to the extended
amygdala(thebednucleusofthestriaterminalis,BNST)areengagedinthecontrolofreactions,andactionsusing
similar output pathways are used by the amygdala to control responses to present threats.
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1085
LEDOUX AND PINE
 circuitry underlying defensive behavior and physiologic re-
sponding. How can this be if the amygdala is a fear center?
We thus argue that the amygdala is not itself responsible
for the experience of fear. Its job can be more appropriately
viewed as detecting and responding to present or imminent
threats. The amygdala contributes to fear indirectly but is not
an innate fear center out of which fear percolates. And the
BNST is not itself responsible for the experience of anxiety,
but instead is a key part of an innate defense circuit that
detects and processes uncertain threats. The BNST con-
tributes to anxiety indirectly in the way that the amygdala
contributes indirectly to fear—consequences of its activation
generate signals that modulate circuits that are directly re-
sponsible for subjective feelings of fear and anxiety (5).
THE EMERGENCE OF CONSCIOUS EXPERIENCE
FROM CORTICAL CIRCUITS
Significant progress has been made in neuroscience research
on the cognitive and neural underpinnings of subjective
experiences (60, 64–72). This work assumes that conscious
experienceiscognitivelyderivedfromnonconsciousprocesses
that allow cortical regions to rerepresent lower-order in-
formation, and that this rerepresentation enables conscious
awareness of nonconscious processing about external stimuli.
We propose that subjective feelings of fear or anxiety are
not products of subcortical circuits underlying defensive
responses, but instead depend on the same circuits that
underlie any other form of conscious experience—namely,
circuits in the so-called higher-order association cortex that
are responsible for cognitive processes such as attention and
working memory (Figure 3). Included are areas of the lateral
and medial prefrontal cortex, as well as the parietal neocortex
(73–77). The lateral prefrontal areas may be especially im-
portant since they have been most consistently implicated
in conscious awareness (see below), are interconnected with
the other key cortical areas, are particularly well developed
in primates, and have unique attributes in humans (78–83).
The insula, another frontal region, has been implicated in the
conscious experience of somatic sensations (84–86) and may
be particularly relevant to threats signaled by perturbations
in the organism’s physiologic milieu and in forms of anxiety
initiated by interoceptive stimuli (87, 88).
When one is aware of a visual stimulus, prefrontal and
parietal circuits are engaged, and when awareness degrades,
the circuits are not engaged (64, 89–91). Twoleading theories
propose two different ways that this neuralarchitecture gives
rise to conscious experience. In global workspace theory,
subjective experience emerges through widely distributed
reentrant circuitry, with prefrontal areas playing an espe-
cially prominent role (64, 65, 92). In higher-order theory,
subjective experience arises from a more delimited circuitry,
especially involving a prefrontal hub, which supports thoughts
about lower-order information (67, 93, 94).
While attention, working memory, and their underlying cir-
cuits support consciousness, working memory can be engaged
without generating conscious content (71, 92, 95–97). An addi-
tional layer of cognitive representation, likely also involving
the frontal cortex, is thus required beyond nonconscious rep-
resentation in working memory (94). Differentiating neural
features of cognitive processing that do and do not result in
introspective awareness is a significant challenge and a major
focus of current research.
Consistent with findings described so far, when partici-
pants in a brain imaging study are conscious of avisual threat,
prefrontal and parietal areas are active, but when awareness
is degraded, prefrontal and parietal areas are not (28, 30,
53–59). Importantly, as also noted above, in such studies, the
amygdala is engaged even when people are not consciously
awareofthethreatanddonotreportfeelingfear.Thishastwo
important implications. First, amygdala processing is disso-
ciable from conscious awareness of threat. Second, conscious
awareness of threats comes about in the same way as the
conscious awareness of nonemotional stimuli.
We thus propose that emotional and nonemotional states
of consciousness both emerge from cortical consciousness
networks. The difference between an emotional and a non-
emotional state of consciousness, in this view, reflects dif-
ferent kinds of inputs to the cortical consciousness network
inthetwokindsofstates:theinputsrequiredtofeelanemotion
elicited by a threat are more elaborate than those required
to see a nonthreatening stimulus. While the feeling of fear
thus does not arise directly from subcortical circuits that con-
trol behavioral and physiological responses to threats, these
circuits indirectly contribute to the feeling of fear by gener-
ating responses, such as brain and body arousal, which can
affect working memory function.
FIGURE 3. Cortical Consciousness Networksa
Medial
cortex
Lateral
cortex
Medial
cortex
Lateral
cortex
Insula
DMPFC
VMPFC
MOFC
DLPFC
VLPFC
LOFC
Posterior
parietal
ACC
a Functional imaging studies have implicated circuits spread across frontal
and parietal areas in conscious experiences in humans. ACC5anterior
cingulate cortex; DLPFC5dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; DMPFC5
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex;
LOFC5lateral orbital frontal cortex;
MOFC5medial orbital frontal cortex; VLPFC5ventrolateral prefrontal
cortex; VMPFC5ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
1086
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
USING NEUROSCIENCE TO HELP UNDERSTAND FEAR AND ANXIETY
 Although feelings of fear and anxiety are most often dis-
cussed in terms of circuits that evolved for predatory defense,
this view is toonarrow.We canalso beafraid or anxiousabout
activity related to other survival circuits (3–5), including
circuits that signal low energy supplies (fear of starvation),
fluid imbalance (fear of dehydration), or hypothermia (fear
of freezing to death). In each example, fear/anxiety reflects
awareness of a potential for harm, occurring when one
cognitively monitors and interprets signals from the brain
and/or body, and integrates these signals with information
about the external situation. But there is more. Humans can
also be fearful or anxious in relation to existential concerns,
such as not leading a meaningful life and the eventuality of
death. A scientific account of “fear” and “anxiety” has to
accommodate all the various ways that fear and anxiety can
manifest within and between individuals. The two-system
view, which treats fear and anxiety as cognitively generated
conscious experiences, accomplishes this.
Separating circuits underlying conscious feelings and
response control also makes it easier to understand the role
language and culture play in the shaping of experience
(98–101). In English alone, there are more than three dozen
words for gradations of fear and anxiety, reflecting the im-
portance of these states to humans (102). Language enables
symbolic representation of emotions like fear and anxiety
without actual exposure to danger (103, 104). In certain
circumstances, this can help keep us safe, but it can also
become a vehicle for excessive rumination and worry.
The two-system view also may explain why infants react
emotionally long before they report emotions (105). In-
terestingly, the defense circuitry in infants is not simply an
immature version of the adult circuitry (106). Developmental
changes in linguistic capacity allow categorization of expe-
rience and may affect the way fear is expressed at different
points in early life: children report different fears than ad-
olescents, who report different fears than adults (107, 108).
Understanding these changes requires a deeper understand-
ing of brain development (109). As discussed later, this also
affects perspectives on treatment.
Whatever degree of self-awareness and conscious expe-
rience is possible without language, it is clear that language
changestheself-and-consciousnessgameinthebrain.Weare
not necessarily suggesting that animals lack conscious ex-
periences, but rather that it is problematic to draw inferences
about conscious experiences, and thus problematic to use
words like fear and anxiety, when describing animal behavior
and physiology. Moreover, because, as noted, defensive be-
haviors and physiological responding are not reliable indi-
cators ofsubjective fearin humans,such responsesin animals
cannot be used to identify circuits responsible for feelings of
fear or anxiety in animals or humans.
The two-system framework provides a way to understand
what animal research can and cannot tell us about human
fear and anxiety without making the impossible-to-evaluate
assumption that in animals exposure to threat elicits states
that are comparable to what humans call feelings of fear and
anxiety. Another important impact of the two-system view is
that it helps us understand why efforts to develop medica-
tions have not been more effective. If feelings of fear or
anxiety are not products of circuits that control defensive
behavior, studies of defensive behavior in animals will be of
limited value in finding medications that can relieve feelings
of fear and anxiety in people. Once this is realized, animal
research can be viewed in a more realistic light as being
relevant to a particular subset of symptoms in anxiety dis-
orders (those arising from subcortical circuits). While it may
neverbepossibletodirectlystudyconsciousstatesinanimals,
animalresearch, especiallynonhuman primateresearch,may
nevertheless be able to make some indirect contributions by
revealing neural underpinnings of cognitive processes, such
as attention and working memory, that contribute to con-
scious experiences, including conscious feelings, in humans.
In sum, being clearer about when research is relevant to
feelings of fear and anxiety, as opposed to defensive behavior
and physiological responses, should enhance the trans-
lational impact of animal research. In particular, it will clarify
when these two sets of phenomena show overlapping and
distinct associations with clinical variables.
IMPLICATIONS FOR STALLED PROGRESS IN
THERAPEUTICS
The two-system framework offers a path forward for finding
better medications and psychotherapies. We focus on med-
ication development, given recent discussions about the poor
outcome of this effort (1). In spite of major expenditures over
several decades, the results have been disappointing (2).
The pharmaceutical industry has concluded that the prob-
ability of discovering new treatments is low (2, 110), and it
has curtailed investment in future psychotropic medication
discovery.
To better understand the problem, consider how novel
agents are tested for anxiolytic properties. The usual ap-
proach is to study effects on the behavioral responses of
rodents in challenging situations. For example, rodents tend
to avoid brightly lit, open areas where they can be easily seen,
captured, and eaten. If a novel compound leads animals to
spend more time in open areas or other threatening situa-
tions, it becomes a candidate for treating anxiety in people.
While new medications have emerged using this strategy,
they inconsistently reduce the feelings of fear or anxiety that
cause people to seek help.
We argue that the disappointment in the results reflects
two faulty assumptions: 1) that a common circuit underlies
the expression of defensive responses and feelings of fear
when threatened, and 2) that the circuits that contribute to
defensive responses in animals can be used to determine how
the human brain gives rise to feelings of fear and anxiety.
If, as we argue, feelings of fear and anxiety arise from a
different system than do defensive behaviors, medications
that make rats or mice less defensive, avoidant, and/or
physiologically aroused in challenging situations will not
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1087
LEDOUX AND PINE
 necessarily make people feel less fearful or anxious. In-
complete response to benzodiazepines, selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), or other anxiolytics in humans,
we propose, may reflect the actions of these medications in
the two systems. While these compounds can act on both
cortical and subcortical brain circuits (111–114), the key qu-
estion is the extent to which the clinical efficacy of a given
medication reflects changes in a particular circuit.
In general, clinicians judge whether therapy is succeeding
on the basis of the degree to which the patient reports feeling
better (115). The expectation that medications that decrease
defense and avoidance in animals should also make people
feel less anxiety needs reevaluation, as new medications are
not meeting this expectation. This distinction can be charac-
terized as one between the effects of medication on behavioral
inhibition on the one hand (116) and anxious feelings on the
other (5). While behavioral inhibition is often used as if it were
synonymous with “anxiety,” the two-system framework treats
behavioral inhibition as separable from anxious feelings.
Available research demonstrates the importance of this
distinction. For example, efforts generally have failed to
translate a replicable pattern of behavioral and physiological
findingsinrodentsover20yearswithcorticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH) receptor manipulations (117), even though
CRH antagonists engage the CRH receptor in humans (118).
CRH antagonists reduce defensive behaviors and associated
physiological responses in animals, but they result in minimal
clinical effect in humans, a finding that is consistent with
predictions from the two-system perspective. Future re-
search may clarify the extent to which different medications
affect the two systems, as well as the degree to which partial
response reflects an effect on behaviors, as opposed to con-
scious feelings, but this is not known at present.
Medications such as SSRIs and benzodiazepines can
make some people feel less anxious. But it is important to ask
whether this effect is due specifically to a change in anxiety
itself.Mightthepositive effectson anxietybe partofageneral
blunting of emotion experience? And given that emotions, in
our theory, are cognitively assembled states, to what extent
are the effects of medications on anxiety due to changes in
cognitive underpinnings, such as alterations in attention and
memory (including working and long-term memory), rather
than in anxious feelings themselves? If the anxiolytic effects
of a medication are due to general emotional blunting or to
impaired cognitive processing, the term anxiolytic would be
a misnomer as a characterization of its treatment properties.
While such indirect changes in anxious feelings are certainly
useful clinically, progress in developing improved treatments
wouldbe facilitated by recognition of the exact ways in which
the effect is achieved.
It is worth considering whether it is even possible to
develop a pharmaceutical treatment that would specifically
target anxious feelings. Because of the diverse effects of the
medications, it may be difficult to do so without producing
effects on other phenomena, such as feelings of sadness or
worthlessness, or cognitive processes such as attention and
memory. Existing medications are blunt tools with broad
effects. But even with improved specificity, it may not be
possible to alter specific feelings. If fear, anxiety, and other
emotionsareindeedcognitivelyassembledstatesthatemerge
from information integration, rather than being an innate
experience prewired into subcortical neural circuits, there is
no fear or anxiety locus to target, and the changes in fear and
anxiety may always be at the expense of emotional or cog-
nitive capacities.
Medications that fail to reduce feelings of fear or anxiety
may nevertheless have beneficial effects by reining in de-
fensive systems that are overly sensitive and are producing
exaggerated defensive reactions, excessive avoidance, hy-
perarousal, hypervigilance, and so forth. The two-system ap-
proach suggests that a detailed understanding of neural
circuits and their functions can help set realistic expectations
about what medications might achieve.
IMPROVING TREATMENT OUTCOMES
We suggest two paths for improving treatment outcomes.
One involves adapting existing treatments to increase their
impact, and the other, tailoring treatments to particular pa-
tients. The two paths are complementary, and each informs
both medication and psychotherapy.
Adapting Treatments to Increase Their Effectiveness
The impact of current treatments might be increased
through adaptations informed by basic science. For exam-
ple, because exposure during cognitive-behavioral therapy
(CBT) shares features with laboratory studies of extinction,
findings about extinction in animals inform attempts to
adapt CBT. This approach has been used to suggest adap-
tations of CBT through the use of partial reinforcement,
exposure in multiple contexts, and particular timing pa-
rameters for exposures (5, 119–128). Similarly, medications
that facilitate extinction in animals have been used to en-
hance initial changes in defensive responding that are
achieved during a therapy session. This has been attempted
using manipulations of glutamate, cortisol, and noradren-
aline, with D-cycloserine being studied most extensively.
While initial results were promising (129), later work has
been inconsistent, with no overall benefits in aggregated
results from the first 21 studies (130). A variable clinical
effect could reflect influences of avoidance (131), levels of
anxiety evoked during exposure (132), postexposure consol-
idation (120), or the use of particular outcome measures to
draw conclusions on efficacy. Different conclusions might
arise from measures that more completely dissociate effects on
subjective feelings and behavioral or physiological responses to
threats. Even if D-cycloserine turns out not to be as useful as
initiallyhoped,theinnovativeconceptionunderlyingthework
can be used to test other compounds that might improve CBT
outcomes.
Other attempts to find more effective treatments might
begin with differential targeting of one system while
1088
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
USING NEUROSCIENCE TO HELP UNDERSTAND FEAR AND ANXIETY
 observing changes in the other. Some novel treatments may
focus specifically on circuits that operate nonconsciously,
using procedures such as subliminal exposures or manipu-
lations of attention, which information technologies make
increasingly possible (5). Indeed, subliminal extinction (133)
may prove to be a way to expose patients to threats without
inducing excessive feelings of fear. Attention bias modifica-
tion treatment is another procedure with similar features in
thatitalsoactsonrapidlydeployedprocessesandmayremain
independent of awareness (107). These and other treatments
could weaken automatic deployment of nonconscious threat-
processing systems, which in some patients could malfunc-
tion and inappropriately initiate defensive behavior and
physiologicalarousal.Throughindirectinfluencesoncortical
circuitry, this could have some partial effect on the conscious
experience of fear or anxiety, much as a patient may partially
respond to an SSRI. Other treatments, especially psycho-
therapeutic ones, then might target the conscious experience
of fear and anxiety. Observing the way particular treatments
targeting rapidly deployed circuits lead to other changes in
thebrain,inbehavior,andinfeelingscouldgenerateaniterative
process whereby novel treatments are continually refined.
Alternatively, treatments might focus initially on circuits
that are more closely related to conscious feeling states. For
example, some patients may exhibit aberrant stimulus gen-
eralization and fail to recognize or appropriately label the
boundaries separating different gradations of threat, leading
them to inappropriately label ambiguous stimuli as threat-
ening. In such patients, treatment might begin by slowly and
carefully teaching them to improve their ability to recognize,
describe, and label these nuanced boundaries (107, 119). With
repeated experience, these new capacities might only later
cometochangeactivityinsystemssupportingrapiddefensive
responding.Thus,anoveltreatmentmighttargeteitherofthe
two systems in an attempt to change the other.
Finally, the two-system perspective informs develop-
mental perspectives. Longitudinal research shows that
chronic anxiety in adults typically begins in childhood (107).
However, many affected children mature to become healthy
adults. The two-system perspective suggests that differential
forms of brain maturation account for diverging develop-
mental profiles, a suggestion with preliminary support from
cross-sectional brain imaging studies (134). For example,
cortical brain systems supporting cognitive processes related
to feeling states mature later than subcortical circuitry. As
a result, adolescents who overcome problems with anxiety
may exhibit different patterns of interactions between the
two sets of circuits, as compared with adolescents who ma-
ture to become adults with anxiety disorders. Adolescents
who fail to overcome their problems could benefit from
treatments that teach them how to deploy these same cortical
systems in a mature fashion. Alternatively, differences in
adolescent compared with adult circuitry may be identifiable
in a subset of anxious individuals in adolescence. In some,
one pattern of alterations in the two systems may predict
chronicity, whereas in others a different pattern may predict
remission. Thus, as studies map the ways in which particular
treatmentsshape the two systems,itmight be possible to tailor
treatments in children according to the developmental status
of the two systems and their subsystems.
Tailoring Treatments to Specific Patients
Basic science findings suggest individual differences in de-
fensive reaction (freezing) and action (avoidance) (135–137)
and underlying circuitry (138, 139). This suggests that it may
be possible to tailor treatments to the specific needs of in-
dividual patients based on their symptoms.
Building on progress in using functional imaging to
identify threat processing circuitry in humans (see earlier
discussion), recent studies have helped illuminate how
subcortical, amygdala-based circuits shape attention (56,
140–142). Forms of psychotherapy that emphasize reap-
praisal or other effortful, consciously deployed strategies in
theservice ofemotion regulation may notbe idealforpatients
who exhibit hyperactivity in the subcortical circuitry at
baseline. For these patients, their dysfunction may lie in the
more rapidly deployed subcortical circuitry, and such pa-
tients could be guided toward other treatments, including
medications or psychotherapies that target the subcortical
defensive circuits.
On the other hand, anxious patients with standard activity
profiles in subcortical circuitry but with altered activity pro-
files incorticalcircuitryunderlying workingmemory mightbe
selected to receive therapies that emphasize reappraisal and
similar top-down strategies as a first line of treatment. In-
deed, imagingmethods can quantify dysfunctions incorticalto
more slowly evolving processes, involving appraisal of feeling
states (134, 143–145). Here, perturbed activity in circuitry
within the prefrontal cortex may identify patients who are
particularly likely to benefit from techniques that teach pa-
tients how to regulate emotion through reappraisal and other
effortful, consciously deployed cognitive strategies (146). In
this way, the two-system perspective may allow clinicians
to tailor particular treatments to perturbed functions in cir-
cuits that control immediate behavior as opposed to conscious
feeling states. Reappraisal can in fact be used to change either
the self-reported emotional experience (147) or autonomic
consequences of amygdala activation (148), depending on the
approach used.
Improvements in brain imaging methods are providing
techniques that are increasingly capable of quantifying func-
tions in distributed neural circuits (149, 150). Research using
these approaches suggests that imaging-based biomarkers
predict treatment outcomes in different ways than do clinical
factors. As such, imaging-based biomarkers couldallow a form
of precision medicine in psychiatry in which treatments are
delivered to particular patients based on the degree to which
thetreatmenttargetsaparticularformofcircuitrydysfunction.
The two-system perspective suggests how this advanced ap-
proach couldbe adapted to link particular functions to distinct
aspectsofthreatresponding.Withthisapproach,someaspects
of brain function could be linked to treatment-related changes
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1089
LEDOUX AND PINE
 in the immediate behavioral response, whereas other aspects
of brain function could be linked to treatment-related changes
in fearful and anxious feelings.
CONCLUSIONS
Progress has stalled in treatment development for mental
disorders. Cross-species conservation of brain-behavior
relationships occurring in the presence of threats pro-
vides unique opportunities and creates the potential for mu-
tually informative basic and clinical research in the service of
treatment development for anxiety disorders. However, cur-
rent approaches fail to recognize adequately the distinctions
between neural circuitry supporting subjective feeling states
as opposed to defensive responding. Failure to do so prevents
the field from leveraging cross-species conservation of threat-
processing circuits. The two-system framework we propose
distinguishes neural circuitry supporting defensive respond-
ing from circuitry supporting feeling states and provides a
new heuristic for basic, clinical, and translational research on
anxiety disorders.
AUTHOR AND ARTICLE INFORMATION
From the Center for Neural Science, the Department of Psychology,
the Department Psychiatry, and the Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, New York University, New York; the Nathan Kline Institute,
Orangeburg, N.Y.; and the Section on Development and Affective
Neuroscience, NIMH Intramural Research Program, Bethesda, Md.
Address correspondence to Dr. LeDoux (ledoux@cns.nyu.edu).
Supported by NIMH Intramural Research Program Project 1ZIAMH002781.
The authors report no financial relationships with commercial interests.
Received March 24, 2016; revision received June 2, 2016; accepted June
28, 2016; published online Sept. 9, 2016.
REFERENCES
1. Hyman SE: Psychiatric drug development: diagnosing a crisis.
Cerebrum, Mar-Apr 2013 (http://www.dana.org/Cerebrum/2013/
Psychiatric_Drug_Development__Diagnosing_a_Crisis/)
2. GriebelG,HolmesA:50yearsofhurdlesandhopeinanxiolyticdrug
discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2013; 12:667–687
3. LeDoux J: Rethinking the emotional brain. Neuron 2012; 73:
653–676
4. LeDoux JE: Coming to terms with fear. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2014; 111:2871–2878
5. LeDoux JE: Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and Treat Fear
and Anxiety. New York, Viking, 2015
6. Kagan J, Schulkin J: On the concepts of fear. Harv Rev Psychiatry
1995; 3:231–234
7. Kagan J: Understanding the effects of temperament, anxiety, and
guilt. Panel: The Affect of Emotions: Laying the Groundwork in
Childhood. Washington, DC, Library of Congress/NIMH Decade
of the Brain Project, Jan 3, 2003 (http://www.loc.gov/loc/brain/
emotion/Kagan.html)
8. Barrett LF, Lindquist KA, Bliss-Moreau E, et al: Of mice and men:
natural kinds of emotions in the mammalian brain? A response to
Panksepp and Izard. Perspect Psychol Sci 2007; 2:297–312
9. Mobbs D, Hagan CC, Dalgleish T, et al: The ecology of human fear:
survivaloptimizationandthenervoussystem.FrontNeurosci2015;9:55
10. Darwin C: The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals.
London, Fontana Press, 1872
11. Ekman P: Universals and cultural differences in facial ex-
pressions of emotions, in Nebraska Symposium on Motivation.
Edited by Cole J. Lincoln, University of Nebraska Press, 1972,
pp 207–283
12. MacLean PD: The triune brain, emotion, and scientific bias, in The
Neurosciences: Second Study Program. Edited by Schmitt FO.
New York, Rockefeller University Press, 1970, pp 336–349
13. Panksepp J: Affective Neuroscience. New York, Oxford University
Press, 1998
14. Davis M: The role of the amygdala in fear and anxiety. Annu Rev
Neurosci 1992; 15:353–375
15. LeDoux JE: The Emotional Brain. New York, Simon and Schuster,
1996
16. Panksepp J, Fuchs T, Iacobucci P: The basic neuroscience of
emotional experiences in mammals: the case of subcortical FEAR
circuitry and implications for clinical anxiety. Appl Anim Behav Sci
2011; 129:1–17
17. Fanselow MS, Poulos AM: The neuroscience of mammalian asso-
ciative learning. Annu Rev Psychol 2005; 56:207–234
18. Lang PJ, Davis M: Emotion, motivation, and the brain: reflex
foundations in animal and human research. Prog Brain Res 2006;
156:3–29
19. Adolphs R: The biology of fear. Curr Biol 2013; 23:R79–R93
20. Pellman BA, Kim JJ: What can ethobehavioral studies tell us about
the brain’s fear system? Trends Neurosci 2016; 39:420–431
21. Gross CT, Canteras NS: The many paths to fear. Nat Rev Neurosci
2012; 13:651–658
22. Tovote P, Fadok JP, Lüthi A: Neuronal circuits for fear and anxiety.
Nat Rev Neurosci 2015; 16:317–331
23. Ramirez F, Moscarello JM, LeDoux JE, et al: Active avoidance
requires a serial basal amygdala to nucleus accumbens shell circuit.
J Neurosci 2015; 35:3470–3477
24. Morgan MA, Romanski LM, LeDoux JE: Extinction of emotional
learning: contribution of medial prefrontal cortex. Neurosci Lett
1993; 163:109–113
25. Quirk GJ, Beer JS: Prefrontal involvement in the regulation of
emotion: convergence of rat and human studies. Curr Opin Neu-
robiol 2006; 16:723–727
26. Maren S, Phan KL, Liberzon I: The contextual brain: implications
for fear conditioning, extinction, and psychopathology. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2013; 14:417–428
27. Milad MR, Quirk GJ: Fear extinction as a model for translational
neuroscience: ten years of progress. Annu Rev Psychol 2012; 63:
129–151
28. Phelps EA: Emotion and cognition: insights from studies of the
human amygdala. Annu Rev Psychol 2006; 57:27–53
29. Adolphs R: Fear, faces, and the human amygdala. Curr Opin Neu-
robiol 2008; 18:166–172
30. Dolan RJ, Vuilleumier P: Amygdala automaticity in emotional
processing. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2003; 985:348–355
31. Monk CS, Telzer EH, Mogg K, et al: Amygdala and ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex activation to masked angry faces in children and
adolescentswithgeneralizedanxietydisorder.ArchGenPsychiatry
2008; 65:568–576
32. Etkin A, Wager TD: Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: a meta-
analysis of emotional processing in PTSD, social anxiety disorder,
and specific phobia. Am J Psychiatry 2007; 164:1476–1488
33. Brühl AB, Delsignore A, Komossa K, et al: Neuroimaging in social
anxiety disorder: a meta-analytic review resulting in a new
neurofunctional model. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2014; 47:260–
280
34. Münsterkötter AL, Notzon S, Redlich R, et al: Spider or no spider?
Neural correlates of sustained and phasic fear in spider phobia.
Depress Anxiety 2015; 32:656–663
35. Delgado MR, Jou RL, LedouxJE, et al: Avoiding negativeoutcomes:
tracking the mechanisms of avoidance learning in humans during
fear conditioning. Front Behav Neurosci 2009; 3:33
1090
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
USING NEUROSCIENCE TO HELP UNDERSTAND FEAR AND ANXIETY
 36. Schlund MW, Hudgins CD, Magee S, et al: Neuroimaging the
temporal dynamics of human avoidance to sustained threat. Behav
Brain Res 2013; 257:148–155
37. Schiller D, Delgado MR: Overlapping neural systems mediating
extinction, reversal, and regulation of fear. Trends Cogn Sci 2010;
14:268–276
38. Walker DL, Davis M: Role of the extended amygdala in short-
duration versus sustained fear: a tribute to Dr. Lennart Heimer.
Brain Struct Funct 2008; 213:29–42
39. Hammack SE, Todd TP, Kocho-Schellenberg M, et al: Role of the
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis in the acquisition of contextual
fear at long or short context-shock intervals. Behav Neurosci 2015;
129:673–678
40. Gray JA, McNaughton N: The Neuropsychology of Anxiety, 2nd ed.
Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 2000
41. Somerville LH, Whalen PJ, Kelley WM: Human bed nucleus of the
stria terminalis indexes hypervigilant threat monitoring. Biol
Psychiatry 2010; 68:416–424
42. GrupeDW,NitschkeJB:Uncertaintyandanticipationinanxiety:an
integrated neurobiological and psychological perspective. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2013; 14:488–501
43. Lebow MA, Chen A: Overshadowed by the amygdala: the bed
nucleus of the stria terminalis emerges as key to psychiatric dis-
orders. Mol Psychiatry 2016; 21:450–463
44. Rosen JB, Schulkin J: From normal fear to pathological anxiety.
Psychol Rev 1998; 105:325–350
45. Perusini JN, Fanselow MS: Neurobehavioral perspectives on the
distinction between fear and anxiety. Learn Mem 2015; 22:417–425
46. Lang PJ: Fear reduction and fear behavior: problems in treating a
construct, in Research in Psychotherapy, vol 3. Edited by Schlien
JM. Washington, DC, American Psychological Association, 1968,
pp 90–103
47. Kozak MJ, Miller GA: Hypothetical constructs versus intervening
variables: a reappraisal of the three-systems model of anxiety as-
sessment. Behav Assess 1982; 4:347–358
48. Rachman S, Hodgson R: I. Synchrony and desynchrony in fear and
avoidance. Behav Res Ther 1974; 12:311–318
49. Anderson AK, Phelps EA: Is the human amygdala critical for the
subjective experience of emotion? Evidence of intact dispositional
affect in patients with amygdala lesions. J Cogn Neurosci 2002; 14:
709–720
50. FeinsteinJS,BuzzaC,HurlemannR,etal:Fearandpanicinhumans
with bilateral amygdala damage. Nat Neurosci 2013; 16:270–272
51. Feinstein JS, Khalsa SS, Salomons TV, et al: Preserved emotional
awarenessof pain ina patientwithextensive bilateraldamagetothe
insula, anterior cingulate, and amygdala. Brain Struct Funct 2016;
221:1499–1511
52. Feinstein JS, Adolphs R, Damasio A, et al: The human amygdala and
the induction and experience of fear. Curr Biol 2011; 21:34–38
53. Mineka S, Ohman A: Phobias and preparedness: the selective,
automatic, and encapsulated nature of fear. Biol Psychiatry 2002;
52:927–937
54. Vuilleumier P, Pourtois G: Distributed and interactive brain mech-
anisms during emotion face perception: evidence from functional
neuroimaging. Neuropsychologia 2007; 45:174–194
55. Whalen PJ, Kagan J, Cook RG, et al: Human amygdala responsivity
to masked fearful eye whites. Science 2004; 306:2061
56. Luo Q, Holroyd T, Majestic C, et al: Emotional automaticity is a
matter of timing. J Neurosci 2010; 30:5825–5829
57. Lissek S, Levenson J, Biggs AL, et al: Elevated fear conditioning to
socially relevant unconditioned stimuli in social anxiety disorder.
Am J Psychiatry 2008; 165:124–132
58. Hariri AR, Tessitore A, Mattay VS, et al: The amygdala response to
emotional stimuli: a comparison of faces and scenes. Neuroimage
2002; 17:317–323
59. Lapate RC, Rokers B, Tromp DPM, et al: Awareness of emotional
stimuli determines the behavioral consequences of amygdala
activation and amygdala-prefrontal connectivity. Sci Rep 2016;
6:25826
60. Weiskrantz L: Consciousness Lost and Found: A Neuropsycholog-
ical Exploration. New York, Oxford University Press, 1997
61. Morris JS, DeGelder B, Weiskrantz L, et al: Differential extra-
geniculostriate and amygdala responses to presentation of emo-
tional faces in a cortically blind field. Brain 2001; 124:1241–1252
62. Tamietto M, de Gelder B: Neural bases of the non-conscious per-
ception of emotional signals. Nat Rev Neurosci 2010; 11:697–709
63. Bertini C, Cecere R, Làdavas E: I am blind, but I “see” fear. Cortex
2013; 49:985–993
64. DehaeneS, ChangeuxJP: Experimental andtheoreticalapproaches
to conscious processing. Neuron 2011; 70:200–227
65. McGovern K, Baars BJ: Cognitive theories of consciousness, in The
Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness. Edited by Zelazo PD,
Moscovitch M, Thompson E. New York, Cambridge University
Press, 2007, pp 177–205
66. Schacter DL: Toward a cognitive neuropsychology of awareness:
implicit knowledge and anosognosia. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 1990;
12:155–178
67. Rosenthal D: Higher-order awareness, misrepresentation and
function. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2012; 367:1424–1438
68. Jack AI, Shallice T: Introspective physicalism as an approach to the
science of consciousness. Cognition 2001; 79:161–196
69. Frith CD: The social functions of consciousness, in Frontiers of
Consciousness: Chichele Lectures. Edited by Weiskrantz L, Davies
M. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 2008, pp 225–244
70. Prinz JJ: The Conscious Brain: How Attention Engenders Expe-
rience. New York, Oxford University Press, 2012
71. Bor D, Seth AK: Consciousness and the prefrontal parietal network:
insights from attention, working memory, and chunking. Front
Psychol 2012; 3:63
72. Cohen MA, Cavanagh P, Chun MM, et al: The attentional re-
quirements of consciousness. Trends Cogn Sci 2012; 16:411–417
73. Goldman-Rakic PS: Working memory, neural basis, in MIT En-
cyclopedia of Cognitive Sciences. Edited by Wilson RA, Keil FC.
Cambridge, Mass, MIT Press, 1999
74. Miller EK, Cohen JD: An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex
function. Annu Rev Neurosci 2001; 24:167–202
75. D’Esposito M, Postle BR: The cognitive neuroscience of working
memory. Annu Rev Psychol 2015; 66:115–142
76. Ramos BP, Arnsten AF: Adrenergic pharmacology and cognition:
focus on the prefrontal cortex. Pharmacol Ther 2007; 113:523–
536
77. Damasio A, Carvalho GB: The nature of feelings: evolutionary and
neurobiological origins. Nat Rev Neurosci 2013; 14:143–152
78. Semendeferi K, Teffer K, Buxhoeveden DP, et al: Spatial organi-
zation of neurons in the frontal pole sets humans apart from great
apes. Cereb Cortex 2011; 21:1485–1497
79. Bruner E, Preuss TM, Chen X, et al: Evidence for expansion of the
precuneus in human evolution. Brain Struct Funct (Epub ahead of
print, Jan 2, 2016)
80. Hecht EE, Gutman DA, Bradley BA, et al: Virtual dissection and
comparative connectivity of the superior longitudinal fasciculus in
chimpanzees and humans. Neuroimage 2015; 108:124–137
81. Preuss TM: The human brain: rewired and running hot. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 2011; 1225(suppl 1):E182–E191
82. Passingham RE, Smaers JB: Is the prefrontal cortex especially
enlarged in the human brain allometric relations and remapping
factors. Brain Behav Evol 2014; 84:156–166
83. Barbey AK, Colom R, Solomon J, et al: An integrative architecture
for general intelligence and executive function revealed by lesion
mapping. Brain 2012; 135:1154–1164
84. Craig AD: How do you feel—now? The anterior insula and human
awareness. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009; 10:59–70
85. Craig AD: An interoceptive neuroanatomical perspective on feel-
ings, energy, and effort. Behav Brain Sci 2013; 36:685–686
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1091
LEDOUX AND PINE
 86. Critchley HD, Wiens S, Rotshtein P, et al: Neural systems sup-
porting interoceptive awareness. Nat Neurosci 2004; 7:189–195
87. Preter M, Klein DF: Panic, suffocation false alarms, separation
anxiety,andendogenousopioids.ProgNeuropsychopharmacolBiol
Psychiatry 2008; 32:603–612
88. Stein DJ: Panic disorder: the psychobiology of external treat and
introceptive distress. CNS Spectr 2008; 13:26–30
89. Rees G, Frith C: Methodologies for identifying the neural correlates
of consciousness, in A Companion to Consciousness. Edited by
Velmans M, Schneider S. Oxford, UK, Blackwell, 2007
90. Frith C, Perry R, Lumer E: The neural correlates of conscious expe-
rience: an experimental framework. Trends Cogn Sci 1999; 3:105–114
91. Lau HC, Passingham RE: Relative blindsight in normal observers
and the neural correlate of visual consciousness. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2006; 103:18763–18768
92. Del Cul A, Dehaene S, Reyes P, et al: Causal role of prefrontal cortex
in the threshold for access to consciousness. Brain 2009; 132:
2531–2540
93. Lau H, Rosenthal D: Empirical support for higher-order theories of
conscious awareness. Trends Cogn Sci 2011; 15:365–373
94. Brown R: The HOROR theory of phenomenal consciousness. Philos
Stud 2015; 172:1783–1794
95. Lau HC, Passingham RE: Unconscious activation of the cognitive
control system in the human prefrontal cortex. J Neurosci 2007; 27:
5805–5811
96. Soto D, Mäntylä T, Silvanto J: Working memory without con-
sciousness. Curr Biol 2011; 21:R912–R913
97. KieferM:Executivecontroloverunconsciouscognition:attentional
sensitization of unconscious information processing. Front Hum
Neurosci 2012; 6:61
98. Bowerman M, Levinson SC (eds): Language Acquisition and Con-
ceptualDevelopment.Cambridge,UK,CambridgeUniversityPress,
2001
99. Kitayama S, Markus HR (eds): Emotion and Culture: Empirical
Studies of Mutual Influence. Washington, DC, American Psycho-
logical Association, 1994
100. Wierzbicka A: Emotion, language, and cultural scripts, in Emotion
and Culture: Empirical Studies of Mutual Influence. Edited by
Kitayama S, Markus HR. Washington, DC, American Psychological
Association, 1994, pp 133–196
101. Boiger M, Mesquita B: The construction of emotion in interactions,
relationships, and cultures. Emot Rev 2012; 4:221–229
102. Marks I: Fears, Phobias, and Rituals: Panic, Anxiety, and Their
Disorders. New York, Oxford University Press, 1987
103. Forsyth JP, Eifert GH: The language of feeling and the feeling of
anxiety: contributions of the behaviorisms toward understanding
the function-altering effects of language. Psychol Rec 1996; 46:
607–649
104. Staats AW, Eifert GH: The paradigmatic behaviorism theory of
emotions: basis for unification. Clin Psychol Rev 1990; 10:539–566
105. Lewis M: The Rise of Consciousness and the Development of
Emotional Life. New York, Guilford, 2013
106. Rincón-Cortés M, Sullivan RM: Early life trauma and attachment:
immediate and enduring effects on neurobehavioral and stress axis
development. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2014; 5:33
107. Pine DS, Fox NA: Childhood antecedents and risk for adult mental
disorders. Annu Rev Psychol 2015; 66:459–485
108. Stattin H: Developmental trends in the appraisal of anxiety-
provoking situations. J Pers 1984; 52:46–57
109. Costello EJ, Copeland W, Angold A: Trends in psychopathology
across the adolescent years: what changes when children become
adolescents, and when adolescents become adults? J Child Psychol
Psychiatry 2011; 52:1015–1025
110. Miller G: Is pharma running out of brainy ideas? Science 2010; 329:
502–504
111. Samuels BA, Mendez-David I, Faye C, et al: Serotonin 1A and se-
rotonin 4 receptors: essential mediators of the neurogenic and
behavioral actions of antidepressants. Neuroscientist 2016; 22:
26–45
112. O’Rourke H, Fudge JL: Distribution of serotonin transporter la-
beled fibers in amygdaloid subregions: implications for mood dis-
orders. Biol Psychiatry 2006; 60:479–490
113. Wiggins JL, Bedoyan JK, Carrasco M, et al: Age-related effect of
serotonin transporter genotype on amygdala and prefrontal cortex
function in adolescence. Hum Brain Mapp 2014; 35:646–658
114. Zezula J, Cortés R, Probst A, et al: Benzodiazepine receptor sites in
the human brain: autoradiographic mapping. Neuroscience 1988;
25:771–795
115. Coric V, Feldman HH, Oren DA, et al: Multicenter, randomized,
double-blind, active comparator and placebo-controlled trial of a
corticotropin-releasing factor receptor-1 antagonist in generalized
anxiety disorder. Depress Anxiety 2010; 27:417–425
116. Gray JA: The Neuropsychology of Anxiety. New York, Oxford
University Press, 1982
117. Hauger RL, Olivares-Reyes JA, Dautzenberg FM, et al: Molecular
and cell signaling targets for PTSD pathophysiology and pharma-
cotherapy. Neuropharmacology 2012; 62:705–714
118. Kwako LE, Spagnolo PA, Schwandt ML, et al: The corticotropin
releasing hormone-1 (CRH1) receptor antagonist pexacerfont in
alcohol dependence: a randomized controlled experimental med-
icine study. Neuropsychopharmacology 2015; 40:1053–1063
119. Craske MG, KircanskiK, ZelikowskyM, et al: Optimizinginhibitory
learning during exposure therapy. Behav Res Ther 2008; 46:5–27
120. Craske MG, Treanor M, Conway CC, et al: Maximizing exposure
therapy: an inhibitory learning approach. Behav Res Ther 2014; 58:
10–23
121. Bouton ME, Mineka S, Barlow DH: A modern learning theory
perspectiveon the etiology of panicdisorder. Psychol Rev 2001; 108:
4–32
122. Dunsmoor JE, Campese VD, Ceceli AO, et al: Novelty-facilitated
extinction: providinga novel outcome in placeof an expected threat
diminishes recovery of defensive responses. Biol Psychiatry 2015;
78:203–209
123. Dunsmoor JE, Niv Y, Daw N, et al: Rethinking extinction. Neuron
2015; 88:47–63
124. MonfilsMH,CowansageKK,KlannE,etal:Extinction-reconsolidation
boundaries: key to persistent attenuation of fear memories. Science
2009; 324:951–955
125. Schiller D, Kanen JW, LeDoux JE, et al: Extinction during
reconsolidation of threat memory diminishes prefrontal cortex
involvement. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110:20040–20045
126. SchillerD,MonfilsMH,RaioCM,etal: Preventingthereturnoffear
in humans using reconsolidation update mechanisms. Nature 2010;
463:49–53
127. Clem RL, Huganir RL: Calcium-permeable AMPA receptor dy-
namics mediate fear memory erasure. Science 2010; 330:1108–1112
128. Hartley CA, Phelps EA: Changing fear: the neurocircuitry of emo-
tion regulation. Neuropsychopharmacology 2010; 35:136–146
129. Davis M, Ressler K, Rothbaum BO, et al: Effects of D-cycloserine on
extinction: translation from preclinical to clinical work. Biol Psy-
chiatry 2006; 60:369–375
130. Ori R, Amos T, Bergman H, et al: Augmentation of cognitive and
behavioural therapies (CBT) with D-cycloserine for anxiety and
related disorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 5:CD007803
131. Otto MW, Kredlow MA, Smits JA, et al: Enhancement of psy-
chosocial treatment with D-cycloserine: models, moderators, and
future directions. Biol Psychiatry (Epub ahead of print, Sept 25,
2015)
132. Foa EB, McLean CP: The efficacy of exposure therapy for anxiety-
related disorders and its underlying mechanisms: the case of OCD
and PTSD. Annu Rev Clin Psychol 2016; 12:1–28
133. WeinbergerJ,SiegelP,SiefertC,etal:Whatyoucannotseecanhelp
you: the effect of exposure to unreportable stimuli on approach
behavior. Conscious Cogn 2011; 20:173–180
1092
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
USING NEUROSCIENCE TO HELP UNDERSTAND FEAR AND ANXIETY
 134. Britton JC, Grillon C, Lissek S, et al: Response to learned threat: an
fMRI study in adolescent and adult anxiety. Am J Psychiatry 2013;
170:1195–1204
135. Bush DE, Sotres-Bayon F, LeDoux JE: Individual differences in
fear: isolating fear reactivity and fear recovery phenotypes. J
Trauma Stress 2007; 20:413–422
136. Galatzer-Levy IR, Bonanno GA, Bush DE, et al: Heterogeneity
in threat extinction learning: substantive and methodological
considerations for identifying individual difference in response to
stress. Front Behav Neurosci 2013; 7:55
137. Galatzer-LevyIR,MoscarelloJ,BlessingEM,etal:Heterogeneityin
signaled active avoidance learning: substantive and methodological
relevance of diversity in instrumental defensive responses to threat
cues. Front Syst Neurosci 2014; 8:179
138. Martinez RC, Gupta N, Lázaro-Muñoz G, et al: Active vs reactive threat
responding is associated with differential c-Fos expression in specific
regionsofamygdalaandprefrontalcortex.LearnMem2013;20:446–452
139. Cowansage KK, Bush DE, Josselyn SA, et al: Basal variability in
CREB phosphorylation predicts trait-like differences in amygdala-
dependent memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013; 110:16645–16650
140. Hardee JE, Benson BE, Bar-Haim Y, et al: Patterns of neural
connectivity during an attention bias task moderate associations
between early childhood temperamentand internalizingsymptoms
in young adulthood. Biol Psychiatry 2013; 74:273–279
141. Pourtois G, Schettino A, Vuilleumier P: Brain mechanisms for emo-
tional influences on perception and attention: what is magic and what
is not. Biol Psychol 2013; 92:492–512
142. Vuilleumier P: How brains beware: neural mechanisms of emo-
tional attention. Trends Cogn Sci 2005; 9:585–594
143. Ball TM, Ramsawh HJ, Campbell-Sills L, et al: Prefrontal dys-
function during emotion regulation in generalized anxiety and
panic disorders. Psychol Med 2013; 43:1475–1486
144. Beesdo K, Lau JY, Guyer AE, et al: Common and distinct amygdala-
function perturbations in depressed vs anxious adolescents. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 2009; 66:275–285
145. Jarcho JM, Davis MM, Shechner T, et al: Early childhood social
reticence predicts brain function in preadolescent youths
during distinct forms of peer evalution. Psychol Sci 2016; 27:
821–835
146. Goldin PR, Ziv M, Jazaieri H, et al: Impact of cognitive behavioral
therapy for social anxiety disorder on the neural dynamics of
cognitive reappraisal of negative self-beliefs: randomized clinical
trial. JAMA Psychiatry 2013; 70:1048–1056
147. Ochsner KN, Gross JJ: The cognitive control of emotion. Trends
Cogn Sci 2005; 9:242–249
148. Delgado MR, Nearing KI, Ledoux JE, et al: Neural circuitry un-
derlying the regulation of conditioned fear and its relation to ex-
tinction. Neuron 2008; 59:829–838
149. Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Ghosh SS, Nieto-Castanon A, et al: Brain
connectomics predict response to treatment in social anxiety dis-
order. Mol Psychiatry 2016; 21:680–685
150. Doehrmann O, Ghosh SS, Polli FE, et al: Predicting treatment re-
sponse in social anxiety disorder from functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging. JAMA Psychiatry 2013; 70:87–97
Am J Psychiatry 173:11, November 2016
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
1093
LEDOUX AND PINE
