 10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028 ©  Duck-chul Lee
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Future Sci. OA 2(3), FSO127
Sarcopenic obesity is the coexistance of sarcopenia and obesity. Modern sarcopenia 
definition includes low muscle mass, weak muscle strength (handgrip strength) and 
poor physical function (slow walking), although the clinical definition of each varies 
worldwide. The cut-points for low muscle mass for men and women using appendicular 
lean mass divided by height (kg/m2) are ≤7.0 and ≤5.4 in Asians, and ≤7.23 and ≤5.67 in 
Caucasians, respectively. The cut-points for weak handgrip strength (kg) for men and 
women are <26 and <18 in Asians, and <30 and <20 in Caucasians, respectively. The 
cut-point for slow walking is ≤0.8 m/s in men and women. Current data suggest the 
potential benefits of physical activity and fitness on sarcopenic obesity in older adults.
Lay abstract: Sarcopenic obesity (SO) is the combination of low muscle mass (sarcopenia) 
and obesity. The average prevalence of SO is about 5–10%. Older adults with SO 
have higher risks of mobility disability, cardiometabolic diseases and mortality. The 
medical problems related to SO are much greater than that in sarcopenia or obesity 
alone. Current studies suggest the potential benefits of physical activity, fitness and 
resistance exercise on the prevention and treatment of SO in older adults. This review 
highlights the importance of the development of effective public health strategies to 
prevent, delay and treat SO in older people. 
First draft submitted: 13 April 2016; Accepted for publication: 11 May 2016; Published 
online: 14 July 2016
Keywords: exercise • handgrip strength • muscle mass • physical activity • physical fitness 
• physical function • sarcopenia • sarcopenic obesity • walking speed
Sarcopenia from the Greek ‘sarco’ for flesh 
and ‘penia’ for loss originally referred to the 
loss of muscle mass as a natural aging pro-
cess [1]. In addition, older adults tend to gain 
fat mass with increasing age with a potential 
of developing obesity. Based on the national 
survey data published in 2014, more than 
one-third (35%) of American older adults 
are obese [2]. Additional concern is the rapid 
growing of the elderly population in most 
developed countries [3], resulting in a potent 
epidemiological confluence of risk factors for 
numerous health-related conditions. Consid-
ering that body composition includes both 
muscle and fat mass, there are four different 
body composition phenotypes, as described 
in Figure 1. The combination of high muscle 
mass and low fat mass is generally considered 
a healthy combination. Low muscle mass 
refers to sarcopenia and high fat mass refers 
to obesity. From a clinical perspective, the 
most concerning is the combination of low 
muscle mass plus high fat mass, termed sarco-
penic obesity (SO) due to the coexistence of 
sarcopenia and obesity. SO is more com-
mon in older adults than young adults due 
to the natural changes in body  
composition 
 
associated aging.
Physical activity and sarcopenic obesity: 
definition, assessment, prevalence and 
mechanism
Duck-chul Lee*,1, Robin P 
Shook1, Clemens Drenowatz2 
& Steven N Blair2,3
1Department of Kinesiology, College of 
Human Sciences, Iowa State University, 
Ames, IA 50011, USA 
2Department of Exercise Science, 
University of South Carolina, Columbia, 
SC 29208, USA 
3Department of Epidemiology 
& Biostatistics, University of South 
Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA 
*Author for correspondence:  
Tel.: +1 515 294 8042 
Fax: +1 515 294 8740  
dclee@iastate.edu
Review
part of
For reprint orders, please contact reprints@future-science.com
 Future Sci. OA (2016) 2(3)
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
future science group
Review    Lee, Shook, Drenowatz & Blair
Compelling evidence has shown that older adults 
with SO have higher risks of mobility disability [4–6], 
metabolic diseases [7,8], hypertension [9], cardiovascular 
diseases [10,11] and mortality [12–14], which is also related 
to significantly higher healthcare costs [15]. These clini-
cal problems related to SO are much greater than that 
in sarcopenia or obesity alone [4,9,12,13], which suggests 
that sarcopenia and obesity have independent and 
additive adverse effects on health in the elderly. How-
ever, despite this significant and rising public health 
concern, there is very little evidence on SO. Therefore, 
investigating and developing effective SO prevention 
and treatment programs should be a priority based on 
the dramatically increasing health impact of SO in 
aging populations.
Although a certain degree of muscle loss and fat 
gain due to aging is inevitable, the good news is that 
SO is a modifiable condition, thus could be prevented 
and treated following effective therapy. Among related 
factors to SO, physical activity has been recognized as 
a key lifestyle factor to prevent and delay muscle loss 
and obesity with aging [16–18]. However, a few data are 
currently available on the effects of physical activity on 
SO in older adults, although there is accumulating evi-
dence suggesting health benefits of physical  
activity on 
either sarcopenia or obesity. One of the major reasons of 
the limited data on SO is due to the differences in the 
definition and assessment of sarcopenia and SO among 
various working groups on sarcopenia. Also, data on 
the possible mechanisms of SO in various health con-
ditions and the role of physical activity on the devel-
opment of SO are still lacking. Therefore, the current 
review focuses specifically on SO including its clinical 
definition, assessment, diagnostic criteria, prevalence 
and potential mechanisms. We also explored and sum-
marized the associations of physical activity, physical 
fitness and exercise training with SO in older adults.
Method
In this review on physical activity and SO, we used 
PubMed to identify relevant peer-reviewed journal 
articles (the last search was conducted on 18 December 
2015). The search keywords included ‘physical activity’ 
or ‘exercise’ or ‘fitness’ and ‘sarcopenic obesity’ using 
the advanced search method. We included all original 
human studies from cross-sectional surveys, observa-
tional cohorts and clinical trials that are not limited 
by publication year, population age, gender or country. 
However, conference abstracts, review articles, editorials 
or commentaries were not included. A total of 96 arti-
cles were initially identified. We read each abstract and 
further reviewed references from selected and eligible 
articles for additional research. To be included in the 
quantitative analyses, we required data on risk ratios 
(odds ratios or relative risk) in observational studies or 
changes in SO variables in intervention studies, compar-
ing active or exercise groups against inactive or control 
groups. We found a total of six original research articles 
that investigated the associations of physical activity, fit-
ness or exercise with SO; five cross-sectional studies and 
one randomized controlled trial. In addition to study 
design, the characteristics of the selected studies were 
further assessed by study population, measurement of 
physical activity, fitness or exercise program, definitions 
of sarcopenia and obesity and the prevalence of SO. The 
data extracted from the selected studies are presented in 
Table 1 for comparisons among studies.
Assessment & definition of sarcopenic 
obesity
As mentioned previously, there currently is no universally 
adopted definition of SO, primarily due to the variations 
in the definition of sarcopenia (Table 2). Modern defi-
nitions of sarcopenia as a progressive medical condition 
includes not only loss of muscle mass, but also weak-
ness of muscle strength (handgrip strength) and/or poor 
physical function (performance), which are well-estab-
lished health predictors. Handgrip strength is a strong 
predictor of all-cause and cardiovascular mor 
tality in 
people of diverse economic and sociocultural back-
grounds based on a large longitudinal population study 
conducted in 17 countries [25]. The common physical 
function test, gait speed, is a significant pre 
dictor of dis-
ability [26] and survival [27]. In addition, there is support-
ing evidence indicating stronger associations of muscle 
strength with mobility limitations in older adults [28], 
but weak or no associations of muscle mass alone with 
mortality [29]. These data support the concept that con-
sideration should be made of all three sarco 
penia criteria: 
muscle mass, muscle strength and physical  
function.
Assessment of sarcopenia
Muscle mass
In recent studies, body composition to measure muscle 
mass was most commonly acquired from whole body 
Figure 1. Sarcopenic obesity by body composition 
phenotype.
Fat mass
High
Low
Low
Sarcopenia
Sarcopenic
obesity
Obesity
Healthy
High
Muscle mass
 www.future-science.com
future science group
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity    Review
Table 1. The associations of physical activity, physical fitness or exercise training with sarcopenic obesity.
Study (year), 
country
Sample 
size
Mean 
age 
(range)
Study 
design
Physical activity/
fitness/exercise
Sarcopenia definition Obesity 
definition
Sarcopenic obesity 
prevalence
Main results
Ref. 
Bouchard et al. 
(2009), Canada
904 (465 
women)
74 
(68–82)
Cross-
sectional
Physical fitness 
using four tests 
(timed up and 
go, chair stand, 
walking speed 
and leg stand)
Two SDs below the 
mean ALM/height2 
of young adults 
(20–35 years) using 
DXA (<8.51 kg/m2 in 
men and <6.29 kg/m2 
in women)
% body fat of 
≥28% in men 
and ≥35% in 
women using 
DXA
Men: 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 30% 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   obese: 31% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 20% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 19% 
Women: 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 23% 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   obese: 59% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 7% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 11% 
Physical 
fitness was 
more strongly 
associated with 
obesity than 
sarcopenia
[19]
Hwang et al. (2012), 
South Korea
2221 
(1257 
women)
70 (≥60) Cross-
sectional
Self-reported 
physical activity 
on frequencies 
of resistance 
exercise, 
flexibility exercise 
and walking time 
per day
Two SDs below 
the mean (ALM/
weight) × 100 of 
healthy young adults 
(20–39 years) using 
DXA (29.53% in 
men and 23.20% in 
women)
Waist 
circumference 
≥90 cm in men 
and ≥85 cm in 
women
Men: 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 70% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 6% 
Women: 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 57% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 7% 
’Nonsarcopenic and 
obese’ and 
’Sarcopenic and 
nonobese’ were 
excluded in the 
analyses
Although not 
significant, 
higher levels of 
physical activity 
were associated 
with lower risk 
of SO
[20]
ALM: Appendicular lean mass (arms and legs); BIA: Bioelectrical impedance analysis; DXA: Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry; EWGSOP: European Working Group on Sarcopenia in Older People; 
RCT: Randomized controlled trial; SD: Standard deviation; SMM: Skeletal muscle mass (whole body); SO: Sarcopenic obesity.
 Future Sci. OA (2016) 2(3)
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
future science group
Review    Lee, Shook, Drenowatz & Blair
Study (year), 
country
Sample 
size
Mean 
age 
(range)
Study 
design
Physical activity/
fitness/exercise
Sarcopenia definition Obesity 
definition
Sarcopenic obesity 
prevalence
Main results
Ref. 
Ryu et al. (2013), 
South Korea
2264 
(1324 
women)
78 (≥65) Cross-
sectional
Physical activity 
using the 
International 
Physical Activity 
Questionnaire
Two SDs below the 
mean (ALM/weight) × 
100 of healthy young 
adults (20–39 years) 
using DXA (cut-points 
not reported)
Waist 
circumference 
≥90 cm in men 
and ≥85 cm in 
women
Men: 
– Nonsarcopenic: 89% 
– Sarcopenic: 11% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 7% 
Women: 
– Nonsarcopenic: 88% 
– Sarcopenic: 12% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 7%
Higher levels of 
physical activity 
was associated 
with a reduced 
risk of SO
[21]
Muñoz-
Arribas et al.(2013), 
Spain
306 (230 
women)
82.5
Cross-
sectional
Physical fitness 
using eight tests 
(leg stand, chair 
stand, arm curl, 
chair sit-and-
reach, back 
scratch, 8-foot 
up-and-go, 30-m 
brisk walk and 
6-min walk)
The lowest two 
quintiles of SMM/
height2 Using BIA 
(<8.62 kg/m2 in men 
and <6.20 kg/m2 in 
women)
The highest two 
quintiles of% 
body fat using 
BIA (≥30.34% 
in men and 
≥40.91% in 
women)
Men: 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 30% 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   obese: 15% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 30% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 25% 
Women: 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 30% 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   obese: 17% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 28% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 25%
Adequate levels 
of physical 
fitness were 
associated with 
a lower risk of 
SO
[22]
ALM: Appendicular lean mass (arms and legs); BIA: Bioelectrical impedance analysis; DXA: Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry; EWGSOP: European Working Group on Sarcopenia in Older People; 
RCT: Randomized controlled trial; SD: Standard deviation; SMM: Skeletal muscle mass (whole body); SO: Sarcopenic obesity.
Table 1. The associations of physical activity, physical fitness or exercise training with sarcopenic obesity (cont.).
 www.future-science.com
future science group
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity    Review
Study (year), 
country
Sample 
size
Mean 
age 
(range)
Study 
design
Physical activity/
fitness/exercise
Sarcopenia definition Obesity 
definition
Sarcopenic obesity 
prevalence
Main results
Ref. 
Pedrero-
Chamizo et al. 
(2015), Spain
2747 
(2102 
women)
72 
(65–92)
Cross-
sectional
Physical fitness 
using eight tests 
(leg stand, chair 
stand, arm curl, 
chair sit-and-
reach, back 
scratch, 8-foot 
up-and-go, 30-m 
brisk walk and 
6-min walk)
The lowest two 
quintiles of SMM/
height2 using BIA 
(<8.62 kg/m2 in men 
and <6.20 kg/m2 in 
women)
The highest two 
quintiles of% 
body fat using 
BIA (≥30.34% 
in men and 
≥40.91% in 
women)
Men: 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 36% 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   obese: 25% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 23% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 16% 
Women: 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 37% 
– Nonsarcopenic and  
   obese: 23% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   nonobese: 24% 
– Sarcopenic and  
   obese: 16%
Higher levels of 
physical fitness 
were associated 
with a reduced 
risk of SO
[23]
Balachandran et al. 
(2014), USA
17 
included 
in the 
analysis 
(16 
women)
71 
(60–90)
RCT
15-week 
traditional 
strength/
hypertrophy 
training versus 
high-speed circuit 
training
Meeting ≥2 out of 
the three sarcopenia 
criteria: SMM/
height2 using BIA 
(<10.76 kg/m2 in men 
and <6.76 kg/m2 in 
women), gait speed 
(<1 m/s) and handgrip 
strength (<30 kg 
in men and <20 in 
women) according 
to the EWGSOP 
definition
Body mass index 
>30 kg/m2
All 17 study 
participants had SO 
at baseline 
The primary outcome 
was the short physical 
performance battery 
(SPPB) test including 
4-m usual gait speed, 
chair stand and 
standing balance 
tests 
Secondary outcomes 
include muscle 
strength and power 
tests using leg and 
chest presses
A significant 
20% 
improvement in 
SPPB was found 
in the high-
speed circuit 
training group. 
Both resistance 
training 
groups showed 
significant 
improvements in 
muscle strength 
and power
[24]
ALM: Appendicular lean mass (arms and legs); BIA: Bioelectrical impedance analysis; DXA: Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry; EWGSOP: European Working Group on Sarcopenia in Older People; 
RCT: Randomized controlled trial; SD: Standard deviation; SMM: Skeletal muscle mass (whole body); SO: Sarcopenic obesity.
Table 1. The associations of physical activity, physical fitness or exercise training with sarcopenic obesity (cont.).
 Future Sci. OA (2016) 2(3)
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
future science group
Review    Lee, Shook, Drenowatz & Blair
Table 2. Clinical definition of sarcopenia.
Group
Diagnostic criteria and cut-points for sarcopenia
Ref.
 
Physical function
 
Muscle strength
 
Muscle mass
European Working Group on Sarcopenia 
in Older People (EWGSOP, 2010) 
Gait speed ≤0.8 m/s
Or
Handgrip strength
And
DXA ALM/height2 
[30]
 
 
Men: <30 kg
 
Men: ≤7.23 kg/m2
 
 
 
Women: <20 kg
 
Women: ≤5.67 kg/m2
 
 
 
 
 
BIA SMM/height2
 
 
 
 
 
 
Men: <8.87 kg/m2†
 
 
 
 
 
 
Women: <6.42 kg/m2†
 
 
 
 
 
 
Men: <10.76 kg/m2‡
 
 
 
 
 
 
Women: <6.76 kg/m2‡
 
International Working Group on 
Sarcopenia (IWGS, 2011) 
Gait speed <1.0 m/s
 
 
And
DXA ALM/height2
[31]
 
 
 
 
Men: ≤7.23 kg/m2
 
 
 
 
 
 
Women: ≤5.67 kg/m2
 
Asian Working Group for Sarcopenia 
(AWGS, 2014)
Gait speed ≤0.8 m/s
Or
Handgrip strength
And
DXA ALM/height2
[32]
 
 
Men: <26 kg
 
Men: ≤7.0 kg/m2
 
 
 
 
Women: <18 kg
 
Women: ≤5.4 kg/m2
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIA ALM/height2§
 
 
 
 
 
 
Men: ≤7.0 kg/m2
 
 
 
 
 
 
Women: ≤5.7 kg/m2
 
Foundation for the NIH Sarcopenia 
Project (FNIHSP, 2014) 
Gait speed ≤0.8 m/s
And Handgrip strength
And
DXA ALM/BMI
[33]
 
 
Men: <26 kg
 
Men: <0.789
 
 
 
 
Women: <16 kg
 
Women: <0.512
 
†The cut-points were developed based on total body skeletal muscle mass using BIA in Asians [34].
‡The cut-points were developed based on total body skeletal muscle mass using BIA in Caucasians [35].
§The cut-points were developed based on appendicular skeletal muscle mass using BIA in Asians [32].
ALM: Appendicular lean mass (arms and legs); BIA: Bioelectrical impedance analysis; BMI: Body mass index; DXA: Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry; SMM: Skeletal 
muscle mass (whole body).
dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA). For skeletal 
muscle mass (SMM), appendicular lean mass (ALM) 
is generally used, which is calculated as the sum of lean 
mass in arms and legs without including fat and bone 
mass using DXA. ALM is also referred to as appen-
dicular SMM or appendicular fat free mass. To define 
sarcopenia, relative muscle mass is typically utilized 
because absolute muscle mass is highly correlated with 
height or weight. Similar to body mass index calculation 
(total body weight divided by height squared, kg/m2), 
most sarcopenia definitions utilized the ALM index, 
ALM in kg divided by height squared in meter (kg/
m2) [30–32] or divided by body mass index (BMI) [33], 
as a ratio of muscle mass to height or BMI. The cut-
point of the height adjusted ALM index for low muscle 
mass was mostly established as two SD below the mean 
value of sex-specific reference values in healthy young 
adults (18–40 years), which was originally proposed 
by Baumgartner et al. [36]. One of the limitations of 
using ALM from DXA is that ALM does not include 
trunk muscles such as chest and back muscles, one of 
the largest muscle groups in humans. It is because the 
trunk has body organs (heart, lung and intestines) and 
DXA cannot accurately distinguish these from muscle 
mass. However, because people use their arms and legs 
in most daily activities as well as during resistance exer-
cise to develop chest and back muscles, it is likely that 
trunk muscle mass is highly correlated to ALM. There-
fore, using ALM from DXA is reasonable, although 
using total body lean mass including trunk muscles is 
ideal in future studies with more advanced technolo-
gies for total body composition assessment [37]. Also, 
based on its accuracy and availability, DXA is useful 
and practical for research and clinical use. Further, 
DXA has relatively low radiation compared with other 
imaging technologies such as computed tomography 
(CT) or MRI, which are more precise, yet expen-
sive and have more radiation exposure. However, all 
these imaging technologies and equipment (DXA, 
CT and MRI) are not portable, which is important 
in large epidemiological studies in populations. There-
fore, more research is needed to define sarcopenia 
 www.future-science.com
future science group
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity    Review
and SO using other traditional or modern technolo-
gies that are safe, inexpensive and widely available 
including anthropometry (e.g., midupper arm or calf 
circum 
ference) [38,39], bioelectrical impedance analysis 
(BIA) [40] and  
ultrasound [37].
Muscle strength
Handgrip (grip) strength has been widely used for 
muscle strength measurement, because it is inexpen-
sive, easy to use and well correlated with most relevant 
health outcomes such as mortality [25]. Handgrip 
strength is measured by a handheld dynamometer, 
mostly using Jamar dynamometer and the maximum 
value from either hand or combined from both hands 
are analyzed [30]. However, because leg strength is more 
related to physical functions such as gait, chair stand-
ing and stair climbing, leg strength tests also have been 
utilized, especially in research studies. Common leg 
strength tests are knee flexion and extension at various 
velocities using isokinetic equipment (e.g., Biodex). 
This isokinetic test measures muscle power (work per 
unit time), which is the capacity of muscles to rapidly 
exert force as a measure of the explosiveness of the mus-
cle. Measuring power may also be important in sarco-
penia research in older adults because it is suggested 
that power could be a better predictor of functional 
capacities, as power is lost faster than strength during 
aging [41,42]. Another strength test is the one repetition 
maximum (1-RM) test, commonly using bench and/or 
leg presses. This test is traditionally used by athletic or 
fitness trainers to evaluate training programs. However, 
there is also strong evidence indicating health benefits 
of increased total body muscle strength measured by 
1-RM test in general populations [43–45]. Never 
theless, 
because isokinetic and 1-RM tests need special equip-
ment and proper training, they are less practical in 
clinical use. Therefore, more feasible as well as reli-
able lower body and total body strength tests, which 
are highly correlated with physical function, should be 
continuously developed and validated.
Physical function
There are a wide range of physical function tests, 
including usual gait speed, 6 min or 400-m walk tests, 
timed get-up-and-go test, chair stand test and the short 
physical performance battery, which is a composite 
measure of balance, gait and leg strength. However, 
usual gait speed is the most popular physical func-
tion and performance test in clinical practice and sar-
copenia research because it is simple, fast and easy to 
measure as a predictor of mobility limitations and mor-
tality in general populations, as well as patients after 
cardiac surgery [46–48]. Habitual gait speed was mostly 
measured at the usual pace on a 4- or 6-m course, and 
the average or the best value was used. Inability to 
rise from a chair was also considered as an alternate 
 
definition of mobility disability [30,31].
Definitions & prevalence of sarcopenia
Because sarcopenia no longer refers purely to loss of 
muscle mass, there are differences in how sarcopenia 
is defined. Table 2 shows various clinical definitions 
of sarcopenia by major professional organizations and 
groups on sarcopenia.
The European Working Group on Sarcopenia in 
Older People (EWGSOP) recommends using the pres-
ence of low muscle mass plus either low muscle strength 
or poor physical function for the diagnosis of sarco-
penia [30]. They noted that defining sarcopenia using 
only muscle mass is too narrow and may be of limited 
clinical value based on the fact that muscle strength 
does not depend solely on muscle mass and the rela-
tionship between strength and mass is not linear [49]. 
They further defined conceptual stages as ‘presarco-
penia’ (low muscle mass), ‘sarcopenia’ (low muscle 
mass plus either low muscle strength or poor physical 
function) and ‘severe sarcopenia’ (low muscle mass, low 
muscle strength and poor physical function) based on 
the single or combination of three sarcopenia criteria 
to help select appropriate treatment and recovery goals. 
To define sarcopenia, the EWGSOP recommends a 
cut-point at two SDs below the mean value of healthy 
young reference adults. To identify sarcopenia cases, 
they suggest initially measuring gait speed, as it is con-
sidered the easiest and most reliable assessment, using 
the cut-point value of ≤0.8 m/s (slow walkers). Then, 
assessments of either handgrip strength or muscle mass 
should be followed based on walking speed. For slow 
walkers, the muscle mass assessment is then completed 
to define sarcopenia. For fast walkers, the handgrip 
strength test is additionally suggested to define low 
muscle strength, then final muscle mass was assessed. 
Therefore, in both cases, low muscle mass in addition to 
poor physical function and/or poor handgrip strength 
is necessary to be diagnosed with sarcopenia. In terms 
of numeric definitions, the EWGSOP recommends 
several cut-points for muscle mass based on different 
studies and measurement techniques. Among those 
different cut-points for muscle mass, we selected ALM 
index measured using DXA of 7.23 kg/m2 for men and 
5.67 kg/m2 for women, which is the same cut-point 
recommended by the International Working Group on 
Sarcopenia (IWGS) 1 year later [31]. These cut-points 
were also used in another study to compare different 
sarcopenia definitions [50]. Also, the EWGSOP pro-
vides two other cut-points for low total body SMM 
measured by BIA, including cut-points of <8.87 kg/m2 
for men and <6.42 kg/m2 for women, which were vali-
 Future Sci. OA (2016) 2(3)
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
future science group
Review    Lee, Shook, Drenowatz & Blair
dated by comparing with MRI [34]. The other provided 
BIA-based cut-points were <10.76 kg/m2 for men and 
<6.76 kg/m2 for women, which were developed based 
on a large US national sample of 4449 older adults [35].
In the sarcopenia definition by the IWGS, the diag-
nosis of sarcopenia was given to individuals with poor 
physical function plus low muscle mass, without con-
sidering handgrip strength [31]. Poor physical function 
is defined as individuals who are bedridden, nonambu-
latory, cannot independently rise from a chair or who 
have a measured gait speed <1.0 m/s (most easily iden-
tifiable measure). These individuals with poor physi-
cal function should be further examined for muscle 
mass. Low muscle mass is defined by ALM index of 
≤7.23 kg/m2 in men and ≤5.67 kg/m2 in women using 
DXA. These cut-points of ALM index for sarcopenia 
were developed based on the sex-specific lowest 20% 
of the distribution of the ALM index from the Health 
ABC Study (3075 well-functioning men and women 
aged 70–79 recruited in 1997–1998 from a random 
sample of Medicare enrollees in Pennsylvania and 
 
Tennessee in USA) [51].
The Asian Working Group for Sarcopenia (AWGS) 
supports using both DXA and BIA to define low 
muscle mass for sarcopenia diagnosis [32]. They indi-
cated that although DXA may be the most widely used 
method for muscle mass assessment in sarcopenia stud-
ies, BIA is suitable based on its portability, reasonable 
cost, fast processing, noninvasiveness, radiation-free 
functions and convenience, especially in community-
based screening programs. They provide evidence sug-
gesting a reliable estimation of ALM from BIA, using 
DXA as a reference method in community-dwelling 
Japanese older women [52]. In another study in elderly 
Taiwanese men, results of fat-free mass using BIA were 
also associated with the results using DXA [53]. The 
AWGS recommends using two SDs below the mean 
muscle mass of a young reference group or the lower 
quintile as the cut-point value. They also recommend 
using height-adjusted ALM index, and cut-points for 
low muscle mass as 7.0 kg/m2 in men and 5.4 kg/m2 
in women by using DXA, and 7.0 kg/m2 in men and 
5.7 kg/m2 in women by using BIA. However, the cut-
points in Asians are lower than those of Caucasian 
populations using the same DXA, recommended by 
the EWGSOP and IWGS groups on sarcopenia. This 
is because of relatively low prevalence of sarcopenia 
in Asian studies, which is partly due to lower body 
weight in Asians, compared with Caucasians. There 
are also differences in socioeconomic factors, lifestyle 
and culture between Asians and Caucasians. Regard-
ing muscle strength, most Asian sarcopenia research 
studies used handgrip strength, the AWGS also recom-
mends it as a feasible and convenient measure, similar 
to other sarcopenia definitions. The cut-point values of 
low handgrip strength are suggested to be defined as 
26 kg in men and 18 kg in women. Regarding physical 
function, the AWGS recommends using a 6-m usual 
walking speed. After extensive review of Asian data, 
slow walking speed was defined as ≤0.8 m/s, which is 
consistent with the EWGSOP and the US definitions 
below. However, they reported that there is a poten-
tial gender difference in the cut-point value of usual 
 
walking speed with a wide range from 0.6 to 1.2 m/s.
In the US Foundation for the National Institutes 
of Health Sarcopenia Project (FNIHSP), a total of 
26,625 participants (11,427 men and 15,198 women) 
were included in the pooled data analyses from nine 
studies after excluding participants <65 years old [33]. 
This is one of the largest sarcopenia projects incorpo-
rating diverse populations from different races, eth-
nicities, geographic regions and a range of health and 
functional status. The average age was 75.2 years for 
men and 78.6 years for women. The average BMIs were 
27.1 kg/m2 in men and 26.9 kg/m2 in women. They 
recommended sequential screening and case identifi-
cation processes: screening for physical function first 
using gait speed, followed by strength assessment using 
handgrip strength and then assessment of lean mass 
using DXA. The FNIHSP selected a usual gait speed 
≤0.8 m/s for poor physical function, which is the same 
cut-point suggested by the EWGSOP and the AWGS 
groups. They reported that 10% of men and 31% of 
women had gait speed ≤0.8 m/s. The final recom-
mended cut-points for muscle weakness were hand-
grip strength <26 kg for men and <16 kg for women. 
Regarding muscle mass assessment, experts in the 
study preferred a measure that accounts for body mass 
index instead of height that was suggested earlier in 
other sarcopenia groups. The final recommended cut-
points of ALM/BMI index for low muscle mass using 
DXA were <0.789 for men and <0.512 for women.
Based on a review of the recommendations by four 
major working groups on sarcopenia above, and a care-
ful examination of the existing literature, we propose 
the following recommendations (Table 3).
First, slow walking (poor physical function) was 
most commonly defined as gait speed of ≤0.8 m/s in 
both men and women regardless of race and ethnic-
ity. This cut-point is supported by the European, Asian 
and the US groups. For muscle strength and mass, 
it is more appropriate to use separate cut-points for 
Asians and Caucasians based on higher adiposity in 
Asians given the same body weight [54], lower handgrip 
strength in Asians [25], lower prevalence of sarcopenia 
in Asians [32] and different lifestyle and cultural factors 
between Asians and Caucasians of European origin. 
This approach is also in line with different cut-points 
 www.future-science.com
future science group
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity    Review
for obesity between Asians (BMI ≥25 mg/m2) and 
Caucasians (BMI ≥30 mg/m2), suggested by the World 
Health Organization [55]. The recommended cut-
points for low handgrip strength (muscle weakness) 
are <26 kg in men and <18 kg in women in Asians, 
as suggested by the Asian group and <30 kg in men 
and <20 kg in women in Caucasians, as suggested by 
the European group. However, the US group suggested 
lower cut-points (<26 kg in men and <16 kg in women) 
for low handgrip strength than that by the European 
group. Based on the lower levels of handgrip strength in 
Asians [25], using the higher cut-points for weak hand-
grip strength in Caucasians suggested by the European 
group would be reasonable. However, more studies are 
needed to identify universal cut-points for low hand-
grip strength in Caucasians, which should be predict-
able of health outcomes such as functional disability 
and mortality. Regarding low muscle mass to define 
sarcopenia, we recommend cut-points of ALM/height2 
≤7.0 kg/m2 in men and ≤5.4 kg/m2 in women using 
DXA in Asians, as suggested by the Asian group. For 
Caucasians, ALM/height2 of ≤7.23 kg/m2 in men and 
≤5.67 kg/m2 in women using DXA were suggested 
by European and international groups. However, 
BMI adjusted ALM cut-points of <0.789 in men and 
<0.512 in women could also be used in Caucasians, 
as suggested by the US group. Also, in large popula-
tion studies when DXA is not available, BIA-based 
cut-points for low muscle mass shown in Table 2 could 
be a practical option. All four major working groups 
on sarcopenia recommend low muscle mass as a core 
diagnostic criteria for sarcopenia. However, there is an 
inconsistency regarding other diagnostic criteria for 
sarcopenia. The European and Asian groups recom-
mend that either slow walking speed or low handgrip 
strength should additionally be included for sarcopenia 
diagnosis, whereas the US group suggests to include 
both slow walking speed and low handgrip strength in 
addition to low muscle mass. On the other hand, the 
IWGS includes only slow walking speed, but not mus-
cle strength, in their diagnostic criteria for sarcopenia 
in addition to low muscle mass. Therefore, more stud-
ies are needed whether using all three criteria or which 
two criteria increases diagnostic power. At this point, 
we recommend to include at least either slow walking 
speed or low handgrip strength in addition to low mus-
cle mass based on the current  
recommendations by the 
 
European and Asian groups.
A recent study compared sarcopenia prevalence using 
different definitions based on data from nine studies in 
an older adults population aged ≥65 years old (a total 
of 7113 men and 2950 women were included in the 
analyses) [50]. They found that the prevalence of sarco-
penia was higher in women than men. They also found 
lower prevalence of sarcopenia with the US definition 
(1.3% in men and 2.3% in women), compared with 
the European definition (5.3% in men and 13.3% in 
women) and Asian definition (5.1% in men and 11.8% 
in women). Therefore, BMI adjusted ALM compared 
with height adjusted ALM in defining sarco 
penia may 
result in a more conservative definition. These different 
definitions, even in the same Caucasian populations, 
make it difficult to compare results between stud-
ies. Therefore, it is important to develop a universal 
 
criterion and definition for the diagnosis of sarcopenia.
Definition & prevalence of sarcopenic obesity
Theoretically, SO has been narrowly defined by low 
muscle mass and high fat mass, as described earlier 
in Figure 1. However, recent SO studies have used 
an expanded diagnostic criteria for identifying both 
sarco 
penia and obesity, which also incorporates single 
or combination of different assessments of sarcopenia 
and the quantification of both systemic and central 
 
adiposity (Figure 2).
In addition, the cut-point values of each sarcope-
nia and obesity criterion are also different between 
studies, depending on population, gender, age, race 
and ethnicity. Most studies used ALM index divided 
by height2 <2.0 SDs [4,5,19,56] or ALM index divided 
by weight ≤2.0 SDs [8,20,21,57] using DXA to define 
sarco 
penia. However, other studies used the low-
est two quintiles of SMM divided by height2 using 
BIA [22,23], handgrip strength lowest tertile [58,59] or 
walking speed ≤0.8 m/s [60]. To define obesity, some 
studies used BMI ≥30 kg/m2 in men and women [51,59] 
Table 3. Recommendation for the diagnostic criteria and cut-points for sarcopenia.
Population
Physical function  
(gait speed)
 
Muscle strength 
(handgrip strength)
 
Muscle mass  
(DXA ALM/height2)
Asian
Men: ≤0.8 m/s
Or 
Men: <26 kg
And
Men: ≤7.00 kg/m2
 
Women: ≤0.8 m/s
Women: <18 kg
 
Women: ≤5.40 kg/m2
Caucasian
Men: ≤0.8 m/s
Or
Men: <30 kg
And
Men: ≤7.23 kg/m2
 
Women: ≤0.8 m/s
Women: <20 kg
 
Women: ≤5.67 kg/m2
ALM: Appendicular lean mass; DXA: Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry.
 Future Sci. OA (2016) 2(3)
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
future science group
Review    Lee, Shook, Drenowatz & Blair
or BMI >27.5 kg/m2 in men [60], and others used dif-
ferent % body fat values of >27% in men and >38% 
in women [4], >28% in men and >35% in women [19], 
>30% in men and >40% in women [5,61] or the high-
est two quintiles of % body fat [22,23]. Instead of BMI 
or % body fat, some studies also used visceral fat 
area >100 cm2 by CT scan [8], or waist circumfer-
ence upper tertile [58], ≥90 cm in men and ≥85 cm 
in women [20,21,57] or >102 cm in men and >88 cm in 
women [56]. Due to these various cut-point values of 
sarcopenia and obesity, comparing findings between 
studies are challenging. Also, the prevalence of SO var-
ies significantly from 0 to 25% in older adults between 
studies depending on study populations and the defini-
tions of SO. However, considering all studies together 
found above, the approximate average prevalence of 
SO in older adults is about 5–10%, and it is similar 
between men and women. In general, the SO preva-
lence is lower (3–8%) using height adjusted ALM 
index [4,5,60,61] compared with weight or BMI adjusted 
ALM index (6–10%) [20,21,56,57] in defining sarco-
penia, as indicated earlier in the prevalence of sarco-
penia [16,33,50]. Also, the SO prevalence is significantly 
higher in people aged ≥80 years, compared with that in 
older adults aged <80 years. However, SO prevalence 
was higher (16–25%) when a more arbitrary defini-
tion of SO was used such as the lowest two quintiles 
of muscle mass or the highest two quintiles of % body 
fat [22,23].
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity
Regular physical activity, including both aerobic and 
resistance exercise, is a significant modifiable factor for 
the prevention and treatment of obesity in the general 
population or sarcopenia in older adults. Although phys-
ical activity has generally been shown to prevent weight 
gain and reduce fat mass in people with obesity, while 
also improving muscle mass and strength in sarco 
penic 
older people, there are still very limited data regarding 
the benefit of physical activity in individuals with SO. 
Table 1 shows the summary of current studies that have 
investigated the associations of physical activity,  
physical 
fitness or exercise training with SO in older adults.
In the Quebec Longitudinal Study involving 
904 older adults (mean age: 74 years), the authors 
investigated the associations between SO and physical 
fitness using objective measures of body composition 
and physical fitness in independent older adults [19]. 
In both men and women, they found that both sarco-
penic obese and nonsarcopenic obese groups had lower 
physical fitness levels (measured by timed up and go, 
chair stand, walking speed and leg stand), compared 
with nonsarcopenic normal weight individuals after 
adjusting for age, physical activity and the sum of 
medical conditions such as cardiac problems, stroke, 
diabetes, lung diseases, digestive diseases, arthritis and 
osteoporosis. However, the sarcopenic obese group had 
similar fitness levels compared with the nonsarcopenic 
obese group. Therefore, obesity rather than sarcopenia 
Figure 2. Diagnostic criteria for sarcopenic obesity.
Sarcopenic obesity
Sarcopenia
Obesity
Low muscle mass
Slow walking
Weak handgrip strength
High body mass index
High fat mass
High waist circumference
 www.future-science.com
future science group
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity    Review
appears to contribute more to lower physical fitness in 
these well-functioning older men and women.
In the Korean study of 2221 elderly population 
(mean age: 70 years), investigators examined the 
associations of exercise and walking with SO [20]. 
Although all results did not reach statistical signifi-
cance, they reported that men who participated in 
resistance exercise ≥3 times/week, flexibility exercise 
≥3-times/week or walking ≥1 h/day had 53, 30 and 
49% lower odds of SO, respectively, compared with 
no resistance exercise, no flexibility exercise or walk-
ing <30 min/day, respectively, after adjusting for age. 
Similar but slightly weaker associations were found in 
women. In addition, high serum insulin was signifi-
cantly associated with increased risk of SO, whereas 
high vitamin D level was associated with lower risk 
of SO among metabolic and nutritional factors. In 
another Korean study, investigators used a nation-
ally representative non 
institutionalized elderly sam-
ple of 2264 older adults aged ≥65 years (mean age: 
78 years) to examine the association between physical 
activity and SO. They found that men participating 
in moderate (e.g., ≥600 MET-min/week) and high 
(e.g., ≥3000 MET-min/week) physical activity had 
51 and 75% significantly lower odds of SO, respec-
tively, compared with low activity that did not meet 
the moderate or high activity criteria [21]. These results 
were adjusted for age, education level, lifestyle factors 
(smoking and alcohol) and medical conditions (heart 
disease, stroke, diabetes, hypertension and hyperlipid-
emia). In women, only high, but not moderate, physi-
cal activity was associated with 57% lower odds of SO, 
compared with low activity in the same analysis model. 
Therefore, this study suggested that there is a gender 
difference in the relationship between physical activ-
ity and SO, with stronger associations in men than 
in women. However, these differences may be due to 
different physical activity patterns between men and 
women, rather than biologically driven. For example, 
men tend to engage in more vigorous-intensity sport-
ing activity and resistance exercise, whereas women 
perform more  
light-intensity domestic activities.
In the Spanish study of 306 octogenarians (mean 
age: 83 years), physical fitness predicted the risk of SO 
in both men and women [22]. Specifically, leg and arm 
strengths, agility, walking speed and balance in men, 
and agility and balance in women were more strongly 
associated with SO. Another larger Spanish study in 
Figure 3.  Relationship between physical activity and sarcopenic obesity.
Aging
Physical activity decline
Diet (protein intake decline)
Muscle loss (sarcopenia) plus fat gain (obesity)
Sarcopenic obesity
Increased risks of mobility disability, falling and fracture, low quality of life and 
independence, metabolic diseases (diabetes, metabolic syndrome), and cardiovascular 
dieseases (hypertension, heart attack, stroke)
Premature mortality
 Future Sci. OA (2016) 2(3)
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
future science group
Review    Lee, Shook, Drenowatz & Blair
2747 noninstitutionalized elderly population (mean 
age: 72 years) reported similar findings indicating 
that lower physical fitness levels were associated with 
an increased risk of SO [23]. Further, balance, aerobic 
capacity and walking speed were identified as the most 
sensitive fitness tests associated with the risk of SO 
with 70–80% significantly lower odds of SO in the 
highest tertile compared with the lowest tertile of each 
fitness test score in each gender after adjusting for age. 
However, body strength and flexibility were less related 
to the risk of SO with 20–70% lower odds of SO in the 
highest tertile compared with the lowest tertile of each 
fitness test score in both men and women.
We found only one randomized controlled trial that 
investigated the effects of a 15-week resistance training 
on physical function in 17 US older adults aged 60–90 
years (mean age: 71 years) with SO at baseline [24]. Physi-
cal function was assessed using the short physical perfor-
mance battery test including 4-m usual gait speed, chair 
stand and standing balance tests. Participants were ran-
domly assigned either traditional strength/hypertrophy 
(SH) training or high-speed circuit (HSC) power train-
ing. The traditional SH training group performed three 
sets of 10–12 repetitions using 70% of their one repeti-
tion maximum on 11 exercises with 1–2 min of recovery 
between sets. The participants were instructed to per-
form the concentric and eccentric phases of each exercise 
in 2 s. The HSC power training group performed the 
same sets and repetitions using relatively lower intensity 
(lower weight) with no recovery between sets. Also, the 
participants were instructed to perform the concentric 
phases of each exercise as fast as possible, and perform 
the eccentric phase in 2 s. Investigators found a signifi-
cant 20% improvement in physical function in the HSC 
power training, and a nonsignificant 7% improvement 
in the traditional SH training group. However, they 
found significant improvements in muscle strength and 
power using leg and chest press tests in both resistance 
training groups. This study clearly suggests the treat-
ment effect of resistance exercise in SO patients, spe-
cifically that high-speed muscle power training (moving 
resistance at higher velocities) could be more beneficial 
to improve physical function. However, due to the small 
sample size (n = 17) and a short intervention (15 weeks), 
additional research on this topic is warranted.
All six studies suggested potential health benefits of 
physical activity, fitness and resistance exercise train-
ing on SO in older adults in different populations, 
although the strength of the associations were differ-
ent between studies. Therefore, the results between 
studies must be interpreted with caution, and there are 
several factors affecting the differences among studies 
such as different methods to measure physical activity, 
fitness or body composition; different cut-point values 
to categorize individuals with sarco 
penia and/or obe-
sity; age and health conditions of the study populations 
and different study design. Five out of six studies used 
a cross-sectional study design, and there is only one 
small exercise intervention study with a short train-
ing period of 15 weeks. Therefore, causality between 
physical activity and SO cannot be established in most 
studies, and the effect of changes in physical activity 
over time on SO remains to be determined. Thus, lon-
gitudinal studies are needed to investigate long-term 
effects of physical activity and fitness on SO in older 
individuals. Also, more studies are needed to estab-
lish the most effective type or combination of exercise 
and its optimal amount and intensity for the preven-
tion and management of SO. Furthermore, to mini-
mize unfavorable adverse events, exercise prescription 
should consider the higher risk of injury or complica-
tions in the elderly due to clinical conditions such as 
osteoporosis or cardiometabolic diseases.
In addition to physical activity, diet including ade-
quate protein intake and amino acid supplementation 
is another key factor in effectively enhancing body 
composition, as recommended for the management of 
sarcopenia and SO [17,18,62,63]. In a recent study, exercise 
combined with amino acid supplementation was most 
effective in improving muscle mass, strength and walk-
ing speed in women with sarcopenia [64]. Another strat-
egy besides exercise and diet could include a pharma-
ceutical approach such as hormone therapy (growth 
hormone), since low levels of growth hormone are a risk 
factor for sarcopenia [65]. SO is a continuous process 
for years and decades, although it progresses and accel-
erates faster after the age of 60. Therefore, multiple 
lifelong approaches combining physical activity, diet 
and potentially pharmaceutical interventions should be 
considered for the prevention and treatment of SO.
Mechanisms linking physical activity to 
sarcopenic obesity
SO is a multifaceted medical condition with a com-
plicated etiology and results in varying health con-
sequences. The central cause of SO in older adults 
is the age-related decline in muscle mass and accu-
mulation of fat mass, directly or indirectly through 
changes in physical activity and diet, as illustrated in 
Figure 3. SO, however, can also occur in young adults. 
For example, due to repetitive extreme diet for weight 
loss (yo-yo diet) following excessive caloric restriction 
and unbalanced diet, which may cause muscle loss, 
weight regain and obesity [66]. However, fat distribu-
tion may be different in SO in older adults with more 
intramuscular (fat infiltration into muscle) [28,67] and 
visceral fat increase and subcutaneous fat decrease 
with aging [68].
 www.future-science.com
future science group
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity    Review
Possible reasons for the decline in aerobic and muscle- 
strengthening physical activity by aging include a 
decreased occupational activity after retirement, osteo-
arthritis and muscular skeletal injuries, fear of falling 
and fracture risk due to osteoporosis and decreased inter-
est and physical ability in sports and exercise. In addi-
tion, decreased appetite and gastrointestinal function 
by aging may also reduce protein intake and digestion, 
which attributes to muscle loss due to decreased muscle 
protein synthesis [69], leading to sarcopenia and SO.
SO is associated with or leads to several adverse 
outcomes with increased risks of mobility disabil-
ity [4–6], falling and fracture [70], low quality of life 
and independence [49], metabolic diseases [7,8] and 
cardio 
vascular diseases [9–11], which increases risk of 
premature mortality [12–14]. Potential mechanisms for 
the development of SO and its health problems include 
increased insulin resistance [20,56], increased chronic 
inflammation [58,71], decreased hormones (testoster-
one, growth hormone, DHEA, IFG-1) [72], decreased 
neuro 
muscular function [73–75] and decreases in energy 
expenditure and fat oxidation [76].
SO and chronic diseases may also cause physical 
inactivity due to reduced exercise capacity (decreased 
cardiorespiratory fitness and muscular strength), phys-
ical limitations [77] and increased fatigue after exercise. 
Therefore, breaking this vicious cycle by increasing 
physical activity and sufficient protein intake should 
be emphasized to prevent SO and its related health 
consequences.
Discussion (current limitations & future 
direction)
Current sarcopenia and SO definitions have been pri-
marily developed based on data available from cross-
sectional analyses, and there is still no universal defi-
nition with consensus. This lack of unified definition 
for SO has contributed inconsistent findings on the 
prevalence of SO and the associations between SO and 
health outcomes. Therefore, it is important to continue 
to discuss and develop consensus criteria for a clinical 
definition of SO by comparing different definitions in 
various populations including those with increased risk 
of functional disability, bone fracture, joint replace-
ment surgery and other musculoskeletal injuries. It is 
also important to measure changes in SO variables over 
time in the same individuals. Therefore, longitudinal 
studies and randomized controlled trials should be per-
formed to investigate the causation and prog 
nosis of 
SO. These studies can contribute to finding the effects 
of changes in ALM, muscle strength, gait speed and fat 
mass on SO. For clinical trials, including the primary 
SO parameters (muscle mass, muscle strength and 
physical function, fat mass and waist circum 
ference) 
as well as relevant clinical outcomes such as cardio-
metabolic markers, chronic inflammatory markers, 
quality of life, falling and fracture, activities of daily 
living and independence (hospitalization) should be 
considered to provide evidence based SO prevention 
and treatment strategies.
Based on the significant differences in body compo-
sition and muscle strength between men and women, 
sarcopenia definitions for muscle mass and strength 
were presented separately by gender. However, regard-
ing gait speed, the same cut-point value is used to define 
poor physical function, although the value is different 
between men and women as presented in USA [33] and 
the Asian groups [32] on sarco 
penia. Therefore, further 
study may be warranted addressing the question whether 
different cut-points of gait speed for men and women 
should be utilized in accordance to other measures of 
physical function. Regarding muscle strength, the cur-
rent recommendation is to use unadjusted handgrip 
strength because it is simple to use clinically, although 
handgrip strength is highly correlated with body 
weight. The FNIHSP study also reported that BMI 
adjusted ALM index had consistent associations with 
mobility limitations between different study samples 
in women [78]. However, continuous clarification and 
further investigation is needed if body weight or BMI 
adjusted handgrip strength or muscle strength should be 
used based on its relations to various health outcomes, 
as used in other studies on muscle strength and health 
outcomes [43–45]. In addition, while gait speed and hand-
grip strength are easy to measure, more practical and 
comprehensive assessment of functional ability and total 
body strength such as the sitting-rising test [79] should 
be developed. Those new tests should be related to daily 
activities and health outcomes such as quality of life and 
mortality in older adults, and could be easily measured 
by individuals at home  
without using instruments.
In defining and diagnosing sarcopenia, the current 
cut-point values for muscle mass were mostly devel-
oped based on the lowest 20% or two SDs below the 
mean value of young healthy reference group from a 
specific study population. This method is originally 
designed to parallel the definition of osteoporosis 
(reduced bone mass), which has been associated with 
risk of fracture. However, low muscle mass alone is not 
consistently associated with relevant adverse health 
outcomes. Therefore, more studies are urgently needed 
to have reliable and validated reference values for low 
muscle mass in general populations around the world, 
as suggested by the FNIHSP [33]. In addition, the cut-
point values should preferably be developed based on 
prospective outcome studies, instead of those simple 
statistical methods (the lowest 20% or two SDs below 
the mean value of the reference group).
 Future Sci. OA (2016) 2(3)
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
future science group
Review    Lee, Shook, Drenowatz & Blair
BMI is easy to measure and commonly used to 
define obesity worldwide as a representative measure 
of whole body obesity in population levels. However, 
because BMI does not consider body composition 
such as muscle and fat mass, its accuracy in research 
is continuously debated, especially in older adults 
and specifically in the assessment of SO. Compared 
with young adults, older adults could have more fat 
mass given the same BMI levels due to muscle loss by 
aging. Therefore, it is possible that older adults even in 
the normal weight category by BMI could have more 
fat mass, which increases the risk of cardiometabolic 
diseases such as diabetes or heart attack. Future stud-
ies on SO should measure body composition instead 
of BMI to define SO in older adults. Additionally, 
because obesity is simply defined by BMI without 
considering metabolic health and fitness, there are 
controversial issues regarding different obesity pheno-
types such as metabolically healthy obesity [80], and 
obesity with high cardiorespiratory fitness levels [81,82] 
that may not be associated with increased risks of 
cardiometabolic diseases and mortality. There is also 
an obesity paradox indicating that obesity has some 
mortality benefits in individuals with heart diseases or 
Type II dia 
betes [83,84]. Also, a recent review reported 
mortality benefits in overweight and obesity in older 
adults [85,86], which is another obesity paradox in older 
adults. The answers to these contro 
versial issues on dif-
ferent obesity pheno 
types and paradox may be related 
to muscle mass and strength, especially in older adults. 
Therefore, future studies on obesity and SO should 
consider more comprehensive approaches including 
body  
composition and muscle mass in the analyses.
Another type of muscle disorder that should be stud-
ied is dynapenia, which is more closely related to mus-
cle quality rather than muscle quantity (muscle mass). 
Possible causes of dynapenia include impairments in 
neural activation, decreased muscle contractile quality 
and reduced motor unit recruitment [74], which leads 
to significant loss of muscle strength. Loss of muscle 
mass due to sarcopenia also affects dynapenia. Sev-
eral studies indicated that older adults with dynapenia 
have increased risk of functional disability [87], fall-
ing [70] and metabolic diseases [88], even after adjust-
ing for sarcopenia [89]. In our earlier study, we found 
that individuals with lower muscle strength (the lowest 
20th percentile) compared with the moderate or high 
muscle strength (upper 80th percentile) had over two-
fold higher risk of developing metabolic syndrome in 
both young (<50 years) and old (≥50 years) men after 
adjusting for age, smoking and alcohol intake [90]. This 
association remained significant, although reduced, 
even after further adjustment for BMI and cardio-
respiratory fitness in both young and old men. We also 
found that individuals with higher muscle strength had 
lower risk of developing obesity [44] and reduced all-
cause, CVD and cancer mortality regardless of their 
body fatness [45,91]. Further, even hypertensive men 
with higher muscle strength (upper third) had 34% 
lower risk of all-cause mortality compared with lower 
muscle strength (lower third), after adjusting for body 
fatness and cardiorespiratory fitness [43]. These find-
ings clearly support the importance of muscle strength 
as an independent risk factor for chronic diseases and 
mortality not only in older but also in general popu-
lations. However, there are still relatively limited data 
on muscle strength and resistance exercise on health 
outcomes compared with cardiorespiratory fitness 
and aerobic exercise on health. Therefore, more stud-
ies are required on this important topic of resistance 
exercise and muscle strength in relation to dynapenia, 
 
sarcopenia and SO.
There are also several important questions that 
should be considered in relation to physical activity 
and SO. What type and amount of physical activity 
and exercise are most effective for SO prevention and 
treatment in older adults with and without functional 
limitations? What are the practical strategies to pro-
mote and increase habitual physical activity in older 
adults? How can physical activity be combined with 
other lifestyle factors including sufficient protein 
intake, healthy diet and chronic disease management 
for prevention and treatment of SO?
Conclusion & future perspective
Based on the current review, the average preva-
lence of SO in older adults ranges from 5 to 10% 
depending on its definitions and study populations, 
and the prevalence is significantly higher in people 
aged ≥80 years. The number of older adults aged 
≥60 years is expected to more than double, from 841 
million in 2013 to over 2 billion in 2050 globally [3]. 
Accordingly, the percentage of older adults is expected 
to increase from 11.7% in 2013 to 21.1% by 2050. 
This older population is also aging themselves, and 
the proportion of the oldest old people aged ≥80 years 
is projected to increase dramatically. Further, older 
adults are projected to exceed the number of children 
for the first time in 2047 worldwide [3]. Based on the 
above estimation of the prevalence of SO and older 
adult population, SO may affect 40–80 million peo-
ple today and will affect 100–200 million in the next 
35 years globally.
Sarcopenia and SO studies have emerged only in the 
past 2–3 decades, and research in this area is still in 
its infancy. However, the population with SO around 
the world has major health, social and economic conse-
quences, often with limited coverage of social security 
 www.future-science.com
future science group
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity    Review
system in many developing countries [3]. Therefore, 
most countries are expected to experience increasing 
challenges to deal with the significant impact of SO 
regarding mobility disability, hospitalization, increased 
chronic diseases, mortality and healthcare cost.
Although we found many important questions that 
remain unanswered, it is important to note that SO can 
be prevented, delayed and treated by maintaining or 
adopting a healthy lifestyle, including increasing aero-
bic and muscle-strengthening activities and sufficient 
protein intake and healthy diet. Specifically, we found 
potential health benefits of physical activity, fitness 
and resistance exercise training on SO in older adults 
in different populations in this review (Table 1). How-
ever, most findings are based on cross-sectional stud-
ies. Therefore, longitudinal studies are clearly needed 
to investigate long-term effects of physical activity and 
fitness on SO in older individuals. We hope that the 
current review guides researchers and health profes-
sionals around the world to further refine definition, 
diagnosis and classification of sarcopenia and SO for 
both research studies and clinical practice. It is also 
important to develop simple and easy measurement 
techniques and tools that are reliable and valid, thus it 
can be included in the routine geriatric assessment to 
provide targeted and appropriate intervention. Simul-
taneously, we should also continue to identify effective 
public health strategies and programs to combat SO for 
health promotion and quality of life improvement for 
millions of older people around the world.
Financial & competing interests disclosure
SN Blair has served on the scientific advisory boards of Tech-
nogym, Clarity, Cancer Foundation for Life, and Santech. He 
has received research funding from BodyMedia, Technogym, 
The Coca-Cola Company, the US Department of Defense, and 
the NIH. He receives book royalties from Human Kinetics. The 
authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involve-
ment with any organization or entity with a financial interest 
in or financial conflict with the subject matter or  
materials 
 
discussed in the manuscript apart from those  
disclosed.
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this 
manuscript.
Author contributions
The first author, DC Lee, designed, developed and drafted the 
manuscript. All other authors critically reviewed the manu-
script including the text, figures and tables, and provided 
 
significant comments.
Open access
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 
4.0 License. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creative-
commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
Executive summary
• Sarcopenic obesity (SO) is the combination of low muscle mass plus high fat mass based on the body 
composition phenotypes. However, modern definition of sarcopenia includes low muscle mass, low muscle 
strength (weak handgrip strength) and poor physical function (slow walking).
• Based on the sarcopenia definitions suggested by different working groups, the cut-points for low muscle mass 
for men and women using appendicular lean mass divided by height2 are ≤7.0 kg/m2 and ≤5.4 kg/m2 in Asians, and 
≤7.23 kg/m2 and ≤5.67 kg/m2 in Caucasians, respectively. The recommended cut-points for weak handgrip strength 
for men and women are <26 kg and <18 kg in Asians, and <30 kg and <20 kg in Caucasians, respectively. The 
most common cut-points for slow walking is ≤0.8 m/s in both men and women regardless of race and ethnicity. 
However, there is a wide range of variations in the definition, assessment and diagnosis of SO for both studies.
• Although the prevalence of SO varies significantly from 0 to 25% in older adults between studies depending 
on study populations and the definitions of SO, the average prevalence of SO is about 5–10%, which is similar 
between men and women. The prevalence of SO is significantly higher in people aged ≥80 years.
• Older adults with SO have higher risks of mobility disability, metabolic diseases, hypertension, cardiovascular 
diseases and mortality, which is also related to significantly higher healthcare cost. These clinical problems 
related to SO is much greater than that in sarcopenia or obesity alone.
• Despite the limited data, current studies suggest that there are potential health benefits of physical activity, 
fitness and exercise training on the prevention and treatment of SO in older adults. Sufficient diet such as 
adequate protein intake and amino acid supplementation is another key factor for the management of SO.
• Potential mechanisms on the development of SO and its health problems include increased insulin resistance, 
increased chronic inflammation, decreased hormones, decreased neuromuscular function and decreased 
energy expenditure and fat oxidation due to aging.
• Given the rapidly increasing health impact of SO in aging populations in most developed countries, the 
current review highlights the importance of the urgent investigation and development of universal definition, 
assessment and diagnosis of SO for both research studies and clinical practice. In addition, we should continue 
to identify effective public health strategies and programs to prevent, delay and treat SO for millions of older 
people around the world.
 Future Sci. OA (2016) 2(3)
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
future science group
Review    Lee, Shook, Drenowatz & Blair
References
1 
Rosenberg IH. Sarcopenia. origins and clinical relevance. 
J. Nutr. 127(Suppl. 5), S990–S999 (1997).
2 
Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of 
childhood and adult obesity in the United States, 2011–2012. 
JAMA 311(8), 806–814 (2014).
3 
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, Population Division. World population ageing 
(2013).  
www.un.org/
4 
Baumgartner RN, Wayne SJ, Waters DL, Janssen I, 
Gallagher D, Morley JE. Sarcopenic obesity predicts 
instrumental activities of daily living disability in the elderly. 
Obes. Res. 12(12), 1995–2004 (2004).
5 
Rolland Y, Lauwers-Cances V, Cristini C et al. Difficulties 
with physical function associated with obesity, sarcopenia, 
and sarcopenic-obesity in community-dwelling elderly 
women. the EPIDOS (EPIDemiologie de l’OSteoporose) 
study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 89(6), 1895–1900 (2009).
6 
Stenholm S, Alley D, Bandinelli S et al. The effect of obesity 
combined with low muscle strength on decline in mobility 
in older persons. Results from the InCHIANTI study. Int. J. 
Obes. (Lond.) 33(6), 635–644 (2009).
7 
Kim TN, Park MS, Yang SJ et al. Prevalence and 
determinant factors of sarcopenia in patients with Type 2 
diabetes. The Korean Sarcopenic Obesity Study (KSOS). 
Diabetes Care 33(7), 1497–1499 (2010).
8 
Lim S, Kim JH, Yoon JW et al. Sarcopenic obesity. 
Prevalence and association with metabolic syndrome in 
the Korean Longitudinal Study on Health and Aging 
(KLoSHA). Diabetes Care 33(7), 1652–1654 (2010).
9 
Park SH, Park JH, Song PS et al. Sarcopenic obesity as 
an independent risk factor of hypertension. J. Am. Soc. 
Hypertens. 7(6), 420–425 (2013).
10 
Kim TN, Choi KM. The implications of sarcopenia and 
sarcopenic obesity on cardiometabolic disease. J. Cell 
Biochem. 116(7), 1171–1178 (2015).
11 
Stephen WC, Janssen I. Sarcopenic-obesity and 
cardiovascular disease risk in the elderly. J. Nutr. Health 
Aging 13(5), 460–466 (2009).
12 
Atkins JL, Whincup PH, Morris RW, Lennon LT, Papacosta 
O, Wannamethee SG. Sarcopenic obesity and risk of 
cardiovascular disease and mortality. A population-based 
cohort study of older men. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 62(2), 
253–260 (2014).
13 
Chuang SY, Hsu YY, Chen RC, Liu WL, Pan WH. 
Abdominal obesity and low skeletal muscle mass jointly 
predict total mortality and cardiovascular mortality in an 
elderly Asian population. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 
(2015) (Epub ahgead of print).
14 
Tian S, Xu Y. Association of sarcopenic obesity with the 
risk of all-cause mortality. A meta-analysis of prospective 
cohort studies. Geriatr. Gerontol. Int. 16(2), 155–166 ( 
2015).
15 
Janssen I, Shepard DS, Katzmarzyk PT, Roubenoff R. The 
healthcare costs of sarcopenia in the United States. J. Am. 
Geriatr. Soc. 52(1), 80–85 (2004).
16 
Cauley JA. An overview of sarcopenic obesity. J. Clin. 
Densitom. 18(4), 499–505 (2015).
17 
Goisser S, Kemmler W, Porzel S et al. Sarcopenic obesity 
and complex interventions with nutrition and exercise in 
community-dwelling older persons – a narrative review. Clin. 
Interv. Aging 10, 1267–1282 (2015).
18 
Poggiogalle E, Migliaccio S, Lenzi A, Donini LM. Treatment 
of body composition changes in obese and overweight older 
adults. Insight into the phenotype of sarcopenic obesity. 
Endocrine 47(3), 699–716 (2014).
19 
Bouchard DR, Dionne IJ, Brochu M. Sarcopenic/obesity and 
physical capacity in older men and women. Data from the 
Nutrition as a Determinant of Successful Aging (NuAge) – 
the Quebec longitudinal study. Obesity (Silver Spring) 17(11), 
2082–2088 (2009).
20 
Hwang B, Lim JY, Lee J, Choi NK, Ahn YO, Park BJ. 
Prevalence rate and associated factors of sarcopenic obesity 
in Korean elderly population. J. Korean Med. Sci. 27(7), 
748–755 (2012).
21 
Ryu M, Jo J, Lee Y, Chung YS, Kim KM, Baek WC. 
Association of physical activity with sarcopenia and 
sarcopenic obesity in community-dwelling older adults. The 
Fourth Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey. Age Ageing 42(6), 734–740 (2013).
22 
Munoz-Arribas A, Mata E, Pedrero-Chamizo R et al. 
[Sarcopenic obesity and physical fitness in octogenarians. 
The multi-center EXERNET project]. Nutr. Hosp. 28(6), 
1877–1883 (2013).
23 
Pedrero-Chamizo R, Gomez-Cabello A, Melendez A et al. 
Higher levels of physical fitness are associated with a reduced 
risk of suffering sarcopenic obesity and better perceived 
health among the elderly. The EXERNET multi-center 
study. J. Nutr. Health Aging 19(2), 211–217 (2015).
24 
Balachandran A, Krawczyk SN, Potiaumpai M, Signorile 
JF. High-speed circuit training vs hypertrophy training 
to improve physical function in sarcopenic obese adults. 
A randomized controlled trial. Exp. Gerontol. 60, 64–71 
(2014).
25 
Leong DP, Teo KK, Rangarajan S et al. Prognostic value of 
grip strength. Findings from the Prospective Urban Rural 
Epidemiology (PURE) study. Lancet 386(9990), 266–273 
(2015).
26 
Abellan Van KG, Rolland Y, Andrieu S et al. Gait speed at 
usual pace as a predictor of adverse outcomes in community-
dwelling older people an International Academy on Nutrition 
and Aging (IANA) Task Force. J. Nutr. Health Aging 13(10), 
881–889 (2009).
27 
Studenski S, Perera S, Patel K et al. Gait speed and survival 
in older adults. JAMA 305(1), 50–58 (2011).
28 
Visser M, Goodpaster BH, Kritchevsky SB et al. Muscle 
mass, muscle strength, and muscle fat infiltration as 
predictors of incident mobility limitations in well-
functioning older persons. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 
60(3), 324–333 (2005).
29 
Newman AB, Kupelian V, Visser M et al. Strength, but not 
muscle mass, is associated with mortality in the health, aging 
and body composition study cohort. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. 
Med. Sci. 61(1), 72–77 (2006).
 www.future-science.com
future science group
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity    Review
30 
Cruz-Jentoft AJ, Baeyens JP, Bauer JM et al. Sarcopenia. 
European consensus on definition and diagnosis: report of 
the European Working Group on Sarcopenia in older people. 
Age Ageing 39(4), 412–423 (2010).
31 
Fielding RA, Vellas B, Evans WJ et al. Sarcopenia. An 
undiagnosed condition in older adults. Current consensus 
definition: prevalence, etiology, and consequences. 
International Working Group on Sarcopenia. J. Am. Med. 
Dir. Assoc. 12(4), 249–256 (2011).
32 
Chen LK, Liu LK, Woo J et al. Sarcopenia in Asia. 
Consensus report of the Asian Working Group for 
Sarcopenia. J. Am. Med. Dir. Assoc. 15(2), 95–101 (2014).
33 
Studenski SA, Peters KW, Alley DE et al. The FNIH 
sarcopenia project. Rationale, study description, conference 
recommendations, and final estimates. J. Gerontol. A Biol. 
Sci. Med. Sci. 69(5), 547–558 (2014).
34 
Chien MY, Huang TY, Wu YT. Prevalence of sarcopenia 
estimated using a bioelectrical impedance analysis prediction 
equation in community-dwelling elderly people in Taiwan. 
J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 56(9), 1710–1715 (2008).
35 
Janssen I, Baumgartner RN, Ross R, Rosenberg IH, 
Roubenoff R. Skeletal muscle cutpoints associated with 
elevated physical disability risk in older men and women. 
Am. J. Epidemiol. 159(4), 413–421 (2004).
36 
Baumgartner RN, Koehler KM, Gallagher D et al. 
Epidemiology of sarcopenia among the elderly in New 
Mexico. Am. J. Epidemiol. 147(8), 755–763 (1998).
37 
Ido A, Nakayama Y, Ishii K et al. Ultrasound-derived 
abdominal muscle thickness better detects metabolic 
syndrome risk in obese patients than skeletal muscle index 
measured by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry. PLoS ONE 
10(12), e0143858 (2015).
38 
Akin S, Mucuk S, Ozturk A et al. Muscle function-
dependent sarcopenia and cut-off values of possible predictors 
in community-dwelling Turkish elderly. Calf circumference, 
midarm muscle circumference and walking speed. Eur. J. 
Clin. Nutr. 69(10), 1087–1090 (2015).
39 
Kawakami R, Murakami H, Sanada K et al. Calf 
circumference as a surrogate marker of muscle mass for 
diagnosing sarcopenia in Japanese men and women. Geriatr. 
Gerontol. Int. 15(8), 969–976 (2015).
40 
Janssen I, Heymsfield SB, Ross R. Low relative skeletal 
muscle mass (sarcopenia) in older persons is associated with 
functional impairment and physical disability. J. Am. Geriatr. 
Soc. 50(5), 889–896 (2002).
41 
Cuoco A, Callahan DM, Sayers S, Frontera WR, Bean J, 
Fielding RA. Impact of muscle power and force on gait speed 
in disabled older men and women. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. 
Med. Sci. 59(11), 1200–1206 (2004).
42 
Herman S, Kiely DK, Leveille S, O’Neill E, Cyberey S, Bean 
JF. Upper and lower limb muscle power relationships in 
mobility-limited older adults. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. 
Sci. 60(4), 476–480 (2005).
43 
Artero EG, Lee DC, Ruiz JR et al. A prospective study of 
muscular strength and all-cause mortality in men with 
hypertension. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 57(18), 1831–1837 
(2011).
44 
Jackson AW, Lee DC, Sui X et al. Muscular strength is 
inversely related to prevalence and incidence of obesity 
in adult men. Obesity (Silver Spring) 18(10), 1988–1995 
(2010).
45 
Ruiz JR, Sui X, Lobelo F et al. Association between muscular 
strength and mortality in men. Prospective cohort study. 
BMJ 337( a439), 1–9 (2008).
46 
Afilalo J, Eisenberg MJ, Morin JF et al. Gait speed as an 
incremental predictor of mortality and major morbidity in 
elderly patients undergoing cardiac surgery. J. Am. Coll. 
Cardiol. 56(20), 1668–1676 (2010).
47 
Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Simonsick EM, Salive ME, 
Wallace RB. Lower-extremity function in persons over 
the age of 70 years as a predictor of subsequent disability. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 332(9), 556–561 (1995).
48 
Toots A, Rosendahl E, Lundin-Olsson L, Nordstrom P, 
Gustafson Y, Littbrand H. Usual gait speed independently 
predicts mortality in very old people. A population-based 
study. J. Am. Med. Dir. Assoc. 14(7), 529.e1–529.e6 
(2013).
49 
Goodpaster BH, Park SW, Harris TB et al. The loss of 
skeletal muscle strength, mass, and quality in older adults. 
The health, aging and body composition study. J. Gerontol. A 
Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 61(10), 1059–1064 (2006).
50 
Dam TT, Peters KW, Fragala M et al. An evidence-based 
comparison of operational criteria for the presence of 
sarcopenia. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 69(5), 584–590 
(2014).
51 
Newman AB, Kupelian V, Visser M et al. Sarcopenia. 
Alternative definitions and associations with lower extremity 
function. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 51(11), 1602–1609 (2003).
52 
Kim M, Kim H. Accuracy of segmental multi-frequency 
bioelectrical impedance analysis for assessing whole-body 
and appendicular fat mass and lean soft tissue mass in frail 
women aged 75 years and older. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 67(4), 
395–400 (2013).
53 
Yeh CW, Chen YJ, Lai LY et al. Bioelectrical impedance 
analysis in a mathematical model for estimating fat-free 
mass in multiple segments in elderly Taiwanese males. Int. J. 
Gerontol. 6(4), 273–277 (2012).
54 
WHO Expert Consultation. Appropriate body-mass index 
for Asian populations and its implications for policy and 
intervention strategies. Lancet 363(9403), 157–163 (2004).
55 
World Health Organization, International Association for 
the Study of Obesity, International Obesity Task Force. The 
Asia-Pacific perspective. redefining obesity and its treatment. 
Sydney. Health Communication, Australia (2000).  
www.wpro.who.int/
56 
Levine ME, Crimmins EM. The impact of insulin 
resistance and inflammation on the association between 
sarcopenic obesity and physical functioning. Obesity (Silver 
Spring) 20(10), 2101–2106 (2012).
57 
Kim YS, Lee Y, Chung YS et al. Prevalence of sarcopenia 
and sarcopenic obesity in the Korean population based 
on the Fourth Korean National Health and Nutritional 
Examination Surveys. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 
67(10), 1107–1113 (2012).
 Future Sci. OA (2016) 2(3)
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
future science group
Review    Lee, Shook, Drenowatz & Blair
58 
Schrager MA, Metter EJ, Simonsick E et al. Sarcopenic 
obesity and inflammation in the InCHIANTI study. J. Appl. 
Physiol. (1985) 102(3), 9–925 (2007).
59 
Stenholm S, Harris TB, Rantanen T, Visser M, Kritchevsky 
SB, Ferrucci L. Sarcopenic obesity. Definition, cause and 
consequences. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 11(6), 
693–700 (2008).
60 
Meng P, Hu YX, Fan L et al. Sarcopenia and sarcopenic 
obesity among men aged 80 years and older in Beijing. 
Prevalence and its association with functional performance. 
Geriatr. Gerontol. Int. 14(Suppl. 1), 29–35 (2014).
61 
Dufour AB, Hannan MT, Murabito JM, Kiel DP, McLean 
RR. Sarcopenia definitions considering body size and 
fat mass are associated with mobility limitations. The 
Framingham Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 68(2), 
168–174 (2013).
62 
Li Z, Heber D. Sarcopenic obesity in the elderly and strategies 
for weight management. Nutr. Rev. 70(1), 57–64 (2012).
63 
Morley JE, Argiles JM, Evans WJ et al. Nutritional 
recommendations for the management of sarcopenia. J. Am. 
Med. Dir. Assoc. 11(6), 3–396 (2010).
64 
Kim HK, Suzuki T, Saito K et al. Effects of exercise and 
amino acid supplementation on body composition and 
physical function in community-dwelling elderly Japanese 
sarcopenic women. A randomized controlled trial. J. Am. 
Geriatr. Soc. 60(1), 16–23 (2012).
65 
Bouchonville MF, Villareal DT. Sarcopenic obesity. How 
do we treat it? Curr. Opin. Endocrinol. Diabetes Obes. 20(5), 
412–419 (2013).
66 
Dulloo AG, Montani JP. Pathways from dieting to weight 
regain, to obesity and to the metabolic syndrome. An 
overview. Obes. Rev. 16(Suppl. 1), 1–6 (2015).
67 
Song MY, Ruts E, Kim J, Janumala I, Heymsfield S, 
Gallagher D. Sarcopenia and increased adipose tissue 
infiltration of muscle in elderly African American women. 
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 79(5), 874–880 (2004).
68 
Hughes VA, Roubenoff R, Wood M, Frontera WR, Evans 
WJ, Fiatarone Singh MA. Anthropometric assessment of 
10-y changes in body composition in the elderly. Am. J. Clin. 
Nutr. 80(2), 475–482 (2004).
69 
Short KR, Nair KS. The effect of age on protein metabolism. 
Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 3(1), 39–44 (2000).
70 
Scott D, Daly RM, Sanders KM, Ebeling PR. Fall and 
Fracture risk in sarcopenia and dynapenia with and without 
obesity. The role of lifestyle interventions. Curr. Osteoporos. 
Rep. 13(4), 235–244 (2015).
71 
Kob R, Bollheimer LC, Bertsch T et al. Sarcopenic 
obesity. Molecular clues to a better understanding of its 
pathogenesis? Biogerontology 16(1), 15–29 (2015).
72 
Morley JE. Hormones and the aging process. J. Am. Geriatr. 
Soc. 51(Suppl. 7), S333–S337 (2003).
73 
Aagaard P, Suetta C, Caserotti P, Magnusson SP, Kjaer M. 
Role of the nervous system in sarcopenia and muscle atrophy 
with aging. Strength training as a countermeasure. Scand. J. 
Med. Sci. Sports 20(1), 49–64 (2010).
74 
Lexell J, Taylor CC, Sjostrom M. What is the cause of 
the ageing atrophy? Total number, size and proportion of 
different fiber types studied in whole vastus lateralis muscle 
from 15 to 83 year-old men. J. Neurol. Sci. 84(2), 275–294 
(1988).
75 
Piasecki M, Ireland A, Jones DA, McPhee JS. Age-
dependent motor unit remodelling in human limb 
muscles. Biogerontology17(3), 485–496 (2015).
76 
Roubenoff R. Sarcopenic obesity. Does muscle loss cause fat 
gain? Lessons from rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. 
Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 904, 553–557 (2000).
77 
Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Pieper CF et al. Lower extremity 
function and subsequent disability. Consistency across 
studies, predictive models, and value of gait speed alone 
compared with the short physical performance battery. 
J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 55(4), M221–M231 (2000).
78 
McLean RR, Shardell MD, Alley DE et al. Criteria for 
clinically relevant weakness and low lean mass and their 
longitudinal association with incident mobility impairment 
and mortality. The foundation for the National Institutes of 
Health (FNIH) sarcopenia project. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. 
Med. Sci. 69(5), 576–583 (2014).
79 
Brito LB, Ricardo DR, Araujo DS, Ramos PS, Myers 
J, Araujo CG. Ability to sit and rise from the floor as a 
predictor of all-cause mortality. Eur. J. Prev. Cardiol. 21(7), 
892–898 (2014).
80 
Ortega FB, Lee DC, Katzmarzyk PT et al. The intriguing 
metabolically healthy but obese phenotype. Cardiovascular 
prognosis and role of fitness. Eur. Heart J. 34(5), 389–397 
(2013).
81 
Lee DC, Sui X, Artero EG et al. Long-term effects of changes 
in cardiorespiratory fitness and body mass index on all-cause 
and cardiovascular disease mortality in men. The Aerobics 
Center Longitudinal Study. Circulation 124(23), 2483–2490 
(2011).
82 
Lee DC, Sui X, Church TS, Lavie CJ, Jackson AS, Blair 
SN. Changes in fitness and fatness on the development of 
cardiovascular disease risk factors hypertension, metabolic 
syndrome, and hypercholesterolemia. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 
59(7), 665–672 (2012).
83 
Carnethon MR, De Chavez PJ, Biggs ML et al. Association of 
weight status with mortality in adults with incident diabetes. 
JAMA 308(6), 581–590 (2012).
84 
McAuley PA, Artero EG, Sui X et al. The obesity paradox, 
cardiorespiratory fitness, and coronary heart disease. Mayo 
Clin. Proc. 87(5), 443–451 (2012).
85 
Flegal KM, Kit BK, Orpana H, Graubard BI. Association 
of all-cause mortality with overweight and obesity using 
standard body mass index categories. A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. JAMA 309(1), 71–82 (2013).
86 
Veronese N, Cereda E, Solmi M et al. Inverse relationship 
between body mass index and mortality in older nursing 
home residents. A meta-analysis of 19,538 elderly subjects. 
Obes. Rev. 16(11), 1001–1015 (2015).
87 
Bouchard DR, Janssen I. Dynapenic-obesity and physical 
function in older adults. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 
65(1), 71–77 (2010).
88 
Senechal M, Dionne IJ, Brochu M. Dynapenic abdominal 
obesity and metabolic risk factors in adults 50 years of age 
and older. J. Aging Health 24(5), 812–826 (2012).
 www.future-science.com
future science group
future science group
10.4155/fsoa-2016-0028
Physical activity & sarcopenic obesity    Review
89 
Clark BC, Manini TM. Functional consequences of 
sarcopenia and dynapenia in the elderly. Curr. Opin. Clin. 
Nutr. Metab. Care 13(3), 271–276 (2010).
90 
Senechal M, McGavock JM, Church TS et al. Cut points of 
muscle strength associated with metabolic syndrome in men. 
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 46(8), 1475–1481 (2014).
91 
Ruiz JR, Sui X, Lobelo F et al. Muscular strength and 
adiposity as predictors of adulthood cancer mortality in 
men. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 18(5), 1468–1476 
(2009).
