 Parvalbumin Interneurons Modulate Striatal Output and Enhance 
Performance during Associative Learning
Kwang Lee1,*, Sandra M. Holley2,*, Justin L. Shobe1, Natalie C. Chong3, Carlos Cepeda2, 
Michael S. Levine2, and Sotiris C. Masmanidis1,4,5
1Department of Neurobiology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, 
90095, USA
2Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, Brain Research Institute, Semel 
Institute for Neuroscience & Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, 90095, USA
3Neuroscience Interdepartmental Program, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California, 90095, USA
4California Nanosystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, 
90095, USA
5Integrative Center for Learning and Memory, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California, 90095, USA
SUMMARY
The prevailing view is that striatal parvalbumin (PV)-positive interneurons primarily function to 
downregulate medium spiny projection neuron (MSN) activity via monosynaptic inhibitory 
signaling. Here, by combining in vivo neural recordings and optogenetics, we unexpectedly find 
that both suppressing and over-activating PV cells attenuates spontaneous MSN activity. To 
account for this, we find that in addition to monosynaptic coupling, PV-MSN interactions are 
mediated by a competing disynaptic inhibitory circuit involving a variety of neuropeptide Y-
expressing interneurons. Next we use optogenetic and chemogenetic approaches to show that 
dorsolateral striatal PV interneurons influence the initial expression of reward-conditioned 
responses, but that their contribution to performance declines with experience. Consistent with 
this, we observe with large-scale recordings in behaving animals that the relative contribution of 
PV cells on MSN activity diminishes with training. Together, this work provides a possible 
mechanism by which PV interneurons modulate striatal output and selectively enhance 
performance early in learning.
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR AND LEAD CONTACT: Sotiris C. Masmanidis, smasmanidis@ucla.edu.
*Co-first author.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS: K.L., S.M.H., C.C., M.S.L. and S.C.M. conceived the experiments and wrote the manuscript. K.L., 
S.M.H., J.L.S., and N.C.C. carried out experiments. All authors analyzed data.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Published in final edited form as:
Neuron. 2017 March 22; 93(6): 1451–1463.e4. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.02.033.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 eTOC BLURB
Lee et al. show that striatal PV cells normally enhance striatal output, but are capable of 
suppressing output, via competing inhibitory microcircuits. They show that the relative 
contribution of PV cells on striatal activity and behavioral performance diminishes with 
experience.
INTRODUCTION
The ability to anticipate rewarding events with appropriately timed actions requires neural 
systems for learning and expressing associations between stimuli and rewards (Day and 
Carelli, 2007; Fanselow and Wassum, 2015; Graybiel, 2008; Schultz, 2000). The striatum is 
a major information processing hub and site of plasticity for a variety of reward-conditioned 
behaviors (Balleine et al., 2007; Gerfen and Surmeier, 2011; Kreitzer and Malenka, 2008; 
Liljeholm and O’Doherty, 2012; Silberberg and Bolam, 2015; Yin and Knowlton, 2006). In 
recent years much attention has been drawn toward unveiling the function of direct and 
indirect pathway projection neurons in movement (Barbera et al., 2016; Cui et al., 2013; 
Kravitz et al., 2010; Oldenburg and Sabatini, 2015; Rothwell et al., 2015; Tecuapetla et al., 
2016; Yttri and Dudman, 2016), reinforcement (Kravitz et al., 2012; Vicente et al., 2016), 
and sensory processing (Reig and Silberberg, 2014; Sippy et al., 2015). In comparison, the 
role of inhibitory striatal interneurons in these behavioral functions is less well understood 
(Fino and Venance, 2011; Kreitzer and Malenka, 2008; Tepper et al., 2010).
A population of GABAergic fast spiking, parvalbumin (PV)-positive interneurons (FSIs) is 
believed to have an important regulatory role in striatal microcircuits (Berke, 2011; Gittis et 
al., 2011b; Xu et al., 2016). PV-positive interneurons are concentrated in the dorsolateral 
striatum (DLS) (Luk and Sadikot, 2001), a subregion that mediates motor skill learning 
(Graybiel and Grafton, 2015; Yin and Knowlton, 2006) and conditioned responding to 
reward-associated stimuli (Corbit and Janak, 2007, 2010; Han et al., 1997). Despite a 
considerable literature on the properties of striatal FSIs based on anatomical studies (Kita et 
al., 1990), in vitro physiology (Tepper et al., 2010), computational models (Damodaran et 
al., 2014; Gittis et al., 2011a; Hjorth et al., 2009; Humphries et al., 2009; Lau et al., 2010; 
Moyer et al., 2014), and recordings in behaving animals (Bakhurin et al., 2016; Gage et al., 
2010; Schmitzer-Torbert and Redish, 2008; Thorn and Graybiel, 2014; Yamada et al., 2016), 
their involvement in reward-guided behavior has not been extensively studied with cell type-
specific manipulations. Since this type of interneuron is monosynaptically coupled to MSNs 
(Koos and Tepper, 1999), the normal function of PV cells is thought to strongly involve 
feedforward inhibition of projection neuron activity (Burguiere et al., 2013; Mallet et al., 
2005; Qi et al., 2016). However, because of potential interactions with other types of striatal 
interneurons (Gittis et al., 2010; Planert et al., 2010; Straub et al., 2016; Szydlowski et al., 
2013), an open question is whether the net effect of striatal PV cells is to inhibit or amplify 
MSN activity.
To understand how PV interneurons influence MSN activity, we performed in vivo 
recordings to examine striatal microcircuit responses to optogenetic PV cell suppression or 
over-activation. Unexpectedly, both types of manipulations reduced spontaneous MSN 
Lee et al.
Page 2
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 firing. Using in vitro measurements we identified a novel disynaptic circuit involving 
neuropeptide Y (NPY)-containing interneurons, primarily the variety known as 
neurogliaform (NGF) cells (Ibanez-Sandoval et al., 2011). This disynaptic microcircuit may 
be a possible, though not exclusive, mechanism by which suppressing PV interneurons 
reduces MSN firing. Next, to examine the effect of DLS PV interneurons on reward-
conditioned behavior, we manipulated these cells in mice learning a Pavlovian stimulus-
reward association task. We found that suppressing PV cell activity disrupted conditioned 
responses, with a selective deficit in the early stage of learning. Finally, to gain insight into 
why PV interneurons influence behavior in an experience-dependent manner, we combined 
large-scale neural recordings and optogenetics in animals undergoing reward conditioning. 
We found that PV interneurons have the greatest impact on neural coding during the initial 
stage of training. Together, this work reveals two novel and related functions of PV 
interneurons: to amplify striatal output, and enhance performance early in learning.
RESULTS
PV Interneurons Regulate Spontaneous Striatal Activity
We first examined the effect of suppressing PV neurons on spontaneous firing activity by 
expressing the hyperpolarizing light-gated proton pump Archaerhodopsin (Arch) (Chow et 
al., 2010) in the dorsolateral striatum of PV-Cre knockin mice (Figures 1A, S1A, S1B) 
(Hippenmeyer et al., 2005). We constructed an opto-microprobe device to record from large 
populations of neurons during optogenetic perturbations (see Experimental Procedures and 
Figure 1B). The opto-microprobe contained a 256 electrode array enabling recordings from 
dozens of striatal neurons (Bakhurin et al., 2016), concurrently with local optogenetic 
manipulations in awake head-fixed mice. Neuronal units were classified as putative MSNs, 
FSIs, or tonically active neurons (TANs) based on electrophysiological properties (see 
Experimental Procedures and Figures 1C, 1D).
The average firing rate of putative FSIs decreased during optical stimulation in a laser 
power-dependent manner (Figure 1E, left and middle; n = 31 FSIs, one-way ANOVA, F4,120 
= 4.3, p = 0.003), with the majority of FSIs being negatively modulated by light (Figure 1E, 
right, signed-rank test, p < 0.0001). Since PV cells are known to provide feedforward 
inhibition onto striatal projection neurons (Koos and Tepper, 1999), we initially expected 
that this suppression would disinhibit MSNs and increase their firing rate. But surprisingly, 
the majority of recorded MSNs responded to optical stimulation with a reduction in firing 
rate (Figure 1F; n = 176 MSNs). The magnitude of this response scaled with the intensity of 
light. We found that the amount of MSN firing rate modulation was not significantly 
correlated with their recorded position along the dorsal-ventral axis (Figure S1C, r = 0.14, p 
= 0.07), suggesting that MSN suppression occurred approximately uniformly across the 
opto-microprobe electrode array. We also observed a brief increase in activity of some 
MSNs at the onset of the optical stimulus. However, we found the same type of transient 
activity increase in GFP-expressing control mice (Figure 1G; n = 57 MSNs), suggesting that 
this is an optical stimulus artifact independent of the optogenetic manipulation.
To examine what effect PV interneurons have on principal neuron activity in cortical 
microcircuits, we carried out Arch stimulation experiments in the prefrontal cortex (see 
Lee et al.
Page 3
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Experimental Procedures). In contrast to the effects seen in the striatum, we found that 
suppressing prefrontal cortical PV interneurons caused an increase in principal neuron 
activity, in line with the expected disinhibitory effect in the cortex (Figure S2A; n = 80 
pyramidal cells). These results indicate that, on average, PV interneurons exert opposite 
effects on principal neuron activity in striatal versus cortical microcircuits.
The action of Arch on presynaptic terminals has been implicated in neurotransmitter release 
(Mahn et al., 2016). To rule out any such effects in our study we also carried out experiments 
using the chloride pump Halorhodopsin (eNpHR3.0) (Gradinaru et al., 2008), and observed 
qualitatively the same trends as with Arch, whereby optical stimulation reduced the 
spontaneous firing of most MSNs in a laser power-dependent manner (Figure S2B; n = 93 
MSNs).
If there is a significant imbalance in DLS PV cell connectivity with direct and indirect 
pathway MSNs (Gittis et al., 2010), suppression of PV cells may lead to a net reduction in 
cortical activity, and subsequently, negative feedback with the DLS. This process may 
represent a mechanism by which suppressing PV cells reduces MSN firing. To examine this 
possibility we optogenetically suppressed DLS PV cells while simultaneously recording 
spontaneous activity in the secondary motor cortex, an area which projects to the DLS 
(Hintiryan et al., 2016) (Figure S2D). We found that optical stimuli did not significantly 
alter average pyramidal cell firing (Figure S2E, signed-rank test, p = 0.18), suggesting that a 
negative feedback loop of the DLS with this specific cortical region may not explain our 
results. Instead, our data suggest that the reduction of MSN activity may be due to local 
microcircuit mechanisms.
Finally, we examined the effects of optogenetically activating PV cells using the 
depolarizing ion channel Chrimson (Klapoetke et al., 2014). Here the average firing rate of 
FSIs increased during optical stimulation in a laser power-dependent manner (Figure 1H, left 
and middle; n = 34 FSIs, one-way ANOVA, F4,132 = 2.6, p = 0.04), even though FSIs were 
equally likely to be positively and negatively modulated by light (Figure 1H, right, signed-
rank test, p = 0.77). This manipulation again led to a potent suppression of spontaneous 
MSN activity (Figure 1I; n = 277 MSNs). Therefore, both suppressing and over-activating 
DLS PV-expressing cells reduces MSN activity. Together, these results demonstrate that PV 
interneurons enhance spontaneous MSN firing under physiological conditions (since 
suppressing PV cells reduces MSN activity), but are also capable of inhibiting MSN firing if 
they are over-activated.
A Disynaptic PV-NPY-MSN Inhibitory Microcircuit
These findings suggest that in addition to controlling striatal output via monosynaptic 
coupling mechanisms (Koos and Tepper, 1999), PV cells indirectly couple to MSNs via 
another type of GABAergic interneuron. This hypothetical disynaptic inhibitory microcircuit 
would oppose the effects of feedforward monosynaptic inhibition, and enable reduction of 
MSN activity via PV cell suppression. We speculated that the source of this disynaptic 
coupling could be neuropeptide Y-containing inhibitory interneurons, because the NGF 
variety of NPY cells was shown to strongly inhibit MSNs in vitro (English et al., 2012; 
Ibanez-Sandoval et al., 2011). In order to determine whether PV interneurons couple to NPY 
Lee et al.
Page 4
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 interneurons, we recorded from cells using whole-cell patch clamp electrophysiology in 
brain slices of PV-Cre mice crossed with NPY-GFP mice, and used viral injections to 
selectively express channelrhodopsin (ChR2) in PV interneurons. Current-clamp recordings 
of PV interneurons expressing ChR2 showed that injection of depolarizing current pulses 
induced high-frequency firing in these cells (Figure 2A). Similarly, optically activating 
ChR2-expressing cells with blue light (0.5 ms, 470 nm, 3 mW) depolarized PV interneurons 
thereby producing action potentials that occurred within 0.3 ms of the light pulse (Figure 
2A, inset).
After determining the effectiveness of optically activating PV interneurons, we recorded 
optically evoked inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) in voltage-clamp mode from 
MSNs and fluorescently labeled NPY interneurons (Figure 2B). Recordings were only 
performed on cells that were located within 150 μm of ChR2-expressing striatal PV 
interneurons that were identified by visible cell surface expression of EYFP fluorescence. 
All MSNs recorded (7/7) produced IPSCs upon optical stimulation consistent with the high 
degree of connectivity between PV interneurons and MSNs (Koos and Tepper, 1999). 
Furthermore, optically evoked IPSCs in MSNs had the greatest amplitude when compared to 
responses recorded in NPY cells (Figures 2B, 2C). Importantly, optically evoked IPSCs also 
were detected in fluorescently labeled NPY interneurons. These neurons were divided into 
two subpopulations, NGF and persistent low-threshold spiking (PLTS) varieties, that were 
distinguished by the significantly higher membrane input resistance in NPY-PLTS 
interneurons compared with that in NPY-NGF interneurons (1517.5 ± 131.8 MΩ in NPY-
PLTS cells, n = 8; versus 198.1 ± 24.9 MΩ for NPY-NGF cells, n = 9; unpaired t-test, p < 
0.001). Optical activation of PV interneurons produced IPSCs in all recorded NGF cells 
(9/9) but only in 62.5% (5/8) of NPY-PLTS cells, suggesting PV cells preferentially connect 
to NGF over PLTS cells. In addition, optically evoked IPSCs in NPY-NGF cells had 
significantly higher amplitudes, larger areas and longer decay times compared to responses 
in NPY-PLTS cells (Figure 2C). All optically evoked IPSC responses in recorded cells had 
similarly short latencies (2.8 ± 0.1 ms for MSNs, 3.3 ± 0.3 ms for NPY-NGF cells, 3.5 ± 0.4 
ms for NPY-PLTS cells) suggestive of direct, monosynaptic connections to PV interneurons. 
Together, these findings reveal that striatal PV interneurons can directly influence the output 
of NPY-NGF interneurons, confirming the existence of a disynaptic inhibitory microcircuit 
that is likely to oppose the effects of monosynaptic (PV to MSN) interactions (Figure 2D). 
Finally, to show that NPY interneurons are also capable of suppressing MSNs in vivo, we 
performed opto-microprobe recordings in NPY-Cre mice. We found that optogenetically 
activating NPY cells robustly lowered spontaneous MSN firing (Figure 2E; n = 49 MSNs).
We also examined whether other types of disynaptic striatal circuits could contribute to our 
results in Figure 1. It is known that striatal FSIs are coupled to each other (Gittis et al., 
2010), raising the possibility that PV-PV interactions invert the sign of inhibition on MSNs. 
A predicted consequence of such interactions is that during optogenetic suppression of a 
subpopulation of PV cells, a significant portion of recorded FSIs should be disinhibited. 
However, our data does not support this prediction, as most FSIs were negatively modulated 
by light (Figure 1E, right). Thus, it is unlikely that interactions between PV cells can explain 
why suppressing PV interneurons reduced MSN activity. On the other hand, our data do not 
rule out the importance of PV-PV interactions under conditions when these cells are 
Lee et al.
Page 5
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 synchronously over-activated (Figure 1H, right). Next we examined TANs, which are 
thought to correspond to cholinergic interneurons (Bennett and Wilson, 1999). Even though 
these cells are not themselves GABAergic, they are thought to be capable of reducing MSN 
firing via at least two distinct inhibitory microcircuits (English et al., 2012; Nelson et al., 
2014). However, our data showed that suppressing PV cell activity did not significantly alter 
TAN firing (Figure S2C; n = 24 TANs), implying that TANs are not widely innervated by 
PV cells. This is in agreement with previous studies showing little or no connectivity 
between these cells (Gittis et al., 2010; Silberberg and Bolam, 2015; Szydlowski et al., 
2013).
PV Interneurons Influence Performance in the Initial Stage of Reward Conditioning
Since PV interneurons regulate striatal output, we hypothesized that they have a role in 
shaping behavioral performance in striatal-dependent tasks. To test this hypothesis, we 
bilaterally expressed Arch or Chrimson in DLS PV cells. We then applied bilateral optical 
stimulation to suppress or over-activate PV cells, while training food-restricted head-fixed 
mice on a Pavlovian stimulus-reward association task (see Experimental Procedures and 
Figures S3A and S3B) (Cohen et al., 2012; Shobe et al., 2015). An olfactory conditioned 
stimulus (CS+) was paired with the delivery of a reward after a 3 s delay, and a neutral 
stimulus (CS-) was unrewarded. We monitored behavioral output in the form of cue-evoked 
licking and rotational motion on a circular treadmill. The optical stimulus had a duration of 
5 s starting at the olfactory cue offset time (Figure 3A). Under control conditions (GFP+ 
mice receiving identical optical stimuli), animals readily acquired an anticipatory licking 
response during the delay period between the CS+ and reward. This conditioned behavior 
was consistent with the expression of a learned stimulus-reward association (Cohen et al., 
2012). The emergence of conditioned anticipatory licking was significantly delayed when 
PV cells were either optogenetically suppressed or over-activated (Figure 3B). This 
unidirectional form of behavioral control by PV interneurons was qualitatively consistent 
with our electrophysiological data showing that both types of manipulations attenuated 
spontaneous MSN activity. But critically, by tracking behavior across 3 days of training we 
found that the contribution of PV interneurons depended on experience. Specifically, we 
found that suppressing PV cells with Arch had the most significant impact on hit rate (the 
fraction of CS+ trials with anticipatory licking) on the first day, and no effect by the third 
day; in contrast, Chrimson-mediated activation had a persistent effect on hit rate (Figure 3C; 
n = 8 animals per group; two-way ANOVA, group effect: F2,21 = 15, p < 0.0001; time effect: 
F2,42 = 43.7, p < 0.0001). These results demonstrate that PV interneurons are sufficient to 
disrupt conditioned responding at any stage of training, but that they are normally only 
necessary for this behavior early in learning.
We next showed that optical stimulation did not affect the false alarm rate (the fraction of CS
− trials with licking), demonstrating that the reduction in hit rate is not due to mice 
generalizing between CS+ and CS− cues (Figure 3D; two-way ANOVA, group effect: F2,21 
= 1.7, p = 0.22; time effect: F2,42 = 6.6, p = 0.003). Furthermore, the reduction in 
anticipatory licking was not due to a suppression of animals’ ability to lick in general, 
because mice in all groups consumed rewards at an equal rate (Figure S3C; two-way 
ANOVA, group effect: F2,21 = 0.3, p = 0.73; time effect: F2,42 = 8.1, p = 0.001). 
Lee et al.
Page 6
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Additionally, we examined whether altering PV cell activity altered cue-evoked motion as 
measured by the animal’s rotation on the treadmill. Suppressing PV interneurons had no 
effect on treadmill speed, whereas over-activating these cells had a modest effect on the third 
day of training (Figure S3D; two-way ANOVA, group effect: F2,21 = 2.9, p = 0.08; time 
effect: F2,42 = 1.7, p = 0.2). Our results suggest that PV interneurons are sufficient to 
modestly disrupt cued treadmill motion if they are over-activated, but that they normally do 
not participate in such movement.
One potential explanation for the lack of a hit rate deficit in the late stage of training is that 
mice learn to compensate for the suppression of PV interneurons over several days of 
optogenetic stimulation. To examine this possibility we trained a separate Arch-expressing 
cohort without applying any laser for the first 3 days of training, and monitored behavior 
both with and without optical stimulation in the middle of day 4. In these animals, we found 
that the hit rate was not significantly affected by optical stimulation (Figure 3E; n = 8 Arch+ 
animals; oneway ANOVA, F2,14 = 2.5, p = 0.12). These results rule out compensatory effects 
of repeated optogenetic stimulation as the cause of the observed experience-dependent 
decline in the behavioral contribution of PV interneurons. Moreover, inhibiting DLS output 
by over-activating PV cells for the first time on day 4 of training, reduced the hit rate (Figure 
S3E, n = 6 Chrimson+ animals; one-way ANOVA, F2,10 = 10.8, p = 0.003). This 
demonstrates that the DLS remains necessary for expressing the conditioned licking 
behavior even after learning has taken place (Sippy et al., 2015).
To examine the robustness of the experience-dependent decline in performance upon 
optogenetic suppression, in another cohort we expressed the inhibitory designer receptor 
hM4D (Armbruster et al., 2007) in DLS PV cells, and trained naïve mice for 3 days under 
clozapine N-oxide (CNO) or saline conditions. In agreement with the optogenetic results we 
found that CNO-treated mice had significantly lower hit rate than controls in the early, but 
not late stage of training (Figure 3F; n = 7 animals per group; two-way ANOVA, group 
effect: F1,12 = 8.2, p = 0.014; time effect: F2,24 = 20.8, p < 0.0001). As with optogenetic 
inactivation experiments, there was no effect on false alarm rate (Figure 3G; two-way 
ANOVA, group effect: F1,12 = 1.4, p = 0.25; time effect: F2,24 = 7, p = 0.004), reward 
consumption (Figure S3F; two-way ANOVA, group effect: F1,12 = 3, p = 0.11; time effect: 
F2,24 = 3.8, p = 0.04), or locomotion (Figure S3G; two-way ANOVA, group effect: F1,12 = 
0.19, p = 0.67; time effect: F2,24 = 0.26, p = 0.77). Taken together, our optogenetic and 
chemogenetic manipulations show that, under physiological conditions, PV interneurons 
selectively promote conditioned behavioral responding in the initial stage of learning when 
animals are relatively inexperienced. Furthermore, since animals that underwent PV cell 
suppression recovered to normal performance levels by day 3, it appears that they were still 
able to learn the stimulus-reward association at the same rate as the control group; however, 
their ability to express the conditioned response was disrupted early in training.
Learning Diminishes the Relative Influence of PV Interneurons on MSN Activity
Our behavioral data suggest the contribution of PV interneurons relative to other sources of 
MSN modulation decreases as a function of experience. To probe the learning-dependent 
influence of PV interneurons on MSN dynamics during behavior, we recorded from two 
Lee et al.
Page 7
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 groups of mice corresponding to the early (day 1; n = 7 Arch+ mice) and late (day 4; n = 7 
Arch+ mice) stage of Pavlovian reward conditioning. Using an opto-microprobe, we 
randomly paired 50% of all CS+ and CS− events with unilateral optical stimulation to 
suppress the contribution of Arch-expressing PV interneurons on striatal activity (Figure 
S4A). We found that optical stimulation impacted MSN population activity in a cue-
dependent manner, with the change on firing rate during CS+ trials exceeding the change 
during CS− trials (Figures S4B–S4D; n = 321 MSNs from the day 1 group; Wilcoxon 
matched pairs signed-rank test, p < 0.0001). This demonstrates that striatal PV interneurons 
contribute more to MSN encoding of reward-associated cues than neutral cues. We also 
showed that unilateral optical stimulation did not significantly alter anticipatory licking 
performance in either training group (Figure S4E, paired t-test, day 1: p = 0.39; day 4: p = 
0.26), allowing us to study optogenetically induced changes in neural activity without 
potentially confounding behavioral changes (Eshel et al., 2015).
Since striatal neurons are known to encode movement-preparatory activity (Fan et al., 2012; 
Jin and Costa, 2010; Jog et al., 1999; Kimura, 1990; Miyachi et al., 2002; Schultz and 
Romo, 1992), we examined population activity aligned to the start of an anticipatory licking 
bout during hit trials. To causally determine the contribution of PV cells to MSN coding, and 
how their relationship with MSNs changes with learning, we compared population dynamics 
between light off and light on conditions, and between early (Figures 4A–4C) and late 
(Figures 4D–4F) stages of training. As a population, MSNs exhibited licking-preparatory 
activity that increased with time, reaching a maximum level at approximately the lick onset 
time (Figures 4C, 4F). Transiently suppressing PV cell firing attenuated this activity pattern 
(Figures 4B, 4C, 4E, 4F). There was an overall reduction in preparatory (see Experimental 
Procedures; preparatory was defined as t = − 1 to 0 s from lick onset) population activity in 
both early (Figure 4G; n = 321 MSNs; Wilcoxon matched pairs signed-rank test, p < 0.0001) 
and late (Figure 4H; n = 256 MSNs; Wilcoxon matched pairs signed-rank test, p < 0.0001) 
stages of training, suggesting that PV cells have a persistent role in modulating MSN 
dynamics. To verify that these effects are optogenetically mediated, we performed 
measurements in control animals (n = 4 GFP+ mice) which did not express Arch, and 
confirmed that there were no light-evoked changes in preparatory MSN dynamics (Figures 
S4F, S4G; n = 146 MSNs; Wilcoxon matched pairs signed-rank test, p = 0.93). We also 
examined if the change in MSN firing during PV cell suppression was dependent on 
recording position. We found that the average firing rate change per MSN caused by optical 
stimulation was not significantly correlated with its position along the dorsal-ventral axis 
(Figure S5A, day 1: r = −0.04, p = 0.57; day 4: r = 0.02, p = 0.79). These results suggest that 
lick preparatory MSN activity was uniformly affected by optogenetic suppression of PV 
cells across the depth of the electrode array.
We next examined different aspects of MSN dynamics in animals recorded on day 1 and 4. 
We found that the absolute amount of light-evoked firing rate suppression remained constant 
between training days (Figure 4I; Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.26). Likewise, the fraction of 
MSNs that were modulated by the laser did not significantly change (Figure S5B, Mann-
Whitney test, p = 0.073). We also did not find any significant within-day changes in the 
firing rate difference between non-laser and laser trials (Figure S5C, one-way ANOVA, day 
1: F2,10 = 3.4, p = 0.08; day 4: F2,12 = 0.01, p = 0.99). These results suggest that PV 
Lee et al.
Page 8
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 interneurons alter MSN activity by the same absolute amount independently of the animal’s 
level of training.
On the other hand, we found that MSN firing rate on non-laser trials showed a significant 
increase from day 1 to 4 (Figure 4J; Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.026). There was a 
concomitant increase in the fraction of significantly excited MSNs (Figure 4K; Mann-
Whitney test, p = 0.002), and decrease in the fraction of inhibited MSNs (Figure 4L; Mann-
Whitney test, p = 0.019), indicating that the overall level of preparatory MSN activity 
increased with training. Since optogenetically suppressing PV cells had the same effect on 
MSN activity on both training days, but the overall MSN activity was higher, the net effect 
was that learning diminished the relative suppression of MSNs by PV cells (Figure 4M; 
Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.002).
To further corroborate these findings we examined preparatory FSI activity, which, in 
contrast to MSNs, did not appear to change with training (Figures 5A, 5B; Mann-Whitney 
test, p = 0.38). We found that neither the fraction of excited (Figure 5C; Mann-Whitney test, 
p = 0.25) nor inhibited (Figure 5D; Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.25) FSIs differed between day 
1 and day 4 of training. Taken together, these results show that under physiological 
conditions, striatal MSN activity is enhanced by PV interneurons at all stages of training. 
However, the contribution of those interneurons relative to other sources of MSN modulation
—such as excitatory cortical input—diminishes with experience (Figure 5E). This model is 
qualitatively consistent with our finding that reward-conditioned behavior was selectively 
disrupted during the initial phase of training, as this is when preparatory striatal output 
signals are weakest and therefore most sensitive to attenuation through PV interneuron 
suppression.
DISCUSSION
PV-expressing interneurons regulate information processing in a wide variety of brain 
circuits (Hu et al., 2014). Here we found that in the dorsolateral striatum, these cells support 
reward-conditioned behavioral performance in an experience-dependent manner. We showed 
that optogenetically or chemogenetically suppressing the activity of these cells selectively 
interfered with reward-anticipatory licking (hit rate) during the initial stage of learning, but 
did not affect the performance of experienced animals. Furthermore, the ability to form 
stimulus-reward associations did not appear to be affected by these manipulations, because 
after 3 days of training animals reached normal performance levels. These results suggest 
that DLS PV interneurons are necessary for the initial expression of reward-conditioned 
responses, but do not control associative learning across different training days. 
Furthermore, since we showed (by over-activating PV cells to inhibit MSN firing) that the 
DLS remained necessary for the behavior throughout all stages of training, this suggests that 
the relative influence of PV cells on DLS microcircuit function declines with experience.
Another study reported dyskinetic behavior upon pharmacological inactivation of FSIs 
(Gittis et al., 2011b). Here we did not find evidence for deficits in locomotion during 
suppression of these cells, as measured by cue-evoked rotation of a circular treadmill. On the 
other hand, activating these cells had a small but significant effect on locomotion. Thus, our 
Lee et al.
Page 9
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 data suggest that PV interneurons are sufficient, but not necessary to drive strong changes in 
locomotion. The relatively brief optical stimulation used in our study may restrict our ability 
to detect the onset of dyskinesias. Moreover, a cell ablation study shows that PV-related 
movement deficits are exacerbated by stress (Xu et al., 2016), which we explicitly tried to 
reduce in our experiments through gradual habituation to head restraint. Additionally, our 
study focused on the DLS because PV-positive cells appear to be most concentrated in this 
area (Luk and Sadikot, 2001), whereas there is evidence that PV cells in other striatal 
subregions are sufficient to drive different aspects of behavior, such as aversion (Qi et al., 
2016). Thus it appears that striatal PV interneurons serve a broader range of functions than 
the reward conditioning task allowed to be examined here, which may reflect the underlying 
functional heterogeneity of different striatal subregions (Thorn et al., 2010; van der Meer et 
al., 2010). For example, PV cells in the dorsomedial striatum (Corbit and Janak, 2010) or 
nucleus accumbens (Day and Carelli, 2007) may have a stronger role in forming stimulus-
reward associations than these interneurons in the DLS, which our data showed regulate the 
expression of conditioned behaviors. Additionally, striatal PV interneurons appear to 
represent a molecularly, electrophysiologically, and morphologically diverse population 
(Koos and Tepper, 1999; Munoz-Manchado et al., 2016), and it is unknown whether these 
subtypes serve different behavioral functions.
To examine the contribution of PV cells on MSN dynamics, we created an opto-microprobe 
device by combining silicon-based probe recording technology with optical fibers (Buzsaki 
et al., 2015). We found that PV cells modulate striatal output signals, and that their 
contribution to MSN firing rate is the same regardless of the animal’s level of experience on 
the reward conditioning task. In support of this observation, we found no change in 
preparatory FSI activity during learning. In contrast, learning was accompanied by an 
increase in preparatory MSN activity from day 1 to 4. The DLS is innervated by 
glutamatergic afferents from sensorimotor cortical areas (Hintiryan et al., 2016; McGeorge 
and Faull, 1989; Pennartz et al., 2009). The experience-dependent increase in MSN activity 
which was observed here, and in other studies (Barnes et al., 2005; Jin and Costa, 2010; Jog 
et al., 1999; Kimchi et al., 2009; Miyachi et al., 2002; Thorn et al., 2010; Yin et al., 2009), is 
consistent with an enhancement of corticostriatal coupling that accompanies some forms of 
learning (Koralek et al., 2013; O’Hare et al., 2016; Xiong et al., 2015). Thus, our results 
suggest that PV interneurons regulate MSN firing rate by a relatively fixed amount across all 
stages of training, compared to other inputs whose strength increases as animals gain 
experience. Finally, some studies show that DLS activity is reduced after extended periods 
of training (Carelli et al., 1997; Tang et al., 2009), raising the possibility that non-monotonic 
changes in firing rate may occur after day 4 as animals repeatedly perform the conditioned 
behavioral response.
In addition to showing that PV interneurons are important for task performance during the 
initial period of learning, we found complementary behavioral and electrophysiological 
evidence that these cells play a role unlike their counterparts in cortical microcircuits. 
Namely, both PV cell hypoactivity and hyperactivity reduced reward conditioning and 
spontaneous MSN output. The PV inactivation experiments demonstrate that under 
physiological conditions, striatal PV interneurons amplify MSN activity, and that this 
enhances the expression of anticipatory lick responses. Conversely, the over-activation 
Lee et al.
Page 10
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiments demonstrate that PV interneurons are sufficient to disrupt neural dynamics and 
behavior. An open question is the biological significance of these results. Suppression of 
activity (reduction of function) may mimic the acute effects of a sparser PV cell population, 
which is associated with disorders such as Tourette syndrome (Kalanithi et al., 2005) and 
Huntington’s disease (Reiner et al., 2013). In contrast, manipulations to excessively drive 
these cells do not reflect any known physiological state, but are nevertheless useful for 
inhibiting DLS output signals and assessing their sufficiency in driving behavior.
The most extensively studied connection of striatal PV interneurons is monosynaptic 
coupling with MSNs (Gittis et al., 2010; Koos and Tepper, 1999; Mallet et al., 2005; Planert 
et al., 2010; Tepper et al., 2010). However, our data also showed the presence of disynaptic 
inhibitory coupling via an intermediary interneuron. Using in vitro electrophysiology we 
identified an inhibitory connection from PV to NPY interneurons, which preferentially 
occurred in the NGF rather than the PLTS subpopulation. Moreover, we confirmed that 
activation of NPY interneurons potently reduced MSN activity in vivo, in agreement with 
previously reported findings in brain slices (English et al., 2012; Ibanez-Sandoval et al., 
2011). Thus we identified a possible mechanism by which suppressing PV interneurons 
inhibits MSN firing, via disinhibition of NPY interneurons. It is notable that NPY-NGF cells 
may provide even stronger inhibition to MSNs than PV interneurons (Ibanez-Sandoval et al., 
2011), which supports our proposed mechanism. Conversely, we speculate that excessively 
activating PV interneurons causes monosynaptic inhibition onto MSNs to override 
disynaptic disinhibition, again resulting in net MSN inhibition. A full understanding of the 
implications of these competing inhibitory coupling mechanisms requires further study, but 
they may have evolved to enable specialized computations in striatal microcircuits, such as 
detecting the absolute value of changes in PV cell firing.
In addition to the disynaptic PV-NPY-MSN circuit, we note other mechanisms that may 
contribute to some of our observations. It is known that the chloride reversal potential can 
lead to GABA-mediated depolarization on MSNs under certain conditions (Berke, 2011; 
Bracci and Panzeri, 2006; Czubayko and Plenz, 2002; Humphries et al., 2009; Plenz, 2003). 
However, this effect appears to be confined to MSNs below the chloride reversal potential, 
whereas neurons above the reversal potential are hyperpolarized by GABA (Plenz, 2003). 
Thus, it is unclear how to reconcile GABA-mediated depolarization with all of our results, in 
which MSN activity was attenuated by PV interneuron suppression under conditions of both 
low (spontaneous) and elevated (task-evoked) firing. Furthermore, it has been proposed that 
NPY-NGF interneurons can inhibit glutamate release from corticostriatal terminals through 
GABAB receptors (Logie et al., 2013). If, as we propose, NPY-NGF interneurons get 
disinhibited by PV interneuron silencing, glutamate released from corticostriatal terminals 
would be reduced, making it less likely for MSNs to generate action potentials. It is also 
possible that disynaptic coupling via MSNs (PV-MSN-MSN interactions) may contribute, in 
light of work showing the importance of lateral inhibition in regulating striatal output 
(Dobbs et al., 2016; Planert et al., 2010; Plenz, 2003). In addition to local microcircuit 
mechanisms, the inhibitory effect of PV interneuron suppression on MSN firing may be 
mediated by negative feedback with cortical areas projecting to the DLS. This could arise if 
there is a significant bias in the connectivity of PV cells toward direct pathway MSNs, as 
suggested by some studies (Gittis et al., 2011a; Gittis et al., 2010). To examine this possible 
Lee et al.
Page 11
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mechanism, we tested whether suppressing striatal PV interneurons has any effect on the 
spontaneous firing of the secondary motor cortex. We found no significant change in the 
mean pyramidal cell firing rate, which does not appear to support the long-range negative 
feedback mechanism with this specific cortical region. However, this does not rule out the 
possibility that other brain areas provide negative feedback to the DLS during PV 
interneuron suppression. Thus, while the competition between monosynaptic (PV-MSN) and 
disynaptic (PV-NPY-MSN) inhibition provides a parsimonious explanation for the results of 
our optogenetic suppression and over-activation experiments, there may be synergistic 
effects with other local and long-range circuit mechanisms, such as those noted above.
We showed that under physiological conditions, PV interneurons increase MSN activity to 
enhance behavioral performance in a reward conditioning task. As learning progresses, the 
contribution of PV cells relative to other sources of MSN input declines, together with their 
involvement in behavior. These results suggest that the abnormal function of PV cells, which 
is linked to a number of neurological disorders (Cepeda et al., 2013; Gittis et al., 2011a; 
Kalanithi et al., 2005; Mallet et al., 2006; Reiner et al., 2013), may cause the most severe 
behavioral deficits in the early stages of striatal-dependent learning. These findings also may 
provide new insights for probing the function of interneurons in learning and behavior.
METHODS
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources, reagents, data, and custom software scripts 
should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact (smasmanidis@ucla.edu).
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Homozygous PV-Cre mice (Hippenmeyer et al., 2005) (Pvalbtm1(cre)Arbr, The Jackson 
Laboratory), of either sex, 8–12 weeks were used for in vivo PV interneuron manipulations. 
BAC transgenic NPY-Cre mice (Tg(Npy-cre)RH26Gsat/Mmucd, Mutant Mouse Resource 
and Research Centers) bred with C57BL/6J mice were used for in vivo NPY interneuron 
manipulations. For in vitro experiments we crossed hemizygous NPY-GFP mice (B6.FVB-
Tg(Npy-hrGFP)1Lowl/J) (van den Pol et al., 2009) with homozygous PV-Cre mice. 
Genotyping was carried out on tail samples (Transnetyx). Animals were group housed until 
the surgery. Animals were kept on a 12 hr light cycle. All procedures were approved by the 
University of California, Los Angeles Chancellor’s Animal Research Committee.
METHOD DETAILS
Surgeries and viral injections—Animals underwent a surgical procedure under aseptic 
conditions and isoflurane anesthesia on a stereotaxic apparatus. We injected carprofen (5 
mg/kg, s.c.) daily for the first three days post-operatively. We attached rectangular head 
fixation bars on each side of the skull (9 mm × 7 mm × 0.76 mm dimensions, 0.6 g weight, 
laser cut from stainless steel at Fab2Order). Cre-dependent adeno-associated virus (AAV) 
was obtained from the University of North Carolina Vector Core. Using pulled glass pipettes 
we injected either AAV5/Flex-ARCH-GFP, AAV5/Syn-Flex-ChrimsonR-tdTomato, AAV5/
EF1a-DIO-eNpHR3.0-eYFP, or AAV5/EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP (for in vitro 
Lee et al.
Page 12
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiments), AAV5/Flex-GFP (for control experiments), or AAV8/hSyn-DIO-hm4D(Gi)-
mcherry (for chemogenetic experiments), unilaterally or bilaterally into the dorsolateral 
striatum (500 nl per hemisphere, 0.8 mm anterior, 2.2 mm lateral, 3.2 mm ventral to 
bregma). In another set of experiments we injected AAV5/Flex-ARCH-GFP into the medial 
prefrontal cortex (300 nl, 1.8 mm anterior, 0.25 mm lateral, 2.5 mm ventral to bregma). For 
behavioral manipulation experiments we also bilaterally implanted ferrule-coupled optical 
fibers (200 μm diameter, 0.22 NA) that terminated 200 μm above the striatal injection sites. 
All animals were individually housed after surgery, and were allowed to recover for 2 weeks 
before beginning habituation and behavioral conditioning (see Behavioral task). Analgesics 
(ibuprofen) and antibiotics (amoxicillin) were administered in the drinking water for the first 
week post-operatively. For electrophysiological experiments, a second surgery under 
isoflurane anesthesia was completed 6 hrs prior to recording, to create a rectangular 
craniotomy above the region of interest. A drop of bupivacaine was applied on the skull 
before drilling craniotomies. An additional craniotomy was made over the posterior 
cerebellum to accommodate a silver/silver-chloride electrical reference wire.
Immunohistochemistry—Brain sections from n=4 Arch+ mice were immunostained 
with antibodies to PV and GFP to visualize Arch expression, and NeuN to visualize 
neuronal nuclei. PV-Cre mice injected with AAV5/Flex-Arch-GFP were perfused with 24 °C 
phosphate-buffered saline (pH 7.3) and ice-cold paraformaldehyde. Brains were placed in 
paraformaldehyde overnight, and were cut as coronal sections with a thickness of 100 μm on 
a vibratome. Subsequently, goat antibody to PV (1:1,000, SWant), rabbit antibody to NeuN 
(1:1000, Millipore) and chicken antibody to GFP (1:1,000, Abcam) primary antibodies were 
used, followed by Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated donkey antibody to goat (1:200, Jackson 
ImmunoResearch) and DyLight 405–conjugated donkey antibody to rabbit (1:200, Jackson 
ImmunoResearch) and Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated donkey antibody to chicken (1:200, 
Jackson ImmunoResearch) as secondary antibodies. Sections were imaged under confocal 
microscopy, and cells were counted manually. The quantification of GFP and PV expression 
levels is provided in Figure S1B.
Behavioral task—After 2 weeks of recovery from the first surgery, mice were food 
restricted to maintain their weight at around 90% of their baseline level, and given water ad 
libitum. Habituation and training procedures are described in detail in another publication 
(Shobe et al., 2015). The timeline is illustrated in Figure S3B. Briefly, animals were initially 
habituated to the head fixation apparatus and to reliably consume uncued rewards (5 μl, 10% 
sweetened condensed milk), which were delivered via actuation of an audible solenoid 
valve. The reward delivery and lick meter port was located around 5 mm from the mouth, 
and animals had to extend their tongue out of the mouth to register as a lick. Subsequently, 
animals were trained on a Pavlovian task using olfactory cues. Aromatic compounds 
(isoamyl acetate for CS+, and citral for CS−) were diluted 1:10 in mineral oil, and diluted 
another factor of 10 by mixing with clean air in an olfactometer (total air flow was 1.5 l/
min). For experiments involving optogenetic manipulations, cues were presented in 
pseudorandom order for 1 s, followed by a reward 3 s after CS+ onset (100 CS+ and 100 CS
− cues per session, 15–25 s intertrial interval). Hit rate for optogenetic experiments was 
defined as the fraction of CS+ trials with a bout of licking starting 0–3 s after CS+ onset 
Lee et al.
Page 13
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (i.e., prior to reward delivery). For experiments involving chemogenetic manipulations, cues 
were presented in pseudorandom order for 1 s, followed by a reward 2.5 s after CS+ onset 
(100 CS+ and 100 CS− cues per session, 15–25 s intertrial interval). Hit rate for 
chemogenetic experiments was defined as the fraction of CS+ trials with a bout of licking 
starting 0–2.5 s after CS+ onset (i.e., prior to reward delivery). False alarm rate for all 
experiments was defined as the fraction of CS− trials with licking 0–5 s after CS− onset. 
Consumption rate for all experiments was defined as the fraction of rewards in which 
animals licked 0–0.5 s after reward onset. Treadmill speed was calculated as the mean 
rotational velocity in a 5 s period after cue offset, averaged across all CS+ trials.
In vivo optical stimulation and chemogenetics—Optical stimulation was provided 
through a pair of optical fibers. The fibers were coupled to a laser (Opto Engine) through a 
50/50 splitter (532 nm, 10 mW per fiber unless the power was explicitly varied). In the first 
optogenetic behavioral cohort (Figures 3A–3D, S3C, S3D) light was delivered throughout 3 
days of training in previously inexperienced animals, between 1–6 s after cue onset. In the 
second optogenetic behavioral cohort (Figures 3E, S3E), mice were initially trained for 3 
days without optical stimulation. On the 4th day mice were presented with 40 CS+ and 40 
CS− trials without light (“Pre”), an equal number of trials with light (“Laser”, same 
stimulation parameters as the first cohort), and again an equal number of trials without light 
(“Post”). In the chemogenetic behavioral cohort (Figures 3F, 3G, S3F, S3G), we injected 
CNO (1 mg/kg, 150 μl, i.p.) or vehicle (150 μl, i.p.) 45 min before beginning training for 3 
days of training in previously inexperienced animals. In electrophysiological experiments 
involving spontaneous firing rate measurements (Figures 1, 2E, S1–S3), light was delivered 
in 5 s continuous pulses in the absence of any explicit cues or rewards. Light intensity was 
varied from 1, 2, 5, 10, 15 mW (20 trials per setting). In electrophysiological experiments 
involving behavioral training (Figures 4, 5, S4–S5), light (10 mW) was delivered on 50% of 
all CS+ and CS− trials, from 1 to 6 s after cue onset.
Opto-microprobe and in vivo electrophysiology—The device used to concurrently 
record neural activity and optically suppress PV cells consisted of a 256 electrode silicon 
microprobe (Shobe et al., 2015) (4 prongs spaced by 200 μm, 64 electrodes per prong in a 
honeycomb array pattern spanning 1.05 mm), integrated with a pair of optical fibers (200 μm 
diameter, 0.22 NA) with their centers spaced 400 μm apart. Electrode impedance was set to 
100–300 kΩ via gold electrodeposition. The device was cleaned after each recording session 
in a trypsin solution and deionized water, and reused in subsequent experiments. Optical 
intensity from each fiber was calibrated prior to every recording, and measured again at the 
end of the recording to ensure stability. On the recording day, animals underwent a brief 
craniotomy surgery under isoflurane anesthesia. The dura was removed to facilitate 
insertion. During a 6 hr recovery period, the craniotomies were sealed with a silicone 
elastomer compound (Kwik-Cast, World Precision Instruments). Subsequently, awake 
animals were head restrained, the elastomer was removed from the craniotomies, the 
reference wire was placed on the surface of the cerebellum, and the opto-microprobe was 
inserted in the brain under the control of a motorized micromanipulator. For recordings in 
the dorsolateral striatum, the target coordinates of the most lateral silicon prong were: 0.8 
mm anterior, 2.5 mm lateral, 4.2 mm ventral to bregma. For recordings in the prefrontal 
Lee et al.
Page 14
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cortex, the target coordinates of the most lateral prong were: 1.8 mm anterior, 0.7 mm 
lateral, 3.0 mm ventral to bregma. For recordings in the motor cortex, the target coordinates 
of the most lateral prong were: 2.4 mm anterior, 1.8 mm lateral, 2.1 mm ventral to bregma. 
Mineral oil was placed on the craniotomy to prevent drying. Data acquisition commenced 45 
min after device insertion, using custom-built hardware at a sampling rate of 25 kHz per 
electrode (Shobe et al., 2015).
In vitro electrophysiology—Recordings were performed in brain slices from 12 week-
old PV-Cre × NPY-GFP mice at 4–5 weeks following AAV injection. To prepare brain 
slices, mice were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane and perfused transcardially with an 
ice-cold, high sucrose-based slicing solution containing (in mM): 26 NaHCO3, 1.25 
NaH2PO4, 208 sucrose, 10 glucose, 2.5 KCl, 1.3 MgCl2, 8 MgSO4. Mice were decapitated, 
brains dissected out and immediately placed in oxygenated sucrose slicing solution. Coronal 
slices (300 μm) were cut and transferred to an incubating chamber containing ACSF (in 
mM): 130 NaCl, 3 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 2 MgCl2, 2 CaCl2, and 10 glucose) 
oxygenated with 95% O2-5% CO2 (pH 7.2–7.4, osmolality 290–310 mOsm/L, 32–34°C). 
Slices were al lowed to recover for an additional 30 min at room temperature prior to 
recording. All recordings were performed at room temperature using an upright microscope 
(Olympus BX51WI) equipped with differential interference contrast optics and fluorescence 
imaging (QIACAM fast 1394 monochromatic camera with Q-Capture Pro software, 
Qlmaging). Whole-cell patch clamp recordings in voltage and current-clamp modes were 
obtained from GFP-positive NPY cells using a MultiClamp 700B Amplifier (Molecular 
Devices) and the pCLAMP 10.3 acquisition software. The patch pipette (3–5 MΩ resistance) 
contained a cesium-based internal solution (in mM): 125 Cs-methanesulfonate, 4 NaCl, 1 
MgCl2, 5 MgATP, 9 EGTA, 8 HEPES, 1 GTP-Tris, 10 phosphocreatine, and 0.1 leupeptin 
(pH 7.2 with CsOH, 270–280 mOsm) for voltage-clamp recordings or a K-gluconate-based 
solution containing (in mM): 112.5 K-gluconate, 4 NaCl, 17.5 KCl, 0.5 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 5 
ATP (potassium salt), 1 NaGTP, 5 EGTA, 10 HEPES, pH 7.2 (270–280 mOsm/L) for 
current-clamp recordings. After breaking through the membrane, cell properties 
(capacitance, input resistance, decay time constant) were recorded while holding the 
membrane potential at −70 mV. Electrode access resistances during whole-cell recordings 
were maintained at < 30 MΩ. PV interneurons were activated with a single light pulse (470 
nm, 0.5 ms, 3 mW, CoolLED) delivered through the epifluorescence illumination pathway 
using Chroma Technologies filter cubes. Evoked IPSCs in response to optical activation 
were recorded in MSNs and NPY-GFP cells in voltage-clamp mode, at a holding potential of 
+10 mV and in the presence of glutamatergic receptor antagonists (10 μM NBQX and 50 
μM APV, Tocris Bioscience). In some cells, 20 μM bicuculline was applied to block 
optically evoked IPSC responses, confirming their GABAergic nature.
Data analysis—Spike sorting and all neural activity analysis was carried out with custom 
Matlab scripts. Striatal units were classified using previously described criteria (Bakhurin et 
al., 2016) as putative medium spiny neurons (MSNs), fast spiking interneurons (FSIs), or 
tonically active neurons (TANs), based on spike waveform peak-to-trough width, and 
coefficient of variation of the baseline firing rate. There is no established procedure for 
electrophysiologically identifying putative NPY NGF or PLTS cells in vivo. FSIs were 
Lee et al.
Page 15
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 characterized by a narrow spike waveform (maximum width = 0.475 ms, Figure 1C). MSNs 
and TANs both have wider waveforms (minimum width = 0.55 ms, maximum width = 1.25 
ms). TANs were separated from MSNs by the regularity of their baseline firing (maximum 
coefficient of variation = 1.5). Units in the prefrontal cortex were classified as putative FSIs 
or pyramidal neurons using the same spike width separation criterion described for striatal 
FSIs. Firing rate was calculated by convolving spike times with a Gaussian filter (SD = 50 
ms) in time steps of 10 ms.
To calculate the change in spontaneous firing rate and rate modulation index during optical 
stimulation, we took into account that some units, regardless of whether animals were 
injected with optogenetic constructs, showed a transient increase in activity at the onset of 
the light stimulus (Figure 1G). This suggests the presence of a visual response artifact to 
green light, which has also been reported elsewhere (Kravitz et al., 2013), despite our best 
attempt to shield light from the animal’s eyes. Since this artifact appears confined to the 
onset of illumination, we excluded the first 1 s post-laser onset in the calculation of 
spontaneous activity effects. The change in spontaneous firing rate was calculated as the 
mean difference in rate between 1–5 s post-laser onset, and 0–1 s pre-laser onset (i.e., the 
baseline period). The rate modulation index per unit (RMI) was defined by the expression:
(1)
where R2 represents the mean firing 1–5 s post-laser onset, and R1 represents the mean 
baseline firing rate 0–1 s pre-laser onset. The RMI is a unitless quantity from −1 to 1, with 
negative values indicating net suppression of activity relative to baseline, and positive values 
indicating net excitation.
To compare neural population activity between laser-off and laser-on conditions, we aligned 
the firing rate to the onset of the first lick, and averaged over all hit trials. We then pooled 
units from all animals, and applied a paired t-test to calculate the likelihood, at each time 
bin, that the population activity from the laser-off and laser-on trials was indistinguishable.
To determine the licking-evoked firing rate change per animal for each unit, we calculated 
the difference in mean firing rate between the lick preparatory period (defined as t = −1 to 0 
s from lick onset), and a baseline period (defined as t = −7 to −3 s from lick onset). We then 
plotted the median rate change of all selected units per animal, and compared distributions 
across the day 1 and 4 groups. To obtain the fraction of excited and inhibited units, we 
randomly permuted each time bin of the firing rate in the lick preparatory period (t = −1 to 0 
s) with the baseline period (t=−7 to −3 s), and calculated the permuted firing rate change 
(500 iterations). We then calculated the likelihood that the observed rate change at a 
particular time bin was equal to the permuted rate change. The significance criterion was 
defined as p < 0.01. If two or more consecutive time bins had a significant positive 
(negative) change, that unit was defined as excited (inhibited). To obtain the fraction of 
laser-modulated units, we randomly swapped activity between non-laser and laser trials for 
each time bin in the lick preparatory period. We then calculated the likelihood that the 
observed difference in firing rate between non-laser and laser trials at a particular time bin 
Lee et al.
Page 16
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 was greater than the permuted difference. If two or more consecutive time bins significantly 
discriminated between non-laser and laser trials, that unit was defined as laser-modulated.
To determine the absolute amount of MSN firing rate suppression mediated by suppressing 
PV interneurons (Figure 4I), we calculated the following expression:
(2)
where Roff (Ron) is the median firing rate of all MSNs per animal in the lick preparatory 
period (t = −1 to 0 s) on hit trials with laser off (on). To determine the amount of MSN firing 
rate suppression relative to the total MSN rate (Figure 4M), we used the following 
expression:
(3)
where ΔRoff (ΔRon) is the median firing rate change of all MSNs per animal between the lick 
preparatory period (t = −1 to 0 s) and baseline period (t = −7 to −3 s), on hit trials with laser 
off (on). The relative suppression factor is a unitless quantity, with smaller values reflecting 
a smaller effect of suppressing PV cells on MSN activity relative to the overall MSN 
activity.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All statistical analyses were performed using standard Matlab functions, custom scripts, or 
Prism software. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was accompanied by Tukey’s post 
hoc test for multiple comparisons. Two-way ANOVA was accompanied by Bonferroni’s post 
hoc test for multiple comparisons. The difference between day 1 and day 4 group neural 
activity was evaluated by a Mann-Whitney U test. The sign of the rate modulation index 
(RMI) was determined by a Wilcoxon signed-rank test for zero median. We excluded one 
animal from the results in Figure S5C, because the mouse did not perform enough correct 
anticipatory licking trials to be included in the within-session activity analysis. Information 
about the exact value of n, what n represents, statistical test used, p-value, and use of SD or 
SEM is provided in the main text and/or figure captions. Statistical results are summarized in 
Table S1.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank E.S. Boyden and K. Deisseroth for sharing optogenetic constructs and B.L. Roth for sharing DREADD 
constructs used in this project, which were obtained from the University of North Carolina Vector Core. S.C.M. 
acknowledges support from a 2014 McKnight Technical Innovations in Neuroscience Award, NIH DA034178, NIH 
NS100050, and NSF CBET 1263785. M.S.L. acknowledges support from NIH NS41574, and NIH U54HD087101, 
which supports the Cell, Circuits and Systems Analysis Core.
Lee et al.
Page 17
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
Armbruster BN, Li X, Pausch MH, Herlitze S, Roth BL. Evolving the lock to fit the key to create a 
family of G protein-coupled receptors potently activated by an inert ligand. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2007; 104:5163–5168. [PubMed: 17360345] 
Bakhurin KI, Mac V, Golshani P, Masmanidis SC. Temporal correlations among functionally 
specialized striatal neural ensembles in reward-conditioned mice. J Neurophysiol. 2016; 115:1521–
1532. [PubMed: 26763779] 
Balleine BW, Delgado MR, Hikosaka O. The role of the dorsal striatum in reward and decision-
making. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:8161–8165. [PubMed: 17670959] 
Barbera G, Liang B, Zhang L, Gerfen CR, Culurciello E, Chen R, Li Y, Lin DT. Spatially Compact 
Neural Clusters in the Dorsal Striatum Encode Locomotion Relevant Information. Neuron. 2016
Barnes TD, Kubota Y, Hu D, Jin DZ, Graybiel AM. Activity of striatal neurons reflects dynamic 
encoding and recoding of procedural memories. Nature. 2005; 437:1158–1161. [PubMed: 
16237445] 
Bennett BD, Wilson CJ. Spontaneous activity of neostriatal cholinergic interneurons in vitro. J 
Neurosci. 1999; 19:5586–5596. [PubMed: 10377365] 
Berke JD. Functional properties of striatal fast-spiking interneurons. Front Syst Neurosci. 2011; 5:45. 
[PubMed: 21743805] 
Bracci E, Panzeri S. Excitatory GABAergic effects in striatal projection neurons. J Neurophysiol. 
2006; 95:1285–1290. [PubMed: 16251264] 
Burguiere E, Monteiro P, Feng G, Graybiel AM. Optogenetic stimulation of lateral orbitofronto-striatal 
pathway suppresses compulsive behaviors. Science. 2013; 340:1243–1246. [PubMed: 23744950] 
Buzsaki G, Stark E, Berenyi A, Khodagholy D, Kipke DR, Yoon E, Wise KD. Tools for probing local 
circuits: high-density silicon probes combined with optogenetics. Neuron. 2015; 86:92–105. 
[PubMed: 25856489] 
Carelli RM, Wolske M, West MO. Loss of lever press-related firing of rat striatal forelimb neurons 
after repeated sessions in a lever pressing task. J Neurosci. 1997; 17:1804–1814. [PubMed: 
9030639] 
Cepeda C, Galvan L, Holley SM, Rao SP, Andre VM, Botelho EP, Chen JY, Watson JB, Deisseroth K, 
Levine MS. Multiple sources of striatal inhibition are differentially affected in Huntington’s 
disease mouse models. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:7393–7406. [PubMed: 23616545] 
Chow BY, Han X, Dobry AS, Qian X, Chuong AS, Li M, Henninger MA, Belfort GM, Lin Y, 
Monahan PE, Boyden ES. High-performance genetically targetable optical neural silencing by 
light-driven proton pumps. Nature. 2010; 463:98–102. [PubMed: 20054397] 
Cohen JY, Haesler S, Vong L, Lowell BB, Uchida N. Neuron-type-specific signals for reward and 
punishment in the ventral tegmental area. Nature. 2012; 482:85–88. [PubMed: 22258508] 
Corbit LH, Janak PH. Inactivation of the lateral but not medial dorsal striatum eliminates the excitatory 
impact of Pavlovian stimuli on instrumental responding. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:13977–13981. 
[PubMed: 18094235] 
Corbit LH, Janak PH. Posterior dorsomedial striatum is critical for both selective instrumental and 
Pavlovian reward learning. Eur J Neurosci. 2010; 31:1312–1321. [PubMed: 20345912] 
Cui G, Jun SB, Jin X, Pham MD, Vogel SS, Lovinger DM, Costa RM. Concurrent activation of striatal 
direct and indirect pathways during action initiation. Nature. 2013; 494:238–242. [PubMed: 
23354054] 
Czubayko U, Plenz D. Fast synaptic transmission between striatal spiny projection neurons. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2002; 99:15764–15769. [PubMed: 12438690] 
Damodaran S, Evans RC, Blackwell KT. Synchronized firing of fast-spiking interneurons is critical to 
maintain balanced firing between direct and indirect pathway neurons of the striatum. J 
Neurophysiol. 2014; 111:836–848. [PubMed: 24304860] 
Day JJ, Carelli RM. The nucleus accumbens and Pavlovian reward learning. The Neuroscientist: a 
review journal bringing neurobiology, neurology and psychiatry. 2007; 13:148–159.
Lee et al.
Page 18
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Dobbs LK, Kaplan AR, Lemos JC, Matsui A, Rubinstein M, Alvarez VA. Dopamine Regulation of 
Lateral Inhibition between Striatal Neurons Gates the Stimulant Actions of Cocaine. Neuron. 
2016; 90:1100–1113. [PubMed: 27181061] 
English DF, Ibanez-Sandoval O, Stark E, Tecuapetla F, Buzsaki G, Deisseroth K, Tepper JM, Koos T. 
GABAergic circuits mediate the reinforcement-related signals of striatal cholinergic interneurons. 
Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:123–130.
Eshel N, Bukwich M, Rao V, Hemmelder V, Tian J, Uchida N. Arithmetic and local circuitry 
underlying dopamine prediction errors. Nature. 2015
Fan D, Rossi MA, Yin HH. Mechanisms of action selection and timing in substantia nigra neurons. J 
Neurosci. 2012; 32:5534–5548. [PubMed: 22514315] 
Fanselow MS, Wassum KM. The Origins and Organization of Vertebrate Pavlovian Conditioning. Cold 
Spring Harbor perspectives in biology. 2015; 8
Fino E, Venance L. Spike-timing dependent plasticity in striatal interneurons. Neuropharmacology. 
2011; 60:780–788. [PubMed: 21262240] 
Gage GJ, Stoetzner CR, Wiltschko AB, Berke JD. Selective activation of striatal fast-spiking 
interneurons during choice execution. Neuron. 2010; 67:466–479. [PubMed: 20696383] 
Gerfen CR, Surmeier DJ. Modulation of striatal projection systems by dopamine. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
2011; 34:441–466. [PubMed: 21469956] 
Gittis AH, Hang GB, LaDow ES, Shoenfeld LR, Atallah BV, Finkbeiner S, Kreitzer AC. Rapid target-
specific remodeling of fast-spiking inhibitory circuits after loss of dopamine. Neuron. 2011a; 
71:858–868. [PubMed: 21903079] 
Gittis AH, Leventhal DK, Fensterheim BA, Pettibone JR, Berke JD, Kreitzer AC. Selective inhibition 
of striatal fast-spiking interneurons causes dyskinesias. J Neurosci. 2011b; 31:15727–15731. 
[PubMed: 22049415] 
Gittis AH, Nelson AB, Thwin MT, Palop JJ, Kreitzer AC. Distinct roles of GABAergic interneurons in 
the regulation of striatal output pathways. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:2223–2234. [PubMed: 20147549] 
Gradinaru V, Thompson KR, Deisseroth K. eNpHR: a Natronomonas halorhodopsin enhanced for 
optogenetic applications. Brain cell biology. 2008; 36:129–139. [PubMed: 18677566] 
Graybiel AM. Habits, rituals, and the evaluative brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2008; 31:359–387. 
[PubMed: 18558860] 
Graybiel AM, Grafton ST. The Striatum: Where Skills and Habits Meet. Cold Spring Harbor 
perspectives in biology. 2015; 7
Han JS, McMahan RW, Holland P, Gallagher M. The role of an amygdalo-nigrostriatal pathway in 
associative learning. J Neurosci. 1997; 17:3913–3919. [PubMed: 9133409] 
Hintiryan H, Foster NN, Bowman I, Bay M, Song MY, Gou L, Yamashita S, Bienkowski MS, Zingg B, 
Zhu M, et al. The mouse cortico-striatal projectome. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19:1100–1114. 
[PubMed: 27322419] 
Hippenmeyer S, Vrieseling E, Sigrist M, Portmann T, Laengle C, Ladle DR, Arber S. A developmental 
switch in the response of DRG neurons to ETS transcription factor signaling. PLoS biology. 2005; 
3:e159. [PubMed: 15836427] 
Hjorth J, Blackwell KT, Kotaleski JH. Gap junctions between striatal fast-spiking interneurons regulate 
spiking activity and synchronization as a function of cortical activity. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:5276–
5286. [PubMed: 19386924] 
Hu H, Gan J, Jonas P. Interneurons. Fast-spiking, parvalbumin(+) GABAergic interneurons: from 
cellular design to microcircuit function. Science. 2014; 345:1255263. [PubMed: 25082707] 
Humphries MD, Wood R, Gurney K. Dopamine-modulated dynamic cell assemblies generated by the 
GABAergic striatal microcircuit. Neural networks: the official journal of the International Neural 
Network Society. 2009; 22:1174–1188. [PubMed: 19646846] 
Ibanez-Sandoval O, Tecuapetla F, Unal B, Shah F, Koos T, Tepper JM. A novel functionally distinct 
subtype of striatal neuropeptide Y interneuron. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:16757–16769. [PubMed: 
22090502] 
Jin X, Costa RM. Start/stop signals emerge in nigrostriatal circuits during sequence learning. Nature. 
2010; 466:457–462. [PubMed: 20651684] 
Lee et al.
Page 19
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Jog MS, Kubota Y, Connolly CI, Hillegaart V, Graybiel AM. Building neural representations of habits. 
Science. 1999; 286:1745–1749. [PubMed: 10576743] 
Kalanithi PS, Zheng W, Kataoka Y, DiFiglia M, Grantz H, Saper CB, Schwartz ML, Leckman JF, 
Vaccarino FM. Altered parvalbumin-positive neuron distribution in basal ganglia of individuals 
with Tourette syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:13307–13312. [PubMed: 
16131542] 
Kimchi EY, Torregrossa MM, Taylor JR, Laubach M. Neuronal correlates of instrumental learning in 
the dorsal striatum. J Neurophysiol. 2009; 102:475–489. [PubMed: 19439679] 
Kimura M. Behaviorally contingent property of movement-related activity of the primate putamen. J 
Neurophysiol. 1990; 63:1277–1296. [PubMed: 2358877] 
Kita H, Kosaka T, Heizmann CW. Parvalbumin-immunoreactive neurons in the rat neostriatum: a light 
and electron microscopic study. Brain Res. 1990; 536:1–15. [PubMed: 2085740] 
Klapoetke NC, Murata Y, Kim SS, Pulver SR, Birdsey-Benson A, Cho YK, Morimoto TK, Chuong 
AS, Carpenter EJ, Tian Z, et al. Independent optical excitation of distinct neural populations. 
Nature methods. 2014; 11:338–346. [PubMed: 24509633] 
Koos T, Tepper JM. Inhibitory control of neostriatal projection neurons by GABAergic interneurons. 
Nat Neurosci. 1999; 2:467–472. [PubMed: 10321252] 
Koralek AC, Costa RM, Carmena JM. Temporally precise cell-specific coherence develops in 
corticostriatal networks during learning. Neuron. 2013; 79:865–872. [PubMed: 23954030] 
Kravitz AV, Freeze BS, Parker PR, Kay K, Thwin MT, Deisseroth K, Kreitzer AC. Regulation of 
parkinsonian motor behaviours by optogenetic control of basal ganglia circuitry. Nature. 2010; 
466:622–626. [PubMed: 20613723] 
Kravitz AV, Owen SF, Kreitzer AC. Optogenetic identification of striatal projection neuron subtypes 
during in vivo recordings. Brain Res. 2013; 1511:21–32. [PubMed: 23178332] 
Kravitz AV, Tye LD, Kreitzer AC. Distinct roles for direct and indirect pathway striatal neurons in 
reinforcement. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:816–818. [PubMed: 22544310] 
Kreitzer AC, Malenka RC. Striatal plasticity and basal ganglia circuit function. Neuron. 2008; 60:543–
554. [PubMed: 19038213] 
Lau T, Gage GJ, Berke JD, Zochowski M. Local dynamics of gap-junction-coupled interneuron 
networks. Physical biology. 2010; 7:16015. [PubMed: 20228446] 
Liljeholm M, O’Doherty JP. Contributions of the striatum to learning, motivation, and performance: an 
associative account. Trends in cognitive sciences. 2012; 16:467–475. [PubMed: 22890090] 
Logie C, Bagetta V, Bracci E. Presynaptic control of corticostriatal synapses by endogenous gaba. J 
Neurosci. 2013; 33:15425–15431. [PubMed: 24068811] 
Luk KC, Sadikot AF. GABA promotes survival but not proliferation of parvalbumin-immunoreactive 
interneurons in rodent neostriatum: an in vivo study with stereology. Neuroscience. 2001; 104:93–
103. [PubMed: 11311534] 
Mahn M, Prigge M, Ron S, Levy R, Yizhar O. Biophysical constraints of optogenetic inhibition at 
presynaptic terminals. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19:554–556. [PubMed: 26950004] 
Mallet N, Ballion B, Le Moine C, Gonon F. Cortical inputs and GABA interneurons imbalance 
projection neurons in the striatum of parkinsonian rats. J Neurosci. 2006; 26:3875–3884. 
[PubMed: 16597742] 
Mallet N, Le Moine C, Charpier S, Gonon F. Feedforward inhibition of projection neurons by fast-
spiking GABA interneurons in the rat striatum in vivo. J Neurosci. 2005; 25:3857–3869. [PubMed: 
15829638] 
McGeorge AJ, Faull RL. The organization of the projection from the cerebral cortex to the striatum in 
the rat. Neuroscience. 1989; 29:503–537. [PubMed: 2472578] 
Miyachi S, Hikosaka O, Lu X. Differential activation of monkey striatal neurons in the early and late 
stages of procedural learning. Exp Brain Res. 2002; 146:122–126. [PubMed: 12192586] 
Moyer JT, Halterman BL, Finkel LH, Wolf JA. Lateral and feedforward inhibition suppress 
asynchronous activity in a large, biophysically-detailed computational model of the striatal 
network. Frontiers in computational neuroscience. 2014; 8:152. [PubMed: 25505406] 
Lee et al.
Page 20
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Munoz-Manchado AB, Foldi C, Szydlowski S, Sjulson L, Farries M, Wilson C, Silberberg G, Hjerling-
Leffler J. Novel Striatal GABAergic Interneuron Populations Labeled in the 5HT3a(EGFP) 
Mouse. Cereb Cortex. 2016; 26:96–105. [PubMed: 25146369] 
Nelson AB, Hammack N, Yang CF, Shah NM, Seal RP, Kreitzer AC. Striatal cholinergic interneurons 
Drive GABA release from dopamine terminals. Neuron. 2014; 82:63–70. [PubMed: 24613418] 
O’Hare JK, Ade KK, Sukharnikova T, Van Hooser SD, Palmeri ML, Yin HH, Calakos N. Pathway-
Specific Striatal Substrates for Habitual Behavior. Neuron. 2016
Oldenburg IA, Sabatini BL. Antagonistic but Not Symmetric Regulation of Primary Motor Cortex by 
Basal Ganglia Direct and Indirect Pathways. Neuron. 2015; 86:1174–1181. [PubMed: 26050037] 
Pennartz CM, Berke JD, Graybiel AM, Ito R, Lansink CS, van der Meer M, Redish AD, Smith KS, 
Voorn P. Corticostriatal Interactions during Learning, Memory Processing, and Decision Making. J 
Neurosci. 2009; 29:12831–12838. [PubMed: 19828796] 
Planert H, Szydlowski SN, Hjorth JJ, Grillner S, Silberberg G. Dynamics of synaptic transmission 
between fast-spiking interneurons and striatal projection neurons of the direct and indirect 
pathways. J Neurosci. 2010; 30:3499–3507. [PubMed: 20203210] 
Plenz D. When inhibition goes incognito: feedback interaction between spiny projection neurons in 
striatal function. Trends in neurosciences. 2003; 26:436–443. [PubMed: 12900175] 
Qi J, Zhang S, Wang HL, Barker DJ, Miranda-Barrientos J, Morales M. VTA glutamatergic inputs to 
nucleus accumbens drive aversion by acting on GABAergic interneurons. Nat Neurosci. 2016
Reig R, Silberberg G. Multisensory integration in the mouse striatum. Neuron. 2014; 83:1200–1212. 
[PubMed: 25155959] 
Reiner A, Shelby E, Wang H, Demarch Z, Deng Y, Guley NH, Hogg V, Roxburgh R, Tippett LJ, 
Waldvogel HJ, Faull RL. Striatal parvalbuminergic neurons are lost in Huntington’s disease: 
implications for dystonia. Movement disorders: official journal of the Movement Disorder Society. 
2013; 28:1691–1699. [PubMed: 24014043] 
Rothwell PE, Hayton SJ, Sun GL, Fuccillo MV, Lim BK, Malenka RC. Input-and Output-Specific 
Regulation of Serial Order Performance by Corticostriatal Circuits. Neuron. 2015; 88:345–356. 
[PubMed: 26494279] 
Schmitzer-Torbert NC, Redish AD. Task-dependent encoding of space and events by striatal neurons is 
dependent on neural subtype. Neuroscience. 2008; 153:349–360. [PubMed: 18406064] 
Schultz W. Multiple reward signals in the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2000; 1:199–207. [PubMed: 
11257908] 
Schultz W, Romo R. Role of primate basal ganglia and frontal cortex in the internal generation of 
movements. I. Preparatory activity in the anterior striatum. Exp Brain Res. 1992; 91:363–384. 
[PubMed: 1483512] 
Shobe JL, Claar LD, Parhami S, Bakhurin KI, Masmanidis SC. Brain activity mapping at multiple 
scales with silicon microprobes containing 1,024 electrodes. Journal of Neurophysiology. 2015; 
114:2043–2052. [PubMed: 26133801] 
Silberberg G, Bolam JP. Local and afferent synaptic pathways in the striatal microcircuitry. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol. 2015; 33:182–187. [PubMed: 26051382] 
Sippy T, Lapray D, Crochet S, Petersen CC. Cell-Type-Specific Sensorimotor Processing in Striatal 
Projection Neurons during Goal-Directed Behavior. Neuron. 2015; 88:298–305. [PubMed: 
26439527] 
Straub C, Saulnier JL, Begue A, Feng DD, Huang KW, Sabatini BL. Principles of Synaptic 
Organization of GABAergic Interneurons in the Striatum. Neuron. 2016; 92:84–92. [PubMed: 
27710792] 
Szydlowski SN, Pollak Dorocic I, Planert H, Carlen M, Meletis K, Silberberg G. Target selectivity of 
feedforward inhibition by striatal fast-spiking interneurons. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:1678–1683. 
[PubMed: 23345240] 
Tang CC, Root DH, Duke DC, Zhu Y, Teixeria K, Ma S, Barker DJ, West MO. Decreased firing of 
striatal neurons related to licking during acquisition and overtraining of a licking task. J Neurosci. 
2009; 29:13952–13961. [PubMed: 19890005] 
Tecuapetla F, Jin X, Lima SQ, Costa RM. Complementary Contributions of Striatal Projection 
Pathways to Action Initiation and Execution. Cell. 2016; 166:703–715. [PubMed: 27453468] 
Lee et al.
Page 21
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tepper JM, Tecuapetla F, Koos T, Ibanez-Sandoval O. Heterogeneity and diversity of striatal 
GABAergic interneurons. Frontiers in neuroanatomy. 2010; 4:150. [PubMed: 21228905] 
Thorn CA, Atallah H, Howe M, Graybiel AM. Differential dynamics of activity changes in 
dorsolateral and dorsomedial striatal loops during learning. Neuron. 2010; 66:781–795. [PubMed: 
20547134] 
Thorn CA, Graybiel AM. Differential entrainment and learning-related dynamics of spike and local 
field potential activity in the sensorimotor and associative striatum. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:2845–
2859. [PubMed: 24553926] 
van den Pol AN, Yao Y, Fu LY, Foo K, Huang H, Coppari R, Lowell BB, Broberger C. Neuromedin B 
and gastrin-releasing peptide excite arcuate nucleus neuropeptide Y neurons in a novel transgenic 
mouse expressing strong Renilla green fluorescent protein in NPY neurons. J Neurosci. 2009; 
29:4622–4639. [PubMed: 19357287] 
van der Meer MA, Johnson A, Schmitzer-Torbert NC, Redish AD. Triple dissociation of information 
processing in dorsal striatum, ventral striatum, and hippocampus on a learned spatial decision task. 
Neuron. 2010; 67:25–32. [PubMed: 20624589] 
Vicente AM, Galvao-Ferreira P, Tecuapetla F, Costa RM. Direct and indirect dorsolateral striatum 
pathways reinforce different action strategies. Current biology: CB. 2016; 26:R267–269. 
[PubMed: 27046807] 
Xiong Q, Znamenskiy P, Zador AM. Selective corticostriatal plasticity during acquisition of an 
auditory discrimination task. Nature. 2015
Xu M, Li L, Pittenger C. Ablation of fast-spiking interneurons in the dorsal striatum, recapitulating 
abnormalities seen post-mortem in Tourette syndrome, produces anxiety and elevated grooming. 
Neuroscience. 2016; 324:321–329. [PubMed: 26968763] 
Yamada H, Inokawa H, Hori Y, Pan X, Matsuzaki R, Nakamura K, Samejima K, Shidara M, Kimura 
M, Sakagami M, Minamimoto T. Characteristics of fast-spiking neurons in the striatum of 
behaving monkeys. Neuroscience research. 2016; 105:2–18. [PubMed: 26477717] 
Yin HH, Knowlton BJ. The role of the basal ganglia in habit formation. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006; 
7:464–476. [PubMed: 16715055] 
Yin HH, Mulcare SP, Hilario MR, Clouse E, Holloway T, Davis MI, Hansson AC, Lovinger DM, Costa 
RM. Dynamic reorganization of striatal circuits during the acquisition and consolidation of a skill. 
Nat Neurosci. 2009; 12:333–341. [PubMed: 19198605] 
Yttri EA, Dudman JT. Opponent and bidirectional control of movement velocity in the basal ganglia. 
Nature. 2016
Lee et al.
Page 22
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 HIGHLIGHTS
•
Examined PV cell function with large-scale neural recordings and 
optogenetics.
•
Suppressing or over-activating striatal PV cells reduces projection neuron 
firing.
•
A disynaptic inhibitory circuit couples PV cells to projection neurons.
•
The influence of PV cells on striatal output and behavior declines with 
experience.
Lee et al.
Page 23
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Striatal PV Interneurons Unidirectionally Control Spontaneous MSN activity
(A) Selective expression of Arch-GFP in PV cells in the dorsolateral striatum of PV-Cre 
mice. GFP (green) and NeuN (blue). Scale bar, 200 μm.
(B) Opto-microprobe device containing a 256 electrode silicon probe combined with 2 
optical fibers. Left: view under ambient light. Right: view under laser illumination from the 
fibers. Scale bar, 200 μm.
(C) Distribution of trough-to-peak spike waveform duration of 678 striatal units recorded 
across 15 animals used in Figure 1. Narrow spiking units (less than 0.475 ms trough-to-peak 
duration) were mainly classified as putative FSIs, and wide spikes (greater than 0.55 ms 
trough-to-peak duration) were mainly classified as putative MSNs. Inset shows mean spike 
waveform of a representative FSI (red) and MSN (blue). Scale bars, 0.5 ms horizontal, 50 
μV vertical.
(D) Percentage of putatively identified or unclassified striatal units.
(E) Response of 31 FSIs recorded in vivo to optical stimulation in Arch-expressing PV-Cre 
mice (PV-Arch). Left: The mean spontaneous firing rate was transiently reduced during 5 s 
continuous light delivery (green bar). Middle: The change in firing rate varied with optical 
fiber output power (one-way ANOVA, F4,120 = 4.3, p = 0.003). Right: Rate modulation 
index (RMI) distribution at 10 mW power. The median RMI was significantly different from 
zero (signed-rank test, p < 0.0001).
(F) Response of 176 MSNs to optical stimulation in PV-Arch mice. Left: After a brief 
excitatory response (black arrow) which was subsequently found to be an artifact, the mean 
activity decreased. Middle: The change in firing rate varied with optical fiber output power 
(one-way ANOVA, F4,700 = 14, p < 0.0001). Right: RMI distribution at 10 mW. The median 
RMI was significantly different from zero (signed-rank test, p < 0.0001).
(G) Response of 57 MSNs to optical stimulation in PV-GFP mice, which were not injected 
with optogenetic constructs. Left: There was no sustained change in firing relative to 
baseline. Middle: The change in firing rate did not significantly depend on optical fiber 
Lee et al.
Page 24
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 output power (one-way ANOVA, F4,224 = 0.1, p = 0.99). Right: RMI distribution at 10 mW. 
The median RMI was not significantly different from zero (signed-rank test, p = 0.77).
(H) Response of 34 FSIs to optical stimulation in PV-Chrimson mice. Left: There was an 
increase in mean firing relative to baseline. Middle: The change in firing rate varied with 
optical fiber output power (one-way ANOVA, F4,132 = 2.6, p = 0.04). Right: RMI 
distribution at 10 mW. The median RMI was not significantly different from zero (signed-
rank test, p = 0.77).
(I) Response of 277 MSNs to optical stimulation in PV-Chrimson mice. Left: There was a 
decrease in mean firing relative to baseline. Middle: The change in firing rate varied with 
optical fiber output power (one-way ANOVA, F4,1104 = 33, p < 0.0001). Right: RMI 
distribution at 10 mW. The median RMI was significantly different from zero (signed-rank 
test, p < 0.0001). See also Figures S1, S2. Data represent mean ± SEM.
Lee et al.
Page 25
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Characterization of a Disynaptic (PV-NPY-MSN) Inhibitory Microcircuit
(A) Striatal PV interneurons are fast-spiking interneurons (FSIs) that are characterized by a 
high firing frequency in response to depolarizing current injection (left). PV interneurons 
expressing ChR2 produced action potentials in response to blue light (right, 0.5 ms duration, 
470 nm, 3 mW) with a latency of 0.3 ms (right, inset).
(B) Sample traces (average of 3 sweeps) of IPSC responses in MSNs, NPY-NGF, and NPY-
PLTS cells after optical activation of PV interneurons.
(C) Mean evoked IPSC properties in MSNs and NPY interneurons after optical activation of 
PV interneurons. While the largest IPSC response magnitude was found to be in MSNs (n = 
7), NPY-NGF cells (n = 9) produced IPSC responses with higher amplitudes (unpaired t-test, 
p = 0.02), larger areas (p = 0.015) and longer decay times (p = 0.018) compared to light-
responsive NPY-PLTS cells (n = 5).
(D) Schematic model of microcircuitry of striatal PV interneurons coupled to MSNs both 
monosynaptically and disynaptically via NPY-NGF interneurons.
(E) Response of 49 MSNs recorded in vivo to optical stimulation in NPY-Chrimson mice. 
Left: The mean activity decreased during 5 s continuous light delivery (green bar). Middle: 
The change in firing rate varied with optical fiber output power (one-way ANOVA, F4,192 = 
7.7, p < 0.0001). Right: RMI distribution at 10 mW. The median RMI was significantly 
different from zero (signed-rank test, p < 0.0001). Data in (C) and (E) represent mean ± 
SEM.*p < 0.05;**p < 0.01; ****p < 0.0001.
Lee et al.
Page 26
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Striatal PV Interneurons Control Behavior during Early Reward Conditioning
(A) Stimulus-reward conditioning and optogenetic stimulation paradigm. Green bars denote 
the duration of bilateral optical stimulation.
(B) CS+ trial lick raster from day 1 of training of a PV-GFP (top), PV-Arch (middle), and 
PV-Chrimson (bottom) mouse receiving optical stimulation. Blue shaded area represents cue 
duration, green bar represents laser duration, dashed red line represents reward delivery 
time.
(C) Optogenetically suppressing or over-activating PV interneurons (n = 8 mice per group) 
selectively disrupted reward-anticipatory behavior (hit rate, two-way ANOVA, group effect: 
F2,21 = 15, p < 0.0001; time effect: F2,42 = 43.7, p < 0.0001). Post hoc Bonferroni’s test 
revealed that hit rate was selectively reduced by PV suppression on day 1 and 2 of training 
relative to GFP controls, but was reduced across all days by PV over-activation.
(D) False alarm rate was not significantly affected by optogenetic manipulation (two-way 
ANOVA, group effect: F2,21 = 1.7, p = 0.22; time effect: F2,42 = 6.6, p = 0.003).
(E) In this cohort, PV-Arch animals (n = 8) were trained without laser for 3 days and tested 
with laser in the middle of day 4. The hit rate was not significantly affected (one-way 
ANOVA, F2,14 = 2.5, p = 0.12). Absolute maximum difference of the 95% confidence 
intervals = 0.07.
(F) Chemogenetically inhibiting PV interneurons using hM4D and CNO (n = 7 mice per 
group) selectively disrupted hit rate in the early stage of training (two-way ANOVA, group 
effect: F1,12 = 8.2, p = 0.014; time effect: F2,24 = 20.8, p < 0.0001). Post hoc Bonferroni’s 
test revealed that hit rate was selectively reduced on day 1 and 2.
(G) False alarm rate was not significantly affected by chemogenetic inhibition (two-way 
ANOVA, group effect: F1,12 = 1.4, p = 0.25; time effect: F2,24 = 7, p = 0.004). Data in (C–G) 
are represented as mean ± SD. See also Figure S3. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ****p < 0.0001.
Lee et al.
Page 27
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Experience Diminishes the Relative Influence of PV Interneurons on Preparatory MSN 
Activity
(A) Mean baseline-subtracted and normalized firing rate as a function of time of 321 MSNs 
recorded on day 1 of training, aligned to the first lick during hit trials without laser. Units are 
ordered by their latency to peak firing.
(B) Same as (A) but showing hit trials with laser. Note that the rate is normalized to the 
maximum firing during trials without laser. The order of units is the same as that of (A).
(C) Comparison of the mean firing rate of the population in (A–B) during laser off (black) 
and laser on (green) conditions. Orange bars above the plots denote time bins with 
significantly different off-on firing rate (paired t-test, p < 0.01).
(D) Mean baseline-subtracted and normalized firing rate as a function of time of 256 MSNs 
recorded on day 4 of training, aligned to the first lick during hit trials without laser. Units are 
ordered by their latency to peak firing.
(E) Same as (D) but showing trials with laser. Note that the rate is normalized to the 
maximum firing during trials without laser. The order of units is the same as that of (D).
(F) Comparison of the mean firing rate of the population in (D–E) during laser off and laser 
on conditions. Data in (C and F) represent mean ± SEM.
(G) Comparison of median firing rate during a 1 s licking-preparatory period, between laser 
off and laser on conditions. The firing rate of the MSN population was significantly 
attenuated by optogenetic suppression of PV interneurons (Wilcoxon matched pairs signed-
rank test, p < 0.0001). Each data point represents one MSN recorded on day 1 of training.
(H) Same as (G) but for day 4 of training. The firing rate of the MSN population was 
significantly attenuated by optogenetic suppression of PV interneurons (Wilcoxon matched 
pairs signed-rank test, p < 0.0001).
Lee et al.
Page 28
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (I) The median level of MSN firing rate suppression per animal (Roff–Ron) did not 
significantly change from day 1 to day 4 (Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.26).
(J) The median level of preparatory MSN activity per animal increased from day 1 to day 4 
(Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.026). The firing rate change is with respect to baseline activity.
(K) The fraction of MSNs per animal that were significantly excited during the preparatory 
period increased from day 1 to day 4 (Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.002).
(L) The fraction of MSNs per animal that were significantly inhibited during the preparatory 
period decreased from day 1 to day 4 (Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.019).
(M) The relative suppression factor per animal, which quantifies the change in MSN activity 
due to PV interneuron suppression relative to the total MSN preparatory activity, decreased 
from day 1 to day 4 (Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.002). Data in (J–L) are derived from non-
laser trials, and each data point represents one animal (n = 7 mice per group). See also 
Figures S4, S5. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01.
Lee et al.
Page 29
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Experience does not Alter Preparatory FSI Activity
(A) Comparison of the mean firing rate as a function of time of the FSI population on day 1 
and day 4 of training. Data are aligned to the first lick during hit trials without laser.
(B) The median level of preparatory FSI activity per animal did not significantly change 
from day 1 to day 4 (Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.38). The firing rate change is with respect to 
baseline activity.
(C) The fraction of FSIs per animal that were significantly excited during the preparatory 
period did not significantly change from day 1 to day 4 (Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.25).
(D) The fraction of FSIs per animal that were significantly inhibited during the preparatory 
period did not significantly change from day 1 to day 4 (Mann-Whitney test, p = 0.25). Data 
in (A–D) are derived from non-laser trials, and each data point in (B–D) represents one 
animal (n = 7 mice per group).
(E) Illustrative model of how the contribution of PV interneurons on MSN activity 
diminishes relative to other influences (here depicted as external excitatory input) in an 
experience-dependent manner. Left and right panels represent day 1 and day 4, respectively. 
Arrow thickness represents the relative strength of the designated pathway.
Lee et al.
Page 30
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 22.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
