 BRIEF REVIEW
BIOMARKERS IN SPORTS AND EXERCISE: TRACKING
HEALTH, PERFORMANCE, AND RECOVERY IN ATHLETES
ELAINE C. LEE,1 MAREN S. FRAGALA,2 STAVROS A. KAVOURAS,3 ROBIN M. QUEEN,4
JOHN LUKE PRYOR,5 AND DOUGLAS J. CASA1
1Department of Kinesiology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut; 2Quest Diagnostics, Madison, New Jersey;
3Department of Health, Human Performance, & Recreation, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas; 4Department of
Biomedical Engineering and Mechanics, Virginia Tech University, Blacksburg, Virginia; and 5Department of Kinesiology,
California State University, Fresno, California
ABSTRACT
Lee, EC, Fragala, MS, Kavouras, SA, Queen, RM, Pryor, JL, and
Casa, DJ. Biomarkers in sports and exercise: tracking health,
performance, and recovery in athletes. J Strength Cond Res 31
(10): 2920–2937, 2017—Biomarker discovery and validation is
a critical aim of the medical and scientific community. Research
into exercise and diet-related biomarkers aims to improve health,
performance, and recovery in military personnel, athletes, and lay
persons. Exercise physiology research has identified individual
biomarkers for assessing health, performance, and recovery dur-
ing exercise training. However, there are few recommendations
for biomarker panels for tracking changes in individuals partici-
pating in physical activity and exercise training programs. Our
approach was to review the current literature and recommend
a collection of validated biomarkers in key categories of health,
performance, and recovery that could be used for this purpose.
We determined that a comprehensive performance set of bio-
markers should include key markers of (a) nutrition and metabolic
health, (b) hydration status, (c) muscle status, (d) endurance
performance, (e) injury status and risk, and (f) inflammation. Our
review will help coaches, clinical sport professionals, researchers,
and athletes better understand how to comprehensively monitor
physiologic changes, as they design training cycles that elicit
maximal improvements in performance while minimizing overtrain-
ing and injury risk.
KEY
WORDS
hydration,
muscle
quality,
endurance
performance, injury prevention, inflammation
INTRODUCTION
P
roteins, metabolites, electrolytes, and other small
molecules may serve as biomarkers for athletes
and recreationally active individuals. Advances in
big data approaches to assessing health and per-
formance of athletes suggest that using the newest technol-
ogy with intrinsic data such as biochemical, hematological
data can be powerful in identifying the balance between
training and recovery in each unique individual. Indeed,
many commercially available services are offering biochem-
ical and genetic testing for athletes, and professional athletes
are reportedly exploiting technology and biomarker testing
to track performance and recovery during training. Numer-
ous biomarkers may assess different aspects of health, sport
performance, and recovery, but when tracking athletes,
even useful biomarkers have limitations. Biomarker test-
ing/analysis poses many challenges: (a) single biomarkers
are not definitive for diagnosing broad physiological function
such as “recovery” in sport, (b) sensitivity of single biomarkers
to detect overtraining or injury risk is limited, (c) reference
ranges for athletes and specific subgroups of athletes are not
well defined, (d) interindividual variance in absolute values
and relative changes in biomarkers, and (e) highly contextu-
alized nature of biomarker testing and analysis.
A single measurement of a biomarker does not allow for
precise determination of an individual’s health status. For
example,
although
the
immune
signaling
molecule
interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a cytokine that can indicate inflamma-
tion alone, it provides little diagnostic information about
chronic inflammation during overtraining in an athlete; it has
both pro inflammatory and anti-inflammatory roles and re-
sponds to many stimuli acutely and chronically. There seems
to be evidence for the usefulness of IL-6 as a potential bio-
marker of overtraining. However, researchers agree that mul-
tiple cytokines should be measured together when attempting
to detect chronic inflammation in athletes, and that other var-
iables related to physiological/physical function and upstream
stimuli for chronic inflammation should be measured simulta-
neously (80,114). Data on multiple inflammatory cytokines,
endocrine markers of long-term dysregulation and overtraining
Address correspondence to Dr. Elaine C. Lee, elaine.c.lee@uconn.edu.
31(10)/2920–2937
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
Copyright � 2017 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
on behalf of the National Strength and Conditioning Association. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0 (CCBY-NC-
ND), where it is permissible to download and share the work provided
it is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used
commercially without permission from the journal.
2920
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
 like testosterone and cortisol, and muscle damage markers like
creatine kinase (CK) can be integrated to provide precise and
accurate information about an athlete’s health and overtraining
status. Relying on a single marker to sensitively and precisely
detect overtraining is overly simplistic given the pleiotropic
nature of most biological markers. Figure 1 outlines markers
of hydration state, nutrition/metabolic health, oxygen trans-
port, muscle status, inflammation, injury risk, and food allergies
that can be integrated to help athletes interpret their blood
biomarker data to meaningful practical application.
Further complicating biomarker analysis is the fact that
isolated or infrequent testing of biomarkers provides limited
information. There are few athlete-specific reference ranges
for most biomarkers, and this is in part because there is large
interindividual variance in biomarker values, and that mea-
surement of biomarkers can vary by context. Again consid-
ering
the
example
of
overtraining
biomarkers,
people
generally exhibit high variability in serum/plasma cytokine
levels and responsiveness (68,74,130), and athletes could
exhibit greater rates of variability or different ranges of values
(compared with average/sedentary individuals) entirely as
they do for other markers such as muscle damage marker
CK (86). Markers such as the many inflammatory cytokines
are elevated after exercise in healthy individuals and return to
baseline values within minutes to hours after exercise (126).
Absolute values of cytokines in a one-time blood sample
might be meaningful if values are elevated or decreased out-
side of the large range of interindividual variability observed,
but perhaps more meaningful might be the responsiveness of
circulating cytokine levels to a challenge such as an acute
training bout or weeks of training. The absolute resting levels
of biomarkers may not change while the response to stress
could be abnormal. Thus, timing of the measurement and an
individual’s average resting levels over multiple days are rele-
vant to interpretation and important to understanding the
normal fluctuation in biomarkers for a given individual over
a short period of time and in response to exercise and recov-
ery over the course of hours, days, or weeks.
Time course for when to take measurements and how
frequently are included in the discussion of specific bio-
markers. Although we do not recommend a precise testing
schedule that is suitable for all athletes under any training
conditions, we recommend 4 main considerations for deter-
mining frequency/timing of biomarker testing (Figure 2).
The first recommendation is to test at the beginning and
end the key points of training transitions. For example,
Figure 1. Comprehensive approach to biomarker analysis. Assessing multiple aspects of biological function allows coaches and athletes to track performance,
recovery, and health in an individualized, practical manner. Relying on multiple validated biomarkers increases sensitivity, allowing athletes to detect potential
impacts of training, recovery, diet, etc., long term. Data from long-term biomarker analysis will enhance preventative detection of injury or negative effects on
performance. Examples of options for well-studied biomarkers in each category are provided as suggested components of a customized panel.
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
| www.nsca.com
VOLUME 31 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2017 | 2921
 testing before and at the end of preseason training will pro-
vide important information about the athlete coming out of
off-season or rest periods and how preseason training has
prepared the athlete for the competitive season without
ideally, inducing any overtraining or injury. Second, it is rec-
ommended that during the competitive season, which may
have training subcycles, that biomarker testing be completed
around a single bout of exercise. Testing can be administered
before and after (a) a bout of exercise during a particularly
challenging training week, (b) a performance test, or (c)
a bout of exercise after recovery from an injury or after some
shift in training. This type of testing will elucidate any defi-
ciencies or defects in biomarker responses to an acute stress.
This would be valuable when resting values of biomarkers
might not reveal any concerns, but the response and recovery
from a bout of exercise would more sensitively detect con-
cerns. A third recommendation is to test before and multiple
times after a major competition event or injury. In this case,
there is a severe stress imposed by either the competitive
event or an injury and biomarker testing multiple times
after the event will allow an athlete to determine whether
recovery has occurred on a biochemically measurable level.
This case highlights the potential of biomarker testing to
precisely detect potential health/recovery concerns when
an athlete might feel ready, but may not actually be ready
at the tissue/cellular level. Finally, a recommendation to
establish standards for each individual and address the
variability in most biomarkers, is that biomarker testing be
done on multiple days during off-season when an athlete is
fit, healthy, and rested to determine the athlete’s average
resting values for all biomarkers to be tested under training
conditions. Flexibility should be built into biomarker testing
schedules to account for testing that can be associated
with an athlete’s subjective feelings of fatigue, measurable
decreases in performance, and injury incidents.
Accurately and precisely assessing health and performance
of athletes requires a more comprehensive, integrative, and
dynamic
approach
to
biomarker analysis.
A
simplistic
approach
to
using
molecular
biology/biochemistry
in
applied/practical sport science will not be appropriate in
maximizing the benefit of biomarker testing to diagnose and
make training decisions. The application of biomarker testing
to traditional sport assessment/coaching requires thoughtful
selection of multiple biomarkers and schedule of biomarker
testing, and informed interpretation of both biochemical
results
and
physiological/physical
data
about
athletes.
Through this review, we present an example holistic
approach to tracking athletes using biomarkers that assess
nutritional health, metabolic health, hydration status, muscle
status, endurance performance, injury status and risk, and
inflammation. Diet and training affect these key aspects of
health and performance that can be assessed with biomarkers
that have been relatively well studied; examples of evidence-
based biomarkers for each specific aspect of health/perfor-
mance are suggested based on our review of the literature
(Figure 1). We suggest ideally, a comprehensive approach to
biomarker analysis, but markers are presented based on their
respective physiological relevance for individuals seeking
a more focused approach to hematological assessment.
BIOMARKERS OF NUTRITION AND METABOLIC HEALTH
Athletic
performance
and
recovery
from
exercise
are
enhanced by optimal nutrition according to a joint position
stand by the American Dietetic Association, Dietitians of
Canada, and the American College of Sports Medicine.
Functional performance is impaired when nutritional intake
is inadequate and a high prevalence of disordered eating in
athletes, especially female athletes contributes to concerns
about general health. Specific nutritional deficiencies are
common in athletes particularly for vitamin D and iron, for
which studies have reported deficiency rates of 73% (27) and
22–31% (in female athletes) (37,104). Other, less common
nutritional deficiencies in nutrients such as folate, vitamin
B12, or magnesium may result in reduced endurance work
performance and muscle function. Individual nutritional
needs
depend
largely
on
sport-
and
training-specific
Figure 2. Suggested biomarker testing time points. C represents
suggested biomarker panel testing at diagnostic opportunities
throughout off-season and during-season training. * represents
competitive season during which both training and competition occur.
** represents peak competition season during which championship
matches might occur. Suggested time points for biomarker testing
include before and after each major shift in training. Frequent (2–3 tests)
testing during rested, healthy periods in the off-season will provide
baseline values for many biomarkers and will be important for providing
individualized biomarker data. Testing is also recommended before and
after at least 1 acute exercise bout or performance test in the middle of
a training season to acquire data around optimal performance. Testing
before and after an acute bout of exercise will also allow athletes to analyze
variables that might be more meaningful as responsive to an acute bout
rather than as a single value at rest. It is also recommended that flexibility
be built in to test biomarkers around a major championship competition or
acute injury event. Testing not just before and after such an event, but also
at additional time points after the competition or injury will allow the athlete
to assess a recovery response. Data from biomarkers should be analyzed
with physiological and physical data to contextualize results. This approach
will optimize sensitivity, precision, and accuracy.
Biomarkers in Sport and Exercise
2922
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
 bioenergetic demands as well as on an athlete’s metabolic
tolerance, needs, and preferences. Frequent monitoring of
macronutrient and micronutrient intake may help identify
individual deficiencies and track changes, especially as train-
ing volume and nutritional demands increase. Nutritional
assessment by objective biomarker testing eliminates bias
associated with more traditional and subjective nutritional
assessments (e.g., recall, questionnaire).
Macronutrient Metabolism
Glucose functions as the primary energy source. Unlike fats
and proteins (e.g., ketones), which the body uses as energy
sources in some conditions, glucose is the only energy
substrate in the body that functions solely for providing
energy to cells. Circulating glucose levels during exercise
depend on energy status, food intake, event intensity, and
glycogen storage levels. Reduced glycogen availability is
commonly associated with fatigue. With glucose-depleting
events, carbohydrate consumption before or during pro-
longed exercise has been shown to replenish glycogen,
maintain blood glucose levels, and enhance performance,
especially for high-intensity activity (136). Tracking and
monitoring fasting and longer-term blood glucose through
biomarkers such as glucose may help individual athletes
monitor the nutritional adequacy of their diet. Although
fasting blood glucose is not often related directly to perfor-
mance, athletes tend to have lower fasting blood glucose
(76), where levels are associated with the intensity of the
training regimen (76). Adequate nutrition for a given training
volume can reduce the risk of exercise-induced hypoglyce-
mia in athletes. In addition, exercise training may reduce
vulnerability to hypoglycemia in athletes because of a shift
in substrate metabolism. However, overtraining may reverse
this adaptation, making athletes more vulnerable to hypo-
glycemia in the over-trained state.
Fats are used as a primary energy source in endurance
events or when carbohydrate availability is low. In particular,
medium-chain fatty acids are preferred for oxidation, as they
enter circulation more rapidly and are primarily absorbed by
the liver. Fat utilization during exercise impacts lipid profiles by
reducing resting levels of total cholesterol and triglycerides
(59), thereby improving cardiovascular health profiles. In addi-
tion to providing energy, some types of fats play important
roles in recovery. Omega-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) reduce inflammation,
muscle soreness, and the perception of pain from exercise
(14,63,129). Moreover, omega-3 fatty acids may influence per-
formance through their effects on neuromuscular function
(123), nerve conduction velocity (123), and neuromuscular
sensitivity of the acetylcholine receptor. In addition, omega-3
fatty acids may support increased training volume (63) and
support adaptations to exercise training. Levels of omega fatty
acids measured in the blood reflect their clinical role more so
than dietary intake. Nevertheless, the recommended daily
intake of omega-3 fatty acids (EPA + DHA) is #3 g$d21 for
average individuals or those moderately physically active, but
recommendations may be as high as 6–8 g$d21 (2:1 ratio of
EPA:DHA) for elite athletes. Greater training demands may
increase requirements for omega-3 fatty acid intake.
Proteins serve as the building blocks of hormones and
enzymes used in all cells and tissues in the body, including
muscle. Generally, protein intakes of 1.3–2.0 grams per kg
body mass per day are recommended for athletes to support
muscle protein synthesis, facilitate training adaptations, and
prevent lean muscle mass loss. An imbalance between dietary
protein intake and dietary protein needs may result in net
protein loss in athletes. With protein deficiency, tissue protein
breakdown becomes a source of essential amino acids needed
to maintain critical body functions. While it is generally rec-
ognized that athletes require higher protein intake than the
recommended daily allowance, defining individual needs is
challenging. As outlined below, a combination of biomarkers
including total protein, albumin, globulin (calculated), urea
nitrogen (blood urea nitrogen [BUN] or urinary urea nitro-
gen), nitrogen balance (calculated), and amino acid analysis
may help athletes to gauge their protein status and make
dietary alterations to improve training outcomes.
Protein deficiency decreases blood proteins, especially of
albumin, and low protein intake seems to decrease the rate
of albumin synthesis (61). However, albumin may also serve
as a marker of other aspects of athlete health and perfor-
mance, and this measure requires contextualization when
assessed in athletes. The need for contextualization is a com-
mon feature of many biomarkers in a comprehensive panel
approach to tracking biomarkers and performance. Contex-
tualizing albumin levels, traditionally defined for sedentary
or nonathlete populations, for athletes training or competing
is important for interpreting the implications of either
decreased or elevated plasma albumin. In addition, it is
important to understand that measures such as albumin
may also be related to performance and recovery through
nontraditional functions or signaling in athletes. For exam-
ple, albumin has been associated with human growth hor-
mone (GH) concentrations in the blood (101), and although
the mechanism by which these 2 markers are related is
unknown, this type of result suggests that albumin may
require additional interpretation when tracking athletes.
Similarly, while urea nitrogen (blood or in urine) is
a product of protein degradation and suggests protein
breakdown, elevations can be due to a variety of factors
such as protein intake, endogenous protein catabolism, fever,
infection, glucocorticoids, state of hydration, hepatic urea
synthesis, and renal urea excretion. Lower urea nitrogen may
be due to low protein intake, malnutrition starvation, or
impaired metabolic activity in the liver. Higher urea nitrogen
may be due to exhaustive exercise training, catabolism (59),
and high dietary protein intake (148). As maintaining a pos-
itive protein balance is essential to facilitating optimal recov-
ery and training adaptations, protein status should be
optimized to avoid nutritional insufficiencies and excessive
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
| www.nsca.com
VOLUME 31 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2017 | 2923
 protein catabolism. In the absence of disease, low blood
protein, low albumin, and elevated urea nitrogen may be
indicative of insufficient protein intake in athletes. In circum-
stances where protein intake seems to be sufficient for an
athlete’s estimated needs, albumin and urea nitrogen may
indicate other relevant athlete health issues.
Many athletes follow nontraditional diets, such as low-
carbohydrate or ketogenic diets. Athletes are able to sustain
performance on diets comprising as little as 7% carbohy-
drates without effects of gluconeogenesis (146), but dramatic
effects on fat oxidation to maintain similar muscle glycogen
use and repletion to that of athletes on traditional high car-
bohydrate diets (139). As with all biomarkers, we recom-
mend contextualizing nutritional biomarkers with each
individual’s habitual diet in a dynamic fashion. In other
words, absolute values for certain biomarkers may not direct
action for a given athlete, but changes with training that
coincide with reduced capacity to recover and decreased
performance should be monitored on an individual basis.
This approach to biomarker monitoring will allow coaches
and staff to better monitor groups of highly variable athletes
who will inevitably have highly different diets and other
behaviors that affect performance.
Micronutrient Metabolism
A variety of vitamins and minerals support physiological
processes that underlie performance. For example, vitamin
D, in addition to being involved in bone maintenance, has
a role in muscle function and protein synthesis. Many
athletes monitor vitamin D with a goal of achieving levels
of greater than 50 ng$ml21 because of the many potential
ergogenic effects of vitamin D on sport performance rev. in
Dahlquist et al (31). Although some studies have determined
that specific vitamin D supplementation regimens do not
affect power-specific performance variables, there is promis-
ing evidence that vitamin D supplementation enhances aer-
obic performance (62) and that vitamin D levels are
correlated to aerobic performance (31). B complex vitamins
(thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, pyridoxine, folate, biotin, panto-
thenic acid, and choline) also play an important role in per-
formance by regulating energy metabolism by modulating
the synthesis and degradation of carbohydrate, fat, protein,
and bioactive compounds. Other vitamins play important
supporting roles in recovery processes. For example, vitamin
E functions as an antioxidant in cell membranes and sub-
cellular structures (65). Deficiencies in vitamin E may relate
to neurologic damage and erythrocyte hemolysis, as well as
muscle degradation (79). Similarly, beta-carotene, a precursor
of vitamin A, acts as antioxidants in reducing muscle damage
and enhancing recovery after exercise (65). Low calcium, iron,
B-vitamins, and vitamin D have been associated with increased
injury risk, specifically lower extremity stress fractures (81).
Several essential minerals, such as magnesium and iron,
affect physical performance (79). For example, magnesium
is important for energy metabolism as well as nerve and
muscle function (79). Deficiencies may lead to muscle weak-
ness (79), muscle spasms (43), and altered CK and lactate
response to exercise (49). In addition, specific nutrients
including iron, folic acid, and vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamin)
are essential to hemoglobin synthesis and subsequently
oxygen transport (79). Deficiencies may lead to fatigue,
anemia, cognitive impairment, and immune deficiencies
(79,81). Iron deficiency is prevalent in athletes from a variety
of sports (79,104), with prevalence as high as 31% in some
sports (104). In addition to decreased iron concentrations,
other biomarkers are useful in the assessment of iron defi-
ciency including ferritin (concentration less than 12 mg$L21)
and transferrin (saturation less than 16%) (79). Moreover, red
blood cell indices may provide early indications of nutri-
tional deficiencies. For example, hematocrit, hemoglobin,
and red blood cell indices may suggest iron, vitamin B12,
or folate deficiency (79).
Other micronutrients including zinc and chromium also
have important supporting roles in athletes. Zinc is required for
a variety of functions including protein synthesis, cellular
function, glucose use, hormone metabolism, immunity, and
wound healing (135). Low zinc is prevalent (22–25%) in endur-
ance athletes (35). Chromium is a provisionally essential min-
eral that functions broadly in the regulation of glucose, lipid,
and protein metabolism by potentiating the action of insulin at
the cellular level. Athletes excrete higher amounts of chromium
(3), which may result in increased nutritional needs. Monitor-
ing micronutrient levels may help athletes to identify deficien-
cies and increase nutritional needs early to reduce the potential
performance-impairing impact of nutritional deficiencies.
Food Allergies
One additional aspect of nutritional and metabolic health
that may have value in tracking athletes is that of an athlete’s
unique responses to certain foods. Blood-based biomarkers
are available for testing food allergen sensitization that may
or may not be known to the athlete. Adverse reactions (food
allergy/intolerance) to specific foods may result from immu-
noglobulin E (IgE)-mediated mechanisms, where IgE is pro-
duced against specific food components in food-allergic
individuals (38). Immunoglobulin E triggers immune re-
sponses within minutes to hours after consuming the food
by way of mast cell degranulation resulting in the release of
vasoactive and proinflammatory mediators. In adults, aller-
gies to peanuts, tree nuts (walnut, hazel, cashew, pistachio,
Brazil nut, pine nut, almond), fish, shellfish (shrimp, crab,
lobster, oyster, scallops), fruits, vegetables, seeds (cotton, ses-
ame, psyllium, mustard), milk, egg and spices are most prev-
alent (38). Reactions vary from aggravation of the skin, nose,
eyes, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract to severe cardiovascu-
lar effects. Symptoms may be noticed as swelling and itching
of the lips, tongue, or palate, abdominal pain and cramping,
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, respiratory challenges, and
asthma. While a variety of methods exist to assess food
allergies, IgE-based testing is considered an acceptable
Biomarkers in Sport and Exercise
2924
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
 approach to assess suspected food allergies. Immunoglobulin
E–based blood tests measure IgE directed against specific
antigens, where levels can predict reactions to certain foods
with greater than 95% certainty (112). Specific IgE levels
higher than 0.35 kU$L21 suggest sensitization (112). The
accurate identification of causative foods is important for
creating effective treatment plans in athletes, especially when
pharmaceutical interventions are subject to the World Anti-
Doping Agency regulations. Food allergen testing may be
performed under resting conditions as part of athletes’ pre-
season physicals. Identification of potential food allergens is
particularly important due to a condition known as food-
dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis (85). In this condi-
tion, exercise in combination with ingestion of the food
agent triggers the allergic response (85), possibly because of
altered absorption from the gastrointestinal tract (85), or
altered IgE levels from exercise (2), or hyperosmolar con-
ditions (93). Although the direct effects of IgE-mediated
responses on exercise tolerance and performance are yet to
be
examined,
symptoms
like
anaphylaxis,
eosinophilic
inflammation,
bronchial
hyperresponsiveness,
urticaria-
angioedema, dermatitis, rhinitis or asthma, and gastrointes-
tinal
disorders
(oral
allergy
syndrome,
colic,
nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain) may present a barrier to
exercise tolerance.
BIOMARKERS OF HYDRATION STATUS
Water is the most essential nutrient of the body undergoing
continuous recycling, functioning as a solvent, and regulating
cell volume, while playing a critical role in thermoregulatory
and overall function. Water balance is mainly regulated by thirst
and antidiuretic hormone, known also as vasopressin, through
its renal effect. Acute decrease in body weight has been used as
the gold standard to evaluate the degree of dehydration
because it reflects mainly a decrease in total body water and
not energy substrates (e.g., fat, protein). In this case, we assume
that both cutaneous (sweating) or renal (urination) water losses
have a specific gravity of approximately 1.000, resulting in a 1-
gram change in body weight for every milliliter of sweat and
urine output. This technique is accurate, assuming there is no
bowel movement or food consumption and of course body
weight is taken before exercise in a euhydrated state. A
hypohydrated state of greater than 22% body mass has
been linked to decreases in exercise/sport performance,
cognitive function, mood, and increases in risk of exertion-
al heat illness or exertional heatstroke for individuals exer-
cising in hot and humid environments (107).
During exercise, especially in the heat, most people tend
to drink less than what they lose through sweating, resulting
in a water deficit (involuntary dehydration). Because sweat is
hypotonic, exercise-induced dehydration leads mainly to
a decrement of the extracellular fluid volume. This state is
described as hypertonic hypovolemia due to water loss from
the plasma. Blood biomarkers of hemoconcentration have
thus been widely used as an indexes of dehydration.
Blood Markers
Both blood osmolality and sodium levels have been used for
hydration assessment because both values increase in a linear
fashion with the levels of dehydration. Blood osmolality is
considered by many as the gold standard for the assessment
of hydration state, especially for acute and dynamic changes
of hydration state (6,25). Even a small degree of dehydration
(e.g., 21% of body weight) can significantly increase plasma
osmolality. Most studies suggest that the threshold of dehy-
dration for blood osmolality is 295 mmol$kg21 of plasma
water (25,45,108). In addition, because dehydration has
a negative impact on kidney function, the ratio of urea nitro-
gen to creatinine has been used as a strong indicator of
hydration state with a suggested threshold of 20 for
dehydration (45).
Timing of blood hydration biomarkers depends on the
intent. Pre-exercise hydration state may be used to assess
whether an athlete is hypohydrated before a training session
or competition; in this case, the result will define fluid
consumption recommendations to optimize training benefit
or performance during an event. Postexercise hydration state
will also define fluid consumption recommendations for an
individual, but for the purposes of promoting optimal
recovery. Tracking hydration state over a number of days
can elucidate whether fluid and food intake is providing
sufficient hydration to maintain a hydrated state during
critical times in training and before and after competition.
Urine Markers
The hemoconcentration-driven elevation in plasma osmo-
lality and decrement in plasma volume stimulate arginine
vasopressin (AVP) secretion by osmotic receptor stimula-
tion and unloading of the baroreceptors. Even though AVP
could be used as a marker of dehydration, its analytical
process is laborious and expensive. Although this 8–amino
acid molecule is very sensitive, it tends to degrade quickly,
making its measurement challenging. Luckily, AVP has
a strong effect on the renal system by increasing water
reabsorption in the nephron tubules. As a result, urine vol-
ume is smaller and more concentrated. Therefore, urinary
markers of concentration have also been widely used as an
index of hydration. Urine-specific gravity (USG) and urine
osmolality (UOsm) are sensitive to changes in hydration
state. Both the American College of Sports Medicine and
the National Athletic Training Association recommend cut-
off
points
for dehydration of $1.020 for
USG and
$700 mmol$kg21 for UOsm, respectively (22,108). Based
on the link between dehydration and urine concentration,
urine color has been shown to be a valid practical marker of
hydration assessment both in adults and in children (5,66).
Based on the 8-point urine color scale developed by
Dr. Lawrence Armstrong, the threshold of dehydration is
color 4, with 1 being the lightest and 8 the darkest color. A
urine color of 5 or above is consistently and reliably associ-
ated with dehydration (83).
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
| www.nsca.com
VOLUME 31 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2017 | 2925
 Thirst
Thirst has also been suggested as a surrogate perceptual
marker of dehydration. Thirst and AVP are similarly
stimulated by decreases in plasma volume and increases in
plasma osmolality (100). However, both are more sensitive
to small osmotic stimulation than to baroreceptor activation.
What is interesting is that the osmotic threshold for thirst
activation is significantly greater than the one for AVP secre-
tion (100). Mild dehydration-induced increase in plasma
osmolality will rapidly increase AVP and elevate urinary
markers of dehydration, even in the absence of thirst. Of
course, because thirst is stimulated by significant dehydra-
tion, people may already be dehydrated by the time they
notice thirst. This phenomenon could also explain why both
recreational and professional athletes often start their train-
ing or competition in a suboptimal hydration state, as
indicated by their elevated urine hydration markers. We
therefore recommend that although thirst be a useful mea-
sure of hydration state particularly at rest, blood or urine
biomarkers may be more precise and accurate.
Other Measures of Hydration
Researchers have studied novel biomarkers including saliva,
sweat, and even tears as possible biological samples in which
to measure hydration state. Saliva osmolality and saliva flow
rate have shown promise as hydration markers (142); other
studies raise doubts about the usefulness of salivary osmo-
larity as a biomarker except in highly controlled conditions,
during physical activity (89) or in special clinical populations
(45). Similarly, sweat osmolality, electrolytes, and other
variables, as well as tear osmolality (44) show promise as
potential biomarkers, but research is limited. Although these
options currently cannot serve as valid biomarkers of hydra-
tion status for athletes, when considering biomarkers to
select for a comprehensive panel, it is critical to consider
newly studied markers as potential options. Table 1 provides
options for well-validated hydration biomarkers.
BIOMARKERS OF MUSCLE STATUS
Skeletal muscle tissue quality (size, structure, composition,
metabolic capacity, and contractile indices) is an important
aspect of athletic health and performance. Strength, power,
fatigue, and endurance in athletes are directly affected by
muscle status or the fatigue and recovery state of the
muscle. Also, insufficient recovery from exercise-induced
muscle damage caused by training impairs performance,
likely because of increased sense of effort, reduced exercise
tolerance, reduced strength, and reduced power. Monitor-
ing indices of muscle status will help athletes to tailor
their
training/competition
and
recovery
regimens
to
optimize performance. Blood-based biomarker muscle
status assessment should focus on endocrine regulation
of muscle repair/adaptations, metabolic homeostasis (ana-
bolic-catabolic balance, protein/amino acid deficiencies,
substrate
availability),
muscle
damage,
and
muscle
excitability. There are well-validated markers (Table 2) related
to fatigue, recovery, protein synthesis, or fueling strategies,
which are all major athlete concerns. Because hormone and
amino acid concentrations in the blood are highly variable
among individuals, these types of biomarkers are best
assessed by analyzing progressive increases/decreases away
from a baseline measure for each person (Table 2). This
requires monitoring for these types of biomarkers at multiple
time points throughout training, off-season, and competition
cycles. To monitor chronic changes across a season, athletes
may be tested every 4–6 weeks under similar conditions (i.e.,
fasted, in the morning, before training, the day after a rest day
or similar training day).
Endocrine Response
Proper hormonal signaling is essential for the physiological
adaptations to exercise training. Dependent on the magni-
tude of the training stimulus, often defined by acute program
variables such as load, volume, duration, modality, and rest,
hormones elicit specific training adaptations. Testosterone,
cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), GH, insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1), sex-hormone binding globulin, and
luteinizing hormone (LH) are among the key hormones
demonstrated to be critical to athletes.
Testosterone is required for promoting protein synthesis,
red blood cell production, and glycogen replenishment and
for reducing protein breakdown. Decreased testosterone
levels accompanied by decreased performance, energy, or
strength observed during a training season may indicate that
that training volume is too high. In this case, an athlete may
benefit from temporarily reducing training volume. Cortisol
works antagonistically to testosterone, inhibiting protein
synthesis by interfering with testosterone’s binding to its
TABLE 1. Indexes of hydration assessment with
their threshold values.
Hydration assessment technique
Threshold
value
Practical self-test
Acute decrease in body mass (kg)
22%
Dark urine color (color chart rating)
4
Thirst sensation (thirst scale rating)
+
Diagnostic laboratory tests
Urine
Urine-specific gravity
1.020
Urine osmolality
(mOsm$kg21 or mmol$kg21)
700
Blood
Urea nitrogen/creatinine ratio
20
Blood osmolality
(mOsm$kg21 or mmol$kg21)
295
Sodium concentration
(mEq$L21 or mmol$L21)
145
Biomarkers in Sport and Exercise
2926
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
 TABLE 2. Markers of muscle status and trends to monitor in athletes.
Biomarker
Role
Potential indication
References
Testosterone
Protein synthesis
Chronic Y may indicate that training
volume and intensity exceeds body’s
tolerance or reduced anabolic potential
(47)
Reduces protein breakdown
Red blood cell production
Glycogen replenishment
Cortisol
Catabolic
Chronic [ may indicate impaired capacity
for recovery, impaired capacity for
protein synthesis, or overreaching
(24,128,133)
Immune suppressive
T:C Ratio
Anabolic-Catabolic balance
Chronic Y in ratio may reflect increased
proteolysis or suppressed protein
synthesis
(8,133,138)
Dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA)
Precursor hormone
Chronic Y levels may reflect susceptibility
to overtraining
(16,42,56)
Body composition
Growth hormone
Protein synthesis
Chronic Y levels may reflect reduced
potential for adaptations to training
(20,52,53,71)
Reduces protein breakdown
Insulin-like growth factor
1 (IGF-1)
Mediator of anabolic actions
GH in skeletal muscle
Chronic Y levels may reflect overreaching
or impaired muscular adaptations to
training
(94,128,137)
Sex-hormone binding
globulin
Transporter for testosterone
and estradiol
Chronic [ or Y may indicate insufficient
recovery, overreaching, or suboptimal
ability to adapt to training
(40,75,128,133)
Luteinizing hormone
Reproduction
Chronic Y levels may reflect susceptibility
to overtraining
(54,133,145)
Creatine kinase
Muscle enzyme
[ levels may indicate muscle damage
(69,86)
Urea nitrogen
Metabolic product of protein
degradation
[ levels may indicate catabolic state
(7,59)
Tryptophan
Amino acid
[ levels may indicate fatigue or suboptimal
training adaptation
(23,67)
Glutamine
Amino acid involved in
neural plasticity and
protein synthesis
Chronic Y levels may reflect fatigue or
suboptimal training adaptation
(67)
Glutamine: glutamate
ratio
Ratio of amino acid
glutamine to glutamate,
a product of glutamine
breakdown
Chronic Y levels may reflect suboptimal
training adaptation and catabolism
(115)
Biomarker
Role
Monitor
for
Potential indication
References
Testosterone
Protein synthesis
Y
Training volume and intensity
exceeds body’s tolerance
(47)
Reduces protein breakdown
Reduced anabolic potential
Red blood cell production
Glycogen replenishment
Cortisol
Catabolic
[
Impaired capacity for recovery
(24,128,133)
Immune suppressive
Impaired capacity for protein
synthesis
Overreaching
T:C Ratio
Anabolic-Catabolic balance
Y
Increased proteolysis
(8,133,138)
Suppressed protein synthesis
Dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA)
Precursor hormone
Y
Susceptibility to overtraining
(16,42,56)
Body composition
Growth hormone
Protein synthesis
Y
Potential adaptations to training
(20,52,53,71)
Reduces protein breakdown
(continued on next page)
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
| www.nsca.com
VOLUME 31 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2017 | 2927
 androgen receptor and by blocking anabolic signaling
through
testosterone-independent
mechanisms.
When
chronically elevated, cortisol is catabolic and immunosup-
pressive leading to circumstances that make it more difficult
for an athlete to build/maintain muscle mass and recover
from training.
In addition to monitoring testosterone and cortisol
separately, monitoring their relative levels (T:C ratio) during
a training season may provide a relative indication of
anabolic-catabolic
balance,
especially
in
male
athletes
(133). T:C ratio is considered more sensitive to training
stresses than either measure alone. A prolonged decrease
in T:C is associated with detriments to performance through
increased proteolysis (muscle protein breakdown) and
decreased protein synthesis. A 30% decrease in T:C has been
suggested as an indicator of insufficient recovery (8,138),
whereas a value of 0.35 3 1023 has been considered to be
the threshold of overtraining (138). Poor performance out-
comes and suboptimal training adaptations have been re-
ported in both soccer athletes (70) and tactical athletes
(26) with a low T:C ratio.
As other hormones moderate physiological adaptations to
training, especially in female athletes, monitoring other
hormones, such as SHBG or DHEA-S in relation to cortisol
may provide additional insights into the anabolic to cata-
bolic balance in both male and female athletes. Dehydroe-
piandrosterone is a precursor hormone to both estrogen and
testosterone. In addition to affecting body composition (56)
in athletes, changes in DHEA in relation to cortisol have
been reported to be a useful marker of susceptibility to over-
training in the female athlete (16,42). Similarly, SHBG is
a useful indicator of training status and performance
(strength and rate of force development) (40). SHBG trans-
ports hormones such as testosterone in the body and in-
creases in response to exercise training in both male and
female athletes. Increased SHBG is believed to protect sex
hormones from being degraded by protecting the biologi-
cally active free sex hormones in circulation. Increased
SHBG and decreased testosterone may indicate insufficient
recovery (53). Low SHBG may merely represent an individ-
ual’s chronic diet (1); diets high in fat and protein may be
associated with low levels of SHBG and high levels of sex
hormones (1) and may be considered a sign of suboptimal
capacity to adapt to training (133).
Other key hormones inform us about training adaptations.
These include GH, IGF-1, and LH. Growth hormone
stimulates anabolism by promoting muscle protein synthesis
and inhibiting protein breakdown. Growth hormone con-
centrations have been correlated to exercise volume and
intensity. Growth hormone increases levels of circulating
IGF-I, both of which hormones are involved in muscle mass
regulation, making IGF-1 and GH together potentially
useful biomarkers. Luteinizing hormone is associated with
reproductive function in men and women. Luteinizing
Insulin-like growth factor
1 (IGF-1)
Mediator of anabolic
actions GH in
skeletal muscle
Y
Overreaching
(94,128,137)
Impaired muscular adaptations
to training
Sex-hormone binding
globulin
Transporter for testosterone
and estradiol
[ or Y
Insufficient recovery
(40,75,128,133)
Overreaching
Suboptimal ability to adapt to
training
Luteinizing hormone
Reproduction
Y
Susceptibility to overtraining
(54,133,145)
Creatine kinase
Muscle enzyme
[
Muscle damage
(69,86)
Urea nitrogen
Metabolic product of
protein degradation
[
Catabolic state
(7,59)
Tryptophan
Amino acid
[
Fatigue
(23,67)
Suboptimal training adaptation
Glutamine
Amino acid involved in
neural plasticity and
protein synthesis
Y
Fatigue
(67)
Suboptimal training adaptation
Glutamine-glutamate
ratio
Ratio of amino acid
glutamine
to glutamate, a product of
glutamine breakdown
Y
Suboptimal training adaptation
(115)
Suboptimal adaptations to
training
Catabolism
Biomarkers in Sport and Exercise
2928
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
 hormone may be another useful marker to detect over-
training or insufficient energy intake.
Amino Acids
Athletes require greater daily intakes of protein (in the range
of 1.3–1.8 g$kg21$d21) to maximize muscle protein synthe-
sis as compared to the general population. As discussed,
markers of nitrogen balance (e.g., urea nitrogen) are impor-
tant for assessing the nutritional status of an athlete, but
a number of specific amino acids can reveal information
about protein synthesis, nutrition, and fatigue. For example,
the branched-chain amino acids (BCAA), leucine, isoleucine,
and valine, increase the rates of protein synthesis and deg-
radation in resting human muscle (13). Branched-chain
amino acids levels have been informative about whether
BCAA supplementation is directly affecting skeletal muscle
protein synthesis signaling (4). With some special consider-
ations for measurement (131), BCAA can also indicate
whether diet, stress, or disease states are affecting an athlete’s
skeletal muscle. There are a few other examples in which
specific amino acids may indicate muscle status based on
their unique roles in skeletal muscle. The amino acid taurine
is not incorporated into protein, but is abundant in muscle
tissue and is needed for the differentiation and growth of
skeletal muscle. Taurine deficiency can impair muscle devel-
opment, structure, and function (118). Researchers have in-
terpreted elevated taurine levels, perhaps because of release
from muscle fibers, as a marker of damage or impaired mus-
cle function (29,144). Others have used urine excretion of
taurine as a biomarker in athletes (28). Another amino acid,
glycine, is involved in the biosynthesis of heme, creatine,
nucleic acids, and uric acid (143), deficiencies in which
may affect various aspects of the metabolic pathways. Other
amino acid patterns (e.g., elevated tryptophan, decreased
glutamine) have been associated with fatigue and suboptimal
training capacity in athletes (23,67,115) and suggest specific
amino acids that may serve as biomarkers of muscle quality/
status. While some amino acids change in response to
acute exercise (103), monitoring resting amino acids across
a season as part of a comprehensive panel under similar
conditions (i.e., fasted, in the morning, before training, the
day after a rest day or similar training day) may provide
insights into training (39) and fatigue (67).
Recovery (Urea Nitrogen and Creatine Kinase)
After muscle-damaging exercise, the enzyme CK leaks from
the muscle into the circulation (69,86). It is typical for ath-
letes to have elevated CK during training, with reference
ranges of 82–1,083 U$L21 in male and 47–513 U$L21 in
female athletes suggested as athletic norms (86). Monitoring
CK levels during training in comparison with baseline levels
may help athletes to monitor muscle status. Creatine kinase
levels peak approximately 24 hours after damaging exercise
such as heavy strength training, but may remain elevated up
to 7 days after exercise. Chronically elevated CK may indi-
cate insufficient recovery. Because other components of
muscle such as myoglobin may leak into circulation during
muscle damage (peak 1–3 hours after exercise), and urea
nitrogen can indicate overall protein synthesis vs. breakdown
(59), using all 3 markers to determine an athlete’s muscle
status during training and recovery will be useful to athletes,
coaches, and clinicians.
BIOMARKERS OF CARDIOVASCULAR
ENDURANCE PERFORMANCE
Iron is an important mineral in oxygen transport and
oxidative phosphorylation which are fundamental physio-
logical processes required for aerobic metabolism and
cardiovascular endurance performance (60). Endurance ath-
letes, especially females (113), are particularly susceptible to
iron deficiency because of one or a combination of the fol-
lowing factors: menstrual bleeding, poor dietary intake,
exercise-related gastrointestinal tract bleeding, hematuria,
sweating, poor intestinal iron absorption due to subclinical
exercise-induced
inflammation
(97),
and
erythrocyte
destruction through repeated foot striking (98), elevated
intramuscular pressure in swimmers and cyclists (110), and
increased mechanical loading and hepcidin release in
response to subclinical exercise-related inflammation
(97,105). Other factors affecting iron status biomarkers in
athletes include regular nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID) use, blood donation, and chronic alcohol con-
sumption (12). Athletes with compromised iron status may
experience decreases in performance because of the inability
to optimally metabolize substrates into energy (51). Iron
deficiencies also prevent adaptations to endurance and alti-
tude training (11,60). Also, iron deficiency with anemia may
have a role in the greater prevalence of upper respiratory
tract infections in marathon runners (88). Given the physi-
ological role of iron and its association with aerobic perfor-
mance, health, and adaptation, athletes and coaches should
consider tracking iron, iron binding capacity, transferrin sat-
uration, and ferritin levels during training. Approaches to
timing and frequency of iron status testing for individual
athletes can be customized to address issues with when car-
diovascular endurance performance may be affected by
changes in training programs/cycles or general health (e.g.,
during infection or personal stress experienced during train-
ing). Iron status assessments acutely before competition will
also be contextually useful. Practical considerations of cost of
biomarker assessments may define frequency of testing.
The compliment of widely used biomarkers includes iron,
total iron binding capacity (TIBC), transferrin saturation,
and ferritin, with more recent biomarkers such as soluble
transferrin receptor and hepcidin peptide assay possibly
improving diagnosis. Iron status markers should be inter-
preted in the context of recent events (e.g., competition
season, recent training intensity, frequency, and duration,
inflammation state, and diet changes). Changes in iron status
markers indicate a number of well-studied, potential effects
on performance (Table 3).
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
| www.nsca.com
VOLUME 31 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2017 | 2929
 Iron concentration reflects total iron content with
a reference ranges within 50–175 mg$dl21 (9). Between
and within-day variation of iron concentration is high
(10–26%) and as a consequence iron concentration must
be interpreted cautiously and cannot be rendered a useful
measure of iron status alone (15). Serum ferritin can be
falsely elevated in an inflammatory state (e.g., postexercise,
infection) but inflammatory markers such as C-reactive
protein (CRP) or alpha-1-acid glycoprotein can aid in the
interpretation of ferritin in the assessment of iron status (9).
A more stable indicator of iron status is TIBC (reference
range: 250–425 mg$dl21), which reflects the total number
of binding sites on the blood iron transporting peptide
transferrin. Daily variation of TIBC is relatively low (8–
12%) and does not change before iron stores are depleted
(9), thus reducing the likelihood of falsely detecting iron
depleted states. Total iron binding capacity would rise in
iron deficiency as more free transferrin binding sites are
available. In addition, transferrin is not an acute phase reac-
tant or affected by other diseases and therefore is a valuable
biomarker panel addition for determining iron status (152).
Transferrin is an iron-carrying monomeric glycoprotein
within blood that transports iron to tissues. Transferrin sat-
uration (reference range: 15–50%) is the percentage of iron
to TIBC, with values under 15% consistent with iron defi-
ciency. Because TIBC is quite stable, alterations in iron
concentration will also affect transferrin saturation (9). Sol-
uble transferrin receptor reflects iron deficiency at the tissue
level and is believed to be a more sensitive measure of
functional iron deficiency assessed by ferritin (152). In 2
iron supplementation studies examining aerobic training
adaptation in females, improvements were only noted
when soluble transferrin receptor was elevated before train-
ing (.8 mg$L21) compared with those with adequate iron
status (,8 mg$L21) (18,19). This biomarker seems not to
be affected by inflammation and has low within-subject
variability in athletes undergoing training. The combina-
tion of at least transferrin and transferrin saturation, TIBC,
serum ferritin, and hemoglobin is required for accurate
determination of the presence and severity of iron defi-
ciency. Including additional clinical parameters such as
soluble
transferrin
receptor,
among others, may increase
the confidence in iron status
diagnosis.
Endurance performance suf-
fers
when
iron
levels
are
insufficient
(serum
ferritin
,12 mg$L21) for hemoglobin
(Hb)
to
efficiently
transport
oxygen to exercising muscle tis-
sue (Hb, females, ,12 g$d21;
males, ,13 g$dL21). Yet, serum
ferritin stores can be depleted
before hemoglobin has declined
to levels required for diagnosis of anemia (32). Functional iron
deficiency has been defined as ferritin ,35 mg$L21, Hb
,11.5 g$dl21, and transferrin (iron transport molecule) satu-
ration ,16% (96); others have used more precise serum fer-
ritin ranges of 12–20 mg$L21. Iron deficiency without anemia
is more common than iron deficiency with anemia in endur-
ance athletes, but it is critical to consider multiple aspects of
iron metabolism that may affect an athlete.
Supplementation with iron is known to correct low
levels of ferritin, transferrin, and hemoglobin, but in some
cases
may
not
affect
endurance
performance
(96).
However, a vast amount of research supports that track-
ing these variables and introducing supplementation
regimens is effective in improving endurance performance
in athletes with low ferritin, both anemic and nonanemic
(33,34,58,73,82,106,109,151).
A
recent
review
deter-
mined
that
in
73%
of
studies,
implementing
low-
moderate doses of iron supplementation resulted in
improvements
in
aerobic/endurance
performance
in
female athletes (32).
BIOMARKERS OF INJURY STATUS AND RISK
Although biomarkers have been studied in human perfor-
mance, there has been limited use of biomarkers to
determine injury states (both risk for injury, severity of
injury, and recovery from injury). No previous work, to our
knowledge, has examined the use of biomarkers for injury
prevention or for recovery after injury. Concussions are
a major concern in sports. One of the major concerns in
concussion is understanding when injured athletes have
recovered. Previous work has examined biomarkers of
concussion recovery with the goal of detecting and moni-
toring changes in the central nervous system to provide
objective measures of when athletes are ready to return to
athletic pursuits safely (111). Previous work in this area has
focused on the examination of biomarkers in the cerebrospi-
nal fluid, with specific emphasis on markers of axonal dam-
age (total tau, neurofilament light), which have been shown
to be elevated in boxers after repeated punches to the head
even without a knockout (92,149). However, because of the
invasiveness, difficulty, and expense of completing a lumbar
TABLE 3. Potential indications from reductions in iron status markers.
Biomarker
Monitoring
for
Potential indication
Reference
Iron status
Y
Reduces time trial performance
(57,82,106)
Y
Impaired V
_ O2peak/V
_ O2max
(33,46,58,73)
Y
Reduced energy efficiency
(33,34,46,57,58,151)
Y
Lower training volume per day
(33)
Y
Greater max lactate
(73,109)
Y
Lower time to exhaustion
(58)
Biomarkers in Sport and Exercise
2930
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
 puncture, researchers began to explore the possibility of as-
sessing blood-based biomarkers of brain injury. Two blood-
based biomarkers of interest have been neuron-specific
enolase and the glial cell biomarker S-100 calcium binding
protein B (S-100B), with most studies focusing on changes in
S-100B levels (36,90,95,119–122). Serum levels of both
markers have been reported to be increased after boxing
matches in which the athlete sustained direct or repetitive
blows to the head (50,150). By contrast, when examining
these same markers in concussed hockey players, only
S-100B was found to be increased in the serum (111). Based
on this work and the 2015 review article by Papa, it is clear
that the study of biomarkers of concussion is beginning to
identify potentially diagnostic as well as recovery markers
(99). However, no biomarkers have yet been identified for
clinical diagnosis or tracking of concussions in athletic pop-
ulations. This remains an active area for examination.
Another area of musculoskeletal health that has received
substantial attention is stress fractures, specifically female
stress fractures. Women had a 10-fold higher risk of
sustaining a stress fracture when compared with men in
a study of military recruits, and the risk has been reported to
be as much as 50% higher in female athletes (10,41). Stress
fractures are known to result in significant medical costs, lost
duty time in the military, and lost game time for athletes.
The female athlete triad is a medical condition that affects
physically active females and is characterized by 3 compo-
nents: (a) low-energy availability with or without disordered
eating, (b) amenorrhea or menstrual dysfunction, and (c) low
bone mineral density (BMD) (91). This condition has been
associated with osteoporosis and low BMD, which have
been proposed as risk factors for stress fracture development
(41,102). Although specific biomarkers have not been asso-
ciated with the female athlete triad, some biomarkers of
bone breakdown have been associated with poor bone qual-
ity or bone density. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF-I), one
biomarker associated with bone quality, has been reported to
be significantly lower in osteoporotic women with poor
bone quality and to be positively associated with BMD
(87,116). In addition, reduced concentrations of IGF-I have
been associated with fracture risk in women (64,125). Only
a few studies have examined the use of biomarkers to assess
stress fracture risk, none of which have identified a single set
of bone turnover biomarkers that could be used for stress
fracture prediction (124,147). However, Strohbach et al.
(124) did report that serum IGF-I was decreased in subjects
who sustained a stress fracture when compared with their
noninjured control subject. The results of these few studies
as well as an improved understanding of the female athlete
triad will allow for the continued exploration of biomarkers
that could potential identify individuals at risk of stress frac-
ture development.
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries have been
reported to result in the development of osteoarthritis
(OA) in up to 50% of patients (77). The development of
OA in ACL patients has been reported to occur within
10–15 years of the primary injury (77,78,141). While the
examination and exploration of both inflammatory bio-
markers as well as markers of cartilage breakdown have been
extensive in the study of OA, very few studies have explored
these markers in ACL patients after injury and surgery; no
studies, to our knowledge, have determined biomarkers that
can be used to predict ACL injuries. The biomarkers of
greatest interest in the early postoperative recovery period
after ACL reconstruction have been serum concentrations of
collagen type I and type II cleavage products as well as
inflammatory responses in both human and animal models
(55,127,132). Immediately after ACL injury, the serum con-
centration of these biomarkers indicates an imbalance
between cartilage breakdown and synthesis that could be
indicative of posttraumatic changes in cartilage metabolism
and signal the onset of posttraumatic OA (127,132). Haslauer
et al. examined changes in the IL-6, IL-8, markers of tissue
damage (CRP), as well as vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and transforming growth factor b (TGFb) in
Yucatan minipigs to examine the immediate response after
ACL transection (55). The results of this study indicate that
in the early postinjury period, there is an increase in IL-6 and
IL-8 in the synovium as well as an increase in CRP in the
ligament, whereas there was no change in TGFb or VEGF.
Similar to human studies, the CRP returned to normal levels
by 15 days after injury or after surgery, wheras IL-6 and IL-8
returned to normal levels by approximately 5 days after
injury or after surgery (21,55). In a study of ACL reconstruc-
tion patients, similar results were found regarding CRP, but
this study reported an increase in TGFb and myostatin in
the early postoperative period and then returned to normal
by approximately 12 weeks after surgery (84). Although
these studies have identified biomarkers that change with
injury and after surgical intervention, no studies to date have
examined the potential for using biomarkers to identify in-
dividuals at increased risk. Thus, further research is required
before these biomarkers should be assayed as a standard,
clinical approach for injury assessment; it is important to
note, that contextualized with results from other biomarkers,
of muscle status for example, potential markers of injury like
certain cytokines or CRP may be indicative of simply,
exercise-induced muscle damage, or more seriously, over-
training. The overlap of biomarkers in many areas of diag-
nosis is one of the reasons that we suggest panels that will
help define the true reason for changes in intersecting
biomarkers.
BIOMARKERS OF INFLAMMATION
Muscle damage is an expected part of exercise training, as
are the physiological and immune responses that occur
during and after muscle tissue damage. Athletes monitoring
their performance during training may track inflammation
indirectly through key components of the inflammation
process that can enter systemic blood circulation. Chronic
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
| www.nsca.com
VOLUME 31 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2017 | 2931
 inflammation that persists after damage results from positive
feedback of multiple signals indicating injury or stress from
overtraining, or results from infection/illness can also be
tracked in specimens by assessing proteins and other
molecules that control inflammation (Figure 3). Chronic
inflammation can also result from infection, autoimmune
disease, cardiovascular disease, or other major health con-
cerns. In both instances, chronic inflammation is a positive
feedback phenomenon that can impact health and perfor-
mance of an individual. Creatine kinase, for example, is
released in response to skeletal muscle damage or cardiac
muscle damage during myocardial infarction. Creatine
kinase levels have remained a valuable biomarker for muscle
damage despite several limitations, including individual var-
iability in CK response to damaging exercise (140), the need
for information on CK isoforms to determine whether ele-
vated CK is due to cardiac or skeletal muscle damage (30),
and other complicating factors. In addition to CK, myoglo-
bin released is a more of a short-term marker of damage
measurable in blood (117). More specific markers including
skeletal muscle troponin I, skeletal muscle specific enzymes,
and
markers
indicating
an
oxidative
stress-antioxidant
response during muscle damage have also been extensively
reviewed and used to track muscle damage during exercise
(17). Concurrently measuring muscle damage markers when
assessing biomarkers of inflammation in an athlete is critical
to contextualizing the potential source of inflammation and
define the subsequent action required for athlete health and
optimal performance.
As markers of muscle damage are released into circulation,
at the tissue level resident or locally surveying naive immune
cells migrate to the site of tissue injury and differentiate into
mature proinflammatory macrophages that function to
phagocytose and clear debris and degenerate damaged
tissue. Mature activated macrophages also release a number
of growth factors, cytokines, and other signaling molecules
to promote the inflammatory process by recruiting other
cells required for skeletal muscle regeneration to differentiate
and function in repair. As inflammation progresses, macro-
phages convert to anti-inflammatory profiles and release
different growth factors, cytokines, and have distinct effects
to encourage the progression of repair stages. Shifts in
circulating immune cells as cell populations move in and
out of tissue vs. systemic circulation can be measured
through a complete blood count with differential (CBC/
diff). Although the CBC/diff assay cannot be used alone to
assess an athlete’s level of inflammation, it is another assay
that provides valuable information about shifts in immune
cell populations that may occur during muscle damage-
induced inflammation. Another benefit of assessing CBC/
diff profiles in athletes is that CBC/diff can be used to diag-
nose potential infection or disease that might also cause
Figure 3. Exercise-induced muscle damage and inflammation are physiologically integrated. Biomarkers of skeletal muscle damage and inflammation often
increase concurrently during exercise-induced muscle damage or injury that will negatively affect performance. Inflammation is a process that will follow initial
tissue damage and lag during recovery.
Biomarkers in Sport and Exercise
2932
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
 inflammation and increases in biomarkers that are common
with muscle damage-induced inflammatory biomarkers.
Additional recruitment of monocytes or other immune cells
during inflammation can be tracked using blood measures of
chemicals that attract immune cells to an area (e.g., mono-
cyte chemoattractant protein-1 or soluble intracellular adhe-
sion molecule-1) while activation of other immune cell types
can be measured through cellular components like CD40
ligand (CD40L, CD154) that are only expressed or released
as soluble factors by activated immune cells.
The blood biomarkers that indicate proinflammatory
macrophages activity include growth factors and cytokines
released by macrophages. The most standard of these
are generalized signaling molecules termed “cytokines.”
Cytokines are numerous and diverse in function, making it
difficult to use the presence of these alone as a direct measure
of inflammation in an athlete. However, we can assess inflam-
mation through increases from an individual’s normal base-
lines in cytokines classically considered proinflammatory
such as IL-1b, TNF-a, IL-6, IL-10, IL-8, and IL-12p40.
There is no recommendation for a threshold above which
increases in inflammatory markers are universally interpret-
able as “elevated.” The recommendation is to use repeat test-
ing at rested, healthy baseline states to establish individual
reference ranges for normal values, and also test at key
changing points in training, health status, performance status
during competition, and heavy training periods to determine
what are normal fluctuations in inflammatory markers, and
which are fluctuations and values associated with physical
concerns. This dynamic approach to biomarker testing begs
coaches and athletes to use biomarker testing to observe
normal changes in biomarkers during healthy states and doc-
ument dramatic changes in biomarkers that are associated
with performance effects. This may require a period of adjust-
ment during which biomarker testing is essentially calibrated
to each individual, but this approach will provide the greatest
accuracy and precision independent of the biological diver-
sity that we know occurs among all individuals.
Hallmarks of prolonged, severe inflammations include
markers of tissue damage associated with chronic inflam-
mation. One aspect of prolonged or severe inflammation
involves hepatic signaling by circulating cytokines. During
inflammation, liver tissue may be stimulated to produce an
acute phase response. The acute phase response and acute
phase reactant proteins produced by the liver trigger
a systemic inflammation response that recruits vascular
tissue activation, systemic immune response, endocrine
function, and other multiorgan involvement in positive
feedback of inflammation. Classic acute phase reactant
proteins that are measured include CRP, serum amyloid A,
E-selectin, von Willebrand factor (endothelial dysfunction),
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, fibrinogen, P-selectin, and
inflammatory cytokines.
Because muscle damage, inflammation, and acute phase
response may normally occur during exercise training
designed to optimize performance, it is critical to contextu-
alize assessment of inflammation biomarkers with other
assays
concurrently.
For
example,
the
assessment
of
CBC/diff could indicate the presence of an infection that
is temporary and requires no long-term change in an
exercise training program. Chronic or prolonged inflamma-
tion should be evaluated with such markers that might
indicate chronic disease states that will direct long-term and
dramatic changes in training. Additional markers that over-
lap with other aspects of an athlete’s health will also provide
valuable information about action from insight. An athlete
that consistently and chronically exhibits high levels of
inflammatory markers should also, for example, be evaluated
for chronic stress, which can be tested for by physical assess-
ment of fatigue or performance decrements, subjective
perceptual scales, or assays measuring levels of stress hor-
mones such as cortisol (48,72,134). We reiterate the recom-
mendation that repeat testing during rested, healthy states
will provide average values for each individual, as markers of
inflammation may be highly varied person to person, and
establishing per-individual reference ranges will be most
practical and useful.
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS
To better understand the dynamic and integrative aspects
of how diet, hydration, training, and competition affect
athletes, assessment of biomarkers should include select,
diverse, and well-validated markers of performance (muscle
status and oxygen transport), health (nutritional and
hydration status, allergies), and recovery (inflammation,
injury risk, muscle damage) (Figure 1). Because many val-
idated biomarker reference ranges are appropriate for gen-
eralized
populations
rather
than
for
athletes,
repeat
measurements will allow each clinician/coach to establish
personalized reference ranges; from these individualized
“normal” values that may fluctuate day-to-day or week-
to-week, an athlete or sports professional can track chronic
changes in directions that are associated with risk of injury,
overtraining, or decreased performance. We have provided
examples
of
useful
biomarkers.
It
is
important
that
the coach and athlete determine priorities for tracking
training and competition and adapt their biomarker panels
accordingly. As new biomarkers are being tested and vali-
dated, researchers will identify more universal, consistent
biomarkers of multiple aspects of athlete health and
performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
E. C. Lee, S. A. Kavouras, R. M. Queen, J. L. Pryor, and D. J.
Casa are members of the Quest Diagnostics’ Sports Science
and Human Performance Medical and Scientific Advisory
Board. M. S. Fragala is an employee of Quest Diagnostics.
No grant support contributed to the development of the
manuscript. The content of the manuscript does not consti-
tute endorsement of a product by the authors or the NSCA.
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
| www.nsca.com
VOLUME 31 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2017 | 2933
 REFERENCES
1. Adlercreutz, H. Western diet and Western diseases: Some
hormonal and biochemical mechanisms and associations. Scand J
Clin Lab Invest Suppl 201: 3–23, 1990.
2. Aldred, S, Love, JA, Tonks, LA, Stephens, E, Jones, DS, and
Blannin, AK. The effect of steady state exercise on circulating
human IgE and IgG in young healthy volunteers with known
allergy. J Sci Med Sport 13: 16–19, 2010.
3. Anderson, RA, Bryden, NA, Polansky, MM, and Deuster, PA.
Exercise effects on chromium excretion of trained and untrained men
consuming a constant diet. J Appl Physiol (1985) 64: 249–252, 1988.
4. Apro, W and Blomstrand, E. Influence of supplementation with
branched-chain amino acids in combination with resistance
exercise on p70S6 kinase phosphorylation in resting and exercising
human skeletal muscle. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 200: 237–248, 2010.
5. Armstrong, LE, Maresh, CM, Castellani, JW, Bergeron, MF,
Kenefick, RW, LaGasse, KE, and Riebe, D. Urinary indices of
hydration status. Int J Sport Nutr 4: 265–279, 1994.
6. Armstrong, LE, Maughan, RJ, Senay, LC, and Shirreffs, SM.
Limitations to the use of plasma osmolality as a hydration
biomarker. Am J Clin Nutr 98: 503–504, 2013.
7. Bacharach, DW, Petit, M, and Rundell, KW. Relationship of blood
urea nitrogen to training intensity of elite female biathlon skiers. J
Strength Cond Res 10: 105–108, 1996.
8. Banfi, G, Marinelli, M, Roi, GS, and Agape, V. Usefulness of free
testosterone/cortisol ratio during a season of elite speed skating
athletes. Int J Sports Med 14: 373–379, 1993.
9. Beard, JL, Murray-Kolb, LE, Rosales, FJ, Solomons, NW, and
Angelilli, ML. Interpretation of serum ferritin concentrations as
indicators of total-body iron stores in survey populations: The role
of biomarkers for the acute phase response. Am J Clin Nutr 84:
1498–1505, 2006.
10. Beck, TJ, Ruff, CB, Shaffer, RA, Betsinger, K, Trone, DW, and
Brodine, SK. Stress fracture in military recruits: Gender differences
in muscle and bone susceptibility factors. Bone 27: 437–444, 2000.
11. Berglund, B. High-altitude training. Aspects of haematological
adaptation. Sports Med 14: 289–303, 1992.
12. Bermejo, F and Garcia-Lopez, S. A guide to diagnosis of iron
deficiency and iron deficiency anemia in digestive diseases. World J
Gastroenterol 15: 4638–4643, 2009.
13. Blomstrand, E, Eliasson, J, Karlsson, HK, and Ko
¨hnke, R. Branched-
chain amino acids activate key enzymes in protein synthesis after
physical exercise. J Nutr 136(1 Suppl): 269S–73S, 2006.
14. Bloomer, RJ, Larson, DE, Fisher-Wellman, KH, Galpin, AJ, and
Schilling, BK. Effect of eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acid
on resting and exercise-induced inflammatory and oxidative stress
biomarkers: A randomized, placebo controlled, cross-over study.
Lipids Health Dis 8: 36, 2009.
15. Borel, MJ, Smith, SM, Derr, J, and Beard, JL. Day-to-day variation
in iron-status indices in healthy men and women. Am J Clin Nutr
54: 729–735, 1991.
16. Bouget, M, Rouveix, M, Michaux, O, Pequignot, JM, and Filaire, E.
Relationships among training stress, mood and
dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate/cortisol ratio in female cyclists.
J Sports Sci 24: 1297–1302, 2006.
17. Brancaccio, P, Lippi, G, and Maffulli, N. Biochemical markers of
muscular damage. Clin Chem Lab Med 48: 757–767, 2010.
18. Brownlie, T IV, Utermohlen, V, Hinton, PS, and Haas, JD. Tissue
iron deficiency without anemia impairs adaptation in endurance
capacity after aerobic training in previously untrained women. Am
J Clin Nutr 79: 437–443, 2004.
19. Brownlie, T IV, Utermohlen, V, Hinton, PS, Giordano, C, and
Haas, JD. Marginal iron deficiency without anemia impairs aerobic
adaptation among previously untrained women. Am J Clin Nutr 75:
734–742, 2002.
20. Buresh, R, Berg, K, and French, J. The effect of resistive exercise
rest interval on hormonal response, strength, and hypertrophy
with training. J Strength Cond Res 23: 62–71, 2009.
21. Calvisi, V and Lupparelli, S. C-reactive protein changes in the
uncomplicated course of arthroscopic anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 21:
603–607, 2008.
22. Casa, DJ, Armstrong, LE, Hillman, SK, Montain, SJ, Reiff, RV,
Rich, BS, Roberts, WO, and Stone, JA. National athletic trainers’
association position statement: Fluid replacement for athletes. J
Athl Train 35: 212–224, 2000.
23. Castell, LM, Yamamoto, T, Phoenix, J, and Newsholme, EA. The
role of tryptophan in fatigue in different conditions of stress. Adv
Exp Med Biol 467: 697–704, 1999.
24. Cevada, T, Vasques, PE, Moraes, H, and Deslandes, A. Salivary
cortisol levels in athletes and nonathletes: A systematic review. Horm
Metab Res 46: 905–910, 2014.
25. Cheuvront, SN, Kenefick, RW, Charkoudian, N, and Sawka, MN.
Physiologic basis for understanding quantitative dehydration
assessment. Am J Clin Nutr 97: 455–462, 2013.
26. Chicharro, JL, Lo
´pez-Mojares, LM, Lucı
´a, A, Pe
´rez, M, Alvarez, J,
Labanda, P, Calvo, F, and Vaquero, AF. Overtraining parameters in
special military units. Aviat Space Environ Med 69: 562–568, 1998.
27. Constantini, NW, Arieli, R, Chodick, G, and Dubnov-Raz, G. High
prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency in athletes and dancers. Clin J
Sport Med 20: 368–371, 2010.
28. Corsetti, R, Barassi, A, Perego, S, Sansoni, V, Rossi, A, Damele, CA,
Melzi D’Eril, G, Banfi, G, and Lombardi, G. Changes in urinary
amino acids excretion in relationship with muscle activity markers
over a professional cycling stage race: In search of fatigue markers.
Amino Acids 48: 183–192, 2016.
29. Cuisinier, C, Ward, RJ, Francaux, M, Sturbois, X, and de Witte, P.
Changes in plasma and urinary taurine and amino acids in runners
immediately and 24h after a marathon. Amino Acids 20: 13–23,
2001.
30. Cummins, P, Young, A, Auckland, ML, Michie, CA, Stone, PC, and
Shepstone, BJ. Comparison of serum cardiac specific troponin-I
with creatine kinase, creatine kinase-MB isoenzyme, tropomyosin,
myoglobin and C-reactive protein release in marathon runners:
Cardiac or skeletal muscle trauma? Eur J Clin Invest 17: 317–324,
1987.
31. Dahlquist, DT, Dieter, BP, and Koehle, MS. Plausible ergogenic
effects of vitamin D on athletic performance and recovery. J Int Soc
Sports Nutr 12: 33, 2015.
32. DellaValle, DM. Iron supplementation for female athletes: Effects
on iron status and performance outcomes. Curr Sports Med Rep 12:
234–239, 2013.
33. DellaValle, DM and Haas, JD. Impact of iron depletion without
anemia on performance in trained endurance athletes at the
beginning of a training season: A study of female collegiate rowers.
Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 21: 501–506, 2011.
34. DellaValle, DM and Haas, JD. Iron supplementation improves
energetic efficiency in iron-depleted female rowers. Med Sci Sports
Exerc 46: 1204–1215, 2014.
35. Deuster, PA, Day, BA, Singh, A, Douglass, L, and Moser-Veillon,
PB. Zinc status of highly trained women runners and untrained
women. Am J Clin Nutr 49: 1295–1301, 1989.
36. Dietrich, MO, Tort, AB, Schaf, DV, Farina, M, Gonc
¸alves, CA,
Souza, DO, and Portela, LV. Increase in serum S100B protein level
after a swimming race. Can J Appl Physiol 28: 710–716, 2003.
37. Dubnov, G and Constantini, NW. Prevalence of iron depletion and
anemia in top-level basketball players. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab
14: 30–37, 2004.
38. Ebo, DG and Stevens, WJ. IgE-mediated food allergy–extensive
review of the literature. Acta Clin Belg 56: 234–247, 2001.
Biomarkers in Sport and Exercise
2934
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
 39. Einspahr, KJ and Tharp, G. Influence of endurance training on
plasma amino acid concentrations in humans at rest and after
intense exercise. Int J Sports Med 10: 233–236, 1989.
40. Fahrner, CL and Hackney, AC. Effects of endurance exercise on
free testosterone concentration and the binding affinity of sex
hormone binding globulin (SHBG). Int J Sports Med 19: 12–15,
1998.
41. Feingold, D and Hame, SL. Female athlete triad and stress
fractures. Orthop Clin North Am 37: 575–583, 2006.
42. Filaire, E, Duche, P, and Lac, G. Effects of amount of training on
the saliva concentrations of cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone and
on the dehydroepiandrosterone: Cortisol concentration ratio in
women over 16 weeks of training. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol
78: 466–471, 1998.
43. Flink, EB. Magnesium deficiency. Etiology and clinical spectrum.
Acta Med Scand Suppl 647: 125–137, 1981.
44. Fortes, MB, Diment, BC, Di Felice, U, Gunn, AE, Kendall, JL,
Esmaeelpour, M, and Walsh, NP. Tear fluid osmolarity as
a potential marker of hydration status. Med Sci Sports Exerc 43:
1590–1597, 2011.
45. Fortes, MB, Owen, JA, Raymond-Barker, P, Bishop, C,
Elghenzai, S, Oliver, SJ, and Walsh, NP. Is this elderly patient
dehydrated? Diagnostic accuracy of hydration assessment using
physical signs, urine, and saliva markers. J Am Med Dir Assoc 16:
221–228, 2015.
46. Friedmann, B, Weller, E, Mairbaurl, H, and Ba
¨rtsch, P. Effects of
iron repletion on blood volume and performance capacity in
young athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 33: 741–746, 2001.
47. Gillespie, CA and Edgerton, VR. The role of testosterone in
exercise-induced glycogen supercompensation. Horm Metab Res 2:
364–366, 1970.
48. Gleeson, M. Biochemical and immunological markers of
over-training. J Sports Sci Med 1: 31–41, 2002.
49. Golf, SW, Bender, S, and Gruttner, J. On the significance of
magnesium in extreme physical stress. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther 12
(Suppl 2): 197–202, 1998.
50. Graham, MR and et al. Direct hits to the head during amateur
boxing is associated with a rise in serum biomarkers for brain
injury. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol 24: 119–125, 2011.
51. Haas, JD and Brownlie, T. Iron deficiency and reduced work
capacity: A critical review of the research to determine a causal
relationship. J Nutr 131: 676S–688S, 2001; discussion 688S–690S.
52. Ha
¨kkinen, K and Pakarinen, A. Acute hormonal responses to two
different fatiguing heavy-resistance protocols in male athletes.
J Appl Physiol (1985) 74: 882–887, 1993.
53. Ha
¨kkinen, K, Pakarinen, A, Ale
´n, M, Kauhanen, H, and Komi,
PV. Neuromuscular and hormonal adaptations in athletes to
strength training in two years. J Appl Physiol (1985) 65: 2406–
2412, 1988.
54. Ha
¨kkinen, K, Pakarinen, A, Ale
´n, M, Kauhanen, H, and Komi, PV.
Relationships between training volume, physical performance
capacity, and serum hormone concentrations during prolonged
training in elite weight lifters. Int J Sports Med 8(Suppl 1): 61–65,
1987.
55. Haslauer, CM, Proffen, BL, Johnson, VM, Hill, A, and
Murray, MM. Gene expression of catabolic inflammatory
cytokines peak before anabolic inflammatory cytokines after ACL
injury in a preclinical model. J Inflamm (Lond) 11: 34, 2014.
56. Hernandez-Morante, JJ, Pe
´rez-de-Heredia, F, Luja
´n, JA, Zamora, S,
and Garaulet, M. Role of DHEA-S on body fat distribution:
Gender- and depot-specific stimulation of adipose tissue lipolysis.
Steroids 73: 209–215, 2008.
57. Hinton, PS, Giordano, C, Brownlie, T, and Haas, JD. Iron
supplementation improves endurance after training in iron-
depleted, nonanemic women. J Appl Physiol (1985) 88: 1103–1111,
2000.
58. Hinton, PS and Sinclair, LM. Iron supplementation maintains
ventilatory threshold and improves energetic efficiency in
iron-deficient nonanemic athletes. Eur J Clin Nutr 61: 30–39,
2007.
59. Hong, CZ and Lien, IN. Metabolic effects of exhaustive training of
athletes. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 65: 362–365, 1984.
60. Hood, DA, Kelton, R, and Nishio, ML. Mitochondrial adaptations
to chronic muscle use: Effect of iron deficiency. Comp Biochem
Physiol Comp Physiol 101: 597–605, 1992.
61. James, WP and Hay, AM. Albumin metabolism: Effect of the
nutritional state and the dietary protein intake. J Clin Invest 47:
1958–1972, 1968.
62. Jastrezebski, Z. Effect of vitamin D supplementation on the level
of physical fitness and blood parameters of rowers during the 8-
week high intensity training. Facicula Educ Fiz Si Sport 2: 57–67,
2014.
63. Jouris, KB, McDaniel, JL, and Weiss, EP. The effect of Omega-3
fatty acid supplementation on the inflammatory response to
eccentric strength exercise. J Sports Sci Med 10: 432–438, 2011.
64. Kanazawa, I, Yamaguchi, T, and Sugimoto, T. Serum insulin-like
growth factor-I is a marker for assessing the severity of vertebral
fractures in postmenopausal women with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Osteoporos Int 22: 1191–1198, 2011.
65. Kanter, MM. Free radicals, exercise, and antioxidant
supplementation. Int J Sport Nutr 4: 205–220, 1994.
66. Kavouras, SA, Johnson, EC, Bougatsas, D, Arnaoutis, G,
Panagiotakos, DB, Perrier, E, and Klein, A. Validation of a urine
color scale for assessment of urine osmolality in healthy children.
Eur J Nutr 55: 907–915, 2016.
67. Kingsbury, KJ, Kay, L, and Hjelm, M. Contrasting plasma free
amino acid patterns in elite athletes: Association with fatigue and
infection. Br J Sports Med 32: 25–32, 1998; discussion 32–3.
68. Kleiner, G, Marcuzzi, A, Zanin, V, Monasta, L, and Zauli, G.
Cytokine levels in the serum of healthy subjects. Mediators Inflamm
2013: 434010, 2013.
69. Koch, AJ, Pereira, R, and Machado, M. The creatine kinase
response to resistance exercise. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 14:
68–77, 2014.
70. Kraemer, WJ, French, DN, Paxton, NJ, Ha
¨kkinen, K, Volek, JS,
Sebastianelli, WJ, Putukian, M, Newton, RU, Rubin, MR, Go
´mez,
AL, Vescovi, JD, Ratamess, NA, Fleck, SJ, Lynch, JM, and
Knuttgen, HG. Changes in exercise performance and hormonal
concentrations over a big ten soccer season in starters and
nonstarters. J Strength Cond Res 18: 121–128, 2004.
71. Kraemer, WJ, Ha
¨kkinen, K, Newton, RU, Nindl, BC, Volek, JS,
McCormick, M, Gotshalk, LA, Gordon, SE, Fleck, SJ, Campbell,
WW, Putukian, M, and Evans, WJ. Effects of heavy-resistance
training on hormonal response patterns in younger vs. older men. J
Appl Physiol (1985) 87: 982–992, 1999.
72. Kraemer, WJ and Ratamess, NA. Hormonal responses and
adaptations to resistance exercise and training. Sports Med 35:
339–361, 2005.
73. LaManca, JJ and Haymes, EM. Effects of iron repletion on
VO2max, endurance, and blood lactate in women. Med Sci Sports
Exerc 25: 1386–1392, 1993.
74. Li, Y, Oosting, M, Deelen, P, Rican
˜o-Ponce, I, Smeekens, S,
Jaeger, M, Matzaraki, V, Swertz, MA, Xavier, RJ, Franke, L,
Wijmenga, C, Joosten, LA, Kumar, V, and Netea, MG. Inter-
individual variability and genetic influences on cytokine responses
to bacteria and fungi. Nat Med 22: 952–960, 2016.
75. Lindholm, C, Hirschberg, AL, Carlstro
¨m, K, and von Schoultz, B.
Hormone anabolic/catabolic balance in female endurance athletes.
Gynecol Obstet Invest 36: 176–180, 1993.
76. Lippi, G, Montagnana, M, Salvagno, GL, Franchini, M, and
Guidi, GC. Glycaemic control in athletes. Int J Sports Med 29: 7–
10, 2008.
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
| www.nsca.com
VOLUME 31 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2017 | 2935
 77. Lohmander, LS, Englund, PM, Dahl, LL, and Roos, EM. The long-
term consequence of anterior cruciate ligament and meniscus
injuries: Osteoarthritis. Am J Sports Med 35: 1756–1769, 2007.
78. Lohmander, LS, Ostenberg, A, Englund, M, and Roos, H. High
prevalence of knee osteoarthritis, pain, and functional limitations in
female soccer players twelve years after anterior cruciate ligament
injury. Arthritis Rheum 50: 3145–3152, 2004.
79. Lukaski, HC. Vitamin and mineral status: Effects on physical
performance. Nutrition 20: 632–644, 2004.
80. MacKinnon, L
T. Special feature for the Olympics: Effects of
exercise on the immune system: Overtraining effects on immunity
and performance in athletes. Immunol Cell Biol 78: 502–509, 2000.
81. McClung, JP, Gaffney-Stomberg, E, and Lee, JJ. Female athletes:
A population at risk of vitamin and mineral deficiencies affecting
health and performance. J Trace Elem Med Biol 28: 388–392, 2014.
82. McClung, JP, Karl, JP, Cable, SJ, Williams, KW, Nindl, BC,
Young, AJ, Lieberman, HR. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial of iron supplementation in female soldiers during
military training: Effects on iron status, physical performance, and
mood. Am J Clin Nutr 90: 124–131, 2009.
83. McKenzie, AL, Munoz, CX, and Armstrong, LE. Accuracy of urine
color to detect equal to or greater than 2% body mass loss in men.
J Athl Train 50: 1306–1309, 2015.
84. Mendias, CL, Lynch, EB, Davis, ME, Sibilsky Enselman, ER, Harning,
JA, Dewolf, PD, Makki, TA, and Bedi, A. Changes in circulating
biomarkers of muscle atrophy, inflammation, and cartilage turnover in
patients undergoing anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction and
rehabilitation. Am J Sports Med 41: 1819–1826, 2013.
85. Morita, E, Kunie, K, and Matsuo, H. Food-dependent
exercise-induced anaphylaxis. J Dermatol Sci 47: 109–117, 2007.
86. Mougios, V. Reference intervals for serum creatine kinase in
athletes. Br J Sports Med 41: 674–678, 2007.
87. Munoz-Torres, M, Mezquita-Raya, P, Lopez-Rodriguez, F, Torres-
Vela, E, de Dios Luna, J, and Escobar-Jimenez, F. The contribution
of IGF-I to skeletal integrity in postmenopausal women. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf) 55: 759–766, 2001.
88. Mun
˜oz, C, Rios, E, Olivos, J, Brunser, O, and Olivares, M. Iron,
copper and immunocompetence. Br J Nutr 98(Suppl 1): S24–S28,
2007.
89. Mun
˜oz, CX, Johnson, EC, Demartini, JK, Huggins, RA, McKenzie,
AL, Casa, DJ, Maresh, CM, and Armstrong, LE. Assessment of
hydration biomarkers including salivary osmolality during passive
and active dehydration. Eur J Clin Nutr 67: 1257–1263, 2013.
90. Mussack, T, Dvorak, J, Graf-Baumann, T, and Jochum, M. Serum
S-100B protein levels in young amateur soccer players after
controlled heading and normal exercise. Eur J Med Res 8: 457–464,
2003.
91. Nattiv, A, Loucks, AB, Manore, MM, Sanborn, CF, Sundgot-Borgen, J,
and W
arren, MP; American College of Sports Medicine. American
College of Sports Medicine position stand. The female athlete triad. Med
Sci Sports Exerc 39: 1867–1882, 2007.
92. Neselius, S, Brisby, H, Theodorsson, A, Blennow, K, Zetterberg, H,
and Marcusson, J. CSF-biomarkers in Olympic boxing: Diagnosis
and effects of repetitive head trauma. PLoS One 7: e33606, 2012.
93. Nielsen, BW, Bjerke, T, Damsgaard, TM, Herlin, T,
Thestrup-Pedersen, K, and Schiøtz, PO. Hyperosmolarity
selectively enhances IgE-receptor-mediated histamine release from
human basophils. Agents Actions 35: 170–178, 1992.
94. Nindl, BC, Alemany, JA, Tuckow, AP, Kellogg, MD, Sharp, MA,
and Patton, JF. Effects of exercise mode and duration on 24-h IGF-
I system recovery responses. Med Sci Sports Exerc 41: 1261–1270,
2009.
95. Otto, M, Holthusen, S, Bahn, E, So
¨hnchen, N, Wiltfang, J,
Geese, R, Fischer, A, and Reimers, CD. Boxing and running lead to
a rise in serum levels of S-100B protein. Int J Sports Med 21:
551–555, 2000.
96. Peeling, P, Blee, T, Goodman, C, Dawson, B, Claydon, G, Beilby, J,
and Prins, A. Effect of iron injections on aerobic-exercise
performance of iron-depleted female athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc
Metab 17: 221–231, 2007.
97. Peeling, P, Dawson, B, Goodman, C, Landers, G, and Trinder, D.
Athletic induced iron deficiency: New insights into the role of
inflammation, cytokines and hormones. Eur J Appl Physiol 103:
381–391, 2008.
98. Peeling, P, Dawson, B, Goodman, C, Landers, G, Wiegerinck, ET,
Swinkels, DW, and Trinder, D. Training surface and intensity:
Inflammation, hemolysis, and hepcidin expression. Med Sci Sports
Exerc 41: 1138–1145, 2009.
99. Papa, L, Ramia, MM, Edwards, D, Johnson, BD, and
Slobounov, SM. Systematic review of clinical studies examining
biomarkers of brain injury in athletes after sports-related
concussion. J Neurotrauma 32: 661–673, 2015.
100. Phillips, PA, Rolls, BJ, Ledingham, JG, Forsling, ML, and
Morton, JJ. Osmotic thirst and vasopressin release in humans: A
double-blind crossover study. Am J Physiol 248: R645–R650, 1985.
101. Pimstone, BL, Barbezat, G, Hansen, JD, and Murray, P. Studies on
growth hormone secretion in protein-calorie malnutrition. Am J
Clin Nutr 21: 482–487, 1968.
102. Pollock, N, Grogan, C, Perry, M, Pedlar, C, Cooke, K, Morrissey, D,
and Dimitriou, L. Bone-mineral density and other features of the
female athlete triad in elite endurance runners: A longitudinal and
cross-sectional observational study. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 20:
418–426, 2010.
103. Refsum, HE, Gjessing, LR, and Stromme, SB. Changes in plasma
amino acid distribution and urine amino acids excretion during
prolonged heavy exercise. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 39: 407–413, 1979.
104. Risser, WL, Lee, EJ, Poindexter, HB, West, MS, Pivarnik, JM,
Risser, JM, and Hickson, JF. Iron deficiency in female athletes: Its
prevalence and impact on performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 20:
116–121, 1988.
105. Roecker, L, Meier-Buttermilch, R, Brechtel, L, Nemeth, E, and
Ganz, T. Iron-regulatory protein hepcidin is increased in female
athletes after a marathon. Eur J Appl Physiol 95: 569–571, 2005.
106. Rowland, TW, Deisroth, MB, Green, GM, and Kelleher, JF. The
effect of iron therapy on the exercise capacity of nonanemic iron-
deficient adolescent runners. Am J Dis Child 142: 165–169, 1988.
107. Sawka, MN, Cheuvront, SN, and Kenefick, RW. Hypohydration
and human performance: Impact of environment and physiological
mechanisms. Sports Med 45(Suppl 1): S51–S60, 2015.
108. Sawka, MN, Burke, LM, Eichner, ER, Maughan, RJ, Montain, SJ,
and Stachenfeld, NS; American College of Sports Medicine.
American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and
fluid replacement. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39: 377–390, 2007.
109. Schoene, RB, Escourrou, P, Robertson, HT, Nilson, KL, Parsons,
JR, and Smith, NJ. Iron repletion decreases maximal exercise
lactate concentrations in female athletes with minimal iron-
deficiency anemia. J Lab Clin Med 102: 306–312, 1983.
110. Selby, GB and Eichner, ER. Endurance swimming, intravascular
hemolysis, anemia, and iron depletion. New perspective on
athlete’s anemia. Am J Med 81: 791–794, 1986.
111. Shahim, P, Tegner, Y, Wilson, DH, Randall, J, Skillba
¨ck, T,
Pazooki, D, Kallberg, B, Blennow, K, and Zetterberg, H. Blood
biomarkers for brain injury in concussed professional ice hockey
players. JAMA Neurol 71: 684–692, 2014.
112. Siles, RI and Hsieh, FH. Allergy blood testing: A practical guide for
clinicians. Cleve Clin J Med 78: 585–592, 2011.
113. Sinclair, LM and Hinton, PS. Prevalence of iron deficiency with
and without anemia in recreationally active men and women. J Am
Diet Assoc 105: 975–978, 2005.
114. Smith, LL. Cytokine hypothesis of overtraining: A physiological
adaptation to excessive stress? Med Sci Sports Exerc 32: 317–331,
2000.
Biomarkers in Sport and Exercise
2936
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
 115. Smith, DJ and Norris, SR. Changes in glutamine and glutamate
concentrations for tracking training tolerance. Med Sci Sports Exerc
32: 684–689, 2000.
116. Snow, CM, Rosen, CJ, and Robinson, TL. Serum IGF-I is higher in
gymnasts than runners and predicts bone and lean mass. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 32: 1902–1907, 2000.
117. Sorichter, S, Puschendorf, B, and Mair, J. Skeletal muscle injury
induced by eccentric muscle action: Muscle proteins as markers of
muscle fiber injury. Exerc Immunol Rev 5: 5–21, 1999.
118. Spriet, LL and Whitfield, J. Taurine and skeletal muscle function.
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 18: 96–101, 2015.
119. Stalnacke, BM, Ohlsson, A, Tegner, Y, and Sojka, P. Serum
concentrations of two biochemical markers of brain tissue damage S-
100B and neurone specific enolase are increased in elite female soccer
players after a competitive game. Br J Sports Med 40: 313–316, 2006.
120. Stalnacke, BM and Sojka, P. Repeatedly heading a soccer ball does
not increase serum levels of S-100B, a biochemical marker of brain
tissue damage: An experimental study. Biomark Insights 3: 87–91, 2008.
121. Stalnacke, BM, Tegner, Y, and Sojka, P. Playing ice hockey and
basketball increases serum levels of S-100B in elite players: A pilot
study. Clin J Sport Med 13: 292–302, 2003.
122. Stalnacke, BM, Tegner, Y, and Sojka, P. Playing soccer increases
serum concentrations of the biochemical markers of brain damage
S-100B and neuron-specific enolase in elite players: A pilot study.
Brain Inj 18: 899–909, 2004.
123. Stiefel, P, Ruiz-Gutierrez, V, Gajo
´n, E, Acosta, D, Garcı
´a-Donas,
MA, Madrazo, J, Villar, J, and Carneado, J. Sodium transport kinetics,
cell membrane lipid composition, neural conduction and metabolic
control in type 1 diabetic patients. Changes after a low-dose n-3 fatty
acid dietary intervention. Ann Nutr Metab 43: 113–120, 1999.
124. Strohbach, CA, Scofield, DE, Nindl, BC, Centi, AJ, Yanovich, R,
Evans, RK, and Moran, DS. Female recruits sustaining stress
fractures during military basic training demonstrate differential
concentrations of circulating IGF-I system components: A
preliminary study. Growth Horm IGF Res 22: 151–157, 2012.
125. Sugimoto, T, Nishiyama, K, Kuribayashi, F, and Chihara, K. Serum
levels of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) I, IGF-binding protein
(IGFBP)-2, and IGFBP-3 in osteoporotic patients with and
without spinal fractures. J Bone Miner Res 12: 1272–1279, 1997.
126. Suzuki, K, Nakaji, S, Yamada, M, Totsuka, M, Sato, K, and
Sugawara, K. Systemic inflammatory response to exhaustive
exercise. Cytokine kinetics. Exerc Immunol Rev 8: 6–48, 2002.
127. Svoboda, SJ, Harvey, TM, Owens, BD, Brechue, WF, Tarwater,
PM, and Cameron, KL. Changes in serum biomarkers of cartilage
turnover after anterior cruciate ligament injury. Am J Sports Med 41:
2108–2116, 2013.
128. Tanskanen, MM, Kyro
¨la
¨inen, H, Uusitalo, AL, Huovinen, J,
Nissila
¨, J, Kinnunen, H, Atalay, M, and Ha
¨kkinen, K. Serum sex
hormone-binding globulin and cortisol concentrations are
associated with overreaching during strenuous military training. J
Strength Cond Res 25: 787–797, 2011.
129. Tartibian, B, Maleki, BH, and Abbasi, A. The effects of ingestion of
omega-3 fatty acids on perceived pain and external symptoms of
delayed onset muscle soreness in untrained men. Clin J Sport Med
19: 115–119, 2009.
130. Todd, J, Simpson, P, Estis, J, Torres, V, and Wub, AH. Reference
range and short- and long-term biological variation of interleukin
(IL)-6, IL-17A and tissue necrosis factor-alpha using high
sensitivity assays. Cytokine 64: 660–665, 2013.
131. Tom, A and Nair, KS. Assessment of branched-chain amino
Acid status and potential for biomarkers. J Nutr 136(1 Suppl):
324S–330S, 2006.
132. Tourville, TW, Johnson, RJ, Slauterbeck, JR, Naud, S, and Beynnon,
BD. Relationship between markers of type II collagen metabolism
and tibiofemoral joint space width changes after ACL injury and
reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 41: 779–787, 2013.
133. Urhausen, A, Gabriel, H, and Kindermann, W. Blood hormones as
markers of training stress and overtraining. Sports Med 20: 251–276, 1995.
134. Urhausen, A and Kindermann, W. Diagnosis of overtraining: What
tools do we have? Sports Med 32: 95–102, 2002.
135. Vallee, BL and Falchuk, KH. The biochemical basis of zinc
physiology. Physiol Rev 73: 79–118, 1993.
136. Vandenbogaerde, TJ and Hopkins, WG. Effects of acute
carbohydrate supplementation on endurance performance:
A meta-analysis. Sports Med 41: 773–792, 2011.
137. Velloso, CP. Regulation of muscle mass by growth hormone and
IGF-I. Br J Pharmacol 154: 557–568, 2008.
138. Vervoorn, C, Quist, AM, Vermulst, LJ, Erich, WB, de Vries, WR,
and Thijssen, JH. The behaviour of the plasma free testosterone/
cortisol ratio during a season of elite rowing training. Int J Sports
Med 12: 257–263, 1991.
139. Volek, JS, Freidenreich, DJ, Saenz, C, Kunces, LJ, Creighton, BC,
Bartley, JM, Davitt, PM, Munoz, CX, Anderson, JM, Maresh, CM,
Lee, EC, Schuenke, MD, Aerni, G, Kraemer, WJ, and Phinney, SD.
Metabolic characteristics of keto-adapted ultra-endurance runners.
Metabolism 65: 100–110, 2016.
140. Volfinger, L, Lassourd, V, Michaux, JM, Braun, JP, and Toutain, PL.
Kinetic evaluation of muscle damage during exercise by calculation
of amount of creatine kinase released. Am J Physiol 266: R434–
R441, 1994.
141. von Porat, A, Roos, EM, and Roos, H. High prevalence of
osteoarthritis 14 years after an anterior cruciate ligament tear in
male soccer players: A study of radiographic and patient
relevant outcomes. Ann Rheum Dis 63: 269–273, 2004.
142. Walsh, NP, Laing, SJ, Oliver, SJ, Montague, JC, Walters, R, and
Bilzon, JL. Saliva parameters as potential indices of hydration
status during acute dehydration. Med Sci Sports Exerc 36: 1535–
1542, 2004.
143. Wang, W, Wu, Z, Dai, Z, Yang, Y, Wang, J, and Wu, G. Glycine
metabolism in animals and humans: Implications for nutrition and
health. Amino Acids 45: 463–477, 2013.
144. Ward, RJ, Francaux, M, Cuisinier, C, Sturbois, X, De Witte, P.
Changes in plasma taurine levels after different endurance events.
Amino Acids 16: 71–77, 1999.
145. Warren, MP and Perlroth, NE. The effects of intense exercise on
the female reproductive system. J Endocrinol 170: 3–11, 2001.
146. Webster, CC, Noakes, TD, Chacko, SK, Swart, J, Kohn, TA, and
Smith, JA. Gluconeogenesis during endurance exercise in cyclists
habituated to a long-term low carbohydrate high fat diet. J Physiol
594: 4389–4405, 2016.
147. Yanovich, R, Evans, RK, Friedman, E, and Moran, DS. Bone
turnover markers do not predict stress fracture in elite combat
recruits. Clin Orthop Relat Res 471: 1365–1372, 2013.
148. Young, VR, El-Khoury, AE, Raguso, CA, Forslund, AH, and
Hambraeus, L. Rates of urea production and hydrolysis and
leucine oxidation change linearly over widely varying protein
intakes in healthy adults. J Nutr 130: 761–766, 2000.
149. Zetterberg, H, Hietala, MA, Jonsson, M, Andreasen, N, Styrud, E,
Karlsson, I, Edman, A, Popa, C, Rasulzada, A, Wahlund, LO,
Mehta, PD, Rosengren, L, Blennow, K, and Wallin, A.
Neurochemical aftermath of amateur boxing. Arch Neurol 63:
1277–1280, 2006.
150. Zetterberg, H, Tanriverdi, F, Unluhizarci, K, Selcuklu, A,
Kelestimur, F, and Blennow, K. Sustained release of neuron-
specific enolase to serum in amateur boxers. Brain Inj 23:
723–726, 2009.
151. Zhu, YI and Haas, JD. Altered metabolic response of iron-depleted
nonanemic women during a 15-km time trial. J Appl Physiol (1985)
84: 1768–1775, 1998.
152. Zoller, H and Vogel, W. Iron supplementation in athletes–first do
no harm. Nutrition 20: 615–619, 2004.
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research
the
TM
| www.nsca.com
VOLUME 31 | NUMBER 10 | OCTOBER 2017 | 2937
