 econstor
Make Your Publications Visible.
A Service of
zbw
Leibniz-Informationszentrum
Wirtschaft
Leibniz Information Centre
for Economics
Lee, Wang-Sheng; McKinnish, Terra
Working Paper
The Marital Satisfaction of Differently-Aged Couples
GLO Discussion Paper, No. 84
Provided in Cooperation with:
Global Labor Organization (GLO)
Suggested Citation: Lee, Wang-Sheng; McKinnish, Terra (2017) : The Marital Satisfaction of
Differently-Aged Couples, GLO Discussion Paper, No. 84, Global Labor Organization (GLO),
Maastricht
This Version is available at:
http://hdl.handle.net/10419/162702
Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:
Die Dokumente auf EconStor dürfen zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen
Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden.
Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle
Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich
machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen.
Sofern die Verfasser die Dokumente unter Open-Content-Lizenzen
(insbesondere CC-Lizenzen) zur Verfügung gestellt haben sollten,
gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der dort
genannten Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.
Terms of use:
Documents in EconStor may be saved and copied for your
personal and scholarly purposes.
You are not to copy documents for public or commercial
purposes, to exhibit the documents publicly, to make them
publicly available on the internet, or to distribute or otherwise
use the documents in public.
If the documents have been made available under an Open
Content Licence (especially Creative Commons Licences), you
may exercise further usage rights as specified in the indicated
licence.
www.econstor.eu
 The Marital Satisfaction of Differently-Aged Couples 
 
 
Wang-Sheng Lee* 
Deakin University 
 
Terra McKinnish 
University of Colorado, Boulder 
 
 
June 27, 2017 
 
 
Abstract 
 
We investigate how the marital age gap affects the evolution of marital satisfaction over 
the duration of marriage using household panel data from Australia. We find that men 
tend to be more satisfied with younger wives and less satisfied with older wives.  
Interestingly, women likewise tend to be more satisfied with younger husbands and less 
satisfied with older husbands. Marital satisfaction declines with marital duration for both 
men and women in differently-aged couples relative to those in similarly-aged couples. 
These relative declines erase the initial higher levels of marital satisfaction experienced 
by men married to younger wives and women married to younger husbands within 6 to 
10 years of marriage. A possible mechanism is that differently-aged couples are less 
resilient to negative shocks compared to similarly-aged couples, which we find some 
supportive evidence for. 
 
Keywords: assortative matching; marital age gap; marital duration; marital satisfaction  
 
JEL Codes: D1; J12 
 
 
 
 
 
We are grateful to two anonymous referees for providing very helpful comments and suggestions. 
This paper uses unit record data from the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia 
(HILDA) Survey. The HILDA Project was initiated and is funded by the Australian Government 
Department of Social Services (DSS) and is managed by the Melbourne Institute of Applied 
Economic and Social Research (Melbourne Institute). The findings and views reported in this 
paper, however, are those of the author and should not be attributed to either DSS or the 
Melbourne Institute.  
 
*Corresponding author. Author affiliations: Wang-Sheng Lee. Department of Economics, Deakin 
University, 70 Elgar Road, Burwood, Victoria 3125, Australia; Tel: +61 3 92446669; Fax: +61 3 
92446283; Email: wang.lee@deakin.edu.au; Terra McKinnish. Department of Economics, 
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309-0256, USA; Email: terra.mckinnish@colorado.edu. 
 
  
1
I. Introduction 
 
A well-documented feature of the marriage market is that individuals match assortatively 
on age and that the most common pairing is one in which the husband is a few years older than 
the wife (Presser, 1975; Glick and Lin, 1986).  While this pattern of matching on age is well-
known, the underlying mechanism that generates this sorting is not well understood. For 
example, some studies suggest that marital gains are largest in older husband-younger wife pairs 
(Bergstrom and Bagnoli, 1993) while others find that marital gains are largest for similarly-aged 
couples (Choo and Siow, 2006).  A number of theoretical models assume that men (and in some 
models, women) prefer younger spouses for their “fitness” or fecundity (Siow, 1998; Coles and 
Francesconi, 2011; Diaz-Gimenez and Giolito, 2013), while analysis using online and speed 
dating data suggest that both men and women instead prefer similarly-aged partners (Belot and 
Francesconi, 2013, Hitsch, Hortascu and Ariely, 2010). 
Marital sorting is an outcome of both male and female preferences as well as the 
distribution of characteristics in an individual’s marriage market.  Assortative matching on age 
can occur if both men and women prefer similarly-aged spouses, but this same pattern of sorting 
can also result from underlying preferences in which both men and women prefer younger 
spouses.  Women could, for example, prefer to match with younger men, but if most men receive 
large disutility from marrying an older woman, women will avoid seeking younger male 
partners.   
 
 This paper adds to the existing literature by analyzing how marital satisfaction varies 
with the marital age gap.  Specifically, this paper analyzes data from the 2001-2013 waves of the 
Household, Income and Labor Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) data.  These longitudinal data are 
particularly well-suited to this study as they contain annual reports of satisfaction with 
relationship with one’s current spouse from both the husband and the wife. Determining whether 
  
2
marital satisfaction is greater for similarly-aged couples, for men and women married to younger 
spouses, or for both men and women in older husband-younger wife pairings will provide insight 
regarding the conflicting assumptions and results from previous theoretical and empirical 
research on marital sorting by age. 
In addition to studying the cross-sectional relationship between the marital age gap and 
marital satisfaction, ours is the first study to analyze how the marital age gap affects the 
evolution of marital satisfaction over the duration of the marriage. Because we observe annual 
reports of marital satisfaction we are able to control for individual fixed-effects in our analysis.  
Unlike analysis that compares recently-married couples to couples with longer marital duration, 
this fixed-effects analysis is identified using within-marriage changes in marital satisfaction over 
time.  We are therefore able to ascertain whether marital satisfaction evolves differently over the 
duration of the marriage for differently-aged couples compared to similarly-aged couples.  For 
example, if men married to younger wives initially express greater marital satisfaction, does this 
higher level of marital satisfaction persist, increase or decrease over the duration of the 
marriage?    
Research on marital dissolution has found that differently-aged couples are more likely to 
divorce than similarly-aged ones (Cherlin, 1977; Lillard et al, 1995), which suggests that 
differently-aged couples may experience greater declines in marital satisfaction over time.   
Previous work suggests that unanticipated shocks to marital gains are a key cause of marital 
dissolution (Becker, Landes and Michael, 1977; Weiss and Willis, 1997).  Therefore, if our 
analysis finds that marital satisfaction declines over time for differently-aged couples relative to 
similarly-aged couples, a potential mechanism is that differently-aged couples suffer larger 
losses to marital gains when experiencing a negative shock.  This could happen if, for example, 
differently-aged couples are less similar in their preferences for consumption, making it more 
  
3
difficult for them to adjust to a negative economic shock.  Fortunately, the HILDA data include 
self-reports of whether there was a “major worsening of finances” in the past year, which allows 
us to test this mechanism. 
Our key findings are: 1) Men tend to be more satisfied with younger wives and less 
satisfied with older wives. 2)  Likewise, women tend to be more satisfied with younger husbands 
and less satisfied with older husbands.  3) For both men and women, marital satisfaction declines 
over the duration of the marriage for those married to differently-aged partners relative to those 
married to similarly-aged partners.  These relative declines erase the initial higher levels of 
marital satisfaction experienced by men married to younger wives and women married to 
younger husbands within 6 to 10 years of marriage. 4) Differently-aged couples experience 
larger declines in marital satisfaction in response to a negative economic shock compared to 
similarly-aged couples. 
 
II. Literature and Background 
A. Theoretical models of marital sorting and marital age gap 
Several theoretical papers in economics focus on the gender differences in timing of 
marriage or the age gap between partners. Predictions from these papers regarding the 
relationship between the marital age gap and marital gains are driven by assumptions regarding 
individual preferences for partner characteristics and the evolution of earnings and/or fecundity 
over the lifecycle.1 
                                                            
1 In the discussion below, we assume that individual reports of marital satisfaction are a proxy for the marital gains 
they experience.  It should be noted that we implicitly assume that marital search is costly.  If it were the case that 
individuals search at very low cost in large marriage markets with no gender imbalances, we would expect for 
competition among prospective mates to compete away any excess marital gains so that all couples begin marriage 
with equivalent (and zero) gains relative to their outside alternative (Weiss and Willis, 1997). Given that even 
among recently-married couples there is considerable variation in marital satisfaction, this seems a reasonable 
assumption. 
  
4
Bergstrom and Bagnoli (1993) assume that husband quality is revealed at later ages than 
wife quality.  This happens when marital gains come from household specialization, and men’s 
market productivity increases over time but women’s household productivity does not.  All 
women marry young, because delays in marriage do not increase their value on the marriage 
market.  High quality women marry high quality older men who have delayed marriage to reveal 
their high earnings potential.  Low quality young women marry low quality young men, who do 
not bother to delay marriage because their earnings potential will not improve over time. 
The Bergstrom and Bagnoli model predicts that differently-aged couples contain matches 
of high quality husbands and wives, generating greater surplus, while similarly-aged couples 
contain lower quality husbands and wives with lower surplus. This predicts greater marital 
satisfaction for both men and women in older husband-younger wife couples compared to 
similarly-aged couples.  
Coles and Francesconi (2011) assume that both men and women receive utility from their 
partner’s income but also from their partner’s “fitness”, which decays with age. Financially 
successful men and women are both able to attract younger spouses.  The younger partners 
receive disutility from matching with an older spouse, but are compensated by the higher 
earnings of the older spouse. Unlike Bergstrom and Bagnoli (1993), it is not clear that the 
younger spouses in large age gap couples will be more satisfied than one in a small age gap 
couple. The younger spouse has traded off one feature (household income) for another (partner 
"fitness").2  We would expect the relationship between marital age gap and marital satisfaction to 
be sensitive to controls for partner characteristics, such as education and income. 
                                                            
2 Siow (1998) generates a very similar prediction: that older husband-younger wife pairs are generated because 
financially successful older men prefer younger “fecund” women, and compensate their younger partners for 
marrying them with higher earnings.  His model, however, does not result in older wife-younger husband pairings 
because he assumes that only young women are fecund and all women marry young in order to produce children. 
  
5
Both Bergstrom and Bagnoli (1993) and Coles and Francesconi (2011) predict that in 
couples with large age gaps the older spouse is financially successful.  Mansour and McKinnish 
(2014), however, find empirically that both members of differently-aged couples tend to be 
negatively selected on education, earnings and cognitive ability. This calls into question whether 
these theoretical models are realistic descriptions of the process that generates differently-aged 
couples.3 
Diaz-Gimenez and Giolito (2013) develop a model in which older husband-younger wife 
pairs are generated simply because fecundity declines more rapidly for women than men over the 
lifecycle.  Women prefer to marry young, while still fecund, and are willing to accept marriage 
proposals from older men, whose fecundity declines at a slower rate.  In contrast, it is less costly 
for men to delay marriage and they reject proposals from less-fecund older women.  Their results 
imply that men should receive greater disutility from an older spouse than women, given 
women’s more rapidly declining fertility. 
It should be noted that the theoretical papers on marital sorting discussed in this section 
generate predictions regarding the formation of couples, but do not provide any insight regarding 
how marital gains evolve over time inside marriage. 
    
B. Revealed preference and marital age gaps 
While there is no empirical research that directly analyzes individual’s preferences for 
marital age gaps, the relevant empirical research is consistent with preferences for similarly-aged 
spouses, with a preference for pairings with slightly older husbands compared to slightly older 
wives. For example, Choo and Siow (2006) develop and estimate a structural model of the 
                                                            
3 Mansour and McKinnish argue that their empirical results likely reflect the fact that men and women with higher 
earnings potential spend more time in age-homogenous settings (e.g. postsecondary and graduate education, jobs 
with career ladders) and therefore are more likely to marry similarly-aged spouses. 
  
6
marriage market.  They estimate systematic net gains to marriage based on age of husband and 
wife, and find that women maximize their net gain with a slightly older husband and men 
maximize their net gain with slightly younger wives.  These larger estimated gains to marriage 
for slightly older husband-slightly younger wives pairings are generated by the fact that these 
pairings are the most common, conditional on the distribution of available partners in the market. 
Belot and Francesconi (2013) analyze data from speed-dating events and find that both 
men and women prefer dates where the man is 0-5 years older rather than dates where the man is 
more than 5 years older or where the man is younger than the woman. Using online dating data, 
Hitsch, Hortacsu and Ariely (2010) find that both men and women are more likely to contact 
similarly-aged partners.  Their estimates also indicate that both men and women particularly 
avoid pairings in which the woman is older than the man.  In the absence of strategic behavior, 
these results suggest that preferences for age difference match the empirically observed age 
differences at marriage.4 
But these studies only reveal true preferences if individuals are not acting strategically 
(Fisman et al., 2006).  If men or women avoid contacting much younger potential partners 
because they suspect the chance of success is very low, this will make it appear as if they prefer 
similarly-aged spouses more than they actually do. Therefore, the fact individuals are more likely 
to contact, date and marry similarly-aged partners could be generated by preferences for 
similarly-aged partners, but this sorting could also be generated by the case in which both men 
and women prefer younger spouses.   
                                                            
4 Hitsch et al (2010) investigate for evidence of strategic behavior using appearance ratings.  They find that for both 
men and women, regardless of appearance rating, the probability of emailing a potential dating partner is 
monotonically increasing in the attractiveness of the potential partner.  There is no evidence, for example, that less 
attractive individuals strategically avoid contacting the most attractive potential partners.  Based on these, Hitsch et 
al (2010) conclude that there is little evidence of strategic behavior, although they acknowledge that they are only 
considering one characteristic: physical appearance. 
  
7
Studying how marital satisfaction varies with marital age gap therefore complements the 
existing literature on marital age gap preferences.  There is no reason to believe that strategic 
behavior plays a role in how people report their marital satisfaction. Therefore, if we find that 
married individuals report greater satisfaction when married to similarly-aged partners; this 
would be consistent with previous findings that individuals prefer to date and marry similarly-
aged partners.  Alternatively, if we find that individuals report greater marital satisfaction when 
married to younger spouses, this suggests that the prior findings may in part have been generated 
by strategic behavior. 
There is limited prior research estimating the relationship between marital age gaps and 
marital satisfaction. Using cross-sectional data from Florida in the early 1970s, Vera et al. (1985) 
find no significant differences in marital quality among couples from various age gap categories.  
Their null result may stem from the fact that husbands and wives were pooled into the same 
regression.5 Rogler and Procidano (1989) also find no evidence that marital quality varies with 
the marital age gap in their analysis of 200 Puerto Rican families in New York City.  
Alternatively, Groot and Van Den Brink (1998) find that both men and women report greater life 
satisfaction if there is a positive age gap between husband and wife, but they do not study marital 
satisfaction. Their sample is fairly different from ours, as theirs is a sample of older Dutch 
couples in which the head of household is ages 43-65, and they also fail to control for marital 
duration.6  Finally, Zhang et al. (2012) find in a cross-sectional sample of Hong Kong couples 
that husbands two to four years older than their wives were 1.92 times more likely to be satisfied 
with their marriages compared with those whose wives were of a similar age to themselves.  The 
                                                            
5 In other words, if husbands are happier in older husband-younger wife marriages than marriages without an age 
gap, but wives are less happy in older husband-younger wife marriages than marriages without an age gap, this can 
average out to no effect of age gap on marital satisfaction if husbands and wives are pooled together. 
6 Another paper which studies the outcomes of older married couples as a function of the marital age gap is Drefahl 
(2010), who finds that in a sample of danish individuals over 50, having an older spouse increases the mortality rate 
for both men and women, and having an older spouse increases the mortality rate for women. 
  
8
Zhang et al. study, however, controls for both husband’s and wife’s age in addition to their set of 
age difference categories.  Because simultaneously controlling for both husband’s and wife’s age 
controls for any linear effect of age difference, their coefficient estimates for the age difference 
categories are difficult to interpret, only reflecting non-linear effects conditional on any linear 
effect. 
 
C. Marital duration, marital age gaps and marital satisfaction 
There are no studies we are aware of that examine from either a theoretical or empirical 
perspective how the marital age gap affects the evolution of marital satisfaction over the duration 
of the marriage.  Prior work by economists argues that couples marry with imperfect information 
and unanticipated shocks can cause gains to marriage to change in ways that were not predictable 
at the time of the marriage (Becker, Landes and Michael, 1977; Weiss and Willis, 1997).  The 
marital age gap could therefore affect changes in marital satisfaction over time by influencing 
how unanticipated shocks affect the gains from the marriage.   
For example, if similarly-aged couples are more similar in their preferences for 
consumption, they might be better able to adjust to a negative financial shock than a differently-
aged couple.  If differently-aged couples engage in more household specialization, they might be 
more negatively affected by a health shock (because the spouses are poor substitutes for each 
other in both market and household production).  It should be acknowledged, however, that if 
this larger negative effect of the shock on the differently-aged couple causes divorce, an analysis 
of marital satisfaction using the selected sample of surviving couples will underestimate this 
effect. 
In our analysis, we first test whether the evolution of marital satisfaction over the 
duration of the marriage is affected by the marital age gap.  We also allow the degree of 
  
9
household specialization to affect trends in marital satisfaction.  Finally, we test whether the 
effect of negative financial shocks and health shocks on martial satisfaction differs for 
differently-aged couples compared to similarly-aged couples.7 
 
III. Data and Methods 
A. Analysis sample 
This analysis uses the Household, Income and Labor Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) 
survey data for the years 2001-2013.  The HILDA is a household-based panel study which began 
in 2001 with a nationally-representative sample of Australian households in private dwellings.  
The initial wave surveyed 7,682 households containing 19,914 individuals, who have then been 
re-surveyed annually.  In each survey year, all current household members of these initial wave 1 
respondents are included in the survey.   
One feature of the HILDA survey is that each year it asks respondents to report life 
satisfaction on a variety of dimensions, including reporting level of satisfaction with relationship 
with partner on a scale from 0 to 10.  Therefore, these HILDA data are unusually rich in that they 
provide, for a large representative sample, annual reports of relationship quality made by both 
members of the couple for as many as to 13 years in a row. 
Our analysis sample contains observations in which: 1) both members of the couple 
report that they are currently married, 2) both are in their first marriage and 3) both members are 
ages 20-55.8  
                                                            
7 Another form of unanticipated shock to a marriage can be a shock to one’s outside alternatives.  If there is a shock 
that changes a married individual’s perception of the average quality of his or her alternative mates, this will likely 
also affect their reported satisfaction with their current marriage.  We cannot observe these shocks empirically and 
don’t have any a priori reasoning for why the effect of such shocks should differ by marital age gap. 
8 Although the paper does not focus on cohabitating couples, cohabitation is relatively common in Australia and 
often precedes marriage. In 2010, almost eight in ten (79%) marriages were preceded by a period of cohabitation 
(Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2012).  Selection into marriage from cohabitation (or more broadly selection into 
marriage from dating) does mean that results might differ if we were studying couples from their first date or from 
  
10
The independent variable of interest is the within-couple age difference: 
 
AgeDiff = Husband’s Age – Wife’s Age 
 
Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for our analysis sample.  For Table 1, the sample is divided 
based on AgeDiff into 7 categories: +7 or more, +4 to 6, +1 to 3, 0, -1 to -3, -4 to -6, and -7 or 
more.  Columns 1 and 2 report frequencies and percentages for the distribution of AgeDiff.  As 
has been previously well-documented, most married couples have a husband who is 0 to 3 years 
older than the wife (55.6%).  While it is somewhat common to have a husband who is at least 7 
years older than the wife (8.9%), it is relatively uncommon for the wife to be 4 or more years 
older than the husband (3.6%). 
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 report the mean reported satisfaction level of husbands and 
wives by age difference category.  The sample means indicate that on average husbands report 
greater satisfaction than their wives.  This is consistent with previous studies of marital 
satisfaction which have found that wives’ reports of marital satisfaction are significantly lower 
than husbands’. For example, national surveys of married adults in the United States in 1980 and 
2000 found that, on average, women reported lower levels of marital quality (Amato et al., 
2007).  
Men with wives who are at least 7 years older report the lowest levels of satisfaction, and 
satisfaction increases monotonically as husband’s age increases relative to wife’s, up until the 
husband is more than 3 years older than the wife.  For women, the relationship between marital 
satisfaction and age-difference with spouse is less obvious from the raw means.  
                                                                                                                                                                                               
 
the start of cohabitation, but should not threaten our interpretation of our results as conditional on entry into 
marriage. 
  
11
 
Figure 1 plots male marital satisfaction by marital age gap and marital duration 
conditional on male age and age-squared.9   This descriptive plot improves upon the raw means 
reported in Table 1 in two ways.  First, it is important to control for age when analyzing the 
relationship between marital age gap and marital satisfaction.  On average, men married to 
younger wives enter the analysis sample at older ages and men married to older wives enter the   
sample at younger ages.  Older individuals report lower marital satisfaction on average, even 
conditional on marital duration.  Therefore, the lower average levels of marital satisfaction 
reported in Table 1 for men married to younger wives may be due to the fact that these men are 
older, rather than the fact that they are married to younger wives. Second, Figure 1 takes into 
account the fact that marital satisfaction varies with marital duration, and the relationship 
between the marital age gap and marital satisfaction may also change over time. 
 
Using Figure 1 to look at men in relatively new marriages (5 years or less),  there is a 
clear monotonic relationship between the marital age gap and husband’s satisfaction, where men 
with much younger wives are the most satisfied and men with much older wives are the least 
satisfied.  Figure 1 also shows that the relationship between the marital age gap and marital 
satisfaction changes with marital duration because marital satisfaction declines more rapidly for 
men with larger marital age gaps, and the decline is particularly steep for men with much 
younger wives.  For men married 6 years or more, husbands married to moderately younger 
wives report the highest average levels of satisfaction.10 
 
Figure 2 is the analogous plot for wife’s marital satisfaction, this time conditional on the 
wife’s age and age-squared.  Looking at women in relatively new marriages, the plot shows that 
                                                            
9 Specifically, Figure 1 is a bivariate smooth function that estimates male marital satisfaction for different 
combinations of the marital age gap and marital duration by tensor product P-splines (Wood, 2006), conditional on 
male age and age-squared. 
10 It is important to note that Fig 1 does not provide show the density of observations, and therefore it must be 
remembered that there is sparse data at the edges of the plot, for example where the marital age gap is above 15 or 
below -5, or marital duration is above 25. 
  
12
women are happiest with a negative marital age gap (younger husbands), and satisfaction 
declines as the marital age gap becomes more positive.  Interestingly, even though women with 
older husbands start out at lower levels of satisfaction, they also, just like their husbands, 
experience the steepest decreases in marital satisfaction with marital duration.  As a result, 
women with much older husbands who have been married at least 5 years are particularly 
dissatisfied. 
The descriptive graphs in Figures 1 and 2, seem to indicate an overall U-Shaped 
relationship between duration and marital satisfaction, which is consistent with some prior 
studies (Glenn, 1998; VanLaningham et al., 2001).  It is important to remember, however, that 
these graphs reflect comparisons across couples with different marital durations, not within-
marriage comparisons of marital satisfaction over time.  This U-shaped pattern probably reflects 
the fact that some couples experience negative shocks to marital gains (some of which cause 
couples to dissolve) counteracted by the positive effects of accumulated marriage-specific capital 
(Weiss and Willis, 1997) and positive selection into longer marital durations. 
 
B.  Characteristics of differently-aged couples  
 
Before estimating the relationship between marital age gap and marital satisfaction, it is 
useful to first consider how individual and couple characteristics differ with respect to the marital 
age gap.  Table 2 sorts couples into three marital age gap categories.  The first column reports 
variable means for couples in which the husband is more than 3 years older than the wife.  The 
second column contains couples in which the husband is 0 to 3 years older than the wife.  The 
third column contains couples in which the wife is older than the husband. 
 
Panel A of Table 2 reports mean age and age of marriage by age gap category.  As one 
might expect, men who marry younger wives and women who marry younger husbands typically 
  
13
have older than average ages of marriage.  Because they marry at older ages, they are older than 
average when they appear in our sample of married couples. 
 
Panel B of Table 2 reports mean employment rates and average weekly earnings (for 
positive earners) by age gap category.  Men with younger wives have slightly lower employment 
rates and lower average weekly earnings than men with similarly-aged or older wives.  This is 
consistent with analysis by Mansour and McKinnish (2014), who also find that men with 
younger wives typically have worse labor market outcomes.  Among married women, those 
married to similarly-aged husbands have the highest employment rate and highest average 
weekly earnings. 
 
Panel C of Table 2 reports descriptive characteristics that are related to the couple’s 
degree of household specialization. The first two rows of Panel C indicate that the similarly-aged 
couples in column 2 are more similar in work hours and housework hours than the differently-
aged couples in columns 1 and 3.   Rows 3 and 4 report measures of the wife’s attitudes towards 
traditional gender roles.  An indicator variable for traditional gender attitudes equals one if the 
wife reports that she agrees with at least 2 of the following 3 statements:  “Mothers who don’t 
really need the money shouldn’t work,” “It is better for everyone involved if the man earns the 
money and the woman takes care of the home and children,” and “A preschool child is likely to 
suffer if his/her mother works full time.” An indicator for very traditional gender attitudes 
equals one if she agrees with all three statements.11 The results in the table indicate that the wives 
with larger marital age gaps are more likely to prefer traditional gender roles.12 
 
                                                            
11 More specifically, these gender attitude questions are asked only in 2001, 2005, 2008 and 2011.  Couples are 
labeled as (very) traditional in all survey years if the wife reports agreement with (3) 2 of the statements in any 
survey year. These three statements were chosen from a larger set of questions about gender roles because they were 
the three questions that generated the largest variance in responses (on a seven point scale). 
12 It has been argued that the level of age homogamy is an important indicator of the egalitarian nature of 
relationships, as large age differences between spouses have been associated with more patriarchal family systems 
and less romantic love (Van Poppel et al., 2001; Van de Putte et al., 2009). 
  
14
The remaining rows of Panel C report mean number of children.  Women with younger 
husbands have the fewest children, probably because they marry at older ages.  Both groups of 
differently-aged couples, however, are more likely to have young children than similarly-aged 
couples. 
 
Finally Panel D considers whether similarly-aged couples are also similar on other 
dimensions.  Similarly-aged couples are more likely to have both spouses complete university 
degrees, which is consistent with university facilitating age-homogenous marital search.  
Similarly-aged couples are not more likely to have both spouses complete high school.  Finally, 
couples in which the husband is older than the wife are more likely to both be immigrants than 
other age gap categories.  It could be that immigrant couples are more likely to prefer traditional 
older husband and younger wife pairings. It could also be that smaller search pools cause 
immigrants to widen their search with respect to the marital age gap. 
 
C. Regression specifications 
In the regression analysis, the effect of age difference is allowed to vary by whether the 
husband or wife is older. Specifically, our two primary explanatory variables are: 
 
AgeDiff_Pos = AgeDiff×Pos, and 
AgeDiff_Neg = AgeDiff×(Pos – 1), 
 
where Pos = I(AgeDiff  > 0) and Pos – 1 therefore equals 1 if AgeDiff ≤ 0.  AgeDiff_Pos 
measures, for couples where the husband is older, the number of years the husband is older than 
the wife.  AgeDiff_Neg measures, for couples where the wife is older, the number of years the 
wife is older than the husband. 
  
15
Table 1 shows that the most common pairings are ones in which the husband is 0-3 years 
older than the wife.  Additionally, some previous research has suggested that both men and 
women prefer matches in which the husband is a few years older than the wife (Choo and Siow 
2006, Belot and Francesconi, 2013).  Therefore, it seems appropriate to also consider an 
alternative specification in which the change point for the slope is at an age difference of 3 rather 
than an age difference of 0.  In these specifications, the RHS variables are: 
 
AgeDiff_Pos_cp3 = (AgeDiff–3)×Pos3, and 
AgeDiff_Neg_cp3=(AgeDiff–3)×(Pos3 – 1), 
 
where Pos3=I(AgeDiff > 3) and Pos3 – 1 therefore equals 1 if AgeDiff≤3. 
The primary regression specification, estimated separately for husbands and wives, is: 
 
(1) 
2
1
2
3
4
2
5
6
7
it
o
i
i
it
it
it
it
it
t
it
RelSat
AgeDiff_Pos
AgeDiff_Neg
Age
Age
Duration
Duration
X




















 
 
where 
it
RelSat  is the report of relationship satisfaction on a scale from 0 to 10 of respondent i in 
survey year t.13 Controls for respondent’s age and the duration of the marriage include quadratic 
terms.  
                                                            
13 There is some question as to whether RelSat should be treated as a cardinal or ordinal variable.  If it is cardinal (a 
change from 7 to 8 is of similar magnitude in terms of increased satisfaction as a change from 8 to 9), then linear 
regression is an appropriate model.  If it is ordinal (9 is happier than 8 which is happier than 7, but a change from 7 
to 8 is different in magnitude than a change from 8 to 9), a model such as an ordered logit would be preferred to 
linear regression.  Ferrer-i-Carbonell and Frijters (2004) investigate this topic directly for happiness measures and 
find that the cardinality assumption is reasonable and that empirical results are not sensitive to relaxing it in favor of 
ordinality. 
  
16
it
X is a vector of controls that includes the following individual characteristics of both the 
husband and wife: education (indicators for high school graduate, post-secondary certification, 
bachelor’s degree and graduate degree), employment status indicator, earnings, indicator for 
indigenous background, indicator for immigrant status, indicator for chronic health/disability.  Xit 
also includes the following couple characteristics from Panels C and D of Table 2: difference in 
weekly work hours, difference in weekly housework hours, traditional and very traditional 
gender attitudes indicators, number of children ages 0-17, number of children ages 0-6, both 
spouses have a university degree indicator, both spouses graduated high school indicator, and 
both spouses are immigrants indicator.  In addition to differences in work hours and housework 
hours, husband’s work hours and husband’s housework hours are also included.  Finally, 
it
X  
includes household-level controls for income, homeownership indicator, house value, indicators 
for residence in a city and inner-region of city, local area unemployment and state fixed-effects.  
 
Survey year fixed-effects are also included in the model. Because the sample contains 
repeated observations on the same individual, the standard errors are clustered at the individual 
level.  For some specifications, the age difference variables in equation (1) are replaced by the 
variables described above allowing the slope to change at an age difference of 3, rather than an 
age difference of 0.  
Relationship satisfaction changes with the duration of the marriage, and it is possible that 
satisfaction evolves differently for couples with different age gaps.  Interaction terms are added 
to the model to allow for this differential effect of duration: 
 
(2) 
1
2
3
4
2
5
6
7
8
(
)
(
)
it
o
i
i
it
i
i
it
it
it
it
it
t
it
RelSat
AgeDiff_Pos
AgeDiff_Pos
Duration
AgeDiff_Neg
AgeDiff_Neg
Duration
Duration
Age
Age
X
























 
  
17
Equations (1) and (2) are pooled cross-section regressions.  In these regressions, the 
effects of duration and the interaction effects of duration with the age gap variables are estimated 
in part by comparing couples who have been married fewer years to couples who have been 
married more years. One advantage of the HILDA data is that we observe annual reports of 
relationship satisfaction for the same couple over an extended time period, allowing us to include 
an individual fixed-effect in order to focus on within-marriage changes in relationship 
satisfaction over time: 
 
(3) 
1
2
2
3
4
(
)
(
)
it
o
i
it
i
it
it
it
t
i
it
RelSat
AgeDiff_Pos
Duration
AgeDiff_Neg
Duration
Age
X


















 
 
In the fixed-effects specification, the main effects of the age difference variables are 
dropped from the model, as they are perfectly collinear with the individual fixed-effect.  
Additionally, when individual fixed-effects are included in the model, the linear terms for age 
and marital duration become perfectly collinear with the survey year fixed-effects.  This is 
because age and duration both change for all respondents by the same amount (1 year) between 
survey years.  Therefore, it is not possible to estimate the main effect of marital duration on 
marital satisfaction in a model that controls for individual fixed-effects.  This specification, 
however, still allows us to test whether marital satisfaction changes over time differently for 
couples with different age gaps.  
 
 
 
  
18
IV. Results 
A.  Pooled cross-sectional results 
 
Table 3 reports the results from estimating equation (1) separately for married men and 
women.14  Panel A reports the results for men, columns 1 and 2 allowing the slope to differ based 
on whether the husband is older or younger than his wife (change point at AgeDiff=0) and 
columns 3 and 4 allowing the slope to differ based on whether the husband is more or less than 3 
years older than his wife (change point at AgeDiff=3). 
 
The results for men in the first column are obtained only using controls for husband’s age 
and age-squared, marital duration and duration squared, and survey year.  The estimates indicate 
that for husbands with younger wives, every additional year they are older than their wife 
increases marital satisfaction on average by 0.031 points. For husbands with older wives, every 
additional year their wife is older than they are decreases marital satisfaction on average by 
0.044 points.  Both effects are statistically significant.   
The second column repeats the column one specification, but controlling for the long list 
of individual, couple and household controls described above in Section III.  Interestingly, the 
coefficient estimates are only very modestly changed by the addition of these controls, though 
the coefficient on the negative age difference variable does become statistically insignificant. 
 
The third and fourth column results, with the change point at AgeDiff=3, present a 
slightly different picture.  For men who are more than 3 years older than their wives, an 
additional year of age gap with their wife does not change their reported relationship satisfaction.  
For men who are no more than 3 years older than their wife, every additional year their wife is 
older relative to their own age reduces their relationship satisfaction by 0.054 points. 
                                                            
14 Sample sizes differ slightly for men and women because there is a relatively modest number of observations for 
which we only have either the wife’s or the husband’s marital satisfaction report. 
  
19
 
The results for women are reported in panel B.  For women with older husbands, every 
additional year their husband is older than them decreases their satisfaction by 0.032.  For 
women with younger husbands, every additional year their husband is younger than them 
increases marital satisfaction by 0.039, but the coefficient is not statistically significant.  The 
results for women in columns 1 and 2 are surprisingly symmetric with the results for men, with 
quite similar coefficient magnitudes, just of opposite sign. 
 
Columns 3 and 4 report the results for women when the slope is allowed to change at 
AgeDiff=3 instead of AgeDiff=0.  Unlike the results for men, the results for women are more 
modestly affected by this change in specification.  
 
Overall, the results in Table 3 indicate that both men and women experience greater 
marital satisfaction when married to younger partners.  These results are more consistent with the 
Coles and Francesconi (2011) assumption that both men and women receive higher utility from 
younger spouses, than with the Bergstrom and Bagnoli (1993) prediction that both men and 
women receive the greatest marital gains in older husband-younger wife pairings or with the 
Choo and Siow (2006) estimates, which suggest that net marital gains are greatest for couples in 
which the husband is just a few years older than the wife.   The symmetry of estimates for men 
and women is inconsistent with Diaz-Gimenez and Giolito (2013), who predict that men receive 
the greater disutility from marrying older partners, given the more rapidly declining fecundity of 
women.  
 
It would be premature, however, to argue that our results confirm the Coles and 
Francesconi (2011) model, as that model predicts that individuals will trade off one attribute 
(partner youth and “fitness”) with another (partner income).  If most individuals entering into 
relationships with older spouses were doing so because they were being compensated for the 
disutility of marrying an older partner by the higher income of the older spouse, we would expect 
  
20
our marital satisfaction results to be sensitive to controls for partner’s education, work hours and 
earnings.  The fact that the results are very robust to controls for partner characteristics suggests 
that this trade-off is not a primary explanation for differently-aged pairings.15 
 
Additionally, the fact that men and women both report greater marital satisfaction when 
married to younger partners seems at odds with the dating literature results that men and women 
are both more likely to prefer similarly-aged dates (Belot and Francesconi, 2013; Hitsch, 
Hortacsu and Ariely, 2010).  Our marital satisfaction results suggest that men and women may 
choose to contact similarly-aged partners in online and speed-dating settings for strategic 
reasons, taking into account the age gap preferences of the potential partners, rather than because 
they themselves prefer similarly-aged spouses. Support for this notion can be found in Antfolk et 
al. (2015) who find using data on preferred partner’s age and actual partner’s age that although 
men revealed a tendency to be sexually interested in women in their mid-twenties, they tended to 
partner up with similar-aged females in real life. The authors suggest that men’s heterosexual 
activity is likely to be constrained by female choice.  
 
B.  Interaction between age difference and marital duration 
 
Tables 4 and 5 report the results from estimating equations (2) and (3).  These 
specifications include interaction effects of the age difference variables with marital duration.   
Table 4 reports the results for husband’s marital satisfaction and Table 5 reports the results for 
wife’s marital satisfaction. In both tables, Panel A uses the same age difference variables used in 
columns 1 and 2 of Table 2, which allow the slope to change at AgeDiff=0, while Panel B reports 
                                                            
15 One possible explanation for the insensitivity of the age difference estimates in Table 3 to the addition of a large 
number of individual, couple and household controls is that different controls act to move the age difference 
coefficients in different directions, ultimately cancelling each other out.  We find, however, that is not the case.  
When we add the controls in small sets, we find the same degree of insensitivity of the age difference coefficient 
estimates. 
  
21
the results using the age difference variables used in columns 3 and 4 of Table 3, which allow the 
slope to change at AgeDiff=3.   
In Panel A of Table 4, the pooled cross-section results reported in column 1 show that the 
main effect of the positive age difference variable is positive and statistically significant.  This 
indicates that at the beginning of the marriage, men derive greater satisfaction from being 
married to younger wives.  The coefficient on marital duration is positive, implying that marital 
satisfaction increases over time.  This estimate must be interpreted with caution, however, as this 
likely reflects the fact that couples surviving to greater marital durations were happier to begin 
with.  The coefficients on the interactions of the age difference variables with duration are 
negative, though statistically insignificant.  These interaction terms indicate that relative to the 
positive main effect of marital duration, marital satisfaction increases at a slower rate for 
husbands with differently-aged spouses compared to husbands with similarly-aged spouses. 
When individual fixed-effects are added to the model in column 2, the main effects of the 
age difference variables and the main effect of marital duration can no longer be estimated.  The 
interaction of positive age difference with duration becomes more negative and statistically 
significant.  While men married to younger wives start out more satisfied, their marital 
satisfaction declines relative to men married to similarly-aged wives over the duration of the 
marriage.   The magnitude of the coefficient (-0.005), when compared to the coefficient on the 
main effect of positive age difference in column 1 (0.040), suggests that the greater marital 
satisfaction enjoyed by men with younger wives dissipates by the 8th year of marriage.  Marital 
satisfaction for men married to older wives also declines relative to men with similarly-aged 
wives, but the coefficient is not statistically significant.  
   
Table 2 indicated that differently-aged couples differ in their degree of household 
specialization compared to similarly-aged couples.   This suggests that differently-aged couples 
  
22
and similarly-aged couples may typically generate marital gains from different sources (e.g. 
household specialization versus joint investment and consumption).  It is possible that different 
sources of marital gains will differ in how well the gains persist over the duration of the 
marriage. Column 3 of Table 4 therefore adds additional interaction terms that allow for the 
possibility that more-specialized couples experience different trends in marital satisfaction than 
less-specialized couples. Specifically, marital duration is interacted with 3 time-constant 
variables: 1) A specialized couple indicator that equals 1 if the couple is in the top quartile of 
average difference in work hours or average difference in housework hours, where work hours 
and housework hours have been averaged across all survey years; 2) The very traditional gender 
attitudes indicator reported in Table 2; and 3) The maximum total number of children ever 
reported by the couple in the survey across all survey years. 
Most importantly, the results in column 3 indicate that the age difference interactions are 
insensitive to these additional controls.16  Of the three additional interaction variables, only the 
interaction of marital duration with total number of children is statistically significant.  The 
coefficient estimate indicates that couples with more children experience increases in marital 
satisfaction over the duration of the marriage relative to couples with fewer children.  This result, 
however, must be interpreted with caution, as couples that are happier and last longer will be 
more likely to have more children.  We reconsider this result in the next section. 
Panel B of Table 4 repeats the same analysis for men, but using the age-difference 
variables from columns 3 and 4 of Table 3, which allow the slope to change at an age difference 
of 3.  In Table 3, we reported that the coefficient on the positive age difference variable for men 
becomes small and insignificant when the slope change point is shifted from 0 years to 3 years.  
                                                            
16 We also find that the results are similar if we experiment with stricter definitions of specialization (for example, 
being in the top quartile for both the mean difference in work hours and mean difference in housework hours), use 
the traditional gender roles indicator instead of very traditional indicator, or add an interaction of marital duration 
with an indicator variable that both spouses are immigrants. 
  
23
In Table 4, we see that this null effect masked considerable heterogeneity by marital duration.  
These results indicate that there is a higher level of marital satisfaction for men with much 
younger wives at the beginning of the marriage, this higher level of satisfaction dissipates rather 
rapidly and is erased after 6 to 10 years of marriage.  Therefore, the null result in Table 2 
reflected the fact that we were averaging the marital satisfaction of men with younger wives 
across marriages of different marital duration.  Overall, the results in Panel B of Table 4 are very 
similar to those in Panel A. 
Table 5 uses the same specifications as Table 4, but reports the results for women.  The 
results in Panel A indicate that, compared to women married to similarly-aged husbands, marital 
satisfaction declines over time both for women married to older husbands and women married to 
younger husbands.  If we compare the coefficients on the interaction of marital duration with the 
negative age difference variable in columns 2 and 3 (-0.009) to the main effect of negative age 
difference reported in column 2 (0.049), this suggests that the initial higher-level of marital 
satisfaction experienced by women married to younger husbands is erased by the 6th year of 
marriage. 
 
The results in Panel B of Table 5 are consistent with those in Panel A, though the 
coefficient on the positive age difference interaction becomes larger in magnitude, while the 
coefficient on the negative age difference variable becomes smaller and insignificant.  
Additionally, the coefficient estimates on the additional interactions of marital duration with the 
household specialization measures are very similar to those obtained for husband’s satisfaction in 
Table 4. 
 
Overall, the results in Tables 4 and 5 suggest that couples with larger marital age gaps 
experience declines in marital satisfaction over the duration of the marriage relative to couples 
with smaller age gaps.  These declines erase the initial higher levels of satisfaction experienced 
  
24
by husbands married to younger wives and wives married to younger husbands within 6-10 years 
of marriage. 
 
C. Sample selection  
While the fixed-effects results in columns 2 and 3 of Tables 4 and 5 are estimated using 
within-marriage changes over time in marital satisfaction, some couples exit the sample due to 
divorce.  This raises the concern that even the fixed-effects estimates are biased by sample-
selection, because only surviving couples are observed at longer marital durations.  To check for 
the robustness of our results to selection out of marriage, in column 4 of Tables 4 and 5, the 
sample is restricted to only include couples who never separate during the HILDA survey years. 
We further restrict the sample to only include couples who are observed for at least 8 years. 
The coefficients on the age-difference interactions for men (Table 4, column 4) and 
women (Table 5, column 4) using this restricted sample are very similar to the results using the 
unrestricted sample (column 3 of Tables 4 and 5 respectively), suggesting that these results are 
largely unaffected by sample selection through divorce.  Interestingly, this change in sample has 
a substantial effect on the coefficient estimate for the interaction of marital duration with number 
of children.  The coefficient changes from positive and significant to negative and significant.  
This sign reversal highlights the concern raised above, that the positive coefficient in the 
unrestricted sample likely reflects the fact that happier, longer last couples have more children.  
The change in the coefficient estimate when the sample is limited to long-term couples shows 
that this sample restriction can be effective at revealing which results are driven by sample 
selection into longer marital durations. 
The self-selection process not only selects happier marriages into the sample over time, 
there is likely also to be selection into marriage with low or high age differences. Given the 
  
25
possible endogeneity of the marital age gap, it would be useful to pursue an instrumental variable 
strategy. In our application, two instruments would be required, one for AgeDiff_Pos and another 
for AgeDiff_Neg. Following Meng and Gregory (2005) who utilized the probability of marrying 
within one’s ethnic-religion-age group and sex ratios as instruments for ethnic intermarriage, we 
pursued a strategy of creating instruments using male and female sex ratios based on location 
(state) and age in the year of marriage and alternatively in the year the individual turned 20. 
These sex ratios reflect the availability of potential partners at the time of marriage and arguably 
affect the marital age gap but not marital satisfaction directly. For multiple endogenous 
variables, inspection of the standard first-stage F-statistics is no longer sufficient and the 
conditional F-statistic is required (Sanderson and Windmeijer, 2016). Unfortunately, the 
conditional F-statistic suggests that the instruments are weak for the possible endogenous 
regressors. Lacking a credible instrument, we therefore were unable to pursue this empirical 
strategy in this paper. 
 
D. Differences in marital satisfaction between husband and wife 
 
Because the HILDA survey elicits relationship satisfaction data from both members of 
the couple, it is possible to use the difference in husband’s and wife’s satisfaction as the 
dependent variable.  This requires a change in the model specification.  Previously, when the 
dependent variable was husband’s satisfaction, husband’s age and age-difference with wife were 
both included as independent variables.  Likewise, when the dependent variable was wife’s 
satisfaction, the wife’s age and age-difference with husband were both included as independent 
variables.  If husband’s and wife’s satisfaction will appear jointly on the left-hand side of the 
regression, the most obvious approach would therefore be to include husband’s age, wife’s age 
and age-difference between husband and wife as independent variables, but it is not possible to 
  
26
separately identify all three of these variables in the same regression.  Therefore, the regressions 
using difference in husband’s and wife’s satisfaction as the dependent variable will use 
husband’s age and wife’s age as independent variables. 
Table 6 builds up to this specification by first, in columns 1 and 2, separately regressing 
husband’s and wife’s satisfaction on both husband’s and wife’s ages.  The results in column 1 
indicate that wife’s age is a much stronger predictor of husband’s satisfaction than husband’s 
age.   Controlling for husband’s age, husband’s satisfaction decreases as wife’s age increases.  
The results for wives in column 2 follow a very similar pattern.  Husband’s age is a stronger 
predictor of wife’s satisfaction than wife’s age, and controlling for wife’s age, wife’s satisfaction 
decreases as husband’s age increases.  Thus, for both genders, controlling for own age, marital 
satisfaction is decreasing in partner’s age. 
 
In column 3 of Table 6, the dependent variable is husband’s satisfaction minus wife’s 
satisfaction.  It is easy to see, by looking across the first two columns, that the negative effect of 
husband’s age on wife’s satisfaction dominates its effect on husband’s satisfaction.  Therefore, 
controlling for wife’s age, an older husband is associated with a larger gap between husband’s 
and wife’s satisfaction.  Similarly, the negative effect of wife’s age on husband’s satisfaction 
dominates its effect on wife’s satisfaction.  Therefore, controlling for husband’s age, an older 
wife is associated with a smaller gap between husband’s and wife’s satisfaction by decreasing 
husband’s satisfaction relative to wife’s satisfaction.   
 
These results in Table 6 are consistent with our findings in Table 3 that men are more 
satisfied and women are less satisfied as the age gap between husband and wife increases.  To 
provide some context for the estimates in column 3, the average difference in marital satisfaction 
between husband and wife for same-aged couples in our sample is 0.065.  This is consistent with 
the descriptive analysis in Table 1 and Figures 1 and 2, which showed that husbands on average 
  
27
tend to report greater marital satisfaction than wives.  This combined with the positive 
coefficient on husband’s age in column 3 indicates that couples in which the husband is older 
than the wife will typically experience even larger gaps in marital satisfaction.  The negative 
coefficient on wife’s age indicates that couples in which the wife is older than the husband will 
typically experience smaller gaps in satisfaction between the husband and wife, with couples in 
which the wife is 4 years older predicted to roughly “break even” with a marital satisfaction gap 
close to zero.  It should be noted that couples in which the wife is 4 or more years older than the 
husband are relatively rare, only 3.6% of our sample. 
 
Column 4 includes interaction effects with marital duration, and shows that the main 
effect of husband’s age estimated in column 3 becomes more pronounced the longer the couple 
has been married.  This suggests that the positive marital satisfaction gap between husband and 
wife widens more over time for marriages with a more positive marital age gap.  This interaction 
effect, however, become statistically insignificant once individual fixed-effects are added to the 
model.   
 
 
E. Negative economic shocks and marital satisfaction 
Compared to similarly-aged couples, both men and women in differently-aged couples 
experience larger declines in marital satisfaction over the duration of the marriage.  One potential 
mechanism is that when couples experience negative shocks, differently-aged couples experience 
a greater loss in marital satisfaction than similarly-aged couples.  Put another way, similarly-
aged couples are more resilient to negative shocks than differently-aged couples.  This could be 
the case, for example, if differently-aged couples have less similar preferences, making it harder 
for them to agree on how to adjust consumption in response to a negative economic shock. 
  
28
 
We test for evidence of this mechanism in Table 7.  HILDA respondents are asked if they 
have experienced a “major worsening in financial situation (e.g. went bankrupt)” in the past year.  
26.2% of couples in our sample report at least one such negative economic shock, 11.5% report 
more at least two negative economic shocks, but only 2.5% report more than two such shocks.  
In Panel A of Table 7, we regress marital satisfaction on an indicator for reporting a worsening 
of finances, and also interact this indicator with the age-difference variables.17  The first two 
columns of Table 7 report the results for men and columns 3 and 4 report the results for women.  
Columns 1 and 3 report results without individual fixed-effects and columns 2 and 4 report 
results controlling for individual fixed-effects.   
 
The results for both men and women in Panel A indicate that differently-aged couples, 
both those with an older wife and those with an older husband, experience larger declines in 
marital satisfaction in response to a negative economic shock than similarly-aged couples.  For 
men, both of the interaction terms are negative and statistically significant.  For women, while 
both interaction terms are negative, only the interaction with the positive age difference variable 
is statistically significant.  The interaction with the negative age difference variable, while 
insignificant, is more negative in magnitude than the interaction with positive age difference. 
 
Panel B performs a similar analysis using reports of whether the couple experienced a 
health shock (“serious personal injury or illness”) in the past year.  43.8% of couples in our 
sample report at least one health shock, but only 3.6 percent report three or more.  The pooled 
estimates reported in columns 1 and 3, while statistically insignificant; also indicate that 
differently-aged couples experience larger declines in marital satisfaction than differently-aged 
                                                            
17 Controls for husband’s and wife’s age and age-squared, marital duration and duration-squared, and year fixed-
effects are included in the regressions, as well as the additional controls used in Tables 2-4, except economic 
controls (employment, earnings, household income and house value).  It would be inappropriate to include these 
controls given that they could control for much of the effect of a negative economic shock. 
  
29
couples.  The estimates in columns 2 and 4, however, once individual fixed-effects are included 
in the model, are much more mixed. 
 
V. Conclusions 
 
Our results indicate that marital satisfaction varies with the marital age gap.   
Specifically, we find that in the first 6-10 years of marriage, both men and women are most 
satisfied with younger partners and least satisfied with older partners. Our analysis of the 
interaction between marital satisfaction and marital age gap suggests that marital satisfaction 
declines more rapidly over time for both men and women in differently-aged couples compared 
to similarly-aged couples, so that after 6-10 years, the initial higher levels of satisfaction 
experienced by men married to younger wives and women married to younger husbands are 
erased.  Finally, our analysis suggests a potential mechanism for the relative declines in the 
satisfaction of differently-aged couples, which is that differently-aged couples experience larger 
declines in marital satisfaction in response to a negative economic shock compared to similarly-
aged couples. 
Our finding that, in the cross-section, both men and women are the most satisfied with 
younger partners and least satisfied with older partners, contradicts much of the existing 
literature on marital sorting and marital age gaps.  For example, our results are at odds with the 
theoretical model of Bergstrom and Bagnoli (1993) which predicts that older husband-younger 
wife pairings experience the greatest marital gains. Our results are also inconsistent with the 
Choo and Siow (2006) estimates which indicate that net marital gains are maximized by pairings 
in which the husband is a few years older than the wife.  While our result are consistent with the 
Coles and Francesconi (2011) assumption that both men and women prefer younger, “fitter” 
spouses, the insensitivity of our estimates to controls for partner’s earnings is inconsistent with 
  
30
their prediction that men and women who marry older spouses are being compensated for their 
disutility by the higher earnings of the older spouse. Finally, the symmetry of the effect of 
marital age gap on marital satisfaction between men and women is inconsistent with Diaz-
Gimenez and Giolito (2013), who predict a greater disutility from older partners for men, due to 
women’s more rapidly declining fecundity. 
Our results also call into question the preference estimates generated using data from 
online data and speed-dating events.  The fact that both men and women tend to seek dates with 
similarly-aged partners had previously been interpreted as evidence that both men and women 
prefer similarly-aged partners (Berlot and Francesconi, 2013; Hitsch, Hortacsu and Ariely, 
2010). But this interpretation is only valid if men and women do not strategically take into 
account their probability of success when choosing who to contact.  The fact that men, at least 
initially, experience high levels of marital satisfaction when married to younger wives, but 
women experience lower levels of marital satisfaction when married to older husbands, suggests 
that men may actually prefer to seek dates with younger partners, but avoid doing so because 
they know that they would only be successful with low-quality younger partners. The same 
reasoning may also explain why women avoid seeking dates with younger men.18 
While several theoretical papers in economics focus on the rationale for the formation of 
differently-aged couples, there are no theoretical predictions regarding how the marital 
satisfaction of differently-aged couples will evolve over time.  While our analysis indicates that 
differently-aged couples are more vulnerable to economic shocks, there might be other 
                                                            
18 An alternative explanation is that individuals are sufficiently forward looking when selecting spouses to recognize 
that their initial higher levels of marital satisfaction with a younger spouse will dissipate, as we find.  They might 
then prefer similarly-aged spouses, to the extent that they generate the greater net present discounted value of 
lifetime marital satisfaction.  Given it takes about 10 years for the benefit of marrying a younger spouse to dissipate, 
this would likely, however, require that an individual have both a low discount rate and a low subjective probability 
of divorce.  Additionally, to the extent that the declines in satisfaction we observe are due in part to the larger 
negative effects of unanticipated shocks, individuals may not be able to anticipate these declines adequately to prefer 
a similarly-aged spouse. 
  
31
mechanisms through which marital age gap affects the evolution of marital satisfaction over 
time.  For example, the fact that the husband and wife are in different points of their life-cycle 
may have different effects on marital satisfaction at different points in the marriage, such as 
when one partner wants to have children or when one partner wants to retire.  Future research 
might want to explore in more depth why marital satisfaction declines more quickly over time 
for both men and women in differently-aged couples as compared to similarly-aged couples.  
This future research should also more fully address the empirical implications of selection into 
marriage of couples with different age gaps, as well as the selection of married couples into 
longer marital durations. 
 
 
  
32
References 
 
Antfolk, J., B. Salo, K. Alanko, E. Bergen, J. Corander, N. Sandnabba and P. Santtila. (2015). 
Women's and Men's Sexual Preferences and Activities with Respect to the Partner's Age: 
Evidence for Female Choice. Evolution and Human Behavior, 36: 73–79. 
 
Amato, P., A. Booth, D. Johnson and S. Rogers. (2007). Alone Together: How Marriage in 
America is Changing. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
Becker, G, E. Landes and R. Michael. (1977). An Economic Analysis of Marital Instability. 
Journal of Political Economy, 85: 1141-87. 
 
Belot, M. and M. Francesconi. (2013). Dating Preferences and Meeting Opportunities in Mate 
Choice Decisions. Journal of Human Resources, vol. 48: 474–508. 
 
Bergstrom, T. and M. Bagnoli. (1993). Courtship as a Waiting Game, Journal of Political 
Economy, 101: 185–201. 
 
Cherlin. A. (1977). The Effect of Children on Marital Dissolution. Demography 14: 265–272. 
 
Choo, E., and A. Siow.  (2006). Who Marries Whom and Why, Journal of Political Economy 
114: 175-201. 
 
Coles, M. and M. Francesconi. (2011). On the Emergence of Toyboys: the Timing of Marriage 
with Aging and Uncertain Careers. International Economic Review, 52: 825–853. 
 
Diaz-Gimenez, J. and E. Giolito. (2013). Accounting for the Timing of First Marriage. 
International Economic Review, 54: 135–158. 
 
Drefahl, S. (2010). How does the Age Gap Between Partners Affect their Survival? 
Demography, 47: 313–326. 
 
Ferrer-i-Carbonell, A. and P. Frijters. (2004). How Important is Methodology for the Estimates 
of the Determinates of Happiness? The Economic Journal, 114:641-59. 
 
Fisman, R., S. Iyengar, E. Kamenica and I. Simonson. (2006). Gender Differences in Mate 
Selection: Evidence from a Speed Dating Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121: 
673-697. 
 
Glenn, N. (1998). The Course of Marital Success and Failure in Five American 10-year Marriage 
Cohorts. Journal of Marriage and Family, 60: 569–576. 
 
Glick, P. and S-L Lin. (1986). Recent Changes in Divorce and Remarriage. Journal of Marriage 
and Family, 48: 737–747. 
 
Groot, W. and H. Van Den Brink. (2002). Age and Education Differences in Marriages and their 
Effects on Life Satisfaction. Journal of Happiness Studies, 3: 153-165. 
 
  
33
Hitsch, G., A. Hortascsu and D. Ariely. (2010). Matching and Sorting in Online Dating. 
American Economic Review, 100: 130–163. 
 
Lillard, L., M. Brien and L. Waite. (1995). Premarital Cohabitation and Subsequent Marital 
Dissolution: A Matter of Self Selection. Demography, 32: 437–457. 
 
Mansour, H. and T. McKinnish. (2014). Who Marries Differently Aged Spouses? Ability, 
Education, Occupation, Earnings, and Appearance. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96: 577–
580. 
 
Meng, X. and Gregory, R.G. (2005). Intermarriage and Economic Assimilation of Immigrants, 
Journal of Labor Economics, 23: 135–176. 
 
Presser, H. (1975). Age Differences between Spouses, American Behavioral Scientist, 19: 190–
205. 
 
Rogler, L. and M. Procidano. (1989). Marital Heterogamy and Marital Quality in Puerto Rican 
Families, Journal of Marriage and Family, 51: 363–372. 
 
Sanderson, E. and F. Windmeijer (2016). A Weak Instrument F-test in Linear IV Models with 
Multiple Endogenous Variables. Journal of Econometrics, 190: 212–221. 
 
Siow, A. (1998). Differential Fecundity, Markets, and Gender Roles. Journal of Political 
Economy, 106: 334–354. 
 
Van Poppel, F., A. Liefbroer, J. Vermunt and W. Smeenk. (2001). Love, Necessity and 
Opportunity: Changing Patterns of Marital Age Homogamy in the Netherlands, 1850–1993. 
Population Studies, 55: 1–13. 
 
Van De Putte, B., F. Van Poppel, S. Vanassche et al. (2009). The Rise of Age Homogamy in 
19th Century Western Europe. Journal of Marriage and Family, 47: 1234–1253. 
 
Van Laningham, J., D. Johnson and P. Amato. (2001). Marital Happiness, Marital Duration, and 
the U-shaped Curve: Evidence from a Five-Wave Panel Study. Social Forces, 78: 1313–1341. 
 
Vera, H., D. Berardo and F. Berardo. (1985). Age Heterogamy in Marriage. Journal of Marriage 
and Family, 47: 553–566. 
 
Weiss, Y. and R. Willis. (1997). Match quality, New Information, and Marital Dissolution. 
Journal of Labor Economics, 15:S293-S329. 
 
Wood, S. (2006). Low-rank Scale-invariant Tensor Product Smooths for Generalized Additive 
Mixed Models. Biometrics, 62: 1025–1036. 
 
Zhang, H., P. Ho and P. Yip. (2012). Does Similarity Breed Marital and Sexual Satisfaction? 
Journal of Sex Research, 49: 583–593. 
 
 
  
34
 
Figure 1: Husband’s marital satisfaction by marital duration and marital age gap, conditional on 
husband’s age and age-squared 
 
  
35
 
Figure 2: Wife’s marital satisfaction by marital duration and marital age gap, conditional on 
wife’s age and age-squared 
 
  
36
Table 1: Within-Couple Age Difference and Marital Satisfaction, Descriptive Statistics 
Husband’s Age 
–Wife’s Age 
N 
% 
Mean  
Husband’s 
Satisfaction 
Mean 
Wife’s 
Satisfaction 
 
+7 or more 
 
299 
 
8.9 
 
8.46 
 
8.28 
 
+4 to 6 
 
608 
 
18.0 
 
8.48 
 
8.28 
 
+1 to 3 
 
1,375 
 
40.8 
 
8.54 
 
8.35 
 
0 
 
499 
 
14.8 
 
8.43 
 
8.32 
 
-1 to -3 
 
469 
 
13.9 
 
8.39 
 
8.34 
  
-4 to -6 
 
89 
 
2.6 
 
8.38 
 
8.36 
 
-7 or more 
 
35 
 
1.0 
 
7.81 
 
8.25 
Notes: Sample of couples observed in a first marriage in HILDA 2001-2013 data where husband and wife are both 
in their first marriage and ages 20-55. There are 3,374 couples in our sample and 18,987 couple-years. Each couple 
receives equal weight in the means reported in columns 3 and 4, regardless of the number of years of data. 
 
 
  
37
Table 2: Within-Couple Age Difference and Couple Characteristics 
 
 
Husband’s Age-Wife’s Age 
>3 
0-3 
<0 
A. Age and Age of Marriage  
 
Husband’s Age 
 
 
43.3 (7.3) 
 
 
40.5 (8.5) 
 
 
37.9 (8.0) 
Wife’s Age 
37.2 (7.4) 
39.1 (8.5) 
40.3 (7.9) 
Husband’s Age of Marriage 
29.8 (5.3) 
25.3 (3.9) 
25.6 (4.3) 
Wife’s Age of Marriage 
23.7 (4.4) 
23.9 (3.0) 
28.0 (4.9) 
 
B. Labor Market Characteristics 
 
Husband Employed 
 
 
 
92.6% 
 
 
 
94.9% 
 
 
 
95.0% 
Wife Employed 
70.9% 
76.7% 
70.5% 
Husband’s Weekly Earningsa 
1444.8 (873.7) 
1556.0 (970.2) 
1548.7 (944.4) 
Wife’s Weekly Earningsa 
844.3 (554.9) 
855.0 (546.7) 
852.9  (608.0) 
 
C. Household Specialization 
 
Husband’s-Wife’s Weekly Hours 
of Work 
 
 
 
 
21.0 (23.2) 
 
 
 
 
20.7 (22.5) 
 
 
 
 
23.1 (23.3) 
Husband’s-Wife’s Weekly Hours 
of Housework 
 
-13.7 (11.8) 
 
-12.7 (11.3) 
 
-13.8 (10.5) 
Traditional Gender Attitudes 
54.1% 
47.7% 
51.9% 
Very Traditional Gender Attitudesb 
31.6% 
24.0% 
27.4% 
Number of Children Age 0-17 
1.58 (1.25) 
1.43 (1.19) 
1.36 (1.12) 
Number of Children Age 0-6 
0.626 (0.861) 
0.551 (0.838) 
0.626 (0.866) 
 
D. Similarity 
 
Both have University Degrees 
 
 
 
10.9% 
 
 
 
11.9% 
 
 
 
9.9% 
Both have High School Degrees 
68.0% 
67.6% 
61.9% 
Both are Immigrants 
20.1% 
10.2% 
12.6% 
 
 
 
 
N 
4,968 
10,454 
3,387 
a Sample restricted to observations with positive earnings. 
b Construction of the gender norms variable is described in section III.B of the paper.   
Notes: Sample as described in Table 1. 
 
 
  
38
Table 3: Marital Satisfaction and Within-Couple Age Difference, Pooled Cross-Sectional Results 
 
Slope change 
point at 
AgeDiff=0 
Slope change 
point at 
AgeDiff=0 
Slope change 
Point at  
AgeDiff=3 
Slope Change 
Point at 
AgeDiff=3 
A. Men 
Age Difference, Positive 
 
0.031** 
(0.015) 
 
0.031** 
(0.016) 
 
-0.000 
(0.021) 
 
0.003 
(0.022) 
Age Difference, Negative 
-0.044* 
(0.026) 
-0.041 
(0.026) 
-0.058*** 
(0.015) 
-0.054*** 
(0.015) 
Male Age 
-0.030 
(0.032) 
-0.009 
(0.031) 
-0.034 
(0.032) 
-0.03 
(0.032) 
Male Age Squared 
-0.0002 
(0.0004) 
-0.0004 
(0.0004) 
-0.0001 
(0.0004) 
-0.0003 
(0.0004) 
Controls for Marital 
Duration and Year? 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y  
Additional Controls? 
N 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
18,233 
18,233 
18,233 
18,233 
B. Women 
Age Difference, Positive 
 
-0.032*** 
(0.012) 
 
-0.028** 
(0.012) 
 
-0.038** 
(0.018) 
 
-0.035** 
(0.018) 
Age Difference, Negative 
0.039 
(0.029) 
0.044 
(0.030) 
0.027 
(0.017) 
0.028 
(0.017) 
Female Age 
-0.010 
(0.036) 
0.017 
(0.037) 
-0.011 
(0.036) 
0.017 
(0.037) 
Female Age Squared 
-0.0005 
(0.0005) 
-0.0009* 
(0.0005) 
-0.0005 
(0.0005) 
-0.0009* 
(0.0005) 
Controls for Marital 
Duration and Year? 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y  
Additional Controls? 
N 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
18,499 
18,499 
18,499 
18,499 
Notes: Sample described in Table 1. Table reports estimates from equation (1). In columns 1 and 2, Age Difference, 
Positive is number of years the husband is older than the wife (=0 if wife is older). Age Difference, Negative is the 
number of years the wife is older than the husband (=0 if husband is older). In Columns 3 and 4 Age Difference, 
Positive is the number of years the husband is older than the wife minus 3 (=0 if husband is less than 3 years older) 
and Age Difference, Negative is the number of years the wife is older than the husband plus 3 (=0 if husband is least 
3 years older)  All regressions include controls for marital duration, marital duration squared and year of survey 
fixed-effects. Additional controls include individual and spouse characteristics: husband’s and wife’s education, 
employment status, earnings, indigenous background, immigration status, chronic health/disability; couple 
characteristics: both have university degrees, both have high school diplomas, both are immigrants, difference in 
work hours (and husband’s work hours), difference in housework hours (and husband’s housework hours), 
indicators for traditional gender attitudes and very traditional gender attitudes; and household characteristics: 
number of children, number of children under 7, household income, homeownership indicator, house value, city and 
inner-region residence, local area unemployment, and state fixed-effects. Standard errors are clustered at the 
individual level. *pvalue<0.1 ** pvalue<0.05 *** pvalue<0.01. 
 
 
  
39
Table 4: Interaction Effects of Age Difference and Marital Duration on Marital Satisfaction, Men 
 
Pooled 
Fixed-
Effects 
Additional  
Interactions 
Never-Separated 
Sample 
A. Men 
Age Difference, Positive 
 
0.040** 
(0.020) 
 
 
 
Age Difference, Negative  
  
-0.003 
(0.034) 
 
 
 
Marital Duration 
0.020** 
(0.008) 
 
 
 
Age Difference, Positive  
     ×Marital Duration 
-0.001 
(0.001) 
-0.005*** 
(0.002) 
-0.005*** 
(0.002) 
-0.004** 
(0.002) 
Age Difference, Negative 
     ×Marital Duration 
-0.005 
(0.003) 
-0.004 
(0.004) 
-0.004 
(0.004) 
-0.003 
(0.004) 
Specialized Couple 
      × Marital Duration 
 
 
0.003 
(0.009) 
0.006 
(0.010) 
Very Traditional Gender Attitudes 
      × Marital Duration 
 
 
-0.012 
(0.009) 
-0.009 
(0.010) 
Total Children 
      × Marital Duration 
 
 
0.195*** 
(0.033) 
-0.058*** 
(0.022) 
 N 
18,233 
18,233 
18,233 
10,704 
B. Men, Slope Change at 3 
Age Difference, Positive 
 
 
0.057* 
(0.020) 
 
 
 
Age Difference, Negative  
-0.020 
(0.029) 
 
 
 
Marital Duration 
0.022** 
(0.009) 
 
 
 
Age Difference, Positive  
     ×Marital Duration 
-0.006*** 
(0.002) 
-0.010*** 
(0.003) 
-0.010*** 
(0.002) 
-0.009** 
(0.002) 
Age Difference, Negative 
     ×Marital Duration 
-0.003** 
(0.002) 
-0.002 
(0.002) 
-0.002 
(0.002) 
-0.002 
(0.002) 
Specialized Couple 
     × Marital Duration 
 
 
0.003 
(0.009) 
0.006 
(0.010) 
Very Traditional Gender Attitudes 
     × Marital Duration 
 
 
-0.012 
(0.009) 
-0.009 
(0.010) 
Total Children 
     × Marital Duration 
 
 
0.182*** 
(0.031) 
-0.060** 
(0.023) 
N 
18,233 
18,233 
18,233 
10,704 
Notes: Regressions include full set of controls used in Table 2. Columns 1 reports estimates from equation (2). Age 
Difference, Positive is the number of years the husband is older than the wife (=0 if wife is older). Age Difference, 
Negative is the number of years the wife is older than the husband (=0 if husband is older). Columns 2 adds individual 
fixed-effects to the specification in column 1. Columns 3 adds interactions of marital duration with measures of couple 
specialization, attitudes about gender roles and number of children. Column 4 restricts the sample to couples who are 
observed for at least 8 years in the HILDA data and for whom separation is never observed. Standard errors are 
clustered at the individual level. *pvalue<0.1 ** pvalue<0.05 *** pvalue<0.01. 
 
  
40
Table 5: Interaction Effects of Age Difference and Marital Duration on Marital Satisfaction, 
Women 
 
Pooled 
Fixed-
Effects 
Additional  
Interactions 
Never-Separated 
Sample 
A. Women 
Age Difference, Positive 
 
-0.024 
(0.017) 
 
 
 
Age Difference, Negative  
  
0.049 
(0.036) 
 
 
 
Marital Duration 
0.017* 
(0.008) 
 
 
 
Age Difference, Positive 
      ×Marital Duration 
-0.000 
(0.001) 
-0.004** 
(0.002) 
-0.004* 
(0.002) 
-0.004** 
(0.002) 
Age Difference, Negative 
      ×Marital Duration 
-0.001 
(0.003) 
-0.009** 
(0.004) 
-0.009** 
(0.004) 
-0.008* 
(0.004) 
Specialized Couple 
       × Marital Duration 
 
 
-0.000 
(0.010) 
0.000 
(0.010) 
Very Traditional Gender Attitudes 
        × Marital Duration 
 
 
-0.013 
(0.010) 
-0.014 
(0.010) 
Total Children 
        × Marital Duration 
 
 
0.260*** 
(0.035) 
-0.076*** 
(0.024) 
 N 
18,499 
18,499 
18,499 
10,866 
B. Women, Slope Change at 3 
Age Difference, Positive 
 
 
-0.023 
(0.020) 
 
 
 
Age Difference, Negative  
0.032 
(0.029) 
 
 
 
Marital Duration 
0.016* 
(0.009) 
 
 
 
Age Difference, Positive  
     ×Marital Duration 
-0.001 
(0.002) 
-0.007** 
(0.003) 
-0.007** 
(0.003) 
-0.007** 
(0.003) 
Age Difference, Negative 
     ×Marital Duration 
-0.001 
(0.002) 
-0.004 
(0.003) 
-0.004 
(0.003) 
-0.003 
(0.003) 
Specialized Couple 
     × Marital Duration 
 
 
0.000 
(0.010) 
0.001 
(0.010) 
Very Traditional Gender Attitudes 
     × Marital Duration 
 
 
-0.013 
(0.010) 
-0.015 
(0.010) 
Total Children 
     × Marital Duration 
 
 
0.242*** 
(0.033) 
-0.076*** 
(0.023) 
N 
18,499 
18,499 
18,499 
10,866 
Notes: Table is the same as described in notes of Table 4, with the dependent variable now wife’s marital satisfaction, 
instead of husband’s. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *pvalue<0.1 ** pvalue<0.05 *** 
pvalue<0.01. 
 
  
41
Table 6: Difference in Husband’s and Wife’s Marital Satisfaction 
 
 Husband’s 
Satisfaction 
Wife’s  
Satisfaction 
Husband’s – 
Wife’s 
Satisfaction 
Husband’s –
Wife’s 
Satisfaction 
Husband’s –
Wife’s Satisf., 
Fixed-Effects 
Husband’s Age 
-0.010 
(0.010) 
-0.030*** 
(0.010) 
0.018** 
(0.008) 
-0.0026 
(0.0112) 
 
 
Wife’s Age 
-0.033*** 
(0.011) 
-0.018* 
(0.011) 
-0.017* 
(0.009) 
 0.0003 
(0.0119) 
 
 
Husband’s Age 
×Duration 
 
 
 
 
0.0020** 
(0.0009) 
0.0008 
(0.0013) 
Wife’s Age 
×Duration 
 
 
 
 
-0.0014 
(0.0009) 
-0.0008 
(0.0013) 
Duration 
 
 
 
 
-0.0266 
(0.0185) 
 
 
N 
 
18,233 
 
18,499 
 
17,923 
  
17,923 
 
17,923 
 
Notes: Columns 1 and 2 estimate versions of equation (1) in which the age-difference and age variables are replaced 
with husband’s age and wife’s age.  Column 3 uses the difference in husband’s and wife’s satisfaction as the dependent 
variable.  Column 4 adds interactions of the age variables with marital duration.  Column 5 adds couple fixed-effects. 
All regressions include the full set of controls listed in the notes of Table 2.  Standard errors are clustered at the couple-
level. *pvalue<0.1 ** pvalue<0.05 *** pvalue<0.01. 
 
  
42
 
Table 7: Effects of a Negative Shocks on Marital Satisfaction for Differently-Aged Couples vs 
Similarly-Aged Couples  
 
Men 
 
Women 
 
Pooled 
Individual 
Fixed-Effects 
Pooled 
Individual 
Fixed-Effects 
A. Economic Shock 
 
Negative Economic Shock 
 
 
-0.290* 
(0.181)  
 
 
0.097  
(0.102) 
 
 
-0.284 
(0.193) 
 
 
-0.066 
(0.107) 
Negative Economic Shock×    
     Age Difference, Positive 
-0.081** 
(0.041) 
-0.081** 
(0.024) 
-0.066 
(0.047) 
-0.055** 
(0.025) 
Negative Economic Shock×  
    Age Difference, Negative    
-0.218 
(0.148) 
-0.223*** 
(0.075) 
-0.066 
(0.106) 
-0.087 
(0.078) 
 
N 
 
18,233 
 
18,233 
 
18,499 
 
18,499 
 
B. Health Shock 
 
Negative Health Shock 
 
 
 
 
-0.032 
(0.087)  
 
 
 
-0.040 
(0.090) 
 
 
 
-0.051 
(0.090) 
 
 
 
0.029 
(0.107) 
Negative Health Shock×    
     Age Difference, Positive 
-0.021 
(0.025) 
0.018 
(0.023) 
-0.032 
(0.026) 
-0.023* 
(0.025) 
Negative Health Shock×  
    Age Difference, Negative    
-0.069 
(0.063) 
-0.062 
(0.051) 
-0.036 
(0.061) 
0.033 
(0.078) 
 
N 
 
18,233 
 
18,233 
 
18,499 
 
18,499 
Notes: Negative Economic Shock is an indicator for whether there is a self-reported “major worsening of finances” in 
the past year.  Negative Health Shock is an indicator for whether there is a self-reported major illness or injury.  Age 
Difference, Positive is the number of years the husband is older than the wife (=0 if wife is older). Age Difference, 
Negative is the number of years the wife is older than the husband (=0 if husband is older). All regressions control for 
husband’s and wife’s age and age-squared, duration and duration-squared, year fixed-effects, and the additional 
controls listed in the notes of Table 2 except economic controls (employment, earnings, work hours, household 
income and household value).  Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *pvalue<0.1 ** pvalue<0.05 *** 
pvalue<0.01. 
 
 
