 Population dynamics of normal human blood inferred from 
somatic mutations
Henry Lee-Six1, Nina Friesgaard Øbro2, Mairi S. Shepherd2, Sebastian Grossmann1, Kevin 
Dawson1, Miriam Belmonte2, Robert J. Osborne1, Brian J. P. Huntly2, Inigo Martincorena1, 
Elizabeth Anderson1, Laura O’Neill1, Michael R. Stratton1, Elisa Laurenti2, Anthony R. 
Green2,§, David G. Kent2,§, and Peter J. Campbell1,§
1Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, CB10 1SA, UK
2Wellcome-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute and Department of Haematology, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK
Abstract
Haematopoietic stem cells drive blood production, but their population size and lifetime dynamics 
have not been directly quantified in humans. We identified 129,582 spontaneous, genome-wide 
somatic mutations in 140 single-cell–derived haematopoietic stem and progenitor colonies from a 
normal 59 year-old man and applied population genetics approaches to reconstruct clonal 
dynamics. Cell divisions from early embryogenesis were evident in the phylogenetic tree, with all 
blood deriving from a common ancestor that preceded gastrulation. Stem cell population size grew 
steadily in early life, reaching a stable plateau by adolescence. We estimate numbers of 
haematopoietic stem cells actively making white blood cells at any one time to be in the range 
50,000-200,000. We observed adult haematopoietic stem cell clones that generate multilineage 
output, including granulocytes and B lymphocytes. Harnessing naturally occurring mutations to 
report an organ’s clonal architecture provides high-resolution reconstruction of somatic cell 
dynamics in humans.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
§ Joint corresponding authors: Dr Peter J. Campbell, Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, 
United Kingdom. Telephone: +44 (0) 1223 834244. pc8@sanger.ac.uk; Dr David G. Kent, WT/MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Hills Rd, Cambridge CB2 0AH, United Kingdom. Tel: +44 (0) 1223 762130. dgk23@cam.ac.uk; Prof. Tony 
R. Green, Cambridge Institute of Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Rd, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom. Tel: 
+44 (0) 1223 336820. arg1000@cam.ac.uk. 
Author Contributions
PJC, DGK, ARG and HLS designed the experiment. BJPH performed the bone marrow aspirate. DGK, NFO, MSS and MB cultured 
HSPCs, with advice and reagents from EL, and isolated cells from subsequent blood draws. EA and LO’N oversaw DNA extraction 
and library preparation. HLS performed most of the data curation and statistical analysis. SG helped call mutations and construct the 
phylogeny. IM tested for positive selection. MRS oversaw mutational signatures analysis. RO and PJC separated signal from noise in 
targeted sequencing analysis. KD helped design the approximate Bayesian computation along with PJC and HLS and co-wrote the 
supplementary results on inference of population size. HLS, PJC, DGK and ARG wrote the manuscript, with contributions from all 
the authors. PJC, DGK and ARG jointly supervised the project.
Author Information
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Correspondence and request for materials should be 
addressed to pc8@sanger.ac.uk.
The authors declare no competing interests.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2018 September ; 561(7724): 473–478. doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0497-0.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Introduction
Human haematopoiesis balances the production and destruction of hundreds of billions of 
specialised blood cells every day. This process relies upon a multi-layered hierarchy of 
progressively more differentiated and more populous cells, at the top of which sits the pool 
of stem cells. First described functionally in the 1960s1,2, haematopoietic stem cells are 
defined by their ability to establish long-term, stable contributions to multiple lineages of 
blood cells, including myeloid, T and B cells. The numbers and dynamics of stem cells in 
homeostatic human haematopoiesis remain poorly defined, despite their routine use in 
therapeutic transplantation for haematological disease.
Historical studies in animals quantified haematopoiesis either by labelling cells in vitro and 
transplanting them into a recipient animal3–6 or by modelling X chromosome inactivation 
patterns7. More recently, studies tracking the clonal contributions of cells labelled directly in 
vivo8–10 have suggested that long-term homeostatic haematopoiesis is driven by many 
thousands of cells that do not function as classical stem cells in transplantation assays11.
Approaches to measuring stem cell dynamics and potential in humans have been less direct. 
Studies of X-chromosome inactivation patterns in haematological malignancies 
demonstrated their clonal origin in stem cells that had multilineage potential12,13. In 
patients receiving gene therapy, hundreds to thousands of clones contribute to lymphoid and 
myeloid lineages more than a year after transplantation14,15. Studies of unperturbed 
haematopoiesis in humans have relied on ex vivo cellular assays16 or modelling of telomere 
lengths17 and X chromosome inactivation patterns18. These analyses have suggested that 
numbers of stem cells increase through childhood and adolescence, reaching a plateau in 
adulthood, with some shift in lineage potential.
Using spontaneous somatic mutations to reconstruct human 
haematopoiesis
Mutations accumulate in somatic cells throughout life19,20. A mutation arising in a cell is 
inherited by its descendant cells, a feature that has enabled reconstruction of clonal 
structures in cancer21 and normal development22,23. In normal blood stem cells, the burden 
of somatic mutations increases linearly with age20, suggesting that they represent an 
accurate molecular clock.
We hypothesised that spontaneous somatic mutations could act as clonal markers enabling 
quantification of the number, activity and longevity of human blood stem cells during 
normal haematopoiesis. Analogous to capture-recapture experiments in Ecology, our design 
followed two phases (Figure 1). First, in the ‘capture’ phase, we isolated single 
haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells24 from a bone marrow aspirate and peripheral 
blood draw from a 59 year-old male with normal blood counts and no past history of blood 
disorders (Extended Figure 1). These were expanded in single cell liquid cultures or colony-
forming cell (CFC) assays. We performed whole genome sequencing on 198 colonies, each 
to ~15x depth (Table S1), and identified somatic mutations. Second, in the ‘recapture’ phase, 
we isolated bulk populations of mature peripheral blood cells from the same individual: 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 granulocytes at three timepoints after the bone marrow aspirate, together with B and T 
lymphocytes, both from one timepoint. We performed deep targeted sequencing on these 
bulk populations for mutations discovered in the capture phase.
Bringing together stem cell biology and population genetics creates a risk of lexical 
confusion. We reserve the term ‘clone’ for the in vivo descendants of a single ancestral cell; 
and use ‘colony’ to describe the cells derived in vitro from a single stem or progenitor cell. 
We use ‘lineage’ to denote a specific functional group of blood cells, such as granulocytes; 
and ‘line-of-descent’ for the set of cells that are direct antecedents/descendants of the cell in 
question (glossary in Technical Supplement).
Mutation burden and spectrum
140 colonies had variant allele fractions (VAFs) distributed around 50%, confirming they did 
in fact derive from a single cell, but 58 of the colonies had lower allele fractions (Extended 
Figure 2, Table S1), most likely due to colonies growing into each other in methylcellulose. 
These polyclonal colonies were excluded from further analyses. It proved more difficult to 
derive clonal colonies from some progenitor types than others, such that our final set of 140 
colonies was composed of 89 immunophenotypic haematopoietic stem cells, 38 
megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitors, eight granulocyte-macrophage progenitors, and five 
common myeloid progenitors.
We assessed whether variants were acquired during in vitro expansion. Any mutation on the 
X chromosome in the original colony-forming cell should be present at allele fractions near 
100%. Reassuringly, the mean percentage of X chromosome mutations found on <50% 
reads was only 5.6% per colony, suggesting that variants acquired in vitro were infrequent.
Mutation burden was consistent across colonies, with a mean of 1023 substitutions (range, 
815-1210) and 20 small insertion/deletion events (range 2-37) (Extended Figure 3). No 
somatically acquired structural variants were identified. The spectrum of mutations was 
dominated by C>T and T>C transitions, as described in myeloid cancers20 and age-related 
clonal haematopoiesis25 (Extended Figure 4).
Driver mutations in myeloid cancer genes occur in some older individuals with normal blood 
counts26–28. In our subject’s colonies, we found no known myeloid driver mutations. 
Furthermore, the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous mutations, a metric that can 
detect positive or negative clonal selection across genes29, was exactly that expected for the 
background mutation spectrum (dN/dS 1.001; CI95% 0.889-1.127; with dN/dS=1 
representing neutrality). Finally, driver mutation hotspots were included in the bait-set for 
the recapture phase (Table S2), and no such drivers were detected. Thus, haematopoietic 
cells in this subject have undergone selectively neutral accumulation of somatic mutations.
Somatic mutations acquired during embryonic development
To explore clonal relationships among the 140 colonies, we constructed a phylogenetic tree 
(Figure 2; Extended Figures 5-6). Of the 129,582 somatic substitutions placed on the tree, 
8,676 were seen in more than one colony. At the top of the tree, two mutations completely 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 partitioned the colonies, one found in 52 and the other in 88 colonies, with every colony 
possessing one or other mutation, and no colony possessing both (Figure 2B). These same 
two mutations were found in a buccal swab taken from the patient, and at clonal 
contributions that suggested the same two thirds to one third split. This indicates that the 
most recent common ancestor of all blood cells in this subject was also the most recent 
common ancestor of buccal epithelial cells. Since blood derives from mesoderm and buccal 
epithelium from ectoderm, this common ancestor must have predated gastrulation. It is 
likely that this most recent common ancestor of both blood and buccal epithelium was in fact 
the fertilised egg: the two observed mutations would have occurred during its first cell 
division, one to each daughter cell. These two daughter cells then contributed unequally to 
adult somatic tissues, as previously observed22,30,31.
Beneath the first division, a cascade of further mutations provides ever finer partitions of the 
colonies (Figure 2B), consistent with data in mice that adult haematopoiesis is a mosaic of 
embryonic clones32. By 10 mutations of molecular time, 33 lines-of-descent were created, 
which required at least 5 generations of cell doublings. Embryonic lineages that are lost or 
unobserved would imply more than 5 generations, so average mutation rates in early 
embryogenesis could be ~2/division at most. Of the 32 cell divisions by 10 mutations in 
molecular time, at least 10 were associated with no mutations (Figure 2C), noting that 
unobserved embryonic lineages can convert polytomies (multi-way splits) to dichotomies. 
This provides an estimate of mutation rate of 1.2/division (Methods). Thus, mutation rates in 
embryonic cells that ultimately contribute to somatogenesis fall in the range 1-2 per cell 
division, similar to estimates from human neural progenitor clones23 and de novo germline 
mutations33.
Clonal relationships of haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
Clonal relationships among the 140 colonies were evident beyond the early embryonic 
mutations as a series of branch-points scattered down the vertical axis of the phylogenetic 
tree (Figure 2A). Mutations shared between two colonies imply they derive from a common 
ancestor, with the ratio of shared to unique mutations a measure of the age at which the two 
lines-of-descent split. Long lines-of-descent with few branches implies that we have 
sequenced only a small fraction of the stem cell pool.
The distribution of different cell types across the tree provides information on population 
stratification among haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Stem cells from the marrow 
aspirate, taken from the right iliac crest, were no more clustered together on the phylogenetic 
tree than those derived from peripheral blood (p=0.14; Figure 2; Extended Figure 3A). This 
suggests that stem cells recirculate and redistribute sufficiently often that the population in 
the iliac crest is a random sample of the whole-body stem cell pool. Similarly, progenitors 
were not more clustered on the tree than stem cells (p=0.12; Extended Figure 3B-C), 
suggesting the progenitors we sequenced are not drawn from a more restricted set of historic 
lines-of-descent than the stem cells.
The interspersed distribution of stem and progenitor cells on the tree and relative paucity of 
recent branch-points implies that the phylogeny is dominated by events that occurred in stem 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 cells. As a progenitor is short-lived, only the most recent mutations in its line-of-descent will 
have occurred while it was a progenitor. Therefore, a branch-point hundreds of mutations 
ago represents an ancient symmetrical division in which one stem cell gave rise to two stem 
cells, since descendants of both daughters persist decades later as haematopoietic cells. In 
traditional experimental models, long-term self-renewal of haematopoietic stem cells is 
established prospectively (through serial transplantation assays) whereas here we infer it 
retrospectively, through the decades-long persistence of lines-of-descent from an ancestral 
stem cell division. For the analyses that follow, therefore, which rely on mutations 
distributed across the tree, we need not distinguish whether the colony sequenced derived 
from a stem or progenitor cell.
Lifetime trajectory of stem cell population size
The relative timings of branch-points, or more formally ‘coalescences’, in the phylogenetic 
tree inform on historical population dynamics. Briefly, under neutral drift, the rate at which 
lines-of-descent coalesce is related to both the effective population size and the generation 
time (here, time between symmetric stem cell divisions). Methods to infer historic 
population dynamics from coalescences34 were applied to the tree built from our subject’s 
blood cells. This revealed a rapid population expansion of haematopoietic stem cells during 
early life, reaching a relatively stable plateau by late childhood/early adolescence (Figure 3), 
consistent with previous inferences17,18. The stable population size during adulthood 
suggests that symmetric self-renewal divisions, where one stem cell divides into two stem 
cells, are balanced by stem cell death, senescence and symmetric divisions into committed 
progenitors.
The same broad coalescence structure of the phylogenetic tree that arises with a given 
population size and number of generations can be generated by a population ten times larger 
going through ten times as many generations. Therefore, from the structure of the tree alone, 
without knowing how many generations the cells have been through, we cannot directly 
estimate the absolute number of stem cells. We therefore performed deep sequencing of 
blood cells in the ‘recapture’ phase of our study.
Estimates of stem cell number and generation time from deep sequencing
We designed a hybridisation bait-set for 7116 mutations identified in the colonies and 
assigned to the phylogenetic tree, choosing 6317 mutations shared by more than one colony 
and 799 unique to single colonies. We performed targeted sequencing of three peripheral 
blood granulocyte samples taken 4 months (mean coverage 776x), 9 months (mean coverage 
4669x), and 14 months (mean coverage 268x) after the bone marrow aspirate, together with 
control cord blood from two individuals (mean coverage 5305x) (Table S3). We used 
Bayesian generalised linear mixed models to estimate the fraction of reads derived from true 
mutant alleles versus sequencing errors. Reassuringly, estimated allele fractions were stable 
across the three time-points and steadily decreased down individual lines-of-descent 
(Extended Figure 8).
Lee-Six et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Three observations emerge (Figure 4). First, the majority of mutations in the bait-set were 
not detectable (horizontal grey ticks in Figure 4). This suggests that the number of active 
stem cells in our subject must be much higher than a few thousand, since our detection 
threshold was typically down to ~1/2000. Second, most branches at the top of the 
phylogenetic tree have mutations that can be detected in granulocytes. This implies that 
many stem cells not closely related to each other actively contribute to haematopoiesis in the 
investigated time period. If only one or a few stem cells produce granulocytes, replaced over 
time as they exhaust, we would expect only the branches of the currently active stem cells to 
be detectable in granulocytes. Third, some branches contribute more to haematopoiesis than 
most, evidenced as a handful of branches with mutations detectable much further down the 
tree than average (although still representing a relatively small proportion: <0.6% of 
granulocytes). Assuming that no undiscovered driver mutations are present, this would be a 
consequence of genetic drift.
We developed an approximate Bayesian computation framework to quantify key properties 
of the stem cell compartment (Methods; Technical Supplement). Briefly, we generated 
200,000 simulations of neutral haematopoiesis in adulthood (Figure 5), varying the number 
of stem cells and the time between successive stem cell renewal divisions. Assumptions 
were: all active stem cells have equal probability of dividing per unit time; size of this pool 
is constant over adulthood; all active stem cells produce similar numbers of granulocytes; 
and stem cells accumulate somatic mutations stochastically. We then recapitulated our 
experimental design on each simulation in silico. Using informative summary statistics, we 
compared the properties of the simulations to the observed data, looking for the 
combinations of stem cell numbers and symmetrical cell division rate that could most 
closely replicate the observed data.
Under our model, the 90% credibility interval for the number of stem cells actively 
contributing to circulating granulocytes at one time was 44,000-215,000 (Figure 5; Extended 
Figure 7). Furthermore, the estimated time between successive self-renewal stem cell 
divisions is most credibly in the range of 2-20 months. Simulations within this range 
(Extended Figure 7n) most closely resembled our observed data (Extended figure 7m), 
whereas simulations from outside the plausible ridge showed marked differences (Extended 
Figure 7o-p). We note the uncertainties in these estimates, which could be improved by 
investigating more subjects; more stratified sampling (cells from spleen, thymus and other 
regions of bone marrow); sequencing more colonies in the ‘capture’ phase (we now know 
that our 140 colonies represent only one thousandth of the active stem cell pool); and 
increasing the sensitivity of mutation detection in the ‘recapture’ phase.
Clonal contributions to granulocytes and lymphocytes
One of the defining features of a stem cell is its contribution to multiple cell types. 
Alongside granulocytes, we deep-sequenced samples of peripheral blood B and T 
lymphocytes (Figure 6, Extended Figure 9). Most of the early mutations, at the top of the 
phylogenetic tree, were detectable in all cell types investigated (black branches in Figure 6), 
implying a shared common ancestry of lymphocytes and granulocytes during development. 
Beyond 100 mutations in molecular time, when population size reached a plateau (Figure 3), 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 464 mutations distributed across 39 branches could be detected, of which 217 on 12 
branches were detected in more than one cell type.
Some adult stem cell clones contributed to detectable numbers of granulocytes and B 
lymphocytes, but their mutations were not detectable in T lymphocytes (Extended Figure 9b-
f). We had equivalent sequencing coverage in B and T lymphocytes, so the discrepancy is 
not technical. This finding implies that descendants of these particular stem cell lines 
contribute a higher fraction of currently produced granulocytes and B cells than T cells. Due 
to the low fraction of stem cells sequenced in the ‘capture’ phase, we cannot exclude the 
existence of stem cell lines that currently contribute to all three cell types, as found in age-
related clonal haematopoiesis35.
Conclusions
The mosaic contribution of many embryonic clones to haematopoiesis and the large number 
of clones active in adulthood accords well with lineage-marking studies in mice8,9,32. We 
estimate that the number of stem cells contributing to unperturbed human haematopoiesis at 
any given time is most likely in the hundreds of thousands and the time between symmetric 
stem cell divisions to fall in the range of 2-20 months, very similar to previous inferences18.
We demonstrate the existence of adult human stem cell clones with multilineage output in 
vivo. Branches with mutations detectable in granulocytes and B lymphocytes exist beyond 
300 mutations of molecular time, which would represent our subject’s late teens or early 
twenties. The similar allele fractions in B cells and granulocytes suggest on-going 
contribution of these stem cell lines to the two cell types. The key principle here is that 
under neutral dynamics, the drift of these branches to an appreciable proportion of 
granulopoiesis would have been gradual. If myeloid and B lymphocyte lineages separated 
early in life and underwent genetic drift independently, then we would not expect the exact 
same lines-of-descent to become enriched in both populations. Instead, the parsimonious 
explanation is that the pool of haematopoietic stem cells contributes to myeloid and B 
lymphocyte populations throughout life, such that the same genetic drift emerges in both 
lineages.
In contrast, we do not observe shared mutations between granulocytes and T lymphocytes 
much beyond 100 mutations of molecular time. Several possible explanations for this 
include a deeper separation between myeloid and T cell production36 than between myeloid 
and B cells; a large and long-lived pool of T lymphocytes that dilute any on-going 
contribution to T lymphopoiesis from recent stem cells; or a lower number of stem cells 
actively contributing to T lymphopoiesis, requiring more than the 140 colonies sequenced 
here to uncover their contribution.
The 40 trillion cells in the human body all trace their ancestry back through a series of cell 
divisions to the fertilised egg. All of these cells can be visualised on a single phylogenetic 
tree with the fertilised egg at its root. Establishing the exact position of any given cell on this 
tree requires a unique and permanent mark stamped on each cell with each division. Somatic 
mutations provide such a mark. Layering phenotypic information, be it transcriptional state, 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 lineage output or functional resilience, on the phylogeny will enable estimation of the 
heritability from mother cell to daughter cell of germane somatic phenotypes. Humans can 
be directly researched, the ubiquity and permanence of somatic mutations enabling studies 
through youth and old age, in steady state and after perturbation, across blood and other 
organs, in health and disease.
Extended Data
Extended Figure 1. Cell sorting strategy.
(a) Sorting of stem and progenitor cells. Human bone marrow (BM) and peripheral blood 
(PB) mononuclear cells (time point 1) were stained with anti-CD34, anti-CD38, anti-
CD45RA, anti-CD90, anti-CD10 and anti-CD135 antibodies. After exclusion of debris and 
doublets, gating on CD34, CD38 and CD90 were used to separate CD34+CD38-
CD90+CD45RA-‘HSCs’. The CD34+CD38+ compartment was gated for CD10- cells 
before gating on CD135 (Flt3) and CD45RA to separate progenitor compartments: 
CD135+CD45RA ‘CMPs’, CD135+CD45RA+ ‘GMPs’ and CD135-CD45RA- ‘MEPs’. (b) 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 sorting of B and T lymphocytes. PB mononuclear cells (time point +4 months) were stained 
with anti-CD4, anti-CD8 and anti-CD19 antibodies. After exclusion of debris and doublets, 
the CD4+CD8+CD19- gate was used to isolate T cells, while CD4-CD8-CD19+ gate was 
used to isolate B cells. (20,000 events shown). MEP: Megakaryocyte Erythrocyte 
Progenitor; CMP: Common Myeloid Progenitor; GMP: Granulocyte Macrophage 
Progenitor; HSC: Haematopoietic Stem Cell.
Extended Figure 2. Quality control of colonies as single-cell derived.
Example histograms of the variant allele fraction (VAF – the proportion of sequencing reads 
that report the mutation) of mutations in single colonies. (a) The VAF of all mutations on 
autosomes in a typical clonal colony. As there are two copies of each autosome, and each 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 mutation occurs on only one of them, in a clonal sample the VAF of autosomal mutations is 
binomially distributed with mean 0.5. (b) The VAF of all mutations on the X chromosome in 
the same clonal colony. As our subject is male, there is only one copy of the X chromosome, 
and so true mutations here must have a VAF of 1. Occasionally, lower VAFs are seen due to 
the failure to detect a mutation on a read, or a read from another locus being aberrantly 
mapped to the locus in question and lowering the apparent coverage, or a mutation acquired 
in vitro. (c) and (d) show the VAF of autosomal and X chromosome mutations, respectively, 
in a typical colony seeded by more than one cell. As not all the reads come from the same 
cell, and most mutations are private to a given cell, a lower proportion of DNA molecules 
carry the mutation in a polyclonal colony than in a clonal colony, resulting in a leftward shift 
of the peak of the VAF histogram. These histograms suggest that the number of mutations 
acquired by the colonies in a few weeks of in vitro expansion is a small fraction of those 
acquired in vivo over 60 years of life.
Extended Figure 3. Mutation burden of colonies.
(a) A histogram of substitution (left hand panel) and indel (right hand panel) burden per 
colony. (b) The location around the genome of substitutions from all clones combined is 
shown as a circos plot. The outermost ring of the circos plot depicts the karyotypic 
ideogram. Moving inwards, base substitutions are shown as rainfall plots where the height of 
the dot in the substitution ring is proportional to log10 of the distance to the next mutation 
and with the colour of the dot illustrating the base change, as shown in the key. (c) a 
comparison of the substitution burden between stem cells (HSCs) and progenitor cells 
(HPCs). There were not significantly more mutations in progenitors than stem cells (p=0.14, 
Wilcoxon Rank Sum test).
Lee-Six et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Figure 4. Trinucleotide context of mutations in normal blood colonies.
(a) The trinucleotide context of substitutions from all colonies combined. Substitutions can 
be classed according to the base change (referred to by the pyrimidine of the mutated base 
pair), and the bases 5’ and 3’ of the mutated one, into 96 categories. The counts in each of 
these categories is shown. (b) comparison with pooled acute myeloid leukaemia genomes, 
excluding genomes with >1500 mutations, and publicly available data on normal tissues that 
have been whole genome sequenced so far. The ordering of bars is the same as in panel a, 
and the same figure as in panel a is provided again at the same resolution for ease of 
comparison. Please note that these samples have been sequenced on different platforms 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 using different systems, which is likely to result in small differences. Normal liver, normal 
colon, and normal small intestine were whole genome sequencing of single-cell derived 
organoids19, whereas normal neurones were derived from single cells that had undergone 
whole genome amplification37. (c) Example trinucleotide substitution plots for a selection 
of individual colonies derived from either stem cells (which have the prefix “BMH”) or 
progenitor cells (which have the prefix “BMP”). The ordering of bars is the same as in panel 
a.
Lee-Six et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Figure 5. Construction of the phylogeny using different methods.
(a) The phylogeny of cells as presented in figures 2, 4, and 6, but with the addition of p 
values next to every node, derived by bootstrapping the substitution matrix 1000 times, 
building a tree using SCITE for each replicate, and counting the proportion of the 
bootstrapped trees that support each node. (b)-(f) Phylogenies constructed using different 
datasets and methods. In each case the phylogeny was constructed using 100 bootstraps of 
the data, and the p value for each node shown underneath it. Branches are coloured by 
whether a branch ancestral to exactly the same descendants is also present in the SCITE tree, 
and are drawn with a thicker line if the branch is recovered in >=70% of bootstrap replicates. 
(b) Substitution and indel datasets combined, building the tree by maximum parsimony. (c) 
Substitution, indel, and neighbour joining datsets combined, building the tree by neighbour 
joining. (d) Substitutions, tree build by maximum parsimony. (e) Indels, tree built by 
maximum parsimony. (f) Short tandem repeats, tree built by neighbour joining.
Lee-Six et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Figure 6. Relationship between cell types in phylogeny.
(a) The phylogeny showing different stem and progenitor cell types. (b) The phylogeny is 
shown as in part (a), but with the labels underneath coloured by which cell types are being 
compared. The first row of labels has stem cells from bone marrow in red, progenitor cells 
from bone marrow in grey and stem cells from peripheral blood in black. The second row of 
labels has stem cells in red and bone marrow progenitors in black. The third row of labels 
has MEPs in red, CMPs in black, GMPs in blue and stem cells in grey. (c)-(e) Analysis of 
molecular variance (AMOVA) is used to test for clustering on the phylogeny for each of 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 stem cells derived from peripheral blood vs bone marrow (c), stem cells vs progenitors (d), 
and different progenitor types (e). In each panel is shown the histogram of the null 
distribution of the statistic used to detect clustering, obtained by randomly permuting which 
cells are assigned to which category. Comparisons are only between cell types not shown in 
grey in panel (b). The observed value of the statistic is shown as a red vertical line. BM: 
bone marrow-derived; PB: peripheral blood-derived; HSC: haematopoietic stem cell; CMP: 
common myeloid progenitor; GMP: granulocyte macrophage progenitor; MEP: 
megakaryocyte erythrocyte progenitor.
Extended Figure 7. Approximate Bayesian Computations (ABC).
(a) The joint prior distribution for stem cell numbers (HSCs) and the generation time for the 
first ABC. (b) The location in sample space of the 10% of simulations that produced 
summary statistics (using only the ltt summary statistics – see methods and technical 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 supplement) most similar to the observed summary statistics. (c) The joint prior distribution 
for the second ABC, in the area of sample space indicated to be plausible by the first set of 
simulations. (d) The joint posterior distribution of the best 500 simulations from the second 
ABC, as shown in figure 5 for ease of reference. Letters n, o, and p on the plot indicate the 
position in sample space from which panels (n), (o), and (p) were drawn, respectively. (e)-(i) 
Cross-validation of the model to choose the number of accepted simulations and the 
weighting applied to the ltt summary statistics (methods and technical supplement). (j) For 
illustrative purposes, five simulations were sampled for each of three population sizes along 
the plausible diagonal of sample space indicated in panel (b). One set of summary statistics 
are shown for these simulations in (k). Here, a red line indicates a simulation coming from 
the area of sample space indicated by a red point in (j); idem for blue and green lines. The 
black dotted line indicates the observed values for these summary statistics. This set of 
summary statistics counts, for different numbers of samples (x axis), how many of the 3952 
mutations considered (y axis) are in this many samples with two or more reads, using error 
model 1 (which simulates errors according to the error rate in control DNA (supplementary 
methods)). The same summary statistics were calculated for different mutant read number 
cutoffs. (l) For each of the 1000 simulations that produce summary statistics most similar to 
the observed, the Euclidean distance from the observed (y axis) is plotted against the number 
of stem cells in that simulation (x axis). This information is used by the neural network 
regression step to define the most likely value for the number of stem cells. It can be seen 
that the most similar values are seen at around 100,000 stem cells, which was the location of 
the median of the posterior distribution from neural network regression. (m) The observed 
phylogeny, with branch points indicated by asterisks. (n)-(p) Phylogenies drawn from 
simulations that occur at the points in sample space indicated in panel (d). (n) represents a 
relatively plausible simulation, since the pattern of branch points is not dissimilar from that 
seen in the observed phylogeny (m). Simulations with smaller stem cell populations and 
faster stem cell turnover rates resulted in phylogenies where the stem cells are very closely 
related to each other (p), whereas those with larger populations and slower turnover result in 
phylogenies where the stem cells only share an embryonic common ancestor, and no 
branches are seen through the tree (p).
Lee-Six et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Figure 8. Targeted sequencing data.
(a) Correlations between the variant allele fractions (VAFs) of all sequenced samples, shown 
on a log scale. Note that samples that were sequenced to lower depth cannot have VAFs as 
small as samples sequenced to higher depths. (b) Targeted sequencing information with no 
error correction. The data are shown as in figure 4 for all the samples interrogated, but just 
focusing on the first 350 mutations of molecular time. To allow a better comparison between 
samples sequenced at different depths, a higher detection threshold and different detection 
threshold are used relative to figure 4. (c) Targeted sequencing information after using cord 
blood controls for sequencing error correction with the Bayesian generalised poisson mixed 
effects model. The colour scale is the same as in panel b. The granulocytes 9 month 
timepoint is the same data as in figure 4 (provided again for ease of comparison), but plotted 
with a different colour scale.
Lee-Six et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Figure 9. Multilineage clonal output
(a) The phylogeny with targeted sequencing information in different blood fractions overlaid 
as in Figure 6, shown again here for ease of reference. The colouring of mutations reflects 
which peripheral blood cell fractions they could be detected in, as indicated by the colour 
key. Arrows indicate adult clones with multilineage output, with letters corresponding to the 
panels below. G, granulocytes; G low VAF, granulocytes, allele fraction too low to be 
detected in lymphocytes; B, B lymphocytes; T, T lymphocytes. (b)-(f) Variant allele 
fractions of all mutations on branches (indicated by arrows in (a)) with mutations beyond 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 molecular time 100 that are detectable in granulocytes and B lymphocytes but not T 
lymphocytes.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Leukemia Lymphoma Society, the WBH Foundation and the Wellcome Trust. PJC 
is a Wellcome Trust Senior Clinical Fellow (WT088340MA). HLS is a recipient of a Wellcome Trust PhD 
studentship. NFO is the recipient of a Danish Lundbeck Fellowship (2016-17) and MSS is the recipient of a 
BBSRC CASE Industrial PhD Studentship. Work in the DGK lab is supported by a Bloodwise Bennett Fellowship 
(#15008), a European Research Council Starting Grant (ERC-2016-STG–715371) and a European Hematology 
Association Non-Clinical Advanced Research Fellowship. Work in the ARG Lab is supported by the Wellcome 
Trust, Bloodwise, Cancer Research UK, the Kay Kendall Leukaemia Fund, and the Leukemia and Lymphoma 
Society of America. Work in EL lab is supported by a Wellcome Trust Sir Henry Dale Fellowship, BBSRC and a 
European Haematology Association Non-Clinical Advanced Research Fellowship. The DGK, EL and ARG labs are 
supported by a core support grant from the Wellcome Trust and Medical Research Council to the Cambridge Stem 
Cell Institute. We acknowledge further assistance from the National Institute for Health Research Cambridge 
Biomedical Research Centre and the Cambridge Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre.
The authors would like to thank Richard Grenfell and Mateusz Strzelecki in the Flow Cytometry Facility of the 
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute for technical assistance and suggestions; Connie Eaves and Philip Beer 
for discussions about the experimental design; Peggy Goodell for discussions about the results; Jacob Grinfeld and 
Carlos Gonzalez-Arias for drawing peripheral blood; and Grace Collord for providing negative control samples for 
targeted sequencing.
References
1. Till JE, McCulloch EA. A direct measurement of the radiation sensitivity of normal mouse bone 
marrow cells. Radiat Res. 1961; 14:213–22. [PubMed: 13776896] 
2. Becker AJ, McCulloch EA, Till JE. Cytological demonstration of the clonal nature of spleen 
colonies derived from transplanted mouse marrow cells. Nature. 1963; 197:452–4. [PubMed: 
13970094] 
3. Lemischka IR, Raulet DH, Mulligan RC. Developmental potential and dynamic behavior of 
hematopoietic stem cells. Cell. 1986; 45:917–27. [PubMed: 2871944] 
4. Antoniou AC, et al. Breast-Cancer Risk in Families with Mutations in PALB2. N Engl J Med. 2014; 
371:497–506. [PubMed: 25099575] 
5. Naik SH, et al. Diverse and heritable lineage imprinting of early haematopoietic progenitors. Nature. 
2013; 496:229–32. [PubMed: 23552896] 
6. Koelle SJ, et al. Quantitative stability of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell clonal output in 
rhesus macaques receiving transplants. Blood. 2017; 129:1448–1457. [PubMed: 28087539] 
7. Abkowitz JL, Catlin SN, Guttorp P. Evidence that hematopoiesis may be a stochastic process in 
vivo. Nat Med. 1996; 2:190–7. [PubMed: 8574964] 
8. Sun J, et al. Clonal dynamics of native haematopoiesis. Nature. 2014; 514:322–327. [PubMed: 
25296256] 
9. Busch K, et al. Fundamental properties of unperturbed haematopoiesis from stem cells in vivo. 
Nature. 2015; 518:542–546. [PubMed: 25686605] 
10. Sawai CM, et al. Hematopoietic Stem Cells Are the Major Source of Multilineage Hematopoiesis 
in Adult Animals. Immunity. 2016; 45:597–609. [PubMed: 27590115] 
11. Bystrykh LV, Verovskaya E, Zwart E, Broekhuis M, de Haan G. Counting stem cells: 
methodological constraints. Nat Methods. 2012; 9:567–574. [PubMed: 22669654] 
12. Fialkow PJ, Gartler SM, Yoshida A. Clonal origin of chronic myelocytic leukemia in man. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1967; 58:1468–71. [PubMed: 5237880] 
Lee-Six et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 13. Fialkow PJ, Jacobson RJ, Papayannopoulou T. Chronic myelocytic leukemia: clonal origin in a 
stem cell common to the granulocyte, erythrocyte, platelet and monocyte/macrophage. Am J Med. 
1977; 63:125–30. [PubMed: 267431] 
14. Cartier N, et al. Hematopoietic stem cell gene therapy with a lentiviral vector in X-linked 
adrenoleukodystrophy. Science (80-. ). 2009; 326:818–823.
15. Biasco L, et al. In Vivo Tracking of Human Hematopoiesis Reveals Patterns of Clonal Dynamics 
during Early and Steady-State Reconstitution Phases. Cell Stem Cell. 2015; 19:107–119.
16. Notta F, et al. Distinct routes of lineage development reshape the human blood hierarchy across 
ontogeny. Science. 2015; 351:1–16.
17. Werner B, et al. Reconstructing the in vivo dynamics of hematopoietic stem cells from telomere 
length distributions. Elife. 2015; 4:1–23.
18. Catlin SN, Busque L, Gale RE, Guttorp P, Abkowitz JL. The replication rate of human 
hematopoietic stem cells in vivo. Blood. 2011; 117:4460–4466. [PubMed: 21343613] 
19. Blokzijl F, et al. Tissue-specific mutation accumulation in human adult stem cells during life. 
Nature. 2016; 538:260–264. [PubMed: 27698416] 
20. Welch JS, et al. The Origin and Evolution of Mutations in Acute Myeloid Leukemia. Cell. 2012; 
150:264–278. [PubMed: 22817890] 
21. Nik-Zainal S, et al. The life history of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012; 149:994–1007. [PubMed: 
22608083] 
22. Behjati S, et al. Genome sequencing of normal cells reveals developmental lineages and mutational 
processes. Nature. 2014; 513:422–425. [PubMed: 25043003] 
23. Bae T, et al. Different mutational rates and mechanisms in human cells at pregastrulation and 
neurogenesis. Science (80-. ). 2017; 555:1–10.
24. Notta F, et al. Isolation of single human hematopoietic stem cells capable of long-term multilineage 
engraftment. Science. 2011; 333:218–21. [PubMed: 21737740] 
25. Zink F, et al. Clonal hematopoiesis, with and without candidate driver mutations, is common in the 
elderly. Blood. 2017; 130:742–752. [PubMed: 28483762] 
26. Jaiswal S, et al. Age-related clonal hematopoiesis associated with adverse outcomes. N Engl J 
Med. 2014; 371:2488–98. [PubMed: 25426837] 
27. Xie M, et al. Age-related mutations associated with clonal hematopoietic expansion and 
malignancies. Nat Med. 2014; 20:1472–8. [PubMed: 25326804] 
28. Mckerrell T, et al. Leukemia-Associated Somatic Mutations Drive Distinct Patterns of Age-Related 
Clonal Hemopoiesis. Cell Rep. 2015; 10:1239–1245. [PubMed: 25732814] 
29. Martincorena I, et al. Universal Patterns of Selection in Cancer and Somatic Tissues. Cell. 2017; 
171:1029–1041. [PubMed: 29056346] 
30. Plusa B, et al. The first cleavage of the mouse zygote predicts the blastocyst axis. Nature. 2005; 
434:391–395. [PubMed: 15772664] 
31. Ju YS, et al. Somatic mutations reveal asymmetric cellular dynamics in the early human embryo. 
Nature. 2017; 543:714–718. [PubMed: 28329761] 
32. Pei W, et al. Polylox barcoding reveals haematopoietic stem cell fates realized in vivo. Nature. 
2017; 548:456–460. [PubMed: 28813413] 
33. Rahbari R, et al. Timing, rates and spectra of human germline mutation. Nat Genet. 2016; 48:126–
133. [PubMed: 26656846] 
34. Lan S, Palacios JA, Karcher M, Minin VN, Shahbaba B. An efficient Bayesian inference 
framework for coalescent-based nonparametric phylodynamics. Bioinformatics. 2015; 31:3282–
3289. [PubMed: 26093147] 
35. Young AL, Challen GA, Birmann BM, Druley TE. Clonal haematopoiesis harbouring AML-
associated mutations is ubiquitous in healthy adults. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:1–7.
36. Schlenner SM, et al. Fate Mapping Reveals Separate Origins of T Cells and Myeloid Lineages in 
the Thymus. Immunity. 2010; 32:426–436. [PubMed: 20303297] 
37. Lodato MA, et al. Aging and neurodegeneration are associated with increased mutations in single 
human neurons. Science (80-. ). 2017; 559:1–8.
Lee-Six et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Experimental design.
The experiment proceeded in two phases: a ‘capture’ phase, in which single haematopoietic 
stem and progenitor cells were expanded in vitro and whole genome sequenced, and a 
‘recapture’ phase, in which bulk populations of differentiated cells were deep sequenced for 
mutations identified in the capture phase. HSC, haematopoietic stem cell; HPC, 
haematopoietic progenitor cell; FACS, fluorescence activated cell sorting.
Lee-Six et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. The phylogeny of cells, showing the relationship between cell types, and embryological 
cell divisions.
(a), phylogeny of 140 single haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells showing the 
relationship between cell types. At each tip of the tree is a colony. Branches connect 
colonies to each other to form a family tree. Branch lengths are proportional to the number 
of somatic mutations. Branches are coloured according to the phenotype of their 
descendants. Branches ancestral to haematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) are coloured red, 
branches ancestral to bone marrow-derived haematopoietic stem cells (BM HSCs) blue, and 
branches ancestral to peripheral blood-derived haematopoietic stem cells (PB HSCs) green. 
Branches ancestral to both stem and progenitor cells are coloured black. (b) the same 
phylogeny as in figure 2a, but showing only the first 10 mutations of molecular time. (c) the 
number of descendants of each node for the first 10 mutations of molecular time, used to 
estimate the embryonic mutation rate.
Lee-Six et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Population size trajectory of stem cell pool.
Phylodynamic methods reveal changes in the effective population size of stem cells over life 
based on the timing of coalescences (branch-points) in our observed phylogeny. Shading 
illustrates different credibility intervals. The y axis is shown in units of ‘population size 
multiplied by generation time’ (cell-years) because the same distribution of coalescences can 
be generated from a population of 10 times the size with 10 times as many generations.
Lee-Six et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 4. ‘Recapture’ of mutations by targeted sequencing.
The phylogenetic tree of cells is shown as in Figure 2, but information from targeted 
sequencing of peripheral blood granulocytes from the 9 month time-point is overlaid. This is 
shown more clearly in the inset, which zooms in on a portion of the tree. The underlying 
structure of the tree is shown in grey. On top are placed horizontal bars, one for every 
mutation in the bait-set for targeted sequencing. Bars are coloured according the proportion 
of cells in the sample that carry the mutations (obtained by multiplying the variant allele 
fraction for autosomal mutations by two), indicated in the colour scale. Undetectable 
mutations are coloured grey and shown as smaller bars. Mutations have been spaced evenly 
along a branch according to their mean variant allele fraction from targeted sequencing of all 
granulocyte and lymphocyte time-points combined. A higher density of baits were designed 
for branches shared by more than one colony. On these branches the mutations are so close 
together that they can appear as one continuous bar.
Lee-Six et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 5. Approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) of the number of stem cells and their 
replication rate.
(a) A contour plot of the most likely values for stem cell numbers and time between 
symmetrical stem cell divisions over the sample space that was simulated. It shows the stem 
cell number and generation times of the 500 simulations that produced summary statistics 
that were most similar to the summary statistics extracted from the observed data. (b) The 
prior distribution for the number of stem cells contributing to granulocytes for the second 
ABC (i.e. the stem cell numbers for all 80,000 simulations). (c) The distribution of stem cell 
numbers for the 1000 simulations that produced summary statistics most similar to the 
observed summary statistics. (d) The posterior distribution of a neural network regression 
run on these 1000 simulations. The 90% credibility interval is quoted for the stem cell 
population in each of (b)-(d).
Lee-Six et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 6. Targeted sequencing of granulocyte and lymphocyte samples.
The phylogeny is depicted as in Figure 4, with the underlying structure of the tree shown in 
grey, and horizontal bars drawn to represent every mutation in the bait-set. Here the 
colouring of mutations reflects which peripheral blood cell fractions they could be detected 
in, as indicated by the colour key. Two colours are used for granulocytes: red for mutations 
only detected in granulocytes that were are at a sufficiently high allele fraction to have been 
found in the shallower lymphocyte sequencing data and pink for mutations that were only 
detected in granulocytes, but at such a low allele fraction (<1/2000 reads) that if they had 
been present in lymphocytes at this allele fraction they would not have been detected. 
Arrows indicate adult clones with multilineage output. G, granulocytes; B, B lymphocytes; 
T, T lymphocytes.
Lee-Six et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 March 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
