 Primary Care Practitioners’ Perceptions
of Electronic Consult Systems
A Qualitative Analysis
Michelle S. Lee, BA; Kristin N. Ray, MD, MS; Ateev Mehrotra, MD, MPH; Paul Giboney, MD;
Hal F. Yee Jr, MD, PhD; Michael L. Barnett, MD, MS
IMPORTANCE Safety-net health systems across the country are implementing electronic
consult (eConsult) systems in which primary care practitioners (PCPs) submit all requests for
specialty assistance electronically to be reviewed and discussed with specialists. Evidence
suggests that eConsult systems can make significant improvements in specialty access, but
the outcomes of these systems for frontline PCPs is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE To understand PCP perceptions of the results of eConsult initiation on PCP
workflow, specialist access, and patient care.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Qualitative interviews were conducted from December
1, 2016, to April 15, 2017, with 40 safety-net PCPs in Los Angeles County who use the
Los Angeles County Department of Health Services (DHS) eConsult system. Interviewees
were recruited to include diversity in PCP type, practice setting, and employer (DHS
employed vs DHS affiliated). Participants were interviewed about their perceptions of clinical
workflow, access to specialists, relationships with specialists, and referral decision making.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Perceptions of the results of eConsult, including positive
and negative themes and remaining perceived gaps in specialty care.
RESULTS Of the 40 participants, 27 (68%) were women; 24 (60%) PCPs performed 5 or
more eConsults per week. Primary care practitioners’perceptions of eConsult clustered
around 4 main themes: access and timeliness of specialty care, shift of work to PCPs,
relationships with specialists, and eConsult interface issues. Many PCPs praised the improved
timeliness of specialist input with eConsult, as well as the added clinical and educational value
of dialogue with specialists, particularly compared with the limitations of the prior referral
process. However, PCPs also consistently perceived that eConsult shifted some of the work
of specialty care to them. Many PCPs believed that this extra burden was worth the effort
given the benefits of eConsult, such as improved timeliness of care and ability to manage
specialty conditions. In contrast, others were frustrated by the increased administrative
burden, broadened clinical responsibility, and restructuring of specialty care delivery.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE While associated with improved specialty care access,
eConsult systems simultaneously created new challenges for PCPs, such as an increased
burden of work in providing specialty care. Primary care practitioners varied in their
enthusiasm for these workflow changes with diverging perceptions of the same processes.
Our findings provide insights on challenges future primary care transformation efforts may
face.
JAMA Intern Med. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.0738
Published online April 12, 2018.
Invited Commentary
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: Department of
Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts (Lee,
Mehrotra); Department of Pediatrics,
University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
(Ray); Los Angeles County
Department of Health Services,
Los Angeles, California (Giboney,
Yee); Department of Health Policy
and Management, Harvard T. H. Chan
School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts (Barnett).
Corresponding Author: Michael L.
Barnett, MD, MS, Department of
Health Policy and Management,
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public
Health, 677 Huntington Ave, Boston,
MA 02115 (mbarnett@hsph.harvard
.edu).
Research
JAMA Internal Medicine | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
E1
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 04/12/2018
 A
ccess to timely, high-quality specialty care is a funda-
mental component of a well-functioning health sys-
tem, yet safety-net health care professionals face per-
sistent challenges delivering such care.1,2 Poor access to
specialtyreferralscanresultinpreventablemorbidityandmor-
tality.Forexample,delayedmanagementofchronickidneydis-
ease is associated with increased mortality and lower access
to transplantation.3-5 Access to specialty care is of particular
concern for safety-net services, such as federally qualified
health centers and public hospitals, that play a critical role in
providing care for disadvantaged populations. Lack of timely
specialty access is likely associated with worse health out-
comes in underserved communities.1,6,7
To address these challenges, in 2012 the Los Angeles (LA)
County Department of Health Services (DHS), the second larg-
est safety-net health system in the United States with 4 hos-
pitals and over 500 000 primary care patients, implemented
a transformative series of innovations in specialty care. The
main goal of these innovations was to improve an inefficient
specialty care system plagued with long wait times and high
no-show rates. For example, an internal audit of specialty ac-
cess in 2011 found that 25% of appointments for gastroenter-
ology and urology had wait times exceeding 9 months. Ap-
pointment no-show rates exceeding 40% in specialty clinics
were commonplace. The set of interventions included devel-
opment of extensive expected practices around specialty care
requests for common issues,8 centralizing scheduling for spe-
cialty care, and developing a new system for communication
fromprimarytospecialtycarenamedeConsult(electroniccon-
sult), which is the primary focus for this study.
eConsult is a process improvement using health informa-
tion technology to transform the traditional approach to spe-
cialty referrals. Instead of submitting simple referral requests
with little clinical information to specialty departments, pri-
mary care practitioners (PCPs) using eConsult submit clinical
inquiries electronically to specialist reviewers through an on-
line portal, opening a dialogue between PCPs and specialists
about patient management (a process also described as pre-
consultation exchange by the American College of
Physicians).9,10 Specialist reviewers then provide recommen-
dations to PCPs, triage the urgency of requests, and often man-
agerequeststhroughelectronicdialoguewiththereferringPCP
without a face-to-face visit.
Early evidence suggests that eConsult can reduce wait
times, improve physician satisfaction, and even serve as
a form of continuing education for PCPs.11-17 Given the
potential of eConsult, new systems have been expanding
in health systems across the United States, such as Mayo
Clinic Health System, the Veterans Administration, and
Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma
Center.18-21 Despite the growing popularity of eConsult,
research on the PCP experience of eConsult transformation
on workflow, specialist access, and patient care is limited.
Prior work has largely focused on PCP interactions with
eConsult in a single specialty22-27 or used surveys to elicit
PCP feedback,17,28 both of which are unable to capture
important nuances of PCP experiences in a large, system-
wide delivery transformation.
To inform other health systems considering implementa-
tion of eConsult, we qualitatively analyzed 40 semistruc-
tured PCP interviews to understand the perceived benefits and
harms of eConsult implementation on PCPs. The large-scale
adoption and transformative nature of eConsult make it a po-
tentially instructive archetype for other health systems seek-
ing to adopt similar innovations in specialty care delivery.
Methods
Setting and Context
In this qualitative study, we conducted interviews focused on
experienceswitheConsultamongPCPsinLACountywhowere
employed either by DHS-owned facilities or other commu-
nity health centers (non-DHS clinics). Non-DHS community
health centers still rely on DHS system specialists to provide
care for uninsured patients in their role as safety-net provid-
ers for LA County. LA County DHS oversees 4 hospitals and 20
primary care sites staffed by DHS-employed physicians, with
an additional 190 non-DHS community health centers in the
region. Prior to eConsult implementation, referrals from both
DHS and non-DHS PCPs to DHS specialists were mailed, faxed,
or electronically sent forms to specialist department staff. Af-
ter passing through both utilization management and clinical
review, department staff would then schedule appointments
for patients on a first-come, first-served basis, generally by
mailing patients a letter (ie, no telephone calls to patients) with
anappointmenttimewithoutconferringwiththepatientabout
their availability and without clinical input regarding ur-
gency. Dialogue between PCPs and specialists or between
schedulers and patients was rare.
The DHS implemented eConsult along with other associ-
ated specialty care reforms to improve on this prior system,
targeting several challenges described in Table 1. The eCon-
sult intervention consisted of an electronic platform separate
fromtheelectronicmedicalrecordthatPCPsloggedintotosub-
mit store-and-forward requests for specialty assistance that
were reviewed by specialist reviewers. Specialist reviewers
were assigned to a set of primary care practices for which they
Key Points
Question What is the association between implementing
electronic consult systems for specialty requests (eConsult) and
perceptions of frontline primary care clinicians in safety-net health
systems?
Findings In this qualitative study of 40 primary care clinicians,
interviewees consistently endorsed that eConsult shifted some
burden of specialty work to them. Many felt that this burden was
worth the effort to improve timeliness of care and their ability to
manage specialty conditions, while others were frustrated by the
broadened responsibility.
Meaning Though eConsult is associated with improved specialist
access, it simultaneously created new challenges for clinicians to
manage; delivery transformations can create new barriers as they
solve existing problems.
Research Original Investigation
Primary Care Practitioners’Perceptions of Electronic Consult Systems
E2
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online April 12, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 04/12/2018
 reviewed all eConsults for 6 months or more. Reviewers were
trained and expected to reply promptly to all eConsult re-
quests and engage in a dialogue with PCPs to meet specialty
care needs in the most effective, patient-centered manner pos-
sible. Primary care practitioners and DHS specialists were not
directly compensated for entering or reviewing eConsults. Af-
ter eConsult implementation, eConsult was required for all
nonemergent, outpatient consultations to DHS specialists, in
contrast to other eConsult systems where its use is an op-
tional pathway for specialty input.29,30
LA County DHS implemented eConsult from 2012 to 2015
across primary and specialty care practice sites on a stag-
gered basis. Primary care practitioners employed by DHS com-
pletely transitioned to the eConsult model of specialty care for
their entire patient panels (DHS PCPs). Non–DHS-employed
PCPs at community health centers (non-DHS PCPs) used eCon-
sult only for specialty access for uninsured patients who were
enrolled in the My Health LA program (approximately 10%-
30% of their panel), and otherwise used existing procedures
for referring their insured patients to non-DHS specialists.
Qualitative Procedures
Interview Guide Development
We developed an interview guide informed by prior concep-
tualworkonsubspecialtyreferrals14,16,31-33andrefinedthrough
pilot interviews with PCPs and discussion with DHS leader-
ship (P.G., H.F.Y.). The interview guide focused on PCP per-
ceptions of the results of eConsult implementation on clini-
cal workflow and workload, care coordination and access to
specialists, clinician and staff relationships with specialists, re-
ferral decision making and comfort with managing a broader
array of diagnoses, and satisfaction with specialty access. The
final interview guide was constructed for goal interview length
of 30 to 45 minutes (eMethods in the Supplement). Inter-
views were conducted by telephone from December 1, 2016,
to April 15, 2017. Participants provided oral informed consent
andwereoffereda$50Amazon.comgiftcardviaemailfortheir
participation. This study was approved as human subjects re-
search by the Harvard Medical School, LA County DHS, and
University of Pittsburgh institutional review boards.
Participant Recruitment
Eligible participants were DHS and non-DHS primary care phy-
sicians, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners practic-
ing in clinics and hospitals directed by consenting medical di-
rectors across LA County. To recruit participants, we contacted
30 clinic medical directors identified by DHS leadership from
across the DHS network; 18 medical directors consented to re-
cruitment in their clinics and they forwarded recruitment
emails to their clinic PCPs. From these 18 consenting clinical
practices,werecruitedparticipantsthroughresponsestomedi-
cal director emails until we reached a prespecified sample size
of 20 DHS and 20 non-DHS professionals, aiming to balance
representation of PCP types and practice setting (Table 1). We
chose this sample size because we expected that it would pro-
vide adequate saturation of major themes.
Qualitative Analysis
A trained investigator with qualitative research background
conductedallinterviews(M.S.L).Afterparticipantconsentwas
obtained, the interviews were recorded and then transcribed
and deidentified. The research team then used thematic con-
tent analysis to identify the main themes and subthemes. A
preliminary codebook was developed based on the first 5
interviews.34 Two investigators then coded each interview
(M.S.L. and K.N.R. or M.L.B.) using qualitative analysis soft-
ware (Dedoose, version 7.5.3). The coded interviews were then
comparedforagreementandfinalizedthroughconsensus,with
iterative refinement of the codebook. The final results fo-
cused on dominant themes shaping PCPs’ attitudes toward
eConsult as well as remaining perceived gaps in specialty care.
Drawing from these themes, we developed a series of design
questions based on interviewee perceptions of the current sys-
tem and potential opportunities for improvement.
Results
Weinterviewed40PCPs,including12internists,17familyprac-
titioners, and 11 advanced practice clinicians (Table 2). Of the
40 participants, 27 (68%) were women; 24 (60%) PCPs per-
Table 1. How eConsult and Associated Interventions Aimed to Address Challenges With Prior Referral Systema
Challenge Before
eConsult
Unclear Referral
Guidelines/Variation in
Referral Practices
No Standard/Timely Way to
Ask Questions to Specialist
Difficulty Tracking Patients
After Referral
Difficulty Scheduling
Appointments
Long Wait Times for
Specialty Visits
Relevant intervention
Expected practices to
facilitate care by PCPs
prior to entering an
eConsult
eConsult created platform
for PCPs to dialogue with
specialists
eConsult system tracks
outcomes of in-person visit
requests
Centralized
scheduling system
that directly contacts
patient after eConsult
dialogue completed
eConsult mandated
use to allow
specialist triage
of referrals,
potentially
resolving requests
without in-person
visit
PCP perceptions before
eConsult and
associated
interventions
NA
“You weren't able to have a
dialogue with the specialists
about what studies that they
wanted or what test that
they wanted done before
their referral, before they
evaluated the patient.”
“Before eConsult, it was a
little bit of a black hole in
terms of what happened to
your referral. We wouldn't
really get much feedback
and a lot of the times
referrals would sit for a long
time…until months later.”
“Before… our patients would sometimes
wait a year or more for an appointment
to be scheduled and then they would still
wait another couple of months for the
appointment to actually happen.”
Abbreviations: NA, not applicable; PCP, primary care practitioner.
a eConsult is an electronic system for PCPs to submit clinical inquiries to
specialists for management via electronic dialogue. Requests can either be
resolved through dialogue alone or converted to face-to-face referrals.
Primary Care Practitioners’Perceptions of Electronic Consult Systems
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online April 12, 2018
E3
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 04/12/2018
 formed 5 or more eConsults per week. In discussing specialty
care prior to eConsult implementation, PCPs described nu-
merous challenges, including uncertainty after referral sub-
mission, long wait times, and no way to “curbside” or discuss
patient care with specialists (Table 1). As one PCP explained:
“Prior to eConsult we were writing all our referrals on paper
and there was little to no communication …we were pretty
much in the dark.”
Three qualitative themes emerged in which PCPs ex-
pressed opposing views on the perceived results of eConsult
on (1) access and timeliness of specialty care, (2) the shift of
specialty care to the PCP, and (3) relationships with special-
ists. Primary care practitioners also expressed strong views re-
garding health information technology interface issues and re-
maining gaps in specialty care delivery.
Access and Timeliness
Primary care practitioners had divided perceptions on the re-
sult of eConsult implementation on specialty access and time-
liness (Table 3). Some believed that patients received in-
person visits more quickly through eConsult (“Now that we’re
able to refer patients and they can get their appointments
withinlikeamonthoreven2months,it'sreallynicetonothave
to send them to the emergency room all the time”) and also
noted more timely care for patients who did not require a spe-
cialist visit (“If it’s a patient that doesn’t really need much spe-
cialist care… it actually saves time because they don’t need to
wait for an appointment to see the specialist anymore”).
At the other extreme, some PCPs stated that eConsult was
an obstruction that slowed access to care: “It's a roadblock for
me.
” More specifically, PCPs perceived delays in specialty care
from the interactive nature of the eConsult approach to refer-
rals. For example, some mentioned delays due to specialist-
requested additional testing (“They ask me a bunch of ques-
tionsthatIdon'tknowandIwouldhavetoseethepatientagain
to get”). Given these concerns with timeliness, PCPs de-
scribed instances when their perceived remaining gaps in ac-
cess to specialty care prompted them to modify their work-
flow (Table 4), such as sending patients to the emergency
department for urgent subspecialty needs.
Primary care practitioners also frequently raised issues re-
garding scheduling specialist appointments, although imple-
mentation of the centralized scheduling system was a dis-
tinct initiative from the eConsult system. Some PCPs cited
Table 2. PCP Characteristics
Characteristic
DHS
(n = 20)
Non-DHS
(n = 20)
Total
(N = 40)
Clinician type, No.
Physicians
15
14
29
Internal medicine
10
2
12
Family medicine
5
12
17
Advanced practice cliniciansa
5
6
11
Practice setting, No.
Hospital-based
17
1
18
Community clinic
3
19
22
Years of experience, No.
<5
10
7
17
5-15
6
9
15
>15
4
4
8
Years in current practice, No.
<2
11
6
17
2-5
4
9
13
>5
5
5
10
Estimated eConsults per week, No.b
<5
4
9
13
5-10
9
5
14
>10
6
4
10
Variable
1
2
3
Race/ethnicity, No.
White
6
8
14
African American
2
3
5
Asian American
6
7
13
Hispanic/Latino
5
2
7
Other
1
0
1
Sex, No.
Male
6
7
13
Female
14
13
27
Abbreviation: DHS, Department of Health Services; PCP, primary care
practitioner.
a Advanced practice clinicians included physician assistants and nurse
practitioners.
beConsult is an electronic system for PCPs to submit clinical inquiries to
specialists for management via electronic dialogue. Requests can either be
resolved through dialogue alone or converted to face-to-face referrals.
Table 3. Key Qualitative Themesa
Theme
Perceptions on eConsult
Positive
Negative
Access and
timeliness
Improves timeliness,
access to specialist input
Delays or obstructs access to
visits
Improves timeliness of
face-to-face specialty
visits
Specialists are now
“gatekeepers”
Reduces unnecessary
visits
Lack of follow-up after
eConsult submitted
Referrals more
meaningful
Scheduling issues and
scheduling timeliness are
problematica
Shift of specialty
care to PCPs
Increased comfort
managing conditions
Increased burden of
prereferral workup
Specialty interchange is
educational
PCP asked to do more testing
and evaluation than PCP
thinks appropriate for PCP to
do
PCPs more accountable
Administrative burden “not
worth the effort”
Publishing of expected
practices assist with
referral processa
Expected practices do not
help the referral processa
Relationships
with specialists
Increased communication
with specialists
Some specialists not helpful
or responsive
Specialists as educators
Impersonal communication
and lack of trust with
specialists
Specialists as gatekeepers
Abbreviation: PCP, primary care practitioner.
a This staement is an item discussed by PCPs that was external to the eConsult
platform (eConsult is an electronic system for PCPs to submit clinical inquiries
to specialists for management via electronic dialogue. Requests can either be
resolved through dialogue alone or converted to face-to-face referrals).
Research Original Investigation
Primary Care Practitioners’Perceptions of Electronic Consult Systems
E4
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online April 12, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 04/12/2018
 difficulties in reliably contacting patients: “The specialist ac-
cepted the referral months ago, and then you see the patient
in clinic and you find out that… no one had contacted them.”
In contrast, other PCPs suggested that the scheduling process
improved after eConsult and centralized scheduling.
Shift of Work to PCPs
Primary care practitioners perceived a shift in the onus of
specialty care to the PCP, with a range of reactions to this
change (Table 3). Some PCPs appreciated the education that
they received through dialogue with specialists, which they
believed could increase their scope of practice: “I definitely
learned a lot from interacting with specialists and my
threshold for contacting them has actually gotten higher
because of all the knowledge that they share with me.
” Oth-
ers described a higher level of accountability in communi-
cating their needs to the specialist: “It used to be easier to
just be like, ‘
I don't know, the neurologist will deal with
that.’ Now, I have to make a really good argument to see a
neurologist … there's less passing the buck on things that are
difficult to deal with.
”
In contrast, other PCPs believed that the previsit require-
ments requested by specialty reviewers were a burdensome
shift of work to PCPs: “Another issue is where the consultant
seems to require a very, very long list of things that need to be
done … it starts to feel like you're almost like the support staff.
It's actually wasting multiple primary care visits to accom-
plish what [the specialist] could in 1 session.” To address this
perceived“gatekeeping,
”somePCPsreportedexaggeratingpa-
tient symptoms or relying on key phrases to get a face-to-face
visit approved, avoiding submitting eConsults if possible, and
requesting second reviewers (Table 4).
In discussing this shift of specialty care to primary care,
PCPs also often frequently discussed DHS’ expected prac-
tices, which is a separate initiative that established manage-
ment pathways for common referrals to be referenced prior to
opening an eConsult dialogue. Some believed that these ex-
pected practices helped to facilitate prereferral workup and re-
duced unnecessary referrals, while others believed that they
mandated tasks that were not helpful to patient care: “I know
the test they want before sending them [to the specialist], but
that's not helping me manage [patients].”
Relationships With Specialists
Primary care practitioners also expressed a range of perspec-
tives of how eConsult affected their relationships with spe-
cialists (Table 3). Some believed that eConsult dialogue
strengthened communication and relationships with the spe-
cialist: “It really has increased communication, and it's also
been really good for my learning as well. I'm getting direct rec-
ommendations from the specialists.
” However, others viewed
interactions with specialist as more antagonistic: “Often the
reviewers… aren't looking at your eConsult with the mind of
‘
I'm here to help the PCP.’ … It sometimes can feel a little bit
insulting.
” Potentially compounding this, some PCPs were put
offbytheimpersonalnatureofeConsultcommunication:“The
eConsult is like a text messaging or email platform where you
don't have to look at the person and you can kind of be a jerk
if you want to be and just put up unnecessary hoops.” Ulti-
mately, redefining communication and relationships with spe-
cialists was viewed as an important effect of eConsult. Sum-
marizing her opinion of the eConsult system, one PCP stated,
“This is all relational, right? We forget that when we build these
tools.”
Frustration With Information Technology
Most PCPs were frustrated to some degree with the adminis-
trative burden of eConsult and interface issues, including lack
of integration between eConsult and electronic health rec-
ords (Table 3). As a PCP described, “It's very, very difficult be-
cause it takes a while to log in to separate systems.” Primary
care practitioners were also frustrated by the time involved to
Table 4. Remaining Gaps in Specialty Care Delivery With Example PCP Responses
Remaining Gap
PCP Response
Category
Quotation
Timeliness/access: need to
address urgent specialty care
needs
Contact specialist
department directly
“Anything that we need to do expeditiously, I wouldn't even go through eConsult.a I asked the
residents to page the fellows, or someone on the service directly, because there's never any
guarantee how quickly you'll have a reply through eConsult if you need something quickly.”
Send patient to ED or
urgent care
“If it's a little more urgent then we have to either send patients to urgent care or the ED.”
“If I know they need specialist care, then I’ll send them to the urgent care… for them to be seen…
and do an internal referral because that’s a lot easier.”
Shift of work to PCP
Exaggerating severity
or using key words
“I always felt I had to embellish their medical condition.”
“I probably adjusted the way I presented the eConsult, and played up things to the ones that I was
concerned wouldn't be accepted.”
Discussing with
specialist prior to
eConsult
“I’ll sort of curbside one of my specialty colleagues to ask them about the case… to see if it makes
sense for me to do any consult and what to actually put in the eConsult.”
Avoiding certain
specialty reviewers
“I think this particular reviewer did not want to see patients. I don’t know. In the future, if I saw her
as the name of the reviewer for that particular week, I actually would hold off on submitting my
referral for a week.”
Requesting rereview
“When the reviewer declines to see the patient against my better judgment, and I can’t convince
them they really need to, and I can’t get on the phone with them, present the case… so sometimes I
have to ask my medical director if we can forward the eConsult to a different reviewer.”
Abbreviations: ED, emergency department; PCP, primary care practitioner.
a eConsult is an electronic system for PCPs to submit clinical inquiries to
specialists for management via electronic dialogue. Requests can either be
resolved through dialogue alone or converted to face-to-face referrals.
Primary Care Practitioners’Perceptions of Electronic Consult Systems
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online April 12, 2018
E5
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 04/12/2018
 upload images on the eConsult interface. Many still experi-
enced difficulty receiving notes after visits: “It still feels like
there is still a black hole. We don't really know what happens
… and we don't get records for like 6 to 12 months.”
Overall Perception of eConsult
Ultimately, PCPs who reported positive attitudes toward eCon-
sult generally perceived improved timeliness of care, seemed
willing to accept the shift of specialty care, and reported im-
proved relationships through eConsult. These PCPs acknowl-
edged challenges but believed that eConsult was worth the ef-
fort because of improved care compared with the previous
flawed referral system (“I think it's increased my job satisfac-
tion … in a broad sense. The amount of time that it takes to do
the eConsults probably negatively [affects] my satisfaction. I
would say the general benefits outweigh the negative feel-
ings.”)
In contrast, PCPs who overall had a negative attitude to-
ward eConsult resented the increased administrative burden
and restructured specialty care delivery. These PCPs did not
endorse added value for their effort entering eConsults or they
perceived additional delays: “Why do I have to… log in to an-
other system, answer these extra questions, put in the same
questions that I wrote in the referral, click Send to have it say,
‘
okay approved for face-to-face visit’? It's the same end point.
”
eConsult Design Questions
DrawingfromintervieweecommentsregardingeConsult’ssuc-
cesses and drawbacks, we developed a list of questions for
health systems seeking to implement eConsult. This list can
be used as a tool to understand the multiple layers of deci-
sions with the potential to affect PCP perception of eConsult
(Box).
Discussion
eConsult implementation in DHS elicited a range of positive
and negative perceptions among frontline clinicians. Three
areas of conflict were the perceived effect of eConsult on ac-
Box. eConsult Implementation Planning Questions
1. eConsult System/Process Design
A. PCP Interface Design
Have log-in steps been minimized?
Has interface with EHR been optimized?
Has entry of duplicate information been minimized?
Can PCPs indicate their desired outcome of the eConsult? Should
they be able to?
Can PCPs track status of eConsult after entry? Is that a desired fea-
ture?
Is there a mechanism for specialists to flag responses that are urgent
vs nonurgent?
B. Process Design
How quickly can PCPs expect a response?
What process should PCPs use if a more urgent specialty care need
arises?
Is there a way for other clinicians in the PCP’
s group to join an ongo-
ing dialogue if a different clinician is covering or sees the patient in
follow-up?
Is there a way to transfer an ongoing dialogue to a different specialist
if determined to be more appropriate?
When should a dialogue be closed?
Should the eConsult platform only be used for previsit conversa-
tions, or could it be used for ongoing comanagement conversations?
Do all eConsults require the same depths of information or might
some (ie, referral for colonoscopy for routine screening) be more
automated in terms of PCP data entry and specialist review?
Will PCPs (and specialists) receive administrative time or some form
of compensation to enter and respond to eConsults?
Should administrative support or care coordinators be part of the
workflow of eConsults?
2. Pre/Post eConsult Process Decisions
A. Pre-eConsult Processes
Are expected practices or referral guidelines or pathways available?
If so, are they easily available at the point of care, or do they require
extra log-ins?
Is there an alternative referral process for urgent referrals or particu-
larly routine referrals?
B. Post eConsult Processes
If a visit is recommended by the specialist reviewer, how is that deci-
sion communicated to the PCP or patient?
If a visit is recommended by the specialist reviewer, what are the
scheduling processes?
If a visit is recommended by the specialist reviewer, is documenta-
tion of the eConsult dialogue available to the specialist who sees the
patient?
How are visit notes shared back with PCPs referring through eCon-
sult?
3. eConsult Implementation/Change Management Decisions
A. Implementation Planning/Messaging
What is the desired outcome of eConsult? How is this desired out-
come to be communicated with specialists, PCPs, and patients?
Has implementation training adequately discussed the potential
value of the eConsult dialogue?
Would PCPs benefit from training in the appropriate amount of in-
formation to enter in eConsult?
How personable are PCP-specialist relationships, and how will this
change relationships? Will PCPs know their specialist reviewers?
Would there be value in meet-and-greet sessions?
B. Maintenance/Feedback
What processes are in place to receive feedback from PCPs and spe-
cialists about the process?
Are there processes to monitor speed or quality of specialist re-
viewer responses?
Abbreviations: EHR, electronic health record; PCP, primary care practitioner.
Research Original Investigation
Primary Care Practitioners’Perceptions of Electronic Consult Systems
E6
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online April 12, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 04/12/2018
 cessandtimelinessofcaredelivery,theacceptabilityoftheshift
of responsibility of specialty care to the PCP, and the result for
relationships with specialists. Many PCPs, particularly those
who were enthusiastic about the mission of eConsult, be-
lieved that it improved the timeliness of specialty input and
appreciated the opportunity to manage a broader spectrum of
care. Others believed that eConsult slowed the process of ob-
tainingareferralasthekeygoalandwerefrustratedbytheneed
to follow specialists’ electronic suggestions. Our results high-
light how delivery transformations can create new perceived
barriers to care and resistance to change among frontline
users.
Ouranalysissuggeststhatclosingthegapbetweenobjective
improvement in access at the population level and individual
PCP’sperceptionsmayrequireaddressingassumptionsaboutthe
goalsofeConsultandtheroleofPCPsinprovidingspecialtycare.
DespitedatademonstratingthateConsultreducedwaittimesfor
specialtyconsultation,12 PCPsheldvariedperceptionsofeCon-
sult’soutcomeonaccesstocare.Manyintervieweesreferredto
having their eConsults accepted or approved for a visit, imply-
ing that a successful eConsult is one that results in a specialist
visit. In contrast, from the perspective of health system leader-
ship, an eConsult that does not result in a visit is a marker of a
successful eConsult if the patient’s needs were adequately ad-
dressedwithoutaface-to-facevisit.Thus,perceptionsofreduced
wait times empirically achieved by eConsult may be tempered
byperceivedunsuccessfuleConsultswherein-personvisitswere
obstructed or denied.
TheshiftofresponsibilityofspecialtycarewitheConsultwas
alsocontroversial.WhilesomePCPsfeltempoweredinaddress-
ingmoreoftheirpatients’needs,othersfelttakenadvantageof
as“supportstaff”performingadditionaltestingrequestedbyspe-
cialists.TheseperceptionsshowhoweConsultcalledintoques-
tiontherespectiveresponsibilitiesofPCPsandspecialists.These
results contrast with broadly positive PCP experiences in other
eConsult systems where the use of an eConsult dialogue is dis-
cretionaryratherthanrequiredforanyreferral.23,28,35Thetrade-
offwithdiscretionarysystemsvstheDHSmandatoryapproach
isthatPCPsuseeConsultrelativelyinfrequentlyandthesystem-
wide result of such an approach may be limited.
Many of the negative themes that emerged from PCP per-
ceptions of eConsult appeared to be old problems with a “new
face,” not necessarily worsened by eConsult but more readily
apparent to PCPs. Prior to eConsult, many challenges in spe-
cialty care were masked by the opaque referral process. For ex-
ample, while PCPs had little formal interaction with special-
ists,eConsultcreatedanewsetofrelationshipswithspecialists
for PCPs to manage, which many criticized as impersonal or
brusque. However, this was not a challenge created by eCon-
sult, but a latent problem that eConsult made visible. An-
otherexampleisthesharingofnotesandrecordsbetweenPCPs
and specialists. The pre-eConsult system was often de-
scribed as a black hole with little communication. Despite the
capacity to share notes and images within eConsult, the awk-
ward information technology interface for uploading images
and sharing notes became a focal point of frustration for PCPs.
Limitations
There are important limitations to this study. As a qualitative
analysis, this research is hypothesis-generating and descrip-
tive, and we are unable to make causal claims about the out-
come of eConsult beyond reporting the perceptions of inter-
viewees. In addition, we did not interview PCPs prior to
eConsult implementation, and PCPs’ memories of that pe-
riod may be subject to recall bias. In addition, we only inter-
viewed PCPs, although we recognize that the eConsult sys-
tem also affected specialists and patients. Last, we attempted
to capture a broad diversity of perspectives by including DHS
and non-DHS PCPs; however, our study was not designed to
compare these groups but rather to obtain a heterogeneity of
perspectives.
Despitetheselimitations,thereareseveralkeylessonsfrom
this study that can help inform other health systems seeking
to adopt eConsult systems or similar wide-scale health infor-
mation technology changes. First, transformative changes will
likely create new problems as they solve old challenges. For
example, while PCP-specialist communication was not a ma-
jor concern when little back-and-forth dialogue was occur-
ring prior to eConsult, eConsult created new opportunities for
friction between PCPs and specialists. Thus, further training
for both PCPs and specialists on best practices for eConsult
communication (eg, providing as much information up front
as possible) could be helpful.
Second, we observed that if clinicians believed in the mis-
sionandpurposeofeConsultandspecialtycaretransformation,
theyweremorelikelytoendorsepositiveexperienceswitheCon-
sult.Itisworthfurtherexploringwhetheradifferentimplemen-
tation process focusing on making the larger case for eConsult
could influence PCP perceptions of eConsult’s inherent value.
Last,wefoundthatanyfactoraffectingclinicianworkflow,even
iftangentialtoanintervention,couldsignificantlyaffectpercep-
tions of the intervention. In this case, frustrations with patient
schedulingandinformationtechnologyinterfaceawkwardness
significantly influenced PCP perceptions of eConsult.
Conclusions
The implementation of eConsult as a transformative delivery
innovation had a range of positive and negative conse-
quences for PCPs’ day-to-day practice. Informed by our analy-
sis, our list of guiding questions (Box) highlights decisions that
health systems implementing eConsult must make, either in-
tentionallyorbydefault.Forhealthsystemsplanningtoimple-
ment eConsult, the LA County DHS eConsult experience can
offer important lessons in anticipating challenges with PCP ex-
pectations, workflow changes, and new problems emerging
with health information technology adoption.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: January 31, 2018.
Published Online: April 12, 2018.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.0738
Author Contributions: Dr Barnett had full access to
all of the data in the study and takes responsibility
Primary Care Practitioners’Perceptions of Electronic Consult Systems
Original Investigation Research
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online April 12, 2018
E7
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 04/12/2018
 for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: All authors.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Lee,
Ray, Barnett.
Drafting of the manuscript: Lee, Ray, Barnett.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.
Statistical analysis: Lee, Ray, Barnett.
Obtained funding: Mehrotra, Barnett.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Mehrotra, Giboney, Yee, Barnett.
Study supervision: Barnett.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Yee is a
cofounder and minority shareholder of
Caredination Inc, is on the board of the community
eConsult network of the Weitzman Institute, and is
an external advisor to RubiconMD. Dr Mehrotra was
supported by an unrestricted gift to Harvard
Medical School by Melvin Hall and CHSi. No other
disclosures are reported.
Funding/Support: This work was supported by the
California Health Care Foundation and the Blue
Shield Foundation of California, and grant
K23HD088642 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (Dr Ray).
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funding
organizations had no role in the design and conduct
of the study; collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
Meeting Presentation: This paper was presented
at the Society of General Internal Medicine 2018
Annual Meeting; April 12, 2018; Denver, Colorado.
REFERENCES
1. Cook NL, Hicks LS, O’
Malley AJ, Keegan T,
Guadagnoli E, Landon BE. Access to specialty care
and medical services in community health centers.
Health Aff (Millwood). 2007;26(5):1459-1468.
2. Cook NL, Ayanian JZ, Orav EJ, Hicks LS.
Differences in specialist consultations for
cardiovascular disease by race, ethnicity, gender,
insurance status, and site of primary care. Circulation.
2009;119(18):2463-2470.
3. Kinchen KS, Sadler J, Fink N, et al. The timing of
specialist evaluation in chronic kidney disease and
mortality. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137(6):479-486.
4. Cass A, Cunningham J, Snelling P, Ayanian JZ.
Late referral to a nephrologist reduces access to
renal transplantation. Am J Kidney Dis. 2003;42(5):
1043-1049.
5. Chan MR, Dall AT, Fletcher KE, Lu N, Trivedi H.
Outcomes in patients with chronic kidney disease
referred late to nephrologists: a meta-analysis. Am J
Med. 2007;120(12):1063-1070.
6. United States Government Accountability
Office. Medicaid and CHIP: Most Physicians Serve
Covered Children But Have Difficulty Referring
Them for Specialty Care. http://www.gao.gov/new
.items/d11624.pdf. Published June 2011. Accessed
April 3, 2017.
7. Felland L, Felt-Lisk S, McHugh M. Health Care
Access For Low-Income People: Significant Safety
Net Gaps Remain. Center for Studying Health
System Change. http://hschange.org/CONTENT
/682/. Published June 2004. Accessed November
9, 2015.
8. Soni SM, Giboney P, Yee HF Jr. Development and
implementation of expected practices to reduce
inappropriate variations in clinical practice. JAMA.
2016;315(20):2163-2164.
9. Sewell JL, Telischak KS, Day LW, Kirschner N,
Weissman A. Preconsultation exchange in the
United States: use, awareness, and attitudes. Am J
Manag Care. 2014;20(12):e556-e564.
10. Laine C. Welcome to the patient-centered
medical neighborhood. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154(1):
60.
11. Kwok J, Olayiwola JN, Knox M, Murphy EJ, Tuot
DS. Electronic consultation system demonstrates
educational benefit for primary care providers.
[published online January 1, 2017]. J Telemed Telecare.
2017;X17711822. doi:10.1177/1357633X17711822
12. Barnett ML, Yee HF Jr, Mehrotra A, Giboney P.
Los Angeles safety-net program eConsult system
was rapidly adopted and decreased wait times to
see specialists. Health Aff (Millwood). 2017;36(3):
492-499.
13. Chen AH, Murphy EJ, Yee HF Jr. eReferral—a
new model for integrated care. N Engl J Med. 2013;
368(26):2450-2453.
14. Vimalananda VG, Gupte G, Seraj SM, et al.
Electronic consultations (e-consults) to improve
access to specialty care: a systematic review and
narrative synthesis. J Telemed Telecare. 2015;21(6):
323-330.
15. Horner K, Wagner E, Tufano J. Electronic
consultations between primary and specialty care
clinicians: early insights. Issue Brief (Commonw Fund).
2011;23:1-14.
16. Liddy C, Drosinis P, Keely E. Electronic
consultation systems: worldwide prevalence and
their impact on patient care—a systematic review.
Fam Pract. 2016;33(3):274-285.
17. Kim Y, Chen AH, Keith E, Yee HF Jr, Kushel MB.
Not perfect, but better: primary care providers’
experiences with electronic referrals in a safety net
health system. J Gen Intern Med. 2009;24(5):614-619.
18. Association of American Medical Colleges.
CORE: Coordinating Optimal Referral Experiences.
https://www.aamc.org/initiatives/core2/. Accessed
August 9, 2017.
19. eConsult. Blue Shield of California Foundation.
http://www.blueshieldcafoundation.org/programs
/fostering-innovation/sub-program/econsult.
Accessed August 9, 2017.
20. Medill Reports Chicago. Koehn A. Apps and
technology help low-income people access
healthcare. http://news.medill.northwestern.edu
/chicago/apps-and-technology-help-low-income
-people-access-healthcare/. Published March 1,
2016. Accessed August 9, 2017.
21. Safety Net Connect. http://www
.safetynetconnect.com/public/apps
/safetynetconnect.mpl?page=customers. Accessed
August 9, 2017.
22. Stoves J, Connolly J, Cheung CK, et al.
Electronic consultation as an alternative to hospital
referral for patients with chronic kidney disease:
a novel application for networked electronic health
records to improve the accessibility and efficiency
of healthcare. Qual Saf Health Care. 2010;19(5):e54.
23. McFarland LV, Raugi GJ, Reiber GE. Primary
care provider and imaging technician satisfaction
with a teledermatology project in rural Veterans
Health Administration clinics. Telemed J E Health.
2013;19(11):815-825.
24. Williams L, O’
Riordan S, McGuigan C,
Hutchinson M, Tubridy N. A web-based electronic
neurology referral system: a solution for an
overburdened healthcare system? Ir Med J. 2012;
105(9):301-303.
25. Moreno-Ramirez D, Ferrandiz L, Ruiz-de-Casas
A, et al. Economic evaluation of a
store-and-forward teledermatology system for skin
cancer patients. J Telemed Telecare. 2009;15(1):
40-45.
26. van der Heijden JP, de Keizer NF, Bos JD, Spuls
PI, Witkamp L. Teledermatology applied following
patient selection by general practitioners in daily
practice improves efficiency and quality of care at
lower cost. Br J Dermatol. 2011;165(5):1058-1065.
27. Whited JD, Hall RP, Foy ME, et al. Patient and
clinician satisfaction with a store-and-forward
teledermatology consult system. Telemed J E Health.
2004;10(4):422-431.
28. Liddy C, Afkham A, Drosinis P, Joschko J, Keely
E. Impact of and satisfaction with a new eConsult
Service: a mixed methods study of primary care
providers. J Am Board Fam Med. 2015;28(3):394-403.
29. Barnett ML, Mehrotra A, Frolkis JP, et al.
Implementation Science Workshop:
implementation of an electronic referral system in a
large academic medical center. J Gen Intern Med.
2016;31(3):343-352.
30. Kirsh S, Carey E, Aron DC, et al. Impact of a
national specialty e-consultation implementation
project on access. Am J Manag Care. 2015;21(12):
e648-e654.
31. Forrest CB. A typology of specialists’clinical
roles. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169(11):1062-1068.
32. Mehrotra A, Forrest CB, Lin CY. Dropping the
baton: specialty referrals in the United States.
Milbank Q. 2011;89(1):39-68.
33. Ray KN, Ashcraft LE, Kahn JM, Mehrotra A,
Miller E. Family perspectives on high-quality
pediatric subspecialty referrals. Acad Pediatr. 2016;
16(6):594-600.
34. Denzin NK, Lincoln YS. The SAGE Handbook of
Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications; 2005.
35. Palen TE, Price D, Shetterly S, Wallace KB.
Comparing virtual consults to traditional consults
using an electronic health record: an observational
case-control study. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak.
2012;12:65.
Research Original Investigation
Primary Care Practitioners’Perceptions of Electronic Consult Systems
E8
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online April 12, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 04/12/2018
