 Treating Wisely: The Surgeon's Role in Antibiotic Stewardship
Ira L. Leeds, MD, MBA§, Anne Fabrizio, MD†, Sara E. Cosgrove, MD‡, and Elizabeth C. Wick, 
MD*
*Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco †Department of Surgery, 
Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington, DC ‡Division of Infectious Diseases, 
Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD §Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
Abstract
Antibiotic resistance continues to receive national attention as a leading public health threat. In 
2015, President Barack Obama proposed a National Action Plan to Combat Antibiotic-Resistant 
Bacteria to curb the rise of “superbugs,” bacteria resistant to antibiotics of last resort. Whereas 
many antibiotics are prescribed appropriately to treat infections, there continue to be a large 
number of inappropriately prescribed antibiotics. Although much of the national attention with 
regards to stewardship has focused on primary care providers, there is a significant opportunity for 
surgeons to embrace this national imperative and improve our practices. Local quality 
improvement efforts suggest that antibiotic misuse for surgical disease is common. Opportunities 
exist as part of day-to-day surgical care as well as through surgeons' interactions with nonsurgeon 
colleagues and policy experts. This article discusses the scope of the antibiotic misuse in surgery 
for surgical patients, and provides immediate practice improvements and also advocacy efforts 
surgeons can take to address the threat. We believe that surgical antibiotic prescribing patterns 
frequently do not adhere to evidence-based practices; surgeons are in a position to mitigate their ill 
effects; and antibiotic stewardship should be a part of every surgeons' practice.
Keywords
antibiotic stewardship; antibiotics; healthcare acquired infections; surgery; surgical site infections; 
urinary tract infections
Antibiotic resistance continues to receive national attention as a leading public health threat. 
In 2015, President Barack Obama proposed a National Action Plan to Combat Antibiotic-
Resistant Bacteria to curb the rise of “superbugs,” bacteria resistant to antibiotics of last 
resort. One of its goals is to reduce the inappropriate use of antibiotics by 50% in the 
outpatient setting and 20% in the inpatient setting.1 Hundreds of millions of antibiotic 
prescriptions are written annually in the United States, and antimicrobials routinely make up 
Reprints: Elizabeth C. Wick, MD, University of California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Ave Rm S549, San Francisco, CA 94143. 
ewick1@jhmi.edu. 
ILL and AF contributed equally to this work.
The authors report no conflicts of interest.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Ann Surg. 2017 May ; 265(5): 871–873. doi:10.1097/SLA.0000000000002034.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 more than 20% of hospital pharmacy budgets.2 In 2011 alone, 842 antibiotic prescriptions 
were written per 1000 people.3 Whereas many antibiotics are prescribed appropriately to 
treat infections, there continue to be a large number of inappropriate prescriptions, estimated 
to be 50% in some studies. It is these unnecessary antibiotic prescriptions that promote 
antibiotic resistance. They threaten the future availability of effective therapeutics as old 
antimicrobial agents no longer work and new agents are coming to the market slowly.2 The 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates there are 2 million illnesses and 
23,000 deaths per year due to antibiotic-resistant organisms, with the incidence continuing to 
rise annually.2 We believe that surgical antibiotic prescribing patterns frequently do not 
adhere to evidence-based practices; surgeons can actively engage in improving prescribing 
patterns; and antibiotic stewardship should be a part of every surgeon's practice.
Surgeons' Call to Action
Antibiotics are an important component of the treatment for many surgical diseases. To 
preserve the efficacy of antibiotics and curb the development of multidrug-resistant bacteria, 
surgeons and patients must be responsible stewards of this limited and precious resource. 
Some of the most common surgical conditions, such as appendicitis, cholecystitis, and 
diverticulitis, are infectious in nature. Additionally, healthcare-associated infections (HAIs), 
such as surgical site infections, urinary tract infections, and pneumonia, are among the most 
common complications we face. Too often, we overtreat surgical infections or HAIs by 
prescribing antibiotics for longer than needed or using broad-spectrum agents when a 
narrower-spectrum agent would suffice.4 Furthermore, HAIs are frequently treated 
presumptively, when the patient may not meet the criteria for a urinary tract infection or 
Clostridium difficile infection, and as a result receives an unnecessary course of 
antibiotics.5,6
Opportunities for Antibiotic Stewardship in Surgery
Although much of the national attention with regards to stewardship has focused on primary 
care providers—pediatricians and family practice providers—there are opportunities for 
surgeons to embrace this national imperative and improve our practices. We evaluated the 
antibiotic-prescribing practices of surgeons at The Johns Hopkins Hospital for patients with 
postoperative HAIs (surgical site infections, urinary tract infections, and pneumonia). 
Patients who developed HAIs within 30 days of colorectal surgery were identified from the 
hospital's American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program 
database. Through further review of patients' records, we identified the date of HAI 
diagnosis, antibiotic selection, and duration of treatment. These treatment regimens were 
then compared with the Johns Hopkins Antibiotic Guidelines—a handbook updated 
annually by the hospital's Antibiotic Stewardship Group.7 We identified significant 
opportunities for improvement with many cases demonstrating over and inappropriate 
treatment (Fig. 1). In 73% of HAIs, the clinicians' treatment deviated (eg, antibiotic 
selection, duration) from recommended practice. Twenty-five per cent of patients were 
treated with too broad a regimen, and 60% of patients were treated beyond the 
recommended duration. These data suggest that surgical practice even at medical centers 
Leeds et al.
Page 2
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with antibiotic stewardship programs fails more often than not to prevent antibiotic misuse. 
We believe this is a common phenomenon.1,3
Areas to Incorporate Antibiotic Stewardship into Surgical Practice
Surgeons need to stay up to date with national consensus guidelines regarding appropriate 
antibiotic prophylaxis for procedures they regularly perform and antibiotic treatment of the 
complications they most commonly encounter. Clinical decision-making regarding antibiotic 
use, including empiric antibiotic selection; daily re-evaluation of the need for continued 
antibiotic therapy; and optimizing the duration of therapy, should be basic expectations of 
surgical practice in the antibiotic-resistance era. Most importantly, surgeons should be 
encouraged to seek consultation from their antimicrobial stewardship team or infectious 
diseases consultant when questions arise.
Newer evidence supports more restrictive antibiotic prescribing, but we frequently fail to 
translate antibiotic treatment-related research into surgical practice. The following 
recommendations can help surgeons incorporate best-evidence practices:
1.
Prophylactic antibiotics should be discontinued at the end of the procedure for 
routine general surgery cases. Prolonged use—even for only 24 hours—does not 
help prevent surgical site infec-tions.8–10
2.
Topical antibiotics are not indicated in the era of prophylactic systemic antibiotic 
therapy. A meta-analysis comparing appendectomy and colorectal surgery 
patients with and without systemic antibiotic prophylaxis demonstrated the 
surgical site infection benefit of topical antibiotic disappeared when using 
routine, prophylactic systemic antibiotics.8
3.
Limited, fixed courses of antibiotics are sufficient for treating complex intra-
abdominal infections after the infectious source is controlled. A recent 
randomized trial demonstrated similar outcomes when comparing the 
effectiveness of approximately 4 days of broad-spectrum antibiotics for intra-
abdominal infections versus physiologic triggered regimens that on average 
lasted 8 days.9
4.
Incision and drainage of superficial skin abscesses and opening of infected 
superficial surgical site infections is an effective treatment. Antibiotic treatment 
is not necessary after appropriate drainage.10–12
5.
Uncomplicated diverticulitis does not typically need to be treated with 
antibiotics. Recent studies support the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
agents without antibiotics for uncomplicated diverticulitis.13,14 Continuing to 
provide unnecessary or excessive antibiotics has been demonstrated to double the 
rates of C difficile infection in surgical patients.15
6.
Asymptomatic bacteriuria should be distinguished from urinary tract infections, 
and the former should not be treated with antibiotics except for pregnant women 
and men undergoing transurethral prostate resections. Urinalyses and urine 
cultures are routinely sent as part of postoperative fever evaluations, but our data 
Leeds et al.
Page 3
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 above suggest the results are not being interpreted correctly. Bacteriuria in 
patients without frequency, urgency, dysuria, or unspecified suprapubic pain does 
not constitute a urinary tract infection and should not be treated.6,7,16
7.
Clostridium difficile samples should only be sent when the pathologic condition 
is suggested by the patients' clinical state including at least 3 or more unformed 
stools in 24 hours.17 A positive laboratory test without evidence of symptoms 
suggests asymptomatic colonization and should not be treated.5,7
Institutional and External Advocacy for Antibiotic Stewardship in Surgery
Although, there is a clear role for antibiotic stewardship in surgical care, there is little 
attention devoted nationally to the subject. For example, more than 20 recommendations 
from various specialty society participants of the American Board of Internal Medicine's 
cross-disciplinary Choosing Wisely Campaign recognize the importance of overuse and 
misuse of antibiotics. However, none of the recommendations contributed by the American 
College of Surgeons address antibiotic use.18 Furthermore, an environmental scan of the past 
12 months of the 5 most highly cited general surgery journals found no articles relating to 
antibiotic stewardship. We are at risk of losing influence over antibiotic decision-making for 
our patients if we do not increase our engagement in antibiotic stewardship work by 
providing proactive leadership in this field.
Residency training programs should provide focused efforts to ensure that future generations 
of surgeons optimize antibiotic use. In the same way that we value and enable ongoing 
professional development with respect to surgical technique and operating knowledge, 
surgeons should be expected to continually hone their knowledge about antibiotic 
prescribing for their surgical practice. Efficient forms of implementing ongoing antibiotic 
stewardship education at the national level include subject-specific continuing medical 
education requirements and formal inclusion of antibiotic stewardship as a topic on specialty 
board maintenance of certification exams.
At the local level, clinical decision support, performance feedback, and surgical engagement 
in hospital antibiotic stewardship activities are all strategies to promote ongoing practice 
improvement. Most hospitals have or are in the process of developing antimicrobial 
stewardship programs. Starting in January 2017, all hospitals accredited by The Joint 
Commission will have to meet the new standard with regards to antibiotic stewardship. This 
includes: establishing antimicrobial stewardship as an organizational priority; educating 
staff, patients, and families about the appropriate use of antibiotics; and creating a 
multidisciplinary antimicrobial stewardship team. Importantly, the Joint Commission 
recognized the importance of requiring diverse expertise for antimicrobial stewardship. 
Surgeons should support and participate in these hospital efforts and ensure that the best 
evidence is reconciled with practical experience and procedure-specific risks.
Antibiotics are one of the medical advances in the 20th century that have radically 
transformed how we are able to care for and treat surgical disease. Unlike some other 
technical counterparts, however, antibiotics represent a healthcare resource in which their 
current use limits their future availability. Before the introduction of antibiotics, surgical 
Leeds et al.
Page 4
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 wound sepsis was effectively a foregone conclusion with infection rates as high as 90% 
during the first world war.19 Combined top-down and bottom-up approaches such as those 
proposed here will help maintain this precious surgical resource for the future.
Acknowledgments
We thank Timothy Pawlik, MD, for his comments on early versions of this manuscript.
References
1. Office of the Press Secretary. Washington, DC: 2015. Fact Sheet: Obama administration releases 
national action plan to combat antibiotic-resistant bacteria [Internet]. [Accessed February 6, 2016]. 
Available at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/12/22/fact-sheet-obama-
administration-releases-national-action-plan-combating
2. Tamma PD, Cosgrove SE. Antimicrobial stewardship. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2011; 25:245–260. 
[PubMed: 21316003] 
3. Hicks LA, Bartoces MG, Roberts RM, et al. US outpatient antibiotic prescribing variation according 
to geography, patient population, and provider specialty in 2011. Clin Infect Dis. 2015; 60:1308–
1316. [PubMed: 25747410] 
4. Bedouch P, Labarère J, Chirpaz E, et al. Compliance with guidelines on antibiotic prophylaxis in 
total hip replacement surgery: results of a retrospective study of 416 patients in a teaching hospital. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2004; 25:302–307. [PubMed: 15108727] 
5. Su W-Y, Mercer J, Van Hal SJ, et al. Clostridium difficile testing: have we got it right? J Clin 
Microbiol. 2016; 51:377–378.
6. Nicolle LE. Asymptomatic bacteriuria: when to screen and when to treat. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 
2003; 17:367–394. [PubMed: 12848475] 
7. Cosgrove, SE., Avdic, E., editors. Antimicrobial Stewardship Program. Antibiotic Guidelines 
2015-2016. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Medicine; 2015. 
8. Charalambous C, Tryfonidis M, Swindell R, et al. When should old therapies be abandoned? A 
modern look at old studies on topical ampicillin. J Infect. 2003; 47:203–209. [PubMed: 12963381] 
9. Sawyer RG, Claridge JA, Nathens AB, et al. Trial of short-course antimicrobial therapy for 
intraabdominal infection. N Engl J Med. 2016; 372:1996–2005.
10. Huizinga WKJ, Kritzinger NA, Bhamjee A. The value of adjuvant systemic antibiotic therapy in 
localised wound infections among hospital patients: a comparative study. J Infect. 1986; 13:11–16. 
[PubMed: 3525684] 
11. Bratzler DW, Dellinger EP, Olsen KM, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for antimicrobial 
prophylaxis in surgery. Am J Heal Pharm. 2013; 70:195–283.
12. Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF, et al. Practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management 
of skin and soft tissue infections: 2014 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin 
Infect Dis. 2014; 59:e10–e52. [PubMed: 24973422] 
13. Mali JP, Mentula PJ, Leppäniemi AK, et al. Symptomatic treatment for uncomplicated acute 
diverticulitis: a prospective cohort study. Dis Colon Rectum. 2016; 59:529–534. [PubMed: 
27145310] 
14. Chabok A, Påhlman L, Hjern F, et al. Randomized clinical trial of antibiotics in acute 
uncomplicated diverticulitis. Br J Surg. 2012; 99:532–539. [PubMed: 22290281] 
15. Itani KMF, Wilson SE, Awad SS, et al. Ertapenem versus cefotetan prophylaxis in elective 
colorectal surgery. N Engl J Med. 2006; 355:2640–2651. [PubMed: 17182989] 
16. Nicolle LE, Bradley S, Colgan R, et al. Infectious Diseases Society of America Guidelines for the 
diagnosis and treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in adults. Clin Infect Dis. 2005; 40:643–654. 
[PubMed: 15714408] 
17. Cohen SH, Gerding DN, Johnson S, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for Clostridium difficile 
infection in adults: 2010 update by the society for healthcare epidemiology of America (SHEA) 
Leeds et al.
Page 5
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and the infectious diseases society of America (IDSA). Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2010; 
31:431–455. [PubMed: 20307191] 
18. ABIM Foundation. Choosing Wisely Recommendations [Internet]. 2014. [Accessed February 6, 
2016]. Available at: http://www.choosingwisely.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Choosing-
Wisely-Recommendations.pdf
19. Fraser F, Dew JW, Taylor DC, et al. Primary and delayed primary suture of gunshot wounds. Br J 
Surg. 2016; 6:92–124.
Leeds et al.
Page 6
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FIGURE 1. 
Panel A: Proportion adhering to Johns Hopkins Antibiotic Guidelines selection and duration 
recommendations for colorectal surgery patients at The Johns Hopkins Hospital grouped by 
HAI (n = 222 patients). Panel B: Proportion of nonadhering prescribing practices by specific 
guideline deviation. SSI indicates surgical site infection; UTI, urinary tract infection.
Leeds et al.
Page 7
Ann Surg. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
