 Pia Leete,1 Abby Willcox,1 Lars Krogvold,2,3 Knut Dahl-Jørgensen,2,3 Alan K. Foulis,4
Sarah J. Richardson,1 and Noel G. Morgan1
Differential Insulitic Profiles Determine
the Extent of b-Cell Destruction and the
Age at Onset of Type 1 Diabetes
Diabetes 2016;65:1362–1369 | DOI: 10.2337/db15-1615
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) results from a T cell–mediated
destruction of pancreatic b-cells following the infiltra-
tion of leukocytes (including CD8+, CD4+, and CD20+
cells) into and around pancreatic islets (insulitis). Re-
cently, we reported that two distinct patterns of insulitis
occur in patients with recent-onset T1D from the U.K.
and that these differ principally in the proportion of in-
filtrating CD20+ B cells (designated CD20Hi and CD20Lo,
respectively). We have now extended this analysis to
include patients from the Network for Pancreatic Organ
Donors with Diabetes (U.S.) and Diabetes Virus Detec-
tion (DiViD) study (Norway) cohorts and confirm that the
two profiles of insulitis occur more widely. Moreover, we
show that patients can be directly stratified according to
their insulitic profile and that those receiving a diagnosis
before the age of 7 years always display the CD20Hi
profile. By contrast, individuals who received a diagno-
sis beyond the age of 13 years are uniformly defined as
CD20Lo. This implies that the two forms of insulitis are
differentially aggressive and that patients with a CD20Hi
profile lose their b-cells at a more rapid rate. In support
of this, we also find that the proportion of residual in-
sulin-containing islets (ICIs) increases in parallel with
age at the onset of T1D. Importantly, those receiving a
diagnosis in, or beyond, their teenage years retain ∼40%
ICIs at diagnosis, implying that a functional deficit rather
than an absolute b-cell loss may be causal for disease
onset in these patients. We conclude that appropriate
patient stratification will be critical for correct inter-
pretation of the outcomes of intervention therapies tar-
geted to islet-infiltrating immune cells in T1D.
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is widely perceived as an autoim-
mune condition arising from the selective destruction of
pancreatic b-cells by influent immune cells targeted to the
islets of Langerhans (1–4). This concept has been exam-
ined extensively in animal models, but many fewer studies
have been undertaken in humans. Indeed, In’t Veld (5,6)
has noted that as few as 150 T1D case patients with
insulitis have been scrutinized worldwide since the begin-
ning of the last century. This is unfortunate because the
extent of insulitis observed in animal models is more
fulminant than in most human patients, implying that
additional studies are required to improve our under-
standing of the process in humans (5). Accordingly, we
have exploited a large collection of autopsy pancreas sam-
ples, recovered from patients who died soon after the
diagnosis of T1D, to investigate the immune infiltrate
in inflamed islets (2,7,8). This has revealed aspects of
the temporal changes that accompany b-cell destruction
and has shown that the principal cells involved in the
destructive process are likely to be CD8+ cytotoxic T cells
(2,7,8). However, the studies also yielded a more unex-
pected outcome in that they revealed a potential role for
CD20+ B cells in some patients based on the finding that
these cells infiltrate islets in large numbers, in parallel
with the influx of CD8+ T cells (7).
Building on this background, we have also highlighted
an unexpected dichotomy in the composition of the
immune cell infiltrates present in the inflamed islets of
patients with recent-onset T1D (8). Thus, it was found
that, although significant numbers of CD20+ B cells
1Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical School,
Exeter, U.K.
2Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway
3Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
4Department of Pathology, National Health Service Greater Glasgow and Clyde,
Southern General Hospital, Glasgow, U.K.
Corresponding authors: Sarah J. Richardson, s.richardson@exeter.ac.uk, and
Noel G. Morgan, n.g.morgan@exeter.ac.uk.
Received 25 November 2015 and accepted 20 January 2016.
This article contains Supplementary Data online at http://diabetes
.diabetesjournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.2337/db15-1615/-/DC1.
© 2016 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as
long as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and
the work is not altered.
See accompanying article, p. 1146.
1362
Diabetes Volume 65, May 2016
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 infiltrate the islets in many individuals, this is not univer-
sally true. Rather, other patients could be found in
whose inflamed islets very few CD20+ cells were present.
To denote this difference, the terms CD20Hi and
CD20Lo were coined to differentiate the two profiles of
insulitis, and it was shown that each was present among a
group of recent-onset patients in whom T1D had been
diagnosed before the age of 20 years (8). Importantly, it
was also noted that the variation in B-cell numbers occurs
independently of the presence of CD8+ T cells. Despite this,
it was also clear that the total population of infiltrating
immune cells is least abundant in cases where CD20+
cell numbers are depleted. Accordingly, the two states
might also be considered as relatively hyperimmune
(CD20Hi) or pauci-immune (CD20Lo), respectively.
In order to develop a greater understanding of the
functional significance of these two insulitic profiles in
human T1D, we now report a more complete character-
ization of the phenomenon in the following three different
pancreas collections: those harvested postmortem
(U.K.) (9), biopsy samples from living donors (Diabetes
Virus Detection [DiViD] study; Norway) (10), and samples
from organ donors (Network for Pancreatic Organ Do-
nors with Diabetes [nPOD]; U.S.) (11,12). The studies
confirm the existence of two distinct profiles of insulitis
and imply that these patterns exert a profound influence
on the rate of disease progression and the extent of b-cell
destruction in humans. As such, these new results suggest
very strongly that correct patient stratification will be es-
sential when testing the efficacy of targeted immunother-
apeutic agents in human populations and imply that
caution should be exercised when interpreting the out-
comes of earlier trials where this was not achieved.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS
Pancreas Samples
Insulitis was examined in 20 human pancreas sections
recovered at the time of postmortem examination from
patients selected from among a U.K. cohort of patients
with T1D who had died within 3 months of diagnosis
(7,9). These comprised 14 females and 6 males with ages
ranging from 1 to 19 years (mean age 10.5 6 1.3 years).
For studies of the extent of residual insulin positivity,
sections from all 151 patients within this collection
were evaluated, irrespective of disease duration or the
presence of insulitis (63 males; 88 females).
In addition, insulitis was also studied in pancreas
sections recovered by laparoscopic minimal tail resection
from six living adult donors who had participated in the
DiViD study (10), as well as in two organ donors with
recent-onset T1D from the nPOD cohort (Supplementary
Table 1). Participants in the DiViD study were between 25
and 35 years of age, and their biopsy specimens were
obtained between 3 and 9 weeks after initial diagnosis.
The two nPOD donors were 4.75 and 11 years old at the
time of death, and their disease durations were 120 and
0 days, respectively. The collection of pancreatic tissue
in the DiViD study was approved by The Norwegian
Government’s Regional Ethics Committee, and all sam-
ples were studied with ethical approval.
Immunohistochemistry
Serial sections (4 mm) were cut from each pancreas and
mounted on glass slides. Samples from the U.K. cohort
were processed and labeled using a standard immunoper-
oxidase technique for paraffin sections, as described pre-
viously (7,8). All antigens, except insulin and glucagon,
were unmasked by heat-induced epitope retrieval. In brief,
sections to be labeled with anti-CD20+ antiserum (M0755;
Dako) were heated in 10 mmol/L citrate buffer, pH 6, for
20 min in a microwave oven at full power (800 W). Those to
be labeled with anti-CD4+ (ab846; Abcam) or anti-CD8+
(ab4055; Abcam) were heated in 10 mmol/L Tris, 1 mmol/L
EDTA, pH 9. Primary antibodies were applied for 1 h at
room temperature, with the exception of anti-CD4, which
was incubated at 4°C overnight (Supplementary Table 2).
Antigen visualization was achieved via the Dako REAL
Envision Detection System. Some slides were processed
in the absence of primary antibody or with isotype con-
trol antisera to confirm the specificity of labeling.
Pancreas sections from the DiViD and nPOD collec-
tions were examined by a combination of immunofluo-
rescence and immunohistochemistry using horseradish
peroxidase and alkaline phosphatase staining, as appro-
priate. Where possible, and to minimize sample usage, at
least two antigens per section were examined in parallel.
Antigens were unmasked by heat-induced epitope re-
trieval (20 min at full power in a microwave oven; 800 W)
in 10 mmol/L citrate buffer (pH 6). Combined staining was
achieved by using guinea pig anti-insulin (A0564; Dako)
in combination with mouse anti-glucagon (ab10988; Abcam)
and visualized using a Vector Red Substrate kit for detection
of alkaline phosphatase activity (AK-5100 and SK-5100;
Vector Laboratories, Peterborough, U.K.). Binding of rabbit
anti-CD8 and mouse anti-CD20 sera was visualized using
secondary antibodies tagged with appropriate fluorescent
probes (Alexa Fluor anti-mouse 488 [A11029; Invitrogen,
Paisley, U.K.] or anti-rabbit 568 [A1136; Invitrogen]). Cell
nuclei were stained with DAPI.
Image Acquisition and Analysis
Bright-field image acquisition and analysis were performed
on a Nikon 50i Microscope fitted with a DS-Fi camera and
a DSL2 camera control unit. Images were captured and
analyzed using the ImageJ platform. Immunofluorescence
image collection and processing were achieved using a Leica
DM4000 B LED upright fluorescence microscope and Leica
Image analysis software (LAS AF).
Statistical Analysis
Ten islets were selected randomly from within each
stained section among the U.K. cohort, and the number
of CD8+, CD4+, and CD20+ cells within the islet area and
in the endocrine-exocrine interface in close contact with
the islet boundary were recorded. The mean number
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Leete and Associates
1363
 6SEM of each immune cell subtype was calculated for
each patient as an average of the 10 individual values from
each islet. The insulin-positive area of each islet was assessed
and expressed as a percentage of the total area, as described
previously (7), and was scored as +++, ++, or +, respectively.
In the DiViD and nPOD cohorts, immune cells were counted
from ;30 islets per patient section and were expressed as
described above. Statistical significance was calculated using
the Kruskal-Wallis with Dunn multiple-comparison test, Stu-
dent t test, or x2 analysis, as appropriate.
RESULTS
Profiles of Insulitis in Patients With T1D
Detailed analysis was undertaken of the numbers of CD8+,
CD4+, and CD20+ cells within, or in close proximity to,
10 randomly selected inflamed islets across multiple case
patients from among the U.K. collection of recent-onset
T1D patients. This confirmed the existence of the two
independent profiles (CD20Hi and CD20Lo) (Fig. 1A
and B). The results also revealed that these profiles are
patient specific, in that all inflamed islets within any given
individual display the same phenotype.
A more dynamic evaluation of the profile of immune
cell infiltration in relation to b-cell loss was also under-
taken in patients from each group (Fig. 1C–F). This anal-
ysis confirmed that CD8+ T cells always comprise the
majority population within inflamed islets, irrespective
of the number of CD20+ cells present. This was evident
both when the absolute number of each cell type was
examined (Fig. 1C and D) and when the relative propor-
tions of each were calculated (Fig. 1E and F). It was also
clear that the number of CD8+ T cells varied according to
the progression of b-cell loss (Fig. 1C and D). CD4+ T-cell
numbers also tended to rise as the extent of b-cell loss
neared totality, but their absolute number (and relative
proportion) was always much lower than the number (or
proportion) of CD8+ cells. Importantly, the most marked
difference between the two phenotypes was in the pro-
portion of CD20+ B cells found within, or near to,
inflamed islets. Among one group (CD20Hi), these were
abundant, and they increased in parallel with the CD8+
cells as b-cell death progressed (Fig. 1C and E). By con-
trast, in the second group (CD20Lo individuals) they were
the least abundant cell type at all stages of the disease
process (Fig. 1D and F).
In addition to the variation in the absolute number of
CD20+ cells, the ratio of CD20+ to CD4+ cells also varied
consistently between the two phenotypes (Fig. 1). Thus,
in CD20Hi case patients, the ratio of CD20+ to CD4+ cells
in inflamed islets was .1.0 at all stages of b-cell loss,
whereas this ratio was consistently ,1.0 in CD20Lo pa-
tients. On this basis, it seemed that estimation of the
CD20+/CD4+ cell ratio might offer greater utility as a
means to subclassify patients. Accordingly, we focused
on this ratio to define the CD20Hi (CD20+/CD4+ ratio
.1.0) and CD20Lo (CD20+/CD4+ ratio ,1.0) subgroups
in subsequent studies.
Because the two profiles of insulitis may represent
differentially aggressive phenotypes with variable rates of
disease progression (8), the ratio of CD20+ to CD4+ cells
was examined in patients from the U.K. at increasing age
at diagnosis. This revealed a striking relationship despite
the limitation that all patients studied had received a di-
agnosis at ,20 years of age (Fig. 2). Notably, it was clear
that CD20Hi patients tended to receive a diagnosis at
younger ages than those defined as CD20Lo. Indeed,
when patients within the U.K. cohort were stratified
into those in whom T1D was diagnosed at between 1 and
6 years of age versus those in whom it was diagnosed at
$13 years of age, the separation between the two pheno-
types was absolute (Fig. 2). All individuals within the youn-
ger group were classified as CD20Hi, whereas those who
received a diagnosis at the older age were CD20Lo. Patients
in whom T1D developed between the ages of 7 and 13 years
fell into either group.
To verify these conclusions, we next examined the
profile of insulitis in pancreas samples from among the
nPOD collection and from the DiViD cohort of living
organ donors. In practice, only two patients who met
our criteria for recent-onset T1D (within 120 days of
diagnosis) were available from the nPOD cohort (case
nos. 6209 and 6228), whereas all six of the DiViD
patients conformed to this criterion. Strikingly, the
insulitic profile in each of the inflamed islets of the six
DiViD patients (all of whom had received a diagnosis
beyond the age of 20 years) was CD20Lo (Fig. 3). A
similar profile was found in one of the two nPOD pa-
tients (nPOD case 6228; T1D diagnosed originally at
13 years of age). By contrast, the second nPOD case
patient (nPOD case 6209) had received a diagnosis much
earlier in life (,5 years of age) and was defined as CD20Hi.
The Influence of Age at Diagnosis on the Proportion of
Residual Insulin-Containing Islets in the Pancreata of
Patients With T1D
In view of the finding that age at diagnosis is predictive of
the profile of insulitis in patients with recent-onset T1D,
and that individuals who have received a diagnosis at
younger ages appear to display a more aggressive pheno-
type, we considered the possibility that the proportion of
residual insulin-containing islets (ICIs) might also differ
between these groups. Accordingly, we calculated the pro-
portion of such islets in sections of pancreas from each
patient. This was achieved by using glucagon immunore-
activity to define the total islet number, with simultaneous
costaining for insulin to monitor the proportion of residual
ICIs. Initially, this analysis was performed for the patients
within the U.K. cohort, and these were stratified according
to age, as follows: group 1, from 1 to 6 years of age at
diagnosis; group 2, from 7 to 12 years of age at diagnosis;
and group 3, $13 years of age at diagnosis. The results
revealed a strongly positive relationship in which individ-
uals who had received a diagnosis at the youngest ages
retained a much lower proportion of ICIs than those who
1364
Insulitis and Age at Onset of Type 1 Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 65, May 2016
 Figure 1—Complement of immune cells in inflamed islets of patients with T1D. The numbers of CD8+ (circles), CD4+ (triangles), and CD20+
(squares) cells were quantified in at least 10 inflamed islets in each of 20 pancreata available within the U.K. cohort of recent-onset T1D
patients. These are displayed as the cumulative mean values per islet (6SEM) of each cell type, stratified according to the average number
of CD20+ cells present. Left-hand panels (A, C, and E) are from patients with a mean of >3 CD20+ cells per inflamed islet (10 case patients);
right-hand panels (B, D, and F) are from those with <3 CD20+ cells per inflamed islet (10 case patients). Panels A and B show the average
number of immune cells per islet independent of islet insulin content. The data analyzed in relation to the insulin content of each islet are
displayed either as the absolute mean number of immune cells (C and D) or as the relative proportion of each immune cell subtype (E and
F). Islet insulin content was calculated relative to total islet area and is expressed as +++, ++, +, and 2 to denote decreasing insulin
immunopositivity (>65%, 33–64%, <33%, and 0, respectively).
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Leete and Associates
1365
 had received a diagnosis in the older age group (P , 0.001)
(Fig. 4).
Extending this analysis to include pancreas samples
from the two additional nPOD case patients, as well as
those from the six DiViD patients, reinforced these
conclusions. Thus, the DiViD patients retained a mean of
25% ICIs in the pancreas sections studied at diagnosis
(Fig. 4), and this was also the situation in nPOD case patient
6228 (CD20Lo) (Fig. 4). By contrast, nPOD case patient
6209, whose insulitic profile was consistent with a more
aggressive inflammatory infiltrate, retained only 10% ICIs
at diagnosis.
Having examined patients soon after diagnosis, the
analysis was extended to include U.K. case patients having
a disease duration of between 1 and 10 years (Supple-
mentary Fig. 1). Consistent with the data from recent-
onset patients, individuals who had received a diagnosis
at the younger ages retained the fewest ICIs.
In view of this striking outcome, we extended the data
set further to examine the entire collection of T1D
pancreas samples available within the U.K. cohort (a total
of 151 patients), irrespective of their disease duration or
the presence of insulitis (Fig. 5). The proportion of re-
sidual ICIs present in at least one pancreatic section (se-
lected randomly from those available for study) from each
block was calculated. When stratified into three groups
according to the original age at diagnosis (1–6 years,
7–12 years, and .13 years of age), the proportion of re-
sidual ICIs increased from a mean of 14 6 3% in those
who received a diagnosis early in life to 39 6 4% in those
who received a diagnosis from their teens or beyond (P ,
0.001). Indeed, among the latter group, 56 of 69 patients
still retained residual ICIs in the pancreas sections stud-
ied. This was significantly more than the equivalent pro-
portion among those in the youngest age group (19 of 43
patients; P , 0.004 by x2 analysis). Similar findings were
made in the nPOD cohort when the proportion of case
patients with residual ICIs was examined (Supplementary
Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table 2).
DISCUSSION
It is often assumed that insulitis and b-cell loss proceed in
a broadly consistent manner in the majority of patients in
whom T1D develops and that the final descent into clin-
ical disease occurs when a defined proportion of the initial
b-cell mass has been lost. Estimates vary as to the precise
extent, but it is frequently argued that a .80% loss may
be required to precipitate the disease (13–16). However,
in accord with Klinke (17), we find that this may be an
oversimplification. Importantly, we note that b-cell num-
bers do not necessarily dwindle to very low levels before
diabetes is manifest but that many patients have diabetes
while still retaining significant numbers of these cells. We
also find that the process and extent of b-cell loss varies
with age such that individuals in whom T1D develops
early in life (before the age of 7 years) lose b-cells to a
much greater extent than those who receive a diagnosis of
the illness in their teenage years or beyond. Similar con-
clusions that patients with an early disease onset may
have a more fulminant form of the illness have also
been reached previously (18,19), and we now attribute
this variation to the existence of two distinct profiles of
insulitis, which yield very different rates of b-cell loss (8).
Careful examination of multiple islets across a range of
patients reveals that all of the inflamed islets within a
given patient display the same insulitic profile but that
this profile differs significantly between individuals.
Importantly, this variation does not occur in a purely
stochastic manner; rather, two identifiable forms of
insulitis can be differentiated. Both are characterized by
a preponderance of CD8+ T cells, suggesting that these are
likely to be the key cytotoxic mediators in each subtype of
the disease. By contrast, there is much greater variation in
the proportion of CD20+ B cells; these are abundant in the
inflamed islets of some individuals but are almost absent
from the islets of others. As a result, the terms CD20Hi or
CD20Lo were coined to denote these two profiles (8). This
designation is intended not to imply that CD20+ cells are
necessarily (or selectively) cytotoxic in one form of the
disease but, rather, to emphasize that these cells may play
an important accessory role in the destructive process and
that this is exerted more effectively in one form than in
the other. Comparison of the number (or proportion) of
CD4+ cells within inflamed islets revealed no significant
Figure 2—Ratio of CD20+ to CD4+ cells in the inflamed islets of
patients with T1D from the U.K. cohort. Patients with recent-onset
T1D from within the U.K. cohort were stratified according to their
age at diagnosis of diabetes and the ratio of CD20+ to CD4+ cells
calculated in 10 inflamed islets from each patient. Each point rep-
resents the mean ratio in an individual patient, and the differen-
tially hatched panels define the increasing age ranges at diagnosis
(1–6 years, left, stippled pattern; 7–13 years, center, diagonal
hatches; and 14–20 years, right, horizontal hatches).
1366
Insulitis and Age at Onset of Type 1 Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 65, May 2016
 differences among this cell population but suggested that
they could provide a useful means to distinguish the two
profiles, based on measurement of the ratio of CD20 to
CD4 cells. Thus, among CD20Hi patients this ratio was .1.0,
whereas it was ,1.0 in those defined as CD20Lo. Accord-
ingly, we propose that monitoring of the ratio of CD20
to CD4 cells may provide a useful and robust means to
distinguish the two subtypes of insulitis.
The justification for our conclusion that the two
profiles of insulitis are functionally different lies in the
striking finding that children in whom diabetes develops
at ,7 years of age uniformly display a CD20Hi profile,
whereas the islets of those patients in whom diabetes is
diagnosed beyond their teenage years always display a
CD20Lo profile. This extraordinary level of differentiation
was unexpected, and it was important to establish that it
did not reflect a hidden variable arising from the study of
individuals whose pancreata were harvested in a partic-
ular way or from one specific geographical region (the
majority of our observations having been made using
samples collected at autopsy in the U.K. from individuals
who had died in ketoacidosis) (9). In noting this, it must
also be emphasized that extending the analysis is not a
trivial task because the number of case patients with
recent-onset T1D available for study worldwide is very
small. Nevertheless, we were able to confirm the find-
ings by analysis of two organ donors with recent-onset
T1D from the nPOD collection (patients 6209 and 6228)
(11,12) and six adults with new diagnoses who had con-
sented to undergo a pancreatic biopsy in the Norwegian
DiViD study (10). These followed patterns identical to
those seen in the larger group from the U.K. and allowed
the compilation of a more extensive data set to verify
the conclusions. This revealed statistically significant
differences in several parameters assessed at the islet
level between those who had received a diagnosis at
younger ages (,7 years of age) and those who were
older at disease onset ($13 years of age). Most notably,
all patients who received a diagnosis at .13 years of
age displayed a CD20Lo islet profile, whereas young
children had a CD20Hi profile. Not surprisingly, indi-
viduals who received a diagnosis of T1D between the
ages of 7 and 12 years could fall into either category, as
might be expected if two overlapping distribution pro-
files exist.
Analysis of the age-related variation in disease pathol-
ogy revealed a second important feature, namely, that the
proportion of ICIs remaining at the diagnosis of T1D
varies significantly between groups. Consistent with the
results of a previous meta-analysis (17), we found that
Figure 3—Ratio of CD20+ to CD4+ cells in the inflamed islets of
patients with T1D from multiple cohorts. Islets were examined in
pancreas samples from patients with recent-onset T1D among the
U.K. cohort (circles), the nPOD collection (squares), and the DiViD
cohort (triangles) and were stratified according to their age at di-
agnosis of diabetes. The ratio of CD20+ to CD4+ cells was calcu-
lated in up to 30 inflamed islets from each patient. Each point
represents the mean ratio in an individual patient displayed in re-
lation to their age at diagnosis. *P < 0.001 relative to those who
received diagnoses at 1–6 years of age.
Figure 4—Proportion of residual ICIs found in pancreas sections
from patients with recent-onset T1D. The proportion of ICIs (ex-
pressed as a percentage) in pancreatic sections from patients
with recent-onset T1D among the U.K. cohort was determined
and displayed in relation to the age at diagnosis. Arrows indicate
the equivalent values in the six patients from the DiViD cohort (all of
whom received diagnoses beyond the age of 20 years) and the two
nPOD case patients (nPOD case patient 6228, diagnosed at 13
years of age; nPOD case patient 6209, diagnosed at <5 years of
age). *P < 0.001 relative to those who received a diagnosis at 1–6
years of age.
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Leete and Associates
1367
 those who received a diagnosis in their early years had a
much lower proportion of ICIs than patients with an older
age at onset. This difference was so pronounced that age
at diagnosis could be used as a strong surrogate to predict
the proportion of ICIs present at diagnosis and the profile
of insulitis that would be found (whether CD20Hi or
CD20Lo). Moreover, when this analysis was extended to
include all 151 samples from within the U.K. cohort and
116 samples from nPOD (irrespective of disease duration)
stratified according to age at diagnosis, these relation-
ships still held. Younger patients (,7 years of age) had
a significantly lower proportion of residual ICIs than
those who presented with T1D in their teenage years or
beyond (even when many years had passed between the
initial diagnosis and the availability of the pancreas for
analysis).
In drawing this conclusion, it is important to recognize
that the present analysis was undertaken on only a small
number of sections from any given pancreas. Indeed, in
many cases the proportion of ICIs was estimated on a
single section. This then raises an important question
about the extent to which an individual set of data de-
rived from one section can be considered representative
of the entire pancreas. This is especially true given that
the processes of insulitis and b-cell loss occur in a lobular
manner across the gland (20–23). Such considerations
inevitably mean that it would be dangerous to draw
firm conclusions from a single pancreatic section taken
from one individual patient studied in isolation. However,
a key strength of the current study is that we were able to
examine sections selected at random from multiple pa-
tients and, thereby, to counter the likelihood of systematic
bias. On this basis, we consider that the cumulative results
provide a representative view of the pathological mecha-
nisms causing T1D and that wider generalization of the
conclusions is valid. If this were not the case, then factors
such as the proportion of ICIs would be expected to be
distributed more randomly in the analysis rather than seg-
regating in parallel with age at disease onset, as we find.
The discovery that T1D develops in many patients at a
time when their b-cell mass remains relatively high sug-
gests that, in these individuals, b-cell dysfunction rather
than cell death may be a significant contributory factor
leading to glucose intolerance. Indeed, this is supported
directly by study of the insulin secretory capacity of the
islets isolated from pancreas biopsy samples recovered
from the DiViD cohort (24). These patients all displayed
a CD20Lo profile of insulitis, and, in accord with this,
they received a diagnosis beyond their teenage years
and retained a large proportion of ICIs at disease onset.
Importantly, their islets were largely unresponsive to a
glucose stimulus upon isolation but gradually regained
responsiveness during tissue culture under ex vivo condi-
tions (24). This implies that the ICIs had become dysfunc-
tional in vivo rather than experiencing an irreversible
decline arising from complete b-cell demise. These results
therefore offer the prospect that, by appropriate thera-
peutic intervention, the residual b-cells of patients with a
CD20Lo insulitic profile might also be reactivated in vivo
and that, in combination with an appropriate immuno-
therapeutic regimen, this could lead to a reduced require-
ment for exogenous insulin.
One important conclusion arising from the present
data is that due care should be exercised when designing
immunotherapeutic interventions in patients with T1D.
In particular, it will be important to ensure that patients
are stratified according to their insulitic profile (for which
age at onset appears a strong surrogate) and that the
regimen is tailored appropriately. One obvious example to
illustrate this principle arises from the outcome of trials
with the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody rituximab (25,26).
Because we find that infiltrating CD20+ cells are present
preferentially in the islets of patients who received a di-
agnosis at ,7 years of age, it is, perhaps, likely that such
individuals may be most sensitive to the therapy, whereas
older patients will be more refractory.
In conclusion, we confirm that insulitis occurs in two
distinct profiles in patients with T1D. These differ
principally in the proportion of CD20+ B cells (expressed
relative to CD4+ cells) present within the infiltrate, and
this appears to lead to a more or less aggressive pheno-
type, respectively. These phenotypes not only lead to
differential rates of b-cell loss (as judged by marked dif-
ferences in the age at onset between the groups) but
also culminate in the loss of glucose tolerance when
Figure 5—Proportion of residual ICIs found in pancreas sections
from 151 patients with T1D among the U.K. cohort, irrespective of
disease duration. The proportion of residual ICIs was calculated (as
a percentage) in at least one pancreatic section from all 151 pa-
tients with T1D among the U.K. cohort. These were then stratified
into three groups according to their age at initial diagnosis of T1D.
*P < 0.001 relative to those 1–6 years of age.
1368
Insulitis and Age at Onset of Type 1 Diabetes
Diabetes Volume 65, May 2016
 dramatically different numbers of b-cells remain in the
pancreas. In the youngest patients, b-cell loss is rapid and
extensive. By contrast, those receiving a diagnosis in their
teenage years or beyond have less aggressive disease, and
they experience clinical onset when a significant b-cell
reserve is still measurable. These results emphasize that,
in the future, it will be critical to stratify patients appro-
priately according to their insulitic profile and age at on-
set of disease in order to design and conduct trials of
effective therapies for T1D.
Acknowledgments. The authors thank specialist nurse Trine Roald, Oslo
University Hospital, Norway, whose invaluable efforts were essential to the
success of the DiViD study.
Funding. This research received financial support from the European Union
Seventh Framework Programme PEVNET (Persistent Virus Infection as a Cause of
Pathogenic Inflammation in Type 1 Diabetes – An Innovative Research Program
of Biobanks and Expertise) (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement number
261441. The participants of the PEVNET consortium are described at http://
www.uta.fi/med/pevnet/publications.html. K.D.-J. has received grants from the
South-Eastern Norway Regional Health Authority and the Novo Nordisk Founda-
tion. Additional support came from a JDRF Career Development Award (5-CDA-
2014-221-A-N) to S.J.R. The research was also performed with the support of the
Network for Pancreatic Organ Donors with Diabetes (nPOD), a collaborative type 1
diabetes research project sponsored by the JDRF (25-2013-268), and with JDRF
research grants awarded to the nPOD-V consortium (JDRF 25-2012-516 and JDRF
25-2012-770). Organ Procurement Organizations (OPO) partnering with nPOD to
provide research resources are listed at www.jdrfnpod.org/our-partners.php.
Duality of Interest. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article
were reported.
Author Contributions. P.L. and A.W. performed data collection and
analysis and reviewed the manuscript. L.K., K.D.-J., and A.K.F. collected patient
material and revised the manuscript. S.J.R. and N.G.M. designed the study,
performed data analysis, and wrote the manuscript. S.J.R. and N.G.M. are the
guarantors of this work and, as such, had full access to all the data in the study
and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data
analysis.
References
1. Roep BO, Tree TI. Immune modulation in humans: implications for type 1
diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev Endocrinol 2014;10:229–242
2. Morgan NG, Leete P, Foulis AK, Richardson SJ. Islet inflammation in human
type 1 diabetes mellitus. IUBMB Life 2014;66:723–734
3. Atkinson MA, Eisenbarth GS, Michels AW. Type 1 diabetes. Lancet 2014;
383:69–82
4. Campbell-Thompson ML, Atkinson MA, Butler AE, et al. The diagnosis of
insulitis in human type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 2013;56:2541–2543
5. In’t Veld P. Rodent versus human insulitis: why the huge disconnect? Curr
Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 2015;22:86–90
6. In’t Veld P. Insulitis in human type 1 diabetes: the quest for an elusive
lesion. Islets 2011;3:131–138
7. Willcox A, Richardson SJ, Bone AJ, Foulis AK, Morgan NG. Analysis of islet
inflammation in human type 1 diabetes. Clin Exp Immunol 2009;155:173–181
8. Arif S, Leete P, Nguyen V, et al. Blood and islet phenotypes indicate
immunological heterogeneity in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes 2014;63:3835–
3845
9. Foulis AK, Liddle CN, Farquharson MA, Richmond JA, Weir RS. The histo-
pathology of the pancreas in type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus: a 25-
year review of deaths in patients under 20 years of age in the United Kingdom.
Diabetologia 1986;29:267–274
10. Krogvold L, Edwin B, Buanes T, et al. Pancreatic biopsy by minimal tail
resection in live adult patients at the onset of type 1 diabetes: experiences from
the DiViD study. Diabetologia 2014;57:841–843
11. Campbell-Thompson M. Organ donor specimens: what can they tell us
about type 1 diabetes? Pediatr Diabetes 2015;16:320–330
12. Pugliese A, Vendrame F, Reijonen H, Atkinson MA, Campbell-Thompson M,
Burke GW. New insight on human type 1 diabetes biology: nPOD and nPOD-
transplantation. Curr Diab Rep 2014;14:530
13. Atkinson MA. ADA Outstanding Scientific Achievement Lecture 2004. Thirty
years of investigating the autoimmune basis for type 1 diabetes: why can’t we
prevent or reverse this disease? Diabetes 2005;54:1253–1263
14. Gale EA. Can we change the course of beta-cell destruction in type 1 di-
abetes? N Engl J Med 2002;346:1740–1742
15. Battaglia M, Atkinson MA. The streetlight effect in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes
2015;64:1081–1090
16. Klöppel G, Löhr M, Habich K, Oberholzer M, Heitz PU. Islet pathology and the
pathogenesis of type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus revisited. Surv Synth Pathol
Res 1985;4:110–125
17. Klinke DJ 2nd. Extent of beta cell destruction is important but
insufficient to predict the onset of type 1 diabetes mellitus. PLoS One 2008;
3:e1374
18. Pipeleers D, Ling Z. Pancreatic beta cells in insulin-dependent diabetes.
Diabetes Metab Rev 1992;8:209–227
19. Lernmark A, Klöppel G, Stenger D, et al. Heterogeneity of islet pathology in
two infants with recent onset diabetes mellitus. Virchows Arch 1995;425:631–
640
20. Atkinson MA, von Herrath M, Powers AC, Clare-Salzler M. Current concepts
on the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes–considerations for attempts to prevent
and reverse the disease. Diabetes Care 2015;38:979–988
21. Rodriguez-Calvo T, Suwandi JS, Amirian N, et al. Heterogeneity and lobu-
larity of pancreatic pathology in type 1 diabetes during the prediabetic phase. J
Histochem Cytochem 2015;63:626–636
22. Richardson SJ, Morgan NG, Foulis AK. Pancreatic pathology in type 1 di-
abetes mellitus. Endocr Pathol 2014;25:80–92
23. Richardson SJ, Willcox A, Bone AJ, Morgan NG, Foulis AK. Immunopa-
thology of the human pancreas in type-I diabetes. Semin Immunopathol 2011;33:
9–21
24. Krogvold L, Skog O, Sundström G, et al. Function of isolated pancreatic
islets from patients at onset of type 1 diabetes; insulin secretion can be restored
after some days in a non-diabetogenic environment in vitro. Results from the
DiViD study. Diabetes 2015;64:2506–2512
25. Pescovitz MD, Greenbaum CJ, Bundy B, et al.; Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet
Anti-CD20 Study Group. B-lymphocyte depletion with rituximab and b-cell
function: two-year results. Diabetes Care 2014;37:453–459
26. Pescovitz MD, Greenbaum CJ, Krause-Steinrauf H, et al.; Type 1
Diabetes
TrialNet
Anti-CD20
Study Group.
Rituximab,
B-lymphocyte
depletion, and preservation of beta-cell function. N Engl J Med 2009;
361:2143–2152
diabetes.diabetesjournals.org
Leete and Associates
1369
