 Building Trust with Children and Young
People at Risk of Child Sexual
Exploitation: The Professional Challenge
Michelle Lefevre*, Kristine Hickle, Barry Luckock and
Gillian Ruch
Department of Social Work and Social Care, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, UK
*Correspondence to Dr Michelle Lefevre, Department of Social Work and Social Care,
University of Sussex, Essex House, Arts Road, Falmer, Brighton, BN1 9QQ, UK. E-mail:
M.Lefevre@sussex.ac.uk
Abstract
Research with children and young people at risk of child sexual exploitation (CSE) has
highlighted that professionals need to engage children in relationships of trust if they
are to be most successful in enabling children to explore and address risky behaviours,
situations and relationships. More needs to be understood about professional
approaches to building such trusting relationships, particularly when children feel
(often with good cause) that professionals are not always able to balance their need
for protection and guidance with their right to a voice and to make agentic choices
about their own lives. This paper draws on interim findings from a two-year realist
evaluation study funded by the Office of the Children’s Commissioner in England into
the implementation and evaluation of a new child-centred framework for working
with CSE , ‘See Me, Hear Me’, within three pilot local authority sites in different re-
gions of England. A survey and qualitative interviews reveal how professionals from a
range of disciplines draw on their knowledge, skills, personal qualities and values to
develop trust. Key themes for effective practice were relationship-based practice, an
ethically grounded approach, child-centred, and being skilled and knowledgeable in
relation to working with CSE.
Keywords: Child sexual exploitation, relationship-based practice, trust, use of self
Accepted: December 2016
# The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
The British Association of Social Workers. All rights reserved.
British Journal of Social Work (2017) 47, 2456–2473
doi: 10.1093/bjsw/bcw181
Advance Access Publication February 14, 2017
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Introduction
There is increasing global awareness of the prevalence, nature and impact
of child sexual exploitation (CSE) (US Department of Justice, 2007; Brodie
and Pearce, 2012). The term ‘CSE’ broadly covers exploitative situations,
contexts and relationships where a child or young person receives tangible
or intangible benefits, such as food, accommodation, drugs, affection, pro-
tection, gifts or money, from someone who has power over them by using,
for example, their age, economic resources, intellect or physical strength to
control, coerce, manipulate or intimidate the child into sexual activity
(Home Office and the Department for Education, 2016). The boundaries
of the definition are fluid and emergent, with dynamics and contexts such
as internet grooming, online abuse, commercial trafficking, group exploit-
ation
or
gang-related
violence
potentially
involved
(Melrose,
2013;
Cockbain et al., 2014) but the child’s powerlessness to resist, and often even
to recognise the exploitation, is fundamental to its definition (Pearce,
2009). Approaches to addressing this problem are equally embryonic
(Pearce, 2011; McMahon-Howard and Reimers, 2013; Bounds et al., 2015).
It is perhaps, then, unsurprising that this relatively newly constructed do-
main of child abuse remains challenging in terms of understanding preva-
lence (Melrose and Pearce, 2013) and identifying effective risk assessment
and management strategies (Klatt et al., 2014). Dilemmas for child protec-
tion practice have been noted across the USA (e.g. Latonero, 2012; Schwarz
and Britton, 2015) and Europe (e.g. Hossain et al., 2010), and have been
particularly marked in England where recent court cases, serious case re-
views and public inquiries (e.g. Coffey, 2014; Jay, 2014) have revealed ser-
ious shortcomings in professionals’ competence in recognising CSE and
engaging children and young people successfully in work to reduce risk. The
recent media storms which followed revelations of serious and ongoing CSE
seemed to have brought about an ‘extraordinary moment of national cathar-
sis’ (The Guardian, 2015) which has galvanised the government in England.
In 2013, it formed a national group to examine the lessons from recent
inquiries and shape responses over time (HM Government, 2015). Public
inquiries have been instituted into gang- and group-related CSE (Berelowitz
et al., 2013), children who go missing from care (All-Party Parliamentary
Group for Runaway and Missing Children and Adults, 2016), legislative
powers for protecting children from CSE (Barnardo’s, 2014) and responses
to localised grooming (Home Affairs Committee, 2013). In areas where
faulty or dangerous leadership was thought to have led to the crisis, local
authorities’ statutory child protection functions have been assumed by cen-
tral government (e.g. Pickles, 2015).
While trust in the statutory response to CSE in England could hardly be
lower, vulnerable children are clear that a trusting relationship with a prac-
titioner is crucial to engaging them in exploring and addressing risky
Building Trust with Children and Young People at Risk of CSE 2457
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 behaviours, situations and relationships (Smeaton, 2013; Gilligan, 2015).
More needs to be understood about professional approaches to building
such trusting relationships in the field of CSE, particularly when children
feel (often with good cause) that professionals struggle to balance their
need for protection and guidance with their right to a voice and to make
agentic choices about their own lives (Hallett, 2015). This paper draws on
findings from a survey and qualitative interviews, conducted in England, in
exploring how professionals from a range of disciplines draw on their
knowledge, skills, personal qualities and values (often termed ‘use of self’)
to develop relationships of care and respect and create child-centred envir-
onments which facilitate the building of trust with children at risk of CSE.
The importance of gaining trust in work with children at
risk of CSE
CSE is recognised as adversely affecting children’s physical, mental and sex-
ual health, educational achievements, social and economic contributionsm,
and later parenting capacity, and increasing their risk of self-harming, drug
and alcohol problems, and anti-social and criminal behaviours (Beckett
et al., 2014). Thus, finding ways of engaging and intervening with young
people at risk is a key policy and practice priority. However, both the risk
factors leading to CSE and the effects of CSE make it particularly challeng-
ing for children and young people to recognise they are being harmed, tell
about their abuse and seek or accept help (Berelowitz et al., 2013).
Earlier poor parenting, insecurity of attachment, abuse, neglect and ex-
periences of public care are common backgrounds for later exploitation
(Scott and Skidmore, 2006). Children whose feelings, rights to safety and
views have been disregarded are less able to recognise they are being
harmed or exploited and have less trust that others will care about them, re-
spect their choices, believe their disclosures or protect them (Collin-Vezina
et al., 2016). Indeed, they are less likely to have trustworthy people around
them who will support them and listen to them (Hallett, 2015). Having often
become self-reliant and desensitised to their own welfare when encountering
potentially risky scenarios, such children are more vulnerable in relation to
those who might groom them to engage their trust and compliance with the
purpose of exploiting them (Coy, 2008). In an era when young people’s cul-
ture is sexualised, digitised and commodified, it becomes even more difficult
for vulnerable children to gain ownership of their own sexual choices and
boundaries and to determine what is acceptable (Melrose, 2013).
The grooming and exploitation process operates to prevent children from
recognising, resisting or telling about abuse (Reid, 2014). Exploiters use
threats, bullying and intimidation to instil fear in children of telling others
about harm they are experiencing (Brayley et al., 2011). Many exploiters also
intersperse abuse with unpredictable gifts of affection or material reward
2458 Michelle Lefevre et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 which inculcates a sense of attachment and loyalty in the abuser, and a sense
of inevitability regarding the abusive relationship, however damaging it is
(Jago et al., 2011). The resultant ‘traumatic bond’ with the abuser (Pace,
2016) can lead to young people being drawn into abusers’ distorted worldview
where family or professionals are to be mistrusted. Young people may have
been groomed into thinking that the exploiter is a ‘boyfriend’ and to see
themselves as in a consensual relationship, regardless of how they are treated,
passed around or trafficked. Even where they do come to recognise their
own exploitation, trusting others, including professionals, might become even
harder, as the young person starts realise that someone they thought had
loved them did not and had betrayed their trust (Smeaton, 2013). Young peo-
ple commonly fear the reaction of family, friends or professionals to revela-
tions of the CSE, particularly fearing not being listened to or believed and
being judged or blamed. In all abuse, shame is likely to play a part; this can
be particularly intense when children feel they have made a ‘choice’ to par-
ticipate in sexual activity, and are less able to see the way they have been
coerced, manipulated or intimidated into participating (Jago et al., 2011).
Studies seeking the views of vulnerable children and young people con-
tinually report that recognition of their own abuse, disclosure of abuse and
engaging in interventions are most likely to be achieved within the context
of a trusted professional relationship where they feel supported and emo-
tionally close to the worker (Smeaton, 2013). Professionals’ personal qual-
ities and relational approach are key: children at risk of CSE are most likely
to engage with and trust workers who listen, are safe, friendly, easy to talk
to, sensitive, supportive, warm, kind, caring and non-judgemental (Gilligan,
2015). Being persistent, reliable and consistent in a relationship over time is
crucial: a ‘“stickability” that will help a young person to recognise that you
are on their side, undeterred by their challenging behaviour, not looking for
any payback (unlike their abusers) and, ultimately, someone they can trust’
(Jago et al., 2011, p. 71). This can mean that, even though young people
may not be ready to engage with risk-focused interventions initially, when a
window opens that suggests a young person does want to change their life,
there is already a worker in place they trust to turn to (Hickle and Hallett,
2016). Trust is also instilled where young people feel that their rights, views,
agency, privacy and confidentiality are respected, and their participation is
promoted through receiving information and explanations so that they
understand their situations; practice driven ‘by the canons of child protection
and surveillance’ are, conversely, likely to result in further erosion of chil-
dren’s trust and retrenchment towards the abuser (Hallett, 2013, p. 76).
These negative experiences with professionals can become a kind of exploit-
ation in themselves, mirroring the constrained choices, coercion, stigma and
isolation embedded in their experiences of CSE.
Two
recent
reports
published
by
the
Office
of
the
Children’s
Commissioner in England (OCC) (an organisation funded through cen-
tral government with a statutory duty to promote and protect the rights
Building Trust with Children and Young People at Risk of CSE 2459
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 of all children in England) have presented strategies for potential profes-
sional responses to abuse risk which place trusting relationships with pro-
fessionals
at
the
centre. The
first
(Cossar
et
al.,
2013),
a
study
commissioned by the OCC of early approaches for helping children at
risk of abuse or neglect, established that children were more likely to rec-
ognise they were being abused or neglected, and to tell about it, within
the context of a close and trusting relationship of duration with a profes-
sional, where they felt listened to and believed rather than judged or
patronised. As with similar studies, the personal qualities and approach
of the professional helper were seen as central: being kind, sympathetic
and caring; being reliable, consistent, accessible and available; being
knowledgeable and competent in relation to abuse; offering clear infor-
mation, explanations and advice; respecting privacy and confidentiality.
The second (Berelowitz et al., 2013) drew on the findings from the OCC
inquiry into CSE in gangs and groups, as well as Cossar et al.’s (2013)
findings, to construct the ‘See Me, Hear Me’ framework: ‘a child-centred
approach for preventing the sexual exploitation of children, identifying,
protecting and supporting the victims, disrupting and stopping perpetra-
tors, securing justice for victims and obtaining convictions’ (p. 11).
Seeking to address the deficits in service structure and delivery high-
lighted by the gangs and groups inquiry, the framework provides guid-
ance for all service levels, from strategic management to front line
practice, outlining the functions and processes required to form a holistic
response to sexual exploitation within each locality. It seeks to promote
the voice of both child and professional, and to protect the child, through
nine foundations and seven principles, which are summarised in Figure 1.
Figure 1: A summary of the ‘See Me, Hear Me’ Framework (Berelowitz et al., 2013)
2460 Michelle Lefevre et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 The OCC subsequently issued a tender for the See Me, Hear Me frame-
work to be piloted and evaluated in three local authority areas in England,
in order to establish the efficacy of the framework for improving the identi-
fication and protection of children being sexually exploited or abused. The
authors of this paper, based at one university in England, were subsequently
commissioned to undertake the project and this paper considers findings in
relation to one strand: how professionals in the three local authorities were
seeking to build trust with children and young people at risk of CSE.
Methods and methodology
The overall project has followed a realist evaluation methodology (Pawson
and Tilley, 1997), to evaluate differences made to service structure and de-
livery through implementation of the framework within three pilot sites in
different regions of England. The sites were selected by the OCC to repre-
sent a geographical mix. Measures have included: a mid-stage and final sur-
vey of all professionals working with CSE in each area; interviews with
representatives from agencies working with CSE; interviews with children
who had experienced CSE interventions in those areas; observations of
multi-agency CSE decision-making fora; and analysis of data relating to
child referrals and outcomes. Ethical clearance was provided through the
university leading the project. Standard ethical principles such as informed
consent, confidentiality and anonymity were followed.
This paper does not focus on the evaluation as a whole, which is to be
reported elsewhere (Lefevre, forthcoming 2016). Instead, it draws on the
midway survey which was completed between July and October 2015 by
204 participants. The survey was disseminated within each site by the
lead workers within each agency and through the Local Safeguarding
Children Boards with the instruction that it should be filled in by any
professional self-identifying as undertaking work related to CSE. Given
the self-identification invitation, it is impossible to know the size of the
complete sample; consequently, sampling bias cannot be determined, nor
the proportion completing ascertained. Table 1 shows that participants
covered a range of professional roles, with police officers and local au-
thority social workers being the largest groups. The length of time profes-
sionals had been in post ranged from a few weeks to twenty-five years.
Sixty per cent had been directly involved in a case where one or more
children were identified as having experienced, or were at risk of experi-
encing, CSE. Others were in managerial, supervisory or strategic roles.
In this study, 73.4 per cent of respondents were female and 60 per cent
were between thirty-five and fifty-four years old. Over 80 per cent identi-
fied as White British. Other larger group ethnic identifications included:
White Irish (four); any other White background (eight); Black or Black
British-Caribbean (eight); Mixed-White and Black Caribbean (five).
Building Trust with Children and Young People at Risk of CSE 2461
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 The overall survey was designed to investigate how professionals
involved in CSE cases across the three sites in England felt about their
own practice response, and that of their agency and local authority, in rela-
tion to CSE. This paper draws upon just two of the survey questions: those
regarding trust between children and professionals. Survey participants
were first asked to rate, using a Likert scale, how confident they were that
they could enable a child to trust them enough to disclose CSE. Analysis
is provided in Table 2. Such self-efficacy self-reports do not measure profi-
ciency in direct practice, but can indicate individuals’ ‘confidence in their
ability to execute specific skills in a particular set of circumstances and
thereby achieve a successful outcome’ (Holden et al., 2002, p. 116).
Respondents were then asked a follow-up open-ended question on what
they believed they needed to do in order to enable a child experiencing or
at risk of CSE to ‘trust them enough to tell them what was happening to
them’. Respondents had an open space to write as much or as little as they
wanted. Some wrote a few words, others a few sentences. Thematic analysis
(Braun and Clarke, 2006) was undertaken on the responses to this question,
using computer-assisted qualitative data analysis software package NVivo
version 10 to organise data. The first and second author analysed the data
together, discussing and resolving any discrepancies in interpretation
throughout. Whilst some new categories were identified inductively, coding
was primarily deductive, drawing on Lefevre’s (2015) taxonomy of key
capabilities for social work engagement and communication with children
Table 2 How confident participants felt in enabling a child to trust them enough to disclose CSE
N
Percentage (n¼204)
Not confident
17
8.3
Somewhat unconfident
53
26
Neither confident or unconfident
53
26
Confident
73
35.8
Very confident
8
3.9
Total
204
100
Table 1 Professional roles of survey participants
Role
N
Percentage (n¼204)
Local authority social work
46
22.5
Police
38
18.6
Youth interventions: services, support and youth offending
24
11.8
Education
19
9.3
Health services
18
8.8
Family support services, including early intervention/early help
15
7.4
Senior management in the local authority
10
4.9
Other
34
16.7
Total
204
100
2462 Michelle Lefevre et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 as a heuristic device. That taxonomy, constructed through a systematic
review of effective social work communication with children, sets out
domains of Knowing (underpinning knowledges, including about child de-
velopment, children’s culture and additional needs, and factors which con-
strain communication), Being (the personal qualities, emotional capacity,
values and ethics which constitute ‘use of self’ such as being non-judge-
mental, respectful, caring, sincere and empathic) and Doing (techniques
and skills in a range of approaches, such as play, interviewing, promoting
participation and relationship-based practice).
The categories identified in this study were then streamed into four
themes, shown in Table 3. The frequency cited represents the number of
Table 3 Factors which survey respondents cited as encouraging children at risk of CSE to trust
them
Number of respondents
providing material relating
to that category
Theme 1: Relationship-based practice
147 total
Building a good rapport/engagement/relationship
28
Spending time with children
26
A relationship developed over time
22
‘Being’ qualities/use of self
20
A relationship which feels safe
19
A supportive relationship which builds confidence and resilience
16
A real relationship, where children feel that they are cared about
10
Being available to children
6
Theme 2: Child-centred practice
121 total
Listening and taking children’s concerns seriously
43
Child-led
18
Going at the child’s pace
17
A safe, comfortable environment
15
Empathic
10
Providing clear and age-appropriate information and explanations
9
Child-centred communication skills
9
Theme 3: An ethically grounded approach
143 total
Non-judgemental
41
Being open, honest, clear and direct
35
Being reliable, persistent and consistent
24
Believing the child
9
Having and demonstrating appropriate and clear boundaries
8
Reassuring children about where the fault lies
8
Attending to confidentiality
6
Showing trust in the child
4
Being respectful
4
Being fair
3
Promoting children’s rights
1
Theme 4: Being skilled and knowledgeable in relation to
working with CSE
21 total
Instilling confidence in the child about your competence in
working with CSE
13
Demonstrating your understanding of particular
dynamics of CSE
8
Building Trust with Children and Young People at Risk of CSE 2463
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 survey respondents providing material consistent with that category.
Some respondents wrote just a word or short phrase that represented
one category (e.g. just the word ‘listen’). Others wrote longer narrative
responses, with material covering several categories. The purpose of tab-
ulating the number of respondents providing material relating to particu-
lar categories is to provide a broad indication of the categories which
more respondents thought were important in building trust. However,
no statistical significance is intended as the categorisation is fuzzy
(Alexander and Enns, 1988): whilst the categories share similar central
tendencies or associated features, the extent to which they fit unambigu-
ously into themes is graded rather than entirely clear-cut and some re-
sponses are coded in more than one category. Regardless of these
limitations, it is notable that some words and phrases are mentioned by
respondents many more times than others.
Separately to the survey, interviews were conducted with fourteen par-
ticipants across Site 1 who had been identified by the site lead worker as
key professionals working with CSE. These included strategic managers,
operational managers and practitioners from agencies such as children’s
social care, the police, probation, health, sexual health, education and a
CSE charity. The interviews were designed to elicit perceptions of the
strengths and limitations to the approach taken to assessing and working
with CSE in that area. A specific question about trust was not asked of
the interviewees. However, a number of interviewees spontaneously dis-
cussed their own work and that of their colleagues in relation to the im-
portance of developing trust if young people were to be engaged in risk
assessment and intervention. Their responses have been drawn upon to
provide further insight into some of the themes and categories identified
through the survey analysis.
Findings: professionals’ views on how to build trust with
children and young people at risk of CSE
While 60 per cent of survey respondents were not confident that they
could enable a child to trust them enough to disclose CSE, all but two
respondents were able to suggest strategies for what they or other pro-
fessionals might do in an attempt to build trust with children and young
people at risk of CSE. Through analysis, a number of categories could
be distinguished which were subsequently streamed into four main
themes: relationship-based practice; child-centred practice; an ethically
grounded approach; and being skilled and knowledgeable in relation to
working with CSE. Table 3 sets out the themes and categories, noting
the number of respondents referring to material consistent with a par-
ticular category.
2464 Michelle Lefevre et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Theme 1: Relationship-based practice
Many of the survey respondents and interviewees were of the view that
trust was facilitated through engaged relationships with children. Whilst
CSE assessments and interventions can often be short-term in nature,
requiring a rapport to be built rapidly, participants echoed young people
(Smeaton, 2013) in describing how it can often take a relationship estab-
lished over time for children to begin to trust workers enough to ac-
knowledge the risks they are facing. It takes time for workers to get to
know the children well enough to understand their experiences and pat-
terns of behaviour so that they can respond to the child in a way that
enables a child to feel safe and comfortable enough to explore their feel-
ings and concerns, possibly even to disclose risky situations. Participants
perceived that this needed to be a real relationship, where children felt
cared about, and were ‘the top priority rather than job requirements’.
Building the relationship often meant spending time with the children in
a more relaxed and informal way, and engaging in mutual activities and
talk which are not just about CSE. Interviewees spoke at length about
going to cafes, going for walks, just chatting with young people about
their everyday lives and ‘not be looking at your watch’.
Participants described how they had to draw on use of self or ‘Being’ capa-
bilities (Lefevre, 2015), to relate congruently in a kind, warm calm, gentle,
sensitive and friendly manner, and not become frustrated with young peo-
ple’s challenging, inconsistent even confrontational behaviour. This reflected
children’s itemisation (e.g. Cossar et al., 2013) of the personal qualities which
professional helpers needed if they were to gain the trust of children experi-
encing abuse and neglect. A relationship which was caring and supportive in
nature was believed not only to inspire young people’s trust, but build their
confidence, resilience and self-esteem—important factors in enabling young
people to begin to recognise and expect more positive relationships with
others (Smeaton, 2013). In this, the professional relationship was seen not
only as offsetting the emotionally neglectful, abusive and traumatic child-
hoods children experiencing CSE have often experienced (Klatt et al., 2014),
but also modelling the kind of alternative relationships which they could po-
tentially have in the future (Rhodes et al., 2006).
Theme 2: Child-centred practice
The category mentioned the most was the importance of showing children
that they were being listened to carefully, openly and actively—an element
emphasised constantly in research with children (Berelowitz et al., 2013;
Gilligan, 2015). Child-centred methods of communication were cited
frequently: using language appropriate to the child’s age and level of
understanding; being flexible in approach and contact methods; asking
Building Trust with Children and Young People at Risk of CSE 2465
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 open-ended questions as much as possible so as not to be leading; and at-
tending not just to their words, but also what their body language, behav-
iour and relational style might be saying. Respondents recognised that
children wanted professionals to take their wants, needs and concerns ser-
iously, and some reflected how the concept of listening is not unproblem-
atic: for children, it may not just mean hearing their words, but acting in
line with their views (McLeod, 2007). Some interviewees referred to the
tension which arises when an approach taken to protect a child, such as
taking away their mobile phones, policing their social media use and using
secure accommodation, may transgress their wishes, autonomy or even
freedom. Children’s trust in the professional system can be destroyed by
such actions (Hallett, 2013), but participants described how it could be
maintained or rebuilt through involving and informing children, explaining
to them why professionals might need to act against their wishes in order
to protect them. There were disciplinary differences apparent in the inter-
views, however, with statutory agencies such as the police and local au-
thority social workers tending more towards ‘protection above all else’,
often for seemingly sound reasons: ‘. . . that immediate containment for
her own safety because of the situation she was putting herself in . . . I’m
not sure she’d still be alive if they hadn’t done that. She put herself in
such dangerous situations’ (Interviewee: Social Worker 3).
Participants were advised that they needed to be available when chil-
dren were ready to talk, perhaps giving out a mobile number or e-mail
address so that the child did not have to traverse a switchboard or go
through another adult, such as a parent or foster-carer, to make contact.
They had noticed that, where children felt the environment was comfort-
able and professionals were receptive to their cues, children were more
likely to let their guard down and explore risks and protective strategies.
By being less directive, according young people a degree of influence
over the nature, location and direction of their work together, partici-
pants felt young people were more willing to ‘meet them halfway’:
Mainly it’s just about getting to know them and not going in with my
agenda quite so much as just going in to, kind of, hear their side of it,
and then hopefully that can really help when you do have to have those
difficult conversations and you have to tell them something they don’t
want to hear or you need to talk to them about something that’s
happened (Interviewee: Social Worker 1).
Going at the child’s pace can be difficult to achieve in CSE contexts,
where there may not only be external timescales such as for court re-
ports or review meetings, but also a strong sense of urgency in trying to
gain a disclosure from a child in order to protect them. However, young
people’s objections about being pressurised to talk about sensitive or
contested matters before they are ready (Hallett, 2013) were recognised
by respondents as potentially counter productive:
2466 Michelle Lefevre et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 The nature of CSE in particular is that the victim probably has a good
chance that they won’t recognise themselves as a victim at the outset, so
you simply cannot rush it . . . that child needs time in their mind to
process the fact that they’ve been exploited, that they are the victim
(Police Interviewee 1).
Theme 3: An ethically grounded approach
Categories included within this theme reflected another facet of ‘Being’
(Lefevre, 2015)—practitioners are required to make ethical choices in
the moment about how to approach and respond to children in complex,
contested and sensitive situations. Young people are often guarded
about talking about their CSE for fear of being judged (Hallett, 2013).
Respondents here recognised the importance of not forming pre-
conceptions about the child’s feelings or situation, and not acting sur-
prised or shocked in relation to what the child said, but rather providing
a respectful, accepting space so children could express their feelings of
attachment or desire to someone whom others viewed as dangerous or
abusive. If that does not happen, young people can just become secret-
ive, which is counter productive:
I know she’s probably got a boyfriend . . . but she’ll never talk about that
. . . because I think she sees it as this thing that’s got her into so much
trouble in the past that she can’t talk about it in any sort of open
normal way, which is completely negating the point of what we’re doing
(Interviewee, Social Worker 3).
Transparency was considered important in relation when and how
confidentiality might be breached. Some interviewees expressed concern
at the readiness with which some child protection professionals would
share very private information (such as about a young person’s sexual
health) around the system and observed that this, unsurprisingly, des-
troyed young people’s trust. As a result, health workers had become
more wary of putting too much personal information about sexual health
on young people’s files, unless it was directly pertinent to safeguarding.
Ensuring young people were aware from the start of the limits to confi-
dentiality on the grounds of safeguarding, and discussing the need to
share information with other professionals in advance of it happening,
were approaches commonly adopted. Indeed, generally being open, hon-
est, clear and direct about a young person’s situation, the professional’s
role and boundaries, and the expectations that the safeguarding system
had about what the young person needed to do in order to be con-
sidered as less at risk, were considered important.
Many of the ethical commitments advised by respondents are inher-
ently relational in nature, such as ‘stickability’ (Jago et al., 2011), striving
to be reliable, persistent and consistent even when young people seemed
Building Trust with Children and Young People at Risk of CSE 2467
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 to be trying to push them away: ‘. . . [the social worker] went to the
house every week to be told to “fuck off”, and, eventually, there was
the child sat there saying, “right, you want to talk to me. What do you
want to talk about?”’ (Interviewee: Social Work Manager).
Respondents recognised that children needed to feel believed by pro-
fessionals and to hear that their abuse was not their fault. Some were
concerned that depriving children of their liberty through secure accom-
modation or other controls placed over their autonomy in order to pro-
tect them, such as the confiscation of mobile phones, could give children
a message of blame and punishment, particularly when they saw how
rarely perpetrators were prosecuted.
Theme 4: Being skilled and knowledgeable in relation to working
with CSE
Only two categories were included within this theme, and they were
mentioned by fewer respondents. However, they emerged as an aspect
specific to this area of practice: children were more likely to trust profes-
sionals who understood the particular dynamics of CSE and could instil
confidence that they were competent in working for children’s safety
and protection. For respondents, competence included understanding the
impact on children of abusive experiences and situations, being skilled in
responding to disclosure, educating the child about risky situations and
working
capably
to
move
the
child
towards
safer
situations
and
behaviours:
How you respond to minor or partial disclosures has a big impact as
these can function as ‘dipping a toe in the water’ to see if you can be
trusted with a full disclosure (Survey Respondent).
Disclosure does not always happen as the child does not see themselves
as a victim and so often non-judgemental conversations need to happen
to explore a child’s social relationships and to see whether from the pro-
fessionals’ perspective the relationship might be sexually exploitative
(Survey Respondent).
Discussion
Most survey respondents were able to indicate strategies for building
trust with children at risk of CSE. These were largely congruent with
the recommendations children themselves have provided elsewhere (e.g.
Hallett, 2013; Gilligan, 2015) indicating a good level of awareness of the
needs and challenges posed by this group. However, there seemed to be
a disparity between this apparent knowledge ability and the limited con-
fidence respondents had that they could enable children to trust them
2468 Michelle Lefevre et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 sufficiently to disclose CSE. The survey does not provide data which dir-
ectly address this disparity. However, it is possible that it reflects the in-
tensive and endless efforts practitioners need to make in seeking to find
a way in and through with this group, as set out in the literature review
(e.g. Jago et al., 2011) and described by respondents and interviewees.
These reflect a clear message of the importance of patiently, consistently
and tirelessly waiting for the window of opportunity with a young person
without being deterred by their avoidance, distancing or even hostility.
The impact upon professionals of the necessary child-centred and per-
sistent approach does perhaps need to be considered further in research,
as it may be undermining practitioners’ belief in their capacity to work
effectively, creating an anxiety which may then leave them less ready to
engage emotionally with children in the future (Ruch, 2012).
Linked to this is the important role played by the facilitating relation-
ship, values and environment which suggests a huge commitment, even
burden, on the part of the practitioner in terms of time and emotional
labour. Much has been written elsewhere about the damage caused by
employers not supporting direct practice (Munro, 2011; Ruch, 2012).
Both practitioners and managers in the survey and interviews spoke of
the need for a context which acknowledges and validates feelings if pro-
fessionals are not to defend against emotionally demanding and chal-
lenging encounters to the extent that they stop relating personally to
children or become ‘burned out’. Participants referred to the importance
of smaller caseloads, which give practitioners the time to create a
relaxed environment where they can get to know children well enough
to help them. Regular, reflective supervision (group and individual) and
informal workplace support were considered vital by interviewees in
helping professionals to provide a containing, supportive, therapeutic
and child-centred environment which enables children to feel safe and
cared for. Whilst such enhanced provision can be challenging amid a
context of public services retrenchment, as is currently the case in
England, strategic managers in Site 1 had successfully argued for this on
the basis of anticipated improvement in outcomes for children over the
longer term.
The category that received almost no attention in the survey was that
relating to children’s rights. This was particularly of note given the em-
phasis within the See Me, Hear Me framework of attending to children’s
rights and voice as well as promoting their safety. The survey was under-
taken only midway in the implementation of the framework across the
three sites, and it seems likely that many participants were influenced in
their responses by the primary paradigm within child protection which is
to foreground risk and vulnerability rather than children’s rights and au-
tonomy if the two come into conflict (Gilligan, 2015). An early decision
had been made in the three sites to refer to all teenagers at risk of CSE
as ‘children’ rather than ‘young people’; this was an attempt to reject
Building Trust with Children and Young People at Risk of CSE 2469
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 earlier social attitudes that adolescents were complicit in their own
abuse (Melrose, 2013). Whilst this repositioning of teenagers as ‘chil-
dren’ facilitates recognition of safeguarding risk, there could be a danger
that it downplays recognition of young people’s rights and agency, mak-
ing more draconian actions, such as the deprivation of liberty through
secure accommodation, less ethically problematic than young people
might wish.
Conclusions
The findings in this paper are drawn from a multi-professional survey in
three areas of the UK and interviews with professionals in one site.
Whilst there is some demographic variation, the research has only been
conducted in one country, so generalisability is limited. In addition, sur-
vey responses were typically one or two sentences, and these relatively
short responses may not reflect professionals’ full understanding, or their
more nuanced views on this topic. The definition of CSE remains varied
and developing (including commercial sexual exploitation, trafficking,
groups- and gang-activity, and online grooming, as well as individual re-
lationships) and it is complex. The survey format did not permit explor-
ation of these diverse forms of CSE, and conclusions must be drawn
more generally regarding how practitioners think about this issue and
the children experiencing it.
Nonetheless, this study identified a substantial overlap between what
children and young people at risk of CSE consider important in building
trust with them and professionals’ understandings of how to achieve this.
It has also provided additional insight into which capabilities and
approaches professionals are most aware of the need to deploy in such
situations (such as listening to children, forming caring and supportive
relationships, being non-judgemental, open, honest, clear and direct,
spending time with children and going at their pace) and those of which
professionals seemed less aware (such as attending to a child’s rights ap-
proach and being fair and respectful). Further research could usefully
explore some of the reasons for this disparity and the extent to which
professionals’ actual practice reflects these capabilities and approaches.
As the categories identified within this research overlapped substantially
with Lefevre’s (2015) taxonomy of key capabilities for social work com-
munication with children, it is suggested that working with children in
relation to CSE draws upon similar communication capabilities as other
areas of social work or safeguarding practice. The final theme, ‘Being
skilled and knowledgeable in relation to working with CSE’, did how-
ever indicate how additional knowledge of the specific dynamics of CSE
risks and impact was required if practitioners are to make sense of what
is being communicated by the child, and to respond appropriately and
2470 Michelle Lefevre et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 sensitively. This should inform training of professionals, as should devel-
opment of the capabilities and approaches to building trust of which pro-
fessionals demonstrated less awareness.
Acknowledgements
Funding of the study: Office of the Children’s Commissioner for
England.
References
Alexander, T. M. and Enns, J. T. (1988) ‘Age changes in the boundaries of fuzzy cat-
egories’, Child Development, 599(5), pp. 1372–86.
All-Party Parliamentary Group for Runaway and Missing Children and Adults (2016)
Inquiry into the Safeguarding of ‘Absent’ Children: ‘It Is Good When Someone
Cares’: Final Report, available online at www.childrenssociety.org.uk/sites/default/
files/appg-absent-inquiry-final-report-may-2016.pdf (accessed 19 June 2016).
Barnardo’s (2014) Report of the Parliamentary Inquiry into the Effectiveness of
Legislation for Tackling Child Sexual Exploitation and Trafficking within the UK,
Ilford, Essex, Barnardo’s.
Beckett, H., Firmin, C., Hines, P. and Pearce, J. (2014) Tackling Child Sexual
Exploitation: A Study of Current Practice in London, London, University of
Bedfordshire/London Safeguarding Board.
Berelowitz, S., Clifton, J., Firmin, C., Gulyurtlu, S. and Edwards, G. (2013) ‘If Only
Someone Had Listened’: Office of the Children’s Commissioner’s Inquiry into
Child Sexual Exploitation in Gangs and Groups: Final Report, London, Office of
the Children’s Commissioner.
Bounds, D., Julion, W. and Delaney, K. (2015) ‘Commercial sexual exploitation of
children and state child welfare systems’, Policy, Politics, and Nursing Practice,
16(1–2), pp. 17–26.
Braun, V. and Clarke, V. (2006) ‘Using thematic analysis in psychology’, Qualitative
Research in Psychology, 3(2), pp. 77–101.
Brayley, H., Cockbain, E. and Laycock, G. (2011) ‘The value of crime scripting:
Deconstructing internal child sex trafficking’, Policing, 5(2), pp. 132–43.
Brodie, I. and Pearce, J. (2012) Exploring the Scale and Nature of Child Sexual
Exploitation in Scotland, Edinburgh, Scottish Government Social Research, Crown
Copyright.
Cockbain, E., Brayley, H. and Sullivan, J. (2014) ‘Towards a common framework for
assessing the activity and associations of groups who sexually abuse children’,
Journal of Sexual Aggression, 20(2), pp. 156–71.
Coffey, A. (2014) Real Voices: Child Sexual Exploitation in Greater Manchester: An
Independent Report by Ann Coffey, MP, available online at http://anncoffeymp.
com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Real-Voices-Final.pdf (accessed 19 June 2016).
Collin-Ve
´zinaa, D., De La Sablonnie
`re-Griffin, M., Palmer, A. and Milne, L. (2016)
‘A preliminary mapping of individual, relational, and social factors that impede
disclosure of childhood sexual abuse’, Child Abuse and Neglect, 43(May), pp.
123–34.
Building Trust with Children and Young People at Risk of CSE 2471
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Cossar, J., Brandon, M., Bailey, S., Belderson, P., Biggart, L. and Sharpe, D. (2013)
‘It Takes a Lot to Build Trust’: Recognition and Telling: Developing Earlier Routes
to Help for Children and Young People, London, Office of the Children’s
Commissioner.
Coy, M. (2008) ‘Young women, local authority care and selling sex’, British Journal
of Social Work, 38(7), pp. 1408–24.
Gilligan, P. (2015) ‘Turning it around: What do young women say helps them to
move on from child sexual exploitation?’, Child Abuse Review, published online in
Wiley Online Library, 10.1002/car.2373.
Hallett, S. (2013) Child Sexual Exploitation in South-East Wales: Problems and
Solutions from the Perspectives of Young People and Professionals, available on-
line at http://orca.cf.ac.uk/58234/ (accessed 19 June 2016).
Hallett, S. (2015) ‘“An uncomfortable comfortableness”: “Care”, child protection and
child sexual exploitation’, British Journal of Social Work, Advance Access pub-
lished 20 December 2015, 10.1093/bjsw/bcv136.
Hickle, K. and Hallett, S. (2016) ‘Mitigating harm: Considering harm reduction prin-
ciples in work with sexually exploited young people’, Children & Society, 30(4),
pp. 302–13.
HM Government (2015) Sexual Violence against Children and Vulnerable People
National
Group:
Progress
Report
and
Action
Plan
2015,
London,
Crown
Copyright, available online at https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/up
loads/attachment_data/file/412420/Sexual_Abuse_Action_plan_5th.pdf (accessed 9
January 2017).
Holden, G., Meenaghan, T., Anastas, J. and Metrey, G. (2002) ‘Outcomes of social
work education: The case for self-efficacy’, Journal of Social Work Education,
38(1), pp. 115–33.
Home Affairs Committee (2013) Second Report: Child Sexual Exploitation and the
Response to Localised Grooming, available online at www.publications.parlia
ment.uk/pa/cm201314/cmselect/cmhaff/68/6802.htm (accessed 19 June 2016).
Home Office and the Department for Education (2016) Consultation on a New Child
Sexual Exploitation Definition, available online at https://www.gov.uk/government/
news/consultation-on-a-new-child-sexual-exploitation-definition (accessed 19 June
2016).
Hossain, M., Zimmerman, C., Abas, M., Light, M. and Watts, C. (2010) ‘The relation-
ship of trauma to mental disorders among trafficked and sexually exploited girls
and women’, American Journal of Public Health, 100(12), pp. 2442–9.
Jago, S., with Arocha, L., Brodie, I., Melrose, M., Pearce, J. and Warrington, C.
(2011) What’s Going On to Safeguard Children and Young People from Sexual
Exploitation?,
available
online
at
https://www.beds.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/
0004/121873/wgoreport2011–121011.pdf (accessed 19 June 2016).
Jay, A. (2014) Independent Inquiry into Child Sexual Exploitation in Rotherham
1997–2013. Rotherham Council, available online at www.rotherham.gov.uk/down
loads/file/1407/independent_inquiry_cse_in_rotherham (accessed 19 June 2016).
Klatt, T., Cavner, D. and Egan, V. (2014) ‘Rationalising predictors of child sexual ex-
ploitation and sex-trading’, Child Abuse and Neglect, 38(2), pp. 252–60.
Latonero, M. (2012) Technology and Human Trafficking: The Rise of Mobile and the
Diffusion
of
Technology-Facilitated
Trafficking,
Los
Angeles,
University
of
California.
2472 Michelle Lefevre et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Lefevre, M. (2015) ‘Integrating the teaching, learning and assessment of communica-
tion with children within the qualifying social work curriculum’, Child & Family
Social Work, 20(2), pp. 211–22.
Lefevre, M., Hickle, K., Luckock, B., Ruch, G. (2017, forthcoming) Evaluation of the
See Me Hear Me Pilot: Final Report, London, Office of the Children’s Commissioner.
McLeod, A. (2007) ‘Whose agenda? Issues of power and relationship when listening
to looked-after young people’, Child andFamily Social Work, 12(3), pp. 278–86.
McMahon-Howard, J. and Reimers, B. (2013) ‘An evaluation of a child welfare train-
ing program on the commercial sexual exploitation of children’, Evaluation and
Program Planning, 40, pp. 1–9.
Melrose, M. (2013) ‘Twenty-first century party people: Young people and sexual ex-
ploitation in the new millennium’, Child Abuse Review, 22(3), pp. 155–68.
Melrose, M. and Pearce, J. (eds) (2013) Critical Perspectives on Child Sexual
Exploitation and Related Trafficking, London, Palgrave Macmillan.
Munro, E. (2011) ‘The Munro Review of Child Protection: Final Report’, available
online at https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/munro-review (accessed 19
June 2016).
Pace (2016) What Is Trauma Bonding?, available online at http://paceuk.info/about-
cse/what-is-trauma-bonding/ (accessed 19 June 2016).
Pawson, R. and Tilley, N. (1997) Realistic Evaluation, London, Sage.
Pearce, J. (2009) Young People and Sexual Exploitation: ‘It’s Not Hidden, You Just
Aren’t Looking’, Abingdon, Routledge.
Pearce, J. (2011) ‘Working with trafficked children and young people: Complexities
in practice’, British Journal of Social Work, 41(8), pp. 1424–41.
Pickles, E. (2015) Intervention in Rotherham Metropolitan District Council: Written
Statement to Parliament, London, House of Commons.
Reid, J. (2014) ‘Entrapment and enmeshment schemes used by sex traffickers’, Sex
Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treatment, 28(6), pp. 491–511.
Rhodes, J., Spencer, R., Keller, T. and Noam, G. (2006) ‘A model for the influence
of
mentoring
relationships
on
youth
development’,
Journal
of
Community
Psychology, 34(6), pp. 691–707.
Ruch, G. (2012) ‘Where have all the feelings gone? Developing reflective and
relationship-based management in child-care social work’, British Journal of Social
Work, 42(7), pp. 1315–32.
Schwarz, C. and Britton, H. E. (2015) ‘Queering the support for trafficked persons:
LGBTQ communities and human trafficking in the heartland’, Social Inclusion,
3(1), pp. 63–75.
Scott, S. and Skidmore, P. (2006) Reducing The Risk: Barnardo’s Support for Sexually
Exploited Young People: A Two-Year Evaluation, Barkingside, Barnardo’s.
Smeaton, E. (2013) Running from Hate to What You Think Is Love: The Relationship
between Running Away and Child Sexual Exploitation, Barkingside, Barnardo’s.
The Guardian (2015) ‘The Guardian view on child sex abuse: This time it really must
be never again’, Editorial, 4 February, available online at www.theguardian.com/
commentisfree/2015/feb/04/guardian-view-child-sex-abuse-this-time-really-never-
again (accessed 19 June 2016).
US Department of Justice (2007) Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children: What
Do We Know and What Do We Do About It?, Human Trafficking: Data and
Documents, Paper 6, Washington, US Department of Justice.
Building Trust with Children and Young People at Risk of CSE 2473
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bjsw/article-abstract/47/8/2456/2995899 by guest on 03 June 2019
