 rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org
Review
Cite this article: Leighton TG. 2016 Are some
people suffering as a result of increasing mass
exposure of the public to ultrasound in air?
Proc.R.Soc.A 472: 20150624.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2015.0624
Received: 3 September 2015
Accepted: 3 November 2015
Subject Areas:
biomedical engineering, acoustics,
medical physics
Keywords:
ultrasound, ultrasonics, hearing,
bioeffects, guidelines, audiology
Author for correspondence:
T. G. Leighton
e-mail: tgl@soton.ac.uk
Are some people suffering as
a result of increasing mass
exposure of the public to
ultrasound in air?
T. G. Leighton
Institute of Sound and Vibration Research, Faculty of Engineering
and the Environment, University of Southampton, Highfield,
Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK
New measurements indicate that the public are
being exposed, without their knowledge, to airborne
ultrasound.
Existing
guidelines
are
insufficient
for such exposures; the vast majority refers to
occupational
exposure
only
(where
workers
are
aware of the exposure, can be monitored and can
wear protection). Existing guidelines are based on
an insufficient evidence base, most of which was
collected over 40 years ago by researchers who
themselves
considered
it
insufficient
to
finalize
guidelines,
but
which
produced
preliminary
guidelines. This warning of inadequacy was lost
as nations and organizations issued ‘new’ guidelines
based on these early guidelines, and through such
repetition generated a false impression of consensus.
The evidence base is so slim that few reports have
progressed far along the sequence from anecdote
to case study, to formal scientific controlled trials
and epidemiological studies. Early studies reported
hearing threshold shifts, nausea, headache, fatigue,
migraine and tinnitus, but there is insufficient research
on human subjects, and insufficient measurement of
fields, to assess what health risk current occupational
and public exposures might produce. Furthermore,
the
assumptions
underpinning
audiology
and
physical measurements at high frequencies must
be questioned: simple extrapolation of approaches
used at lower frequencies does not address current
unknowns. Recommendations are provided.
2016 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
 2
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. Executive summary
(a) The history
For over 40 years, there have been reports of hearing threshold shift [1] and a range of subjective
effects (nausea, dizziness, migraine, fatigue, tinnitus and ‘pressure in the ears’ [1–8]) from
ultrasound in air to which workers have been routinely exposed (plus other symptoms that have
not occurred in more than one study; §3b). The degree of response, from significant to none,
varied between workers. The evidence base has not studied sufficient numbers of subjects, and
has not been sufficiently sensitive to the presence of sensitive individuals, or sensitive subgroups,
within the population, to support the guidelines required today. Studies focused on occupational
exposure to ultrasound, which tends also to occur alongside high levels of audible sound, and
the effect of this audio frequency noise on the observed effects must be isolated because there
is increasing public exposure to ultrasound without such audible cues. Measurement methods
and audiological procedures in the past have tended to follow extrapolations of methods used
in the audio frequency range which, alongside the calibrations and allowed tolerances of the
equipment used, must be critically examined (§3a). It is therefore no simple matter to measure
the very high frequency/ultrasonic (VHF/US) fields to which people are exposed, either in situ
or during audiological testing, and relate those to the levels quoted in past studies. Consequently,
the evidence to date has been wholly inadequate to inform the development of guidelines for the
increasing exposure of the public to ultrasound in air, and is suspect for occupational exposure.
(b) The need for evidence
Policymakers need guidelines from which to work. Guidelines must be based on good evidence.
Evidence must be collected with reliable measurement methods and calibrations, and this is
unlikely to be possible by simply extending to the ultrasonic regime the established procedures
used in audiology, acoustical engineering, and metrology at audio frequencies. There must be
a sufficient volume of evidence to be statistically significant, and it must not ignore possible
variations in sensitivity seen in the population, and between and within subsets of the population.
UK clinicians are unlikely to consider ultrasound in their differential diagnosis when
encountering the symptoms listed earlier, as it is not well recognized and not included in any
of the relevant NICE (UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence) publications, which
are all evidence based.
For both policymakers and clinicians, the evidence base is inadequate to predict the health
risk and discomfort likely to be seen in the general population as a result of public exposure
to ultrasound in air. Even for occupational exposure the evidence base is too small (if it were
adequate, we would not see a factor of over 3 million in intensity between the lowest and highest
occupational guidelines at 20 kHz). When the research has not been done, assurances such as
‘there are no studies that show any issues of long term exposure to airborne ultrasound ... despite
many years of human exposure to existing ultrasound sources’ [9] take on a different meaning
compared to similar statements made about research-rich fields (see §2b(i) for the full quote). Lack
of evidence and reliable physical measurements is not currently a stimulus for evidence gathering,
but rather is providing a situation of uncertainty and confusion that enables manufacturers and
those responsible for public places to deploy devices that insonify the public. The current lack of
evidence makes it unlikely that clinicians will consider VHF/US exposure to be a possible cause
when confronted with patients experiencing these symptoms.
The evidence base has not progressed far up the hierarchy from manufacturer claims and
individual anecdotes, to case and cohort studies and laboratory testing, all the way up to
randomized controlled trials. In such a dearth of scientific and medical data, those least reliable
items that form the base of this hierarchy cannot be ignored, and therefore web pages are
perforce cited at times in this study. Given that we must be sceptical even of articles in peer-
reviewed journals of high quality, we must be increasingly sceptical of citations further down the
 3
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
publication hierarchy, from non-peer reviewed articles (professional journals, most conferences)
down to web pages.
This paper presents new measurements that demonstrate human exposure to airborne
ultrasound in public places, including railway stations, museums, libraries, schools and sports
stadia. It argues that the guidelines for protecting humans from airborne ultrasound vary and
are uniformly inadequate: for energy above 22.4 kHz, they are based on avoiding ultrasonically
induced hearing damage at the lower frequencies used to understand speech, taking no account
of reports of the ability of airborne ultrasound in occupational settings to cause nausea, dizziness,
tinnitus, fatigue, migraine and headaches. The scepticism to reports of symptoms by the public is
supported by the scarcity of attempts to measure such fields, and lack of a proposed mechanism
by which such effects are produced, both of which this paper has taken the initial steps to address.
Furthermore, the guidelines are based on the average response of small groups, often of adult
males, whereas recent data suggest 1 in 20 people aged 40–49 years have hearing thresholds that
are at least 20 dB more sensitive at 20 kHz than that of the average 30–39 year old [10]. Moreover,
5% of the 5–19 year age group is reported to have a 20 kHz threshold that is 60 dB more sensitive
than the median for the 30–39 year age group [10]. There will therefore be significant numbers of
the public (with a greater proportion seen among children) who have significantly better VHF/US
hearing acuity than the ‘average’ on which current guidelines are based. While this does not allow
us to extrapolate what adverse effects this acuity might cause, it suggests that the underpinning
scientific research on which guidelines have been set is inadequate for current exposures.
(c) Objectives
The objectives of this paper are:
— to show that the public is being exposed to VHF sound and ultrasound on a mass basis;
— to show that the current state of knowledge is inadequate to make an assessment of the
safety of such exposures, current guidelines being based on inadequate data; and
— to draw attention to the need to understand what mechanisms might be capable of
generating the symptoms listed above following exposure to VHF sound and ultrasound.
(d) Recommendations
For exposure to airborne VHF sound and ultrasound, this paper recommends that:
— No new guidelines must be based primarily on selection of levels quoted in older
guidelines, as this gives the incorrect impression of consensus, independence and the
consideration of new science.
— Guidelines for occupational exposure must not be applied to public or residential
exposure, and recognition must be given to exposure of long-term ‘guests’ (in schools,
hospitals, prisons, public transport etc.).
— All new guidelines must indicate from what research base they are drawn, and report
when they have been unable to draw on any such research base (e.g. when making
recommendations on durations of exposure, sensitive subgroups etc.).
— Studies and new guidelines must take account of the deviation from the average of
individuals within a population, and within particular demographic subsets within the
population.
— New guidelines must consider the implications of the duration of exposure in a rigorous
manner with an appropriate scientific basis.
— Research must be undertaken in recognition that the fundamental science upon which all
existing guidelines have been based is not sufficiently substantial.
— Research is required to ensure that guidelines properly account for the selection of those
adverse effects that should be minimized or prevented.
 4
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
— Research must be undertaken to consider whether specifying only third octave levels in
guidelines is appropriate for narrowband and tonal exposures.
— Research must be undertaken to support guidelines in specific recognition that current
public exposures to narrowband or tonal VHF/US fields might not be accompanied by
the high levels of audio frequency sound that was typical of most of the occupational
ultrasound studies on which the current guidelines are based.
— All data must be examined for its statistical significance before conclusions are drawn,
in particular with regards to sample size, number of studies and the degree to which the
sample represents the relevant population.
— Attention must be paid to the fact that international standards for the specification of
noise measurement instrumentation do not adequately address the requirements for
measuring airborne VHF sound and ultrasound. For example, at 20 kHz a sound level
meter can over-read by 40% or under-read without limit (tolerances from +3 dB to
−∞ dB), and still meet even the most stringent requirements of the standard. For higher
frequencies there are virtually no performance specifications. Standards specifying a new
type of instrumentation for airborne VHF sound and ultrasound are therefore required.
— Research must be undertaken to assess whether current audiological practices,
equipment and standards are suitable for the VHF and ultrasonic regimes, and identify
measures to rectify any shortcomings.
— A current survey of modern devices and their source levels (using international standard
procedures and calibrations traceable back to primary standards) should be undertaken.
— Manufacturers should provide: a statement of the source level and spectral content
(measured using international standard procedures and calibrations traceable back to
primary standards) of the output of VHF/US emitters if above a yet-to-be-determined
spectral level; a statement of the purpose of the sound; and an assessment of the levels
when deployed in the field.
Subsidiary recommendations are listed in §5.
2. Overview
(a) Mass public exposure of today versus occupational exposure of the past
(i) Public exposure and the decibel
Take a smart phone or tablet computer, equip it with an app capable of producing a spectrogram
of the microphone reading, and see whether you can detect airborne ultrasound in a public
place (appendix A). Because some such devices (such as the iPhone 5� and iPad Air 2�) have
microphones capable of monitoring above 20 kHz (appendix A), you may detect a tone (as in
figure 1a) or alternatively pulses, at frequencies close to 20 kHz. The data in figure 1 were recorded
in two large hallways, in public buildings, at a time when they were occupied and traversed
by hundreds of people. In both, there were loudspeakers placed every few metres. Figure 1a
was recorded in the main lobby of a major public library, open on several levels, that contained
walkways, workstations for staff and visitors, and seating areas where many people (including
infants) sat directly under the ceiling-mounted loudspeakers. The library has an annual footfall
in excess of 1.6 million people. In the absence of plans, the author estimates this lobby to measure
approximately 50 m by 50 m by 15 m high.
The smartphone or tablet is a convenient and inexpensive method of immediately testing for
the presence of ultrasound, although it comes with many limitations (e.g. uncertainty regarding
the reported levels) and drawbacks (the possibility of increased awareness causing anxiety in
some individuals). To make calibrated measurements for this paper, either three (figure 1b,c) or
two (figure 2) independent microphone and data acquisition systems were deployed, all with
calibrations traceable back to a primary standard (see appendix A for details).
 5
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19 496
19 395
19 293
finger on
finger off
train station
train station
94 dB SPL re 20 mPa across the third
octave band centred at 20 kHz, with
peak energy at 20.8 kHz
(a)
(b)
(c)
19 192
0
–20
0
20
40
60
80
0
5000
10 000
15 000
frequency (Hz)
20 000
25 000
1
2
3
time (s)
4
5
0
8
16
24
32
40
48
56
64
72
80
5000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
30 000
19 090
18 989
18 887
18 786
18 685
0
5.1
10.2
15.4
time (s)
frequency (Hz)
scale (dBFS)
frequency (Hz)
power spectral density
dB re (20 mPa)2 Hz–1
dB re (20 mPa)2 Hz–1
20.5
–96
–84
–72
–60
–48
–36
–24
–12
0
Figure 1. Acoustic field measurements taken by (a) an iPhone 5� in a public library (the horizontal arrow indicating the
main tone at approx. 19.2 kHz) and (b) a calibrated microphone in a railway station. In (a) the temporary placement of the
author’
s finger over the microphone (as indicated by the vertical arrows) allows the signal to be confirmed as acoustic and not
electromagnetic pickup (see appendix A). Spectrograms (a,b) plot how the distribution of energy across frequencies varies in
time. These data can be summed over time to produce the power spectral density (PSD, as shown in (c) for the data in (b)). The
sound pressure levels are calibrated in (b,c) and traceable back to primary standards, but not in (a). Fluctuations in frequency
in (a) are probably Doppler and diffraction effects as the phone is moved into position. The vertical dashed lines in (c) show
the upper and lower frequency limits of the third-octave band centred on 20 kHz, and the horizontal dashed (red) line shows
the level of broadband signal that would give the same third-octave SPL as the measured ultrasonic signal. See appendix A for
details on instrumentation.
Figure 1b,c records a sound pressure level (SPL) of approximately 94 dB re 20 µPa (in the third-
octave frequency band centred at 20 kHz). This was recorded at a table where the public eat in the
food concourse of the main hall of a major railway station (which hosts nearly 30 million visitors
each year). Here the loudspeakers are wall-mounted. This hall measures around 100 m by 30 m
by 20 m high and contains food outlets and shops.
In both situations, the microphones were at head height and pointed towards the loudspeakers
and approximately 1 m from the nearest speaker, locations typical of public occupancy.
Considerable audio frequency energy is evident in figure 1b, corresponding mainly to voice
announcements of train departures via the Public Address system. In the absence of specific
information, the author considered the aforementioned loudspeakers of the PAVA (public address
voice alarm) system to be the most likely to be producing the ultrasound in both the library and
the railway station, and in the recording locations of figure 2.
Figure 2a,b reports data taken in the toilets of a major swimming pool (the building as a
whole receives over 600 000 visitors per year). Figure 2c,d shows the data recorded at a world-
renowned museum that receives in excess of 3 million visitors per year (data taken in an open
hall measuring roughly 30 m by 40 m by 15 m high). These two sites produced SPLs of 77 and
63 dB re 20 µPa, respectively, in the third-octave frequency band centred at 20 kHz. One school
 6
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
0
–20
–40
20
40
60
80
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
5000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
30 000
1
2
3
time (s)
0
5000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
frequency (Hz)
(a)
(b)
77 dB SPL re 20 mPa across the
third octave band centred at 20 kHz, 
with peak energy at 20 kHz
frequency (Hz)
power spectral density
dB re (20 mPa)2 Hz–1
dB re (20 mPa)2 Hz–1
0
–20
–40
20
40
60
0
5000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
frequency (Hz)
(d)
63 dB SPL re 20 mPa across the third
octave band centred at 20 kHz, with
peak energy at 20 kHz
power spectral density
dB re (20 mPa)2 Hz–1
4
5
0
–20
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
5000
10 000
15 000
20 000
25 000
30 000
0.2
0.4
0.6
time (s)
(c)
frequency (Hz)
dB re (20 mPa)2 Hz–1
0.8
1.0
Figure2. Datatakenfrom(a,b)toiletsinapublicswimmingpool;and(c,d)amuseum.Whereasthesignalsinfigures1and2a,b
arecontinuous,theoneinfigure2c,d consistsofa1 sburstevery30s,apatternthisstudyhasobservedatseveralotherlocations
(withas muchas 90 s betweenpulses). In(b,d)the verticaldashed linesonthe boxshow the upper and lower frequencylimits
ofthethird-octavebandcentredon20 kHz,andthehorizontaldottedlineshowsthelevelofbroadbandsignalthatwouldgive
the same third-octave SPL as the measured ultrasonic signal. See appendix A for details on instrumentation.
and one major sports stadium were also tested, and both contained signals close to 20 kHz. All
measurements were made at locations that members of the public of all ages, and local workers,
occupy on a daily basis. These locations had been identified for testing from anecdotal reports
by members of the public claiming to have headaches, migraine, nausea, fatigue, dizziness and
an uncomfortable feeling of ‘pressure in the ears’ that they attribute to ultrasound. Should we be
concerned?
Although the symptoms correlate with those reported from occupational exposure in the
literature [1–8], participants in the historical studies were usually also exposed to high levels of
audio frequency sound. This is because unlike the devices measured in figures 1 and 2, ultrasonic
devices tested in the past (such as ultrasonic cleaning baths) also generated audio frequency
sound. A further complication is that it is no simple matter to compare the dB levels measured in
this paper with those reported historically (see below). This will be discussed extensively in §3,
but an introductory example is found in figures 1 and 2. To see this, note that the dB levels labelled
against the peaks in figures 1c and 2b,d do not match the levels on the graphs’ vertical axes (78, 60.9
and 47.2 dB re (20 µPa)2 Hz−1 in figures 1c, 2b and 2d respectively). As a further complication, a
third level in each of figures 1c and 2b,d is indicated by the horizontal red dotted line, which along
with a fourth dB level—the energy in the peak itself—will be discussed later. That it is possible to
report four different dB levels from the same data, even after an extensive careful calibration, is a
very important point that should be borne in mind when assessing historical reports of dB levels:
it is vital that there are sufficient metadata to understand what is being reported. When plotting
 7
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
a spectrum from the voltage time history output of a sensor (used here as a more general proxy
for acoustic pressure as monitored by a microphone), there are a number of conventions. With the
frequency usually plotted on the horizontal axis, the four most common options for the vertical
axis are: V Hz−1; V2 Hz−1; V; V2. Clearly, the representations that use V2 in preference to V are
plotting a parameter which reflects a function related to the power of the signal, as opposed to the
amplitude. The advantage of using Hz−1 comes from the common interpretation of a spectrum as
a histogram, as the frequency bins will be finite: changing the width of these bins should affect the
amplitude of the spectral level plotted [11]. This is certainly appropriate for broadband signals,
and it is these that have usually been considered when setting the third-octave limits shown in
figure 3, all but one of which are guidelines for occupational exposures to ‘VHF/US’ fields (using
this label throughout this article to mean 12–20 kHz for VHF and ‘greater than 20 kHz’ for US,
noting that some authorities place the lower frequency limit for ultrasound at 10 kHz [2], 15 kHz
[30], 16 kHz [5,31] or 18 kHz [12] rather than 20 kHz [32]). It seems likely that setting guidelines
based on the energy in a third-octave band for VHF/US signals followed the standard practice
for exposure to audio frequency occupational noise, which tends to be broadband, and the design
of commercial sound level meters (appendix A). However, stating maximum permissible levels
(MPLs) in terms of the energy allowed in a third-octave band is problematic if the signal is
narrowband, as are the examples in figures 1 and 2. These examples are nearly tonal, and for
purely tonal signals, the energy in the bin that contains the signal is independent of the bin width,
as all the energy is at a single frequency, i.e. it has zero bandwidth. Only one of the bins will
contain non-zero energy. Division of the energy of that bin by the bandwidth of the bin simply
causes the spectral peak corresponding to the sine wave to reduce in amplitude as the bin width
increases. As a result, the parameters V and V2 are sometimes used in preference to V Hz−1 and
V2 Hz−1, if the signal is perceived to more closely resemble a sinewave than a broadband signal.
In figures 1c and 2b,d, the vertical axis is plotted as the power spectral density (PSD; dB re
(20 µPa)2 per Hz). The horizontal red dotted line shows that level which would give the identical
third-octave level if the energy were equally distributed across frequencies in the band centred on
20 kHz (the upper and lower frequencies of which are shown by the vertical red dotted lines).
However, the actual measured signal is narrowband so that, given the preceding paragraph,
it makes sense also to express this in terms of the SPL over the frequency bin that contains
most energy: as the frequency resolution of the PSD is 23.4 Hz, this ‘peak SPL’ level would be
10 log10(23.4) = 13.7 dB higher than the maximum PSD level for this peak (shown on the vertical
axis) if all the energy inside the third-octave band were contained in a single frequency bin of the
PSD. This is not the case in practice because of background noise and the ability of the Discrete
Fourier Transform to spread energy into neighbouring bins. These features mean that in figures 1c
and 2b,d the difference is not exactly 13.7 dB, the discrepancies being around 2–3 dB. Similarly, its
peak SPL would be expected to be 10 log10(22 400 − 17 800) = 36.6 dB higher than the horizontal
dotted line that would score exactly the same when compared with the third-octave levels of
the guidelines (figure 3). When integrated across just the frequency range of the peak itself (as
opposed to the whole third-octave band), loss of the energy contained in the background signal
outside the narrow band covered by the peak gives SPLs of 92 (figure 1c), 75 (figure 2b) and 61
(figure 2d) dB re 20 µPa.
The range of available guidelines [3,7,12–28,33,34] is plotted in figure 3. Almost all refer to
the MPL allowable for occupational exposures for 8 h a day, 5 days a week, in each third-octave
band. Comparison of the nearly tonal signals of figures 1 and 2 against these third-octave MPLs
is therefore problematic, particularly if those exposures are not occupational.
The problems increase when we consider the limitations of the underpinning research on
which the guidelines are based, and the misinterpretations of these. The problems would worsen
if we were to introduce the subjective or annoyance effects that different signals elicit. These issues
will be discussed in §2b.
As a postscript on the use of dB levels in this paper, the International Standards Organization,
ISO [35] allows use of a reference intensity of 10−12 W m−2 or a reference RMS pressure of
20 µPa when stating dB levels for sound in air. The human ear is a pressure sensor (intensity
 8
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
140
135
130
125
120
115
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
8 1012.5 16
20
25
31.5
40
50
0
10
20
40
50
30
7.08
11.2
17.8
28.2
44.7
8.91
14.1
22.4
35.5
56.2
110
USSR (1975) (as cited in WHO [19])
Internat. Lab. Off. (1977)
(as cited in Lee [18])
ACGIH (2004) for 8 h 
average (as cited in Howard et al. [34])
INIRC-IRPA [20]: occupational (
or public (  
 ) exposures
)
Parrack (1969, pers. commun.) (as cited in WHO [19] and Acton [6])
US Department of Defence [25]
Canada (1980) (as cited in WHO [19])
USSR(1983) (as cited in Tanttari [21])
Japan (1971) (as cited in WHO [19])
Sweden (1978) (as cited in WHO [19])
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, ACGIH (1979)
(as cited in Lee [18])
Parrack [14] for octave or one-third
octave bands
ACGIH (2004) ceiling
values (as cited in Howard et al. [34])
Poland (2002) Lmax (as cited in
L
Grigor’eva [13] for wideband exceeding 20 kHz;
and third octave bands at 8, 10, 12.5 and 16 kHz
Norway (1978) for octave band level (as cited in
Damongeot & André [7])
US Air Force (1976) (as cited in WHO [19])
max. permissible sound pressure level (dB re 20 µPa)
in one-third octave bands (unless otherwise stated)
one-third octave band limits (in blue)
and centre (in red) frequencies (kHz)
Acton [15]
Acton [16,17]
Health Canada [22]
EARS Project [26]
Australia (1981) (as cited in
Damongeot & André [7])
Poland (2002) Leq8h (as cited in
Pawlaczyk-  uszczynska et al. [24])
L
Pawlaczyk-  uszczynska et al. [24])
Figure3. MaximumpermissiblesoundpressurelevelsforVHFsoundandultrasoundinair,aslaidoutbyarangeofindividuals,
groups and organizations [3,7,12–29]. The use of boxes indicates ‘
families’
of similar guidelines: most of the data are repeats or
reviews of earlier works, such that this figure is actually based on a handful of original studies. The figure groups all guidelines
tothenearest5 dB,whichisaccurateforallbuttheminorityofguidelinesthatusefinergradations(seeappendixBforthisand
other important details). Unless otherwise stated, the guidelines refer to the one-third octave level. Please refer to table 1 in
Appendix B to aid identification.
of course being a vector) and a reference RMS pressure of 20 µPa will be used in this paper,
unless otherwise stated (the microphones in figures 1b,c and 2 were calibrated in terms of
pressure). Conversion between intensity and pressure assumes knowledge of the geometry of
the wavefront and knowledge of the pressure and density at the reference and measurement
points, oversight of which can lead to errors and ambiguities [36], though these are unlikely
for the type of measurements reported in this paper. In general, even when using calibrated
microphones, because of both the equipment and the processing issues it is probably prudent
to include approximately 3 dB of expanded uncertainty when assessing calculations made from
field microphone measurements [37,38], and any guidelines (current or historical) following
from them. The 2–3 dB discrepancy discussed above in relation to figures 1c and 2b,d illustrates
this. Radosz [27,39] discusses the difficulties associated with calibration when making field
measurements at these frequencies.
(ii) The crux of the matter
In assessing the issue of human exposure to ultrasound in air, the heart of the matter is this:
advances in the ability to market inexpensive commercial ultrasonic sources have led to their
increased use, exposing large numbers of people. Industrial ultrasonic devices, for cleaning,
drilling, homogenizing etc. have been around for decades, and formed the core of historical
interest in developing guidelines and in the underpinning research base. However, many devices
now deliver exposures that cannot be classed as occupational. Some sources are deliberately
 9
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
incorporated into devices (e.g. pest scarers, some door opening sensors), while some are present
as an adjunct to the main operation of a device (e.g. in many PAVA systems). It is also possible that
some modern devices are inadvertently producing ultrasound (e.g. possibly from data projection
and lighting systems, but this needs confirmation). Output powers vary significantly between
types of device, although surveying is sparse and levels stated by manufacturers are open
to question because procedures for taking measurements traceable back to primary standards
have only just been developed (with papers [40–42] preceding a full formal recommendation).
Exposures that, were they to be done in a laboratory would require significant consideration by,
and permission from, an ethics committee, are occurring in public spaces. Individuals are unlikely
to be aware of such exposures. Some members of the public are complaining, for themselves and
their children. No studies have been conducted to assess which, if any, of these complaints can be
traced to exposure to VHF/US fields. Such public exposures are not common knowledge and, on
the assumption (indeed the definition) that humans cannot hear ultrasound, their safety is rarely
questioned. Guidelines for the exposure of humans to VHF/US signals in air vary, but are not
adequate for current exposures because:
— Firstly, the original studies are scarce and not sufficient for guidelines (which outnumber
the source studies by around 3:1).
— Secondly, none of the guidelines that pertain to exposure above the third-octave band
centred on 20 kHz are based on avoiding effects that have been labelled as ‘subjective’
(including nausea, dizziness, tinnitus, fatigue, migraine and persistent headaches [1–8,
20,43]): at these frequencies, the guidelines are designed to avoid hearing damage at the
lower frequencies used for speech (see §2b). It is likely that the public exposures today are
at levels whereby the issue that needs consideration is whether they generate subjective
effects, and if so, what is the impact of these on quality of life, and on concentration and
productivity in work and schools, given mass exposure.
— Thirdly, these guidelines take little account of the very significant variability in sensitivity
to VHF/US signals of individuals, or specific demographics within the population
compared to the ‘average’ on which the guidelines are based (often an adult male from
industrial or Services employment). Recent data suggest 1 in 20 of people aged 40–49
years old have hearing thresholds that are at least 20 dB more sensitive at 20 kHz than the
average 30–39 year old [10]. One demographic that should be investigated for departure
from the ‘population norm’ is children. The same study [10] reports that 5% of the 5–
19 year age group are reported to have a 20 kHz threshold that is 60 dB more sensitive
than the median for the 30–39 year age group [10]. Our current level of knowledge
does not allow us to say whether or not enhanced hearing acuity in the VHF/US range
will affect their chances of suffering adverse (including subjective) effects (§2b(i)), but
the departures from the ‘averages’ used to produce current guidelines clearly need
investigating, as does the change in VHF/US sensitivity during infancy and childhood.
Other recent data challenge the assumption underlying early guidelines, and repeated
since, that the steep fall-off in sensitivity seen in the average of the human adult data
between 16 and 20 kHz may be extrapolated to higher frequencies (§2b(ii)) [44].
— Fourthly, international standards for measuring ultrasonic fields are only just developing,
so that even where outputs of devices are stated, or field measurements taken, their
accuracy cannot be guaranteed unless they can be traced back to primary standards and
measurement procedures.
For these reasons, this paper asserts that the scientific basis for setting guidelines for exposure to
VHF sound and ultrasound in air is not sufficient to cope with the current mass exposure of the
public and workers, and that there is as yet an insufficient scientific basis to confirm that any of
the current guidelines are safe for large numbers of people.
Lack of research means that it is not possible to prove or disprove public health risk or
discomfort. Publication of this report comes at the cost of possibly raising anxiety and potentially
 10
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
promoting symptoms in individuals who had none. However, it is important that existing
sufferers are able to identify the true cause of their symptoms, whether they result from VHF/US
exposure or not, and lack of research means that it is impossible to make such an identification of
the source of the symptoms currently reported by members of the public. This paper highlights
the knowledge gap in which ultrasonic sources are being placed in public spaces.
(b) Are the current guidelines appropriate for mass public exposure to tones?
Scepticism is always required when anecdotal reports of subjective symptoms are produced
by members of the public, particularly when the public attribute the cause to something
imposed upon them (a windfarm, power cable etc.) and other individuals feel no adverse effects.
However, we must also be sceptical about scepticism: it is possible for some individuals to be
particularly susceptible to certain agents (allergens being an example), and our classification
of symptoms as ‘subjective’ glosses over what we really mean by the word: all symptoms are
subjective until we develop the technology to detect and objectively measure a quantifiable
and repeatable observable (the introduction of fMRI has, for example, begun to convert some
previously subjective symptoms into observables that are quantifiable by proxy, as has recently
been investigated for infrasound [26]). Following convention, ultrasonically induced temporary
or permanent changes in the quietest sounds an individual can hear at a given frequency (called
the temporary threshold shift (TTS) and permanent threshold shift (PTS), respectively) are called
‘objective’ measures in this paper in contrast with the ‘subjective’ effects (nausea, fatigue etc.).
However, the audiological measurement of a hearing threshold is often a subjective assessment of
hearing performance, requiring individual judgement on whether the sound is detectable or not,
the extent to which that can be truthfully reported, and whether lack of repeatability in retesting
can have an identified causal link (such as recent noise exposure that is not reported by the subject
to the tester). Such tests have an objective ‘right/wrong’ answer, whereas annoyance, fatigue etc.,
are often assessed on a rating scale with no ‘right/wrong’ answer. This, and the tendency for
better test–retest reliability with performance measures, has led to TTS and PTS being classed as
‘objective’ measures, but the distinction is not so straightforward.
No mechanism has been proposed that might produce the above subjective symptoms claimed
for VHF (12–20 kHz) and US (greater than 20 kHz) acoustic irradiation. Audiology has had, for at
least four decades, established methods of objectively quantifying the adverse effects of exposure
to audio frequency sound that is too loud, or persists for too long. This is primarily through
measurement of the TTS of patients who come for testing, and from epidemiological studies
relating any PTS to estimates of past occupational noise exposure. Indeed, as §2b will explain, this
has played a large part in setting the guidelines for the advisable levels of exposure to VHF/US
fields (figure 3) to the extent that the inducement of subjective effects above the 20 kHz third-
octave band has not played a role in setting guidelines. Those guidelines show a large spread in
values (a factor of over 3 million in intensity, and a factor of more than 1000 in pressure, at 20 kHz),
even though they are based in large part on monitoring the averages of selected cohorts, rather
than reflecting the spread in response that characterizes the hearing and balance functions in
the general population. The calibrated recording in figure 1c would contravene around half of the
MPLs in figure 3, and would do so continuously without interruption. The concern arises because
in §2b it is proposed that even the guidelines in figure 3 are based on inadequate evidence, and
were for the most part drawn up for the scenario of occupational exposure of adults for limited
and monitored periods of time.
(i) What question is being asked?
Figure 3 is visually unpalatable but necessarily so. Lawton [45,46], on whose excellent
compilations of guidelines much of figure 3 is based, followed the generally accepted route of
tabulating the centre frequency of the third-octave band against the maximum permitted dB level
(which in guidelines is sometimes the instantaneous level, the time-averaged (e.g. 8 h) level or is
 11
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
unspecified). However, figure 3 illustrates that, in doing so, that MPL stretches from the lower to
the upper frequency limit of each band (as shown in blue on the upper axis of figure 3).
Figure 3 also makes clear the step change in allowed levels that occurs across the 20 kHz band.
This follows from the criteria that levels at and below the 20 kHz band (i.e. below 22.4 kHz;
figure 3) are set to avoid subjective effects (nausea, fatigue etc.), while above 22.4 kHz they are
set to avoid the ultrasound generating hearing loss at frequencies generally used to understand
speech (normal audiometric testing for hearing loss does not extend to frequencies higher than
8 kHz, so damage at frequencies higher than 8 kHz would not normally be detected [47]).
Finally, the agreement between authors in figure 3 is illusory (authors who tend to agree
are grouped in boxes in the legend). There are only six basic studies (Grigor’eva [13]; Acton
[15–17]; Parrack [14] with a 1969 revision from Parrack via personal communication; [6,19]). As
a result, the reviews and guidelines in figure 3 outnumber the underpinning studies by around
3:1, such that (in the words of Lawton [46]) ‘these first interim limits were taken up by national
and international bodies, and repeated with enough regularity over several decades to gain a
degree of authority and permanence, perhaps not deserved... It seems that Soviet, UK and
American investigators of the 1960s took a reasoned approach, recommending DRCs [Damage
Risk Criteria] and MPLs supported by limited experimental and survey data. These tentative first
recommendations were then taken up by national and international bodies, to gain authority by
repetition: the idea of ‘proposed’ or ‘tentative’ has been lost in the repetitions’. Henceforth, any
new guidelines must address the fact that:
— there is a paucity of original studies, and re-issuing new guidelines based on old ones
gives the unintended impression of confirmation, validation and independent agreement
where none was intended; furthermore, transcription errors occur and through repetition
become embedded (though care was taken in appendix B, the original sources are now
over 40 years old, and some of their recommended levels are known only through citation
by others);
— these original studies dealt with occupational exposures rather than modern public
exposures (see figures 1 and 2);
— the original studies had small subject numbers, and neglected potentially sensitive
individuals and demographics, such as children (we should consider variations in
individual sensitivity to both auditory and subjective effects—numerous research teams
of adults dating from the 1940s [48] to the present day, as observed by this author, noted
that some team members reported effects such as dizziness when close to the ultrasonic
source, while others were unaffected, although controlled human experimentation in
ignorance of the exposure conditions would be required to prove that such reports are
ultrasonically induced);
— past studies addressed the duration of exposure in an uneven manner (such that many
national guidelines opt for an 8 h daily exposure, 5 days a week) and the convention of
trading-off the intensity of exposure against its duration is not well suited to the public
exposures to VHF/US fields seen in figures 1 and 2; and
— modern wide-ranging guidelines need to take into account who is to be protected and
monitored, and which adverse effects are to be minimized or even prevented.
Figure 3 groups ‘families’ of similar guidelines into boxes. The dominant sources are the 1975
work of Acton [16] (which produced three similar families, bracketed together in figure 3),
H. O. Parrack 1969 (personal communication [6,19]) and, to a lesser extent, Grigor’eva [13].
Parrack’s original 1966 recommendations [14] have been surprisingly long-lived and influential,
given that he retracted them in 1969 (as cited in the 1982 WHO guidelines [19]). These were
all based on work carried out in the 1960s and 1970s on exposure to occupational noise in the
VHF/US regimes. As regards the final two boxes in figure 3, it has been difficult to identify the
source of the basic research on which the 1976 USAF, and the 2004 ACGIH (American Conference
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists) 8 h average, guidelines are based.
 12
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The scenario in mind for the basic studies behind figure 3 would typically be work at an
ultrasonic cleaning bath, and the goal for signals above 22.4 kHz would be the avoidance of
hearing loss below 8 kHz. The context of such known exposures would be worker protection
against occupational exposure enshrined in law, subject to monitoring, with known and recorded
durations for the exposure and ‘quiet’ times for recovery. Furthermore, the worker would be made
aware of the exposure and might (within reason) be required to wear protective equipment. The
occupational source envisaged by most of those setting guidelines would be inadvertently leaking
ultrasound into the air (e.g., an ultrasonic cleaning bath), and so shielding it could be an option. By
contrast, people receiving VHF/US exposures in public areas, for exposures resembling figures 1
and 2 (that are not accompanied by a familiar audio frequency alert that most people can hear,
such as the hiss of an ultrasonic cleaning bath), are currently ignorant of their exposures; they
cannot reasonably be expected to wear hearing protection; they receive no monitoring of their
exposure; they might also be exposed at home (by pest scarers) or during the commute (by public
transport PAVA), and at work. Whether they respond significantly or not at all is a function of the
unknown variation in response in the population, and the as-yet unknown exposures. Moreover,
how we view a symptom depends on our knowledge of cause and effect (§4) and the extent
to which the evidence base leads to guidance of which clinicians can be aware. To take one
example, dizziness from ultrasound is classed as a subjective symptom. Dizziness from taking
a medication for which it is a known side effect would not be classed as subjective, and in that
respect would not only be a consideration in how well the medication can be tolerated and how
it affects productivity and quality of life, but would also be included in statutory assessments of
risk and health (for example, when operating machinery).
Against this uncertainty in the hazard comes uncertainty in the response: there are no records
of large numbers of complaints from the public, and this might be because only a small number
are affected, or it might be because there has been no awareness of exposure and no route by
which to complain. If significant numbers do complain, statistically there will be a proportion that
attributes adverse effects to ultrasound when ultrasound is not in fact the cause. Large numbers
will be unaffected: while their existence at all is surprising, the exposures shown in figures 1 and 2
are orders of magnitude less intense than those exploited in ultrasonic weaponry, see §3b(iii)(4).
This section will ask whether, considering today’s mass exposure of the public to tonal
VHF/US signals, the six original studies on which figure 3 is based were considering relevant
cohorts, relevant exposures and relevant adverse effects, and whether we need to reconsider the
guidelines for occupational and public exposures.
When drawing up such guidelines, we are mapping the available evidence base on to a dB
level, a process that retrospectively translates the evidence base into a single question: what is the
appropriate dB level? It is vital, in doing so, that we ask ourselves how well the original research
maps onto that specific question, and avoid a mismatch because the context is not considered.
The work of Knight [49] is frequently cited, drawing upon his conclusion that ‘there is no
evidence of hazardous influence of airborne ultrasonic radiation on the acoustic or vestibular
systems’ [49]. What question was Knight [49] really asking? This author’s interpretation of it
would be ‘If a group of only 18 men with an average age of 30, who work in the ultrasonic
cleaning baths industry but for whom there is no quantification of exposure either to audio
frequency or ultrasonic signals, is compared to a group of 20 men of similar average age who
do not work in the ultrasonic cleaning bath industry, do the average (across the whole group)
Hearing Threshold Levels from 250 to 8000 Hz differ between the two groups?’ The average
of the ultrasonic workers was worse by 2–7 dB over the entire frequency range. However,
Knight’s data also show the most pronounced reduction as being a dip at 4 kHz, which usually
follows from exposure to high levels of audio frequency sound. Indeed, Knight [49] records
that half of the 18-man cohort had experienced gunfire, of which one was also working with
pneumatic road drills, one with riveting noise and one (who had also received an ototoxic drug)
had worked in an aero-engine test bed. Of the remaining nine men who had not experienced
gunfire, two tested 100 W guitar amplifiers between their ultrasonic exposures. This would negate
comparisons. In common with many studies that looked for changes to hearing, Knight [49]
 13
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
adds as a postscript that ‘The reported prevalence of subjective effects and stress disorders was
extremely small’.
Knight [49] compared the average hearing sensitivity of a group who worked with ultrasonic
cleaning machines, with the average hearing sensitivity of a group that did not. There is no
measurement of the exposure the first group had, no attempt to test the variability within
that group, and no reported recognition of any self-selection that subjective effects may cause
in occupational studies (a subject who routinely feels fatigue and nausea when operating a
particular machine is less likely to continue doing so, and so be available for Knight to select).
When the excellent review by Howard et al. [34] cites Knight, it states: ‘There are no reports
of hearing loss due to ultrasound exposure [1,49], although there is a report of TTS in subjects
exposed to frequencies of 18 kHz at 150 dB for about 5 min [1]. Research has shown that airborne
ultrasound has the potential to cause nausea, fatigue, and headaches [3,7,8,20,43,50]’ [34]. The
context (which as §3b will demonstrate is sometimes crucially omitted) includes the fact that
Knight’s study [49] was not designed to address the question of whether a minority (that
would be hard to detect in population averages such as Knight [49] conducted) will suffer the
above subjective effects. It is not sufficient to say that such deficiencies would be evident to
epidemiologists and statisticians, because in 40 years no organization setting guidelines has
attempted to rectify the problems in the original data, which is used to support assurances from
manufacturers that:
‘there are no studies that show any issues of long term exposure to airborne ultrasound in
the uBeam frequency range, despite many years of human exposure to existing ultrasound
sources’ [9]
(noting that, at the time, the manufacturers were withholding specifying what ‘the uBeam
frequency range’ was, and are still vague about their device’s specifications; see section 3(b)(ii)).
Do we care if only a minority is affected? The spirit of German workplace law effectively states
that protection must be given to all workers from all possible hazards [51,52]. In contrast, in the
UK the Health and Safety at Work etc., Act 1974 qualifies the duty of employers to protect their
employees and the public, and employees to protect themselves and each other, by the principle
of ‘so far as is reasonably practicable’, explained as follows by the UK Health and Safety Executive
[53]: ‘In other words, an employer does not have to take measures to avoid or reduce the risk if
they are technically impossible or if the time, trouble or cost of the measures would be grossly
disproportionate to the risk’. This suggests a balance between risk and remedy.
If a minority of a given workforce were suffering adverse effects from airborne ultrasound,
although the above attitudes taken by German and British lawmakers seem different, in both cases
the workers should be protected, once workers and management were aware of the exposure.
Measures might include building protective casings around the acoustic sources, donning ear
protection, limiting exposures and/or redeploying sensitive individuals to other tasks. This
section has up to now considered occupational exposures in terms of the underlying scientific
studies and the resulting guidelines. What, however, about public exposure such as was recorded
in figures 1 and 2? The public and management may well be unaware of it, the ‘dosages’ of
ultrasound would be uncontrolled and unmonitored, and the option of protective measures
would be impractical. There are unknown numbers of sites generating ultrasound; an inadequate
evidence base from which to predict the effects; the vagaries of reporting subjective symptoms
among the footfall of millions at each site; and the complexities of assessing the costs associated
with a minority of those who commute, attend education or seek recreation feeling subjective
adverse effects. These may seem obvious questions when seen from a public health perspective,
but they are not relevant to the guidelines of figure 3, except for one. Only the 1984 INIRC-IRPA
[20] guidelines (built on a 1981 report [54]) considered public exposure, giving a very reasoned
account of the differences that must be taken into account for public, as opposed to occupational,
exposure (§2b(iii)) but noting that these were interim because of the lack of definitive data. The
author has been unable to identify any additional data, other than the occupational exposure
 14
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
studies that are criticized in this paper, on which the INIRC-IRPA [20] based the ‘existing data’ of
their opening remark when they stated that
‘Existing data suggest that exposure of the general public to airborne ultrasound (one-third
octave band mid frequencies above 20 kHz) at levels up to 110 dB is not known to cause
untoward health effects. However, noting that the general population can potentially be
exposed 24 h per day and for the other considerations noted above, an added safety factor
should be incorporated, at least as an interim measure until more definite data on adverse
health effects of exposure to airborne ultrasound become available. Thus an SPL of 100 dB is
recommended. For similar reasons, an added safety factor should be incorporated into the
exposure limit for frequencies in the range of the one-third octave band centred on 20 kHz.
An SPL of 70 dB is recommended’.
This interim 70 dB limit is the only suggestion we have to cover the mass public exposures of figures 1
and 2, and it is based on a small number of occupational exposure studies primarily of the average response
of small cohorts of adult males.
(ii) The use of averages
It is commonly accepted that the arithmetic averaging of data is a sensible route to reliable
conclusions, but this section contests this for the mass exposure of the public to ultrasound in
air. As emphasized in the previous subsection, Knight [49] (in common with all the studies on
which the guidelines of figure 3 are based) worked with averages, primarily for occupational
exposures, and was consequently insensitive to the variation that occurs within the population.
Therefore, they did not detect population variation, in particular whether specific demographics
(such as children) vary significantly from the average. As long ago as 1972, Johnsson & Hawkins
[55] suggested that the high frequency sensitivity of children arises because the concentration of
hair cells in the basilar portion of the cochlea is high in newborns, and subsequently reduces.
This sensitivity had been observed for some time [56–58] but there were no standard methods of
testing [44,59]. Figure 4a shows the evidence behind the earlier statement that 5% of the people
tested by Rodríguez Valiente et al. [10] who were between the ages of 40 and 49 years old, had
hearing at 20 kHz that was at least 20 dB more sensitive than the median for the 30–39 year
olds tested (a typical age for subjects on which a considerable portion of figure 3 is based). At
20 kHz, 5% of the 5–19 year age group had a threshold 60 dB more sensitive than the median
for the 30–39 year age group. Because the dB scale is logarithmic, these 20 and 60 dB differences
correspond to factors of 100 and 1 000 000 in intensity (equivalent to factors of 10 and 1000 in
pressure for plane and spherical progressive waves).
Filipo et al. [60] compared the average hearing threshold of a group of 25 children aged 7–10,
with the average of a group of 20 people aged 17–20, using pure tone audiometry via headphones
at 8, 10, 12.5, 16 and 20 kHz. They found the average threshold at 20 kHz of the younger group was
20 dB more sensitive than that of the older group. Burén et al. [61] conducted pure tone audiometry
on three groups, having median ages 11, 14 and 19 (to the nearest six months, the respective cohort
size being 172, 94 and 69). At 20 kHz, the average threshold of the youngest group was 10 dB
more sensitive than that of the oldest group. Although the raw data are not available, it would
appear that the most sensitive individuals in the youngest group have thresholds at 20 kHz that
were 55 dB better than the average threshold for the older group. As a word of caution, Herbertz
[62] does show the raw scatter in the data, and although he does make conclusions on trends,
the scatter is significant: in audiometric VHF/US studies, it might be useful to show scatter and
provide raw data as a matter of course.
In audiology, standard pure tone audiometry measures hearing thresholds from 0.125 to 8 kHz,
and does not as a matter of routine measure frequencies above 8 kHz (which are known as
‘extended high frequencies’, EHFs). The international standard [63] for the EHF range covers
only from 8 to 16 kHz, and furthermore, only includes data from subjects aged 18 and over. If,
during childhood, the hearing acuity to VHF/US signals decreases rapidly with age, care must be
 15
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
median
5th percentile
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
hearing threshold SPL (dB)
(a)
at 20 kHz
(b)
at 16 kHz
age range of cohort
age range of cohort
5–19 years
20–29 years
30–39 years
40–49 years
50–59 years
60–69 years
70–90 years
5–19 years
20–29 years
30–39 years
40–49 years
50–59 years
60–69 years
70–90 years
Figure 4. The hearing threshold (pure tone audiometry) as a function of age, showing median and 5th percentile values at
(a) 20 kHz and (b) 16 kHz. Data taken from Rodríguez Valiente et al. [10], who used a total dataset of 645 people. Data at 0 dB
and120 dBre20 µPahavebeeninfluencedbythethresholdandsaturationlimitsoftheinstrumentationandsocontributeless
reliably to the statistics. The vertical arrows indicate the difference between the median in the 30–39 age group, and the 5th
percentile in the 5–19 age group.
taken when applying averaging and developing standards for the VHF/US regime. Commercial
high frequency audiometers, and problems with their use, are discussed in appendix A.
Having therefore questioned what demographic is sampled using a cohort of what size, and
having obtained access to the raw data with its scatter, what is to be done with it? Certainly,
its statistical significance should be tested. There is no escaping the attraction of presenting the
average, but which average? Even if one decides on using the mean, which mean should be used?
At a practical level, how appropriate for predicting the threshold for subjective effects, is a system
that averages decibels of hearing thresholds of TTS or PTS? Because the decibel is a logarithmic
representation, then consider three individuals with hearing thresholds of 60, 70 and 80 dB re
20 µPa. These decibel levels correspond to hearing thresholds in pressure of 20, 63.2 and 200 mPa,
giving a mean RMS acoustic pressure of 94.4 mPa, i.e. 73.5 dB re 20 µPa, not 70 dB—and error bars
that are not symmetrical about the mean when plotted on a dB scale. Simply taking the mean of
the raw dB numbers tends to increase the permissible levels over and above the arithmetic mean
of the acoustic pressures because it takes a geometric mean. Note that the mean of the intensities
represented by 60, 70 and 80 dB re 10−12 W m−2 (1, 10 and 100 µW m−2) is 37 µW m−2, i.e. 75 dB
re 10−12 W m−2. Without an established record of human responses to ultrasound in air (taking
into account deviations from the average) and without a mechanism for producing these effects,
the only basis for this approach for either hearing loss or subjective effects from ultrasound in air
is an extrapolation from the practice that has served at audio frequencies [64], of averaging dBs
because it is more closely aligned to audio frequency hearing than a linear representation would
be. Extrapolation of this approach to predict the subjective effects produced by ultrasound in air
has yet to be validated.
(iii) The range seen in the guidelines
One immediate question to address is why, if the guidelines are based on the same small number
of basic studies, there is such a spread in allowable limits (65 dB for occupational exposures, i.e.
a factor of over 3 million in intensity, and a factor of more than 1000 in pressure, at 20 kHz). The
most generous guidelines in figure 3 can, in the opinion of this author, be immediately criticized.
Ultrasonic manufacturing (of pest deterrents, cleaning baths etc.) grew significantly in the 1980s:
 16
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
for example, between 1980 and 1983, production of ultrasonic pest control devices in the USA
increased approximately 80-fold [65]. The manufacturers sought high intensities, to generate an
effective deterrent. On addressing safety concerns in the postscript to their protocol for deploying
ultrasonic pest deterrents, in 1989 proponents of the devices stated ‘OSHA standards require
ear protection or exposure limitation for continuous sound pressures above 120 dB. Commercial
ultrasonic units fall below this threshold; most units do not operate continuously, and sound
pressures (except very close to the transducers) are less than 120 dB. Some workers, especially
younger females, may be annoyed by the ultrasound field’ [66] (noting that these stated dB levels
are re 20 µPa RMS). Recent measurements in a Tokyo restaurant detected 120 dB re 20 µPa SPL
directly under a pest deterrent source, and 90 dB re 20 µPa SPL some 15 m from it, and noted
strong adverse reactions from some people, §3b(iii)(1).
Having in this way been used to justify high exposures in the past, in 2004 US Occupational
Health and Safety Administration (OSHA) voted to adopt the recommendations from The
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) [23] to increase the
allowable limits by 30 dB ‘when there is no possibility that the ultrasound can couple with the
body by touching water or some other medium’. The author has been unable to find any basis
for this rationale. One trail of logic that would lead here would be if the ACGIH and OSHA
incorrectly believed that the observations of adverse effects on which other guidelines were based
had been obtained when the subjects had been coupled to the ultrasound source. OSHA’s vote
permitted manufacturers and users to deploy devices that exposed humans to 1000 times the
intensity levels that other guidelines considered to be the maximum permissible. Furthermore,
the ACGIH [23] confined itself to avoiding only one specific adverse effect, stating: ‘These
recommended limits (set at the middle frequencies of the one-third octave bands from 10 kHz
to 50 kHz) are designed to prevent possible hearing loss caused by the subharmonics of the set
frequencies rather than the ultrasonic sound itself’. That is to say, the only hazard that was to be
avoided was one where the energy in subharmonics caused hearing loss: no other criteria were
deemed relevant. Any potential for the primary ultrasonic frequency (e.g. the peak at 20.8 kHz
in figure 1c) to cause hearing impairment other than through audio frequency subharmonics is
ignored. Despite extensive criticisms from the international community [34], the latest version
of the OSHA manual [50] still supports all these stances except that the 30 dB statement is not
explicit, though given previous editions users could readily implicitly apply it given that it still
states ‘ACGIH set the ceiling values assuming that the worker has no direct contact with the
ultrasound source, but that the worker does have contact with water or other media that can
transfer the sound waves’. The 2012 ACGIH document [67] repeats the above permission to allow
for a 30 dB increase if the transmission path is airborne, and also states that all (measurement)
instrumentation should meet the specifications of a standard that allows for sound level meters
in general usage to underestimate the level of the signal (measured in the 20 kHz third-octave
band) to an unlimited degree and still meet the standard (see §3a).
Consider the railway station of figure 1b,c. The 30 000 000 who pass through it each year are not
covered by the above OSHA guidelines, as it explicitly protects only workers. If 5% of the station’s
workers on 8 h shifts are impaired by headaches, migraine, nausea, fatigue, tinnitus or dizziness,
would that effect on their work and lives not be considered at all if we were to adopt the OSHA
guidelines? The answer is that it would be in part, if the exposure is at 10–20 kHz, because of the
following phrase from OSHA and ACGIH, repeated from the start to their latest editions [50]:
‘Subjective annoyance and discomfort may occur in some individuals at levels between 75 and
105 dB for the frequencies from 10 kHz to 20 kHz, especially if they are tonal in nature. Hearing
protection or engineering controls may be needed to prevent subjective effects’ (noting that these
stated dB levels are re 20 µPa RMS). On reviewing this, Lenhardt [68] recommends his earplug
design [69] and notes that goggles may be required if unproven theories that the eye is a route by
which ultrasound activates the auditory system are proved [70].
The exposures of figures 1 and 2 are indeed tonal. Engineering controls (shielding) will be
practicable for some workers, but not if the objective of the device is to emit sound into the
public space (§3b), as appears to be the case for the sources of figures 1 and 2. For these,
 17
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
hearing protection might be worn (if shown to be adequate for VHF/US signals), but if the
assessment of need comes from guidelines that follow from the current evidence base with its
data predominantly taken from the averages of adult males, then it is not aligned with German
occupational law (translated) that states ‘Risks are to be controlled at source; ... individual
protection measures are subordinate to other measures ... special dangers for vulnerable groups
of workers are to be taken into account’ (translated from Bundesministerium der Justiz und für
Verbraucherschutz, 1982) [51].
Having looked in detail at the guidelines which are most permissive above the 20 kHz third-
octave bands, consider now the third-octave band centred at 20 kHz, where the exposures of
figures 1 and 2 occur. In this band in figure 3, the OSHA guidelines [50] are not the most
permissive. In 1966, Parrack [14] suggested a 140 dB re 20 µPa maximum permissible limit in
octave and third-octave bands, though Parrack retracted this in 1969 [6,19], reducing levels overall
(and making the 20 kHz limit 105 dB re 20 µPa). Nevertheless, Parrack’s original 140 dB re 20 µPa
limit has persisted with many reviewers and authorities, from Crabtree & Forshaw [4] in 1977
to Altmann [71] in 2010, who stated that ‘High audio frequencies (above 10 kHz) produce less
threshold shift [than do lower frequencies], and at ultrasound [sic] the ear is essentially untouched
if levels are below 140 dB. In these frequency ranges heating of air cavities, of textiles or hair
may become important above about 160 dB’ (dB levels re 20 µPa). The statement regarding the
extreme heating of hairs at around 160 dB re 20 µPa probably follows from original experiments
with mice [72–74].
Acton [16], in turn, revised his 1968 limit of 110 dB re 20 µPa, reducing it to 75 dB re 20 µPa
for the third-octave band centred around 20 kHz, as its frequency range extended from 22.5 kHz
down to 17.6 kHz, i.e. to within the audio frequency range (and certainly audible to many young
females [75]). In addition, criteria for narrowband emissions were introduced [16,76].
For the most part, the subsequent guidelines do not address questions that should be key, such
as the lack of dose–response relationships. Lawton [45] summarizes the issue of the duration
of the exposure as follows: ‘None of the recommended limits have a fully developed Exposure
Level, combining noise level and duration on a daily basis. Where duration is considered at all,
there is an equal-energy trading relationship: halving of noise duration allows a 3 dB increase in
level. However, the recommended limits have two stated aims: to avoid subjective effects and to
avoid hearing damage. In sensitive individuals, adverse subjective effects might be expected to
appear shortly after the start of a very high frequency noise exposure. An increase of permitted
band level, in line with any duration correction, would hasten the onset of subjective effects
in sensitive individuals, and probably involve a larger proportion of the exposed population.
Both of these outcomes are undesirable: a relaxation of maximum acceptable level, to account for
reduced daily duration, works to thwart one stated aim of any recommended limit.’ Four years
later, Howard et al. [34] noted that the 1984 INIRC-IRPA [20] guidelines ‘allow for an increase in
the exposure limits if the exposure duration is less than 4 h per day; however, Health Canada [22]
does not support this recommendation and it should be noted that the IRPA recommended limits
for continuous exposure for airborne ultrasound to the public are lower than’ [the Health Canada
limits, which reference [22] states ‘are independent of time of exposure as subjective effects can
occur immediately’]. The 1984 INIRC-IRPA [20] guidelines built on earlier ones from 1981 [54]
and make cogent points on the extra considerations public exposure requires over and above
occupational exposure, including the often neglected issue of the duration of the exposure and
opportunity for people to undertake ‘recovery times’ without exposure. They state that: ‘Exposure
may occur for up to 24 h per day; There is no medical surveillance as is possible for a controlled
occupational group; It would be undesirable to require hearing protectors or other protective
devices to keep levels at the ears within the limits; Noise-related effects such as annoyance, stress
etc. must be considered in addition to other possible auditory effects; The general public is a
population containing a broad range of sensitivities to insult from physical agents’.
This range of guidelines is critically assessed by several authors [28,45,46,77,78]. The standard
method for estimating noise induced hearing loss [79] does take into account the duration of
exposure, but it is only relevant to noise at frequencies less than 10 kHz. Moreover, when applied
 18
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
to signals having SPLs exceeding 140 dB re 20 µPa, it is an extrapolation. Given that workers in
public places (as in figures 1 and 2) might feel adverse effects without identifying the source, the
examination of the effects of long-duration exposure should be addressed [5].
Perhaps of greatest concern is that any discussion (as given above) of the range seen in
the guidelines, and how they relate to the exposed people, can currently only be made for
occupational exposure, as there is only one interim recommendation [20] for public exposure.
(iv) Are current guidelines adequate?
This paper argues that figure 3, and the current understanding of the adverse effects of ultrasound
in air, are grounded on, and provide for, an insufficient scientific basis to control human exposure
to VHF sound and ultrasound. Furthermore, new guidelines should not merely select maximum
permitted levels in each frequency band from previous reviews, without stating the precise
criteria for that selection. The author believes this cannot adequately be done, because:
— Most of the papers cited in figure 3 are reviews of the original work, and that work
was not suitable for mass public exposure. New guidelines must not simply select
levels from past guidelines. They require directed research specific for today’s exposures,
considering appropriate adverse effects, exposure duration, and cohorts (both in size and
demographic, tuned to quantify the more sensitive outliers, with research to investigate
the possible implications of the presence of children, workers exposed in ignorance, and
the additional exposure outside of the workplace).
— Subjective effects (including migraine, nausea, fatigue, headache and dizziness), and
the public health/economic/social question of how these affect safety and performance
particularly when exposure is continuous (in the home, workplace, school, hospital
etc.), must not be ignored in setting guidelines. Recalling the opening paragraph of
§2b, measurement of hearing thresholds, and TTS and PTS appear to be ‘objective’, and
therefore, attractive and more readily quantifiable than ‘subjective’ effects. However, the
amplitudes demonstrated in figures 1 and 2 are less likely to produce TTS than they are
to produce subjective effects.
— Past guidelines were based on studies that attempted to identify differences in average
values (e.g. in the hearing thresholds) between groups (e.g. those who worked
with equipment thought to produce ultrasound in air—usually without quantifying
exposures—and those who do not). The guidelines were overwhelmingly influenced
by studies on adult men. The response of the ear (which serves hearing and balance,
and provides input into other procedures such as swallowing) varies very greatly
between individuals, such that the concept of an ‘average’ becomes difficult. This is
particularly so when considering frequency issues, because we generally lose sensitivity
to high frequencies with increasing age, so that the application of guidelines based
on data from 30-year old males to school children or infants is questionable. If, as a
Gedankenexperiment, each agency that contributed guidelines to figure 3 had taken into
account the 5% most sensitive 5–19 year olds in figure 4a by adjusting the maximum
permissible SPLs in accordance with the hearing sensitivity of the demographic, then
they would reduce the levels in the 20 kHz band down by 60 dB. If this were valid, even
the quietest signal in figures 1 and 2 (the museum) would exceed all modern guidelines
by a significant margin.
— The above 60 dB adjustment is interesting but open to challenge. Without a validated
mechanism for the production of subjective effects, it is not possible to assess the
questionable validity of the assumption that the potential for adverse effects has been
linked to hearing acuity or sensitivity. The received wisdom that ‘if you cannot hear
a sound it cannot cause an adverse effect’ continues to be supported by agencies, the
current OSHA (2015) guidelines stating that:
‘Research indicates that ultrasonic noise has little effect on general health unless
there is direct body contact with a radiating ultrasonic source. Reported cases
 19
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
of headache and nausea associated with airborne ultrasonic exposures appear to
have been caused by high levels of audible noise from source subharmonics. The
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH [22]) has
established permissible ultrasound exposure levels. These recommended limits (set
at the middle frequencies of the one-third-octave bands from 10 kHz to 100 kHz)
are designed to prevent possible hearing loss caused by the subharmonics of the
set frequencies, rather than the ultrasound itself. These exposure levels represent
conditions under which it is believed that nearly all workers may be repeatedly
exposed without adverse effects on their ability to hear and understand normal
speech [50]’.
Transposition of hearing thresholds, TTS and other measurements to cover all adverse
effects is not justified on current research.
— The current mass exposure of human populations is to tones such as those shown in
figures 1 and 2, whereas the guidelines are almost all stated in terms of the SPL averaged
over bands of one-third of an octave, or even greater. This perhaps reflects the fact
that those considering the exposure followed procedures developed for exposure to
broadband noise at audio frequencies, not exposure to the intense tones. Section 2a(i)
noted that if guidelines are expressed as a single number for each third-octave band,
they cannot distinguish between the data and the horizontal dotted lines in figures 1c
and 2b,d. The measured signal, if audible, would be akin to a piercing whistle, while the
dotted horizontal line, if audible, would sound akin to a ‘shhh’ (36.6 dB less in terms of
the peak SPL of the measured signal as detailed in section 2a(i)). We have no empirical
evidence and no mechanism for the generation of adverse effects that allows us to state
that the two will generate the same adverse effects. The standard for estimating noise
induced hearing loss at audio frequencies simply uses the A-weighted acoustic energy
(Pa2 s) averaged over the number of years of exposure regardless of whether this is a
pure tone, narrowband noise, or broadband noise [80] even though, at audio frequencies,
as stimulus levels for a pure tone increase, there are nonlinear effects in the cochlea which
mean that the area of the basilar membrane receiving the acoustic energy broadens.
Across the spectrum of effects (objective, subjective and psychological) that have been
claimed to result from VHF/US exposure (these include those that are proved, disproved
and uncertain), it would be difficult to extrapolate from guidelines designed from one
sort of exposure (e.g., broadband occupational exposure to a specific ultrasonic tool for
limited duration) to the long-term tonal exposure of figures 1 and 2, even if a mechanism
for the development of adverse effects had been established (which it has not).
Failure to recognize these flaws (in the scientific basis for applying past research to current
exposures) has led to some dismissal among the scientific and medical communities of the claims
by the public of adverse effects by VHF sound and ultrasound in air. The temptation has been
to extrapolate to the whole current population the almost certainty that the original widespread
claims of ‘ultrasonic sickness’ were false (§3b(i)), and reports suggesting mis-attribution in some
members of the public for infrasonic exposure [81]. This paper does not set out to prove adverse
effects, but rather to achieve the objectives outlined in the Executive summary section.
3. Exposures
(a) The current scenario: difficult measurements are not keeping pace with burgeoning
deployments
There has been a massive increase in deployment of devices that operate by placing ultrasonic
fields in air (in residential, recreational and occupational places). Those exposed (and in the case
of workers, their employers) are often in ignorance of the exposure, and there is no monitoring
of levels, and of off-times and the duration of respite periods in and out of work. The advent of
 20
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
emitters such as those measured in figures 1 and 2 open up the prospect of the citizen scientist
undertaking personal monitoring and exploration (appendix A).
These exposures contrast to those considered in developing most guidelines, where
occupational sources (like cleaning baths) place ultrasound in air only through unintended
leakage, and against which screens or hearing protection can be considered as viable mitigation
given the limited periods to which cognizant humans are exposed to them (which cannot be
considered reasonable if exposure is not occupational).
The number and type of sources is increasing year on year, but the information detailing their
types and locations is not publicly advertised, and there is no statutory requirement to do so.
While ultrasonic pest deterrents have been in use, even domestically, for well over 20 years, in
recent years inexpensive technology has allowed a proliferation of devices that project VHF/US
signals into air. In part, this is because the manufacture of ultrasonic sources involves hazardous
materials. This has in the past contributed to high shelf prices where health and safety practices
challenge the manufacturer, but now manufacturers from regions without such regulations are
able to market devices at one-tenth the price. This has resulted in the increased deployment of
ultrasonic deterrents for pests. Some residents, on behalf of themselves and their children, have
claimed that ultrasonic projectors (placed by themselves, landlords, neighbours etc.) cause them
distress in their homes, gardens, workplaces and transport routes, see §3b(iii)(1). Of course, such
claims might be spurious, but it is not ethical to persist with possible detrimental exposures
on the basis that no claims could be proved because no measurements have been made. Some
devices that project ultrasound in air are undoubtedly useful, and in the long term industry
would benefit by knowing what usage is safe. Some manufacturers of ultrasonic pest deterrents
are in the invidious position of believing they are compliant with guidelines but include in their
instruction manuals warnings of subjective adverse reactions [82] and even damage to the ears
[83]. Others offer advice on resolving complaints from neighbours [84] (which is not applicable
if a neighbouring infant or pet, or their carer, is unable to identify the ultrasonic source as the
problem). For other devices (e.g. automatic door opening systems), there are alternatives (e.g.
infrared sensors) for which the safety guidelines are not so questionable.
The measurement of device outputs and VHF/US fields in situ is currently inadequate to
provide, and compare against, guidelines that are relevant to today’s exposures. Although dB
scales are provided by the manufacturers or distributers of the phone/software, recordings such
as that shown in figure 1a do not currently have a traceable calibration, so that signal levels
cannot be known. Sound level meters are not so simple that they can produce dB levels that
are guaranteed fit for purpose for whatever use the operator wishes to make of them, when
measuring a VHF/US signal of any type (tonal, broadband etc.; see section 2a(i) and appendix A).
Many studies (e.g. [85]) specify the use of sound level meters in measuring VHF/US fields, and
yet the performance of these meters and their microphones in this regime is often poorly specified.
The relevant standard [86] states that a Class 1 sound level meter should record frequencies up
to and including the 16 kHz third-octave band, but that 12.5 kHz is the minimum frequency to
which the frequency characteristics should be specified. While the performance acceptance limits
in this standard [86] at 1 kHz are ±1 dB, at 20 kHz they are from +3 dB to −∞ dB for a Class 1
device, meaning that it could be capable of severely underestimating signal amplitudes at 20 kHz
and still meet acceptance by the standard. This standard [86] cross references to an older standard
[87] which states:
‘The noise which is usually of interest with ultrasonic equipment arises from audible
sounds produced by the ultrasonic process, for example, the cavitation noise which is
audible in ultrasonic cleaners. To achieve reproducible measurements of the audible sound
with existing sound level meters which comply with IEC 651, the practice is to use the
A-weighting response in conjunction with a low-pass filter which has a very sharp cut-off
above 20 000 Hz. The purpose of this standard is to specify the characteristics of such a low-
pass filter. When the filter characteristic is used with the sound level meter A-weighting
specified in IEC 651, the resulting nominal values of the overall frequency response fall
within the scope of Type 1 tolerances. Where the measurement of the ultrasonic component
 21
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
frequencies is required, the practice is to measure the unweighted sound pressure level
using a microphone system which is known to have a frequency response extending
sufficiently, for example, to at least the operating frequency of the ultrasonic equipment.
A narrow band or one-third octave band filter is usually included in the measuring chain.
However, this standard is not concerned with the measurement of such components, nor
with any possible hazard from them.’
The use of A-weighting, a filter based on average human hearing that is a common option with
sound level meters, is of course wholly inappropriate for assessing health risk due to airborne
ultrasonic frequencies, especially so with sensitive individuals or demographics.
The tolerance of −∞ dB at 20 kHz is common across several standards (which have tolerances
for overestimation of +3 dB and +5 dB for Class 1 and Class 2 devices, respectively) [86,88],
although the older 1997 version [88] specified tighter tolerances for the Class 0 devices at 20 kHz,
from +2 dB to −3 dB. Class 0 was generally considered to be a laboratory standard and beyond the
requirements for general measurement instruments. Since then, the old four-class system (Classes
0–3) has been replaced by a two-class system (Classes 1 and 2), and this older standard [88] is now
considered obsolete and replaced by the newer one in Europe and the USA [86], which allows the
−∞ dB tolerance at 20 kHz.
Although microphones with ultrasonic sensitivity are now commercially available, the smaller
wavelengths associated with these higher frequencies are much more strongly scattered than
the 250–8000 Hz signals typically used in hearing tests. At ultrasonic frequencies, the shape
of the ear, head and microphone mounting can strongly influence the field they are detecting.
A free field audiometric or sound field measurement at 2000 Hz is robust to inexact positioning of
the microphone or head, because the wavelength in dry air at 20◦C at 2000 Hz is around 17 cm, 10
times the wavelength at 20 kHz. However, a given microphone tends to become more directional
as the frequency increases (figure 5), so that the measured SPL can change significantly if the
microphone is angled slightly differently to the sound source.
The greater directionality that is observed as the ratio of the sensor size to wavelength increases
has been usefully exploited for decades, e.g. with microphones lined up in arrays (effectively
making a larger detector) commonly being used to improve the ability to determine the direction
of a source (for example, in the use of microphone arrays to produce acoustic cameras for the
automotive industry, and throughout the Cold War in submarine tracking). One might, therefore,
suppose that even a single human ear will be better at determining the direction to a high
frequency sound source than a low frequency one (in what is termed monaural localization:
a second ear will introduce other factors that will not be considered here). However, this
simple prediction ignores a second effect, which is the extent to which the measurement device
disturbs the acoustic field (see appendix A for comments on how this complicates microphone
measurements as the frequency increases).
Figure 6 shows how this simple extrapolation from a physical principle (that the human ear
should be better at locating high frequency sources than low frequency ones) is complicated by
human anatomy. At the lowest frequency plotted (200 Hz), the scattered component of the sound
field from a source placed behind the ear (figure 6a) is nearly uniform over the pinna and differs
(notably in sign, which will of course be reversed half a cycle later) from the scattered field that
would occur across the pinna if the same source is directly in front of the ear (figure 6e). Recall
that the total pressure field is a combination of this scattered field and the incident field. At 200 Hz
the wavelength in air is approximately 1.7 m, far larger than the pinna. At the eardrum itself, the
scattered component of the sound field is around +10 Pa in figure 6a, and −10 Pa in figure 6e. These
predictions indicate that at 200 Hz the total pressure for a given configuration is relatively uniform
across the pinna, indicating that the measurement will be robust against slight relative motions
of source and ear. The same is true at 2 kHz (figure 6b,f), when the wavelength is approximately
17 cm, and the scattered component of the sound field at the eardrum itself is −2 kPa in figure 6b,
and +2 kPa in figure 6f. One ear alone will have difficulty localising a sound source when the
wavelength is large, but the measurement is stable. However, at 20 kHz (when the wavelength is
 22
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
measured directivity of half-inch laboratory
standard microphone (LS2)
3
0
–3
–6
–9
–12
–15 dB
30
20 kHz
10 kHz
16 kHz
1 kHz
60
90
120
150
330
300
270
240
210
180
Figure5. Thispolarplotdescribesthedirectivityofhalf-inchlaboratorystandardmicrophones(LS2).Fourcurvesareshown,for
stated frequencies that are at the centre of the third-octave band over which the measurement was made (at 1 degree angular
resolution)inthefreefieldchamberoftheNPLinTeddington.The1 kHzplotisalmostcircular,indicatingthatifthesamesource
is placed the same distance in front of (0◦), behind (180◦) or to left (270◦) or right (90◦) of the microphone, the microphone
would output almost identical voltages. However, as the frequency increases, the curve increasingly departs from circular. The
front/back (i.e. 0◦/180◦) discrepancy increases to over 4 dB at 10 kHz, to nearly 9 dB at 16 kHz and around 10 dB at 20 kHz. This
implies that slight misalignment of this microphone could cause increasing measurement errors as the frequency increases.
approx. 1.7 cm) the other extreme is reached, when the wavelength is so small that sensitivity to
source location has turned into oversensitivity to slight movements of the head, as can be seen by
comparing the results for the source at the front (figure 6g) and at the back (figure 6c). At 30 kHz
(figure 6d,h) the sound field in the pinna is highly inhomogeneous, indicating that the robustness
of the sensor has deteriorated. This is confirmed by comparing the middle and lower rows: a
small (15◦) change in the position of the sensor produces only small changes in the real part of
the scattered fields at low frequencies (cf. figure 6e with i and compare f with j), but at the higher
frequencies small relative motion between the source and ear produce complicated changes in
the scattered field, and particularly the level at the eardrum (cf. figure 6g with k and compare h
with l). Figure 6 plots the scattered field, and not only will its amplitude change rapidly across
the pinna, but so will its phase, and therefore, the total pressure field it produces when combined
with the incident field. The amplitude of the total field on the pinna will therefore be sensitive to
relative motion between the head and sound source, and indeed to the characteristics of the signal.
Changes in the spectral content of a signal, and how this varies over time, that may be used in
audiometry below 8 kHz to elicit subjective behavioural responses in order to measure hearing
thresholds, could at higher frequencies be introducing physical acoustic factors that affect the
level on the eardrum. As a practical consequence, audiometric testing with tones, warble tones
and narrowband signals at high frequencies may produce unexpectedly different results; and the
question of comparing like with like might involve even more than the issue of using the same
energy or same peak amplitude that was discussed in §2a(i).
 23
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(a)
200 Hz
Pa
1 cm
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
6000
4000
2000
0
–2000
–4000
–6000
6
×104
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
4
3
×104
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–20
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
6000
4000
2000
0
–2000
–4000
–6000
6
×104
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
4
3
×104
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–20
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
6000
4000
2000
0
–2000
–4000
–6000
6
×104
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
4
3
×104
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–20
Pa
Pa
Pa
Pa
Pa
Pa
Pa
Pa
Pa
Pa
Pa
source to rear
source to front
source at 15°
2 kHz
20 kHz
30 kHz
(b)
(c)
(d)
(i)
( j)
(k)
(l)
(e)
( f )
(g)
(h)
Figure 6. The real part of the scattered pressure (in Pascals) from a point source placed 1 m from the opening of the ear canal,
andinthesamehorizontalplaneasit(calculatedusingboundaryelementmethodoptimizedforhighperformancecomputing
afterthemannerofGraceetal.[89]).(a–d)Whenthesourceisdirectlybehindtheear,(e–h)whenthesourceisdirectlyinfront
of the ear, (i–l) when the source is angled 15◦ outwards, away from the front position. The columns from left to right are for
increasing source frequency: 200 Hz (a,e,i); 2 kHz (b,f,j); 20 kHz (c,g,k); 30 kHz (d,h,l). The point source has a volume velocity
amplitudeof1 m3 s−1 forallplots,andthiscausestheacousticpressurenaturallytoincreasewithfrequency(becausethereisa
scaling factor between them that is proportional to frequency). For simplicity the flesh is assumed to be acoustically rigid. The
geometry of the pinna was adapted from Kahana & Nelson [90] with an added ear canal depth of 2.5 cm. The ear canal in this
model is straight so that the eardrum is visible in every image at the base of the ear canal. Human ear canals contain a bend,
although in some individuals this is less pronounced than in others.
The application of simple physics to a single ear, therefore, reveals a far more complex pattern
of results where, counterintuitively, humans who can detect frequencies as high as 20 kHz may
find it more difficult to determine the direction to the source than they would at somewhat lower
frequencies even though basic physics tells us that directionality will improve with decreasing
wavelength in this range. It is perhaps not surprising that there exists such a range of pinna
shapes in the mammalian world.
Of course when locating sound sources binaurally, use can be made of the pressure, phase
and arrival time at both sensors (which for human ears are many wavelengths apart at 20 kHz).
However, the object of the discussion around figure 6 [89,90] is to illustrate that intuition based
on sound physics can be misleading as one extrapolates from standard audiology to the VHF/US
ranges. Those conducting measurements of sound fields in the environment must therefore
be aware of the influence of the pinna and head, and preferably test with microphones in a
mannequin as well as free field; and those who conduct audiometric testing must appreciate that
techniques and instrumentation that are adequate for the 0.2–8 kHz regime that is normally tested
will need re-examining for the VHF/US regimes (appendix A). Small wavelengths are not of
 24
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
themselves a problem: indeed we exploit the ability they give us to focus waves and form shadows
in optics, because we are familiar with these processes, and never expect the short wavelengths
of visible light to bend around corners as the long wavelengths of radio waves do. However, our
experience of hearing and audiometry is in the relatively long-wavelength regime for sound, and
our procedures and intuition are ill suited to the short wavelengths of ultrasound in air, such that
the casual user can make incorrect assumptions.
The complications illustrated above for receivers have their counterparts with VHF/US
sources. Although ultrasonic projectors are widespread with advertised output levels, it is highly
unlikely that these can be reliably traced to international standards because traceable standards
are only just emerging. At higher frequencies sources tend to be more directional, and scatter by
the room and objects in it can produce small-scale spatial variation of the sound field. As a result,
small discrepancies in positioning microphones, and details of the stands that mount them, can
lead to significant changes in the measurement.
(b) Categories of exposure
Leighton [91] defined three categories of exposure of humans to ultrasound in air. Category
1 is labelled Ultrasonic noise exposure. This occurs when some process or device (e.g. a jet
engine) generates ultrasound as a by-product of its operation. Category 2 is labelled Unintended
ultrasonic exposure. This occurs when some process (such as an ultrasonic cleaning bath) requires
the generation of a specific ultrasonic signal as key to completing its task, but in addition
to insonifying its inanimate target, it also unintentionally exposes a human or animal to
ultrasound. Category 3 is labelled Deliberate ultrasonic exposure. This occurs when devices (such
as pest deterrents) are designed to expose humans and/or animals to ultrasound in air in
order to elicit some subjective response (whether or not the target is the intended species or
demographic).
(i) Ultrasonic noise exposure
‘Ultrasonic noise exposure first became an issue in the 1940s, when ‘ultrasonic sickness’ was
thought by many (probably erroneously [45]) to be caused by the advent of the jet engine
[14,92–94]. ‘Ultrasonic sickness’ was claimed to be responsible for earache, headache, irritability,
excessive fatigue and feelings of fear [95–97]. In 1948, the Ultrasonics Panel (formed only one year
previously) of the United States Aeronautical Board reported on the first legal case for injury by
ultrasound [92,98]. In a study considering ultrasound from jet engines, dental drills and cleaning
baths, Parrack [94] concluded that ‘Ultrasonic sickness, as described around 1948–1952, appears to
be largely of psychosomatic origin and engendered by the apprehension and/or fear growing out
of speculative publicity about the effects of air-borne ultrasound’. This is one of several quotes by
Parrack that was used in a 1967 article by a member of American Sterilizer Company [99], which
concluded that there was no evidence to support a call in the same journal (Canadian Hospital) for
protective measures when using ultrasonic cleaning equipment in hospitals (which, as a category
2 exposure, will be further discussed in section 2b(ii)). In the same year, Acton & Carson [1]
stated that subjective adverse reactions did not occur unless the subject was sensitive to sound
up to at least 17 kHz, and the SPL in the 17 kHz band exceeded 78 dB re 20 µPa, women and
younger individuals being more prone to suffer adverse effects (in the absence of a mechanism,
the hypothesis being that this is because of greater high-frequency acuity). Given the preceding
sentence, it is at this point germane to comment that the lack of clear mechanism for adverse
reaction in the time of Acton & Carson [1] (which is still the case today) means that we should
avoid an automatic association between hearing sensitivity and the potential for adverse effects,
unless this is proved. This is discussed further in §4.
It has been (and still is) often the response to the accelerated development of a new technology
that the popular press and the public between them ratchet up concerns. In the 1950s, this led to
stories of an ‘ultrasonic death ray’ [100]. The existence of bizarre extrapolations from an excitable
 25
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
press and anxious public is in itself potentially harmful, as it can cause more moderate judges
to dismiss all such claims, and produce anxiety-based symptoms in some. There were enough
scientific reports to allow the popular press to extrapolate. Allen et al. [101] had observed some
lethal effects from intense ultrasonic exposures in air of mice and cockroaches (recall that the
frequency sensitivity varies between species as well as individuals), and transitory dizziness
and feelings of heating in humans. Fatigue, headaches and nausea were reported by several
sources [98]. In a 1966 review, Gorskhkov et al. [102] claimed to observe the death of 28 of
80 volunteers who were exposed to intense sustained jet noise in Spain, the remainder being
permanently debilitated.
Of course, the generation of ultrasound through use of a jet engine undeniably generated levels
of audio frequency sound that few had ever experienced before, so intense that unprotected
exposure close-up quickly led to permanent hearing loss. Indeed, the nature of other sources
of ‘Ultrasonic noise exposure was that the exposure was almost always accompanied by audio
frequency noise which has two consequences. First, it might fortuitously have led to the use of
hearing protection: in general, the effectiveness of such protection increases with frequency, and
even if deployed against audio frequency noise, it might defend well against ultrasound in air.
The United States Navy conducted what a 1948 magazine [103] described as:
‘experiments at its Aero Medical Equipment Laboratory at Philadelphia which left Navy
men being tested unharmed. The men were protected against noise by a helmet or
springband headphones, double kapok-filled “ear doughnuts” and cotton ear plugs. Some
of the men lost weight and seven said they were more tired than ordinarily, but the Navy
concluded that “although high-frequency sound does damage some animal tissues, ill
effects upon human tissues appear unlikely unless the frequency is extremely high”’.
This report, reproduced almost in its entirety, lacks detail on the experimental conditions and the
duration and intensity of the exposure, on what percentages of the exposed cohort lost weight
and felt tired, and where the evidence for the counterintuitive phrase ‘unless the frequency is
extremely high’ came from.
Second, adverse effects from ultrasound would need to be separated out from adverse
effects of intense audio frequency sound. This turned out to be important, because in 1953 a
research study attributed the symptoms of ‘ultrasonic sickness’ to high levels of audio frequency
sound [104].
Health Canada [22] and the Health Protection Agency [105] list numerous sources of ultrasonic
noise in the industrial workplace, based in part on the work of Michael et al. [100] and Shoh
[106], and more recent studies add to the body of knowledge on device outputs [107]. The EU
EARS project recently reported ‘Traceable measurement of airborne ultrasound output of devices
is now possible for the first time, using a newly developed measurement set-up and measurement
methods for the characterisation of typical sources. Sound pressure levels with peak values up to
147 dB were detected from commercially available devices’ [26] (dB levels are re 20 µPa).
(ii) Unintended ultrasonic exposure
Probably the earliest widespread example of Unintended ultrasonic exposure came from the
ultrasonic cleaning bath, which deliberately generates ultrasound to clean but does not intend
or require that ultrasound to impinge upon humans or animals for it to operate. Its operation
is usually accompanied by a hissing audio frequency sound associated with cavitation [11,108],
the effects of which would have to be separated out from those of the ultrasound, and any
subharmonics of the ultrasound.
In 1977, Crabtree & Forshaw [4] reported that the noise from ultrasonic cleaners caused nausea,
headaches, tinnitus and fatigue in Services personnel at CFB North Bay and CFB Trenton. One-
third octave sound pressure levels around 20 kHz were 105 dB re 20 µPa at the position of the
operator, ‘well under 140 dB (the level below which damage to the human ear is thought not to
occur)’ to quote the authors [4], noting that their 140 dB criterion (re 20 µPa) was based on the
 26
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1966 guideline of Parrack [14] which he replaced 8 years prior to the above quote by Crabtree &
Forshaw (§2b(iii)) [4]. They recommended enclosing the units or, failing that, the use of hearing
protection. They also noted that ‘One of the authors (RBC) himself experienced extraordinary
fatigue and an “unnatural sensation” in his ears after a two-hour exposure (without hearing
protection) in the ultrasonic room at CFB Trenton’. Crawford [109] noted loss of equilibrium,
unusual fatigue, nausea and headaches that persisted after insonification ceased. Acton & Carson
[1] noted that cleaning baths producing (alongside the expected audio frequency noise) 95 dB
re 20 µPa at 20 kHz and 115 dB re 20 µPa at 40 kHz, resulted in worker complaints of fatigue,
buzzing noises and painful whistles, nausea and headache, persisting for some hours after the
end of exposure. The effects disappeared when the tanks were in an enclosure. In the presence
of ultrasonic drills operating at 20 kHz, Acton & Carson [1] both noted that ‘No complaints
were volunteered by the operators of the drills, who were all men, but the authors themselves
experienced a persistent ringing in the head and an unpleasant sensation of “fullness” of the
ears from the noise which was clearly audible yet not very loud, but they were not exposed
for sufficiently long periods for the other symptoms to become manifest’. In 1983, Acton [3]
confirmed sensations of fullness and pressure in the ears and added tinnitus to the list for workers
exposed to ultrasound. Herman & Powell [5] provide interesting anecdotes from their survey of
VHF/US devices, adding to the preceding list the irritation of a researcher by audible emissions
from a device mounted above an escalator, and unconfirmed irregular heart beat when in the
vicinity of another device (both devices being intrusion alarms, which are discussed in §3b(iii)(1)).
Skillern [2] investigated noise levels in the vicinity of ultrasonic devices for cleaning, welding
and drilling. He gave one of the earliest descriptions of pain in the ear attributed to ultrasound,
commenting on the narrowband nature of the source, though contamination of this by energy at
other frequencies could clearly be an issue:
‘Certainly the drill gave the author the most interesting subjective response, and it was the
only instrument that was operated for a long period of time, viz., longer than one hour with
the operator remaining close. The same subjective pain was experienced by the operator
with the operation of the drill. This pain was similar to a burning sensation in the auditory
canal. The sound emitted from the drill was evidently a very narrow band as pain was
experienced more rapidly than while measuring other devices with sound pressure levels
of greater intensity’.
It is no easy thing to distinguish between the effects of the ultrasound, and that of the associated
audio frequency sound that accompanies the operation of the equipment [1], and a number of
agencies [23,33,50] attribute all the adverse effects to this audio frequency energy, and others
appear strongly influenced by this consideration [20]. Given that the public exposure of figures 1
and 2 lack any unusual audio frequency energy, it is important to explore this assumption.
Maccà et al. [110] compared 24 industrial ultrasound-exposed subjects (a comparatively small
sample), 113 industrial noise-exposed subjects and 148 non-exposed subjects, using both
conventional-frequency (0.125–8 kHz) and high-frequency (9–18 kHz) audiometry. They describe
the Unintended ultrasonic exposure as follows:
‘The [ultrasound-exposed] group comprised 14 subjects recruited in a spectacle frames
factory where there were four welding machines (three Branson welders, operating
frequency 30 kHz, and one Schoeller, operating frequency 25 kHz); subjects worked
continuously at a distance of 30–40 cm from the machines and non-continuously in front
of the cleaning tanks. The other 10 subjects were employed in a textile factory; subjects
worked at a distance of 30–40 cm from all the machines. They all had ear protectors, but
used them minimally; the shift was 6 h and 30 min in a day. The intensity levels measured
near the ears of subjects exceeded the TLV-C (threshold limit value-ceiling) proposed by
ACGIH in all sample cutters and label-trimmers at nominal frequencies of 20, 31.5 and
40 kHz, and in two of the cleaning tanks at frequencies of 20 and 25 kHz. All ultrasound
emissions were accompanied by subharmonics produced in the audible high-frequency
range as by-products of industrial ultrasonic processes’.
 27
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
headache
asthenia
vertigo
Tingling in limbs
sleep disorders
tinnitus
nausea
stomach pain
vomiting
sensation of fullness
uncertain gait
hypoacusia
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
ultrasound (24 subjects)
control (101 subjects)
percentage of subjects (%)
noise (56 subjects)
Figure 7. Plots of the occurrence of a range of subjective symptoms from the 2015 data of Maccà et al. [110]. There are no data
for the inducement of ‘
Tingling in limbs’by industrial audio frequency noise. Note that there are typographical errors in the
original tables as explained in appendix C.
Maccà et al. [110] found correlations that indicated adverse effects on hearing from those who
had worked with ultrasonic devices, in agreement with earlier studies [111–113], but hoped
to separate out the effect of the audio frequency noise that accompanies most occupational
exposures to industrial ultrasound of the type described above. Their findings are plotted
in figure 7. Recalculation of the χ2-test results for their data in appendix C agrees with the
conclusions of Maccà et al. that the cohort exposed to audio frequency noise showed statistically
significant increases in problems with tinnitus and hypoacusia (partial loss of hearing). In
addition to these differences between cohorts, Maccà et al. conclude from the raw data on
individuals (not presented in their paper) that ‘Significant correlations were also shown between
the group of workers [who were] exposed [to audio frequency noise] to tinnitus, sensation of
fullness in the ears and hearing loss >25 dB at 4 kHz’. Appendix C recalculates the χ2-test
result from the data of Maccà et al. for the ultrasound-exposed group. Both Maccà et al. and
appendix C agree that the data show statistically significant increases in asthenia (loss or lack
of bodily strength) and vertigo, but only appendix C finds (from the data tabulated by Maccà
et al.) a statistically significant increase in ‘tingling in the limbs’ for the ultrasound-exposed
group. Maccà et al. state that ‘Asthenia mainly occurred once a week and vertigo about once a
month, both at the end of the workshift or during it. Histories also showed that the symptoms
persisted for a few days after exposure had ceased and no longer occurred in the absence
of exposure’.
Grezsik & Pluta [114] measured 106 operators of ultrasonic devices and concluded that noise
levels in the third-octave bands centred on 10, 12.5 and 16 kHz that were well below several of
the guidelines in figure 3 (80 dB re 20 µPa) produced hearing loss in the 10–16 kHz range (which
would not be detected by normal audiometric testing that goes up to 8 kHz) measurable in people
who had experienced long exposures (8 h a day for up to 15 years).
 28
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
These conclusions were drawn by looking at averages of the cohort [114], whereas in a
companion paper [115] Grezsik & Pluta returned to the factory they examined in 1983 [111] and
tested again the 26 workers out of the original 55 who were still employed by the factory, using
the same methods they employed in 1983. This enabled them to compare the effect of 3 years of
additional industrial exposure on individuals, and they detected an additional hearing loss (over
and above ageing) of 1 dB per year in the range 14–17 kHz for workers with prolonged exposure.
They found that the number of ears that responded to the highest frequencies fell by 10% per kHz
per year in the range 13–19 kHz and concluded that the higher the frequency to which an ear
was sensitive, the greater its susceptibility to high frequency noise. This retesting of individuals
is significant because the authors paid particular attention to the quality of the delivery of sound
above 8 kHz when testing, there being no standard method of doing this, making it difficult to
extrapolate from measurements and compare between studies.
In dental ultrasonics, a single source may be exposing a range of people and the relevant
guidelines would vary between workers, patients, pupils, visitors, inmates etc. To take the
case of a dental ultrasonic tool, the patient can receive ultrasound through both airborne
and bone conduction routes, while the dental practitioners (for whom occupational guidelines
should apply) receive longer and repeated exposures through the airborne route only. By
1976, Moller et al. [116] had observed tinnitus and/or TTS in half of the 20 patients they
subjected to 5 min of dental scaling, other studies finding no such effects [117]. Coles & Hoare
[118] had found tinnitus and numbness of the ears (though not at significant levels compared
with the normal population [118]), and Rahko et al. [119] found no significant difference in
hearing ability between dental personnel and controls. Even guidelines with dedicated sections
on dental ultrasonics [19] had a very thin research base on which to comment, with too
few studies, and too few subjects, to assess reproducibility. The topic continues to produce
anecdotal stories from patients and operators [120,121]. The review by Trenter & Walmsley [122]
is recommended.
While older technologies produced considerable audio frequency energy alongside the
ultrasound, making identification of the source of adverse reactions difficult, newer technologies
may well produce ultrasound without audio frequency emissions. One example is the use of
ultrasound to charge electronic devices wirelessly. While the author has no specific knowledge of
the safety or otherwise of this technology because the manufacturers are not currently revealing
the frequencies or intensities used, it does the manufacturer no favours not to report the output
characteristics of the device, but instead to inform us that ‘the power levels beamed are more than
50 times lower than the lowest ultrasound imaging exposure limits set by the FDA for medical
imaging, making the system inherently safe and within all existing regulatory constraints’ [9].
The FDA limits for medical imaging are set to avoid heating and cavitation in utero for ultrasonic
transmission via tissue, not via an air path, and relate to the ultrasonic signals of 1 MHz or
higher (§4b). The health risk under consideration in this paper is via different mechanisms and a
different propagation path. The manufacturer refers to a published paper [123] that uses 1 MHz
and includes no air in the transmission path, allowing charging at a few tens of millimetres.
While the frequencies and intensities used in that study [123] would have negligible health
risk through an airborne transmission path to the human, to achieve the manufacturer’s goal
(‘a world where you could simply lift your phone in the air to charge it without needing to
plug it in, no less be next to a power outlet’ [9]) one would need to overcome the problems
of reflection losses at the air/device interface, and absorption losses which restrict the range
of the ultrasound in air. In order to charge at the stated range of 4 m [9], a practical device
might need to increase the power (though the manufacturers state they will decrease power [9])
and decrease the frequency (to allow the airborne ultrasound to propagate to greater ranges)
compared to the values used in the paper they quote [123]: indications of this intention occur in
the manufacturer’s statement that ‘uBeam’s frequency is too high for dogs and most mammals’
[9], suggesting that it might fall into the remit of this paper, because no mammal can hear
airborne ultrasound at the 1 MHz used in the paper [123] they cite (note again application of
the common yet unproved assumption that if airborne ultrasound cannot be heard, then it can
 29
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
do no harm). There are therefore too few specifics published currently to assess the safety of
this technology.
Although a current survey of modern devices is needed to update and/or correct this list,
and quantify the likely exposures, a 1981 FDA report [5] catalogued ultrasonic sources including
TV remote controls, humidifiers/vapourizers and devices to assist the visually impaired. It also
listed items belonging in section 3(b)(iii), including intrusion alarms and automatic door openers,
examples where infrared technology now provides adequate alternatives (the measurements
of which figures 1 and 2 are a subset have confirmed ultrasound from such devices in public
places, at lower levels than found in figures 1 and 2). The modern world has numerous sources
of ultrasound not common in 1981 (e.g. vehicle parking and collision avoidance sensors), and
in some circumstances it is difficult to identify the source. For example, the full set of data
of which figures 1 and 2 are a subset, includes measurements detecting low level ultrasound
in some libraries and schools, but it has been difficult to determine whether lighting, data
projectors, smart screen multimedia projectors, or some other system is producing it, and without
controlled testing where the subject is in ignorance of the exposure conditions, it is not possible
to confirm the discomfort they attribute to such low levels of ultrasound. Some will by their
nature be intermittent, such as the ultrasonic signals that are claimed to be used to monitor those
adverts or websites that are viewed (appendix D), making spot checks unreliable. We need to
know what the sources are in the modern world, the levels of exposure and compare these to
appropriate guidelines.
In the author’s opinion, the most common source of high intensity airborne ultrasound in
today’s public places, even more so than pest deterrents, is one which has not been identified
previously, specifically the public address systems that are found in sports facilities, cinemas,
workplaces, public transport etc. Many PAVA systems in shopping centres, airports, public
buildings, department stores and most UK stadia are monitored using 20 kHz tones. These tones
report to an ‘end of line’ device on each loudspeaker circuit which ‘acknowledges’ receipt of the
signal, which is then returned to the amplifier and repeated continuously across the hundreds
of circuits throughout the stadium/building/space. Manufacturers require some method of
monitoring because EU legislation [125] makes supervision of evacuation systems mandatory,
which is laudable. From the various alternative monitoring techniques available, one of the
selection criteria should be compliance with safety guidelines, and our current knowledge does
not make the guidelines of figure 3 applicable for assessing the safety of long-duration exposure
to VHF/US tones in PAVA systems, particularly as one device might exposure workers, visitors
with differing ages and medical histories (even possibly confined people such as patients and
prisoners), for very different durations and intensities during a day. Moreover, PAVA exposures
resemble tones (continuous or pulsed), and as the dotted lines in figures 1 and 2 show, a
broadband flat-frequency signal that is 36.6 dB lower than a tonal peak scores identically to the
tone if the limit is based only on third-octave band levels. The author considers PAVA systems to
be the most likely source of all the signals in figures 1 and 2.
(iii) Deliberate ultrasonic exposure
Category 3 systems range from automated door openers (the author and his team have measured
ultrasonic signals from such devices) to ultrasonic weapons, as marketed to joggers against dogs.
(1) Pest repellents
Ultrasonic pest repellers can be mounted inside or on roofspaces, on building exteriors, in homes,
gardens and public spaces. They are designed as deterrents for a range of species including dog,
cat, fox, bird (especially pigeon), rodent (especially squirrel, mouse, rat), insects and spiders.
Whether they deter animals by generating an unattractive environment, or by other adverse
effects, is not known [126]. This raises the question of their use near protected species (e.g. bats),
pets, working animals and the wider ecosystem (e.g. fauna that are currently thought not to
response to ultrasound directly—such as pollinating bees [127]—could be indirectly affected by
 30
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ultrasonically mediated effects upon their predators or food source). Although some researchers
have induced extreme adverse effects, from seizure-like responses in rodents [128] and cats [129]
(with anecdotal reports for birds [130]) to mutilation [48,74] and death [72], they appear to have
used levels far in excess of those used in commercial ultrasonic deterrents.
Although walls would afford a measure of protection to residents from ultrasonic pest
repellents outside of the home, some repellents are marketed for use in the home. Furthermore,
Herman & Powell [5] observed significant person-to-person variations in reactions to a dog
repeller that vary from ‘no perception or no symptoms at all, to expressions of severe discomfort
40 feet from the source, in another room’ [5].
Marketing these devices is a major business, and there are numerous claims of both efficacy
and inefficacy, and have been from the outset [85,131–134]. In possibly the first scientific study
of the effectiveness of ultrasound as a pest repellent, Frings [48] noted that there were numerous
claims without any evidence, even following an open challenge he had issued to a national pest
control convention in the 1940s to provide such data. In 1982, Shumake et al. [135] noted a range
of effectiveness depending on frequency, intensity, and the environment and history of the rat
population tested (e.g. prior exposure etc.). In 1990, Smith [136] called for Trading Standards
policing following trials showing no effect on deterring birds when ultrasonic devices were
placed within a building; and in 2001, a warning was issued by the Federal Trade Commission’s
Division of Enforcement on the effectiveness of ultrasonic rodent and insect repellents [137]. Their
continued use, however, suggests certainly a perceived benefit.
The possibility of humans and pets being affected has been recognized for decades, again with
numerous claims and counterclaims [138,139]. As noted in §3a, some manufacturers publicly
note the problem. In 2001, Cope [140] surveyed the nuisance caused by several commercial
units but, because his microphones were calibrated for the audio frequency range only, he
restricted his study only to the inadvertent generation of VHF acoustic signals from devices
that purport to generate ultrasonic signals. He found that none of the devices matched the
manufacturer’s specifications on dynamic range or operating frequency. He measured VHF sound
signals between 18 and 19 kHz (i.e. within the third-octave band centred at 20 kHz—figure 3),
with SPLs up to 109 dB re 20 µPa at a range of 1 m from the source, increasing as one approached
the source. This indicated little improvement in quality control since 1984, when Gold et al. [141]
warned that pest control devices did not match manufacturer claims for frequency, output or
effectiveness.
News outlets and web forums have featured reports of adverse reactions by individuals to pest
deterrents and warnings re their proximity to children and pets [142–146] although these have
not been subjected to rigorous scientific testing, which would involve human experimentation.
Recently, however, Ueda et al. [147,148] rigorously measured the ultrasonic fields in a Tokyo
restaurant from pest scarers around 20 kHz (with strong harmonics) reaching 120 dB re 20 µPa
directly under the source, and 90 dB re 20 µPa some 15 m from it. Young workers could hear the
output better than older ones. A survey was made of 35 volunteers (including 29 college students,
12 of whom were female). The survey responses indicated that the sound could be heard by 31 of
the 35 volunteers (of which four could hear it clearly). Discomfort, restlessness and ‘pain in the
ear’ were common, while nausea and dizziness were less common. Some responded so strongly
as to add that ‘my head may split’ and ‘I will never come here again because of the pain in the ear’.
Relocating the sources provided mitigation for adults although there were no data for children.
Recently, the Federal Public Service in Belgium for Health, Food Chain Safety and
Environment issued advice regarding the potential nuisance caused to humans by ultrasonic
pest repellers [149], having commissioned a two-part study, firstly measuring the outputs of
several devices [150] (building on an earlier study [151]), and secondly to monitor the reactions of
human subjects [152]. The first study [150] showed that simple calculations to estimate the levels
6.5 m from the source, having measured the levels 1 m from the source, tended to underestimate
significantly the actual field measured at 6.5 m. The second study [152] exposed two groups with
normal hearing (25 adults with ages from 18 to 25 years, and 25 adults with ages from 46 to 58
years) to SPLs of 44.6–71 dB (depending on the nominal frequency setting: 12.5, 25 or 35 kHz) at a
 31
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
range of 6.5 m from the devices. After 20 min exposures, there was no detectable effect on hearing
thresholds, and none of the subjects reported nausea, headache, dizziness, pressure in the ears,
pain in the eyes, tinnitus, tiredness, or feelings of tenseness, warmth, unease or fright. However,
those subjects that could perceive signals when the devices were set to VHF output found them to
be disturbing. The devices did generate audio frequency output in addition to emissions at their
nominal VHF/US settings [150]. The authors state that ‘Some settings of the ultrasonic repellent
were not investigated in this study. One of the reasons was that [in a pilot test] their respective
emissions were considered so loud and annoying that it was agreed that prolonged continuous
exposure would not be possible’.
Given their wide usage, increasingly in domestic gardens frequented by children and pets, an
up-to-date assessment of current requirements, device effectiveness and the alternative methods
available [136] would be useful.
(2) Entertainment and communication
There are many possible reasons why VHF/US signals might be included in entertainment
and communication systems as technology develops, in order to affect the acoustic field or its
perception. However, it has not been possible to ascertain actual current usage or amplitudes.
Subcarrier frequencies in radio and telephone communications offer data opportunities, but it is
not known for certain to what extent they use VHF/US signals.
There is debate in the hi-fi entertainment industry as to the value of including the capacity to
generate sounds above 20 kHz into the more expensive sound reproduction systems. While many
markets for high value products have a history of being able to charge a premium for high-tech
but ultimately borderline enhancements, many argue that discerning users appreciate inclusion of
an ultrasonic capacity in hi-fi [153]. Certainly, the compact disc format provides no such capacity.
The ability to hear an ultrasonic tone is, of course, very different from an ability to appreciate the
difference made by the perception of the broader range of frequencies that can be present when
such a pulse starts.
The use of ultrasound to provide the sensation of touch through acoustic streaming and
radiation forces (§4b) may become commercialized in the near future.
(3) Acoustic spotlights
Audiosonic spotlights [154,155] use intense ultrasound to generate zones into which audio
frequency sound is contained, so that exhibition booths, museums etc. can have audio
commentary contained in front of the exhibit without leaking to neighbouring ones. To do this
with audio frequency sources would require large loudspeakers or arrays, much larger than
a wavelength (section 3a). However, a transducer of modest size can generate a tight beam of
ultrasound because of its smaller wavelength. If two beams are generated, and they are intense
enough to generate nonlinearities, then an audio frequency signal can be generated. Because the
generation of the difference frequency is a second-order process (as represented by the ‘s2’ term
in the following simple power series expansion), the power of the primary ultrasonic frequencies
needs to be very great in order to generate a loud signal at audio frequencies in the response, R:
R = s0 + s1P + s2P2 + s3P3 + · · · .
(3.1)
If the driving sound field P = cos 2πfat + cos 2πfbt consists of two primary ultrasonic frequencies,
fa and fb, then when the second-order nonlinearity is significant, it generates a propagating wave
with energies at other frequencies including the difference frequency, (fa − fb):
P2 = (cos 2πfat + cos 2πfbt)2
= (cos 2πfat)2 + (cos 2πfbt)2 + 2 cos 2πfat cos 2πfbt
= (cos 2πfat)2 + (cos 2πfbt)2 + cos 2π(fa + fb)t + cos 2π(fa − fb)t,
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
(3.2)
 32
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
the final term indicating that energy will propagate at the difference frequency. It should be
stressed that this is different to the phenomenon of beats, which requires no nonlinearity but
which is simply a linear phenomenon resulting from superposition of signals at a receiver, and
generates no energy at the difference frequency. If the two frequencies, fa and fb, are 30 and 31 kHz,
the second-order nonlinearity will generate a signal at 1 kHz (plus a sum signal at 61 kHz, and
second harmonics of the double the frequencies of the original signals at 60 and 62 kHz).
The advantage of generating low frequencies in this way is that, for a given size of acoustic
source, it is easier to produce a beam of sound if intense high frequencies can be generated.
Therefore, the two fa and fb signals can be generated over a zone that is far more confined than the
(fa − fb) signal could ever be if it were generated linearly by a source of the same size, but in the
overlap zone between the two high frequency beams, a narrow zone containing the low frequency
(fa − fb) is generated: an ‘acoustic spotlight’. If the frequency of fb varies over time, then (fa − fb)
follows it to produce a time-varying audio waveform.
The phenomenon originated many decades ago for submarine sonar, but only in recent
decades has the technology become sufficiently affordable for the mass market. The point here
is that the second-order nonlinearity is weak, because s2 is small: to produce significant sound
levels at the difference frequency, the amplitude of the ‘primary’ ultrasonic signals, fa and fb,
within the acoustic spotlight must be very high.
(4) Ultrasonic weapons
Just because acoustic weaponry is intended to produce adverse effects in its victims, it cannot be
free of regulation: Even if one accepts the argument for its deployment in certain circumstances,
the effects it produces must be proportionate, with due consideration taken of the potential for
exposure of the target, unintended targets and the user, and for its misuse. As a result, it falls
within the remit of this paper.
In the use of acoustic weaponry, a method is required to ensure that the attacker is not
disturbed, but the victim is. This occasionally occurs through providing hearing protection for
the attacker, or a safe stand-off distance through the use of a remotely- or automatically-activated
ultrasonic source [156]. However, if the attacker is directly operating (and hence closer to) the
weapon, then usually the acoustic field is at a high frequency to which the victim (but not the
attacker) is sensitive; or the field is confined to a location occupied by the victim but not the
attacker; or both methods are used.
At audio frequencies, confinement has received most attention, with recent success despite a
poor initial record [157]. There has been considerable publicity given to non-lethal sonic weapons
for crowd control, marine vessel protection etc. such as the commercial LRAD (long range
acoustic device) systems. Reputedly designed to deliver warning messages at 1 km range, they are
advertised as being capable of producing audio frequency signals of 120 dB re 20 µPa at 60 m and
130 dB re 20 µPa at 4 m [158,159]. At such levels, in addition to psychological reactions, hearing
damage is a risk (depending on the level and duration of exposure), and there have also been
reports of migraine, vomiting and loss of equilibrium [160]. Handheld prototypes have been
reported generating pulses of sound of 1 s duration at 125–150 dB re 20 µPa, with ‘the capacity
to knock people off their feet’ [159], but any proven effectiveness might well rely on auditory
effects rather than radiation forces, which would be too weak (§4b).
The sensitivity of the ear makes auditory routes to adverse effects more accessible than other
routes. Given that combatants, pirates and hostage takers will learn to use hearing protection, the
market would appear to be primarily for less prepared targets, such as occur in crowd control, at
least with the current cumbersome vehicle-mounted devices.
Although some have confused the ability of LRAD devices to project ‘beams’ of intense
sound with the ability of parametric sonar to generate such beams, the LRAD does not use the
technology of the preceding subsection. LRAD has the expected directionality of a large sound
source operating at, typically, 2.5 kHz, as discussed in §3a. Although there are repeated calls
to use the parametric sonar technology described in the preceding section to produce beams of
 33
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
audible sound for non-lethal weaponry [71,161–164], such calls do not take into account the fact
that, although the intensities at the primary frequencies fa and fb are necessarily large to produce
nonlinear effects, the audio frequency signal at fa − fb is weak because it is produced by a second-
order nonlinearity, and extremely strong primary beams would be needed to produce anything
other than a comparatively weak audio frequency signal.
Although an LRAD source was aimed at protestors in New York at the 2004 Republican
National Convention, the uncertainty regarding the effect on people at very short ranges meant
it was not activated [165]. LRADs were probably not used on the public until 2009, in Pittsburgh
at the G20 Summit. LRAD devices operate at frequencies of a few kHz, and so are outside the
main topic of this article. Ultrasonic weapons are distinctly different: using higher frequencies,
a tight beam can be produced from a smaller (e.g. handheld) device, although scattering and
attenuation are usually more of an issue at these higher frequencies. Barring subharmonics or the
ability of the victim to hear above the upper limit expected by the manufacturer (figure 4), the
ultrasonic weapon would not be expected to give to humans the audible cues and discomfort of
an LRAD, although if the intended target is some non-human pest, it may claim to operate in such
a way. In either scenario, the ultrasonic weapon is perceived to offer the advance of presenting
a deterrent without risk of hearing loss to humans. This assumption must be critically assessed
against research (or its lack) on: the potential for ultrasound to cause audio frequency hearing
loss; the occurrence of non-auditory adverse reactions; and the possibility of generating adverse
reactions in sensitive individuals to a greater degree than would be observed in some nominal
‘average’ person.
There are numerous adverts available for ultrasonic weapons, although the author has
found no convincing evidence of efficacy. In the marketplace, ultrasonic weapons claiming to
induce non-auditory effects face the challenge of competing with devices like LRAD, which
do exploit the extreme sensitivity of the human ear to acoustics, and therefore ultrasonic
weapons advertise at lower prices and would offer greater portability. Of many such products,
the ‘Phasor Pain Field Pistol 135 dB’ is advertised as producing 10–25 kHz at 130–135 dB re
20 µPa (‘130 dB at 18 inches’ [166]), and is ‘intended for animal control, routing out rodents,
predators from bird feeders, control of unruly dogs, cats, even people! ... May be set to an
inaudible but intolerable feeling of pain or discomfort’ [166] because ‘Exposure to people will
cause severe discomfort, pain nausea, paranoia and disorientation’ [166]. The larger ‘Phasor Pain
Field Generator with remote control 140 dB’ operates in the same frequency range and claims
to produce 140 dB re 20 µPa at arrange of 30 cm. This device is advertised for ‘for potential
crowd control applications ... Excellent for keeping out two and four legged pests from gardens,
unauthorized areas ... Also excellent deterrent to intruders when used in the home’ [156]. The
statement by the manufacturer on the safety of the device is recommended reading, contained
in appendix D.
It is clearly possible to generate sound fields intense enough to cause both auditory and non-
auditory adverse effects, in both the 10–20 kHz and the less-researched 20–25 kHz ranges that
these two devices, and many similar ones, claim to cover. However as to the specific amplitudes
claimed for these devices, this study has not had access to them in order to verify the accuracy
of these claims in a manner traceable back to primary standards. Let us assume as a working
hypothesis that there exists, in the classified literature, a similar dearth of evidence to that found
in the open literature (and which has led to the uncertainties outlined in this article as to effects
and mechanisms; sections 2b(i,iv), 3b and 4). If so, despite the persistence of advertisements for
ultrasonic weapons, the most reliable option to make a VHF/US weapon work is by deterring
victims using acoustic fields that are audible to them, but not to the user of the device. This is
of course the protocol for the familiar pest deterrents, and the less common devices resembling
the ‘Phasor Pain Field Pistol 135 dB’ mentioned above for deterring non-humans with VHF/US
auditory sensitivity. It would be extremely disturbing if this protocol were to be used to target
specific demographics of the human population, such as women or children or other groups
who do not experience high frequency hearing loss (either through genetic or environmental
reasons [167]) to the same extent as members of the demographic group who manufacturers
 34
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
expect would be deploying the device against more sensitive individuals. As a species we have
already commercialized such devices, as will now be discussed.
(5) Mosquito
There now exist devices that exploit the fact that the sensitivity of the ear to high frequencies is
personal, and often age-related. The purpose of these devices is to target specific demographic
groups, for example, by using high frequencies below 20 kHz to prevent teenagers loitering
around shops. In 2006, The Telegraph reported that ‘Police have given their backing to a gadget
that sends out an ultra high-pitched noise that can be heard only by those under 20 and is so
distressing it forces them to clutch their ears in discomfort’ [168]. The device operates on the
principle that people more than, say, 25 years old will have lost sensitivity to these irritating VHF
acoustic signals. Variations on this, for example producing low frequency sensations using two
ultrasonic fields of slightly different frequency, have also been proposed [169].
Routine hearing threshold measurement is normally restricted to frequencies below 8 kHz.
Although the loss of high-frequency sensitivity with advancing age is well established, the
trends with age and gender in the 15–20 kHz range used by Mosquito devices are less frequently
researched [170].
The installation and use of such ‘Mosquito’ devices continues to be unregulated. Individual
householders and owners of business premises can install the devices. These devices do not emit
ultrasound but emit intense sounds at around 15–18 kHz (the later versions tending to 17–18 kHz).
This is done with the specific intention of creating a distress response in young people and thereby
discourage them from ‘loitering’ in the vicinity of the device, neglecting:
— the effect on very young children and animals brought close the device by parents or
grandparents who are not aware of the signal;
— the effect on children with pre-existing conditions that make them especially sensitive
(autistic spectrum disorder, hyperacusis, Williams syndrome etc.);
— the health effects on children who cannot avoid long-term exposure (e.g. because of their
residence, the daily route to school);
— the lack of research to understand the potential effects of VHF/US signals on individuals
who cannot hear them; and
— the lack of research on the auditory and possible non-auditory effects of such exposures.
In 2008, the Association of Chief Police Officers declined to award its ‘Secured by Design’
accreditation to Mosquito, their press release stating:
‘Secured by Design is the only official form of national Police approval and we must be
satisfied that products are safe and meet performance standards before offering them Police
endorsement. We have refused to accredit Mosquito primarily due to lack of evidence that
it is safe. Following credible, external scrutiny of the product it could not be confirmed that
noise it emits is only audible to young people and the potential effects of the product on
people suffering disabilities was inadequately researched and uncertain. In addition, there
were issues surrounding the appropriateness of utilising this kind of device given that it’s
discriminatory against a particular group ... ACPO Crime Prevention Initiatives has taken
the stance that the product is not yet and may never be ready to receive official Police
endorsement however the decision as to whether or not to use Mosquito is a matter for
individual Forces’ [171].
Sections of the media reported dissatisfaction with the decision from manufacturers and
shopkeepers [172].
In Congleton in 2015, the local government unanimously voted to refuse permission to install
Mosquito devices following instances including a parent reporting that a Mosquito device caused
a child to fall from a bicycle as he removed his hands from the handlebars to cover his ears
 35
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[173]. They supported enhanced educational routes to improving teenager behaviour. While
it touches beyond the remit of this article, such a social response to an acoustical technology
that was designed to reduce a social problem, does introduce symmetry in addressing the fact
that the Mosquito should not be a substitute for investment to provide appropriate safe places
(e.g. youth clubs) for children to meet, as the device can potentially displace children to more
hazardous areas.
The Mosquito produces a discriminatory adverse effect. Its use should not be conflated with
the use of a ultrasonic ring tone, intended to be covert with respect to the older generation [174],
presumably using a signal and an amplitude that does not distress the youths using it.
Section 3b has shown examples of VHF/US devices that are marketed to cause distress
(§3b(iii)(4,5)), while other airborne VHF/US technologies are marketed as safe (§3b(ii);
appendix D). Statements from manufacturers include insufficient detail and contain assurances
of safety that are not supported by relevant evidence. Coming atop this paper’s evidence of
public exposure by commercial devices that are not explicitly advertised as producing ultrasound,
and the difficulties in measuring device outputs and fields, it is important that there are
appropriate guidelines backed by rigorous research, and calibrated measurements backed by
appropriate equipment and standardized procedures, so that safety can be properly assessed for
the populations and demographics that will be exposed.
4. Is there a feasible mechanism for the reported adverse subjective effects of
ultrasound?
The subjective symptoms reported by people (migraine, nausea, tinnitus, headaches, fatigue,
dizziness, feelings of ‘pressure’) are so common and so non-specific that most clinicians are
unlikely to attribute them to a physical cause. As regards viewing the proposal that airborne
ultrasound is the cause, difficulties include the fact that: the lack of evidence means that adverse
effects from airborne ultrasound are not included in any of the relevant NICE publications that
support differential diagnoses; the sources of ultrasound are difficult to identify and locate or
even confirm as existing at all; the VHF/US fields have been difficult to measure in a manner
traceable to international standards; reports are primarily anecdotal and vary from describing
instantaneous responses to a 30-min delay before the onset of adverse effects and include reports
of persistence of headaches etc. for hours after exposure has ceased; some VHF/US studies
would have included significant audio frequency energy, especially in the case of occupational
exposure [1].
Although reports of subjective effects from airborne VHF/US exposure date back over
40 years, they are complicated by inadequate progression along the evidence hierarchy, the
disproving of the original ‘ultrasonic sickness’ claims, and the frequent presence of high levels
of audio frequency sound accompanying the ultrasonic exposures, as reported in this paper. This
has left holes in the evidence base. Two further questions are: whether subjective effects might
occur only in those who can hear the sound, or whether they can also occur in others; and to what
extent the audibility of the VHF/US signal observed in an individual reflects that individual’s
tendency to suffer each of the subjective adverse reactions. The case for asking whether there is a
conceivable mechanism by which subjective effects can occur in those who cannot hear the sound
is based on:
— the need to assess the anecdotal stories from those who purport to have suffered in
this way; and
— the need properly to frame and test the assumption that adverse effects only occur when
airborne VHF/US signals are heard, which has, and will in future, direct assessments of
who is susceptible, and what safety guidelines are required.
If an unpleasant intense signal is heard, whether it be VHF/US or some audio frequency noise
that accompanies the ultrasound (such as the hiss of cavitation in a cleaning bath, the noise of
 36
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
an ultrasonic drill etc.) then a combination of anxiety, stress and our knowledge of the human
response to audio frequency noise can offer a plausible explanation for the symptoms (which
nevertheless needs testing). If, however, nothing is heard, is there a mechanism for generating
adverse subjective effects?
The lack of a mechanism for generating these subjective effects has underpinned many
assumptions. Howard et al. [34] worked on the assumption that subjective effects from exposure
to ultrasound were caused by the accompanying levels of audio frequency sound that the sources
of ultrasound generated, such generation being either accidental (e.g. through the unwanted
placement of energy at subharmonic frequencies) or deliberate (e.g. when nonlinear effects
are used to produce zones of audio frequency signal, the advent of such devices being the
specific prompt for the review of guidelines by Howard et al. [34]). In 1984, the INIRC-IRPA [20]
stated that ‘Effects on the general public of airborne acoustic energy appear to be mediated by
nervous reaction. Many people are unable to enter commercial establishments having an intrusion
alarm (where the alarm is turned off, but the airborne ultrasound is still radiating) because
they immediately suffer headaches or feel nauseated’. In the above quote, in using the phrase
‘mediated by nervous reaction’, the INIRC-IRPA was probably using phraseology similar to that
of Health Canada who refer to ‘the so-called “subjective” effects on the central nervous system’
which might have been written to include the type of scenario in which, for example, a sufferer
feels compelled to remove themselves from the vicinity of the source of pain or disturbance.
This paper will proceed on the assumption that at least some of the complaints from the public
are indeed caused by ultrasound in air.
(a) Is the potential for adverse effects linked to hearing acuity?
We are taught, as part of formal education, definitions such as ‘Ultrasound is the name given
to sound waves that have frequencies greater than 20 000 Hz. It’s too high pitched for human
hearing, but many animals, such as dogs, cats and bats can hear ultrasound’ [175]. However,
even a small sample size can show VHF/US acuity to the levels shown in figure 1c [26]. Given
that we know that there is great variation between individuals in hearing acuity and frequency
range, with a tendency for greater high frequency acuity in the younger population, a single
cut-off frequency for all is clearly too simplistic. It is timely to re-examine the source of the
current received wisdom, and to interpret it in the light of the difficulties that having such small
wavelengths introduces in making measurements that can usefully be transferred from one piece
of equipment to another.
There is a wealth of material on hearing acuity and how it varies with frequency. However,
it is important to appreciate that this legacy of knowledge was almost wholly taken with low
amplitude tests. Furthermore, the accepted trends come from averages over large numbers. As
we enter an era where it is possible that large numbers of the population are exposed to high
amplitude ultrasound without any corresponding audio frequency cues, then the diversity in the
population, and the unnatural nature of the stimulation, mean that reliance on received wisdom
from current audiology must be scientifically tested.
As seen above [22,34,50], the common belief is that if there is to be an adverse effect, the subject
must be able to hear it, an assumption which has been used to justify the focus by the ACGIH [23]
on the levels of the subharmonics only, which forms the basis of current United States regulations
for exposures above the 20 kHz third-octave band. There is a wealth of material on mechanisms
for acuity [176–182] although a great deal is based on bone conduction rather than the airborne
pathway. The issue to be addressed in §4b is whether there is a mechanism for adverse effects
without hearing acuity.
(b) Is there an alternative mechanism? Adverse effects without hearing acuity
The remarkable aspect of looking for a mechanism for adverse effects without hearing acuity
is that the intensities associated with airborne acoustic fields are almost always low compared
 37
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
with the intensities we see in comparable radiations. The 140 dB re 20 µPa acoustic field cited by
Crabtree & Forshaw ([4]—see §2b(iii) and below) corresponds to an acoustic pressure that, in a
plane acoustic wave at ground level in Earth’s atmosphere, would have an intensity of around
100 W m−2, approximately one-tenth of the intensity of ground-level daylight on a clear day.
While a dark adjusted person might shy from such dim daylight for a short period, this is a
response due to the sensitivity of the relevant sense organ (the eye). If our sense organ is not
part of the equation, adverse effects are unlikely, as we would feel only mild heating from the
absorption of such weak daylight. How, therefore, can airborne ultrasound cause adverse effects
if we cannot feel it?
It would be unwise to consider adverse effects only in terms of the physics of the wave.
Frings & Senkovits [74], on confirming their earlier work [72,73] that damage in mice from
airborne ultrasound comes from heating of the fur, stated that this finding was ‘supporting
the statement of Davis [92] that reflection from the skin can afford satisfactory protection from
heating by high intensity air-borne sounds in man’ (the context being that all these authors were
considering heating only, and Davis specifically excludes ‘sense organs’ and ‘general “sensations”
or mental states’ from the musing to which Frings and Senkovits were referring).
However, intense acoustic fields can generate nonlinearities, such that an oscillating acoustic
pressure can give rise to a steady ‘radiation pressure’, net motions in the gas or liquid through
which the wave travels (streaming, microstreaming [91]) and the generation of harmonics
(at frequencies of nf), ultraharmonics (at frequencies of nf/m) and subharmonics (at frequencies
of f/m which can be in the audio frequency range if the frequency fof the fundamental wave
is ultrasonic, where m and n are integers greater than unity). A radiation pressure of prad = I/c
is generated by a plane wave of intensity I that is wholly absorbed after travelling through
a medium of sound speed c [91,108]. For the 140 dB re 20 µPa field mentioned above, this
equates to a radiation pressure of 0.3 Pa, a tiny steady pressure given that the human ear can
withstand immersion, where every metre further underwater adds an additional 10 000 Pa. It
would certainly be too weak to ‘knock people off their feet’ ([159]; §3b(iii)(4)).
Health Canada [22] stated that ‘most plausible mechanisms for non-auditory effects of airborne
ultrasound on a human are heating and cavitation’, though neither is relevant to humans below
the levels associated with extremely intense ultrasonic fields, and certainly not for the potential
human exposures of figure 1. The two mechanisms (heating and cavitation) immediately suggest
themselves because they are of such importance during diagnostic fetal scanning that the United
States FDA mandated that scanners show on-screen real-time indicators reflecting the likely
hazard to the fetus associated with these mechanisms [78], but they are not relevant for current
airborne exposures (§3b(ii)).
Although experiments with ultrasound in air generated death in insects and mice in 10–180 s
as a result of 20 kHz in air at 169 dB re 20 µPa [101], and dizziness and mild-to-very-unpleasant
heating at crevices (fingers, skin clefts, nasal passages) in excess of 140 dB re 20 µPa in humans
[3,22,101], these levels are almost certainly very significantly greater than those to which the
public are being exposed. As Davis et al. [30] commented in 1949,
‘Although we can cook a small animal with the energy of a sound field, it is probably
impossible to cook a man.... There is no evidence that air-borne ultrasonics can produce
any specific direct effect on the brain or other parts of the nervous system [92]. In spite of
many suggestions of such mysterious possibilities, the only reliably established effects are
either through the stimulation of the ear or some other sense organ’.
From the point of view of heating and cavitation, this is a sensible proposal, but in the absence
of a mechanism for subjective effects, it needs careful testing against evidence, which includes an
assessment of whether the current evidence base is sufficiently large.
However, the ear has extraordinary properties, an analogue sensor with a dynamic range
exceeding 120 dB (6 orders of magnitude in pressure) and it is no simple matter to predict the
 38
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
1000
each subject (80 dB)
0.10
0.01
10–3
10–4
10–5
mean with 1 STD band (80 dB)
mean with 1 STD band (60 dB)
each subject (60 dB)
frequency (Hz)
displacement (mm)
10 000
Figure 8. The displacement of the tympanic membrane measured in vivo on five healthy males aged between 25 and 35, for
two different sound pressure levels in the ear cavity, the signals having centre frequencies in third-octave bands from 200 to
10 000 Hz. Taken with permission from Ahn etal. [183].
sensations it might generate when driven by intense ultrasound in air. Recognizing that the
data in figure 8 are drawn from only five males of 25–35 years age, having normal hearing,
and granted that at high frequencies relative positioning on the tympanum will be challenging,
its trends suggest that the response of the tympanic membrane decreases with frequency, but
offers the preliminary suggestion that the limited data suggest a drop of only around a factor of
10 in displacement (approx. 20 dB) in going from 1 to 10 kHz [183]. It is difficult to extrapolate
what would be the effect of the outer ear, especially given the small-wavelength effects seen
in figure 6, but resonances would not be unexpected. Given the 120 dB operational dynamic
range of human hearing, in the absence of measurements it is not unrealistic to hypothesize
tympanic membrane vibration when high amplitude (e.g. 140 dB re 20 µPa) signals at 20–30 kHz
are incident on the tympanum (the upper frequency limit of normal human hearing is not set by
the tympanum, but rather by the frequency characteristics of the middle ear [184] with loss of hair
cell activity in the basal region of the cochlea contributing to high frequency loss from childhood
onwards [111]). The proposition that tympanic ultrasonic vibration speculatively might occur
in some individuals, is stimulated by extrapolating to high frequencies the variation between
individuals: figure 8 indicates that, at 80 dB re 20 µPa exposures, the individuals showing the
greatest displacement at 10 kHz exhibit displacements (approx. 0.01 µm for the 1 STD upper limit
at 10 kHz) that are comparable with the displacements observed in the individuals at the 1 STD
lower limit at 1 kHz. It is not possible to extrapolate from the data at 10 kHz and below from just
five adult males shown in figure 8 to discuss VHF/US exposure in the general population, but
figure 8 does give perspective on the use of averages.
The tympanic membrane contains mechanical proprioceptors that are sensitive to pressure,
tension and stretch (Nagai [185] identifying Pacinian corpuscules). The middle ear tympano-
ossicular chain contains two muscles, the tensor tympani and the stapedius muscles, which
contract to reduce the amount of motion in the presence of intense acoustic fields [186]. When
applying small air pressure changes sufficient to cause small movements of the tympanum, Job
et al. [186] used fMRI to show that proprioreceptors in the tympanic membrane responded by
generating brain activity in a limited region of Brodmann area 43 at the caudal edge of the
somatosensory cortex. This is the area involved in activities accompanying oral intake such as
gustation and swallowing. The tympanic membrane is tensed by the tensor tympani muscle, and
both it and the veli palatini muscles (which are involved in swallowing) are Eustachian tube
muscles that, it was recently proposed [187] are in histochemical continuity with a long tendon
 39
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
[186], possibly forming a functional unit. Taking a step back, it is perhaps not unsurprising that
sensors in the tympanic membrane that detect pressure changes might have a neural connection
to Eustachian tube muscles because the response of opening the Eustachian tube by swallowing
mitigates pain from, for example, reduced air pressure in aircraft: indeed, Nagai [185] disrupted
the function of the Eustachian tube by anaesthetizing the tympanic membrane.
Consider therefore the following untested hypothesis. In the presence of intense ultrasound,
the tympanic membrane still undergoes displacement (extrapolating from figure 8). Given the
diversity in the responses of the hearing and balance systems between individuals, in some
individuals the neural connections in the brain between these tympanic receptors and the
associated Eustachian tube muscles are activated. However, the brain does not receive the
complementary signals from the auditory nerve that it usually receives when hearing sound,
because the inner ear is not responding to the ultrasonic stimulation: the filtering by the
middle ear and cochlea means that the brain does not associate the ultrasonic vibration of
the tympanic receptors with hearing as it would at lower frequencies. The hypothesis is that
the conflicting signals from the cochlea, and those from the receptors in the tympanum and
Eustachian system, could lead to headache, dizziness, nausea, fatigue etc. A similar disconnect
in the brain between the signals from proprioceptors and those from the inner ear (the balance
organs) is the most widely cited cause of motion sickness (vision also being important here,
but not critical [188–190]; note that there are competing hypotheses for the cause of motion
sickness [191–193]).
This speculation ends by noting the overlap between the wide range of symptoms reported
for motion sickness and those reported for ultrasonic exposure. The terminology ‘ultrasonic
seasickness’ should not imply that a given motion sickness medication would work in relieving
adverse subjective effects from ultrasound as it depends on the mechanism and the specific effect
on the proprioceptors.
Some issues remain unresolved by this hypothesis. For example, the marketing of the
Mosquito device suggests that, at least for the lower intensities and frequencies used in that
application, subjective effects have not been reported by those who cannot hear the device, which
challenges the above mechanism.
The conclusion must be that there is a knowledge gap regarding the mechanism for the
reported subjective effects of ultrasound in air, and without a validated mechanism, measures to
protect the public and workforce become more difficult to design and to assess. Indeed, it opens
up the need critically to assess the assumptions underpinning the transposition of established
practices in the audio frequency range to the ultrasonic range, including the use of equivalent
noise pressure levels for an 8 h day, and maximum third-octave limits [107].
5. Conclusion
Any author raising the issue of a possible health hazard from ultrasound in air should understand
that this comes at reputational risk: writing in 1966, Parrack [94] wrote:
‘what are the “effects of airborne ultrasound on humans?” The question is generated
by conflicting points of view presented in some recent public utterance on this subject.
Some of these statements ascribe to air-borne ultrasound, a capacity to induce remarkably
dramatic effects in humans. Apparently, twenty years have wrought little change in our
understanding of the effects on man of air-borne ultrasound!’,
eventually concluding that the reported symptoms were probably psychosomatic (see §3b(i) for
the quote).
The same year he published his now infamous 140 dB re 20 µPa guidelines [14], which he
retracted 3 years later. Parrack could little imagine that the 20 years of uncertainty to which
he referred would extend to 70 years by 2015. Why therefore does this article choose to
address the same topic? In part, it is because the industry still refers to the ‘latest’ guidelines
 40
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
without recognizing that these are re-issues or slight adaptations of older guidelines and without
addressing the fact that those guidelines were based on an inadequate research base, as some
of those older guidelines explicitly state [20]. It is also because of evidence that commercial
devices project ultrasound into air in public places at not insignificant intensities, without the
public or many workers in these areas being aware of this. These intensities are almost certainly
significantly less than those to which occupational workers tested in the past were exposed,
and there has been no research to test independently whether adverse effects reported by the
public are in fact caused by ultrasound. However, signals such as those shown in figures 1
and 2 represent a new development, because they warrant testing the effect of tonal ultrasonic
signals alone: very many of the original studies on which the guidelines are based relate to
exposures where the ultrasonic component is contaminated by audio frequency energy through
subharmonics, or through a physical phenomenon (jet noise, cavitation etc.) that was produced
when the ultrasonic energy was generated. In such circumstances there remains to this day
uncertainty (and for most authors, significant doubts) whether the ultrasound, rather than the
accompanying audio frequency energy, caused the adverse effects [43,107,194]. This is less likely
to be an issue with the spectra of figures 1 and 2.
Despite the fact that potential adverse effects were raised over 70 years ago, we still know very
little about human responses (both auditory and non-auditory) to ultrasound in air. Standard
hearing tests do not consider acuity above 8 kHz, and although loss in this frequency range
due to exposure at other frequencies has been established, the number of studies and cohort
sizes remain small. Furthermore, the questions asked in directed studies have not to date been
designed to address the mass public exposures of figures 1 and 2. The same is true in assessing
the extent to which individuals suffer the effects labelled as ‘subjective’ (nausea, headaches,
tinnitus etc.), and to what extent public exposures might stimulate these, and to what extent
ultrasound might be blamed by the public when it is not the source of adverse effects. There
is a lack of confirmed mechanism, and although a speculative one is aired in this paper, it has no
supporting evidence.
The evidence suggests that VHF/US exposures elicit greater adverse effects in some
individuals than others, possibly even without the need to hear the signal or without the degree of
suffering being related to the degree of audibility of the VHF/US signal to an individual, although
this is insufficiently researched. If this is the case, employers, parents, spouses, teachers and carers
may well be unaware that the location they find to be benign, and into which they direct those
for whom they are responsible, may induce adverse effects in more susceptible individuals. The
increased susceptibility of some minorities has been exploited to produce deterrents aimed at
them on the basis of this susceptibility, rather than on the basis of their actions. As a form of
discrimination, ultrasound in air has the peculiar characteristic that susceptible individuals may
not even know that the adverse effects are caused by ultrasound as opposed to some other source
(e.g. ‘sick building syndrome’).
The overwhelming conclusion must be that the research base is too small to support the current
guidelines because
— The issuing of new guidelines based on a review of existing guidelines has inadvertently
given rise to the misconception that there exists a consensus, the new guidelines
validating the old and vice versa, when what is missing is the fundamental research to
validate a genuinely new set of guidelines. That research must ask the correct directed
questions and test sufficient numbers of subjects in representative cohorts in order to
allow manufacturers to know that their products are safe, and to allow those who believe
they are suffering as a result of ultrasound exposure to have the true source of their
symptoms identified, whether it is ultrasonic or not;
— The application of these guidelines for occupational exposure, to circumstances of public
exposure, is inappropriate, particularly given the nature of the few research studies
on which current guidelines are based (typically small numbers of adult males having
occupational exposure);
 41
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
— The use of averaging is problematic, there is a failure to consider the spread of the
population about the mean, and a failure to consider sensitive subsets of the population
(including specific demographics); and
— Most, if not all, advertised levels on commercial devices cannot have been rigorously
measured traceable to primary standards.
Because there is now mass public exposure to ultrasound in air, we require
— Appropriate guidelines for both public and occupational exposure, with appropriate
consideration of women and children and exposure in residential areas, accompanied by
an end to the practice of issuing new guidelines based on old guidelines (particularly,
the erroneous interpretation of the most populous guideline in figure 3 as indicating
consensus, so enhancing this particular problem), and an end to using occupational
guidelines for non-occupational circumstances;
— Surveys of the occurrence and properties of devices that expose the public and workers;
— Standardization of procedures for reporting levels, reporting both third-octave and peak
SPL levels where the signals are tonal, with information on the frequency content (centre
frequency for tonal signals, and existence of harmonics and subharmonics);
— Measurements following international protocols that take account of the particular
features of using ultrasonic equipment (directionality, scattering etc.), and labeling by
manufacturers that includes (and distinguishes from any other claims) measurements
taken in this way, expressed with suitable metadata and clarity as to the spectral
distribution of the energy;
— Surveys of adverse reactions (both impairment of normal sensations, and inability to
achieve optimal performance, e.g. in schools), taking into account the false positives, with
appropriate care for sufferers regardless of whether ultrasound is the actual source of
discomfort;
— If genuine adverse reactions are found in workplace, residential or public settings, an
assessment of whether normal measures offer sufficient protection (e.g. the fall-off of
intensity with range from source, attenuation of ultrasound by common materials and
enclosures [141]);
— Standardization of procedures and equipment for hearing tests above 8 kHz;
— Double blind testing of individuals who suggest they are sensitive;
— A critical assessment of the unchallenged use of hearing thresholds as a proxy for all
adverse effects, and as a reliable indicator for the likelihood of the occurrence and severity
of adverse effects;
— A requirement that researchers who report the results of testing the acuity and reaction
of humans to ultrasound in air should publish the raw data and report on the scatter
in the data, not just the trends that come from linear regressions (for example by using
electronic supplements to journal papers);
— Assessment of workplace, public and residential exposures (and their overlap e.g. in
hospitals, schools, nurseries);
— Research towards the possibility of dose–response relationships for auditory and non-
auditory effects, taking into account sensitive individuals;
— Appreciation of the implication of averaging and assessment of departures from the
average;
— Assessment of what public exposure is necessary, what can be stopped with little
inconvenience to the user, and for what devices alternatives must be found, if adverse
reactions are proved with existing exposures; and
— Political will to address these issues. There exists a knowledge partial vacuum on the
adverse effects of ultrasound in air, and legislators must make a choice on whether this
vacuum is considered to be a lack of evidence for or against the current exposure of the
public to ultrasound. After this immediate response, the evidence to allow those who
wish to use ultrasound in air, to do so safely, must be gathered.
 42
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Note added in proof
In Section 3(b)(ii) an example of the use of ultrasound to charge electronic devices wirelessly is
discussed. When this article was in final proof stage, the manufacturer revealed previously hidden
details of their defence regarding the safety of the technology through an industry blog [124]
(although their website [9] still compares its outputs to those for fetal scanning). As deduced
above, they need to deploy lower frequencies than the 1 MHz that was used in the journal article
they cite [123], and now state that they transmit ‘at a single frequency within the range of 45 kHz
to 75 kHz with an output of 145 dB to 155 dB (or 316 Wm−2–3 kWm−2)’ [124]. They do not state
the location at which these levels are measured, and do not pin down their ‘single frequency’
with any greater specificity than 45–75 kHz, which makes it difficult to compare with reports of
ill effects [1]. As noted in section 2b(iii), the only guideline for public exposure is the INIRC-
IRPA [20] one allowing 70 dB in the 20 kHz third-octave band, and 100 dB in the third-octave
bands centred on 25, 31.5, 40, 50, 63, 80 and 100 kHz. These will need to be reconsidered if the
research base is appropriately expanded, particularly with respect to the generation of subjective
adverse reactions, which appear not to have been taken into account for any third-octave band
higher than the one centred on 20 kHz.
Since the current article went to press, the authors of reference [110] have confirmed that the
numbers, analysis and conclusions in appendix C and table 2 of this paper are correct, and that
‘tingling in the limbs’ should have been identified as being significant from their reported data.
Data accessibility. The original data in this paper (figures 1 and 2) were collected from sites that only gave
permission for recording on condition of anonymity. The original data files contain information (e.g. audio
frequency public address announcements) that would reveal the location and break the contract, and so
cannot currently be made publicly available. Each site has been supplied with a report of the findings for
their site and comparison to guidelines.
Authors’contributions. This is a sole author paper. The author was supported by volunteers as described in the
acknowledgements.
Competing interests. The author has no competing interests.
Funding. The author is grateful to the Colt Foundation for supplying funds used for the purchase
of equipment.
Acknowledgements. Apart from a contribution to equipment costs, this work was unfunded, and therefore, a
large number of volunteers were vital to completing this multidisciplinary study, and credit to them that it
was completed in a few months. To be sure of the levels recorded in figures 1 and 2, several independent
measurements were made of the ultrasonic field from students Fabio Casagrande Hirono and Mengyang
Zhu, and from the NPL’s Ben Piper, each operating their own independent equipment and measurement
systems. Ben Piper and Richard Barham of NPL assisted with calibration, as did ISVR Consultancy Services
(ICS), who loaned us equipment. The author is very grateful to Ben Lineton and Sian Lloyd Jones for
audiological advice, Sian also for providing an independent audiological detective to assist in tracing
though often obscure and difficult-to-find records of the tests on which some current guidelines are based.
All the above, plus Ben Lawton and Carl Verschuur commented on sections of the draft. The author is
grateful to Erika Quaranta for undertaking all the modelling requested by the author of the interaction
of sound and ultrasound with the pinna (figure 6); and to Richard Jackett (NPL) for supplying figure 5
at the author’s request. The author is grateful to Paul White for advising on signal processing and the
statistics of appendix C; Andrea Wolff for interpretations and guidance on German law; Su Blandy for helpful
advice on how a clinician interacts with NICE guidelines. The author is grateful to two school students on
work experience placements, specifically Laura Overton-Hore and Tim Scrase, for their assistance during
field tests, taking notes on sites locations and metadata, and for their assistance in checking transcriptions
of notes and data. The author is grateful to Claire Chapman and Rhiannon Leighton for proof-reading
the manuscript.
Appendix A. Instrumentation and the citizen scientist
Figure 1a shows the type of spectrogram (also known as a time-frequency plot) that can be taken
with a smart phone equipped with an appropriate app. Spectrograms show how the spread of
energy (the colour scale) across the various frequencies (the vertical axis) changes as a function
 43
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
of time (the horizontal axis), and these apps can also display the microphone data as PSDs like
figures 1c and 2b,d. However, if members of the public wish to try to detect VHF/US signals in
such a way, they must appreciate that:
— the reported dB levels are unlikely to be reliable;
— like ears, even high frequency microphones have an upper frequency limit above which
they are insensitive, and their device can obtain no information on the existence or not of
signals above this (see the notes in §2a(i)); and
— some signal processing routines produce artefacts, e.g. through aliasing.
Some smartphones and tablet computers do have high frequency sensitivity sufficient to produce
images such as figure 1a, and sound level meter apps are available. Not only must your
microphone and preamplifier system be sensitive to high frequencies, but the settings on the app
must ensure that the data are acquired at sufficiently high frequency (to detect 20 kHz signals, the
sample rate must be over 40 000 Hz, preferably over 48 000 Hz). The number of samples in the
Fast Fourier Transform for recording VHF/US signals should be set to the maximum that current
apps allow, and if there are other settings, these too should be set to maximum. Activating the
automatic gain functions can help generate good pictures but means the reported levels must be
treated with scepticism. Always take a note of those settings, the make, model and (if possible)
operating system, and details of the spectrum analyser app, and your location (with time and
GPS if possible). Interrupt your recording by placing your finger over the microphone, after the
manner shown in figure 1a, to ensure the signal is not electrical pickup (check on the web which
microphone you need to cover—many phones have two different microphones, one for voice and
one for functions like video recording, and that is the one you need to cover).
For pulsed signals, note that if the time window over which the signal is measured
encompasses just a single pulse, as in figure 2c,d, then the intensity will be scaled by the duty
cycle in the expected manner compared with measurements over a longer period [91].
It may be that a future app could record spectra, settings, metadata and GPS data in order to
map locations or show the change of fields over time.
In figure 1a the app is SpectrumViewPlus. Microphone sensitivity for VHF sound and
ultrasound varies significantly between iPhone� models, the iPhone 5� appearing to be most
sensitive in limited testing, but even today’s microphone and app combinations would probably
not be sensitive to signals as high as 30 kHz. Similar recordings could be made with a modern
iPad�, but the reliability of calibrations on sound level meter apps, especially in the VHF/US
frequency range, should be treated with scepticism. It was not possible to rely on an iPhone
and the available apps to make the calibrated measurements of figures 1b, c and 2. Instead three
(for figure 1b,c) or two (for figure 2) calibrated microphone and data acquisition systems were
deployed to allow each to cross-validate the other.
This paper presents the data from one system only in each figure to save space. The data in
figure 1b were recorded using a B&K Type 4939 Microphone plus Type 2669 preamplifier, B&K
NEXUS Type 2692-C Charge Amplifier, RME Fireface UCX Sound Card into a Windows laptop
running Adobe Audition 3.0.
The data for figure 2 were recorded on a Fostex handheld recorder with a PCB 377B02
microphone and a PCB 426E01 preamplifier and a PCB 480E09 ICP� sensor signal conditioner.
The signal processing strategy adopted for figures 1b,c and 2 gives a frequency resolution of
approximately 23 Hz.
The calibration of each system was traceable back to primary standards for VHF/US ranges at
the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in the UK, and the Danish Fundamental Metrology A/S
(DFM) in Denmark. The calibration of the microphones was checked by NPL against a reference
microphone (IEC type WS3) which had been calibrated up to 200 kHz at DFM using a primary
free field calibration method.
Both of the microphones used to record the signals in figures 1b,c and 2 are ‘free field’
(as opposed to ‘pressure’; [195]) microphones, designed to measure the pressure that would
 44
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
have existed in the environment before the microphone itself was introduced and disturbed
that acoustic field (as the microphone body scatters and diffracts the field). In principle free
field microphones should always be pointed at the source of interest. The compensation factors
that are used to infer this pre-existing field become more difficult to calculate as the frequency
increases, which again makes extension of standard measurement methods and equipment into
the VHF/US regime less simple than an uncritical belief in a microphone’s output might assume.
Even when all such compensations are made in the calibration conditions of an anechoic chamber,
in the field (when sometimes the location of the ultrasonic source is difficult to identify) the
uncertainties become much greater.
It is worth commenting on another correction factor, that is not appropriate for the ultrasonic
regime. Commercial sound level meters usually are equipped with third-octave band filters and
the widespread use of these in assessing environmental noise might have influenced their use in
the guidelines of figure 3. However, they are probably unsuitable for assessing the tonal exposures
of figures 1 and 2, because the broadband signals shown by the dotted red horizontal lines in
figures 1c and 2b,d score identically to the tonal data when assessed against third-octave levels.
Such sound level meters also come equipped with a range of filters (A, B, C weighting etc. which
filter the incoming sound to reflect the response of a normal human ear to low, medium and high
intensities) but these are unsuitable for use when measuring airborne ultrasound [5].
Recalling from section 3(a) that, for sound level meters, the most stringent international
standard [86] allowed variations from the stated design at 20 kHz from +3 dB to −∞ dB for
a Class 1 device, it would seem appropriate to question the underlying science behind other
instrumentation. Although commercial high frequency audiometers exist, the underlying science
that underpins taking measurements with them should be critically assessed. High frequency
audiometers are designed to provide a subject’s dB HL (Hearing Level), which is the dB difference
between the dB SPL of the quietest signal that a given subject can hear, compared to RETSPL
(Reference Equivalent Threshold Sound Pressure Level), for example at 18 and 20 kHz. However,
the RETSPL is an average, and if the average is insufficiently representative, then provision of dB
HL is less appropriate than simply recording the dB SPL of the quietest sound the subject can hear
at a given frequency. One manufacturer, when questioned, confirmed that the RETSPL values for
18 and 20 kHz were obtained from Table 1 of the 1990 paper by Frank [196], which gives median
threshold values from 200 ears of 100 young adults (aged 18–28 years old) who had normal
hearing at 0.25–8 kHz. Given the discussion of section 2(b)(ii), the statistical significance of this
sample can be questioned even when used to provide RETSPL for subjects aged 18–28, and its use
is open to challenge outside of this age range. Indeed, Frank [196] did not recommend using his
data to derive RETSPL values for 18 and 20 kHz because of the large variations seen in threshold
between subjects even in this restricted 18–28 year old cohort. The author did suggest that ‘test-
minus-retest’ thresholds on the same ear, using the same equipment, might be used clinically. This
is because, in his data, the intra-subject test/retest variance (when the same ear was re-tested)
appeared to be sufficiently low (±10 dB for at least 95% of the ears at 18 and 20 kHz). As a further
point regarding equipment, Frank [196] took his measurements with a specific type of earphone (a
Sennheiser HD250), and because of the significant high frequency differences (in terms of output,
distortion etc.) seen between different types of earphones, and the sensitivity of the pressure field
to the geometry of the scattering surfaces (figure 6), use of a RETSPL derived from his data for
high frequency audiometers that use a different type of earphone, would be questionable were it
to occur.
Appendix B. Compendium of guideline levels for the third-octave band centred
on 20 kHz
Table 1 is a compendium of the Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure Levels that are shown
graphically in figure 3 for the third-octave bands (unless otherwise stated) centred from 8 to
50 kHz (no data outside these limits are shown although some guidelines have been suggested),
 45
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 1. Compendium of the maximum permissible sound pressure levels that are shown graphically in figure 3 for the third-
octave bands (unless otherwise stated) centred from 8 to 50 kHz (no data outside these limits are shown although some
guidelines have been suggested), arranged in original author publication year (1966–2015). All are for occupational exposure
except the one labelled ‘
INIRC-IRPA [20] (1984) for general public’
. The listing of these figures in this table should not be
misinterpreted as an endorsement of them as guidelines by the author.
f (kHz)
8
10
12.5
16
20
25
31.5
40
50
Parrack [14] (1966)
—
—
—
—
140
140
140
140
140
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Grigor’
eva [13] (1966)
80
85
90
90
120 for wideband exceeding 20 kHz
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Acton [15] (1968)
75
75
75
75
110
110
110
—
—
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Parrack (1969, pers. commun.) as cited in WHO [19]
and Acton [6]
—
80
80
80
105
110
115
115
115
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan (1971) as cited in WHO [19]
90
90
90
90
110
110
110
110
110
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
USSR (1975) as cited in WHO [19]
—
—
75
85
110
110
110
110
110
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Acton [16,17] (1975, 1976)
75
75
75
75
75
110
110
110
—
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
US Air Force (1976) as cited in WHO [19]
—
—
85
85
85
85
85
85
—
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Internat. Lab. Off. (ILO) (1977) as cited in Lee [18]
—
—
75
85
110
110
110
110
110
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sweden (1978) as cited in WHO [19]
—
—
—
—
105
110
115
115
115
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway(1978)ascitedinDamongeotandAndré[7]
—
—
—
—
120 (octave band limit)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACGIH (1979) as cited in Lee [18]
—
80
80
80
105
110
115
115
115
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada (1980) as cited in WHO [19]
80
80
80
80
80
110
110
110
110
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia (1981) as cited in Damongeot and
André [7]
—
75
75
75
75
110
110
110
110
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
USSR (1983) as cited in Tanttari [21]
—
—
80
90
100
105
110
110
110
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
INIRC-IRPA [20] (1984) for occupational exposure
—
—
—
—
75
110
110
110
110
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
INIRC-IRPA [20] (1984) for general public
—
—
—
—
70
100
100
100
100
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Health Canada [22] (1991)
—
—
—
75
75
110
110
110
110
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poland (2002) Leq8h as cited by
Pawlaczyk-Łuszczyńska etal. [24] and
Smagowska & Pawlaczyk-Łuszczyńska [28]
—
80
80
80
90
105
110
110
—
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poland (2002) Lmax as cited by
Pawlaczyk-Łuszczyńska etal. [24] and
Smagowska & Pawlaczyk-Łuszczyńska [28]
—
100
100
100
110
125
130
130
—
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACGIH (2004) 8 h average as cited in Howard etal.
[34]
—
88
89
92
94
—
—
—
—
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ACGIH (2004) ceiling values as cited in
Howard etal. [34]
—
105
105
105
105
140
145
145
145
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
US Department of Defence [25] (2010)
—
80
80
80
105
110
115
115
115
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
EARS Project [26] (2015)
—
75
75
75
77
102
110
110
110
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
arranged in original author publication year (1966–2015). Figure 3 makes clear the 65 dB spread
at 20 kHz that relates to a factor of 3 000 000 range in intensity (and over 1000 in pressure; see the
note on dB references in §2a(i)), for occupational MPLs.
These data are based on the compilations listed by Lawton [45,46], with additions. Most of the
authors specify levels to the nearest 5 dB, and the vertical axis in figure 3 is therefore quantified in
 46
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table2. Thep-valuescalculatedtothreesignificantfiguresfromthedataofMaccàetal.[110]usingcohortsizesof24and56for
the numbers ofultrasound-exposed and industrialnoise-exposed subjects. Entrieswith p-valuesbelow 0.05 are showninbold
to indicate that they satisfy the first criterion for significance, but they are bracketed if they fail to satisfy the second criterion
of having at least five instances of each occurrence in the observations. The number of occurrences in shown in { } after each
occurrence for which the p-value is less than 5%.
subjects exposed to
symptom
ultrasound
industrial noise
headache
0.0628
0.232
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
asthenia
0.000131{8}
0.518
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vertigo
0.000175{6}
0.652
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
tingling in limbs
0.000807 {7}
—
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
sleep disorders
0.0625
0.115
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
tinnitus
0.318
0.00366 {18}
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
nausea
0.592
0.476
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
stomach pain
0.984
0.0876
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vomiting
(0.0394) {1}
0.178
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
sensation of fullness
0.667
0.153
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
hypoacusia
(0.0496) {3}
0.000021{14}
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
uncertain gait
0.529
0.544
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
this way (the popular 110 dB re 20 µPa band being expanded to accommodate all the occupants).
The exceptions are the EARS Project 20 and 25 kHz values (77 and 102 dB re 20 µPa, respectively)
[26], and the ‘American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (2004)’ [23] for 8
h average (building on their earlier 1989 guidelines [33]). The ACGIH (2004) [23] 8 h average
specifies 88, 89, 92 and 94 dB re 20 µPa for the third-octave bands having centre frequencies of 10,
12.5, 16 and 20 kHz, perhaps an unrealistically fine distinction given that much of the acoustics
industry works to a measurement tolerance of around 3 dB (see section 2a(i)).
Polish researchers [24,28] report that Poland (2002) separated out the maximum allowable SPL
(Lmax) from the 8 h third-octave limit (Leq8h) and, furthermore, reduced the allowable limits on
Leq8h by 3 dB for pregnant women and 5 dB for young people (though Poland’s allowable Lmax is
the same for all types of person). French researchers [29] have also discussed reduced levels for
pregnant women, although France has no national guidelines (see below).
Note that one of the reviews [27] has erroneous values attributed to USA-Air Force (1977)
in an otherwise very useful paper. This error occurred because of an error in [27] when citing
[19], and thereby attributing the USSR (1975) values to the USAF (1976). The same paper also
contains values for Bulgaria (1979) that resemble the levels for USSR (1975) but the author could
not identify the original source and so the Bulgaria (1979) levels are not included in figure 3.
Another otherwise excellent paper [28] also has incorrect levels for the guidelines issued by
Australia (1981). That paper [28] also reports levels for France (1985) that are similar to the
levels for Australia (1981) (as cited in Damongeot & André [7]). However, France has never, as
a country, had recommended levels for either infrasound or ultrasound, but it has produced
reports from research institutions [7,29], some of which may have been incorrectly interpreted
as national maximum levels by the authors of reference [28]. Both papers [27,28] report levels for
Sweden (1992) that are identical to the levels reported in table 1 for Sweden (1978) as cited in
WHO [19], except that they report a level of 115 dB re 20 µPa for the third-octave band centred
on 25 kHz (the author has not been able to track down the source of Sweden (1992)). Both
 47
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
papers [27,28] contain values for USSR (1989) that resemble the USSR (1983) guidelines cited by
Tanttari [21]. Without a rigorous underpinning science base, taking into account the variations in
sensitivities seen across the exposed population and without excluding relevant adverse effects,
no guidelines for either the deliberate, incidental or accidental exposure of humans to ultrasound
can be accepted without question. All such emissions are encompassed by the FDA’s term
’electronic product radiation’ [197,198] for electronic sources. The relevant British Standard [199]
specifies that:
‘If equipment not intended to emit ultrasound produces ultrasound at a level which
could cause a hazard, the manufacturer shall measure the maximum ultrasonic pressure
level which the equipment can produce. When measured both at the operator’s normal
position and at 1 m from the position on the equipment with the highest pressure level,
the ultrasonic pressure shall not exceed 110 dB above the reference value of 20 µPa, for
frequencies between 20 kHz and 100 kHz. Conformity is checked by measuring the pressure
under reference test conditions.
If equipment intended to emit ultrasound produces ultrasonic pressure at a level which
could cause a hazard, the manufacturer shall measure the maximum ultrasonic pressure
level which the equipment can produce. The sound pressure shall be measured at the
operator’s normal position and at 1 m from the position on the equipment with the
highest pressure level both outside and inside the useful beam. Outside the useful beam
the ultrasonic pressure shall not exceed 110 dB above the reference value of 20 µPa,
for frequencies between 20 kHz and 100 kHz. If inside the useful beam the ultrasonic
pressure exceeds 110 dB for frequencies between 20 kHz and 100 kHz, the equipment
shall be marked with symbol 14 of table 1 and the following information shall be in the
documentation: a) the dimensions of the useful beam; the area of the useful beam in which
the pressure exceeds 110 dB; the maximum sound pressure value inside the beam area.
Conformity is checked by inspection and measurement of the pressure under reference test
conditions.’
The use of a labelling solution to deal with radiation that has been identified as being potentially
hazardous may need revisiting given the sparse research base.
Appendix C. Statistics for figure 7
Tables 4 and 7 of Maccà et al. [110], from which the data of figure 7 are obtained, contain
typographical errors in the number of subjects in the study. Estimations of the true values were
inferred for this appendix by assuming that the number of subjects (n) takes a positive integer
value, then multiplying the percentages given in the relevant table by n/100 to give a value m,
the number of people exhibiting each of the symptoms if this value of n were correct. Given that
m should be an integer, the ‘error’ (e) is defined as the difference between m and the rounded
value of m. The sum of the squared errors across all of the data provides a value s, and n was
identified as the lowest positive integer for which s is suitably small. This identified the number
of ultrasound-exposed subjects in table 4 of Maccà et al. [110] to be 24, and the number of noise-
exposed subjects to be 56. These values were confirmed by the authors of the original paper just
before publication (the 24 as described for the whole cohort in §3b(ii), the 56 comprising a subset
of the 113 industrial noise-exposed subjects described in the same section, comprising 20 women
and 36 men). The p-values, as re-calculated using a χ2 test from their data for these corrected
cohort sizes, are shown in table 2.
The p-values scoring less than 0.05 are indicated in bold, but bracketed if the number of
occurrences of each observation (shown in curly brackets {} after each one) is less than 5 (thereby
failing the test of robustness). Using the data tabulated by Maccà et al., the results of table 2
agree with the χ2 findings on statistical significance presented by Maccà et al., except in that here
(in appendix C) ‘tingling in the limbs’ for the ultrasound group is also shown to be significant.
 48
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Appendix D. Example of manufacturer statement
The range of uses that appear to be claimed for airborne ultrasound is very great, and many
would insonify the public without their knowledge. There are now claims for the existence of a
market for products that embed software on mobile devices (e.g. phones) to track, using airborne
ultrasound, which adverts and websites are viewed by the carrier of the mobile device, without
the need for there to be any direct electromagnetic connection between the phone and the platform
hosting the advert. For example, it is claimed that adverts on a PC or TV can be constructed
to emit a coded ultrasonic signal that is detected by the mobile phone that is being carried by
the person watching the advert. The phone then transmits the information back to the company
without the owner of the phone being aware of the monitoring. In simple terms, such monitoring
might indicate whether the user is watching an advert or fast-forwarding through it; or enable the
company to infer user habits and preferences from the various sites visited and adverts watched
on platforms (e.g. internet cafe PCs, hotel TVs etc.) that might otherwise be anonymous. One
manufacturer states:
‘Millions of mobile devices with SilverPush powered SDK [software development kit]
are constantly listening to SilverPush patented audio beacons (ultrasonic) which are
watermarked in Televison ad commercial. A pair is made once a SDK comes in proximity
of audio beacon. The individual ID is mapped back to its audience genome and a
brand-consumer journey has been started’ [200].
Whilst the author cannot find information on physical measurements of the intermittent emission
of ultrasonic signals that such a practice would create, or data on any adverse health effects, the
practice of embedding such signals has raised privacy concerns [201].
The designers of the above technology should in principle have been mindful of the
requirement not to generate adverse effects on the public, though the guidelines for this are
limited (section 3b(ii)) and appear not to have taken into account the ability to generate
’subjective’ adverse effects by energy in any third-octave band higher than the one centred on
20 kHz.
In contrast, other devices are designed to generate such adverse effects. A statement by the
manufacturer on the on safety of the Phasor Pain Field Generator states:
We have selected a sound pressure level and a strength that we feel is safe to use and
liability-free. This means you can use it feeling comfortable it will have a deterring effect
on the intrusion and yet at the same time will not cause injury to the intruder where you
could be liable. You might want to check your local laws, as some states unfortunately
favour the rights of the perpetrator far more than the homeowner or law-abiding citizen.
Even though these products will not cause injury, they could create a situation in a highly
politically correct atmosphere, so it is always good to know your local environment. We can
only warn you of this, and it has not yet happened (knock on wood) [156].
References
1. Acton WI, Carson MB. 1967 Auditory and subjective effects of airborne noise from industrial
ultrasonic sources. Br. J. Ind. Med. 24, 297–304. (doi:10.1136/oem.24.4.297)
2. Skillern CP. 1965 Human response to measured sound pressure levels from ultrasonic
devices. Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 26, 132–136. (doi:10.1080/00028896509342712)
3. Acton WI. 1974 The effects of industrial airborne ultrasound on humans. Ultrasonics 12,
124–128. (doi:10.1016/0041-624X(74)90069-9)
4. Crabtree RB, Forshaw SE. 1977 Exposure to ultrasonic cleaner noise in the Canadian Forces.
DCIEM technical report no. 77X45 (July 1977). Accession no: ADA048115. (http://
oai.dtic.mil/oai/oai?verb=getRecord&metadataPrefix=html&identifier=ADA048115)
5. Herman BA, Powell D. 1981 Airborne ultrasound: measurement and possible adverse effects.
Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Resources, Public Health Service
Publication (Food and Drug Administration) 81-8163, 12 p.
 49
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6. Acton WI. 1983 Exposure to industrial ultrasound: hazards, appraisal and control. J. Soc.
Occup. Med. 33, 107–113. (doi:10.1093/occmed/33.3.107)
7. Damongeot A, André G. 1988 Noise from ultrasonic welding machines: risks and prevention.
Appl. Acoust. 25, 49–66. (doi:10.1016/0003-682X(88)90112-0)
8. Von Gierke HE, Nixon CW. 1992 Damage risk criteria for hearing and human body vibration.
In Noise and vibration control engineering: principles and applications, pp. 598–600. New York,
NY: John Wiley and Sons.
9. uBeam. 2015 A new age of power. http://ubeam.com (last viewed 29 November 2015).
10. Rodríguez Valiente A, Trinidad A, García Berrocal JR, Górriz C, Ramírez Camacho R.
2014 Extended high-frequency (9–20 kHz) audiometry reference thresholds in 645 healthy
subjects. Int. J. Audiol. 53, 531–545. (doi:10.3109/14992027.2014.893375)
11. Leighton TG et al. 2005 Characterisation of measures of reference acoustic cavitation
(COMORAC):
an
experimental
feasibility
trial.
In
Bubble
and
particle
dynamics
in
acoustic fields: modern trends and applications (ed. AA Doinikov), pp. 37–94. Trivandrum,
Kerala: Research Signpost. (see footnote 5). (http://resource.isvr.soton.ac.uk/staff/pubs/
PubPDFs/Pub8039.pdf)
12. Swedish regulations. 2005 Buller—Arbetsmiljöverkets föreskrifter om buller samt allmänna
råd om tillämpningen av föreskrifterna. Swedish Manual AFS 2005:16. See especially
ultrasound limits on pp. 22–23. [in Swedish with title translation: ‘Noise—Work
Environment Authority regulations on noise and general advice on the application of
Regulations’]. (http://www.av.se/dokument/afs/afs2005_16.pdf)
13. Grigor’eva VM. 1966 Effect of ultrasonic vibrations on personnel working with ultrasonic
equipment. Sov. Phys. Acoust. 11, 426–427.
14. Parrack HO. 1966 Effect of air-borne ultrasound on humans. Int. J. Audiol. 5, 294–308.
(doi:10.3109/05384916609074198)
15. Acton WI. 1968 A criterion for the prediction of auditory and subjective effects due
to air-borne noise from ultrasonic sources. Ann. Occup. Hyg. 11, 227–234. (doi:10.1093/
annhyg/11.3.227)
16. Acton WI. 1975 Exposure criteria for industrial ultrasound. Ann. Occup. Hyg. 18, 267–268.
(doi:10.1093/annhyg/18.3.267)
17. Acton WI. 1976 Exposure criteria for industrial ultrasound. Ultrasonics 14, 42. (doi:10.1016/
0041-624X(76)90074-3)
18. Lee HK. 1980 Health hazards of occupational exposure to airborne ultrasound. Occupational
Health Technical Memorandum No. 6; 1980. Health and Welfare Canada, Medical Services
Branch.
19. World Health Organization (WHO). 1982 WHO United Nations Environment Programme,
International Radiation Protection Association (1982). Ultrasound: environmental health criteria 22.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
20. International Non-Ionizing Radiation Committee of the International Radiation Protection
Association. (INIRC-IRPA). 1984 Interim guidelines on the limits of human exposure to
airborne ultrasound. Health Phys. 46, 969–974. (doi:10.1016/0041-624X(76)90074-3)
21. Tanttari J. 1986 Low-frequency ultrasound in the working environment. In Proc. INTER-
NOISE 86, Cambridge, MA, vol. 2, pp. 805–810. Poughkeepsie, NY: Noise Control Foundation.
22. Health Canada. 1991 Guidelines for the safe use of ultrasound: part ii—industrial and
commercial applications safety code 24. EHD-TR-158. Ottawa, Canada: Health Protection
Branch, Environmental Health Directorate, National Health and Welfare.
23. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). 2004 2004 TLVs and
BEIs based on the documentation of the threshold limit values for chemical substances and physical
agents, biological exposure indices. Cincinnati, OH: ACGIH.
24. Pawlaczyk-Łuszczy´
nska M, Dudarewicz A,
´
Sliwi´
nska-Kowalska M. 2007 Theoretical
predictions and actual hearing threshold levels in workers exposed to ultrasonic noise
of impulsive character—a pilot study. Int. J. Occup. Saf. Ergon. 13, 409–418. (doi:10.1080/
10803548.2007.11105098)
25. US Department of Defence. 2010 Department of Defence Instruction number 6055.12,
Hearing Conservation Program.
26. EARS
Project.
2015
Assessment
and
safety
of
non-audible
sound,
EARS
Project
Communiqué, June 2015, 3 pages. (http://www.ears-project.eu/emrp/ears-downloads.
html)
 50
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27. Radosz J. 2012 Methodology issues of ultrasonic noise exposure assessment. Noise Control
Eng. J. 60, 645–654. (doi:10.3397/1.3701038)
28. Smagowska B, Pawlaczyk-Łuszczy´
nska M. 2013 Effects of ultrasonic noise on the
human body—a bibliographic review. Int. J. Occup. Saf. Ergon. 19, 195–202. (doi:10.1080/
10803548.2013.11076978)
29. Chatillon J. 2006 Limites d’exposition aux infrasons et aux ultrasons—étude bibliographiqu.
INRS Hygiène et sécurité du travail—Cahiers de notes documentaires—2e trimestre 2006—203.
[in French, transl. Limits of exposure to infrasound and ultrasound. A bibliographical
study. INRS—Health and Safety—Documentary notebooks—2nd Quarter 2006—203/67].
(http://www.inrs.fr/media.html?refINRS=ND%202250)
30. Davis H, Parrack HO, Eldredge DH. 1949 Hazards of intense sound and ultrasound. Ann.
Otol. Rhinol. Laryngol. 58, 732–738.
31. Schmidt RF (ed.). Fundamentals of sensory physiology, 3rd edn, 208. Berlin, Germany: Springer.
32. American National Standards Institute. 2013 American national standard acoustical terminology.
ANSI S1.1-2013. New York, NY: ANSI.
33. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). 1989 Threshold limit
values and biological exposure indices for 1988–1989. In American Conf. of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 45211-4438.
34. Howard CQ, Hansen CH, Zander AC. 2005 A review of current ultrasound exposure limits.
J. Occup. Health Saf. Aust. N. Z. 21, 253–257.
35. International Standards Organization. 2013 Acoustics—preferred reference values for acoustical
and vibratory levels (2013). Geneva, Switzerland: International Standards Organization.
ISO/DIS 1683:2013.
36. Ainslie MA, Leighton TG. 2015 Sonar equations for planets and moons. In Proc. of the
22nd Int. Cong. on Sound and Vibration. Major challenges in acoustics, noise and vibration
research, Florence, Italy, 12–16 July 2015 (eds MJ Crocker, M Pawelczyk, F Pedrielli,
E Carletti, S Luzzi), p. 1304. (http://iiav.org/archives_icsv_last/2015_icsv22/content/
papers/papers/full_paper_1304_20150330094349943.pdf)
37. Craven NJ, Kerry G. 2007 A good practice guide on the sources and magnitude of uncertainty
arising in the practical measurement of environmental noise. DTI Project: 2.2.1—National
Measurement
System
Programme
for
Acoustical
Metrology.
University
of
Salford
Publishing, Version 1a, May 2007.
38. Manvell D, Aflalo E. 2005 Uncertainties in environmental noise assessments—ISO 1996,
effects of instrument class and residual sound. In Proc. of Forum Acusticum 2005, Budapest,
Hungary, 29 August–2 September 2005 (eds F Augusztinovicz, AB Nagy, Z Hunyadi), p. 217.
Budapest, Hungary: OPAKFI.
39. Radosz J. 2014 Uncertainty due to instrumentation for sound pressure level measurement in
high frequency range. Noise Control Eng. J. 62, 186–195. (doi:10.3397/1/376219)
40. Barrera-Figueroa S, Rasmussen K, Torras-Rosell A, Jacobsen F. 2013 Free-field calibration of
measurement microphones at high frequencies. In Proc. of INTERNOISE 2011, Osaka, Japan,
4–7 September 2011, pp. 1692–1696.
41. Barrera-Figueroa S, Torras-Rosell A, Jacobsen F. 2013 Extending the frequency range
of free field reciprocity calibration of measurement microphones to frequencies up
to 150 kHz. In Proc. of INTERNOISE 2013, Innsbruck, Austria, 15–18 September 2013,
pp. 3898–3906.
42. EARS Project. 2013 EARS project newsletter no. 2 (January 2013), 6 p. (http://www.ears-
project.eu/emrp/ears-downloads.html)
43. National Occupational Health and Safety Commission (NOHSC). 2002 Noise—annual
situation report 2002. Technical report, Commonwealth of Australia, July 2002. (www.nohsc.
gov.au/PDF/Standards/ASR/Noise2002ASR.pdf)
44. Ashihara K. 2007 Hearing thresholds for pure tones above 16 kHz. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 122,
EL52–EL57. (doi:10.1121/1.2761883)
45. Lawton BW. 2001 Damage to human hearing by airborne sound of very high frequency or
ultrasonic frequency. Health and Safety Executive Contract Research Report No. 343/2001.
HSE Books, Sudbury, Canada.
46. Lawton BW. 2013 Exposure limits for airborne sound of very high frequency and ultrasonic
frequency. ISVR Technical Report No. 334, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK,
16 p.
 51
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47. Kurakata K, Ashihara K, Matsushita K, Tamai H, Ihara Y. 2003 Threshold of hearing
in free field for high-frequency tones from 1 to 20 kHz. Acoust. Sci. Tech. 24, 398–399.
(doi:10.1250/ast.24.398)
48. Frings H. 1948 Pest control with sound waves; ultrasonics as a possibility in the future of
rodent and insect control. Pests and their Control 16, 9–11, and 44–46. See https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/23371373_Pest_control_with_sound_waves_ultrasonics_as_a_
possibility_in_the_future_of_rodent_and_insect_control.
49. Knight JJ. 1968 Effects of airborne ultrasound on man. Ultrasonics 6, 39–41. (doi:10.1016/
0041-624X(68)90016-4)
50. Occupational
Health
and
Safety
Administration
(OSHA).
2015
Technical
manual,
section
III:
chapter
5—noise
measurement.
U.S.
Department
of
Labor,
Occupational
Safety and Health Administration. (https://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/otm/new_noise/
index.html#appendixc and https://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/otm/new_noise/appendixc.
pdf) (accessed 18 July 2015).
51. Bundesministerium der Justiz und für Verbraucherschutz. 1982 Dieses Gesetz dient
dazu,
Sicherheit
und
Gesundheitsschutz
der
Beschäftigten
bei
der
Arbeit
durch
Maßnahmen des Arbeitsschutzes zu sichern und zu verbessern. Es gilt in allen
Tätigkeitsbereichen und findet im Rahmen der Vorgaben des Seerechtsübereinkommens
der Vereinten Nationen vom 10. Dezember 1982 (BGBl. 1994 II S. 1799) auch in
der ausschließlichen Wirtschaftszone Anwendung. (http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/
arbschg/ and http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/arbschg/_4.html) [in German].
52. Bundesministerium
der
Justiz
und
für
Verbraucherschutz.
2007
Verordnung
zum
Schutz der Beschäftigten vor Gefährdungen durch Lärm und Vibrationen (Lärm- und
Vibrations
Arbeitsschutzverordnung—LärmVibrationsArbSchV).
(http://www.gesetze-
im-internet.de/bundesrecht/l_rmvibrationsarbschv/gesamt.pdf) [in German].
53. Health and Safety Executive. 2003 Health and safety regulation... a short guide HSC13
(rev1). (http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/hsc13.pdf)
54. International Non-Ionizing Radiation Committee of the International Radiation Protection
Association. (INIRC-IRPA). 1981 Guidelines on limits of human exposure to airborne
acoustic energy having one-third octave bands with mid frequencies from 8 to 50 kHz.
International Radiation Protection Association, International Non-Ionizing Radiation
Committee (IRPA/INIRC).
55. Johnsson LG, Hawkins JE. 1972 Sensory and neural degeneration with aging, as seen
in microdissections of the human inner ear. Ann. Otol. 81, 179–193. (doi:10.1177/
000348947208100203)
56. Green DM, Kidd Jr G, Stevens KN. 1987 High-frequency audiometric assessment of a young
adult population. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 81, 485–494. (doi:10.1121/1.394914)
57. Henry KR, Fast GA. 1984 Ultrahigh-frequency auditory thresholds in young adults:
reliable responses up to 24 kHz with a quasi-free field technique. Audiology 23, 477–489.
(doi:10.3109/00206098409070087)
58. Stelmachowicz PG, Beauchaine KA, Kalberer A, Jesteadt W. 1989 Normative thresholds
in the 8- to 20-kHz range as a function of age. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 86, 1384–1391.
(doi:10.1121/1.398698)
59. Ashihara K, Kurakata K, Mizunami T, Matsushita K. 2006 Hearing threshold for pure tones
above 20 kHz. Acoust. Sci. Tech. 27, 12–19. (doi:10.1250/ast.27.12)
60. Filipo R, de Seta E, Bertoli GA. 1988 High-frequency audiometry in children. Scand. Audiol.
17, 213–216. (doi:10.3109/01050398809070707)
61. Burén M, Solem BS, Laukli E. 1992 Threshold of hearing (0.125–20 kHz) in children and
youngsters. Br. J. Audiol. 26, 23–31. (doi:10.3109/03005369209077868)
62. Herbertz J. 1983 Loudness of airborne ultrasonic noise. In Proc. Ultrasonics International 83,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, July 1983, pp. 226–231.
63. International Standards Organization. 2006 Acoustics—reference zero for the calibration of
audiometric equipment. Part 5: reference equivalent threshold sound pressure levels for pure tones
in the frequency range 8 kHz to 16 kHz. ISO 385-9:2006. Geneva, Switzerland: ISO.
64. International Standards Organization. 2000 Acoustics—statistical distribution of hearing
thresholds as a function of age, 9 p. ISO 7029:2000. Geneva, Switzerland: ISO. (http://
www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=26314)
65. Mix J. 1984 Researchers debunk controlling insects with ultrasonic devices. Pest Control
(February 1984), 25–28.
 52
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66. Jackson WB, McCartney WC, Ashton AD. 1989 Protocol for field tests of ultrasonic devices
for rodent management. In Vertebrate pest control and management materials, 6th Volume, ASTM
STP 1055 (eds KA Fagerstone, RD Curnow), pp. 7–12. Philadelphia, PA: American Society
for Testing and Materials.
67. American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). 2012 2012 TLVs and
BEIs based on the documentation of the Threshold Limit Values for chemical substances and physical
agents, Biological Exposure Indices. Cincinnati, OH: ACGIH.
68. Lenhardt ML. 2008 Airborne ultrasonic standards for hearing protection, 2008. In Proc. of the
9th Int. Congress on Noise as a Public Health Problem (ICBEN), Foxwoods, CT, 2008.
69. Lenhardt ML. 2007 Novel vacuum personal hearing protection device. In Proc. of the Natl
Hearing Conservation Association, Savannah, GA, 18–20 February 2007.
70. Lenhardt ML. 2007 Eyes as fenestrations to the ears; a novel mechanism for high frequency
hearing. Int. Tinnitus J. 13, 3–10.
71. Altmann J. 2001 Acoustic weapons—a prospective assessment. Sci. Glob. Secur. 9, 165–234.
(doi:10.1080/08929880108426495)
72. Allen CH, Frings H, Rudnick I. 1948 Some biological effects of intense high frequency
airborne sound. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 20, 62–65. (doi:10.1121/1.1906349)
73. Frings H, Allen CH, Rudnick I. 1948 The physical effects of high intensity air-borne ultrasonic
waves on animals. J. Cell. Physiol. 31, 339–358. (doi:10.1002/jcp.1030310309)
74. Frings and Senkovits. 1951 Destruction of the pinnae of white mice by high intensity air-
borne sound. J. Cell. Compar. Physiol. 37, 267–281. (doi:10.1002/jcp.1030370208)
75. Pearson JD, Morrell CH, Gordon-Salant S, Brant LJ, Metter EJ, Klein LL, Fozard JL. 1995
Gender differences in a longitudinal study of age-associated hearing loss. J. Acoust. Soc Am.
97, 1196–1205. (doi:10.1121/1.412231)
76. Acton WI, Hill CR. 1977 Hazards of industrial ultrasound. Protection 12, 15–16.
77. Duck FA. 2007 Medical and non-medical protection standards for ultrasound and
infrasound. Progr. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 93, 176–191. (doi:10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2006.07.008)
78. Duck FA. 2008 Hazards, risks and safety of diagnostic ultrasound. Med. Eng. Phys. 30,
1338–1348. (doi:10.1016/j.medengphy.2008.06.002)
79. International
Standards
Organization.
2013
Acoustics—estimation
of
noise-induced
hearing loss. ISO 1999:2013, 23 p. Geneva, Switzerland: ISO. (http://www.iso.org/iso/
catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=45103)
80. International Standards Organization. 2013 Acoustics—preferred reference values for acoustical
and vibratory levels. ISO 2013. ISO/DIS 1683:2013. Geneva, Switzerland: ISO.
81. Rubin GJ, Burns M, Wessely S. 2014 Possible psychological mechanisms for ‘wind
turbine syndrome’. On the windmills of your mind. Noise and Health 16, 116–122.
(doi:10.4103/1463-1741.132099)
82. Pigeonpatrol.
2015
Tubesonic
impact
instruction
manual.
(http://pigeonpatrol.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2014/11/tubesonic_pdf.pdf)
83. Pigeonpatrol.
2015
Ultrasonic
impact
instruction
manual.
(http://pigeonpatrol.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2013/12/ultrasonic_balcony_impact_pdf.pdf)
84. Bird-X. 2015 Ultrasound and good neighbour information. (http://www.bird-x.com/
ultrasound-safety-pages-249.php)
85. Jackson WB. 1980 Ultrasonics protect egg farm. Pest Control (August 1980), 28–38.
86. British
Standards
publications.
2013
Electroacoustics—sound
level
meters—part
1:
specifications BS EN 61672–1:2013, following IEC 61672-1:2002, British Standards 2013.
87. British Standards publications. 1998 Filters for the measurement of audible sound in the
presence of ultrasound BS EN 61012–1998, following IEC 61012-1990, British Standards 1998.
88. American National Standards Institute. 1997 Specification for sound level meters. ANSI S1.4-
1983 (R1997). New York, NY: ANSI.
89. Grace SM, Quaranta E, Shinn-Cunningham BG, Voigt F. 2008 Simulation of the binaural
environmental transfer function for Gerbils using a boundary element method. Acta Acust.
United Acust. 94, 310–320. (doi:10.3813/AAA.918034)
90. Kahana Y, Nelson PA. 2007 Boundary element simulations of the transfer function of human
heads and baffled pinnae using accurate geometric models. J. Sound Vib. 300, 552–579.
(doi:10.1016/j.jsv.2006.06.079)
91. Leighton TG. 2007 What is ultrasound?. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 93, 3–83. (doi:10.1016/
j.pbiomolbio.2006.07.026)
 53
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92. Davis H. 1948 Biological and psychological effects of ultrasonics. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 20,
605–607. (doi:10.1121/1.1906414)
93. MacPherson PA, Thrasher DB. 1959 A ‘near field’ study of jet engine noise. DRML technical
memorandum no. 27-11 (Toronto).
94. Parrack HO. 1966 Effects of air-borne ultrasound on humans. In The 8th Int. Congress of
Audiology, Mexico City, Mexico, November 1966.
95. Pharris C. 1948 Ultrasonic sickness. Am. Ind. Hyg. Q. 9, 57–62. (doi:10.1080/0096820480
9344268)
96. Nixon CW. 1988 A glimpse into history: the origin of hearing conservation was in the Military?
Fort Belvoir, VA: Defense Technical Information Center. Accession no: ADA355531.
97. McIlwain DS, Gates K, Ciliax D. 2008 Heritage of Army audiology and the road
ahead: the Army hearing programme. Am. J. Public Health 98, 2167–2172. (doi:10.2105/
AJPH.2007.128504)
98. Graff KF. 1981 A history of ultrasonics. In Physical acoustics volume XV: principles and methods,
(eds WP Mason, RN Thurston), pp. 2–97, ch. 1. New York, NY: Academic Press.
99. Brown GG. 1967 Airborne ultrasonics and their effects on humans. Canadian Hospital, January
1967, pp. 55–56.
100. Michael PL, Kerlin RL, Bienvenue GR, Prout JH. 1974 An evaluation of industrial acoustic
radiation above 10 kHz. Final report on contract no. HSM-99-72-125. US Department of
Health, Education and Welfare.
101. Allen CH, Frings H, Rudnick I. 1948 Some biological effects of intense high frequency
airborne sound. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 20, 62–65. (doi:10.1121/1.1906349)
102. Gorskhkov SI, Gorbunov ON, Antropov GA. 1966 Biological effect of ultrasound (translated
from Russian). Joint Publ. Res. Serv. 36, 924.
103. Ziff W (ed.). 1948 Flying magazine 43(3) 10. Chicago, IL: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company.
104. Ades HW, Davis H, Eldredge DH, Miles WR, Neff WD. 1953 BENOX report: an exploratory
study of the biological effects of noise. Fort Belvoir, VA: Defense Technical Information
Center. Accession no: AD0024685.
105. Health Protection Agency. 2010 Health effects of exposure to ultrasound and infrasound.
Report of the independent Advisory Group on Non-ionizing Radiation, 196 p.
106. Shoh A. 1975 Industrial applications of ultrasound—a review I. High-power ultrasound.
IEEE Trans. Sonics Ultrason. SU-22, 60–71. (doi:10.1109/T-SU.1975.30780)
107. ´
Sliwi´
nski A. 2013 Assessment of ultrasonic noise hazard in workplaces environment. Arch.
Acoust. 38, 243–252. (doi:10.2478/aoa-2013-0029)
108. Leighton TG. 1994 The acoustic bubble, 640 pages. New York, NY: Academic Press.
109. Crawford AE. 1955 Ultrasonic engineering. London, UK: Butterworth.
110. Maccà I, Scapellato ML, Carrieri M, Maso S, Trevisan A, Bartolucci GB. 2015 High-frequency
hearing thresholds: effects of age, occupational ultrasound and noise exposure. Int. Arch.
Occup. Environ. Health 88, 197–211. (doi:10.1007/s00420-014-0951-8)
111. Grezsik J, Pluta E. 1983 High-frequency hearing risk of operators of industrial ultrasonic
devices. Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health 57, 137–142. (doi:10.1007/BF00381381)
112. Sulkowski WI, Pawlaczyk Luszczynska M. 1994 Evaluation of occupational exposure to
noise from the hearing conservation point of view. Int. J. Occup. Med. Environ. Health 7,
167–175.
113. Silvestri F, Arena G, Predonzani A, Cardini G, Palma G. 2001 Effects of ultrasonic hearing.
G. Ital. Med. Lav. Ergon. 23, 332.
114. Grezsik J, Pluta E. 1986 High-frequency-noise-induced hearing loss: a field study on the role
of intensity level and accumulated noise dose. Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health 57, 127–136.
(doi:10.1007/BF00381380)
115. Grezsik J, Pluta E. 1986 Dynamics of high-frequency hearing loss of operators of industrial
ultrasonic devices. Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health 53, 77–88. (doi:10.1007/BF00406179)
116. Moller P, Grevstad AO, Kristofferson T. 1976 Ultrasonic scaling of maxillary teeth
causing
tinnitus
and
temporary
hearing
shifts.
J.
Clin.
Periodontol.
3,
123–127.
(doi:10.1111/j.1600-051X.1976.tb01858.x)
117. Walmsley AD, Hickson FS, Laird WRE, Williams AR. 1987 Investigation into patients’
hearing following ultrasonic scaling. Br. Dental J. 162, 221–224. (doi:10.1038/sj.bdj.4806085)
118. Coles RAA, Hoare NW. 1985 Noise induced hearing loss and the dentist. Br. Dental J. 159,
209–218. (doi:10.1038/sj.bdj.4805687)
 54
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119. Rahko
AA,
Karma
PH,
Rahko
KT,
Kataja
MJ.
1988
High-frequency
hearing
of
dental
personnel.
Commun.
Dent.
Oral
Epidemiol.
16,
268–270.
(doi:10.1111/j.1600-
0528.1988.tb01771.x)
120. Morrissey E. 2015 Don’t lend me this ear. RDH Mag. 35. (http://www.rdhmag.com/articles/
print/volume-35/issue-02/columns/anecdotal-hygienist/don-t-lend-me-this-ear.html)
121. Bauman N. 2013 Ultrasonic tooth cleaning and tinnitus. Center for Hearing Loss Help.
(http://hearinglosshelp.com/blog/ultrasonic-tooth-cleaning-and-tinnitus/)
122. Trenter SC, Walmsley AD. 2003 Ultrasonic dental scaler: associated hazards. J. Clin.
Periodontol. 30, 95–101. (doi:10.1034/j.1600-051X.2003.00276.x)
123. Radziemski L, Makin IRS. 2016 In vivo demonstration of ultrasound power delivery to charge
implanted medical devices via acute and survival porcine studies. Ultrasonics 64, (9 pages).
(Epub ahead of print 29 July 2015; doi:10.1016/j.ultras.2015.07.012)
124. Constine J. 2015 uBeam declassifies secrets to try to prove wireless power is possible.
TechCrunch blog (posted 7 November 2015). http://techcrunch.com/2015/11/07/wireless-
power-charger/#.v1vbjhj:Ckow (last accessed 19 December 2015).
125. European Union. 2008 Fire detection and fire alarm systems—part 16: voice alarm control
and indicating equipment. EN 54-16:2008.
126. Burwell AK, Baldwin AL. 2006 Do audible and ultrasonic sounds of intensities common in
animal facilities affect the autonomic nervous system of rodents? J. Appl. Anim. Welfare Sci. 9,
179–200. (doi:10.1207/s15327604jaws0903_1)
127. Kirchner WH, Dreller C, Towne WF. 1991 Hearing in honeybees: operant conditioning
and
spontaneous
reactions
to
airborne
sound.
J.
Comp.
Physiol.
A
168,
85–89.
(doi:10.1007/BF00217106)
128. Lehmann A, Busnel RG. 1963 A study of audiogenic seizure. In Acoustic behaviour of animals’,
ch. 10 (ed. RG Busnel), pp. 244–274. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elvesier.
129. Lowrie M, Bessant C, Harvey RJ, Sparkes A, Garosi L. 2015 Audiogenic reflex seizures in
cats. J. Feline Med. Surg. (Epub ahead of print 27 April 2015; doi:10.1177/1098.612X15582080)
130. Whitford P. 2015 Scientific studies show that birds are affected by ultrasound. BIRD-
X commercial material. See http://www.bird-x.com/filebin/pdf/research/Ultrasound_
Whitford-Study_observations.pdf
131. Scalingi AV. 1980 Use of ultrasonics in IPM program for rodent control. Pest Control
(December 1980), 26–28
132. Ballard JB, Gold RE. 1982 Ultrasonics: no effect on cockroach behaviour. Pest Control (June
1982), 24–26
133. Laidlaw G. 1984 Canada has developed guidelines to restrict ultrasonics. Pest Control (March
1984), 32.
134. Bomford M, O’Brien PH. 1990 Sonic deterrents in animal damage control: a review of device
tests and effectiveness. Wildl. Soc. Bull. 18, 411–422.
135. Shumake SA, Kolz AL, Crane KA, Johnson RE. 1982 Variables affecting ultrasound
repellency in Philippine rats. J. Wildl. Manag. 46, 148–155. (doi:10.2307/3808417)
136. Smith CP. 1990 Repelling pest birds by visual, chemical, acoustic and physical stimuli: a
review. In Proc. of the 9th Br. Pest Control Conf., 5–8 April 1990, 10 p. British Pest Control
Association.
137. Federal Trade Commission’s Division of Enforcement. 2001 FTC warns manufacturers and
retailers ultrasonic pest control (published 3 May 2001). See http://www.ftc.gov/opa/
2001/05/fyi0128.htm
138. Culver EH. 1980 Practical utilization of ultrasonic devices in rodent control part I. Pest Control
(September 1980), 14–16
139. Culver EH. 1980 Electromagnetics vs Ultrasonics: a clarification. Pest Control (August 1980),
30–32.
140. Cope A. 2001 Noise nuisance caused by domestic garden ‘ultrasonic’ pest control devices.
Acoust. Bull. (Nov/Dec 2001 issue), 13–21
141. Gold RE, Decker TN, Vance AD. 1984 Acoustical characterization and efficacy evaluation
of ultrasonic pest control devices marketed for control of German cockoraches (Orthoptera:
Blattellidae). J. Econ. Entomol. 77, 1507–1512. (doi:10.1093/jee/77.6.1507)
142. Wisnewski G. 2010 Ultraschall: der horror aus nachbars garten [transl. from German,
Ultrasound: the horror from the neighbour’s garden?]. Kopp Online. http://info.kopp-
verlag.de/hintergruende/deutschland/gerhard-wisnewski/ultraschall-der-horror-aus-nac
hbars-garten-.html (published 20 September 2010; accessed 22 December 2015).
 55
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143. Frida van Til, Stichting KonijnenBelangen 2005 Waarschuwing voor kattenverjagers:
marteling voor mens en dier (17 juli 2015). See http://igo.nl/nieuws/algemeen/artikel/
14842/Waarschuwing-voor-kattenverjagers-marteling-voor-mens-en-di
144. BIRD-X Manufacturer’s instructional material 2015 Ultrasonic pigeon and bird control. See
http://www.pigeoncontrolresourcecentre.org/html/reviews/ultrasonic-pigeon-and-bird-
control.html
145. Schlossmatte. 2015 Tiervertreibergeraete. See http://schlossmatte.ch/siedlung/tiervertrei
bergeraete.htm
146. Bode J. 2015 Protest Tegen Pieptonen. Telegraaf 5 Aug 2015 http://www.pieptonen.nl/ (last
accessed 23 August 2015).
147. Ueda M, Ota A, Takahashi H. 2014 Investigation on high-frequency noise in public space. -We
tried noise abatement measures for displeasure people. In Proc. of the 7th Forum Acusticum,
Krakow, Poland, 7–12 September 2014, paper PJ06_7, 5 p.
148. Ueda M, Ota A, Takahashi H. 2014 Investigation on high-frequency noise in public space.
Internoise 2014, Melbourne Australia, 16–19 November 2014, 7 p.
149. Federal Public Service in Belgium for Health, Food Chain Safety and Environment. 2015
Ultrasonic animal repellers: disturbing or not? http://www.health.belgium.be/eportal/
Environment/19104803_EN?backNode=83&fodnlang=en#.VjXwWrfhDIV
(published
28
September 2015; accessed 22 December 2015).
150. Glorieux C. 2014 Undesirable effects as a result of short-term exposure to an ultrasonic
repellent device. Part I—acoustic measurements. Assignment no. DGS/PB_PP/IVC/13026
from the Federal Public Service in Belgium for Health, Food Chain Safety and Environment
(28 July 2014).
151. AIB-Vinçotte.
2011
Karakterisatie
van
(ultra)
geluidsemissies
van
ultrasone
dierenverdrijvers. Meetverslag, in opdracht van FOD volksgezondheid, voedselketen
en leefmilieu, DG5/RB/ML/11031
152. van Wieringen A. 2014 Undesirable effects as a result of short-term exposure to an ultrasonic
repellent device. Part II—exposure of volunteers. Assignment no. DGS/PB_PP/IVC/13026
from the Federal Public Service in Belgium for Health, Food Chain Safety and Environment
(28 July 2014).
153. Ashihara K, Shogo Kiryu S. 2003 Audibility of components above 22 kHz in a harmonic
complex tone. Acta Acust. United Acust. 89, 540–546.
154. Bennett MB, Blackstock DT. 1975 Parametric array in air. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 57, 562–568.
(doi:10.1121/1.380484)
155. Pompei FJ. 1999 The use of airborne ultrasonics for generating audible sound beams. J. Audio
Eng. Soc. 47, 726–730.
156. Information unlimited Amherst product information and advertising material. 2015
Phasor
pain
field
generator.
See
http://www.amazing1.com/products/phasor-pain-
field-generator-with-remote-control-140db.html and http://www.amazing1.com/content/
download/PCC30_Instructions.pdf
157. Jauchem JR. 2007 High-intensity acoustics for military nonlethal applications: a lack of useful
systems. Mil. Med. 172, 182–189.
158. General Dynamics. 2002 Long range acoustic device (LRAD), product information sheet.
159. Lewer N, Davison N. 2005 Non-lethal technologies—an overview. In Disarmament forum
(issue 1), pp. 36–51. Geneva, Switzerland: UNIDIR.
160. Sella M. 2003 The sound of things to come. New York Times, 23 March 2003.
161. Rodwell R. 1973 Army tests new riot weapon. New Sci. 59, 684.
162. Rodwell R. 1973 ‘Squawk box’ technology. New Sci. 59, 667.
163. Rodwell R. 1973 How dangerous is the Army’s squawk box? New Sci. 60, 730.
164. National Research Council. 2003 An assessment of non-lethal weapons science and
technology,
Committee
for
an
Assessment
of
Non-Lethal
Weapons
Science
and
Technology, National Research Council, p. 31 and 39. (http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?
record_id=10538)
165. Casey-Maslen S. 2010 Non-kinetic-energy weapons termed ‘non-lethal’—a preliminary assessment
under International Humanitarian Law and International Human Rights Law. Geneva Academy
of International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights, 86 pages.
166. Information Unlimited Amherst Product information and advertising material. 2015
Phasor Pain Field Pistol 135 dB. See http://www.amazing1.com/products/phasor-pain-
field-pistol-135db.html and http://www.amazing1.com/content/download/PSP60INS.pdf
 56
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
167. Wilcox SA et al. 2000 High frequency hearing loss correlated with mutations in the GJB2
gene. Hum. Genet. 106, 399–405. (doi:10.1007/s004390000273)
168. Alleyne R. 2006 Plagued by teenagers? You’ll like the sound of this. Daily Telegraph.
(http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2006/02/16/noise16.xml)
169. Stapleton H. 2005 Sound emitting device. UK Patent application GB 2421655B (published 17
January 2007).
170. Wiley TL, Cruickshanks KJ, Nondahl DM, Tweed TS, Klein R, Klein BEK. 1998
Aging and high-frequency hearing sensitivity. J. Speech Lang. Hear. Res. 41, 1061–1072.
(doi:10.1044/jslhr.4105.1061)
171. Child R. 2008 Mosquito is denied official Police approval. Association of Chief Police
Officers, Media release (February 2008).
172. The
Mirror.
2008
Exclusive:
Fury
as
tops
cops
refuse
to
back
‘discriminatory’
anti-yob mosquito gadget. See http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/exclusive-fury-
as-tops-cops-refuse-294088 (19 February 2008).
173. Byrne J. 2015 ‘Vile piece of equipment’ that targets loitering youths will not be used. The
Chronicle, 15 January 2015. (www.chronicleseries.co.uk)
174. Vitello P. 2006 A ring tone meant to fall on deaf ears’. The New York Times, June 12, 2006.
175. BBC Bitesize. 2015 http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/science/add_gateway_
pre_2011/radiation/ultrasoundrev2.shtml (accessed 28 June 2015)
176. Pumphrey RJ. 1950 Upper limit of frequency for human hearing. Nature 4222, 571.
(doi:10.1038/166571b0)
177. Bryan ME, Tempest W. 1970 Hearing above 20 kHz. Br. J. Audiol. 4, 67–71. (doi:10.3109/
00381797009075523)
178. Abramovich SJ. 1978 Auditory perception of ultrasound in patients with sensorineural and
conductive hearing loss. J. Laryngol. Otol. 92, 861–867. (doi:10.1017/S0022215100086230)
179. Fujimoto K, Nakagawa S, Tonoike M. 2005 Nonlinear explanation for bone-conducted
ultrasonic hearing. Hear. Res. 204, 210–215. (doi:10.1016/j.heares.2005.02.004)
180. Fujisaka Y-I, Nakagawa S, Tonoike M. 2006 Relationship between detecting pitch via bone-
conducted ultrasound and eigenfrequencies of human head. J. Comput. Acoust. 14, 369–378.
(doi:10.1142/S0218396X06003086)
181. Ito K, Nakagawa S. 2013 Perception mechanisms of bone-conducted ultrasound assessed by
acoustic characteristics in the external auditory meatus. Jpn J. Appl. Phys. 49, 07HF31.
182. Ito K, Nakagawa S. 2010 Bone-conducted ultrasonic hearing assessed by tympanic
membrane vibration in living human beings. Acoust. Sci. Technol. 34, 413–423. (doi:10.1250/
ast.34.413)
183. Ahn T-S, Baek M-J, Lee D. 2013 Experimental measurement of tympanic membrane
response for finite element model validation of a human middle ear. SpringerPlus 2, 527.
(doi:10.1186/2193-1801-2-527)
184. Hemilä S, Nummela S, Reuter T. 1995 What middle ear parameters tell about impedance
matching and high frequency hearing. Hear. Res. 85, 31–44. (doi:10.1016/0378-5955(95)000
31-X)
185. Nagai T. 1995 Innervation of the tympanic membrane. Acta Otorhinolaryngol. Belg. 49,
117–120.
186. Job A, Paucod J-C, O’Beirne GA, Delon-Martin C. 2011 Cortical representation of tympanic
membrane movements due to pressure variation: an fMRI Study. Hum. Brain Mapp. 32,
744–749. (doi:10.1002/hbm.21063)
187. Kierner AC, Mayer RV, Kirschhofer K. 2002 Do the tensor tympani and tensor veli palatini
muscles of man form a functional unit? A histochemical investigation of their putative
connections. Hear. Res. 165, 48–52.
188. Money KE. 1970 Motion sickness. Physiol. Rev. 50, 1–39.
189. Graybiel A. 1970 Susceptibility to acute motion sickness in blind persons. Aerospace Med. 41,
650–653.
190. Sharma K, Aparna. 1997 Prevalence and correlates of susceptibility to motion sickness.
Acta geneticae medicae et gemellologiae: twin research 46, 105–121. (https://www.researchgate.
net/journal/0001-5660_Acta_et_gemellologiae)
191. Reason JT, Brand JJ. 1975 Motion sickness, pp. 83–101. London, UK: Academic Press.
192. Riccio GE, Stoffregen TA. 1991 An ecological theory of motion sickness and postural
instability. Ecol. Psychol. 3, 195–240. (doi:10.1207/s15326969eco0303_2)
 57
rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org Proc. R.Soc. A 472: 20150624
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193. Bos JE. 2011 Nuancing the relationship between motion sickness and postural stability.
Displays 32, 189–193. (doi:10.1016/j.displa.2010.09.005)
194. Smith PE. 1967 Temporary threshold shift produced by exposure to high-frequency noise.
Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 28, 447–51. (doi:10.1080/00028896709342663)
195. G.R.A.S. Selection guide for microphones and preamplifiers, 8 p. (http://www.ni.com/
white-paper/14044/en/) (published 10 October 2012; accessed 22 December 2015).
196. Frank T. 1990 High-frequency hearing thresholds in young adults using a commercially
available audiometer. Ear and Hearing, 450–454.
197. Food Drug Administration. 2015 Summary of the electronic product radiation control
provisions of the federal food, drug, and cosmetic act. Laws and Regulations (Radiation-
Emitting Products). U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (last updated 5 February
2015)
http://www.fda.gov/Radiation-EmittingProducts/ElectronicProductRadiation
ControlProgram/LawsandRegulations/ucm118156.htm (accessed 23 December 2015).
198. Food Drug Administration. 2015 Title 21–Food and Drugs. Volume 8, Chapter I - Subchapter
J - Radiological Health. Part 1003 – Notification of defects or failure to comply. Subpart
A - General Provisions. Sec. 1003.2 Defect in an electronic product. Food and Drug
Administration, Department of Health and Human Services. Code of Federal Regulations
(revised
1
April
2015).
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/
CFRSearch.cfm?FR=1003.2 (accessed 23 December 2015).
199. British Standards Institution. 2010 Safety requirements for electrical equipment for measurement,
control, and laboratory use. Part 1: General requirements. BS EN 61010-1:2010 (the UK
implementation
of
EN
61010-1:2010,
derived
from
IEC
61010-1:2010
incorporating
corrigendum May 2011). London UK.
200. SilverPush
Technology
2015
Audio
beacon
technology.
Manufacturer
web
page
http://www.silverpush.co/#!/audio (last accessed 19 December 2015).
201. Center for Democracy & Technology (2015, Letter to the Federal Trade Commission USA,
https://cdt.org/files/2015/10/10.16.15-CDT-Cross-Device-Comments.pdf.
