 Readiness for Delivering Digital Health at Scale: Lessons From a
Longitudinal Qualitative Evaluation of a National Digital Health
Innovation Program in the United Kingdom
Lennon, Bouamrane et al. 2016
APPENDIX 1: Overview of dallas Communities
1
(a)         i-Focus (iF)
Overview: i-Focus is a community with a focus on interoperability. They also developed prototypes of
both statutory and consumer targeted reassurance services to promote and encourage a more
proactive self-care or self-management approach. A key output of i-focus is the national membership
based digital health interoperability community called DHACA.
Location: National
Partner Organisations: Lead: Industry - Advanced Digital Institute (ADI)
Industry Partners: Microsoft, Healthcare Gateway, KPMG, Tunstall, Tynetec, TheAlloy, The Future
Customer, Canary Care, Lumi Mobile, Sitekit.     NHS: Innov8.   State and Government Services: Health
Design & Technology Institute, CarersUK, 
Services
 
and
Products
Description
AroundMe 
Canary Care
An informal reassurance care platform that uses a range of connected home 
sensor technologies to support older or vulnerable people in their home. 
Learnings from prototype development being leveraged to support the roll 
out of CanaryCare.
AboutMe
An e-learning service for carers developed with Carers UK.
PainSense
Mobile app for promoting self-management of chronic pain. Developed by 
ADI and NHS England leveraging learnings and architectures from dallas.
Self-Care Hub
Online portal acting as digital advisor and front-door to healthcare services for
people with chronic illness. Deployed in Kirklees in 2015.
DHACA
National interoperability membership based community providing a source 
for the learnings from the programme and support to exploitation across the 
sector. 
1
 1 (b)             Living it Up (LiU)
Overview: Living it Up is a digitally enabled community of opportunities (aimed primarily at people
over the age of 50 and people living with long term health conditions) to support better health,
wellbeing and active lifestyles in Scotland. A key activity was co-design in the community and a key
output was a web based portal signposting people to health and wellness services across Scotland.
Location: Scotland
Partner Organisations: NHS - NHS 24, NHS Lothian, NHS Western Isles, NHS Forth Valley, NHS
Grampian, NHS Highland.         Voluntary Sector - Carers Scotland, Alliance Scotland
Industry - O2, Vodafone, Highlands & Islands Enterprise, Atos, Philips, Intersystems, STV, STV Health
Centre, Maverick TV, Ernst & Young, Scottish Enterprise, Illuminadigital Ltd, Intrelate, Sitekit, Looking
Local.              Academia – Glasgow School of Art.  State and Government Services -  Scottish
Government, Kirklees Council, The Highland Council, Argyll & Bute Council, Moray Council, West
Lothian  council,  East  Lothian  Council,  Edinburgh  Council,  Falkirk  Council,  Stirling  Council,
Clackmannanshire Council, Midlothian Council.
Services
 
and
Products
Description
Liu Portal
A web based portal acting as a single access points to the range of services 
offered by LiU (https://portal.livingitup.org.uk/)
Shine
An online profiling service to identify individuals’ skills and expertise along 
with encouraging members to help others to share their own skills and 
"talents" in their communities. (https://shine.livingitup.org.uk/)
Connect
A means for people to remain 'connected' with their friends, family and care-
givers via Skype or Cisco Jabber Client video conferencing (VC) suite. 
(https://portal.livingitup.org.uk/connect) 
Discover
An online portal with access to information on a range of health and social 
care products and services available in local communities. 
(https://shine.livingitup.org.uk/discover/Searching).
Flourish
Suite of interactive tools to support self-management of long term conditions 
('experience guides', NHS resources,  a home monitoring service and a text 
messaging service. (https://flourish.livingitup.org.uk)
Get Active
A service developed in collaboration with Storm Health which aims to 
promote and support healthy activity for targeted individuals. 
2
 1 (c)            More Independent (Mi)
Overview:  More Independent (Mi) is a Liverpool based partnership led by Liverpool (NHS) Clinical
Commissioning Group. Mi aimed to enable citizens take control of their health, well-being and lifestyle.
Key outputs include the role of both lay champions and clinical champions in increasing uptake and use of
digital health and self-management.
Location: Liverpool
Partner Organisations: NHS Liverpool Commissioning Group (CCG), NHS Liverpool Community Health
Trust, Person Shaped Support,  NHS Informatics Merseyside, Riverside (social housing).  Voluntary: Hft
Industry: Sitekit, Philips, Tunstall.
Services and
Products
Description
Mi Awareness
People invited to engage in community events, and join both virtual and physical 
community interest groups.
Mi Health and 
Care Technology
Scaling the deployment of health and care technology across to enable more people 
to live healthier independent lives and give families (inc carers) peace of mind.
www.moreindependent.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/Mi-Telehealth-Report.pdf
Mi Plans
Online tools (i.e. personal health records) to increase people's ability to manage life-
enhancing plans to support self-care.
Mi Retail
An initiative is to improve the visibility and availability of Digital Technologies to local
communities by engaging with the retail sector in Liverpool.  
www.moreindependent.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/Mi-Retail-Report.pdf
Mi LET helpline
A telephone hotline to provide advice on health and wellbeing technologies and 
services. 
Mi Champions
Active volunteer citizens who work in local areas to promote and advise people of 
the telehealth and telecare services available to them. 
www.moreindependent.co.uk/news/mi-community-champions/
Mi Digital 
Inclusion
Initiative to reduce digital exclusion by creating digital hubs in areas of low digital 
access.
www.publictechnology.net/articles/features/delivering-health-care-digitally-
excluded
A (real and virtual) Demonstrator Smart House equipped with a wide variety of 
3
 Mi Smart House
technology to make life easier. 
www.moreindependent.co.uk/news/come-and-visit-the-mi-smarthouse/
Mi ‘House of 
Memories’ App 
App designed to support people living with dementia and their families. 
www.moreindependent.co.uk/news/mi-house-of-memories/
Mi Health 
Innovation
Supporting local business to innovate, opening up new forms of finance to support 
growth, up-skilling the workforce and digitally including citizens.
1 (d)           Year Zero (YZ)
Overview: Year Zero is an industry led consortia bringing together expertise in healthcare, design, media
and technology to develop user-centred tools that will deliver new digital healthcare services and enable
citizens to take greater control of their own health and wellbeing. A central objective was to test the
utility of new services designed around personal health records and digital interactions between citizens
and service providers. 
Location: West Midlands, Liverpool, Grampian and London
Partner Organisations: Media Industry Lead: Digital Life Sciences.
NHS and Social Care: Locally Healthy (formerly  NHS Local), Liverpool Community Health Trust, South
Warwickshire Foundation Trust, Moray Community Health and Social Care Partnership, The Rotherham
Foundation Trust, the Vitality Partnership. 
Industry: Sitekit, Kameleon, Maverick, Microsoft. 
Services
 
and
Products
Description
eRedBook (eRB)
A digital version of the printed Redbook (a Personal Child Health Record (PCHR) that 
logs a child's healthcare information such as developmental growth and milestones, 
vaccinations, and other information from birth. http://www.eredbook.org.uk/
Health United 
Birmingham HuB
The roll-out of remote live consultation and extending out of hours services with the 
Vitality Partnership in Birmingham. www.digitallifesciences.co.uk/digital-life-
sciences-helps-improve-patient-access-to-gps/
A Better Plan 
(ABP)
A care planning application that is designed to help healthcare professionals and 
patients to collaboratively consider and set a range of health, wellbeing and personal
4
 Vitality Plan
goals. https://www.abetterplan.co.uk/
Good Neighbours
A social networking application that allows users to create circles of support with 
family members, friends and carers and to share and allocate tasks and diaries 
within an online social support network. www.mygoodneighbours.co.uk/
No Delays
An application that allows GPs to prescribe a digital postcard (a personalised package
of short videos that explains their condition and informs them about available local 
services) by email to the patient. www.nodelays.co.uk
uMotif
A mobile and web application designed to support self-management for patients 
with Type 1 and 2 diabetes. https://www.umotif.com/
EDaybook
A prototype application for staff (Carers) working in Domiciliary Care to support 
management of care plans and to facilitate improved communication between 
Carers. 
http://www.digitallifesciences.co.uk/ive-got-better-plan/
5
