 Article
Peripheral Elevation of a Klotho Fragment Enhances
Brain Function and Resilience in Young, Aging, and
a-Synuclein Transgenic Mice
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d A klotho fragment (aKL-F) enhances cognition in young and
aging mice
d aKL-F counters deficits in a-synuclein mice without altering
pathogenic protein levels
d aKL-F induces GluN2B cleavage and increases NMDAR-
dependent synaptic plasticity
d Selective NMDAR blockade of GluN2B subunits abolishes
acute aKL-F effects
Authors
Julio Leon, Arturo J. Moreno,
Bayardo I. Garay, Robert J. Chalkley,
Alma L. Burlingame, Dan Wang,
Dena B. Dubal
Correspondence
dena.dubal@ucsf.edu
In Brief
Klotho is a longevity factor associated
with cognitive enhancement when
genetically and widely overexpressed
over the lifetime of mice. Leon et al. show
that peripheral delivery of a klotho
fragment, aKL-F, acutely enhances
cognition and neural resilience in young,
aging, and disease model mice,
establishing its therapeutic relevance and
dissecting its underlying mechanisms.
Leon et al., 2017, Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371
August 8, 2017 ª 2017 The Author(s).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.024
 Cell Reports
Article
Peripheral Elevation of a Klotho Fragment
Enhances Brain Function and Resilience
in Young, Aging, and a-Synuclein Transgenic Mice
Julio Leon,1 Arturo J. Moreno,1 Bayardo I. Garay,1 Robert J. Chalkley,2 Alma L. Burlingame,2 Dan Wang,1
and Dena B. Dubal1,3,4,*
1Department of Neurology, Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, and Weill Institute for Neurosciences
2Department of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Chemistry
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
3Senior author
4Lead Contact
*Correspondence: dena.dubal@ucsf.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.024
SUMMARY
Cognitive dysfunction and decreased mobility from
aging and neurodegenerative conditions, such as
Parkinson andAlzheimer diseases, aremajor biomed-
ical challenges in need of more effective therapies.
Increasing brain resilience may represent a new treat-
ment strategy. Klotho, a longevity factor, enhances
cognition when genetically and broadly overex-
pressed in its full, wild-type form over the mouse life-
span. Whether acute klotho treatment can rapidly
enhance cognitive and motor functions or induce re-
silience is a gap in our knowledge of its therapeutic
potential. Here, we show that an a-klotho protein frag-
ment (aKL-F), administered peripherally, surprisingly
induced cognitive enhancement and neural resilience
despite impermeability to the blood-brain barrier
in young, aging, and transgenic a-synuclein mice.
aKL-F treatment induced cleavage of the NMDAR
subunit GluN2B and also enhanced NMDAR-depen-
dent synaptic plasticity. GluN2B blockade abolished
aKL-F-mediated effects. Peripheral aKL-F treatment
is sufficient to induce neural enhancement and resil-
ience in mice and may prove therapeutic in humans.
INTRODUCTION
Cognitive dysfunction and decreased mobility from aging and
age-related neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer
disease (AD) and Parkinson disease (PD) are major biomedical
challenges. Because more effective treatments are needed,
and clinical trials targeting putative pathogenic proteins have
failed, it is critical to develop alternate or complimentary thera-
peutic strategies. In light of this urgent medical need for our
rapidly aging populations, delaying aging itself or increasing
the function and resilience of the brain (Bennett, 2017; McEwen
and Morrison, 2013) may represent new treatment strategies.
a-Klotho (klotho) is a pleiotropic protein that circulates as a
hormone following cleavage from its transmembrane form. It
regulates insulin (Kurosu et al., 2005), Wnt (Liu et al., 2007), and
fibroblast growth factor (FGF) (Urakawa et al., 2006) signaling.
Overexpression of klotho extends life in organisms (Ch^
ateau
et al., 2010; Kurosu et al., 2005), whereas lowering klotho
shortens it (Kuro-o et al., 1997). Elevated klotho levels in humans,
resulting from genetic variation (Arking et al., 2002; Dubal et al.,
2014; Yokoyama et al., 2017), also associate with lifespan (Arking
et al., 2002; Invidia et al., 2010) in some populations. In model
organisms and humans, levels of klotho decline with age (Duce
et al., 2008; Semba et al., 2011), chronic stress (Prather et al.,
2015), cognitive aging (Shardell et al., 2016), neurodegenerative
disease (Semba et al., 2014), and models of neurodegenerative
disease (Dubal et al., 2015; Masso
´ et al., 2015).
We previously discovered that life-long, genetic overexpres-
sion of klotho causally enhances normal cognition and neural
resilience independent of age and when broadly expressed in
the mouse body and brain (Dubal et al., 2014, 2015). It does
so, at least in part, by directly or indirectly optimizing synaptic
functions through NMDA receptor (NMDAR)-dependent mecha-
nisms (Dubal et al., 2014, 2015). Importantly, genetic, lifelong,
and widespread klotho elevation also contributes to neural
resilience in a human amyloid precursor protein (hAPP) model
of neurodegenerative disease related to AD (Dubal et al.,
2015); that is, it effectively counters cognitive and synaptic
deficits despite high levels of pathogenic proteins, including
Ab, tau, and phospho-tau.
The relevance of klotho to brain health in humans is supported
by the findings that elevated serum klotho, related to KLOTHO
variation, are associated with better measures, including cogni-
tion (Dubal et al., 2014; Yokoyama et al., 2015), structural reserve
of the prefrontal cortex in normal aging (Yokoyama et al., 2015),
connectivity between cortical regions (Yokoyama et al., 2017),
and physical performance in aging (Shardell et al., 2015), and
that diminished klotho levels are associated with worse brain
measures (Prather et al., 2015; Yokoyama et al., 2015, 2017).
Furthermore, KLOTHO variation is associated with less cognitive
decline and better cortical structure in another large cohort (de
Vries et al., 2017), although positive genetic associations were
1360
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017 ª 2017 The Author(s).
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 not observed in other populations at particularly advanced ages
(Almeida et al., 2017; Mengel-From et al., 2016).
Multiple proteins contribute to the pathogenesis of neurode-
generative diseases. a-Synuclein, a membrane protein whose
overexpression inhibits mechanisms of exocytosis (Logan
et al., 2017), is central to PD and other parkinsonian disorders
and contributes to multi-etiology dementias such as AD. Trans-
genic mice that overexpress wild-type human a-synuclein
(hSYN) simulate key aspects of neurodegenerative disease,
including cognitive and motor dysfunction (Fleming et al.,
2004; Hatami and Chesselet, 2015). Therapeutic strategies that
induce resilience against common pathogenic proteins such as
a-synuclein involved in multiple diseases with broad phenotypes
(Montine et al., 2014) could positively affect the human condition.
Whether acute klotho elevation represents a strategy that can
rapidly enhance cognition, motor functions, and/or induce brain
resilience is a gap in our knowledge of its therapeutic potential.
Here we show that aKL-F, a fragment of the a-klotho protein
similar to its secreted form, can acutely improve cognitive and
motor functions following peripheral administration. It does so
despite apparent impermeability to the blood-brain barrier in
young, aging, and hSYN transgenic mice. Further investigation
of aKL-F-mediated molecular mechanisms revealed activation
ofglutamatergicsignaling and enhancementofsynapticplasticity.
RESULTS
aKL-F Is a Recombinant Modified Fragment of Mouse
Klotho that Does Not Penetrate into the Brain or Alter
Endogenous Hippocampal Klotho Levels
We first characterized the recombinant, mouse aKL-F fragment
(Kurosu et al., 2005) by mass spectrometry. aKL-F is a protein
representing a truncated form of the endogenous a-klotho pro-
tein but lacking its transmembrane, N-terminal signal peptide,
and intracellular domains (Figure 1A). This truncated peptide
(954 amino acids [aa]) includes the KL-1 and KL-2 subdomains
and a C-terminal 6-His tag sequence. It resembles the extracel-
lular portion of a-klotho (or klotho) endogenously shed from the
membrane by ADAM 10 and 17 (Bloch et al., 2009; Chen et al.,
2007), leading to a protein of approximately 959 aa that includes
some of the transmembrane domain (Chen et al., 2015) and
circulates in mouse serum, human serum, and human cerebral
spinal fluid (CSF) (Imura et al., 2004).
We assessed for post-translational modifications (PTMs)
of aKL-F and detected six glycosylation sites (Figure 1B). The
identified N- and O-glycosylation sites map to the KL1 and
KL2 domains and could potentially affect many facets of the pro-
tein, including recognition, stability, and solubility. No regulatory
PTMs, such as phosphorylation, were detected. Other physical
A
C
D
E
B
Figure 1. aKL-F Is a Recombinant Post-translationally Modified Fragment of Klotho, and Its Peripheral Administration Does Not Show BBB
Crossing or Alteration of Endogenous Hippocampal Klotho Levels
(A) Amino acid sequence of the endogenous a-klotho protein (top, aa 1–1014) and the recombinant a-klotho fragment (aKL-F, bottom, aa 35–982) followed by a
His tag. N-T, N terminus; TR, transmembrane region; IC, intracellular domain.
(B) Locations of O-glycosylation and N-glycosylation sites of the recombinant protein made in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells.
(C) aKL-F was not observed to cross into the brain 4 hr following i.p. injection of Veh or aKL-F (100 mg/kg). Western blot shows immunoprecipitation against
His-tagged aKL-F (His-IP) in kidney (detected) and brain (not detected) lysates. aKL-F was added to the veh-treated lysates as a positive control for detection of
His-tagged protein (His-Total).
(D) Representative western blot showing Klotho and GAPDH levels in homogenized whole hippocampus 4–5 hr following Veh or aKL-F (i.p., 10 mg/kg) treatment
(n = 12/group; male; age, 4 months). Images were captured from the same gel.
(E) Quantitation of endogenous brain klotho levels showing no differences between Veh- and aKL-F-treated mice. NTG levels are arbitrarily defined as 1.0.
Data are mean ± SEM.
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
1361
 properties of the protein, such as its aggregation, higher-form
conformations, and their importance to cognition-related func-
tions, remain to be determined.
To probe whether peripherally administered aKL-F penetrates
the brain, we injected a high dose (10–40 times the doses used in
our studies) of the His tag protein (100 mg/kg, intraperitoneally
[i.p.]). We assessed for its presence in the kidney and brain
4 hr later, within its estimated 7.5-hr half-life (Hu et al., 2016),
by immunoprecipitation of the His tag (Figure 1C). The protein
was observed in the kidney but not in the brain. Consistent
with previous findings using autoradiographic methods (Hu
et al., 2016), our data suggest that peripheral treatment with
aKL-F does not cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
Because the endogenous klotho protein is also produced
and circulates within the BBB, we wondered whether peripheral
aKL-F treatment causes shifts in brain klotho levels. Peripheral
aKL-F did not alter the levels of endogenous klotho in the hippo-
campus (Figures 1D and 1E). These data suggest that the central
activity of peripherally administered aKL-F probably engages
signals transduced from the periphery to the CNS.
A Fragment of Klotho, aKL-F, Delivered Peripherally,
Acutely Enhances Cognition in Young Mice
Whether klotho, or some form of it, can acutely enhance
cognition or induce resilience is a gap in our knowledge of its bio-
logic functions and therapeutic potential. To test the therapeutic
potential of mouse aKL-F, we administered it peripherally (i.p.) in
young mice.
We first tested spatial learning and memory in the Morris
water maze. Young mice were treated with vehicle (Veh) or
aKL-F (10 mg/kg, i.p.) daily prior to hidden platform training or a
probe trial (Figure 2A). Remarkably, aKL-F treatment enhanced
learning, as measured by decreased distance traveled to find
the hidden platform (Figure 2B). aKL-F also enhanced spatial
memory retention, as measured by increased time spent in the
target quadrant (Figure 2C) and at the target site (Figure 2D) in
the probe trial following hidden training. Mice treated with Veh
or aKL-F showed no differences in their swim speeds (Figure 2E)
or ability to find the target platform, identified by a visual cue
(Figure 2F). Thus, similar to genetic, lifelong, and widespread
overexpression of full-length mouse klotho (Dubal et al., 2014,
2015), peripheral delivery of mouse aKL-F was sufficient to
enhance learning and memory, but acutely.
We then tested whether aKL-F improves another domain of
cognition, working memory, in the small Y-maze (Figures 2H
and 2I). In the same cohort and in several (over ten) independent,
naive cohorts, young mice were treated with vehicle or aKL-F
(10 mg/kg, i.p.) 4 hr prior to exploration in the small Y-maze.
aKL-F acutely enhanced working memory, as measured by
increased spontaneous alternations in the maze. aKL-F induced
a threshold-dependent dose response on cognition, with the
lowest effective dose detected at 2.5 mg/kg (Figure S1A). In addi-
tion, aKL-F-mediated cognitive enhancement combined with
cognitive training persisted for at least 2 weeks after the last
treatment (Figure S1B), suggesting organizational, longer-last-
ing, and beneficial effects on the synapse and brain. Collectively,
these data show that peripheral administration of aKL-F is suffi-
cient to induce enhancement of a normal brain.
Of note, in our experiments, we did not detect cognitive
enhancement with human aKL-F (87% homology to mouse)
administration in mice following the same acute treatment para-
digms in the small Y-maze or water maze (data not shown). This
suggests species specificity of the biologic action and addition-
ally shows that a protein of the same size, but with a different
sequence, did not arbitrarily enhance cognition.
aKL-F Enhances Cognition in the Aging Brain
Because aging is the primary risk factor for cognitive impairment,
we wondered whether aKL-F could enhance cognition in the ag-
ing brain. To test this, aging mice (18 months) were treated once
with Veh or aKL-F (10 mg/kg, i.p.) 1 day prior to training in the two-
trial Y-maze (Figure 3A). This task probes both spatial and work-
ing memory by measuring exploration time in a novel compared
with a familiar arm of the maze following context training (Dellu
et al., 1992). During testing, Veh-treated, aged mice showed
no preference for the novel arm. aKL-F induced preference for
the novel arm, indicating that it enhanced spatial and working
memory in aged mice (Figure 3B). Thus, a single peripheral injec-
tion of aKL-F boosted cognition in the aging brain.
aKL-F Acutely Counters Motor and Cognitive Deficits in
Transgenic hSYN Mice, an a-Synuclein Model of
Neurodegenerative Disease
Next, we probed whether aKL-F can acutely counter neuro-
degenerative disease-related deficits and pathologies in mice
that overexpress wild-type hSYN mice using motor and cogni-
tive tasks (Figure 4A). We chose this model because the majority
of dementias related to both PD and AD are multi-etiology,
a-synuclein is commonly shared among them, and this model
enabled testing of motor deficits. hSYN mice (Rockenstein
et al., 2002) accumulate a-synuclein in neurons and synapses
throughout the brain (Rockenstein et al., 2002) and exhibit motor
and cognitive deficits (Fleming et al., 2004, 2006; Masliah et al.,
2000; Morris et al., 2011).
We first tested whether aKL-F counters motor deficits in hSYN
mice. Motor dysfunction is a predominant deficit in hSYN mice
and linked with clinical manifestations of a-synuclein toxicity in
humans. Building on our findings that a lower dose of aKL-F
enhanced function in the normal brain (Figure S1A), we injected
Veh and a lower dose of aKL-F (2.5 mg/kg instead of 10 mg/kg,
i.p.) daily for 2 days prior to rotarod testing in hSYN mice and
nontransgenic (NTG) littermate controls (Figure 4A). As expected
(Morris et al., 2011), all hSYN mice showed a motor deficit in
training and testing, as measured by decreased time to fall off
a fixed (Figure 4B) and accelerating (Figure 4C) rod. aKL-F
increased motor learning in hSYN mice during training and
mean motor performance during testing (Figures 4B and 4C).
Thus, aKL-F improved motor learning and deficits, extending
its therapeutic functions to another functional domain.
We then tested whether aKL-F counters cognitive deficits
in hSYN mice. Because hSYN mice show motor deficits but
move around normally, we used the two-trial Y-maze, which
measures spatial and working cognition based on exploration
without heavy reliance on motor strength. After rotarod testing,
mice were injected with Veh and aKL-F (2.5 mg/kg, i.p.) daily
for an additional 2 days (Figure 4A). Veh-treated hSYN mice
1362
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
 showed cognitive deficits compared with NTG controls, as
measured by decreased preference for the novel arm (Figure 4D).
aKL-F improved novel arm preference (by main effect) in NTG
and hSYN mice (Figure 4D). aKL-F countered cognitive deficits
in hSYN mice (Figure 4D) despite equivalent levels of speed
and movement among all experimental groups during training
(data not shown). Thus, in addition to enhancing cognition in
the normal and aging brain, peripheral treatment with aKL-F
acutely improved cognitive deficits in an hSYN model.
aKL-F Induces Neural Resilience in hSYN Mice without
Altering Pathogenic Protein Species Related to
Neurodegenerative Disease
Because deficits in hSYN mice depend on a-synuclein expres-
sion, we assessed whether aKL-F reduces levels of the patho-
genic protein. Acute treatment with aKL-F, with the same exper-
imental paradigm that countered neural deficits, did not alter
the steady-state levels of a-synuclein or its phosphorylated
form (Figures 4E–4G) in the hippocampus or cortex. In addition,
aKL-F did not alter the levels of potential co-pathogens of a-syn-
uclein, such as tau or phospho-tau (Haggerty et al., 2011; Wills
et al., 2010) in hSYN mice (Figures 4E, 4H, and 4I). Thus, acute
and peripheral treatment with aKL-F induced neural resilience
in hSYN mice, as defined by countering neural functions without
altering the levels of pathogenic protein species.
aKL-F Acutely Increases GluN2B Cleavage without
Altering Synaptic GluN2B Levels and Enriches
Glutamate Receptor Signaling
To begin to explore the mechanisms underlying aKL-F-mediated
cognitive enhancement and neural resilience, we focused sub-
sequent studies on normal, young mice because effects of
A
C
F
G
H
I
D
E
B
Figure
2. aKL-F,
Delivered
Peripherally,
Acutely Enhances Cognition in Young Mice
(A) Diagram of the experimental paradigm of Veh or
aKL-F injection (i.p., 10 mg/kg) followed by spatial
and working memory testing in the Morris water
maze. Mice received daily treatment for 5 days, 16
or 4 hr prior to training and testing (n = 11–18/
group; sex-balanced; age, 4 months).
(B) Spatial learning curves (platform hidden) in the
water maze. Data represent the daily average of
distance traveled to the platform. aKL-F decreased
the distance, indicating enhanced learning. Rank-
sum test, aKL-F effect days 2–4, p < 0.05.
(C) Probe trial with the platform removed 24 hr after
completion of hidden training. aKL-F increased the
percentage of time spent in the target quadrant,
indicating enhanced recall of spatial memory.
(D) Probe trial at 24 hr. aKL-F increased the dura-
tion of time spent at target, indicating enhanced
recall of spatial memory.
(E) Velocity in the water maze did not differ between
mice treated with Veh or aKL-F.
(F) The distance traveled to find a cued, visible
platform in the water maze did not differ between
mice treated with Veh or aKL-F.
(G–I) Diagram of the experimental paradigm of
Veh or aKL-F injection (G, i.p., 10 mg/kg), followed
by working memory testing in the small Y-maze
(H and I). Mice (age, 4 months) received treatment
4 hr prior to testing.
(H) Percentages of alternations among arms during
exploration of the Y-maze. aKL-F increased alter-
nations, indicating enhanced working memory. In
this cohort, mice (males, n = 12–13/group) were
exposed to Veh or aKL-F 2 days before testing.
(I) Percentages of alternations among arms during
exploration of the Y-maze. In a replicate indepen-
dent cohort, aKL-F increased working memory.
Mice (males, n = 9/group) were naive to previous
treatments or testing.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 (t test). Data are mean ± SEM.
See also Figure S1.
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
1363
 aKL-F were discovered in this age group, and these mice were
more available. We assessed the GluN2B subunit of NMDARs
because transgenic overexpression of klotho increases cogni-
tion through GluN2B-dependent functions (Dubal et al., 2014),
transgenic elevation of GluN2B enhances cognition in mice
and rats (Cao et al., 2007; Tang et al., 1999; Wang et al., 2009),
and dysfunction of GluN2B contributes to cognitive decline
in aging and neurodegenerative diseases (Ittner et al., 2010; Pig-
gott et al., 1992; Sze et al., 2001; Zhao et al., 2009). We first as-
sessed, in parallel with the effects of lifelong, transgenic klotho
overexpression (Dubal et al., 2014, 2015), whether aKL-F treat-
ment acutely increases the levels of GluN2B in synaptic fractions
of the hippocampus. Synaptic levels of GluN2B in the hippocam-
pus did not differ between Veh- and aKL-F-treated mice (Figures
5A–5C) despite aKL-F-mediated cognitive enhancement in
mice. Thus, acute effects of aKL-F on cognition did not induce
or require the synaptic increase of GluN2B levels observed in
transgenic, klotho-overexpressing mice.
Synaptic proteins are dynamic structures with activity-depen-
dent modification and turnover (Alvarez-Castelao and Schuman,
2015). Following stimulation, the GluN2B subunit of NMDARs
can undergo cleavage by calpain, producing a low-molecular-
weight (LMW) form of the subunit (�115 kDa) (Dong et al.,
2004, 2006; Simpkins et al., 2003). We noticed that, in whole
hippocampal homogenates, an LMW form of the GluN2B protein
not detected in synaptic, post-synaptic density (PSD)-enriched
fractions, differed between experimental groups upon western
blotting (Figures 6A–6E). aKL-F treatment elevated LMW
GluN2B by approximately 4 hr following treatment (Figures 6A
and 6B), and this correlated with better cognitive ability in the
small Y-maze (Figure 6C). aKL-F increased LMW GluN2B in
multiple replicate cohorts (Figure 6D; data not shown) and
tended to do so in the absence of a cognitive task following
several days of treatment (albeit less intensely) (Figure 6E).
Thus, acute treatment with aKL-F led to engagement of the
GluN2B subunit of NMDARs, causing its increased cleavage.
To verify the specificity of the LMW band, we generated
a GluN2B blocking peptide harboring the GluN2B antibody
epitope sequence. We then immunoprecipitated GluN2B pro-
teins from mouse hippocampal homogenates and preincubated
them with and without the GluN2B-blocking peptide. The block-
ing peptide abrogated detection of the high-molecular-weight
(HMW) and LMW bands, but not other non-specific bands, on
western blotting (Figure 6F). Of note, the LMW form was not
detected in synaptic fractions and surfaced clearly on western
blotting of total hippocampal lysates only after increasing strin-
gency with addition of 1% SDS to the homogenization buffer.
Thus, GluN2B also exists in an LMW form, as reported previously
(Dong et al., 2004, 2006; Simpkins et al., 2003), and aKL-F
acutely increased its levels.
Because the klotho-derived fragment aKL-F probably en-
gages multiple downstream pathways to enhance cognition,
we probed broadly for possible targets with an independent
and unbiased proteomic analysis of whole hippocampal ho-
mogenates from mice treated with Veh and aKL-F (10 mg/kg,
i.p.) 4 hr prior to exploration in the small Y-maze. aKL-F induced
glutamate receptor signaling as the top enriched canonical
pathway by ingenuity pathway analysis, which identifies biologic
patterns of molecular changes in a large dataset (Figure S2).
Taken together, two experimental approaches, hypothesis-
and non-hypothesis-driven, independently converged on evi-
dence for glutamatergic signaling as an important downstream
target pathway of aKL-F-mediated functions. aKL-F modestly
changed GluN2B in proteomic mass spectrometry studies (Fig-
ure S2); it tended to increase many, but not all, GluN2B peptides
following trypsinization (Figure S2). This suggests that, instead of
increasing overall protein levels, aKL-F may alter GluN2B cleav-
age, degradation, PTM, or other baseline cellular processes.
This possibility is supported by our findings that aKL-F signifi-
cantly increased the LMW form of GluN2B, but not the HMW
form, on western blotting (Figure 6) and requires further study.
Downstream main effect analysis of all proteomic changes
predicted that aKL-F activates synaptic transmission (Figure S2).
We directly probed and validated this functional prediction.
aKL-F Acutely Enhances NMDAR-Dependent Synaptic
Plasticity in the Hippocampus
Activation of glutamate receptor signaling is critical for synaptic
functions and plasticity. Long-term potentiation (LTP) is a form
of synaptic plasticity dependent on NMDAR activation and is a
A
B
Figure
3. aKL-F,
Delivered
Peripherally,
Acutely Enhances Cognition in Aged Mice
(A) Diagram of the experimental paradigm of Veh
or aKL-F treatment (i.p., 10 mg/kg) and testing of
aged mice in the two-trial Y-maze. (n = 8–10 mice/
group; sex-balanced groups; age, 18 months).
Mice received an injection followed by training
(24 hr after treatment) and then testing (40 hr after
treatment).
(B) Duration of time spent in the novel compared
with the familiar arm, expressed as a ratio to
indicate novel arm preference. aKL-F increased
spatial and working memory in aged mice over
time. Two-way repeated measures ANOVA, aKL-F
effect, **p < 0.01.
Data are mean ± SEM.
1364
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
 key cellular substrate of learning and memory (Morris et al., 1986;
Nabavi et al., 2014; Nakazawa et al., 2004). To assess whether
aKL-F activates synaptic transmission and enhances synaptic
plasticity, we next measured LTP in acute hippocampal
slices at the CA1 Schaffer collateral pathway synapse, largely
mediated by NDMARs (Kauer et al., 1988). During the same
time frame that it enhanced cognition and caused GluN2B
cleavage (4 hr after i.p. treatment), aKL-F enhanced LTP, as
determined by field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP)
recordings (Figures 7A and 7B). Of note, the extent of synaptic
enhancement with acute, peripheral aKL-F treatment was similar
to that observed with lifetime, transgenic, full-length klotho over-
expression in the body and brain, although a different hippocam-
pal region was examined in the current study (Dubal et al., 2014,
2015)
Selective Blockade of NMDAR GluN2B Subunits
Abolishes aKL-F Effects on Cognition
The dynamics of NMDAR channels are governed in part by their
subunit compositions (Wang et al., 2008; Yashiro and Philpot,
2008). GluN2B-containing NMDARs deactivate more slowly
than those with other subunit types, transducing longer-lasting
calcium-dependent signals (Wang et al., 2008). Because aKL-F
acutely increased measures of GluN2B activation, including
increasing its LMW form and enhancing synaptic plasticity,
we
tested
whether
blocking
GluN2B-containing
NMDARs
A
D
G
H
I
E
F
B
C
Figure
4. aKL-F,
Delivered
Peripherally,
Induces Neural Resilience by Acutely Coun-
tering Cognitive and Motor Deficits in Trans-
genic hSYN Mice
(A) Diagram of the experimental paradigm of
Veh or aKL-F treatment (i.p., 2.5 mg/kg). Mice
received single daily injections for 6 days. On day
4, NTG and hSYN mice were tested on the ro-
tarod to assess motor performance. On day 7
(17 hr after the last injection), mice were tested
in the two-trial Y-maze to assess spatial and
working cognition.
(B) Motor learning and function measured by
time on the rotarod during training. hSYN mice
showed motor dysfunction compared with NTG
mice. aKL-F treatment improved motor learning
in hSYN mice (n = 10–15 mice/group; male;
age, 3–6 months). Mixed model ANVOA: hSYN
effect, p < 0.0001.
(C) Motor function measured by time on the
rotarod during testing. hSYN mice showed motor
dysfunction compared with NTG mice. Mixed
model ANOVA: hSYN effect, p < 0.0001. aKL-F
treatment increased time on the rotarod across
sessions in hSYN mice. Two-way repeated mea-
sures ANOVA: aKL-F effect, *p < 0.05 as indicated
by brackets.
(D) Duration of time spent in the novel compared with
the familiararmduring testing,expressedasa ratioto
indicate novel arm preference at 5 min of exploration.
aKL-F improved cognitive deficits in hSYN mice
(n= 14–23 mice/group;male;age,3–6months).Two-
way ANOVA: hSYN effect, p < 0.0001; aKL-F effect,
p < 0.01.
(E–I) The hippocampus and cortex of Veh- and
aKL-F-treated hSYN mice were analyzed after
3 days of daily injection (n = 5–6 mice/group; male;
age, 3–7 months).
(E) Representative western blots showing hippo-
campal levels
of
total
a-Syn,
phosphorylated
a-Syn (p-a-Syn, Ser-129), total mouse tau (T-Tau),
phosphorylated mouse tau (p-Tau, Ser-396/404),
Actin, and GAPDH in Veh- and aKL-F-treated
hSYN mice.
(F) Quantitation of a-Syn levels, showing no differences between Veh- and aKL-F-treated hSYN mice.
(G) Quantitation of p-a-Syn (Ser-129) levels, showing no differences between Veh- and aKL-F-treated hSYN mice.
(H) Quantitation of T-Tau levels, showing no differences between Veh- and aKL-F-treated hSYN mice.
(I) Quantitation of p-Tau levels, showing no differences between Veh- and aKL-F-treated hSYN mice.
#p = 0.10, *p < 0.05 versus trial 1 (B, paired t tests) or as indicated by brackets (C, mean effect; D, unpaired t tests) via Bonferroni-Holm test. Data are
mean ± SEM.
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
1365
 modulates the effects of aKL-F on cognition. We specifically
tested whether blockade of GluN2B in an acute, transient, and
broad manner preferentially abrogates aKL-F-mediated cogni-
tive enhancement without disrupting normal cognition.
To test this, we used a low dose of Ro 25-6981 (Ro 25), a highly
specific GluN2B antagonist (L€
u et al., 2017; Paoletti and Neyton,
2007) that minimally affects normal cognition (Figure S3), as
described previously (Dubal et al., 2014; Mathur et al., 2009).
Mice treated with a single injection of Veh or aKL-F (10 mg/kg,
i.p.) were tested in the small Y-maze 4 hr later. Ten minutes
prior to Y-maze testing, they received saline or low-dose Ro 25
(5 mg/kg, i.p.) (Dubal et al., 2014; Mathur et al., 2009). As
expected, in the absence of Ro 25, aKL-treated mice showed
better working memory than Veh-treated controls (Figure 7C),
consistent with their enhanced cognition and enhanced LTP.
Ro 25 effectively and preferentially blocked aKL-F-mediated
cognitive enhancement (Figures 7C and 7D). At higher doses,
Ro 25 also inhibited normal cognition (Figure S3). Thus, in
parallel with the effects observed in transgenic klotho-overex-
pressing mice (Dubal et al., 2014), a low dose of a specific
GluN2B antagonist effectively and preferentially blocked the
effects of peripheral, acute treatment with aKL-F.
DISCUSSION
Our cognitive, behavioral, biochemical, protein-based, electro-
physiological, and pharmacological studies in mice reveal a
role for the peripheral delivery of a post-translationally modified
mouse klotho fragment, aKL-F, in acute enhancement of synap-
tic and brain functions. aKL-F enhanced normal cognition in
young mice and boosted cognition in aging mice. Furthermore,
aKL-F countered cognitive and motor dysfunction in hSYN
mice that model aspects of neurodegenerative disease. It did
so without altering the levels of a-synuclein or related co-patho-
genic proteins, indicating that aKL-F increases neural resilience.
Further investigation into its mechanisms revealed that
peripheral aKL-F delivery increased glutamatergic signaling. It
increased the LMW form of the NMDAR subunit GluN2B on
western blotting, a putative marker of its activation in the hippo-
campus (Dong et al., 2004, 2006; Simpkins et al., 2003) within
4 hr of delivery and cognitive testing. Furthermore, peripheral
aKL-F acutely increased synaptic function, as measured by
enhanced LTP, a cellular substrate of learning and memory.
Antagonism of NMDAR function through acute blockade of
GluN2B preferentially abrogated aKL-F-mediated enhancement
of cognition.
Taken together, our findings suggest that peripheral treatment
with aKL-F or a similarly derived and/or modified klotho fragment
could enhance brain function and resilience and could represent
a new therapeutic strategy for dysfunction related to aging,
neurodegenerative diseases like PD and AD, and other brain
diseases.
Peripheral aKL-F Elevation Causes Central Cognitive
Enhancement and Phenocopies Lifelong, Widespread,
Genetic Klotho Overexpression
Surprisingly, a fragment of klotho, aKL-F, acutely enhanced
cognition in young mice when delivered peripherally, thus phe-
nocopying, in part, the functional effects we found with genetic,
lifelong, and widespread overexpression of full-length, wild-type
klotho (Dubal et al., 2014). This was unexpected because the
fragment is impermeable to the BBB by prediction (Pardridge,
2005), direct radiography (Hu et al., 2016), and our immunopre-
cipitation studies. Because the aKL-F effects were acute, we
conclude that neurodevelopmental effects of klotho, or sus-
tained and high levels of wild-type klotho in the brain over a
long period, are not required for neural enhancement. How pe-
ripheral aKL-F transmits a signal to the CNS is a fascinating
question that remains to be answered. Possibilities include in-
duction or modification of other factors that cross or interact
with the BBB and direct or indirect alteration of central klotho
levels, although we did not find evidence for the latter. Impor-
tantly, the ability of peripheral aKL-F to induce central effects
is of therapeutic value because it bypasses the need to deliver
protein directly into the CNS and, thus, evades a primary limita-
tion of developing brain therapies. Our study does not rule out
that klotho might also act with the CNS but, rather, establishes
the relevance of its acute, peripheral elevation, particularly in a
truncated form.
aKL-F, Lacking Several Structural Domains, Causes
Better Cognitive Functions
The cognition-enhancing effects of aKL-F define an important
segment of the klotho protein required for brain benefits.
A
B
GluN2B
Synaptophysin
PSD-95
Veh
αKL-F
αKL-F
Veh
1
2
1
2
C
170kDa
95kDa
38kDa
GluN2B
Synaptophysin
PSD-95
170kDa
95kDa
38kDa
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Veh
KL-F
PSD-Fraction
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Relative GluN2B level
Veh
KL-F
PSD-Fraction
0h (i.p.)
4h
Harvest
D1 (i.p. daily, 5 days)
D5
Harvest
Relative GluN2B level
Figure 5. aKL-F Does Not Alter Synaptic
Levels of HMW GluN2B
(A–C)
Synaptic
membrane
fraction
1
(PSD-
enriched)
and
fraction
2
(non-PSD-enriched)
isolated
from
the
hippocampus
of
mice
(age, 4 months; male) 4 hr after a single treatment
followed by the small Y-maze or after 5 days
of
daily
treatment
with
Veh
or
aKL-F
(i.p.,
10 mg/kg).
(A) Representative western blots from hippo-
campal membrane fractions from mice 4 hr (top)
following a single treatment or 5 days following
daily treatments (bottom). Only the HMW GluN2B
band was observed.
(B) Quantitation of PSD-enriched (fraction 1) GluN2B protein levels 4 hr following treatment (n = 4/group).
(C) Quantitation of PSD-enriched (fraction 1) GluN2B protein levels 5 days following daily treatment (n = 10/group).
Data are mean ± SEM.
1366
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
 Because aKL-F lacks the transmembrane, intracellular, and
N-terminal regions, our findings identify the cognition-enhancing
effects within amino acids 35-982 comprising the KL1 and
KL2 domains. How this post-translationally modified protein,
which exists endogenously in a similar form (sometimes called
soluble klotho), and its interactions with other proteins lead to
signals than converge upon glutamatergically mediated cogni-
tive enhancement remain to be determined.
Because wild-type, full-length klotho is a pleiotropic protein
that engages multiple signaling peripheral pathways, including
insulin (Kurosu et al., 2005), Wnt (Liu et al., 2007), and FGF
(Urakawa et al., 2006), narrowing the fragment(s) necessary
for cognitive enhancement may help to further target neural
functions that may be independent, or not, of klotho’s putative
actions on aging-related mechanisms.
The effects of peripheral aKL-F treatment on cognition largely
phenocopied the effects of widespread, transgenic klotho over-
expression; however, direct assessment of whether one is more
robust is limited by the variability inherent to behavioral assays
and the divergent nature of pharmacologic and genetic strate-
gies. Acute pharmacologic elevation, potentially relevant for
therapeutic development, may also be influenced by various fac-
tors affecting the potency and detection of neural enhancement,
such as klotho aggregation and oligomerization (Imura et al.,
2004) or precipitation; protein production, handling, or stability;
differing influences of subtle stressors on the complex measure-
ment of cognition (Sorge et al., 2014); or some combination
of factors. In our studies, aKL-F effects were replicated in well
over ten independent mouse cohorts of diverse characteristics
(young, aging, and disease model mice) with dosing of a fresh
preparation. How the fragment can be optimized by dose,
composition, and biologic action may increase our understand-
ing of how to enhance the brain-targeted effects of klotho.
aKL-F Improves Cognition in the Aging Brain
Peripheral delivery of aKL-F acutely enhanced cognition in aging
mice. This is important because it demonstrates that aKL-F can
increase spatial and working memory in the naturally aged brain
and, therefore, can effectively target vulnerable substrates of
cognition in aging. The long-lasting effect in aged mice induced
better cognitive functions nearly 2 days following treatment, after
predicted elimination of aKL-F (Hu et al., 2016). In further studies
of young mice, a long-lasting aKL-F effect combined with cogni-
tive training was observed over 2 weeks later. Together, our data
suggest that aKL-F may harbor therapeutic benefits for the
young and aging brain in a long-lasting and organizational
manner. Because the synapse is a target of aging and enhanced
by aKL-F, we speculate that the beneficial effects occur through
synaptic remodeling.
aKL-F Causes Neural Resilience against Motor and
Cognitive Dysfunction without Altering Pathogenic
Protein Levels
Peripheral aKL-F acutely improved motor dysfunction in an
a-synuclein model of neurodegenerative diseases, extending
the beneficial effects of the klotho-derived fragment from cogni-
tion to motor functions. Because transgenic klotho elevation
does not modify measures of muscle function (Phelps et al.,
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Veh
KL-F
D
HMW GluN2B
LMW GluN2B
Actin
GAPDH
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Veh
KL-F
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Veh
KL-F
E
F
150KDa
~170 KDa 
~115 KDa
GluN2B IP
GluN2B Ab
Bl. Peptide +
+
–
+
0h (i.p.)
4h
Harvest
0
1
2
40
60
80
100
Relative LMW/Total
% Alternations
Veh
A
B
C
0h (i.p.)
4h
Harvest
*
*
#
Relative LMW/Total
GluN2B Levels
HMW GluN2B
LMW GluN2B
Actin
GAPDH
170kDa
115kDa
Relative LMW/Total
 GluN2B Levels
Relative LMW/Total
 GluN2B Levels
Veh
αKL-F
αKL-F Veh
42kDa
37kDa
D1 (i.p. daily, 5 days)
D5
Harvest
0h (i.p.)
4h
Harvest
170kD
115kD
42kD
37kD
aKL-F
Figure 6. aKL-F Acutely Increases an LMW
Form of GluN2B
(A–E) Whole hippocampal lysate isolated from
mice treated with Veh or aKL-F (10 mg/kg i.p.) after
4 hr of a single treatment followed by the small
Y-maze or 5 days of daily treatment and then as-
sessed for GluN2B levels.
(A) Representative western blots from hippo-
campal total lysates (with 1% SDS) from mice
with Veh or aKL-F 4 hr after treatment (top,
images were captured from the same gel) or
5 days following daily treatment (bottom) (age,
4 months; male). HMW and LMW GluN2B forms
were observed.
(B)
Quantitation
of
LMW/total
(HMW+LMW)
GluN2B protein levels from the hippocampus 4 hr
after treatment (n = 10/group).
(C) Correlation of relative LMW/total GluN2B
fragment levels from mice shown in (D) with per-
centage alternations in the small Y-maze (R2 = 0.5,
p < 0.03 with aKL-F treatment).
(D) Replicate independent cohort quantitation of
LMW/total GluN2B protein levels from the hippo-
campus 4 hr after treatment (n = 21/group).
(E) Quantitation of LMW/total GluN2B protein
levels from the hippocampus following 5 days of
daily treatment in the absence of behavior studies
(n = 11–12/group).
(F)
Western
blot
showing
the
specificity
of
the HMW and LMW GluN2B band by immuno-
precipitation with and without preincubation with a GluN2B-blocking peptide harboring the GluN2B antibody epitope sequence.
#p < 0.10, *p < 0.05 versus Veh as indicated by brackets. Data are mean ± SEM. See also Figure S2.
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
1367
 2013), our findings raise the possibility that aKL-F acutely coun-
ters motor problems by facilitating cognitive motor learning or
boosting motor regions of the brain, probably through substrates
of synaptic plasticity. Of note, we did not find effects of aKL-F on
total movements in the open field or time spent in the open arms
of an elevated plus maze (data not shown), suggesting that the
protein improves motor function without causing hyperactivity
or anxiety.
Peripheral aKL-F acutely counteracted cognitive deficits in a
disease model with overexpression of the wild-type a-synuclein
human protein, which plays a major role in a-synucleinopathies,
including Parkinson disease, multiple system atrophy, and Lewy
body dementia. Because dementias are multi-etiology and share
common pathogenic proteins, including a-synuclein (Montine
et al., 2014), the protein is also relevant to AD. Of note, the
immediate beneficial cognitive effect of aKL-F described here
is similar to effects of genetic, lifelong, and widespread overex-
pression of full-length wild-type klotho in the body and brain of
hAPP mice, another disease model related to AD (Dubal et al.,
2015).
aKL-F induced motor and cognitive benefit in hSYN mice
without altering the levels of pathogenic or putative co-patho-
genic proteins, a-synuclein, phospho-a-synuclein, tau, and
phospho-tau. These data support growing lines of evidence
that klotho induces neural resilience or the capacity to acutely
counter or recover from cognitive and motor dysfunction. We
speculate that klotho, and more specifically aKL-F, modulates
common downstream targets, such as glutamatergic signaling
at the synapse, in the pathogenesis of aging, AD, PD, and other
diseases.
aKL-F Acutely Activates Glutamatergic Signaling to
Enhance Cognition and Synaptic Plasticity
Hypothesis- and non-hypothesis-driven approaches indepen-
dently converged on evidence for glutamate receptor signaling
as an important downstream pathway of aKL-F-mediated func-
tions. aKL-F acutely caused enriched levels of the NMDAR sub-
unit GluN2B in the normal, young brain. However, instead of syn-
aptic enrichment of HMW levels observed in transgenic mice
chronically overexpressing klotho (Dubal et al., 2014), we found
that acute aKL-F treatment increased LMW GluN2B in whole
hippocampal homogenate within 4 hr. This probably represents
calpain-mediated cleavage linked with GluN2B activation (Simp-
kins et al., 2003; Wu and Lynch, 2006) rather than increased tran-
scription, translation, or trafficking of the subunit to the synapse.
From a temporal perspective, it is possible that the immediate
effects of klotho activate GluN2B-containing NMDARs by cleav-
age and that the lifelong, chronic overexpression effects of klo-
tho cause compensatory GluN2B increases to ultimately offset
klotho-mediated, ongoing cleavage and turnover.
NMDAR channel dynamics are governed by their subunit
compositions (Yashiro and Philpot, 2008); GluN2B-containing
NMDARs deactivate more slowly and transduce longer-lasting
intracellular signals (Wang et al., 2008). Increased GluN2B-
dependent NMDAR functions cause enhanced cognitive and
synaptic functions (Cao et al., 2007; Tang et al., 1999; Wang
et al., 2009). Thus, our findings support the hypothesis
that aKL-F-mediated signals preferentially activate GluN2B-
containing NMDARs. Consistent with this hypothesis, peripheral
delivery of aKL-F enhanced cognition and synaptic plasticity,
and selective blockade of GluN2B preferentially abrogated
D
A
100
125
150
175
200
Normalized Ave fEPSP Slope (%)
**
Veh
KL-F
C
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
% Change in Alternations
after Ro 25
Veh
KL-F
*
40
50
60
70
80
% Alternations
Ro 25: –   +
Veh
KL-F
–   +
*
*
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
100
150
200
250
Time (Mins)
Normalized fEPSP Slope (%)
KL-F
Veh
B
0h (i.p.)
4h
Harvest 
6-7h
Record
0h (i.p.)
4h
Ro Test
0
Figure 7. aKL-F Acutely Enhances NMDAR-Dependent Synaptic
Plasticity in the Hippocampus, and Selective Blockade of the
NMDAR Subunit GluN2B Abolishes aKL-F Effects on Cognition
(A and B) fEPSP recordings from acute hippocampal slices of 3-month-old
male mice (n = 7–14 slices/group, 3 mice/group) treated with Veh or aKL-F 4h
prior to brain slicing.
(A) LTP induction and potentiation in the CA1 region was monitored for 30 min
following theta burst stimulation of the Schaffer collateral pathway.
(B) Average fEPSP slope averaged over 30 min in hippocampal slices of mice
treated with Veh or aKL-F. Two-way repeated measures ANOVA: aKL-F effect,
p < 0.01.
(C and D) Mice (n = 15/group; male; age, 4 months) were treated i.p. with Veh or
aKL-F (10 mg/kg) 4 hr prior to testing, followed by i.p. saline (–) or Ro 25 (+)
(5 mg/kg) 10 min prior to testing in the small Y-maze.
(C) Percentages of alternations among arms during exploration of the small
Y-maze over 4 min. aKL-F increased alternations, and Ro 25 preferentially
decreased aKL-F-mediated effects. Two-way ANOVA: Ro 25 by aKL-F inter-
action, p < 0.05.
(D) Percentage of decrease in alternations following Ro 25 treatment in Veh-
and aKL-F-treated mice. Ro 25 preferentially decreased the percentage of
alternations in mice with aKL-F treatment.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 versus Veh or as indicated by brackets by t test (B and D)
or Bonferroni-Holm test (C). Data are mean ± SEM. See also Figure S3.
1368
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
 aKL-F-mediated effects. Of note, a study of direct application
of a klotho fragment to hippocampal slices did not observe
increased hippocampal LTP (Li et al., 2017), potentially reflecting
hypoactive protein, induction protocol differences, and/or a
requirement for peripheral rather than central klotho delivery to
elicit synaptic effects.
The direct target of aKL-F, the relevant and causal peripheral
mechanisms linked to that target, and the processes by which
these core peripheral events reach the brain to affect the
NMDAR and other synaptic functions remain to be determined.
It is interesting to speculate that immune signals, other known
klotho-related mechanisms, or some combination of pathways
could converge onto glutamatergic signaling to induce better
synaptic functions underlying cognitive and motor enhancement
and neural resilience.
Our findings highlight a role for aKL-F in promoting optimal
synaptic functions in the normal brain and to boost ‘‘synaptic
health’’ (Morrison and Baxter, 2014) in aging and disease-states.
Because synaptic health may confer resilience against the
effects of aging and a myriad of aging-and non-aging related
neurologic and psychiatric diseases, the potential to enhance it
may be relevant to the human condition. Synaptic enhancement
induced by aKL-F might be non-specific or, in contrast, could
directly relate to abnormal mechanisms involved in aging and
disease. Future studies will need to determine whether aKL-F
specifically reduces detrimental synaptic mechanisms caused
by aging, a-synuclein, and other pathogenic proteins.
aKL-F-mediated enhancement of synaptic functions and brain
resilience with peripheral treatment in mice is potentially prom-
ising for paths toward human therapeutics in aging and disease.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Mice
All studies were conducted in a blinded manner in age-matched and sex-
balanced, congenic C57BL/6 mice unless indicated otherwise. Specifically,
mice were randomly allocated to each group, and the experimenter was
blinded to their treatment. Aged mice were obtained from the National Institute
on Aging (NIA) mouse colony. Transgenic hSYN mice (Rockenstein et al., 2002)
overexpress human wild-type a-synuclein under the Thy-1 promoter. Because
the a-synuclein transgene is inserted on the X chromosome in this line and
randomly inactivates in females, we utilized only males from this line. Mice
were kept on a 12-hr light/dark cycle with ad libitum access to food (Picolab
Rodent Diet 20) and water. All studies were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of California, San Francisco
and conducted in compliance with NIH guidelines. See the Supplemental
Experimental Procedures for further details.
Mass Spectrometry for PTMs of the Klotho Fragment
Mouse klotho fragment peptide (R&D Systems, 1819-KL) was trypsin-digested
and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using
a NanoAcquity (Waters) ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC)
system interfaced to a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos (Thermo
Scientific) mass spectrometer. Data were analyzed using Protein Prospector
version 5.19 (Chalkley et al., 2008). See the Supplemental Experimental Pro-
cedures for further details.
Cognition and Behavior
Mice were tested as described previously in the Morris water maze (Dubal et al.,
2014), small Y-maze (Dubal et al., 2014), two-trial Y-maze (Dellu et al., 1992),
and rotarod (Morris et al., 2011). Drug treatments were administered as indi-
cated. See the Supplemental Experimental Procedures for further details.
Synaptic Membrane Fractionation
Synaptic membrane fractions were separated for protein analysis as described
(Dubal et al., 2014; Dubal et al., 2015).
Western Blot Analyses
Protein studies on the hippocampus and cortex were performed and quanti-
fied as described previously (Dubal et al., 2015). Additionally, a-synuclein
(1:1,000, Abcam) and phosphorylated a-synuclein-Ser129 (1:1,000, Wako
Pure Chemicals Industries) were measured. SDS (1%) was included in homog-
enates for optimal detection of the LMW GluN2B protein.
Immunoprecipitation
Immunoprecipitation (IP) of klotho was performed using modification of
methods described previously (Bonifacino et al., 2001). In brief, hippocampal
lysates were incubated with magnetic Dynabeads protein G (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) conjugated with GluN2B antibody (2 mg, 06600, Millipore) For
specificity of bands identified by IP, GluN2B antibody (Ab) was incubated
with a blocking peptide (KFNGSSNGHVYEKLSSIESDV, 21 aa, generated by
Watsonbio Sciences) harboring the GluN2B antibody epitope sequence prior
to conjugation with Dynabeads. Beads were magnetically pulled, washed,
and eluted. The precipitates were resolved on SDS-PAGE gel. See the Supple-
mental Experimental Procedures for further details.
Electrophysiology
Coronal brain slices of 300-mm thickness from 3-month-old mice were
obtained as described previously (Dubal et al., 2014; Dubal et al., 2015) with
modifications. Recordings were performed using the Med64-Quad II multi-
electrode array (Alpha MED Scientific) in the CA1 region following stimulation
of the Schaffer collateral path. See the Supplemental Experimental Proced-
ures for further details.
Statistical Analyses
Experimenters were blinded to the treatment. Statistical analyses were per-
formed as described previously (Dubal et al., 2014, 2015) using GraphPad
Prism 7 for t tests. R Studio (v 2.0) was used for rank-sum tests as described
previously (Possin et al., 2016) and post hoc tests. All t tests were two-tailed
unless indicated otherwise. Post hoc tests were conducted with the Bonfer-
roni-Holm correction (R) to control for a family-wise error rate at a = 0.05.
Error bars represent SEM, and null hypotheses were rejected at or below a
p value of 0.05.
See the Supplemental Experimental Procedures for further details regarding
all experimental methods.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures
and three figures and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.07.024.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.L., D.W., B.I.G., R.J.C., A.L.B., A.J.M., and D.B.D. designed and conducted
experiments and analyzed data. J.L. and D.B.D. wrote the manuscript. All au-
thors edited and reviewed the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Stephen Hauser for discussions, Ruth Huttenhain for expertise with
proteomic analyses, Frederic Hopf for input on electrophysiology, and Emily
Davis and Elena Minones-Moyano for assistance with tissue collection and
discussions. Behavioral data were obtained in part using the Gladstone Insti-
tutes Neurobehavioral Core. This study was funded by grants from NINDS
(R01 NS092918 to D.B.D.), the National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, through UCSF-CTSI (UL1 TR001872
to D.B.D.), the American Federation for Aging Research (to D.B.D.), the Glenn
Medical Foundation (to D.B.D.), and the Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
1369
 Medical Research Foundation (to A.L.B.). The study was also funded by gifts
from Unity Biotechnology (to D.B.D.), the Bakar Foundation (to D.B.D.), the
Bradley Foundation (to D.B.D.), and the Coulter-Weeks Foundation (to
D.B.D.). Portions of this work are the subject of a provisional patent application
held by the Regents of the University of California.
Received: October 3, 2016
Revised: May 28, 2017
Accepted: July 12, 2017
Published: August 8, 2017
REFERENCES
Almeida, O.P., Morar, B., Hankey, G.J., Yeap, B.B., Golledge, J., Jablensky,
A., and Flicker, L. (2017). Longevity Klotho gene polymorphism and the risk
of dementia in older men. Maturitas 101, 1–5.
Alvarez-Castelao, B., and Schuman, E.M. (2015). The Regulation of Synaptic
Protein Turnover. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 28623–28630.
Arking, D.E., Krebsova, A., Macek, M., Sr., Macek, M., Jr., Arking, A., Mian,
I.S., Fried, L., Hamosh, A., Dey, S., McIntosh, I., and Dietz, H.C. (2002). Asso-
ciation of human aging with a functional variant of klotho. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 99, 856–861.
Bennett, D.A. (2017). Mixed pathologies and neural reserve: Implications of
complexity for Alzheimer disease drug discovery. PLoS Med. 14, e1002256.
Bloch, L., Sineshchekova, O., Reichenbach, D., Reiss, K., Saftig, P., Kuro-o,
M., and Kaether, C. (2009). Klotho is a substrate for alpha-, beta- and
gamma-secretase. FEBS Lett. 583, 3221–3224.
Bonifacino, J.S., Dell’Angelica, E.C., and Springer, T.A. (2001). Immunoprecip-
itation. Curr Protoc Mol Biol Chapter 10, Unit 10 16.
Cao, X., Cui, Z., Feng, R., Tang, Y.P., Qin, Z., Mei, B., and Tsien, J.Z. (2007).
Maintenance of superior learning and memory function in NR2B transgenic
mice during ageing. Eur. J. Neurosci. 25, 1815–1822.
Chalkley, R.J., Baker, P.R., Medzihradszky, K.F., Lynn, A.J., and Burlingame,
A.L. (2008). In-depth analysis of tandem mass spectrometry data from dispa-
rate instrument types. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 7, 2386–2398.
Ch^
ateau, M.T., Araiz, C., Descamps, S., and Galas, S. (2010). Klotho interferes
with a novel FGF-signalling pathway
and insulin/Igf-like
signalling
to
improve longevity and stress resistance in Caenorhabditis elegans. Aging 2,
567–581.
Chen, C.D., Podvin, S., Gillespie, E., Leeman, S.E., and Abraham, C.R. (2007).
Insulin stimulates the cleavage and release of the extracellular domain of Klo-
tho by ADAM10 and ADAM17. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 19796–19801.
Chen, C.D., Li, H., Liang, J., Hixson, K., Zeldich, E., and Abraham, C.R. (2015).
The Anti-Aging and Tumor Suppressor Protein Klotho Enhances Differentiation
of a Human Oligodendrocytic Hybrid Cell Line. J. Mol. Neurosci. 55, 76–90.
de Vries, C.F., Staff, R.T., Harris, S.E., Chapko, D., Williams, D.S., Reichert, P.,
Ahearn, T., McNeil, C.J., Whalley, L.J., and Murray, A.D. (2017). Klotho,
APOEε4, cognitive ability, brain size, atrophy, and survival: a study in the Aber-
deen Birth Cohort of 1936. Neurobiol. Aging 55, 91–98.
Dellu, F., Mayo, W., Cherkaoui, J., Le Moal, M., and Simon, H. (1992). A two-
trial memory task with automated recording: study in young and aged rats.
Brain Res. 588, 132–139.
Dong, Y.N., Waxman, E.A., and Lynch, D.R. (2004). Interactions of postsyn-
aptic density-95 and the NMDA receptor 2 subunit control calpain-mediated
cleavage of the NMDA receptor. J. Neurosci. 24, 11035–11045.
Dong, Y.N., Wu, H.Y., Hsu, F.C., Coulter, D.A., and Lynch, D.R. (2006).
Developmental and cell-selective variations in N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor
degradation by calpain. J. Neurochem. 99, 206–217.
Dubal, D.B., Yokoyama, J.S., Zhu, L., Broestl, L., Worden, K., Wang, D., Sturm,
V.E., Kim, D., Klein, E., Yu, G.Q., et al. (2014). Life extension factor klotho en-
hances cognition. Cell Rep. 7, 1065–1076.
Dubal, D.B., Zhu, L., Sanchez, P.E., Worden, K., Broestl, L., Johnson, E., Ho,
K., Yu, G.Q., Kim, D., Betourne, A., et al. (2015). Life extension factor
klotho prevents mortality and enhances cognition in hAPP transgenic mice.
J. Neurosci. 35, 2358–2371.
Duce, J.A., Podvin, S., Hollander, W., Kipling, D., Rosene, D.L., and Abraham,
C.R. (2008). Gene profile analysis implicates Klotho as an important contrib-
utor to aging changes in brain white matter of the rhesus monkey. Glia 56,
106–117.
Fleming, S.M., Salcedo, J., Fernagut, P.O., Rockenstein, E., Masliah, E., Lev-
ine, M.S., and Chesselet, M.F. (2004). Early and progressive sensorimotor
anomalies in mice overexpressing wild-type human a-synuclein. J. Neurosci.
24, 9434–9440.
Fleming, S.M., Salcedo, J., Hutson, C.B., Rockenstein, E., Masliah, E., Levine,
M.S., and Chesselet, M.F. (2006). Behavioral effects of dopaminergic agonists
in transgenic mice overexpressing human wildtype a-synuclein. Neuroscience
142, 1245–1253.
Haggerty, T., Credle, J., Rodriguez, O., Wills, J., Oaks, A.W., Masliah, E., and
Sidhu, A. (2011). Hyperphosphorylated Tau in an a-synuclein-overexpressing
transgenic model of Parkinson’s disease. Eur. J. Neurosci. 33, 1598–1610.
Hatami, A., and Chesselet, M.F. (2015). Transgenic rodent models to study
alpha-synuclein pathogenesis, with a focus on cognitive deficits. Curr. Top.
Behav. Neurosci. 22, 303–330.
Hu, M.C., Shi, M., Zhang, J., Addo, T., Cho, H.J., Barker, S.L., Ravikumar, P.,
Gillings, N., Bian, A., Sidhu, S.S., et al. (2016). Renal Production, Uptake, and
Handling of Circulating aKlotho. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 27, 79–90.
Imura, A., Iwano, A., Tohyama, O., Tsuji, Y., Nozaki, K., Hashimoto, N.,
Fujimori, T., and Nabeshima, Y. (2004). Secreted Klotho protein in sera and
CSF: implication for post-translational cleavage in release of Klotho protein
from cell membrane. FEBS Lett. 565, 143–147.
Invidia, L., Salvioli, S., Altilia, S., Pierini, M., Panourgia, M.P., Monti, D., De
Rango, F., Passarino, G., and Franceschi, C. (2010). The frequency of Klotho
KL-VS polymorphism in a large Italian population, from young subjects to
centenarians, suggests the presence of specific time windows for its effect.
Biogerontology 11, 67–73.
Ittner, L.M., Ke, Y.D., Delerue, F., Bi, M., Gladbach, A., van Eersel, J., Wo
¨ lfing,
H., Chieng, B.C., Christie, M.J., Napier, I.A., et al. (2010). Dendritic function of
tau mediates amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Cell
142, 387–397.
Kauer, J.A., Malenka, R.C., and Nicoll, R.A. (1988). A persistent postsynaptic
modification mediates long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. Neuron 1,
911–917.
Kuro-o, M., Matsumura, Y., Aizawa, H., Kawaguchi, H., Suga, T., Utsugi, T.,
Ohyama, Y., Kurabayashi, M., Kaname, T., Kume, E., et al. (1997). Mutation
of the mouse klotho gene leads to a syndrome resembling ageing. Nature
390, 45–51.
Kurosu, H., Yamamoto, M., Clark, J.D., Pastor, J.V., Nandi, A., Gurnani, P.,
McGuinness, O.P., Chikuda, H., Yamaguchi, M., Kawaguchi, H., et al.
(2005). Suppression of aging in mice by the hormone Klotho. Science 309,
1829–1833.
Li, Q., Vo, H.T., Wang, J., Fox-Quick, S., Dobrunz, L.E., and King, G.D. (2017).
Klotho regulates CA1 hippocampal synaptic plasticity. Neuroscience 347,
123–133.
Liu, H., Fergusson, M.M., Castilho, R.M., Liu, J., Cao, L., Chen, J., Malide, D.,
Rovira, I.I., Schimel, D., Kuo, C.J., et al. (2007). Augmented Wnt signaling in a
mammalian model of accelerated aging. Science 317, 803–806.
Logan, T., Bendor, J., Toupin, C., Thorn, K., and Edwards, R.H. (2017).
a-Synuclein promotes dilation of the exocytotic fusion pore. Nat. Neurosci.
20, 681–689.
L€
u, W., Du, J., Goehring, A., and Gouaux, E. (2017). Cryo-EM structures of
the triheteromeric NMDA receptor and its allosteric modulation. Science,
355, Published online February 23, 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.
aal3729.
Masliah, E., Rockenstein, E., Veinbergs, I., Mallory, M., Hashimoto, M.,
Takeda, A., Sagara, Y., Sisk, A., and Mucke, L. (2000). Dopaminergic loss
1370
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
 and inclusion body formation in a-synuclein mice: implications for neurode-
generative disorders. Science 287, 1265–1269.
Masso
´ , A., Sa
´ nchez, A., Gimenez-Llort, L., Lizcano, J.M., Can
˜ ete, M., Garcı
´a,
B., Torres-Lista, V., Puig, M., Bosch, A., and Chillon, M. (2015). Secreted and
Transmembrane aKlotho Isoforms Have Different Spatio-Temporal Profiles in
the Brain during Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease Progression. PLoS ONE 10,
e0143623.
Mathur, P., Graybeal, C., Feyder, M., Davis, M.I., and Holmes, A. (2009).
Fear memory impairing effects of systemic treatment with the NMDA NR2B
subunit antagonist, Ro 25-6981, in mice: attenuation with ageing. Pharmacol.
Biochem. Behav. 91, 453–460.
McEwen, B.S., and Morrison, J.H. (2013). The brain on stress: vulnerability and
plasticity of the prefrontal cortex over the life course. Neuron 79, 16–29.
Mengel-From, J., Soerensen, M., Nygaard, M., McGue, M., Christensen, K.,
and Christiansen, L. (2016). Genetic Variants in KLOTHO Associate With
Cognitive Function in the Oldest Old Group. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med.
Sci. 71, 1151–1159.
Montine, T.J., Koroshetz, W.J., Babcock, D., Dickson, D.W., Galpern, W.R.,
Glymour, M.M., Greenberg, S.M., Hutton, M.L., Knopman, D.S., Kuzmichev,
A.N.,
et
al.;
ADRD
2013
Conference
Organizing
Committee
(2014).
Recommendations of the Alzheimer’s disease-related dementias conference.
Neurology 83, 851–860.
Morris, R.G., Anderson, E., Lynch, G.S., and Baudry, M. (1986). Selective
impairment of learning and blockade of long-term potentiation by an
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, AP5. Nature 319, 774–776.
Morris, M., Koyama, A., Masliah, E., and Mucke, L. (2011). Tau reduction does
not prevent motor deficits in two mouse models of Parkinson’s disease. PLoS
ONE 6, e29257.
Morrison, J.H., and Baxter, M.G. (2014). Synaptic health. JAMA Psychiatry 71,
835–837.
Nabavi, S., Fox, R., Proulx, C.D., Lin, J.Y., Tsien, R.Y., and Malinow, R. (2014).
Engineering a memory with LTD and LTP. Nature 511, 348–352.
Nakazawa, K., McHugh, T.J., Wilson, M.A., and Tonegawa, S. (2004). NMDA
receptors, place cells and hippocampal spatial memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.
5, 361–372.
Paoletti, P., and Neyton, J. (2007). NMDA receptor subunits: function and
pharmacology. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 7, 39–47.
Pardridge, W.M. (2005). The blood-brain barrier: bottleneck in brain drug
development. NeuroRx 2, 3–14.
Phelps, M., Pettan-Brewer, C., Ladiges, W., and Yablonka-Reuveni, Z. (2013).
Decline in muscle strength and running endurance in klotho deficient C57BL/6
mice. Biogerontology 14, 729–739.
Piggott, M.A., Perry, E.K., Perry, R.H., and Court, J.A. (1992). [3H]MK-801
binding to the NMDA receptor complex, and its modulation in human frontal
cortex during development and aging. Brain Res. 588, 277–286.
Possin, K.L., Sanchez, P.E., Anderson-Bergman, C., Fernandez, R., Kerchner,
G.A., Johnson, E.T., Davis, A., Lo, I., Bott, N.T., Kiely, T., et al. (2016). Cross-
species translation of the Morris maze for Alzheimer’s disease. J. Clin. Invest.
126, 779–783.
Prather, A.A., Epel, E.S., Arenander, J., Broestl, L., Garay, B.I., Wang, D., and
Dubal, D.B. (2015). Longevity factor klotho and chronic psychological stress.
Transl. Psychiatry 5, e585.
Rockenstein, E., Mallory, M., Hashimoto, M., Song, D., Shults, C.W., Lang, I.,
and Masliah, E. (2002). Differential neuropathological alterations in transgenic
mice expressing alpha-synuclein from the platelet-derived growth factor and
Thy-1 promoters. J. Neurosci. Res. 68, 568–578.
Semba, R.D., Cappola, A.R., Sun, K., Bandinelli, S., Dalal, M., Crasto, C., Gur-
alnik, J.M., and Ferrucci, L. (2011). Plasma klotho and mortality risk in older
community-dwelling adults. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 66, 794–800.
Semba, R.D., Moghekar, A.R., Hu, J., Sun, K., Turner, R., Ferrucci, L., and
O’Brien, R. (2014). Klotho in the cerebrospinal fluid of adults with and without
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci. Lett. 558, 37–40.
Shardell, M., Semba, R.D., Kalyani, R.R., Hicks, G.E., Bandinelli, S., and
Ferrucci, L. (2015). Serum 25-Hydroxyvitamin D, Plasma Klotho, and Lower-
Extremity Physical Performance Among Older Adults: Findings From the
InCHIANTI Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 70, 1156–1162.
Shardell, M., Semba, R.D., Rosano, C., Kalyani, R.R., Bandinelli, S., Chia,
C.W., and Ferrucci, L. (2016). Plasma Klotho and Cognitive Decline in Older
Adults: Findings From the InCHIANTI Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med.
Sci. 71, 677–682.
Simpkins, K.L., Guttmann, R.P., Dong, Y., Chen, Z., Sokol, S., Neumar, R.W.,
and Lynch, D.R. (2003). Selective activation induced cleavage of the NR2B
subunit by calpain. J. Neurosci. 23, 11322–11331.
Sorge, R.E., Martin, L.J., Isbester, K.A., Sotocinal, S.G., Rosen, S., Tuttle, A.H.,
Wieskopf, J.S., Acland, E.L., Dokova, A., Kadoura, B., et al. (2014). Olfactory
exposure to males, including men, causes stress and related analgesia in
rodents. Nat. Methods 11, 629–632.
Sze, C., Bi, H., Kleinschmidt-DeMasters, B.K., Filley, C.M., and Martin, L.J.
(2001). N-Methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit proteins and their phosphory-
lation status are altered selectively in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurol. Sci. 182,
151–159.
Tang, Y.P., Shimizu, E., Dube, G.R., Rampon, C., Kerchner, G.A., Zhuo, M.,
Liu, G., and Tsien, J.Z. (1999). Genetic enhancement of learning and memory
in mice. Nature 401, 63–69.
Urakawa, I., Yamazaki, Y., Shimada, T., Iijima, K., Hasegawa, H., Okawa, K.,
Fujita, T., Fukumoto, S., and Yamashita, T. (2006). Klotho converts canonical
FGF receptor into a specific receptor for FGF23. Nature 444, 770–774.
Wang, H., Stradtman, G.G., 3rd, Wang, X.J., and Gao, W.J. (2008). A special-
ized NMDA receptor function in layer 5 recurrent microcircuitry of the adult rat
prefrontal cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105, 16791–16796.
Wang, D., Cui, Z., Zeng, Q., Kuang, H., Wang, L.P., Tsien, J.Z., and Cao, X.
(2009). Genetic enhancement of memory and long-term potentiation but not
CA1 long-term depression in NR2B transgenic rats. PLoS ONE 4, e7486.
Wills, J., Jones, J., Haggerty, T., Duka, V., Joyce, J.N., and Sidhu, A. (2010).
Elevated tauopathy and alpha-synuclein pathology in postmortem Parkinson’s
disease brains with and without dementia. Exp. Neurol. 225, 210–218.
Wu, H.Y., and Lynch, D.R. (2006). Calpain and synaptic function. Mol. Neuro-
biol. 33, 215–236.
Yashiro, K., and Philpot, B.D. (2008). Regulation of NMDA receptor subunit
expression and its implications for LTD, LTP, and metaplasticity. Neurophar-
macology 55, 1081–1094.
Yokoyama, J.S., Sturm, V.E., Bonham, L.W., Klein, E., Arfanakis, K., Yu, L.,
Coppola, G., Kramer, J.H., Bennett, D.A., Miller, B.L., and Dubal, D.B.
(2015). Variation in longevity gene KLOTHO is associated with greater cortical
volumes. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 2, 215–230.
Yokoyama, J.S., Marx, G., Brown, J.A., Bonham, L.W., Wang, D., Coppola, G.,
Seeley, W.W., Rosen, H.J., Miller, B.L., Kramer, J.H., and Dubal, D.B. (2017).
Systemic klotho is associated with KLOTHO variation and predicts intrinsic
cortical connectivity in healthy human aging. Brain Imaging Behav. 11,
391–400.
Zhao, X., Rosenke, R., Kronemann, D., Brim, B., Das, S.R., Dunah, A.W., and
Magnusson, K.R. (2009). The effects of aging on N-methyl-D-aspartate recep-
tor subunits in the synaptic membrane and relationships to long-term spatial
memory. Neuroscience 162, 933–945.
Cell Reports 20, 1360–1371, August 8, 2017
1371
