 C E R E B R A L P A L S Y
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
A lower-extremity exoskeleton improves knee
extension in children with crouch gait from
cerebral palsy
Zachary F. Lerner, Diane L. Damiano, Thomas C. Bulea*
The ability to walk contributes considerably to physical health and overall well-being, particularly in children
with motor disability, and is therefore prioritized as a rehabilitation goal. However, half of ambulatory children
with cerebral palsy (CP), the most prevalent childhood movement disorder, cease to walk in adulthood. Robotic
gait trainers have shown positive outcomes in initial studies, but these clinic-based systems are limited to short-
term programs of insufficient length to maintain improved function in a lifelong disability such as CP.
Sophisticated wearable exoskeletons are now available, but their utility in treating childhood movement dis-
orders remains unknown. We evaluated an exoskeleton for the treatment of crouch (or flexed-knee) gait, one of
the most debilitating pathologies in CP. We show that the exoskeleton reduced crouch in a cohort of ambula-
tory children with CP during overground walking. The exoskeleton was safe and well tolerated, and all children
were able to walk independently with the device. Rather than guiding the lower limbs, the exoskeleton dynam-
ically changed the posture by introducing bursts of knee extension assistance during discrete portions of the
walking cycle, a perturbation that resulted in maintained or increased knee extensor muscle activity during
exoskeleton use. Six of seven participants exhibited postural improvements equivalent to outcomes reported
from invasive orthopedic surgery. We also demonstrate that improvements in crouch increased over the course
of our multiweek exploratory trial. Together, these results provide evidence supporting the use of wearable
exoskeletons as a treatment strategy to improve walking in children with CP.
INTRODUCTION
Injury to the central nervous system during early development can
lead to neuromotor disorders, such as cerebral palsy (CP), that nega-
tively affect quality of life (1). Motor deficits in CP produce patholog-
ical walking patterns (2). Crouch gait, characterized by excessive knee
flexion (3), is a common and debilitating gait disorder in CP. No con-
sensus exists on how much knee flexion constitutes crouch (4). In chil-
dren, the mean minimum knee angle during stance is typically 4° ± 6°
(5); in those with crouch, the knee angle is beyond this range and may
exceed 40° in severe cases (6). Surgery (7, 8), toxin injections (9), and
physical therapy (2, 10) may temporarily improve crouch, but long-
term deficits frequently remain (11, 12). Although not progressive
from a neurological perspective, crouch gait is more energetically cost-
ly than typical walking (13), so children with CP often decline in func-
tional capability as they age (14). Muscle strength and endurance do
not keep pace with body mass during growth, exacerbating locomotor
deterioration (15, 16), ultimately leading to mobility loss in 50% of
ambulatory adolescents with CP in adulthood (17).
Technology-driven gait rehabilitation has led to new treatment op-
tions. Treadmill-based body weight support locomotor training (18)
and robot-assisted gait trainers (RAGTs) (19) are more efficient than
traditional approaches and have shown some effectiveness in children
and adults with CP. However, in controlled trials, improvements were
not superior to therapies of equal intensity, indicating that these new
treatments should not replace overground training (20). Further,
treadmill-based approaches are constrained to clinical or research
facilities, which limits treatment frequency and duration; thus, reten-
tion ofimprovements is unlikely after training ends (20).Alternatively,
whole-body vibration training may offer some gains in muscle and
bone mass (21) but does not address specific gait deficits.
A clear need exists for more effective and sustainable treatmentsfor
crouch gait. Powered exoskeletons provide an untapped resource for
this population. Wearable robotic devices for gait rehabilitation have
primarily focused on restoring lost function due to paralysis in adults
after spinal cord injury (22) or stroke (23). Typically, these systems use
impedance-based controllers to achieve desired joint trajectories (24),
with the amount of robotic guidance dependent on the user’s capabil-
ity (25). Fundamentally, this approach mirrors the assist-as-needed
strategy of RAGT, albeit in an overground setting. Translation of these
technologies to children with gait pathology is not straightforward be-
cause the primary goal is to train a different walking pattern rather
than to restore lost walking capability. Further, the neurological deficits
underlying gait pathology from CP, including spasticity, poor selective
motor control, and muscle weakness make the effect of motorized as-
sistance difficult to predict in this population. An alternative strategy is
to deploy motorized assistance to dynamically change posture during
each gait cycle without imposing a strict trajectory, instead requiring
the user to adjust to the perturbation using volitional muscle activity.
Repeated exposure to such perturbations can recalibrate the motor
strategy, but whether this recalibrated strategy can persist and replace
the user’s previous one remains an open question (26).
To our knowledge, no previous studies have assessed wearable
exoskeletons to treat biomechanical gait deficits in children and ado-
lescents. Thus, their suitability for pediatric rehabilitation remains
largely unknown. Here, we present findings from a multiweek explor-
atory trial of a pediatric exoskeleton (27) designed to alleviate crouch
gait from CP. This study is the first step toward the long-term goal of
implementing a novel device-based approach to treating crouch. The
primary aims were to determine whether motorized knee extension
assistance safely and effectively reduced crouch during overground
Rehabilitation Medicine Department, National Institutes of Health Clinical Center,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: thomas.bulea@nih.gov
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
1 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 walking in ambulatory children with CP, evaluate its effect on voluntary
muscle activity during walking, and elucidate short-term changes in gait
biomechanics in response to robotic assistance. We demonstrate that
wearable exoskeletons can reliably reduce crouch within a short time
frame in a cohort of children with CP as young as 5 years of age and
that children with CP are capable of acclimating to robotic assistance
without reducing knee extensor muscle activity, suggesting that exo-
skeletons are viable for overground gait training in this population.
RESULTS
Timing of exoskeleton assistance affects reduction in crouch
The exoskeleton provided powered knee extension assistance during
the stance and late swing phases of walking in the form of a dynamic
extensor torque about the knee rather than position- or impedance-
controlled limb guidance (Fig. 1A). A proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) motor controller compensated for friction and inertia to achieve
the specified torque output at each state, including zero torque when
no assistance was provided. The ankle joint was passively hinged,
allowing free rotation. In-depth technical details can be found in
(27). Seven participants completed the multiweek trial (Fig. 1B and
Table 1). After initial fit adjustment and exoskeleton tuning, partici-
pants completed five additional visits to the National Institutes of
Health Clinical Center, each lasting 2 to 3 hours. Similar to lower-
extremity orthotic studies (28), participants acclimated to the exo-
skeleton during four laboratory-based practice sessions before the fi-
nal biomechanical assessment of differences between baseline and
exoskeleton-assisted gait (Fig. 1C). An initial gait assessment was also
performed once the participant was able to walk independently with
the exoskeleton. Total practice amount varied by individual because of
fitness level, walking ability, age, and compliance with experimenter
directions. Each assessment included the participant’severyday (baseline)
walking condition, walking with exoskeleton assistance, and the null
exoskeleton condition (zero-torque mode) during which no assistance
was provided, but the controller compensated for the inertia of the de-
vice. Three different modes of knee extension assistance were imple-
mented: during stance phase only, swing phase only, or both stance
and swing phases (Fig. 1D). For each participant, the assistive torque
in eachmode was held constant across the assessments. All participants
achieved independent overground walking in the exoskeleton without
a mobility aid or therapist assistance, with six of seven doing so within
the first practice session. No falls were observed in any participant after
this milestone.
For the stance and swing assist condition, the average knee extensor
torque provided by the exoskeleton was 0.17± 0.06Nm/kg (mean ± SD)
during stance and 0.06 ± 0.02 Nm/kg during swing (table S1). For the
stance assist condition the average torque was 0.15 ± 0.05 Nm/kg, and
for the swing assist condition, the average torque was0.07± 0.03 Nm/kg.
For the null (zero-torque) exoskeleton condition, the average torque
was 0.0013 ± 0.002 Nm/kg. The average torque in the early swing
Fig. 1. Lower-extremity exoskeleton study description. (A) Image illustrating exoskeleton components on a study participant. To ensure accurate kinematic com-
parison between conditions, marker clusters were placed on limb locations free from interference with the exoskeleton and were not removed between conditions.
EMG electrodes were placed over the vastus lateralis (vastus lat.) and semitendinosus (semitend.). (B) Timeline of the six visits, including two data collection assess-
ments and practice visits. (C) Time spent walking over ground with the exoskeleton by each participant. (D) Schematic of gait cycle phases and the timing for the three
modes of knee extension assistance: stance and swing (blue), stance only (red), and swing only (green). (E) Kinematic outcome measures included knee angle at initial
contact (q initial contact), peak knee angle during midstance (q midstance), and total knee excursion. Knee angle data of a representative participant (P7) at baseline
and with the exoskeleton and reference data from typically developing children and young adults from our clinical laboratory database are shown. EMG outcome
measures included the integrated muscle activity (area under the EMG percent gait cycle curve) during stance [area under the curve (AUC) stance] and swing (AUC
swing), normalized by the peak value of each muscle during baseline.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
2 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 phase of the assist modes, when the setting was also zero, was 0.019 ±
0.02 Nm/kg.
The mode of exoskeleton assistance significantly affected knee
angle outcome measures [Fig. 2; q initial contact analysis of variance
(ANOVA), P = 0.002; q midstance ANOVA, P = 0.001]. The stance
and swing assist condition resulted in significantly greater mean im-
provements in knee extension during midstance compared to the
swing assist condition [more-affected limb, 11.8° (P = 0.012); less-
affected limb, 7.4° (P = 0.004)] and at initial contact compared to the
stance assist condition [more-affected limb, 5.5° (P = 0.014); less-
affected limb, 10° (P = 0.003)] (Fig. 2) and was therefore selected for
all subsequent in-depth analyses. Stance assist resulted in more knee
extension during midstance compared to swing assist [more-affected
limb, 6.3° (P = 0.014); less-affected limb, 7.7° (P = 0.013)]. Swing assist
elicited a 7.5° reduction in knee flexion for the less-affected limbs com-
pared to stance assist (P = 0.003). The response to each assistive mode
varied across individuals (fig. S1).
Exoskeleton assistance improved knee extension without
reducing volitional muscle activity
Kinematic responses to extension assistance varied across individuals
and between limbs within an individual at the final assessment (Fig. 3).
Significant reductions in knee flexion at initial contact and midstance
were observed in six of the seven participants when walking with the
exoskeleton; the largest individual improvement was a 36.7° increase
in midstance knee extension. At the group level, walking with the exo-
skeleton in stance and swing assist mode improved mean stance-phase
knee extension by 13.3° (P = 0.024) and 5.8° (P = 0.039) for the more-
and less-affected limbs, respectively (Fig. 3A). Knee extension at initial
contact was improved by 6.8° for the more-affected limbs (P = 0.004).
Vastus lateralis activity increased during swing [more-affected limb,
56% (P = 0.027); less-affected limb, 28% (P = 0.041)] (Fig. 3B). Sem-
itendinosus activity increased during stance [more-affected limb, 55%
(P = 0.012); less-affected limb, 61% (P = 0.042)] and swing [more-
affected limb, 81% (P = 0.001); less-affected limb, 75% (P = 0.014)]
(Fig. 3C).
Comparing baseline and null exoskeleton conditions, no group-level
significant differences were seen in knee angle at midstance (more-
affected limb, P = 0.81; less-affected limb, P = 0.12) or initial contact
(more-affected limb, P = 0.58; less-affected limb, P = 0.17) (fig. S2).
The only significant differences observed in electromyography (EMG)
were increases in both semitendinosus (51%; P = 0.001) and vasti (46%;
P = 0.002) muscle activity during swing for the more-affected limbs
(fig. S2), an expected result due to the added mass of the exoskeleton.
Three participants used AFOs in their baseline walking condi-
tion (P1, P5, and P7). Although we did not compare the AFO to the
no-AFO condition, the null exoskeleton (and the exoskeleton) had
a free ankle. One individual (P1) was more crouched in the null exo-
skeleton condition compared to baseline with AFOs (fig. S2), which
likely decreased the effectiveness of the exoskeleton in reducing her
crouch. No difference was observed between the AFO baseline and
Table 1. Participant information. GMFCS, Gross Motor Function Classification System; MAS, modified Ashworth Scale for knee flexors of the more- and less-affected
limbs; AFO, ankle-foot orthosis.
Patient (ID) Age (years) Gender Height (m) Body mass (kg) GMFCS level MAS (more/less affected) Baseline condition Exoskeleton mass (kg)*
P1
10
Female
1.48
42.5
II
1+/1+
AFO
3.7
P2
12
Male
1.72
69.3
I
1/1
Shod
3.8
P3
19
Female
1.48
65.1
II†
1/1
Shod
4.5
P4
11
Male
1.35
32.0
II
2/1+
Shod
3.0
P5
6
Male
1.11
20.0
II
0/0
AFO
3.1
P6
11
Female
1.56
40.8
II
1+/1+
Shod
3.6
P7
5
Male
1.15
20.6
II
1+/1
AFO
2.6
*Exoskeleton mass is the combined total for both limbs.
†P3 typically walks with crutches and was originally classified as GMFCS III; however, when
prompted, she walked without assistance and was reclassified as GMFCS II.
Fig. 2. Effect of exoskeleton assistance mode on crouch. Reduction in crouch,
measured as increased knee extension angle compared to baseline walking during
early (q initial contact) and midstance (q midstance) for the three assistance modes:
stance and swing, stance only, and swing only. The darker and lighter bars depict
group mean (n = 7) values of the more- and less-affected limbs, respectively. Error
bars denote 1/2 SD; the large error bars indicate the large interparticipant variability
(fig. S1). Significant differences between conditions are indicated (post hoc paired
t tests with Bonferroni correction, P < 0.05).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
3 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 3. Biomechanical effects of exoskeleton extension assistance. (A) Knee angles across the gait cycle (GC) for each participant’s more- and less-affected limbs
during exoskeleton walking under stance and swing assist (colored lines) and at baseline (thin black lines). Measured exoskeleton torques across the gait cycle (black
dashed lines) for each limb, normalized by body mass, are plotted relative to the right axis. Bar charts below show the mean reduction in crouch during exoskeleton
walking at midstance (left) and initial contact (right) for each individual. Vastus lateralis (B) and semitendinosus (C) EMG activity across the gait cycle for each partic-
ipant’s more- and less-affected limbs during exoskeleton walking (colored lines) and baseline (thin black lines); EMG activity was scaled to baseline. Bars below are the
mean change in EMG during exoskeleton walking relative to baseline during stance (left) and swing (right). For all bar plots, participants are presented from left to right
by least-to-most improvement in crouch for their more-affected limbs. The darker and lighter bars depict the more- and less-affected limbs, respectively, and error bars
denote 1/2 SD. Lines across the bar charts indicate group-level significant mean (avg.) changes from baseline for more-affected (dark shade) and less-affected (light
shade) limbs (q midstance for less-affected limbs: one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test, P < 0.05; all other comparisons: paired t tests, P < 0.05). All gait cycle plots are
individual means ± 1 SD in shaded regions; darker and lighter lines depict more- and less-affected limbs, respectively.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
4 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 the null exoskeleton for the other participant (P7) for which data
were available.
Mean total knee angle excursion (more-affected limb, P = 0.06;
less-affected limb, P = 0.15), step length (more-affected limb, P =
0.22; less-affected limb, P = 0.22), and cadence (more-affected limb,
P = 0.07; less-affected limb, P = 0.17) were not significantly different
between baseline and exoskeleton walking during the final assessment
(fig. S3). Baseline spasticity (knee extensors, P = 0.77; knee flexors, P =
0.80) and body mass–normalized muscle strength (knee extensors, P =
0.41; knee flexors, P = 0.59) were not significantly associated with the
changes in crouch (Fig. 4). Mean extension torque provided by the
exoskeleton during stance amounted to 27 ± 13% of mean knee exten-
sor strength (table S1).
Improvement in knee extension accrued with practice
Marked changes in gait were observed between the first and final
sessions with the powered exoskeleton. Stance-phase knee extension
improved by 5.3° (P = 0.003) on the more-affected limbs between as-
sessments (Fig. 5 and fig. S4), indicating a progressive reduction in
crouch with continued exoskeletonuse.Whenparticipants first walked
with the exoskeleton, significant reductions in step length (more-
affected limb, P = 0.025; less-affected limb, P = 0.039) and gait speed
(P = 0.023) were seen compared to baseline walking (Fig. 5A). However,
both measures returned to baseline values during the final assessment
with step length increasing by 33% (0.09 m; P = 0.027) and gait speed
increasing by 32% (0.18 m/s; P = 0.028) across assessments (Fig. 5A).
Increased muscle activity during exoskeleton use was also observed be-
tween assessments; relative vasti activity increased by 61% (P = 0.048)
during swing in the more-affected limbs, whereas relative semitendino-
sus activity increased during stance by 36% (P = 0.027) and swing by
55% (P = 0.016) for the less-affected limbs (Fig. 5B).
There were no significant changes in stance-phase knee extension
(more-affected limb, P = 0.99; less-affected limb, P = 0.26) or gait
speed (P = 0.05) when walking in the null exoskeleton condition (zero
assistive torque) between assessments (fig. S5). On the more-affected
limbs, step length increased by 10% (0.04 m; P = 0.024), and knee an-
gle at initial contact increased by 3.2° (P = 0.039). There were no sig-
nificant changes in stance or swing phase knee extensor and flexor
muscle activity between assessments in the null exoskeleton condition
(all P > 0.05; fig. S5).
DISCUSSION
We developed a robotic exoskeleton designed to ameliorate crouch
gait. Our results demonstrate that robotic assistance provided during
overgroundwalking significantly reduces crouch in children and adoles-
cents with CP. We observed improvements in knee extension in six of
seven participants with gains (8° to 37°) similar to or greater than those
reported from invasive surgical interventions (7, 8). Walking with the
exoskeleton was safe and well tolerated with all participants able to walk
independently after an initial acclimation period. Our results suggest
that powered knee exoskeletons should be investigated as an alternative
to or in conjunction with existing treatments for crouch gait, including
orthopedic surgery, muscle injections, and physical therapy.
Effects of knee extension assistance were specific to the gait phase
duringwhichit was provided (Fig. 2). Poweredassistance during stance
reduced crouch at midstance but did not improve knee angle at initial
contact. Similarly, assistance in late swing improved knee extension
at initial contact, but improvements did not persist throughout stance.
However, the effects were additive such that combined stance and swing
assist mode provided the greatest improvement in knee extension
across the entire gait cycle.
The increase in gait speed across assessments, with no difference
frombaseline speed at the secondassessment, indicatesthat participants
acclimated favorably to the exoskeleton. Crouch, as assessed by knee
extension during midstance, and step length also improved between as-
sessments in most of the participants despite the amount of exoskeleton
assistance being held constant. The lack of intermediate visit data pre-
cluded conclusions regarding the time course of crouch improvement
during the acclimation period. It is likely that additional practice or
increased amounts of assistive torque would have enhanced gains in
crouch reduction in some participants. Long-term studies of the effects
of assistance on crouch are needed to elucidate the mechanisms of im-
provement over time.
Many robotic gait trainers and exoskeletons use impedance-based
controllers to guide the limbs along predefined trajectories (29). We im-
plemented a different strategy of providing
dynamic extension assistance at multiple
pointsin the gait cycle, aparadigm intended
toperturb theuser’sbaseline walking pat-
tern. Most participants adjusted to the as-
sistance after a short amount of practice
as evidenced by the ability to walk inde-
pendently on the first visit. Our results
demonstrate that ambulatory children
with CP did not reduce, but instead main-
tained or increased, knee extensor muscle
activity when walking with the exo-
skeleton, suggesting that robotic assist-
ance augmented, rather than replaced,
volitional knee extensor muscle activity
to elicit improvements in gait mechanics,
despite unwanted concurrent increases
in antagonist muscle activity in some in-
dividuals. Notably, knee extensor activity
was maintained or improved between the
first and final assessments, a result which
Fig. 4. Improvement in crouch does not correlate with spasticity or strength. Mean reduction in crouch at
midstance during exoskeleton walking plotted versus clinical measure of spasticity (modified Ashworth score; left)
and body mass–normalized strength (MVIC, maximum voluntary isometric contraction; right) for the knee extensor
(diamond) and knee flexor (circle) muscles. Pearson’s product-moment correlation analysis revealed no significant
relationships between crouch reduction and spasticity (knee extensors, P = 0.77; knee flexors, P = 0.80) or strength
(knee extensors, P = 0.41; knee flexors, P = 0.59).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
5 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 has positive implications for retaining or potentially increasing muscle
strength with long-term use of phasic wearable assistance. Previous
studies of robotic assistance during walking in healthy individuals have
found that users respond by reducing their voluntary effort to maintain
baseline kinematics. Initial increases in ankle plantar flexion in the pres-
ence of assistance were transient and relatively quickly discarded with
continued practice (30). Similarly, robotic hip flexion assistance re-
sulted in decreased muscle activity and peak hip flexion angle (31).
These results at the hip and ankle, combined with our results at the
knee, suggest that the biomechanical effect of isolated exoskeleton as-
sistance may differ between healthy individuals and those with neuro-
logical deficits.
The exoskeleton was most effective at reducing crouch during mid-
stance, whereas improving knee extension at initial contact was more
difficult. Torque transfer to the knee was more effective in stance,
when the average specified torque was 0.19 ± 0.08 Nm/kg and the
measured assistance was 0.17 ± 0.06 Nm/kg, as compared to swing,
when specified torque was 0.18 ± 0.04 Nm/kg but measured assist-
ance was 0.06 ± 0.02 Nm/kg. Delivery of torque during late swing is
challenging because knee extension velocity approaches the motor no-
load speed, and the motor latency (~50 ms) constitutes a considerable
percentage of this gait phase, limiting the available time to deliver as-
sistance (27). However, neural responses to robotic assistance may
also contribute to the gap in exoskeleton-mediated crouch reduction
between stance and swing. Knee extensor and flexor muscle response
tothe exoskeleton was greater in swing despitedelivery of less-assistive
torque. Part, although not all, of this increased activity was due to the
inertia of the exoskeleton (fig. S2). Coactivation of antagonist muscles,
either due to abnormal reciprocal inhibition (32), reciprocal excitation
(33), attenuated presynaptic inhibition (34), or dystonia, may be re-
sponsible for the observed increases in both muscle groups, and spas-
ticity may have contributed to increased flexor activation during late
swing knee extension. Another possibility is that the elevated muscle
activity in late swing was not a reflex but rather an attempt to resist
postural changes at foot contact caused by robotic assistance because
cocontraction responses improve stability for control over joint angles
(35), and such control has been previously demonstrated in children
with CP (36).
In stance phase, vasti activity remained at baseline values with the
exoskeleton, whereas hamstring activity increased in five of seven par-
ticipants in response to assistance (Fig. 3). There are several possible
explanations for this increased activation. Spasticity is a potential
primary contributor because six of seven children in our cohort had
mild spasticity measured clinically (Table 1). More rapid knee exten-
sion after loading response may have elicited a stretch response in some
individuals (P2, P3, P5, and P7), although these presumed stretch re-
sponses observed in EMG were not always consistent with clinical as-
sessment of spasticity. This could be explained by a lack of sensitivity of
the MAS, particularly in the lower extremity (37), or because knee joint
velocity during MAS assessment is slower than that during assisted gait.
Alternatively, the elevated hamstring EMG may be an attempt to main-
tain stability because reduction in crouch during midstance without a
Fig. 5. Change in biomechanical measures between first and last assessments. (A) Knee angle during midstance (q midstance), knee angle at initial contact (q initial
contact), and step length for more-affected (dark shades) and less-affected (light shades) limbs and gait speed at the first and last assessment visits during baseline (black/
gray) and exoskeleton stance and swing assist (dark/light blue) walking. Asterisks indicate significant differences between conditions during the first assessment (paired
t tests, P < 0.05) in step length (more-affected limb, P = 0.025; less-affected limb, P = 0.039) and gait speed (P = 0.023). Differences between conditions at the last assessment are
shown in Fig. 3 and fig. S3. (B) Change in vastus lateralis and semitendinosus activity during exoskeleton walking relative to baseline as measured by area under the curve. EMG
data during the exoskeleton trials were normalized by the EMG from baseline walking within visits. All values plotted are group means (n = 7); error bars denote ±1/2 SD.
Bold lines and P values indicate significant differences between visits (paired t tests, P < 0.05).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
6 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 concurrent increase in hip extension would anteriorly shift the center
of mass. Increased hamstring activity may also constitute a mal-
adaptive response because of the external torque provided by the motor
exceeding the internalflexor moment (38). Additional improvements in
posture and muscle patterns may be achieved by refinement of robotic
control algorithms to account for internal joint mechanics (38). More
practice time may also enhance coordination of muscle activity with the
external assistance.
In addition to alleviating crouch, the perturbation-like dynamic as-
sistance may also provide the opportunity to train a new strategy for
walking. Modifying locomotor strategies via motor adaptation has been
studied extensively (39). Individuals with brain lesions from stroke (40)
and CP (41) have shown improved short-term step symmetry in re-
sponse to perturbations. Such changes are transient; the newly adapted
movement patterns are rapidly abandoned after the perturbation is re-
moved. The beneficial effects of short-term adaptation may be extended
by repetitive training (42) and reinforcement (43), supporting the idea
that long-term training in the presence of a perturbation may form new
motor patterns (26). An exoskeleton that introduces postural changes as
a perturbation, as in this study, may therefore provide an opportunity
for long-term rehabilitation gains by reinforcing short-term adaptations
through extensive home-based training, a potential advantage over tra-
ditional therapy settings. Transfer of these new patterns outside the
environment within which they were learned (in this case, to walking
without the exoskeleton) remains a key challenge. Gradually increasing
the perturbation over time may result in more effective generalization
of the new motor pattern (44). Future studies focusing on systematic
follow-up after intensive training with the exoskeleton will be vital in
determining the dosage of assistance required to achieve long-term
biomechanical improvements.
Exoskeleton use may confer other benefits even in the absence of
long-term crouch reduction without the device. A flexed posture sig-
nificantly increases the muscular effort (6) and metabolic cost (45) as-
sociated with walking. Thus, the improved knee extension achieved
using our device may ease the energy burden of walking and enhance
physical activity in those with crouch, which may subsequently help
halt or reverse the downward cycle of impaired mobility (14, 46).
Detailed studies of walking in the exoskeleton over longer time periods
are necessary to fully assess the effect on metabolic cost and energy
expenditure.
We observed asymmetric biomechanical responses to robotic as-
sistance with greater kinematic improvements generally observed on
the more-affected limbs. The less-affected limb, by definition, had a
smaller range over which kinematic improvements could take place.
In some cases, the disparity in knee extension improvements between
limbs concurred with muscle activity results. For example, P5 and P7
had greater increases in hamstring activity and less crouch reduction
with stance phase assistance on the less-affected limb. This result is in
agreement with recent studies of unilateral leg weighting in children
with CP in which adaptation effects differed between dominant (less-
affected) and nondominant (more-affected) legs (47) suggesting that,
like healthy individuals, children with CP have separate neural circuits
for controlling each leg during walking that can adapt independently
(48). Although we tuned the torque setting for each leg independently,
outcomes may be further improved by using distinct control strategies
for each limb.
Heterogeneity in the type and timing of neurological insults leading
to CP creates variability in both the degree of motor disability (49) and
the response to interventions (50, 51). However, we observed significant
crouch reduction in six of seven participants. These improvements were
not correlated with clinical assessment of spasticity or extensor strength.
The former result was not surprising because spasticity is only weakly
correlated with reduced walking ability (52). Conversely, the same study
found that strength was strongly correlated to gait function. Our partic-
ipants had sufficient strength to ambulate independently; a stronger
correlation between strength and exoskeleton response may become
more evident in individuals with greater weakness and mobility chal-
lenges. Nonetheless, the exoskeleton improved upright posture in chil-
dren with widely varying crouch severity (21° to 51° of knee flexion at
initial contact) and thus may be a broadly applicable treatment for
crouch across the CP population.
Our findings pave the way for the longer-term investigation of
wearable exoskeletons for gait rehabilitation in children with neuro-
logical disorders. Even the participant (P1) who did not exhibit re-
duced crouch with the exoskeleton compared to baseline at the final
assessment improved over the course of the study. This participant
had the slowest absolute and height-normalized walking speed during
baseline and exoskeleton conditions. On her first assessment with the
exoskeleton, she ambulated via noncontinuous steps. However, she
increased her gait speed by 140% and her more-affected limb knee
extension by 20% between assessments, suggesting that additional
practice with the exoskeleton may have improved her posture.
Limitations of this study were the small number of participants and
that all were at Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS)
level I or II. To isolate the biomechanical effects of robotic assistance,
only participants who could walk without external assistance were in-
cluded, limiting the generalizability of our findings. Many individuals
at GMFCS levels III and IV are at higher risk for losing functional mo-
bility in and after adolescence (53, 54) and thus would likely benefit
from exoskeleton assistance. Similarly, children with lower limb weak-
ness as a result of muscular dystrophy, spina bifida, or incomplete spinal
cord injury are also potential candidates for training with this type of de-
vice.Althoughmoreresearchisneeded,thediversityinagerange,anthro-
pometrics, and crouch severity was a strength of our small cohort, which
lends credence to broad applicability of exoskeletons for gait training.
In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that a powered lower ex-
tremity exoskeleton providing dynamic extension assistance produces
clinically meaningful improvements in crouch during overground
walking in children and adolescents with CP. The exoskeleton was
well tolerated, and biomechanical improvements accrued after a small
amount of time in the device. Collectively, these results provide evi-
dence to support larger controlled intervention studies of pediatric
exoskeleton efficacy for gait rehabilitation in CP and other disorders.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The goal of this study was to assess the effects of powered knee exten-
sion assistance during overground walking in children with crouch gait
from CP. Biomechanical effects were measured in a motion capture lab-
oratory, with primary outcome measures of knee extension angle and
knee extensor (vastus lateralis) and flexor (semitendinosus) EMG. This
was a cohort study with two data collection time points. Primary out-
come measures were evaluated at the final assessment, allowing all par-
ticipants four practice sessions to acclimate to the exoskeleton. These
acclimation periods are common in studies of lower extremity orthoses
(28). To examine short-term biomechanical changes during acclima-
tion, an initial data collection was performed when each participant
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
7 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 was first able to walk independently with the exoskeleton. At each as-
sessment, data were collected in the baseline walking condition, with the
exoskeleton in three assist modes (stance only, swing only, and stance
and swing) and a null exoskeleton mode in which no assistance was
provided, but the controller provided inertia compensation for the
exoskeleton. Within each session, the order of exoskeleton modes was
randomized.
Ourprotocol(#13-CC-0210)wasapprovedbythe NationalInstitutes
of Health institutional review board. Individuals between the ages of
5 and 19 were recruited to participate in our study that included six
visits over 8 to 12 weeks (Fig. 1B). In addition to a diagnosis of crouch
gait from CP, inclusion criteria were GMFCS levels I and II, thigh-foot
angle from 10° internal tibial rotation to 25° external rotation, and less
than 5° and 10° knee flexion and plantar flexion contractures, respec-
tively. Participants were excluded if they had any health condition other
than CP that would affect their participation. Eight participants with
spastic diplegic CP met all the criteria. Informed assent and consent
were obtained from each child and their parents, respectively. The
parents of one participant, a 5-year-old who had difficulty complying
with study procedures, withdrew the child from the study. Participant
information for the seven individuals who completed all six visits is
shown in Table 1.
Exoskeleton design
A full technical description of the exoskeleton used in this study can be
foundin (27). The deviceisbasedonastandardknee AFOwithapassive
adjustable dynamic ankle joint and an actuated knee joint containing
a back-drivable 24-V, 90-W brushless motor (Maxon Motor) with a
custom-designed two-stage transmission. The exoskeleton’s maximum
torque is 16.1 Nm, and the maximum no-load speed is 314°/s. The exo-
skeleton weight varied by individual ranging from 2.6 to 4.5 kg for both
legs combined (Table 1). Each limb’s exoskeleton contained a quadra-
ture encoder(Maxon Motor), atorquesensor(TransducerTechniques),
and a force sensitive resistor (Interlink Electronics) to track knee angle
and angular velocity, knee joint torque, and foot-ground contact, re-
spectively. The gait cycle was split into three discrete states (stance, early
swing, and late swing) in real time using sensor feedback and a rule-
based finite state machine. Within each phase, a PID controller wasused
to achieve the desired torque output. PID gains were tuned manually
during benchtop testing before each participant donned the device
and remained the same for all experimental sessions. The mean latency
was 53 ms for torque activation and 57 ms for deactivation (27); thus,
the desired step input changes in torque set points within each gait
phase were achieved as ramp responses in practice. The control sys-
tem was implemented in a single-board computer (LX800, LiPPERT
Embedded Computers) running Debian Linux with Xenomai real-
time kernel. The exoskeleton can be powered by a DC power source
or an onboard 22.2-V lithium-ion battery. The control box weighed
2.0 kg and was carried by an experimental assistant walking behind
the participant.
Study protocol
On the first visit, participants completed baseline overground gait
analysis and knee flexor and extensor spasticity and strength assess-
ment (System 4, Biodex). An orthotist cast each participant’s legs for
fabrication of the custom exoskeleton. On the second, fourth, and fifth
visits, each lasting 2 to 3 hours, participants donned their exoskeleton
and practiced walking overground and on a treadmill (Fig. 1C). Exo-
skeleton assistance could be provided during the stance and late swing
phases to assist knee extension. Assistance was provided in the form of
a step change in torque set point. Whenever assistance was not active,
the control algorithm specified zero torque (free rotation) as was al-
ways the case during early swing to allow the knee to flex without
resistance and to maintain toe clearance. The amount of assistance
was tuned during the second visit with the goal of maximizing knee
extension without compromising walking stability. The torque set
point was incrementally increased, and the effect was evaluated visu-
ally and through verbal feedback with the user until the optimal setting
within the limits of the device that could be comfortably accommo-
dated by each participant was reached, an approach similar to clinical
tuning of commercially available prosthetics and orthotics. Torque set
points were tuned separately for each limb and gait phase (stance and
swing) and remained the same during all data collection sessions to
allow acclimation and to preclude confounding effects of varying
the amount of assistance. We evaluated three different modes of exo-
skeleton assistance: (i) stance assist, (ii) swing assist, and (iii) com-
bined stance and swing assist (Fig. 1D).
Data collection was allocated to two visits: The first assessment
occurred on the third visit except for one participant (P5) who was
unable to walk independently with the exoskeleton until the fourth
visit, so the fifth visit was his first assessment, and the final assessment
took place on the last visit. At the start of the data collection visits,
which lasted 3 to 4 hours, participants completed an overground
walking trial in their normal baseline condition (shoes with or without
prescribed AFOs). Each walking trial comprised a minimum of four
passes across the 5-m motion capture space. Next, participants
donned the exoskeleton and completed each exoskeleton walking con-
dition over ground. A safety line, attached to a torso-mounted gait
belt, was in place but untensioned as long as the participant remained
upright. The exoskeleton was tethered to a power supply to guarantee
continuous operation during testing. Participants were provided fre-
quent rest periods to minimize fatigue. One participant (P5) was unable
to complete the null exoskeleton condition during the final assessment.
Gait assessments included motion capture and EMG. Ten infrared
cameras (Vicon Motion Systems) recording at 100 Hz captured the
three-dimensional positions of retroreflective markers placed according
to a custom marker set (27). Wireless EMG electrodes (Trigno,Delsys)
recording at 1000 Hz were placed bilaterally on the vastus lateralis and
semitendinosus. Motion capture, EMG, and exoskeleton data were
synchronized via an electrical pulse.
Biomechanical analysis
Joint angles were computed in Visual 3D (C-Motion). MATLAB ver-
sion 2016a (MathWorks Inc.) was used to postprocess the joint angle,
exoskeleton torque, and EMG data. EMG data were band-pass–filtered
(15 to 380 Hz), full wave–rectified, and low-pass–filtered with a 7-Hz
cutoff frequency to generate linear envelopes (55). The area under the
stance and swing portions of the EMG versus percent gait cycle curve
were calculated by numerical integration (Fig. 1E).
For each subject, strides were normalized to percent gait cycle and
averaged across gait cycles for each walking condition. The leg with the
greatest crouch during stance was designated as the more-affected
limb. Only independent walking strides without external assistance
in which the exoskeleton was functioning properly were analyzed.
Kinematic outcome measures included knee angle at initial contact
(q initial contact), minimum knee flexion during stance (q midstance),
and total knee excursion (Fig. 1E), with a reduction in knee flexion
angle (increased knee extension) considered an improvement in posture.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
8 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Spatiotemporal outcome measures included step length, cadence, and gait
velocity. Neuromuscular outcome measures included integrated EMG
during stance and swing. To compare between exoskeleton and baseline
walking conditions within a visit, EMG data were normalized by the
peak value of each muscle’s activity during the baseline trials. To com-
pare the exoskeleton conditions between visits, EMG data for each
muscle during the exoskeleton trials were normalized by the EMG
data during the baseline trials for that visit.
Statistical analysis
Foreachconditionandoutcomemeasure,meansandSDswerecalculated
for the more- and less-affected limbs. One-factor repeated-measures
ANOVA procedures were used to determine the effects of the three exo-
skeleton assist conditions on knee flexion at initial contact and mid-
stance. When indicated, post hoc comparisons were performed using
paired t tests with Bonferroni multiple comparisons correction. Paired
t tests were used to evaluate a small number of a priori comparisons:
between baseline and exoskeleton walking conditions under optimized
torque settings (and the null exoskeleton condition) on the final assess-
ment and between the two assessments during walking with the exo-
skeleton operating at same torque settings. For each comparison, the
Jarque-Bera two-sided goodness-of-fit test was used to check for nor-
mality. Wilcoxon signed-rank tests replaced paired t tests for distribu-
tions that failed normality. Pearson’s product-moment correlation
analysis was used to relate knee extensor and flexor strength and spas-
ticity to changes in crouch. Statistical significance was set at a < 0.05,
except when adjusted for multiple comparisons. Individual subject-level
data are shown in table S2.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/404/eaam9145/DC1
Fig. S1. Effect of exoskeleton assistance mode on crouch by individual.
Fig. S2. Biomechanical effects of walking with the null exoskeleton.
Fig. S3. Effect of exoskeleton assistance on gait parameters.
Fig. S4. Individual differences in crouch between first and last assessments.
Fig. S5. Group-level change in biomechanical measures between first and last assessments
during walking with the null exoskeleton.
Table S1. Knee torque measurement by exoskeleton condition and muscle strength.
Table S2. Individual subject-level data.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. P. Rosenbaum, N. Paneth, A. Leviton, M. Goldstein, M. Bax, D. Damiano, B. Dan, B. Jacobsson,
A report: The definition and classification of cerebral palsy April 2006. Dev. Med. Child
Neurol. Suppl. 109, 8–14 (2007).
2. D. L. Damiano, K. E. Alter, H. Chambers, New clinical and research trends in lower
extremity management for ambulatory children with cerebral palsy. Phys. Med. Rehabil.
Clin. N. Am. 20, 469–491 (2009).
3. T. A. L. Wren, S. Rethlefsen, R. M. Kay, Prevalence of specific gait abnormalities in children
with cerebral palsy: Influence of cerebral palsy subtype, age, and previous surgery.
J. Pediatr. Orthop. 25, 79–83 (2005).
4. S. A. Galey, Z. F. Lerner, T. C. Bulea, S. Zimbler, D. L. Damiano, Effectiveness of surgical and
non-surgical management of crouch gait in cerebral palsy: A systematic review.
Gait Posture 54, 93–105 (2017).
5. S. Ounpuu, J. R. Gage, R. B. Davis, Three-dimensional lower extremity joint kinetics in
normal pediatric gait. J. Pediatr. Orthop. 11, 341–349 (1991).
6. J. L. Hicks, M. H. Schwartz, A. S. Arnold, S. L. Delp, Crouched postures reduce the capacity
of muscles to extend the hip and knee during the single-limb stance phase of gait.
J. Biomech. 41, 960–967 (2008).
7. C. De Mattos, K. P. Do, R. Pierce, J. Feng, M. Aiona, M. Sussman, Comparison of hamstring
transfer with hamstring lengthening in ambulatory children with cerebral palsy: Further
follow-up. J. Child. Orthop. 8, 513–520 (2014).
8. J. L. Stout, J. R. Gage, M. H. Schwartz, T. F. Novacheck, Distal femoral extension
osteotomy and patellar tendon advancement to treat persistent crouch gait in cerebral
palsy. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 90, 2470–2484 (2008).
9. I. S. Corry, A. P. Cosgrove, C. M. Duffy, T. C. Taylor, H. K. Graham, Botulinum toxin A in
hamstring spasticity. Gait Posture 10, 206–210 (1999).
10. D. L. Damiano, A. S. Arnold, K. M. Steele, S. L. Delp, Can strength training predictably
improve gait kinematics? A pilot study on the effects of hip and knee extensor strengthening
on lower-extremity alignment in cerebral palsy. Phys. Ther. 90, 269–279 (2010).
11. T. Dreher, D. Vegvari, S. I. Wolf, A. Geisbusch, S. Gantz, W. Wenz, F. Braatz, Development of
knee function after hamstring lengthening as a part of multilevel surgery in children with
spastic diplegia: A long-term outcome study. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 94, 121–130 (2012).
12. S. A. Rethlefsen, S. Yasmeh, T. A. L. Wren, R. M. Kay, Repeat hamstring lengthening for
crouch gait in children with cerebral palsy. J. Pediatr. Orthop. 33, 501–504 (2013).
13. J. Rose, J. G. Gamble, A. Burgos, J. Medeiros, W. L. Haskell, Energy expenditure index of
walking for normal children and for children with cerebral palsy. Dev. Med. Child Neurol.
32, 333–340 (1990).
14. K. F. Bjornson, B. Belza, D. Kartin, R. Logsdon, J. F. McLaughlin, Ambulatory physical
activity performance in youth with cerebral palsy and youth who are developing
typically. Phys. Ther. 87, 248–257 (2007).
15. K. J. Bell, S. Ounpuu, P. A. DeLuca, M. J. Romness, Natural progression of gait in children
with cerebral palsy. J. Pediatr. Orthop. 22, 677–682 (2002).
16. D. C. Johnson, D. L. Damiano, M. F. Abel, The evolution of gait in childhood and
adolescent cerebral palsy. J. Pediatr. Orthop. 17, 392–396 (1997).
17. M. Bottos, C. Gericke, Ambulatory capacity in cerebral palsy: Prognostic criteria and
consequences for intervention. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 45, 786–790 (2003).
18. K. J. Dodd, S. Foley, Partial body-weight-supported treadmill training can improve
walking in children with cerebral palsy: A clinical controlled trial. Dev. Med. Child Neurol.
49, 101–105 (2007).
19. I. Borggraefe, A. Meyer-Heim, A. Kumar, J. S. Schaefer, S. Berweck, F. Heinen, Improved
gait parameters after robotic-assisted locomotor treadmill therapy in a 6-year-old child
with cerebral palsy. Mov. Disord. 23, 280–283 (2008).
20. B. H. Dobkin, P. W. Duncan, Should body weight–supported treadmill training and
robotic-assistive steppers for locomotor training trot back to the starting gate?
Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 26, 308–317 (2012).
21. S. Gusso, C. F. Munns, P. Colle, J. G. B. Derraik, J. B. Biggs, W. S. Cutfield, P. L. Hofman,
Effects of whole-body vibration training on physical function, bone and muscle mass in
adolescents and young adults with cerebral palsy. Sci. Rep. 6, 22518 (2016).
22. R. J. Farris, H. A. Quintero, S. A. Murray, K. H. Ha, C. Hartigan, M. Goldfarb, A preliminary
assessment of legged mobility provided by a lower limb exoskeleton for persons with
paraplegia. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 22, 482–490 (2014).
23. M. Bortole, A. Venkatakrishnan, F. Zhu, J. C. Moreno, G. E. Francisco, J. L. Pons,
J. L. Contreras-Vidal, The H2 robotic exoskeleton for gait rehabilitation after stroke: Early
findings from a clinical study. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 12, 54 (2015).
24. L. Marchal-Crespo, D. J. Reinkensmeyer, Review of control strategies for robotic
movement training after neurologic injury. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 6, 20 (2009).
25. S. K. Banala, S. H. Kim, S. K. Agrawal, J. P. Scholz, Robot assisted gait training with active
leg exoskeleton (ALEX). IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 17, 2–8 (2009).
26. A. J. Bastian, Understanding sensorimotor adaptation and learning for rehabilitation.
Curr. Opin. Neurol. 21, 628–633 (2008).
27. Z. F. Lerner, D. L. Damiano, H. S. Park, A. J. Gravunder, T. C. Bulea, A robotic exoskeleton
for treatment of crouch gait in children with cerebral palsy: Design and initial application.
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 25, 650–659 (2017).
28. W. E. Carlson, C. L. Vaughan, D. L. Damiano, M. F. Abel, Orthotic management of gait in
spastic diplegia. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 76, 219–225 (1997).
29. R. Riener, L. Lunenburger, S. Jezernik, M. Anderschitz, G. Colombo, V. Dietz,
Patient-cooperative strategies for robot-aided treadmill training: First experimental
results. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 13, 380–394 (2005).
30. K. E. Gordon, D. P. Ferris, Learning to walk with a robotic ankle exoskeleton. J. Biomech.
40, 2636–2644 (2007).
31. T. Lenzi, M. C. Carrozza, S. K. Agrawal, Powered hip exoskeletons can reduce the user’s hip
and ankle muscle activations during walking. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 21,
938–948 (2013).
32. C. T. Leonard, T. Moritani, H. Hirschfeld, H. Forssberg, Deficits in reciprocal inhibition of
children with cerebral palsy as revealed by H reflex testing. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 32,
974–984 (1990).
33. B. M. Myklebust, G. L. Gottlieb, R. D. Penn, G. C. Agarwal, Reciprocal excitation of antagonistic
muscles as a differentiating feature in spasticity. Ann. Neurol. 12, 367–374 (1982).
34. V. Dietz, T. Sinkjaer, Spastic movement disorder: Impaired reflex function and altered
muscle mechanics. Lancet Neurol. 6, 725–733 (2007).
35. P. Aagaard, E. B. Simonsen, J. L. Andersen, S. P. Magnusson, F. Bojsen-Moller,
P. Dyhre-Poulsen, Antagonist muscle coactivation during isokinetic knee extension.
Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 10, 58–67 (2000).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
9 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 36. D. van Roon, B. Steenbergen, R. G. Meulenbroek, Trunk use and co-contraction in cerebral
palsy as regulatory mechanisms for accuracy control. Neuropsychologia 43, 497–508
(2005).
37. A. D. Pandyan, G. R. Johnson, C. I. Price, R. H. Curless, M. P. Barnes, H. Rodgers, A review of
the properties and limitations of the Ashworth and modified Ashworth Scales as
measures of spasticity. Clin. Rehabil. 13, 373–383 (1999).
38. Z. F. Lerner, D. L. Damiano, T. C. Bulea, Estimating the mechanical behavior of the knee
joint during crouch gait: Implications for real-time motor control of robotic knee
orthoses. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 24, 621–629 (2016).
39. G. Torres-Oviedo, E. Vasudevan, L. Malone, A. J. Bastian, Locomotor adaptation. Prog. Brain
Res. 191, 65–74 (2011).
40. L. A. Malone, A. J. Bastian, Spatial and temporal asymmetries in gait predict split-belt
adaptation behavior in stroke. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 28, 230–240 (2014).
41. D. Damiano, C. J. Stanley, T. C. Bulea, H. S. Park, Motor learning abilities are similar in
hemiplegic cerebral palsy compared to controls as assessed by adaptation to unilateral
leg-weighting during gait: Part 1. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11, 49 (2017).
42. D. S. Reisman, H. McLean, J. Keller, K. A. Danks, A. J. Bastian, Repeated split-belt treadmill
training improves poststroke step length asymmetry. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 27,
460–468 (2013).
43. S. Bar-Haim, N. Harries, I. Nammourah, S. Oraibi, W. Malhees, J. Loeppky, N. J. Perkins,
M. Belokopytov, J. Kaplanski, E. Lahat, Effectiveness of motor learning coaching in
children with cerebral palsy: A randomized controlled trial. Clin. Rehabil. 24,
1009–1020 (2010).
44. J. Kluzik, J. Diedrichsen, R. Shadmehr, A. J. Bastian, Reach adaptation: What determines
whether we learn an internal model of the tool or adapt the model of our arm?
J. Neurophysiol. 100, 1455–1464 (2008).
45. R. L. Waters, S. Mulroy, The energy expenditure of normal and pathologic gait. Gait Posture
9, 207–231 (1999).
46. R. A. Cooper, L. A. Quatrano, P. W. Axelson, W. Harlan, M. Stineman, B. Franklin,
J. S. Krause, J. Bach, H. Chambers, E. Y. Chao, M. Alexander, P. Painter, Research on physical
activity and health among people with disabilities: A consensus statement. J. Rehabil.
Res. Dev. 36, 142–154 (1999).
47. T. C. Bulea, C. J. Stanley, D. L. Damiano, Part 2: Adaptation of gait kinematics in unilateral
cerebral palsy demonstrates preserved independent neural control of each limb.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11, 50 (2017).
48. J. T. Choi, A. J. Bastian, Adaptation reveals independent control networks for human
walking. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 1055–1062 (2007).
49. D. L. Damiano, J. Quinlivan, B. F. Owen, M. Shaffrey, M. F. Abel, Spasticity versus strength
in cerebral palsy: Relationships among involuntary resistance, voluntary torque, and
motor function. Eur. J. Neurol. 8 (suppl. 5), 40–49 (2001).
50. K. M. Steele, D. L. Damiano, M. N. Eek, M. Unger, S. L. Delp, Characteristics associated with
improved knee extension after strength training for individuals with cerebral palsy and
crouch gait. J. Pediatr. Rehabil. Med. 5, 99–106 (2012).
51. D. L. Damiano, Meaningfulness of mean group results for determining the optimal motor
rehabilitation program for an individual child with cerebral palsy. Dev. Med. Child Neurol.
56, 1141–1146 (2014).
52. S. A. Ross, J. R. Engsberg, Relationships between spasticity, strength, gait, and the GMFM-66
in persons with spastic diplegia cerebral palsy. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 88, 1114–1120
(2007).
53. S. E. Hanna, P. L. Rosenbaum, D. J. Bartlett, R. J. Palisano, S. D. Walter, L. Avery, D. J. Russell,
Stability and decline in gross motor function among children and youth with cerebral
palsy aged 2 to 21 years. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 51, 295–302 (2009).
54. R. J. Palisano, P. Rosenbaum, D. Bartlett, M. H. Livingston, Content validity of the
expanded and revised Gross Motor Function Classification System. Dev. Med. Child Neurol.
50, 744–750 (2008).
55. Z. F. Lerner, W. J. Board, R. C. Browning, Pediatric obesity and walking duration increase
medial tibiofemoral compartment contact forces. J. Orthop. Res. 34, 97–105 (2016).
Acknowledgments: We thank M. DeHarde and Ultraflex Systems Inc. for fabricating the
orthotics for each exoskeleton. We thank H. S. Park and J. Kim for their contributions to the
design of the exoskeleton and control electronics. We also thank K. Alter, A. Gravunder,
C. Stanley, C. Zampieri-Gallagher, S. Galey, A. Sharma, and L. Ohlrich for their assistance
with clinical assessments and data collection. Z.F.L. was with the NIH and is currently with
the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ.
Funding: This work was supported by the intramural research program at the NIH
Clinical Center (protocol #13-CC-0210). Author contributions: Z.F.L. contributed to the
experimental design, collected and analyzed the data, generated the figures, and wrote
the manuscript. D.L.D. supervised the study, advised on clinical aspects, assisted in data
interpretation, and wrote the manuscript. T.C.B. was the principal investigator, conceived,
designed, and led the study, collected and interpreted the data, and wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests: Z.F.L., D.L.D., and T.C.B. are named inventors on a provisional patent
application (U.S. patent application no. 62/368,926, “Powered Gait Assistance Systems”)
covering the exoskeleton used in the study, which is held by the NIH. Data and materials
availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the
paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may
be requested from T.C.B. (thomas.bulea@nih.gov).
Submitted 3 February 2017
Resubmitted 13 April 2017
Accepted 18 July 2017
Published 23 August 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aam9145
Citation: Z. F. Lerner, D. L. Damiano, T. C. Bulea, A lower-extremity exoskeleton improves knee
extension in children with crouch gait from cerebral palsy. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Lerner, Damiano, Bulea, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaam9145 (2017)
23 August 2017
10 of 10
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 cerebral palsy
A lower-extremity exoskeleton improves knee extension in children with crouch gait from
Zachary F. Lerner, Diane L. Damiano and Thomas C. Bulea
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aam9145
, eaam9145.
9
Sci Transl Med 
longer-term studies with robotic exoskeleton assistance in this patient population.
Increased step length and gait speed suggest that the participants adapted to the assistive devices, warranting
visits, six of seven participants showed improved knee extension during overground walking with the exoskeleton. 
knee bending. The exoskeleton provided dynamic assistance during specific phases of the gait cycle. After six
on the legs could alleviate crouch gait in children with cerebral palsy. Crouch gait is characterized by excessive 
. investigated whether an exoskeleton worn
et al
palsy, can limit mobility and independence throughout life. Lerner 
Neurological and movement disorders occurring during early childhood, collectively known as cerebral
A stand-up job for cerebral palsy
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/404/eaam9145
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/08/21/9.404.eaam9145.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/210/210rv2.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/5/210/210ps15.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/400/eaai9084.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/399/eaah3621.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/404/eaam9145#BIBL
This article cites 54 articles, 4 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
