 The Aging Navigational System
Adam W. Lester1,2, Scott D. Moffat4, Jan M. Wiener5, Carol A. Barnes1,2,3, and Thomas 
Wolbers6,7
1Evelyn F McKnight Brain Institute, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA
2Division of Neural Systems, Memory and Aging, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA
3Departments of Psychology, Neurology and Neuroscience, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
Arizona, USA
4School of Psychology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 30332
5Department of Psychology, Ageing and Dementia Institute, Bournemouth University, Poole, 
BH12 5BB, United Kingdom
6German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Aging and Cognition Research Group, 
39120 Magdeburg, Germany
7Center for Behavioral Brain Sciences (CBBS), 39118 Magdeburg, Germany
1. Introduction
The world’s population is aging at an unprecedented rate. According to the WHO, the 
number of people aged over 60 is set to rise to 2 billion by 2050, a significant proportion of 
whom will have to cope with normative or pathological cognitive decline. While a large of 
body of research into cognitive aging has focused on functions such as memory and 
attention, relatively few studies have investigated changes in spatial navigation. This is 
surprising because key structures of the brain’s navigation circuit are particularly vulnerable 
to the deleterious consequences of aging. Hence, detection of navigational deficits should 
provide a distinct metric for assessing age-related cognitive decline. Furthermore, recent 
breakthroughs in understanding the cellular components of basic navigational circuits in a 
variety of species, including rodents, bats and nonhuman primates, provide the opportunity 
to distinguish those network changes that occur as a result of normative aging processes 
independent from those imposed by specific neuropathological conditions.
In surveys, older people indeed report substantial declines in navigational capabilities 
(Burns, 1999), which can severely restrict mobility and social participation. Self-reported 
difficulties and objective tests are consistent with the observations of altered spatial 
Corresponding author: Thomas Wolbers. German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Aging & Cognition Research 
Group, Leipziger Str. 44, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany. thomas.wolbers@dzne.de. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Published in final edited form as:
Neuron. 2017 August 30; 95(5): 1019–1035. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2017.06.037.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cognition in all species examined. For example, older humans show deficits in tasks 
designed to test spatial navigation (Moffat, 2009) as do nonhuman primates (Rapp et al., 
1997), dogs (Head et al., 1995), rats (Barnes, 1979) and mice (Bach et al., 1999). Given that 
these problems cannot be explained by general, age-related declines in cognitive (e.g., 
reduced processing speed) or motor functioning, the following sections will provide an in-
depth discussion of the behavioral and neural mechanisms that cause specific navigational 
impairments in old age.
2. Mechanisms of Spatial Navigation
Navigation – one of the most fundamental behaviors in humans and other animals – involves 
a multitude of cognitive functions and processes. First of all, spatial navigation can be based 
on dynamic self-motion cues and/or static environmental cues. The former comprise body 
based self-motion cues derived from motor efference copy, vestibular feedback and 
proprioceptive cues, all of which can be used to keep track of one’s position and orientation. 
Following primary sensory processing, these cues are first integrated in brainstem nuclei to 
yield estimates of angular and linear movement velocity. Similarly, optic flow arising from 
visual perception also provides self-motion information to the organism. In primates, both 
types of self-motion cues are further processed in parietal/superior temporal cortices (i.e., 
areas MST, VIP and 7a), thus providing an integrated percept of self-motion. The second 
type of cues, referred to here as environmental cues, mainly comprise stable objects such as 
landmarks and extended boundaries that can be used to determine one’s position and 
orientation relative to the environment. In primates, these cues are predominantly derived 
from visual perception, but other species also make heavy use of non-visual cues (i.e., 
auditory, olfactory and tactile stimuli). Perception of environmental cues involves, beyond 
primary sensory cortices, various structures in posterior parietal cortex (Kravitz et al., 2011). 
Importantly, self-motion and environmental cues can inform both allocentric and egocentric 
reference frames (Figure 1A, B). An allocentric reference frame is independent of the 
position of the navigator and does not change as the navigator moves through space. An 
egocentric reference frame, on the other hand, involves representations of locations that are 
encoded relative to the navigator.
Secondly, the mammalian brain uses self-motion and environmental cues to build up a 
variety of spatial representations. The first window into such representations came from 
O’Keefe and Dostrovsky’s observation (1971) that the firing properties of rodent 
hippocampal principal cells are tuned to the region of space an animal is in. These place 
cells inspired ideas about how space provides a scaffold for integrating multimodal features 
of a given experience or episode. Cells with similar properties have subsequently been found 
in a number of mammalian species including mice (e.g., McHugh et al., 1996), bats (e.g., 
Ulanovsky and Moss, 2007), humans (e.g., Ekstrom et al., 2003) and non-human primates 
(e.g., Feigenbaum and Rolls, 1991). O’Keefe and Nadel (1978) went on to describe how 
space and navigation through it anchors our daily experiences within the hippocampus to 
create a cognitive map. Since this time, a number of other functionally classified spatially 
modulated cell types have been identified including grid cells, head direction cells, border 
cells and speed cells. All are thought to contribute to the computations required for 
successful navigation and the generation of an integrated cognitive map. While the firing of 
Lester et al.
Page 2
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 all these cell subtypes is likely influenced by both self-motion and by environmental cues, 
each may utilize these cues differently to perform distinct computational functions. For 
environmental cues, both distal landmarks and environmental boundaries (e.g., walls) are 
important. Distance and direction to boundaries are signaled by border cells, which have 
been found in entorhinal cortex, subiculum, pre- and parasubiculum (Boccara et al., 2010; 
Lever et al., 2009; Solstad et al., 2008).
For self-motion cues, body orientation and linear and angular velocity are important. Head 
direction cells signal the orientation of an organism’s head in the horizontal plane. These 
cells were first observed in the dorsal presubiculum and later in a network of structures 
including thalamic nuclei, mammillary bodies, parasubiculum, retrosplenial and entorhinal 
cortices (Taube, 2007). Neuroimaging studies have provided corresponding evidence for 
head direction coding in humans (Shine et al., 2016). Similarly, speed cells, recently 
discovered in the hippocampus and medial entorhinal cortex, vary their firing rate based on 
an animal’s running speed (Kropff et al., 2015). Grid cells have been found in entorhinal 
cortex, subiculum, pre- and parasubiculum in several species, including humans (Hafting et 
al., 2008; Jacobs et al., 2013; Killian et al., 2012). These cells fire in multiple locations in 
the environment to form a repeating hexagonal grid-like pattern. Various features of the grid 
field are preserved regardless of what environment the animal occupies (Fyhn et al., 2007), 
and these cells often also show heading and velocity modulation (Kropff et al., 2015; 
Sargolini et al., 2006). Together, speed and head direction cells may support a path 
integration function whereby an animal’s current position can be continually updated – on 
the basis of self-motion cues through the integration of distance and heading information – 
and fed forward to the grid cell network (Kropff et al., 2015). Importantly, most behavioral 
paradigms used to study path integration tasks also require an estimate of a vector towards a 
goal location (i.e., the origin of a journey), which has been linked to hippocampal/entorhinal 
and parietal computations (Chadwick et al., 2015; Sarel et al., 2017; Wolbers et al., 2007). 
Moreover, the function of head direction (Taube et al., 1990) and grid cells (Chen et al., 
2016; Hafting et al., 2005; Pérez-Escobar et al., 2016) is still dependent on environmental 
cues, which serve to align their internal representation to an allocentric reference frame and 
to correct for path integration errors that accumulate over time and space (McNaughton et 
al., 1996, 2006; O’Keefe, 1976).
Finally, it is important to note that humans and other animals face a variety of navigation 
tasks on a daily basis. The navigation strategies and the neural computations employed to 
solve these tasks critically depend on the scale of the environment (Figure 1C–E), the 
availability of environmental cues and the agent’s knowledge of the space, the location of 
the destination, and the path to the destination (Wiener et al., 2009; Wolbers and Wiener, 
2014). Multiple terms have evolved to describe navigation strategies (e.g., egocentric versus 
allocentric vs. beacon; non-spatial versus spatial; response versus place; route versus survey; 
objects versus geometry; language-based code versus visual imagery), and these can be 
sources of confusion as different researchers may use different nomenclature to describe the 
same cognitive process. In the present review, we rely on Tolman’s description of an 
allocentric or place strategy (Tolman, 1948), which utilizes the configuration of 
environmental cues to determine position, and is thought to be mediated by temporal lobe 
structures, contrasted with the route strategy which involves learning habitual routes. Route 
Lester et al.
Page 3
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 knowledge consists of associations between local views of an environment and associated 
movements (e.g., turn right at the bakery), which is critically dependent on striatal structures 
such as the caudate nucleus (Hartley et al., 2003). Despite its egocentric, procedural nature, 
however, there is evidence that route knowledge may also depend on hippocampal 
computations, for example information about the temporal order in which landmarks have 
been encountered (Rondi-Reig et al., 2006). Importantly, because strategies can be 
considered dynamic interactions between the characteristics of the spatial environment/task 
and of the individual, it is difficult to design a task that is inherently egocentric or allocentric 
without taking into account the behavior and cognitive processes of the navigator (Ekstrom 
et al., 2014). Older humans and other animals will, for example, differ from younger 
individuals in strategic approaches in solving even the simplest two choice T-maze or Y-
maze (Barnes et al., 1980; Rodgers et al., 2012). Conclusive evidence of the strategy utilized 
typically requires post-test manipulation or testing to discern strategy preferences. 
Nevertheless, some tasks may lend themselves to allocentric/egocentric strategies such that 
the adoption of one strategy over the other will more readily result in success.
To conclude, successful everyday navigation is a particularly complex behavior relying on a 
range of perceptual, mnemonic and executive computations. It requires the integration of 
different types of spatial information, the selection of the appropriate navigation strategy 
and, if circumstances change, switching between strategies. Moreover, navigation typically 
involves coordinating a number of different sub-tasks or processes. Given this complexity, it 
is unlikely that age-related declines in navigation abilities can solely be explained by general 
declines in learning and memory. Rather, such deficits can result from a multitude of 
mechanisms, which will be discussed in the following sections.
3. How does aging affect our ability to compute online spatial information?
We begin our review of age-related changes in spatial navigation by discussing the processes 
involved in computing online or transient representations of spatial information. Even 
though older adults are known to experience various changes in visual perception (e.g., 
visual acuity; contrast sensitivity), perceiving the position of static external objects is 
unimpaired. For example, older adults outperform younger participants in the perception of 
egocentric distances (4–12m) in an outdoor environment, because they show less 
compression of space at longer distances (Bian and Andersen, 2013). These results are in 
line with other studies showing intact perception of surface slant in old age (Norman et al., 
2009), which is an important cue for distance perception. Similarly, other studies found no 
impairment when older participants estimated the distance between two external objects 
(Norman et al., 2015), demonstrating that neither egocentric nor allocentric distance 
perception are significantly affected by age.
In contrast to the preserved perception of static spatial relationships, older adults exhibit 
subtle deficits in perceiving the direction and speed of self-motion. For example, Warren and 
colleagues (Warren et al., 1989) found a small but significant age-related decline of about 1–
2° in the ability to perceive heading direction, and subsequent studies have reported similar 
results with a range of optic flow stimuli (Kavcic et al., 2011; Lich and Bremmer, 2014). 
Importantly, such deficits are also observed when self-motion is computed from body-based 
Lester et al.
Page 4
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cues and used to regulate walking speed (Lalonde-Parsi and Lamontagne, 2015; Roditi and 
Crane, 2012). Note, however, that self-motion perception in everyday navigation is normally 
based on body-based and visual cues simultaneously, and older adults appear to at least 
partially compensate for the unisensory deficits by recalibrating the relative weights given to 
each cue type (Bates and Wolbers, 2014; Lalonde-Parsi and Lamontagne, 2015).
Age-related deficits in self-motion perception have been linked to several mechanisms. First, 
neuron loss or reduced GABAergic inhibition in areas VIP and MT/MST (Lich and 
Bremmer, 2014) increase the level of noise and decrease the directional tuning of motion 
sensitive neurons (Liang et al., 2010). Such deficits can be further enhanced by altered eye 
movement behavior (Dowiasch et al., 2015), which changes the way older adults sample the 
outside world. Secondly, epidemiological, physiological and histopathological studies have 
shown that vestibular function declines with age (Anson and Jeka, 2015). While the 
vestibular system is known for its role in maintaining balance and postural control, 
increasing evidence demonstrates important connections between the vestibular system and 
spatial navigation in humans (Brandt et al., 2005) as previously reported in rodents (Potegal 
et al., 1977). In rodent model studies, disruption of vestibular inputs results in reduced place 
cell spatial tuning (Stackman et al., 2002) and a complete loss of directional tuning of 
anterior thalamic head direction cells (Stackman and Taube, 1997). In addition, areas VIP 
and MT/MST also receive vestibular input, hence vestibular damage could also alter the 
computation of self-motion speed and direction in cortical structures.
Even though age-related deficits in space perception appear to be absent for static cues and 
relatively subtle for self-motion cues, older adults often show striking difficulties in path 
integration tasks). For example, after moving about in an unfamiliar environment, they 
underestimate travelled distances and turns, and are less accurate when returning to the start 
of a journey. This has been shown when navigation is based either on visual or non-visual 
cues (Adamo et al., 2012; Allen et al., 2004; Harris and Wolbers, 2012; Mahmood et al., 
2009). Given that both self-motion and environmental cues are used to compute position and 
orientation in all the spatially-modulated cells described above, the particular vulnerability 
of the hippocampus and other medial temporal lobe structures to the deleterious 
consequences of aging (Barnes et al., 1997; Burke and Barnes, 2006; Lister and Barnes, 
2009; Stranahan and Mattson, 2010) could result in compromised computations of position 
and orientation. In fact, even though there is mixed evidence regarding an association 
between age-related changes in hippocampal volume and memory function (van Petten, 
2004), several studies have reported changes in place cell firing characteristics. For example, 
old rats show differences in the stability of their cognitive maps as assessed by ensemble 
recordings of hippocampal neurons (Barnes et al., 1997; Schimanski et al., 2013). CA1 
hippocampal pyramidal cells in aged rats occasionally generate a new and distinct place cell 
representation for a familiar environment (Barnes et al., 1997; Schimanski et al., 2013), and 
these cells take significantly longer to begin to show consistent spatial firing, even in 
familiar environments (Hok et al., 2012).
Changes in spatial working memory are a further likely source of impaired positional coding 
in old age. For example, older adults are impaired when revisiting a location that was 
memorized relative to external landmarks (Bates and Wolbers, 2014), which is consistent 
Lester et al.
Page 5
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with rodent studies employing working memory versions of the Morris Water Maze (Bizon 
et al., 2009; Frick et al., 1995). Given the intact perception of spatial relationships (see 
above), these findings demonstrate that adding a working memory component – i.e., having 
to remember a location from an outbound trajectory – leads to substantial performance drops 
in older adults. Such deficits in navigational working memory are not related to changes in 
long-term memory (Bizon et al., 2009; Laczó et al., 2017), arguing against a role of 
hippocampal dysfunction. Rather, numerous studies have established medial prefrontal 
cortex as a key structure for monitoring hippocampal output and for using stored location 
information to guide navigational behavior (Jones and Wilson, 2005; Wolbers et al., 2007). 
Neurons in medial PFC undergo several changes in the course of normal aging, including a 
loss of NMDA receptors and increased inhibition of pyramidal cells due to GABAergic 
changes (Carpenter et al., 2016; McQuail et al., 2016). As a consequence, compromised 
computations in medial prefrontal circuits can cause deficits in maintaining information 
about position, and navigational goals in working memory, thus contributing to the 
navigational errors observed in both rodent and human studies.
Finally, changes in vestibular processing can affect the coding for position and orientation in 
old age. Age-related degeneration of the vestibular system (i.e., progressive neuronal loss) is 
a multifactorial process, affecting the peripheral end-organs, the brainstem, the cerebellum 
and the cerebral cortex (Arshad and Seemungal, 2016). Age-related neuronal loss in the 
vestibular nucleus has been reported in both humans (Lopez et al., 1997) and mice 
(Sturrock, 1989). The vestibular nuclei of aged rats also show a number of abnormal 
structural changes (Johnson and Miquel, 1974) as well as reduced levels of glutamate which 
could indicate a reduction in excitatory afferent drive (Liu et al., 2010). Given that vestibular 
signals convey information about translation and rotation of the body, age-related changes of 
vestibular functioning will render self-motion perception imprecise. This could explain why, 
for example, older adults are impaired when they are transported in a wheelchair and have to 
return to the starting location at the end of an outbound journey (Adamo et al., 2012; Allen 
et al., 2004). Importantly, such deficits are attenuated when the outbound path is experienced 
via active walking (Adamo et al., 2012; Allen et al., 2004), showing that motor efference 
copy and/or proprioceptive feedback can at least partially compensate for impaired 
vestibular processing. Furthermore, vestibular damage can induce pathology in downstream 
structures such as the hippocampus (Brandt et al., 2005), thus impacting the precision of 
positional computations in the place and grid cell systems. Finally, vestibular changes often 
induce problems with balance and postural control, which makes avoiding obstacles more 
difficult and increases the risk of falling. To counteract such deficits, older adults often 
employ more conservative adaptation strategies by taking slow, short and more frequent 
steps (Caetano et al., 2016) and by prioritizing walking control over concurrent cognitive 
tasks (Simieli et al., 2015). As a consequence, a reduced amount of attentional resources can 
be allocated to keeping track of both self-motion and environmental cues, ultimately 
resulting in reduced navigation performance.
Lester et al.
Page 6
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4. How does aging affect our ability to create, consolidate and retrieve 
memory traces of spatial information?
Beyond the deficits with creating online representations of spatial information, older adults 
have difficulties with turning such representations into enduring long-term memory traces 
and with retrieving them when necessary. For example, in large environmental-scale spaces 
which require substantial movement to be fully sampled and comprehended (Figure 1D, E; 
Wolbers & Wiener, 2014), advanced age is often associated with substantial problems in 
learning the position of distal targets located beyond the current sensory horizon (Head and 
Isom, 2010; Lövden et al., 2012). Similarly,, studies using a virtual analog of the Morris 
Water Maze, a vista-scale space that is visible in its entirety from a single viewpoint with 
little or no movement (Figure 1C; Wolbers & Wiener, 2014), have shown that older adults 
generally show slower learning rates (Daugherty et al., 2015), are less accurate in locating 
the hidden platform and are less able to reproduce a map of the environment (Moffat and 
Resnick, 2002). Similar effects have been observed in studies with aged rodents (Gage et al., 
1984), and the mechanisms underlying such deficits will be discussed in this section.
Place learning and cognitive mapping
In human navigation, the role of the hippocampus and associated medial-temporal lobe 
structures has been of considerable interest, in part because of the findings from animal 
models of spatial navigation noted above. Place learning and cognitive mapping have been 
shown to critically rely on hippocampus and retrosplenial computations (Goodrich-Hunsaker 
et al., 2010; Hartley et al., 2003; Kolarik et al., 2016; Morris et al., 1982; Wolbers and 
Büchel, 2005), hence, in human aging there has been great interest in the role of these 
structures in mediating age-related navigation impairments. For example, three studies have 
now reported quite consistent results demonstrating reduced or absent hippocampal/
parahippocampal and retrosplenial activation (Figure 2B) in older as compared to younger 
adults during virtual navigation (Antonova et al., 2009; Meulenbroek et al., 2004; Moffat et 
al., 2006), despite quite different task demands across studies. This may suggest a lack of 
hippocampal recruitment or switching to extra-hippocampal strategies (see section 5 below) 
during spatial navigation in older participants, but could also result from sub-threshold 
activations or possibly from sparse coding (activations in a relatively smaller set of neurons) 
in older participants.
One key mechanism for storing spatial memories in the hippocampus is long-term 
potentiation (LTP), a sustained increase in synaptic strength (Bliss and Lomo, 1973). Donald 
Hebb first postulated that memories may be stored within a neural network, or cell assembly, 
through the selective modification of synapses between co-activated neurons (Hebb, 1949), 
and David Marr developed a theoretical model suggesting that the anatomical configuration 
of the hippocampus is well-suited to perform a rapid mnemonic function (Marr, 1971). The 
first empirical validation of these theories was accomplished by delivering patterned 
electrical stimulation to axons afferent to dentate gyrus granule cells, which resulted in 
strengthened synaptic weights (Bliss and Gardner-Medwin, 1973; Bliss and Lomo, 1973). It 
is now well established that defects in plasticity mechanisms underlying LTP in 
hippocampal and other circuits across the brain result in learning and memory deficits.
Lester et al.
Page 7
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Aged animals undergo a number of changes in synaptic communication and plasticity 
regulation (Figure 3). We focus here on changes in transmitter systems and intracellular 
signaling pathways within the hippocampus as they relate to LTP and long-term depression 
(LTD). Acetycholine is an important neuromodulator for memory encoding and has been 
shown to facilitate hippocampal LTP (Huerta and Lisman, 1995). In aged rats, cholinergic 
drive from the medial septum is reduced by approximately half in all three primary areas of 
the hippocampus, including the dentate gyrus, CA3 and CA1 (Shen and Barnes, 1996). The 
catecholamine transmitter systems have also been found to modify LTP in the hippocampus. 
Age-related spatial memory deficits have been linked to hippocampal dopamine D1 receptor 
signaling deficits (Hersi et al., 1995), altered serotonergic 5HT receptors within the 
hippocampus (Gozlan et al., 1990) and altered adrenergic receptor density and binding in the 
hippocampus (Topic et al., 2007). Glutamate is the predominant excitatory neurotransmitter 
in the mammalian nervous system. There are alterations in both AMPA and NMDA receptor 
function in the aging rodent (Sonntag et al., 2000; Yang et al., 2008) and nonhuman primate 
(Gazzaley et al., 1996). Additionally, glutamate binding to metabotropic glutamate receptors 
can facilitate the release of calcium through their action on inositol trisphosphate receptors. 
Memory-impaired aged rats also show reduced expression levels of postsynaptic 
metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 in CA1, accompanied by a loss in related downstream 
signaling molecules involved in LTP maintenance (Ménard and Quirion, 2012). Memory-
impaired aged rats also have significantly smaller postsynaptic density areas in CA1 
perforated synapses, suggesting some of these synapses are not functional during aging 
(Nicholson et al., 2004). Finally, aged rats show elevated voltage-dependent calcium channel 
mediated LTP (Shankar et al., 1998) and a higher density of L-type calcium channels 
(Thibault and Landfield, 1996). This overall disruption of calcium homeostasis may actually 
shift the threshold for synaptic modification and bias aged synapses towards LTD and away 
from LTP (Foster and Norris, 1997; Norris et al., 1996).
Assessing the functional properties of synapses is one way to examine how spatial memory 
is altered in the aged nervous system. Older animals show reduced elevations of synaptic 
strength following tetanic stimulation-induced frequency potentiation (Landfield et al., 
1978). This reduced synaptic depolarization likely results from a defect in synaptic 
integration of coincident inputs in old animals (Rosenzweig et al., 1997) and may contribute 
to degraded capacity to induce a synaptic weight change. When high frequency and high 
amplitude stimulation protocols were used that resulted in LTP induction, no age-related 
deficit was evident in the ability to modify synaptic strength (Barnes, 1979; Dieguez and 
Barea-Rodriguez, 2004; Landfield et al., 1978). Weaker stimulation protocols, however, 
unmasked reliable LTP induction deficits in aged animals (Moore et al., 1993; Rosenzweig 
et al., 1997). Using the same robust stimulus protocols in which no LTP induction 
differences were observed, aged animals do show a more rapid decay of LTP (Barnes, 1979; 
Dieguez and Barea-Rodriguez, 2004), and this LTP maintenance deficit is significantly 
correlated with spatial memory accuracy (Barnes, 1979). In contrast, when stimulation 
protocols that induce LTD (Lynch et al., 1977) are applied, older rats actually show more 
robust depression than do young rats (Norris et al., 1996). This suggests that the 
bidirectionality of synaptic modification is compromised in the aged brain – i.e., it is more 
difficult to increase synaptic strength and easier to decrease synaptic strength in older 
Lester et al.
Page 8
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 animals. Both of these mechanisms could, at least in part, account for the observations that 
older animals show faster forgetting of a spatial memory task (Barnes and McNaughton, 
1985). Additionally, one particular NMDA-dependent form of plasticity, which is known to 
be impaired in aged animals, is experience-dependent place field expansion plasticity 
(Ekstrom et al., 2001, Shen et al., 1997; Figure 3). Normally, even in familiar environments, 
the size of a CA1 place field is smaller on initial exposure to the environment on a given day. 
As the rat makes repeated traversals of a route, the place field becomes larger, and shifts 
backwards from the direction of movement. For aged rats this phenomenon is attenuated. 
Because NMDA receptor blockade impairs both stimulation-induced LTP (Collingridge et 
al., 1983) and experience-dependent place field expansion plasticity in young rats, 
dysregulation of NMDA receptor function likely plays a key role in age-related plasticity 
and spatial navigation deficits (Figure 3).
One potential contribution to the LTP deficits discussed above is the observation that granule 
cells in aged rats have a quarter fewer synaptic contacts from layer II medial entorhinal 
cortex (MEC) (Geinisman et al., 1992; Figure 3). The same MEC cells also project to the 
lacunosum moleculare layer of CA3, and older rats with spatial learning deficits show 
decreased levels of the presynaptic marker synaptophysin, suggesting reduced synaptic input 
in CA3 as well (Smith et al., 2000). Because there is no loss of layer II MEC projection cells 
in old rats (Merrill et al., 2001), axons from these cells are thought to undergo pruning of 
their extensive collateral projections. In support of this model, the extracellularly recorded 
presynaptic fiber potential is smaller in old rats (Barnes and McNaughton, 1980). In 
addition, the size of the extracellularly recorded EPSP is smaller in old animals (Barnes, 
1979; Barnes and McNaughton, 1980; Yang et al., 2008) for equivalent stimulation 
strengths, which is consistent with reduced synaptic input. In line with the rodent data 
suggesting axon pruning, older, memory-impaired human participants show reduced white 
matter volume in the vicinity of the perforant pathway (Rogalski et al., 2012). The dentate 
gyrus with its disproportionately large population of granule cells receives minimally 
overlapping projections from the entorhinal cortex that could serve to expand the 
representational space in downstream CA3 principal cells (Marr, 1971). Specifically, this 
process of pattern separation decorrelates cortical inputs in order to minimize the overlap 
between neurons recruited to encode successive memory traces. The drastic reduction in 
perforant path synapses observed in aged rats could, therefore, contribute to changes in 
pattern separation mechanisms. Consistent with this idea, aged humans with degraded 
perforant path integrity as assessed through DTI imaging (Yassa et al., 2011a), and a patient 
with dentate gyrus damage show poorer performance on discrimination tasks used to assess 
pattern separation (Baker et al., 2016).
In addition to deficits with forming spatial representations, inefficient retrieval from long-
term memory can also contribute to a decline of navigational abilities (Head and Isom, 2010; 
Iaria et al., 2009). One specific mechanism by which spatial/mnemonic representations may 
be reinstantiated in the hippocampus is pattern completion (Marr, 1971; McNaughton and 
Morris, 1987). Pattern completion is achieved when recall of a complete representation is 
accomplished in the presence of partial or degraded input. The anatomical implementation 
of this process involves the autoassociative connections of CA3 principal cells. These 
connections functionally couple coactive cells at the time of encoding so that later activation 
Lester et al.
Page 9
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of a sufficient subset will propagate to all members of the cell assembly resulting in a 
complete reinstantiation of the learned pattern. As mentioned above, old rats show distinct 
differences in the stability of their cognitive maps as assessed by ensemble recordings of 
CA1 hippocampal neurons (Barnes et al., 1997; Schimanski et al., 2013). Aged rats 
occasionally generate a new and distinct place cell representations for a familiar 
environment (Barnes et al., 1997; Schimanski et al., 2013) – that is, they occasionally 
retrieve ‘the wrong map’ (Figure 2A; Figure 3). The inability to represent an identical 
environment as the same place may indicate excessive pattern separation in the aged CA1 
region. In CA3, the opposite change occurs – when old rats are exposed to distinct 
environments, they often retrieve the same map for these multiple places – this may suggest 
excessive pattern completion mechanisms in this structure (Wilson et al., 2006). There is 
evidence of hyperactivity (Figure 3) of CA3 cells in older rats (Wilson et al., 2005) and non-
human primates (Thomé et al., 2016), as well as increased CA3 and dentate gyrus activity 
linked to pattern separation/completion deficits in aged humans (Yassa et al., 2011a). Given 
that the auto-associative connections in stratum radiatum of the CA3 network are unaffected 
by age (Smith et al., 2000), the hyperactivity of CA3 principal cells could bias this auto-
associative network to incorrectly re-instantiate a stored memory trace.
Finally, aged rats show a decline in cholinergic modulation, which might reduce the 
influence of new information arriving through the perforant pathway (Hasselmo et al., 
1995). Collectively, these changes would result in the network favoring the reactivation of 
stored cognitive maps, particularly under conditions in which new stimuli have a high degree 
of feature overlap with learned stimuli. On the behavioral level, corresponding data have 
been reported in older adults, who show increased pattern completion in situations when 
only partial cues of an environment can be seen (Head and Isom, 2010; Liu et al., 2011). 
Using a scene recognition task, Vieweg et al. (2015) observed a bias in older adults towards 
falsely classifying novel scenes as familiar ones, in particular when the scenes were partially 
masked. This bias could not be explained by an overall tendency to produce more false 
alarms, suggesting that new partial information triggered the recognition of learned items. 
Together with fMRI studies pointing to a reduced ability of the aging hippocampus to 
distinguish between similar stimuli (Yassa et al., 2011a, 2011b), these data support the 
rodent literature in terms of a heightened, age-related tendency for pattern completion in 
CA3 (Wilson et al., 2005).
Response-learning and route-based learning
In contrast to the wealth of findings on age-related deficits in cognitive mapping or place-
based navigation, fewer studies have investigated how aging affects route navigation and 
response-based navigation. Aged rats and primates preferentially use response-based 
strategies over place-based strategies (Barnes et al., 1980; Rapp et al., 1997; Rodgers et al., 
2012). Nevertheless, route learning deficits are detected in older animals when using multi-
compartment mazes, but can be partially ameliorated by cholinergic treatment in both rats 
and mice (Ingram, 1988; Pistell et al., 2012). In humans, arguably the most frequently used 
navigation task is route navigation, and several studies have demonstrated declines in route 
learning in older adults (Head and Isom, 2010; Moffat et al., 2001; Wiener et al., 2012; 
Wilkniss et al., 1997). Successful route learning depends on a number of processes and 
Lester et al.
Page 10
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mechanisms, most of which are affected by aging. Specifically, route navigation requires the 
recognition of landmarks and places encountered during learning, knowledge about the 
sequence in which places/landmarks were encountered, the selection of landmarks that are 
navigationally relevant (i.e., those at decision points), and typically also the association of 
directional information with these landmarks. Moreover, successful navigation often 
requires one to find their way back, that is, to retrace a recently travelled path. Aging has 
been associated with less accurate binding of directional knowledge to landmarks (Head and 
Isom, 2010; Liu et al., 2011; Wiener et al., 2012; Zhong and Moffat, 2016) and impaired 
memory of the sequence in which landmarks were encountered (Head and Isom, 2010; 
Wiener et al., 2012; Wilkniss et al., 1997).
One mechanism that has already been discussed and could contribute to age-dependent 
sequence learning deficits is experience-dependent place field expansion plasticity. As 
described previously, this plasticity mechanism increases the size of place fields in the 
direction opposite to the animal’s trajectory of movement, which could provide a means of 
encoding sequences within cell assemblies (Blum and Abbott, 1996). Specifically, when 
place fields enlarge, the fields adjacent to each other will overlap to a greater degree 
following this expansion. The resultant longer periods of concurrent firing lead to synaptic 
weight changes favoring activation of cells in sequential order, which may act to more 
effectively link ‘places’ together (Figure 3). Older rats show deficits in this plasticity 
mechanism which could result in less effective storage of spatial sequences. This idea is also 
consistent with observations in aged human navigation behavior that shows older adults 
require longer acquisition periods to reduce their search path length in a virtual Morris Water 
test (Daugherty et al., 2016).
Finally, older adults are also more likely to point out salient landmarks than turns as 
providing the most useful information when learning novel routes (Lipman, 1991), and their 
ability to retrace a recently travelled route is impaired as compared to younger participants 
(Liu et al., 2011; Wiener et al., 2012). In terms of the underlying neural mechanisms, route 
learning and route navigation has been associated with caudate activation (Hartley et al., 
2003) and caudate volume (Head and Isom, 2010). Furthermore, the caudate shows age-
related neurodegenerative changes (Betts et al., 2016) at similar rates to the hippocampus, 
which may explain aging-related declines in route navigation performance. In contrast to 
deficits with sequence learning and with associating directional information with landmarks, 
the ability to freely recall or recognize objects/landmarks encountered along a route is 
comparatively spared in older adults (Cushman et al., 2008; Head and Isom, 2010; Zhong 
and Moffat, 2016). This demonstrates that aging-related declines in route learning 
performance do not exclusively result from general memory decline.
Consolidation of spatial memories
Newly encoded spatial memories are typically fragile and, because they may decay, require 
additional maintenance processes. The concept of memory consolidation, originally 
proposed by Muller and Pilzecker (Müller and Pilzecker, 1900), refers, in the broadest sense, 
to the process by which memories are stabilized over time. At the network level, one such 
process is the offline reactivation of assembly firing patterns that occurred during previous 
Lester et al.
Page 11
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 active behavior. The recurrent collaterals of CA3 have long been thought to subserve an 
auto-associative function in the hippocampus, allowing for spontaneous replay of memories 
even in the absence of external input (Marr, 1971). As previously mentioned, place fields 
with spatially-adjacent firing fields undergo an associative, temporally-asymmetric synaptic 
weight change that bias these cells toward firing in a specific sequence. These sequences are 
preserved even when an animal is not actively exploring an environment, such that place 
cells which are activated sequentially during waking exploration will be more likely to fire 
in the same sequence during off-line periods such as sleep and wakeful resting (Figure 3). 
Such replay events could help strengthen a given spatial representation within the 
hippocampus as well as coordinate the reactivation of multiple neocortical networks in order 
to consolidate new long-term memory traces (Wilson and McNaughton, 1994). Reactivation 
of ensemble activity predominantly occurs during episodes of sharp wave ripple activity, 
which are hypothesized to coordinate the hippocampal-cortical transfer of memories 
(Buzsáki, 1996). While cell pair reactivation in CA1 ensembles is equivalent in young and 
old rats (Gerrard et al., 2001), the temporal sequence of cell pair firing is disrupted in aging 
animals and is correlated with the fidelity of spatial memory (Gerrard et al., 2008; Figure 3). 
This age-related sequence reactivation deficit may be linked to changes in behaviorally 
induced place field expansion plasticity that is implicated in sequence encoding (Mehta et 
al., 2000; Shen et al., 1997). This is also consistent with observed deficits in sequence 
learning (Oler and Markus, 2000), and may account for impairments in memory 
consolidation more generally. Sleep-dependent memory consolidation is also diminished in 
older humans (Spencer et al., 2007), but whether this deficit also affects the consolidation of 
spatial memories is unknown at present.
More recently, it has been found that reactivation also occurs during waking periods (Foster 
and Wilson, 2006). This waking replay is implicated in memory consolidation (Jadhav et al., 
2012), real time action selection (Johnson and Redish, 2007) and generation of novel un-
experienced paths during spatial exploration (Gupta et al., 2010). It remains to be 
determined if aging also results in compromised waking replay, and if so, what the 
implications might be for spatial memory. Evidence from the human literature suggest 
spatial memory for landmark locations in a virtual navigation task is poorer in older 
compared with younger adults, but both age groups improved to a similar degree following 
rest periods that might foster waking replay. This suggests that waking replay may be 
similarly efficient in older and younger adults (Craig et al., 2016).
5. How does aging change the use of spatial information during 
navigational behavior?
Successful navigation not only requires the formation of spatial representations and their 
retrieval from long-term memory, it often involves the computation of novel information, 
recombining information, or switching between different strategies or representations. For 
example, planning a novel route requires both the retrieval of cognitive maps from long-term 
memory as well as the computation of novel and viable path options from the current 
position to the destination. Aging humans are less efficient in using cognitive map-like 
Lester et al.
Page 12
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 knowledge for such route planning tasks, even if they have first successfully learned an 
environment (Harris and Wolbers, 2014; Iaria et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2011).
With respect to navigation strategies, aged rodents not only show more severe performance 
deficits in allocentric than in egocentric navigation tasks (Barnes et al., 1980), but they also 
exhibit spontaneous preferences for egocentric response strategies (Figure 4A) after being 
successfully trained on both allocentric and egocentric strategies (Barnes et al., 1980; 
Nicolle et al., 2003). This strategy bias is also reflected in the firing behavior of place cells. 
For example, when the starting position on a linear track is systematically varied with 
respect to the distance from the end of the track, CA1 place cells of both old and young rats 
tend to dynamically shift from being anchored to the starting location on the track 
(egocentric reference frame; Figure 1B), to aligning with the external room cues 
(Rosenzweig et al., 2003) (allocentric reference frame; Figure 1A). In older rats, this 
reference shift is delayed, suggesting the network itself is biased toward maintaining an 
egocentric reference frame (Rosenzweig et al., 2003). Similar to rodents, aged humans have 
more difficulties in allocentric than in egocentric navigation tasks (Head and Isom, 2010; 
Iaria et al., 2009; Moffat et al., 2007) and accordingly show preferences for egocentric 
navigation strategies (Figure 4B; Rodgers et al., 2012) even if these strategies are 
maladaptive and result in navigational errors (Figure 4C; Wiener et al., 2013). Shifts in 
navigation strategy use and preferences, away from allocentric strategies towards egocentric 
strategies, are accompanied by the use of different environmental cues during navigation. In 
the virtual navigation Morris Water Maze task, for example, older adults tend to rely more 
on proximal cues rather than distal cues or boundaries (Moffat and Resnick, 2002; Schuck et 
al., 2013). Thus, age-related shifts in preferences for navigation strategies are now well 
established for a number of species including humans.
In many situations, successful navigation also requires switching between different 
navigation strategies or frames of reference, for example when the available cues or task 
demands change. This ability is particularly problematic for aged humans and other animals 
when required to switch from an egocentric to an allocentric strategy (Figure 4C), whereas 
switches from allocentric to egocentric strategies are less affected (Harris and Wolbers, 
2012, 2014). Age-related deficits with navigational strategy switching are assumed to be a 
special case of general strategy switching impairments, which are caused by changes in 
prefrontal and locus coeruleus (LC) functioning. In the LC, noradrenaline (NA) levels 
increase in response to changes in rewards associated with the current behavioral strategy 
(Aston-Jones and Cohen, 2005). Depletion of prefrontal NA by lesioning noradrenergic 
fibers projecting from LC to prefrontal cortex (PFC) or by infusion of a NA receptor 
antagonist into medial PFC produces deficits in switching between different strategies 
(Caetano et al., 2012; Tait et al., 2007). Given that aging degrades LC and disrupts NA 
function (Grudzien et al., 2007; Manaye et al., 1995), older adults can experience problems 
with detecting when a given behavioral strategy is no longer appropriate and with adjusting 
their behavior accordingly. Moreover, the frontal aging hypothesis suggests that various 
aspects of age-related cognitive decline may be attributable to PFC degradation 
(Pfefferbaum et al., 2005; West, 1996). While there are currently no animal model studies 
specifically exploring aged PFC function in the context of navigation strategy switching, 
both aged monkeys (Gray et al., 2017; Rapp, 1990) and rats (Beas et al., 2017) show reliable 
Lester et al.
Page 13
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 impairments on tasks assessing set shifting. Like navigation strategy switching, these set 
shifting paradigms require an animal to modify their behavior in response to changing task 
demands and are PFC dependent. Rodent studies show that these impairments are directly 
linked to decreased GABA(B) receptor expression in medial PFC (Beas et al., 2017; Figure 
3), but may also be a result of age-related decreases in PFC gray matter volume that is 
present in rats (Alexander et al., in press), non-human primates (Alexander et al., 2008) and 
humans (Storsve et al., 2014).
6. Clinical potential of spatial navigation
In the previous sections, the behavioral manifestations and putative neural mechanisms of 
spatial navigation deficits have been reviewed with a focus on normal aging – that is, 
cognitive and brain aging that occurs in the absence of diagnosed neuropathology. Both 
neuroscientists and the lay public are intensely interested in pathological aging, with 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) being the second most feared disease of aging worldwide 
(Alzheimer’s Association Worldwide Survey, 2014). Behaviorally, AD manifests as a 
progressive cognitive decline often beginning with memory and progressing to other 
cognitive and perceptual domains as the disease advances (Weintraub et al., 2012). A 
common, though understudied aspect of AD is that of topographical disorientation. Even 
very early AD patients may become disoriented in their environment, a phenomenon that is 
more colloquially referred to as ‘getting lost’ or ‘wandering’.
The early emergence of topographical disorientation in AD would be expected from the 
overlap of neural mechanisms of spatial computation with AD pathology, which prominently 
affects the perirhinal and entorhinal cortex, the hippocampus (Braak and Braak, 1995) and 
the retrosplenial cortex (Pengas et al., 2010). Motivated by this observation and also by the 
prospect of early detection and early intervention, there has been considerable recent interest 
in studying spatial navigation deficits in AD and in mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a 
condition hypothesized to be prodromal to AD. Serino et al. (2014) reviewed the extant 
literature and reported substantial navigation impairments in AD and MCI in tasks that 
emphasized both allocentric and egocentric processing. Interestingly, one study showed 
relatively specific deficits in translating an allocentric reference frame to an egocentric 
reference frame (Pai and Yang, 2013), an ability thought to rely on the retrosplenial cortex 
(Byrne et al., 2007). Based in part on these findings, the earliest deficit in preclinical AD 
may be in the conversion between allocentric to egocentric coordinate systems (Serino and 
Riva, 2013). Moreover, deficits in route learning performance in early AD have been 
associated with hypometabolism in the retrosplenial cortex, thalamus and parietal cortex 
(Pengas et al., 2012). Mokrisova et al. (2016) showed that deficits in path integration in AD 
and MCI were mediated in part by changes in hippocampal, entorhinal and parietal cortex 
volumes. Cumulatively, these findings suggest that changes in the ‘navigation circuit’ may 
be a predominant and early consequence of AD and manifest as behavioral deficiencies in 
spatial navigation.
With respect to entorhinal cortex, tau deposition has been found to impair grid cell function 
and to cause navigation deficits in a transgenic mouse model of AD (Fu et al., 2017). 
Impaired grid cell-like properties have also been reported in young adults who were carriers 
Lester et al.
Page 14
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of the APOE E4 allele (Kunz et al., 2015), suggesting that physiological changes in grid cell 
networks may appear very early in adulthood (Figure 5). In addition to the APOE E4 gene, a 
negative influence of other genetic risk factors for AD on navigation skill has been observed 
among carriers of the VL variant of the Tomm40 gene (Laczó et al., 2015) and the T 
polymorphism of the KIBRA gene (Schuck et al., 2013). Given that old, memory-deficient 
rats show improved memory following pharmacological treatments that manipulate KIBRA 
activity (Huentelman et al., 2009), KIBRA pathways may be promising therapeutic targets 
for cognitive enhancement in normative aging, and potentially in attenuating AD-related 
memory deficits.
Given that healthy older individuals show impairments in various navigational computations, 
it is not surprising that those individuals with MCI, early AD or who are at genetic risk for 
AD show still more profound impairments. A major limitation in the current literature, 
however, is the dearth of prospective longitudinal studies examining whether navigation 
assessment in healthy elderly can be used as a predictor of future AD or MCI onset on an 
individual basis, as this is critical to early diagnosis and intervention. One such study (Laczo 
et al., 2010) demonstrated that amnestic MCI converters (compared with the nonconverters) 
showed higher deficits in both ego- and allocentric navigation tasks, suggesting that spatial 
navigation testing may help predict the conversion to AD among MCI patients.
A third aspect of potential clinical utility of navigation assessment is for purposes of 
treatment and intervention. In this domain, spatial navigation tasks have been used as both 
an outcome variable (to assess the efficacy of clinical/pharmacologic intervention) and also 
as an intervention for possible cognitive/neural training. Pharmacological treatment of early 
AD with cholinergic agonists to reverse AD-related acetylcholine depletion has been found 
to enhance navigation performance in early AD (Hort et al., 2014) and to increase 
navigation-related hippocampal activation in MCI (Grön et al., 2006). In addition, 
behavioral interventions in the form of cognitive training may enhance cognitive 
performance in healthy elderly and also delay the onset or ameliorate the symptoms of 
dementia. The utility of cognitive training to enhance cognitive function is an area of some 
controversy as it is clear that participants improve on virtually all trained domains, but 
generalization of this training to other cognitive domains or to real world tasks (i.e., transfer) 
has been less consistent (Noack et al., 2014). Lövdén et al. (2012) found that navigation 
training improved navigation performance in younger and older adults and also prevented 
the age-related hippocampal volume loss that would have occurred over the training interval. 
In another study of the same participants, increases in cortical thickness in the precuneus and 
parietal lobe were observed only in younger trained participants, with no effect of navigation 
training on cortical thickness observed in the older participants (Wenger et al., 2012). The 
navigation training in this study showed little transfer to other, non-trained cognitive 
domains. In contrast, Mitolo et al. (2016) found that route learning training enhanced route 
learning performance up to 3 months post-training and also improved visuo-spatial working 
memory, indicating transfer to an important cognitive domain. Finally, a one month spatial 
training in middle aged adults (40–55 years) has been shown to improved performance on a 
maze learning task and to decrease activation in the hippocampus and parahippocampal 
gyrus (Hötting et al., 2013), a finding which the authors attributed to reduced cognitive effort 
required post-training.
Lester et al.
Page 15
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Researchers and clinicians have just begun to incorporate navigation tasks into clinical 
research and practice. Navigation assessment has potential utility as a predictor of future 
AD, as an outcome measure in behavioral and pharmacological intervention studies, and as a 
cognitive training task. Spatial navigation may prove to be particularly useful in these 
domains because of its known dependence on the highly plastic brain systems that may be 
both benefitted by training but also vulnerable to AD pathology. Currently, however, this 
field is hampered by the absence of agreement on ‘gold standard’ navigation task(s) to be 
used in clinical settings that are quick to administer, require minimal training, have 
established population norms, and meet quality criteria for diagnostic tests.
7. Summary
A progressive loss of navigational abilities in old age is now a well-established fact both in 
rodents and humans. Given that spatial navigation is a complex cognitive operation, deficits 
can arise at multiple processing stages that are summarized in Figure 6. These include 
difficulties with computing spatial information from incoming sensory cues, deficits with 
forming stable and distinct memory traces of spatial information, and challenges arising 
during planning and control of navigational behavior. Importantly, the research discussed in 
this review clearly shows that the deficits go beyond general impairments in learning and 
memory, because highly specialized, spatial computations (e.g. self-motion processing) are 
also altered in old age. As a consequence, age-related navigational deficits are best 
understood as reflecting a combination of impaired spatial coding as well as other learning 
and memory problems, which will also affect non-spatial behaviors.
Despite the wealth of studies discussed in this review, several important problems remain to 
be addressed. For example, the almost complete absence of longitudinal studies in humans 
makes it difficult to separate true age-related change from confounding cohort effects and 
complicates the precise identification of the variables driving potential decline. Moreover, 
while we know that the scale of space in which navigation takes place affects the exact 
cognitive processes involved in navigation (Meilinger et al., 2016; Wolbers & Wiener, 2014), 
it is currently unknown whether aging differentially affects navigation in, and spatial 
representations of, vista and environmental scale spaces. It is also unknown if and how key 
systems such as the entorhinal grid cell system are affected in healthy aging, which makes it 
difficult to pinpoint the exact reasons why older adults may find it difficult to keep track of 
their position. Critically, such studies are also needed if we are to harness the clinical 
potential of spatial navigation.
Given the current interest in developing functional biomarkers to detect people at risk for 
dementia, and the fact that key structures of the navigation circuit are among the first cortical 
structures affected by AD pathology, assessing navigational abilities might contribute to the 
detection of preclinical stages of AD. Moreover, navigational indicators could prove to be 
sensitive outcome measures – or cognitive endpoints – in clinical trials testing novel 
therapeutic approaches. This, however, requires the development of standardized, validated 
assessment protocols, which are not available at present. Excitingly, the recent advent of 
affordable, high quality virtual reality technology opens up completely new possibilities for 
Lester et al.
Page 16
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 developing ecologically valid assessments of navigational functions and for training 
navigational computations.
Acknowledgments
T.W. was supported by a Starting Investigator Grant of the European Research Council (AGESPACE 335090). J.W. 
was supported by a grant of the Economic and Social Research Council (ES/M009254/1). C.A.B. and A.W.L. were 
supported by McKnight Brain Research Foundation and National Institutes of Health RO1 AG003376.
References
Adamo DE, Briceño EM, Sindone JA, Alexander NB, Moffat SD. Age differences in virtual 
environment and real world path integration. Front Aging Neurosci. 2012; 4:26. [PubMed: 
23055969] 
Alexander GE, Lin L, Yoshimaru E, Pradyumna BK, Bergfield KL, Hoang L, Chawla M, Chen K, 
Moeller JR, Barnes CA, et al. Age-related regional network covariance of magnetic resonance 
imaging gray matter in the rat. J Neurosci. (in press). 
Alexander GE, Chen K, Aschenbrenner M, Merkley TL, Santerre-Lemmon LE, Shamy JL, Skaggs 
WE, Buonocore MH, Rapp PR, Barnes CA. Age-related regional network of magnetic resonance 
imaging gray matter in the rhesus macaque. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:2710–2718. [PubMed: 18337400] 
Allen GL, Kirasic KC, Rashotte MA, Haun DB. Aging and path integration skill: kinesthetic and 
vestibular contributions to wayfinding. Percept Psychophys. 2004; 66:170–179. [PubMed: 
15095949] 
Anson E, Jeka J. Perspectives on Aging Vestibular Function. Front Neurol. 2015; 6:269. [PubMed: 
26779116] 
Antonova E, Parslow D, Brammer M, Dawson GR, Jackson SH, Morris RG. Age-related neural 
activity during allocentric spatial memory. Memory. 2009; 17:125–143. [PubMed: 18608980] 
Arshad Q, Seemungal BM. Age-Related Vestibular Loss: Current Understanding and Future Research 
Directions. Front Neurol. 2016; 7:231. [PubMed: 28066316] 
Aston-Jones G, Cohen JD. An integrative theory of locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function: adaptive 
gain and optimal performance. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2005; 28:403–450. [PubMed: 16022602] 
Bach ME, Barad M, Son H, Zhuo M, Lu YF, Shih R, Mansuy I, Hawkins RD, Kandel ER. Age-related 
defects in spatial memory are correlated with defects in the late phase of hippocampal long-term 
potentiation in vitro and are attenuated by drugs that enhance the cAMP signaling pathway. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999; 96:5280–5285. [PubMed: 10220457] 
Baker S, Vieweg P, Gao F, Gilboa A, Wolbers T, Black SE, Rosenbaum RS. The Human Dentate Gyrus 
Plays a Necessary Role in Discriminating New Memories. Curr Biol. 2016; 26:2629–2634. 
[PubMed: 27666968] 
Barnes CA. Memory deficits associated with senescence: a neurophysiological and behavioral study in 
the rat. J Comp Physiol Psychol. 1979; 93:74–104. [PubMed: 221551] 
Barnes CA, McNaughton BL. Physiological compensation for loss of afferent synapses in rat 
hippocampal granule cells during senescence. J Physiol. 1980; 309:473–485. [PubMed: 7252877] 
Barnes CA, McNaughton BL. An age comparison of the rates of acquisition and forgetting of spatial 
information in relation to long-term enhancement of hippocampal synapses. Behav Neurosci. 
1985; 99:1040–1048. [PubMed: 3843538] 
Barnes CA, Nadel L, Honig WK. Spatial memory deficit in senescent rats. Can J Psychol. 1980; 
34:29–39. [PubMed: 7388694] 
Barnes CA, Suster MS, Shen J, McNaughton BL. Multistability of cognitive maps in the hippocampus 
of old rats. Nature. 1997; 388:272–275. [PubMed: 9230435] 
Bates SL, Wolbers T. How cognitive aging affects multisensory integration of navigational cues. 
Neurobiol Aging. 2014; 35:2761–2769. [PubMed: 24952995] 
Beas BS, McQuail JA, Ban Uelos C, Setlow B, Bizon JL. Prefrontal cortical GABAergic signaling and 
impaired behavioral flexibility in aged F344 rats. Neuroscience. 2017; 345:274–286. [PubMed: 
26873002] 
Lester et al.
Page 17
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Betts MJ, Acosta-Cabronero J, Cardenas-Blanco A, Nestor PJ, Düzel E. High-resolution 
characterisation of the aging brain using simultaneous quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) 
and R2* measurements at 7T. Neuroimage. 2016; 138:43–63. [PubMed: 27181761] 
Bian Z, Andersen GJ. Aging and the perception of egocentric distance. Psychol Aging. 2013; 28:813–
825. [PubMed: 23276215] 
Bizon JL, LaSarge CL, Montgomery KS, McDermott AN, Setlow B, Griffith WH. Spatial reference 
and working memory across the lifespan of male Fischer 344 rats. Neurobiol Aging. 2009; 
30:646–655. [PubMed: 17889407] 
Bliss TV, Gardner-Medwin AR. Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in the dentate area 
of the unanaestetized rabbit following stimulation of the perforant path. J Physiol (Lond). 1973; 
232:357–374. [PubMed: 4727085] 
Bliss TV, Lomo T. Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in the dentate area of the 
anaesthetized rabbit following stimulation of the perforant path. J Physiol (Lond). 1973; 232:331–
356. [PubMed: 4727084] 
Blum KI, Abbott LF. A model of spatial map formation in the hippocampus of the rat. Neural Comput. 
1996; 8:85–93. [PubMed: 8564805] 
Boccara CN, Sargolini F, Thoresen VH, Solstad T, Witter MP, Moser EI, Moser MB. Grid cells in pre- 
and parasubiculum. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:987–994. [PubMed: 20657591] 
Braak H, Braak E. Staging of Alzheimer’s disease-related neurofibrillary changes. Neurobiol Aging. 
1995; 16:271–278–284. [PubMed: 7566337] 
Brandt T, Schautzer F, Hamilton DA, Bruning R, Markowitsch HJ, Kalla R, Darlington C, Smith P, 
Strupp M. Vestibular loss causes hippocampal atrophy and impaired spatial memory in humans. 
Brain. 2005; 128:2732–2741. [PubMed: 16141283] 
Burke SN, Barnes CA. Neural plasticity in the ageing brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006; 7:30–40. 
[PubMed: 16371948] 
Burns PC. Navigation and the mobility of older drivers. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 1999; 
54:S49–55. [PubMed: 9934402] 
Buzsáki G. The hippocampo-neocortical dialogue. Cereb Cortex. 1996; 6:81–92. [PubMed: 8670641] 
Byrne P, Becker S, Burgess N. Remembering the past and imagining the future: a neural model of 
spatial memory and imagery. Psychol Rev. 2007; 114:340–375. [PubMed: 17500630] 
Caetano MJD, Lord SR, Schoene D, Pelicioni PHS, Sturnieks DL, Menant JC. Age-related changes in 
gait adaptability in response to unpredictable obstacles and stepping targets. Gait Posture. 2016; 
46:35–41. [PubMed: 27131174] 
Caetano MS, Jin LE, Harenberg L, Stachenfeld KL, Arnsten AFT, Laubach M. Noradrenergic control 
of error perseveration in medial prefrontal cortex. Front Integr Neurosci. 2012; 6:125. [PubMed: 
23293590] 
Carpenter HE, Kelly KB, Bizon JL, Frazier CJ. Age-related changes in tonic activation of presynaptic 
versus extrasynaptic γ-amniobutyric acid type B receptors in rat medial prefrontal cortex. 
Neurobiol Aging. 2016; 45:88–97. [PubMed: 27459929] 
Chadwick MJ, Jolly AEJ, Amos DP, Hassabis D, Spiers HJ. A Goal Direction Signal in the Human 
Entorhinal/Subicular Region. Curr Biol. 2015; 25:87–92. [PubMed: 25532898] 
Chen G, Manson D, Cacucci F, Wills TJ. Absence of Visual Input Results in the Disruption of Grid 
Cell Firing in the Mouse. Curr Biol. 2016; 26:2335–2342. [PubMed: 27498565] 
Collingridge GL, Kehl SJ, McLennan H. Excitatory amino acids in synaptic transmission in the 
Schaffer collateral-commissural pathway of the rat hippocampus. J Physiol (Lond). 1983; 334:33–
46. [PubMed: 6306230] 
Craig M, Wolbers T, Harris MA, Hauff P, Della Sala S, Dewar M. Comparable rest-related promotion 
of spatial memory consolidation in younger and older adults. Neurobiol Aging. 2016; 48:143–152. 
[PubMed: 27689512] 
Cushman LA, Stein K, Duffy CJ. Detecting navigational deficits in cognitive aging and Alzheimer 
disease using virtual reality. Neurology. 2008; 71:888–895. [PubMed: 18794491] 
Daugherty AM, Yuan P, Dahle CL, Bender AR, Yang Y, Raz N. Path Complexity in Virtual Water 
Maze Navigation: Differential Associations with Age, Sex, and Regional Brain Volume. Cereb 
Cortex. 2015; 25:3122–3131. [PubMed: 24860019] 
Lester et al.
Page 18
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Daugherty AM, Bender AR, Yuan P, Raz N. Changes in Search Path Complexity and Length During 
Learning of a Virtual Water Maze: Age Differences and Differential Associations with 
Hippocampal Subfield Volumes. Cereb Cortex. 2016; 26:2391–2401. [PubMed: 25838036] 
Dieguez D, Barea-Rodriguez EJ. Aging impairs the late phase of long-term potentiation at the medial 
perforant path-CA3 synapse in awake rats. Synapse. 2004; 52:53–61. [PubMed: 14755632] 
Dowiasch S, Marx S, Einhäuser W, Bremmer F. Effects of aging on eye movements in the real world. 
Front Hum Neurosci. 2015; 9:46. [PubMed: 25713524] 
Ekstrom AD, Meltzer J, McNaughton BL, Barnes CA. NMDA receptor antagonism blocks experience-
dependent expansion of hippocampal “place fields”. Neuron. 2001; 31:631–638. [PubMed: 
11545721] 
Ekstrom AD, Kahana MJ, Caplan JB, Fields TA, Isham EA, Newman EL, Fried I. Cellular networks 
underlying human spatial navigation. Nature. 2003; 425:184–188. [PubMed: 12968182] 
Ekstrom AD, Arnold AEGF, Iaria G. A critical review of the allocentric spatial representation and its 
neural underpinnings: toward a network-based perspective. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014; 8
Feigenbaum JD, Rolls ET. Allocentric and egocentric spatial information processing in the 
hippocampal formation of the behaving primate. Psychobiology. 1991; 19:21–40.
Foster TC, Norris CM. Age-associated changes in Ca(2+)-dependent processes: relation to 
hippocampal synaptic plasticity. Hippocampus. 1997; 7:602–612. [PubMed: 9443057] 
Foster DJ, Wilson MA. Reverse replay of behavioural sequences in hippocampal place cells during the 
awake state. Nature. 2006; 440:680–683. [PubMed: 16474382] 
Frick KM, Baxter MG, Markowska AL, Olton DS, Price DL. Age-related spatial reference and 
working memory deficits assessed in the water maze. Neurobiol Aging. 1995; 16:149–160. 
[PubMed: 7777133] 
Fu H, Rodriguez GA, Herman M, Emrani S, Nahmani E, Barrett G, Figueroa HY, Goldberg E, 
Hussaini SA, Duff KE. Tau Pathology Induces Excitatory Neuron Loss, Grid Cell Dysfunction, 
and Spatial Memory Deficits Reminiscent of Early Alzheimer’s Disease. Neuron. 2017; 93:533–
541e5. [PubMed: 28111080] 
Fyhn M, Hafting T, Treves A, Moser MB, Moser EI. Hippocampal remapping and grid realignment in 
entorhinal cortex. Nature. 2007; 446:190–194. [PubMed: 17322902] 
Gage FH, Dunnett SB, Björklund A. Spatial learning and motor deficits in aged rats. Neurobiol Aging. 
1984; 5:43–48. [PubMed: 6738785] 
Gazzaley AH, Siegel SJ, Kordower JH, Mufson EJ, Morrison JH. Circuit-specific alterations of N-
methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit 1 in the dentate gyrus of aged monkeys. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA. 1996; 93:3121–3125. [PubMed: 8610179] 
Geinisman Y, deToledo-Morrell L, Morrell F, Persina IS, Rossi M. Age-related loss of axospinous 
synapses formed by two afferent systems in the rat dentate gyrus as revealed by the unbiased 
stereological dissector technique. Hippocampus. 1992; 2:437–444. [PubMed: 1308200] 
Gerrard JL, Kudrimoti H, McNaughton BL, Barnes CA. Reactivation of hippocampal ensemble 
activity patterns in the aging rat. Behav Neurosci. 2001; 115:1180–1192. [PubMed: 11770050] 
Gerrard JL, Burke SN, McNaughton BL, Barnes CA. Sequence reactivation in the hippocampus is 
impaired in aged rats. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:7883–7890. [PubMed: 18667620] 
Goodrich-Hunsaker NJ, Livingstone SA, Skelton RW, Hopkins RO. Spatial deficits in a virtual water 
maze in amnesic participants with hippocampal damage. Hippocampus. 2010; 20:481–491. 
[PubMed: 19554566] 
Gozlan H, Daval G, Verge D, Spampinato U, Fattaccini CM, Gallissot MC, el Mestikawy S, Hamon 
M. Aging associated changes in serotoninergic and dopaminergic pre- and postsynaptic 
neurochemical markers in the rat brain. Neurobiol Aging. 1990; 11:437–449. [PubMed: 2381503] 
Gray DT, Smith AC, Burke SN, Gazzaley A, Barnes CA. Attentional updating and monitoring and 
affective shifting are impacted independently by aging in macaque monkeys. Behav Brain Res. 
2017; 322:329–338. [PubMed: 27368416] 
Grön G, Brandenburg I, Wunderlich AP, Riepe MW. Inhibition of hippocampal function in mild 
cognitive impairment: targeting the cholinergic hypothesis. Neurobiol Aging. 2006; 27:78–87. 
[PubMed: 16298243] 
Lester et al.
Page 19
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Grudzien A, Shaw P, Weintraub S, Bigio E, Mash DC, Mesulam MM. Locus coeruleus neurofibrillary 
degeneration in aging, mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 
2007; 28:327–335. [PubMed: 16574280] 
Gupta AS, van der Meer MAA, Touretzky DS, Redish AD. Hippocampal replay is not a simple 
function of experience. Neuron. 2010; 65:695–705. [PubMed: 20223204] 
Hafting T, Fyhn M, Molden S, Moser MB, Moser EI. Microstructure of a spatial map in the entorhinal 
cortex. Nature. 2005; 436:801–806. [PubMed: 15965463] 
Hafting T, Fyhn M, Bonnevie T, Moser MB, Moser EI. Hippocampus-independent phase precession in 
entorhinal grid cells. Nature. 2008; 453:1248–1252. [PubMed: 18480753] 
Harris MA, Wolbers T. Ageing effects on path integration and landmark navigation. Hippocampus. 
2012; 22:1770–1780. [PubMed: 22431367] 
Harris MA, Wolbers T. How age-related strategy switching deficits affect wayfinding in complex 
environments. Neurobiol Aging. 2014; 35:1095–1102. [PubMed: 24239438] 
Hartley T, Maguire EA, Spiers HJ, Burgess N. The well-worn route and the path less traveled. Distinct 
neural bases of route following and wayfinding in humans. Neuron. 2003; 37:877–888. [PubMed: 
12628177] 
Hasselmo ME, Schnell E, Barkai E. Dynamics of learning and recall at excitatory recurrent synapses 
and cholinergic modulation in rat hippocampal region CA3. J Neurosci. 1995; 15:5249–5262. 
[PubMed: 7623149] 
Head D, Isom M. Age effects on wayfinding and route learning skills. Behav Brain Res. 2010; 209:49–
58. [PubMed: 20085784] 
Head E, Mehta R, Hartley J, Kameka M, Cummings BJ, Cotman CW, Ruehl WW, Milgram NW. 
Spatial learning and memory as a function of age in the dog. Behav Neurosci. 1995; 109:851–858. 
[PubMed: 8554710] 
Hebb, DJ. The Organization of Behavior. New York: Wiley; 1949. 
Hersi AI, Rowe W, Gaudreau P, Quirion R. Dopamine D1 receptor ligands modulate cognitive 
performance and hippocampal acetylcholine release in memory-impaired aged rats. Neuroscience. 
1995; 69:1067–1074. [PubMed: 8848095] 
Hok V, Chah E, Reilly RB, O’Mara SM. Hippocampal dynamics predict interindividual cognitive 
differences in rats. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:3540–3551. [PubMed: 22399776] 
Hort J, Andel R, Mokrisova I, Gazova I, Amlerova J, Valis M, Coulson EJ, Harrison J, Windisch M, 
Laczó J. Effect of donepezil in Alzheimer disease can be measured by a computerized human 
analog of the Morris water maze. Neurodegener Dis. 2014; 13:192–196. [PubMed: 24192578] 
Hötting K, Holzschneider K, Stenzel A, Wolbers T, Röder B. Effects of a cognitive training on spatial 
learning and associated functional brain activations. BMC Neurosci. 2013; 14:73. [PubMed: 
23870447] 
Huentelman MJ, Stephan DA, Talboom J, Corneveaux JJ, Reiman DM, Gerber JD, Barnes CA, 
Alexander GE, Reiman EM, Bimonte-Nelson HA. Peripheral delivery of a ROCK inhibitor 
improves learning and working memory. Behav Neurosci. 2009; 123:218–223. [PubMed: 
19170447] 
Huerta PT, Lisman JE. Bidirectional synaptic plasticity induced by a single burst during cholinergic 
theta oscillation in CA1 in vitro. Neuron. 1995; 15:1053–1063. [PubMed: 7576649] 
Iaria G, Palermo L, Committeri G, Barton JJ. Age differences in the formation and use of cognitive 
maps. Behav Brain Res. 2009; 196:187–191. [PubMed: 18817815] 
Ingram DK. Complex maze learning in rodents as a model of age-related memory impairment. 
Neurobiol Aging. 1988; 9:475–485. [PubMed: 3062459] 
Jacobs J, Weidemann CT, Miller JF, Solway A, Burke JF, Wei XX, Suthana N, Sperling MR, Sharan 
AD, Fried I, et al. Direct recordings of grid-like neuronal activity in human spatial navigation. Nat 
Neurosci. 2013; 16:1188–1190. [PubMed: 23912946] 
Jadhav SP, Kemere C, German PW, Frank LM. Awake hippocampal sharp-wave ripples support spatial 
memory. Science. 2012; 336:1454–1458. [PubMed: 22555434] 
Johnson JE, Miquel J. Fine structural changes in the lateral vestibular nucleus of aging rats. Mech 
Ageing Dev. 1974; 3:203–224. [PubMed: 4374609] 
Lester et al.
Page 20
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Johnson A, Redish AD. Neural ensembles in CA3 transiently encode paths forward of the animal at a 
decision point. J Neurosci. 2007; 27:12176–12189. [PubMed: 17989284] 
Jones MW, Wilson MA. Theta rhythms coordinate hippocampal-prefrontal interactions in a spatial 
memory task. PLoS Biol. 2005; 3:e402. [PubMed: 16279838] 
Kavcic V, Vaughn W, Duffy CJ. Distinct visual motion processing impairments in aging and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Vision Res. 2011; 51:386–395. [PubMed: 21156185] 
Killian NJ, Jutras MJ, Buffalo EA. A map of visual space in the primate entorhinal cortex. Nature. 
2012; 491:761–764. [PubMed: 23103863] 
Kolarik BS, Shahlaie K, Hassan A, Borders AA, Kaufman KC, Gurkoff G, Yonelinas AP, Ekstrom 
AD. Impairments in precision, rather than spatial strategy, characterize performance on the virtual 
Morris Water Maze: A case study. Neuropsychologia. 2016; 80:90–101. [PubMed: 26593960] 
Kravitz DJ, Saleem KS, Baker CI, Mishkin M. A new neural framework for visuospatial processing. 
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011; 12:217–230. [PubMed: 21415848] 
Kropff E, Carmichael JE, Moser MB, Moser EI. Speed cells in the medial entorhinal cortex. Nature. 
2015; 523:419–424. [PubMed: 26176924] 
Kunz L, Schröder TN, Lee H, Montag C, Lachmann B, Sariyska R, Reuter M, Stirnberg R, Stöcker T, 
Messing-Floeter PC, et al. Reduced grid-cell-like representations in adults at genetic risk for 
Alzheimer’s disease. Science. 2015; 350:430–433. [PubMed: 26494756] 
Laczo J, Andel R, Vyhnalek M, Vlcek K, Magerova H, Varjassyova A, Tolar M, Hort J. Human 
analogue of the morris water maze for testing subjects at risk of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neurodegener Dis. 2010; 7:148–152. [PubMed: 20197695] 
Laczó J, Andel R, Vyhnalek M, Matoska V, Kaplan V, Nedelska Z, Lerch O, Gazova I, Moffat SD, 
Hort J. The effect of TOMM40 on spatial navigation in amnestic mild cognitive impairment. 
Neurobiol Aging. 2015; 36:2024–2033. [PubMed: 25862420] 
Laczó J, Andel R, Nedelska Z, Vyhnalek M, Vlcek K, Crutch S, Harrison J, Hort J. Exploring the 
contribution of spatial navigation to cognitive functioning in older adults. Neurobiol Aging. 2017; 
51:67–70. [PubMed: 28039765] 
Lalonde-Parsi MJ, Lamontagne A. Perception of Self-Motion and Regulation of Walking Speed in 
Young-Old Adults. Motor Control. 2015; 19:191–206. [PubMed: 25029587] 
Landfield PW, McGaugh JL, Lynch G. Impaired synaptic potentiation processes in the hippocampus of 
aged, memory-deficient rats. Brain Res. 1978; 150:85–101. [PubMed: 208716] 
Lever C, Burton S, Jeewajee A, O’Keefe J, Burgess N. Boundary vector cells in the subiculum of the 
hippocampal formation. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:9771–9777. [PubMed: 19657030] 
Liang Z, Yang Y, Li G, Zhang J, Wang Y, Zhou Y, Leventhal AG. Aging affects the direction 
selectivity of MT cells in rhesus monkeys. Neurobiol Aging. 2010; 31:863–873. [PubMed: 
18674846] 
Lich M, Bremmer F. Self-motion perception in the elderly. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014; 8:681. 
[PubMed: 25309379] 
Lindner MD. Reliability, distribution, and validity of age-related cognitive deficits in the Morris water 
maze. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 1997; 68:203–220. [PubMed: 9398584] 
Lipman PD. Age and exposure differences in acquisition of route information. Psychol Aging. 1991; 
6:128–133. [PubMed: 2029361] 
Lister JP, Barnes CA. Neurobiological changes in the hippocampus during normative aging. Arch 
Neurol. 2009; 66:829–833. [PubMed: 19597084] 
Liu I, Levy RM, Barton JJ, Iaria G. Age and gender differences in various topographical orientation 
strategies. Brain Res. 2011; 1410:112–119. [PubMed: 21803342] 
Liu P, Zhang H, Devaraj R, Ganesalingam GS, Smith PF. A multivariate analysis of the effects of aging 
on glutamate, GABA and arginine metabolites in the rat vestibular nucleus. Hear Res. 2010; 
269:122–133. [PubMed: 20600737] 
Lopez I, Honrubia V, Baloh RW. Aging and the Human Vestibular Nucleus. J Vestib Res. 1997; 7:77–
85. [PubMed: 9057161] 
Lester et al.
Page 21
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lövden M, Schaefer S, Noack H, Bodammer NC, Kuhn S, Heinze HJ, Duzel E, Backman L, 
Lindenberger U. Spatial navigation training protects the hippocampus against age-related 
changes during early and late adulthood. Neurobiol Aging. 2012; 33:620 e9–620 e22.
Lynch GS, Dunwiddie T, Gribkoff V. Heterosynaptic depression: a postsynaptic correlate of long-term 
potentiation. Nature. 1977; 266:737–739. [PubMed: 195211] 
Mahmood O, Adamo D, Briceno E, Moffat SD. Age differences in visual path integration. Behav 
Brain Res. 2009; 205:88–95. [PubMed: 19665496] 
Manaye KF, McIntire DD, Mann DM, German DC. Locus coeruleus cell loss in the aging human 
brain: a non-random process. J Comp Neurol. 1995; 358:79–87. [PubMed: 7560278] 
Marr D. Simple memory: a theory for archicortex. Philos Trans R Soc Lond, B, Biol Sci. 1971; 
262:23–81. [PubMed: 4399412] 
McHugh TJ, Blum KI, Tsien JZ, Tonegawa S, Wilson MA. Impaired Hippocampal Representation of 
Space in CA1-Specific NMDAR1 Knockout Mice. Cell. 1996; 87:1339–1349. [PubMed: 
8980239] 
McNaughton BL, Morris RGM. Hippocampal synaptic enhancement and information storage within a 
distributed memory system. Trends Neurosci. 1987; 10:408–415.
McNaughton BL, Barnes CA, Gerrard JL, Gothard K, Jung MW, Knierim JJ, Kudrimoti H, Qin Y, 
Skaggs WE, Suster M, et al. Deciphering the hippocampal polyglot: the hippocampus as a path 
integration system. J Exp Biol. 1996; 199(Pt 1):173–185. [PubMed: 8576689] 
McNaughton BL, Battaglia FP, Jensen O, Moser EI, Moser MB. Path integration and the neural basis 
of the “cognitive map”. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006; 7:663–678. [PubMed: 16858394] 
McQuail JA, Beas BS, Kelly KB, Simpson KL, Frazier CJ, Setlow B, Bizon JL. NR2A-Containing 
NMDARs in the Prefrontal Cortex Are Required for Working Memory and Associated with Age-
Related Cognitive Decline. J Neurosci. 2016; 36:12537–12548. [PubMed: 27807032] 
Mehta MR, Barnes CA, McNaughton BL. Experience-dependent, asymmetric expansion of 
hippocampal place fields. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1997; 94:8918–8921. [PubMed: 9238078] 
Mehta MR, Quirk MC, Wilson MA. Experience-dependent asymmetric shape of hippocampal 
receptive fields. Neuron. 2000; 25:707–715. [PubMed: 10774737] 
Meilinger T, Strickrodt M, Bülthoff HH. Qualitative differences in memory for vista and 
environmental spaces are caused by opaque borders, not movement or successive presentatio. 
Cognition. 2016; 155:77–95. [PubMed: 27367592] 
Ménard C, Quirion R. Successful cognitive aging in rats: a role for mGluR5 glutamate receptors, 
homer 1 proteins and downstream signaling pathways. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e28666. [PubMed: 
22238580] 
Merrill DA, Chiba AA, Tuszynski MH. Conservation of neuronal number and size in the entorhinal 
cortex of behaviorally characterized aged rats. J Comp Neurol. 2001; 438:445–456. [PubMed: 
11559900] 
Meulenbroek O, Petersson KM, Voermans N, Weber B, Fernández G. Age differences in neural 
correlates of route encoding and route recognition. Neuroimage. 2004; 22:1503–1514. [PubMed: 
15275907] 
Mitolo M, Borella E, Meneghetti C, Carbone E, Pazzaglia F. How to enhance route learning and visuo-
spatial working memory in aging: a training for residential care home residents. Aging Ment 
Health. 2016:1–9.
Moffat SD. Aging and spatial navigation: what do we know and where do we go? Neuropsychol Rev. 
2009; 19:478–489. [PubMed: 19936933] 
Moffat SD, Resnick SM. Effects of age on virtual environment place navigation and allocentric 
cognitive mapping. Behav Neurosci. 2002; 116:851–859. [PubMed: 12369805] 
Moffat SD, Zonderman AB, Resnick SM. Age differences in spatial memory in a virtual environment 
navigation task. Neurobiol Aging. 2001; 22:787–796. [PubMed: 11705638] 
Moffat SD, Elkins W, Resnick SM. Age differences in the neural systems supporting human allocentric 
spatial navigation. Neurobiol Aging. 2006; 27:965–972. [PubMed: 15982787] 
Moffat SD, Kennedy KM, Rodrigue KM, Raz N. Extrahippocampal contributions to age differences in 
human spatial navigation. Cereb Cortex. 2007; 17:1274–1282. [PubMed: 16857855] 
Lester et al.
Page 22
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mokrisova I, Laczo J, Andel R, Gazova I, Vyhnalek M, Nedelska Z, Levcik D, Cerman J, Vlcek K, 
Hort J. Real-space path integration is impaired in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive 
impairment. Behav Brain Res. 2016; 307:150–158. [PubMed: 27038766] 
Moore CI, Browning MD, Rose GM. Hippocampal plasticity induced by primed burst, but not long-
term potentiation, stimulation is impaired in area CA1 of aged Fischer 344 rats. Hippocampus. 
1993; 3:57–66. [PubMed: 8364683] 
Morris RGM, Garrud P, Rawlins JNP, O’Keefe J. Place navigation impaired in rats with hippocampal 
lesions. Nature. 1982; 297:681–683. [PubMed: 7088155] 
Müller G, Pilzecker A. Experimental contributions to the theory of memory. Z Psychol Z Angew 
Psychol. 1900; 1:1–288.
Nicholson DA, Yoshida R, Berry RW, Gallagher M, Geinisman Y. Reduction in Size of Perforated 
Postsynaptic Densities in Hippocampal Axospinous Synapses and Age-Related Spatial Learning 
Impairments. J Neurosci. 2004; 24:7648–7653. [PubMed: 15342731] 
Nicolle MM, Prescott S, Bizon JL. Emergence of a cue strategy preference on the water maze task in 
aged C57B6 x SJL F1 hybrid mice. Learn Mem. 2003; 10:520–524. [PubMed: 14657263] 
Noack H, Lövdén M, Schmiedek F. On the validity and generality of transfer effects in cognitive 
training research. Psychol Res. 2014; 78:773–789. [PubMed: 24691586] 
Norman JF, Crabtree CE, Bartholomew AN, Ferrell EL. Aging and the perception of slant from optical 
texture, motion parallax, and binocular disparity. Atten Percept Psychophys. 2009; 71:116–130. 
[PubMed: 19304602] 
Norman JF, Adkins OC, Pedersen LE, Reyes CM, Wulff RA, Tungate A. The visual perception of 
exocentric distance in outdoor settings. Vision Res. 2015; 117:100–104. [PubMed: 26475085] 
Norris CM, Korol DL, Foster TC. Increased susceptibility to induction of long-term depression and 
long-term potentiation reversal during aging. J Neurosci. 1996; 16:5382–5392. [PubMed: 
8757251] 
O’Keefe J, Dostrovsky J. The hippocampus as a spatial map. Preliminary evidence from unit activity in 
the freely-moving rat. Brain Res. 1971; 34:171–175. [PubMed: 5124915] 
O’Keefe J. Place units in the hippocampus of the freely moving rat. Exp Neurol. 1976; 51:78–109. 
[PubMed: 1261644] 
O’Keefe, J., Nadel, L. The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1978. 
Oler JA, Markus EJ. Age-related deficits in the ability to encode contextual change: a place cell 
analysis. Hippocampus. 2000; 10:338–350. [PubMed: 10902903] 
Pai MC, Yang YC. Impaired translation of spatial representation in young onset Alzheimer’s disease 
patients. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2013; 10:95–103. [PubMed: 23036016] 
Pengas G, Hodges JR, Watson P, Nestor PJ. Focal posterior cingulate atrophy in incipient Alzheimer’s 
disease. Neurobiol Aging. 2010; 31:25–33. [PubMed: 18455838] 
Pengas G, Williams GB, Acosta-Cabronero J, Ash TW, Hong YT, Izquierdo-Garcia D, Fryer TD, 
Hodges JR, Nestor PJ. The relationship of topographical memory performance to regional 
neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 2012; 4:17. [PubMed: 
22783190] 
Pérez-Escobar JA, Kornienko O, Latuske P, Kohler L, Allen K. Visual landmarks sharpen grid cell 
metric and confer context specificity to neurons of the medial entorhinal cortex. Elife. 2016; 5
Pfefferbaum A, Adalsteinsson E, Sullivan EV. Frontal circuitry degradation marks healthy adult aging: 
Evidence from diffusion tensor imaging. Neuroimage. 2005; 26:891–899. [PubMed: 15955499] 
Pistell PJ, Spangler EL, Kelly-Bell B, Miller MG, de Cabo R, Ingram DK. Age-associated learning and 
memory deficits in two mouse versions of the Stone T-maze. Neurobiol Aging. 2012; 33:2431–
2439. [PubMed: 22217418] 
Potegal M, Day MJ, Abraham L. Maze orientation, visual and vestibular cues in two-maze 
spontaneous alternation of rats. Physiological Psychology. 1977; 5:414–420.
Rapp PR. Visual discrimination and reversal learning in the aged monkey (Macaca mulatta). Behav 
Neurosci. 1990; 104:876–884. [PubMed: 2285486] 
Rapp PR, Kansky MT, Roberts JA. Impaired spatial information processing in aged monkeys with 
preserved recognition memory. Neuroreport. 1997; 8:1923–1928. [PubMed: 9223078] 
Lester et al.
Page 23
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Rodgers MK, Sindone JA, Moffat SD. Effects of age on navigation strategy. Neurobiol Aging. 2012; 
33:202.e15–22.
Roditi RE, Crane BT. Directional asymmetries and age effects in human self-motion perception. J 
Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2012; 13:381–401. [PubMed: 22402987] 
Rogalski E, Stebbins GT, Barnes CA, Murphy CM, Stoub TR, George S, Ferrari C, Shah RC, 
deToledo-Morrell L. Age-related changes in parahippocampal white matter integrity: a diffusion 
tensor imaging study. Neuropsychologia. 2012; 50:1759–1765. [PubMed: 22561887] 
Rondi-Reig L, Petit GH, Tobin C, Tonegawa S, Mariani J, Berthoz A. Impaired sequential egocentric 
and allocentric memories in forebrain-specific-NMDA receptor knock-out mice during a new 
task dissociating strategies of navigation. J Neurosci. 2006; 26:4071–4081. [PubMed: 16611824] 
Rosenzweig ES, Rao G, McNaughton BL, Barnes CA. Role of temporal summation in age-related 
long-term potentiation-induction deficits. Hippocampus. 1997; 7:549–558. [PubMed: 9347351] 
Rosenzweig ES, Redish AD, McNaughton BL, Barnes CA. Hippocampal map realignment and spatial 
learning. Nat Neurosci. 2003; 6:609–615. [PubMed: 12717437] 
Sarel A, Finkelstein A, Las L, Ulanovsky N. Vectorial representation of spatial goals in the 
hippocampus of bats. Science. 2017; 355:176–180. [PubMed: 28082589] 
Sargolini F, Fyhn M, Hafting T, McNaughton BL, Witter MP, Moser MB, Moser EI. Conjunctive 
representation of position, direction, and velocity in entorhinal cortex. Science. 2006; 312:758–
762. [PubMed: 16675704] 
Schimanski LA, Lipa P, Barnes CA. Tracking the course of hippocampal representations during 
learning: when is the map required. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:3094–3106. [PubMed: 23407964] 
Schuck NW, Doeller CF, Schjeide BMM, Schröder J, Frensch PA, Bertram L, Li SC. Aging and 
KIBRA/WWC1 genotype affect spatial memory processes in a virtual navigation task. 
Hippocampus. 2013; 23:919–930. [PubMed: 23733450] 
Serino S, Riva G. Getting lost in Alzheimer’s disease: a break in the mental frame syncing. Med 
Hypotheses. 2013; 80:416–421. [PubMed: 23374425] 
Serino S, Cipresso P, Morganti F, Riva G. The role of egocentric and allocentric abilities in 
Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review. Ageing Res Rev. 2014; 16:32–44. [PubMed: 
24943907] 
Shankar S, Teyler TJ, Robbins N. Aging differentially alters forms of long-term potentiation in rat 
hippocampal area CA1. J Neurophysiol. 1998; 79:334–341. [PubMed: 9425202] 
Shen B, McNaughton BL. Modeling the spontaneous reactivation of experience-specific hippocampal 
cell assembles during sleep. Hippocampus. 1996; 6:685–692. [PubMed: 9034855] 
Shen J, Barnes CA. Age-related decrease in cholinergic synaptic transmission in three hippocampal 
subfields. Neurobiol Aging. 1996; 17:439–451. [PubMed: 8725906] 
Shen J, Barnes CA, McNaughton BL, Skaggs WE, Weaver KL. The effect of aging on experience-
dependent plasticity of hippocampal place cells. J Neurosci. 1997; 17:6769–6782. [PubMed: 
9254688] 
Shine JP, Valdés-Herrera JP, Hegarty M, Wolbers T. The Human Retrosplenial Cortex and Thalamus 
Code Head Direction in a Global Reference Frame. J Neurosci. 2016; 36:6371–6381. [PubMed: 
27307227] 
Simieli L, Barbieri FA, Orcioli-Silva D, Lirani-Silva E, Stella F, Gobbi LTB. Obstacle crossing with 
dual tasking is a danger for individuals with Alzheimer’s disease and for healthy older people. J 
Alzheimers Dis. 2015; 43:435–441. [PubMed: 25096621] 
Smith TD, Adams MM, Gallagher M, Morrison JH, Rapp PR. Circuit-specific alterations in 
hippocampal synaptophysin immunoreactivity predict spatial learning impairment in aged rats. J 
Neurosci. 2000; 20:6587–6593. [PubMed: 10964964] 
Solstad T, Boccara CN, Kropff E, Moser MB, Moser EI. Representation of geometric borders in the 
entorhinal cortex. Science. 2008; 322:1865–1868. [PubMed: 19095945] 
Sonntag WE, Bennett SA, Khan AS, Thornton PL, Xu X, Ingram RL, Brunso-Bechtold JK. Age and 
insulin-like growth factor-1 modulate N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subtype expression in rats. 
Brain Res Bull. 2000; 51:331–338. [PubMed: 10704784] 
Spencer RMC, Gouw AM, Ivry RB. Age-related decline of sleep-dependent consolidation. Learn 
Mem. 2007; 14:480–484. [PubMed: 17622650] 
Lester et al.
Page 24
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Stackman RW, Taube JS. Firing Properties of Head Direction Cells in the Rat Anterior Thalamic 
Nucleus: Dependence on Vestibular Input. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci. 1997; 17:4349–4358.
Stackman RW, Clark AS, Taube JS. Hippocampal spatial representations require vestibular input. 
Hippocampus. 2002; 12:291–303. [PubMed: 12099481] 
Stone CP. The age factor in animal learning: I. Rats in the problem box and the maze. Genetic 
Psychology Monographs. 1929:1–130.
Sturrock RR. Age related changes in neuron number in the mouse lateral vestibular nucleus. J Anat. 
1989; 166:227–232. [PubMed: 2621140] 
Storsve AB, Fjell AM, Tamnes CK, Westlye LT, Overbye K, Aasland HW, Walhovd KB. Differential 
longitudinal changes in cortical thickness, surface area and volume across the adult life span: 
regions of accelerating and decelerating change. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:8488–8498. [PubMed: 
24948804] 
Stranahan AM, Mattson MP. Selective vulnerability of neurons in layer II of the entorhinal cortex 
during aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neural Plast. 2010; 2010:108190. [PubMed: 21331296] 
Tait DS, Brown VJ, Farovik A, Theobald DE, Dalley JW, Robbins TW. Lesions of the dorsal 
noradrenergic bundle impair attentional set-shifting in the rat. Eur J Neurosci. 2007; 25:3719–
3724. [PubMed: 17610591] 
Taube JS. The head direction signal: origins and sensory-motor integration. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2007; 
30:181–207. [PubMed: 17341158] 
Taube JS, Muller RU, Ranck JB Jr. Head-direction cells recorded from the postsubiculum in freely 
moving rats. II. Effects of environmental manipulations. J Neurosci. 1990; 10:436–447. 
[PubMed: 2303852] 
Thibault O, Landfield PW. Increase in single L-type calcium channels in hippocampal neurons during 
aging. Science. 1996; 272:1017–1020. [PubMed: 8638124] 
Thomé A, Gray DT, Erickson CA, Lipa P, Barnes CA. Memory impairment in aged primates is 
associated with region-specific network dysfunction. Mol Psychiatry. 2016; 21:1257–1262. 
[PubMed: 26503764] 
Tolman CE. Cognitive maps in rats and man. Psych Rev. 1948; 55:189–208.
Topic B, Willuhn I, Palomero-Gallagher N, Zilles K, Huston JP, Hasenöhrl RU. Impaired maze 
performance in aged rats is accompanied by increased density of NMDA, 5-HT1A, and alpha-
adrenoceptor binding in hippocampus. Hippocampus. 2007; 17:68–77. [PubMed: 17111411] 
Ulanovsky N, Moss CF. Hippocampal cellular and network activity in freely moving echolocating bats. 
Nat Neurosci. 2007; 10:224–233. [PubMed: 17220886] 
Van Petten C. Relationship between hippocampal volume and memory ability in healthy individuals 
across the lifespan: review and meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia. 2004; 42:1394–1413. 
[PubMed: 15193947] 
Vieweg P, Stangl M, Howard LR, Wolbers T. Changes in pattern completion–a key mechanism to 
explain age-related recognition memory deficits? Cortex. 2015; 64:343–351. [PubMed: 
25597525] 
Warren WH Jr, Blackwell AW, Morris MW. Age differences in perceiving the direction of self-motion 
from optical flow. J Gerontol. 1989; 44:P147–53. [PubMed: 2768773] 
Weintraub S, Wicklund AH, Salmon DP. The neuropsychological profile of Alzheimer disease. Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012; 2:a006171. [PubMed: 22474609] 
Wenger E, Schaefer S, Noack H, Kuhn S, Martensson J, Heinze HJ, Duzel E, Backman L, 
Lindenberger U, Lovden M. Cortical thickness changes following spatial navigation training in 
adulthood and aging. Neuroimage. 2012; 59:3389–3397. [PubMed: 22108645] 
West RL. An application of prefrontal cortex function theory to cognitive aging. Psychol Bull. 1996; 
120:272–292. [PubMed: 8831298] 
Wiener JM, Büchner SJ, Hölscher C. Towards a Taxonomy of Wayfinding Tasks: A Knowledge-Based 
Approach. Spatial Cognition and Computation. 2009; 9:152–165.
Wiener JM, Kmecova H, de Condappa O. Route repetition and route retracing: effects of cognitive 
aging. Front Aging Neurosci. 2012; 4:7. [PubMed: 22661944] 
Lester et al.
Page 25
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Wiener JM, de Condappa O, Harris MA, Wolbers T. Maladaptive bias for extrahippocampal navigation 
strategies in aging humans. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:6012–6017. [PubMed: 23554482] 
Wilkniss SM, Jones MG, Korol DL, Gold PE, Manning CA. Age-related differences in an ecologically 
based study of route learning. Psychol Aging. 1997; 12:372–375. [PubMed: 9189997] 
Wilson MA, McNaughton BL. Reactivation of hippocampal ensemble memories during sleep. Science. 
1994; 265:676–679. [PubMed: 8036517] 
Wilson IA, Ikonen S, Gallagher M, Eichenbaum H, Tanila H. Age-associated alterations of 
hippocampal place cells are subregion specific. J Neurosci. 2005; 25:6877–6886. [PubMed: 
16033897] 
Wilson IA, Gallagher M, Eichenbaum H, Tanila H. Neurocognitive aging: prior memories hinder new 
hippocampal encoding. Trends Neurosci. 2006; 29:662–670. [PubMed: 17046075] 
Wolbers T, Büchel C. Dissociable retrosplenial and hippocampal contributions to successful formation 
of survey representations. J Neurosci. 2005; 25:3333–3340. [PubMed: 15800188] 
Wolbers T, Wiener JM. Challenges for identifying the neural mechanisms that support spatial 
navigation: the impact of spatial scale. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014; 8:571. [PubMed: 25140139] 
Wolbers T, Wiener JM, Mallot HA, Büchel C. Differential recruitment of the hippocampus, medial 
prefrontal cortex, and the human motion complex during path integration in humans. J Neurosci. 
2007; 27:9408–9416. [PubMed: 17728454] 
Yang Z, Krause M, Rao G, McNaughton BL, Barnes CA. Synaptic commitment: developmentally 
regulated reciprocal changes in hippocampal granule cell NMDA and AMPA receptors over the 
lifespan. J Neurophysiol. 2008; 99:2760–2768. [PubMed: 18417629] 
Yassa MA, Mattfeld AT, Stark SM, Stark CEL. Age-related memory deficits linked to circuit-specific 
disruptions in the hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011a; 108:8873–8878. [PubMed: 
21555581] 
Yassa MA, Lacy JW, Stark SM, Albert MS, Gallagher M, Stark CEL. Pattern separation deficits 
associated with increased hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus activity in nondemented older 
adults. Hippocampus. 2011b; 21:968–979. [PubMed: 20865732] 
Zhong JY, Moffat SD. Age-Related Differences in Associative Learning of Landmarks and Heading 
Directions in a Virtual Navigation Task. Front Aging Neurosci. 2016; 8:122. [PubMed: 
27303290] 
Lester et al.
Page 26
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Navigation within different spatial reference frames and spatial scales
(A) An example of an Allocentric Reference Frame. Spatial information, such as the 
position of a landmark, is encoded with respect to other objects in the environment, i.e., the 
edge of the soccer field. The solid vertical arrow represents the allocentric reference 
direction that is fixed with respect to the dominant geometric boundary, and hatched lines 
represent the allocentric direction to other features in the space (e.g., the soccer goal). (B) 
An example of an Egocentric Reference Frame. The solid vertical arrow represents the 
egocentric reference direction, which is aligned to the orientation of the observer, and 
hatched lines denote the egocentric self-to-object distance and direction. (C) An example of 
a typical Vista Space for humans (top) and rats (bottom). Vista space refers to the space that 
is visible from a single location with little or no movement (Wolbers and Wiener, 2014). 
Both the person standing in the corner of the open soccer stadium and the rat performing the 
Morris Water Maze task have nearly full visual access to their surroundings. (D) An example 
of a typical Environmental Space for humans (top) and rats (bottom). Environmental space 
refers to large-scale spaces that require substantial movement or exploration to be sampled 
and comprehended. For humans city environments such as the example shown (top), or 
complex mazes with multiple hallways qualify as environmental spaces. In animal studies of 
navigation, multicompartment environments, such as the Hairpin Maze shown (bottom), 
would qualify as an environmental space. (E) The visual field of view is shown for an 
observer within an example environmental space. The pink shaded region represents the 
visual horizon for the observer. For any location within an environmental space the visual 
horizon is limited, requiring the navigator to move through multiple connected (vista) spaces 
and to integrate information over extended space and time to create a complete 
representation of that space. Furthermore, target locations may lie outside the sensory 
horizon, such as the bus stop in in the example shown, requiring the planning of more 
complex routes with multiple decision points.
Lester et al.
Page 27
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Correspondence of age-related navigational deficits in rodents and humans: Cognitive 
mapping
(A) Aged rats periodically generate new and distinct cognitive maps after repeated exposure 
to a familiar environment. Place field distributions are shown for one young and one old rat 
recorded over two consecutive episodes of running on a figure-8 maze (Barnes et al., 1997). 
Individual place cells are denoted with colored points. Place-field maps of young animals 
are highly correlated between consecutive exposures while aged animals occasionally 
showed uncorrelated firing, indicative of remapping. When the proportion of rats that 
remapped between morning and afternoon sessions was tracked over 31 days (Schimanski et 
al., 2013), maps were stable between sessions until day 14, when both age groups began to 
show periodic remapping episodes, with aged animals remapping more frequently. Aged rats 
also show reduced spatial navigation accuracy in the Morris Water Maze task (Lindner, 
1997) (bottom right, shows performance for rats from age 1.3 to 26.3 months old). (B) In a 
virtual Morris Water Maze task, there was a non-linear relationship between age and total 
distance traveled in the virtual environment (Moffat and Resnick, 2002) in humans. As with 
a number of rodent aging studies (e.g., A, bottom right), older adults took a longer time and 
traversed a greater linear distance in locating the hidden platform compared to younger 
adults (bottom). In a neuroimaging study (top), older adults showed reduced activation in 
the hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus and in the retrosplenial cortex compared to 
younger participants (Moffat et al., 2006).
Lester et al.
Page 28
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Neurophysiological changes with age
Graphical overview of the major age-related neurophysiological changes discussed in the 
text. Examples from young animals are indicated in dark gray and those from age animals 
are indicated with light gray. NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; mGluR-5, metabotropic 
glutamate receptor 5; GABA(B), gamma-amino butyric acid receptor B-type; PSD, 
postsynaptic density; LTP, long- term potentiation; LTD, long- term depression.
Lester et al.
Page 29
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Correspondence of age-related navigational deficits in rodents and humans: Strategy 
preferences
(A) In the T-maze task, an egocentric strategy was coded when a rat ‘turned right’ following 
180° rotation of the start location and an allocentric strategy was coded when an animal 
moved to the same learned goal location relative to the external cues. Older rats 
overwhelmingly revealed an egocentric strategy on the probe trials (Barnes et al., 1980). (B) 
In the virtual Y-maze task, an egocentric strategy was coded when a human participant 
‘turned right’ following displacement to a new starting location and an allocentric strategy 
was coded when the participant moved to the same learned goal location in absolute space 
(Rodgers et al., 2012). As with the rodent study (A), older adults spontaneously chose an 
egocentric strategy over an allocentric strategy compared to younger adults. (C) Similar 
results are observed in an environmental space task (top), in which older adults were 
impaired at switching from a learned route to a more optimal allocentric strategy, leading to 
increased route lengths and a reduced use of shortcuts (Harris and Wolbers, 2014). Critically, 
in a task that distinguishes between allocentric and two egocentric (beacon/associative cue, 
not shown) strategies (bottom), older adults remain biased toward using an egocentric 
navigation strategy (Wiener et al., 2013). These results suggest that egocentric strategy 
preferences are difficult to overcome for older adults, even when they are maladaptive and 
lead to suboptimal task performance.
Lester et al.
Page 30
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Alzheimer’s disease-related grid cell dysfunction in mice and humans
(A) Firing rate map (left panels) and spatial autocorrelograms (right panels) are shown for 
an example grid cell recorded from a control mouse and a grid cell from an age-matched 
mouse expressing a human tau mutation (EC-Tau; Fu et al., 2017). (B) The EC-Tau mice 
who formed mature tangles also had impaired grid cell function at 30+ months of age. (C) 
Top-down (top panel) and first-person (bottom panel) view of a virtual reality environment 
used to test memory performance and grid cell function in young controls and young human 
adults at risk of developing AD (i.e., those carrying the APOE- ε4 allele; Kunz et al., 2015). 
(D) fMRI was used to assess a correlate of grid cell activity in the entorhinal cortex, and the 
pattern of activity suggested disrupted grid cell-like representations in the at risk population.
Lester et al.
Page 31
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Mechanisms underlying navigational deficits in old age
The age-related neurophysiological changes described in Figure 3 affect neural 
computations in multiple (sub-)cortical structures, thus leading to changes in general 
learning and memory processes (upper left box) as well as changes in processes that are 
more specific to spatial cognition (upper right box). Given that aberrant retrosplenial 
processing and altered hippocampal dynamics (which include aberrant pattern separation/
completion, delayed spatial firing, etc.) are thought to also play a more general role in 
episodic memory, these processing deficits are likely to contribute to navigational deficits at 
both levels. Potential changes in grid, border or head direction cell coding are highlighted to 
indicate that direct evidence is missing at present. Collectively, both general learning and 
memory deficits as well as spatially specific changes can give rise to multiple functional 
deficits (middle boxes). These functional deficits will in turn affect various navigational 
processes (lower box), thereby causing the everyday navigational difficulties (e.g., impaired 
cognitive mapping) often seen in older adults.
Lester et al.
Page 32
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 August 30.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
