 The concept of monoclonal gammopathy of undeter-
mined significance (MGUS) was first introduced in 
1978 by Robert Kyle1. This premalignant condition is 
characterized by the presence of a serum monoclonal 
immunoglobulin <30 g/l and <10% monoclonal bone 
marrow plasma cells in a patient who does not have any 
organ damage attributable to the monoclonal immuno-
globulin. Conversion of MGUS to malignancy, which 
mandates the initiation of appropriate treatment, is 
indicated by the development of disease- 
specific fea-
tures. For example, conversion to multiple myeloma 
(MM) is indicated by the occurrence of one or more 
myeloma- 
defining events, such as hypercalcaemia, renal 
impairment, anaemia, lytic bone lesions or an event 
suggestive of impending myeloma (such as a serum 
involved:uninvolved free light- 
chain ratio >100, >60% 
 
bone marrow plasma cells or ≥1 bone lesions on MRI)2. 
Progression to Waldenström macroglobulinaemia 
(WM) is indicated by the development of anaemia, 
thrombocytopenia, bulky adenopathy or organomeg-
aly, blood hyperviscosity, severe neuropathy, amy-
loidosis, cryoglobulinaemia, cold agglutinin disease 
 
or malignant transformation3. Similarly, treatment for 
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is initiated when 
a patient with MGUS develops cytopenias, progressive 
or symptomatic lymphadenopathy, organomegaly or 
EXPERT CONSENSUS DOCUMENT
The evaluation of monoclonal gammopathy 
of renal significance: a consensus report  
of the International Kidney and Monoclonal 
Gammopathy Research Group
Nelson Leung  
1*, Frank Bridoux2, Vecihi Batuman3, Aristeidis Chaidos4, Paul Cockwell5, 
Vivette D. D’Agati6, Angela Dispenzieri1, Fernando C. Fervenza1, Jean- 
Paul Fermand7, Simon Gibbs8, 
Julian D. Gillmore9, Guillermo A. Herrera10, Arnaud Jaccard11, Dragan Jevremovic1, 
Efstathios Kastritis12, Vishal Kukreti13, Robert A. Kyle1, Helen J. Lachmann9, Christopher P
. Larsen14, 
Heinz Ludwig15, Glen S. Markowitz6, Giampaolo Merlini16, Peter Mollee17, Maria M. Picken18, 
Vincent S. Rajkumar1, Virginie Royal19, Paul W. Sanders  
20, Sanjeev Sethi  
1, Christopher P
. Venner21, 
Peter M. Voorhees22, Ashutosh D. Wechalekar9, Brendan M. Weiss23 and Samih H. Nasr1
Abstract | The term monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance (MGRS) was introduced by the 
International Kidney and Monoclonal Gammopathy Research Group (IKMG) in 2012. The IKMG met in 
April 2017 to refine the definition of MGRS and to update the diagnostic criteria for MGRS- 
related 
diseases. Accordingly 
, in this Expert Consensus Document, the IKMG redefines MGRS as a clonal 
proliferative disorder that produces a nephrotoxic monoclonal immunoglobulin and does not meet 
previously defined haematological criteria for treatment of a specific malignancy. The diagnosis of 
MGRS- 
related disease is established by kidney biopsy and immunofluorescence studies to identify the 
monotypic immunoglobulin deposits (although these deposits are minimal in patients with either C3 
glomerulopathy or thrombotic microangiopathy). Accordingly 
, the IKMG recommends a kidney biopsy 
in patients suspected of having MGRS to maximize the chance of correct diagnosis. Serum and urine 
protein electrophoresis and immunofixation, as well as analyses of serum free light chains, should also 
be performed to identify the monoclonal immunoglobulin, which helps to establish the diagnosis of 
MGRS and might also be useful for assessing responses to treatment. Finally 
, bone marrow aspiration 
and biopsy should be conducted to identify the lymphoproliferative clone. Flow cytometry can be 
helpful in identifying small clones. Additional genetic tests and fluorescent in situ hybridization studies 
are helpful for clonal identification and for generating treatment recommendations. Treatment of 
MGRS was not addressed at the 2017 IKMG meeting; consequently 
, this Expert Consensus Document 
does not include any recommendations for the treatment of patients with MGRS.
*e- 
mail: leung.nelson@ 
mayo.edu
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41581-018-0077-4
Corrected: Publisher Correction
 
 volume 15 | JANuARY 2019 | 45
Consensus
Statement
Nature reviews | Nephrology
 constitutional symptoms4. Patients with MGUS who do 
 
not yet exhibit any of these disease- 
specific features 
do not require treatment but should undergo careful 
monitoring2,5–9.
The kidney is commonly involved in these haema-
tological malignancies. Light- 
chain cast nephropathy 
is now considered a myeloma- 
defining event, although 
it is not exclusive to MM10. In addition to cryoglobu-
linaemic glomerulonephritis, a variety of other kidney 
diseases have been observed in patients with WM, 
including immunoglobulin light- 
chain (AL) amyloi-
dosis, monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disease 
(MIDD), light- 
chain proximal tubulopathy (LCPT) 
and, on rare occasions, cast nephropathy11–13. Similar 
renal lesions have also been described in patients with 
CLL14. Importantly, however, these kidney diseases have 
also been described in patients with a low clonal bur-
den (defined as monoclonal immunoglobulin <30 g/l 
and <10% monoclonal bone marrow plasma cells) who 
therefore do not meet the diagnostic criteria for MM 
or other malignancies. In the past, these patients were 
categorized as having ‘idiopathic’ light- 
chain disposi-
tion disease or ‘primary’ amyloidosis15,16. The fact that 
these kidney lesions have been replicated in animal 
models by Bence Jones protein injections alone further 
supports the notion that the presence of MM is not 
required17,18. For this reason, the International Myeloma 
Working Group does not consider patients with plasma 
cell dyscrasia and kidney diseases other than cast 
nephropathy to have MM unless they also exhibit other 
 
myeloma- 
defining events2.
The occurrence of kidney diseases associated with a 
monoclonal gammopathy in the absence of symptomatic 
MM, WM or CLL is increasingly recognized10. Most 
of these patients have a small, low- 
grade clonal disor-
der that is similar to MGUS, although (unlike MGUS) 
these clones do cause vital organ damage — including 
neuropathy, cardiomyopathy, hepatic dysfunction and 
dermopathy — mediated by the monoclonal immu-
noglobulin2,19,20. The clonal aetiology of these diseases 
results in clinical features that differ from those of 
non- 
monoclonal gammopathies, such as membranous 
nephropathy or IgA nephropathy. For example, mono-
clonal immunoglobulin- 
related diseases tend to be 
progressive and are unlikely to undergo spontaneous 
remission21–25. Monoclonal immunoglobulin- 
related 
diseases also show higher rates of recurrence after 
kidney transplantation (often >80%) than their non- 
monoclonal counterparts26–28. Monoclonal diseases are 
poorly responsive to conventional immunosuppression 
and instead require clone- 
directed therapy25,29–32.
Increasing recognition of the relationship between 
monoclonal gammopathies and kidney disease gener-
ated the need for more- 
accurate classification of these 
disorders, which were previously often misdiagnosed or 
categorized as unclassifiable by existing disease criteria. 
Moreover, as the use of cytotoxic therapy is typically lim-
ited to patients with MM, WM or CLL, patients with 
monoclonal gammopathy- 
related kidney diseases (who 
do not meet the criteria for these malignancies) were left 
without access to these essential drugs2. Accordingly, a 
series of meetings was organized by the International 
Kidney and Monoclonal Gammopathy Research Group 
(IKMG) with the aim of designating these clonal dis-
orders as pathologies distinct from MGUS and thereby 
enabling government agencies to allocate resources for 
their treatment. In 2012, the IKMG introduced the term 
monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance (MGRS) 
to describe haematological conditions that produce a 
monoclonal immunoglobulin associated with kidney 
injury33. Since then, the IKMG has published recommen-
dations for the treatment of MGRS34 and a classification 
scheme for MGRS- 
related renal lesions35. The IKMG met 
again in New Orleans, Louisiana, United States, in 2017 
to update the classification of MGRS- 
associated renal 
lesions as well as to refine the definition of MGRS. The 
present Expert Consensus Document is derived from 
these discussions, which occurred both face to face and 
in e- 
mail exchanges that incorporated the views of IKMG 
members who could not be present. The treatment of 
MGRS was not discussed at the meeting; therefore, this 
topic is not updated in this consensus document.
Bence Jones protein
Monoclonal immunoglobulin 
light chains detected in the 
urine of patients with multiple 
myeloma and other 
haematological malignancies.
Author addresses
1Division of Nephrology, Hematology, Department of laboratory medicine and Pathology, 
mayo Clinic, Rochester, mN, uSA.
2Department of Nephrology, Centre Hospitalier universitaire et université de  
Poitiers, Poitiers, France; CNRS umR7276, limoges, France; and Centre de Référence 
Amylose Al et Autres maladies par Dépôt d’Immunoglobulines monoclonales, 
Poitiers, France.
3veterans Administration medical Center, New orleans, lA, uSA and Tulane university 
medical School, Tulane, lA, uSA.
4Centre for Haematology, Department of medicine, Imperial College london and 
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, Hammersmith Hospital, london, uK.
5Department of Nephrology, Renal medicine — university Hospitals Birmingham NHS 
Foundation Trust, Queen elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, uK.
6Department of Pathology, Renal Pathology laboratory, Columbia university,  
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, uSA.
7Department of Haematology and Immunology, University Hospital St Louis, Paris, France.
8The victorian and Tasmanian Amyloidosis Service, Department of Haematology, monash 
univerity easter Health Clinical School, melbourne, victoria, Australia.
9National Amyloidosis Centre, Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins, Division 
of medicine, Royal Free Campus, university College london, london, uK.
10Department of Pathology and Translational Pathobiology, louisiana State university 
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, lA, uSA.
11Service d’Hématologie et de Thérapie Cellulaire, Centre de Référence des Amyloses 
Primitives et des Autres maladies par Dépôts d’Immunoglobuline, CHu limoges, 
limoges, France.
12Department of Clinical Therapeutics, School of medicine National and Kapodistrian 
university of Athens Alexandra Hospital, Athens, Greece.
13university Health Network, Princess margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada.
14Arkana laboratories, little Rock, AR, uSA.
15Wilhelminen Cancer Research Institute, Wilhelminenspital, vienna, Austria.
16Amyloidosis Research and Treatment Center, IRCCS Policlinico San matteo, university 
of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
17Haematology Department, Princess Alexandra Hospital and School of medicine, 
university of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
18Department of Pathology, loyola university medical Center, maywood, Il, uSA.
19Department of Pathology, Hôpital maisonneuve- 
Rosemont, université de montreal, 
montreal, Quebec, Canada.
20Department of medicine, university of Alabama at Birmingham and Department of 
veterans Affairs medical Center, Birmingham, Al, uSA.
21Cross Cancer Institute, university of Alberta, edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
22Department of Hematologic oncology and Blood Disorders, levine Cancer Institute, 
Atrium System, Charlotte, NC, uSA.
23Abramson Cancer Center, university of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, uSA.
46 | JANuARY 2019 | volume 15 
www.nature.com/nrneph
Consensus statement
 Updated definition of MGRS
The original definition of MGRS included all small 
B cell clones that produced a toxic monoclonal protein33. 
Although this definition was based on the dangerous 
 
small B cell clones concept19, the nature of the clonal 
disease was not well defined. Specific questions arose 
regarding whether patients with smouldering (indolent) 
MM (SMM) or smouldering (indolent) WM (SWM) 
should be considered to have MGRS. Similar confu-
sion existed with regard to the inclusion of patients 
with low- 
grade CLL or lymphoma, who do have a diag-
nosis of a malignancy but do not require treatment. 
The new definition includes all B cell and plasma cell 
clonal proli 
ferative disorders that do not require imme-
diate treat 
ment for the clonal disease. In addition, 
the toxic monoclonal protein is now specified to be a 
nephrotoxic monoclonal immunoglobulin33.
The new IKMG consensus definition of MGRS (Box 1) 
includes all B cell or plasma cell proliferative disorders 
(such as SMM, SWM and monoclonal B cell lymphocy-
tosis (MBL; a diagnosis that is the equivalent of MGUS 
for clones of the CLL lineage)) that produce a nephro-
toxic monoclonal immunoglobulin1,4,36,37. Low- 
grade CLL 
and low- 
grade B cell non- 
Hodgkin lymphomas, such as 
marginal zone lymphoma, mantle- 
cell lymphoma or 
mucosa- 
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma 
are also considered to be MGRS when they are associated 
with renal lesions38–41 (TaBle 1). These low- 
grade prolifer-
ative disorders would be classified as MGUS, and affected 
patients would be monitored for progression but not 
offered treatment if not for the renal injury19. In patients 
who develop renal lesions as a result of the monoclonal 
immunoglobulin, therapeutic intervention is required 
to prevent further damage resulting in end- 
stage renal 
disease. Accordingly, the diagnosis of MGRS does not 
require the presence of any defining features of an overt 
lymphoplasmacytic malignancy and particularly not the 
presence of any myeloma- 
defining event.
Once the haematological condition progresses to 
overt MM, WM, advanced stage CLL or malignant lym-
phoma (as defined by their respective established dis-
ease criteria), these diseases are no longer considered 
MGRS and affected patients are managed according to 
 
disease- 
specific protocols.
Updated classification system
Terminology. A variety of renal diseases have now 
been described in association with MGRS35 (Fig. 1). 
The IKMG recommends that these should be referred 
to as MGRS- 
associated lesions, conditions or disor-
ders. Thus, for instance, classic AL amyloidosis might 
be considered an MGRS- 
associated condition when 
renal involvement is present. By contrast, the term 
 
MM- 
associated AL amyloidosis would be used when 
the same renal condition is associated with a sympto-
matic high tumour mass accompanied by at least one 
classic myeloma- 
defining event.
The type of renal lesion is governed by the innate 
structural characteristics and physicochemical proper-
ties of the monoclonal immunoglobulin rather than by 
the features of the clone that produced it17. Except for 
C3 glomerulopathy and thrombotic microangiopathy, 
which are not associated with renal deposition of mono-
clonal immunoglobulin, most MGRS- 
associated lesions 
are caused by the deposition of entire or parts of the 
monoclonal immunoglobulins or of various products of 
aggregation. Monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits in 
the kidney are generally restricted to immuno 
globulin 
light chains (except in diseases that show a monoclo-
nal immunoglobulin heavy- 
chain restriction, such 
 
as heavy- 
chain deposition disease or immunoglobulin 
heavy- 
chain amyloidosis). For example, in AL amyloi-
dosis, the renal deposits are composed of only a single 
light chain35. In conditions where the entire immuno-
globin is deposited, demonstration of both heavy- 
chain 
and light- 
chain restrictions are required to provide 
evidence of monoclonality.
The classification scheme proposed in 2017 by the 
IKMG for MGRS- 
associated lesions (Fig. 2) is based on 
the findings of immunofluorescence studies and the 
ultrastructural appearance of the deposits on electron 
microscopy. However, electron microscopy is not uni-
versally available, even in industrialized countries; 
consequently, the IKMG classification encourages but 
does not mandate the use of electron microscopy in the 
assessment of MGRS- 
associated disorders. By contrast, 
light microscopy and immunofluorescence studies 
with a full panel of antibodies are invariably required. 
The renal deposits are initially categorized as organ-
ized, non- 
organized and non- 
immunoglobulin. At the 
2017 IKMG meeting in New Orleans, two additional 
subcategories were added to the non- 
organized and 
non- 
immunoglobulin categories of the classification 
scheme35. Thrombotic microangiopathy associated 
with monoclonal gammopathy was provisionally added 
as a subcategory of non- 
immunoglobulin deposits42, 
and a miscellaneous subcategory was added to the 
non- 
organized deposit category, which applies to 
pathological entities that are ultrastructurally similar 
to a non- 
monoclonal-immunoglobulin- 
related dis-
ease but are only sometimes associated with a mono-
clonal gammopathy. The MGRS- 
associated disorders 
included in this classification are discussed in more 
detail below.
Lesions with organized deposits. Organized depos-
its of monoclonal immunoglobulins can be further 
divided into fibrillar, microtubular or crystalline and/or 
 
inclusionary forms (Fig. 3). Immunoglobulin- 
related 
amyloidosis, which includes subtypes with light- 
chain, 
heavy- 
chain and both heavy- 
and-light- 
chain deposition 
 
 volume 15 | JANuARY 2019 | 47
Nature reviews | Nephrology
Consensus statement
Box 1 | Updated definition of MGRS
The following consensus view of monoclonal 
gammopathy of renal significance (mGRS) has emerged.
The term mGRS applies specifically to any B cell or 
plasma cell clonal lymphoproliferation with both of the 
following characteristics:
• one or more kidney lesions that are related to the 
produced monoclonal immunoglobulin
• The underlying B cell or plasma cell clone does not 
cause tumour complications or meet any current 
haematological criteria for specific therapy
Dangerous small B cell 
clones
Size is not everything — even 
small B cell- 
derived clones 
might synthesize a very toxic 
monoclonal immunoglobulin 
that produces devastating 
systemic damage and a 
progressive or even fatal 
clinical course.
 48 | JANuARY 2019 | volume 15 
www.nature.com/nrneph
Consensus statement
(AL, AH and AHL, respectively), has traditionally been 
recognized as the only condition in the fibrillar cat-
egory43. However, monoclonal fibrillary glomerulo-
nephritis has occasionally also been reported44. Amyloid 
fibrils stain with Congo red and are solid, non- 
branching 
and randomly arranged, with diameters of 7–12 nm 
(Fig. 3a). Amyloid fibrils involve glomeruli and blood 
vessels in the vast majority of patients and the inter-
stitium in roughly 60% of patients (Fig. 2). Intratubular cyto-
plasmic AL amyloidosis occurs rarely45. The randomly 
arranged fibrils seen in fibrillary glomerulonephritis are 
on average twice as thick (10–30 nm) as those observed 
in amyloidosis (Fig. 3b) and generally do not stain with 
Congo red44. A small subgroup (7–17%) of patients 
 
with fibrillary glomerulonephritis demonstrates clinical 
evidence of a monoclonal gammopathy. In 3–15% of these 
 
patients, the IgG deposits exhibit light- 
chain restric-
tion44,46,47, and this pathology is termed monoclonal 
fibrillary glomerulonephritis. Glomerular staining for 
DnaJ homologue subfamily B member 9 (DNAJB9) is 
a reliable marker for fibrillary glomerulonephritis48. 
This feature can be used to distinguish monoclonal 
fibrillary glomerulonephritis from AHL and AH amy-
loidosis, especially as fibrillary glomerulonephritis can 
 
sometimes show Congo red staining49,50.
Immunotactoid glomerulonephritis and cryoglobu-
linaemic glomerulonephritis are the two diseases that 
feature microtubular immunoglobulin deposits (Fig. 3c). 
Microtubules can be distinguished from fibrils by their 
hollow centres and large diameters (17–52 nm)51. Only 
type I and II cryoglobulinaemias are considered to be 
MGRS- 
associated disorders because type III cryoglob-
ulinaemia is associated solely with polyclonal immuno-
globulins. Immunotactoid glomerulonephritis is usually 
a renal- 
limited disease, whereas systemic manifestations 
including vasculitic rashes, peripheral neuropathy and 
arthralgias are common in patients with cryoglobulinae-
mia. Moreover, immunotactoid glomerulonephritis is 
not associated with cryoglobulinaemia and does not dis-
play the typical characteristics of cryoglobulinaemic glo-
merulonephritis (namely, glomerular protein thrombi 
and arterial or arteriolar vasculitic lesions). The glomer-
ular deposits in immunotactoid glomerulonephritis are 
uniformly composed of microtubules, typically arranged 
in parallel arrays, with predominantly subepithelial and 
subendothelial localization. By contrast, only some of 
the deposits in cryoglobulinaemic glomerulonephritis 
are organized, and they usually appear as short, curved 
or straight microtubules (Fig. 3d) with predominantly 
intraluminal and subendothelial localization52–54. 
Of note, organized deposits are not always observed in 
cryoglobulinaemic glomerulonephritis55.
The crystalline and/or inclusions category consists 
of LCPT, crystal- 
storing histiocytosis (CSH) and (cryo)
crystalglobulinaemic glomerulonephritis56,57. LCPT 
occurs as crystalline and non- 
crystalline variants. In 
the crystalline variant, numerous light- 
chain crystals of 
various shapes are seen within proximal tubular cells, 
inside lysosomes or freely in the cytoplasm (FigS 1, 3e). 
This variant is associated with κ light- 
chain deposi-
tion and complete or partial Fanconi syndrome56–59. In 
the non- 
crystalline variant, proximal tubular cells are 
Table 1 | Characteristics of clonal B cell and plasma cell proliferative disorders
Disease
Clone
Bone marrow 
involvement
Immunoglobulin
M- 
spike
Organ damage and/or 
involvement
MGUS
Any
 <10%
Any
 <30 g/l
None
Smouldering MMa
Plasma cell
10–60%
Any
 ≥30 g/l
None
MMa
Plasma cell
 ≥10%
Any
 ≥30 g/l
SLiM CRAB: 60% bone marrow 
plasma cells, involved:uninvolved  
free light- 
chain ratio >100, 
>1 bone lesion on MRI, 
hypercalcaemia, renal impairment, 
anaemia and lytic bone lesions
Smouldering WMa
Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 
cloneb
 ≥10%
IgM
 ≥30 g/l
Absent
WMa
Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma 
cloneb
 ≥10%
IgM
 ≥30 g/l
Anaemia, hyperviscosity 
, 
constitutional symptoms, 
bulky lymphadenopathy 
, 
hepatosplenomegaly and 
neuropathy
MBL
B- 
cell clonec
Peripheral  
B- 
cell count  
<5 × 109/l
Any
Any
Absence of lymph node 
involvement
CLL
B- 
cell clonec
Peripheral 
B-cell count  
>5 × 109/l
Any
Any
Adenopathy 
, anaemia and 
thrombocytopenia
Other B cell lympho-
proliferative disorders
Pan B- 
cell markers 
(CD19+CD20+CD79+CD22+PAX5+)
Presence or 
absence
Any
Any
Adenopathy and splenomegaly
CLL 
, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; MBL 
, monoclonal B cell lymphocytosis; MGUS, monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance; MM,  
multiple myeloma; SLiM CRAB, symptomatic, light chains, MRI, high calcium, renal dysfunction, anaemia, and bony lytic lesions; WM, Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia. aEither bone marrow involvement or an M- 
spike above these thresholds is sufficient for the diagnosis. bTypically 
, B cells are surface 
IgM+CD5−CD10−CD11c−CD19+CD20+CD22+CD23−CD25+CD27+FMC7+CD103−CD138− with a plasmacytic component that is CD138+CD38+CD19+CD45+CD56−. 
cCD5+CD19+CD23+surface immunoglobulin+CD20dim.
  
 volume 15 | JANuARY 2019 | 49
Nature reviews | Nephrology
Consensus statement
distended and injured by the accumulation of numer-
ous non- 
crystalline light- 
chain inclusions within lyso-
somes. This variant is typically associated with λ rather 
than κ light- 
chain deposition, and Fanconi syndrome is 
uncommon56–59. Rarely, non- 
crystalline LCPT can mimic 
acute tubular necrosis or acute interstitial nephritis57,59. 
In patients with CSH, light- 
chain crystals are often seen 
in renal histiocytes as well as in proximal tubular cells60 
(Fig. 3f) and can have a widespread extrarenal distribution, 
including in bone marrow, lymph nodes, lungs, thyroid, 
parotid gland, cornea, synovium, skin, subcutaneous fat, 
stomach, liver and brain61–64. Finally, (cryo)crystalglobu-
linaemic glomerulonephritis is a rare monoclonal gam-
mopathy characterized by immunoglobulin thrombi in 
 
Loop
of Henle
Distal tubule
Interlobular 
artery
Afferent
arteriole
Glomerulus
Bowman’s 
capsule
Proximal
tubule
Proximal
tubule 
lumen
Efferent 
arteriole
Endothelial cells
Mesangial cell
GBM
Podocyte
Amyloid fibrils
Microtubules
MIDD punctate deposits
Cryoglobulins
Immunoglobulin crystals
Proximal tubule 
epithelium
MIDD
PGNMID
C3 glomerulonephritis
MIDD
LCPT
Punctate
deposits
along 
tubular
basement
membranes
MIDD
Punctate
deposits
along
myocyte
basement
membranes
Ig-related
amyloidosis
Fibrils in
the vessel
media
Intracytoplasmic
crystals
Cryoglobulinaemic glomerulonephritis
Intraluminal immune deposits
Crystalglobulin-induced nephropathy
Intraluminal crystals
Myocyte
Elastica interna
Ig-related
amyloidosis
Immunotactoid
glomerulonephritis
Fig. 1 | Localization of MGRS- 
associated renal lesions. Monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance (MGRS)-associated 
lesions can involve one or more renal compartments. In immunotactoid glomerulonephritis, C3 glomerulopathy and 
proliferative glomerulonephritis with monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits (PGNMID), MGRS-associated lesions involve 
only the glomeruli, whereas in light- 
chain proximal tubulopathy (LCPT), MGRS-associated lesions involve only the 
proximal tubules. MGRS- 
associated lesions in cryoglobulinaemic glomerulonephritis mainly involve the glomeruli but can 
occasionally affect blood vessels in the form of intravascular cryoglobulin thrombi or endovasculitis. Immunoglobulin- 
related amyloidosis and monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disease (MIDD) usually affect all renal compartments, 
including glomeruli, vessels and the tubulointerstitium. GBM, glomerular basement membrane.
 50 | JANuARY 2019 | volume 15 
www.nature.com/nrneph
Consensus statement
the arterioles and glomerular capillaries. These thrombi 
exhibit a crystalline structure or periodicity on electron 
microscopy65. In some patients, the crystallization pro-
cess in the periphery is precipitated by cold exposure, 
termed cryocrystalglobulinaemia66. Mesangial and endo-
capillary hypercellularity is often absent65,66. As in cryo-
globulinaemia, intravascular crystal deposition results in 
small- 
vessel occlusion, thrombosis and/or inflammatory 
MGRS-associated diseases
Monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits
No monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits
Non-organized
Organized
Fibrillar
Microtubular
Inclusions or 
crystalline deposits
Immunoglobulin-
related amyloidosis
Immunotactoid 
glomerulonephritis
Monoclonal fibrillary
glomerulonephritis
Cryoglobulinaemic 
glomerulonephritis
type I and type II
LCPT
Crystal storing 
histiocytosis
(Cryo) crystalglobulin
glomerulonephritis
MIDD
PGNMID
Miscellaneous
C3 glomerulopathy with
monoclonal gammopathy
Thrombotic 
microangiopathy
Lambda
IgG1
IgM
IgG3
Kappa
Kappa
IgG
Kappa
Kappa
C3
Fig. 2 | Categorization of MGRS- 
associated renal lesions. Monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance (MGRS)- 
associated renal lesions (blue boxes) are initially separated by the presence or absence of monoclonal immunoglobulin 
deposits in kidney biopsy samples. They are further subcategorized by the ultrastructural characteristics of the deposits 
into organized and non- 
organized. Organized deposits are further subdivided into fibrillar, microtubular and inclusions or 
crystalline categories. Images of typical histological sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E), periodic acid–
Schiff or Masson trichrome stain and Congo red (top) are paired with immunofluorescence studies of frozen tissue sections 
(bottom) to reveal the specific immunoglobulin species. Pink box: the miscellaneous category represents polyclonal 
glomerulopathies that sometimes present with monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits, such as monotypic membranous 
nephropathy and monotypic anti- 
glomerular basement membrane disease. Purple box: thrombotic microangiopathy 
currently has a provisional status as an MGRS- 
associated lesion pending further evidence. Because this lesion has no 
immunoglobulin deposits and is best identified by electron microscopy 
, the immunofluorescence and H&E stained sections 
were replaced by an electron micrograph. LCPT, light- 
chain proximal tubulopathy 
; MIDD, monoclonal immunoglobulin 
deposition disease; PGNMID, proliferative glomerulonephritis and monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits.
  
 volume 15 | JANuARY 2019 | 51
Nature reviews | Nephrology
Consensus statement
vasculitis65,67. Renal biopsy samples in patients with (cryo)
crystalglobulinaemia reveal large extracellular crystals 
within glomerular capillaries and arterioles, which are 
frequently associated with fibrin thrombi and inflam-
mation. Intracellular crystals can also be seen in patients 
with cryocrystalglobulinaemia (Fig. 3g).
Lesions with non- 
organized deposits. Non- 
organized 
monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits are seen in 
patients with MIDD and those with proliferative glo-
merulonephritis with monoclonal immunoglobulin 
deposits (PGNMID). MIDD comprises a group of dis-
eases characterized by deposition of light chains, heavy 
a
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
b
c
d
Fig. 3 | Ultrastructural appearance of MGRS- 
associated lesions. Top row: electron microscopy images showing fibrillar 
or microtubular deposits. a | Small randomly oriented fibrils of mean thickness 10 nm in a patient with immunoglobulin 
light- 
chain-κ amyloidosis (original magnification ×49,000). b | Randomly oriented fibrils with mean thickness of 15 nm in a 
patient with fibrillary glomerulonephritis (original magnification ×52,000). c | Deposits composed of microtubules with 
hollow centres organized in parallel arrays and with a mean thickness of 26 nm in a patient with immunotactoid 
glomerulopathy (original magnification ×49,500). d | Focal deposits composed of short microtubules with hollow centres 
with a mean thickness of 29 nm in a patient with cryoglobulinaemic glomerulonephritis (original magnification ×40,000). 
Centre row: electron microscopy images showing crystals or inclusions. e | Proximal tubular cells filled with moderately 
electron- 
dense, light- 
chain crystals that have rod and rhomboid shapes in a patient with crystalline light- 
chain proximal 
tubulopathy. The crystals are predominantly free within the cytoplasm, not membrane bound (original magnification 
×2,700). f | Numerous light- 
chain crystals with rod, rectangle or rhomboid shapes within the cytoplasm of interstitial 
infiltrating histiocytes in a patient with crystal- 
storing histiocytosis (original magnification ×4,200). g | Needle- 
shaped, 
electron- 
dense crystals in the mesangium and within phagolysosomes of infiltrating inflammatory cells in a patient with 
cryocrystalglobulinaemia (original magnification ×9,300). The crystals showed monotypic staining for IgG and κ light chains 
on pronase immunofluorescence. Bottom row: electron microscopy images showing non- 
organized deposits. h | Finely 
granular, highly electron- 
dense deposits along a tubular basement membrane in a patient with light- 
chain deposition 
disease (original magnification ×15,000). i | Large, discrete (mesangial, subendothelial and subepithelial) granular, electron- 
dense deposits in a patient with proliferative glomerulonephritis with monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits (original 
magnification ×6,000). j | Mesangial deposits and a hump- 
shaped subepithelial deposit located overlying the glomerular 
basement membrane reflection over the mesangium in a patient with C3 glomerulonephritis associated with monoclonal 
gammopathy (original magnification ×9,300). k | ‘Sausage- 
like’ thickening of the glomerular basement membrane 
associated with highly electron- 
dense intramembranous deposits in a patient with dense deposit disease associated with 
monoclonal gammopathy (original magnification ×4,800). MGRS, monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance.
 52 | JANuARY 2019 | volume 15 
www.nature.com/nrneph
Consensus statement
chains or both light and heavy chains68–70. In MIDD 
(FigS 1, 3h), linear punctate deposits are seen along both 
the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and the 
 
tubular basement membrane (and occasionally extra-
renally). By contrast, in PGNMID, deposits are confined 
to the glomeruli, where they are present in the mesan-
gium and subendothelial space and occasionally in the 
subepithelial space (FigS 1, 3i). In addition, the deposits 
seen in PGNMID contain only intact immunoglobu-
lins24,71, whereas those seen in heavy- 
chain MIDD or 
light- 
and-heavy- 
chain MIDD typically lack the first 
constant domain of the immunoglobulin24,70,71. In most 
patients, PGNMID is IgG3-driven, whereas truncated 
IgG1 is the most frequent immunoglobulin deposited 
in heavy- 
chain MIDD70,72. However, PGNMID can also 
be IgA- 
driven or (rarely) IgM- 
driven72,73.
Lesions without deposits. Not all MGRS- 
associated 
renal lesions include monoclonal immunoglobulin 
deposits. The best example of an MGRS- 
associated 
disorder lacking such deposits is C3 glomerulopathy 
with monoclonal gammopathy, which includes both C3 
glomerulonephritis and the rare entity of dense deposit 
disease. By definition, substantial renal immunoglobulin 
deposits will be absent in patients with C3 glomerulo-
pathy, although 60–80% of patients aged >50 years with 
C3 glomerulopathy have a monoclonal gammopathy at 
the time of diagnosis74–76. This proportion far exceeds the 
 
expected rate in the general population75–77. Thus, 
although renal disease related to the monoclonal immu-
noglobulin can be demonstrated in only about 30% of 
patients affected by C3 glomerulopathy (in whom the 
monoclonal immunoglobulin acts as a C3 nephritic 
factor or anti- 
factor-H antibody), it should still be 
considered an MGRS- 
associated disorder25,75.
C3 glomerulonephritis and dense deposit disease 
are distinguished by their ultrastructural appearance: 
ill- 
defined, moderately electron- 
dense mesangial, sub-
epithelial and subendothelial deposits are seen in C3 glo-
merulonephritis (Fig. 3j), whereas highly electron- 
dense 
‘sausage- 
like’ intramembranous deposits and mesangial 
rounded nodular deposits are seen in dense deposit dis-
ease (Fig. 3k). Large ‘hump- 
shaped’ subepithelial deposits 
might be seen in either lesion25 (Fig. 3j). C3 glomerulo-
nephritis is the most common form of C3 glomerulopathy 
 
with monoclonal gammopathy. Importantly, roughly 
5–10% of patients with monoclonal gammopathy and 
findings on standard immunofluorescence (that is, con-
ducted on frozen tissue) consistent with C3 glomeru-
lonephritis will actually have a membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis with masked monoclonal deposits. 
These patients require additional immunofluorescence 
studies to be performed on protease- 
digested, paraffin- 
embedded tissue for identification of the monoclonal 
immunoglobulin in the deposits78,79.
Lesions with provisional status. Thrombotic micro-
angiopathy is the endothelial injury seen most com-
monly in microangiopathy with haemolytic anaemia 
(MAHA). Thrombotic microangiopathy and MAHA 
can occur concurrently in patients with monoclonal 
 
gammopathies, including MM and WM13,42,80,81. 
The pathophysiology of these disorders is not entirely 
understood but might be related to the monoclonal 
immunoglobulin acting as an autoantibody against a 
complement regulatory protein82. The other lesion in 
this category is glomerular microangiopathy associated 
with polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, 
monoclonal gammopathy and skin changes (POEMS) 
syndrome83,84. The glomerular microangiopathy seen 
in POEMS syndrome is associated with a monoclonal 
gammopathy, which is nearly always λ light- 
chain type. 
However, the λ light chain itself is usually absent from 
kidney biopsy samples. Instead, the lesion is a subacute 
to chronic glomerular thrombotic microangiopathy 
characterized by mesangial and endothelial cell pro-
liferation, mesangiolysis, widening of the subendothe-
lial zone and double contouring85. Interestingly, these 
patients show no evidence of MAHA. The renal lesions 
in POEMS syndrome are thought to be secondary to 
a cytokine- 
mediated endothelial cell injury, similar 
to that seen in myeloproliferative neoplasm- 
related 
glomerulopathy86.
Lesions classed as miscellaneous. The ‘miscellaneous’ 
subcategory of MGRS- 
associated lesions includes kid-
ney diseases that are typically not associated with MGRS, 
such as anti- 
GBM disease secondary to a monoclonal 
gammopathy. The anti- 
GBM monoclonal antibody can 
be IgG or IgA87–89. In most patients with this disease, the 
anti- 
GBM antibody is not detectable in serum by com-
mercially available enzyme- 
linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) or multiplex flow immunoassays, which are 
designed to detect antibodies against only α3NC1. These 
patients experience frequent relapses and the disease 
recurs after kidney transplantation, which is not typi-
cal in patients with non- 
MGRS-associated anti- 
GBM 
disease87–89. A pattern of membranous nephropathy that 
is visually indistinguishable from that associated with 
polyclonal immunoglobulin- 
mediated membranous 
lesions on light microscopy and electron microscopy 
has been described in patients with monoclonal IgG 
deposits90,91. Although the phospholipase A2 receptor 
(PLA2R) was identified as the target of the monoclonal 
IgG in a single patient included in a small study, a larger 
study found that only 26% of patients showed evidence 
of antibodies to PLA2R and that none of those patients 
had a lymphoproliferative disorder90,91. Finally, Henoch–
Schönlein purpura with IgA nephropathy has very occa-
sionally been reported in patients with IgA monoclonal 
gammopathy or MM92,93.
Evaluation of suspected MGRS
Owing to differences in clinical characteristics and 
therapy, it is essential to distinguish MGRS- 
associated 
disorders from kidney diseases that are unrelated to 
monoclonal immunoglobins10,12,24,28,94,95. In patients 
suspected of having MGRS, the evaluation starts with a 
kidney biopsy. If analysis of the biopsy sample identifies 
an MGRS- 
associated lesion, a haematological evalua-
tion (including monoclonal immunoglobulin studies, 
clonal determination and cytogenetic analysis) should 
be performed. These steps are discussed in greater 
 
detail below.
  
 volume 15 | JANuARY 2019 | 53
Nature reviews | Nephrology
Consensus statement
When to perform a renal biopsy. As MGRS is a haema-
tological condition defined by its renal manifestations, a 
kidney biopsy is essential for its diagnosis. However, not 
every patient with a monoclonal gammopathy and kid-
ney disease has MGRS. The frequency of MGUS is 3% 
in people aged >50 years, 5% in persons aged >70 years 
 
and as high as 8% in men aged >80 years77. The preva-
lence of MGUS is two to three times higher in African 
Americans than in white individuals of the same 
 
population96. The incidence of chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) also increases after age 60 years97. Therefore, 
the same patient could have both MGUS and CKD that 
 
are unrelated to each other. Studies from the same county 
in the United States found that the annual incidence 
 
of glomerular disease was approximately 1 per 100,000 
individuals in the general population and that the prev-
alence of MGUS in people aged >50 years was 3.2%77,98. 
A renal biopsy study of patients with clinically sus-
pected MGUS found that 45% of these patients did not 
have an MGRS- 
associated kidney disorder; however, 
as additional disease entities related to monoclonal 
 
gammopathies have been identified after the publication 
of this article, the true value might be lower10.
Clinicians must balance the risks associated with 
underdiagnosis of potentially treatable conditions 
against those of complications from the biopsy proce-
dure. However, patients with MGRS- 
associated renal 
lesions (including amyloidosis) do not experience any 
increase in the risk of bleeding after kidney biopsy 
(which remains about 4%)99,100. Thus, performing a 
kidney biopsy in a patient with diabetes and rapidly 
progressive loss of renal function or increasing pro-
teinuria is reasonable, especially if their diabetes is well 
controlled and/or evidence of extrarenal microvascular 
disease is absent. Because MGUS is uncommon in indi-
viduals aged <50 years (and is especially rare in those 
aged <40 years), its presence in people aged <50 years, 
when accompanied by renal manifestations, deserves a 
thorough evaluation. Older age (≥70 years) should not 
discourage biopsy as most MGRS- 
related renal diseases 
occur in patients aged >50 years. In young and physi-
cally fit patients who are eligible for kidney transplan-
tation, a kidney biopsy should be performed provided 
the kidneys are not markedly shrunken. Transjugu-
lar kidney biopsy is an option in high- 
risk patients 
from whom it would otherwise be difficult to obtain 
 
kidney tissue101,102.
Renal biopsy evaluation. The diagnosis of MGRS- 
associated lesions requires the integration of morphologi-
cal alterations seen on light microscopy with the findings 
of immunohistochemistry (immunofluorescence or 
immunoperoxidase) and transmission electron micro-
scopy studies, as well as correlation with the patient’s 
medical history and laboratory findings. In some patients, 
ancillary techniques are needed to establish the diagnosis, 
including protease immunofluorescence, ultrastructural 
immunogold labelling and laser microdissection fol-
lowed by liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry 
(LC–MS). A detailed description of our consensus recom-
mendations for renal biopsy and the indications for ancil-
lary techniques is provided in TaBle 2. Our recommended 
 
approach to renal biopsy analysis in patients suspected to 
have MGRS is provided in Fig. 4.
To confirm the monotypic nature of the immuno-
globulin deposits, immunofluorescence staining for 
IgG subclasses should be performed in biopsy sam-
ples from patients with glomerular disorders related 
to deposition of an intact monoclonal IgG (such as 
PGNMID, immunotactoid glomerulopathy, type I cryo-
globulinaemic glomerulonephritis and monoclonal 
 
membranous nephropathy) or of a truncated mono-
clonal heavy chain (such as heavy- 
chain deposition 
disease, heavy- 
and-light- 
chain deposition disease or 
heavy-chain amyloidosis). Of note, IgG subclass restric-
tion is not sufficient by itself to establish monoclonal-
ity, as some non- 
MGRS glomerular diseases — such as 
PLA2R- 
associated polyclonal membranous nephropathy 
and non- 
monoclonal fibrillary glomerulonephritis — 
commonly show staining restricted to one IgG subclass 
but positive staining for both κ and λ light chains23,103. 
Identification of complement C1q and/or C3 proteins 
within the monotypic renal deposits might reveal the 
cause of hypocomplementaemia in patients with MGRS- 
associated lesions such as PGNMID, immunotactoid 
glomerulonephritis, type I cryoglobulinaemic glomer-
ulonephritis, C3 glomerulonephritis and heavy- 
chain or 
heavy- 
and-light- 
chain deposition disease23,24,51,52,68,103,104.
Electron microscopy is often necessary to iden-
tify the specific MGRS- 
associated lesion. Ideally, 
electron microscopy should be performed on 2–3% 
glutaraldehyde- 
fixed tissue. If glutaraldehyde- 
fixed tis-
sue is not available or lacks glomeruli, formalin- 
fixed, 
paraffin- 
embedded tissue samples can be reprocessed 
for electron microscopy. Although reprocessing is 
usually associated with various artefacts, the immune 
deposits generally remain sufficiently intact to permit 
an accurate assessment of their location and structure. 
Electron microscopy of frozen tissue samples or tissue 
fixed in Zenker or B5 fixatives is not recommended 
owing to its generally very poor ultrastructural pres-
ervation. In patients with monoclonal gammopathy, at 
least two glomeruli should be studied ultrastructurally as 
glomerular deposits can be sparse and only a portion of 
the deposits show substructural features. For example, in 
most patients with cryoglobulinaemic glomerulonephri-
tis, only a small number of deposits (most commonly 
intraluminal ones) exhibit the microtubular substruc-
ture that is so useful in establishing the diagnosis53. 
In patients with monoclonal gammopathy, a directed 
search for intratubular cytoplasmic crystals or inclusions 
by electron microscopy is of paramount importance, as 
these features can be overlooked by light microscopy and 
standard immunofluorescence studies on frozen tissue. 
Additionally, in some patients with classic MIDD, the 
characteristic punctate, powdery, electron- 
dense depos-
its can be found only in small sections of the tubular 
basement membranes. Therefore, a thorough search 
for tubular basement membrane deposits by electron 
microscopy is necessary to distinguish classic MIDD 
from MIDD identified by immunofluorescence only69. 
Ultrastructural immunogold labelling is a sensitive tech-
nique that can assist in the histopathological diagnosis 
of MGRS- 
associated lesions, such as AL amyloidosis, 
 54 | JANuARY 2019 | volume 15 
www.nature.com/nrneph
Consensus statement
MIDD, LCPT and CSH, by confirming the location and 
composition of monoclonal deposits, but it is not widely 
available35,60,70,105–107.
Laser microdissection followed by LC–MS is cur-
rently the gold standard for amyloid typing but is avail-
able in only a few specialized centres. In renal pathology 
laboratories that routinely perform immunofluorescence 
studies on native kidney biopsy samples, LC–MS is 
essential for typing renal amyloidosis in about 15% of 
patients43,108. LC–MS is crucial for the diagnosis of rare 
hereditary forms of renal amyloidosis that cannot be 
typed by immunofluorescence, but it is also important 
to distinguish AH and AHL amyloidoses from non- 
immunoglobulin amyloidoses associated with nonspe-
cifically entrapped immunoglobulins (particularly AA 
amyloidosis) and from fibrillary glomerulonephritis49,109. 
LC–MS can also be useful in the diagnosis of MGRS- 
associated lesions other than immunoglobulin amy-
loidosis when immunofluorescence studies are not 
available or have negative findings. An example of the 
latter situation is IgD heavy- 
chain deposition disease, 
which is generally missed by immunofluorescence 
studies because an IgD antibody is not included in the 
 
routine immunofluorescence panel110.
Monoclonal immunoglobulin testing. Once the diagno-
sis of an MGRS- 
associated lesion has been established, 
a search for the culprit monoclonal immunoglobu-
lin should be undertaken (if it has not been identified 
already). Protein electrophoresis analyses of serum and 
urine samples are the first tests performed111. Although its 
sensitivity is inferior to that of some other tests discussed 
Table 2 | Consensus recommendations for the evaluation of MGRS- 
associated disorders
Modality
Recommendations
Refs
Kidney biopsy
Recommended in the following patients:
• Those with monoclonal gammopathy and unexplained kidney disease
• Those with known risk factors for chronic kidney disease but an atypical clinical course
• Patients with kidney disease and monoclonal gammopathy aged <50 years
NA
Protease immunofluorescence 
on kidney biopsy
Recommended in the following scenarios:
• When glomeruli are lacking in frozen tissue samples
• In patients with suspected LCPT and other forms of crystalline nephropathies, such as CSH and 
crystalglobulin- 
induced nephropathy
• In patients with a monoclonal gammopathy in whom kidney biopsy samples show C3 glomerulonephritis or 
unclassified proliferative glomerulonephritis in the context of negative findings by immunofluorescence on 
frozen tissue samples (including in patients with features of cryoglobulinaemic glomerulonephritis on light 
or electron microscopy)
• In patients with fibrillary glomerulonephritis who have apparent light- 
chain restriction detected by 
immunofluorescence on frozen tissue
NA
Renal amyloid typing by liquid 
chromatography and mass 
spectrometry
Recommended in the following situations:
• When frozen tissue for immunofluorescence is not available
• Negative immunofluorescence staining for κ and λ light chains, with negative immunoperoxidase staining 
for SAA and LECT2
• Equal staining for κ and λ light chains by immunofluorescence
• Bright staining for IgG and/or IgA by immunofluorescence
• Equivocal Congo red staining
• To enable distinction between AHL amyloidosis and congophilic fibrillary glomerulonephritis
108
Flow cytometry or other 
immunotyping
• Neoplastic plasma cells frequently show aberrant loss of CD45 and CD19, as well as aberrant expression 
of CD56 and CD117; therefore, these markers (in addition to κ and λ light chains and CD38) are useful in 
identifying small plasma cell clones
• Including CD5 and CD20 in the immunophenotyping of B cells can frequently separate small clones from 
polytypic cells
• The most sensitive assay available at a given institution should be used. Although there is no established 
gold standard, many laboratories have the capability to determine minimal residual disease in MGRS at a 
sensitivity of 10−4 to 10−6 monoclonal cells. The sensitivity of flow cytometry immunophenotyping depends 
on the total number of collected cells, the number of antibodies used to find an aberrant phenotype, the 
phenotype of the abnormal clone and sample quality
118
Immunohistochemistry
• Immunohistochemistry of bone marrow biopsy samples has a low sensitivity for detecting κ- 
expressing 
and λ- 
expressing plasma cells and could be useful only if there is a major plasma cell clone and a lack of 
polyclonal plasma cells
• Immunohistochemistry might be useful in the evaluation of atypical lymphoid infiltrates, particularly if flow 
cytometry is not available or infiltrates are very focal
• If an abnormal clone is detected, the light- 
chain isotype should be compared with that present in renal 
lesions and additional information should be obtained
NA
Mutational analysis
The MYD88 L265P mutation is found in over 90% of patients with lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma or 
Waldenström macroglobulinaemia but in only 40–60% of individuals with IgM MGUS
119–121
FISH
Cyclin D1 FISH with immunostaining for CD10, BCL2 and BCL6 to subclassify diffuse large cell lymphoma, 
and prognostic FISH panels for MM and CLL 
, can also be useful
119–121
AHL 
, immunoglobulin A heavy- 
and-light chain; CLL 
, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; CSH, crystal- 
storing histiocytosis; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; 
LCPT, light- 
chain proximal tubulopathy 
; LECT2, leukocyte cell- 
derived chemotaxin 2; MGRS, monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance; MGUS, monoclonal 
gammopathy of undetermined significance; MM, multiple myeloma; NA 
, not applicable; SAA 
, serum amyloid A protein.
  
 volume 15 | JANuARY 2019 | 55
Nature reviews | Nephrology
Consensus statement
here, serum protein electrophoresis is quantitative, easy 
to perform and inexpensive. Urine protein electrophore-
sis is less sensitive than serum protein electrophoresis but 
provides the total protein level, urinary albumin level and 
globular protein (monoclonal immunoglobulin or light 
chain) component — parameters that are necessary for 
diagnosis, prognostication and response assessment112–114. 
Immunofixation of a serum sample and of a concentrated 
urine aliquot from a 24 h collection should also be done 
because this test is more sensitive than protein electro-
phoresis. Immunofixation is necessary for the identifi-
cation and typing of monoclonal immunoglobulins, as 
well as for the determination of a complete response113,115. 
Immunoblotting is a highly sensitive technique that can 
detect small amounts of monoclonal immunoglobulin, 
characterize the distribution of IgG heavy- 
chain subclasses 
and detect deletion of the first constant domain, the hallmark 
of heavy- 
chain deposition disease and AH amyloidosis70. 
However, this technique is not widely available.
Another critical test is the serum free light- 
chain 
assay, which detects unbound free light chains113. This 
assay measures κ and λ free light chains independently 
and can be used to determine the κ:λ free light- 
chain 
ratio. Clonality can be inferred from an abnormal κ:λ 
free light- 
chain ratio: a high ratio indicates a κ clone 
whereas a low ratio indicates a λ clone. Because free light 
Kidney biopsy
Light microscopy
Immunofluorescence findings
C3 dominant
Light 
chains only
Light-chain
restriction
Heavy-chain
restriction
Light and
heavy chains
Heavy 
chains only
TMA
Liquid chromatography and
mass spectrometry or
immunogold electron microscopy
+ serum or urine 
monoclonal 
immunoglobulin
IgG subclasses
when heavy
chains are IgG
Amyloidosis or MIDD detected 
by light or electron microscopy 
with negative or inconclusive 
immunofluorescence findings
Diagnosis of MGRS lesions
Possible MGRS (or known MGUS)
Laboratory evaluation of kidney disease
• Kidney function testing:creatinine-based eGFR
• Urinalysis:diptest, albumin:creatinine ratio and protein:creatinine ratio
• Metabolic testing:serum bicarbonate, chloride, phosphate and uric acid levels;
serum and urine glucose levels for Fanconi syndrome assessment
Biopsy advised (if one or more of)
• AKI stage 3
• eGFR <60ml/min/1.73m2 and 
>2ml/min/1.73m2 per year decline
• Proteinuria and haematuria
• Albumin:creatinine ratio
>30mg/mmol
• Fanconi syndrome (hypouricaemia)
Biopsy consider (if one or more of)
• AKI stage 1 or 2
• eGFR <60ml/min/1.73m2 and 
<2ml/min/1.73m2 per year decline
• Albumin:creatinine ratio 3–30mg/mmol
and eGFR >60ml/min/1.73m2
• Haematuria and eGFR <60 ml/min/1.73m2
• Evidence of light-chain proteinuria
Biopsy defer
• Stable eGFR
• Bland urinalysis
• No evidence of light- 
chain proteinuria
Creatinine
eGFR
Urinalysis
Metabolic
+ serum or urine 
monoclonal 
immunoglobulin
Fig. 4 | Algorithm for renal biopsy evaluation in patients suspected to have MGRS. Kidney biopsy analysis in patients 
suspected to have monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance (MGRS) should include light microscopy (including 
staining the paraffin sections with haematoxylin and eosin, periodic acid−Schiff, Masson trichrome, Jones methenamine 
silver and Congo red). Immunofluorescence studies conducted on frozen tissue should include staining for IgG, IgM, IgA 
, 
C1q, C3 and κ and λ light chains. Finally 
, transmission election microscopy should be conducted. This standard renal biopsy 
approach enables diagnosis of MGRS in the majority of affected patients. In some individuals, ancillary techniques are 
needed to establish the diagnosis, including mass spectrometry 
, immunogold electron microscopy 
, immunofluorescence 
staining for IgG subtypes and paraffin immunofluorescence. The indications for these ancillary techniques are detailed in 
TaBle 2. AKI, acute kidney injury 
; eGFR 
, estimated glomerular filtration rate; MGUS, monoclonal gammopathy of 
undetermined significance; MIDD, monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disease; TMA 
, thrombotic microangiopathy.
 56 | JANuARY 2019 | volume 15 
www.nature.com/nrneph
Consensus statement
chains are cleared by the kidney, impaired renal function 
alters the free light- 
chain concentration. The ‘normal’ 
free light- 
chain ratio, 0.26–1.65, can rise to 0.34–3.10 
 
in patients with severe renal impairment (CKD stage 5 
or greater), but small declines in renal function can also 
impair free light- 
chain clearance116. Knowing which 
serum free light- 
chain assay is being used by the labora-
tory is extremely important, as at least two major assays 
are currently on the market. Not only are the results of 
these assays mathematically inconvertible, but the effects 
of renal impairment differ between these assays; the 
evidence suggests that the N Latex assay is less affected 
than the FreeLite assay by impaired renal function117. 
Thus, the same assay must be used to monitor a particu-
lar patient throughout their treatment. Moreover, given 
that the two assays have different performance charac-
teristics, free light- 
chain levels might need to be checked 
using the other assay if the first result is negative. In 
addition, serum immunofixation might be more helpful 
than serum free light- 
chain assays in diseases associated 
with an intact monoclonal immunoglobulin (such as 
PGNMID)72. Finally, although antibodies for use in uri-
nary light- 
chain assays have been developed, these assays 
have not been validated and should not be used to quan-
tify the amount of light chain (Bence Jones protein) in a 
24 h urine specimen (which should instead be measured 
by urine protein electrophoresis, as previously stated)118.
Identification of the culprit monoclonal immuno-
globulin has important diagnostic and prognostic 
consequences. The monoclonal immunoglobulin 
detected in serum and/or urine must match that found 
in immunoglobulin deposits in the kidney35; if the 
immunoglobulin found in renal deposits differs from 
that found in the circulation, the monoclonality of the 
putative culprit immunoglobulin is called into question. 
Although the serum M- 
spike concentration and serum 
free light- 
chain assay results have both diagnostic and 
prognostic importance, the correlation between the 
results of these tests and the severity or type of kidney 
disease is less well established.
Clonal identification
The diagnosis of MGRS should generally be established 
before obtaining a haematological consultation. The 
focus of the haematologist and/or oncologist and hae-
matopathologists should be clonal identification, which 
is central to the management of patients with MGRS. 
The only exception is when the patient has already been 
diagnosed as having MM, WM or CLL, which eliminates 
the need for a kidney biopsy (because treatment will be 
initiated regardless of the kidney lesions present). Clonal 
identification is essential because the same kidney dis-
eases can occur in different haematological disorders 
(TaBle 3). Of note, although a pathological clone can be 
identified in virtually every patient with AL amyloido-
sis or MIDD, such clones are often difficult to detect in 
other diseases. For example, the chance of identifying the 
pathological clone falls below 17% for patients who do 
not have a detectable monoclonal immunoglobulin on 
immunofixation studies72, and only 20–30% of patients 
with PGNMID have a detectable circulating monoclo-
nal immunoglobulin24,72. As treatment differs according 
Table 3 | Renal lesions associated with monoclonal gammopathy
Lesion
Proportion of lesions (%)
Monoclonal 
immuno-
globulin 
deposits
Detectable 
monoclonal 
immuno-
globulin
MM
MGRS
Othera
Refs
Light- 
chain cast nephropathy
100
100
99
0
~1
2,4,11,13
Immunoglobulin- 
related amyloid amyloidosis
96
99
16
80
1–4
43,113,128,129
MIDD
100
100
0–20
78–100
1–2
29,31,68,130,131
Light- 
chain proximal tubulopathy
100
97b
12–33
61–80
3–8
32,56,58,132
Cryoglobulinaemic (type I) glomerulonephritis
100
90–100
6–8
47–52
24–56
133–136
Cryoglobulinaemic (type II) glomerulonephritis
100
49
0
20
7
133–136
PGNMID
100
30–32
4
96
~1
24,72
Crystal- 
storing histiocytosis
83
90
33
8
50
137
Cryocrystalglobulin or crystalglobulin 
nephropathy
91
82
61
18
4
138
Immunotactoid glomerulonephritis
69–93
63–71
0–13
25–50
25–50
23,51
C3 glomerulopathy with monoclonal 
gammopathyc
0
28–83d
0–40d
40–90
6–10
25,74,75,104
Monoclonal fibrillary glomerulonephritise
100
7–17
0–54
55–98
2–10
44,47,139
MGRS, monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance; MIDD, monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disease; MM, multiple 
myeloma; PGNMID, proliferative glomerulonephritis with monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits. aHaematological conditions 
including lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (Waldenström macroglobulinaemia), smouldering Waldenström macroglobulinaemia, B cell 
lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic lymphoma and monoclonal B cell lymphocytosis. bSensitivity increased by immunofluorescence 
after pronase digestion. cMost instances of fibrillary glomerulonephritis and C3 glomerulopathy are not associated with a monoclonal 
gammopathy. The percentages for MM, MGRS and other haematological conditions relate to the group of patients who do have a 
monoclonal gammopathy. dPatients over the age of 50 years. eIn these patients, the glomerular deposits show light- 
chain restriction 
or stain for IgG without light chains, both by frozen tissue and paraffin tissue immunofluorescence (as in 15–17% of patients with 
fibrillary glomerulonephritis).
 to whether the clone has a plasmacytic or lymphocytic 
nature, choosing the right agent is challenging if a clone 
cannot be identified.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy should be per-
formed to evaluate MGRS in most patients, although in 
patients with CLL clones, the diagnosis could be made 
with peripheral blood flow cytometry. Morphological 
assessment should include quantification of the percent-
age of plasma cells (in plasma cell clones) and evaluation 
for the presence of atypical lymphoid or lymphoplasma-
cytic aggregates (in lymphoma clones) as well as amyloid 
deposits. In addition, ancillary studies — in particular, 
flow cytometry immunophenotyping, detection of min-
imal residual disease and cytogenetic and genetic evalu-
ation of the clones — are helpful for the identification of 
small clones as well as for deriving treatment recommen-
dations119–121. The myeloma fluorescent in situ hybridi-
zation (FISH) panel has shown increasing importance 
in guiding the treatment of patients with plasma cell 
dyscrasias. For example, patients with AL amyloidosis 
featuring translocation t(11;14) have inferior responses 
to bortezomib- 
based therapy, whereas those with gain of 
chromosome 1q21 show poorer responses to melphalan 
plus dexamethasone99,100,122–124 (versus patients without 
these genetic variants). These findings highlight the 
importance of performing the myeloma FISH panel 
on all bone marrow biopsy samples from patients with 
plasma cell dyscrasia.
If bone marrow evaluation does not reveal a clonal 
haematological disorder, the next step could be to per-
form imaging studies (such as CT with or without PET, 
or whole- 
body MRI) to look for a localized plasmacy-
toma or for lymphadenopathy in low- 
stage, low- 
grade 
lymphoma34,35. For patients suspected to have MM, 
whole- 
body CT with or without PET (or MRI) should 
be performed to look for bone disease125,126. Any suspi-
cious lesions should be biopsied and enough material 
should be obtained to enable diagnostic and prognostic 
studies. Next- 
generation flow cytometry has been used 
in the measurement of minimal residual disease127. 
This technique might be helpful in patients suspected 
of having MGRS who have negative findings on tra-
ditional cytology or flow cytometry studies of bone 
 
marrow samples.
Summary
MGRS is a new classification of pathogenic clonal pro-
liferative disorders that produce a nephrotoxic protein. 
The term MGRS was needed to improve the classifi-
cation of these diseases for research purposes, and 
to accurately categorize them as pathological, so that 
government agencies could allocate the resources nec-
essary for their treatment. The diagnosis of MGRS can 
be established only by performing a kidney biopsy that 
either demonstrates the presence of monotypic immu-
noglobulin deposits or infers their involvement in the 
case of C3 glomerulonephritis or thrombotic micro-
angiopathy with a circulating monoclonal immunoglobu-
lin. Clinicians will need to balance the risk of missing 
a diagnosis against those of the complications of renal 
biopsy; therefore, the judicious use of renal biopsy is 
important. Detection of a monoclonal immunoglobu-
lin, in addition to helping to establish the diagnosis of 
MGRS, has diagnostic and prognostic value and is also 
used to predict treatment responses. Haematological 
evaluation might require peripheral blood flow cyto-
metry, bone marrow biopsy and imaging studies to assess 
localized disease.
Published online 3 December 2018
1. 
Kyle, R. A. Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined 
significance. Natural history in 241 cases. Am. J. Med. 
64, 814–826 (1978).
2. 
Rajkumar, S. V. et al. International Myeloma  
Working Group updated criteria for the diagnosis of 
multiple myeloma. Lancet Oncol. 15, e538–e548 
(2014).
3. 
Dimopoulos, M. A. et al. Update on treatment 
recommendations from the Fourth International 
Workshop on Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia.  
J. Clin. Oncol. 27, 120–126 (2009).
4. 
Strati, P
. & Shanafelt, T
. D. Monoclonal B cell 
lymphocytosis and early- 
stage chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia: diagnosis, natural history, and risk 
stratification. Blood 126, 454–462 (2015).
5. 
Bence Jones, H. On a new substance occurring in the 
urine of a patient with mollities ossium. Philos. T
rans. 
R. Soc. B. Biol. Sci. 138, 55–62 (1848).
6. 
Steensma, D. P
. & Kyle, R. A. A history of the kidney in 
plasma cell disorders. Contrib. Nephrol. 153, 5–24 
(2007).
7. 
Von Rustizky, J. Multiples myelom. Deutsch. Z. Chir. 3, 
162–172 (1873).
8. 
Decastello, A. Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Benc- 
Jonesschen Albuminurie [German]. Z. Kin. Med. 67, 
319–343 (1909).
9. 
Koss, M. N., Pirani, C. L. & Osserman, E. F. 
Experimental Bence Jones cast nephropathy.  
Lab. Invest. 34, 579–591 (1976).
10. Paueksakon, P
., Revelo, M. P
., Horn, R. G., Shappell, 
S. & Fogo, A. B. Monoclonal gammopathy: significance 
and possible causality in renal disease. Am. J. Kidney 
Dis. 42, 87–95 (2003).
11. Higgins, L. et al. Kidney involvement of patients  
with Waldenström macroglobulinemia and other 
IgM- 
producing B cell lymphoproliferative disorders. 
Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 13, 1037–1046 (2018).
12. Chauvet, S. et al. Kidney diseases associated with 
monoclonal immunoglobulin M- 
secreting B cell 
lymphoproliferative disorders: a case series of 
35 patients. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 66, 756–767  
(2015).
13. Vos, J. M. et al. Renal disease related to Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia: incidence, pathology and  
clinical outcomes. Br. J. Haematol. 175, 623–630 
(2016).
14. Strati, P
. et al. Renal complications in chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia and monoclonal B cell 
lymphocytosis: the Mayo Clinic experience. 
Haematologica 100, 1180–1188 (2015).
15. Pozzi, C. et al. Light chain deposition disease with 
renal involvement: clinical characteristics and 
prognostic factors. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 42, 1154–1163 
(2003).
16. Kyle, R. A. & Bayrd, E. D. Amyloidosis: review of 236 
cases. Medicine (Baltimore) 54, 271–299 (1975).
17. Solomon, A., Weiss, D. T
. & Kattine, A. A. Nephrotoxic 
potential of Bence Jones proteins. N. Engl. J. Med. 
324, 1845–1851 (1991).
18. Sirac, C. et al. Animal models of monoclonal 
immunoglobulin- 
related renal diseases. Nat. Rev. 
Nephrol. 14, 246–264 (2018).
19. Merlini, G. & Stone, M. J. Dangerous small B cell 
clones. Blood 108, 2520–2530 (2006).
20. Glavey, S. V. & Leung, N. Monoclonal gammopathy: 
the good, the bad and the ugly. Blood Rev. 30,  
223–231 (2016).
21. Gertz, M. A. et al. Clinical outcome of immunoglobulin 
light chain amyloidosis affecting the kidney.  
Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 24, 3132–3137 (2009).
22. Zand, L. et al. Clinical and prognostic differences 
among patients with light chain deposition disease, 
myeloma cast nephropathy and both. Leuk. Lymphoma 
56, 3357–3364 (2015).
23. Bridoux, F. et al. Fibrillary glomerulonephritis and 
immunotactoid (microtubular) glomerulopathy are 
associated with distinct immunologic features. 
Kidney Int. 62, 1764–1775 (2002).
24. Nasr, S. H. et al. Proliferative glomerulonephritis with 
monoclonal IgG deposits. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 20, 
2055–2064 (2009).
25. Chauvet, S. et al. T
reatment of B cell disorder 
improves renal outcome of patients with monoclonal 
gammopathy- 
associated C3 glomerulopathy. Blood 
129, 1437–1447 (2017).
26. Czarnecki, P
. G. et al. Long- 
term outcome of kidney 
transplantation in patients with fibrillary 
glomerulonephritis or monoclonal gammopathy with 
fibrillary deposits. Kidney Int. 75, 420–427 (2009).
27. Leung, N. et al. Long- 
term outcome of renal 
transplantation in light- 
chain deposition disease. 
Am. J. Kidney Dis. 43, 147–153 (2004).
28. Said, S, M. et al. Proliferative glomerulonephritis with 
monoclonal immunoglobulin G deposits is associated 
with high rate of early recurrence in the allograft. 
Kidney Int. 94, 159–169 (2011).
29. Cohen, C. et al. Bortezomib produces high 
hematological response rates with prolonged renal 
survival in monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition 
disease. Kidney Int. 88, 1135–1143 (2015).
30. Hassoun, H. et al. High- 
dose melphalan and  
auto- 
SCT in patients with monoclonal Ig deposition 
disease. Bone Marrow T
ransplant. 42, 405–412 
(2008).
31. Sayed, R. H. et al. Natural history and outcome of light 
chain deposition disease. Blood 126, 2805–2810 
(2015).
32. Vignon, M. et al. Current anti- 
myeloma therapies in 
renal manifestations of monoclonal light chain- 
associated Fanconi syndrome: a retrospective series of 
49 patients. Leukemia 31, 123–129 (2017).
 
 volume 15 | JANuARY 2019 | 57
Nature reviews | Nephrology
Consensus statement
 58 | JANuARY 2019 | volume 15 
www.nature.com/nrneph
Consensus statement
33. Leung, N. et al. Monoclonal gammopathy of renal 
significance: when MGUS is no longer undetermined 
or insignificant. Blood 120, 4292–4295 (2012).
34. Fermand, J. P
. et al. How I treat monoclonal 
gammopathy of renal significance (MGRS). Blood 122, 
3583–3590 (2013).
35. Bridoux, F. et al. Diagnosis of monoclonal 
gammopathy of renal significance. Kidney Int. 87, 
698–711 (2015).
36. Kyle, R. A. et al. Progression in smoldering 
Waldenström macroglobulinemia: long- 
term results. 
Blood 119, 4462–4466 (2012).
37. Kyle, R. A. & Greipp, P
. R. Smoldering multiple- 
myeloma. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 302, 1347–1349 (1980).
38. Li, S. J. et al. Renal involvement in non- 
Hodgkin 
lymphoma: proven by renal biopsy. PLOS ONE 9, 
e95190 (2014).
39. Poitou- 
Verkinder, A. L. et al. The spectrum of kidney 
pathology in B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/ 
small lymphocytic lymphoma: a 25-year multicenter 
experience. PLOS ONE 10, e0119156 (2015).
40. Da’as, N. et al. Kidney involvement and renal 
manifestations in non- 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma and 
lymphocytic leukemia: a retrospective study in 
700 patients. Eur. J. Haematol. 67, 158–164 (2001).
41. Luciano, R. L. & Brewster, U. C. Kidney involvement in 
leukemia and lymphoma. Adv. Chronic Kidney Dis. 21, 
27–35 (2014).
42. Ravindran, A., Go, R. S., Fervenza, F. C. & Sethi, S. 
Thrombotic microangiopathy associated with 
monoclonal gammopathy. Kidney Int. 91, 691–698 
(2017).
43. Said, S. M. et al. Renal amyloidosis: origin and 
clinicopathologic correlations of 474 recent cases. 
Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 8, 1515–1523 (2013).
44. Nasr, S. H. et al. Fibrillary glomerulonephritis: a report 
of 66 cases from a single institution. Clin. J. Am. Soc. 
Nephrol. 6, 775–784 (2011).
45. Gibier, J. B. et al. Intratubular amyloid in light chain 
cast nephropathy is a risk factor for systemic light 
chain amyloidosis. Mod. Pathol. 31, 452–462 (2017).
46. Grove, P., Neale, P. H., Peck, M., Schiller, B.  
& Haas, M. Monoclonal immunoglobulin G1-κ fibrillary 
glomerulonephritis. Mod. Pathol. 11, 103–109 
(1998).
47. Rosenstock, J. L. et al. Fibrillary and immunotactoid 
glomerulonephritis: distinct entities with different 
clinical and pathologic features. Kidney Int. 63, 
1450–1461 (2003).
48. Nasr, S. H. et al. DNAJB9 is a specific 
immunohistochemical marker for fibrillary 
glomerulonephritis. Kidney Int. Rep. 3, 56–64 (2018).
49. Dasari, S. et al. DnaJ heat shock protein family 
B member 9 is a novel biomarker for fibrillary GN. 
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 29, 51–56 (2018).
50. Alexander, M. P
. et al. Congophilic fibrillary 
glomerulonephritis: a case series. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 
72, 325–336 (2018).
51. Nasr, S. H. et al. Immunotactoid glomerulopathy: 
clinicopathologic and proteomic study. Nephrol. Dial. 
T
ransplant. 27, 4137–4146 (2012).
52. Karras, A. et al. Renal involvement in monoclonal (type I) 
cryoglobulinemia: two cases associated with IgG3 κ 
cryoglobulin. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 40, 1091–1096 (2002).
53. Ojemakinde, K., T
urbat- 
Herrera, E. A., Zeng, X., Gu, X. 
& Herrera, G. A. The many faces of cryoglobulinemic 
nephropathy: a clinico- 
pathologic study of 47 cases 
with emphasis on the value of electron microscopy. 
Ultrastruct. Pathol. 38, 367–376 (2014).
54. Heher, E. C., Rennke, H. G., Laubach, J. P
. & 
Richardson, P
. G. Kidney disease and multiple 
myeloma. Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 8, 2007–2017 
(2013).
55. Nasr, S. H. et al. Dysproteinemia, proteinuria, and 
glomerulonephritis. Kidney Int. 69, 772–775 (2006).
56. Stokes, M. B. et al. Light chain proximal tubulopathy: 
clinical and pathologic characteristics in the modern 
treatment era. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 27, 1555–1565 
(2015).
57. Kapur, U., Barton, K., Fresco, R., Leehey, D. J.  
& Picken, M. M. Expanding the pathologic spectrum 
of immunoglobulin light chain proximal tubulopathy. 
Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 131, 1368–1372 (2007).
58. Larsen, C. P
. et al. The morphologic spectrum and 
clinical significance of light chain proximal tubulopathy 
with and without crystal formation. Mod. Pathol. 24, 
1462–1469 (2011).
59. Herrera, G. A. Proximal tubulopathies associated  
with monoclonal light chains: the spectrum of 
clinicopathologic manifestations and molecular 
pathogenesis. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 138,  
1365–1380 (2014).
60. El Hamel, C. et al. Crystal- 
storing histiocytosis with 
renal Fanconi syndrome: pathological and molecular 
characteristics compared with classical myeloma- 
associated Fanconi syndrome. Nephrol. Dial. 
T
ransplant. 25, 2982–2990 (2010).
61. Koo, H., Oh, D. H., Chun, Y. S. & Kim, J. C. A case of 
crystalline keratopathy in monoclonal gammopathy  
of undetermined significance (MGUS). Korean J. 
Ophthalmol. 25, 202–205 (2011).
62. Dogan, S., Barnes, L. & Cruz- 
Vetrano, W. P
. Crystal- 
storing histiocytosis: report of a case, review of the 
literature (80 cases) and a proposed classification. 
Head Neck Pathol. 6, 111–120 (2012).
63. Kanagal- 
Shamanna, R. et al. Crystal- 
storing 
histiocytosis: a clinicopathological study of 13 cases. 
Histopathology 68, 482–491 (2016).
64. de Alba Campomanes, A. G. et al. Crystal- 
storing 
histiocytosis and crystalline keratopathy caused by 
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined 
significance. Cornea 28, 1081–1084 (2009).
65. Gupta, V., El Ters, M., Kashani, K., Leung, N.  
& Nasr, S. H. Crystalglobulin- 
induced nephropathy. 
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 26, 525–529 (2015).
66. Leung, N., Buadi, F., Song, K. W., Magil, A. B.  
& Cornell, L. D. A case of bilateral renal arterial 
thrombosis associated with cryocrystalglobulinaemia. 
Nephrol. Dial. T
ransplant. 3, 74–77 (2010).
67. Ball, N. J., Wickert, W., Marx, L. H. & Thaell, J. F. 
Crystalglobulinemia syndrome. A manifestation of 
multiple myeloma. Cancer 71, 1231–1234 (1993).
68. Nasr, S. H. et al. Renal monoclonal immunoglobulin 
deposition disease: a report of 64 patients from  
a single institution. Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 7,  
231–239 (2012).
69. Lin, J. et al. Renal monoclonal immunoglobulin 
deposition disease: the disease spectrum. J. Am. Soc. 
Nephrol. 12, 1482–1492 (2001).
70. Bridoux, F. et al. Unravelling the immunopathological 
mechanisms of heavy chain deposition disease with 
implications for clinical management. Kidney Int. 91, 
423–434 (2017).
71. Nasr, S. H. et al. Proliferative glomerulonephritis with 
monoclonal IgG deposits: a distinct entity mimicking 
immune- 
complex glomerulonephritis. Kidney Int. 65, 
85–96 (2004).
72. Bhutani, G. et al. Hematologic characteristics of 
proliferative glomerulonephritides with nonorganized 
monoclonal immunoglobulin deposits. Mayo Clin. 
Proc. 90, 587–596 (2015).
73. Vignon, M. et al. The clinicopathologic characteristics 
of kidney diseases related to monotypic IgA deposits. 
Kidney Int. 91, 720–728 (2017).
74. Lloyd, I. E. et al. C3 glomerulopathy in adults:  
a distinct patient subset showing frequent association 
with monoclonal gammopathy and poor renal 
outcome. Clin. Kidney J. 9, 794–799 (2016).
75. Zand, L. et al. C3 glomerulonephritis associated with 
monoclonal gammopathy: a case series. Am. J. Kidney 
Dis. 62, 506–514 (2013).
76. Sethi, S. et al. Dense deposit disease associated with 
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined 
significance. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 56, 977–982 (2010).
77. Kyle, R. A. et al. Prevalence of monoclonal gammopathy 
of undetermined significance. N. Engl. J. Med. 354, 
1362–1369 (2006).
78. Larsen, C. P
. et al. Membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis with masked monotypic 
immunoglobulin deposits. Kidney Int. 88, 867–873 
(2015).
79. Lloyd, I. E. & Khalighi, M. A. Glomerulonephritis with 
masked monotypic immunoglobulin deposits and 
concurrent lymphomatous infiltration. Am. J. Kidney 
Dis. 68, 640–644 (2016).
80. Yandrapalli, S., Gupta, S., Papanagnou, A., Karass, M. 
& Chugh, S. Thrombotic microangiopathy in renal 
transplanted patients: analysis of nationwide inpatient 
sample. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 69, A103 (2017).
81. Mahmood, U. et al. Monoclonal gammopathy of renal 
significance triggering atypical haemolytic uraemic 
syndrome. Nephrology 22, 15–17 (2017).
82. Blanc, C. et al. Anti- 
factor H autoantibodies in C3 
glomerulopathies and in atypical hemolytic uremic 
syndrome: one target, two diseases. J. Immunol. 194, 
5129–5138 (2015).
83. Modesto- 
Segonds, A., Rey, J. P
., Orfila, C., Huchard, G. 
& Suc, J. M. Renal involvement in POEMS syndrome. 
Clin. Nephrol. 43, 342–345 (1995).
84. Nakamoto, Y., Imai, H., Yasuda, T., Wakui, H.  
& Miura, A. B. A spectrum of clinicopathological 
features of nephropathy associated with POEMS 
syndrome. Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 14, 2370–2378 
(1999).
85. Ye, W. et al. Renal impairment in patients with 
polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, 
monoclonal gammopathy and skin changes syndrome: 
incidence, treatment and outcome. Nephrol. Dial. 
T
ransplant. 31, 275–283 (2016).
86. Said, S. M. et al. Myeloproliferative neoplasms cause 
glomerulopathy. Kidney Int. 80, 753–759 (2011).
87. Borza, D. B. et al. Recurrent Goodpasture’s disease 
secondary to a monoclonal IgA1-κ antibody 
autoreactive with the α1/α2 chains of type IV collagen. 
Am. J. Kidney Dis. 45, 397–406 (2005).
88. Coley, S. M., Shirazian, S., Radhakrishnan, J.  
& D’Agati, V. D. Monoclonal IgG1κ anti- 
glomerular 
basement membrane disease: a case report. Am. 
J. Kidney Dis. 65, 322–326 (2015).
89. Nasr, S. H. et al. The clinicopathologic characteristics 
and outcome of atypical anti- 
glomerular basement 
membrane nephritis. Kidney Int. 89, 897–908 (2016).
90. Debiec, H. et al. Recurrent membranous nephropathy 
in an allograft caused by IgG3κ targeting the PLA2 
receptor. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 23, 1949–1954 (2012).
91. Best Rocha, A. & Larsen, C. P
. Membranous 
glomerulopathy with light chain- 
restricted deposits: 
a clinicopathological analysis of 28 cases. Kidney Int. 
Rep. 2, 1141–1148 (2017).
92. Dosa, S., Cairns, S. A., Mallick, N. P
., Lawler, W.  
& Williams, G. Relapsing Henoch–Schönlein syndrome 
with renal involvement in a patient with an IgA 
monoclonal gammopathy. A study of the results of 
immunosuppressant and cytotoxic therapy. Nephron 
26, 145–148 (1980).
93. Zickerman, A. M. et al. IgA myeloma presenting as 
Henoch–Schönlein purpura with nephritis. Am. 
J. Kidney Dis. 36, E19 (2000).
94. Kyle, R. A. & Gertz, M. A. Primary systemic 
amyloidosis: clinical and laboratory features in 474 
cases. Semin. Hematol. 32, 45–59 (1995).
95. Randall, R. E., Williamson, W. C. Jr, Mullinax, F.,  
Tung, M. Y. & Still, W. J. Manifestations of systemic 
light chain deposition. Am. J. Med. 60, 293–299  
(1976).
96. Landgren, O. et al. Risk of monoclonal gammopathy  
of undetermined significance (MGUS) and subsequent 
multiple myeloma among African American and white 
veterans in the United States. Blood 107, 904–906 
(2006).
97. Delanaye, P
., Glassock, R. J., Pottel, H. & Rule, A. D. 
An age- 
calibrated definition of chronic kidney disease: 
rationale and benefits. Clin. Biochem. Rev. 37, 17–26 
(2016).
98. Swaminathan, S. et al. Changing incidence of 
glomerular disease in Olmsted County, Minnesota:  
a 30-year renal biopsy study. Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 
1, 483–487 (2006).
99. Soares, S. M. et al. Bleeding complications after 
transcutaneous kidney biopsy in patients with systemic 
amyloidosis: single- 
center experience in 101 patients. 
Am. J. Kidney Dis. 52, 1079–1083 (2008).
100. Fish, R. et al. The incidence of major hemorrhagic 
complications after renal biopsies in patients with 
monoclonal gammopathies. Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 
5, 1977–1980 (2010).
101. Levi, I. M., Ben- 
Dov, I. Z., Klimov, A., Pizov, G.  
& Bloom, A. I. Transjugular kidney biopsy: enabling 
safe tissue diagnosis in high risk patients. Isr. Med. 
Assoc. J. 13, 425–427 (2011).
102. Thompson, B. C. et al. T
ransjugular kidney biopsy.  
Am. J. Kidney Dis. 43, 651–662 (2004).
103. Huang, C. C. et al. IgG subclass staining in renal 
biopsies with membranous glomerulonephritis 
indicates subclass switch during disease progression. 
Mod. Pathol. 26, 799–805 (2013).
104. Bridoux, F. et al. Glomerulonephritis with isolated C3 
deposits and monoclonal gammopathy: a fortuitous 
association? Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 6, 2165–2174 
(2011).
105. Herrera, G. A. & T
urbat- 
Herrera, E. A. Ultrastructural 
immunolabeling in the diagnosis of monoclonal light- 
and heavy- 
chain-related renal diseases. Ultrastruct. 
Pathol. 34, 161–173 (2010).
106. Herrera, G. A. The contributions of electron microscopy 
to the understanding and diagnosis of plasma cell 
dyscrasia- 
related renal lesions. Med. Electron. Microsc. 
34, 1–18 (2001).
107. Herrera, G. A. Renal manifestations of plasma cell 
dyscrasias: an appraisal from the patients’ bedside 
to the research laboratory. Ann. Diagn. Pathol. 4,  
174–200 (2000).
108. Vrana, J. A. et al. Classification of amyloidosis by laser 
microdissection and mass spectrometry- 
based 
proteomic analysis in clinical biopsy specimens. Blood 
114, 4957–4959 (2009).
  
 volume 15 | JANuARY 2019 | 59
Nature reviews | Nephrology
Consensus statement
109. Mohamed, N. & Nasr, S. H. Renal amyloidosis.  
Surg. Pathol. Clin. 7, 409–425 (2014).
110. Royal, V. et al. IgD heavy- 
chain deposition disease: 
detection by laser microdissection and mass 
spectrometry. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 26, 784–790 
(2015).
111. Leung, N., Barnidge, D. R. & Hutchison, C. A. 
Laboratory testing in monoclonal gammopathy of 
renal significance (MGRS). Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 54, 
929–937 (2016).
112. Leung, N. et al. Urinary albumin excretion patterns of 
patients with cast nephropathy and other monoclonal 
gammopathy- 
related kidney diseases. Clin. J. Am. 
Soc. Nephrol. 7, 1964–1968 (2012).
113. Katzmann, J. A. et al. Screening panels for detection 
of monoclonal gammopathies. Clin. Chem. 55,  
1517–1522 (2009).
114. Palladini, G. et al. A staging system for renal outcome 
and early markers of renal response to chemotherapy 
in AL amyloidosis. Blood 124, 2325–2332 (2014).
115. Palladini, G. et al. New criteria for response to 
treatment in immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis 
based on free light chain measurement and cardiac 
biomarkers: impact on survival outcomes. J. Clin. Oncol. 
30, 4541–4549 (2012).
116. Hutchison, C. A. et al. Serum free light chain 
measurement aids the diagnosis of myeloma in 
patients with severe renal failure. BMC Nephrol. 9, 
11 (2008).
117. Kennard, A. et al. Comparison of Freelite and N Latex 
serum free light chain assays in subjects with end 
stage kidney disease on haemodialysis. Clin. Chem. 
Lab. Med. 54, 1045–1052 (2016).
118. Dispenzieri, A. et al. International Myeloma Working 
Group guidelines for serum- 
free light chain analysis in 
multiple myeloma and related disorders. Leukemia 
23, 215–224 (2009).
119. Kumar, S. et al. International Myeloma Working Group 
consensus criteria for response and minimal residual 
disease assessment in multiple myeloma. Lancet Oncol. 
17, e328–e346 (2016).
120. T
reon, S. P
. et al. MYD88 L265P somatic mutation in 
Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 
367, 826–833 (2012).
121. Shanafelt, T
. D., Ghia, P
., Lanasa, M. C., Landgren, O. 
& Rawstron, A. C. Monoclonal B cell lymphocytosis 
(MBL): biology, natural history and clinical 
management. Leukemia 24, 512–520 (2010).
122. Bochtler, T
. et al. Gain of chromosome 1q21 is an 
independent adverse prognostic factor in light chain 
amyloidosis patients treated with melphalan/
dexamethasone. Amyloid 21, 9–17 (2014).
123. Bochtler, T
. et al. T
ranslocation t(11;14) is associated 
with adverse outcome in patients with newly diagnosed 
AL amyloidosis when treated with bortezomib- 
based 
regimens. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 1371–1378 (2015).
124. Muchtar, E. et al. Interphase fluorescence in situ 
hybridization in untreated AL amyloidosis has an 
independent prognostic impact by abnormality type 
and treatment category. Leukemia 31, 1562–1569 
(2017).
125. Hillengass, J. et al. Whole- 
body computed tomography 
versus conventional skeletal survey in patients with 
multiple myeloma: a study of the International Myeloma 
Working Group. Blood Cancer J. 7, e599 (2017).
126. Chantry, A. et al. Guidelines for the use of imaging  
in the management of patients with myeloma.  
Br. J. Haematol. 178, 380–393 (2017).
127. Landgren, O. MRD testing in multiple myeloma: from a 
surrogate marker of clinical outcomes to an every- 
day 
clinical tool. Semin. Hematol. 55, 1–3 (2018).
128. Palladini, G. et al. Identification of amyloidogenic light 
chains requires the combination of serum- 
free light 
chain assay with immunofixation of serum and urine. 
Clin. Chem. 55, 499–504 (2009).
129. Wechalekar, A. D. et al. AL amyloidosis associated 
with IgM paraproteinemia: clinical profile and 
treatment outcome. Blood 112, 4009–4016 (2008).
130. Kourelis, T
. V. et al. Outcomes of patients with renal 
monoclonal immunoglobulin deposition disease. 
Am. J. Hematol. 91, 1123–1128 (2016).
131. Ziogas, D. C. et al. Hematologic and renal 
improvement of monoclonal immunoglobulin 
deposition disease after treatment with bortezomib- 
based regimens. Leuk. Lymphoma 58, 1832–1839 
(2017).
132. Messiaen, T
. et al. Adult Fanconi syndrome secondary 
to light chain gammopathy. Clinicopathologic 
heterogeneity and unusual features in 11 patients. 
Medicine (Baltimore) 79, 135–154 (2000).
133. Brouet, J. C., Clauvel, J. P
., Danon, F., Klein, M.  
& Seligmann, M. Biologic and clinical significance of 
cryoglobulins. A report of 86 cases. Am. J. Med. 57, 
775–788 (1974).
134. Bryce, A. H., Kyle, R. A., Dispenzieri, A. & Gertz, M. A. 
Natural history and therapy of 66 patients with mixed 
cryoglobulinemia. Am. J. Hematol. 81, 511–518 
(2006).
135. Neel, A. et al. Long- 
term outcome of monoclonal 
(type 1) cryoglobulinemia. Am. J. Hematol. 89,  
156–161 (2014).
136. Sidana, S. et al. Clinical presentation and outcomes  
of patients with type 1 monoclonal cryoglobulinemia. 
Am. J. Hematol. 92, 668–673 (2017).
137. Jones, D., Bhatia, V. K., Krausz, T
. & Pinkus, G. S. 
Crystal- 
storing histiocytosis: a disorder occurring in 
plasmacytic tumors expressing immunoglobulin κ light 
chain. Hum. Pathol. 30, 1441–1448 (1999).
138. Dotten, D. A., Pruzanski, W., Olin, J. & Brown, T
. C. 
Cryocrystalglobulinemia. Can. Med. Assoc. J. 114, 
909–912 (1976).
139. Javaugue, V. et al. Long- 
term kidney disease outcomes 
in fibrillary glomerulonephritis: a case series of 27 
patients. Am. J. Kidney Dis. 62, 679–690 (2013).
Acknowledgements
N.L. is supported by the generous donations of T
. Kirshenbaum 
 
and J. Kirshenbaum as well as G. Kohler and A. Drennan. 
P
.W.S. is supported by grants from the US Office of Research 
and Development, Medical Research Service, Department of 
Veterans Affairs (grant 1 IP1 BX001595), the US National 
Institutes of Health George M. O’Brien Kidney and Urological 
Research Centers Program (P30 DK079337) and the 
University of Alabama–Birmingham School of Medicine 
(AMC21 Multi- 
PI Grant and Anderson Innovation Award).
Author contributions
N.L., F.B., P
.C., V.D.D., J.P
.-F., J.D.G., G.A.H., A.J., D.J., E.K., 
R.A.K., H.J.L., C.P
.L., G.S.M., G.M., M.M.P
., V.R., P
.W.S. and 
S.H.N. researched data for the article, contributed to discus-
sions of its content, writing the manuscript, and review or 
editing of the manuscript before submission. V.B. researched 
data for the article and participated in review and/or editing 
of the manuscript before submission. A.C., F.C.F. and P
.M.V. 
contributed to discussions of the article content and review 
and/or editing of the manuscript before submission. A.D., 
P
.M. and B.M.W. contributed to discussions of the article con-
tent, writing the manuscript and review or editing of the man-
uscript before submission. S.G. participated in review and/or 
editing of the manuscript before submission. V.K. contributed 
to writing the manuscript and review and/or editing of the 
manuscript before submission. H.J.L., V.S.R., S.S. and A.D.W. 
researched data for the article, contributed to discussions of 
content and participated in review and/or editing of the man-
uscript before submission. C.P
.V. contributed to discussions of 
the article content, writing the manuscript and review and/or 
editing of the manuscript before submission.
Competing interests
N.L. declares that he is a member of the advisory boards of 
BTG International, Prothena and Takeda; has received trial 
support from Omeros; and consults for Aduro. F.B. declares 
that he has received honoraria from Celgene and Janssen. 
P.C. declares that he is a member of the advisory board of 
The Binding Site, receives research support from The Binding 
Site and has received honoraria from Janssen. A.D. declares 
that she has received research grants from Alnylam, Celgene, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Pfizer, Prothena and T
akeda. F.C.F. 
declares that he has received an unrestricted grant from 
Genentech and Janssen and is a member of the advisory 
board for Alnylam. J.D.G. declares that he is a member of the 
advisory boards for Alnylam, Eidos and GlaxoSmithKline. V.K. 
declares that he has received honoraria from Amgen, Celgene 
and Takeda. H.J.L. declares that she has received research 
funding from Amgen and Takeda and is a member of the 
speaker’s bureau for Amgen, Bristol- 
Myers Squibb, Celgene, 
Janssen and Takeda. H.L. declares that he has received 
research support from Amgen and Takeda and is a member 
of the speaker’s bureau for Amgen, Bristol- 
Myers Squibb, 
Celgene, Janssen and Takeda and consults for PharmaMar. 
G.M. declares that he has received honoraria from Janssen, 
Pfizer and Prothena. P
.M. declares that he is a member of the 
advisory boards of Amgen, Celgene and Janssen and has 
received clinical trial support from Janssen. S.H.N declares 
that he has received honoraria from Alnylam. C.P
.V. declares 
that he has received honoraria from Amgen, Celgene, 
Janssen, Prothena and Takeda. P.M.V. declares that he is 
 
a member of the advisory boards of Bristol- 
Myers Squibb, 
Celgene, Janssen, Oncopeptides and TeneoBio and is a 
 
member of the speaker’s bureau for Amgen and Janssen 
and consults for Celgene, Novartis, Oncopeptides and 
T
eneoBio. B.M.W. declares that in October 2017 he became 
an employee of Janssen. All other authors declare no 
competing interests.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License, which permits use, 
sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any 
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to 
the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the 
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were 
made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material 
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and 
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
