  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
King’s Research Portal 
 
DOI:
10.1016/j.respol.2017.02.008
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
Levecque, K., Anseel, F., De Beuckelaer, A., Van der Heyden, J., & Gisle, L. (2017). Work organization and
mental health problems in PhD students. RESEARCH POLICY, 46(4), 868-879.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2017.02.008
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Download date: 05. Jun. 2019
  
1 
 
Work organization and mental health problems in PhD students 
Katia Levecque, Frederik Anseel, Alain De Beuckelaer, Johan Van der Heyden, Lydia Gisle (f) 
 
Forthcoming in Research Policy - http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2017.02.008 
Please, cite as 
Levecque, K., Anseel, F., De Beuckelaer, A., Van der Heyden, J., & Gisle, L. (2017). Work 
organization and mental health problems in PhD students. Research Policy, 46(4), 868-879. 
 
ABSTRACT 
Research policy observers are increasingly concerned about the potential impact of current academic 
working conditions on mental health, particularly in PhD students. The aim of the current study is 
threefold. First, we assess the prevalence of mental health problems in a representative sample of PhD 
students in Flanders, Belgium (N=3659). Second, we compare PhD students to three other samples: 
(1) highly educated in the general population (N=769); (2) highly educated employees (N=592); and 
(3) higher education students (N=333). Third, we assess those organizational factors relating to the 
role of PhD students that predict mental health status. Results based on 12 mental health symptoms 
(GHQ-12) showed that 32% of PhD students are at risk of having or developing a common psychiatric 
disorder, especially depression. This estimate was significantly higher than those obtained in the 
comparison groups. Organizational policies were significantly associated with the prevalence of 
mental health problems. Especially work-family interface, job demands and job control, the 
supervisor’s leadership style, team decision-making culture, and perception of a career outside 
academia are linked to mental health problems. 
 
KEY WORDS:  
mental health, GHQ-12, work organization, psychosocial working conditions, PhD students 
 
HIGHLIGHTS: 
 
One in two PhD students experiences psychological distress; one in three is at risk of a common 
psychiatric disorder. 
 
The prevalence of mental health problems is higher in PhD students than in the highly educated 
general population, highly educated employees and higher education students.  
 
Work and organizational context are significant predictors of PhD students’ mental health. 
 
  
2 
 
Author contact details: 
Katia Levecque (a, b)* – Frederik Anseel (a, b, c) – Alain De Beuckelaer (d, e, a) 
Johan Van der Heyden (f, g) – Lydia Gisle (f) 
 
a. 
Department of Personnel Management, Work and Organizational Psychology, Faculty of 
Psychology and Educational Sciences, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 9000 Ghent, 
Belgium. 
b. 
ECOOM, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. 
c. 
Department of Management and Technology, Bocconi University, Via Roberto Sarfatti 25, 
20100 Milano, Italy. 
d. 
Institute for Management Research, Radboud University, Thomas van Aquinostraat 3, 6525 
GD Nijmegen, The Netherlands.  
e. 
School of Sociology and Population Studies, Renmin University of China, No. 59 
Zhongguancun Street, Haidian District, Beijing 100872, P.R. China. 
f. 
Scientific Institute of Public Health, OD Public Health and Surveillance, Juliette 
Wytsmanstraat 14, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.  
g. 
Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, Ghent University, University Hospital, De 
Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.  
 
E-mail address of corresponding author: 
      
katia.levecque@ugent.be 
E-mail addresses of co-authors: 
      
frederik.anseel@ugent.be 
 
      
a.debeuckelaer@fm.ru.nl 
      
Johan.Vanderheyden@wiv-isp.be 
      
Lydia.Gisle@wiv-isp.be 
 
 
 
 
  
3 
 
 
1. 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Mental health concerns at universities  
 
In recent years, journalists, research policy observers and academics have voiced concerns 
about the potential impact of research conditions in universities on mental health problems (e.g. the 
Economist, 2012; Schillebeeckx et al., 2013; Shaw and Ward, 2014; Philips and Heywood-Roos, 
2015). These concerns are often related to recent shifts in the organization of academic research, such 
as increased workloads, intensification and the pace of change (e.g. Petersen et al., 2012; Shen, 2015). 
For example, across OECD countries, the number of new PhDs (i.e. recipients of doctorate degrees) 
grew from 158,000 in 2000 to 247,000 in 2012, a rise of 56% (OECD, 2014). Encouragement by 
government policy, both at the national and international levels, has led to increased participation rates 
in the PhD production process (Robotham, 2008). An unfavorable shift in the labor-supply demand 
balance, a growing popularity of short-term contracts, budget cuts and increased competition for 
research resources may paint a bleak picture of academic careers for prospective PhD students (e.g. 
Biron et al., 2008; Petersen et al., 2012; Walsh and Lee, 2015). 
Although universities were traditionally regarded as low stress environments, research on 
occupational stress among academics indicates that it is alarmingly widespread and on the rise 
(Bozeman and Gaughan, 2011; Reevy and Deason, 2014). Some studies suggest that stress is more 
prevalent in younger academics (see e.g. Kinman, 2001), a group that typically faces high levels of job 
insecurity. As a result, the media increasingly reports testimonies of depression and anxiety, burnout 
and emotional exhaustion. However, the prevalence of mental health problems as shown in official 
registries remains low. National figures in 2012 for higher education in the UK, for example, show 
that approximately one in 500 individuals disclosed a mental health problem to their university (Shaw, 
2015). Reluctance to seek help is often caused by fear of stigma, retaliation or the expected negative 
impact on one’s future career (OECD, 2015).  
 
1.2 Why is the mental health of PhD students important for research policy?  
 
While a genuine concern for individual well-being is probably the most important reason why 
policymakers should pay attention to mental health problems, we argue that mental health of PhD 
students should be of concern for three additional main reasons. First, the work of PhD students 
themselves constitutes a major source of scientific advancement, as a doctoral dissertation requires an 
  
4 
 
original contribution to the scientific knowledge base. Furthermore, the publication of dissertation 
results is a prerequisite for an academic career (Roach and Sauermann, 2010), making dissertation 
work a major contributor to academic output (Hagen, 2013; Miller, 2013). Given the compelling 
evidence for the effects of mental health problems on individuals’ research output (Danna and Griffin, 
1999), it is to be expected that a sizable cohort of PhD students suffering from mental health problems 
may affect the overall quality and quantity of individuals’ research output.  
Second, as most PhD students are part of larger research teams, whose composition 
determines scientific impact (Lee et al., 2015), PhD students with mental health issues may pose a 
considerable cost to research institutions and teams. To date, research policy efforts seemed to have 
focused more on ‘hard outcomes’ such as publications, impact factors and patents, while ignoring the 
health effects of ‘soft’ policy outcomes, such as stress. However, soft outcomes may create serious 
financial costs for research institutions, and they will impact the functioning of the larger research 
teams that the individual researchers are part of, thus also determining ‘hard’ outcomes (see e.g. Goh 
et al., 2015a, 2015b). 
Third, mental health problems of PhD students impact both the supply and entrance to the 
research industry. Organizational policies that are linked to mental health problems will lead 
individuals to quit their PhD studies or leave the research industry altogether (Podsakoff et al., 2007). 
Several studies of PhD students suggest that the dropout numbers range from 30 to 50 percent, 
depending on the scientific discipline and country (Stubb et al., 2012). Such high turnover will make it 
difficult for the industry to attract new talent (Lievens and Highhouse, 2003), thus threatening the 
viability and quality of the academic research industry. Because economic competition between 
countries is heavily dependent on the nation’s scientific advancement and cognitive ability 
(Rindermann and Thompson, 2011), the prospects of having trained academic researchers not further 
pursuing a research career because of mental health problems should be a major concern for research 
policy. 
In sum, given the potential importance of mental health problems for research policy, there is 
an urgent need for systematic empirical data rather than anecdotal information on their prevalence and 
the organizational policies that are linked to them. Given the current lack of an empirical basis for 
mental health concerns and solutions, the current study has three aims. First, we aim to inform 
research policy by assessing mental health prevalence in a large-scale representative sample of PhD 
students in Flanders, Belgium. Second, to assess the scope of the problem, we compared the mental 
health of PhD students with that of three other samples, a group of highly educated adults in the 
general population, a group of highly educated employees and a group of higher education students. 
Third, with the aim of better understanding how research and organizational policies may relate to 
mental health, we examined PhD students’ perceptions of the academic environment and linked them 
to mental health problems. 
  
5 
 
 
2. 
Background and literature review 
 
2.1 PhD students in Flanders, Belgium 
Flanders has seen a rise in PhD production that is substantially larger than in other EU 
countries: in the academic year 2013-2014, a total of 1,724 new doctorates were awarded, which is an 
increase of 71% compared to 2004-2005 (ECOOM, 2015). To depict the overall characteristics of the 
PhD student experience in Flanders, we compared it to defining characteristics in the U.S. (see Table 
1). While there is considerable overlap between the PhD models in the U.S. and Europe, the length of 
time-to-degree and the intensiveness of coursework seem the most notable differences. This is 
probably also the key characteristic of the Flemish PhD model that departs most from U.K. and U.S. 
models: there are only few compulsory classes that PhD students must attend, instead most of the 
emphasis is placed on doing actual research in close collaboration with their advisor(s). 
 Insert Table 1   
Note that in Flanders, and in many European countries, a sizeable group of PhD students have 
a formal employment agreement with a university and have full-time working schedules and a full 
scholarship, providing them with a financial situation that is better than most of their counterparts on 
the private job market. Thus, in contrast to U.K. and U.S. systems, PhD students in this setting do not 
study on a part-time basis, which means they do not have to balance research with paid work in other 
areas. In the Flemish context, all universities are basically research universities, and most of their 
funding comes from the Flemish government. Over the past decade, research output has become an 
increasingly important determinant of the extent of the university’s public funding. More specifically, 
the universities are encouraged (with financial means) to increase the number of PhDs awarded. As 
shown in Figure 1, the number of faculty in Flanders has only marginally increased over the past 15 
years, leading to an increased ratio of 3.2 PhD students per faculty member in 2014.  
 Insert Figure 1  
 
2.2 Prior research on mental health in the university sector 
A growing line of research has examined mental health problems in academic contexts. 
Although this undertaking has clearly yielded a range of important insights, we believe it to be 
currently limited for drawing strong conclusions about the prevalence and determinants of mental 
  
6 
 
health problems in PhD students, the focal aim of the current study. First, previous studies have been 
largely restricted to one specific discipline (especially health and social care) (e.g. El-Ghoroury et al., 
2012), campus, department or university (see also Gillespie et al., 2001), and are therefore prone to 
reflecting discipline- or institution-related specificity. Second, the number of published studies 
focusing on mental health of PhD students is limited (El-Ghoroury et al., 2012), as most studies have 
focused on the undergraduate level (Peluso et al., 2011). Epidemiological studies provide a plethora of 
data demonstrating the steadily increasing rates of college students aged between 18 and 24 with 
diagnosable mental health problems, and there is evidence that students already begin their university 
careers with mood, anxiety and eating disorders (Blanco et al., 2008). The limited research that is 
available on graduate students suggests they may be vulnerable to developing depression (Peluso et 
al., 2011). Other studies, especially European and Australian ones, have tended to utilize samples of 
university employees in general and mostly reported aggregate findings (Kinman, 2008), making it 
difficult to draw fine-grained conclusions on the mental health of PhD students as a separate category. 
As task characteristics and research conditions within the academic population are subject to 
considerable variation, research focusing on specific features of the organizational environment that 
predict health outcomes for specific groups within universities is needed (see also Kinman, 2008). 
Previous research on mental health in the university sector suggests that, in comparison with 
other professions and with the general population, levels of self-reported psychological health are 
generally low (Kinman, 2001). Reported prevalence rates vary considerably, depending on the sample, 
the specific health problem considered and the measurement instrument being used. Most studies have 
focused on psychological well-being, psychological distress, or on depression as a specific 
manifestation of distress. As the issue of mental health is complex and multidimensional, comparison 
of prevalence rates assessed with different measurement tools should be carried out with caution, as 
convergent validity between mental health measures is not always high (e.g. Shankman and Klein, 
2002).   
The most widely used measurement instrument in occupational health research, the General 
Health Questionnaire (GHQ), enables researchers to tap into both psychological distress and 
depression (Goldberg, 1972; Goldberg and Williams, 1988). In the university sector, the 12-item 
version of the GHQ (GHQ-12) has been used both in Australia and the U.K. Both categorical (see 
Table 2 below) and dimensional (e.g. Boyd et al., 2011) analytical strategies were employed. A 
categorical strategy assesses whether a mental health problem is present or absent. Such assessment is 
based on a specific cut-off value, which prescribes the minimum number of symptoms a person has to 
experience before a mental health problem is considered to be prevalent. In contrast, a dimensional 
assessment quantifies the extent to which a person has the mental problem. When assessing prevalence 
rates as in our study, the categorical approach to mental health is most convenient. In Table 2, we 
  
7 
 
present an overview of published prevalence rates in the university sector from 2000 onwards, based 
on the GHQ-12. As can be seen in the last three columns of Table 2, studies vary in the number of 
GHQ symptoms required to be present before categorizing a person as psychologically distressed or 
ill. The GHQ2+ requires that a person experiences at least two GHQ symptoms, the GHQ3+ requires 
the presence of at least 3 symptoms and the GHQ4+ requires the presence of at least 4 symptoms.  
 Table 2 
 
As Table 2 shows, the prevalence of mental health problems as tapped by the GHQ2+, was 
found to be as high as 43.7% in a study of all staff at the University of Adelaide, Australia (Winefield 
and Jarret, 2001). GHQ3+ rates were calculated in several studies in the U.K., and range from 24% in 
men at a British university (Emslie et al., 2002) to 53% in academic and academic-related staff in 
several UK universities (Kinman, 2001). As for the GHQ4+, results from the U.K. vary from 31.8% in 
a study of lecturers and senior lecturers (McClenahan et al., 2007) to 41.8% in academic employees 
(Kinman and Jones, 2008). 
 
2.3 Work organization and mental health problems in universities  
While few studies have examined determinants of well-being in PhD students (Stubb et al., 
2011), there is a long tradition of research in occupational health showing that work organization and 
health are highly intertwined. The central idea in occupational health research is that low levels of 
well-being, or the presence of ill health, is not simply an individual symptom, but results from an 
imbalance between the individual and his environment, leading to stress (Stubb et al., 2011). For PhD 
students, the primary context for their roles as students and researchers is the university. The few 
studies on PhD students suggest that stress may stem from various problems in the PhD process, such 
as problems concerning one’s own learning, different aspects of insecurity (financial insecurity, 
insecurity concerning unwritten rules), frequent evaluation, competitive atmosphere, supervision, 
relationships to faculty and peers, workload and work-life interface (Appel and Dahlgren, 2003; 
Kurtz-Costes et al., 2006; Stubb et al., 2011,  2012). Occupational health research provides an 
overarching framework by delineating the key determinants in the organizational context that may 
affect mental health and well-being. 
 
2.3.1 Work context 
Work roles and workload demands, job control, support by peers or supervisors, and job 
insecurity are the most frequently examined characteristics of the work context (e.g. WHO, 2010). 
  
8 
 
Studies almost unanimously report a consistent link between high job demands and emotional 
exhaustion and depressive feelings (e.g. de Lange et al., 2004). While PhD students clearly have 
different roles, tasks and responsibilities to fulfill than regular employees do, we believe that there are 
a series of common psychological characteristics that make it useful to study PhD students’ roles 
through the lens of the organizational context in which they perform their study and research work. 
For reasons of clarity, we use the commonly accepted terminology in occupational health psychology, 
with the clear understanding that work-related aspects, such as job demands, refer to the demands 
experienced by students in their specific study and research roles. Job demands are those physical, 
social or organizational aspects of the job that require sustained physical or mental effort. Job control 
on the other hand, refers to control over the work environment, more specifically over the pace of 
work, the timing of breaks, or the use of skills (Karasek and Theorell, 1990). Most, but not all, 
occupational health studies find significant emotional costs when job control is low (de Lange et al., 
2004; Vanroelen et al., 2009). Existing research on occupational stress in university staff has 
consistently found work load to be one of the main causes of stress (e.g. Gillespie et al., 2001; 
Winefield et al., 2003; Kinman, 2001; Kinman et al., 2006; Tytherleigh et al., 2005; Biron et al., 2008; 
Sun et al., 2011; Mark and Smith, 2011; Boyd et al., 2011). 
For PhD students, the balance between demands and control might be different across 
scientific disciplines as it entails differences in academic practice. Writing a doctoral dissertation in 
the natural sciences may entail working as part of a large team within a specific well-defined project, 
and operating with pre-defined, transparent quantitative publication criteria (Larivière, 2012). For PhD 
students in the humanities and social sciences, establishing one’s own research idea (and thus often 
working in isolation) may constitute more of a challenge in terms of perseverance, given also the lack 
of consensus over the quality criteria in these fields (Long and Fox, 1995).  
Another demand factor is the type of appointment. Depending on the type of appointment, 
researchers may experience role conflict, for instance, when juggling the demands of their PhD 
research and teaching obligations. At Flemish universities, there is significant variation in the type of 
appointment and the resulting demands. The types of appointment or scholarship vary in level of 
prestige, research autonomy and position security. In research on job stress of university staff, job 
insecurity has been identified as a major source of occupational stress (e.g. Gillespie et al., 2001; 
Kinman, 2001; Chandler et al., 2002; Winefield et al., 2003; Tytherleigh et al., 2005 ; Reevy and 
Deason, 2014).  
Demands and control might also differ along the phase of the PhD process. In Flanders, most 
PhD students have no prior work experience, implying that the initial PhD phase is associated with 
taking on new roles, new tasks and responsibilities and entering into new relationships. New work 
environments might be stressful, and this can trigger, among other things, fear of failure (Ellis et al., 
  
9 
 
2015). Fear of failure might also be more prevalent at the end of a PhD track, when funding is running 
out and the submission deadline is rapidly approaching. This stress is often accompanied by the stress 
associated with making future career decisions.  
Occupational health researchers have not only reported extensively on the health effects of 
job demands and job control, but also on the role of social support (Cox et al., 2000). Social support 
refers to support received by colleagues, by the supervisor, or both. Low support at work has long 
been found to affect levels of anxiety, emotional exhaustion, job tension and job satisfaction (e.g. de 
Lange et al., 2004; Vanroelen et al., 2009). In a Finnish study of 383 PhD students, Stubb, Pyhältö and 
Lonka (2011) found that 44% reported the academic community as a source of empowerment, 
enthusiasm and inspiration, while 56% experienced it as a source of burden. Among the burdening 
factors were lack of meaningfulness, not knowing one’s own place, and poor support for learning and 
doing research. A lack of social support has been identified as a major source of occupational stress in 
university staff (Gillespie et al., 2001; Biron et al., 2008). In addition, there is a body of research, 
closely related to social support, that shows significant associations between specific leadership styles, 
levels of stress and well-being (Kinman, 2001; Gillespie et al., 2001; Winefield et al., 2003; 
Tytherleigh et al., 2005; Biron et al., 2008). Research on graduate students has also shown that the 
quality of the advisory relationship is a significant predictor of depressive symptoms (e.g. Peluso et 
al., 2011).  
As prior research has shown that both employment frustration (not finding the work one 
wants) and reward frustration (e.g. poor promotion prospects) have an impact on self-reported mental 
health (e.g. Castro et al., 2010), the current study will also examine the career prospects of PhD 
students. The majority of PhD students in Flanders is at the very beginning of their career. As the 
supply-side of PhD production steadily increases, and the demand-side of tenure track positions 
remains largely unaltered (see Figure 1), more and more students turn to the nonacademic labor 
market after obtaining their PhD, often regarding this as a second-choice option (Van Damme, 2014).  
 
2.3.2 Organizational context 
Contrary to the work context, organizational context has received much less attention in 
occupational health research, and its effects on workplace health are not always well understood. 
Organizational context refers to participative management strategies, work-life programs and flexible 
work arrangements, or elements of high performance/lean production work systems (e.g. teamwork). 
As organizations have moved toward a greater team orientation over the last two decades, teamwork 
has become a day-to-day reality for many employees. A similar trend towards large teams has also 
been observed in research (Lee et al., 2015). A focal variable that has received much attention in 
research on teams is interpersonal conflict. Several studies have found evidence for the role of task 
  
10 
 
and relational conflict on employee well-being (e.g. Martinez-Corts et al., 2015). Given that the need 
for teamwork might be higher in the natural sciences than in the humanities or social sciences, we 
control for disciplines in each analysis (see section 4). 
Another organizational factor presumed to influence health consists of participative 
management strategies. According to Kinman (2001), the social interaction patterns between 
university staff have shifted from a culture of collegiality to a bureaucratic culture and a management 
style in which consultation and participation in decision making are given less importance (see also 
Biron et al., 2008). Workers’ participation in decision making has often been shown to reduce job-
related emotional strain, job dissatisfaction, absenteeism and turnover intentions (e.g. Rhoades and 
Eisenberger, 2002). 
According to the WHO (2010), the interplay between work and home is also a significant 
potential source of stress impacting mental health, particularly for dual career couples and those 
experiencing financial difficulties or life crises. Prior research in the university sector has shown that 
work-life interference is high (e.g. Gmelch et al., 1984; Kinman and Jones, 2003; Fox et al., 2011; Sun 
et al., 2011), with PhD students and academic employees commonly working evenings and on the 
weekend (e.g. El-Ghoroury et al., 2012; Kinman, 2001). As in other settings, work-home conflict in 
the university sector has also shown particularly strong relations with psychological distress (Kinman 
and Jones, 2003; Kinman et al., 2006). In their cross discipline study in nine US research universities, 
Fox, Fonseca and Bao (2011) show that it is important to consider both the conflict of work with 
family life and the conflict of family life with work. However, with the exception of Post et al. (2009), 
few studies among academics have addressed work-family conflict bi-directionally.   
 
3. 
Data and methodology 
 
3.1 Sample 1: PhD students 
We used a sample of PhD students (N=3,659), drawn from a cross-sectional survey 
organized in 2013 addressing the total population of 12,191 junior researchers in Flemish universities. 
For the current study, we included only those junior researchers enrolled in a PhD program. The 
survey consisted of a web-based questionnaire, administered in English or Dutch depending on the 
participant’s choice. There were 4,069 participants (response rate of 33%). Selective non-response 
analyses showed a slightly higher proportion of females, respondents in the youngest age categories, 
social scientists and Belgians compared to the total population.  
3.2 Sample 2: comparison groups 
  
11 
 
The mental health data in Sample 1 are compared to mental health data for Flanders 
extracted from the National Health Interview Surveys (HIS). These surveys are periodically organized 
in Belgium by the Scientific Institute for Public Health and follow a similar research design and 
procedures as for Sample 1. An extensive description of the methods, sampling frame, response rates 
and respondents is available (HIS, 2013). We used three specific groups from this sample as relevant 
‘comparison groups’: a group of (1)  highly educated individuals in the general population (N=769); 
(2) highly educated employees (N=592); and (3) higher education students (N=333). Higher education 
refers to educational programs leading to an academic Bachelor, Master or Doctoral degree and to 
educational programs in higher education outside the university system (3 to 5 year programs). The 
first two comparison groups are extracted from the HIS 2013 sample. Due to the small number of 
higher education students in HIS 2013, HIS data had to be pooled over the years 2001, 2004, 2008 and 
2013 to attain a sizable third comparison group appropriate for statistical comparison. Preliminary 
analyses showed that pooling of HIS data over years was warranted as year of survey administration 
had no impact on mental health outcomes.  
 
3.3 Variables 
 
3.3.1 Mental health problems 
Mental health problems were measured using the 12-item version of the General Health 
Questionnaire (GHQ) (Goldberg, 1972; Goldberg and Williams, 1988). The GHQ is a screening 
instrument to identify psychological distress and potential cases of common psychiatric disorder 
(especially depression), leaving the task of diagnosing actual disorder to a psychiatric interview 
(McDowell, 2006). The GHQ is the most frequently used scale worldwide to tap into psychological 
well-being (e.g. Boyd et al., 2011). The internal consistency of the GHQ-12 was 0.88 in Sample 1 and 
0.87 in Sample 2. The 12 GHQ items are presented in Table 3.  
GHQ items explore the respondent’s experience in recent weeks compared to his or her usual 
experience. Response categories are item-specific but all responses are given on 4-point Likert-type 
scales. We adopt the GHQ scoring method, which uses a bimodal 0-0-1-1 scheme (to score subsequent 
response categories), conceiving the respondent’s total number of 1 scores over the 12 items as an 
indication of the number of symptoms experienced. In order to determine that a person has a mental 
health problem, (s)he should experience a minimum number of symptoms. The literature reports 
substantial variation in the minimum number of symptoms to be considered (Goldberg et al., 1997). In 
the current study we opt for the GHQ2+ (presence of at least 2 symptoms), indicating psychological 
distress. We also assess the GHQ4+ (presence of at least 4 symptoms), indicating the risk of having or 
  
12 
 
developing a common psychiatric disorder (especially depression) (Goldberg, 1972; Goldberg and 
Williams, 1988). A worldwide study on mental health by the World Health Organization suggests 
using the GHQ4+ if the mean GHQ score in the sample is higher than 2.70 (Goldberg et al., 1998). In 
Sample 1, the mean GHQ score is 2.84. However, for reasons of comparison with other studies on 
mental health in the university sector (see Table 2), we also include the GHQ3+ (presence of at least 3 
symptoms) when calculating prevalence.  
Preliminary multigroup confirmatory factor analyses across both samples in our study 
attested to the stability of the measurement model underlying the GHQ.     
 
3.3.2 Work context 
The PhD student’s work context was operationalized by job demands and job control, 
scientific discipline, type of appointment, PhD phase, the supervisor’s level of inspirational leadership 
style, level of autocratic leadership style, and level of laissez-faire leadership style. Three indicators 
reflecting the PhD student’s career perspectives were also included.  
Job demands and job control were assessed using the Dutch VBBA-quality of labor 
questionnaire (Vanroelen et al., 2009). The job demands scale measures psychosocial demands such as 
work pace and work load (11 items), whereas the job control scale measures aspects of job variation, 
job autonomy and skill discretion (17 items). All items were measured on 4-point Likert scales. 
Internal consistency was 0.85 for the job demands scale and 0.88 for the job control scale.  
Research discipline was measured by five categories: 1=science; 2=biomedical sciences; 
3=applied sciences; 4=humanities; and 5=social sciences. The type of appointment was assessed by 
registering the source of research funding. Six categories were distinguished: 1=assistant lectureship; 
2=research scholarship; 3=research project; 4=no funding from the university, only enrollment as a 
PhD student; 5=other; and 6=don’t know. Three categories distinguished between PhD phases: 
1=planning; 2=executing; and 3=finishing. Inspirational leadership style, autocratic leadership style, 
and ‘laissez-faire’ or passive leadership style were measured using 11, 6 and 4 items respectively (de 
Hoogh et al., 2004). All items were responded to on 7-point Likert scales, with response categories 
ranging from ‘totally disagree’ to ‘totally agree’. Cronbach’s alphas were 0.93, 0.78 and 0.74 for the 
three leadership styles, respectively. 
Three variables measured the PhD student’s career perspectives. First, interest in a career in 
academia was measured with one item, “To what extent are you interested in working at the university 
in the future?” (1=not, 2=a little, and 3=much). We dichotomized this variable to facilitate 
interpretation into two categories, namely low interest (0=not/a little) and high interest (1=much). The 
second one-item measure targeted perceived chance of a career in academia, “How big do you 
perceive your chance of finding a job in academia?” Again, we dichotomized this variable into two 
categories: low likelihood (0=(very) small chance/chance is neither small nor big) and high likelihood 
  
13 
 
(1=(very) big chance). Third, we measured one’s perception of a career outside of academia with two 
5-point Likert items (ranging from ‘totally disagree’ to ‘totally agree’). Items were “A PhD in my field 
of study prepares one sufficiently for a career outside academia” and “A PhD in my field of study can 
represent added value for future employers outside of academia”. 
 
3.3.3 Organizational context 
Team conflict was assessed using Jehn’s (1995) Intragroup Conflict scale. All eight items 
represent 5-point Likert items on a scale ranging from 1 (none) to 5 (a lot). Cronbach’s alpha for this 
scale was 0.92. Participative management strategy within the team was measured through closedness 
of decision making in the team with two 5-point Likert items (with response options ranging from 
‘totally disagree’ to ‘totally agree’): “only a limited number of people are involved in the decision-
making process” and “when decisions are made, everyone’s opinion is taken into account”. Work-life 
interface was measured using the two widely adopted scales of family-work conflict (5 items) and 
work-family conflict (5 items) developed by Netemeyer, Boles and McMurrian (1996). All items were 
rated on 5-point Likert scales ranging from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally agree). Cronbach’s alpha 
was 0.91 for the life-work conflict scale and 0.93 for the work-life conflict scale. 
 
3.3.4 Sociodemographics 
Four sociodemographic indicators were included as control variables: gender (0=male, 
1=female), age (in years), having a partner (0=no, 1=yes), and the presence of children in the 
household (0=no, 1=yes).  
 
3.4 Analytical Strategy 
To assess the differences in mental health problems between PhD students (Sample 1) and the 
highly educated population members in Flanders (Sample 2), we calculated percentages and risk ratios 
(RRs) for both samples. The RR is the ratio between the percentage respondents with a mental health 
problem in Sample 1 and the corresponding percentage in Sample 2. However, following common 
methodological practices in epidemiology (e.g. McNamee, 2005), an ‘adjusted RR’ was calculated as 
well. The adjusted RR statistically corrects for age and gender differences across samples. 
Technically, the adjusted RR is derived from data from the pooled samples (i.e. sample of PhD 
students and sample of highly educated general population) using a generalized linear model in 
STATA (Version 14.0), which includes three covariates, namely a sample indicator (dichotomous 
variable), age class (8 class categories) and gender (for technical details see McNamee, 2005).  
  
14 
 
Associations between mental health problems in PhD students and the independent variables 
in our two dependency models (Table 4) were estimated using odds ratios (ORs) as produced by the 
logistic regression procedure in SPSS (Version 22). The OR is a ratio describing (the strength of) the 
association between the presence or absence of a property (e.g. GHQ2+) and the presence or absence 
of another property (e.g. job demands). The significance of individual predictors is assessed by means 
of the Wald test, and their relative importance by relative weights (RWs). The RWs were calculated 
using procedures described by Tonidandel and LeBreton (2010). For interpretational purposes, 
percentages corresponding to the RWs were calculated as well. The overall goodness of model fit of 
both dependency models is quantified using Nagelkerke R² (Allison, 1999). 
 
4. 
Results  
As can be seen in Table 3, respondents were on average 28.37 years old, 52.01% was female, 
71.16% had a partner, and 13.48% had one or more children.  
 Insert Table 3 
In Table 4 we assessed the prevalence of mental health problems. Results showed that 51% 
of PhD students experienced at least two symptoms (GHQ2+), 40% reported at least three symptoms 
(GHQ3+), while 32% reported at least four symptoms (GHQ4+).  
 Insert Table 4 
The percentages in columns 2 to 4 in Table 4 clearly demonstrate that, in terms of mental 
health problems, PhD students were consistently more affected (as indicated by the higher number of 
symptoms) than the highly educated general population, highly educated employees and higher 
education students. The RRs varied from 3.82 (could not face problems) to 1.16 (under constant 
strain). For psychological distress (GHQ2+), the prevalence was about twice as high in PhD students 
compared to the highly educated general population (RR = 1.90) and highly educated employees (RR 
=2.02). The RRs for risk of a common psychiatric disorder (GHQ4+) was 2.43 and 2.84, respectively. 
For GHQ3+ we observed RRs of 2.26 and 2.56, respectively. Comparing PhD students with higher 
education students, we observed that differences in mental health were smaller than for the other 
comparison groups, but the prevalence remained higher in PhD students. The RRs were 1.53 for 
GHQ2+, 1.63 for GHQ3+ and 1.85 for GHQ4+.   
Table 5 reports the findings of analyses examining whether characteristics of the work and 
organizational context of PhD students in Flanders were associated with their mental health, while 
controlling for sociodemographic characteristics.  
  
15 
 
 Insert Table 5 
 
The analyses revealed significant relationships with psychological distress (GHQ2+) and 
with the risk of having or developing a common psychiatric disorder (GHQ4+) in case of high job 
demands and low job control. For job demands, the model showed an OR of 1.896; this finding 
indicates that for a one-unit increase in job demands, we expect to see a 90% increase in the odds of 
experiencing psychological distress. The OR for job control in the same model was 0.784. In the 
model predicting the odds of having or developing a common psychiatric disorder, the ORs were 
1.651 and 0.631, respectively. No differences between scientific disciplines were found. For type of 
appointment our findings showed that – compared to assistant lecturers – PhD students employed 
through project funding and those not knowing their funding resources showed significantly more 
psychological distress (ORs of 1.321 and 1.644, respectively). PhD students receiving project funding 
and those on a personal scholarship also showed higher risks of having or developing a common 
psychiatric disorder (ORs of 1.353 and 1.405, respectively). When turning to the PhD phase, we 
observed that mental health problems were less prevalent in the execution phase as compared to the 
beginning of the PhD process: the OR was 0.739 for the GHQ2+ and 0.674 for the GHQ4+. The 
prevalence of mental health problems was not significantly different at the beginning and at the end of 
the PhD process. Turning to the leadership style of the PhD supervisor, we see evidence for a better 
mental health in those PhD students who are advised by a professor with an inspirational leadership 
style (OR is 0.868 for GHQ2+ and 0.908 for GHQ4+). No significant associations were found 
between an autocratic leadership style and the experience of mental health problems. However, when 
PhD students were exposed to a laissez-faire leadership style, the risk of experiencing psychological 
distress significantly increased. For each unit increase on the laissez-faire scale score, the odds of 
experiencing psychological distress increased by 8%. Finally, we observed that PhD students 
expressing a high interest in an academic career are in better mental health than those with no or only 
little interest in remaining in academia. The OR was 0.824 for the GHQ2+ and 0.782 for the GHQ4+. 
The model showed that even if a PhD student perceived his/her actual chance of an academic career as 
low, aspiring a career in academia during one’s PhD track was associated with better mental health. 
The same can be said for a positive career perception for PhDs outside academia. Better mental health 
was found for those PhD students who thought that a PhD sufficiently prepares them for a career 
outside academia and consider a PhD in their field as an added value for future employers outside 
academia: the OR was 0.849 for GHQ2+ and 0.789 for GHQ4+.  
Team conflict did not show a significant association with mental health of PhD students in 
the multivariate model. Closedness of decision making within the team showed health damaging 
associations. The OR of 1.205 means that the odds of having or developing a common psychiatric 
disorder increases by 20% for each unit increase on the closedness of decision-making scale. Finally, 
  
16 
 
considering the work-family interface, we observed significantly more mental health problems in case 
of conflicting demands. Both family-work conflict and work-family conflict show higher odds of 
psychological distress (ORs of 1.206 and 1.521, respectively) and an increased risk of having or 
developing a common psychiatric disorder (ORs of 1.296 and 1.522, respectively).  
The odds of experiencing at least two psychological symptoms were 34% higher for female 
PhD students than for males (OR = 1.336); the odds of having at least four symptoms was 27% higher 
(OR = 1.273). Age was not significantly associated with mental health. The OR for having a partner 
was 0.779 for GHQ2+, indicating that having a partner was associated with lower levels of 
psychological distress. The association with GHQ4+ was in the same direction, but not statistically 
significant. As for having children in the household, Table 5 shows that there was no association with 
GHQ2+. However, there was a significant OR of 0.653 for the GHQ4+, indicating that those persons 
having one or more children in the household showed significantly lower odds of having or 
developing a common psychiatric disorder.  
While several of the predictors listed in Table 5 showed significant associations with 
GHQ2+ and GHQ4+, a relative weights analysis (% RW) indicated that not all predictors were equally 
important. Most important was work-family conflict (% RW=34.1% and 29.8% for GHQ2+ and 
GHQ4+, respectively), and this was more important than family-work conflict (% RW=10.2% and 
12.2% for GHQ2+ and GHQ4+, respectively). Job demands (% RW=25.8% and 19.3% for GHQ2+ 
and GHQ4+, respectively) and, to a lesser extent, job control were also important (% RW=5.8% and 
9.2% for GHQ2+ and GHQ4+, respectively). Inspirational leadership style (% RW=7.5% and 5.8% 
for GHQ2+ and GHQ4+, respectively), and closed decision making were moderately important but the 
latter only for GHQ4+ (% RW=7.1%). The smaller size of the % RWs (all below 5%) indicate that 
type of appointment, PhD phase and interest in a future academic career were less important than other 
features of the work organization incorporated in our models.  
Finally, the regression equation relating work context factors to psychological distress 
showed significant predictive power. The value of the Nagelkerke R2 (pseudo R2) was 0.202 for the 
GHQ2+ and 0.204 for the GHQ4+, which were reasonable effect sizes for psychological research in 
the workplace (Bosco et al., 2015; Landry et al., 2006).  
 
5. 
Discussion and conclusion  
 
5.1 Contributions 
Official registration of both staff and student mental health problems (e.g. depression, 
anxiety, burnout or emotional exhaustion) by universities is relatively low,  which seems to be in stark 
  
17 
 
contrast with the picture painted in media reports. From an evidence-based research policy 
management perspective, systematic empirical data collection on the prevalence of mental health 
problems and the organizational policies that are linked to them is urgently needed. Our study 
contributes to this necessity in four ways.  
First, we provide empirical estimates for the prevalence of mental health problems in PhD 
students on the basis of representative data covering all disciplines and all universities in Flanders, 
Belgium. Previous research on well-being and mental health in academia has usually been restricted to 
one specific discipline or university.  
Second, by adopting the widely used GHQ-12, our study provides an accessible benchmark 
for future studies on mental health problems in the university sector thereby strengthening the 
evidence base for accurate research policy management. Our study enables a comparison of the 
prevalence of mental health problems with many different groups in and outside of the university, 
whether they are specific occupational groups, groups of students, or the general population.   
Third, our study empirically documents the link between organizational factors and the 
mental health of PhD students. Compared to existing studies on mental health in academia, our study’s 
focus is exclusively on students pursuing a PhD. As task characteristics and working conditions for 
PhD students might be quite different from other academic groups, fine-grained research identifying 
the specific organizational factors predicting an individual’s mental health is particularly important 
from a research policy perspective. 
Fourth, our study extends previous research on mental health in the sector by considering 
work-life conflict bi-directionally and by adding data on future career prospects to a series of well-
known organizational stressors found in the work environment. Findings have shown that considering 
the bi-directionality of work-life conflict is informative from a management perspective, as the relative 
impact of both predictors on mental health is quite different. 
 
5.2 Summary of main findings 
Our study shows that 51% of the PhD students in Flanders report at least two symptoms on the 
GHQ-12 (GHQ2+), 40% report at least three symptoms (GHQ3+), while 32% experience at least four 
symptoms (GHQ4+). These prevalence rates suggest that a sizeable group of PhD students experience 
psychological distress or is at risk of having or developing a common psychiatric disorder. Most 
prevalent are feelings of being under constant strain, unhappiness and depression, sleeping problems 
due to worries, inability to overcome difficulties and not being able to enjoy day-to-day activities. The 
prevalence of having or developing a common psychiatric disorder was 2.43 times higher in PhD 
students compared to the highly educated in the general population. It was 2.84 times higher compared 
to highly educated employees and 1.85 times higher compared to higher education students. 
  
18 
 
Multivariate analyses show that work-family conflict is the most important predictor of both 
psychological distress and a risk of a common psychiatric disorder in PhD students. Another strong 
predictor is job demands, followed by family-work conflict, job control and inspirational leadership 
style. A closed decision making culture was found to have a significant impact on risk of psychiatric 
disorder only.  
 
5.3 Limitations and alternative explanations 
Three important limitations are worth mentioning. The first pertains to the interpretation of our 
study findings. Is working at a university bad for one’s mental health? Or, alternatively, are 
individuals who start on a PhD track more vulnerable to developing mental health problems (self-
selection)? Our cross-sectional dataset does not allow us to draw conclusions about causality. A 
potential alternative interpretation of our findings could, for instance, be that PhD students 
experiencing mental health problems are more likely to evaluate their environmental conditions 
negatively. However, the vast number of studies examining causal links between organizational 
factors and the onset of mental health problems in occupational health research in other settings 
suggests that the work environment is at least partially responsible for the prevalence of mental health 
problems observed in the current study. 
A second limitation pertains to the generalizability of our findings. Our data consists of PhD 
students from all scientific disciplines at all universities in Flanders (Belgium). It could be that our 
findings are idiosyncratic to the Flemish academic landscape. To shed light on the extent of 
generalizability, we included a context box (see Table 1), which compares characteristics of PhD 
models in the US and Europe. While some differences may potentially limit generalizability (e.g. 
intensiveness of coursework), we believe most of the factors in the academic environment should be 
reasonably comparable from an occupational health perspective. Furthermore, given the international 
orientation of the academic work environment, with high mobility of researchers across countries, we 
would expect that research organization factors rapidly spread across the globe, thus making the PhD 
experience in all probability comparable across countries. Of course, future cross-national research is 
needed to make stronger claims about generalizability. One noteworthy aspect that should receive 
attention in future cross-national research is the financial situation of PhD students. Most PhD students 
in Flanders receive a scholarship or are formally employed by a university. Studies in other countries 
have shown that financial worries and debts are one of the major stressors experienced by those 
working towards a PhD (Biron et al., 2008; El-Ghoroury et al., 2012). As financial worries and debts 
are probably not a crucial issue for PhD students in Flanders, if anything, we would expect that the 
prevalence of mental health problems is even higher in those countries where PhD candidates have 
more financial difficulties. 
  
19 
 
A third limitation pertains to the measurement of mental health. The GHQ4+ is a probabilistic 
measurement for psychiatric caseness, and advises medical attention to be sought for the reported 
problems (McDowell, 2006). The diagnosis as to whether an individual actually has a clinically 
significant disorder must be assessed by psychiatric interview. Assessments of mental health problems 
based on scales such as the GHQ are useful in understanding various sources of distress as well as any 
predisposing factors. However, the results of such assessments are preferably not used in isolation but 
rather combined with other information of distress or mental health problems (such as absence due to 
sickness, poor productivity or increased turnover) (Jackson, 2007). 
 
5.4 Policy implications 
Because of the widespread stigma and implicit beliefs, mental ill-health is a key issue for labor 
market and social policies that has long been neglected (OECD, 2015). In recent years, however, 
OECD governments have shifted their focus towards mental health, developing specific policies to 
promote mental health in their citizens (OECD, 2015). We believe the current study should urge 
research policymakers to make a similar directional shift.  The high prevalence of mental health 
problems in PhD students is critical in terms of individual suffering, organizational and societal costs. 
In the long run, however, it will also impact on research itself.  
What can research policymakers do? First, they should emphasize prevention by raising 
awareness and by developing mental health competence in recognizing and dealing with problems at 
the right time. As a second focus, policy research makers may want to screen their own policy rules, 
especially those underlying research funding and employment conditions. For instance, a gradual 
increase in governmental research investments in the number of PhD scholarships and financial 
incentives for universities to increase the number of PhDs could have unforeseen side effects (see 
Figure 1). A higher number of PhD students for each advisor could imply that faculty may find it more 
difficult to invest sufficient time and attention in each PhD student. Our findings suggest that the type 
of leadership experienced by PhD students, and particularly a lack of inspirational leadership, was 
associated with a higher risk for mental health problems. In contrast, governmental research policies 
that allow advisors to invest in developing an inspirational influence towards their PhD students could 
buffer against stress (LePine et al., 2016). Similarly, an increase in the number of PhD students versus 
stability in the number of faculty positions may give graduating PhD students bleak career prospects, 
in which supply exceeds demand for professionals with a PhD. Our findings indeed show how career 
prospects (both in and outside academia) were a determinant of mental health problems. Stephan and 
Levin (2001) have shown that such a situation not only impacts mental health, but weakens the 
implicit psychological contract between PhD students and the research team in which they are doing 
  
20 
 
their research, thus directly affecting research performance. Although these hypothetical links await 
further research, they illustrate how policymakers should take into account potential negative effects 
of macro governmental research policies on individual mental health. A third focus might be on the 
protection of employees with mental health problems, starting with a more systematic collection and 
monitoring of mental health data.  
Second, what can universities do? By increasing their efforts of systematically mapping and 
monitoring the stressors and stress outcomes in their organization, they may develop a risk 
management approach (WHO, 2015) to identify “general” risk factors affecting everyone in the 
organization or “specific” risk factors affecting only specific categories. Our analyses suggest that 
universities will benefit in terms of PhD students’ mental health when they facilitate management of 
work-family balance and workload, design open decision-making procedures, and help PhD 
supervisors to adopt leadership styles that lead to satisfactory and constructive work relations. Our 
findings also suggest that universities might benefit from offering PhD students clear and full 
information on job expectations and career prospects, both in and outside academia.  
 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to express our gratitude to all participants of the Survey of Junior Researchers 2013 
and the national Health Interview Survey 2013. We would also like to thank all Flemish universities 
for their collaboration and the Ministry of Work, Economy, Innovation and Sports for funding the 
Survey of Junior Researchers 2013. We are also indebted to the commissioners of the Health Interview 
Survey 2013: the federal government (FPS Public Health), the Flemish Community, the Federation 
Wallonia-Brussels, the Brussels-Capital Region, the Walloon Region and the German Community. 
The current research, based on both the Survey of Junior Researchers 2013 and the Health Interview 
Survey 2013, did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or 
not-for-profit sectors. 
 
6. 
References  
 
  
21 
 
Allison, P., 1999. Logistic regression using the SAS system: Theory and application. SAS Institute 
Inc. Cary, NC.  
Appel, M., & Dahlgren, L., 2003. Swedish doctoral student’s experiences on their journey towards 
a PhD: Obstacles and opportunities inside and outside the academic building. 
Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 47, 89-110. 
Biron, C., Brun, J-P., & Ivers, H., 2008. Extent and sources of occupational stress in university 
staff. Work, 30, 511-522. 
Blanco, C., Okuda, M., Wright, C., Hasin, D.S., Grant, B.F., Liu, S.M., & Olfson, M., 2008. 
Mental health of college students and their non-college attending peers: results from the 
national epidemiologic study on alcohol and related conditions. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 65, 1429-1437. 
Bosco, F.A., Aguinis, H. Singh, K., Field, J.G., & Pierce, C.A., 2015. Correlational effect size 
benchmarks. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100, 431-449. 
Boyd, C., Bakker, A., Pignata, S., Winefield, A., Gillespie, N., & Stough, C., 2011. A longitudinal 
test of the job demands-resources model among Australian university academics. Applied 
Psychology: An international Review, 60, 112-140. 
Bozeman, B., & Gaughan, M., 2011. Job satisfaction among university faculty: Individual, work 
and institutional determinants. Journal of Higher Education, 82, 2, 154-186.  
Castro, A., Rue, T., & Takeuchi, D., 2010. Associations of employment frustration with self-rated 
physical and mental health among Asian American immigrants in the US Labor Force. 
Public Health Nursing, 27, 492-503. 
Chandler, J., Barry, J., & Clark, H., 2002. Stressing academe: The wear and tear of New Public 
Management. Human Relations, 55, 9, 1051-1069. 
Coimbra 
Group, 
2016. 
 
http://www.coimbra-group.eu/transdoc/uploads/TRANS-
DOC%20Survey%20findings.pdf (last accessed on 12/3/2016) 
Cox, T., Griffiths, A., & Rial-Gonzalez, E., 2000. Research on work related stress. Luxembourg: 
Office for Official Publications of the European Communities. 
Danna, K., & Griffin, R.W., 1999. Health and well-being in the workplace: A review and 
synthesis of the literature. Journal of Management, 25, 357-384. 
de Hoogh, A., den Hartog, D. & Koopman, P., 2004. De ontwikkeling van de CLIO: een 
vragenlijst voor charismatisch leiderschap in organisaties. Gedrag & Organisatie, 17, 354-
382. 
De Lange, A.H., Taris, T.W., Kompier, M.A.J., Houtman, I.L.D., & Bongers, P.M., 2004. Work 
characteristics and psychological well-being: Testing normal, reversed and reciprocal 
relationships within the 4-wave SMASH study. Work & Stress, 18, 149-166. 
  
22 
 
ECOOM–Centre for Research & Development Monitoring, 2015. Vlaams Indicatorenboek 2015, 
https://www.ecoom.be/nl/indicatorenboek  
El-Ghoroury, N.H., Galper, D., Sawaqdeh, A., & Bufka, L., 2012. Stress, coping and barriers to 
wellness among psychology graduate students. Training and Education in Professional 
Psychology, 6, 2, 122-134. 
Ellis, A.M., Bauer, T.N., Mansfield, L.R., Erdogan, B., Truxillo, D.M., & Simon, L.S., 2015. 
Navigating uncharted waters: Newcomer socialization through the lens of stress theory. 
Journal of Management, 41, 203-235. 
Emslie, C., Fuhrer, R., Hunt, K., Macintyre S., Shipley, M., & Stansfeld, S., 2002. Gender 
differences in mental health: Evidence from three organizations. Social Science & 
Medicine, 54, 621-624. 
Fox, M.F., Fonseca, C. & Bao, J., 2011. Work and family conflict in academic science: Patterns 
and predictors among women and men in research universities. Social Studies of Science, 
41, 715-735. 
Gillespie, N.A., Walsh, M., Winefield, A.H., Dua, J., & Stough, C., 2001. Occupational stress in 
universities: Staff perceptions of the causes, consequences and moderators of stress. Work 
& Stress, 15, 53-72. 
Gmelch, W.H., Lovrich, N.P., & Wilke, P.K., 1984. Sources of stress in academe: A national 
perspective. Research in Higher Education, 20, 477-490.  
Goldberg, D.P., 1972. The detection of psychiatric illness by questionnaire. London, University 
Press. 
Goldberg, D.P., & Williams, P., 1988. A user’s guide to the General Health Questionnaire, NFER-
Nelson Basingstoke. 
Goldberg, D.P., Gater, R., Sartorius, N., Ustun, T.B., Piccinelli, M., Gureje, O., & Rutter, C., 
1997. The validity of two versions of the GHQ in the WHO study of mental illness in 
general health care. Psychological Medicine, 27, 191-197. 
Goldberg, D.P., Oldehinkel, T., & Ormel, J., 1998. Why GHQ threshold varies from one place to 
another. Psychological Medicine, 28, 915-921.  
Goh, J., Pfeffer, J., & Zenios, S.A., 2015a. Workplace stressors & health outcomes: Health policy 
for the workplace. Behavioral Science & Policy, 1, 43-52. 
Goh, J., Pfeffer, J., & Zenios, S., 2015b. The relationship between workplace stressors and 
mortality and health costs in the United States. Management Science, 62, 608-208. 
Goodwin, L., Ben-Zion, I., Fear, N.T., Hotopf, M., Stansfeld, S.A., & Wessely, S., 2013. Are 
reports of psychological stress higher in occupational studies? A systematic review across 
occupational and population based studies. Plos One, 8, 11, e78693. 
  
23 
 
Hagen, N.T., 2010. Deconstructing doctoral dissertations: How many papers does it take to make a 
PhD? Scientometrics, 85, 567-579. 
HIS-Health Interview Survey, 2013. Belgium 2013 https://his.wiv-isp.be/SitePages/Reports.aspx 
(last accessed on 12/9/2015) 
Jackson, G., 2007. The general health questionnaire. Occupational Medicine, 57, 79. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/occmed/kql169.  
Jehn, K.A., 1995. A multimethod examination of the benefits and detriments of intragroup 
conflict. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40, 256-282. 
Karasek, R.A., & Theorell, T., 1990. Healthy work: Stress, productivity and the reconstruction of 
working life. New York, Basic Books. 
Kinman, G., 2001. Pressure points: a review of research on stressors and strains in UK academics. 
Educational Psychology, 21, 473-492. 
Kinman, G., 2008. Work stressors, health and sense of coherence in UK academic employees. 
Educational Psychology, 28, 823-835. 
Kinman, G., & Jones, F., 2003. Running up the down escalator: Stressors and strains in UK 
academics. Quality of Higher Education, 9, 22-37. 
Kinman, G., Jones, F., & Kinman, R., 2006. The well-being of the UK academy. Quality in Higher 
Education, 12, 1, 15-27. 
Kinman, G., & Jones, F., 2008. Effort-reward imbalance and overcommitment: Predicting strain in 
academic employees in the United Kingdom. International Journal of Stress Management, 
15, 381-395. 
Kurtz-Costes, B., Andrews Helmke, L., & Ülkü-Steiner, B., 2006. Gender and doctoral studies: 
the perceptions of PhD students in an American university. Gender & Education, 18, 137-
155. 
Landry, R., Amara, N., & Rherrad, I., 2006. Why are some university researchers more likely to 
create spin-offs than others? Evidence from Canadian universities. Research Policy, 35, 
1599–1615. 
Larivière, V., 2012. On the shoulders of students? The contribution of PhD students to the 
advancement of knowledge. Scientometrics, 90, 463-481. 
Lee, Y.-N., Walsh, J.P., & Wang, J., 2015. Creativity in scientific teams: Unpacking novelty and 
impact. Research Policy, 44, 684-697. 
LePine, M.A., Zhang, Y., Crawford, E., & Rich, B.L, 2016. Turning their pain to gain: 
Charismatic leader influence on follower stress appraisal and job performance. Academy 
of Management Journal, 59, 1036-1059. 
Lievens, F., & Highhouse, S., 2003. The relation of instrumental and symbolic attributes to a 
company’s attractiveness as an employer. Personnel Psychology, 56, 75-102. 
  
24 
 
Long, J.S., & Fox, M.F., 1995. Scientific careers: universalism and particularism. Annual Review 
of Sociology, 21, 45-71. 
Mark, G., & Smith, A., 2012. Effects of occupational stress, job characteristics, coping, and 
attributional style on the mental health and job satisfaction of university employees. 
Anxiety, Stress & Coping, 25, 63-78. 
Martinez-Corts, Demerouti, E., Bakker, A.B., & Boz, M., 2015. Spillover of interpersonal 
conflicts from work into non-work: A daily diary study. Journal of Occupational Health 
Psychology, 20, 326-337. 
McClenahan, C.A., Giles, M.L., & Mallett, J., 2007. The importance of context specificity in work 
stress research: A test of the demand-control-support model in academics. Work & Stress, 
21, 85-95. 
McDowell, I., 2006. Measuring health. A guide to rating scales and questionnaires. Oxford 
University Press, USA (3rd ed). 
McNamee, R., 2005. Regression modelling and other methods to control confounding. 
Occupational & Environmental Medicine, 62, 500-506. 
Miller, M.M., 2013. Interdisciplinary research and the early career: The effect of interdisciplinary 
dissertation research on career placement and publication productivity of doctoral 
graduates in the sciences. Research Policy, 42, 1152-1164. 
Netemeyer, R.G., Boles, J.S., & McMurrian, R., 1996. Development and validation of work-
family conflict and family-work conflict scales. Journal of Applied Psychology, 81, 4, 
400-410. 
OECD, 2014. Who are the doctorate holders and where do their qualifications lead them? 
Education Indicators in Focus. DOI: 10.1787/22267077. 
OECD, 2015. Fit mind, fit job: From evidence to practice in mental health at work, Mental Health 
at Work, OECD Publishing, Paris. DOI: 10.1787/9789264228283. 
Peluso, D.L., Carleton, N.R., & Asmundson, G.J.G., 2011. Depression symptoms in Canadian 
psychology graduate students: Do research productivity, funding, and the academic 
advisory relationship play a role? Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 43, 119-127. 
Petersen, A.M., Riccaboni, M., Stanley, H.E., & Pammolli, F., 2012. Persistence and uncertainty 
in the academic career, PNAS, 109, 14, 5213-5218.  
Philips & Heywood-Roos, 2015. http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2015/06/30/early-
career-paths-of-doctorate-holders-esf-pilot/ (last accessed on 12/9/2015) 
Podsakoff, N.P., LePine, J.A., & LePine, M.A., 2007. Differential challenge stressor-hindrance 
stressor relationships with job attitudes, turnover intentions, turnover, and withdrawal 
behavior. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92, 438-454. 
  
25 
 
Post, C., DiTomaso, N., Farris, G., & Cordero, R., 2009. Work-family conflict and turnover 
intentions among scientists and engineers working in R&D. Journal of Business and 
Psychology, 24, 19-32. 
Reevy, G.M., & Deason, G., 2014. Predictors of depression, stress, and anxiety among non-tenure 
track faculty. Frontiers in Psychology. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00701. 
Rindermann H., & Thompson J. P., 2011. Cognitive capitalism: The effect of cognitive ability on 
wealth, as mediated through scientific achievement and economic freedom. Psychological 
Science, 22, 754–763. 
Roach, M., & Sauermann, H., 2010. A taste for science? PhD scientists’ academic orientation and 
self-selection into research careers in industry. Research Policy, 39, 422-434. 
Rhoades, L., & Eisenberger, R., 2002. Perceived organizational support: A review of the literature. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 698-714. 
Robotham, D., 2008. Stress among higher education students: towards a research agenda. Higher 
Education, 56, 735-746. 
Schillebeeckx, M., Maricque, B., & Lewis, C., 2013. The missing piece to changing the university. 
Nature Biotechnology, 31, 938-941. 
Shankman, S., & Klein, D., (2002). Dimensional diagnosis of depression: Adding the dimension 
of course to severity, and comparison to the DSM. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 43, 6, 420-
426. 
Shaw, C., 2015. http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/13/university-staff-scared-to-
disclose-mental-health-problems. (last accessed on 12/9/2015) 
Shaw, 
C., 
& 
Ward, 
L., 
2014. 
http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-
network/2014/mar/06/mental-health-academics-growing-problem-pressure-university. 
(last accessed on 12/3/2016) 
Shen, H., 2015. Employee benefits: Plight of the postdoc. Nature, 525, 279-281. 
Stephan, P.E., & Levin, S.G., 2001. Career stage, benchmarking and collective research. 
International Journal of Technology Management, 22, 676-687. 
Stubb, J., Pyhältö, K., & Lonka, K., 2011. Balancing between inspiration and exhaustion: PhD 
students’ experienced sociological well-being. Studies in Continuing Education, 33, 33-
50. 
Stubb, J., Pyhältö, K., & Lonka, K., 2012. The experienced meaning of working with a PhD thesis. 
Scandinavian Journal of Higher Education, 56, 439-456. 
Sun, W., Wu, H., & Wang, L., 2011. Occupational stress and its related factors among university 
teachers in China. Journal of Occupational Health, 53, 280-286. 
The Economist, 2012. http://www.economist.com/node/17723223?story_id=17723223 (last 
accessed on 12/3/2016) 
  
26 
 
Tonidandel, S., & LeBreton, J. M., 2010. Determining the relative importance of predictors in 
logistic regression: An extension of relative weights analysis. Organizational Research 
Methods, 13, 767-781. 
Tytherleigh, M.Y., Webb, C., Cooper, C.L., & Ricketts, C., 2005. Occupational stress in UK 
higher education institutions: A comparative study of all staff categories. Higher 
Education Research & Development, 24, 41-61. 
Van Damme, D., 2014. Doctorate degree holders take research skills outside academia. 
http://oecdeducationtoday.blogspot.be/2014/10/doctorate-degree-holders-take-
research.html. 
Vanroelen, C., Levecque, K., & Louckx, F., 2009. Psychosocial working conditions and self-
reported health in a representative sample of wage-earners: a test of the different 
hypotheses 
of 
the 
Demand-Control-Support-Model. 
International 
Archives 
of 
Occupational and Environmental Health 82 (3), 329-342.  
Walsh, J.P., & Lee, Y.N., 2015. The bureaucratization of science. Research Policy, 44, 1584-1600. 
WHO, 2010. Health impact of psychosocial hazards at work: An overview. 
WHO, 2015. http://www.who.int/management/general/risk/en/ (last accessed on 12/3/2016) 
Winefield, H.R., Boyd, C., & Winefield, A.J., 2014. Work-family conflict and well-being in 
university employees. Journal of Psychology, 148, 683-697. 
Winefield, A.H., & Jarret, R., 2001. Occupational stress in university staff. International Journal 
of Stress Management, 8, 285-298. 
Winefield, A.H., Gillespie, N., Stough, C., Dua, J., Hapuarachchi, J., & Boyd, C., 2003. 
Occupational stress in Australian university staff: Results from a national survey, 
International Journal of Stress Management, 10, 51-63. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Evolution in ratio between faculty positions and PhD students, 1999-2014, Flanders 
(Belgium). 
 
 
Source: ECOOM (2015). 
 
 
 
  
28 
 
 
 
Table 1.  Context box: Similarities and differences between European and North American (U.S.) PhD programs 
Similarities 
 
Emphasis on independent, individual research aimed at an original contribution to scientific knowledge 
 
One or two main faculty advisors, assisted by a guidance committee and ultimately an examination board 
 
Provision of a structured PhD program with courses on specialist topics and transferrable skills 
 
Predominance of universities with centralized PhD program policies 
 
Wide availability of funding opportunities (depending on prior qualifications) 
 
Universities tend to cooperate with other PhD programs internationally, although internationalization in Europe is more 
pronounced than in the U.S. 
Differences 
 
Fees. Considerable variation in fees in US higher education institutions, but generally higher than in Europe. In Belgium, the 
PhD program fee is less than €300 (around 325 USD). A similar fee is charged for the PhD defense. 
 
Degree. Unlike in the U.S., in most of Europe obtaining a Master’s degree is not part of the PhD program, but an entrance 
requirement. In the U.S., most PhD programs require a Bachelor’s degree (4 years of study) or a Master’s degree. 
 
Variation in publication requirement. While publication requirements vary considerably across countries and disciplines, 
European PhD models may put more emphasis on having published research by the time of dissertation submission. 
 
Time-to-degree. Although there is significant variation between disciplines, median time-to-degree in the U.S. is 7 years (often 
due to the mandatory integration of a Master’s degree), and, in Europe, 5 years. 
 
Finance. In the U.S., being accepted into a PhD program is often associated with a scholarship that not only pays the fees but 
also a stipend. In Belgium, the majority of PhD students has a fixed-term formal employment contract with the university (as 
research assistant or project researcher) or received a personal PhD scholarship. A small minority of PhD students are 
employed elsewhere or are unemployed. 
 
PhD program. In the U.S., more emphasis is put on formalized intensive coursework with PhD students needing to pass 
qualifying exams before they can proceed. In contrast, European PhD programs may put more emphasis on personal “on-the-
job” training by an advisor. 
Partly based on Coimbra Group (2016).  
 
 
 
  
29 
 
Table 2. Prevalence of GHQ2+, GHQ3+ and GHQ4+ (based on the GHQ-12) in academia samples since 2000a  
First author, year of publication, 
title 
Population and 
location 
Type of study and 
sampling strategy 
No. of 
participantsb  
RR 
Sample 
characteristics  
GHQ2
+ 
GHQ3
+ 
GHQ4
+ 
Winefield 
& 
Jarret 
(2001) 
Occupational stress in university staff 
All staff from 
University of Adelaide 
Cross-sectional study 
2,040 
57% 
 
43.7% 
/ 
/ 
Kinman (2001) Pressure points: A 
review  of research on stressors and 
strains in UK academics (see also 
Kinman & Jones, 2003; see also 
Kinman, Jones & Kinman, 2006) 
Academic and 
academic-related staff 
from UK universities 
Cross-sectional study. 
Random sampling 
782 
37% 
66% male 
 
69% between 41-
60y 
/ 
53% 
/ 
Emslie et al. (2002) Gender 
differences in mental health: 
Evidence from three organisations 
White collar workers 
from a bank, a 
university and the civil 
service in the UK (only 
the data from the 
British university is 
presented) 
Cross-sectional study 
1,641 
67% 
62% male 
 
Mean ages: 44y for 
men, 39y for 
women 
/ 
Men 
24%, 
women 
27% 
/ 
Winefield et al. (2003) Occupational 
stress in Australian university staff: 
Results from a national survey 
Australian university 
staff (only the data for 
the academic staff is 
presented 
Cross-sectional study 
3,711 
25% 
 
/ 
43% 
/ 
McClenahan et al. (2007) The 
importance of context specificity in 
work stress research: A test of the 
demand-control-support model in 
academics 
UK academics 
Cross-sectional and 
non-random (only 
lecturers and senior 
lecturers were 
included) 
166 
23% (but not 
all 
respondents 
included in 
current study) 
63% male 
Mean age 44y 
/ 
/ 
31.8% 
Kinman (2008) Work stressors, 
health and sense of coherence in UK 
academic employees 
UK academics 
Cross-sectional study. 
Random sample of 
1,000 UK academic 
employees working 
full time 
465 
47% 
59% male 
Mean age 46y 
/ 
/ 
43.4% 
Kinman & Jones (2008) Effort-
reward imbalance and 
overcommitment: Predicting strain in 
academic employees in the UK 
UK academics 
Cross-sectional study. 
Random sampling 
844 
22% (but not 
all 
respondents 
included in 
current study) 
59% male 
77% aged 40y or 
more 
/ 
49% 
41.8% 
a  Partly based on Goodwin et al. (2013) 
b no. who completed GHQ (if differently) 
  
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Characteristics of PhD students, Flanders 2013 (N=3,659): percentage (%), mean (M), 
standard deviation (SD), minimum-maximum (Min-Max) 
 
% 
M (SD) 
Min-Max 
 
Sociodemographics 
Female  
 
 
52.01 
 
 
Age 
 
28.37  (4.67) 
22-71 
Partner  
71.16 
 
 
Children 
 
Work context 
Job demands 
Job control 
Scientific discipline 
        Sciences 
        Biomedical sciences 
        Applied sciences 
        Humanities 
        Social sciences 
Type of appointment 
        Assistant lectureship 
        Scholarship 
        Research project 
        No funding by university 
        Other 
        Don’t know 
13.48 
 
 
 
 
 
18.78 
29.80 
17.18 
10.31 
23.92 
 
15.93 
36.03 
26.31 
10.35 
7.09 
4.30 
 
 
 
2.12  (0.45) 
3.01  (0.39) 
 
 
 
1-4 
1-4 
PhD phase 
        Initiating    
        Executing 
        Finishing 
Leadership style: inspirational 
Leadership style: autocratic 
Leadership style: laissez-faire 
Much interest in an academic career 
Perception of high chance of an academic career 
Positive perception of career outside academia 
 
Organizational context 
Team conflict 
 
21.57 
55.96 
22.48 
 
 
 
57.52 
54.90 
 
 
 
 
5.14  (1.15) 
4.05  (1.10) 
4.29  (1.25) 
 
 
3.43  (0.83) 
 
 
2.12  (0.75) 
 
 
 
 
1-7 
1-7 
1-7 
 
 
1-5 
 
 
1-5 
Closed team decision making  
 
3.01  (0.93) 
1-5 
Family-work conflict 
Work-family conflict 
 
2.71  (1.02) 
2.02  (0.85) 
1-5 
1-5 
  
31 
 
Table 4. Prevalence of common mental health problems in PhD students compared to three comparison groups, Flanders, 2013: %, risk 
ratio adjusted for age and gender (RR), 95% confidence interval (CI) 
 
PhD 
students 
Comparison group 1: 
Highly educated general 
population 
Comparison group 2: 
Highly educated employees  
Comparison group 3: 
Higher education students 
Source 
SJR 
HIS 
HIS 
HIS 
Year of survey 
2013 
2013 
2013 
2001, 2004, 2008,2013 
 
N=3,659 
N=769a 
N=592  
N=333b 
 
% 
% 
RR 
CI 
% 
RR 
CI 
% 
RR 
CI 
Felt under constant strain 
Unhappy and depressed 
Lost sleep over worry 
Could not overcome difficulties 
Not enjoying day-to-day activities 
Lost confidence in self 
Not playing a useful role 
Could not concentrate 
Not feeling happy, all things considered 
Felt worthless 
Could not make decisions 
Could not face problems 
40.81 
30.30 
28.33 
26.11 
25.41 
24.35 
22.46 
21.74 
21.15 
16.17 
14.95 
13.36 
27.47 
13.60 
18.13 
12.00 
13.07 
7.95 
9.20 
10.67 
11.11 
5.30 
6.00 
4.27 
1.38 
2.09 
1.62 
2.36 
2.21 
3.48 
2.33 
1.94 
2.15 
3.40 
2.74 
3.69 
(1.18-1.62) 
(1.65-2.65) 
(1.32-2.01) 
(1.82-3.06) 
(1.74-2.82) 
(2.52-4.79) 
(1.73-3.15) 
(1.48-2.54) 
(1.64-2.81) 
(2.29-5.07) 
(1.87-4.02) 
(2.39-5.68) 
26.69 
12.31 
17.16 
10.57 
12.31 
7.56 
8.15 
9.01 
9.43 
4.30 
5.03 
3.81 
1.43 
2.22 
1.70 
2.71 
2.39 
3.54 
2.54 
2.14 
2.41 
4.11 
2.97 
3.82 
(1.20-1.70) 
(1.70-2.91) 
(1.35-2.15) 
(2.01-3.64) 
(1.82-3.13) 
(2.47-5.06) 
(1.80-3.59) 
(1.56-2.92) 
(1.77-3.29) 
(2.57-6.59) 
(1.91-4.62) 
(2.34-6.24) 
30.21 
18.48 
18.13 
12.69 
10.88 
10.24 
10.88 
10.57 
11.45 
4.22 
6.04 
4.24 
1.16 
1.42 
1.35 
1.85 
1.68 
2.04 
1.78 
1.53 
1.49 
3.16 
2.16 
2.42 
(0.96-1.42) 
(1.09-1.84) 
(1.03-1.76) 
(1.35-2.54) 
(1.19-2.38) 
(1.43-2.91) 
(1.26-2.53) 
(1.07-2.20) 
(1.05-2.10) 
(1.82-5.48) 
(1.35-3.48) 
(1.38-4.25) 
GHQ2+ 
51.11 
26.80 
1.90 
(1.62-2.22) 
24.96 
2.02 
(1.69-2.41) 
30.61 
1.53 
(1.27-1.84) 
GHQ3+ 
39.53 
18.40 
2.26 
(1.85-2.75) 
16.12 
2.56 
(2.03-3.22) 
22.21 
1.63 
(1.29-2.06) 
GHQ4+ 
31.84 
14.00 
2.43 
(1.92-3.08) 
11.79 
2.84 
(2.15-3.74) 
14.55 
1.85 
(1.38-2.49) 
a Including 14 PhDs 
b Including 1 PhD student 
  
32 
 
 
Table 5. Predictors of common mental health problems in PhD students, Flanders 2013 (N=3,659): odds ratio (OR), 95% confidence intervals (95% CI), level of significance, 
relative weights (RW – only reported when p<0.05)  
 
GHQ2+ 
Psychological distress 
 
GHQ4+ 
Risk of having or developing  
a common psychiatric disorder 
 
OR 
95% CI 
Sign 
RW 
% RW 
OR 
95% CI 
Sign 
RW 
% RW 
Constant 
0.089 
 
*** 
- 
- 
0.299 
 
 
- 
- 
 
Work context 
Job demands 
 
 
1.896 
 
 
(1.495-2.406) 
 
 
*** 
 
 
0.0353 
 
 
25.8 
 
 
1.651 
 
 
(1.293-2.109) 
 
 
*** 
 
 
0.0269 
 
 
19.3 
Job control 
0.784 
(0.627-0.981) 
* 
0.0079 
5.8 
0.631 
(0.499-0.798) 
*** 
0.0128 
9.2 
Scientific discipline 
        Sciences    (ref) 
        Biomedical sciences 
        Applied sciences 
        Humanities 
        Social sciences 
Type of appointment 
         Assistant lectureship (ref) 
         Scholarship 
         Research project 
         No funding by university 
         Other  
         Don’t know 
 
- 
0.812 
1.104 
0.994 
0.889 
 
- 
1.256 
1.321 
1.133 
1.334 
1.644 
 
- 
(0.638-1.032) 
(0.851-1.433) 
(0.724-1.364) 
(0.700-1.154) 
 
- 
(0.992-1.591) 
(1.032-1.693) 
(0.816-1.572) 
(0.929-1.945) 
(1.064-2.540) 
n.s. 
- 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
n.s. 
* 
n.s. 
n.s. 
* 
n.s. 
- 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
n.s. 
0.0010 
n.s. 
n.s. 
0.0007 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.7 
- 
- 
0.5 
 
- 
0.784 
1.019 
0.909 
0.871 
 
- 
1.405 
1.353 
1.235 
1.264 
1.410 
 
- 
(0.604-1.018) 
(0.769-1.350) 
(0.649-1.273) 
(0.664-1.143) 
 
- 
(1.082-1.824) 
(1.032-1.774) 
(0.868-1.757) 
(0.844-1.893) 
(0.883-2.254) 
n.s. 
- 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
* 
* 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
0.0009 
0.0010 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
0.6 
0.7 
- 
- 
- 
PhD phase 
        Initiating   (ref) 
        Executing 
        Finishing 
Leadership style: inspirational 
Leadership style: autocratic 
Leadership style: laissez-faire 
High interest in an academic career 
Perception of high chance of an academic career 
Positive perception of career outside academia 
 
Organizational context 
Team conflict 
 
- 
0.739 
0.805 
0.868 
0.968 
1.084 
0.824 
 
1.064 
 
0.849 
 
 
 
- 
(0.602-0.907) 
(0.621-1.043) 
 (0.798-0.943) 
(0.896-1.046) 
(1.015-1.158) 
(0.699-0.972) 
 
(0.903-1.254) 
 
(0.765-0.943) 
 
 
* 
- 
** 
n.s. 
*** 
n.s. 
* 
* 
 
n.s. 
 
** 
 
 
0.0024 
- 
0.0024 
n.s. 
0.0103 
n.s. 
0.0039 
0.0022 
 
n.s. 
 
0.0067 
 
 
1.8 
- 
1.8 
- 
7.5 
- 
2.9 
1.6 
 
- 
 
4.9 
 
 
 
- 
0.674 
0.778 
0.908 
0.929 
1.045 
0.782 
 
1.014 
 
0.789 
 
 
 
- 
(0.541-0.840) 
(0.592-1.024) 
 (0.833-0.989) 
(0.856-1.009) 
(0.974-1.121) 
(0.656-0.933) 
 
(0.850-1.210) 
 
(0.707-0.882) 
 
 
** 
- 
*** 
n.s. 
* 
n.s. 
n.s. 
** 
 
n.s. 
 
*** 
 
 
0.0037 
- 
0.0037 
n.s. 
0.0081 
n.s. 
n.s. 
0.0030 
 
n.s. 
 
0.0103 
 
 
2.6 
- 
2.6 
- 
5.8 
- 
- 
2.1 
 
- 
 
7.4 
 
 
  
33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.057 
 
(0.936-1.194) 
 
n.s. 
 
n.s. 
 
- 
 
1.050 
 
(0.926-1.190) 
 
n.s. 
 
n.s. 
 
- 
Closed team decision making  
1.100 
(0.995-1.216) 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
1.205 
(1.082-1.342) 
** 
0.0099 
7.1 
Family-work conflict 
Work-family conflict 
1.206 
1.521 
(1.083-1.344) 
(1.363-1.697) 
*** 
*** 
0.0139 
0.0467 
10.2 
34.1 
1.296 
1.522 
(1.162-1.445) 
(1.354-1.710) 
*** 
*** 
0.0171 
0.0417 
12.2 
29.8 
 
Sociodemographics 
Female  
 
 
1.336 
 
 
(1.130-1.579) 
 
 
*** 
 
 
0.0036 
 
 
2.6 
 
 
1.273 
 
 
(1.063-1.524) 
 
 
** 
 
 
0.0023 
 
 
1.6 
Age 
0.994 
(0.971-1.017) 
n.s. 
n.s 
- 
1.001 
(0.977-1.026) 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
Partner  
0.779 
(0.651-0.932) 
** 
0.0022 
1.6 
0.855 
(0.706-1.035) 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
Children 
0.824 
(0.626-1.084) 
n.s. 
n.s. 
- 
0.653 
(0.487-0.877) 
** 
0.0020 
1.4 
 
Legend: ref=reference category     RW=relative weight      n.s.=not significant        
               *=p<0.05        **=p<0.01       ***=p<0.001       
 
Model fit GHQ2+:  LR = 498.84         df = 27        p<0.001          Nagelkerke R²= 0.2023  
Model fit GHQ4+: LR = 475.181       df = 27        p<0.001          Nagelkerke R²= 0.2036 
