 Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
GlennN.Levine,MD,FAHA,Chair;RichardA.Lange,MD,MBA,FAHA,ViceChair;C.NoelBairey-Merz,MD,FAHA;RichardJ.Davidson,PhD;
Kenneth Jamerson, MD, FAHA; Puja K. Mehta, MD, FAHA; Erin D. Michos, MD, MHS, FAHA; Keith Norris, MD; Indranill Basu Ray, MD;
Karen L. Saban, PhD, RN, APRN, CNRN, FAHA; Tina Shah, MD; Richard Stein, MD; Sidney C. Smith, Jr, MD, FAHA; on behalf of the
AmericanHeartAssociationCouncilonClinicalCardiology;CouncilonCardiovascularandStrokeNursing;andCouncilonHypertension
Abstract-—Despite numerous advances in the prevention and treatment of atherosclerosis, cardiovascular disease remains a leading
cause of morbidity and mortality. Novel and inexpensive interventions that can contribute to the primary and secondary prevention of
cardiovascular disease areof interest. Numerous studies have reported onthe benefits ofmeditation. Meditationinstructionand practice
is widely accessible and inexpensive and may thus be a potential attractive cost-effective adjunct to more traditional medical therapies.
Accordingly, this American Heart Association scientific statement systematically reviewed the data on the potential benefits of
meditation on cardiovascular risk. Neurophysiological and neuroanatomical studies demonstrate that meditation can have long-standing
effects on the brain, which provide some biological plausibility for beneficial consequences on the physiological basal state and on
cardiovascularrisk.Studiesoftheeffectsofmeditationoncardiovascular riskhave includedthoseinvestigatingphysiological responseto
stress, smoking cessation, blood pressure reduction, insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome, endothelial function, inducible
myocardial ischemia, and primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Overall, studies of meditation suggest a possible
benefit on cardiovascular risk, although the overall quality and, in some cases, quantity of study data are modest. Given the low costs and
low risks of this intervention, meditation may be considered as an adjunct to guideline-directed cardiovascular risk reduction by those
interested in this lifestyle modification, with the understanding that the benefits of such intervention remain to be better established.
Furtherresearchonmeditationandcardiovascularriskiswarranted.Suchstudies,tothedegreepossible,shouldutilizerandomizedstudy
design, be adequately powered to meet the primary study outcome, strive to achieve low dropout rates, include long-term follow-up, and
be performed by those without inherent bias in outcome. (J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e002218. DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218.)
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements • cardiovascular disease • cardiovascular risk • meditation • primary prevention •
secondary prevention
D
espite numerous advances in the prevention and treat-
ment of atherosclerosis, cardiovascular disease (CVD)
remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the
United States1,2 and the developed world.3–5 Although educa-
tional, lifestyle modifying, and pharmacological interventions
have lowered the prevalence of cardiovascular risk factors,
most Americans still have at least 1 major risk factor.6,7 More
than $200 billion are spent on care of patients with CVD in the
United States annually, and this is expected to increase 2- to 3-
fold over the next several decades.2,8 Accordingly, novel and
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or a
personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit a
Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on March 13, 2017, and the American Heart
Association Executive Committee on April 17, 2017. A copy of the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using either “Search for
Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area.
Accompanying Tables S1 through S9 are available at http://jaha.ahajournals.org/content/6/10/e002218/DC1/embed/inline-supplementary-material-1.pdf
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Levine GN, Lange RA, Bairey-Merz CN, Davidson RJ, Jamerson K, Mehta PK, Michos
ED, Norris K, Ray IB, Saban KL, Shah T, Stein R, Smith SC Jr; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascular
and Stroke Nursing; and Council on Hypertension. Meditation and cardiovascular risk reduction:a scientific statement fromthe AmericanHeart Association.J Am Heart
Assoc. 2017;6:e002218. DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines development,
visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
ª 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-
commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
1
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 inexpensive interventions that are of benefit to patients and
can contribute to the primary and secondary prevention of
CVD are of interest.
Dozens of studies have reported on the health benefits of
meditation. According to the National Health Interview Survey,
8% of US adults practice some form of meditation.9 Up to 14% to
24% of patients with CVD have been reported to use or to have
used some form of mind-body therapy, and 2% to 3% use or have
used some form of meditation.10–13 In addition, half of CVD
patients are interested in participating in a clinical trial of
alternative therapies, and 17% are interested in participating in a
clinical trial of meditation.10–13 Many forms of meditation can be
learned from publications, the internet, and audio media. Many
meditation courses are available for a modest fee or voluntary
contribution. Hence, meditation may be an attractive cost-
effective adjunct to more traditional medical therapies. Accord-
ingly, the American Heart Association commissioned this
scientific statement to systematically and scientifically review
the data on the potential benefits of meditation related to CVD.
Methodology
Studies on meditation and cardiovascular risk reduction were
searched for on PubMed using search terms including medita-
tion, stress, blood pressure, hypertension, smoking, tobacco
use, insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, atherosclerosis,
endothelial function, myocardial ischemia, primary prevention,
and secondary prevention. Additional searches were performed
on Google and Google Scholar, because some articles on
meditation are not listed in PubMed.
Practices such as tai chi, qigong, and yoga, although
involving inner focus and a concentration on breathing,
consist of both mental and physical practices. Regular
physical activity and exercise has itself been associated with
cardiovascular risk reduction,14,15 and thus findings from
such studies would be confounded. Therefore, this review was
restricted to practices of sitting meditation.
For all sections examining the effects of meditation on
aspects of cardiovascular risk, a primary author without
relationships with industry and a secondary reviewer drafted
the initial text and conclusions. All sections, tables, and
conclusions were then reviewed by all writing group members
and the manuscript revised based on this review. The
manuscript was then reviewed by 4 external reviewers and
revised accordingly. The finalized manuscript was approved by
all writing group members.
Meditation
The practice of meditation dates as far back as 5000 BC.16
Although associated with Eastern philosophies and religion,
including Buddhism and Hinduism, references or inferences
regarding meditation and the meditative process can be found
in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam.16 Over the past several
decades, meditation is increasingly practiced as a secular and
therapeutic activity.
In the traditional context, meditation refers to a family of
mental practices that are designed to improve concentration,
increase awareness of the present moment, and familiarize a
person with the nature of their own mind.16 In a more general and
contemporarycontext, meditationcanbecategorizedasprimarily
focused attention, mindfulness, loving kindness and compassion,
or mantra repetition, although there is usually overlap between
the focuses.17–19 With focused attention (“samatha” meditation),
the practitioner may focus on the breath or on an object, sound,
sensation, visualization, thought, or repeated word or phrase
(“mantra”). When the mind wanders, the meditator notices the
mind wandering and learns to bring the mind back to the present
moment or the object of meditation. In mindful meditation, the
individual strives to be in the present moment and aware of
internal sensations, thoughts, and external stimuli, without
becoming engrossed in or distracted by them. Mindfulness-based
stress reduction is a program based primarily on mindful
meditation, as well as yoga; other mindfulness-based programs
are similarly based on mindful meditation. Insight (“vipassana”)
meditation can be considered a form of mindful meditation. In
loving kindness and compassion, the meditator cultivates a
feeling of benevolence toward oneself and others. In Vedic or
Transcendental Meditation,* repeated thought of a word is used
to relax and clear the mind. The “relaxation response” technique
similarly uses focused silent repetition of a word,sound, orphase.
These practices may be used to: (1) increase concentration,
insight, or awareness of the present moment; (2) promote
relaxation; (3) reduce stress; (4) settle the mind; (5) achieve a
state of increased consciousness; and (6) reduce perceived
suffering and increase happiness.
Table 1 provides a summary of common types of meditation.
Most forms of meditation are practiced ≥20 minutes or once
or twice daily. Although meditation was first practiced millennia
ago as part of Buddhist and Hindu religions, it has recently
been introduced in the West as a stand-alone secular activity.
Neurophysiology and Neuroanatomy of
Meditation
Almost 2 decades of scientific studies, conducted at ≥20
universities, have identified the effects of meditation on the
*The registration number for Transcendental Meditation is 1,082,923, which
is owned by World Plan Executive Council. This form of meditation listed in the
article is only an example of meditation. This is not intended to be an
endorsement of any commercial product, process, service, or enterprise by
the American Heart Association.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
2
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 brain.18 Most forms of meditation engage regions in the brain
that regulate attention and emotion.29 The adult brain can
undergo changes through a process called neuroplasticity,
which may include development of new circuits (“rewiring”)
and/or neurons.30 The different psychological targets of
meditation are instantiated in distributed neural circuits that
include different sectors of the prefrontal cortex and anterior
cingulate cortex, the insula, and the midline regions that are
important in default mode function.31 In addition, studies of
loving-kindness and/or compassion meditation practices
often lead to alterations in subcortical circuits directly
implicated in emotional processing, such as the amygdala
and ventral striatum.29,32,33
Studies of the effects on meditation on the brain include
those using electroencephalography, magnetic resonance
imaging,
and
functional
magnetic
resonance
imaging.
Whereas numerous studies have reported on the acute
neurophysiological effects of meditation, more relevant to this
Table 1. Common Types of Meditation
Meditation
Description
Origins and Well-Known Teachers in the West
Samatha meditation
Samatha is translated to mean “calm” and samatha meditation is
often referred to as calm, abiding meditation. Samatha meditation
is the practice of calming the mind by practicing single-pointed
meditation through mindful concentration focusing on the breath,
image, or object.
Buddhist practice, dating to the time of the Buddha or even
before
Vipassana meditation
(insight meditation)
Vipassana is translated to mean, “to see things as they really are.”
Vipassana emphasizes awareness of the breath, tuning into the
air passing in and out through the nose. Vipassana teaches one to
label thoughts and experiences as they arise, taking mental notes
as one identifies objects that grab one’s attention. Vipassana
meditation is often taught at 10-day retreats.
Traditional Buddhist and Indian meditation. Well-known
teachers include Mahasi Sayadaw, S.N. Goenka, Sharon
Salzberg, Joseph Goldestein, Jack Kornfield, and Michael
Stone
Mindful meditation
An umbrella term for the category of techniques used to create
awareness and insight by practicing focused attention, observing,
and accepting all that arises without judgment. This type of
meditation is also referred to as “open monitoring,” in which one
allows one’s attention to flow freely without judgment or
attachment.
Origins come from Buddhist teaching. Well-known Western
teachers include Jon-Kabat Zinn, Tara Brach, Sharon
Salzberg, Joseph Goldestein, Jack Kornfield, and Pema
Chodron
Zen meditation
(zazen)
A type of meditation where one focuses one’s awareness on one’s
breath and observes thoughts and experiences as they pass
through the mind and environment. In some senses similar to
Vipassana meditation, but with an emphasis on a focus of the
breath at the level of the belly and on posture while sitting.
Buddhist meditation from Japan. Well-known teachers
include Thich Nhat Hanh and Joan Halifax Roshi
Raja yoga meditation
Referred to also as “mental yoga,” “yoga of the mind,” or Kriya
yoga. A practice of concentration to calm the mind and bring it to
one point of focus. Includes a combination of mantra, breathing
techniques, and meditation on the chakras/spinal cord focus
points.
Hindu practice dating back thousands of years. Introduced
to the West in 1893 by Swami Vivekananda. Further
clarified and taught by Paramhansa Yogananda for the
Western audience
Loving-kindness
(metta) meditation
Loving-kindness meditation involves sending loving kindness to
oneself, then continuing to send it to a friend or loved one, to
someone who is neutral in your life, to a difficult person, and then
out to the universe. Through this practice, the meditator cultivates
a feeling of benevolence toward oneself and others.
Originates from Buddhist teachings, mainly Tibetan
Buddhism. Well-known instructors include Sharon
Saltzberg and Pema Chodron
Transcendental
Meditation
Mantra-based meditation technique in which each practitioner is
given a personal mantra that is used to help settle the mind
inward. Transcendental Meditation is taught by certified teachers
through a standard 4-day course of instruction. Transcendental
Meditation is practiced for 20 minutes twice daily.
Origins in ancient Vedic traditions of India. Popularized in
the West by the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and now taught
in the United States by the Maharishi Foundation
Relaxation response
A multifaceted practice that can involve awareness and tracking of
breaths or repetition of a word, short phase, or prayer
A term and practice pioneered by Dr Herbert Benson in the
1970s, based in part of the practice of Transcendental
Meditation
There is no definitive definition of most types of meditation. These descriptions represent a synthesis of numerous sources and are best viewed as a general overview of the techniques.
Initial table concept from references 20 and 21. Additional data from references 16–19 and 22–28.
Table adapted with permission from Rakel,21 Integrative Medicine, 3rd ed. Copyright Elsevier 2012.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
3
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 scientific statement are long-term neurophysiological and
neuroanatomical changes. In 1 of the first reports on the long-
term effects of meditation on the brain, a 2-month mindful-
ness meditation program resulted in increased left-sided
anterior brain electrical activation, a pattern associated with
positive affect and emotion, whereas no such changes
occurred in a wait-listed control group.34 A study of long-
standing Buddhist meditation practitioners demonstrated
durable electroencephalographic changes, suggesting that
the resting state of the brain may be altered by long-term
meditative practices.35 A brain magnetic resonance imaging
study of experienced meditators found, when compared with
age-matched controls, higher gray matter density in lower
brainstem regions involved in the autonomic system and
cardiorespiratory control.36 Some, though not all, longitudinal
studies of 1 to 3 months of mindful meditation have
demonstrated changes in brain structure and function not
observed in control participants.37 A meta-analysis of 21
neuroimaging studies examining �300 meditation practition-
ers found 8 brain regions consistently altered in meditators,
including areas key to meta-awareness, body awareness, and
self- and emotion regulation.38 Anatomical changes have been
reported in the cerebral cortex, subcortical gray and white
matter, brainstem, and cerebellum of meditators.37
Neurophysiological and neuroanatomical studies suggest
that meditation can have long-standing effects on the brain,
which may have beneficial consequences on the physiological
basal state, physiological responses, and cardiovascular risk.
However, these studies generally were nonrandomized and
involved modest numbers of participants, some of whom
were highly experienced (>10 000 hours) meditators. Addi-
tionally, different forms of meditation (eg, focused attention,
mindfulness, and loving kindness) will have different psycho-
logical and neurological effects. Thus, the neurophysiological
and neuroanatomical findings associated with 1 type of
meditation cannot be extrapolated to all forms. Extrapolation
of the findings in the aforementioned studies to the general
population who engage in meditation must be done with
caution.
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk
Reduction
A summary of the findings on meditation and cardiovascular
risk reduction is provided in Table 2. Summaries of the
individual studies, as well as their limitations, evaluated in this
scientific statement are provided in Tables S1 through S9.
These summary tables are not all-inclusive but summarize the
findings of those studies deemed most relevant to this
scientific statement. Findings on the effects of meditation on
specific aspects of cardiovascular health are given in the
following sections.
Effects of Meditation on Psychological,
Psychosocial, and Physiological Responses to
Stress
Numerous studies, across both healthy and disease-based
populations, have explored the effects of meditation on
psychological and psychosocial outcomes. Most published
studies report some improvements in levels of perceived
stress, mood, anxiety, depression, quality of sleep, or overall
well-being39–45 (Table S1). A review by the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality restricted to randomized,
controlled trials with an active control concluded—with low
strength of evidence—that mindfulness meditation programs
show modest improvements in stress/distress and negative
affect.46
Few studies have focused on patients with CVD. In a study
of 60 patients recruited from a private cardiology clinic, those
randomized to 8 weeks of mindfulness-based stress reduc-
tion (primarily using meditation techniques) had significantly
lower perceived stress and anger47 than a comparison control
group. Similarly, a study of 59 elderly participants with stage I
hypertension randomized to Zen meditation (20 minutes
twice daily for 3 months) or a wait list found that meditation
significantly improved psychological facets of and overall
quality of life.48
A growing body of research has examined the mechanisms
by which meditation alters the physiological response to stress,
with salivary cortisol the most commonly studied biomarker
and a few exploring salivary amylase,49 proinflammatory
cytokines (ie, interleukin-6), or telomerase activity. Overall,
findings from these studies have been mixed, with some
demonstrating improvements in physiological parameters with
meditation and others finding no changes.39,43,44,50–56
Several recent studies have focused on the impact of
meditation on proteomic and genomic regulators of the
physiological stress response.51,57,58 Although unique gene
expression profiles have been noted with meditation, their
association with established physiological parameters is
unknown.59 One study of 40 patients reported that mindful-
ness-based stress reduction downregulated proinflammatory
nuclear factor kappa B gene expression profile compared to
wait-list control, with a trend—but no statistically significant
reduction—in C-reactive protein levels.57
Overall, many, though not all, studies have reported that
meditation is associated with improved psychological and
psychosocial
indices.
Differences
in
study
populations,
control of potential confounders, and type and length of
meditation evaluated may account for discrepant findings.
Furthermore, small sample sizes and lack of randomization
are common study limitations. Further study is needed on
how meditation influences physiological processes associ-
ated with stress.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
4
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Effects of Meditation on Blood Pressure
Few high-quality, randomized trials of meditation and lowering
of blood pressure have been published (Table S2). The efficacy
of mindfulness meditation for blood pressure reduction has
been evaluated in a few studies.48,60–62 The HARMONY
(Hypertension Analysis of Stress Reduction Using Mindfulness
Meditation and Yoga) trial assessed 24-hour ambulatory blood
pressure measurements in patients with stage I hypertension
randomized to an 8-week mindfulness-based stress reduction
program or wait-list control and found no benefit of medita-
tion.63 In contrast, in a pilot study of 83 predominantly
hypertensive blacks randomized to a mindful meditation
Table 2. Summary of Findings on Studies of Meditations and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction*
Topic
Findings
Neurophysiology and
neuroanatomy
• Neurophysiological and neuroanatomical studies suggest that meditation can have long-standing effects on brain
physiology and anatomy
• Studies generally are nonrandomized and involve modest numbers of participants, sometimes performed under the
direction of extremely experienced (>10 000 hours) meditators
• Different forms of meditation have different psychological and neurological effects, and thus the neurophysiological
and neuroanatomic findings of 1 type of meditation cannot be extrapolated to other forms of meditation
Psychological, psychosocial,
and physiological response
to stress
• Many, although not all, studies report that meditation is associated with improved psychological and psychosocial
indices
• Differences in populations, control of potential confounders, and type and length of meditation evaluated may
account for discrepant findings. Small sample sizes and lack of randomization are common study limitations
• Further study is needed on how meditation influences physiological processes associated with the stress response
Blood pressure
• Magnitude of reductions of systolic blood pressure varies widely
• Study limitations including the methods of blood pressure measurements and bias in data ascertainment, high
dropout rates, and different populations studied
Smoking and tobacco use
• Some randomized data show that mindful meditation instruction improves smoking cessation rates
Insulin resistance and
metabolic syndrome
• Limited data on the effects of meditation on insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome
Subclinical atherosclerosis
• A few suboptimal studies of meditation and lifestyle intervention suggest the potential for benefit on atherosclerosis
regression
• Studies limited by multimodality approach, attrition, and incomplete follow-up
• No firm conclusions can be drawn on the effects of meditation on atherosclerosis
Endothelial function
• Three studies showed no benefit of meditation on brachial reactivity in the overall cohorts, although 1 study
suggested a benefit in a subgroup of patients with coronary artery disease
• No conclusions can be drawn on the effects of meditation on endothelial function
Inducible myocardial ischemia
• Limited older studies suggest that meditation can lead to improvement in exercise duration and decreased
myocardial ischemia
• No contemporary studies have evaluated effects of meditation on myocardial blood flow or ischemia with advanced
imaging techniques
Primary prevention of CVD
• Two studies of short-term intervention report surprising mortality reductions, and thus these findings need to be
reproduced in larger, multicenter studies
• Overall, because of the limited evidence to date, no conclusions can be drawn as to the effectiveness of meditation
for the primary prevention of CVD
Secondary prevention of CVD
• Data on the potential benefits of meditation in patients with established coronary artery disease can best be
characterized as generally of modest quality and as suggesting, but not definitely establishing, benefit
• Because of generally limited follow-up time, there are more data on reduction of cardiac risk factors and
psychological indices than on hard end points (eg, death, myocardial infarction)
*Summaries of the individual studies, as well as their limitations, evaluated in this scientific statement are provided in Tables S1 through S9.
CVD indicates cardiovascular disease.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
5
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 program or control social support group, an 11/4 mm Hg
decrease in systolic/diastolic blood pressure was observed in
those randomized to 8 weeks of treatment and an analysis-
adjusted 22/17 mm Hg difference in blood pressure between
the 2 groups at follow-up.64 Of note, this trial had 100% data
ascertainment, over 80% compliance at each clinic visit, and
measured blood pressure with an unattended manual device (a
rigorous protocol with measurements 7–15 mm Hg lower than
typical office readings). Other mind-body interventions that
involve both a physical and mental component have been
associated with significant reductions in blood pressure,65–69
but the specific contribution of meditation and meditation-like
practices of inner focus and a concentration on the breath
cannot be determined.
The effects of Transcendental Meditation on blood pressure
have also been reported.70–73 A study of 298 university
students randomized to Transcendental Meditation or wait-list
control found at 3-month follow-up no significant changes in
systolic or diastolic blood pressure, although significant
reductions in blood pressure (5/3 mm Hg, respectively) did
occur in those at high risk of the development of hyperten-
sion.71 In a randomized study of stress reduction in 201 black
men and women with angiographically documented coronary
artery disease randomized to Transcendental Meditation or
health education, 5.4-year follow-up found a 4.9 mm Hg lower
systolic blood pressure, 1 of numerous secondary study end
points, in those randomized to Transcendental Meditation than
in those randomized to health education, primarily because of
an increase in blood pressure in the health education group.70
Numerous systematic reviews have been conducted on the
effects of meditation on blood pressure. One 2007 systematic
review assessed several methods of stress reduction in
patients with hypertension and found modest benefit (ie, 5/
3 mm Hg systolic/diastolic blood pressure reduction) with
Transcendental Meditation; other popular types of meditation
were not assessed.74 Numerous meta-analyses in a 2007
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality report on
meditation and health generally found modest to no signif-
icant benefit with different meditation techniques when
compared with active control groups (eg, health education),
though the report also stated that meta-analyses based on
low-quality studies and small numbers of hypertensive
participants showed that Transcendental Meditation and Zen
Buddhist meditation significantly reduced blood pressure.75 A
2013 American Heart Association scientific statement on
alternate approaches to lowering blood pressure concluded
that Transcendental Meditation modestly lowers blood pres-
sure and that its use may be considered.75 The writing group
also concluded at that time that there were insufficient high-
quality studies assessing the benefit of other forms of
meditative techniques to recommend them for blood pressure
lowering. A 2015 analysis of 12 randomized, clinical trials of
Transcendental Meditation involving a total of 996 predom-
inantly black patients with or without hypertension found a
mean reduction in blood pressure of 4/2 mm Hg (systolic/
diastolic) over the study duration of 2 to 60 months (mean
4 months) when compared with control participants.72 Ben-
efit in systolic blood pressure reduction seemed to persist up
to 12 months.70–73,76 Of note, the completion rate (percent-
age of patients who completed all training and post-test) in
these studies was a modest 63%.
The mechanism(s) whereby meditation lowers blood pres-
sure when it occurs has not been fully elucidated.77 Possibly,
the long-term neurophysiological changes that occur with
meditation35–37,78 may lead to autonomic nervous system–
mediated changes in blood pressure. One study of 15
participants with hypertension and chronic kidney disease
reported a decrease in muscle sympathetic nerve activity and
blood pressure during mindfulness meditation,79 but no such
long-term data exist. The impact of stress reduction on blood
pressure remains to be better defined.
Reported reductions of systolic blood pressure with
meditation vary widely. The heterogeneity in results reflects
the various study populations, study designs, data ascertain-
ment protocols, study duration, baseline blood pressure, and
blood pressure measurement techniques used. Limitations to
clinical interpretation include high dropout rates, bias in data
ascertainment, and lack of attention to statistical power,
control participants, and methods of blood pressure mea-
surements.46,80 The ability to generalize the findings is limited
by the lack of reproducibility of results.
Effects of Meditation on Smoking and
Tobacco Use
Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease
and deaths in the United States, accounting for >480 000
deaths every year, or 1 of every 5 deaths.81,82 Two thirds of
American adults want to quit smoking, and yet only �6%
achieve this goal annually.83 Several types of meditation have
been studied as interventions to facilitate smoking cessation
(Table S3). Small studies84–89 have shown that mindfulness
training, a form of meditation, increases abstinence rates
when compared with more traditional intervention programs.
In 1 study of volunteers wishing to reduce stress, half of
whom were smokers, who were randomized to either a 2-
week program of integrative body-mind technique—a form of
mindfulness meditation—or relaxation training, a 60% reduc-
tion in smoking was observed among those instructed in
integrative body-mind technique, with no reduction in those
instructed in relaxation training. In this study, resting-state
brain scans before and after intervention showed increased
activity in the anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortex—areas
of the brain that are related to self-control—for the
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
6
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 meditation group, but not the relaxation training group.90 A
meta-analysis of 4 randomized, controlled trials of mindful-
ness training involving a total of 474 patients found that it
was more effective than group counseling, with 25% of
mindfulness training participants remaining abstinent from
smoking for >4 months, compared with 14% of those
receiving more-traditional cessation instruction.91 One study
of Transcendental Meditation in 295 college students found
no significant reduction in cigarette smoking at 3-month
follow-up between those randomized to Transcendental
Meditation and those in a wait-list control group.92
Thus, some randomized data show that mindful meditation
instruction improves smoking cessation rates. Potential
mechanisms include management of cravings and decreasing
negative effect, which has been shown to be a potent stimulus
for drug-seeking behavior and smoking relapse. Meditation
may also affect smoking behavior through changes in urge
intensity87 and improved self-control.90
Effects of Meditation on Insulin Resistance
and Metabolic Syndrome
Metabolic syndrome, a cluster of conditions including hyper-
tension, dyslipidemia, elevated fasting blood glucose, and
abdominal obesity, is a risk factor for diabetes mellitus and
CVD.93–95 Data on the effects of meditation on insulin
resistance and metabolic syndrome are sparse (Table S4). In a
study of 103 patients with coronary artery disease randomized
to Transcendental Meditation or active control (health educa-
tion), Transcendental Meditation improved insulin resistance.96
A study of the effects of meditation, yoga, and a vegetarian diet
on parameters of metabolic syndrome97 was too confounded by
the multimodality approach to draw meaningful conclusions.
The relaxation response—the counterpart of the stress
response—can be evoked by meditation. In 1 novel study,98
20 minutes of listening to a relaxation response instructional CD
reducedexpressionofgeneslinkedtoinflammatoryresponseand
the stress-related pathway—mechanisms that contribute to
metabolic syndrome99,100—and enhanced expression of genes
associated with energy metabolism, mitochondrial function, and
insulin secretion. Changes in gene expression were more
pronounced in experienced practitioners of relaxation techniques
than in novices who had recently undergone 8 weeks of
relaxation response training. The clinical effects of these changes
in gene expression, if any, remain unknown.
A comprehensive review of metabolic syndrome and mind-
body therapies identified only 3 relevant clinical trials, 2 of
which are discussed above and the third of which involved
restorative yoga as the primary intervention.101 In summary,
data on the effects of meditation on insulin resistance and
metabolic syndrome are limited.
Effects of Meditation on Subclinical
Atherosclerosis
Limited evidence exists for the effects of meditation on
subclinical atherosclerosis (Table S5). Only 1 randomized,
controlled trial was identified that studied the effects of a
meditation intervention on atherosclerosis progression.102
In this study, carotid intimal thickness was assessed in
138 hypertensive blacks randomized to a Transcendental
Meditation
or
control
health
education
program
and
followed for a mean of 7 months. Attrition was high,
with 57% of participants not completing follow-up. Among
completers of the study, carotid intimal thickness regres-
sion
was
noted
in
the
meditation
group,
whereas
progression occurred in controls, with the difference
between the 2 groups being statistically significant. In
another
randomized
study,
57
healthy
adults
aged
≥65 years were randomized to 1 of 3 interventions: a
Transcendental Meditation program that also included
diet, exercise, and vitamin treatment; a diet/exercise/
vitamin arm without the meditation component; or a usual
care arm.103 At 1 year, the meditation intervention group
showed reduction in carotid intimal thickness that was
not observed in the other groups.
Other studies on subclinical atherosclerosis evaluated
more comprehensive multimodality lifestyle interventions
that generally included components of dietary changes,
exercise, and stress management (including components
of meditative practice).104–107 Study end points included
changes in coronary artery atherosclerosis as assessed by
quantitative coronary angiography104–106 and ankle-bra-
chial indices.107 Although these studies showed favorable
effects of lifestyle intervention on atherosclerosis regres-
sion, given the multimodality approach, it is difficult to
discern the effects of the meditation component alone.
Study result interpretation is also limited by attrition and
incomplete follow-up. In summary, although a few studies
of
meditation
and
lifestyle
intervention
suggest
the
potential for benefit on atherosclerosis progression, no
firm conclusions can be made on the effects of medita-
tion alone on atherosclerosis.
Effects of Meditation on Endothelial Function
Endothelial function can be indirectly assessed by evaluating
brachial artery endothelial vasomotor response. In a pilot
study of 41 participants (33 of whom completed the study),
a 6-week combined yoga and meditation intervention failed
to significantly improve endothelial function, although there
was improvement in the cohort of 10 patients with coronary
artery disease.108 In a trial of 103 patients with coronary
artery
disease
(84
of
whom
completed
follow-up)
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
7
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 randomized to 16 weeks of Transcendental Meditation or
control health education, meditation had no significant effect
on brachial artery reactivity testing.96 In a trial of 68 black
Americans with metabolic syndrome risk factors, consciously
resting meditation improved flow-mediated dilation at 12-
month follow-up, but compared with changes in the control
health-education group, this improvement was not signifi-
cantly different.109 Only 38 participants (56%) completed the
12-month follow-up.
Limitations of these studies variably include modest
sample size, relatively short durations of intervention,
high attrition rates, and incomplete follow-up (Table S6).
Given these factors, as well as the different patient
populations studied and variable findings in those with
established coronary artery disease, no definitive conclu-
sions on the effects of meditation on endothelial function
can be made.
Effects of Meditation on Inducible Myocardial
Ischemia
A paucity of studies has examined the effects of meditation on
inducible myocardial ischemia (Table S7). In a 1996 study of 21
participants with coronary artery disease, 7.6 months of
Transcendental Meditation led to significant increases in
exercise duration (15%) and maximal workload (12%) compared
with wait-listed controls, as well as lower rate-pressure products
at given workloads and significantly delayed onset of ST
depression.110 In a 1983 study of 46 patients with ischemic
heart disease that combined stress management (meditation
and stretching/relaxation exercises) and a vegan-based diet,
after 24 days those randomized to the lifestyle-intervention
group had a 44% increase in exercise duration, 55% increase in
total work, and improved exercise ejection fraction and regional
wall motion, whereas no significant changes occurred in those
randomized to the control group.111
No contemporary studies have evaluated the impact of
meditation on myocardial blood flow or ischemia with
techniques such as stress echocardiography, single-photon
emission computed tomography, cardiac positron emission
tomography, or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. Larger,
randomized, clinical studies that evaluate the impact of
meditation-based
interventions
on
inducible
myocardial
ischemia, ideally using more sophisticated modalities to
assess and quantify ischemia, are needed.
Meditation and Primary Prevention of CVD
Although studies have assessed the effect of meditation on
cardiovascular risk factors, recent Cochrane reviews112–115
have concluded that no properly conducted randomized,
controlled trials have assessed its role in the primary
prevention of cardiovascular mortality or nonfatal primary
end points. This is largely because the relevant studies are
small, with short-term follow-up and carried out in predom-
inantly healthy participants.
One study116 measured survival rate in 73 elderly partic-
ipants randomly assigned to 3 months of Transcendental
Meditation, mindfulness training, mental relaxation, or a no-
treatment control group. The survival rate after 3 years for the
Transcendental Meditation group was significantly better;
100% compared with 65% to 87% for other groups. In a second
study, mortality and cause of death were assessed from vital
statistics over 8 years of follow-up in 109 older black patients
who had participated in a hypertension study. Participants
were randomly assigned to 2 stress reduction approaches—
either Transcendental Meditation or progressive muscle
relaxation—or to a health education (ie, control) group for
3 months. The adjusted relative risk for CVD mortality was
significantly reduced by 81% in the Transcendental Meditation
group when compared with the control group.117 In both
studies, mortality was assessed 3 to 8 years after the
intervention period, so the results may not be attributed to
Transcendental Meditation. This and other methodological
issues raise concerns about the validity of their findings.
When patient data from the abovementioned 2 random-
ized, controlled trials were combined in a post-hoc analysis,8
the Transcendental Meditation group reportedly showed a
23% reduction in all-cause mortality compared with the
control patients, a 30% reduction in cardiovascular mortality,
and a nonstatistically significant 51% reduction in rate of
cancer mortality (Table S8). These studies of short-term
intervention applied to a limited number of participants report
surprising mortality reductions that are on par with, or greater
than, those observed in long-term intervention, large-scale,
primary prevention studies of cholesterol therapy118 and of
blood pressure reduction.119,120 Accordingly, these findings
need to be reproduced in larger, multicenter studies.
In summary, data regarding the effectiveness of meditation
for primary prevention of CVD are lacking, and because of the
limited evidence to date, no conclusions can be drawn as to
the effectiveness of meditation for the primary prevention of
CVD.
Meditation and Secondary Prevention of
CVD
Limited and limited-quality data are available from studies of
meditation for secondary prevention of CVD (Table S9). Such
studies, which generally have enrolled patients with stable
coronary artery disease, have variably reported reductions in
systolic blood pressure, insulin resistance, serum lipids,
clinical symptoms, and anxiety and stress.70,96,106,110,121–127
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
8
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Most, although not all, studies randomized patients to either
meditation or some type of “usual care.” These studies are
generally limited by modest sample size and limited duration
follow-up, and a few assessed multifactorial interventions that
combined meditation with other interventions (ie, yoga, diet).
A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized,
controlled trials of mind-body practices, including meditation
but other interventions as well, found that such interventions
were associated with improvements in physical and mental
quality of life, depression and anxiety, and systolic and
diastolic blood pressure, but rated the overall quality of the
studies as low.128
One commonly cited study involves 201 patients with
angiographically documented coronary artery disease random-
ized to Transcendental Meditation or health education.70 After a
mean of 5.4 years, the primary composite end point of all-cause
mortality, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke was
significantly lower in the meditation group (adjusted hazard
ratio, 0.52). Post-hoc analysis found greater benefit (hazard
ratio, 0.34) in those with high adherence. There was a
nonsignificant 24% reduction in the broader secondary com-
posite end point, which also included coronary revasculariza-
tion or hospitalization for cardiac causes. The study, though,
was conducted in 2 phases after a 1-year hiatus with58 patients
not participating in phase 2 of the study, and some concerns
about analysis of the data have been raised.129,130
Overall, data on the potential benefits of meditation in
patients with established coronary artery disease can best be
characterized as of modest quality and suggesting, but not
definitely
establishing,
benefit
in
secondary
prevention.
Because of the generally limited follow-up time, more data
on reduction of cardiac risk factors and psychological indices
(eg, stress, anxiety, and depression) exist than on hard end
points (eg, death or myocardial infarction).
Summary
Studies of meditation to date suggest a possible, though not
definitively established, benefit of meditation on cardiovascu-
lar risk reduction. A 2008 review of >400 trials of meditation
and health care rated the methodological quality of clinical
trials as poor, but noted that the quality of these trials had
significantly improved over time.80 Methodological issues in
research to date include modest study size, limited and often
incomplete follow-up, high dropout rates, lack of randomiza-
tion and/or appropriate control group, and unavoidable
patient nonblinded study design. As with many other novel
interventions, there is the possibility of publication bias
toward positive studies of the beneficial effects of medita-
tion.37,38 Many investigators who conducted studies of
meditation may have a strong belief in the benefits of
meditation and may be enthusiastic meditators themselves,37
thereby introducing the possibility of unintended bias. Many
studies of meditation techniques are performed by the same
groups of researchers, so there is a need for independent
verification of reported positive findings. Whereas these
studies are important in that they serve to suggest that
meditation may reduce cardiovascular risk, these limitations
prevent definitive conclusions regarding efficacy of meditation
on cardiovascular risk reduction.
Currently, the mainstay for primary and secondary preven-
tion of CVD is American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association guideline-directed interventions. However,
considering the generally low costs and risks associated with
meditation, meditation may be considered as a reasonable
adjunct to guideline-directed cardiovascular risk reduction by
those so interested in this lifestyle modification, with the
understanding that the benefits of such intervention remain to
be better established.
Further research on meditation and cardiovascular risk is
warranted. Such studies, to the degree possible, should utilize
randomized study design, be adequately powered to detect
clinically meaningful benefit, include long-term follow-up, and
be performed by those without inherent bias in outcome. One
such example is the ongoing Yoga-CaRe study for secondary
prevention of myocardial infarction.131 A summary of findings
on meditation and cardiovascular risk reduction and on
suggested methodology for future research are given in
Table 3.
Table 3. Summary of Findings and Suggestions on
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
• Studies of meditation suggest a possible benefit on
cardiovascular risk, although the overall quality and, in
some cases, quantity of study data is modest
• The mainstay for primary and secondary prevention of CVD
is ACC/AHA guideline-directed interventions
• Meditation may be considered as an adjunct to guideline-directed
cardiovascular risk reduction by those interested in this lifestyle
modification with the understanding that the benefits of
such intervention remain to be better established
• Further research on meditation and cardiovascular risk is
warranted. Such studies, to the degree possible, should meet the
following criteria:
– Utilize a randomized study design
– Blinded adjudication of end points
– Adequate power to meet the primary study outcome(s)
– Include long-term follow-up
– Have <20% dropout rate
– Have >85% follow-up data
– Be performed by investigators without inherent financial
or intellectual bias in outcome
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; CVD,
cardiovascular disease.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
9
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Disclosures
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other
Research
Support
Speakers’ Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert
Witness
Ownership
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Glenn N. Levine
Baylor College of
Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Richard A. Lange
Paul L. Foster School
of Medicine, Texas
Tech University
Health Science
Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
C. Noel Bairey-
Merz
Cedars-Sinai Heart
Institute
WISE HFpEF†;
RWISE†;
Microvascular*;
Normal
Control*;
FAMRI*
None
Pri-Med*; Practice
Point*; Annenberg
Center for Health
Science*; American
Diabetes Assn.*;
Expert Exchange*;
Japanese
Circulation
Society*; Kaiser*;
Mayo*; Pacific
Medical Center*;
University of
Colorado*; Valley
Health Grand
Rounds*; VBWG*;
UCSF*; University
of Utah*; Women’s
Health Congress*;
WomenHeart*;
New York
University*; San
Bernardino 18th
Cardiology
Symposium*;
UCSC*;
Northwestern*
None
None
NIH-CASE NIH
grant
review study
section*; NHLBI
Research
Triangle
Institute (RTA)†;
Sanofi*;
ACRWH (NIH
advisory
council)*
None
Richard J.
Davidson
University of
Wisconsin-Madison
None
None
None
None
None
Healthy Minds
Innovations,
Inc.*
None
Kenneth
Jamerson
University of
Michigan Health
System
NIDDK*; Bayer*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Puja K. Mehta
Emory Medicine/
Cardiology
General
Electric†;
Gilead
Sciences†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Erin D. Michos
Johns Hopkins
University School of
Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Keith Norris
University of
California, Los
Angeles
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Indranill Basu
Ray
Texas Heart
Institute/Baylor
College of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Continued
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
10
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing Group
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other
Research
Support
Speakers’ Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert
Witness
Ownership
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Karen L. Saban
Loyola University
Chicago Marcella
Niehoff School of
Nursing
VA (PI for VA
funded grant
examining
Mindfulness in
Women
Veterans)*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Tina Shah
Michael E. DeBakey
VA Medical Center
and Baylor College
of Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sidney C. Smith,
Jr
University of North
Carolina
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Richard Stein
New York University
School of Medicine
None
None
None
Martin
Clearwater and
Bell-Defendant
Law Firm*;
Angel and
Mccarthy-
Defendant Law
Firm*
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire,
which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month
period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the
entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research
Grant
Other Research
Support
Speakers’
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert
Witness
Ownership
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory
Board
Other
David S. Krantz
Uniformed Services
University of the Health
Sciences
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Seth S. Martin
Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine
None
Apple (Apple watches:
in-kind support)*
None
None
None
None
None
Michael D. Shapiro
Oregon Health and Science
University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Salim S. Virani
VA Medical Center Health
Services/Baylor College of
Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all
reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the
person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is
considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Significant.
References
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Heart disease facts. 2016.
Available
at:
http://www.cdc.gov/heartdisease/facts.htm.
Accessed
September 23, 2016.
2. Benjamin EJ, Blaha MJ, Chiuve SE, Cushman M, Das SR, Deo R, de
Ferranti SD, Floyd J, Fornage M, Gillespie C, Isasi CR, Jimenez MC, Jordan
LC, Judd SE, Lackland D, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth L, Liu S, Longenecker CT,
Mackey RH, Matsushita K, Mozaffarian D, Mussolino ME, Nasir K,
Neumar RW, Palaniappan L, Pandey DK, Thiagarajan RR, Reeves MJ,
Ritchey M, Rodriguez CJ, Roth GA, Rosamond WD, Sasson C, Towfighi A,
Tsao CW, Turner MB, Virani SS, Voeks JH, Willey JZ, Wilkins JT, Wu JHY,
Alger HM, Wong SS, Muntner P; on behalf of the American Heart
Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee.
Heart disease and stroke statistics—2017 update: a report from the
American Heart Association [published correction appears in Circulation.
2017;135:e646]. Circulation. 2017;135:e146–e603. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.
0000000000000485.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
11
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 3. Writing Committee, Smith SC Jr, Collins A, Ferrari R, Holmes DR Jr, Logstrup
S, McGhie DV, Ralston J, Sacco RL, Stam H, Taubert K, Wood DA, Zoghbi WA.
Our time: a call to save preventable death from cardiovascular disease (heart
disease and stroke). Glob Heart. 2012;7:297–305.
4. World Health Organization. Global health observatory data repository. Cardio-
vascular diseases, deaths per 100,000. Data by country. 2016. Available
at:
http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.A865CARDIOVASCULAR?
lang=en. Accessed September 23, 2016.
5. World Heart Federation. Deaths due to cardiovascular disease. 2016.
Available at: http://www.world-heart-federation.org/cardiovascular-health/
global-facts-map/. Accessed September 23, 2016.
6. Fryer CD, Chen TC, Li X. Prevalence of uncontrolled risk factors for
cardiovascular disease: United States, 1999–2010. 2012. NCHS Data Brief.
No 102. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db103.
pdf. Accessed September 23, 2016.
7. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics
Report, 201. 2014. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/
statsreport14/national-diabetes-report-web.pdf. Accessed September 23,
2016.
8. Heidenreich PA, Trogdon JG, Khavjou OA, Butler J, Dracup K, Ezekowitz MD,
Finkelstein EA, Hong Y, Johnston SC, Khera A, Lloyd-Jones DM, Nelson SA, Nichol
G, Orenstein D, Wilson PW, Woo YJ; on behalf of the American Heart Association
Advocacy Coordinating Committee; Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular
Radiology and Intervention; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Epidemi-
ology and Prevention; Council on Arteriosclerosis; Thrombosis and Vascular
Biology; Council on Cardiopulmonary; Critical Care; Perioperative and Resusci-
tation;CouncilonCardiovascularNursing;CouncilontheKidneyinCardiovascular
Disease; Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and Interdisciplinary
Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Forecasting the future of
cardiovasculardisease intheUnitedStates:apolicystatementfrom theAmerican
Heart Association. Circulation. 2011;123:933–944.
9. Use of complementary health approaches in the U.S. National Health
Interview Survey. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.
National Institute of Medicine. 2012. Available at: https://nccih.nih.gov/
research/statistics/NHIS/2012/mind-body/meditation. Accessed Septem-
ber 23, 2016.
10. Prasad K, Sharma V, Lackore K, Jenkins SM, Prasad A, Sood A. Use of
complementary
therapies
in
cardiovascular
disease.
Am
J
Cardiol.
2013;111:339–345.
11. Saydah SH, Eberhardt MS. Use of complementary and alternative medicine
among adults with chronic diseases: United States 2002. J Altern Comple-
ment Med. 2006;12:805–812.
12. Leung YW, Tamim H, Stewart DE, Arthur HM, Grace SL. The prevalence and
correlates of mind-body therapy practices in patients with acute coronary
syndrome. Complement Ther Med. 2008;16:254–261.
13. Yeh GY, Davis RB, Phillips RS. Use of complementary therapies in patients
with cardiovascular disease. Am J Cardiol. 2006;98:673–680.
14. Thompson PD, Buchner D, Pi~
na IL, Balady GJ, Williams MA, Marcus BH, Berra
K, Blair SN, Costa F, Franklin B, Fletcher GF, Gordon NF, Pate RR, Rodriguez
BL, Yancey AK, Wenger NK. Exercise and physical activity in the prevention
and treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a statement from
the Council on Clinical Cardiology (Subcommittee on Exercise, Rehabilitation,
and Prevention) and the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and
Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physical Activity). Circulation. 2003;107:
3109–3116.
15. Shiroma EJ, Lee IM. Physical activity and cardiovascular health: lessons
learned from epidemiological studies across age, gender, and race/ethnicity.
Circulation. 2010;122:743–752.
16. Gawler I, Bedson P. Meditation. An In-Depth Guide. New York, NY: Jeremy P.
Tarcher/Penguin; 2011.
17. Meditation. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.
National Institute of Health. 2016. Available at: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/
meditation?nav=govd. Accessed February 26, 2017.
18. Ricard M, Lutz A, Davidson RJ. Mind of the meditator. Sci Am. 2014;311:38–
45.
19. Goyal M, Singh S, Sibinga EM, Gould NF, Rowland-Seymour A, Sharma R,
Berger Z, Sleicher D, Maron DD, Shihab HM, Ranasinghe PD, Linn S, Saha S,
Bass EB, Haythornthwaite JA. Meditation programs for psychological stress
and well-being: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med.
2014;174:357–368.
20. Pantuso T. Meditation Types and Clinical Use. Chicago, IL: AHC Media; 2015.
21. Rakel D. Integrative Medicine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012.
22. Eisler M. 11 meditation styles and techniques explained. 2015. Available at:
https://mindfulminutes.com/meditation-styles-techniques-explained/.
Accessed February 26, 2017.
23. Wallace B. The Buddhist tradition of Samatha. J Conscious Stud. 1999;6:175–
187.
24. Types of meditation: extensive list of techniques. 2016. Available at:
http://mentalhealthdaily.com/2015/03/24/types-of-meditation-extensive-
list-of-techniques/. Accessed February 26, 2017.
25. Maharishi Foundation USA. What is TM? 2017. Available at: https://www.tm.
org/transcendental-meditation. Accessed February 26, 2017.
26. ZEN-BUDDHISM.NET. Zen Buddhism. 2017. Available at: http://www.zen-
buddhism.net/practice/zen-meditation.html. Accessed February 26, 2017.
27. Mitchell M. Dr. Herbert Benson’s Relaxation Response. 2017. Available at:
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/heart-and-soul-healing/201303/
dr-herbert-benson-s-relaxation-response. Accessed February 26, 2017.
28. Nazari J, Hebert M. Raja Yogis. 2017. Available at: http://www.rajayogis.net/
content/raja-yoga. Accessed February 26, 2017.
29. Lutz A, Slagter HA, Dunne JD, Davidson RJ. Attention regulation and
monitoring in meditation. Trends Cogn Sci. 2008;12:163–169.
30. Davidson RJ, Lutz A. Buddha’s brain: neuroplasticity and meditation. IEEE
Signal Process Mag. 2008;25:176–174.
31. Brewer JA, Worhunsky PD, Gray JR, Tang YY, Weber J, Kober H. Meditation
experience is associated with differences in default mode network activity
and connectivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011;108:20254–20259.
32. Weng HY, Fox AS, Shackman AJ, Stodola DE, Caldwell JZ, Olson MC, Rogers
GM, Davidson RJ. Compassion training alters altruism and neural responses
to suffering. Psychol Sci. 2013;24:1171–1180.
33. Klimecki OM, Leiberg S, Ricard M, Singer T. Differential pattern of functional
brain plasticity after compassion and empathy training. Soc Cogn Affect
Neurosci. 2014;9:873–879.
34. Davidson RJ, Kabat-Zinn J, Schumacher J, Rosenkranz M, Muller D, Santorelli
SF, Urbanowski F, Harrington A, Bonus K, Sheridan JF. Alterations in brain
and immune function produced by mindfulness meditation. Psychosom Med.
2003;65:564–570.
35. Lutz A, Greischar LL, Rawlings NB, Ricard M, Davidson RJ. Long-term
meditators self-induce high-amplitude gamma synchrony during mental
practice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004;101:16369–16373.
36. Vestergaard-Poulsen P, van Beek M, Skewes J, Bjarkam CR, Stubberup M,
Bertelsen J, Roepstorff A. Long-term meditation is associated with increased
gray matter density in the brain stem. Neuroreport. 2009;20:170–174.
37. Tang YY, Holzel BK, Posner MI. The neuroscience of mindfulness meditation.
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015;16:213–225.
38. Fox KC, Nijeboer S, Dixon ML, Floman JL, Ellamil M, Rumak SP, Sedlmeier P,
Christoff K. Is meditation associated with altered brain structure? A
systematic review and meta-analysis of morphometric neuroimaging in
meditation practitioners. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2014;43:48–73.
39. Carlson LE, Doll R, Stephen J, Faris P, Tamagawa R, Drysdale E, Speca M.
Randomized controlled trial of mindfulness-based cancer recovery versus
supportive expressive group therapy for distressed survivors of breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:3119–3126.
40. Tang YY, Ma Y, Wang J, Fan Y, Feng S, Lu Q, Yu Q, Sui D, Rothbart MK, Fan M,
Posner MI. Short-term meditation training improves attention and self-
regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007;104:17152–17156.
41. Black DS, O’Reilly GA, Olmstead R, Breen EC, Irwin MR. Mindfulness
meditation and improvement in sleep quality and daytime impairment among
older adults with sleep disturbances: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern
Med. 2015;175:494–501.
42. Klatt MD, Buckworth J, Malarkey WB. Effects of low-dose mindfulness-based
stress
reduction
(MBSR-ld)
on
working
adults.
Health
Educ
Behav.
2009;36:601–614.
43. Pace TW, Negi LT, Adame DD, Cole SP, Sivilli TI, Brown TD, Issa MJ, Raison
CL. Effect of compassion meditation on neuroendocrine, innate immune and
behavioral responses to psychosocial stress. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2009;34:87–98.
44. Cash E, Salmon P, Weissbecker I, Rebholz WN, Bayley-Veloso R, Zimmaro LA,
Floyd A, Dedert E, Sephton SE. Mindfulness meditation alleviates fibromyal-
gia symptoms in women: results of a randomized clinical trial. Ann Behav
Med. 2015;49:319–330.
45. Speca M, Carlson LE, Goodey E, Angen M. A randomized, wait-list controlled
clinical trial: the effect of a mindfulness meditation-based stress reduction
program on mood and symptoms of stress in cancer outpatients. Psychosom
Med. 2000;62:613–622.
46. Goyal M, Singh SS, Sibinga EM, Gould NF, Rowland-Seymour A, Sharma R,
Berger Z, Sleicher D, Maron DD, Shihab HM, Ranasinghe PD, Linn S, Saha S,
Bass EB, Haythornthwaite JA. Meditation programs for psychological stress
and well-being. Comparitive Effectiveness Review No. 124. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2014.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
12
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 47. Momeni J, Omidi A, Raygan F, Akbari H. The effects of mindfulness-based stress
reduction on cardiac patients’ blood pressure, perceived stress, and anger: a
single-blind randomized controlled trial. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2016;10:763–771.
48. de Fatima Rosas MM, Kozasa EH, Miranda RD, Monezi Andrade AL, Perrotti
TC, Leite JR. Decrease in blood pressure and improved psychological aspects
through meditation training in hypertensive older adults: a randomized
control study. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2015;15:1158–1164.
49. Lipschitz DL, Kuhn R, Kinney AY, Donaldson GW, Nakamura Y. Reduction in
salivary alpha-amylase levels following a mind-body intervention in cancer
survivors—an exploratory study. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013;38:1521–
1531.
50. Rosenkranz MA, Davidson RJ, Maccoon DG, Sheridan JF, Kalin NH, Lutz A. A
comparison of mindfulness-based stress reduction and an active control in
modulation of neurogenic inflammation. Brain Behav Immun. 2013;27:174–184.
51. Epel ES, Puterman E, Lin J, Blackburn EH, Lum PY, Beckmann ND, Zhu J, Lee
E, Gilbert A, Rissman RA, Tanzi RE, Schadt EE. Meditation and vacation
effects have an impact on disease-associated molecular phenotypes. Transl
Psychiatry. 2016;6:e880.
52. Jacobs TL, Epel ES, Lin J, Blackburn EH, Wolkowitz OM, Bridwell DA, Zanesco
AP, Aichele SR, Sahdra BK, MacLean KA, King BG, Shaver PR, Rosenberg EL,
Ferrer E, Wallace BA, Saron CD. Intensive meditation training, immune cell
telomerase activity, and psychological mediators. Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2011;36:664–681.
53. Carlson LE, Speca M, Faris P, Patel KD. One year pre-post intervention follow-
up of psychological, immune, endocrine and blood pressure outcomes of
mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) in breast and prostate cancer
outpatients. Brain Behav Immun. 2007;21:1038–1049.
54. Malarkey WB, Jarjoura D, Klatt M. Workplace based mindfulness practice and
inflammation: a randomized trial. Brain Behav Immun. 2013;27:145–154.
55. Witek-Janusek L, Albuquerque K, Chroniak KR, Chroniak C, Durazo-Arvizu R,
Mathews HL. Effect of mindfulness based stress reduction on immune
function, quality of life and coping in women newly diagnosed with early
stage breast cancer. Brain Behav Immun. 2008;22:969–981.
56. Jensen CG, Vangkilde S, Frokjaer V, Hasselbalch SG. Mindfulness training
affects
attention—or
is
it
attentional
effort?
J
Exp
Psychol
Gen.
2012;141:106–123.
57. Creswell JD, Irwin MR, Burklund LJ, Lieberman MD, Arevalo JM, Ma J, Breen
EC, Cole SW. Mindfulness-based stress reduction training reduces loneliness
and pro-inflammatory gene expression in older adults: a small randomized
controlled trial. Brain Behav Immun. 2012;26:1095–1101.
58. Qu S, Olafsrud SM, Meza-Zepeda LA, Saatcioglu F. Rapid gene expression
changes in peripheral blood lymphocytes upon practice of a comprehensive
yoga program. PLoS One. 2013;8:e61910.
59. Bower JE, Irwin MR. Mind-body therapies and control of inflammatory biology:
a descriptive review. Brain Behav Immun. 2016;51:1–11.
60. Manikonda JP, St€
ork S, T€
ogel S, Lobm€
uller A, Gr€
unberg I, Bedel S, Schardt F,
Angermann CE, Jahns R, Voelker W. Contemplative meditation reduces
ambulatory blood pressure and stress-induced hypertension: a randomized
pilot trial. J Hum Hypertens. 2008;22:138–140.
61. Hughes JW, Fresco DM, Myerscough R, van Dulmen MH, Carlson LE,
Josephson R. Randomized controlled trial of mindfulness-based stress
reduction for prehypertension. Psychosom Med. 2013;75:721–728.
62. Gregoski MJ, Barnes VA, Tingen MS, Harshfield GA, Treiber FA. Breathing
awareness meditation and LifeSkills Training programs influence upon
ambulatory blood pressure and sodium excretion among African American
adolescents. J Adolesc Health. 2011;48:59–64.
63. Blom K, Baker B, How M, Dai M, Irvine J, Abbey S, Abramson BL, Myers MG,
Kiss A, Perkins NJ, Tobe SW. Hypertension analysis of stress reduction using
mindfulness meditation and yoga: results from the HARMONY randomized
controlled trial. Am J Hypertens. 2014;27:122–129.
64. Palta P, Page G, Piferi RL, Gill JM, Hayat MJ, Connolly AB, Szanton SL.
Evaluation of a mindfulness-based intervention program to decrease blood
pressure in low-income African-American older adults. J Urban Health.
2012;89:308–316.
65. Chung SC, Brooks MM, Rai M, Balk JL, Rai S. Effect of Sahaja yoga meditation
on quality of life, anxiety, and blood pressure control. J Altern Complement
Med. 2012;18:589–596.
66. Yeh GY, Wang C, Wayne PM, Phillips RS. The effect of tai chi exercise on
blood pressure: a systematic review. Prev Cardiol. 2008;11:82–89.
67. Xiong X, Wang P, Li X, Zhang Y. Qigong for hypertension: a systematic review.
Medicine (Baltimore). 2015;94:e352.
68. Dhameja K, Singh S, Mustafa MD, Singh KP, Banerjee BD, Agarwal M, Ahmed
RS. Therapeutic effect of yoga in patients with hypertension with reference to
GST gene polymorphism. J Altern Complement Med. 2013;19:243–249.
69. Hagins M, States R, Selfe T, Innes K. Effectiveness of yoga for hypertension:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med.
2013;2013:649836.
70. Schneider RH, Grim CE, Rainforth MV, Kotchen T, Nidich SI, Gaylord-King C,
Salerno JW, Kotchen JM, Alexander CN. Stress reduction in the secondary
prevention of cardiovascular disease: randomized, controlled trial of
transcendental meditation and health education in Blacks. Circ Cardiovasc
Qual Outcomes. 2012;5:750–758.
71. Nidich SI, Rainforth MV, Haaga DA, Hagelin J, Salerno JW, Travis F, Tanner M,
Gaylord-King C, Grosswald S, Schneider RH. A randomized controlled trial on
effects of the Transcendental Meditation program on blood pressure,
psychological distress, and coping in young adults. Am J Hypertens.
2009;22:1326–1331.
72. Bai Z, Chang J, Chen C, Li P, Yang K, Chi I. Investigating the effect of
transcendental meditation on blood pressure: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Hum Hypertens. 2015;29:653–662.
73. Anderson JW, Liu C, Kryscio RJ. Blood pressure response to transcendental
meditation: a meta-analysis. Am J Hypertens. 2008;21:310–316.
74. Rainforth MV, Schneider RH, Nidich SI, Gaylord-King C, Salerno JW,
Anderson JW. Stress reduction programs in patients with elevated blood
pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Curr Hypertens Rep.
2007;9:520–528.
75. Ospina MB, Bond K, Karkhaneh M, Tjosvold L, Vandermeer B, Liang Y.
Meditation Practices for Health: State of the Research. Rockville, MD: Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality Evidence Report/Technology Assess-
ment Number 155; 2007.
76. Urushidani S, Kuriyama A. Transcendental meditation and blood pressure. J
Hum Hypertens. 2016;30:354.
77. Brook RD, Appel LJ, Rubenfire M, Ogedegbe G, Bisognano JD, Elliott WJ, Fuchs
FD, Hughes JW, Lackland DT, Staffileno BA, Townsend RR, Rajagopalan S; on
behalf of the American Heart Association Professional Education Committee
of the Council for High Blood Pressure Research, Council on Cardiovascular
and Stroke Nursing, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, and Council
on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism. Beyond medications and
diet: alternative approaches to lowering blood pressure: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2013;61:
1360–1383.
78. Xiong GL, Doraiswamy PM. Does meditation enhance cognition and brain
plasticity? Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009;1172:63–69.
79. Park J, Lyles RH, Bauer-Wu S. Mindfulness meditation lowers muscle
sympathetic nerve activity and blood pressure in African-American males
with chronic kidney disease. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol.
2014;307:R93–R101.
80. Ospina MB, Bond K, Karkhaneh M, Buscemi N, Dryden DM, Barnes V, Carlson
LE, Dusek JA, Shannahoff-Khalsa D. Clinical trials of meditation practices in
health
care:
characteristics
and
quality.
J
Altern
Complement
Med.
2008;14:1199–1213.
81. United States. Public Health Service. Office of the Surgeon General, United
States. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences
of Smoking: 50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. Rockville,
MD: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2014.
82. Jha P, Ramasundarahettige C, Landsman V, Rostron B, Thun M, Anderson RN,
McAfee T, Peto R. 21st-century hazards of smoking and benefits of cessation
in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:341–350.
83. Quitting smoking among adults—United States, 2001–2010. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60:1513–1519.
84. Davis JM, Fleming MF, Bonus KA, Baker TB. A pilot study on mindfulness
based stress reduction for smokers. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2007;7:2.
85. Davis JM, Mills DM, Stankevitz KA, Manley AR, Majeskie MR, Smith SS. Pilot
randomized trial on mindfulness training for smokers in young adult binge
drinkers. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013;13:215.
86. Davis JM, Goldberg SB, Anderson MC, Manley AR, Smith SS, Baker TB.
Randomized trial on mindfulness training for smokers targeted to a
disadvantaged population. Subst Use Misuse. 2014;49:571–585.
87. Davis JM, Manley AR, Goldberg SB, Smith SS, Jorenby DE. Randomized trial
comparing mindfulness training for smokers to a matched control. J Subst
Abuse Treat. 2014;47:213–221.
88. Brewer JA, Mallik S, Babuscio TA, Nich C, Johnson HE, Deleone CM, Minnix-
Cotton CA, Byrne SA, Kober H, Weinstein AJ, Carroll KM, Rounsaville B.
Mindfulness training for smoking cessation: results from a randomized
controlled trial. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2011;119:72–80.
89. Davis JM, Manley AR, Goldberg SB, Stankevitz KA, Smith SS. Mindfulness
training for smokers via web-based video instruction with phone support: a
prospective observational study. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2015;15:95.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
13
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 90. Tang YY, Tang R, Posner MI. Brief meditation training induces smoking
reduction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013;110:13971–13975.
91. Oikonomou MT, Arvanitis M, Sokolove RL. Mindfulness training for smoking
cessation: a meta-analysis of randomized-controlled trials. J Health Psychol.
2016 April 4. pii: 1359105316637667. [Epub ahead of print]
92. Haaga DA, Grosswald S, Gaylord-King C, Rainforth M, Tanner M, Travis F,
Nidich S, Schneider RH. Effects of the transcendental meditation program on
substance
use
among
university
students.
Cardiol
Res
Pract.
2011;2011:537101.
93. Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Daniels SR, Donato KA, Eckel RH, Franklin BA,
Gordon DJ, Krauss RM, Savage PJ, Smith SC Jr, Spertus JA, Costa F. Diagnosis
and management of the metabolic syndrome: an American Heart Associa-
tion/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute scientific statement. Circula-
tion. 2005;112:2735–2752.
94. Isomaa B, Almgren P, Tuomi T, Fors�
en B, Lahti K, Niss�
en M, Taskinen MR,
Groop L. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality associated with the
metabolic syndrome. Diabetes Care. 2001;24:683–689.
95. Reilly MP, Rader DJ. The metabolic syndrome: more than the sum of its parts?
Circulation. 2003;108:1546–1551.
96. Paul-Labrador M, Polk D, Dwyer JH, Velasquez I, Nidich S, Rainforth M,
Schneider R, Merz CN. Effects of a randomized controlled trial of transcen-
dental meditation on components of the metabolic syndrome in subjects with
coronary heart disease. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:1218–1224.
97. Khatri D, Mathur KC, Gahlot S, Jain S, Agrawal RP. Effects of yoga and
meditation on clinical and biochemical parameters of metabolic syndrome.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2007;78:e9–e10.
98. Bhasin MK, Dusek JA, Chang BH, Joseph MG, Denninger JW, Fricchione GL,
Benson H, Libermann TA. Relaxation response induces temporal transcrip-
tome changes in energy metabolism, insulin secretion and inflammatory
pathways. PLoS One. 2013;8:e62817.
99. Cai D, Liu T. Inflammatory cause of metabolic syndrome via brain stress and
NF-kappaB. Aging (Albany NY). 2012;4:98–115.
100. Hotamisligil
GS.
Inflammation
and
metabolic
disorders.
Nature.
2006;444:860–867.
101. Anderson J, Taylor AG. The metabolic syndrome and mind-body therapies: a
systematic review. J Nutr Metab. 2011;2011:276419.
102. Castillo-Richmond A, Schneider RH, Alexander CN, Cook R, Myers H, Nidich
S, Haney C, Rainforth M, Salerno J. Effects of stress reduction on carotid
atherosclerosis in hypertensive African Americans. Stroke. 2000;31:568–
573.
103. Fields JZ, Walton KG, Schneider RH, Nidich S, Pomerantz R, Suchdev P,
Castillo-Richmond A, Payne K, Clark ET, Rainforth M. Effect of a multimodality
natural medicine program on carotid atherosclerosis in older subjects: a pilot
trial of Maharishi Vedic Medicine. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:952–958.
104. Ornish D, Brown SE, Scherwitz LW, Billings JH, Armstrong WT, Ports TA,
McLanahan SM, Kirkeeide RL, Brand RJ, Gould KL. Can lifestyle changes reverse
coronary heart disease? The Lifestyle Heart Trial. Lancet. 1990;336:129–133.
105. Ornish D, Scherwitz LW, Billings JH, Brown SE, Gould KL, Merritt TA, Sparler S,
Armstrong WT, Ports TA, Kirkeeide RL, Hogeboom C, Brand RJ. Intensive
lifestyle
changes
for
reversal
of
coronary
heart
disease.
JAMA.
1998;280:2001–2007.
106. Gupta SK, Sawhney RC, Rai L, Chavan VD, Dani S, Arora RC, Selvamurthy W,
Chopra HK, Nanda NC. Regression of coronary atherosclerosis through
healthy lifestyle in coronary artery disease patients—Mount Abu Open Heart
Trial. Indian Heart J. 2011;63:461–469.
107. Zhang Y, Li N, Sun J, Su Q. Effects of combined traditional Chinese exercises
on blood pressure and arterial function of adult female hypertensive patients.
Res Sports Med. 2013;21:98–109.
108. Sivasankaran S, Pollard-Quintner S, Sachdeva R, Pugeda J, Hoq SM, Zarich
SW. The effect of a six-week program of yoga and meditation on brachial
artery reactivity: do psychosocial interventions affect vascular tone? Clin
Cardiol. 2006;29:393–398.
109. Vaccarino V, Kondwani KA, Kelley ME, Murrah NV, Boyd L, Ahmed Y, Meng
YX, Gibbons GH, Hooper WC, De Staercke C, Quyyumi AA. Effect of
meditation on endothelial function in Black Americans with metabolic
syndrome: a randomized trial. Psychosom Med. 2013;75:591–599.
110. Zamarra JW, Schneider RH, Besseghini I, Robinson DK, Salerno JW.
Usefulness of the transcendental meditation program in the treatment of
patients with coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol. 1996;77:867–870.
111. Ornish D, Scherwitz LW, Doody RS, Kesten D, McLanahan SM, Brown SE,
DePuey E, Sonnemaker R, Haynes C, Lester J, McAllister GK, Hall RJ, Burdine
JA, Gotto AM Jr. Effects of stress management training and dietary changes
in treating ischemic heart disease. JAMA. 1983;249:54–59.
112. Hartley L, Mavrodaris A, Flowers N, Ernst E, Rees K. Transcendental
meditation for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2014;(12):CD010359.
113. Hartley L, Flowers N, Lee MS, Ernst E, Rees K. Tai chi for primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;
(4):CD010366.
114. Hartley L, Lee MS, Kwong JS, Flowers N, Todkill D, Ernst E, Rees K. Qigong for
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2015;(6):CD010390.
115. Hartley L, Dyakova M, Holmes J, Clarke A, Lee MS, Ernst E, Rees K. Yoga for
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2014;(5):CD010072.
116. Alexander CN, Langer EJ, Newman RI, Chandler HM, Davies JL. Transcen-
dental meditation, mindfulness, and longevity: an experimental study with the
elderly. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1989;57:950–964.
117. Barnes J, Schneider RH, Alexander CN, Rainforth M, Staggers F, Salerno J.
Impact of transcendental meditation on mortality in older African Americans
with hypertension—eight-year follow-up. J Soc Behav Pers. 2005;17:201–
216.
118. Shepherd J, Cobbe SM, Ford I, Isles CG, Lorimer AR, MacFarlane PW,
McKillop JH, Packard CJ. Prevention of coronary heart disease with
pravastatin in men with hypercholesterolemia. West of Scotland Coronary
Prevention Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:1301–1307.
119. Major outcomes in high-risk hypertensive patients randomized to angioten-
sin-converting enzyme inhibitor or calcium channel blocker vs diuretic: the
Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial
(ALLHAT). JAMA. 2002;288:2981–2997.
120. Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, Whelton PK, Snyder JK, Sink KM, Rocco MV,
Reboussin DM, Rahman M, Oparil S, Lewis CE, Kimmel PL, Johnson KC, Goff
DC Jr, Fine LJ, Cutler JA, Cushman WC, Cheung AK, Ambrosius WT. A
randomized trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J
Med. 2015;373:2103–2116.
121. DuBroff R, Lad V, Murray-Krezan C. A prospective trial of ayurveda for
coronary heart disease: a pilot study. Altern Ther Health Med. 2015;21:52–
62.
122. Parswani MJ, Sharma MP, Iyengar S. Mindfulness-based stress reduction
program in coronary heart disease: a randomized control trial. Int J Yoga.
2013;6:111–117.
123. Nehra DK, Sharma NR, Kumar P, Nehra S. Efficacy of mindfulness-based
stress reduction (MBSR) program in reducing perceived stress and health
complaints in patients with coronary heart disease. Dysphrenia. 2014;5:19-
25.
124. Delui MH, Yari M, Khouyinezhad G, Amini M, Bayazi MH. Comparison of
cardiac rehabilitation programs combined with relaxation and meditation
techniques on reduction of depression and anxiety of cardiovascular
patients. Open Cardiovasc Med J. 2013;7:99–103.
125. Tac�
on AM, McComb J, Caldera Y, Randolph P. Mindfulness meditation,
anxiety reduction, and heart disease: a pilot study. Fam Community Health.
2003;26:25–33.
126. Robert McComb JJ, Tacon A, Randolph P, Caldera Y. A pilot study to
examine the effects of a mindfulness-based stress-reduction and relax-
ation program on levels of stress hormones, physical functioning, and
submaximal exercise responses. J Altern Complement Med. 2004;10:819–
827.
127. Sullivan MJ, Wood L, Terry J, Brantley J, Charles A, McGee V, Johnson D,
Krucoff MW, Rosenberg B, Bosworth HB, Adams K, Cuffe MS. The Support,
Education, and Research in Chronic Heart Failure Study (SEARCH): a
mindfulness-based psychoeducational intervention improves depression and
clinical symptoms in patients with chronic heart failure. Am Heart J.
2009;157:84–90.
128. Younge JO, Gotink RA, Baena CP, Roos-Hesselink JW, Hunink MG. Mind-body
practices for patients with cardiac disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2015;22:1385–1398.
129. Olex S, Newberg A, Figueredo VM. Meditation: should a cardiologist care? Int
J Cardiol. 2013;168:1805–1810.
130. Husten L. Archives decides at last minute not to publish scheduled
paper. Cardiobrief. Available at: http://cardiobrief.org/2011/06/27/
archivesdecidesatlastminutenottopublishascheduledpaper/. Accessed June
27, 2011.
131. Kinra S, Ebrahim S, Pocock SJ, Chaturvedi N, Roberts IG, Acharya AK, Hughes
AD. Development and evaluation of a yoga-based cardiac rehabilitation
programme (Yoga-CaRe) for secondary prevention of myocardial infarction.
2017.
Available
at:
http://gtr.rcuk.ac.uk/projects?ref=MR/J000175/1.
Accessed February 12, 2017.
DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.117.002218
Journal of the American Heart Association
14
Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction
Levine et al
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Supplementary Study Summary Table 1. Effects of meditation on psychological, psychosocial, and physiological response to stress 
 
Reference 
Study type, design, type of meditation, and population 
Primary Findings 
Comments 
Momeni, J, J 
Am Soc 
Hypertension, 
2016 (1) 
• Single-blind randomized controlled trial to that assessed 
blood pressure, perceived stress, and anger in 60 cardiac 
patients. 
• Experimental group (N=30) received 8 weeks MBSR training 
while those in control group received no psychological 
training (wait-listed control group N=30). 
• Systolic blood pressure, perceived 
stress, and ager were significantly 
improved (p<.01) in MBSR group as 
compared to control group. 
• Wait-listed control group 
• Small sample size 
Epel ES, Transl 
Psychiatry, 
2016 (2) 
• 97 Healthy women aged 30–60 entered into 1 week spa 
retreat: 30 regular meditators and 64 non meditators (31 
vacation only and 33 vacation + meditation) with post 
intervention 1 and 10 month follow up 
• Regular meditators had lower 
telomerase at baseline, and a 
significant increase in peripheral 
blood cell telomerase activity post 
treatment not observed in the other 
two groups. 
• Small sample size 
• Quasi controlled design 
(confounding of vacation 
with meditation) 
Koncz, R, J 
Occup Environ 
Med, 2016 (3) 
• University employees were randomized to a 6-week 
mindfulness-based stress release program (SRP) (N=50) or a 
waitlist control group (N=29) 
• SRP program is a structured program consisting of “practices 
using body, breath, and cognitive strategies and reflective 
activities to enhance professional and personal life” and is 
considered to be less intensive than MBSR 
• Perceived stress, workplace well-being, and engagement 
were measured at baseline and at completion of the 
program 
• Participants in SRP group had 
significant improvements in level of 
distress [-3.0 (95% CI -5.5 to -0.6 
p=0.02], university workplace 
wellbeing (2.5, 95% CI 0.5 to 4.5, 
p=0.02), and vigor (0.39, 95% CI 0.65 
to 3.07; p <0.01) at follow-up 
compared with baseline. No 
improvements were observed in 
control group. 
• Wait-listed control group 
• Attendance at sessions and 
practice time not assessed. 
Himashree, G., 
et al. Altern 
Ther Health 
Med 2016 (4) 
• 200 soldiers fully acclimatized to high altitude were 
randomized to routine physical training activities vs. 
comprehensive yoga package (physical asanas, pranayama, 
and meditation) 
• The yoga group had lower body fat 
%, respiratory rate, DBPs, and anxiety 
scores. They had higher EtCO2, 
forced vital capacity, forced 
expiratory volume in the first second 
(FEV1), and VO2Max. Also, the yoga 
group showed a significant reduction 
in serum cholesterol, LDL, and 
triglycerides. 
• Greatest benefit in those 
markedly hypertensive 
(SBP>160 mmHg) 
• No long-term f/u of 
durability of benefit 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Bharshankar JR, 
et al. Indian J 
Physiol 
Pharmacol. 
2015 (5) 4 
• Case control study of 50 Raja-yoga meditators practicing 
meditation for 5 years and 50 age matched non-meditators. 
• Mean resting HR, SBP and DBP were 
less in meditators. Galvanic Skin 
Response in meditators was 
significantly more (p < 0.001). Mean 
increase BP response to Hand Grip 
Test and Cold Pressor Test was 
significantly less in meditators than 
non-meditators (p < 0.001). 
• Small sample size 
• Results, suggest a shifting of 
the autonomic balance to 
parasympathetic side in 
Raja-yoga meditators, which 
suggests meditation combat 
the ill effects of stress. 
• Case control design 
Black, DS, JAMA 
Intern Med, 
2015 (6) 
• Randomized clinical trial 
• Participants (older adults with sleep disturbances) 
randomized to a standardized mindful awareness practice 
(MAP) intervention (N=24) or sleep hygiene education (SHE) 
intervention (N=25). 
• Each group met for 2 hours per week for 6 weeks with 
assigned homework 
• Participants in the MAP group had 
better improvements in sleep than 
the SHE group. 
• MAP group participants reported 
significant improvements relative to 
the SHE group in health outcomes, 
depressive symptoms, and levels of 
fatigue. 
• NF-kappa B concentrations 
significantly declined over time for 
both groups 
• Small sample size 
Bower, JE, 
Cancer, 2015 
(7) 
• Randomized trial that examined brief mindfulness-based 
intervention for younger female breast cancer 
survivors. 
• Women diagnosed with early stage breast cancer at or 
before age 50 who had completed cancer treatment were 
randomly assigned to a 6-week Mindful Awareness Practices 
(MAPS) intervention group (n = 39) or to a wait-list control 
group (n = 32). 
• Participants completed questionnaires before and after the 
intervention to assess stress and depressive symptoms 
(primary outcomes) as well as physical symptoms, cancer- 
related distress, and positive outcomes. Blood samples were 
collected to examine genomic and circulating markers of 
inflammation. Participants also completed questionnaires 
at 
a 3-month follow-up assessment. 
• Perceived stress reduced (p=.004) 
post intervention, 
• Decreased pro-inflammatory gene 
expression (P = .009) and 
inflammatory signaling (P = .001) at 
post intervention. 
• Intervention effects on psychological 
and behavioral measures not 
maintained at 3 month follow up. 
• Small sample size 
• Use of wait-list control 
group 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Schutte, NS, 
Psychoneuro- 
endocrinology, 
2016 (8) 
• Meta-analysis of 4 clinical trials (total N=191) examining 
telomerase activity in association with meditation. 
• A meta-analytic effect size of d = 0.46 
indicated that mindfulness 
meditation leads to increased 
telomerase activity in peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells. These 
results 
• Small number of studies 
included in analysis. 
Younge, JO, 
PLoS One, 2015 
(9) 
• Randomized controlled single-blind trial that examined the 
physiological and psychological outcomes of a 12 weeks 
online mindfulness training program (N=215) as compared 
to usual care (N=109) in patients with cardiac disease 
• Primary outcome was exercise capacity as measured by a 6 
min walk test. Other outcomes included heart rate, blood 
pressure, respiratory rate, NT-proBNP, subjective health 
status, perceived stress, psychological well-being, social 
support, and a composite end-point (all-cause mortality, 
heart failure, symptomatic arrhythmia, cardiac surgery, and 
percutaneous cardiac intervention). 
• Compared to the control group, 
participants in the online MBSR 
program demonstrated improved 
exercise capacity (effect size; 13.2, 
95% CI: -0.02-26.4, p=0.050). 
• Participants in the MBSR group also 
had a lower heart rate (effect size, 
beats per minute;-2.8, 95% CI: - 
5.4;0.2, p=0.033) 
• No control group 
Azam, MA, Int J 
Psychophysiolo 
gy, 2015 (10) 
• Stratified-randomized trial 
• Following a laboratory cognitive stressor, participants 
(maladaptive perfectionists – N=21, and controls – N=39, 
were randomly assigned to a 10 min audio instructed 
mindfulness meditation condition or a 10 min rest condition 
with audio description of mindfulness 
meditation. 
• Significant elevated heart rate 
variability (HRV) during meditation 
for controls but not for maladaptive 
perfectionists 
• Findings suggest that mindfulness 
meditation promotes relaxation 
following cognitive stress but the 
maladaptive perfectionist personality 
hinders relaxation possibly due to 
decreased cardiac vagal tone 
• Small sample size 
• 10 minutes of audiotaped 
guided meditation may not 
be sufficient 
de  Fátima 
Rosas Marchiori 
M, et al. 
Geriatric 
Gerontol Int., 
2015 (11) 
• 59 volunteers, aged ≥60 years with SBP 130-159 mmHg and 
DBP 85-99 mmHg, were randomly divided into meditation 
twice a day for 20 min for 3 months vs. control wait-list 
control 
• SBP, CRP and IL-6 levels did not differ 
between groups 
• QOL improved in psychological 
aspects (e.g. loneliness) and overall 
in the meditation group vs. control. 
• Small sample size 
• No change in physiologic 
parameters 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Carlson, LE, 
Cancer, 2015 
(12) 
• Randomized controlled trial comparing Mindfulness Based 
Cancer Recovery program to a supportive-expressive group. 
A one day stress management seminar was used for the 
control group. 
• 88 distressed cancer survivors with a diagnosis of stage 1 
or 
stage 11 cancer who completed treatment at least three 
months prior participated. 
• No differences were found in regards 
to telomere length between the 
mindfulness group and the 
supportive expressive group – but a 
trend was observed in the combined 
intervention group as compared to 
the control group (F(1,84) 3.82, 
p=.054, η2=.043. 
• No associations were found between 
changes in telomere length and 
changes in mood or stress scores 
over time. 
• Small sample size 
• Control group consisted 
only of a one-day stress 
management seminar. 
Cash, E. Ann 
Behav Med, 
2015 (13) 
• Randomized clinical trial of MBSR in women with 
fibromyalgia 
• Examined pain, perceived stress, sleep quality, fatigue, 
symptom severity, and salivary cortisol at baseline, post- 
program, and 2 month follow up 
• 51 women in treatment group, 40 in wait-list control 
group 
• MBSR significantly reduced perceived 
stress, symptom severity, and sleep 
disturbances with changes sustained 
at follow up. 
• MBSR did not change level of pain, 
physical functioning, or cortisol 
profile. 
• Frequency of home MBSR practice 
significantly associated with greater 
symptom relief. 
• Small sample size 
• High attrition rate 
(attendance fell over 33% 
from first session to fourth 
session) 
Creswell, JD, 
Psychoneuro- 
endocrinology, 
2014 (14) 
• Examined the extent to which a brief mindfulness training 
intervention buffered self-reported psychological and 
cortisol responses to TSST in 66 young adults. 
• Participants were randomly assigned to either a 3 day (25 
min per day) mindfulness meditation training or an analytic 
cognitive training control program. 
• Controlled for treatment expectancies. 
• Perceived stress was reduced in brief 
mindfulness training group however 
demonstrated increased cortisol 
reactivity to TSST as compared to the 
control group. 
• No changes were observed in systolic 
or diastolic blood pressure between 
the two groups. 
• Did not include a validated 
state mindfulness measure 
• Since blood pressures were 
not taken continuously 
during/after the TSST, BP 
reactivity may not have 
been fully captured. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Arch, JJ, 
Psychoneuro- 
endorinology, 
2014 (15) 
• Examined the extent to which a brief self-compassion 
training program (consisting of 10 min. recordings listened 
to daily for 3 days) moderated biophysiological responses to 
the Trier Social Stress Test in women (N=105). 
• Compared intervention to attention and no training control 
conditions 
• Collect salivary cortisol, salivary alpha amylase, and heart 
rate variability in response to Trier Social Stress Test 
• Brief self-compassion training 
attenuated sympathetic, cardiac 
parasympathetic, and subjective 
anxiety to Trier Social Stress test as 
compared to attention and no 
training control conditions 
• No differences were noted in cortisol 
response to the TSST between the 
self-compassion group and the 
control groups. 
• Small sample size 
Kaliman, P. 
Psychoneuro- 
endocrinology, 
2014 (16) 
• Examined impact of a day of intensive mindfulness 
meditation in experienced individuals (N=19) on expression 
of circadian, chromatin modulatory, and inflammatory genes 
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells compared to a control 
group (N=21) of individuals with no meditation experience 
who engaged in leisure activities in the same environment 
as intervention group 
• Blood was collected before and after the intervention for 
analysis of gene expression. In addition, individuals 
underwent the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST). 
• Core clock gene expression at 
baseline was similar between groups 
and their rhythmicity was not 
influenced by meditation. 
• Epigenetic regulatory enzymes and 
inflammatory genes were similar at 
baseline for the two groups. 
• Reduced expression of histone 
deacetylase genes (HDAC 2, 3, and 
9), alterations in global modification 
of histones (H4ac;H3Lme3), and 
decreased expression of pro- 
inflammatory genes (RIPK2 and COX2 
were found in meditators as 
compared to controls. 
• Faster recovery of cortisol levels after 
the TSST was associated with lower 
gene expression levels of RIPK2 and 
HDAC2 
• Small sample size 
Lengacher CA, 
Biol Res 
Nursing 2014 
(17) 
• 162 breast cancer survivors were randomized or wait-listed. 
6 week Mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) on 
telomere length (TL) and telomerase activity (TA) at 6 and 12 
weeks. 
• MBSR led to increased telomerase 
activity but no increase in telomere 
length 
• Small-modest sample size 
• Mindfulness-based stress 
reduction influenced 
telomerase activity in 
women with breast cancer 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Lipschitz, DL, 
Psychoneuro- 
endocrinology, 
2013 (18) 
• Randomized controlled trial of 57 cancer survivors with 
sleep disturbances. Participants were randomized into either 
a sleep hygiene education control group (n=18) or a Mind- 
Body Bridging program (N-19) or a Mindfulness Meditation 
program (N=20). 
• The Mind-Body Bridge program is a program that teaches 
individuals how to become aware of dysfunctional mind- 
body states. 
• Each intervention consisted of one session per week for 
three consecutive weeks. 
• Saliva cortisol and serum alpha amylase (sAA) measured at 
baseline and one week after last session. 
• Mean sAA upon awakening levels 
declined in the Mind-Body Bridge 
group as compared to the Sleep 
Hygiene Education group. 
• Self-reported sleep improved in all 
three interventions with largest 
improvements demonstrated in 
Mind-Body Bridge group. 
• Cortisol levels were not altered by 
any of the interventions. 
• Small sample size 
• Saliva samples were 
collected over the course of 
a single day rather than 2 or 
3 consecutive days 
• Intervention was only three 
weeks long. 
Malarkey, WB, 
Brain Behav 
Immun, 2013 
(19) 
• Controlled randomized of university faculty and staff at 
risk 
for cardiovascular disease (N=186) comparing a low dose 
Mindfulness Based Intervention group to an active control 
group receiving lifestyle education program. 
• Low dose Mindfulness Based Intervention (MBI-ld) consisted 
of one hour sessions for 8 consecutive weeks. Participants 
were expected to practice 20 minutes per day. 
• The low dose Mindfulness Based 
Intervention significantly improved 
mindfulness post intervention and 
this change was sustained 1 year 
later as compared to the education 
group. 
• No significant changes were found 
between groups in regards to 
cortisol, IL-5, or self-reported 
measures of stress, depression, or 
sleep quality. 
• Did not compare low dose 
MBSR to traditional MBSR 
program 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Bhasin MK, 
PLoS ONE 2013 
(20) 
• Prospective study of 26 healthy subjects who had no prior 
relaxation response training (RR; diaphragmatic 
breathing, 
mantra repetition, and mindfulness meditation)- eliciting 
experience (Novices, N1) who underwent 8 weeks of RR- 
eliciting training (Short-term Practitioners, 
N2). 
• Parallel cross-sectional study of another 26 healthy subjects 
with significant prior RR- practice (4– 20 years; Long-Term 
Practitioners, M) and compared with novices either before 
or after their 8-week RR training. 
• Both short-term and long-term 
practitioners evoked significant 
temporal gene expression changes 
with greater significance in the long- 
term practitioners as compared to 
novices. RR practice enhanced gene 
expression related to energy 
metabolism, mitochondrial function, 
insulin secretion and telomere 
maintenance, and reduced 
expression of genes linked to 
inflammatory response and stress- 
related pathways. 
• Small sample size 
• Quasi-experimental design 
• Relaxation response induces 
temporal transcriptome 
changes in energy 
metabolism, insulin 
secretion and inflammatory 
pathways. Some genes were 
modified only in long-term 
practitioners, whereas 
others were modified in 
both short- and long-term 
practitioners with a greater 
intensity in the latter. 
Rosenkranz, 
MA, Brain 
Behav Immun, 
2013 (21) 
• Randomized controlled trial (N=49) comparing 8 weeks 
MBSR program to Health Enhancement Program (HEP) 
• Psychological stress and endocrine response were measured 
before and after the Trier Social Stress Test. 
• Inflammation was measured by using capsaicin topical 
cream  to induce inflammation before and after 
intervention 
• Cortisol responses to TSST were 
similar between MBSR and HEP 
groups. 
• Reduction in psychological distress 
and symptoms in response to TSST 
were similar between groups 
• Those randomized to MBSR group 
had significantly smaller post-stress 
inflammatory response as compare 
to HEP. 
• Generalizability to 
populations with chronic 
illness 
• Unable to determine 
interaction between stress 
and inflammation because, 
due to potential participant 
burden, stress condition was 
not employed in the 
absence of inflammation 
and an inflammation 
condition was not tested in 
the absence of stress. 
Qu S, PLoS ONE 
2013 (22) 
• Ten health adults did two courses of 4 consecutive days of a 
comprehensive yoga program, at the same time of the day 
(6.30 am – 8.30 am) or yoga and related practices or nature 
walk with relaxing music. 
• Gene expression changes were noted 
as early as 2 hours. 97 unique genes 
were affected by yoga and related 
practices vs. 24 by the control 
regimen. 36% of the control group 
genes were also influenced by the 
yoga regimen, suggesting overlap in 
effect on biological processes. 
• Small sample size 
• Intervention is poorly 
described 
• Rapid gene expression 
changes in peripheral blood 
lymphocytes upon practice 
of a comprehensive yoga 
program 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Nyklicek, L, 
Health Psychol, 
2013 (23) 
• 88 community-dwelling volunteers reporting elevated levels 
of perceived stress were randomly assigned to a MBSR 
program or waitlist control group. 
• Participants underwent a social stressor consisting of mental 
math and making a speech before and after the 
intervention. 
• Measurements before, during and after the social stressor 
included heart rate variability, blood pressure, and 
salivary 
cortisol. 
• Controlling for age, body mass index, 
and beta blockers, participants in the 
MBSR group demonstrated larger 
decreases in systolic blood pressure, 
diastolic blood pressure. 
• No effect was obtained for other 
physiological measures. 
• Absence of critical 
committee during TSST 
could have reduced cortisol 
response to stressor. 
• Recovery period after social 
stressor was only 10 
minutes which may have 
limited the ability to capture 
changes during recovery. 
Carlson, J Clin 
Oncol, 2013 
(12) 
• Randomized controlled trial to compare mindfulness –based 
cancer recovery (MBCR) program to supportive-expressive 
group therapy (SET) in distressed survivors of stage 1 to III 
breast cancer (N=271) 
• 1-day stress management class was used as a control 
condition 
• Measures (mood, diurnal salivary cortisol, stress, quality of 
life, and social support) were collected at baseline and 
after 
the intervention by evaluators blinded to the study 
condition. 
• Cortisol slopes were maintained in 
MBCR (p=.011) and SET group 
(p=.002) participants in comparison 
to those in the control group whose 
cortisol slopes became flatter. 
• Stress symptoms were improved in 
MBCR group compared to SET 
(p=.009) and control (p=.024) groups. 
• Those participating in the MBCR 
group demonstrated greater 
improvements in quality of life 
compared to the control group 
(p=.005) and social support 
compared to those in the SET group 
(p=.012). 
• Only breast cancer patients 
in study –findings may not 
be generalizable. 
• High attrition (34.5% in 
MBCR group). 
Jacobs, TL, 
Health Psychol, 
2013 (24) 
• Observational study examining self-reported mindfulness 
and evening cortisol at the beginning and after a 3 month 
Shamatha meditation retreat (N=57) 
• The group met 2×/day for 1-hr sessions to engage in 
guided 
meditations and dialogue but primarily practiced solitary 
meditation for much of the day (M = 6.3 hr/day, SD = 1.34). 
• Mindfulness increased from pre- 
retreat (M = 5.16, SD = .77) to post- 
retreat(M= 5.76, SD= .72), F(1, 56) = 
36.20, p= .001 
• Cortisol levels did not change 
• Mindfulness was inversely related to 
cortisol levels both pre and post 
retreat. 
• To allow for acclimatization, 
cortisol measures were 
taken 2 weeks after arrival 
to the retreat site, which 
meant that participants had 
already been meditating for 
up to 9 days before the 
initial cortisol measure was 
obtained 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Jensen, J Exp 
Psychol Gen, 
2012 (25) 
• Blinded design - 48 young, healthy meditation novices were 
randomly assigned to MBSR, non-MBSR, or inactive control 
group. 
• At posttest, those in the inactive control group were 
randomly split into incentive and non-incentive controls 
• Attention, self-report of mindfulness, perceived stress, and 
salivary cortisol were measured at pre and post 
intervention. 
• Attentional effects of MBSR, non- 
MBSR, and the financial incentive 
were comparable or significantly 
larger in the incentive group. 
• Selective attention improved 
significantly more in the MBSR group 
than non-MBSR and inactive control 
group. F(6, 84)=2.30,p=.052. 
• Conscious perception and visual 
working memory capacity were only 
improved in the MBSR group F(1, 
22)= 7.31, p=.05) 
• MBSR participants had significant 
reduction of perceived stress (p=.04) 
and improvement in salivary cortisol 
levels (p<.05). 
• Small sample size 
• Use of inactive control 
group 
Creswell JD, 
Brain Behav 
Immun 2012 
(14) 
• 40 healthy older adults (mean age 65 years) in a 8 week 
randomized controlled trial, Mindfulness-Based Stress 
Reduction (MBSR) program vs. wait-list control 
• MBSR downregulated NF-kB gene 
expression profile & a trend to 
reduce C Reactive Protein 
• Small sample size 
• MBSR training reduced 
loneliness and 
proinflammatory gene 
expression in older adults 
Matousek, RH, 
Complement 
Ther Clin Pract 
2011 (26) 
• 33 women who had completed treatment for breast cancer 
participated in the study’ 
• MBSR group met weekly for 2.5 hours for 8 consecutive 
weeks 
• Cortisol Awakening Response (CAR) was assessed at three 
days prior to the MBSR program and three days after. 
• Depressive symptoms, perceived stress, and medical 
symptoms were measured pre and post intervention. 
• Cortisol levels demonstrated a 
prolonged increase after awakening 
at the post MBSR assessment. This 
was accompanied by significant 
improvements in self-reported stress, 
depressive symptoms, and medical 
symptoms. 
• Small sample size 
• No control or comparison 
group 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Jacobs TL, 
Psychoneuro- 
endocrinology 
2011; 36: 664– 
681 (27) (27) 
• 3-month meditation retreat (concentrative meditation 
techniques and complementary practices used to cultivate 
benevolent states of mind: 30 active and 30 matched 
waitlist) on telomerase activity and two measures of stress: 
Perceived Control and Neuroticism 
• Telomerase activity was significantly 
greater in retreat participants than in 
controls at the end of the retreat 
• Retreat group: increases in Perceived 
Control, decreases in Neuroticism, 
and increases in both Mindfulness 
and Purpose in Life were greater in 
the 
• Intensive meditation 
training, immune cell 
telomerase activity, and 
psychological mediators 
• Small sample size but 
lengthy intervention with 
control. 
Klatt, MD, 
Health Educ 
Behav, 2009 
(28) 
• University employees and staff randomized to a low 
dose 
MBSR program (N=24 or wait list control group 
(N=24). 
• Low dose MBSR program consisted of 1 hour weekly 
sessions for 6 consecutive weeks with 20 minutes of daily 
practice. 
• Perceived stress, sleep quality and mindfulness assessed at 
baseline and at end of 6 weeks intervention. 
• Salivary cortisol was collected three times a day for 2 
consecutive days every week for the duration of the 
intervention. 
• Participants in the low dose MBSR 
group had significant reduction of 
perceived stress (p=.0025) and 
increase in mindfulness (p=.0149). 
• No changes in average daily salivary 
cortisol levels over time for 
participants in both groups and no 
differences from the pretest to the 
posttest were found. 
• Small sample size 
• Psychological measures (i.e. 
perceived stress) only 
measured at baseline and 
end of intervention. 
• Wait list control group 
Pace, TW, 
Psychoneuro- 
endocrinology, 
2009 (29) 
• Examined the effect of compassion meditation on innate 
immune, neuroendocrine, and behavioral responses to 
psychosocial stress and examined the degree to which 
meditation practice influenced stress reactivity in 61 healthy 
adults randomized to 6 weeks of training in compassion 
meditation (N=33) or in a health discussion control group 
(N=28). 
• Response to TSST was measured by repeated measures of 
interleukin -6 (IL-6), cortisol and total distress scores on the 
Profile of Mood States (POMS). 
• No main effect of group assignment 
on TSST responses was found for IL- 
6, cortisol, or POMS scores. 
• Increase meditation practice was 
correlated with decreased TSST- 
induced IL-6 (p=.0008) and POMS 
distress scores (p=.014). 
• Small sample size 
• Did not perform TSST prior 
to intervention – may be 
possible that individuals 
who had reduced 
inflammatory response to 
social stress may have been 
more willing or able to 
engage in meditation 
practice. 
• Those randomized to the 
meditation group may have 
had higher expectations of 
outcomes than those 
randomized to the control 
group. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Witek-Janusek, 
Brain Behav 
Immun, 2008 
(30) 
• Non randomized controlled design to evaluate the effect of 
MBSR on immune function, quality of life, and coping in 
women recently diagnosed with breast cancer 
• Participants self-selected into the MBSR group (N=44) or 
control group (usual care) (N=31). 
• Data was collected from a cancer free group of women 
(N=30) for comparison of immune measures. 
• Over time, women in MBSR group re- 
established NKCA and cytokine 
production levels while women in the 
usual care group demonstrated 
continued reductions in NKCA and 
IFN-gamma. IL4, IL-6, and IL-10 
increased. 
• Women in MBSR group had reduced 
cortisol levels and improved QOL and 
coping effectiveness compared to 
those in the usual care group. 
• Small sample size 
• Non-randomization of 
participants 
Carlson, LE, 
Brain Behav 
Immun, 2007 
(31) 
• 49 women with breast cancer and 10 men with prostate 
cancer were enrolled in an 8 weeks MBSR program. 
• Health behaviors, quality of life, mood, stress, salivary 
cortisol levels, immune cell counts, intracellular cytokine 
production, blood pressure and heart rate were assessed at 
baseline, post-intervention, and 6 and 12 months post 
intervention. 
• Symptoms and stress were 
significantly improved after the 
intervention and improvements were 
maintained at 12 months post 
intervention. 
• Cortisol and proinflammatory 
cytokines decreased over follow up 
period 
• Blood pressure significantly 
decreased from baseline to post 
intervention. 
• No control or comparison 
group 
• Multiple statistical 
comparisons 
Tang, YY, Proc 
Natl Acad Sci 
USA, 2007 (32) 
• Randomly assigned undergraduate Chinese students to 5 
days of meditation practice with integrative body –mind 
training (20 minutes per day) (N=40) or 5 days of relaxation 
training (20 minutes per day) (N=40). 
• Those in meditation practice group 
demonstrated improved attention 
(p<.01), lower anxiety (p<.01), 
depression (p<.05), anger (p<.05), 
and fatigue (p<.01). 
• Cortisol response to 3 min of mental 
arithmetic was significantly lower in 
the meditation group then the 
relaxation group (p<.01) after 20 
minutes of practice. 
• Small sample size 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Jain, S. Annals 
of Behavioral 
Medicine, 2007 
(33) 
• Randomized controlled trial examining the effects of a 1- 
month mindfulness meditation to a somatic relaxation 
training to a control group in 83 students. 
• Both meditation and relaxation 
groups demonstrated improvements 
in mood and decreases in distress 
when controlling for social 
desirability as compared to the 
control group (p>.05). 
• Meditation group demonstrated 
significant pre-post decreases in 
distractive and ruminative thoughts 
compared to control group (p<.04). 
• Small sample size 
Robert 
MacComb, JJ, J 
Altern 
Complement 
Med, 2004 (34) 
• Women with documented histories of cardiovascular 
disease were randomly assigned to a MBSR group (N=9) or 
control group (N=9). 
• Pre-post hormonal measures and physical functioning 
were 
collected 
• Submaximal exercise responses were measured after the 8 
weeks intervention. 
• No significant main effects or 
interaction for resting levels of stress 
hormones or physical functioning, or 
submaximal exercise responses 
• Significant differences in breathing 
patterns (p<.01). 
• Small sample size 
Speca, M. 
Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 2000 
(35) 
• 90 outpatient cancer patients were randomized to a weekly 
meditation group lasting 1.5 hours or 7 weeks with home 
meditation practice or a wait-list control group. 
• Participants completed the Profile of Mood States and the 
Symptoms of Stress Inventory before and after the 
intervention 
• Participants in meditation group 
reported significantly lower total 
mood disturbance and fewer overall 
symptoms of stress (p<.05). 
• Wait list control group 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Supplementary Study Summary Table 2. Effects of meditation on blood pressure 
 
Reference 
Study type, design, type of meditation, and population 
Primary Findings 
Comments 
Bai Z, J Human 
Hypertension, 
2015 
• MA of 12 RTC’s of TM versus control for effect on blood 
pressure 
• Total 996 patients 
• TM improved BP 4.26/2.33 mmHg 
when compared to control P<.05 
• The completion rate was 
<75% in 6 of 11 studies. 
Dropouts might have 
enhanced tendency to favor 
TM 
• Only one study reported on 
all primary and secondary 
outcomes with intention-to- 
treat analysis, 
• The efficacy of TM on BP 
tended to decrease with the 
study durations 
de  Fátima 
Rosas Marchiori 
M, Geriatr 
Gerontol Int., 
2015 
• RCT of twice-daily meditation for 20 min for 3 months vs. 
wait-list control 
• 59 volunteers, aged ≥60 years with SBP 130-159 mmHg and 
DBP 85-99 mmHg 
• At one month SBP was lower in 
meditation group but at 3 months BP 
did not differ 
• Small sample size 
• No change in physiologic 
parameters at end of study 
Blom, Am J 
Hypertension, 
2014 
• RTC of 8 weeks of mindfulness meditation on 24 hour BP 
control 
• 101 subjects (38% male) 
• Decrease in 24 hour BP of 0.4 mmHg 
in both treatment and control (wait 
list group) 
• No significant between group 
reductions in blood pressure 
 
Hughes JW, 
Psychosomatic 
medicine. 2013 
• RCT of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) vs 
progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) over 8 weeks 
• 56 pre-hypertensive adults (50.3 years of age, on no BP 
meds). Clinic BP was the primary outcome. 
• In an intention to treat, clinic SBP fell 
4.8 mmHg with MBSR vs 0.7 mmHg 
with PMR (P=0.016) 
• Small sample size 
• 
Schneider RH, 
Circ Cardiovasc 
Qual 
Outcomes. 
2012 
• RCT 201 adults with coronary artery disease treated with a 
TM program or health education 
• Systolic blood pressure fell 4.9 mmHg 
in TM vs. control (P=0.01) 
• Blood pressure reduction 
was a secondary outcome 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Palta P, J Urban 
Health, 2012 
• 8 week RTC on mindfulness meditation versus social support 
on BP control 
• 12 intervention and 8 control subjects 
• there was a 11/4 mmHg decrease in 
systolic/diastolic blood pressure in 
those randomized to 8 weeks of 
treatment 
• there was a analysis adjusted 
significant 22/17 mmHg difference in 
blood pressure between the two 
groups at follow-up 
• Small number of patients 
studied 
Gregoski MJ, et 
al. J Adolesc 
Health. 2011 
• Randomized trial - breathing awareness meditation (BAM), 
Botvin Life Skills Training (LST), and health education control 
(HEC) 
• Study population consisted of 166 normotensive African 
American adolescents 
• BAM had greatest reduction in SBP 
and SBP, DBP and HR over the 24- 
hour period, overnight and during 
school hours. (Bonferroni adjusted, p 
<0.05) 
 
Nidich SI, Am J 
Hypertens. 
2009 
• Randomized trial in 298 university students treated with a 
Transcendental Meditation program or wait-list 
control. 
• 3 month intervention 
• Overall no difference in SBP & DBP 
between groups. 
• In hypertension risk subgroup 
(n=112), SBP fell 5 mmHg with TM 
compared to increased 1.3 mmHg for 
control (P= 0.014) 
• Hypertension risk subgroup 
was a secondary analysis 
Anderson, JV, 
Am J Cardiol, 
2008 
• MA of RTC of TM that randomly assigned individuals to 
different target BP levels 
• Transcendental Meditation, 
compared to control, was associated 
with the following changes: -4.7 mm 
Hg (95% confidence interval (CI), -7.4 
to -1.9 mm Hg) and -3.2 mm Hg (95% 
CI, -5.4 to -1.3 mm Hg) 
Study designs and BP 
methods of blood pressure 
measurement, as well as 
dropout rates, limit the 
extrapolation of results 
Manikonda JP, 
J Hum 
Hypertens. 
2008 
• 8 week pilot study of either contemplative meditation 
combined with breathing techniques (CMBT) or no 
intervention in this 
• observer-blind design 
• SBP after 8 weeks of meditation fell 
15 mm Hg (vs 3 mm Hg in controls 
(P<0.0001) 
• Small sample size 
• Short duration 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Rainforth MV, 
Curr Hypertens 
Rep, 2007 
• Systematic review and MA of stress reduction therapies 
• Seventeen trials of 960 participants with elevated BP 
• Reductions in blood pressure with 
Transcendental Meditation were 
5.0/2.8 mmHg (systolic/diastolic); 
p=0.002 (systolic) and p=0.02 
(diastolic 
• No significant reductions in blood 
pressure with biofeedback, 
relaxation-assisted biofeedback, 
progressive muscle relaxation, and 
stress management training. 
• program, −5.0/−2.8 mm Hg (P = 
0.002/0.02 
• Review did not study other 
forms of meditation 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Supplementary Study Summary Table 3.  Effects of meditation on smoking and tobacco use 
 
Reference 
Study type, design, type of meditation, and population 
Primary Findings 
Comments 
Oikonomou, 
Journal of 
health 
Psychology, 
2016 (36) 
• Meta-analysis of 4 randomized controlled trials 
• Studies between 2011-2014, included 474 patients 
• Included studies examined smoking abstinence in short (4–6 
weeks) and long term (17–24 weeks) comparing mindfulness 
training for smokers to a control group 
• 25.2% of participants in the 
mindfulness group remained 
abstinent in the long term (17-24 
weeks) compared to 13.6% of those 
who received usual care therapy (RR: 
1.88; 95% confidence interval, 1.04- 
3.40) 
• No significant differences 
were found in the short 
term (4-6 weeks) (RR: 1.52; 
95% CI, 0.95–2.45) 
• Small number of studies 
included in the meta- 
analysis (4), of which 3 are 
conducted by the same 
author 
Ruscio, Nicotine 
& Tobacco 
Research, 2016 
(37) 
• Randomized controlled trial of a brief mindfulness practice 
(Brief-MP) intervention on self-reported smoking behavior 
delivered to smokers on a Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) in 
the field 
• Participants carried a PDA for 2 weeks and were instructed 
to initiate 20 minutes of meditation (or control) training on 
the PDA daily (n=24 (MP) vs. n=20 (control)) 
• Brief-MP (vs. Control) reduced 
overall negative effect, reduced 
craving immediately post-meditation 
and reduced cigarettes smoked per 
day over time 
• Small sample size 
• 27% of the participants did 
not complete the study (12 
of 44) 
• The study advertisements 
mentioned meditation, 
which could have appealed 
to individuals who were 
more educated, more 
interested in meditation, or 
more motivated to quit 
smoking, and reduces the 
generalizability of the 
findings 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Davis JM, 
 
BMC 
Complement 
Altern Med, 
2015 (38) 
• Prospective observational study 
• Participants (n=26) were asked to watch eight classes of 
web-based video instruction describing mindfulness 
skills 
and how to use these skills to overcome various core 
challenges in tobacco dependence 
• Participants received eight weekly phone calls from a 
smoking cessation coach who provided general support and 
answered questions about the videos 
• 7-day point prevalence smoking 
abstinence at 4 and 6-months post- 
quit of 23.1% and 15.4% respectively 
• Participants showed a significant pre- 
to post-intervention increase in 
mindfulness as measured by the Five- 
Factor Mindfulness Questionnaire 
• Participants also demonstrated a 
significant pre- to post-intervention 
decrease in the Anxiety Sub-scale of 
the Depression Anxiety and Stress 
Scale 
• Small sample size 
• Lack of control group 
• Possible selection bias as 
participants were required 
to have internet access 
Davis JM, 
J Subst 
Abuse Treat, 
2014 (39) 
• Randomized controlled trial comparing mindfulness training 
to a matched control based on the American Lung 
Association's Freedom From Smoking program 
• 135 low socioeconomic status smokers were randomized to 
Mindfulness Training for Smokers (MTS) or Freedom from 
smoking-enhanced (FFS-E) 
• Participants in the MT and FFS-E groups received 24 hours of 
instruction in each group 
• Intent-to-treat analysis of 7-day point 
prevalence abstinence between two 
groups was almost identical at 4 
weeks (MTS = 35.3%; FFS-E = 34.3%; 
p = 1.00, OR = 1.04, CI = 0.51-2.19) 
• At 24 weeks, MTS compared to FFS-E 
showed higher numerical abstinence 
rates (MTS = 25.0%; FFS-E = 17.9%; p 
= 0.35, OR = 1.53, CI = 0.67-3.51), but 
failed to reach statistical significance 
• Mindfulness training was associated 
with decreased urges, increased 
mindfulness, and decreased stress 
and experiential avoidance 
• Participants were not 
blinded to their respective 
treatments 
• Intervention attrition was 
32.4% in the MTS group and 
26.9% in the FFS-E group 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Davis JM, Subst 
Use 
Misuse,2014 
(40) 
• Randomized trial comparing mindfulness training for 
smokers (MTS) to a usual care therapy (Controls), which 
included the availability of a tobacco quit line and nicotine 
patches 
• 198 low socioeconomic status smokers were randomized to 
MTS or Quit Line 
• Primary outcome measure of the 
study (7-day point-prevalence 
abstinence at 4 and 24- weeks post- 
quit) did not reach statistical 
significance in an intent-to-treat 
analysis 
• Did reach statistical significance 
comparing treatment initiators at 4- 
weeks (MTS = 45.8%, Controls = 
25.4%) and at 24-weeks (MTS = 
38.7%, Controls = 20.6%, OR = 2.33 p 
= .05) 
• The study showed high pre- 
intervention attrition and 
high 24-week assessment 
visit attrition 
• Participants not blinded to 
their respective 
interventions 
• Compares MTS to a less 
intensive usual-care therapy 
and as such lacks a 
time/intensity matched 
control 
Tang YY, Proc 
Natl Acad Sci 
USA, 2013 (41) 
• Healthy college students recruited through campus 
advertisements for learning meditation/relaxation to reduce 
stress and improve cognitive performance 
• Randomized to Integrated body-mind (IBMT) technique for 
meditation (15 smokers and 18 non-smokers) vs. Relaxation 
(RT) technique (12 smokers and 15 non-smokers) 
• The participants received 30-min of IBMT or RT group 
practice every night for 10 consecutive sessions, for a total 
of 5 h of training 
• Among smokers, meditation training 
produced a significant reduction in 
smoking of 60%; no reduction was 
found in the relaxation control 
• Resting-state brain scans showed 
increased activity for the meditation 
group in the anterior cingulate and 
prefrontal cortex, brain areas related 
to self-control 
• Small study 
• Recruitment via 
advertisements, so possible 
selection bias 
• Participants with the goal of 
quitting smoking were not 
included 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Brewer, Drug 
Alcohol Depend, 
2011 (42) 
• 88 smokers were randomly assigned to receive Mindfulness 
Training (MT) or the American Lung Association’s Freedom 
From Smoking (FFS) treatment 
• Both treatments were delivered twice weekly over four 
weeks (eight sessions total) in a group format 
• 88% of individuals who received MT 
and 84% of individuals who received 
FFS completed treatment 
• Compared to those randomized to 
the FFS intervention, individuals who 
received MT showed a greater rate of 
reduction in cigarette use during 
treatment and maintained these 
gains during follow-up 
• They also exhibited a trend toward 
greater point prevalence abstinence 
rate at the end of treatment (36% vs. 
15%, p = .063), which was significant 
at the 17-week follow-up (31% vs. 
6%, p = .012). 
• First randomized clinical 
trial to evaluate the efficacy 
of Mindfulness Training as a 
stand-alone treatment for 
smoking cessation 
compared to an active, 
empirically-supported 
control condition 
• Exclusion of individuals 
using psychoactive 
medications 
• Single site study 
Davis JM, BMC 
Complement 
Altern Med, 
2007 (43) 
• Pilot study designed to test the feasibility of using 
Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) as a smoking 
intervention 
• At the 6-week post-quit visit, 10 of 18 
subjects (56%) achieved biologically 
confirmed 7-day point-prevalent 
smoking abstinence 
• Small sample size 
• Short follow-up 
• Lack of control group 
• 28% (5 of 18 subjects) 
attrition rate 
• No concurrent use of 
pharmacotherapy for 
smoking cessation 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Supplementary Study Summary Table 4.  Effects of meditation on insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome. 
 
Reference 
Study type, design, type of meditation, and population 
Primary Findings 
Comments 
Paul Labrador, 
Archives of 
Internal 
Medicine, 2006 
(44) 
• Randomized control trial with 103 subjects diagnosed with 
coronary artery disease randomized to health education 
versus Transcendental Meditation for 16 weeks. 
• At study end, compared to changes 
in the control group, in the 
Transcendental Meditation group 
there were significant reductions in 
systolic blood pressure and insulin 
resistance, and a trend towards 
improved heart rate variability 
• There were no significant changes in 
diastolic blood pressure, lipoprotein 
levels, C-reactive protein, BMI, or 
brachial artery reactivity 
• Limitations of this trial 
included its numerous end 
points,  relatively  small 
size and short duration. 
Khatri, Diabetes 
Research and 
Clinical 
Practice, 
2007 (45) 
• Randomized control trial of 101 subjects diagnosed with 
metabolic syndrome. 
• Usual care versus usual care plus yoga for 12 weeks 
• Significant improvement in waist 
circumference, blood pressure, blood 
glucose,HbA1c, triglycerides, and 
HDL-C in Yoga Group 
• Limited description of 
study population, 
methods and intervention 
time and frequency of 
meditation/ Yoga 
Vaccarino, 
Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 2013 
(46) 
• Randomized control in 68 black Americans with metabolic 
syndrome. 
• Comparing the effect of consciously resting meditation 
(CRM), a sound (mantra)-based meditation, with a control 
intervention of health education (HE) on endothelial 
function in the setting of metabolic syndrome as primary 
end point and metabolic risk factors, psychosocial and 
behavioral variables were secondary endpoints 
• CRM, did not improve endothelial 
function significantly more than a 
control intervention of HE (p=0.51) 
 
 
 
• Improved metabolic syndrome 
parameters like Diastolic BP, Weight, 
lipid profile and metabolic risk 
factors score. 
• Study is limited by small 
number and high attrition 
rate 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Bijlani RL, The 
journal of 
alternative and 
complimentary 
medicine, 2005 
(47) 
• Single group with 98 subjects with hypertension, 
coronary 
artery disease, diabetes mellitus, and multiple 
comorbidities. 
• The intervention consisted of yoga, breathing exercises, 
meditation, stress management, diet, and 
health education. 
• Improved lipid profile at the end of 
the study. The changes were more 
marked in subjects with 
hyperglycemia or 
hypercholesterolemia 
• Subjects were too 
heterogeneous and study 
is limited by meagre 
intervention period of 9 
days 
Sivasankaran, 
Clinical 
Cardiology, 
2006 (48) 
• Prospective Cohort study with 2 cohort of subjects with and 
without established CAD. 
• 6 weeks of yoga and meditation on hemodynamic and 
laboratory parameters as well as on endothelial function 
were studied. 
• Significant reductions in blood 
pressure, heart rate, and BMI in the 
total cohort with yoga. 
• None of the laboratory parameters 
changed significantly with yoga. 
• Improved endothelial function in 
patients with CAD is demonstrated 
69% (6.38–10.78%; p = 0.09). 
• Study limited with small 
group of subjects and 20 
% of patients failed to 
complete some portion of 
the study protocol 
Younge, 
Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 2015 
(49) 
• Cross sectional study with 2579 subjects free of 
Cardiovascular disease from Rotterdam, Netherlands were 
interviewed for mind body practices (prayer, meditation, 
yoga, tai chi, qi-gong, breathing exercises, or any other form 
of mind-body related relaxation techniques). 
• Cardiometabolic risk factors (body mass index, blood 
pressure, and fasting blood levels of cholesterol, 
triglycerides, and glucose) and presence of metabolic 
syndrome were recorded. 
• Age, gender, Daily activities, Diet, Alcohol consumption and 
smoking habits were documented and analyzed 
statistically. 
• Fifteen percent of the participants 
engaged in a form of mind-body 
practice of which only (n = 97 ) were 
meditating. 
• Population which did mind-body 
practices had significantly lower body 
mass index (β = −0.84 kg/m2, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] = −1.30 to 
−0.38, p < .001), log transformed 
triglyceride levels (β = −0.02, 95% CI = 
−0.04 to −0.001, p = .037), and log- 
transformed fasting glucose levels( β 
= −0.01, 95%CI = −0.02 to −0.004, p = 
.004). 
• Metabolic syndrome was less 
common among individuals who 
engaged in mind-body practices 
(odds ratio = 0.71, 95% CI = 0.54– 
0.95, p = .019). 
• Observational cross 
section study where 
conclusions cannot be 
drawn for causality. 
• Low number of subjects 
practicing Meditation. 
• Findings may be subjected 
to confounding factors 
like  more  health 
conscious lifestyle among 
mind body practicing 
subjects. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Supplementary Table 5.   Studies of meditation on subclinical atherosclerosis: 
 
Reference 
Study type, design, type of meditation, and population 
Primary Findings 
Comments 
Zhang Y et al. 
Res Sports 
Med 2013 (50) 
7 
• Design:  Within group change (no comparator 
intervention) 
• Population: 20 female hypertensive patients (mean age 
57 
±3.5 years) 
• Intervention: Program of traditional Chinese mental and 
physical exercises performed for 60 minutes twice a week x 
24 weeks. One of the mental exercises, “Tu-Na-Yang-Sheng” 
included breathing and meditation 
• Outcome:  ABI (as well as SBP, DBP, and PP) 
• Follow-up: 24 weeks 
• Right ABI increased from 1.06 ± 0.08 
to 1.12 ±0.08, p=0.041 
• Left ABI increased from 1.06 ± 0.09 
to 1.11 ± 0.09, p=0.100 
• Also improvements in SBP, DBP, PP 
• A program of physical and 
mental Chinese exercises 
(which includes a 
meditative component) 
may improve ABI (only 
statistically significant in 
right ABI noted but 
sample is small). 
• Multi-modality, so unable 
to discern the effects of 
the meditative 
components vs. the other 
stretching and postural 
components. 
• Small sample 
• Hypertensive women only 
• No comparator group 
(each participant was 
their own control) 
• By nature, intervention 
was noted blinded. 
• Mean ABI was normal to 
begin with – did not look 
at a group with PAD. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Gupta SK, et 
al. Indian 
Heart Journal 
2011 (51) 
• Design:  Pre-post (within group change) 
• Population: 123 individuals with angiographically- 
documented moderate to severe CAD. 
• Intervention: Rajyoga meditation for stress management, 
healthy diet (low fat, high fiber vegetarian diet), moderate 
aerobic exercise. Patients first spent 7 days in-house training, 
with retraining at 6 month 
• Outcome: Change in CAD severity by angiography 
• Follow-up: 2 years for angiographic change in coronary 
stenosis; 6.48 years for cardiac events 
• Decline in absolute % diameter of 
coronary stenosis and cardiac events 
were correlated with percent 
adherence to intervention. 
• In patients with highest adherence, 
percent diameter stenosis regressed 
by 18.2 ±12.0 absolute percentage 
points (29% relative improvement, 
p<0.0001). 
• Least adherence had a progression of 
10.6 ± 13.2 absolute percentage 
points (23% relative worsening, 
p<0.0001) 
• 91% patients showed a trend 
towards regression and 51.4% lesions 
regressed by more than 10 absolute 
percentage points. 
• Cardiac events were 11 in group with 
most adherence, and 38 in least 
adherence. (risk ratio of least vs 
most; 4.32; 95% CI: 1.69-11.71; 
p<0.002). 
• A lifestyle invention that 
included meditation was 
associated with regression 
in CAD relative to 
adherence 
• By nature, intervention 
not blinded. Also 
intervention required a 7 
day in-house “sojourn”. 
• Only 76% of patients 
completed 2 year follow- 
up angiography 
• No comparison group; 
patients served as their 
own control and 
compared by adherence 
scores 
• Intervention could not be 
blinded 
• Multimodality 
intervention including 
meditation, diet, exercise 
– unable to discern the 
effects of meditation 
alone 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Fields JZ et al. 
Am J Cardiol 
2002 (52) 
• Design: RCT 
• Population: 57 healthy older adults older than 65 years (mean 
age 74 years), of which 46 completed post-test 
ultrasound 
• Intervention (3 arms): 
1. Maharishi Vedic Medicine (MVM) which is Transcendental 
Meditation practiced 20 min twice daily. This group also got 
herbal supplements high in antioxidants, were instructed on a 
Vedic medicine diet (low in fat, high in fruits & vegetables), 
incorporated Vedic exercises (yoga poses and walking), and 
attended monthly f/u meetings. 2. “Modern Medicine” arm 
that included a conventional diet, exercise, and multivitamin 
approach. 
3. Usual care (no added therapy) 
• Outcome:  cIMT by B-mode U/S 
• Follow-up: 1 yr 
• Significant within change in MVM 
arm (-0.15 +/- 0.21, p=0.004). No 
significant within change in other 
treatment groups. 
• Among high risk subjects with 
multiple CAD risk factors, cIMT 
decreased more in MVM group (-0.32 
± 0.23 mm) than in the usual care 
(+0.022 ± 0.085; p=0.009) or modern 
medicine (-0.082 ± 0.095, p=0.10) 
groups. 
• cIMT decreased in a larger fraction of 
MVM subjects (16 out of 20) than in 
modern (5 out of 9) or usual care 
groups (7 of 14). 
• Trend for more cIMT decrease 
among those with better adherence 
(r= -0.34, p=0.08) 
• 
• MVM (which is TM) 
reduced carotid 
atherosclerosis among 
older adults 
• Reductions in cIMT were 
greater than the Castillo- 
Richmond study 
suggesting benefit for 
multimodality approach 
with MVM. 
• By nature, intervention 
not blinded. 
• Small sample size 
• Multi-modality approach. 
The MVM arm also 
included an herbal 
supplement, counseling 
on healthy diet and 
incorporated exercise 
which limits the ability to 
discern the effect of MVM 
alone. 
• Older adults only were 
included. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
 
Castillo- 
Richmond et 
al. Stroke 2000 
(53) 
• Design: RCT 
• Population: 138 hypertensive African Americans enrolled but 
only 60 completed post-test carotid ultrasound. 
• Intervention: Transcendental Meditation vs a Health 
Education program.  TM is a mental technique practiced 
twice a day for 20 minutes. Initial teaching instructions 
conducted in both groups within 1 weeks, follow-up meetings 
1 weeks later, than every 2 weeks for 2 months, and once a 
month for 3 months. 
• Outcome: carotid intimal medial thickness (cIMT) by B-mode 
U/S. 
• Follow-up: 6-9 months (mean 6.8±1.3 months) 
• TM group showed a significant 
decrease of -0.098 mm (95% CI -0. 
198 to 0.003 mm) in cIMT compared 
with an increase of 0.054 mm (95% 
CI -0.05 to 0.158 mm) in the control 
group (P=0.038 for between group 
difference). 
• Correlation between attendance 
rates of meetings and change in cIMT 
scores was significant for TM group 
but not health education group 
• TM group also had statistically 
significant within-group changes in 
SBP, DBP, pulse and pulse pressure 
while health education group 
improved only SBP and DBP. 
• 
• TM reduced carotid 
atherosclerosis among 
African American 
hypertensive adults 
• High rate of attrition 
questions the 
generalizability of these 
findings. 170 participants 
were randomized but only 
60 had completed post- 
test interpretable cIMT 
scans, although attrition 
was equal in both groups. 
• By nature, intervention 
not blinded. 
• Low number of men 
(~30%) 
• Only African Americans 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Ornish et al. 
Lancet 1990 (1 
yr f/u) (54) 
and JAMA 
1998 (5 yr f/u) 
(55) 
• Design: RCT 
• Population: 28 patients with CAD 
• Intervention: randomized to a lifestyle intervention vs 
control. Lifestyle intervention included a very low fat 
vegetarian diet, moderate aerobic exercise, stopping 
smoking, stress management program (that included 
stretching, breathing techniques, meditation, progressive 
relaxation, and imagery) which they were asked to practice at 
least 1 hour per day, and group therapy 
• Outcome: Coronary atherosclerosis by quantitative coronary 
angiography 
• Follow-up: 1 yr and 5 years 
• At 1 yr, 82% overall experienced 
some regression of their CAD. 
Average % diameter stenosis 
regressed from 40% to 38% in 
intervention group, yet progressed 
from 43% to 46% in controls. 
• More regression of atherosclerosis 
occurred at patients in the 
intervention group at 5 years follow- 
up than was seen at the 1 yr follow- 
up. There was a 4.5% and 7.9% 
relative improvement in coronary 
stenosis in the intervention arm at 1 
and 5 years, respectively vs. 5.4% and 
28% relative worsening at 1 and 5 
years in control. 
• A multi-modality lifestyle 
intervention  (that 
includes meditation stress 
management as one 
component) confers 
coronary atherosclerosis 
regression 
• Small sample size. And 
only 20 out of 28 (71%) 
had 5 yr follow-up data 
• Intervention not blinded 
• Multi-modality of the 
lifestyle  intervention 
limits the ability to discern 
the effects of mediation 
vs. the other components 
such as the extremely low 
fat vegetarian diet. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Supplementary Study Summary Table 6.   Studies of meditation on endothelial function. 
 
Reference 
Study type, design, type of meditation, and population 
Primary Findings 
Comments 
Vaccarino V et 
al. 
Psychosomatic 
Medicine 2013 
(46) 
• Design: RCT 
• Population: 68 year old black Americans with metabolic risk 
factors 
• Intervention: Randomized to consciously resting meditation 
(CRM) vs. high education 
• Outcome: Brachial reactivity (FMD) 
• Follow-up: 6 and 12 months 
• CRM did improve FMD at 12 months 
but not statistically significantly more 
than the health education group 
despite more favorable trends in 
metabolic risk factors. Mean change 
was 2.1% (95% CI 0.5%-3.7%, 
p=0.009) in CRM group and 1.4% 
(95% CI = -0.2% to 2.9%, p=0.094) for 
health education, p-interaction 0.51. 
• Non-endothelium dependent dilation 
and arterial elasticity also did not 
change in either group. 
• Meditation did not 
improve endothelial 
function more than 
controls 
• Outcome was endothelial 
function, not 
atherosclerosis 
• As nature of study, 
intervention not blinded. 
• Small sample size 
• Only African Americans 
Paul-Labrador 
M et al. Arch 
Intern Med 
2006 (44) 
• Design: RCT 
• Population: 103 subjects with stable CAD 
• Intervention: Transcendental Meditation (TM) vs health 
education 
• Outcome: Brachial Reactivity assessed by flow mediated 
dilation (FMD) 
• Follow-up: 16 weeks 
• No significant effect on brachial 
reactivity with TM, despite beneficial 
changes in SBP, insulin resistance, 
and heart rate variability. 
• There was a non-significant 
improvement in FMD (-0.11%) in the 
TM group and a non-significant 
decline in the health education group 
(+0.81); (p=0.24 for difference 
between groups). 
• This study failed to show a 
benefit of TM on 
endothelial function. 
• Outcome was endothelial 
function, not 
atherosclerosis 
• As nature of study, 
intervention not blinded. 
• High level of statin use 
and near optimal LDL-C 
levels in population may 
have limited TM to confer 
any additional benefit 
• Relatively small size and 
short duration 
• All had CAD 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Sivasankaran S 
et al. Clin 
Cardiol 2006 
(48) 
• Design: Within group change, no comparator 
intervention 
• 33 subjects (mean age 55±11 years). 30% had CAD. 
• Intervention: Yoga plus meditation combined classes given 
90 mins a day three times a day for 6 weeks (each 90 min 
session was 15 min meditation, 15 min yogic breathing, 20 
min of deep relaxation (shavasana), 40 min postural 
exercises (asanas). 
• Outcome: Brachial reactivity (endothelial-dependent 
vasodilation) and also endothelial-independent 
vasoreactivity with nitroglycerin 
• Follow-up: 6 weeks 
• Overall no significant improvement 
brachial reactivity with yoga and 
meditation compared with baseline 
(16.7% relative improvement from a 
baseline reactivity of 7.2-8.4%; 
p=0.3). 
• In the group with CAD, there was a 
trend for relative improvement in 
brachial reactivity with intervention, 
(69% relative improvement from a 
baseline of 6.38-10.78%; p = 0.09). 
No significant change in subgroup 
without CAD. 
• No significant change in endothelial- 
independent vasodilation overall or 
in either subgroup. 
• Yoga plus meditation may 
improve endothelial 
function in individuals 
with CAD. 
• Outcome was endothelial 
function, not 
atherosclerosis 
• As nature of study, 
intervention not blinded. 
• No comparison group 
• Intervention was yoga and 
meditation combined. 
Thus unable to discern the 
effect  of  meditation 
alone. 
• Small study, short 
duration 
• 20% failed to complete 
some portion of study 
protocol 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Supplementary Study Summary Table 7. Effects of meditation on inducible myocardial ischemia 
 
Reference 
Study type, design, type of meditation, and population 
Primary Findings 
Comments 
Cunningham et 
al. 
AJC  2000 (56) 
• Longitudinal pre/post TM intervention study in 9 
postmenopausal women with cardiac syndrome X 
• Subjects underwent exercise treadmill testing (Bruce 
Protocol) pre and post 3 months of TM 
• Compared to baseline, TM improved 
time to 1 mm ST segment depression 
(p = 0.03), maximum ST segment 
depression (p=0.03), frequency of 
angina episodes (p=0.04), and quality 
of life (p=0.003). 
• No significant differences in heart 
rate, blood pressure, or duration of 
exercise before and after TM. 
• Non-randomized 
• Patients served as their 
own control group 
• TM compliance was high 
Zamarra et al. 
AJC  1996 (57) 
• Single blinded study in 21 subjects that compared 7.6 
months of TM in 12 CAD patients vs. 9 CAD patients who 
were waitlisted for TM and served as controls 
• Subjects underwent symptom-limited exercise tolerance 
testing (upright cycle protocol) before and after 
intervention 
• TM led to greater exercise tolerance - 
14.7% increase in exercise duration 
(p=0.013), 11.7% increase in maximal 
work load (p=0.004), and 18.1% delay 
of onset of ST depression (p=0.029). 
• Only 16 completed the 
study due to various 
reasons (10 in TM and 6 
waiting controls) 
• TM compliance was high 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Ornish et al. 
JAMA 1983 (58) 
• Randomized study comparing the effects of short-term (24 
days) stress management training plus dietary changes in 23 
subjects with IHD vs 23 controls. 
• Subjects underwent exercise nuclear ventriculography 
imaging with wall motion and ejection fraction (EF) 
• Stress management training and 
dietary changes resulted in a 44% 
increase in exercise duration 
(p<0.001) and 55% increase in total 
work performed (p<0.001). 
• Improved left ventricular wall motion 
during peak exercise and a net 
change in EF from rest to maximum 
exercise of +6.4%. 
• Lifestyle intervention lowered total 
cholesterol (p<0.001) and triglyceride 
levels (p<0.01); deceased HDL levels 
(p<0.0001), but the ratio of total 
cholesterol/HDL showed no 
difference between the two groups. 
• Since both dietary 
changes (mainly vegan- 
based diet and 1400 
kcal/day) and stress 
management training 
were included, the 
relative contribution of 
stress reduction cannot 
be assessed. 
• Changes in EF and wall 
motion assessed but 
inducible myocardial 
ischemia or changes in 
coronary blood flow not 
measured. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Supplementary Study Summary Table 8. Meditation and primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. 
 
Reference 
Study type, design, type of meditation, and population 
Primary Findings 
Comments 
Barnes VA, 
Journal  of 
Social Behavior 
and Personality, 
2005 (59) 
• RCT of African Americans >55 years old with mild 
hypertension (n=109) assigned to (a) Transcendental 
Meditation (TM); (b) progressive muscle relaxation (PMR) or 
(c) a health education control (EC) program 
• Treatment conducted twice daily for 20 minutes, over a 3- 
month period, after which patients were encouraged to 
continue with their treatment program on their own long- 
term. 
• Follow-up of mortality events conducted an average of eight 
years after randomization in the original phase of this 
trial 
• Relative risk for all-cause mortality in 
the TM group compared with PMR 
was 0.43 (95% CI 0–1.16, p < .08), 
and for the TM group compared with 
EC was 0.51 (95% CI 0–1.33, p < .12). 
• Relative risk of cardiovascular deaths 
for TM compared to PMR was 0.33 
(95% CI 0–2.27, p < .16), and for TM 
compared to EC was 0.25 (95% CI 0– 
1.60, p < .08). 
• Study limited by small 
sample size 
• Mortality not the original 
primary endpoint 
• Follow-up of mortality 
events conducted an 
average of eight years 
after randomization in the 
original phase of this trial 
• Compliance to the 
intervention was not 
monitored after the 
three-month follow-up 
was completed. 
Schneider RH, 
Am J Cardiol, 
2005 (60) 
• Data pooled from 2 RCT (n=202) (see Alexander and Barnes, 
above) that compared TM, other behavioral interventions, 
and usual therapy for hypertension 
• Programs practiced for 20 minutes twice daily for 3 months 
• All-cause mortality primary endpoint; cardiovascular 
and 
cancer mortality secondary endpoints. 
• Mean follow-up was 7.6 ± 3.5 years. 
• Compared with controls, TM showed 
a 23% decrease in all-cause mortality 
(relative risk 0.77, p = 0.039). 
Secondary analyses showed a 30% 
decrease in cardiovascular mortality 
(relative risk 0.70, p = 0.045) and a 
49% decrease in the rate of cancer 
mortality (relative risk 0.49, p = 0.16) 
in the TM group compared with 
controls 
• Retrospective study 
limited by modest sample 
size 
• Only mortality data from 
national databases were 
collected 
• Follow-up of mortality 
events conducted three to 
eight years after 
randomization 
• Compliance to the 
intervention was not 
monitored after the 
three-month follow-up 
was completed. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Alexander CN, J 
Pers Soc 
Psychol 1989 
(61) 
• RCT of institutionalized elderly (n=73) assigned to (a) no 
treatment (n=11); (b) Transcendental Meditation (TM) 
(n=20); (c) mindfulness training (MF) in active distinction 
making (n=21), or (d) mental relaxation (MR) with low 
mindfulness (n=21). 
• Programs practiced for 20 minutes twice daily for 3 months 
• Assessed cognitive function and health (i.e., blood pressure, 
mental health, general health and longevity) endpoints 
• Mindfulness techniques associated 
with improvements in blood 
pressure, cognitive functioning and 
mental health. 
• Mindfulness techniques improved 36 
month survival rates; mortality 100% 
for TM; 87.5% for MF; 77.3% for no 
treatment; and 65% for relaxation 
(p<0.00025). 
• Study limited by small 
sample size 
• Highly biased study (i.e., 
data were unavailable for 
3 “no treatment 
subjects,” so 14 
nonrandomized subjects 
were included in the 
mortality analysis of these 
subjects). 
• Follow-up of mortality 
events conducted three 
years after randomization 
• Compliance to the 
intervention was not 
monitored after the 
three-month follow-up 
• Longevity assessed from 
nursing home records 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Supplementary Study Summary Table 9. Studies of meditation in patients with established cardiovascular disease. 
 
Reference 
Study type, design, type of meditation, and population 
Primary Findings 
Comments 
DuBroff R, 
Alternative 
Therapies, 2015 
(62) 
• Longitudinal pilot study of 22 patients with documented 
CAD treated with ayurvedic therapy (dietary 
recommendations and restrictions, meditation, breathing 
exercises, yoga and herbs) 
• So’Ham meditation practiced initially 10 minutes twice daily, 
with instructions for patients to increase durations weekly 
• At 90 days, there was significant 
improvement in arterial pulse wave 
velocity and significant reductions in 
BMI, total cholesterol, LDL 
cholesterol and triglycerides 
• Study limited by small 
sample size (19 patients 
completed the study) and 
no control group 
• Exact contribution of 
meditation to study 
findings cannot be 
discerned 
Younge JO, Eur 
J Preventive 
Cardiology, 
2015 (63) 
• Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials of mind-body practices for patients 
with 
cardiac disease 
• 11 studies included various types of meditation, mindfulness 
based stress reduction, stress management, and relaxation 
• Studies variably included patients with coronary artery 
disease or heart failure 
• Pooled analyses revealed effect sizes 
of 0.45 (95%CI 0.20–0.72) for 
physical quality of life, 0.68 (95%CI 
0.10–1.26) for mental quality of life, 
0.61 (95%CI 0.23–0.99) for 
depression, 0.52 (95%CI 0.26–0.78) 
for anxiety, 0.48 (95%CI 0.27–0.69) 
for systolic blood pressure and 0.36 
(95%CI 0.15–0.57) for diastolic blood 
pressure. 
• Study authors concluded 
“promising but 
heterogeneous results 
were seen on overall 
effect sizes of mental and 
physical quality of life, 
anxiety, depression, and 
blood pressure” 
• Study authors rated 
overall quality of the 
studies as low and that no 
firm conclusions could be 
drawn 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Parswani MJ, 
International 
Journal of Yoga, 
2013 (64) 
• Randomized study of 30 male patients with a diagnosis of 
coronary artery disease treated with either mindfulness 
based stress reduction (mindfulness meditation) consisting 
of 8 weekly instructional session and 30 minutes meditation 
daily at home or “treatment as usual” 
• Mindfulness based stress reduction including training in 
different variants of mindfulness meditation including body 
scan meditation, sitting meditation, mindful walking and 
mindful eating 
• All patients in both groups instructed on health behaviors 
including regular exercise for at least 30 minutes and 
suggested diet 
• At the end of the intervention, for 
the mindfulness based stress 
reduction group, there were 
significant within group and between 
group decreases in anxiety, 
depression, perceived stress, and 
systolic blood pressure 
• At 3 month follow-up, there was a 
further significant reduction in blood 
pressure 
• Study limited by small 
sample size (15 patients 
per group) and relatively 
short-term follow-up 
• Intervention consisted not 
only of meditation but 
also exercise and diet, 
though only significant 
changes seen in the group 
additionally treated with 
meditation 
Nehra, 
Dysphrenia 
(now called 
Open Journal of 
Psychiatry & 
Allied Sciences), 
2013 (65) 
• Randomized study of 50 patients with coronary artery 
disease (MI or angina) randomized to 8 week program of 
mindfulness based stress reduction (mindful meditation) or 
usual care control group 
• Mindfulness based stress reduction program included 2.5 
hour weekly meetings, six-hour daylong retreat, and home 
practice at least 45 minutes daily, and included sitting 
meditation, hatha yoga, and the body scan 
• At 10-17 week post-assessment 
follow-up, there were, compared to 
changes in the control group, 
significant decreases in perceived 
stress, cognitive health complaints, 
and somatic health complaints in the 
mindfulness based stress reduction 
program group 
• Study limited by modest 
sample size (25 patients 
per group) 
Delui MH, The 
Open 
Cardiovascular 
Medicine 
Journal, 2013 
(66) 
• Randomized trial of 45 patients with cardiovascular disease 
and depression referred for cardiac rehabilitation 
randomized to relaxation, mindful meditation, or control 
• Mindful meditation instruction included ten 20-25 minute 
sessions and home practice 
• At the end of the study (duration 
unclear) repeat testing showed 
significant reductions in depression, 
systolic blood pressure and heart 
rate in the meditation group 
compared to the control group 
• Study limited by small 
sample size (15 patients 
per group) 
• Diastolic blood pressure 
and anxiety score not 
significantly reduced by 
any intervention 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Schneider RH, 
Circ Cardiovasc 
Qual Outcomes, 
2012 (67) 
• Randomized study of 201 black men and women with 
angiographic evidence of at least 1 coronary artery with 
>50% stenosis treated with either Transcendental 
Meditation (20 minutes twice daily) or health education 
• After a mean of 5.4 years, primary 
composite endpoint (all-cause 
mortality, nonfatal MI, nonfatal 
stroke) significantly lower in the 
Transcendental Meditation group 
(adjusted HR=0.52; 95% CI=0.29- 
0.92; p=0.025) 
• Secondary composite endpoint (CV 
mortality, nonfatal MI, nonfatal 
stroke, coronary revascularization, 
hospitalization for IHD or heart 
failure) non-significantly reduced 
(adjusted HR-0.76; 95% CI=0.51-1.13; 
p=0.17) 
• Study conducted in two 
phases after a hiatus in 
funding with 58 of the 201 
subjects not participating 
in phase 2 
• Study completed in 2007 
and published in 2012 
• Significant net difference 
of -4.9 mmHg in SBP in 
TM group (95% CI=-8.3 to 
-1.5 mm Hg; p=0.01) 
Gupta SK, 
Indian Heart J, 
2011 (51) 
• Longitudinal study of 123 patients with angiographically 
documented stable CAD (67% with history of MI) treated 
with comprehensive lifestyle modification, including Rajyoga 
meditation 
• Intervention included stress management through Rajyoga 
meditation, vegetarian diet, and moderate aerobic exercise 
• 2 year angiographic follow-up 
performed on 76% of participants. 
Average percent diameter stenosis 
decreased by 6.10 absolute 
percentage points (p<0.003) 
• Specific independent 
contribution of 
meditation to study 
findings cannot be 
determined 
Paul-Labrador, 
Arch Intern 
Med, 2006 (44) 
• Randomized trial of 103 patients with documented and 
stable coronary artery disease randomized to 16 weeks of 
Transcendental Meditation or active control (health 
education) 
• Transcendental Meditation intervention included 
personalized and group instruction and maintenance 
meetings 
• At study end, compared to changes 
in the control group, in the 
Transcendental Meditation group 
there were significant reductions in 
systolic blood pressure and insulin 
resistance, and a trend towards 
improved heart rate variability 
• There were no significant changes in 
diastolic blood pressure, lipoprotein 
levels, C-reactive protein, BMI, or 
brachial artery reactivity 
• Study findings somewhat 
limited by numerous 
study endpoints 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Tacon AM, Fam 
Community 
Health, 2003 
(68) and 
Robert- 
McComb JJ, 
Journal of 
Alternative and 
Complementar 
y Medicine, 
2004 (34) 
• Randomized study of 18 patients with cardiovascular 
disease 
randomized to either mindfulness based stress reduction 
instruction (2 hours each week for 8 weeks) and home 
practice or a waiting list for such training 
• Intervention included training in body scan, sitting 
meditation, and hatha yoga 
• At study end, in the intervention 
group there were significant 
improvements in measured anxiety, 
emotional control, and coping styles 
• There was no significant 
change in “health locus of 
control” 
• Study limited by small 
sample size (9 patients 
per group) and relatively 
short term follow-up 
• Participants included a 
mixed population of those 
with  angina, 
hypertension, 
“cardiovascular disease”, 
and cardiac valve 
disorders 
• A second publication of 
seemingly the same study 
population reported no 
significant changes in 
stress hormones or 
submaximal exercise 
responses 
Sullivan, Am 
Heart J, 2009 
(69) 
• Prospective cohort study of 208 patients with heart failure 
(46% due to ischemic etiology) geographically assigned to 
a 
mindfulness-based intervention (8 weekly meetings plus 
practice of skills at least 30 minutes each day) or standard 
care 
• Mindfulness-based intervention included mindfulness based 
stress reduction plus education on improving coping skills 
and an expressive support group discussion 
• At 12 month follow-up, intervention 
resulted in significantly lower 
anxiety, depression, and heart failure 
symptoms and clinical scores 
• No treatment effect on 
rehospitalization or death at 1 year 
• Study limitation is use of a 
geographic control 
• Specific contribution of 
mindful meditation itself 
to study findings cannot 
be determined 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Zamarra JW, 
Am J Cardiol, 
1996 (57) 
• 21 male patients with documented CAD (≥70 lesion on 
angiography and/or prior MI) with inducible myocardial 
ischemia on upright cycle ETT were assigned to either 
Transcendental Meditation or wait-list control group. 
• Transcendental Meditation intervention included 10 hours 
of basic instruction, follow up meetings, and home practice 
20 minutes twice daily 
• At a mean 7.6 month follow-up, 
repeat ETT demonstrated that 
compared to the control group, the 
meditation group had significant 
increases in exercise duration, 
maximum workload, and time to ST 
depression onset 
• Study limited by small 
sample size (only 10 in 
intervention group and 6 
in control group 
completed study) 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
Reference List 
1. Momeni J, Omidi A, Raygan F, Akbari H. The effects of mindfulness-based stress reduction on cardiac patients' blood pressure, perceived 
stress, and anger: a single-blind randomized controlled trial. J Am Soc Hypertens 2016; 10:763-71. 
2. Epel ES, Puterman E, Lin J, et al. Meditation and vacation effects have an impact on disease-associated molecular phenotypes. Transl 
Psychiatry 2016; 6:e880. 
3. Koncz R, Wolfenden F, Hassed C, Chambers R, Cohen J, Glozier N. Mindfulness-Based Stress Release Program for University Employees: A 
Pilot, Waitlist-Controlled Trial and Implementation Replication. J Occup Environ Med 2016; 58:1021-7. 
4. Himashree G, Mohan L, Singh Y. Yoga Practice Improves Physiological and Biochemical Status at High Altitudes: A Prospective Case- 
control Study. Altern Ther Health Med 2016; 22:53-9. 
5. Bharshankar JR, Mandape AD, Phatak MS, Bharshankar RN. Autonomic Functions In Raja-yoga Meditators. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 
2015; 59:396-401. 
6. Black DS, O'Reilly GA, Olmstead R, Breen EC, Irwin MR. Mindfulness meditation and improvement in sleep quality and daytime 
impairment among older adults with sleep disturbances: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175:494-501. 
7. Bower JE, Crosswell AD, Stanton AL, et al. Mindfulness meditation for younger breast cancer survivors: a randomized controlled trial. 
Cancer 2015; 121:1231-40. 
8. Schutte NS, Malouff JM. A meta-analytic review of the effects of mindfulness meditation on telomerase activity. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2014; 42:45-8. 
9. Younge JO, Wery MF, Gotink RA, et al. Web-Based Mindfulness Intervention in Heart Disease: A Randomized Controlled Trial. PLoS One 
2015; 10:e0143843. 
10. Azam MA, Katz J, Fashler SR, Changoor T, Azargive S, Ritvo P. Heart rate variability is enhanced in controls but not maladaptive 
perfectionists during brief mindfulness meditation following stress-induction: A stratified-randomized trial. Int J Psychophysiol 2015; 
98:27-34. 
11. de Fatima Rosas MM, Kozasa EH, Miranda RD, Monezi Andrade AL, Perrotti TC, Leite JR. Decrease in blood pressure and improved 
psychological aspects through meditation training in hypertensive older adults: A randomized control study. Geriatr Gerontol Int 2015; 
15:1158-64. 
12. Carlson LE, Doll R, Stephen J, et al. Randomized controlled trial of Mindfulness-based cancer recovery versus supportive expressive  group 
therapy for distressed survivors of breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31:3119-26. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
13. Cash E, Salmon P, Weissbecker I, et al. Mindfulness meditation alleviates fibromyalgia symptoms in women: results of a randomized 
clinical trial. Ann Behav Med 2015; 49:319-30. 
14. Creswell JD, Irwin MR, Burklund LJ, et al. Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction training reduces loneliness and pro-inflammatory gene 
expression in older adults: a small randomized controlled trial. Brain Behav Immun 2012; 26:1095-101. 
15. Arch JJ, Brown KW, Dean DJ, Landy LN, Brown KD, Laudenslager ML. Self-compassion training modulates alpha-amylase, heart rate 
variability, and subjective responses to social evaluative threat in women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2014; 42:49-58. 
16. Kaliman P, Alvarez-Lopez MJ, Cosin-Tomas M, Rosenkranz MA, Lutz A, Davidson RJ. Rapid changes in histone deacetylases and 
inflammatory gene expression in expert meditators. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2014; 40:96-107. 
17. Lengacher CA, Reich RR, Kip KE, et al. Influence of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) on telomerase activity in women with 
breast cancer (BC). Biol Res Nurs 2014; 16:438-47. 
18. Lipschitz DL, Kuhn R, Kinney AY, Donaldson GW, Nakamura Y. Reduction in salivary alpha-amylase levels following a mind-body 
intervention in cancer survivors--an exploratory study. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2013; 38:1521-31. 
19. Malarkey WB, Jarjoura D, Klatt M. Workplace based mindfulness practice and inflammation: a randomized trial. Brain Behav Immun 
2013; 27:145-54. 
20. Bhasin MK, Dusek JA, Chang BH, et al. Relaxation response induces temporal transcriptome changes in energy metabolism, insulin 
secretion and inflammatory pathways. PLoS One 2013; 8:e62817. 
21. Rosenkranz MA, Davidson RJ, Maccoon DG, Sheridan JF, Kalin NH, Lutz A. A comparison of mindfulness-based stress reduction and an 
active control in modulation of neurogenic inflammation. Brain Behav Immun 
2013; 27:174-84. 
22. Qu S, Olafsrud SM, Meza-Zepeda LA, Saatcioglu F. Rapid gene expression changes in peripheral blood lymphocytes upon practice of a 
comprehensive yoga program. PLoS One 2013; 8:e61910. 
23. Nyklicek I, Mommersteeg PM, Van BS, Ramakers C, Van Boxtel GJ. Mindfulness-based stress reduction and physiological activity during 
acute stress: a randomized controlled trial. Health Psychol 2013; 32:1110-3. 
24. Jacobs TL, Shaver PR, Epel ES, et al. Self-reported mindfulness and cortisol during a Shamatha meditation retreat. Health Psychol 2013; 
32:1104-9. 
25. Jensen CG, Vangkilde S, Frokjaer V, Hasselbalch SG. Mindfulness training affects attention--or is it attentional effort? J Exp Psychol Gen 
2012; 141:106-23. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
26. Matousek RH, Pruessner JC, Dobkin PL. Changes in the cortisol awakening response (CAR) following participation in mindfulness-based 
stress reduction in women who completed treatment for breast cancer. Complement Ther Clin Pract 2011; 17:65-70. 
27. Jacobs TL, Epel ES, Lin J, et al. Intensive meditation training, immune cell telomerase activity, and psychological mediators. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2011; 36:664-81. 
28. Klatt MD, Buckworth J, Malarkey WB. Effects of low-dose mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR-ld) on working adults. Health Educ 
Behav 2009; 36:601-14. 
29. Pace TW, Negi LT, Adame DD, et al. Effect of compassion meditation on neuroendocrine, innate immune and behavioral responses to 
psychosocial stress. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2009; 34:87-98. 
30. Witek-Janusek L, Albuquerque K, Chroniak KR, Chroniak C, Durazo-Arvizu R, Mathews HL. Effect of mindfulness based stress reduction on 
immune function, quality of life and coping in women newly diagnosed with early stage breast cancer. Brain Behav Immun 2008; 22:969- 
81. 
31. Carlson LE, Speca M, Faris P, Patel KD. One year pre-post intervention follow-up of psychological, immune, endocrine and blood pressure 
outcomes of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) in breast and prostate cancer outpatients. Brain Behav Immun 2007; 21:1038- 
49. 
32. Tang YY, Ma Y, Wang J, et al. Short-term meditation training improves attention and self-regulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007; 
104:17152-6. 
33. Jain S, Shapiro SL, Swanick S, et al. A randomized controlled trial of mindfulness meditation versus relaxation training: effects on distress, 
positive states of mind, rumination, and distraction. Ann Behav Med 2007; 33:11-21. 
34. Robert McComb JJ, Tacon A, Randolph P, Caldera Y. A pilot study to examine the effects of a mindfulness-based stress-reduction and 
relaxation program on levels of stress hormones, physical functioning, and submaximal exercise responses. J Altern Complement Med 
2004; 10:819-27. 
35. Speca M, Carlson LE, Goodey E, Angen M. A randomized, wait-list controlled clinical trial: the effect of a mindfulness meditation-based 
stress reduction program on mood and symptoms of stress in cancer outpatients. Psychosom Med 2000; 62:613-22. 
36. Oikonomou MT, Arvanitis M, Sokolove RL. Mindfulness training for smoking cessation: A meta-analysis of randomized-controlled trials. J 
Health Psychol 2016. 
37. Ruscio AC, Muench C, Brede E, Waters AJ. Effect of Brief Mindfulness Practice on Self-Reported Affect, Craving, and Smoking: A Pilot 
Randomized Controlled Trial Using Ecological Momentary Assessment. Nicotine Tob Res 2016; 18:64-73. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
38. Davis JM, Manley AR, Goldberg SB, Stankevitz KA, Smith SS. Mindfulness training for smokers via web-based video instruction with  
phone support: a prospective observational study. BMC Complement Altern Med 2015; 15:95. 
39. Davis JM, Manley AR, Goldberg SB, Smith SS, Jorenby DE. Randomized trial comparing mindfulness training for smokers to a matched 
control. J Subst Abuse Treat 2014; 47:213-21. 
40. Davis JM, Goldberg SB, Anderson MC, Manley AR, Smith SS, Baker TB. Randomized trial on mindfulness training for smokers targeted to  
a disadvantaged population. Subst Use Misuse 2014; 49:571-85. 
41. Tang YY, Tang R, Posner MI. Brief meditation training induces smoking reduction. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013; 110:13971-5. 
42. Brewer JA, Mallik S, Babuscio TA, et al. Mindfulness training for smoking cessation: results from a randomized controlled trial. Drug 
Alcohol Depend 2011; 119:72-80. 
43. Davis JM, Fleming MF, Bonus KA, Baker TB. A pilot study on mindfulness based stress reduction for smokers. BMC Complement Altern 
Med 2007; 7:2. 
44. Paul-Labrador M, Polk D, Dwyer JH, et al. Effects of a randomized controlled trial of transcendental meditation on components of the 
metabolic syndrome in subjects with coronary heart disease. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166:1218-24. 
45. Khatri D, Mathur KC, Gahlot S, Jain S, Agrawal RP. Effects of yoga and meditation on clinical and biochemical parameters of metabolic 
syndrome. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2007; 78:e9-10. 
46. Vaccarino V, Kondwani KA, Kelley ME, et al. Effect of meditation on endothelial function in Black Americans with metabolic syndrome: a 
randomized trial. Psychosom Med 2013; 75:591-9. 
47. Bijlani RL, Vempati RP, Yadav RK, et al. A brief but comprehensive lifestyle education program based on yoga reduces risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus. J Altern Complement Med 2005; 11:267-74. 
48. Sivasankaran S, Pollard-Quintner S, Sachdeva R, Pugeda J, Hoq SM, Zarich SW. The effect of a six-week program of yoga and meditation 
on brachial artery reactivity: do psychosocial interventions affect vascular tone? Clin Cardiol 2006; 29:393-8. 
49. Younge JO, Leening MJ, Tiemeier H, et al. Association Between Mind-Body Practice and Cardiometabolic Risk Factors: The Rotterdam 
Study. Psychosom Med 2015; 77:775-83. 
50. Zhang Y, Li N, Sun J, Su Q. Effects of combined traditional Chinese exercises on blood pressure and arterial function of adult female 
hypertensive patients. Res Sports Med 2013; 21:98-109. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
51. Gupta SK, Sawhney RC, Rai L, et al. Regression of coronary atherosclerosis through healthy lifestyle in coronary artery disease patients-- 
Mount Abu Open Heart Trial. Indian Heart J 2011; 63:461-9. 
52. Fields JZ, Walton KG, Schneider RH, et al. Effect of a multimodality natural medicine program on carotid atherosclerosis in older subjects: 
a pilot trial of Maharishi Vedic Medicine. Am J Cardiol 2002; 89:952-8. 
53. Castillo-Richmond A, Schneider RH, Alexander CN, et al. Effects of stress reduction on carotid atherosclerosis in hypertensive African 
Americans. Stroke 2000; 31:568-73. 
54. Ornish D, Brown SE, Scherwitz LW, et al. Can lifestyle changes reverse coronary heart disease? The Lifestyle Heart Trial. Lancet 1990; 
336:129-33. 
55. Ornish D, Scherwitz LW, Billings JH, et al. Intensive lifestyle changes for reversal of coronary heart disease. JAMA 1998; 280:2001-7. 
56. Cunningham C, Brown S, Kaski JC. Effects of transcendental meditation on symptoms and electrocardiographic changes in patients with 
cardiac syndrome X. Am J Cardiol 2000; 85:653-5, A10. 
57. Zamarra JW, Schneider RH, Besseghini I, Robinson DK, Salerno JW. Usefulness of the transcendental meditation program in the 
treatment of patients with coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol 1996; 
77:867-70. 
58. Ornish D, Scherwitz LW, Doody RS, et al. Effects of stress management training and dietary changes in treating ischemic heart disease. 
JAMA 1983; 249:54-9. 
59. Barnes J, Schneider RH, Alexander CN, Rainforth M, Staggers F, Salerno J. Impact of transcendental meditation on mortality in older 
African Americans with hypertension - eight-year follow-up. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality 2005; 17:201-16. 
60. Schneider RH, Alexander CN, Staggers F, et al. Long-term effects of stress reduction on mortality in persons > or = 55 years of age with 
systemic hypertension. Am J Cardiol 2005; 95:1060-4. 
61. Alexander CN, Langer EJ, Newman RI, Chandler HM, Davies JL. Transcendental meditation, mindfulness, and longevity: an experimental 
study with the elderly. J Pers Soc Psychol 1989; 57:950-64. 
62. DuBroff R, Lad V, Murray-Krezan C. A Prospective Trial of Ayurveda for Coronary Heart Disease: A Pilot Study. Altern Ther Health Med 
2015; 21:52-62. 
63. Younge JO, Gotink RA, Baena CP, Roos-Hesselink JW, Hunink MG. Mind-body practices for patients with cardiac disease: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol 2015; 22:1385-98. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
 Levine et al. Meditation and Cardiovascular Risk Reduction: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association 
© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., by Wiley. This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the 
use is non-commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. 
 
 
64. Parswani MJ, Sharma MP, Iyengar S. Mindfulness-based stress reduction program in coronary heart disease: A randomized control trial. 
Int J Yoga 2013; 6:111-7. 
65. Nehra DK, Sharma NR, Kumar P, Nehra S. Efficacy of mindfulness-based stress reduction programme in reducing perceived stress and 
health complaints in patients with coronary heart disease. Dysphrenia . 7-8-2013. 
66. Delui MH, Yari M, Khouyinezhad G, Amini M, Bayazi MH. Comparison of cardiac rehabilitation programs combined with relaxation and 
meditation techniques on reduction of depression and anxiety of cardiovascular patients. Open Cardiovasc Med J 2013; 7:99-103. 
67. Schneider RH, Grim CE, Rainforth MV, et al. Stress reduction in the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease: randomized, controlled 
trial of transcendental meditation and health education in Blacks. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2012; 5:750-8. 
68. Tacon AM, McComb J, Caldera Y, Randolph P. Mindfulness meditation, anxiety reduction, and heart disease: a pilot study. Fam Community 
Health 2003; 26:25-33. 
69. Sullivan MJ, Wood L, Terry J, et al. The Support, Education, and Research in Chronic Heart Failure Study (SEARCH): a mindfulness-based 
psychoeducational intervention improves depression and clinical symptoms in patients with chronic heart failure. Am Heart J 2009; 157:84-
90. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 1, 2019
