 REVIEW
Prostate-Induced Orgasms: A Concise Review
Illustrated with a Highly Relevant Case Study
R. J. LEVIN
*
Independent Research Worker, Sheffield, England, United Kingdom
Current medical literature does not describe precisely the activation and mech-
anisms of prostate orgasms. This brief review describes what we know about
the anatomy and physiology of the prostate and its involvement in reproduction
and especially its stimulation for sexual recreation. It is illustrated with a highly
relevant case history. Clin. Anat. 31:81–85, 2018.
V
C 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Key words: prostate; prostate stimulators; orgasms; ejaculation; brain rewiring;
brain plasticity
INTRODUCTION
Gross Anatomy
Cancer of the prostate is the most commonly
diagnosed cancer in Western world males and is the
second cause of cancer deaths in men (Siegel et al.,
2015). The male human prostate is a musculoglandu-
lar organ the size of a walnut; it surrounds the neck of
the bladder and urethra and is itself surrounded by a
complex of fascial structures. Ayala et al. (1989) stud-
ied histologically whole organ sections of 50 prostate
glands and concluded that a ‘capsule’ of the prostate
does not exist, it being a concentrically placed fibro-
muscular band surrounding the prostate that is an
inseparable component of the prostatic stroma. Ray-
chaudhuri and Cahill (2008) in an extensive literature
search about the pelvic fascia that included peripro-
static structures confirmed this conclusion. However,
Ali et al. (2004) still used the term ‘prostatic capsule’
when describing nerves passing through it into the
prostate body. The gland can be divided into three
zones, namely—a peripheral zone (75% of the gland,
the portion that surrounds the distal urethra), a cen-
tral zone (5–8% of the gland, the zone that surrounds
the ejaculatory ducts), and a transitional zone (20%
of the gland that surrounds the proximal urethra) all
enclosed by the fibromuscular band.
DEVELOPMENT
The complexity of the development of the prostate
in humans from the embryonic urogenital sinus has
been reviewed by Marker et al. (2003) and Santos
and
Taboga
(2006).
This
embryonic
structure
is
indistinguishable between male and female embryos
until weeks 10–12 of gestation. It then differentiates
under the influence of the androgens secreted initially
by the fetal testes that maintain its embryonic and
neonatal growth through activation of local paracrine
factors (Thomson, 2001) finally creating male pros-
tatic glandular activity at puberty (Isaacs, 1994).
GLANDULAR FUNCTIONS
The functions of the prostate are its involvement in
the reproductive aspects of the male ejaculate (its
procreative function) and its involvement in the ecs-
tacy of the orgasm (its recreative function). While
there are many studies of its reproductive function(s)
there are relatively few that characterize its recreative
functioning. Most of the information about this plea-
surable function comes from anecdotal sources. There
is a website dedicated to its recreative function (see
section below on prostate and the internet).
It should be mentioned that there are suggestions
that the gland also has a possible endocrine function.
Kacker et al. (2014) reviewed the evidence that the
gland contributed to the local and systemic concentra-
tions of 5a-dihydroxytestosterone, a more potent andro-
gen than its precursor testosterone from which it is
converted by the prostate expressed isoenzyme 5a-
*Correspondence to: R. J. Levin; 145 Dobcroft Road, Sheffield
S 7 2LT, Yorkshire, England, United Kingdom. E-mail: R.J.
Levin@sheffield.ac.uk
Received 19 October 2017; Accepted 25 October 2017
Published online 20 December 2017 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/ca.23006
V
V
C 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Clinical Anatomy 31:81–85 (2018)
 reductase-2 (Kang et al., 2014). The concentration of
the androgen in the prostate is 5–10 times greater than
that of testosterone (Hay and Wass, 2009). The impor-
tance of the prostate function for male fertility is exem-
plified by males who have a deficiency of this isoenzyme
(5a-reductase type 2 deficiency) as they have decreased
sperm counts, low semen volume and failure of the
semen to liquefy because of a deficiency of the prostate-
specific antigen (a serine protease) that de-coagulates
the gelled ejaculated semen.
NEURAL INNERVATION OF THE
PROSTATE
The gland is abundantly innervated by the para-
sympathetic (hypogastric and pelvic nerves) and by
the sympathetic (hypogastric ganglion). According to
Gupta and McVary (2017) ‘there is widespread agree-
ment that expulsion of the contents of the gland during
emission is under adrenergic control while cholinergic
nerves are secretomotor’. In regard to the sensory
innervation of the prostate, McVary et al. (1998) state
that the majority of the afferents to the ventral pros-
tate is localised to sensory nerves from the L5 and L 6
segments of the spinal cord but there is a smaller
degree of innervation from T13 to L2.
A collection of nerves that is located in the fascia
covering the prostate is named the prostatic plexus.
They arise from the lower (inferior) portion of the pel-
vic plexus and are distributed not only to the prostate
but also to the corpora cavernosa of the penis and
urethra. Injury or damage to these nerves impacts on
the mechanisms of erection and can thus cause erec-
tile dysfunction (see section below on orgasm and
radical prostatectomy).
Dense neuropeptide Y innervation is present through-
out the prostatic stroma but most studies have not
found the neuropeptide to be involved in the contraction
of the prostate (White et al., 2013).
PROCREATIVE FUNCTIONS
The serial order of the male ejaculate is composed
of secretions from the glands of Littr�
e (lining the
penile urethra), Cowper’s (bulbourethral) gland, tes-
ticular, and epididymal fluid containing the spermato-
zoa, the prostate and finally the seminal vesicles
(Levin, 2005a). In this glandular company the pros-
tate manufactures a highly complex secretion which
becomes approximately 30% of the fluid volume of
the ejaculate. It contains a large variety of constitu-
ents many having proposed or unknown function(s).
These
include
citric
acid
(20–150
mM,
function
unknown), zinc [590 6 45 SE mg/mL; Zaichick et al.
(1996), possibly antibacterial], the enzyme prostatic
specific antigen (PSA) that liquefies the coagulated
semen after ejaculation, prostatic acid phosphatase,
phosphorylcholine
(specific
substrate
for
previous
enzyme), aminopeptidase, ATPase, spermine (Pegg,
2014) and spermidine (possible antibacterial activity,
enzymatic breakdown gives semen its characteristic
odor),
prostasomes
[small
vesicles
containing
cholesterol, sphingomyelin, calcium, enzymes, and
some 139 proteins—(Levin, 2005b)], lipids (Scott,
1945) and phospholipids of which sphingomyelin con-
stitutes about half the latter with phosphatidyl serine
and ethanolamine plasmalogen most of the remainder
(their functions are unknown). Semen also contains
some 60 plus peptides and proteins (Tsai et al., 1984;
Fung et al., 2004).
According to Baker and Bellis (1995) the prostate
secretion provides the sperm with some protection
from the seminal vesicle secretion that has spermicidal
properties (Linderholmer
, 1973).
THE PROSTATE AND EJACULATION
The involvement of the prostate in the mechanisms
of
ejaculation
was
first
promoted
by
Marberger
(1974). He proposed that the distention of the pros-
tatic urethra by the volume of the entering semen
was the trigger for the initiation of the ejaculatory
reflex and the theory was called ‘the prostatic pres-
sure chamber trigger concept’. This speculative expla-
nation was repeated by a number of authors (Jannini
et al., 2002). Levin (2005a) reviewed the evidence for
this mechanism and found that there were important
experimental studies with results against the concept,
namely that there are ‘definite occasions where the
ejaculatory mechanisms is activated yet no seminal
fluids enter the prostatic urethra’. Giuliano and Clem-
ent (2005), in their review of ejaculation, agreed that
‘the expulsion phase of ejaculation can occur in the
absence of urethral stimulation and that the prostatic
pressure chamber concept does not definitively iden-
tify the ejaculation trigger’.
RECREATIVE FUNCTIONS
Descriptions of the Male Orgasms
Unlike the female orgasm, where a number of com-
peting descriptions for induced orgasms exist (see
Levin, 2015), those for the male are limited (Zilber-
geld, 1978; Otto, 1999). Surprisingly, neither Masters
and
Johnson
(1966),
Zilbergeld
(1979),
Margolis
(2004), or Bancroft (2009) in their books on human
sexual arousal mention those obtained from prostate
stimulation in the male while even in the book on
orgasm by Komisaruk et al. (2006) has only a single,
very short paragraph of but two sentences.
The classic penile-induced male orgasm description
is that of Masters and Johnson (1966) who character-
ized it into two separate stages. The first stage is initi-
ated by the contractions of the various accessory
organs beginning with the vasa efferentia of the testis,
then the epididymis following through to the vas def-
erens with the contractions of the seminal vesicles.
The prostatic contractions then occur. This stage is
controlled by the thoracolumbar (T11-L2) neural path-
way (Giuliano and Clement, 2005). In this stage the
male has a feeling of ‘ejaculatory inevitability’ and the
knowledge that ejaculation is coming and cannot be
delayed. The second stage is the seminal fluid flowing
into
the
distended
urethral
bulb
and
the
penile
82
Levin
 urethra. The perineal musculature (mainly the bulbo-
cavernosus muscle, Levin, 2005) then propels the
semen along the penile urethra to be expelled forcibly
in spurts from the penile meatus, this is mediated by
the sacral (S2-S4) pathway (Giuliano and Clement,
2005). With each spurt a feeling of intense pleasure is
generated which gradually subsides as the spurts
decrease. Often nonverbal vocalizations occur with
each spurt (Levin, 2006). If the pelvic muscles do not
contract the semen emission is one of dribbling,
powered by the peristaltic contractions of the urethra
alone with little ecstatic pleasure (Newman et al.,
1982). Although orgasm normally takes place con-
comitantly with ejaculation, the two processes are
actually independent (Levin, 2003).While the prostate
is involved in forming part of the ejaculate (as detailed
above) it is also involved in ejaculation per se as its
fibromuscular
covering
containing
smooth
muscle
contracts clonically under its adrenergic innervation
propelling the semen from the prostatic urethra into
the penile urethra (White et al., 2013).
Published
descriptions
of
the
prostate-induced
orgasm in academic and clinical literature have been
thin on the ground (Levin, 2004). In an early article by
Perry (1988) he described prostatic-induced orgasms
as ‘emission type reflexive orgasms’ with occasional
oozing of semen from the penis. Such a description
applies to ejaculations that occur when the pelvic
striated muscles (especially the bulbocavernous) are
nonfunctional (Newman et al., 1982). A paradox to
note is that when induced ejaculations are without pel-
vic contractions they are of poor erotic value as previ-
ously described yet intense erotic pleasure appears to
be activated by prostate stimulation even when there
are no pelvic contractions to create semen ejaculation.
ORGASM AFTER RADICAL
PROSTATECTOMY
Men
can
experience
changes
in
their
sexual
responses
after
radical
prostatectomy,
the
gold-
standard treatment for localized cancer of the pros-
tate. Early operations caused damage to the nerves
that passed along the organ that subserved erection
but later nerve sparing operations were designed to
preserve this innervation. Koeman et al. (1994), for
example, reported that in their series of prostatecto-
mies (n 5 20) no patient could maintain a rigid erec-
tion but 5 could manage to have coitus with their
partial erection. None experienced the sensation of
‘ejaculatory inevitability’. A few (n 5 7) complained
that their orgasm was weakened and 9 had involun-
tary loss of urine at orgasm (climacturia). A very
extensive, comprehensive, and up-to-date review of
orgasmic dysfunctions after radical prostatectomy by
Capogrosso et al. (2017) report that despite technical
surgical advances ‘the achievement of good operative
functional outcomes is still considered a troublesome
issue both for patients and urologist’. These include
impairments in sexual desire, penile morphology and
orgasmic function. In relation to the latter the condi-
tions of climacturia, orgasm associated pain and mod-
ification of orgasmic sensation are prevalent and even
complete anorgasmia occurs. Unfortunately, reliable
data from which to estimate these impairment risks
are lacking.
THE ‘BRAIN REWIRING’ CONCEPT
An obvious question is—why do prostate orgasms
appear more powerful and pleasurable than penile
induced ones? Increased body awareness has been
linked to increased genital awareness and arousal in
women (see Handy and Meston, 2016 for references).
It
is
possible
that
similar
heightened
awareness
occurs in those males who focus on and practice pros-
tate stimulation. Such awareness could enhance the
sexual pleasure obtained as modulation of physiologi-
cal function can occur through changes in mental pro-
cesses (Mitani et al., 2006). It is now accepted that
the human brain is constantly changing its functional
and structural properties depending on the variety of
inputs and experiences. This plasticity is thought to be
manifest through synaptic reorganization (Kolb et al.,
2003)
and/or
the
balance
of
excitation/inhibition
among neurones (Cooke and Bliss, 2006). The brain
literature refers to this as ‘the plasticity of the brain’
but in lay parlance a common description is ‘rewiring
of the brain’ (Arden, 2010). Those learning to experi-
ence prostate-induced orgasms often use this concept
(see ‘prostate orgasms and the internet’ below).
PROSTATE ORGASMS AND THE
INTERNET
Because there have been no published laboratory-
conducted investigations of the orgasms induced by
prostate stimulation alone, information about them
has to be gathered from the various websites dedi-
cated to such orgasms. While unsatisfactory in that
the vast number are obviously anecdotal they repre-
sent the only available source. Unlike the sparsity of
academic literature on prostate-induced orgasms there
appears to be an enormous number of internet sites
involving such activity. Typing in ‘websites for prostate-
induced orgasms’ in Google produces 383,000 results
(August, 2017). Specific products have been devel-
oped commercially to enable males to stimulate their
prostates per rectum without using hands and these
have created a large user community. One of the most
popular is that devised by Aneros (http://www. Anero-
s.com) costing $69.95 while there is also a vibrating
model (Vice) priced at $139.95. The Aneros Forum
(https://www.com/community)
is
the
commercially
sponsored repository for individual’s posts about their
use of the various Aneros devices. Some of these listed
posts have received hundreds of views while a few
have over half a million. What many of these reports
from individual users stress is that to obtain prostate-
induced orgasms needs relaxation, time and practice.
Apart from the vibrating model, the device moves
slightly associated with normal contraction of the inter-
nal and external anal sphincter
, which is sufficient to
stimulate the prostate and sensitive areas of the rectal
wall. The subject can initiate these contractions, but
Prostate-Induced Orgasms
83
 once orgasm starts the device moves spontaneously in
response to the orgasmic contractions, stimulating the
prostate and increasing the intensity of the orgasm.
Perry (1988) suggested that this area of the rectal
wall was similar to the so-called ‘G-spot’ of the female
in that it activated orgasm when stimulated so it has
been called ‘the male G-spot’, it is anatomically incor-
rect but a widely used description. Some get erections
during its use while others do not. A number report
extreme
bouts
of
shaking/shuddering
before
the
induced orgasms occur and when they do they are
infinitely more pleasurable than those obtained from
penile stimulation. One post included the interesting
comment about the curse of the Aneros—‘it’s addictive
and it takes a good deal of time—at least 30 min’.
The accepted term among the community of users for
the very best orgasms induced by the stimulation is
‘Super-O’s’ which everyone strives to obtain (see
‘Relevant Case Study’ below).
THE RELEVANT CASE STUDY
The subject was a 63-year-old, medically qualified
male in good physical health with a good libido and a
normal prostate on digital examination. He experi-
mented initially with an Aneros helix prostate stimula-
tor for prostatic massage to relieve symptoms from
an episode of prostatitis. He rapidly became highly
orgasmic with the device (without the use of sexual
fantasy) after only a few hours of use, spread over
several occasions. He also had a course of the PDE-5
inhibitor tadalafil 2.5 mg daily which is now licensed
for lower urinary tract symptoms in men. His prostati-
tis symptoms resolved within 2 months of regular
Aneros use several times weekly combined with tada-
lafil. However, he found that the intense orgasms pro-
duced by the device were highly addictive and many
were subjectively in the ‘Super-O’ category described
above. Despite the device being inserted in the anus
and lower rectum, he described the orgasms as being
felt in the penis, perineum, and pelvis, similar to a
normal male orgasm. When becoming really intense
in the Super-O category, he experienced some whole
body sensation with some involuntary muscular con-
tracting and shaking. He stopped using the Aneros
after about 2 months and attempted to overcome the
addiction to the device.
Whilst using the Aneros, he had produced some
secretions from the urethra, but he did not normally
ejaculate. He had been in the habit of wearing a con-
dom to catch these secretions and any possible ejacu-
late. He had mainly used the device lying prone with a
couple of pillows to support his pelvis with the penis
hanging comfortably in between, as he would some of
the time become erect or partially erect whilst using
the device. The Aneros forum describes a process of
rewiring when learning to orgasm with the device and
it then becomes possible to experience Aneros-free
orgasms. Our subject found that he could achieve
intense orgasms by lying prone wearing a condom
without the Aneros present, the condom and the pil-
lows being sufficient stimuli to trigger a reflex orgasm
without
any
direct
mechanical
stimulation
to
the
penis. The ability to orgasm without the device has
persisted for at least 12 months since the last inser-
tion of the Aneros.
This subject found that whilst the orgasms were
extremely enjoyable at the time, he could easily
spend too much time experiencing them. Further, he
had an old neck injury which flared up in association
with some neck spasm at orgasm whilst lying prone.
It has proved difficult to stop experiencing these
orgasms and ‘unwire’ himself back to normal. He
attempted this by replacing the passive stimulus with
stimulatory masturbation or sexual intercourse, and in
the process became multiorgasmic with both sexual
scenarios up to 10 orgasms before the final ejacula-
tion). He has managed to stay off non-stimulatory
orgasms for several months at a time, but has had a
tendency to relapse.
CONCLUSIONS
Despite the fact that so much of the information
that
is
available
about
prostate-induced
orgasms
comes from the anecdotal reports of individuals, there
can be little doubt that stimulating the prostate via
the rectal wall can create ecstatic feelings that are
exceptionally
pleasurable,
often
surpassing
those
obtained from penile stimulation. However
, the exact
mechanism(s) by which these are induced is unclear
,
some propose it is by the nerves passing along the
outer surface of the gland (prostatic plexus), others
suggest it is via the nervous innervation of the pros-
tate itself while others talk about a ‘re-wiring’ of the
brain needed to appreciate the effects of the organ’s
stimulation. What is clear, however, is the reticence of
the scientific community to study the phenomenon
possibly because it involves the need for rectal inser-
tion and stimulation. Why, for an obvious example,
have we still not had any brain imaging of prostate-
stimulated orgasms so that we can compare them
with penile orgasms? Who will lead the challenge?
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank the anonymous subject, Dr. A,
for
bringing
to
my
attention
this
grossly
under
researched area of prostate function.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The author has no conflicts of interest to declare.
REFERENCES
Ali M, Johnson IP, Hobson J, Mohammadi B, Khan F. 2004. Anatomy
of the pelvic plexus and innervation of the prostate gland. Clin
Anat 17:123–129.
Arden J. 2010. Rewire Your Brain. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley
and Sons. p 256.
Ayala AG, Ro JY, Babaian R, Troncoso P, Grignon DJ. 1989. The pros-
tatic capsule: Does it exist? Its importance in the staging and
treatment of prostatic carcinoma. Am J Surg Pathol 13:21–27.
84
Levin
 Baker RR, Bellis MA. 1995. Human Sperm Competition—Copulation,
Masturbation and Infidelity. London: Chapman Hall. p 353.
Bancroft J. 2009. Human Sexuality and its Problems. 3rd Ed. Edin-
burgh: Churchill Livingstone Elsevier. p 546.
Capogrosso P, Ventimiglia E, Cazzaniga W, Montorsi F, Salonia A.
2017. Orgasmic dysfunction after radical prostatectomy. World J
Mens Health 35:1–13.
Cooke SF, Bliss TVP. 2006. Plasticity in the human central nervous
system. Brain 129:1659–1673.
Fung KYC, Glode LM, Green S, Duncan MWE. 2004. A comprehen-
sive characterization of the peptide and protein constituents of
human seminal fluid. Prostate 61:171–181.
Giuliano F, Clement P. 2005. Neuroanatomy and physiology of
ejaculation. Annu Rev Sex Res 16:190–2016.
Gupta NK, McVary KT
. 2017. Physiological and pharmacological studies
of the prostate gland. J Urol 1992:26–S27.
Handy AB, Meston CM. 2016. Interoreceptive awareness moderates
the relationship between perceived and physiological genital
arousal in women. J Sex Med 13:1907–1914.
Hay ID, Wass JAH (eds.) 2009. Clinical Endocrine Oncology. New
York: Wiley and Sons. p 37.
Isaacs JT, Furuya Y, Berges R. 1994. The role of androgen in the reg-
ulation of programmed cell death and apoptosis in normal and
male prostatic tissue. Semin Cancer Biol 5:391–400.
Jannini EA, Simonelli C, Lenzi.A. 2002. Disorders of ejaculation.
J Enocrine Invest 25:1006–1019.
Kacker R, Morgentaler A, Traish A. 2014. Medical hypothesis: loss of
the endocrine function of the prostate is important to the patho-
physiology of postprostatectomy erectile dysfunction. J Sex Med
11:1898–1902.
Kang H-J, Imperato-McGinley J, Zhu Y-S, Rosenwaks Z. 2014. The
effect of 5a-reductase-2 deficiency on human fertility. Fertil Steril
101:310–316.
Koeman M, van Driel MF
, Schultz WC, Mensink HJ. 1996. Orgasm
after radical prostatectomy. Br J Urol 77:861–864.
Kolb B, Gibb R, Robinson TE. 2003. Brain plasticity and behaviour.
Curr Direct Psychol Sci 12:1–5.
Komisaruk BR, Beyer-Flores C, Whipple B. 2006. The science of
orgasms. Baltimore, Maryland: John Hopkins University Press. p
8.
Komisaruk BR, Whipple B. 2011. Non-genital orgasms. Sex Relat
Ther 26:356–372.
Levin RJ. 2003. The physiology of male and female sexual arousal.
Chapter 26. In: Payne J, Busuttil A, Smock W, editors. Forensic
Medicine: Clinical and Pathological Aspects. London, Greenwich:
Medical Media Publication. p 377–389.
Levin RJ. 2004. An orgasm is . . .. who defines what an orgasm is?
Sex Relat Ther 19:101–107.
Levin RJ. 2005a. The mechanisms of human ejaculation: a critical
analysis. Sex Relat Ther 20:123–131.
Levin RJ. 2005. Sexual arousal: its physiological roles in human
reproduction. Ann Rev Sex Res 16:154–189.
Levin RJ. 2006. Vocalised sounds and human sex. Sex Relat Ther
21:99–107.
Levin RJ. 2015. Recreation and procreation: A critical view of sex in
the human female. Clin Anat 28:339–354.
Linderholmer CH. 1973. Survival of human sperm in different frac-
tions of split ejaculates. Fertil Steril 24:521–526.
McVary KT, McKenna KE, Lee C. 1998. Prostate innervation. Prostate
Suppl 8:2–13.
Masters WH, Johnson V. 1966. Human Sexual Response. Boston: Lit-
tle Brown and Company. P 366.
Marberger H. 1974. The mechanisms of ejaculations. In: Coutinho
EM, Fuchs F, editors. Physiology and Genetics of Reproduction.
New York: Plenum. p 99–110.
Margolis JG. 2004. The Intimate History of the Orgasm. London:
Century the Random House Group. p 403.
Marker PL, Donjacour AA, Dahiya R, Cunha GR. 2003. Hormonal,
cellular and molecular control of prostatic development. Dev Biol
253:165–174.
Mitani S, Fujita M, Sakamoto S, Shirakawa T. 2006. Effects of auto-
genic training on cardiac autonomic nervous activity in high-risk
fire
service
workers
for
posttraumatic
stress
disorder.
J Psychosomatic Res 60:439–444.
Newman HF, Reiss H, Northup JD. 1982. Physical basis of emission,
ejaculation and orgasm in the male. Urology 19:341–350.
Otto HA. 1999. Liberated Orgasm: The Orgasmic Revolution. Silver-
ato California: Liberating Creations Inc. p 249.
Pegg A. 2014. The function of spermine. Int Union Biochem Mol Biol
66:8–18.
Perry JF. 1988. Do men have a G-spot? Aust Forum 2:37–41.
Raychaudhuri B, Cahill D. 2008. Pelvic fasciae in urology. Annu R
Coll Surg Engl 90:633–637.
Robbins MB, Jensen GD. 1978. Multiple orgasms in the male. J Sex
Res 14:21–26.
Santos FCA, Tobago SR. 2006. Female prostate: A review about the
biological repercussions of this gland in humans and rodents.
Anim Reprod 3:3–18.
Scott WW. 1945. The lipids of the prostatic fluid, seminal plasma
and enlarged prostate gland of man. J Urol 53:712.
Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. 2015. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Can-
cer J Clin 65:5–29.
Thomson AA. 2001. Role of androgens and fibroblast growth factors
in prostatic development. Reproduction 121:187–195.
Tsai YC, Harrison HH, Lee C. 1984. Systematic characterization of
human prostatic fluid proteins with two dimensional electropho-
resis. Clin Chem 30:2026–2030.
White CW, Xie JH, Ventura S. 2013. Age-related changes in the
innervation of the prostate gland. Organogenesis 9:206–215.
Zaichick VY, Sviridova TV, Zaichick SV. 1996. Zinc concentration in
human prostatic fluid: Normal, chronic prostatitis, adenoma and
cancer. Int Urol Nephrol 28:687–694.
Zilbergeld B. 1979. Men and Sex: A Guide to Sexual Fulfilment.
London: Souvenir Press Ltd. p 105.
Prostate-Induced Orgasms
85
