 1 
 
  
 
Acupuncture and electro-acupuncture for people diagnosed 
with subacromial pain syndrome: a multicentre randomized 
trial 
 
 
Jeremy Lewis1,2,3, Julius Sim4, Panos Barlas5 
1 Department of Clinical Therapies, University of Limerick, Ireland 
2 School of Health and Social Work, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, United Kingdom 
3 Central London Community Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom 
4 Institute for Primary Care and Health Sciences, Keele University, Staffordshire, United Kingdom 
5 School of Health and Rehabilitation, Keele University, Staffordshire, United Kingdom 
 
 
 
Correspondence:  
Jeremy Lewis; E-mail: jeremy.lewis@londonshoulderclinic. com 
 
 
 
 
Accepted for publication in European Journal of Pain, 29 November 2016; doi:10.1002/ejp.1001 
 
 
 
 2 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Background:  
Musculoskeletal disorders have been identified globally as the second most common healthcare 
problem for ‘years lived with disability’, and of these shoulder conditions are amongst the most 
common, frequently associated with substantial pain and morbidity. Exercise and acupuncture are 
often provided as initial treatments for musculoskeletal shoulder conditions but their clinical 
effectiveness is uncertain. This study compared group exercise with group exercise plus either 
acupuncture or electro‐acupuncture in patients with subacromial pain syndrome. 
Methods:  
Two hundred and twenty‐seven participants were recruited to a three‐arm parallel‐group 
randomized clinical trial. The primary outcome measure was the Oxford Shoulder Score. Follow‐up 
was post treatment, and at 6 and 12 months. Between‐group differences (two comparisons: the 
exercise group versus each of the acupuncture groups) were analysed at 6 months. A similar 
comparison across all follow‐up time points was also conducted. Data were analysed on intention‐
to‐treat principles with imputation of missing values. 
Results:  
Treatment groups were similar at baseline, and all treatment groups demonstrated an 
improvement over time. Between‐group estimates at 6 months were, however, small and non‐
significant, for both of the comparisons. The analyses across all follow‐up time points yielded 
similar conclusions. There was a high rate of missing values (22% for the Oxford Shoulder Score). 
A sensitivity analysis using complete data 
gave similar conclusions to the analysis with missing 
values imputed. 
Conclusions:  
In the current investigation, neither acupuncture nor electro‐acupuncture were found to be 
more beneficial than exercise alone in the treatment of subacromial pain syndrome. These 
findings may support clinicians with treatment planning. 
Significance: 
 Shoulder pain is common and associated with substantial morbidity. Acupuncture is a popular 
treatment for shoulder pain. The findings suggest that acupuncture and electro‐acupuncture 
offer no additional benefit over exercise in the treatment of shoulder pain of musculoskeletal 
origin. 
 
 
  
3 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Musculoskeletal disorders have been identified globally as the second most common condition associated 
with ‘years lived with disability’ (Vos et al., 2012). Of these disorders, shoulder conditions are amongst the 
most common (Charles et al., 2007). Pain is the most common symptom described by people experiencing 
musculoskeletal shoulder conditions and the most common reason for seeking treatment (van der Windt et 
al., 1995). 
Deriving a definitive diagnosis for most musculoskeletal shoulder conditions is difficult. Orthopaedic 
tests have been developed to enable clinicians to establish the cause of shoulder symptoms (Magee, 
2014). However, narrative and systematic reviews have challenged the usefulness of these tests as a 
means of assessing isolated individual structures (Lewis, 2009; Hegedus et al., 2012; Lewis et al., 2015). 
For those suffering low back pain it is now acceptable to classify symptoms as non‐specific, simple or 
mechanical back pain (Waddell, 2004), without a need to be structurally definitive, and for many 
clinical presentations, the same may be appropriate for the shoulder region (Lewis, 2009). Conditions 
such as traumatic shoulder dislocations, frozen shoulder, severe osteoarthritis, avascular necrosis and 
tumours are ones where diagnoses may be easier to establish than those involving the bursae, the 
range of rotator cuff pathologies and other tissues under and around the acromion. Accordingly, 
‘subacromial pain syndrome’ may be a more appropriate clinical classification than a specific tissue‐
based diagnosis or unsubstantiated aetiological mechanism such as subacromial impingement 
syndrome (Lewis, 2011, 2015, 2016). Subacromial pain syndrome embraces: subacromial impingement 
(Haahr et al., 2005; Haahr and Andersen, 2006; Holmgren et al., 2012), partial‐thickness (Kukkonen et 
al., 2014) and full‐thickness (Kuhn et al., 2013) rotator cuff tears, as well as massive irreparable rotator 
cuff tears (Ainsworth, 2006). The main treatment for subacromial pain syndrome is exercise. 
Although exercise is the main treatment for the majority of musculoskeletal shoulder conditions and 
has been demonstrated to be as effective as surgery (Haahr and Andersen, 2006; Ketola et al., 2013; 
Kukkonen et al., 2014), both exercise and surgery are frequently not fully curative and are often 
associated with recurrence and ongoing morbidity and pain (Linsell et al., 2006; Paloneva et al., 2013). 
Accordingly, many clinicians incorporate other treatments to reduce symptoms. Acupuncture and 
electro‐acupuncture (acupuncture with electrical stimulation of the inserted needles) are other 
common methods of treating shoulder pain. Despite its popularity (Kleinhenz et al., 1999; 
Molsberger et al., 2010; Johansson et al., 2011), findings from 
research investigating acupuncture 
in the treatment of shoulder pain have proven to be equivocal (Berry et al., 1980; Roach et al., 
1991; Kleinhenz et al., 1999; Guerra de Hoyos et al., 2004; Green et al., 2005; Johansson et al., 
2005; Lathia et al., 2009; Molsberger et al., 2010), as well as controversial (e.g. 
http://www.dcscience.net/?p=6089, www.which.co.uk/news/2014/01/five‐surprising‐facts‐about‐
health‐treatments‐350088/). 
Current research demonstrates uncertainty regarding the effectiveness of acupuncture in the 
management of musculoskeletal shoulder pain. Green et al. (2005) state that due to the small 
number of trials to date, and their clinical and methodological diversity, there is little to support or 
challenge the use of acupuncture for shoulder pain. Accordingly, more information is required 
regarding the effectiveness of acupuncture treatments in the treatment of shoulder conditions. 
The aim of this study was to compare the benefits of group exercise, group exercise and 
acupuncture, and group exercise and electro‐acupuncture in the treatment of people with 
musculoskeletal shoulder pain classified as subacromial pain syndrome. 
Standards for Reporting Interventions in Controlled Trials of Acupuncture (STRICTA) were 
adhered to, and include:  
(1) Acupuncture rationale; 
   (2) Details of needling;  
   (3) Treatment regimen;    
   (4) Other components of treatment;  
  
4 
 
   (5) Practitioner background; and  
   (6) Control or comparator interventions (MacPherson et al., 2010). 
 
2. Methods 
The design of the study was a prospective, multicentre, randomized clinical trial, with assessor 
blinding. Between 2007 and 2013, participants with shoulder pain were recruited from four United 
Kingdom National Health Service (NHS) physiotherapy clinics. Three of these clinics were based in 
secondary healthcare teaching hospitals and one was based in a primary healthcare community clinic. 
Participants were referred to the physiotherapy clinics by general practitioners, consultant physicians 
and surgeons, and other physiotherapists. 
Potential participants presenting with shoulder pain were identified prior to commencing 
treatment and were given both oral and written information about the study. Those interested in 
learning more about the study were contacted by the principal research physiotherapist at each 
location. Subject to the study inclusion and exclusion criteria (Table 1), participants who agreed 
to participate gave written informed consent and then underwent a baseline assessment. 
At each site, participants were then randomized into one of three groups: 
Group I: Shoulder advice and weekly exercise group (six 50–55‐min sessions). 
Group II: Shoulder advice and weekly exercise group (six 50–55‐min sessions) together with six 
treatments of acupuncture. 
Group III: Shoulder advice and weekly exercise group (six 50–55‐min sessions) together with six 
treatments of electro‐acupuncture. 
Randomization was in a 1:1:1 ratio according to a sequence produced by a random number 
generator; a separate sequence was generated for each study site. Sequentially numbered opaque 
envelopes ensured concealment of group 
allocation. 
 
2.1 Ethics 
Participants were fully informed of the study, including their right to withdraw from the 
investigation at any stage without the need to explain their decision, and were told that 
subsequent care would not be compromised by this decision. Ethical approval was granted by 
the NHS National Research Ethics Committee (07/Q0401/2). 
 
2.2 Outcome measures 
The primary outcome measure for this investigation was the Oxford Shoulder Score (OSS; Dawson et 
al., 2009). This is a 0–48 health‐related quality of life scale on which higher scores are better. 
Secondary outcome measures were: the Shoulder Pain and Disability Index (SPADI), a 0–100 pain and 
disability scale on which lower scores are better (Roy et al., 2009); night pain; analgesic use; impact of 
main functional problem (0–10 scale on which lower scores are better); and shoulder range of 
movement. Two orthopaedic tests (Neer sign, Hawkin’s test) were also included, not as tests to 
implicate a condition or structure, but as procedures to elicit symptoms associated with subacromial 
pain syndrome. Outcome measures were obtained prior to randomization, at the end of treatment (6 
weeks), at 6 months, and at final follow‐up at 12 months. The 6‐month data collection was the 
primary outcome time point. The data collected and the time points at which this occurred are 
detailed in Table 2. Shoulder flexion, abduction, external rotation and internal rotation ranges of 
movement were measured as described by Valentine and Lewis (2006). 
 
2.3 Participant, therapist and assessor blinding 
The nature of the interventions did not permit the therapists providing the intervention or the 
participants receiving the intervention to be unaware of group allocation. However, assessors 
who collected all the outcome data were blind to participants’ group allocation at every data 
collection time point. 
 
  
5 
 
2.4 Procedures 
A generic shoulder advice and exercise class that might be classified as light to moderate level of 
exercise, attended by all participants, was conducted once a week for 6 weeks as a circuit 
program. The class included: (1) warm‐up exercises (e.g. static exercise bike); (2) shoulder range 
of movement exercises; (3) resisted internal and external rotation exercises; (4) generalized 
shoulder strengthening exercises (e.g. pulling and pushing against resistance); (5) weight‐bearing 
exercises (e.g. pushing Swiss ball against wall, weight through arms on Swiss ball); (6) lower limb 
exercises (e.g. step‐ups with concomitant upper limb elevation); and (7) cool‐down exercises. 
Participants who were randomized to receive acupuncture or electro‐acupuncture received these 
additional treatments twice a week for the first 3 weeks of the 6‐week shoulder programme. At 
each site, the shoulder advice and exercise class was conducted by two qualified 
physiotherapists. 
Three acupuncture protocols were used, comprising: (1) an anterolateral shoulder pain protocol; (2) 
a posterolateral shoulder pain protocol; and (3) a general shoulder pain protocol (Table 3). The 
acupuncture point protocols were designed to correspond to the most common clinical presentations 
of shoulder pain and to allow some flexibility for the practitioner to modify according to individual 
patients’ complaints; each protocol comprised points with which the practitioners were very familiar. 
Each participant received the protocol most relevant for his or her pain presentation. The acupuncture 
treatments (number of points, duration of treatment and frequency of treatment) were based on 
recommendations for adequate intervention (White et al., 2008). Needles were inserted unilaterally, 
on the side of symptoms, and up to six local needles were used as well as two distal needles 
(forearm or lower leg). Each acupuncture treatment lasted 30 min; the timing of each treatment 
started after the last needle was inserted. 
The acupuncture needles used in this investigation were single‐use Seirin 0.25 9 40 mm W/T, Seirin 
0.25 9 50 mm W/T, Seirin 0.25 9 40 mm metal and Seirin 0.25 9 50 mm metal (supplied by 
Scarsboroughs Ltd, Somerset, UK). 
In the acupuncture group the needles were stimulated manually and in the electro‐acupuncture 
group the intensity of stimulation was controlled via the stimulator. Typically, the therapists inserted 
all points intramuscularly (provided there was a muscle under the point) and stimulated all points 
every 3– 5 min in order to maintain ‘Deqi’ for the duration of the treatment.  
In addition to receiving general information about the research, all participants were made aware of 
any potential risks and benefits of acupuncture and electro‐acupuncture, and were provided with 
acupuncture information sheets, acupuncture health screening questions, and an acupuncture 
consent form. All participants went through this process as part of the pre‐randomization assessment 
procedures to ensure that they were aware of the possible interventions and risks and that no 
participant would be excluded from these treatments on health grounds following randomization. As 
recommended by the Acupuncture Association of Chartered Physiotherapists (AACP; a special interest 
group of the UK Chartered Society of Physiotherapy), routine pre‐ and post‐acupuncture treatment 
advice was provided to all participants.  
All physiotherapists providing acupuncture and electro‐acupuncture treatments had completed a 
minimum of 80 h training in acupuncture. This period of training is based upon the UK Department of 
Health recommendation for health professionals (doctors, physiotherapists) wishing to provide 
acupuncture in the NHS. This is also the requirement of the UK Chartered Society of Physiotherapy 
and the UK Health and Care Professions Council. These practitioners do not use the protected title 
‘acupuncturist’ unless registered with the British Acupuncture Council. Although having expert 
musculoskeletal knowledge with respect to anatomy, pathology and physiology, the physiotherapists 
providing the acupuncture treatment were not required to make a Traditional Chinese Medicine 
diagnosis or apply specialist techniques such as moxa. All practitioners were very familiar with all the 
points used in the protocols. As a requirement of the AACP, all physiotherapists who provided the 
acupuncture treatment participated annually in continuing professional development training. 
