 Clinical Infectious Diseases
Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e1
Official American Thoracic Society/Infectious Diseases  
Society of America/Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention Clinical Practice Guidelines: Diagnosis of 
Tuberculosis in Adults and Children
David M. Lewinsohn,1,a Michael K. Leonard,2,a Philip A. LoBue,3,a David L. Cohn,4 Charles L. Daley,5 Ed Desmond,6 Joseph Keane,7  
Deborah A. Lewinsohn,1 Ann M. Loeffler,8 Gerald H. Mazurek,3 Richard J. O’Brien,9 Madhukar Pai,10 Luca Richeldi,11 Max Salfinger,12 Thomas M. Shinnick,3 
Timothy R. Sterling,13 David M. Warshauer,14 and Gail L. Woods15
1Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, 2Emory University School of Medicine and 3Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, 4Denver Public Health Department, 
Denver, Colorado, 5National Jewish Health and the University of Colorado Denver, and 6California Department of Public Health, Richmond; 7St James’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland; 8Francis J. Curry 
International TB Center, San Francisco, California; 9Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, Geneva, Switzerland; 10McGill University and McGill International TB Centre, Montreal, Canada; 
11University of Southampton, United Kingdom; 12National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado, 13Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health, Nashville, Tennessee, 
14Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene, Madison, and 15University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock
Background. Individuals infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) may develop symptoms and signs of disease (tuber-
culosis disease) or may have no clinical evidence of disease (latent tuberculosis infection [LTBI]). Tuberculosis disease is a leading 
cause of infectious disease morbidity and mortality worldwide, yet many questions related to its diagnosis remain.
Methods. A task force supported by the American Thoracic Society, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Infectious 
Diseases Society of America searched, selected, and synthesized relevant evidence. The evidence was then used as the basis for rec-
ommendations about the diagnosis of tuberculosis disease and LTBI in adults and children. The recommendations were formulated, 
written, and graded using the Grading, Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach.
Results. Twenty-three evidence-based recommendations about diagnostic testing for latent tuberculosis infection, pulmonary 
tuberculosis, and extrapulmonary tuberculosis are provided. Six of the recommendations are strong, whereas the remaining 17 are 
conditional.
Conclusions. These guidelines are not intended to impose a standard of care. They provide the basis for rational decisions in 
the diagnosis of tuberculosis in the context of the existing evidence. No guidelines can take into account all of the often compelling 
unique individual clinical circumstances.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Individuals infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) 
may develop symptoms and signs of disease (TB disease) or 
may have no clinical evidence of disease (latent tuberculosis 
infection [LTBI]). TB disease is a leading cause of infectious 
disease morbidity and mortality worldwide, with many diag-
nostic uncertainties. A task force supported by the supported 
by the American Thoracic Society, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, and Infectious Diseases Society of America 
appraised the evidence and derived the following recommen-
dations using the Grading, Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach (Table 1):
Testing for LTBI
Our recommendations for diagnostic testing for LTBI are based 
upon the likelihood of infection with Mtb and the likelihood of 
progression to TB disease if infected, as illustrated in Figure 1.
• 
We recommend performing an interferon-γ release assay 
(IGRA) rather than a tuberculin skin test (TST) in individuals 
5 years or older who meet the following criteria: (1) are likely 
to be infected with Mtb, (2) have a low or intermediate risk 
of disease progression, (3) it has been decided that testing for 
LTBI is warranted, and (4) either have a history of BCG vacci-
nation or are unlikely to return to have their TST read (strong 
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). Remarks: A TST 
is an acceptable alternative, especially in situations where an 
IGRA is not available, too costly, or too burdensome.
• 
We suggest performing an IGRA rather than a TST in all 
other individuals 5 years or older who are likely to be 
infected with Mtb, who have a low or intermediate risk 
of disease progression, and in whom it has been decided 
that testing for LTBI is warranted (conditional recommen-
dation, moderate-quality evidence). Remarks: A TST is an 
I D S A  G U I D E L I N E
These guidelines were endorsed by the European Respiratory Society on 20 June 2016.
aAuthors are co-chairs of this guideline committee. 
Correspondence: D. M. Lewinsohn, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, OR (lewinsod@ohsu.edu).
Clinical Infectious Diseases® 2017;64(2):e1–e33
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciw694
Received 4 October 2016; editorial decision 6 October 2016; accepted 14 October 2016.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e2 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
acceptable alternative, especially in situations where an 
IGRA is not available, too costly, or too burdensome.
• 
There are insufficient data to recommend a preference for 
either a TST or an IGRA as the first-line diagnostic test in 
individuals 5 years or older who are likely to be infected 
with Mtb, who have a high risk of progression to disease, 
and in whom it has been determined that diagnostic test-
ing for LTBI is warranted.
• 
Guidelines recommend that persons at low risk for Mtb 
infection and disease progression NOT be tested for Mtb 
infection. We concur with this recommendation. However, 
we also recognize that such testing may be obliged by law 
or credentialing bodies. If diagnostic testing for LTBI is 
performed in individuals who are unlikely to be infected 
with Mtb despite guidelines to the contrary:
• 
We suggest performing an IGRA instead of a TST in 
indivduals 5 years or older (conditional recommendation, 
low-quality evidence). Remarks: A TST is an acceptable 
alternative in settings where an IGRA is unavailable, too 
costly, or too burdensome.
• 
We suggest a second diagnostic test if the initial test 
is positive in individuals 5 years or older (conditional 
recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: 
The confirmatory test may be either an IGRA or a 
TST. When such testing is performed, the person is 
considered infected only if both tests are positive.
• 
We suggest performing a TST rather than an IGRA in 
healthy children <5 years of age for whom it has been 
decided that diagnostic testing for LTBI is warranted 
(conditional recommendation, very low-quality evidence). 
Remarks: In situations in which an IGRA is deemed the 
preferred diagnostic test, some experts are willing to use 
IGRAs in children over 3 years of age.
• 
The preceding recommendations are summarized in Figure 
2. While both IGRA and TST testing provide evidence for 
infection with Mtb, they cannot distinguish active from 
latent TB. Therefore, the diagnosis of active TB must be 
excluded prior to embarking on treatment for LTBI. This 
is typically done by determining whether or not symptoms 
suggestive of TB disease are present, performing a chest 
radiograph and, if radiographic signs of active TB (eg, air-
space opacities, pleural effusions, cavities, or changes on 
serial radiographs) are seen, then sampling is performed 
and the patient managed accordingly.
Testing for TB Disease
• 
We recommend that acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear micros-
copy be performed, rather than no AFB smear microscopy, 
in all patients suspected of having pulmonary TB (strong 
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). Remarks: 
False-negative results are sufficiently common that a 
negative AFB smear result does not exclude pulmonary 
TB. Similarly, false-positive results are sufficiently com-
mon that a positive AFB smear result does not confirm 
pulmonary TB. Testing of 3 specimens is considered the 
normative practice in the United States and is strongly 
recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention and the National Tuberculosis Controllers 
Association in order to improve sensitivity given the 
pervasive issue of poor sample quality. Providers should 
request a sputum volume of at least 3 mL, but the optimal 
volume is 5–10 mL. Concentrated respiratory specimens 
and fluorescence microscopy are preferred.
• 
We suggest that both liquid and solid mycobacterial cultures 
be performed, rather than either culture method alone, 
for every specimen obtained from an individual with sus-
pected TB disease (conditional recommendation, low-qual-
ity evidence). Remarks: The conditional qualifier applies to 
performance of both liquid and solid culture methods on 
all specimens. At least liquid culture should be done on all 
specimens as culture is the gold standard microbiologic test 
for the diagnosis of TB disease. The isolate recovered should 
be identified according to the Clinical and Laboratory 
Standards Institute guidelines and the American Society for 
Microbiology Manual of Clinical Microbiology.
• 
We suggest performing a diagnostic nucleic acid amplifi-
cation test (NAAT), rather than not performing a NAAT, 
on the initial respiratory specimen from patients suspected 
of having pulmonary TB (conditional recommendation, 
low-quality evidence). Remarks: In AFB smear-positive 
Table 
1. Interpretation 
of 
Strong 
and 
Weak 
(Conditional) 
Recommendations
Strong Recommendation
Weak (Conditional) 
Recommendation
Patients
Most individuals in this situation 
would want the recommended 
course of action, and only a  
small proportion would not.
The majority of individuals in 
this situation would want 
the suggested course of 
action, but many would 
not.
Clinicians
Most individuals should receive  
the intervention. Adherence to 
this recommendation according 
to the guideline could be used  
as a quality criterion or perfor-
mance indicator. Formal decision 
aids are not likely to be needed 
to help individuals make deci-
sions consistent with their  
values and preferences.
Recognize that different 
choices will be appropri-
ate for individual patients 
and that you must help 
each patient arrive at a 
management decision 
consistent with his or her 
values and preferences. 
Decision aids may be 
useful in helping individ-
uals to make decisions 
consistent with their 
values and preferences.
Policy 
makers
The recommendation can be 
adopted as policy in most 
situations.
Policymaking will require 
substantial debate and 
involvement of various 
stakeholders.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e3
patients, a negative NAAT makes TB disease unlikely. 
In AFB smear-negative patients with an intermediate to 
high level of suspicion for disease, a positive NAAT can 
be used as presumptive evidence of TB disease, but a 
negative NAAT cannot be used to exclude pulmonary 
TB. Appropriate NAAT include the Hologic Amplified 
Mycobacteria Tuberculosis Direct (MTD) test (San 
Diego, California) and the Cepheid Xpert MTB/Rif test 
(Sunnyvale, California).
• 
We recommend performing rapid molecular drug sus-
ceptibility testing for rifampin with or without isoniazid 
using the respiratory specimens of persons who are either 
AFB smear positive or Hologic Amplified MTD positive 
and who meet one of the following criteria: (1) have been 
treated for tuberculosis in the past, (2) were born in or 
have lived for at least 1 year in a foreign country with 
at least a moderate tuberculosis incidence (≥20 per 100 
000) or a high primary multidrug-resistant tuberculosis 
prevalence (≥2%), (3) are contacts of patients with multid-
rug-resistant tuberculosis, or (4) are HIV infected (strong 
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). Remarks: 
This recommendation specifically addresses patients who 
are Hologic Amplified MTD positive because the Hologic 
Amplified MTD NAAT only detects TB and not drug 
resistance; it is not applicable to patients who are positive 
for types of NAAT that detect drug resistance, including 
many line probe assays and Cepheid Xpert MTB/RIF.
• 
We suggest mycobacterial culture of respiratory speci-
mens for all children suspected of having pulmonary TB 
(conditional recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). 
Remarks: In a low incidence setting like the United States, 
it is unlikely that a child identified during a recent con-
tract investigation of a close adult/adolescent contact 
with contagious TB was, in fact, infected by a different 
individual with a strain with a different susceptibility 
pattern. Therefore, under some circumstances, microbi-
ological confirmation may not be necessary for children 
with uncomplicated pulmonary TB identified through a 
recent contact investigation if the source case has drug- 
susceptible TB.
Figure 1. Paradigm for evaluation of those with latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) based on risk of infection, risk of progression to tuberculosis, and benefit of therapy. In 
developing a diagnostic approach for the evaluation of those with suspected LTBI, we recommend the clinician weigh the likelihood of infection, the likelihood of progression to 
tuberculosis if infected, and the benefit of therapy (Horsburgh and Rubin, Clinical practice: latent tuberculosis infection in the United States. N Engl J Med 2011; 364:1441–8). 
Recommendations were formulated for each of the 3 groups illustrated above. These groups are concordant with current recommendations for the interpretation of the tuber-
culin skin test (American Thoracic Society, Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection. MMWR Recomm Rep 2000; 49:1–51). Abbreviations: CXR, 
chest radiograph; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; LTBI, latent tuberculosis infection; Mtb, Mycobacterium tuberculosis; RR, ; TB, tuberculosis; TST, tuberculin skin test.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e4 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
• 
We suggest sputum induction rather than flexible broncho-
scopic sampling as the initial respiratory sampling method 
for adults with suspected pulmonary TB who are either 
unable to expectorate sputum or whose expectorated spu-
tum is AFB smear microscopy negative (conditional recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
• 
We suggest flexible bronchoscopic sampling, rather than 
no bronchoscopic sampling, in adults with suspected 
pulmonary TB from whom a respiratory sample can-
not be obtained via induced sputum (conditional recom-
mendation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: In the 
committee members’ clinical practices, bronchoalveolar 
lavage (BAL) plus brushings alone are performed for most 
patients; however, for patients in whom a rapid diagnosis 
is essential, transbronchial biopsy is also performed.
• 
We suggest that postbronchoscopy sputum specimens be 
collected from all adults with suspected pulmonary TB 
who undergo bronchoscopy (conditional recommendation, 
low-quality evidence). Remarks: Postbronchoscopy spu-
tum specimens are used to perform AFB smear micros-
copy and mycobacterial cultures.
• 
We suggest flexible bronchoscopic sampling, rather than 
no bronchoscopic sampling, in adults with suspected mil-
iary TB and no alternative lesions that are accessible for 
sampling whose induced sputum is AFB smear micros-
copy negative or from whom a respiratory sample cannot 
be obtained via induced sputum (conditional recommenda-
tion, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: Bronchoscopic 
sampling in patients with suspected miliary TB should 
include bronchial brushings and/or transbronchial biopsy, 
as the yield from washings is substantially less and the yield 
from BAL unknown. For patients in whom it is important 
to provide a rapid presumptive diagnosis of tuberculosis 
(ie, those who are too sick to wait for culture results), trans-
bronchial biopsies are both necessary and appropriate.
• 
We suggest that cell counts and chemistries be performed 
on amenable fluid specimens collected from sites of sus-
pected extrapulmonary TB (conditional recommendation, 
very low-quality evidence). Remarks: Specimens that are 
amenable to cell counts and chemistries include pleural, 
cerebrospinal, ascitic, and joint fluids.
• 
We suggest that adenosine deaminase levels be measured, 
rather than not measured, on fluid collected from patients 
with suspected pleural TB, TB meningitis, peritoneal 
TB, or pericardial TB (conditional recommendation, low- 
quality evidence).
• 
We suggest that free IFN-γ levels be measured, rather 
than not measured, on fluid collected from patients with 
Figure 2. Summary of recommendations for testing for latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI). 1Performing a second diagnostic test when the initial test is negative is a 
strategy to increase sensitivity. This may reduce specificity, but the panel decided that this is an acceptable trade-off in situations in which the consequences of missing LTBI 
(ie, not treating individuals who may benefit from therapy) exceed the consequences of inappropriate therapy (ie, hepatotoxicity). 2Performing a confirmatory test following 
an initial positive result is based upon both the evidence that false-positive results are common among individuals who are unlikely to be infected with Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis and the committee’s presumption that performing a second test on those patients whose initial test was positive will help identify initial false-positive results. 
Abbreviations: IGRA, interferon-γ release assay; LTBI, latent tuberculosis infection; TST, tuberculin skin test.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e5
suspected pleural TB or peritoneal TB (conditional recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
• 
We suggest that AFB smear microscopy be performed, rather 
than not performed, on specimens collected from sites of 
suspected extrapulmonary TB (conditional recommenda-
tion, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: A positive result 
can be used as evidence of extrapulmonary TB and guide 
decision making because false-positive results are unlikely. 
However, a negative result may not be used to exclude TB 
because false-negative results are exceedingly common.
• 
We recommend that mycobacterial cultures be performed, 
rather than not performed, on specimens collected from 
sites of suspected extrapulmonary TB (strong recommen-
dation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: A positive result 
can be used as evidence of extrapulmonary TB and guide 
decision making because false-positive results are unlikely. 
However, a negative result may not be used to exclude TB 
because false-negative results are exceedingly common.
• 
We suggest that NAAT be performed, rather than not per-
formed, on specimens collected from sites of suspected 
extrapulmonary TB (conditional recommendation, very 
low-quality evidence). Remarks: A positive NAAT result 
can be used as evidence of extrapulmonary TB and guide 
decision making because false-positive results are unlikely. 
However, a negative NAAT result may not be used to exclude 
TB because false-negative results are exceedingly common. 
At present, NAAT testing on specimens other than sputum 
is an off-label use of the test.
• 
We suggest that histological examination be performed, 
rather than not performed, on specimens collected from 
sites of suspected extrapulmonary TB (conditional rec-
ommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: Both 
positive and negative results should be interpreted in 
the context of the clinical scenario because neither false- 
positive nor false-negative results are rare.
• 
We recommend one culture isolate from each mycobac-
terial culture-positive patient be submitted to a regional 
genotyping laboratory for genotyping (strong recommen-
dation, very low-quality evidence).
Persons infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) have a 
broad array of presentations, ranging from those with clinical, 
radiographic, and microbiological evidence of tuberculosis (TB 
disease) to those who are infected with Mtb but have no clini-
cal evidence of TB disease (latent tuberculosis infection [LTBI]). 
Individuals with LTBI who have been recently exposed have 
an increased risk of developing TB, whereas those with remote 
exposure have less risk over time unless they develop a condi-
tion that impairs immunity. Operationally, recent exposure can 
be defined either epidemiologically (ie, as might occur in the set-
ting of the household of an infectious case or occupational expo-
sure) or immunologically (ie, conversion of a tuberculin skin test 
or interferon-γ release assay [IGRA] from negative to positive).
These clinical practice guidelines on the diagnosis and classi-
fication of tuberculosis in adults and children were prepared by 
a task force supported by the American Thoracic Society (ATS), 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA). Additionally, 
Fellows of the American Academy of Pediatrics participated in 
the development of these guidelines. The specific objectives of 
these guidelines are as follows:
• 
To define high- and low-risk patient populations based 
upon the results of epidemiological studies.
• 
To provide diagnostic recommendations that lead to bene-
ficial treatments and favorable clinical outcomes.
• 
To describe a classification scheme for tuberculosis that is 
based on pathogenesis.
These guidelines target clinicians in high-resource coun-
tries with a low incidence of TB disease and LTBI, such as the 
United States. The recommendations may be less applicable to 
medium- and high-tuberculosis incidence countries. For such 
countries, guidance documents published by the World Health 
Organization (WHO) may be more suitable.
HOW 
TO USE 
THESE GUIDELINES
These guidelines are not intended to impose a standard of care. 
They provide the basis for rational decisions in the diagnos-
tic evaluation of patients with possible LTBI or TB. Clinicians, 
patients, third-party payers, stakeholders, or the courts should 
never view the recommendations contained in these guidelines 
as dictates. Guidelines cannot take into account all of the often 
compelling unique individual clinical circumstances. Therefore, 
no one charged with evaluating clinicians’ actions should 
attempt to apply the recommendations from these guidelines by 
rote or in a blanket fashion. Qualifying remarks accompanying 
each recommendation are its integral parts and serve to facili-
tate more accurate interpretation. They should never be omit-
ted when quoting or translating recommendations from these 
guidelines.
METHODS
Committee Selection
The criteria for committee selection were an (1) established track 
record in the relevant clinical or research area; (2) involvement 
with the ATS Assembly on Microbiology, Tuberculosis and 
Pulmonary Infections, the IDSA Tuberculosis Committee, or 
employment by the United States CDC Division of Tuberculosis 
Elimination; and (3) absence of disqualifying conflicts of interest. 
Conflicts of interest were managed according to the policies and 
procedures agreed upon by the participating organizations [1].
The committee was divided into subcommittees assigned to 
develop drafts for each of the following areas: (1) LTBI, (2) clini-
cal and radiological aspects of TB diagnosis, (3) microbiological 
evaluation for TB diagnosis and detection of drug resistance, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e6 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
and (4) pediatric TB diagnosis. Meetings were held either 
in-person or via teleconference.
Evidence Synthesis
Each subcommittee identified key diagnostic questions and then 
performed a pragmatic evidence synthesis for each question, to 
identify and summarize the related evidence. The subcommit-
tees first sought studies comparing one diagnostic intervention 
with another and measuring clinical outcomes. Such evidence 
was unavailable, so the subcommittees next sought diagnostic 
accuracy studies. When published evidence was lacking, the 
collective clinical experience of the committee was used. The 
evidence syntheses were used to inform the recommendations. 
Though comprehensive, the evidence syntheses should not be 
considered systematic reviews of the evidence.
Developing and Grading Recommendations
Recommendations were formulated and the quality of evidence 
and strength of each recommendation were rated using the 
Grading, Recommendations, Assessment, Development and 
Evaluation (GRADE) approach [2, 3].
The quality of evidence is the extent to which one can be con-
fident that the estimated effects are close to the actual effects 
and was rated as high, moderate, low, or very low. The quality of 
evidence rating derived from the quality of the accuracy studies 
that informed the panel’s judgments, as randomized trials and 
controlled observational studies were lacking. Well-done accu-
racy studies that enrolled consecutive patients with legitimate 
diagnostic uncertainty and used appropriate reference stand-
ards represented high-quality evidence; lack of these charac-
teristics constituted reasons to downgrade the quality evidence. 
Normally, the quality of evidence for first-line therapy would 
have been factored into such quality of evidence ratings but, in 
this case, the quality of evidence that treatment of TB disease and 
LTBI improve outcomes is high quality, so the overall quality of 
evidence rating was determined entirely by the accuracy study.
The decision to recommend for or against an intervention 
was based upon consideration of the balance of desirable conse-
quences (ie, benefits) and undesirable consequences (ie, harms, 
burdens), quality of the evidence, patient values and preferences, 
cost, resource use, and feasibility. The subcommittees used open 
discussion to arrive at a consensus for each of the recommen-
dations. An open voting procedure was reserved for situations 
when the subcommittee could not reach consensus through 
discussion, but this was not needed for any recommendation.
The strength of a recommendation indicates the committee’s 
certainty that the desirable consequences of the recommended 
course of action outweigh the undesirable consequences. 
A strong recommendation is one for which the subcommittee is 
certain, whereas a conditional recommendation is one for which 
the subcommittee is uncertain. Uncertainty may exist if the qual-
ity of evidence is poor, there is a fine balance between desirable 
and undesirable consequences (ie, the benefits may not be worth 
the costs or burdens), the balance of desirable and undesirable 
consequences depends upon the clinical context, or there is 
variation about how individuals value the outcomes. A strong 
recommendation should be interpreted as the right thing to do 
for the vast majority of patients; a weak recommendation should 
be interpreted as being the right thing to do for the majority of 
patients, but maybe not for a sizeable minority of patients.
TUBERCULOSIS: EPIDEMIOLOGY
, TRANSMISSION, 
AND PATHOGENESIS
A full discussion of these topics can be found in the 
Supplementary Materials. TB disease remains one of the 
major causes of morbidity and mortality in the world. 
 
The WHO estimates that 8.6 million new cases of tuberculosis 
occurred in 2014 and approximately 1.5 million persons died from 
the disease [4]. The emergence of drug-resistant tuberculosis has 
become apparent over the past 2 decades, and in particular, mul-
tidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB; resistant to isoniazid and 
rifampin) and extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB; 
resistant to isoniazid and rifampin, plus any fluoroquinolone and at 
least 1 of 3 injectable second-line drugs [ie, amikacin, kanamycin, 
or capreomycin]), which are more difficult to treat than drug-sus-
ceptible disease [5, 6]. The approximate number of cases of 
MDR-TB in the world is roughly 500 000 reported from at least 127 
countries, and XDR-TB has been reported from 105 countries [4].
In the United States, 9412 cases of TB disease were reported in 
2014, with a rate of 3.0 cases per 100 000 persons. Sixty-six per-
cent of cases were in foreign-born persons; the rate of disease was 
13.4 times higher in foreign-born persons than in US- born indi-
viduals (15.3 vs 1.1 per 100 000, respectively) [7]. An estimated 
11 million persons are infected with Mtb [8]. Thus, although 
the case rate of TB in the United States has declined during the 
past several years, there remains a large reservoir of individuals 
who are infected with Mtb. Without the application of improved 
diagnosis and effective treatment for LTBI, new cases of TB will 
develop from within this group, which is therefore a major focus 
for the control and elimination of tuberculosis [9].
Mtb is transmitted from person to person via the airborne 
route [10]. Several factors determine the probability of Mtb 
transmission: (1) infectiousness of the source patient—a posi-
tive sputum smear for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) or a cavity on chest 
radiograph being strongly associated with infectiousness; (2) 
host susceptibility of the contact; (3) duration of exposure of the 
contact to the source patient; (4) the environment in which the 
exposure takes place (a small, poorly ventilated space providing 
the highest risk); and (5) infectiousness of the Mtb strain. In the 
United States, among contacts of patients with TB disease eval-
uated during a contact investigation, about 1% have TB disease 
themselves and 23% have a positive tuberculin skin test (TST) 
without evidence of tuberculosis disease and are considered 
to have LTBI [11]. Those who are household contacts and are 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e7
exposed to patients who are smear positive have higher rates of 
both infection and disease [12]. Medical procedures that gener-
ate aerosols of respiratory secretions, such as sputum induction 
and bronchoscopy, entail significant risk for Mtb transmission 
unless proper precautions are taken [13].
Initial Infection: Acquisition of Latent Mtb Infection
After inhalation, the droplet nucleus is carried down the bron-
chial tree and implants in a respiratory bronchiole or alveolus. 
Whether or not inhaled tubercle bacilli establish an infection 
depends on both host and microbial factors [14]. It is hypoth-
esized that, following infection, but before the development of 
cellular immunity, tubercle bacilli spread via the lymphatics to 
the hilar lymph nodes and then through the bloodstream to 
more distant anatomic sites [15]. The majority of pulmonary 
tuberculosis infections are clinically and radiographically unap-
parent [16]. A positive TST or IGRA result, most commonly, 
is the only indication that infection with Mtb has taken place.
Those who develop a positive TST are considered to have 
LTBI. It is estimated that, in the absence of treatment, approx-
imately 4%–6% of individuals who acquire LTBI will develop 
active TB disease during their lifetime. The greatest risk of pro-
gression is during the first 2 years following exposure [11, 17]. 
The ability of the host to contain the organism is reduced in 
young (<4 years) children and by certain diseases such as silico-
sis, diabetes mellitus, and diseases associated with immunosup-
pression (eg, human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection), 
as well as by corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive 
drugs such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) inhibitors. 
In these circumstances, the likelihood of progression to TB dis-
ease is greater. For example, individuals who have a prior latent 
infection with Mtb (not treated) and then acquire HIV infection 
will develop TB disease at an approximate rate of 5%–10% per 
year (in the absence of effective HIV treatment) [18, 19].
DIAGNOSTIC 
TESTS FOR LTBI
The aim of testing for LTBI is to identify those who will benefit 
from prophylactic therapy. At present, the likelihood of complet-
ing LTBI treatment is relatively modest. In some reports, only 
17%–37% of those eligible for LTBI therapy ultimately complete 
the treatment course, with higher rates of completion associated 
with shorter courses of therapy [20, 21]. Once therapy has been 
initiated, completion rates are more favorable [22]. It is hoped 
that better diagnostic tests, testing strategies, and treatment reg-
imens will allow for resources to be focused on patients who are 
most deserving of evaluation and treatment of LTBI and, there-
fore, result in increased completion of therapy rates.
Tuberculin Skin Testing
The tuberculin skin test (TST) detects cell-mediated immunity 
to Mtb through a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction using a 
protein precipitate of heat-inactivated tubercle bacilli (purified 
protein derivative [PPD]–tuberculin). The TST has been the 
standard method of diagnosing LTBI.
The TST is administered by the intradermal injection of 
0.1 mL of PPD (5 TU) into the volar surface of the forearm 
(Mantoux method) to produce a transient wheal. The test is 
interpreted at 48–72 hours by measuring the transverse diame-
ter of the palpable induration. TST interpretation is risk-strat-
ified [23]. A reaction of 5 mm or greater is considered positive 
for close contacts of tuberculosis cases; immunosuppressed 
persons, in particular persons with HIV infection; individu-
als with clinical or radiographic evidence of current or prior 
TB; and persons receiving TNF blocking agents. A reaction of 
≥10 mm is considered positive for other persons at increased 
risk of LTBI (eg, persons born in high TB incidence countries 
and those with at risk of occupational exposure to TB) and 
for persons with medical risk factors that increase the prob-
ability of progression from LTBI to TB (Figure 1). A reaction 
of 15 mm or greater is considered positive for all other per-
sons. Serious adverse reactions to PPD-tuberculin are rare. 
However, strong reactions with vesiculation and ulceration 
may occur.
The sensitivity of the TST, as measured in clinically well per-
sons with previously treated tuberculosis, is high (95%–98%). 
False-negative reactions occur more frequently in infants and 
young children, early (<6–8 weeks) after infection, in persons 
having recently received viral vaccination, in persons with 
clinical conditions associated with immunosuppression (eg, 
HIV infection) or overwhelming illness (including extensive 
or disseminated tuberculosis), after recent viral and bacterial 
infections, and in association with treatment with immunosup-
pressive drugs (eg, high-dose corticosteroids, TNF inhibitors).
Test specificity of the TST is decreased among persons with 
prior BCG vaccination, especially those vaccinated postinfancy 
and those with repeat vaccination. Similarly, persons living in 
areas where nontuberculous mycobacteria are common are at 
increased risk of having false-positive TST reactions. Repeated 
administration of TSTs cannot induce reactivity; however, a 
repeat TST can restore reactivity in persons whose TST reac-
tivity has waned over time. Because of this “boosting phenom-
enon,” initial repeat testing is recommended for persons with a 
negative TST who are to undergo periodic TST screening and 
who have not been tested with tuberculin recently (eg, 1 year).” 
This “2-step” testing, with a repeat TST within 1–3 weeks after 
an initial negative TST, is intended to avoid misclassification of 
subsequent positive TSTs as a TST conversion, indicating recent 
infection, when they are actually a result of boosting.
Benefits and Limitations of the TST
The benefits of the TST include its simplicity to perform (it 
does not require a laboratory or equipment and can be done 
by a trained healthcare worker in remote locations), its low 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e8 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
cost, no need for phlebotomy, the observation that it reflects a 
polycellular immune response, and the foundation of well-con-
trolled studies that support the use of the TST to detect LTBI 
and guide the use of prophylactic therapy [24]. In addition, 
there are well-established definitions of TST conversion, which 
are particularly helpful when using the TST in the setting of 
serial testing.
Limitations include the need for trained personnel to both 
administer the intradermal injection and interpret the test, 
inter- and intrareader variability in interpretation, the need for 
a return visit to have the test read, false-positive results due to 
the cross-reactivity of the antigens within the PPD to both BCG 
and nontuberculous mycobacteria, false-negative results due to 
infections and other factors, rare adverse effects, and compli-
cated interpretation due to boosting, conversions, and rever-
sions [24].
Interferon-Gamma Release Assays
Overview of IGRAs
Until recently, the TST has been the only method to test for 
latent infection with Mtb. Ideally, an improved diagnostic test 
would specifically identify those with Mtb infection and would 
delineate those at risk for disease progression. In this regard, the 
TST has well-known strengths and limitations [23, 25, 26]. The 
IGRAs are newer tests to diagnose infection with Mtb. IGRAs 
are in vitro, T cell–based assays that measure interferon gamma 
(IFN-γ) release by sensitized T cells in response to highly spe-
cific Mtb antigens.
Immune Basis of IGRAs
Like the TST, the IGRA is a reflection of the cellular immune 
response. The discovery of antigens that have elicited robust 
immune responses and are relatively specific for infection with 
Mtb has enabled the development of IGRA assays, which are 
more specific for Mtb infection than the TST [27], particularly 
in the setting of BCG vaccination. Of particular interest has 
been the RD-1 gene segment, a 9.5-kb DNA segment absent 
from all strains of Mycobacterium bovis BCG but present in 
wild-type M. bovis and Mtb [28]. This region, containing 11 
open reading frames, is responsible for the transcription and 
translation of a variety of antigenic proteins, including early 
secretory antigen (ESAT-6) [29–33] and culture filtrate protein 
(CFP-10) [34–37]. Both antigens are absent from all attenuated 
strains of M. bovis (BCG strains) and most nontuberculous 
mycobacteria with the important exceptions of Mycobacterium 
kansasii, Mycobacterium szulgai, Mycobacterium marinum [32, 
38], and Mycobacterium leprae [39, 40].
IGRA assays are primarily a reflection of a CD4+ T-cell 
immune response to these antigens. Immunologic memory 
is characterized by the clonal expansion of antigen-specific T 
cells following exposure to an antigen. Effector memory T cells 
are defined by their capacity to respond rapidly to subsequent 
antigenic exposure. This response is characterized by the 
release of cytokines, as well as further expansion of these cells. 
Responses measured in current short-term IGRA assays reflect 
the presence of these cells. Although it has been postulated 
measurement of these short-term effectors might reflect recent 
infection and/or ongoing bacterial replication, current evidence 
does not support this hypothesis [41–43].
Commercially Available IGRAs
Currently, there are 2 commercially available IGRA platforms that 
measure interferon-γ release in response to Mtb-specific antigens: 
the QuantiFERON TB Gold In Tube (QFT-GIT; Cellestis Limited, 
Carnegie, Victoria, Australia) and T-SPOT.TB test (T-SPOT, 
manufactured by Oxford Immunotec Ltd, Abingdon, United 
Kingdom). The QFT-GIT measures IFN-γ plasma concentration 
using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), while 
the T-SPOT assay enumerates T cells releasing IFN-γ using an 
enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assay.
QuantiFERON Assays
The QFT-GIT method has been approved by the US Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) and has replaced the 
QuantiFERON-TB Gold (QFT-G) test. Whole blood (mini-
mum 3 mL) is drawn directly into heparinized tubes coated 
with lyophilized antigen and agitated. In this case, peptides from 
ESAT-6, CFP-10, and TB7.7 are found within the same tube. 
Two additional tubes are drawn as controls (mitogen control and 
nil control). The mitogen control (phytohemagglutinin [PHA]) 
stimulates T-cell proliferation and ensures that viable cells are 
present. After incubation for 16–24 hours at 37°C, plasma is col-
lected from each tube and the concentration of IFN-γ is deter-
mined for each by ELISA. The in-tube methodology requires 
no additional sample handling. Perhaps because of the nearly 
immediate exposure of T cells to antigen, as well as the addition 
of the TB7.7 peptide, the QFT-GIT may be more sensitive than 
the QFT-G test. Studies reporting the sensitivity and specificity 
of the QFT-GIT test are provided in Supplementary Tables 1 and 
2, respectively. The next generation of QFT (QFTPlus) has been 
introduced in Europe and is pending approval in the United 
States. QFTPlus contains a tube of short peptides derived from 
CFP-10, which are designed to elicit an enhanced CD8 T-cell 
response. There is no TB7.7 peptide. No published information 
is available to evaluate the performance of this test.
The QFT-GIT assay is considered positive if the difference 
between the IFN-γ concentration in response to the Mtb anti-
gens and the IFN-γ response to the nil control is ≥0.35 IU. In 
addition, to control for high background in the nil control, the 
IFN-γ response to antigen must be 25% greater than the IFN-γ 
concentration in the NIL control. An indeterminate response 
defined as either a lack of response in the PHA control well 
(IFN-γ concentration ≤0.5 IU) or a nil control that has a very 
high background (IFN-γ concentration >8 IU).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e9
T-SPOT.TB Assays
The T-SPOT.TB assay is currently available in Europe, Canada, 
and has been approved for use in the United States with revised 
criteria for test interpretation. For the T-SPOT.TB assay, blood 
(minimum 2 mL) is drawn into either a heparin or CPT Ficoll 
tube, and must be processed within 8 hours. More recently, this 
time has been extended to 32 hours if the “T-cell Xtend” additive is 
used and the blood kept between 10°C and 25°C. Peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are separated using density gradient 
centrifugation, enumerated, and then added to microtiter wells at 
2.5 × 105 viable PBMCs per well that have been coated with mon-
oclonal antibodies to IFN-γ (ELISPOT assay). Peptides derived 
from ESAT-6 and CFP-10 antigens are then added and the plate is 
developed following overnight (16–20 hours) incubation at 37°C. 
Cells are then washed away and “captured” IFN-γ is then detected 
via a sandwich capture technique by conjugation with secondary 
antibodies hence revealing a “spot.
” These spots are then enumer-
ated as “footprints” [44] of effector T cells [44, 45].
For the T-SPOT.TB assay, a positive response is based on 
spot-forming units (SFU). Outside of the United States, if the 
negative control well contains ≤5 SFU and there are >6 SFU 
above the media nil control in either of the antigen wells, then 
this is considered positive. If the negative control well has ≥6 
SFU, then the antigen wells must be at least 2 times the negative 
control well for a response to be considered positive. An invalid 
response is defined as high background in the negative control 
well (≥10 SFU) or if the positive control well is not responsive 
to mitogen (PHA, <20 SFU). The FDA has published revised 
criteria for T-SPOT.TB interpretation in the United States, in 
which a test is considered negative if there are ≤4 spots. Eight 
spots or greater is considered positive. Five, 6, and 7 spots are 
considered “borderline” and would be interpreted in conjunc-
tion with the subject’s pretest probability of infection with Mtb. 
Studies reporting the sensitivity and specificity of the T-SPOT 
test are provided in Supplementary Tables 3 and 4, respectively.
Indeterminate/Invalid IGRA Responses
Unlike the TST, in which the results are interpreted categorically 
based on the size of the reaction [46], the IGRAs currently have 
a trichotomous outcome yielding a positive, negative, or inde-
terminate result (T-SPOT may also yield a borderline result as 
described above). As described above, an indeterminate/invalid 
IGRA can result from either a high background (nil) response or 
from a poor response to positive control mitogen. Indeterminate 
IGRA results are associated with immunosuppression [47–49], 
although they may occur in healthy individuals (studies report-
ing the test characteristics of IGRAs in individuals with immu-
nosuppression are provided in Supplementary Tables 5 and 6). 
With regard to those with a poor response to the positive con-
trol mitogen, there are at least 2 possibilities. First, the test may 
not have been correctly performed. For example, errors in spec-
imen collection, long delays in specimen processing, incubator 
malfunction, or technical errors might result in a poor mito-
gen response. Here, it is reasonable to simply repeat the assay. 
Second, a persistently diminished response to mitogen may 
be a reflection of anergy. Thus, the reproducibility and details 
regarding the reason for an indeterminate result may provide 
clinically useful information.
Reproducibility of IGRAs
Because IGRAs are predicated on in vitro release of cytokines 
from stimulated cells, there is likely to be more variability in 
these tests than those based on the measurement of a circu-
lating substance such as sodium. There are at least 4 sources 
of variability which are inherent in the IGRA: (1) the type of 
measurement itself (ie, ELISA or ELISPOT), (2) reproducibility 
of a complex biological reaction, (3) the natural variability of 
immune responses, and (4) variability introduced during the 
course of test performance or manufacturing variances.
Reproducibility has been evaluated for both the QFT and 
T-SPOT assays. Although published information regarding 
currently available tests is limited [50, 51] the QFT-IT result 
was reported to have an 11% variance (http://www.access-
data.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf/P010033). Studies on within 
subject variability of the QFT-IT are limited and most were 
performed in areas of the world where Mtb is endemic and 
variability over time due to reinfection would be expected 
[50, 51]. Recently, intrasubject variability of QFT-IT was 
assessed using available plasma, and a discordance rate of 8% 
between the first and second tests was observed. While the 
variations were quantitatively modest, results at or near the 
cutoff resulted in differing test results [52]. This variability 
might spuriously change the test result (positive to negative 
or negative to positive). Consequently, values at or near the 
test cutoff should be interpreted with caution. Variability of 
the T-SPOT was dependent on the strength of the response, 
and varied from 4% in those with robust responses, to 22% in 
those whose responses were close to the cutoff (http://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cftopic/pma/pma.
cfm?num=p070006).
Boosting of IGRAs
Initial studies found that repeat TST testing did not alter the 
IGRA response [53, 54]. However, more recent evidence [50, 
51] suggests that the prior placement of a TST can boost an 
IGRA, particularly in those individuals who were already IGRA 
positive to begin with (ie, previously sensitized to Mtb or pos-
sibly other mycobacteria). Additionally, it was found that this 
could be observed in as little as 3 days post-TST administration, 
and that the boosting effect may wane after several months [50, 
51]. While these data do not detract from the excellent overall 
agreement that has been reported, they suggest when dual test-
ing is to be considered that the IGRA be collected either con-
currently or prior to TST placement.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e10 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
Special Considerations
Because IGRAs rely on a functional assessment of viable lympho-
cytes, these tests require special attention to the technical aspects 
of the test. This includes proper filling of the blood collection tube, 
proper mixing, timely transport to the laboratory, and timely pro-
cessing of the specimen. Additionally, for the laboratory, perfor-
mance of cellular assays may pose unique challenges with regard to 
reagent storage and preparation as well as the separation of viable 
cells. Finally, manufacturing problems such as endotoxin contam-
ination can confound assays that depend on cellular activation.
Benefits and Limitations of IGRAs
The benefits of IGRAs include the use of antigens that are 
largely specific for Mtb (ie, no cross-reactivity with BCG and 
minimal cross-reactivity with nontuberculous mycobacteria), 
the test can be performed in a single visit, and both the perfor-
mance and reporting of results in a laboratory setting fall under 
the auspices of regulatory certification [24].
Limitations include cost, the need for phlebotomy (which 
may be particularly challenging in children), complicated inter-
pretation due to frequent conversions and reversions and lack 
of consensus on thresholds, and inconsistent test reproducibility 
[24]. The reproducibility of results is particularly problematic in 
the setting of serial testing. While some of this can be attributed 
to results that fall near the cutoff, this is not always the case, and 
current data does not provide specific guidance. Data on the 
effect of IGRA-guided therapy on prevention of TB disease is 
limited, although one study demonstrated a roughly 84% reduc-
tion in TB disease among household contacts who received 
IGRA-based preventive therapy [55]. Finally, several studies 
have reported an increased rate of indeterminate IGRA results in 
children <5 years of age [47, 56–60] and one study described an 
increased rate of indeterminate IGRA results among individuals 
with HIV infection and a CD4 count ≤200 cells/µL [61]
DIAGNOSTIC 
APPROACH: 
TESTING 
FOR 
SUSPECTED LTBI
This section addresses how to test for LTBI. A complementary 
ATS/CDC/IDSA guideline that addresses who to screen for 
LTBI and how to treat LTBI is in development and forthcoming.
No definitive diagnostic test for LTBI exists. Our recommen-
dations for diagnostic testing for LTBI are based upon the likeli-
hood of infection with Mtb and the likelihood of progression to 
TB disease if infected, as illustrated in Figure 1. The recommen-
dations are summarized in Figure 2. As our literature searches 
failed to identify randomized trials or observational studies that 
directly compared different diagnostic approaches and meas-
ured clinical outcomes, our recommendations are based upon 
evidence about the accuracy of various tests combined with evi-
dence that treatment of LTBI improves clinical outcomes.
There are 2 major benefits of treating LTBI: Treating LTBI 
prevents progression to active TB disease with its attendant 
morbidities [62] and has public health benefits, as each new 
case is likely to infect others. The consequences of failing to pre-
vent progression to active TB disease may be especially severe 
in the young or immunocompromised host, in whom the dis-
ease is more likely to be disseminated and elude discovery, and 
has a higher mortality rate. Failure to rapidly diagnose TB dis-
ease also poses a risk of widespread transmission in hospitals, 
homeless shelters, and prisons.
Patients with LTBI have a 4%–6% lifetime risk of developing TB 
disease, with approximately half of these cases occurring follow-
ing recent exposure [11, 17]. Multiple placebo-controlled trials in 
adults and children with LTBI have shown that isoniazid reduces 
the subsequent development of TB disease in patients at high risk 
of progression. As an example, in a trial of 28 000 individuals with 
LTBI and radiographic evidence of healed tuberculosis, isonia-
zid taken for 52 weeks reduced the subsequent development of 
TB disease from 14.3% to 3.6% [62]. Other groups in which the 
treatment of LTBI has been demonstrated to reduce the incidence 
of TB disease include household contacts of active TB patients 
[55, 63], native Alaskan communities [64], residents of mental 
health facilities [65], persons with HIV infection [66–69], and 
individuals treated with TNF inhibitors [70, 71]. These data can 
be extrapolated to populations at low risk for progression (ie, no 
risk factors) and intermediate risk for progression (ie, diabetes, 
chronic renal disease, intravenous drug abuse); while the relative 
benefit of treatment is probably similar in these lower risk popu-
lations, the absolute benefit is almost certainly smaller due to the 
lower baseline risk of progression to TB disease.
These studies provide high-quality evidence that treatment 
of LTBI reduces the incidence of TB disease in populations at 
high risk for progression. However, they provide only moder-
ate-quality evidence that treatment of LTBI reduces the inci-
dence of TB disease in populations at low or intermediate risk 
for progression because the data are from high-risk populations.
Our recommendations for the diagnosis of LTBI reflect both 
the likelihood of infection (either likely or unlikely, based upon 
studies that used the TST to detect LTBI) and the risk of pro-
gression if infected (low; intermediate, RR 1.3–3; and high, RR 
3–10). This paradigm is summarized in Figure 1.
Question 1: Should an IGRA or a TST be performed in indi-
viduals 5 years or older who are likely to be infected with 
Mtb, who have a low or intermediate risk of disease progres-
sion, and in whom it has been decided that testing for LTBI 
is warranted?
Evidence
In individuals who are likely to be infected with Mtb but at low 
or intermediate risk of disease progression, the sensitivity of 
IGRAs in the detection of Mtb infection has been consistently 
reported as either equal (QFT; 81%–86%) or superior (T-SPOT; 
90%–95%) to the sensitivity of the TST (71%–82%) [47, 72–94] 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e11
when a final diagnosis of either microbiologically confirmed or 
clinical TB is used as the reference standard. Individuals who 
are likely to be infected with Mtb include household contacts 
(studies reporting the test characteristics of IGRAs in contacts 
are provided in Supplementary Table 7), recent exposures of 
an active case, mycobacteriology laboratory personnel, immi-
grants from high-burden countries, and residents or employees 
of high-risk congregate settings. Individuals at low risk of pro-
gression to TB include those with no risk factors, while those at 
intermediate risk of progression to TB include those with diabe-
tes, chronic renal failure, or intravenous drug abuse.
In patients who are known to have received vaccination with 
BCG, the specificity of IGRAs has also been consistently supe-
rior to TST testing, presumably because IGRAs rely on responses 
to antigens absent in BCG and many nontuberculous mycobac-
teria. In contrast, among patients who have not received vac-
cination with BCG, the specificity of IGRAs and TST appears 
similar. Meta-analyses estimate that the specificity of QFT–IT 
to be >95%, whereas the specificity for TST is roughly 97% in 
those with no prior exposure to BCG. The specificity is reduced 
to roughly 60% in those with a history of BCG vaccination [24]. 
Data for the commercially available T-SPOT are more limited. 
In German healthcare workers, specificity (using a cutoff of 6 
spots) was reported at 97%, whereas in Korean adolescents the 
specificity was 85% [49]. In Navy recruits, specificity was 99% 
using the 8-spot cutoff [95].
Our confidence in the estimated test characteristics was 
moderate because many of the studies did not report whether 
the subjects were consecutively enrolled.
Recommendation 1a: We recommend performing an IGRA 
rather than a TST in individuals 5 years or older who meet the 
following criteria: (1) are likely to be infected with Mtb, (2) have 
a low or intermediate risk of disease progression, (3) it has been 
decided that testing for LTBI is warranted, and (4) either have 
a history of BCG vaccination or are unlikely to return to have 
their TST read (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evi-
dence). Remarks: A TST is an acceptable alternative, especially 
in situations where an IGRA is not available, too costly, or too 
burdensome.
Recommendation 1b: We suggest performing an IGRA 
rather than a TST in all other individuals 5 years or older who 
are likely to be infected with Mtb, who have a low or intermedi-
ate risk of disease progression, and in whom it has been decided 
that testing for LTBI is warranted (conditional recommendation, 
moderate-quality evidence). Remarks: A TST is an acceptable 
alternative, especially in situations where an IGRA is not availa-
ble, too costly, or too burdensome.
Rationale
Accuracy studies indicate that IGRAs are more specific and 
equally or more sensitive than TST in individuals who have 
received the BCG vaccination; therefore, false-positive results 
are less likely with IGRAs than TST. This is important because 
false-positive results may lead to unnecessary treatment and its 
accompanying risks (ie, hepatotoxicity) [96–98]. To minimize 
these risks, the guideline development panel chose to recom-
mend IGRA testing for individuals who received the BCG 
vaccination.
In contrast, the accuracy of TST and IGRAs appears similar 
in those without a history of BCG vaccination. Despite the sim-
ilar test characteristics, the guideline development committee 
chose to suggest IGRA testing over TST testing in such patients 
because it was concerned about the reliability of a history of 
having received or not received the BCG vaccination. Because 
many of the individuals who fall into the likely to be infected 
with Mtb category are from regions of the world in which the 
BCG vaccination is routinely administered, the committee con-
cluded that individuals who are likely to be infected with Mtb 
and provide history of not having received the BCG vaccination 
should be treated the same as those who provide a history of 
having received the BCG vaccination, unless there is a reason 
to choose an alternate approach such as IGRA testing not being 
available, being too costly, or being too burdensome.
The recommendation to perform IGRA testing rather than 
TST testing is strong for those who have received the BCG vac-
cination or who are not likely to return for TST read, reflecting 
the guideline development committee’s certainty that avoiding 
the serious consequences of false-positive results and obtaining 
a result to guide therapy outweigh the additional cost and need 
to perform phlebotomy for IGRA testing. In contrast, the sug-
gestion to perform IGRA testing rather than TST testing on all 
other patients who are likely to be infected with Mtb and have a 
low or moderate risk of progressing to TB disease is conditional, 
reflecting the committee’s recognition that the choice should 
depend upon the clinical context as the test characteristics are 
similar. While the committee concluded that IGRA testing is 
preferable in most patients, it recognized that TST testing may 
be more appropriate in a sizeable minority due to availability, 
feasibility, cost, or burden.
Justification for Extending the Recommendation Down to  
5 Years of Age
Young children are at increased risk of developing TB following 
infection and more likely to develop severe disease than older 
children and adults [99, 100]. This risk is highest in the young-
est infants, diminishes with increasing age, and becomes equiv-
alent with older children and adults at approximately 5 years 
of age. Thus, children ≥5 years old have a similar risk of TB 
as adults and display a similar disease spectrum. With respect 
to Mtb infection, children aged ≥5 years possess a functional 
immune response equivalent to that of adults. In addition, the 
results of existing studies of IGRA performance in children 
≥5 years of age, albeit limited, are consistent with results of stud-
ies of IGRA performance in adults. The sensitivity of IGRAs in 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e12 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
children with TB [56, 59, 101–105] and in older children who 
are household [106, 107] or school [108] contacts and the spec-
ificity of IGRAs in children [102, 108] are comparable to those 
of adults. For these reasons, it seems reasonable to extrapolate 
the results of studies of IGRA performance in healthy adults to 
children aged ≥5 years.
Cautions and Limitations
While both IGRA and TST testing provide evidence for infec-
tion with Mtb, they cannot distinguish active from latent tuber-
culosis. Therefore, the diagnosis of active TB must be excluded 
prior to embarking on treatment for LTBI. This is typically 
done by determining whether or not symptoms suggestive of 
TB disease are present, performing a chest radiograph and, if 
radiographic signs of active tuberculosis (eg, airspace opacities, 
pleural effusions, cavities, or changes on serial radiographs) 
are seen, then sampling is performed and the patient managed 
accordingly.
Quantitative aspects of the tests are poorly understood. With 
respect to the TST, the result is categorized as positive or nega-
tive and quantitative data are of limited utility, with the excep-
tion of recognition that a large (>15 mm) skin test reaction is 
more likely to reflect infection with Mtb [109, 110]. The dichot-
omous characterization of the result, coupled with the fact that 
repeat testing is not recommended in the setting of a prior posi-
tive test result, has resulted in a paucity of information about the 
variability of the TST result over time. With respect to IGRAs, 
measurement of IFN-γ over time may reflect inherent variabil-
ity in the test result (the FDA accepts a variance of 11%) or true 
immunological variation due to alterations in the abundance of 
Mtb antigens, exposure to other antigens, and/or the health and 
nutritional status of the host. As an example, it is possible that 
a rise in IFN-γ might reflect ongoing exposure and/or growth 
of the bacteria. Alternatively, a rise in IFN- γ may reflect var-
iability of the test. At present, there are insufficient data upon 
which to base any recommendations for quantitative interpre-
tation of IGRAs beyond those cut-points recommended by the 
FDA. However, it is important to recognize that the optimal 
cut-points are controversial and results near the cut-point are 
less reliable than results far above or below the cut-point. The 
results of IFN-γ testing should be reported quantitatively such 
that these immune correlates of the natural history of TB can 
be prospectively discerned and ultimately applied to clinical 
practice.
Discordance between TST and IGRA testing is common. 
Not surprisingly, TST-positive/IGRA-negative discordance is 
often seen in persons with prior exposure to BCG. However, 
TST-positive/IGRA-negative discordant results where the TST 
is well over 15 mm have also been reported. The reasons for 
this delayed type hypersensitivity are not understood. It could 
relate to the possibility that discordance may reflect immune 
responses that have occurred in the remote past (and where the 
antigen is currently not available to drive an ongoing response 
that can be measured by IGRA), may reflect immune differences 
inherent in a delayed-type hypersensitivity versus blood assay, 
or may reflect exposures to nontuberculous mycobacteria. In 
low-risk populations, discordant tests are likely to be false posi-
tives [61, 111]. Clearly, more information is desirable regarding 
which test best reflects productive infection and, therefore, best 
reflects the likelihood of disease progression.
The benefit of targeted testing for LTBI resides not in the 
test employed, but in its programmatic use. We acknowledge 
that programmatic considerations such as cost, test availability, 
prevalence of BCG exposure in the target population, ability to 
reevaluate the patient 2–3 days after testing, and the training 
and expertise of program staff might all affect the decision to 
use IGRA- or TST-based evaluations.
Question 2: Should an IGRA or a TST be performed in indi-
viduals 5 years or older who are likely to be infected with 
Mtb, who have a high risk of progression to disease, and in 
whom it has been decided that testing for LTBI is warranted?
Evidence
Individuals at high risk of progression to TB include those 
with HIV infection, an abnormal chest radiograph consist-
ent with prior TB, or silicosis. It also includes those who are 
receiving immunosuppressive therapy. Most data about the 
accuracy of the TST and IGRA are from patients who are 
immunocompromised.
Studies have compared TST and IGRAs in the setting of 
immunocompromise. Both diagnostic tests have diminished 
sensitivity in this setting. The sensitivity of IGRAs (QFT-IT and 
T-SPOT) for detecting LTBI in individuals with HIV infection 
has been estimated to be from 65% to 100% [112–114], while 
the sensitivity of TST is only 43% (25,85) when a final diagnosis 
of either microbiologically confirmed or clinical TB is used as 
the reference standard. These limited data suggest that IGRAs 
are at least as sensitive as TST in the setting of HIV infection. 
Studies have also compared IGRAs with TST in populations that 
were heterogeneous with respect to both the type of underlying 
immunocompromise and the reasons for testing. These stud-
ies demonstrated significant discord between TST and IGRA 
results, but the source of the discordance has not been eluci-
dated [61]. The panel’s confidence in the estimated test charac-
teristics of IGRA and TST testing was moderate because it was 
not reported whether patients were consecutively enrolled or 
whether there was true diagnostic uncertainty.
Recommendation 2: There are insufficient data to recom-
mend a preference for either a TST or an IGRA as the first-line 
diagnostic test in individuals 5 years or older who are likely to 
be infected with Mtb, who have a high risk of progression to 
disease, and in whom it has been determined that diagnostic 
testing for LTBI is warranted.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e13
Rationale
The committee judged the body of evidence insufficient to 
render a recommendation for either IGRA or TST testing in 
patients likely to be infected with Mtb who are at high risk for 
progression to disease because the estimated test characteristics 
were widely variable and derived from only a small subgroup of 
such patients (ie, immunocompromised patients).
As part of the discussion about which diagnostic test 
to perform in patients likely to be infected who are at high 
risk for progression to disease, many committee members 
acknowledged that they perform a second test in their clinical 
practices when such patients test negative; specifically, they 
perform a TST if an initial IGRA is negative or an IGRA if 
an initial TST is negative. If the second test is positive, they 
consider this evidence for infection with Mtb. Their practice is 
not based upon empirical evidence, but rather, the following 
clinical rationale. A sensitive diagnostic test is important for 
individuals who are likely to be infected with Mtb and at high 
risk of progression, so that such individuals are less likely to 
receive false-negative results that will result in delayed diagno-
sis and treatment. Performing a second diagnostic test when 
the initial test is negative is one strategy to increase sensitivity. 
While this strategy to increase sensitivity may reduce the spec-
ificity of diagnostic testing, this may be an acceptable tradeoff 
in situations in which it is determined that the consequences 
of missing LTBI (ie, not treating individuals who may benefit 
from therapy) exceed the consequences of inappropriate ther-
apy (ie, hepatotoxicity).
Cautions and Limitations
While both QFT and T-SPOT rely on the release of IFN-γ in 
response to RD-1 antigens, limited data have suggested that 
indeterminate results are more common for QFT-IT when 
the CD4 count is <200 cells/µL than T-SPOT [115]. This may 
be the result of T-SPOT using a defined number of PBMCs, 
which may better, but not completely, normalize for the lack of 
CD4+ T cells. By incorporating a measure of anergy into the 
test (Mitogen control), IGRAs may more accurately allow the 
clinician to discriminate a test that is negative from one that 
is indeterminate (anergic by virtue of inadequate responses to 
mitogen).
Question 3: Should an IGRA or a TST be performed in indi-
viduals 5 years or older who are unlikely to be infected with 
Mtb, but in whom it has been decided that testing for LTBI 
is warranted?
Evidence
There is a lack of direct evidence regarding the relative test 
characteristics of IGRA and TST testing in individuals who 
are unlikely to be infected with Mtb. Indirect evidence from 
individuals likely to be infected with Mtb indicates that IGRA 
testing is more specific than TST testing and equally or more 
sensitive than TST testing. We have no reason to suspect that 
these relative test characteristics will be different among indi-
viduals who are unlikely to be infected with Mtb. However, it 
is likely that false-positive results are more common for both 
IGRAs and TST in populations with a lower prevalence of LTBI. 
This is supported by a study of longitudinal testing of healthcare 
workers residing in areas of low TB prevalence, which found 
that most conversions were false-positive results as evidenced 
by a negative result on repeat testing [116].
The evidence provides low confidence in the estimated test 
characteristics in our population of interest because many of 
the estimates are based upon evidence from patients who are 
likely to be infected with a high risk for progression rather 
than patients who are unlikely to be infected, and many of the 
studies did not report whether subjects were consecutively 
enrolled.
Guidelines recommend that persons at low risk for Mtb infec-
tion and disease progression NOT be tested for Mtb infection. 
We concur with this recommendation. However, we also rec-
ognize that such testing may be obliged by law or credentialing 
bodies. If diagnostic testing for LTBI is performed in individu-
als who are unlikely to be infected with Mtb despite guidelines 
to the contrary.
Recommendation 3a: We suggest performing an IGRA 
instead of a TST in individuals 5 years or older (conditional 
recommendation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: A TST is an 
acceptable alternative in settings where an IGRA is unavailable, 
too costly, or too burdensome.
Recommendation 3b: We suggest a second diagnostic test 
if the initial test is positive in individuals 5 years or older 
(conditional recommendation, very low-quality evidence). 
Remarks: The confirmatory test may be either an IGRA or a 
TST. When such testing is performed, the person is consid-
ered infected only if both tests are positive.
Rationale
Current ATS/CDC and American Academy of Pediatrics guide-
lines recommend that testing for LTBI not be performed in 
individuals at low risk for infection with Mtb because the risk of 
isoniazid chemoprophylaxis may outweigh the potential benefit 
[117]. Despite this, testing is often performed in conjunction 
with school enrollment, employee health testing, and other 
institutional settings. In such patients, many conversions are 
false results, which may lead to unnecessary therapy and, there-
fore, unnecessary and age-related risk of hepatotoxicity.
The evidence indicates that false-positive results are frequent 
(ie, more common than true-positive results) among individ-
uals who are unlikely to be infected with Mtb. Use of a more 
specific test may result in fewer false-positive results and, there-
fore, fewer persons receiving unnecessary LTBI treatment and 
being placed at risk for adverse outcomes. In addition to the risk 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e14 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
associated with isoniazid chemoprophylaxis, those with a posi-
tive test for LTBI often undergo additional screening, including 
a chest radiograph. Avoiding such unnecessary screening has 
both cost and health benefits. The desire for a more specific test 
favors IGRA testing over TST, according to evidence described 
above from patients who are likely to be infected and who have 
a low or intermediate risk for progression. The notion of per-
forming a second, confirmatory test following an initial posi-
tive result is based upon the evidence that false-positive results 
are common among individuals who are unlikely to be infected 
with Mtb and the committee’s presumption that performing a 
second test on those whose initial test was positive will improve 
specificity.
The recommendations are both conditional because the 
quality of evidence provided the committee with limited confi-
dence in the estimated test characteristics of IGRAs and TST in 
individuals who are unlikely to be infected; therefore, the com-
mittee could not be certain that the desirable consequences of 
performing IGRAs instead of TST, or of performing a second 
test following a positive result, outweigh the undesirable conse-
quences in the vast majority of patients.
Cautions and Limitations (Testing for TB in Healthcare Workers)
Traditionally, once an individual has had a positive TST, 
future use of the TST for screening is not recommended due 
to the belief that the skin test will remain positive for life. 
In those who are TST negative, serial testing can be compli-
cated by random variability, boosting (ie, increased reactions 
upon retesting due to immunological memory), conversions 
(ie, new reactions due to new infection), and reversions (ie, 
decreased reactions). Criteria for the placement and reading 
of the TST, as well as the effect of boosting with PPD, criteria 
for TST conversion have been established. Receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) analysis has been used to establish crite-
ria for positive and negative IGRA results in those thought to 
be unlikely to be infected or those with TB disease. However, 
IGRAs have not proven to be the solution to the problem 
of false-positive results associated with serial testing in low 
risk individuals. At present, there is insufficient information 
available to guide the establishment of definitive criteria for 
the conversion and possible reversion of IGRAs. The issue of 
interpreting IGRA conversions and reversions in the context 
of serial testing has proven especially problematic. For exam-
ple, in a study of 216 Indian healthcare workers, a QFT con-
version rate of 12% and a reversion rate of 24% were observed, 
with many of these apparent changes occurring near the cutoff 
values [118]. A longitudinal study involving 2563 in health-
care workers demonstrated an IGRA conversion (6%–8%) in 
those undergoing serial testing [116]. These rates were 6–9 
times higher than that seen for the TST and were thought to 
have represent false conversions. Such studies have not yielded 
useful criteria that can be used to distinguish Mtb infection 
from a false-positive result [119]. As discussed above, there 
are a number of sources of variability in the IGRA assay 
related to laboratory technique such as sample agitation, time 
elapsed prior to incubation, duration of incubation, agitation 
technique, and blood volume that could result in variability 
around the cutoff value. In this instance, this variability may 
reflect the inherent variability of a biologic measurement, and 
is the rationale behind the committee’s recommendation that 
quantitative values be reported. The optimal cut-points for 
IGRA testing are controversial. While results close to the cut-
point tend to be less reliable than results substantially above 
or below the cut-point, this is not absolute; in many instances, 
positive values well above the threshold were not repro-
duced in subsequent testing [116]. It is for this reason that 
the committee felt that quantitative guidance regarding the 
interpretations of conversions and reversions in the context 
of healthcare worker screening could not be provided. Given 
the varied sources of IGRA variability [24], the committee 
thought that a positive test in a low-risk individual was likely 
to be a false-positive result, and recommended repeat testing.
Question 4: Should an IGRA or a TST be performed in 
healthy children <5 years of age in whom it has been decided 
that testing for LTBI is warranted?
Evidence
The body of evidence regarding IGRA performance in young 
children is limited. Compared with adults, a limited number of 
children have been enrolled in IGRA studies. Even fewer chil-
dren from nonendemic countries have been studied, and many 
reports do not include a separate analysis of young children.
The sensitivity of IGRAs in young children with TB ranges 
from 52% to 100% when a final diagnosis of either microbio-
logically confirmed or clinical TB disease is used as the reference 
standard, which is comparable to adults [56, 59, 76, 102–105, 
120]. The sensitivity of the TST has been reported as equiva-
lent or increased compared with IGRAs in children [56, 59, 76, 
101–105, 120], with young age associated with decreased IGRA 
positivity [107]. Important caveats to this comparison, however, 
are that some studies used earlier, less sensitive versions of the 
IGRA and results have been inconsistent. As examples of the 
inconsistencies, a study using an IGRA similar to a currently 
available IGRA test demonstrated increased sensitivity of the 
IGRA compared with TST in children aged <3 years, especially 
among those coinfected with HIV and/or malnourished [121]. 
None of these studies were performed in nonendemic countries.
The specificity of IGRAs appears to be excellent in children 
in the range of 90%–100% [122] according to a study conducted 
in children who had nontuberculous mycobacteria. The study 
found that IGRAs were more specific than TST in children with 
nontuberculous mycobacterial disease [102].
Our confidence in the estimated test characteristics of IGRAs 
and TST in children is very low because most of the studies did 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e15
not report whether or not they enrolled consecutive patients, 
were not performed in nonendemic countries, and have pro-
vided inconsistent results.
Recommendation: We suggest performing a TST rather than 
an IGRA in healthy children <5 years of age for whom it has 
been decided that diagnostic testing for LTBI is warranted (con-
ditional recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: 
In situations in which an IGRA is deemed the preferred diag-
nostic test, some experts are willing to use IGRAs in children 
over 3 years of age.
Rationale
The limited direct evidence described above suggests that the 
TST might be more sensitive than IGRAs in young children, 
and IGRAs may be more specific than the TST, particularly in 
those given BCG. Because young children have a high risk for 
progression to active TB disease, the committee believed that 
the sensitivity of the diagnostic test (ie, avoiding false-negative 
results, missed opportunities to treat) is more important than 
the specificity of the test (ie, avoiding false-positive results, 
unnecessary therapy). This is supported by the observations 
that the potential consequences of delayed treatment are high, 
while the risk of hepatotoxicity is greatly reduced in young 
children. An additional reason to favor TST testing over IGRA 
testing in young children is that the management of the most 
at-risk young children (ie, young household contacts) depends 
upon the results of serial testing for infection, for which there 
are no data for IGRAs in young children.
While there are theoretical benefits from IGRA testing (eg, 
improved acceptance of LTBI therapy), these benefits have not 
been proven. Therefore, there is insufficient evidence that the 
benefits of IGRA testing exceed the well-known limitations of 
the TST. For these reasons, it is too early to recommend replac-
ing the TST with IGRA testing. The recommendation is condi-
tional because the quality of evidence provided the committee 
with limited confidence in the estimated test characteristics of 
IGRAs and TSTs in children; therefore, the committee could 
not be certain that the desirable consequences of performing 
IGRAs instead of TSTs outweigh the undesirable consequences 
in the vast majority of patients.
Cautions and Limitations
In studies of young children that report rates of indeterminate 
IGRA results, the frequency ranges from 0 to 35%, which is 
generally higher than in studies that reported in adults. Several 
studies have reported an increased rate of indeterminate IGRA 
results in children <5 years of age [47, 56–60]. As phlebotomy is 
more difficult in young children, inability to perform the IGRA 
due to insufficient blood volumes represents an additional prac-
tical limitation to IGRA testing in young children. A relatively 
high incidence of failed phlebotomy has been documented in 
some studies [106, 123].
DIAGNOSTIC 
TESTS FOR TB
The diagnosis and management of TB disease rely on accurate 
laboratory tests, both for the benefit of individual patients and 
the control of TB in the community through public health ser-
vices. Therefore, laboratory services are an essential component 
of effective TB control at the local, state, national, and global 
levels.
In the United States, up to 80% of all initial TB-related labora-
tory work (eg, AFB smear and culture inoculation) is performed 
in hospitals, clinics, and independent laboratories outside the 
public health system, whereas >50% of species identification 
and drug susceptibility testing (DST) is performed in public 
health laboratories [124]. Thus, effective TB control requires a 
network of public and private laboratories to optimize labora-
tory testing and the flow of information. Public health labora-
tory workers, as a component of the public health sector with a 
mandate for TB control, should take a leadership role in devel-
oping laboratory networks and in facilitating communication 
among laboratory workers, clinicians, and TB controllers.
Seven types of tests for the diagnosis of TB disease and detec-
tion of drug resistance are performed within the tuberculosis 
laboratory system and recommended for optimal TB control 
services (Table 2). These laboratory tests should be available to 
every clinician involved in TB diagnosis and management, and 
to jurisdictional public health agencies charged with TB control.
For suspected cases of pulmonary TB, sputum smears for 
AFB are correlated with the likelihood of transmission and then, 
for AFB smear–positive pulmonary cases, a nucleic acid ampli-
fication assay provides rapid confirmation that the infecting 
mycobacteria are from the Mtb complex. Both sputum smears 
for AFB and nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) should be 
available with rapid turnaround times from specimen collection. 
Table 2. Essential Laboratory Tests for the Detection of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis
Test
Time Required
I. Nucleic acid amplification test, 
detection (NAAT-TB)
1 d
II. Nucleic acid amplification test, 
resistance markers (NAAT-R)
1–2 d
III. Acid-fast bacilli microscopy
1 d
IV. Growth detection
 Liquid
 Solid
Up to 6–8 wk
(average 10–14 d)
(average 3–4 wk)
V. Identification of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis complex by DNA probe 
or HPLC
1 da
VI. First-line drug susceptibility testing 
(liquid medium)
1 to 2 wka
VII. Second-line and novel compound 
drug susceptibility testing
 i. Liquid (broth-based) medium
1 to 2 wka
 ii. Solid (agar- or egg-based) medium
3 to 4 wka
Abbreviation: HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography.aAfter detection of growth.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e16 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
These tests facilitate decisions about initiating treatment for TB 
or a non-TB pulmonary infection, infection control measures 
(eg, patient isolation), and, if TB is diagnosed, for reporting the 
case and establishing priority for the contact investigation.
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH: 
TESTING FOR SUSPECTED 
PULMONARY TB
Pulmonary TB is often first suspected on the basis of chest 
computed tomographic findings (Supplementary Table 8). 
Randomized trials and controlled observational studies that 
directly compared diagnostic tests for pulmonary tuberculo-
sis and measured patient-important outcomes have not been 
performed. Therefore, the recommendations in this section 
are based upon data that describe how accurate a diagnostic 
test is at confirming or excluding pulmonary TB, coupled with 
the widely accepted knowledge that diagnosing pulmonary TB 
leads to therapy that dramatically improves patient-important 
outcomes and reduces disease transmission [125, 126]. Finally, 
it was the consensus of the committee that testing for LTBI 
(TST or IGRA) cannot be used to exclude a diagnosis of TB 
and, hence, should not be used in the evaluation of those with 
suspected TB. 
Question 5: Should AFB smear microscopy be performed in 
persons suspected of having pulmonary TB?
Evidence
Performing 3 AFB smears confirms pulmonary TB with a 
sensitivity of approximately 70% when culture-confirmed TB 
disease is the reference standard. The reason for performing 
3 AFB smears is that each specimen increases sensitivity. The 
sensitivity of the first specimen is 53.8%, which increases by 
a mean of 11.1% by obtaining a second specimen. Obtaining 
a third specimen increases the sensitivity by a mean of only 
2%–5% (ie, false-positive results could exceed the additional 
true-positive results obtained from a third specimen).
The sensitivity of a first morning specimen is 12% greater 
than a single spot specimen [127]. Concentrated specimens 
have a mean increase in sensitivity of 18% compared with non-
concentrated specimens (using culture as the standard) and flu-
orescence microscopy is on average 10% more sensitive than 
conventional microscopy [128, 129]. The specificity of micros-
copy is relatively high (≥90%), but the positive predictive value 
(PPV) varies (70%–90%) depending upon the prevalence of 
tuberculosis versus nontuberculous mycobacterial disease [130, 
131]. These accuracy studies provide moderate confidence in 
the estimated test characteristics because many did not report 
having enrolled consecutive patients.
Recommendation 5: We recommend that AFB smear micros-
copy be performed, rather than no AFB smear microscopy, in all 
patients suspected of having pulmonary TB (strong recommen-
dation, moderate-quality evidence). Remarks: False-negative 
results are sufficiently common that a negative AFB smear result 
does not exclude pulmonary TB. Similarly, false-positive results 
are sufficiently common that a positive AFB smear result does 
not confirm pulmonary TB. Testing of 3 specimens is consid-
ered the normative practice in the United States and is strongly 
recommended by the CDC and the National Tuberculosis 
Controllers Association to improve sensitivity given the per-
vasive issue of poor sample quality. Providers should request 
a sputum volume of at least 3 mL, but the optimal volume is 
5–10 mL. Concentrated respiratory specimens and fluorescence 
microscopy are preferred.
Rationale
AFB smear microscopy can be performed in hours, is inex-
pensive, and is technically simple. Our committee predeter-
mined that AFB smear microscopy would be recommended if 
false-negative results occur <30% of the time (ie, sensitivity is 
≥70%) and false-positive results occur <10% of the time (ie, 
specificity is ≥90%). The likely outcome of a false-negative 
result is additional diagnostic testing and/or delayed diagnosis 
due to the duration required for cultures to become positive, 
whereas the likely outcome of a false-positive result is unnec-
essary therapy with its associated risk for hepatotoxicity. The 
different thresholds for false results reflect the committee’s 
recognition that the consequences of false-negative results are 
generally transient, whereas the consequences of false-pos-
itive results may be long lasting. In this case, the sensitivity 
and specificity of AFB smear microscopy were approximately 
70% and ≥90%, respectively, so AFB smear microscopy is 
recommended.
The recommendation is strong because the quality of evi-
dence provided the committee with moderate confidence in the 
estimated test characteristics of AFB smear microscopy, and the 
committee therefore felt certain that the desirable consequences 
of AFB smear microscopy (ie, an early presumptive diagnosis, 
initiation of therapy, and possibly less transmission) outweigh 
the undesirable consequences (ie, cost, burden, effects of false 
results) in the vast majority of patients.
Question 6: Should both liquid and solid mycobacterial cul-
tures be performed in persons suspected of having pulmo-
nary TB?
Evidence
A meta-analysis comparing 2 liquid culture methods with 
solid cultures found that both liquid culture methods were 
more sensitive (88% and 90%) than the solid culture method 
(76%) when a combination of conventional solid media with a 
broth-based method was the reference standard, and also had 
a shorter time to detection (13.2 and 15.2 days for liquid cul-
ture methods versus 25.8 days for the solid culture method) 
[132]. The specificity of all 3 methods exceeded 99%. Liquid 
culture medium has a higher contamination rate than solid 
culture medium due to the growth of bacteria other than 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e17
mycobacteria (4%–9% in the meta-analysis), which interferes 
with obtaining a valid culture result. This evidence provides 
low confidence in the estimated test characteristics for 2 rea-
sons. First, there may be selection bias, as many of the stud-
ies did not state whether they enrolled consecutive patients. 
Second, there is indirectness, since the studies address the test 
characteristics of either test alone but the question is about the 
tests combined.
Recommendation 6: We suggest that both liquid and solid 
mycobacterial cultures be performed, rather than either cul-
ture method alone, for every specimen obtained from an 
individual with suspected TB disease (conditional recommen-
dation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: The conditional qual-
ifier applies to performance of both liquid and solid culture 
methods on all specimens. At least liquid culture should be 
done on all specimens as culture is the gold standard micro-
biologic test for the diagnosis of TB disease. The isolate 
recovered should be identified according to the Clinical and 
Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines and the American 
Society for Microbiology Manual of Clinical Microbiology 
[133, 134].
Rationale
Mycobacterial culture is the laboratory gold standard for tuber-
culosis diagnosis, but the preferred type of cultures is uncer-
tain. Liquid cultures alone are reasonably sensitive and highly 
specific, but limited by contamination. Solid cultures alone 
are not sufficiently sensitive to reliably diagnose TB and gen-
erally take longer to yield results; however, some Mtb isolates 
are detected only on solid medium. Performing both liquid and 
solid cultures likely improves the sensitivity of mycobacterial 
cultures, while the liquid cultures provide a more rapid answer 
and the solid cultures serve as a safeguard against contamina-
tion. The recommendation is conditional because the quality 
of evidence provided the committee with limited confidence in 
the estimated test characteristics of the culture methods; there-
fore, the committee could not be certain that the desirable con-
sequences of performing both culture methods instead of only 
one method outweigh the undesirable consequences in the vast 
majority of patients.
Question 7: Should NAAT be performed on the initial res-
piratory specimen in persons suspected of having pulmonary 
TB?
Evidence
Three meta-analyses were identified and reviewed. The first 
stratified the performance characteristics of NAAT based upon 
AFB smear results [135]. When AFB smear microscopy was 
positive, the sensitivity and specificity of NAAT were 96% and 
85%, respectively. Most studies used culture as the reference 
standard. When AFB smear microscopy was negative, the sen-
sitivity decreased to 66% and the specificity increased to 98%. 
When further stratified by whether the patient received treat-
ment, the specificity in untreated patients was 97%. The second 
meta-analysis reported an overall sensitivity of 85% and speci-
ficity of 97% and did not stratify according to the results of AFB 
smear microscopy [136]. There was significant heterogeneity 
in both meta-analyses. The third meta-analysis stratified the 
NAAT test characteristics in AFB smear microscopy–negative 
suspects according to clinical suspicion of tuberculosis [137]. 
It found that in AFB smear microscopy–negative individuals, 
a positive NAAT result is beneficial when the clinical suspicion 
of tuberculosis was intermediate or high (>30%) and a negative 
NAAT result is of little use in excluding the presence of Mtb. 
This evidence provides low confidence in the estimated test 
characteristics because there may be selection bias since many 
of the studies did not state whether they enrolled consecutive 
patients with legitimate diagnostic uncertainty and there was 
significant inconsistency in the meta-analyses.
Recommendation 7: We suggest performing a diagnostic 
NAAT, rather than not performing a NAAT, on the initial res-
piratory specimen from patients suspected of having pulmo-
nary TB (conditional recommendation, low-quality evidence). 
Remarks: In AFB smear–positive patients, a negative NAAT 
makes TB disease unlikely. In AFB smear–negative patients 
with an intermediate to high level of suspicion for disease, 
a positive NAAT can be used as presumptive evidence of TB 
disease, but a negative NAAT cannot be used to exclude pul-
monary TB. Appropriate NAATs include the Hologic Amplified 
Mycobacteria Tuberculosis Direct (MTD) test (San Diego, 
California) and the Cepheid Xpert MTB/Rif test (Sunnyvale, 
California).
Rationale
Mycobacterial culture results require at least 1–2 weeks; there-
fore, rapid diagnostic tests that can be performed within hours 
are desirable, such as AFB smear microscopy and diagnostic 
NAAT. Diagnostic NAAT has the added advantage over AFB 
smear microscopy of being able to distinguish Mtb from nontu-
berculous mycobacteria. However, NAAT is appropriate only as 
an adjunct to mycobacterial culture and AFB smear microscopy. 
It is used as an adjunct to mycobacterial culture because it is not 
sensitive enough to replace mycobacterial culture for diagnosis 
and does not produce an isolate, which is needed for phenotypic 
DST. It is used as an adjunct to AFB smear microscopy because 
the test characteristics of NAAT are highly variable depending 
upon the AFB smear results and clinical suspicion.
In AFB smear–positive patients, NAAT yields false-negative 
results only 4% of the time, indicating that it is reliable for exclud-
ing pulmonary TB. In AFB smear–negative patients, clinical sus-
picion needs to be considered. When there is an intermediate 
to high level of suspicion for disease, NAAT yields sufficiently 
few false-positive results that a positive NAAT result can be used 
as presumptive evidence of TB and guide therapeutic decisions; 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e18 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
however, false-negative results are sufficiently common that 
NAAT cannot be used to exclude pulmonary TB. When the clin-
ical suspicion for TB is low, NAAT is generally not performed 
because false-positive results are unacceptably frequent. An 
algorithm for interpretation and use of NAAT results in con-
junction with AFB smear results has been published [138].
The recommendation is conditional because the quality of 
evidence provided the committee with limited confidence in 
the estimated test characteristics of NAAT; therefore, the com-
mittee could not be certain that the desirable consequences 
of performing NAAT (ie, promptly diagnosing TB disease 
and initiating treatment), instead of not performing NAAT, 
outweigh the undesirable consequences (ie, cost, false-posi-
tive results leading to unnecessary treatment, and false-neg-
ative results provided false reassurance) in the vast majority 
of patients.
Cautions and Limitations
Laboratory-based diagnostic tests are not a replacement for 
clinical judgment and experience. A diagnosis of pulmonary 
tuberculosis can be made in the absence of laboratory confir-
mation, especially in children [139]. Although there appears to 
be little increase in accuracy achieved by routinely performing 
NAAT on multiple specimens rather than on a single speci-
men, some clinicians may find it beneficial in the diagnosis 
of individual patients [140, 141]. As an example, the presence 
of inhibitors can cause false-negative results for some NAATs 
[142] and, therefore, if a specimen has a positive AFB smear 
result and a negative NAAT result, evaluation of the sample for 
the presence of inhibitors should be considered if the NAAT 
being used is subject to inhibition. If inhibitors are detected, 
collection of a new specimen for NAAT should be considered. 
The recommendation for use of NAATs is based on stud-
ies of commercial test kits. The data on in-house tests show 
even greater heterogeneity [143]. If in-house tests are to be 
used, they should be validated and be shown to have analyti-
cal performance accuracy comparable to or better than that of 
commercial tests.
Question 8: Should rapid molecular drug susceptibility test-
ing for isoniazid and rifampin be performed as part of the 
initial diagnostic evaluation for all patients suspected of hav-
ing pulmonary TB or only in selected subgroups?
Evidence
Rapid molecular DST can be performed via line probe or 
molecular beacon assays. We evaluated systematic reviews 
with meta-analyses of 2 line probe assays [144, 145]. Both line 
probe assays detected rifampin resistance with a sensitivity and 
specificity of ≥97% and ≥98%, respectively, when conventional, 
culture-based DST was used as the reference standard. More 
recently, a molecular-beacon based method for rapid rifampin 
resistance detection was evaluated in a large international 
accuracy study [146]. This assay, Xpert MTB/RIF, was >92% 
sensitive and >99% specific for detection of rifampin resistance 
when performed on a single specimen; the sensitivity increased 
to >97% when performed on 3 specimens [146]. Despite its 
good sensitivity and specificity, the PPV of rapid molecular 
DST for the detection of rifampin resistance is low in popula-
tions with a low prevalence of drug resistance (Supplementary 
Table 9) [147].
One of the assays also detects isoniazid resistance. It identi-
fied isoniazid resistance with a sensitivity and specificity of 84% 
and 99%, respectively, when culture-based DST is used as the 
reference standard. However, when the meta-analysis was per-
formed on a subgroup of studies that evaluated a newer version 
of the assay, the sensitivity increased to approximately 90%. This 
indicates that in appropriate subgroups of patients, false-posi-
tive and false-negative results occur in 1% and 10% of patients, 
respectively. In contrast to rifampin resistance, the PPV of a 
test indicating isoniazid resistance is quite high, a reflection of 
isoniazid resistance being fairly prevalent in the United States 
(approximately 8%) [144].
This evidence provides moderate confidence in the estimated 
sensitivities and specificities among patient subgroups with 
increased rates of drug resistance. The confidence is moderate 
instead of high because the absence of reporting that patients 
were enrolled consecutively suggests that there is a risk of bias.
Recommendation 8: We recommend performing rapid 
molecular DST for rifampin with or without isoniazid using 
the respiratory specimens of persons who are either AFB smear 
positive or Hologic Amplified MTD positive and who meet one 
of the following criteria: (1) have been treated for tuberculosis 
in the past, (2) were born in or have lived for at least 1 year 
in a foreign country with at least a moderate tuberculosis inci-
dence (≥20 per 100 000) or a high primary MDR-TB prevalence 
(≥2%), (3) are contacts of patients with MDR-TB, or (4) are 
HIV infected (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evi-
dence). Remarks: This recommendation specifically addresses 
patients who are Hologic Amplified MTD positive because the 
Hologic Amplified MTD NAAT only detects TB and not drug 
resistance; it is not applicable to patients who are positive for 
types of NAAT that detect drug resistance, including many line 
probe assays and Cepheid Xpert MTB/RIF.
Rationale
Conventional, culture-based DST is the laboratory gold stand-
ard [134, 148, 149]. It is performed routinely any time Mtb com-
plex is isolated in culture. Drug susceptibility testing is essential 
because treatment success for patients with MDR-TB (can 
reach 75% or higher [150, 151]) is dependent upon patients 
being treated with an effective antimicrobial regimen [152]. 
An important limitation of culture-based DST, however, is that 
it can take >2 weeks to grow the isolate that is necessary for 
testing.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e19
Rapid molecular DST addresses this limitation. It can be per-
formed within hours, enabling earlier initiation of an appropri-
ate antimicrobial regimen. Rapid molecular DST is an adjunct 
and not a replacement for culture-based DST because it only 
evaluates susceptibility to rifampin and occasionally isonia-
zid. Nonetheless, detection of rifampin resistance is helpful to 
clinicians because it is a good surrogate for MDR-TB in loca-
tions where rifampin monoresistance is uncommon. However, 
an important limitation is that the PPV is expected to be lower 
in the United States than in areas where rifampin resistance is 
more common [153–155].
The committee recommends rapid molecular DST only for 
subgroups in which drug resistance is more likely, as the PPV 
for rifampin resistance testing is low in populations with a low 
prevalence of drug resistance. Examples of appropriate persons 
for testing include those who are NAAT or AFB smear positive 
and meet one of the following criteria: (1) have been treated for 
tuberculosis in the past, (2) were born in or have lived for at 
least 1 year in a foreign country with at least a moderate tuber-
culosis incidence (≥20 per 100 000) or a high primary MDR-TB 
prevalence (≥ 2%), (3) are contacts of patients with MDR-TB, or 
(4) are HIV infected [154, 156–158].
The sensitivity and specificity of rapid molecular DST for 
detecting rifampin resistance are both >97%, indicating that 
false-positive and false-negative results occur <3% of the time; 
thus, rapid molecular DST can be used confirm or exclude 
rifampin resistance in respiratory specimens. The sensitivity and 
specificity of rapid molecular DST for detecting isoniazid resist-
ance are estimated to be 90% and 99%, respectively, indicating 
that false-positive and false-negative results occur roughly 1% 
and 10% of the time, respectively; thus, rapid molecular DST 
can be used to confirm isoniazid resistance in respiratory spec-
imens, but not exclude it.
The recommendation is strong because the moderate-quality 
evidence provided the committee with sufficient confidence in 
the test characteristics to be certain that the benefits of rapid 
molecular DST (ie, early identification of possible MDR-TB and 
initiation of an appropriate antimicrobial regimen) outweigh 
the costs and burden of testing in the overwhelming majority of 
patients who have increased risk for drug resistance.
Cautions and Limitations
Line probe and molecular beacon assays have not been suffi-
ciently validated for use on specimens other than respiratory 
specimens. The recommendation for line probe assays and 
molecular beacon on respiratory specimens is based upon 
studies of commercial test kits, only one of which is currently 
approved by the FDA: the molecular beacon–based method, 
Xpert MTB/RIF. It is the only FDA-approved assay and it inte-
grates diagnosis of TB and detection of rifampin resistance. If 
this test is used for the diagnosis of TB, a rifampin resistance 
result is automatically provided regardless of patient risk.
Other assays for rapid detection of drug resistance using 
alternative molecular techniques (eg, automated real-time pol-
ymerase chain reaction [PCR] with sequencing, loop-mediated 
isothermal amplification [LAMP]) are being developed. These 
assays are promising, but are not yet commercially available 
[146, 159, 160]. The data on in-house tests show substantial het-
erogeneity [161]. If in-house tests are to be used, they should 
be validated and shown to have performance accuracy at least 
comparable to that of commercial tests. The same cautions also 
apply to new commercial assays that may become available in 
the near future.
Some clinicians and health departments may opt for broader 
use of the molecular detection of drug resistance assays than 
recommended above, especially in regions where MDR-TB is 
more common. Because the prevalence of rifampin resistance 
(and therefore MDR-TB) is low in the United States, the PPV 
of Xpert MTB/RIF and other assays for rifampin resistance will 
be lower than in settings where Xpert MTB/RIF has been pre-
dominantly studied. Therefore, confirmation of a positive test 
result for rifampin resistance has been recommended [147]. To 
confirm a positive result, genetic loci associated with rifampin 
resistance (to include rpoB), as well as isoniazid resistance (to 
include inhA and katG), should be sequenced to assess for 
MDR-TB. If mutations associated with rifampin resistance are 
confirmed, rapid molecular testing for other known mutations 
associated with drug resistance (to first-line and second-line 
drugs) is needed for healthcare providers to select an opti-
mally effective treatment regimen. All molecular testing should 
prompt growth-based DST.
Alternative methods for rapid molecular DST are being 
developed and other technologies are likely to become available 
in the near future (eg, automated real-time PCR with sequenc-
ing, LAMP) [162]. It is possible that these techniques will be 
sufficiently sensitive to be used for AFB smear–negative spec-
imens. Laboratories in the United States should only use tests 
approved by the FDA or tests that have been produced and val-
idated in accord with applicable FDA and Clinical Laboratory 
Improvement Amendments regulations.
Question 9: Should respiratory specimens be collected from 
children with suspected pulmonary TB disease?
Evidence
Respiratory specimens that can be collected from children 
include gastric aspirates; sputum collected by spontaneous 
expectoration, induction, or nasopharyngeal aspiration; and 
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Gastric aspirates involve intu-
bating the stomach after an overnight fast to collect swallowed 
sputum before the stomach empties. Collection of specimens 
on 3 consecutive mornings from patients with suspected pul-
monary TB provides a diagnostic yield of up to 40%–50%, with 
higher yields for infants (up to 90%), symptomatic children, 
and children with extensive disease (up to 77%), using a clinical 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e20 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
diagnosis of TB disease in a low prevalence country as criteria 
for the diagnosis of TB disease [163–165]. Meticulous attention 
to detail during the collection and processing of the specimen 
can improve yield (details are provided at http://www.currytb-
center.ucsf.edu/pediatric_tb/). Sputum collected from children 
by nasopharyngeal aspiration or sputum induction with a bron-
chodilator has a yield of 20%–30% [166], whereas BAL in chil-
dren with pulmonary TB has a yield of 10%–22% [167]. These 
estimates of diagnostic yield are based upon moderate-quality 
evidence—accuracy studies for which it was not documented 
whether the subjects were enrolled consecutively.
Recommendation 9: We suggest mycobacterial culture of 
respiratory specimens for all children suspected of having pul-
monary TB (conditional recommendation, moderate-quality 
evidence).
Remarks: In a low incidence setting like the United States, it 
is unlikely that a child identified during a recent contract inves-
tigation of a close adult/adolescent contact with contagious 
TB was, in fact, infected by a different individual with a strain 
with a different susceptibility pattern. Therefore, under some 
circumstances, microbiological confirmation may not be nec-
essary for children with uncomplicated pulmonary TB identi-
fied through a recent contact investigation if the source case has 
drug-susceptible TB.
Rationale
Despite the observation that less than half of pediatric spec-
imens yield a positive culture, the committee judged that the 
desirable consequences of mycobacterial cultures of respiratory 
specimens outweigh the undesirable consequences of specimen 
collection in children for several reasons. First, a positive myco-
bacterial culture is likely to be reassuring to parents and staff 
that the diagnosis of tuberculosis is correct. Second, cultures are 
necessary for DST, which is particularly important in situations 
in which TB drug resistance is prevalent. Third, suspectibility 
data are not always available from the presumed source case. 
Finally, after-the-fact culture collection in the face of treatment 
failure may have even lower yield than sampling a drug-na-
ive child. Specimens that can be used for mycobacterial culture 
include gastric aspirates, sputum, and BAL; the panel decided 
that there was insufficient evidence to advocate one collection 
method over another.
With respect to the need for DST, overtreatment for pre-
sumed drug-resistant TB may lead to unnecessary toxicities and 
cost, while undertreatment due to unidentified drug resistance 
may lead to treatment failure, risk of dissemination, and even 
death. While it is tempting to avoid culture collection from the 
child contact when a putative source case is identified (espe-
cially when susceptibility results are already available), prior 
case series indicate that 2%–10% of children have susceptibility 
patterns that differ from the presumed source case [168] and 
more recent US studies have found up to 15% discordance of 
molecular fingerprinting between the isolates collected from 
children with culture-proven TB compared to their presumed 
source case [169, 170]. In contrast, no discordance was found 
between pediatric TB cases and their presumed source cases 
from 2000 to 2004 in Houston [171].
The recommendation is conditional because the moderate 
quality of evidence provided the committee with insufficient 
confidence in the estimated diagnostic yield; thus, the com-
mittee felt uncertain that a diagnosis was rendered frequently 
enough that the desirable consequences of collecting respira-
tory specimens (ie, confirming the diagnosis of TB, obtaining 
an isolate for DST) outweigh the undesirable consequences (ie, 
cost, burden, effects of false results) in the vast majority of chil-
dren with suspected pulmonary TB.
The highest yields for gastric aspirates are in the youngest 
infants, in children with extensive or symptomatic disease, and 
for the first gastric aspirate collected. While there are situations 
where a presumed source case is not the child’s true source case, 
in the case of a very recent contact investigation of a house-
hold-type contact with pan-susceptible disease, performing 
only one gastric aspirate or relying on the source case suscep-
tibility may be appropriate. For infants, immunocompromised 
hosts, children with extensive, disseminated, or extrapulmo-
nary disease, exposure to other potential source cases, or risk 
of drug-resistance, respiratory specimens should be collected. 
Studies comparing the yield of gastric aspirates to sputum have 
shown discrepent results. Selection of an appropriate respira-
tory specimen (i.e., gastric aspirates, spontaneous or induced 
sputa, or rarely bronchoalveolar lavage) should be based upon 
the expertise of the clinic and provider, the patient’s age and 
developmental level, and the likelihood of an alternative diagno-
sis. Most investigators have not found increased yield for bron-
choalveolar lavage compared to gastric aspirates. Bronchoscopy 
should be reserved for situations where an alternative diagnosis 
is being considered or when the anatomy is unclear.
Cautions and Limitations
Gastric aspirates are rarely AFB smear positive and the yield 
of cultures is suboptimal in children with pulmonary TB; thus, 
gastric aspirate culture results are helpful only if they are pos-
itive. Negative results should not dissuade the provider from 
empirically treating tuberculosis in children in the appropriate 
clinical setting. Gastric aspirate, sputum induction, and naso-
pharyngeal aspiration in children are not comfortable and not 
without financial cost. The procedures have modest risk (bleed-
ing from the nose, bronchospasm, airway intubation).
Question 10: Should sputum induction or flexible broncho-
scopic sampling be the initial respiratory sampling method 
for adults with suspected pulmonary TB who are either una-
ble to expectorate sputum or whose expectorated sputum is 
AFB smear microscopy negative?
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e21
Evidence
We identified 6 studies [172–177] that compared the diagnostic 
yield of induced sputum with the yield of specimens obtained 
by flexible bronchoscopy, using a positive mycobacterial culture 
or evidence of a response the therapy as criteria for the diag-
nosis of pulmonary TB. Five of the 6 studies demonstrated a 
higher yield from induced sputum than bronchoscopy, with 
the remaining study [176] demonstrating a similar yield. The 
diagnostic yield of induced sputum increases with multiple 
specimens, with detection rates by AFB smear microscopy of 
91%–98% and mycobacterial culture of 99%–100% reported 
when 3 or more specimens are obtained [178].
Two cost-analysis studies favored sputum induction over 
bronchoscopy [172, 174]. In the first study, direct costs for 
bronchoscopy measured in Canadian dollars were $187.60, 
compared with $22.22 for sputum induction [172]. In the sec-
ond study, induced sputum was about one-third the cost of flex-
ible bronchoscopy, and the most cost-effective strategy was 3 
induced sputa without bronchoscopy [174].
Our confidence in the accuracy of the study results is low 
because there was a risk of bias and indirectness. With respect 
to risk of bias, most of the studies did not report whether or not 
consecutive patients were enrolled. Supporting this concern, 
the variability of prevalence among studies suggests that the 
degree of diagnostic uncertainty likely differed among studies. 
With respect to indirectness, there appeared to be indirectness 
of the intervention because the studies varied in the number of 
specimens collected (from 1 to 3 per patient), the concentra-
tions of hypertonic saline, the type of nebulizers, and the cul-
ture techniques.
Recommendation 10: We suggest sputum induction rather 
than flexible bronchoscopic sampling as the initial respiratory 
sampling method for adults with suspected pulmonary TB who 
are either unable to expectorate sputum or whose expectorated 
sputum is AFB smear microscopy negative (conditional recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence).
Rationale
Induced sputum has equal or greater diagnostic yield than 
bronchoscopic sampling, has fewer risks, and is less expensive. 
These features all favor induced sputum as the initial respira-
tory sampling method in patients with suspected pulmonary 
TB who are either unable to expectorate sputum or whose 
expectorated sputum is AFB smear microscopy negative. The 
committee recognizes that a potential advantage of bronchos-
copy over sputum induction is the possibility of making a rapid 
presumptive diagnosis of tuberculosis by performing biopsies 
and identifying typical histopathologic findings, but felt that 
the balance of the upsides to downsides of induced sputum 
outweighed that of bronchoscopic sampling. The recommen-
dation is conditional because the quality of evidence does 
not provide sufficient confidence in the study results for the 
committee to be absolutely certain that the balance of desira-
ble to undesirable consequences favors induced sputum over 
bronchoscopy.
Question 11: Should flexible bronchoscopic sampling be per-
formed in adults with suspected pulmonary TB from whom a 
respiratory sample cannot be obtained via induced sputum?
Evidence
Numerous studies reported the diagnostic yield of respiratory 
specimens obtained by flexible bronchoscopy, using a positive 
mycobacterial culture or evidence of a response the therapy as 
criteria for the diagnosis of pulmonary TB [172–175, 178–182]. 
Generally speaking, bronchoscopic sampling appears to have a 
diagnostic yield of 50%–100% when based on culture in patients 
suspected of having pulmonary TB. This yield appears unaffected 
by HIV infection, with bronchoscopy leading to an early pre-
sumptive diagnosis of TB in 34%–48% of HIV-infected patients 
according to 2 studies [183, 184]. In one study, bronchial washings 
had the same culture yield (95%) as BAL but higher frequency of 
positive AFB smears (26% vs. 4%) [235]. Bronchoscopic brush-
ings yield AFB smear–positive results in 9%–56% [180, 185].
Transbronchial biopsy (TBB) provides histopathologic find-
ings suggestive of pulmonary TB in 42%–63% of specimens 
from smear-negative HIV-uninfected patients [183, 186]. HIV-
infected patients are less likely (9%–19%) to demonstrate gran-
ulomas on TBB [183, 186], although in 2 studies TBB was the 
exclusive means of diagnosing pulmonary TB in 10%–23% of 
patients [183, 184].
Our confidence in the accuracy of these estimated diagnostic 
yields is very low because most of the studies did not report 
whether or not consecutive patients were enrolled, the range of 
reported diagnostic yields is wide, and the studies varied in how 
specimens were collected (bronchial aspirates and/or BAL and/
or bronchial brushings and/or TBB) and the culture techniques.
Recommendation 11: We suggest flexible bronchoscopic 
sampling, rather than no bronchoscopic sampling, in adults 
with suspected pulmonary TB from whom a respiratory sample 
cannot be obtained via induced sputum (conditional recommen-
dation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: In the committee 
members’ clinical practices, BAL plus brushings alone are per-
formed for most patients; however, for patients in whom a rapid 
diagnosis is essential, transbronchial biopsy is also performed.
Rationale
The committee judged that the desirable consequences of bron-
choscopic sampling outweigh the undesirable consequences 
among patients with suspected pulmonary TB from whom 
respiratory samples could not be obtained noninvasively. The 
most important reason to perform bronchoscopy in a patient 
with possible pulmonary TB is to differentiate TB disease from 
alternative diseases. Another reason to perform bronchoscopy 
is to obtain specimens for cultures that provide isolates for DST. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e22 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
Empiric treatment for presumed drug-resistant TB may lead 
to unnecessary toxicities and cost if the patient actually has 
drug-sensitive TB, while empiric treatment for drug-sensitive 
TB may lead to treatment failure, risk of dissemination, and even 
death if the patient actually has drug-resistant TB. Moreover, 
delayed diagnosis of drug resistance will prolong therapy and 
increase risk of default. Bronchoscopy also provides the oppor-
tunity of obtaining a rapid presumptive diagnosis by identifying 
histopathologic findings consistent with tuberculosis. These 
benefits of bronchoscopic sampling were thought to outweigh 
the risks of bronchoscopy and the accompanying sedation, as 
well as the costs and burdens.
The recommendation is conditional, reflecting the guide-
line development committee’s uncertainty that the desirable 
consequences of bronchoscopy outweigh the undesirable 
consequences in many situations. Reasons for the commit-
tee’s uncertainty included the highly variable estimates of 
diagnostic yield, the very low quality of evidence, recogni-
tion that bronchoscopy is an invasive procedure and the risk 
of harm varies according to the patient’s clinical condition, 
and recognition that the feasibility of timely bronchoscopy 
varies according to the clinical setting. For example, in the 
context of a public health clinic, the benefits of obtaining a 
bronchoscopy may not justify the thousands of dollars that 
it will cost due to professional fees, hospital charges, pathol-
ogy costs, and laboratory fees, or the days to weeks of delays 
that will be necessary to refer the patient to a pulmonologist 
for bronchoscopy. In some situations, the potential harm 
associated with delayed diagnosis may warrant empiric ini-
tiation of therapy based upon a reasonable suspicion of TB 
disease.
Question 12: Should postbronchoscopy sputum specimens 
be collected from adults with suspected pulmonary TB?
Evidence
Postbronchoscopy sputum specimens are typically sent for AFB 
smear microscopy and mycobacterial culture. Postbronchoscopy 
AFB smears have a diagnostic yield of 9%–73% and postbro-
nchoscopy mycobacterial cultures have a yield of 35%–71% 
according to multiple studies [182, 185, 187, 188]. In HIV-
infected patients, the yield of postbronchoscopy sputum cul-
tures was 80% in a single study [186]. Our confidence in the 
accuracy of the estimated diagnostic yields is low because most 
of the studies did not report whether or not consecutive patients 
were enrolled and the diagnostic yields reported varied greatly 
as indicated by the wide ranges described above.
Recommendation 12: We suggest that postbronchoscopy 
sputum specimens be collected from all adults with suspected 
pulmonary TB who undergo bronchoscopy (conditional recom-
mendation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: Postbronchoscopy 
sputum specimens are used to perform AFB smear microscopy 
and mycobacterial cultures.
Rationale
The rationale for postbronchoscopy sputum collection is the 
same as that described above for the bronchoscopic collection 
of respiratory specimens.
Question 13: Should flexible bronchoscopic sampling be per-
formed in adults with suspected miliary TB and no alterna-
tive lesions that are accessible for sampling whose induced 
sputum is AFB smear microscopy negative or from whom a 
respiratory sample cannot be obtained via induced sputum?
Evidence
Specimens obtained via bronchoscopy can undergo AFB 
smear microscopy, mycobacterial culture, NAAT, and his-
topathological analysis. There is a paucity of evidence 
regarding the diagnostic characteristics of various types of 
bronchoscopic specimens (ie, washings, BAL, brushings, 
TBB) obtained from patients with possible miliary TB. It has 
been reported that bronchial washings, brushings, and TBB 
have diagnostic yields of 14% [234], 27%–78% [181, 189, 
190], and 32%–75% [181, 189, 190], respectively. The diag-
nostic yield of BAL has not been reported. Our confidence 
in the accuracy of the estimated diagnostic yields is very low 
because most of the studies did not report whether or not 
consecutive patients were enrolled (the prevalence of miliary 
TB ranged from 55% to 90% in the studies, suggesting that the 
degree of diagnostic uncertainty differed among the studies), 
the ranges of diagnostic yields were wide for both brushings 
and TBB, reflecting the variable results reported by the indi-
vidual studies, and the studies varied in the technique used to 
perform the sampling (particularly TBB) and the number of 
specimens collected.
Recommendation 13: We suggest flexible bronchoscopic 
sampling, rather than no bronchoscopic sampling, in adults 
with suspected miliary TB and no alternative lesions that 
are accessible for sampling whose induced sputum is AFB 
smear microscopy negative or from whom a respiratory 
sample cannot be obtained via induced sputum (condi-
tional recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: 
Bronchoscopic sampling in patients with suspected miliary 
TB should include bronchial brushings and/or TBB, as the 
yield from washings is substantially less and the yield from 
BAL unknown. For patients in whom it is important to pro-
vide a rapid presumptive diagnosis of tuberculosis (ie, those 
who are too sick to wait for culture results), TBB is both nec-
essary and appropriate.
Rationale
The rationale for bronchoscopic sampling in individuals with sus-
pected miliary TB and no alternative lesions that are accessible for 
sampling (eg, enlarged lymph nodes or draining lesions) whose 
induced sputum is AFB smear negative or from whom a respiratory 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e23
sample cannot be obtained via induced sputum is essentially the 
same as that described above for patients with suspected pulmo-
nary TB from whom a respiratory sample cannot be obtained via 
induced sputum. That is, it is important to differentiate miliary TB 
from other diseases and also to obtain specimens for mycobacte-
rial culture because cultures provide isolates for DST, which may 
prevent unnecessary drug toxicities and cost, mitigate treatment 
failure, and reduce the risk of dissemination and death. Moreover, 
bronchoscopy also provides the opportunity of obtaining a rapid 
presumptive diagnosis by identifying histopathologic findings con-
sistent with tuberculosis. These benefits outweigh the risks of both 
bronchoscopy and the accompanying sedation.
The recommendation is conditional, reflecting the guide-
line development committee’s uncertainty that the desirable 
consequences of bronchoscopy outweigh the undesirable con-
sequences and its recognition that the balance of desirable 
and undesirable consequences depends upon clinical context. 
Reasons for the committee’s uncertainty included the variable 
estimates of the diagnostic yield and very low quality of evi-
dence. Clinical considerations that may affect the balance of 
desirable and undesirable effects include the patient’s condi-
tion (ie, bronchoscopy is an invasive procedure and the risk of 
harm varies according to the patient’s clinical condition) and 
the availability, feasibility, and cost of timely bronchoscopy in a 
particular clinical setting.
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH: 
TESTING FOR SUSPECTED 
EXTRAPULMONARY TB
Randomized trials and controlled observational studies that 
directly compared diagnostic tests or approaches for extrapul-
monary TB and measured patient-important outcomes have not 
been performed. Therefore, the recommendations in this section 
are based upon data that describe how accurate a diagnostic test 
is at confirming or excluding extrapulmonary TB, coupled with 
evidence that the diagnosis of extrapulmonary TB leads to therapy 
that improves patient-important outcomes. Tests used to diagnose 
extrapulmonary TB are described in Supplementary Figure 1.
With respect to the evidence that the diagnosis of extrapul-
monary TB leads to therapy that improves patient-important 
outcomes, trials directly comparing treatment with no treat-
ment will never be done. However, indirect evidence from 
patients with pulmonary TB (described above) and evidence 
from patients with disseminated TB suggests that extrapulmo-
nary TB is treatable with high cure rates in most drug-suscepti-
ble cases and that untreated extrapulmonary TB has significant 
morbidity and mortality, particularly meningeal TB [191]. As 
an example, an observational study that excluded patients with 
tuberculous meningitis found that mortality due to dissemi-
nated TB fell from 100% to <5% with the introduction of iso-
niazid-based antimicrobial regimens [192]. The large mortality 
reduction in this study would probably have been less dramatic 
if patients with tuberculous meningitis had been included, as 
2 case series that included patients with tuberculous menin-
gitis found that mortality due to disseminated tuberculosis is 
20% [193, 194]. Nevertheless, mortality is clearly improved 
with a large magnitude of effect. This evidence constitutes 
moderate-quality evidence that treatment of extrapulmonary 
TB improves mortality because there are observational stud-
ies with a very large magnitude of effect, but the increase in 
confidence in the results due to the large magnitude of effect is 
mitigated by the indirectness of the population.
Question 14: Should cell counts and chemistries be per-
formed on amenable (ie, liquid) specimens collected from 
sites of suspected extrapulmonary TB?
Evidence
We identified no studies that reported the sensitivity and spec-
ificity of cell counts and chemistries in the identification of 
extrapulmonary TB. Therefore, the committee used its collec-
tive clinical experience to inform its recommendation. Clinical 
experience constitutes very low-quality evidence.
Recommendation 14: We suggest that cell counts and chem-
istries be performed on amenable fluid specimens collected 
from sites of suspected extrapulmonary TB (conditional rec-
ommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: Specimens 
that are amenable to cell counts and chemistries include pleural, 
cerebrospinal, ascitic, and joint fluids.
Rationale
Cell counts and chemistries can be performed in hours, are 
inexpensive, and are technically simple. Any risks are related to 
the sampling procedure. Although their sensitivity and speci-
ficity for extrapulmonary TB have not been reported, the com-
mittee suspects that the sensitivity is moderate to high and the 
specificity is poor if interpreted alone, but substantially better 
if interpreted in the context of the clinical setting, radiographic 
findings, and other laboratory results. Most importantly, it 
is believed that cell counts and chemistries can provide use-
ful information to guide the clinician toward either confirm-
atory diagnostic testing for tuberculosis or diagnostic testing 
for alternative etiologies; this alone provides enough benefit 
to justify the costs of the additional tests. The strength of the 
recommendation is conditional because it is believed that the 
balance of the benefits of the additional information versus the 
cost of the testing may be finely balanced in some clinical situ-
ations, and the quality of evidence provides little confidence in 
the estimates upon which the committee based its judgments.
Question 15: Should adenosine deaminase (ADA) and free 
IFN-γ levels be measured on specimens collected from sites 
of suspected extrapulmonary TB?
Evidence
Test characteristics of ADA in the diagnostic evaluation of 
meningeal, pleural, peritoneal, and pericardial tuberculosis 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e24 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
have been reported in meta-analyses of accuracy studies. Two 
meta-analyses estimated the sensitivity and specificity of an ele-
vated ADA level in the cerebrospinal fluid [195, 196]. The first 
meta-analysis included 10 studies and found a sensitivity and 
specificity of 79% and 91%, respectively [195], using final clin-
ical diagnosis, consistent pathology/cytology, or microbiologic 
confirmation as the reference standard. Most of the studies used 
a threshold of 9 U/L or 10 U/L to define an elevated ADA. The 
second meta-analysis included 13 studies and showed that the 
sensitivity and specificity are exquisitely sensitive to the thresh-
old used to define an elevated ADA level [196]. If 4 U/L was 
used as the threshold, the sensitivity and specificity were >93% 
and <80%, respectively. In contrast, if 8 U/L was used as the 
threshold, the sensitivity and specificity were <59% and >96%, 
respectively.
Five meta-analyses that included 9–63 studies estimated that 
the sensitivity and specificity of an elevated ADA level in the 
pleural fluid are 89%–99% and 88%–97%, respectively, with all 
but one of the meta-analyses estimating that the specificity is 
≥90% [197–201]. A more recent meta-analysis reported similar 
sensitivity and specificity [202]. Final clinical diagnosis, con-
sistent pathology/cytology, or microbiologic confirmation were 
used as the reference standard in most studies. Thresholds used 
to define an elevated ADA level ranged from 10 U/L to 71 U/L, 
with most clustering around 40 U/L.
A meta-analysis of 31 studies estimated that the sensitivity 
and specificity of an elevated ADA level in pericardial fluid are 
88% and 83%, respectively [203]. The threshold to define an ele-
vated ADA level was 40 U/L. Finally, a meta-analysis of 4 studies 
estimated that the sensitivity and specificity of an elevated ADA 
level in peritoneal fluid are 100% and 97%, respectively [204]. 
The threshold used to define an elevated ADA level ranged from 
36 U/L to 40 U/L.
The test characteristics of free IFN-γ levels have not been as 
extensively studied. A meta-analysis of 6 studies estimated that 
the sensitivity and specificity of an elevated free IFN-γ level 
in peritoneal fluid are 93% and 99%, respectively [205]. The 
threshold used to define an elevated IFN-γ level ranged from 
0.35 U/L to 9 U/L or 20 pg/mL to 112 pg/mL. A meta-analy-
sis of 22 studies estimated that the sensitivity and specificity of 
an elevated free IFN-γ level in pleural fluid are 89% and 97%, 
respectively [206]. The threshold used to define an elevated 
IFN-γ level ranged from 0.3 U/L to 10 U/L or 12 pg/mL to 
300 pg/mL. We did not identify any studies that looked at the 
test characteristics of free IFN-γ levels on pericardial fluid or 
cerebrospinal fluid.
No studies were identified that reported the test character-
istics of using both ADA and free IFN-γ to evaluate specimens 
from patients with suspected extrapulmonary TB. This evidence 
provides low confidence in the accuracy of the estimated test 
characteristics for both ADA and free IFN-γ levels. The studies 
did not report whether consecutive patients were enrolled (ie, 
risk of bias) and the studies reported variable results (ie, incon-
sistency), probably due in large part to the different thresholds 
used to define an elevated level.
Recommendation 15a: We suggest that ADA levels be 
measured, rather than not measured, on fluid collected from 
patients with suspected pleural TB, TB meningitis, peritoneal 
TB, or pericardial TB (conditional recommendation, low-qual-
ity evidence).
Recommendation 15b: We suggest that free IFN-γ levels be 
measured, rather than not measured, on fluid collected from 
patients with suspected pleural TB or peritoneal TB (condi-
tional recommendation, low-quality evidence).
Rationale
Neither the ADA level nor the IFN-γ level provide a defin-
itive diagnosis of extrapulmonary TB disease; rather, they 
provide supportive evidence that must be interpreted in the 
entire clinical context. In any type of diagnostic testing for 
extrapulmonary TB, both false-negative results and false-pos-
itive results have important consequences. False-negative 
results delay diagnosis and treatment while diagnostic testing 
continues, whereas false-positive results may lead to unnec-
essary therapy and the associated risks of drug toxicity and 
cost. Therefore, it is desirable for diagnostic tests to be both 
sensitive and specific.
Our committee made the judgment that measurement of 
ADA levels and free IFN-γ levels are indicated if false-neg-
ative results occur <30% of the time (ie, sensitivity is ≥70%) 
and false-positive results occur <20% of the time (ie, specificity 
is ≥80%). The different thresholds for false results reflect the 
committee’s recognition that the consequences of false-nega-
tive results are generally transient, whereas the consequences 
of false-positive results may be long lasting. In this case, the 
sensitivity and specificity of ADA were ≥79% and ≥83%, 
respectively, for detecting TB in cerebrospinal fluid, pleural 
fluid, peritoneal fluid, and pericardial fluid, so ADA measure-
ments are recommended in these fluids. Similarly, the sensitiv-
ity and specificity of free IFN-γ measurements were ≥89% and 
≥97%, respectively, for detecting TB in pleural fluid and peri-
toneal fluid, so free IFN-γ measurements are recommended in 
these fluids.
The recommendations are conditional because the low qual-
ity of evidence does not provide sufficient confidence in the 
estimated sensitivities and specificities for the committee to 
be certain that the balance of desirable to undesirable conse-
quences favors testing and obtaining the specimens to test usu-
ally requires an invasive procedure and, therefore, the balance 
of benefits versus risks may vary substantially depending upon 
the clinical condition of the patient. Furthermore, the commit-
tee recognized that these tests often required the services of an 
off-site laboratory, and that standards were variable across labo-
ratories and across published studies.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e25
Question 16: Should AFB smear microscopy be performed 
on specimens collected from sites of suspected extrapulmo-
nary TB?
Evidence
The diagnostic yield and sensitivity of AFB smear micros-
copy tend to be lower in extrapulmonary TB than pulmo-
nary TB because the former is paucibacillary. Accuracy 
studies indicate that AFB smear microscopy has a sensitivity 
of 0–10%, 14%–39%, 10%–30%, <5%, and 0–42% in pleural 
fluid (Supplementary Table 10), pleural tissue (Supplementary 
Table 10), urine (Supplementary Table 11), cerebrospinal fluid 
(Supplementary Table 12), peritoneal fluid (Supplementary 
Table 13), and pericardial fluid (Supplementary Table 14), 
respectively [207–218], when final clinical diagnosis, consistent 
pathology/cytology, or microbiologic confirmation is used as 
the reference standard. In contrast, the specificity of AFB smear 
microscopy tends to be quite high as described for pulmonary 
TB (≥90%). This evidence provides very low confidence in 
the estimated test characteristics because many studies do not 
report enrolling consecutive patients, most studies were small 
with few samples, and ranges are wide due to variable results 
from the individual studies.
Recommendation 16: We suggest that AFB smear micros-
copy be performed, rather than not performed, on specimens 
collected from sites of suspected extrapulmonary TB (condi-
tional recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: 
A positive result can be used as evidence of extrapulmonary 
TB and guide decision making because false-positive results 
are unlikely. However, a negative result may not be used to 
exclude TB because false-negative results are exceedingly 
common.
Rationale
AFB smear microscopy provides the opportunity for early diag-
nosis and treatment. The estimated specificity of ≥90% for AFB 
smear in the diagnosis of extrapulmonary TB indicates that 
false-positive results occur only ≤10% of the time; thus, if a pos-
itive AFB smear result is obtained, it is reasonable to assume 
that infection is present and to act accordingly. In contrast, the 
estimated sensitivity of <50% for all specimen types indicates 
that false-negative results are more common that true-nega-
tive results and, thus, a negative AFB smear result should not 
be used to exclude extrapulmonary TB; additional diagnostic 
testing is indicated.
Even though a positive AFB smear result is infrequent, the 
committee judged the benefits of early diagnosis (early initia-
tion of treatment, potential to reduce transmission) to outweigh 
the cost and burden of AFB smear microscopy. The recommen-
dation is conditional because the very low quality of evidence 
does not provide sufficient confidence in the estimated sensi-
tivities and specificities for the committee to be certain that the 
balance of desirable to undesirable consequences favors testing 
and obtaining the specimens to test usually requires an invasive 
procedure and, therefore, the balance of benefits versus risks 
may vary substantially depending upon the clinical condition 
of the patient.
Question 17: Should mycobacterial cultures be performed on 
specimens collected from sites of suspected extrapulmonary 
TB?
Evidence
Accuracy studies indicate that mycobacterial culture has a sen-
sitivity of 23%–58%, 40%–58%, 80%–90%, 45%–70%, 45%–
69%, and 50%–65% in pleural fluid (Supplementary Table 10), 
pleural tissue (Supplementary Table 10), urine (Supplementary 
Table 11), cerebrospinal fluid (Supplementary Table 12), peri-
toneal fluid (Supplementary Table 13), and pericardial fluid 
(Supplementary Table 14), respectively [207, 208, 211, 213–216, 
219–223], when final clinical diagnosis, consistent pathology/
cytology, or microbiologic confirmation is used as the reference 
standard. The specificity of mycobacterial culture tends to be 
comparatively higher than the sensitivity (>97%). This evi-
dence provides low confidence in the estimated test character-
istics because many studies do not report enrolling consecutive 
patients and most studies were small with few samples.
Recommendation 17: We recommend that mycobacterial 
cultures be performed, rather than not performed, on spec-
imens collected from sites of suspected extrapulmonary TB 
(strong recommendation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: 
A positive result can be used as evidence of extrapulmonary 
TB and guide decision making because false-positive results are 
unlikely. However, a negative result may not be used to exclude 
TB because false-negative results are exceedingly common.
Rationale
The estimated specificity of >97% for mycobacterial cultures in 
the diagnosis of extrapulmonary TB indicates that false-positive 
results occur only <3% of the time; thus, a positive mycobac-
terial culture is a reliable indicator that infection is present. In 
contrast, the estimated sensitivity of mycobacterial culture is 
widely variable depending upon the specimen type. However, 
even the specimen that provides the highest sensitivity (urine 
has an 80%–90% sensitivity for the diagnosis of urinary TB) 
provides false-negative results 10%–20% of the time. Such fre-
quent false-negative results suggest that mycobacterial cultures 
should not be used exclude extrapulmonary TB; additional 
diagnostic testing is indicated.
The committee judged the diagnostic yield and benefits 
of mycobacterial culture sufficient to outweigh the cost and 
burden. Importantly, positive mycobacterial cultures are the 
only way to obtain isolates for DST. Empiric treatment for 
presumed drug-resistant TB may lead to unnecessary toxici-
ties and cost if the patient actually has drug-susceptible TB, 
whereas empiric treatment for drug-susceptible TB may lead 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e26 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
to treatment failure, risk of dissemination, and even death if 
the patient actually has drug-resistant TB. Moreover, delayed 
diagnosis of drug resistance will prolong therapy and increase 
risk of default.
The recommendation is strong despite the low quality of 
evidence because the committee is certain that the balance of 
desirable to undesirable consequences favors mycobacterial cul-
ture. This certainty reflects the committee’s recognition of the 
importance of obtaining mycobacterial isolates for DST com-
pared with the costs and burdens of performing the cultures, 
and the belief that additional data would not alter the balance 
of desirable and undesirable consequences in the overwhelming 
majority of patients.
Question 18: Should NAAT be performed on specimens col-
lected from sites of suspected extrapulmonary TB?
Evidence
Meta-analyses have been published for the use of NAAT in 
suspected pleural and meningeal tuberculosis [224, 225]. 
Most studies used final clinical diagnosis, consistent pathol-
ogy/cytology, or microbiologic confirmation as the reference 
standard. Nucleic acid amplification performed on pleural 
fluid and cerebrospinal fluid has a sensitivity of 56% and 62%, 
respectively, indicating false-negative rates of 44% and 38%, 
respectively. In contrast, the specificity of NAAT is high for 
both pleural fluid and cerebrospinal fluid (98% for both), indi-
cating that only about 2% of positive results are false-positives. 
Individual studies have been published describing the test char-
acteristics of nucleic acid amplification on other body fluids 
and tissues. The studies showed considerable variability in the 
sensitivity and specificity based upon the disease site; generally 
speaking, the sensitivity was usually <90%, while the specificity 
was >95% (Supplementary Table 15) [191, 226]. This evidence 
provides very low confidence in the estimated test characteris-
tics because many studies do not report enrolling consecutive 
patients, findings were inconsistent as exemplified by the wide 
ranges, and the studies were small with few samples.
Recommendation 18: We suggest that NAAT be performed, 
rather than not performed, on specimens collected from sites 
of suspected extrapulmonary TB (conditional recommendation, 
very low-quality evidence). Remarks: A positive NAAT result can 
be used as evidence of extrapulmonary TB and guide decision 
making because false-positive results are unlikely. However, a 
negative NAAT result may not be used to exclude TB because 
false-negative results are exceedingly common.
Rationale
NAAT cannot replace mycobacterial culture for diagnosis 
because it is not sensitive enough and it does not produce 
an isolate, which is needed for DST. However, NAAT is 
appropriate as an adjunct to mycobacterial culture because 
mycobacterial culture results require at least 1–2 weeks, 
but NAAT can be performed within hours, thereby offer-
ing the opportunity for early diagnosis and treatment. The 
committee felt that NAAT gives positive results frequently 
enough that the potential benefits outweigh the costs and 
burden of testing. Moreover, the committee felt that if the 
test results are applied correctly (ie, a positive NAAT result 
is considered adequate to confirm extrapulmonary TB, but 
a negative NAAT result is not used to exclude extrapulmo-
nary TB), then the risks associated with false results are 
minimal.
The recommendation is conditional because the very low 
quality of evidence does not provide sufficient confidence in 
the estimated sensitivities and specificities for the committee to 
be certain that the balance of desirable to undesirable conse-
quences favors testing and obtaining the specimens to test usu-
ally requires an invasive procedure and, therefore, the balance 
of benefits versus risks may vary substantially depending upon 
the clinical condition of the patient.
Cautions and Limitations
At this time there are no FDA-approved NAATs for use with 
extrapulmonary specimens.
Question 19: Should histological examination be performed 
on specimens collected from sites of suspected extrapulmo-
nary TB?
Evidence
Accuracy studies indicate that histological examination 
has a sensitivity of 69%–97%, 86%–94%, 60%–70%, 79%–
100%, and 73%–100% in pleural tissue (Supplementary 
Table 10), urologic tissue (Supplementary Table 11), endo-
metrial curettage (Supplementary Table 11), peritoneal 
biopsy (Supplementary Table 13), and pericardial tissue 
(Supplementary Table 14), respectively, when final clinical 
diagnosis, consistent pathology/cytology, or microbiologic 
confirmation is used as the reference standard. The speci-
ficity of mycobacterial culture microscopy tends to be low 
because necrotizing and nonnecrotizing granulomas are 
seen in other infectious and noninfectious diseases. This 
evidence provides very low confidence in the estimated test 
characteristics because many studies do not report enrolling 
consecutive patients, the wide ranges of sensitivity are due 
to the variable results of individual studies, and the studies 
were small with few samples.
Recommendation 19: We suggest that histological examina-
tion be performed, rather than not performed, on specimens 
collected from sites of suspected extrapulmonary TB (condi-
tional recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: 
Both positive and negative results should be interpreted in the 
context of the clinical scenario because neither false-positive 
nor false-negative results are rare.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e27
Rationale
Tissue sampling with histological examination generally 
occurs after other types of diagnostic testing have failed to 
identify a definitive diagnosis. Thus, at this stage in the diag-
nostic process, the committee thought testing was worthwhile 
if sensitivity and specificity were both >50%, meaning that 
true results were more likely than false results. Histological 
examination surpassed these thresholds and, therefore, is rec-
ommended. However, the committee emphasizes the impor-
tance of interpreting the results within the clinical context, 
to lessen the impact of false results. The recommendation is 
conditional because the very low quality of evidence does not 
provide sufficient confidence in the estimated sensitivities and 
specificities for the committee to be certain that the balance 
of desirable to undesirable consequences favors testing and 
obtaining the specimens to test usually requires an invasive 
procedure and, therefore, the balance of benefits versus risks 
may vary substantially depending upon the clinical condition 
of the patient.
GENOTYPING OF M. 
TUBERCULOSIS
Over the past 2 decades, genotyping of TB strains has been shown 
to be a valuable tool in TB control. Molecular epidemiology has 
helped to identify unsuspected transmission, determine likely 
locations of transmission, measure the extent of transmission, 
and differentiate reactivation from newly acquired infection 
[227]. Often traditional contact investigations focus on persons 
in the household and workplace. Numerous reports describe TB 
cases linked through genotyping of Mtb isolates, when detection 
of transmission was initially missed by conventional contact 
investigation because the setting was nontraditional. This type 
of transmission occurs frequently among members of a “social 
network” that is centered around a specific activity, including 
illicit drug use, excess alcohol use, or gambling, or location such 
as a homeless shelter, adult entertainment club, or HIV residen-
tial care facility [228–231]. When genotyping detects previously 
unrecognized transmission of TB in a nonconventional setting, 
public health interventions to contain and subsequently end the 
outbreak can be redirected to focus on the social network or 
location associated with transmission.
Genotyping or DNA fingerprinting of Mtb can be used for 
determining the clonality of bacterial cultures. PCR-based, 
and sometimes Southern blotting, methods are used. The 
PCR-based methods are mycobacterial interspersed repeti-
tive units (MIRU) and spacer oligonucleotide typing (spol-
igotyping) [232, 233]. A standardized protocol has been 
developed to permit comparison of genotypes from different 
laboratories [232].
Question 20: Should genotyping be performed on a culture 
isolate from culture-positive patients with TB?
Evidence
We identified no empirical evidence that estimated the fre-
quency with which the availability of genotyped isolates 
changed public health practices or affected patient outcomes. 
Therefore, the recommendation is based upon the committee’s 
collective clinical experience, which constitutes very low-qual-
ity evidence.
Recommendation 20: We recommend one culture isolate 
from each mycobacterial culture–positive patient be submitted 
to a regional genotyping laboratory for genotyping (strong rec-
ommendation, very low-quality evidence).
Rationale
Genotyping is useful in detecting false-positive results due to 
confirming laboratory cross-contamination [234, 235], investi-
gating outbreaks of TB (both detecting unsuspected outbreaks 
and confirming suspected outbreaks) [236], evaluating contact 
investigations [237], and determining whether new episodes 
of TB are due to reinfection or reactivation [238]. In addition, 
genotyping is useful for elucidating sites and patterns of Mtb 
transmission within communities [237, 239]. This information 
is used by state and local tuberculosis control programs to focus 
interventions to interrupt further TB transmission. Genotyping 
is used to aid public health departments in the control of TB 
and poses no risk to individual patients.
Recently, whole-genome sequencing (WGS) has been applied 
to investigation of tuberculosis outbreaks [240]. This technique 
may add discriminatory power to strain identification, but the 
role of WGS in outbreak investigation is still being determined.
In response to nosocomial outbreaks and tuberculosis among 
HIV-infected patients, the CDC established a national univer-
sal tuberculosis genotyping system for the United States. The 
merger of modern molecular protocols for strain identification 
at the DNA level and conventional epidemiological methodol-
ogies has given birth to an enhanced collaborative strategy to 
impact tuberculosis control efforts. Regional TB genotyping 
laboratories can be contacted through the state public health 
laboratories or TB control programs.
The recommendation is strong because the committee felt 
certain that the public health benefits of genotyping far outweigh 
the modest costs and burdens of genotyping. Even though the 
evidence can provide very little confidence in the magnitude of 
the benefits, costs, and burdens used by the committee to make 
its decision, the differences seemed so overwhelming that the 
committee thought it extraordinarily unlikely that additional 
data would lead to a judgment that the costs and harms exceed 
the benefits.
RESEARCH NEEDS
As described by Abu-Raddad et al [241], improved detection 
of those with TB and improved identification of those at risk 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e28 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
to progress once infected have the potential to substantially 
decrease the prevalence of TB and its associated mortality.
Tuberculosis
The ability to rapidly and accurately identify Mtb as well as 
drug resistance (eg, through NAAT, line probe, molecular bea-
con, and Xpert MTB/RIF assays) reflects substantial advances. 
While rapid tests for TB diagnosis still have a sensitivity of 
70%–90%, they may fail to detect paucibacillary pulmonary TB. 
They also remain relatively expensive, making them difficult to 
implement in high-burden, low-resource settings. Ideally, what 
is needed is a simple, inexpensive, rapid (ie, hours) test that is 
highly accurate (>95% sensitivity and specificity). Rapid tests 
for detection of drug resistance are approaching the desired 
level of accuracy, at least for rifampin. However, these tests also 
are relatively expensive and need to be expanded to allow for 
detection of resistance to other TB medications. Such expansion 
is currently limited by gaps in knowledge of the molecular basis 
of resistance to most first- and second-line drugs. In this regard, 
improved functional tests for resistance may prove useful.
Other significant gaps remain in the diagnosis of pediatric 
and extrapulmonary TB. First, the yield of AFB smear and cul-
ture in children is low compared to that in adults, which leads 
to excessive morbidity and mortality due to delayed and missed 
diagnoses, especially in resource-limited settings. Conversely, 
the inability to exclude TB results in overtreatment when the 
diagnosis cannot be excluded. In areas of the world where TB is 
diagnosed entirely based on smear microscopy, children will be 
almost completely neglected and untreated for TB. In areas with 
greater resources, low yields of microbiologic specimens in chil-
dren deter many clinicians from even attempting culture collec-
tion. This may result in prolonged treatment with extra TB drugs 
(in jurisdictions that use 4 drugs for 6 months in patients lack-
ing susceptibility data). Alternatively, drug resistance will not be 
identified and the child could suffer dire consequences receiving 
inadequate care. Second, similar challenges exist for the accurate 
diagnosis of those with extrapulmonary TB. Finally, diagnostic 
approaches to the identification of those likely to fail TB treat-
ment are needed. These limitations in the diagnosis of paucibac-
illary TB highlight the need to develop testing strategies based on 
either host or bacterial markers of infection that can be measured 
from readily available clinical sources such as plasma or urine.
Latent Tuberculosis Infection
Individuals with immunological evidence of exposure to Mtb 
antigens, but without evidence of clinical disease are termed 
“latently” infected. However, it is clear that there is considerable 
heterogeneity within this classification. As was described previ-
ously, those with recent infection (<2 years) are at increased risk 
for progression to clinical disease, and functionally might be 
considered acutely infected. Conversely, those more remotely 
infected are at substantially lower risk, but remote infection 
remains difficult to define operationally. Those with nega-
tive TSTs or IGRAs are unlikely to progress to TB. However, 
the PPV of either test is relatively modest, as current estimates 
would suggest that among household contacts, 20–40 peo-
ple require treatment to prevent one case. While the number 
needed to treat based on IGRAs is not known with certainty, 
early evidence suggests that it is not likely to be dramatically 
different [24, 55]. Nonetheless, a careful evaluation of which 
diagnostic is more closely associated with the development of 
TB remains a research priority. Given the relatively poor PPVs 
of current diagnostics for the prediction of progression to TB 
disease, a diagnostic that can accurately identify those at risk 
is needed. It should be noted that both QFT and T-SPOT are 
largely measures of CD4 T-cell immunity, but additional mark-
ers of inflammation, cellular, or humoral immunity may prove 
useful. Clearly, the identification of biomarkers associated with 
the development of tuberculosis following infection will require 
carefully performed prospective investigation. In this regard, 
the prospective evaluation of populations at risk for disease pro-
gression, and the use of sophisticated imaging such as positron 
emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) are 
likely to further delineate markers associated with either disease 
progression or subclinical infection.
Operationally, the intent of targeted testing is to identify those 
who would benefit from treatment. While much is now known 
about the accuracy of both the TST and IGRAs, much less is 
known about their performance with regard to treatment com-
pletion. Additional research on the use of IGRAs with regard 
to provider and patient perceptions is needed to establish opti-
mal diagnostic and treatment strategies. Finally, the literature 
addressing the performance of IGRAs in children <5 years old 
is still limited and studies to inform the appropriate use of these 
tests to accurately diagnose LTBI in this age group are needed. 
Studies of young household contacts in low-incidence countries 
would be especially informative.
GUIDELINE STATEMENT
These guidelines are not intended to impose a standard of care. They provide 
the basis for rational decisions in the diagnostic evaluation of patients with 
possible latent tuberculosis or tuberculosis. Clinicians, patients, third-party 
payers, stakeholders, or the courts should never view the recommendations 
contained in these guidelines as dictates. Guidelines cannot take into account 
all of the often compelling unique individual clinical circumstances. Therefore, 
no one charged with evaluating clinicians’ actions should attempt to apply 
the recommendations from these guidelines by rote or in a blanket fashion. 
Qualifying remarks accompanying each recommendation are its integral parts 
and serve to facilitate more accurate interpretation. They should never be 
omitted when quoting or translating recommendations from these guidelines.
Supplementary Data
Supplementary materials are available at Clinical Infectious Diseases online. 
Consisting of data provided by the author to benefit the reader, the posted 
materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of the author, so 
questions or comments should be addressed to the author.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e29
Notes
Acknowledgments. The writing committee thanks Drs Mike Iseman 
and Jeffrey Starke for their critical examination of the manuscript. The 
committee is particularly indebted to Kevin Wilson for his patience and 
his editing skills.
Potential conflicts of interest. D. L. C. has received speaking fees from 
Qiagen. C. L. D. serves on the data and safety monitoring board (DSMB) for 
Otsuka America Pharmaceutical, Inc, served on a DSMB for Sanofi Pasteur 
Inc, received research support from Insmed, and received travel support 
from Qiagen. L. R. serves as a speaker and on an advisory committee for 
Boehringer Ingelheim and F. Hoffmann-La Roche, serves on an advisory 
committee and received research support from Biogen Inc, served on an 
advisory committee for AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and Sanofi Pasteur, 
served as a consultant for Bayer HealthCare, served as a speaker for Cipla. 
T.M.S. is employed by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC). T. R. S. serves on a DSMB for Otsuka. P. A. L. is employed by the 
CDC. All other authors report no potential conflicts. All authors have sub-
mitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. 
 
Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content of the manuscript 
have been disclosed.
References
1. Schünemann HJ, Osborne M, Moss J, et al. ATS Ethics and Conflict of Interest 
Committee and the Documents Development and Implementation Committee. 
An official American Thoracic Society Policy statement: managing conflict of 
interest in professional societies. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009; 180:564–80.
2. Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Brozek J, et al. Grading quality of evidence and 
strength of recommendations for diagnostic tests and strategies. BMJ 2008; 
336:1106–10.
3. Schünemann HJ, Jaeschke R, Cook DJ, et al. ATS Documents Development and 
Implementation Committee. An official ATS statement: grading the quality of 
evidence and strength of recommendations in ATS guidelines and recommenda-
tions. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 174:605–14.
4. World Health Organization. Global tuberculosis report 2015. Geneva, 
Switzerland: WHO, 2015.
5. Edlin BR, Tokars JI, Grieco MH, et al. An outbreak of multidrug-resistant tuber-
culosis among hospitalized patients with the acquired immunodeficiency syn-
drome. N Engl J Med 1992; 326:1514–21.
6. Gandhi NR, Moll A, Sturm AW, et al. Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis as a 
cause of death in patients co-infected with tuberculosis and HIV in a rural area of 
South Africa. Lancet 2006; 368:1575–80.
7. Scott C, Kirking HL, Jeffries C, et al. Tuberculosis trends—United States, 2014. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015; 64: 265–9.
8. Bennett DE, Courval JM, Onorato I, et al. Prevalence of tuberculosis infection 
in the United States population: the national health and nutrition examination 
survey, 1999–2000. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008; 177:348–55.
9. US Institute of Medicine; Committee on the Elimination of Tuberculosis in the 
United States, Geiter L, ebrary Inc. Ending neglect the elimination of tuberculosis 
in the United States. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2000:xvi, 269 p.
10. Reichman LB, Hershfield ES; ebrary Inc. Tuberculosis: a comprehensive inter-
national approach. Lung biology in health and disease v 144. 2nd ed. New York: 
Dekker, 2000:xxviii, 898 p.
11. Targeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection. 
American Thoracic Society. MMWR Recomm Rep 2000; 49:1–51.
12. Reichler MR, Reves R, Bur S, et al. Evaluation of investigations conducted to 
detect and prevent transmission of tuberculosis. JAMA 2002; 287:991–5.
13. Catanzaro A. Nosocomial tuberculosis. Am Rev Respir Dis 1982; 125:559–62.
14. Schluger NW, Rom WN. The host immune response to tuberculosis. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1998; 157:679–91.
15. Balasubramanian V, Wiegeshaus EH, Taylor BT, Smith DW. Pathogenesis of 
tuberculosis: pathway to apical localization. Tuber Lung Dis 1994; 75:168–78.
16. Dannenberg AM Jr. Immune mechanisms in the pathogenesis of pulmonary 
tuberculosis. Rev Infect Dis 1989; 11 Suppl 2:S369–78.
17. Horsburgh CR Jr. Priorities for the treatment of latent tuberculosis infection in 
the United States. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:2060–7.
18. Selwyn PA, Hartel D, Lewis VA, et al. A prospective study of the risk of tuberculo-
sis among intravenous drug users with human immunodeficiency virus infection. 
N Engl J Med 1989; 320:545–50.
19. Markowitz N, Hansen NI, Wilcosky TC, et al. Tuberculin and anergy testing in 
HIV-seropositive and HIV-seronegative persons. Pulmonary Complications of 
HIV Infection Study Group. Ann Intern Med 1993; 119:185–93.
20. Marks SM, Taylor Z, Qualls NL, Shrestha-Kuwahara RJ, Wilce MA, Nguyen CH. 
Outcomes of contact investigations of infectious tuberculosis patients. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 162:2033–8.
21. Reichler MR, Reves R, Bur S, et al. Contact Investigation Study Group. Treatment 
of latent tuberculosis infection in contacts of new tuberculosis cases in the United 
States. South Med J 2002; 95:414–20.
22. Hirsch-Moverman Y, Daftary A, Franks J, Colson PW. Adherence to treatment for 
latent tuberculosis infection: systematic review of studies in the US and Canada. 
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2008; 12:1235–54.
23. Huebner RE, Schein MF, Bass JB Jr. The tuberculin skin test. Clin Infect Dis 1993; 
17:968–75.
24. Pai M, Denkinger CM, Kik SV, et al. Gamma interferon release assays for detec-
tion of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Clin Microbiol Rev 2014; 27:3–20.
25. Kendig EL Jr, Kirkpatrick BV, Carter WH, Hill FA, Caldwell K, Entwistle M. 
Underreading of the tuberculin skin test reaction. Chest 1998; 113:1175–7.
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidelines for preventing the trans-
mission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health-care settings, 2005. MMWR 
Recomm Rep 2005; 54:1–141.
27. Black CA. Delayed type hypersensitivity: current theories with an historic per-
spective. Dermatol Online J 1999; 5:7.
28. Cole ST, Brosch R, Parkhill J, et al. Deciphering the biology of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis from the complete genome sequence. Nature 1998; 393:537–44.
29. Andersen P, Andersen AB, Sørensen AL, Nagai S. Recall of long-lived immunity 
to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in mice. J Immunol 1995; 154:3359–72.
30. Mustafa AS, Amoudy HA, Wiker HG, et al. Comparison of antigen-specific 
T-cell responses of tuberculosis patients using complex or single antigens of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Scand J Immunol 1998; 48:535–43.
31. Mustafa AS, Oftung F, Amoudy HA, et al. Multiple epitopes from the 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis ESAT-6 antigen are recognized by antigen-specific 
human T cell lines. Clin Infect Dis 2000; 30(suppl 3):S201–5.
32. Harboe M, Oettinger T, Wiker HG, Rosenkrands I, Andersen P. Evidence for 
occurrence of the ESAT-6 protein in Mycobacterium tuberculosis and virulent 
Mycobacterium bovis and for its absence in Mycobacterium bovis BCG. Infect 
Immun 1996; 64:16–22.
33. Mahairas GG, Sabo PJ, Hickey MJ, Singh DC, Stover CK. Molecular analysis of 
genetic differences between Mycobacterium bovis BCG and virulent M. bovis. J 
Bacteriol 1996; 178:1274–82.
34. Berthet FX, Rasmussen PB, Rosenkrands I, Andersen P, Gicquel B. A 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis operon encoding ESAT-6 and a novel low-mo-
lecular-mass culture filtrate protein (CFP-10). Microbiology 1998; 144 (pt 
11):3195–203.
35. Bothamley GH, Rudd RM. Clinical evaluation of a serological assay using a mon-
oclonal antibody (TB72) to the 38 kDa antigen of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Eur 
Respir J 1994; 7:240–6.
36. Colangeli R, Spencer JS, Bifani P, et al. MTSA-10, the product of the Rv3874 gene 
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, elicits tuberculosis-specific, delayed-type hyper-
sensitivity in guinea pigs. Infect Immun 2000; 68:990–3.
37. Dillon DC, Alderson MR, Day CH, et al. Molecular and immunological charac-
terization of Mycobacterium tuberculosis CFP-10, an immunodiagnostic antigen 
missing in Mycobacterium bovis BCG. J Clin Microbiol 2000; 38:3285–90.
38. Arend SM, de Haas P, Leyten E, et al. ESAT-6 and CFP-10 in clinical versus envi-
ronmental isolates of Mycobacterium kansasii. J Infect Dis 2005; 191:1301–10.
39. Geluk A, van Meijgaarden KE, Franken KL, et al. Identification and characteriza-
tion of the ESAT-6 homologue of Mycobacterium leprae and T-cell cross-reactivity 
with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infect Immun 2002; 70:2544–8.
40. Geluk A, van Meijgaarden KE, Franken KL, et al. Immunological crossreactivity 
of the Mycobacterium leprae CFP-10 with its homologue in Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis. Scand J Immunol 2004; 59:66–70.
41. Millington KA, Gooding S, Hinks TS, Reynolds DJ, Lalvani A. Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis-specific cellular immune profiles suggest bacillary persistence 
decades after spontaneous cure in untreated tuberculosis. J Infect Dis 2010; 
202:1685–9.
42. Hinks TS, Dosanjh DP, Innes JA, et al. Frequencies of region of difference 1 
antigen-specific but not purified protein derivative-specific gamma interferon- 
secreting T cells correlate with the presence of tuberculosis disease but do not 
distinguish recent from remote latent infections. Infect Immun 2009; 77:5486–95.
43. Kik SV, Franken WP, Arend SM, et al. Interferon-gamma release assays in immi-
grant contacts and effect of remote exposure to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Int J 
Tuberc Lung Dis 2009; 13:820–8.
44. Lalvani A, Nagvenkar P, Udwadia Z, et al. Enumeration of T cells specific for 
RD1-encoded antigens suggests a high prevalence of latent Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis infection in healthy urban Indians. J Infect Dis 2001; 183:469–77.
45. T-SPOT.TB: an aid in the diagosis of tuberculosis infection; package insert for in 
vitro diagnositic use. Abingdon, UK: Oxford Immunotec Ltd.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e30 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
46. Diagnostic Standards and Classification of Tuberculosis in Adults and Children. 
This Official Statement of the American Thoracic Society and the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention was Adopted by the ATS Board of Directors, July 
1999. This statement was endorsed by the Council of the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America, September 1999. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 161:1376–95.
47. Ferrara G, Losi M, D’Amico R, et al. Use in routine clinical practice of two com-
mercial blood tests for diagnosis of infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis: a 
prospective study. Lancet 2006; 367:1328–34.
48. Ferrara G, Losi M, Meacci M, et al. Routine hospital use of a new commercial 
whole blood interferon-gamma assay for the diagnosis of tuberculosis infection. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005; 172:631–5.
49. Lee JY, Choi HJ, Park IN, et al. Comparison of two commercial interferon-gamma 
assays for diagnosing Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Eur Respir J 2006; 
28:24–30.
50. van Zyl-Smit RN, Zwerling A, Dheda K, Pai M. Within-subject variability of 
interferon-g assay results for tuberculosis and boosting effect of tuberculin skin 
testing: a systematic review. PLoS One 2009; 4:e8517.
51. van Zyl-Smit RN, Pai M, Peprah K, et al. Within-subject variability and boosting 
of T-cell interferon-gamma responses after tuberculin skin testing. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2009; 180:49–58.
52. Metcalfe JZ, Cattamanchi A, McCulloch CE, Lew JD, Ha NP, Graviss EA. Test 
variability of the QuantiFERON-TB gold in-tube assay in clinical practice. Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 2013; 187:206–11.
53. Richeldi L. An update on the diagnosis of tuberculosis infection. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2006; 174:736–42.
54. Leyten EM, Prins C, Bossink AW
, et al. Effect of tuberculin skin testing on a 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific IFN-{gamma} assay. Eur Respir J 2007; 29:1212–6.
55. Zellweger JP, Sotgiu G, Block M, et al. TBNET. Risk assessment of tuberculosis in 
contacts by IFN-γ release assays. A Tuberculosis Network European Trials Group 
Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015; 191:1176–84.
56. Connell TG, Curtis N, Ranganathan SC, Buttery JP. Performance of a whole blood 
interferon gamma assay for detecting latent infection with Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis in children. Thorax 2006; 61:616–20.
57. Richeldi L, Bergamini BM, Vaienti F. Prior tuberculin skin testing does not boost 
QuantiFERON-TB results in paediatric contacts. Eur Respir J 2008; 32:524–5.
58. Bergamini BM, Losi M, Vaienti F, et al. Performance of commercial blood tests 
for the diagnosis of latent tuberculosis infection in children and adolescents. 
Pediatrics 2009; 123:e419–24.
59. Kampmann B, Whittaker E, Williams A, et al. Interferon-gamma release assays do 
not identify more children with active tuberculosis than the tuberculin skin test. 
Eur Respir J 2009; 33:1374–82.
60. Lighter J, Rigaud M, Eduardo R, Peng CH, Pollack H. Latent tuberculosis diagno-
sis in children by using the QuantiFERON-TB Gold In-Tube test. Pediatrics 2009; 
123:30–7.
61. Talati NJ, Seybold U, Humphrey B, et al. Poor concordance between inter-
feron-gamma release assays and tuberculin skin tests in diagnosis of latent 
tuberculosis infection among HIV-infected individuals. BMC Infect Dis 2009; 
9:15.
62. Efficacy of various durations of isoniazid preventive therapy for tuberculosis: five 
years of follow-up in the IUAT trial. International Union Against Tuberculosis 
Committee on Prophylaxis. Bull World Health Organ 1982; 60:555–64.
63. Ferebee SH, Mount FW. Tuberculosis morbidity in a controlled trial of the 
prophylactic use of isoniazid among household contacts. Am Rev Respir Dis 
1962; 85:490–510.
64. Comstock GW, Ferebee SH, Hammes LM. A controlled trial of community-wide 
isoniazid prophylaxis in Alaska. Am Rev Respir Dis 1967; 95:935–43.
65. Ferebee SH, Mount FW, Murray FJ, Livesay VT. A controlled trial of isoniazid 
prophylaxis in mental institutions. Am Rev Respir Dis 1963; 88:161–75.
66. Pape JW, Jean SS, Ho JL, Hafner A, Johnson WD Jr. Effect of isoniazid prophy-
laxis on incidence of active tuberculosis and progression of HIV infection. Lancet 
1993; 342:268–72.
67. Whalen CC, Johnson JL, Okwera A, et al. A trial of three regimens to prevent 
tuberculosis in Ugandan adults infected with the human immunodeficiency 
virus. Uganda-Case Western Reserve University Research Collaboration. N Engl 
J Med 1997; 337:801–8.
68. Wilkinson D, Squire SB, Garner P. Effect of preventive treatment for tuberculosis 
in adults infected with HIV: systematic review of randomised placebo controlled 
trials. BMJ 1998; 317:625–9.
69. Martinson NA, Barnes GL, Moulton LH, et al. New regimens to prevent tubercu-
losis in adults with HIV infection. N Engl J Med 2011; 365:11–20.
70. Carmona L, Gomez-Reino JJ, Rodriguez-Valverde V, et al. Effectiveness of 
recommendations to prevent reactivation of latent tuberculosis infection in 
patients treated with tumor necrosis factor antagonists. Arthritis Rheum 2005; 
52:1766–72.
71. Perez J, Kupper H, Spencer-Green G. Impact of screening for latent TB before 
initiating anti-TNF therapy in North America and Europe. Ann Rheum Dis 2005; 
64:265.
72. Bartu V, Havelkova M, Kopecka E. QuantiFERON-TB Gold in the diagnosis of 
active tuberculosis. J Int Med Res 2008; 36:434–7.
73. Bosshard V, Roux-Lombard P, Perneger T, et al. Do results of the T-SPOT.TB 
interferon-gamma release assay change after treatment of tuberculosis? Respir 
Med 2009; 103:30–4.
74. Chee CB, Gan SH, Khinmar KW, et al. Comparison of sensitivities of two com-
mercial gamma interferon release assays for pulmonary tuberculosis. J Clin 
Microbiol 2008; 46:1935–40.
75. Chou CH, Hsu HL, Lee LN, Hsueh PR, Luh KT. Comparison of 2 interfer-
on-gamma assays and Roche Cobas Amplicor Mycobacterium tuberculosis assay 
for rapid diagnosis of tuberculosis among patients with suspected tuberculosis in 
Taiwan. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 2009; 42:251–7.
76. Domínguez J, Ruiz-Manzano J, De Souza-Galvão M, et al. Comparison of two 
commercially available gamma interferon blood tests for immunodiagnosis of 
tuberculosis. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2008; 15:168–71.
77. Dosanjh DP, Hinks TS, Innes JA, et al. Improved diagnostic evaluation of sus-
pected tuberculosis. Ann Intern Med 2008; 148:325–36.
78. US Food and Drug Administration. Medical devices: T-SPOT-TB—P070006. 
Silver Spring, MD: FDA, 2008.
79. Gerogianni I, Papala M, Klapsa D, Zinzaras E, Petinaki E, Gourgoulianis KI. 
Whole-blood interferon-gamma assay for the diagnosis of tuberculosis infection 
in an unselected Greek population. Respirology 2008; 13:270–4.
80. Goletti D, Carrara S, Butera O, et al. Accuracy of immunodiagnostic tests for 
active tuberculosis using single and combined results: a multicenter TBNET-
Study. PLoS One 2008; 3:e3417.
81. Harada N, Higuchi K, Yoshiyama T, et al. Comparison of the sensitivity and spec-
ificity of two whole blood interferon-gamma assays for M. tuberculosis infection. 
J Infect 2008; 56:348–53.
82. Higuchi K, Kawabe Y, Mitarai S, Yoshiyama T, Harada N, Mori T. Comparison 
of performance in two diagnostic methods for tuberculosis infection. Med 
Microbiol Immunol 2009; 198:33–7.
83. Jafari C, Ernst M, Diel R, et al. Rapid diagnosis of smear-negative tuberculosis by 
bronchoalveolar lavage enzyme-linked immunospot. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2006; 174:1048–54.
84. Janssens JP. Interferon-gamma release assay tests to rule out active tuberculosis. 
Eur Respir J 2007; 30:183–4; author reply 184–5.
85. Kang YA, Lee HW, Hwang SS, et al. Usefulness of whole-blood interfer-
on-gamma assay and interferon-gamma enzyme-linked immunospot assay in 
the diagnosis of active pulmonary tuberculosis. Chest 2007; 132:959–65.
86. Latorre I, De Souza-Galvão M, Ruiz-Manzano J, et al. Quantitative evaluation of 
T-cell response after specific antigen stimulation in active and latent tuberculo-
sis infection in adults and children. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2009; 65:236–46.
87. Leung WL, Law KL, Leung VS, et al. Comparison of intracellular cytokine flow 
cytometry and an enzyme immunoassay for evaluation of cellular immune 
response to active tuberculosis. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2009; 16:344–51.
88. Liao CH, Lai CC, Tan CK, et al. False-negative results by enzyme-linked immu-
nospot assay for interferon-gamma among patients with culture-confirmed 
tuberculosis. J Infect 2009; 59:421–3.
89. Meier T, Eulenbruch HP, Wrighton-Smith P, Enders G, Regnath T. Sensitivity 
of a new commercial enzyme-linked immunospot assay (T SPOT-TB) for diag-
nosis of tuberculosis in clinical practice. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2005; 
24:529–36.
90. Palazzo R, Spensieri F, Massari M, et al. Use of whole-blood samples in in-house 
bulk and single-cell antigen-specific gamma interferon assays for surveillance of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2008; 15:327–37.
91. Park SY, Jeon K, Um SW, Kwon OJ, Kang ES, Koh WJ. Clinical utility of the 
QuantiFERON-TB Gold In-Tube test for the diagnosis of active pulmonary 
tuberculosis. Scand J Infect Dis 2009; 41:818–22.
92. Ruhwald M, Bodmer T, Maier C, et al. TBNET. Evaluating the potential of IP-10 
and MCP-2 as biomarkers for the diagnosis of tuberculosis. Eur Respir J 2008; 
32:1607–15.
93. Tan CK, Lai CC, Liao CH, et al. Rapid diagnosis of active pulmonary tuberculo-
sis in the elderly using enzyme-linked immunospot assay for interferon-gamma. 
J Am Geriatr Soc 2009; 57:2361–2.
94. Wang JY, Chou CH, Lee LN, et al. Diagnosis of tuberculosis by an enzyme-linked 
immunospot assay for interferon-gamma. Emerg Infect Dis 2007; 13:553–8.
95. Bienek DR, Chang CK. Evaluation of an interferon-gamma release assay, 
T-SPOT.TB, in a population with a low prevalence of tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc 
Lung Dis 2009; 13:1416–21.
96. LoBue PA, Moser KS. Use of isoniazid for latent tuberculosis infection in a pub-
lic health clinic. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003; 168:443–7.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e31
97. Nolan CM, Goldberg SV, Buskin SE. Hepatotoxicity associated with isoniazid 
preventive therapy: a 7-year survey from a public health tuberculosis clinic. 
JAMA 1999; 281:1014–8.
98. Yee D, Valiquette C, Pelletier M, Parisien I, Rocher I, Menzies D. Incidence of 
serious side effects from first-line antituberculosis drugs among patients treated 
for active tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003; 167:1472–7.
99. Comstock GW, Livesay VT, Woolpert SF. The prognosis of a positive tuberculin 
reaction in childhood and adolescence. Am J Epidemiol 1974; 99:131–8.
100. Marais BJ, Gie RP, Schaaf HS, et al. The natural history of childhood intra-tho-
racic tuberculosis: a critical review of literature from the pre-chemotherapy era. 
Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2004; 8:392–402.
101. Connell T, Bar-Zeev N, Curtis N. Early detection of perinatal tuberculosis 
using a whole blood interferon-gamma release assay. Clin Infect Dis 2006; 
42:e82–5.
102. Detjen AK, Keil T, Roll S, et al. Interferon-gamma release assays improve the 
diagnosis of tuberculosis and nontuberculous mycobacterial disease in chil-
dren in a country with a low incidence of tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 
45:322–8.
103. Dogra S, Narang P, Mendiratta DK, et al. Comparison of a whole blood inter-
feron-gamma assay with tuberculin skin testing for the detection of tuberculosis 
infection in hospitalized children in rural India. J Infect 2007; 54:267–76.
104. Connell TG, Ritz N, Paxton GA, Buttery JP, Curtis N, Ranganathan SC. A 
three-way comparison of tuberculin skin testing, QuantiFERON-TB gold and 
T-SPOT.TB in children. PLoS One 2008; 3:e2624.
105. Nicol MP, Davies MA, Wood K, et al. Comparison of T-SPOT.TB assay and 
tuberculin skin test for the evaluation of young children at high risk for tubercu-
losis in a community setting. Pediatrics 2009; 123:38–43.
106. Hesseling AC, Mandalakas AM, Kirchner HL, et al. Highly discordant T cell 
responses in individuals with recent exposure to household tuberculosis. Thorax 
2009; 64:840–6.
107. Nakaoka H, Lawson L, Squire SB, et al. Risk for tuberculosis among children. 
Emerg Infect Dis 2006; 12:1383–8.
108. Higuchi K, Harada N, Mori T, Sekiya Y. Use of QuantiFERON-TB Gold to inves-
tigate tuberculosis contacts in a high school. Respirology 2007; 12:88–92.
109. Chee CB, Soh CH, Boudville IC, Chor SS, Wang YT. Interpretation of the tuber-
culin skin test in Mycobacterium bovis BCG-vaccinated Singaporean schoolchil-
dren. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001; 164:958–61.
110. Radhakrishna S, Frieden TR, Subramani R; Tuberculosis Research Centre 
(ICMR). Association of initial tuberculin sensitivity, age and sex with the inci-
dence of tuberculosis in south India: a 15-year follow-up. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 
2003; 7:1083–91.
111. Mancuso JD, Tribble D, Mazurek GH, et al. Impact of targeted testing for latent 
tuberculosis infection using commercially available diagnostics. Clin Infect Dis 
2011; 53:234–44.
112. Clark SA, Martin SL, Pozniak A, et al. Tuberculosis antigen-specific immune 
responses can be detected using enzyme-linked immunospot technology in 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 patients with advanced disease. Clin 
Exp Immunol 2007; 150:238–44.
113. Sauzullo I, Mengoni F, Lichtner M, et al. QuantiFERON-TB Gold and selected 
region of difference 1 peptide-based assays for the detection of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis infection in a cohort of patients enrolled with suspected tuberculo-
sis. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2008; 62:395–401.
114. Vincenti D, Carrara S, Butera O, et al. Response to region of difference 1 (RD1) 
epitopes in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected individuals enrolled 
with suspected active tuberculosis: a pilot study. Clin Exp Immunol 2007; 
150:91–8.
115. Cattamanchi A, Smith R, Steingart KR, et al. Interferon-gamma release assays for 
the diagnosis of latent tuberculosis infection in HIV-infected individuals: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 2011; 56:230–8.
116. Dorman SE, Belknap R, Graviss EA, et al. Tuberculosis Epidemiologic Studies 
Consortium. Interferon-γ release assays and tuberculin skin testing for diagno-
sis of latent tuberculosis infection in healthcare workers in the United States. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 2014; 189:77–87.
117. Lobue P, Menzies D. Treatment of latent tuberculosis infection: an update. 
Respirology 2010; 15:603–22.
118. Pai M, Joshi R, Dogra S, et al. Serial testing of health care workers for tuber-
culosis using interferon-gamma assay. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006; 
174:349–55.
119. Daley CL, Reves RR, Beard MA, et al. A summary of meeting proceedings on 
addressing variability around the cut point in serial interferon-gamma release 
assay testing. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013; 34:625–30.
120. Okada K, Mao TE, Mori T, et al. Performance of an interferon-gamma release 
assay for diagnosing latent tuberculosis infection in children. Epidemiol Infect 
2007:1–9.
121. Liebeschuetz S, Bamber S, Ewer K, Deeks J, Pathan AA, Lalvani A. Diagnosis of 
tuberculosis in South African children with a T-cell-based assay: a prospective 
cohort study. Lancet 2004; 364:2196–203.
122. Sun L, Xiao J, Miao Q, et al. Interferon gamma release assay in diagnosis of 
pediatric tuberculosis: a meta-analysis. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 2011; 
63:165–73.
123. Tsiouris SJ, Austin J, Toro P, et al. Results of a tuberculosis-specific IFN-gamma 
assay in children at high risk for tuberculosis infection. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 
2006; 10:939–41.
124. Taylor Z, Nolan CM, Blumberg HM; American Thoracic Society; Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention; Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
Controlling tuberculosis in the United States. Recommendations from the 
American Thoracic Society, CDC, and the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. MMWR Recomm Rep 2005; 54:1–81.
125. Greenaway C, Menzies D, Fanning A, Grewal R, Yuan L, FitzGerald JM; 
Canadian Collaborative Group in Nosocomial Transmission of Tuberculosis. 
Delay in diagnosis among hospitalized patients with active tuberculosis– 
predictors and outcomes. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002; 165:927–33.
126. Golub JE, Bur S, Cronin WA, et al. Delayed tuberculosis diagnosis and tubercu-
losis transmission. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2006; 10:24–30.
127. Mase SR, Ramsay A, Ng V, et al. Yield of serial sputum specimen examinations in 
the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis: a systematic review. Int J Tuberc Lung 
Dis 2007; 11:485–95.
128. Steingart KR, Ng V, Henry M, et al. Sputum processing methods to improve 
the sensitivity of smear microscopy for tuberculosis: a systematic review. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2006; 6:664–74.
129. Steingart KR, Henry M, Ng V, et al. Fluorescence versus conventional sputum 
smear microscopy for tuberculosis: a systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis 2006; 
6:570–81.
130. Gordin F, Slutkin G. The validity of acid-fast smears in the diagnosis of pulmo-
nary tuberculosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1990; 114:1025–7.
131. Yajko DM, Nassos PS, Sanders CA, Madej JJ, Hadley WK. High predictive value 
of the acid-fast smear for Mycobacterium tuberculosis despite the high preva-
lence of Mycobacterium avium complex in respiratory specimens. Clin Infect Dis 
1994; 19:334–6.
132. Cruciani M, Scarparo C, Malena M, Bosco O, Serpelloni G, Mengoli C. Meta-
analysis of BACTEC MGIT 960 and BACTEC 460 TB, with or without solid 
media, for detection of mycobacteria. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42:2321–5.
133. Forbes B, Banaiee N, Beavis K, et al. Laboratory detection and identification 
of mycobacteria; approved guideline. Wayne, PA: Clinical and Laboratory 
Standards Institute (CLSI publication no. M48A), 2008.
134. Woods G, Lin G, Desmond E. Susceptibility test methods: mycobacteria, 
Nocardia, and other actinomycetes. Washington, DC: ASM Press, 2011.
135. Greco S, Girardi E, Navarra A, Saltini C. Current evidence on diagnostic accu-
racy of commercially based nucleic acid amplification tests for the diagnosis of 
pulmonary tuberculosis. Thorax 2006; 61:783–90.
136. Ling DI, Flores LL, Riley LW, Pai M. Commercial nucleic-acid amplification tests 
for diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in respiratory specimens: meta-analysis 
and meta-regression. PLoS One 2008; 3:e1536.
137. Dinnes J, Deeks J, Kunst H, et al. A systematic review of rapid diagnostic 
tests for the detection of tuberculosis infection. Health Technol Assess 2007; 
11:1–196.
138. Updated guidelines for the use of nucleic acid amplification tests in the diagnosis 
of tuberculosis. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2009; 58:7–10.
139. Shingadia D, Novelli V. Diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis in children. 
Lancet Infect Dis 2003; 3:624–32.
140. Moore DF, Guzman JA, Mikhail LT. Reduction in turnaround time for labora-
tory diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis by routine use of a nucleic acid ampli-
fication test. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2005; 52:247–54.
141. Campos M, Quartin A, Mendes E, et al. Feasibility of shortening respiratory 
isolation with a single sputum nucleic acid amplification test. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2008; 178:300–5.
142. Sloutsky A, Han LL, Werner BG. Practical strategies for performance optimi-
zation of the enhanced Gen-Probe amplified Mycobacterium tuberculosis direct 
test. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42:1547–51.
143. Flores LL, Pai M, Colford JM Jr, Riley LW. In-house nucleic acid amplification 
tests for the detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum specimens: 
meta-analysis and meta-regression. BMC Microbiol 2005; 5:55.
144. Ling DI, Zwerling AA, Pai M. GenoType MTBDR assays for the diagno-
sis of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis: a meta-analysis. Eur Respir J 2008; 
32:1165–74.
145. Morgan M, Kalantri S, Flores L, Pai M. A commercial line probe assay for the 
rapid detection of rifampicin resistance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis 2005; 5:62.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 e32 • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • Lewinsohn et al
146. Boehme CC, Nabeta P, Hillemann D, et al. Rapid molecular detection of tuber-
culosis and rifampin resistance. N Engl J Med 2010; 363:1005–15.
147. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Availability of an assay for detect-
ing Mycobacterium tuberculosis, including rifampin-resistant strains, and con-
siderations for its use—United States, 2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2013; 62:821–7.
148. Woods G, Brown-Elliott B, Conville P, et al. Susceptibility testing of mycobac-
teria, nocardiae, and other aerobic actinomycetes; approved standard—2nd ed. 
Wayne, PA: Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI publication no. 
M24-A2), 2011.
149. Francis J. Curry National Tuberculosis Center and California Department 
of Public Health. Drug-resistant tuberculosis: a survival guide for clinicians. 
2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Francis J. Curry National Tuberculosis Center, 
 
2008.
150. Chan ED, Laurel V, Strand MJ, et al. Treatment and outcome analysis of 205 
patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004; 
169:1103–9.
151. Narita M, Alonso P, Lauzardo M, Hollender ES, Pitchenik AE, Ashkin D. 
Treatment experience of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in Florida, 1994–1997. 
Chest 2001; 120:343–8.
152. Lew W, Pai M, Oxlade O, Martin D, Menzies D. Initial drug resistance and tuber-
culosis treatment outcomes: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern 
Med 2008; 149:123–34.
153. Traore H, Fissette K, Bastian I, Devleeschouwer M, Portaels F. Detection of 
rifampicin resistance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates from diverse coun-
tries by a commercial line probe assay as an initial indicator of multidrug resist-
ance. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2000; 4:481–4.
154. Moore M, Onorato IM, McCray E, Castro KG. Trends in drug-resistant tubercu-
losis in the United States, 1993–1996. JAMA 1997; 278:833–7.
155. LoBue PA, Moser KS. Isoniazid- and rifampin-resistant tuberculosis in San 
Diego County, California, United States, 1993–2002. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2005; 
9:501–6.
156. Clark CM, Li J, Driver CR, Munsiff SS. Risk factors for drug-resistant tuberculo-
sis among non-US-born persons in New York City. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2005; 
9:964–9.
157. Granich RM, Oh P, Lewis B, Porco TC, Flood J. Multidrug resistance among 
persons with tuberculosis in California, 1994–2003. JAMA 2005; 293:2732–9.
158. Weiner M, Benator D, Burman W, et al. Tuberculosis Trials Consortium. 
Association between acquired rifamycin resistance and the pharmacokinetics of 
rifabutin and isoniazid among patients with HIV and tuberculosis. Clin Infect 
Dis 2005; 40:1481–91.
159. Helb D, Jones M, Story E, et al. Rapid detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
and rifampin resistance by use of on-demand, near-patient technology. J Clin 
Microbiol 2010; 48:229–37.
160. Zhu RY, Zhang KX, Zhao MQ, et al. Use of visual loop-mediated isotheral ampli-
fication of rimM sequence for rapid detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and 
Mycobacterium bovis. J Microbiol Methods 2009; 78:339–43.
161. World Health Organization. Molecular line probe assays for rapid screening 
of patients at risk of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB). Geneva, 
Switzerland: WHO, 2008.
162. Marais BJ, Brittle W, Painczyk K, et al. Use of light-emitting diode fluorescence 
microscopy to detect acid-fast bacilli in sputum. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 47:203–7.
163. Loeffler AM. Pediatric tuberculosis. Semin Respir Infect 2003; 18:272–91.
164. Marais BJ, Gie RP, Schaaf HS, Beyers N, Donald PR, Starke JR. Childhood pul-
monary tuberculosis: old wisdom and new challenges. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2006; 173:1078–90.
165. Berggren Palme I, Gudetta B, Bruchfeld J, Eriksson M, Giesecke J. Detection 
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in gastric aspirate and sputum collected from 
Ethiopian HIV-positive and HIV-negative children in a mixed in- and outpa-
tient setting. Acta Paediatr 2004; 93:311–5.
166. Hatherill M, Hawkridge T, Zar HJ, et al. Induced sputum or gastric lavage for 
community-based diagnosis of childhood pulmonary tuberculosis? Arch Dis 
Child 2009; 94:195–201.
167. Abadco DL, Steiner P. Gastric lavage is better than bronchoalveolar lavage for 
isolation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in childhood pulmonary tuberculosis. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J 1992; 11:735–8.
168. Steiner M, Zimmerman R, Park BH, Shirali SR, Schmidt H. Primary tuberculo-
sis in children. 2. Correlation of susceptibility patterns of M. tuberculosis isolated 
from children with those isolated from source cases as an index of drug-resistant 
infection in a community. Am Rev Respir Dis 1968; 98:201–9.
169. Steiner P, Rao M, Mitchell M, Steiner M. Primary drug-resistant tuberculo-
sis in children. Correlation of drug-susceptibility patterns of matched patient 
and source case strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Am J Dis Child 1985; 
139:780–2.
170. Sun SJ, Bennett DE, Flood J, Loeffler AM, Kammerer S, Ellis BA. Identifying 
the sources of tuberculosis in young children: a multistate investigation. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2002; 8:1216–23.
171. Marquez L, Feske ML, Teeter LD, Musser JM, Graviss EA. Pediatric tuberculosis: 
the litmus test for tuberculosis control. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2012; 31:1144–7.
172. Anderson C, Inhaber N, Menzies D. Comparison of sputum induction with fib-
er-optic bronchoscopy in the diagnosis of tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 1995; 152(5 pt 1):1570–4.
173. Conde MB, Soares SL, Mello FC, et al. Comparison of sputum induction with 
fiberoptic bronchoscopy in the diagnosis of tuberculosis: experience at an 
acquired immune deficiency syndrome reference center in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 162:2238–40.
174. McWilliams T, Wells AU, Harrison AC, Lindstrom S, Cameron RJ, Foskin E. 
Induced sputum and bronchoscopy in the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis. 
Thorax 2002; 57:1010–4.
175. Saglam L, Akgun M, Aktas E. Usefulness of induced sputum and fibreoptic 
bronchoscopy specimens in the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis. J Int Med 
Res 2005; 33:260–5.
176. Brown M, Varia H, Bassett P, Davidson RN, Wall R, Pasvol G. Prospective study 
of sputum induction, gastric washing, and bronchoalveolar lavage for the diag-
nosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in patients who are unable to expectorate. Clin 
Infect Dis 2007; 44:1415–20.
177. Al Zahrani K, Al Jahdali H, Poirier L, René P, Menzies D. Yield of smear, culture 
and amplification tests from repeated sputum induction for the diagnosis of pul-
monary tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2001; 5:855–60.
178. Charoenratanakul S, Dejsomritrutai W, Chaiprasert A. Diagnostic role of fiber-
optic bronchoscopy in suspected smear negative pulmonary tuberculosis. Respir 
Med 1995; 89:621–3.
179. Wongthim S, Udompanich V, Limthongkul S, Charoenlap P, Nuchprayoon C. 
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy in diagnosis of patients with suspected active pulmo-
nary tuberculosis. J Med Assoc Thai 1989; 72:154–9.
180. Chawla R, Pant K, Jaggi OP, Chandrashekhar S, Thukral SS. Fibreoptic bron-
choscopy in smear-negative pulmonary tuberculosis. Eur Respir J 1988; 1:804–6.
181. Willcox PA, Benatar SR, Potgieter PD. Use of the flexible fibreoptic broncho-
scope in diagnosis of sputum-negative pulmonary tuberculosis. Thorax 1982; 
37:598–601.
182. Danek SJ, Bower JS. Diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis by flexible fiberoptic 
bronchoscopy. Am Rev Respir Dis 1979; 119:677–9.
183. Miro AM, Gibilara E, Powell S, Kamholz SL. The role of fiberoptic bronchoscopy 
for diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in patients at risk for AIDS. Chest 1992; 
101:1211–4.
184. Salzman SH, Schindel ML, Aranda CP, Smith RL, Lewis ML. The role of bron-
choscopy in the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in patients at risk for HIV 
infection. Chest 1992; 102:143–6.
185. Wallace JM, Deutsch AL, Harrell JH, Moser KM. Bronchoscopy and transbron-
chial biopsy in evaluation of patients with suspected active tuberculosis. Am J 
Med 1981; 70:1189–94.
186. Kennedy DJ, Lewis WP, Barnes PF. Yield of bronchoscopy for the diagnosis of 
tuberculosis in patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection. Chest 
1992; 102:1040–4.
187. Sarkar SK, Sharma GS, Gupta PR, Sharma RK. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy in the 
diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis. Tubercle 1980; 61:97–9.
188. Schoch OD, Rieder P, Tueller C, et al. Diagnostic yield of sputum, induced spu-
tum, and bronchoscopy after radiologic tuberculosis screening. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 2007; 175:80–6.
189. Willcox PA, Potgieter PD, Bateman ED, Benatar SR. Rapid diagnosis of sputum 
negative miliary tuberculosis using the flexible fibreoptic bronchoscope. Thorax 
1986; 41:681–4.
190. Pant K, Chawla R, Mann PS, Jaggi OP. Fiberbronchoscopy in smear-negative 
miliary tuberculosis. Chest 1989; 95:1151–2.
191. Cheng VC, Yew WW, Yuen KY. Molecular diagnostics in tuberculosis. Eur J Clin 
Microbiol Infect Dis 2005; 24:711–20.
192. Falk A. U.S. veterans administration-armed forces cooperative study on the 
chemotherapy of tuberculosis. 13. Tuberculous meningitis in adults, with special 
reference to survival, neurologic residuals, and work status. Am Rev Respir Dis 
1965; 91:823–31.
193. Maartens G, Willcox PA, Benatar SR. Miliary tuberculosis: rapid diagnosis, 
hematologic abnormalities, and outcome in 109 treated adults. Am J Med 1990; 
89:291–6.
194. Kim JH, Langston AA, Gallis HA. Miliary tuberculosis: epidemiology, clinical 
manifestations, diagnosis, and outcome. Rev Infect Dis 1990; 12:583–90.
195. Xu HB, Jiang RH, Li L, Sha W, Xiao HP. Diagnostic value of adenosine deam-
inase in cerebrospinal fluid for tuberculous meningitis: a meta-analysis. Int J 
Tuberc Lung Dis 2010; 14:1382–7.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Diagnosis of TB in Adults and Children • CID 2017:64 (15 January) • e33
196. Tuon FF, Higashino HR, Lopes MI, et al. Adenosine deaminase and tuberculous 
meningitis–a systematic review with meta-analysis. Scand J Infect Dis 2010; 
42:198–207.
197. Morisson P, Neves DD. Evaluation of adenosine deaminase in the diagno-
sis of pleural tuberculosis: a Brazilian meta-analysis. J Bras Pneumol 2008; 
34:217–24.
198. Liang QL, Shi HZ, Wang K, Qin SM, Qin XJ. Diagnostic accuracy of adeno-
sine deaminase in tuberculous pleurisy: a meta-analysis. Respir Med 2008; 
102:744–54.
199. Greco S, Girardi E, Masciangelo R, Capoccetta GB, Saltini C. Adenosine deami-
nase and interferon gamma measurements for the diagnosis of tuberculous pleu-
risy: a meta-analysis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2003; 7:777–86.
200. Goto M, Noguchi Y, Koyama H, Hira K, Shimbo T, Fukui T. Diagnostic value of 
adenosine deaminase in tuberculous pleural effusion: a meta-analysis. Ann Clin 
Biochem 2003; 40(pt 4):374–81.
201. Ena J, Valls V, Pérez de Oteyza C, Enríquez de Salamanca R. The usefulness 
and limitations of adenosine deaminase in the diagnosis of tubercular pleurisy. 
A meta-analytical study [in Spanish]. Med Clin (Barc) 1990; 95:333–5.
202. Gui X, Xiao H. Diagnosis of tuberculosis pleurisy with adenosine deaminase 
(ADA): a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Clin Exp Med 2014; 
7:3126–35.
203. Tuon FF, Litvoc MN, Lopes MI. Adenosine deaminase and tuberculous pericar-
ditis—a systematic review with meta-analysis. Acta Trop 2006; 99:67–74.
204. Riquelme A, Calvo M, Salech F, et al. Value of adenosine deaminase (ADA) in 
ascitic fluid for the diagnosis of tuberculous peritonitis: a meta-analysis. J Clin 
Gastroenterol 2006; 40:705–10.
205. Su SB, Qin SY, Guo XY, Luo W, Jiang HX. Assessment by meta-analysis of inter-
feron-gamma for the diagnosis of tuberculous peritonitis. World J Gastroenterol 
2013; 19:1645–51.
206. Jiang J, Shi HZ, Liang QL, Qin SM, Qin XJ. Diagnostic value of inter-
feron-gamma in tuberculous pleurisy: a metaanalysis. Chest 2007; 
131:1133–41.
207. Epstein DM, Kline LR, Albelda SM, Miller WT. Tuberculous pleural effusions. 
Chest 1987; 91:106–9.
208. Chan CH, Arnold M, Chan CY, Mak TW, Hoheisel GB. Clinical and patholog-
ical features of tuberculous pleural effusion and its long-term consequences. 
Respiration 1991; 58(3–4):171–5.
209. Berenguer J, Moreno S, Laguna F, et al. Tuberculous meningitis in patients 
infected with the human immunodeficiency virus. N Engl J Med 1992; 
326:668–72.
210. Ogawa SK, Smith MA, Brennessel DJ, Lowy FD. Tuberculous meningitis in an 
urban medical center. Medicine (Baltimore) 1987; 66:317–26.
211. Haas EJ, Madhavan T, Quinn EL, Cox F, Fisher E, Burch K. Tuberculous menin-
gitis in an urban general hospital. Arch Intern Med 1977; 137:1518–21.
212. Monteyne P, Sindic CJ. The diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis. Acta Neurol 
Belg 1995; 95:80–7.
213. Karney WW, O’Donoghue JM, Ostrow JH, Holmes KK, Beaty HN. The spec-
trum of tuberculous peritonitis. Chest 1977; 72:310–5.
214. Shakil AO, Korula J, Kanel GC, Murray NG, Reynolds TB. Diagnostic features 
of tuberculous peritonitis in the absence and presence of chronic liver disease: a 
case control study. Am J Med 1996; 100:179–85.
215. Sherman S, Rohwedder JJ, Ravikrishnan KP, Weg JG. Tuberculous enteritis 
and peritonitis. Report of 36 general hospital cases. Arch Intern Med 1980; 
140:506–8.
216. Singh MM, Bhargava AN, Jain KP. Tuberculous peritonitis. An evaluation of 
pathogenetic mechanisms, diagnostic procedures and therapeutic measures. N 
Engl J Med 1969; 281:1091–4.
217. Quale JM, Lipschik GY, Heurich AE. Management of tuberculous pericarditis. 
Ann Thorac Surg 1987; 43:653–5.
218. Fowler NO, Manitsas GT. Infectious pericarditis. Prog Cardiovasc Dis 1973; 
16:323–36.
219. Berger HW, Mejia E. Tuberculous pleurisy. Chest 1973; 63:88–92.
220. Seibert AF, Haynes J Jr, Middleton R, Bass JB Jr. Tuberculous pleural effusion. 
Twenty-year experience. Chest 1991; 99:883–6.
221. Simon HB, Weinstein AJ, Pasternak MS, Swartz MN, Kunz LJ. Genitourinary 
tuberculosis. Clinical features in a general hospital population. Am J Med 1977; 
63:410–20.
222. Christensen WI. Genitourinary tuberculosis: review of 102 cases. Medicine 
(Baltimore) 1974; 53:377–90.
223. Alvarez S, McCabe WR. Extrapulmonary tuberculosis revisited: a review of 
experience at Boston City and other hospitals. Medicine (Baltimore) 1984; 
63:25–55.
224. Pai M, Flores LL, Hubbard A, Riley LW, Colford JM Jr. Nucleic acid amplifi-
cation tests in the diagnosis of tuberculous pleuritis: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis 2004; 4:6.
225. Pai M, Flores LL, Pai N, Hubbard A, Riley LW, Colford JM Jr. Diagnostic accu-
racy of nucleic acid amplification tests for tuberculous meningitis: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2003; 3:633–43.
226. Pai M, Ling DI. Rapid diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis using nucleic 
acid amplification tests: what is the evidence? Future Microbiol 2008; 3:1–4.
227. Daley CL, Kawamura LM. The role of molecular epidemiology in contact inves-
tigations: a US perspective. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2003; 7(12 suppl 3):S458–62.
228. Daley CL, Small PM, Schecter GF, et al. An outbreak of tuberculosis with accel-
erated progression among persons infected with the human immunodeficiency 
virus. An analysis using restriction-fragment-length polymorphisms. N Engl J 
Med 1992; 326:231–5.
229. Cluster of tuberculosis cases among exotic dancers and their close contacts—
Kansas, 1994–2000. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2001; 50:291–3.
230. Bock NN, Mallory JP, Mobley N, DeVoe B, Taylor BB. Outbreak of tuberculosis 
associated with a floating card game in the rural south: lessons for tuberculosis 
contact investigations. Clin Infect Dis 1998; 27:1221–6.
231. Increase in African immigrants and refugees with tuberculosis—Seattle-King 
County, Washington, 1998–2001. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2002; 
51:882–3.
232. Cowan LS, Diem L, Monson T, et al. Evaluation of a two-step approach for 
large-scale, prospective genotyping of Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates in the 
United States. J Clin Microbiol 2005; 43:688–95.
233. Oelemann MC, Diel R, Vatin V, et al. Assessment of an optimized mycobacte-
rial interspersed repetitive-unit-variable-number tandem-repeat typing system 
combined with spoligotyping for population-based molecular epidemiology 
studies of tuberculosis. J Clin Microbiol 2007; 45:691–7.
234. Breese PE, Burman WJ, Hildred M, et al. The effect of changes in laboratory 
practices on the rate of false-positive cultures for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 
Arch Pathol Lab Med 2001; 125:1213–6.
235. Burman WJ, Reves RR. Review of false-positive cultures for Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis and recommendations for avoiding unnecessary treatment. Clin 
Infect Dis 2000; 31:1390–5.
236. Daley CL. Molecular epidemiology: a tool for understanding control of tubercu-
losis transmission. Clin Chest Med 2005; 26:217–31, vi.
237. Malakmadze N, González IM, Oemig T, et al. Unsuspected recent transmission 
of tuberculosis among high-risk groups: implications of universal tuberculosis 
genotyping in its detection. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40:366–73.
238. Behr MA, Small PM. Molecular fingerprinting of Mycobacterium tuberculosis: 
how can it help the clinician? Clin Infect Dis 1997; 25:806–10.
239. Kimerling ME, Benjamin WH, Lok KH, Curtis G, Dunlap NE. Restriction frag-
ment length polymorphism screening of Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates: 
population surveillance for targeting disease transmission in a community. Int J 
Tuberc Lung Dis 1998; 2:655–62.
240. Gardy JL, Johnston JC, Ho Sui SJ, et al. Whole-genome sequencing and 
social- 
network analysis of a tuberculosis outbreak. N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 
730–9.
241. Abu-Raddad LJ, Sabatelli L, Achterberg JT, et al. Epidemiological benefits of 
more-effective tuberculosis vaccines, drugs, and diagnostics. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 2009; 106:13980–5.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/2/e1/2629583 by guest on 03 June 2019
