 A Cortical Circuit for Sexually Dimorphic Oxytocin-Dependent 
Anxiety Behaviors
Kun Li, Miho Nakajima, Ines Ibañez-Tallon, and Nathaniel Heintz*
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, 
1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA
SUMMARY
The frequency of human social and emotional disorders varies significantly between males and 
females. We have recently reported that oxytocin receptor interneurons (OxtrINs) modulate female 
sociosexual behavior. Here we show that in male mice OxtrINs regulate anxiety-related behaviors. 
We demonstrate that corticotropin releasing hormone binding protein (CRHBP), an antagonist of 
the stress hormone CRH, is specifically expressed in OxtrINs. Production of CRHBP blocks the 
CRH-induced potentiation of postsynaptic layer 2/3 pyramidal cell activity of male but not female 
mice, thus producing an anxiolytic effect. Our data identify OxtrINs as critical for modulation of 
social and emotional behaviors in both females and males, and reveal a molecular mechanism that 
acts on local mPFC circuits to coordinate responses to OXT and CRH. They suggest that 
additional studies of the impact of the OXT/OXTR and CRHBP/CRH pathways in males and 
females will be important in development of gender specific therapies.
Keywords
cerebral cortex; sexually dimorphic; Crhbp; male anxiety; OxtrINs; Oxytocin
INTRODUCTION
Gender specific differences in the occurrence of social and emotional disorders are well 
documented. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), which is characterized by impaired social 
communication and restrictive, repetitive behaviors, is severalfold more prevalent in males 
than females (Rubenstein et al, 2015). In contrast, anxiety-related disorders such as post-
traumatic stress disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and social anxiety 
disorder occur approximately twice as frequently in females than males (Altemus et al, 
2014; Maeng and Milad, 2015). Although recent studies in rodents (Yang et al, 2013; Lee et 
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: heintz@rockefeller.edu. 
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Data Resources: Supplemental files: table S1 and S2.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
All TRAP-seq data were subjected to the work flow described in https://gensat.rockefeller.edu/heintzp30/
Bioinformatics_Flow_Chart.jsp
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, I.I.T. and N.H; Investigation, K.L; Validation and Resources, M.N.; Writing - Original Draft, N.H; Writing Review 
& Editing, K.L., I.I.T. and N.H; Visualization K.L, I.I.T. and N.H; Supervision I.I.T. and N.H; Funding Acquisition N.H.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 September 22; 167(1): 60–72.e11. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.067.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 al, 2014; Kunwar et al, 2015; Scott et al, 2015) and humans (Wigton et al et al, 2015; Insel, 
2016) have provided strong evidence that differences in hormonal balance and brain 
circuitry between males and females can contribute to complex behaviors, the specific 
mechanisms that are responsible for gender biases in the occurrence and treatment of social 
and emotional disorders are not understood.
Oxytocin (OXT) is a peptide hormone that has been shown to contribute to many aspects of 
social behavior (Insel, 2010; Neumann and Slattery, 2015; Guastella and Hickie, 2016). It is 
released in response to a variety of social cues and acts through oxytocin receptors (OXTR) 
that are widely dispersed in the brain and periphery. Studies of behaviors altered in response 
to systemic or local administration of OXT and analysis of behavioral phenotypes evident in 
knockout mice lacking Oxt or Oxtr have demonstrated definitively that this hormone system 
plays essential roles in maternal care, social cognition and affiliative behaviors. Stressful and 
anxiogenic stimuli result in release of OXT, which acts as a powerful modulator of anxiety 
and stress related behaviors. These studies have led to a great deal of interest in OXT as a 
potential treatment for human social disorders, resulting in a large number of clinical trials 
to assess its therapeutic efficacy. Although the results of these trials have been encouraging 
in the context of ASD and anxiety disorders, our understanding of the brain circuits engaged 
by endogenous or exogenously supplied OXT and their role in specific behaviors remains 
incomplete.
We have recently identified a specific class of interneurons (OxtrINs) in the mouse medial 
prefrontal cortex (mPFC) that express Oxtr and are activated in response to OXT (Nakajima 
et al, 2014). Genetic and pharmacological studies of these neurons revealed that they 
modulate female social interactions with male mice during the sexually responsive, estrus 
phase of their cycle. Although the number of OxtrINs in male and female mPFC is 
equivalent, social behavior of male mice was not altered by silencing of OxtrINs or blockade 
of OXT signaling in the mPFC. While it is possible that these neurons are dedicated to 
modulation of social behaviors in female mice, OXT administration can impact a wide range 
of behaviors in both males and females. Furthermore, human imaging studies have indicated 
that OXT elicits activity in cortical and subcortical sites in both sexes, although gender 
specific differences in these responses have been noted (Bethlehem et al, 2013; MacDonald, 
2013). It seems probable, therefore, that OxtrINs in the mPFC of male mice also modulate 
behavior in response to changing levels of OXT, but that gender specific differences in 
physiology or circuitry result in sexually dimorphic behavioral outcomes.
Here we report that optogenetic activation of OxtrINs in male mice has a strong anxiolytic 
effect and no impact on social interaction, whereas activation of these neurons in female 
mice results in increased sociality and no change in anxiety-related behaviors. Postsynaptic 
responses to OxtrINs activation in cortical pyramidal cells are primarily inhibitory. Layer 2/3 
neurons respond more robustly in male mice, whereas postsynaptic responses in layer 5 are 
enhanced in females. TRAP translational profiling (Heiman et al, 2008) revealed that 
expression of the corticotropin releasing hormone binding protein (Crhbp) gene (Van Den 
Eede et al, 2005), an inhibitor of the stress hormone CRH (Laryea et al, 2012), is specifically 
enriched in OxtrINs. Upon CRH application, induced activity of male but not female layer 
2/3 pyramidal cells in mPFC slice recordings was potentiated. This response to CRH was 
Li et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 blocked by optogenetic stimulation of OxtrINs, and enhanced by bath application of a 
CRHBP antagonist. Infusion of OXT into the mPFC resulted in a significant decrease of 
anxiety-related behavior in male mice. This anxiolytic effect was blocked by co-infusion of 
a CRHBP antagonist. Furthermore, shRNA mediated knockdown of Crhbp expression in 
OxtrINs of the mPFC resulted in increased anxiety related behaviors only in male mice. 
Finally, CRH expression in female mice is strongly elevated. Taken together, these data 
identify a molecular mechanism regulating male specific anxiety-related behaviors. They 
demonstrate that OXT acts through OxtrINs and CRHBP to moderate the anxiogenic effects 
of the stress hormone CRH in the mPFC. When taken together with our previous study of 
the role of OxtrINs in female sociosexual behavior, these results provide an important 
illustration of the concept that higher brain circuits regulating complex behaviors may be 
identical in males and females, yet retain the ability to generate gender specific behaviors 
based on differential sensitivity to sexually dimorphic hormones. They suggest that 
coordination of the local actions of OXT and CRH in the cerebral cortex by OxtrINs and 
CRHBP may be involved in the modulation of a wide variety of gender specific cognitive 
and behavioral functions.
RESULTS
OxtrINs in the mPFC of Male Mice Modulate Anxiety-Related Behaviors
To investigate the function of OxtrINs in male mice, we performed two types of genetic 
manipulations. We first used Oxtr-Cre mice (Nakajima et al, 2014) for optogenetic activation 
of OxtrINs (Figure 1A–I). For this purpose, the mPFC of male and female Oxtr-Cre mice 
were stereotactically injected with a Cre-dependent AAV virus expressing channelrhodopsin 
(ChR2-H134R), and fiber-optic cannulas were implanted in the prelimbic cortex (Figure 
1A–C; Figure S1A–D). Behavioral responses during blue light (BL) on and off periods were 
scored in the three-chamber social interaction test, the open field test (OF), and the elevated 
plus maze (EPM). Optogenetic activation of OxtrINs in the mPFC of female mice promoted 
social preference toward male mice (Figure 1D), consistent with the suppression of 
sociosexual preference observed by silencing these same neurons (Nakajima et al, 2014). 
However, male mice showed no significant changes in social interaction upon light 
activation of OxtrINs (Figure 1E). Given that the oxytocin system can also affect behavioral 
responses to stress (Neumann and Slattery, 2015), we next examined whether OxtrINs can 
contribute to the regulation of anxiety-related behaviors in males. Avoidance of open arms of 
the elevated plus maze and decreased exploration time in the center of an open field are 
established behavioral tests that are used to assess anxiety-like behavior in rodents. In 
female mice, activation of OxtrINs by blue light had no impact on the behavior of the 
animals in either of these assays (Figure 1F, H). However, optogenetic activation of OxtrINs 
in the mPFC of male mice resulted in more exploration of the open arms of the EPM (Figure 
1G) and increased time in the center area of the OF arena (Figure 1I) compared to the light-
off phase. As expected, the strength of the anxiety phenotype in male mice correlated 
directly with the number of OxtrINs expressing ChR2 (Figure S1A–C). These data 
demonstrate that activation of OxtrINs in the mPFC results in the induction of distinct 
gender specific behaviors. They confirm our previous studies demonstrating a role for 
Li et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 OxtrINs in female sociosexual behavior (Nakajima et al, 2014), and establish a role for these 
same neurons in the modulation of anxiety-related behaviors in male mice.
To determine whether the anxiolytic effect of OxtrINs in male mice requires OXT/OXTR 
signaling as we have shown previously for sociosexual behavior in females (Nakajima et al, 
2014), we conducted a second set of experiments using Cre expressing AAV viruses injected 
into mice carrying a conditional allele of the Oxtr gene (Oxtrflox/flox) (Lee et al, 2008). We 
bilaterally injected the mPFC of adult male and female Oxtrflox/flox mice with AAV 
expressing Cre to delete the receptor (Oxtrf/f:Cre). As a control, we injected control 
Oxtrflox/flox mice with an AAV expressing GFP (Oxtrf/f:GFP) that cannot result in deletion 
of Oxtr. As shown in Figure 1 (J, L), deletion of the Oxtr in female mice has no significant 
effect on performance in either the OF or EPM assays. However, in male mice deletion of 
Oxtr resulted in a strong anxiogenic effect. Thus, male Oxtrf/f:Cre mice spent significantly 
less time in open arms of the EPM and in the center of the open field arena than did the 
control male Oxtrf/f:GFP mice (Figure 1K,M). There were no significant differences in 
anxiety levels between control males and females (Figure 1F–M), and between females 
during estrus and diestrus (Figure S1E). There were also no major differences in total 
locomotor behavior as a consequence of optogenetic activation or Oxtr deletion, although a 
slight increase in female locomotion in the open field test was observed with Oxtr deletion 
(Figure S1F–I). We conclude that OXT action on OxtrINs in the mPFC regulates distinct, 
gender specific behaviors.
Postsynaptic Responses to OxtrINs Activation are Primarily Inhibitory
OxtrINs are regular spiking, GABAergic interneurons that increase their rate of firing in 
response to OXT (Nakajima et al, 2014). To investigate the mechanism by which OxtrINs 
activation regulates local circuit activity, we performed whole cell recordings of layer 2/3 
and layer 5 pyramidal neurons in acute brain slices of the mPFC during photostimulation of 
ChR2 expressing OxtrINs (Figure 2). Brief light stimulation (470nm) efficiently evoked 
action potentials in ChR2-mCherry expressing OxtrINs in slice preparations (Figure 2A–C). 
We observed no differences in the response of male and female OxtrINs to BL at different 
frequencies (Figure 2C). To measure postsynaptic responses to OxtrIN activation, light-
evoked responses of layer 2/3 and layer 5 pyramidal neurons (Figure 2D) were recorded at 
0mV and −60mV holding potentials, allowing independent detection of both GABA and 
AMPA receptor mediated currents (Figure S2A, B). OxtrINs synapse extensively with layer 
2/3 and layer 5 pyramidal neurons in both genders. Thus, in males 91.3% of layer 2/3 and 
97% of layer 5 neurons responded to OxtrINs activation, whereas 95.2% of layer 2/3 and 
95.6% of layer 5 pyramidal neurons responded in females (Figure 2E).
Analysis of the amplitudes of postsynaptic responses elicited by optogenetic activation of 
OxtrINs revealed that GABAergic responses to OxtrINs activation differed between males 
and females (Figure 2F–K). Inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) elicited in response of 
BL activation were significantly larger in male layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons (Figure 2F, H), 
whereas IPSCs in layer 5 postsynaptic neurons were larger in females (Figure 2I, K). These 
differences in IPSCs between male and female were observed at different BL intensities 
(Figure S2C, D). Excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC) amplitudes were also larger in 
Li et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 females in layer 5 (Figure 2J, K). No differences in EPSC amplitudes in layer 2/3 (Figure 
2G, H) were observed between male and female neurons. Thus, the electrophysiological 
evidence presented here establishes that there is broad connectivity between OxtrINs and 
pyramidal cells in the mPFC of both sexes, and that the strength of inhibition in male and 
female neurons in the mPFC is both laminar and gender specific.
Translating Ribosome Affinity Purification (TRAP) Reveals Cell-Specific Enrichment of 
Corticotropin Releasing Hormone Binding Protein (CRHBP) in OxtrINs
Although the differences in postsynaptic inhibitory responses we observed between male 
and female neurons may explain the gender-specific anxiolytic effect of OXT, the response 
differences between genders suggested that additional factors might be involved. To gain 
insight into signaling pathways that are active in OxtrINs and to elucidate candidate 
mechanisms that might play a role in the anxiolytic effects of OxtrINs activation, we 
employed Translational Ribosome Affinity Purification (TRAP) to identify proteins actively 
synthesized in these cells in the mPFC. This was accomplished using Oxtr-Cre mice 
(Nakajima et al, 2014) crossed to EGFP-L10a reporter mice (Liu et al, 2014) (Figure S3A, 
B), followed by TRAP profiling as described previously (Heiman et al, 2008). Six replicate 
samples were collected from the mPFC of Oxtr-Cre/EGFP-L10a mice and the resulting 
RNA sequenced from each sample. Normalized values from each of the 6 replicates, and 
their averages, were obtained for both the INPUT and IP samples (Table S1). These data 
provided us with a more comprehensive and quantitative list of highly translated mRNAs 
than that available from our previous microarray analyses, and allowed us to confirm the 
reported (Nakajima et al, 2014) high expression and enrichment of somatostatin (Sst), 
glutamic acid decarboxylase 1 (Gad1), and Oxtr in OxtrINs. As shown in the scatter plot in 
Figure 3A, these markers are expressed at quite different levels, and each of them is 
significantly enriched in the OxtrINs IP data relative to the sample taken from the intact 
mPFC prior to immunoprecipitation (INPUT). To evaluate expressed genes as possible 
candidates for further analysis, we first removed genes whose mRNAs were present at low 
levels (Base Mean < 25.00), and then sorted for mRNAs that are highly enriched in the 
OxtrINs IP data (log2 Fold Change IP v INPUT). This resulted in the identification of a 
large number of known interneuron markers, and a variety of transcription factors, receptors 
and signaling proteins that were not known previously to be enriched in OxtrINs (Table S1).
An intriguing candidate for further analysis, the corticotropin releasing hormone binding 
protein (Crhbp), was among the most highly enriched mRNAs in OxtrINs (log2 Fold 
Change = 4.64; Figure 3B). CRHBP is a small, secreted glycoprotein that binds to 
corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) with equal or greater affinity than do the CRH 
receptors. The primary functional role of CRHBP is to bind and limit the bioavailability of 
CRH, thus diminishing the activity of CRH receptors (Westphal and Seasholtz, 2006). CRH 
and CRH receptors have been shown to be critical regulators of stress and anxiety (Van Den 
Eede et al, 2005), suggesting that production of CRHBP by OxtrINs may be important in the 
regulation of the male specific anxiety-related behaviors (Figure 1). To confirm that Crhbp 
expression is specific, two additional datasets were interrogated. First, comparative 
expression of Crhbp in 20 cell types was evaluated using our internal database of cell 
specific TRAPseq data. As shown in Figure 3C, Crhbp expression is very robust in OxtrINs 
Li et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 relative to the other CNS cell types presented. The only other dataset in which Crhbp 
expression is evident is that collected from a broad population of Dlx1 expressing, non-fast 
spiking cortical interneurons that includes OxtrINs (Nakajima et al, 2014). Second, in situ 
hybridization data from the Allen Brain Institute (http://www.brain-map.org/.brain) was 
surveyed to determine whether the patterns of Crhbp and Crhr1 are consistent with our data 
(Figure S3C, D). Although specific cell type localization is not possible to determine from 
the ISH data, the scattered pattern of Crhbp positive cells in the mPFC is consistent with 
expression in interneurons. Given these data, we employed fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) to confirm that OxtrINs express CRHBP (Figure S3E). The limited sensitivity this 
approach did not allow accurate determination of the co-expression of Oxtr and Crhbp, 
although we reproducibly detected CRHBP in >50% of OxtrINs. The significance of this 
result is enhanced both by the finding that the CRH receptor (Crhr1), which was present in 
the input cortical samples but not enriched in the IP (Figure 3A), is expressed specifically in 
layer 2/3 pyramidal cells (Figure S3D) and by our recent demonstration that layer 2/3 
pyramidal cells in the mPFC can mediate stress-induced depressive behaviors (Shrestha et 
al, 2015).
The Response of Layer 2/3 Pyramidal Neurons to CRH is Enhanced in Male Mice and 
Blocked by Optogenetic Stimulation of OxtrINs
The CRH/CRHR1 system is considered fundamental for the regulation of stress and anxiety 
in both experimental animals and humans (Altemus et al, 2014; Bangasser and Kawasumi, 
2015). Genetic studies have established that loss of Crhr1 in glutamatergic cells in the 
cerebral cortex is anxiolytic (Refojo et al, 2011), and that CRH dysfunction can contribute to 
human anxiety related disorders (Weber et al, 2015; Smoller, 2016). Although no data 
suggesting an interaction of the OXT/OXTR and CRH/CRHR1 systems in the cerebral 
cortex has been reported previously, the specific and high expression of Crhbp in OxtrINs 
suggested to us that the anxiogenic effects of CRH on layer 2/3 pyramidal cells might be 
modulated by release of CRHBP from OxtrINs, and that differential sensitivity of this 
system may account for the male specific anxiolytic effects of OxtrINs activation. As a first 
test of this hypothesis, electrophysiological responses of layer2/3 pyramidal cells from 
female or male mPFC were assayed for their sensitivity to CRH, and for the influence of 
OxtrINs optogenetic activation on these responses (Figure 4). In each condition, the number 
of action potentials elicited (induced spikes) over an interval of 500ms was measured as the 
current was varied in steps of 50pA from −50pA to 400pA (Figure 4). Bath application of 
CRH (1μM) to female slice recordings resulted in a very small increase in activity at high 
current pulses (Figure 4B, C) that was insensitive to CRHR1 antagonists (Figure 4B, C). In 
contrast, in male slice recordings, CRH increased the number of induced spikes at all 
currents tested (Figure 4D, E). This response was suppressed by co-application of CRHR1 
antagonist (Figure 4D, E). These results demonstrate that male layer 2/3 pyramidal cells are 
more sensitive to CRH than are those of female mice, and that this response is due to 
activation of the Crhr1 receptor. As predicted from the restricted expression of Crhr1 in layer 
2/3 neurons, application of CRH to layer 5 pyramidal neurons did not alter induced spiking 
in recordings from either females or males (Figure S4A, B).
Li et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 As shown in Figure 1, optogenetic stimulation of OxtrINs in the mPFC of male mice is 
anxiolytic. To determine whether activation of male layer 2/3 pyramidal cells by CRH could 
be modulated by OxtrINs, we again injected AAV-ChR2-H134R into the mPFC of Oxtr-Cre 
mice. Brain slices were prepared three weeks after viral injection to test whether CRH 
activation of layer 2/3 pyramidal cells could be measured in the presence or absence of 
OxtrINs stimulation by light. Optogenetic activation of OxtrINs in the slice preparation 
strongly diminished the activity of CRH on layer 2/3 male pyramidal cells at all current 
pulses (Figure 4F, G). BL alone did not significantly reduce induced spiking in male and 
female layer 2/3 neurons (Figure S4C, D). These data directly demonstrate that OxtrINs play 
an important role in the male mPFC circuit by inhibiting the activation of layer 2/3 neurons 
in response to the stress hormone CRH.
OxtrINs Production of CRHBP Regulates Anxiety in Male but not Female Mice
CRHBP binds to CRH and inhibits its ability to activate its receptors (Van Den Eede et al, 
2005). Given the high and specific expression of Chrbp in OxtrINs (Figure 3 and S3), the 
robust potentiation of induced firing in pyramidal neurons of male mice by bath application 
of CRH, and the ability of optogenetic stimulation of OxtrINs to block the effects of CRH 
(Figure 4), we hypothesized that CRHBP released by OxtrINs binds to CRH and inhibits the 
stress inducing effects of CRH that are elicited by its binding to CRHR1 receptors in layer 
2/3 pyramidal cells. To test this hypothesis, we performed electrophysiological recordings 
with an antagonist to CRHBP to determine whether ambient levels of CRHBP in the slice 
preparations influence the activity of layer 2/3 pyramidal cells. Application of a CRHBP 
antagonist augmented the number of induced spikes at increasing current clamp amplitudes 
(Figure 5A,B blue), indicating that CRHBP is present in the slice preparations and that it 
contributes to the observed activity of layer 2/3 pyramidal cells. Moreover, addition of 
exogenous CRH (Figure 5A, B green) further potentiated the effect of the CRHBP 
antagonist on induced activity. These data demonstrate that the balance of CRH and CRHBP 
is important for the regulation of local circuit activity in the mPFC, and that a major role for 
CRHBP is to limit the actions of CRH at CRHR1 receptors in layer 2/3 pyramidal cells.
The simplest interpretation of the data we have presented thus far is that production of 
CRHBP in response to OXT activation of OxtrINs inhibits the anxiogenic effects of CRH, 
thus resulting in decreased anxiety-related behaviors. To assess this possibility in vivo and 
determine whether competition between CRH and CRHBP accounts for the anxiety 
phenotype in males, we designed lentiviral constructs to express shRNAs for conditional 
knockdown of Crhbp in Cre positive OxtrINs (LV-Crhbp shRNA and LV-scramble shRNA, 
Figure S5) (Ventura et al, 2004). Cre-dependent expression of the shRNA was monitored by 
western blot analyses of CHRBP in transfected cells (Figure S5C, D) and by loss of EGFP 
upon excision of the loxP flanked CMV-EGFP cassette preceding the shRNA cassette 
(Figure S5B). Cre-dependent shRNA expression reduced expression of CRHBP by 67% 
(Figure S5C, D). Given the strong inhibition observed in the in vitro studies, we next tested 
the effect of the shRNA in vivo. Accordingly, Oxtr-Cre mice were injected bilaterally in the 
mPFC with LV-Crhbp shRNA and LV-scramble shRNA and tested in the EPM and OF. 
Anxiety-like behaviors were not affected by shRNA mediated knockdown of Chrbp in 
female mice (Figure 5C–E). However, males expressing the Crhbp shRNA spent less time in 
Li et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the open arms, and entered the open arms and the center of the OF less frequently than did 
mice expressing the control scrambled shRNA (Figure 5F–H). These results clearly establish 
that Crhbp expression is essential for regulation of anxiety-related behaviors in male but not 
female mice. Furthermore, in spite of the critical role of OxtrINs in the regulation of social 
behavior and the expression of Crhbp in these neurons, knockdown of Crhbp in the mPFC of 
female mice had no impact on female sociosexual behavior (Figure 5I) or total locomotor 
behavior in male or female mice (Figure S5E, F). It is apparent, therefore, that CRHBP 
produced by OxtrINs acts as a key molecular modulator for anxiety related behaviors in 
male, but not female mice.
While the CRHBP knockdown data clearly establish that CRHBP production by OxtrINs is 
an essential component of the pathway regulating male anxiety, it remained possible that 
CRHBP acts chronically to establish sensitivity to CRH rather than to dynamically regulate 
its function. To address this possibility, OXT was infused into the prefrontal cortex of male 
and female mice in the presence or absence of the CRHBP antagonist. As shown in Figure 
5K, administration of OXT results in a strong, acute anxiolytic effect in male mice that is 
blocked by the CRHBP antagonist. No change in anxiety-related behavior was evident in 
female mice in response to OXT. These data prove that OXT can act in the PFC to 
dynamically regulate anxiety in male mice, and that CRHBP acts downstream of OXT to 
mediate this anxiolytic effect.
CRH Expression is Elevated in Female Mice
The male specific anxiolytic effects of OxtrINs activation and its dependence on CRHBP 
could be the result of gender specific differences in the expression or activity of any of the 
components of this system. To explore this issue, we first measured the expression of Oxtr, 
Crhbp, Crhr1, and Xist in the mPFC (Figure 6A, B). Since Oxtr and Crhbp are both 
expressed in OxtrINs, we quantitated their expression in TRAPseq data from replicate 
samples of male and female IPs (Figure 6A, Table S2). Crhr1 is not expressed in OxtrINs 
but in nearby cortical neurons, and thus was measured in the INPUT samples (Figure 6A, 
Table S3). Crhr2 was not expressed at significant levels in the mPFC. Xist (X-inactive 
specific transcript) was measured as an internal control for gender specific expression in the 
INPUT of TRAP samples (Figure 6A, Table S3) because it is a non-coding RNA. No 
significant difference in expression of Oxtr, Crhbp or Crhr1 between male and female 
animals was observed (Figure 6A). RT-PCR experiments were performed (Figure 6B) to 
confirm the TRAP results, revealing no significant changes in the expression of Oxtr, Crhbp, 
or Crhr1 in the mPFC of males and females. It is interesting to note that in addition to the 
expected changes in expression of genes located on the X and Y chromosomes, a number of 
autosomal genes whose expression differs between genders are evident in these data (Table 
S2). While the magnitudes of these expression changes are small and none appear to be 
directly relevant to the OXT or CRH pathways, future studies of these genes may yield 
additional insights into gender specific functions of the mPFC.
We next turned our attention to CRH. Two facts support the hypothesis that differences in 
the levels of CRH between males and females might account for the male specific results 
presented thus far. First, the electrophysiological data we have presented in Figures 4 and 5 
Li et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 strongly support a model in which the balance of CRH and CRHBP determines the impact 
of this pathway on layer 2/3 pyramidal cell activity. Second, Crh expression is elevated in 
the female rat CNS (Iwasaki-Sekino et al, 2009). Thus, Crh expression was measured in the 
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVH) by RT-PCR. As shown in Figure 6C, D, 
the level of Crh present in the PVH of female mice is strongly elevated. These data both 
confirm previous studies cited above, and suggest that the high level of CRH present in 
female mice may account for female insensitivity to OxtrINs expression of Crhbp.
A Model to Illustrate the Sexually Dimorphic Role of OxtrINs in the mPFC
A model to illustrate the pathways involved in OxtrINs modulation of gender specific social 
and emotional behaviors is presented in Figure 7. The concept is simple: the prefrontal 
cortex is tuned to respond to the changing levels of OXT and CRH that occur in a variety of 
social and stressful situations. In both genders, OXT stimulation of OxtrINs results in 
release of the fast acting neurotransmitter GABA and the neuromodulator CRHBP. In female 
mice, the elevated levels of circulating CRH render the inhibitory action of CRHBP 
ineffective. Consequently, the dominant arm of the pathway in females (orange arrow) is 
GABAergic modulation of layer 5 pyramidal cells. These cells respond more robustly to 
GABA in the female mPFC, and we believe that it is this pathway that is responsible for the 
modulation of social behavior. In male mice, due to limiting amounts of CRH in the mPFC, 
the critical OxtrINs modulatory event (green panel) is the release of CRHBP, which 
intercepts CRH and inhibits its activation of layer 2/3 pyramidal cells expressing the CRHR1 
receptor thus producing an anxiolytic effect. Although GABA may augment the actions of 
CRHBP in this arm of the circuit, CRHBP is absolutely required. The relative activities of 
these two pathways, and thus the behavioral output of the circuit, depends on three factors: 
the balance of CRHBP released from OxtrINs versus the circulating levels of CRH; the fine 
tuning of postsynaptic responses to GABA in layer 5 and layer 2/3; and the actions of the 
two sexually dimorphic hormones OXT and CRH.
DISCUSSION
Differences in social and emotional behaviors between males and females are common. We 
have recently identified OxtrINs as a class of mPFC interneurons that respond to OXT and 
modulate sociosexual behavior in female, but not male mice (Nakajima et al, 2014). Here we 
report that these same neurons in male, but not female mice regulate anxiety-related 
behaviors. This role for OxtrINs is also dependent on OXT. It is due to production of 
CRHBP by OxtrINs, which suppresses the anxiogenic effects of CRH on postsynaptic layer 
2/3 pyramidal cells. Although the number of Oxtr interneurons and the expression of Oxtr, 
Crhbp, and Crhr1 in the mPFC do not differ between males and females, expression of Crh 
in the hypothalamus of female mice is strongly elevated. Thus, our results demonstrate that 
the sexually bivalent roles of mPFC OxtrINs in social and emotional behaviors arise from 
gender specific impacts on local circuitry that depend on distinct molecular pathways that 
confer sensitivity to sexually dimorphic hormones. They suggest that modulation of 
additional complex gender specific social, emotional and cognitive functions may rest upon 
the coordination of OXT and CRH actions by CRHBP expression in OxtrINs, or other 
Li et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cellular and molecular mechanisms that are fine-tuned to modulate local, higher order 
circuitry in response to remote sexually dimorphic cues.
Sexually Dimorphic Neural Circuits
Differences in male and female behaviors in mammals ultimately derive from the effects of 
gonadal hormones (estradiol, progesterone, testosterone) on the developing and adult 
nervous system (Pfaff and McEwen, 1883). While the consequences of these hormones on 
brain development and function must be many and varied, recent studies focusing on their 
impact on hypothalamic circuits have advanced substantially our knowledge of cell types 
controlling sexually dimorphic behaviors. For instance, ablation of progesterone receptor 
(PR) expressing neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) results in deficits in 
mating behavior in both sexes, yet reduces aggression in only males (Yang et al, 2013). PR 
expressing neurons differ in number, distribution and connectivity in the VMH of males and 
females, suggesting that the gender specific behavioral outcomes reflect the anatomical 
differences in PR expressing neurons between sexes (Yang et al, 2013). On the other hand, 
optogenetic activation of estrogen receptor (ESR1) expressing neurons in the VMH resulted 
in sexual approach behaviors in both males and females, and stimulated attack behavior in 
males only (Lee et al, 2014; Kunwar et al, 2015). In this case, ESR1 expressing cells are also 
sexually dimorphic, but attack behavior could be elicited simply by increasing 
photostimulation in male mice. It is clear from these studies that gender specific behaviors 
reflect sexually dimorphic features of VMH neuronal populations in this hypothalamic 
circuitry. This is also the case in the anteroventral periventricular (APVP) hypothalamic 
nucleus, where a sexually dimorphic population of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) expressing 
neurons modulates parental care and oxytocin secretion specifically in females, while in 
males TH positive neurons in the APVP regulate inter-male aggression (Scott et al, 2015). 
These studies provide potent and precise examples of the importance of sexually dimorphic 
cells and circuits in the hypothalamus for regulation of gender specific sexual and aggressive 
behaviors in mammals. They suggest that identification and analysis of other sexually 
dimorphic modules will be a productive avenue for investigation of other sex specific 
behavioral biases (Yang and Shah, 2014).
Our studies of OxtrINs in the mPFC provide a different paradigm for the generation of 
gender specific complex behaviors. In this case, the critical cell type is not sexually 
dimorphic: OxtrINs number does not vary between males and females in the mPFC 
(Nakajima et al, 2014), and no gender specific differences in expression of the key signaling 
proteins that regulate female social behavior or male anxiety are evident (Figure 6). 
However, OxtrINs produce two mechanistically distinct modulatory substances, GABA and 
CRHBP, which act on local circuits in the mPFC to regulate behavior differentially. They do 
so because their function requires the sexually dimorphic hypothalamic hormones OXT and 
CRH, and because of the restricted expression of CRHR1 in superficial layers of the mPFC. 
Consequently, the high levels of OXT and CRH produced in females result predominantly in 
GABAergic control of postsynaptic cells by OxtrINs and modulation of social behavior. In 
males, the reduced production of CRH allows CRHBP released from OxtrINs to block 
activation of CRHR1 in layer 2/3 pyramidal cells, thus modulating anxiety-related 
behaviors. In this case, therefore, sexually dimorphic modules in the hypothalamus work 
Li et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 remotely to regulate sexually bivalent behaviors through a uniform higher order circuit in the 
mPFC.
OXT, CRH, CRHBP, Stress and Anxiety
OXT is considered a “social” hormone because of the extensive literature documenting its 
ability to impact a variety of different social behaviors in many species, and because its 
production is dynamically regulated in response to changing social situations (Insel, 2010; 
Neumann and Slattery, 2015; Guastella and Hickie, 2016). OXT is produced in the 
hypothalamus, and acts through the OXTR in many brain regions. Progress on circuits 
responsible for its role in social behaviors has been substantial: in the nucleus accumbens, it 
acts together with serotonin (5-HT) to modulate social reward through regulation of synaptic 
properties of both Drd1 and Drd2 expressing medium spiny neurons (Dolen et al, 2013); in 
the auditory cortex, OXT increases the salience of infant distress calls to stimulate maternal 
behavior in experienced, but not virgin females (Marlin et al, 2013); and in the mPFC, OXT 
modulates social approach toward male mice during estrus (Nakajima et al, 2014). A second 
major role for OXT is the regulation of anxiety and stress (Neumann and Slattery, 2015). 
OXT is produced in response to stress, and its abilities to modulate stress and anxiety have 
been demonstrated both pharmacologically and genetically. Although it is quite clear that 
responses to OXT administration in humans can vary between genders (Donaldson and 
Young, 2008), little is known regarding higher order circuits that regulate the anxiolytic 
effects of OXT or its differential effects in men and women.
The main system regulating physiological responses to stress is the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal (HPA) axis (Smith and Vale, 2006). CRH plays a fundamental role in stress because 
its production in the PVN stimulates the HPA axis, resulting in myriad peripheral 
physiological responses. The receptors for CRH (CRHR1 and CRHR2) are expressed in 
distinct patterns in the periphery and the brain (Laryea et al, 2012). CRHR1, which has been 
strongly implicated in stress vulnerability (Labermaier et al, 2014), is highly expressed in 
layer 2/3 pyramidal cells of the cerebral cortex ((http://www.brain-map.org/.brain; Figure 
S3D). These cells are particularly vulnerable to stress, which typically induces alterations in 
their morphology and synaptic function (Shansky and Morrison, 2009; Moench and 
Wellman, 2014). Layer 2/3 pyramidal cells in the mPFC also express the Wolfram syndrome 
gene, and it has been demonstrated recently that they are required to modulate stress-induced 
depressive behaviors (Shrestha et al, 2015).
Although the central targets for OXT and CRH are largely distinct, stress and social 
behaviors are complex and intertwined. (Sandi and Haller, 2015). In general, stress results in 
decreased social motivation, reduced social interaction and increased antisocial behavior. 
While the influence of social interactions on stress responses is less studied, recent evidence 
strongly supports the concept that “social buffering” can protect against a variety of stress 
related behaviors (Beery and Kaufer, 2015). Administration of OXT in animal models 
promotes behavioral resilience to stress, and in humans it both stimulates social behavior 
and decreases anxiety. Despite the roles of both OXT and CRH in the regulation of stress 
and anxiety, and the comorbidity of social and emotional disorders in humans, it has 
Li et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 remained unclear how these systems are modulated in higher brains areas to control 
behavior.
The data we have presented here provides important mechanistic insights into the central 
coordination of social and anxiety-related behaviors. First, the observation thatoptogenetic 
activation of sexually monomorphic OxtrINs in the mPFC results in bivalent, gender specific 
behaviors identifies these neurons as a critical node in social brain circuitry. Second, the 
discovery that this class of interneurons expresses CRHBP when activated, thus blocking the 
anxiogenic effects of CRH on layer 2/3 pyramidal cells in the cortex, provides a direct 
molecular mechanism through which OXT can both promote social behaviors and alleviate 
stress and anxiety. Third, the facts that OXT and CRH are circulating hormones whose 
actions are coordinated by OxtrINs in the mPFC, and that the receptors for OXT and CRH 
are expressed in many brain regions, suggest that CRHBP production in response to OXT 
may coordinate the actions of these hormones in other brain regions to modulate additional 
social and emotional behaviors. It will be of particular interest, for example, to determine 
whether OxtrINs production of CRHBP in the auditory cortex is involved in suppression of 
pup retrieval behavioral responses in virgin female or male mice (Marlin et al, 2015), and 
whether expression of CRHBP in the shell of the nucleus accumbens (http://mouse.brain-
map.org) is involved in the modulation of social reward by OXT and serotonin (Dolen et al, 
2013). Finally, the model we have presented allows for graded control of behavior. Thus, the 
balance between the prosocial and anxiolytic effects of OXT will depend ultimately on the 
vast variety of circumstances that are known to alter the levels of OXT and CRH in the 
brain.
The mPFC, OxtrINs, Gender and Therapy
OXT is now being investigated intensively as a treatment for social/emotional disorders, 
including autism spectrum disorders (Guastella and Hickie, 2015), social anxiety disorders 
(Neumann and Slattery, 2015), and schizophrenia (Insel, 2010; MacDonald and Feifel, 
2011). In the Cntnap2 mouse model of ASD, both exogenous and evoked OXT can restore 
normal social behaviors (Penagarikano et el, 2015). Given the prominent role of OXT in 
female reproductive biology and behavior, gender is recognized as a critically important 
factor in studies of its therapeutic effects and development of improved treatments (Insel, 
2015). The sexually dimorphic role we have demonstrated for OxtrINs in the mPFC, the 
mechanistic relationship between OXT and CRH that we have discovered, and the 
arrangement of OxtrINs and Crhr1 pyramidal cells suggest that both gender and 
environment will be critically important for understanding the therapeutic efficacy of OXT. 
Thus, the mechanism we have described in the mPFC is sensitive to the levels of both 
hormones, which vary independently as a consequence of sex, social situation and stress. 
Since it is capable of generating a graded response to the levels of OXT and CRH, the 
behavioral outcome of this system will be complex and dependent on all of the factors 
influencing OXT and CRH levels in vivo. Consequently, we expect that OXT therapy will be 
strongly dependent on the effective dose reaching the mPFC, the degree of target 
engagement, and the relative contributions of the mPFC and other sites to the overall clinical 
outcome. We speculate that in some settings it may be beneficial to reduce the impacts of 
Li et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 gender and environment by artificially titrating these pathways through combined therapy 
employing OXTR agonists and CRHR1 antagonists.
METHODS AND RESOURCES
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Nathaniel Heintz, The Rockefeller University, heintz@rockefeller.edu
MTAs required.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Mice
All procedures involving mice were approved by The Rockefeller University Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and were in accordance with the National 
Institutes of Health guidelines.
All mouse lines were bred to C57BL/6J (Jackson Stock #000664) for more than 7 
generations. Male and female transgenic mice were bred in our facility and were 2–3 months 
of age, 22–26 g weight, at the beginning of each experiment. Oxtr-Cre ON82 transgenic 
mice previously generated (Nakajima et al. 2014) were crossed with knock-in Rosa-flox-
EGFP-L10a line (Liu et al 2014) to generate the Oxtr-EGFP-L10a (TRAP) line. The 
conditional knockout mouse line of the oxytocin receptor (Oxtr-CKO) was donated by Dr. 
W. Scott Young III (Lee et al. 2008). Mice were housed in a specific-pathogen free facility, 
in groups of four to five per cage under a 12-h light-dark cycle with food and water ad 
libitum. Littermates of the same sex were randomly assigned to different experimental 
groups.
293TN producer cell line—293TN cells were grown in DMEM 10%FCS for 2 passages.
METHOD DETAILS
Behavioral Testing
Sociosexual Behavior: Sociosexual behavior was measured using the three-chamber social 
interaction chamber as previously described (Nakajima 2014). The apparatus is comprised of 
a rectangular, three chamber box. Each dividing wall has an open middle section, which 
allows free access to each chamber. Two identical wire cups are placed in each side chamber. 
Animal behaviors were scored three weeks after surgery and virus injection. Prior to 
behavioral testing, the test mouse was moved to a holder cage and the fiber optic cannula 
was connected to the fiberoptic patchcord. The sociosexual behavior test comprised two 
parts: a habituation session and 2 trial sessions. During the habituation session, two empty 
wire cups were placed in the left and right chambers. The test mouse was placed in the 
middle chamber and allowed to explore all three chambers of the apparatus for 10 min. The 
doors to the side chambers were closed, the test mouse was placed in the middle chamber, 
and a stranger mouse of the opposite sex and a novel lego were placed inside the left or right 
wire cups randomly. Doors between chambers were opened to allow the test mouse to 
Li et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 explore the three chambers freely. For mice expressing Cre dependent ChR2-mCherry in the 
mPFC, the test mouse was allowed to explore and interact with the stranger animal or lego 
for 2 trial sessions and each trial lasted for 10min. Blue light was generated by 473nm laser 
at 1mW and driven at 10Hz to activate OxtrINs cell bodies. During each social interaction 
session, the light was off during the first 3 min and on during the following 3 min. Two trial 
sessions were performed and the total duration that the mice spent in sniffing the stranger 
mouse or lego during the 6 min light-off and 6 min light-on phases were analyzed. 
Sociosexual behavior tests in Oxtr-cKO and Crhbp shRNAinjected mice did not require 
optogenetic stimulation and comprised a habituation period and one trial session during 
which the test mouse was allowed to explore the chamber for 10 min and sniffing behaviors 
were scored during this period. Mouse behavior was videotracked (Noldus system) and 
sniffing time was manually scored with Nodules software. The experimenter was blind to the 
type of virus injected besides for AAV-DIO-ChR2 injected mice. No mice were excluded 
from the Sociosexual Behavior.
Elevated Plus Maze (EPM): The apparatus consisted of two open arms, two closed arms 
and a center zone. Light intensity on the center zone and two open arms was always 
measured by light meters at the beginning of each experimental day. For EPM tests 
combined with optogenetics (Oxtr-ChR2 mice), the light intensity in the center zone of EPM 
was adjusted to 130 Lux. Prior to behavioral testing, the test mouse was moved to a holder 
cage and the fiber optic cannula was connected to the fiber optic patchcord. The test mouse 
was placed in the center zone of the EPM facing an open arm. The EPM trials consisted of 5 
min light off and 5 min light on phases. For EPM tests in Oxtr-cKO and Crhbp shRNA 
experimental groups, which did not require optogenetics, light intensity in the center zone 
was maintained at 60 lux. Mice were allowed to move freely in the maze for 5 min. The 
distance moved, the time spent in each arm and the number of entries into each arm were 
automatically analyzed by Noldus software. The experimenter was blind to the type of virus 
injected besides for AAV-DIO-ChR2 injected mice. Animals falling off from open arms 
were excluded from analyses.
Open Field Test (OF): Animal behavior in the open field was automatically measured by 
fusion software. The test mice were introduced into a corner of the open arena 
(50*50*30cm) and allowed to explore for 30 min. Parameters including total distanced 
travelled and time spent in the center of the open field were measured by the Fusion tracking 
software. For OPT tests in Crhbp shRNA experimental groups, the number of entries into the 
center zone during the first 5 min were automatically analyzed by the Fusion tracking 
software. The experimenter was blind to the type of virus injected besides for AAV-DIO-
ChR2 injected mice. Mice injected with AAV-DIO-ChR2 virus were randomly divided into 
light on and light off groups. No mice were excluded from the Open field test.
Brain Slice Preparation—Adult mice (2–3 months) were anesthetized with Ketamine/
Xylazine and perfused with 20 ml chilled dissection buffer (25.0 mM NaHCO3, 1.25 mM 
NaH2PO4, 2.5 mM KCl, 0.5 mM CaCl2, 7.0 mM MgCl2, 25.0 mM glucose, 110.0 mM 
choline chloride, 11.6 mM ascorbic acid and 3.1 mM pyruvic acid, gassed with 95% O2 and 
5% CO2). Coronal mPFC slices of 300μm thickness were sectioned in chilled dissection 
Li et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 buffer with a VT1000s vibratome (Leica). Slices were incubated in oxygenated artificial 
cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF; 118 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1 mM 
NaH2PO4, 10 mM glucose, 1.3 mM MgCl2 and 2.5 mM CaCl2, gassed with 95% O2 and 
5% CO2), let recover for 90 min at 32°C and transferred to room temperature until 
electrophysiological recordings.
Electrophysiological Recordings—Slices were continuously perfused with ACSF in 
the recording chamber and Patch-clamp experiments were performed at 32°C using a 
temperature control system. Signals were amplified using EPC10-2 amplifier (HEKA 
Elektronik, Lambrecht, Germany). Slices were visualized under a Zeiss microscope station 
equipped with camera. The pipette resistance was in the range of 4–6 MΩ. For voltage clamp 
recordings, the intracellular solution contained (in mM): 115 CsMeSO3, 20 CsCl, 10 
HEPES, 2.5 MgCl2, 4 Na2-ATP, 0.4 Na-GTP, 10 Na-phosphocreatine, and 0.6 EGTA. For 
current-clamp recordings, the composition of the intracellular solution was (in mM): 130 K-
Gluconate, 5 KCl, 10 HEPES, 2.5 MgCl2. 4 Na2ATP, 0.4 Na3GTP, 10 Na-phosphocretine, 
0.6 EGTA. Current clamp recordings were filtered at 2.5kHz and sampled at 5kHz. Voltage-
clamp recordings were filtered at 2.5kHz and sampled at 10kHz using Pathmaster program 
(HEKA Elektronik). Data were analyzed by Fitmaster (HEKA Elektronik). To measure 
light-evoked postsynaptic currents, 5 ms 470nm light pulses were delivered to the mPFC via 
an optic fiber attached to a laser. Layer 2/3 pyramidal cells were clamped at 0mV and 
−60mV. Ten sweeps were taken at each potential. To confirm the excitatory or inhibitory 
currents evoked by light, picrotoxin (100μM), D-APV (100μM) and CNQX (20μM) were 
added during the recordings. Peak amplitude was calculated by subtracting the baseline. 
Synaptic latency was determined as the duration from current onset time to peak time. To 
examine the effect of CRH (1μM, BACHEM) and the CRHBP antagonist (CRF 6–33, 1μM, 
BACHEM) on excitability of layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons, we injected sequential currents 
from −50pA to 400pA in a 50pA step during 500ms. Current was injected every 60 s in 
current clamp. To measure the effect of light on excitability, continuous blue light was 
delivered at the same time of current injection. Littermates were randomly used to prepare 
brain slices treated with different drugs. Two to four independent data sets were collected.
Stereotactic surgeries—Adult male and female mice (2–3 month old) were anesthetized 
with a mix of ketamine (100mg/ml) and xylazine (1mg/ml) by intraperitoneal injection. 
Oxtr-Cre mice received unilateral virus infusion of AAV5-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-mcherry in 
the mPFC using the coordinates: (A-P: 1.84 to 1.50 mm; M-L: 0.28 mm; D-V: 2.2 from 
dura). We injected 0.25 μl of AAV virus per site. Fiber optic cannulae were implanted after 
virus injection using the coordinates: (A-P: 1.60 mm; M-L: 0.28 mm; D-V 1.9 mm). Oxtrf/f 
mice received AAV8-cre expressing virus bilaterally in the mPFC for conditional deletion of 
oxtr. Lentivirus expressing Crhbp shRNA (1μl virus per site) were bilaterally injected into 
Oxtr-cre mice to silence Crhbp in OxtrINs. The coordinates were the same as above. 
Behavioral experiments were performed 3 weeks after the surgery.
For infusion experiments, double guide cannulae (C235GS-5-0.5/SP, Plastic One) were 
implanted following bilateral craniotomy and attached to the skull using dental cement 
(S380, C&B-Metabond). Behavioral experiments were performed 3 weeks after the surgery. 
Li et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Twenty five minutes before the EPM behavioral test, either saline, or OXT (1μg/μl H-2510, 
BACHEM) or OXT and CRHBP antagonist (CRF 6–33; 50μg/μl, BACHEM) were infused 
in a volume of 1μl through the internal cannula inserted in the guide cannula.
TRAP (Translating Ribosome Affinity Purification) and RNA-SEQ—Three male 
and three female Oxtr-EGFP-L10a mice were used for independent TRAP replicates. The 
TRAP procedure was performed as described previously (Mellén et al. 2012). In brief, 
medial prefrontal cortices were dissected from individual mice. Tissue was immediately 
homogenized with a motor-driven Teflon glass homogenizer. Polyribosomes were 
immunoprecipitated by monoclonal anti-EGFP antibodies (custom made, a mix of 19C8 and 
19F7)-coated protein L magnetic beads. RNAs from polyribosomes were extracted and 
further purified with an Rneasy Plus Micro Kit. RNA quantity and quality were determined 
with an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. cDNA was synthesized from 5ng of mRNA from IP and 
input samples and further amplified by Oviation RNA-seq Kit. cDNA fragments of 200 bp 
were end-repaired and ligated with adapters for HiSeq 2000 (Ilumina Inc., San Diego, CA, 
USA) technology using TruSeq Nano DNA Sample kit (Illumina). Quality of libraries was 
assessed using HT DNA High Sensitivity Chip (Agilent) for 2100 Bioanalyzer. RNA-seq 
reads were aligned to the UCSC mm10 reference genome using STAR (version 
2.3.0e_r291). Aligned reads were quantified by htseq-count module, part of the ‘HTSeq’ 
framework (version 0.6.0). Differentially expressed genes were identified by performing a 
negative binomial test using DESeq2 (R-package version 1.4.5) with default settings. 
Significant P-values were corrected to control the false discovery rate of multiple testing at 
0.05 threshold.
FISH (Fluorescence in situ hybridization)—FISH was performed as described 
previously (Nakajima 2014). 12μm brain sections were collected on slides. Crhbp probe 
template was generated by PCR using gene-specific primers (F: 
CCCTCTCCTGCTCTTCAGTG, R: ATGGCTCCAGCTGACGATAC; from Crhbp cDNA 
plasmid). The PCR product was used to make Digoxigenin (DIG) labeled RNA probes using 
a T7-based in vitro transcription kit (Roche). Sections were hybridized with RNA probe for 
16 hours at 55°C. Slides were washed and treated with the anti-DIG polyclonal antibodies 
and then incubated with biotin conjugated anti-sheep IgG antibodies (Chemicon) in PBS for 
1 hr. After washing, samples were reacted with the HRP-conjugated streptavidin 
(PerkinElmer) and signals were visualized by incubating the samples with TSA-Cy3 (Perkin 
Elmer). After ISH, slides were incubated with chicken anti-EFGP (Aves) (1:500) for 
overnight and visualized with Alexa-fluor conjugated secondary antibodies (Invitrogen).
Lentivirus Packaging—Lentivirus was generated as described previously (Auer et al, 
2010.) In brief, 293TN cells were co-transfected with the expression vector plasmid (pSico-
Crhbp-shRNA), together with packaging and envelope plasmids, using PEI solution 
(Polysciences INC #24765-2). Two days after transfection, viral particles were harvested and 
the supernatant was concentrated by ultracentrifugation. The titer of concentrated lentivirus 
was measured by transducing 1 × 105 293TN cells per well in a 24-well cell culture plate 
with virus dilutions and quantification of EGFP-positive cells by fluorescence-activated cell 
sorting (FACS) analysis after 3 days. TU= (P*N/100*V)*1/DF. (p=%GFP+ cells; N=number 
Li et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of cell at the time of transfection; V=volume if dilution added to each well; DF=dilution 
factor). The titer of lenti-crhbp-shRNA virus is 4.6×108 transducing units/ml.
shRNA Design—The Cre regulated conditional RNA interference plasmid, pSico was 
purchased from addgene (#11578). The 19-nt sequence (GAGCCATTCGAGCTAGAAA) 
used for knockdown of Crhbp mRNA was generated by pSicoOligomaker and the knock 
down efficiency was validated by western blotting. The sense oligo and antisense oligo 
containing Crhbp shRNA generated by pSicoOligomaker were digested by SacII and NotI 
after annealing and cloned into the pSico vector (Ventura A et al., 2004).
Western Blot—To test the knockdown efficiency of the shRNA crhbp, 293TN cells were 
co-transfected with pSico-crhbp-shRNA and pCMV-crhbp-Myc (MR204660, ORIGENE) 
and a cre-expressing vector. Cell lysates were collected 48 hours after transfection. Protein 
extracts were loaded in 4–12% Bis-Tris gel, transferred to PDVF membrane for analysis and 
immunobloted with anti-CRHBP primary antibodies (1:500, sc-20630, Santa Cruz) and anti-
b actin (1:2000).
Real Time PCR (RT-PCR)—Tissues were dissected from the mPFC and PVH of male and 
female wild type mice. Total RNA was homogenized and isolated by RNAeasy Mini Kit 
(QIAGEN). The first strand cDNA was synthesized by SuperScript IV reverse transcriptase 
(Invitrogen). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using 480 SYBR Green I Master in 
a LightCycler 480II system (Roche). Quantification was analyzed by the delta Ct method 
with Gapdh as an endogenous control. Brain samples of same age male and female mice 
were collected in the same day and processing of the samples was performed in parallel.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical parameters including the exact value of n, precision measures (mean± SEM) and 
statistical significance are reported in the Figures and the Figure Legends. Data is judged to 
be statistically significant when p<0.05 by two tailed Mann Whitney test, One-way ANOVA 
or Two-way ANOVA. In figures, asterisks denote statistical significance (*, p<0.05; **, 
p<0.01; ***, p<0.001; ****, p<0.0001) as compared to controls. Pearson correlation 
coefficients were calculated with PRISM and statistical significance is based upon the 
assumption that values exhibit a Gaussian distribution. Statistical analysis was performed in 
Graph Pad PRISM 6.
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Rabbit polyclonal anti-CRHBP Antibody
Santa Cruz
sc-20630
Mouse monoclonal anti-beta-actin Antibody
ABGENT
AM1829B
Mouse monoclonal anti-EGFP antibody
Laboratory of Nathaniel 
Heintz
N/A
Chicken anti-EGFP antibody
AVES
GFP-1020
Li et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Sheep anti-DIG polyclonal antibodies
Roche
11333089001
Biotinylated Rabbit anti-sheep IgG antibody
Vector lab
BA-6000
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Oxytocin acetate salt
BACHEM
H-2510.0025
CRF (human, rat) acetate salt
BACHEM
H-2435.0001
CRF (6-33) (human, rat)
BACHEM
H-3456.1000
Picrotoxin
TOCRIS
1128
D-AP5
TOCRIS
0106
CNQX disodium salt
TOCRIS
1045
Polyethylenimine HCI MAX
Polysciences, Inc.
24765-2
Critical Commercial Assays
TSA plus cyanine 3 system
PerkinElmer
NEL744001KT
RNAeasy Mini Kit
QIAGEN
74106
LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master
Roche
04887352001
DIG RNA Labeling Kit (SP6/T7)
Roche
11175025910
Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T1
Invitrogen
65601
RNeasy Plus Micro Kit
QIAGEN
74034
Ovation RNA-seq System V2
Nugen
7102
TruSeq Nano DNA LT kit
illumina
15041757
C&B Metabond
parkell
S380
SuperScript IV First-Strand Synthesis System
Invitrogen
18091050
NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels
Invitrogen
NP0321BOX
Deposited Data
No
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
293TN producer cell line
System Biosciences
LV900A-1
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
C57BL/6J
The Jackson Laboratory
000664
Oxtr-cre ON82
Laboratory of Nathaniel 
Heintz (Nakajima N et 
al.,2014)
N/A
Rosa26-flox-EGFP-L10a
The Jackson Laboratory
022367
Oxtr-EGFP-L10a
Laboratory of Nathaniel 
Heintz
N/A
Oxtrflox/flox
The Jackson Laboratory
008471
Recombinant DNA
AAV5-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-mCherry
University of 
Pennsylvania vector 
core
AAV-5-20297P
AAV8-hSyn-GFP-Cre
University of North 
Carolina vector Core
N/A
AAV8-CMV-GFP
University of North 
Carolina vector Core
N/A
Li et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Sequence-Based Reagents
Crhbp probe for ISH
Forward: CCCTCTCCTGCTCTTCAGTG
Reverse: ATGGCTCCAGCTGACGATAC
This paper
N/A
pCMV-Crhbp cDNA (Myc-DDK-Tagged)
Origene
MR204660
pSico
Ventura A et al.,2004 
( Addgene )
11578
19-nt sequence used for knockdown of Crhbp mRNA 
GAGCCATTCGAGCTAGAAA
This paper
Generated by pSicoOligomaker
Sense oligo containing Crhbp shRNA: 
TGAGCCATTCGAGCTAGAAATTCAAGAGATTTCTAG 
CTCGAATGGCTCTTTTTTC
Antisense oligo containing Crhbp shRNA: 
TCGAGAAAAAAGAGCCATTCGAGCTAGAAATCTCTT 
GAATTTCTAGCTCGAATGGCTCA
This paper
Generated by pSicoOligomaker
RT-PCR primers of Oxtr
Forward: CTTCCTCAGATTCCACACCTG
Reverse: TTCCAGAACATTCAGCTCCAG
This paper
N/A
RT-PCR primers of CRH
Forward: AAAGAAGAGAAAGGAGAAGAGGAAG
Reverse: CCGCAGCCGCATGTTAG
This paper
N/A
RT-PCR primers of CrhR1
Forward: CAGCCGCCTACAACTACTTCC
Reverse: GGTGGAGTACGTGAGTACGATG
This paper
N/A
RT-PCR primers of Crbhp
Forward: TGATGCCCTTAGCAGACCTGT
Reverse: CACACGGTTAATGTGTTTCCCA
This paper
N/A
RT-PCR primers of GAPDH
Forward: CATGGCCTTCCGTGTTCCTA
Reverse: GCCTGCTTCACCACCTTCTT
This paper
N/A
Software and Algorithms
MainScript
Laboratory of Nathaniel 
Heintz
https://gensat.rockefeller.edu/heintzp30/Bioinformatics_Flow_Chart.jsp
Other
Double guide canula
Plastic one
C235GS-5-0.5/SP
Fiber-optic cannula
Doric lenses
MFP_200/230-0.37 _1m_ZF1.25_FLT
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the HHMI (N.H), the NIH/NIDA: grant 1P30 DA035756-01 (I.I.T and N.H.), the Leon 
Black Family Foundation (N.H.) and the HFSP postdoctoral fellowship LT000271/2015-L (K.L.). We wish to thank 
Cuidong Wang (Rockefeller University, New York) for technical assistance. The authors declare no conflicts of 
interest.
References
Altemus M, Sarvaiya N, Neill Epperson C. Sex differences in anxiety and depression clinical 
perspectives. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2014; 35:320–330. [PubMed: 24887405] 
Li et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Aoki Y, Watanabe T, Abe O, Kuwabara H, Yahata N, Takano Y, Iwashiro N, Natsubori T, Takao H, 
Kawakubo Y, et al. Oxytocin’s neurochemical effects in the medial prefrontal cortex underlie 
recovery of task-specific brain activity in autism: a randomized controlled trial. Mol Psychiatry. 
2014; 20:447–453. [PubMed: 25070538] 
Auer S, Stürzebecher AS, Jüttner R, Santos-Torres J, Hanack C, Frahm S, Liehl B, Ibañez-Tallon I. 
Silencing neurotransmission with membrane-tethered toxins. Nat Methods. 2010; 7:229–236. 
[PubMed: 20139968] 
Bangasser DA, Kawasumi Y. Cognitive disruptions in stress-related psychiatric disorders: A role for 
corticotropin releasing factor (CRF). Horm Behav. 2015; 76:125–135. [PubMed: 25888454] 
Beery AK, Kaufer D. Stress, social behavior, and resilience: insights from rodents. Neurobiol Stress. 
2015; 1:116–127. [PubMed: 25562050] 
Bethlehem RA, van Honk J, Auyeung B, Baron-Cohen S. Oxytocin, brain physiology, and functional 
connectivity: a review of intranasal oxytocin fMRI studies. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013; 
38:962–974. [PubMed: 23159011] 
Dolen G, Darvishzadeh A, Huang KW, Malenka RC. Social reward requires coordinated activity of 
nucleus accumbens oxytocin and serotonin. Nature. 2013; 501:179–184. [PubMed: 24025838] 
Donaldson ZR, Young LJ. Oxytocin, vasopressin, and the neurogenetics of sociality. Science. 2008; 
322:900–904. [PubMed: 18988842] 
Guastella AJ, Hickie IB. Oxytocin Treatment, Circuitry, and Autism: A Critical Review of the 
Literature Placing Oxytocin Into the Autism Context. Biol Psychiatry. 2015; 79:234–242. [PubMed: 
26257243] 
Insel TR. The challenge of translation in social neuroscience: a review of oxytocin, vasopressin, and 
affiliative behavior. Neuron. 2010; 65:768–779. [PubMed: 20346754] 
Insel TR. Translating Oxytocin Neuroscience to the Clinic: A National Institute of Mental Health 
Perspective. Biol Psychiatry. 2016; 79:153–154. [PubMed: 26723108] 
Iwasaki-Sekino A, Mano-Otagiri A, Ohata H, Yamauchi N, Shibasaki T. Gender differences in 
corticotropin and corticosterone secretion and corticotropin-releasing factor mRNA expression in 
the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and the central nucleus of the amygdala in 
response to footshock stress or psychological stress in rats. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2009; 
34:226–237. [PubMed: 18849120] 
Kunwar PS, Zelikowsky M, Remedios R, Cai H, Yilmaz M, Meister M, Anderson DJ. Ventromedial 
hypothalamic neurons control a defensive emotion state. eLife. 2015; 4
Labermaier C, Kohl C, Hartmann J, Devigny C, Altmann A, Weber P, Arloth J, Quast C, Wagner KV, 
Scharf SH, et al. A polymorphism in the Crhr1 gene determines stress vulnerability in male mice. 
Endocrinology. 2014; 155:2500–2510. [PubMed: 24773341] 
Laryea G, Arnett MG, Muglia LJ. Behavioral Studies and Genetic Alterations in Corticotropin-
Releasing Hormone (CRH) Neurocircuitry: Insights into Human Psychiatric Disorders. Behav Sci 
(Basel). 2012; 2:135–171. [PubMed: 23077729] 
Lee H, Caldwell HK, Macbeth AH, Tolu AK, Scott Young W 3rd. A Conditional Knockout Mouse 
Line of the Oxytocin Receptor. Endocrinology. 2008; 149(7):3256–3263. [PubMed: 18356275] 
Lee H, Kim DW, Remedios R, Anthony TE, Chang A, Madisen L, Zeng H, Anderson DJ. Scalable 
control of mounting and attack by Esr1+ neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus. Nature. 2014; 
509:627–632. [PubMed: 24739975] 
Liu J, Krautzberger AM, Sui SH, Hofmann OM, Chen Y, Baetscher M, Grgic I, Kumar S, Humphreys 
BD, Hide WA, McMahon AP. Cell-specific translational profiling in acute kidney injury. J Clin 
Invest. 2014; 124:1242–1254. [PubMed: 24569379] 
MacDonald K, Feifel D. Oxytocin’s role in anxiety: a critical appraisal. Brain Res. 2014; 1580:22–56. 
[PubMed: 24468203] 
Marlin BJ, Mitre M, D’Amour JA, Chao MV, Froemke RC. Oxytocin enables maternal behaviour by 
balancing cortical inhibition. Nature. 2015; 520:499–504. [PubMed: 25874674] 
Mellén M, Ayata P, Dewell S, Kriaucionis S, Heintz N. MeCP2 binds to 5hmC enriched within active 
genes and accessible chromatin in the nervous system. Cell. 2012; 151(7):1417–30. [PubMed: 
23260135] 
Li et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nakajima N, Görlich A, Heintz N. Oxytocin modulates female sociosexual behavior through a specific 
class of prefrontal cortical interneurons. Cell. 2014; 159(2):295–305. [PubMed: 25303526] 
Neumann ID, Slattery DA. Oxytocin in General Anxiety and Social Fear: A Translational Approach. 
Biol Psychiatry. 2015; 79:213–221. [PubMed: 26208744] 
Owen SF, Tuncdemir SN, Bader PL, Tirko NN, Fishell G, Tsien RW. Oxytocin enhances hippocampal 
spike transmission by modulating fast-spiking interneurons. Nature. 2013; 500:458–462. 
[PubMed: 23913275] 
Penagarikano O, Lazaro MT, Lu XH, Gordon A, Dong H, Lam HA, Peles E, Maidment NT, Murphy 
NP, Yang XW, et al. Exogenous and evoked oxytocin restores social behavior in the Cntnap2 
mouse model of autism. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:271ra278.
Pfaff DW, McEwen BS. Actions of estrogens and progestins on nerve cells. Science. 1983; 219:808–
814. [PubMed: 6297008] 
Refojo D, Schweizer M, Kuehne C, Ehrenberg S, Thoeringer C, Vogl AM, Dedic N, Schumacher M, 
von Wolff G, Avrabos C, et al. Glutamatergic and dopaminergic neurons mediate anxiogenic and 
anxiolytic effects of CRHR1. Science. 2011; 333:1903–1907. [PubMed: 21885734] 
Rilling JK, Young LJ. The biology of mammalian parenting and its effect on offspring social 
development. Science. 2014; 345:771–776. [PubMed: 25124431] 
Rubenstein E, Wiggins LD, Lee LC. A Review of the Differences in Developmental, Psychiatric, and 
Medical Endophenotypes Between Males and Females with Autism Spectrum Disorder. J Dev 
Phys Disabil. 2015; 27:119–139. [PubMed: 26146472] 
Sabihi S, Durosko NE, Dong SM, Leuner B. Oxytocin in the prelimbic medial prefrontal cortex 
reduces anxiety-like behavior in female and male rats. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2014; 45:31–
42. [PubMed: 24845174] 
Sandi C, Haller J. Stress and the social brain: behavioural effects and neurobiological mechanisms. Nat 
Rev Neurosci. 2015; 16:290–304. [PubMed: 25891510] 
Scott N, Prigge M, Yizhar O, Kimchi T. A sexually dimorphic hypothalamic circuit controls maternal 
care and oxytocin secretion. Nature. 2015; 525:519–522. [PubMed: 26375004] 
Shrestha P, Mousa A, Heintz N. Layer 2/3 pyramidal cells in the medial prefrontal cortex moderate 
stress induced depressive behaviors. eLife. 2015; 4:e08752.
Smoller JW. The Genetics of Stress-Related Disorders: PTSD, Depression, and Anxiety Disorders. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016; 41:297–319. [PubMed: 26321314] 
Van Den Eede F, Van Broeckhoven C, Claes SJ. Corticotropin-releasing factor-binding protein, stress 
and major depression. Ageing Res Rev. 2005; 4:213–239. [PubMed: 15996902] 
Ventura A, Meissner A, Dillon CP, McManus M, Sharp PA, Van Parijs L, Jaenisch R, Jacks T. Cre-lox-
regulated conditional RNA interference from transgenes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 
101(28):10380–5. [PubMed: 15240889] 
Weber H, Richter J, Straube B, Lueken U, Domschke K, Schartner C, Klauke B, Baumann C, Pane-
Farre C, Jacob CP, et al. Allelic variation in CRHR1 predisposes to panic disorder: evidence for 
biased fear processing. Mol Psychiatry. 2015
Westphal NJ, Seasholtz AF. CRH-BP: the regulation and function of a phylogenetically conserved 
binding protein. Front Biosci. 2006; 11:1878–1891. [PubMed: 16368564] 
Wigton R, Radua J, Allen P, Averbeck B, Meyer-Lindenberg A, McGuire P, Shergill SS, Fusar-Poli P. 
Neurophysiological effects of acute oxytocin administration: systematic review and meta-analysis 
of placebo-controlled imaging studies. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2015; 40:E1–22. [PubMed: 
25520163] 
Yang CF, Chiang MC, Gray DC, Prabhakaran M, Alvarado M, Juntti SA, Unger EK, Wells JA, Shah 
NM. Sexually dimorphic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus govern mating in both sexes 
and aggression in males. Cell. 2013; 153:896–909. [PubMed: 23663785] 
Yang CF, Shah NM. Representing sex in the brain, one module at a time. Neuron. 2014; 82:261–278. 
[PubMed: 24742456] 
Zohar I, Weinstock M. Differential effect of prenatal stress on the expression of corticotrophin-
releasing hormone and its receptors in the hypothalamus and amygdala in male and female rats. J 
Neuroendocrinol. 2011; 23:320–328. [PubMed: 21306450] 
Li et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Sex-specific behavioral responses to OxtrINs function in the mPFC
(A) Scheme indicating the mPFC area where AAV2.5-EF1-α-DIO-ChR2-mCherry was 
injected in Oxtr-Cre mice (referred to as Oxtr-Cre::ChR2)
(B) Coronal section Oxtr-Cre::ChR2 mice showing expression of ChR2-mCherry in OtxrINs 
in mPFC. Scale bars 100 μm.
(C) Diagram showing the optic fiber in the prelimbic cortex (PrL) for photostimulation of 
Oxtr interneurons in the mPFC in Oxtr-Cre::ChR2 mice.
(D) Photostimulation (light on, 10 Hz) in Oxtr-Cre::ChR2 female mice in the three-chamber 
social interaction test significantly increased social preference for male mice compared to 
time epochs without photostimulation (light off). n=9 mice per group. Two-way ANOVA, 
Bonferroni post test. *** p < 0.001.
Li et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (E) Photostimulation (light on, 10 Hz) in Oxtr-Cre::ChR2 male mice did not increase social 
preference for female mice compared to time epochs without photostimulation. n=8 mice per 
group. Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni post-test. n.s. p>0.05
(F–I) Optogenetic stimulation of the mPFC in Oxtr-Cre::ChR2 increased open-arm time in 
the EPM (G) and center time on the OF (I) during light-on in males, but not in females (F, 
H). F to G, n=16 mice per group; Wilcoxon signed rank test p=0.78 in F and p=0.0017 in G; 
H to I, n=7 to 9, Mann Whitney test. p>0.9 in H and p=0.0164 in I.
(J–K) Conditional Oxtr female mice (Oxtrf/f) injected with AAV-Cre (Oxtrf/f:Cre), showed 
no changes in open-arm time (J) and center time in the OF (L) relative to Oxtrf/f:GFP 
controls. Male Oxtrf/f:Cre mice spent significantly less time in the open arms (K) and in the 
center of the OF (M) than controls. For J, n=10 to 20 mice per group; For K to M, n=7 to 9 
mice per group. Mann Whitney test. p=0.64 in J and p=0.04 in K; p=0.82 in L and p=0.03 in 
M.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM.
See also Figure S1.
Li et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Postsynaptic Responses to OxtrINs Activation are Primarily Inhibitory
(A–B) Diagram (A) and photomicrograph (B) of mPFC brain slice showing the recordings 
in OxtrINs expressing ChR2.
(C) Female and Male OxtrINs-ChR2 respond similarly to single and consecutive blue light 
pulses (blue squares). Scale bar: 100ms, 20mV.
(D) mPFC scheme showing the recordings in layer 2/3 and layer 5 pyramidal cells (yellow 
triangles) upon blue light stimulation of OxtrINs (blue) expressing ChR2.
(E) High percentage of pyramidal cells in layer 2/3 and layer 5 responded to OxtrINs 
optogenetic stimulation in female and male mice. n=21 to 29 cells.
Li et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (F–H) Representative traces and quantitation of IPSCs and EPSCs amplitudes in layer 2/3 
cells in male and female mPFC slices. n=16 cells recorded in female and n=23 cells 
recorded in male. Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test. ** p<0.01.
(I–K) Representative traces and quantitation of IPSCs and EPSCs amplitudes in layer 5 
pyramidal neurons in male and female. n=21 cells recorded in female and n=29 cells 
recorded in male. Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test. * p<0.05.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
See also Figure S2.
Li et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. TRAP profiling reveals cell-specific enrichment of corticotropin releasing hormone 
binding protein (CRHBP) in OxtrINs
(A) Scatterplot of average TRAP IP samples (Y axis) versus INPUT samples (X axis) from 
the mPFC of Oxtr-EFGP-L10a mice. Sst, Gad1, Crhbp and Oxtr are highly enriched in the 
OxtrINs IP population (red). Crhr1 (green) is not enriched in the IP.
(B) The top ten most highly enriched translated mRNAs in OxtrINs. Base mean is the 
average expression in all samples (IP and INPUT). Log2 Fold Change is the enrichment in 
IP compared to INPUT.
(C) Analyses of cell-specific translated mRNAs displayed using the Integrated Genomics 
Viewer (IGV 2.3). Positive control genes expressed in each cell type are indicated on the top 
row. Chrbp (last column, red arrow) is specifically expressed at very high levels in OxtrINs, 
and at lower levels in a broad class of non-fast spiking interneurons that includes OxtrINs.
See also Figure S3 and Table S1.
Li et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. CRH enhances the response of layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons in males and this response 
is suppressed by optogenetic stimulation of OxtrINs
(A) Scheme of the recordings in layer 2/3 neurons (in yellow) were recorded upon 
superfusion with CRH and upon blue light stimulation of OxtrINs (blue)
(B–C) Representative recordings and quantitation of induced spikes in female mice showing 
that addition of CRH (orange) and addition of CRH and CRHR1 antagonist (dark orange) do 
not increase action potential firing with respect to control conditions (grey) at increasing 
injected currents. n=8 to 15 cells per group. Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s multiple 
comparison test. n.s. p>0.05.
(D–E) Representative recordings and quantitation of induced firing in male mice showing 
that CRH (green) significantly increases the number of induced spikes and that addition of a 
CRHR1 antagonist to CRH superfused slices (dark green) suppresses the response to CRH. 
n=14 to 25 cells per group. Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test. **** 
p<0.0001, n.s. p>0.05.
(F–G) Representative recordings and quantitation of induce spikes at different injected 
currents showing that blue light (blue) activation of OxtrINs suppresses the increase of firing 
mediated by CRH (green). n=10 to 25 cells per group. Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s 
multiple comparison test. **** p<0.0001. n.s. p>0.05.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
See also Figure S4.
Li et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Conditional Knockdown of Crhbp in OxtrINs increases anxiety in males but not 
females
(A–B) Representative recordings in layer 2/3 pyramidal male neurons and quantitation of 
induced spikes show that application of CRHBP antagonist (1μM, blue) significantly 
increases induced firing with respect to control conditions (grey). Additional superfusion 
with CRH (1μM, green) further increases the number of induced spikes. n=10 to 15 cells per 
group. Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test. ****p<0.0001, **p<0.01.
(C–E) Oxtr-Cre female mice injected with Chrbp shRNA lentivirus showed no changes in 
EPM open-arm time (C), EPM open-arm entries (D) and open field center area entries (E) 
Li et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 relative to Oxtr-Cre female mice injected with shRNA scramble control lentivirus. n=5 to 16 
mice per group; Mann Whitney test, p=0.27 in C, p=0.41 in D and p=0.29 in E.
(F–H) Oxtr-Cre male mice injected with Chrbp shRNA lentivirus showed significantly 
reduced EPM open-arm time (F), EPM open-arm entries (G) and Open field center area 
entries (H) relative to Oxtr-Cre male mice injected with scramble shRNA lentivirus. n=8 to 
14 mice per group; Mann Whitney test, p=0.04 in F, p=0.0006 in G and p=0.01 in H.
(I, J) Oxtr-Cre female (I) and male (J) mice injected with Chrbp shRNA lentivirus show no 
significant differences in the three-chamber social interaction test relative to Oxtr-Cre mice 
injected with shRNA scramble control. n=5 to 9 mice per group; Two-way ANOVA, 
Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test. n.s. p>0.05
(K) mPFC cannulated male mice were tested in the EPM after infusion of saline (light 
green), OXT (medium green) and OXT together with a CRHBP antagonist (dark green). 
Time in the open arms was significantly increased in male mice infused with OXT and the 
anxiolytic effect of OXT was blocked by coinfusion with the CRHBP antagonist (CRH 6–
33). n=7 to 13 mice for each condition, One-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s multiple 
comparison test. * p<0.05.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
See also Figure S5.
Li et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Quantitation of Oxtr, Crhbp, Crhr1, Crh and Xist in female and male mice
(A) Normalized TRAP values of IP samples showing no change in Oxtr, Crhbp and Crhr1 
expression in mPFC. Female specific Xist expression is included as a gender specific 
control. n=3 mice per group, Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test. n.s. 
p>0.05. **** p<0.0001.
(B) RT-PCR of Oxtr, Crhbp and Crhr1 expression in mPFC samples. Normalization is to 
female values. n=6 mice per group, Two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s multiple comparison 
test. n.s. p>0.05.
(C–D) RT-PCR analyses of PVH samples normalized to male expression levels show that 
CRH is significantly higher in female mice. n=6 to 7 mice per group; Mann Whitney test, 
p=0.0047.
Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
See also Table S2.
Li et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. A Model for mPFC Control of Social and Emotional Behaviors by OxtrINs
Two pathways in the mPFC are coordinated by OxtrINs to generate prosocial or anxiolytic 
behaviors. In the OXT pathway (left side of both diagrams) activation of OxtrINs results in 
production of GABA and CRHBP. In females (orange diagram) this pathway predominates 
(orange arrow), because CRH levels are high (CRH large font) and release of CRHBP by 
OxtrINs has little effect. Consequently, in female mice pulses of OXT produce primarily a 
GABAergic inhibitory effect on layer 5 pyramidal neurons that regulate social behaviors. In 
contrast, in males (green diagram) the CRH pathway predominates (green arrow) because 
CRH levels are low (small font) and release of CRHBP is sufficient to bind to CRH, and 
suppress the activation of CRHR1 receptors on layer 2/3 pyramidal cells resulting in an 
anxiolytic effect.
Li et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 09.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
