 Extensive graft-derived dopaminergic innervation is
maintained 24 years after transplantation in the
degenerating parkinsonian brain
Wen Lia, Elisabet Englundb, Håkan Widnerc, Bengt Mattssond, Danielle van Westene, Jimmy Lätte, Stig Rehncronaf,
Patrik Brunding, Anders Björklundd,1,2, Olle Lindvallc,h,1,2, and Jia-Yi Lia,1,2
aNeural Plasticity and Repair Unit, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, 221 84 Lund, Sweden;
bDivision of Oncology and Pathology, Lund University Hospital, 221 85 Lund, Sweden; cDivision of Neurology, Lund University Hospital, 221 85 Lund,
Sweden; dNeurobiology Unit, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, 221 84 Lund, Sweden;
eCenter for Medical Imaging and Physiology, Lund University Hospital, 221 85 Lund, Sweden; fDivision of Neurosurgery, Lund University Hospital, 221 85
Lund, Sweden; gCenter for Neurodegenerative Science, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI 49503; and hLund Stem Cell Center, Lund University
Hospital, 221 84 Lund, Sweden
Contributed by Anders Björklund, April 1, 2016 (sent for review February 17, 2016; reviewed by Lorenz Studer and Jun Takahashi)
Clinical trials using cells derived from embryonic ventral mesen-
cephalon have shown that transplanted dopaminergic neurons
can survive and function in the long term, as demonstrated by
in vivo brain imaging using 18F-fluorodopa and 11C-raclopride pos-
itron emission tomography. Here we report the postmortem anal-
ysis of a patient with Parkinson’s disease who 24 y earlier underwent
unilateral transplantation of embryonic dopaminergic neurons in the
putamen and subsequently exhibited major motor improvement and
recovery of striatal dopaminergic function. Histopathological analysis
showed that a dense, near-normal graft-derived dopaminergic
reinnervation of the putamen can be maintained for a quarter of
a century despite severe host brain pathology and with no evidence
of immune response. In addition, ubiquitin- and α-synuclein–posi-
tive inclusions were seen, some with the appearance of typical Lewy
bodies, in 11–12% of the grafted dopaminergic neurons, reflecting
the spread of pathology from the host brain to the transplants.
Because the clinical benefits induced by transplantation in this pa-
tient were gradually lost after 14 y posttransplantation, our findings
provide the first reported evidence, to our knowledge, that even a
viable dopaminergic graft giving rise to extensive striatal reinnerva-
tion may lose its efficacy if widespread degenerative changes de-
velop in the host brain.
Parkinson’s disease | transplantation | autopsy | synucleinopathy |
reinnervation
A
fundamental question for cell therapies in neurodegenera-
tive disorders is whether transplanted neurons can survive
and integrate their terminal network with the host brain for many
years despite an ongoing disease process. In patients with
Parkinson’s disease (PD) implanted with human embryonic mes-
encephalic tissue into the striatum, varying numbers of grafted
dopaminergic neurons have survived for up to 2 decades (1–3);
however, in some patients, characteristic Lewy bodies were de-
tected in a small fraction (1–5%) of grafted dopaminergic neurons
at 12–22 y after transplantation (2–5). Other studies have shown
that grafted dopaminergic neurons remain healthy up to 14 y
posttransplantation (1, 6). Whether the disease process affects the
density and extension of a well-developed graft-derived dopami-
nergic innervation is unknown.
Here we report the histopathological analysis of a unique
patient with PD who exhibited major clinical improvement for
more than a decade after undergoing unilateral transplantation
into the putamen, associated with complete restoration of puta-
minal dopaminergic function as demonstrated by positron emission
tomography (7). We demonstrate, for the first time to our knowl-
edge, that a dense graft-derived dopaminergic reinnervation of the
putamen can be maintained for a quarter of a century despite
widespread host brain pathology and α-synucleinopathy eventu-
ally affecting 11–12% of grafted neurons.
Results and Discussion
Patient History and Clinical Follow-Up. In 1989, at age 59 y, the pa-
tient underwent transplantation with ventral mesencephalic tissue
from four human embryos obtained at routine suction abortions (8).
Using a computed tomography-guided stereotactic technique, dis-
sociated tissue was implanted along three tracts in the anterior,
middle, and posterior parts of the right putamen. The patient had
developed typical PD in 1980 and was started on L-dopa treatment
in 1982. He did well until 1986, when he developed “on–off”
symptoms, with “off” periods characterized by resting tremor,
hypokinetic movements, and rigidity, particularly on the left side of
the body, and only mild parkinsonian symptoms during “on” periods.
Up to 10 y after transplantation, the patient was monitored
according to the Core Assessment Program for Intracerebral
Transplantations protocol (9) as part of a scientific program. He
Significance
Parkinson’s disease is the most common movement disorder.
Here we describe the histopathological analysis of a unique
patient with Parkinson’s disease who underwent unilateral cell
transplantation in the putamen with human embryonic mes-
encephalic tissue at 24 y before death. The patient enjoyed
major clinical benefits for at least a decade after transplantation.
After a quarter of a century, complete graft-derived dopami-
nergic reinnervation was still evident in the transplanted puta-
men. α-Synuclein–positive inclusions, some with the appearance
of typical Lewy bodies, were present in 11–12% of the grafted
dopaminergic neurons, reflecting spread of pathology from the
host brain to the transplant. The clinical improvements were
gradually lost from 14 y posttransplantation, indicating that
even extensive graft-derived dopaminergic reinnervation loses
its efficacy in a severely degenerating brain.
Author contributions: W.L., A.B., O.L., and J.-Y.L. designed research; W.L., E.E., H.W., B.M.,
D.v.W., J.L., S.R., P.B., O.L., and J.-Y.L. performed research; W.L., H.W., A.B., O.L., and J.-Y.L.
analyzed data; and W.L., A.B., O.L., and J.-Y.L. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: L.S., Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center; and J.T., Center for iPS Cell
Research and Application, Kyoto University.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
See Commentary on page 6332.
1A.B., O.L., and J.-Y.L. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: anders.bjorklund@med.lu.se, Olle.
lindvall@med.lu.se, or Jia-Yi.Li@med.lu.se.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1605245113/-/DCSupplemental.
6544–6549
|
PNAS
|
June 7, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 23
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1605245113
 improved dramatically during the first 3 y, and L-dopa was with-
drawn at 32 mo (8, 10). Immunosuppressive treatment (prednis-
olone, azathioprine, and cyclosporine) was slowly tapered and
then stopped at 64 mo (11). Low-dose L-dopa (approximately
one-third of the preoperative dose) was reintroduced at 74 mo
owing to progression of symptoms axially and in the limbs ipsilateral
to the graft (7). The patient responded well to this medication, and
motor function and L-dopa dose remained unchanged thereafter.
At 10 y after transplantation, he showed a marked clinical benefit,
with virtually no rigidity, minor hypokinesia, intermittent and mild
resting tremor, and no on–off fluctuations (7). Off-medication
dyskinesias were not observed on clinical examinations during the
first decade posttransplantation, except for a slight nonprogressive
activity-related dyskinesia in the left foot that appeared during the
third posttransplantation year (7, 8, 10, 11). Post hoc analysis of
video recordings revealed nontroublesome, very mild off-medication
dyskinesias on the left side of the body (contralateral to the
graft) at 28 mo and 11 y after transplantation, but not at 12 mo
after transplantation (12, 13).
Between 10 and 24 y after transplantation, the patient was
followed as a regular patient at the neurology outpatient clinic. A
routine neurologic examination, including assessments of rigid-
ity, tremor, hypokinesia, and cognitive function, was performed
by the same neurologist every 6–9 mo. Motor function remained
Fig. 1.
Survival of transplanted dopaminergic neurons
in the three graft deposits. (A, B, and F) The graft de-
posits were rich in TH-positive neurons, arranged in
clusters at the periphery of the grafts. (C–E) Cell
counting revealed a total of ∼43,000 surviving dopa-
minergic neurons identified by their TH-positive immu-
nostaining and/or neuromelanin content. The surviving
neurons were categorized into three different pop-
ulations: cells with very dense TH staining and an
elaborate healthy morphology (arrow in C), cells with
weaker TH staining and poorly stained processes (ar-
rows in D and E), and cells with neuromelanin gran-
ules but no detectable TH staining (arrowheads in E).
The first and second types accounted for 76% of the
total number of surviving neurons. (Scale bars: 1 mm
in A, 0.5 mm in B, 20 μm in E.)
Li et al.
PNAS
|
June 7, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 23
|
6545
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
 unchanged until 12 y posttransplantation, when a low-dose
dopamine agonist was added for 2 y and the L-dopa dose was
increased to the preoperative level because of worsening
hypokinesia. The increased L-dopa doses were accompanied
by slight bilateral dyskinesias, but no off-medication dyskinesias
were noted.
The patient initially responded well to this change in medication
regimen, but starting in year 14 began to exhibit progressively
increasing rigidity and hypokinesia and a gradual loss of the
beneficial L-dopa response. Also in year 14, cognitive impairment
was first noted, and progressive dementia ensued. His condition
continued to deteriorate, and no graft-related motor improvement
remained at 18 y posttransplantation. At that time, the patient was
unable to walk and had lost the ability to swallow and speak. He
died of cardiac insufficiency at 24 y after transplantation. In-
formed consent for an autopsy was obtained in June 2009.
Detailed descriptions of the preoperative history, the trans-
plantation procedure, and the clinical course in this patient up to
10 y after surgery have been published previously (7, 8, 10).
Survival of Dopaminergic Neurons in the Grafts. Postmortem analysis
identified all three grafts in the dorsal putamen (Figs. 1 and 2A). A
total of 6,246, 10,728, and 25,854 surviving dopaminergic neurons
[tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-immunoreactive and/or neuromelanin-
containing] were found in the rostral, middle, and caudal grafts,
respectively (Fig. 1F). The cells formed clusters in the pe-
riphery of each graft (Fig. 1 A and B) (3, 6). The majority
(76%) of the neuromelanin-containing neurons within the graft
were TH-immunoreactive (Fig. 1 C–E) and associated with dense
networks of axonal/dendritic profiles. Approximately 24% of the
neurons that contained distinct neuromelanin granules had no
detectable TH immunoreactivity, suggesting down-regulation of
TH (Fig. 1E).
Complete Reinnervation of Grafted Putamen. The nontransplanted
putamen was devoid of TH-positive terminals (Figs. 2B and 3G),
consistent with the presence of few neuromelanin-positive neu-
rons bilaterally in the substantia nigra. In contrast, a rich network
of TH-positive fibers extended throughout the postcommissural
part of the transplanted putamen (Fig. 2 C–K). The TH-positive
fiber density showed a gradient extending from the core of the
grafts to the edge of the putamen (Fig. 3 A–C). In the area ad-
jacent to the graft (Fig. 3 A–E), the density of the TH-positive
innervation was comparable to that of the dopaminergic in-
nervation in the putamen of an age-matched control subject (age
85 y) who died from a nonneurologic disease (Fig. 3 F, H, and I;
dashed line in 3 A–C). A similar dense innervation was seen in
sections stained for vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2)
Fig. 2.
Overview of graft-derived TH-positive in-
nervation. (A) A 3D reconstruction showing the lo-
cation and size of three graft deposits in the caudal,
middle, and rostral putamen. (C–K) Extent of the
graft-derived
TH-positive innervation throughout
the postcommissural putamen (positions of the sec-
tions indicated in A, arranged in a caudal-to-rostral
order). (B) In contrast, the nongrafted putamen was
completely devoid of TH-positive fibers. (Scale bars:
1 mm in B, 0.5 mm in D, 20 μm in E–G, 5 mm in H–K.)
6546
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1605245113
Li et al.
 Fig. 3.
Complete reinnervation of grafted putamen. (A–E) From the core of the transplants, the graft-derived TH fibers extended throughout the post-
commissural putamen, with an innervation density close to normal in the dorsal part, with a decreasing gradient dorsoventrally (A and B) and in the medial
and lateral directions from the graft core (C–E). A′, B′, C′, and C′′ show quantification of TH-positive fiber density in the boxed regions (yellow bars), compared
with the nongrafted side (black bars) and the innervation density recorded from an age-matched non-PD brain (dashed lines, ±SEM). (F–I) Dark-field images
showing the dense varicose TH-positive innervation in the grafted putamen (H and I), similar in morphology and density to that seen in the non-PD brain (F).
The nongrafted putamen was completely devoid of TH-positive terminals; only scattered neuritic profiles with the appearance of truncated preterminal axons
remained (G). (Scale bars: 5 mm in C, 1 mm in D and E, 100 μm in F–I.)
Li et al.
PNAS
|
June 7, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 23
|
6547
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
 (Fig. S1). The precommissural part of the putamen, containing the
rostral graft, was paraffin-embedded. In the 4-μm-thick paraffin
sections through this part, TH immunostaining allowed visualiza-
tion of cells, but not of axons or terminals.
Microglia Reaction and Graft and Host Brain Pathology. Although
immunosuppression was terminated at 5 y posttransplantation, at
24 y there was no evidence of an ongoing immune/inflammatory
response. Quantitative analyses showed no difference between
transplanted putamen, nontransplanted putamen, and putamen
in the control subject in terms of numbers of IBA-1–positive
(recognizing both activated and nonactivated microglia) (Fig. S2
A–C) or CD68-positive cells (recognizing activated microglia)
(Fig. S2H) or in the morphology of microglia (14) (Fig. S2 D–G).
The patient exhibited a dense, near-normal dopaminergic
reinnervation derived from the grafts at 24 y posttransplantation.
Two main mechanisms likely underlie the gradual loss of the
L-dopa response and dopaminergic graft effects on motor func-
tion, as well as the progressive cognitive decline starting at 14 y
posttransplantation. First, a considerable number of synuclein-
opathy-related phenotypes were detected in the transplanted
neurons, reflecting pathology spread from the host brain to the
transplant, which could contribute to the decreasing functional
efficacy of a portion of the grafted dopaminergic neurons.
Quantitative analyses revealed ubiquitin- and α-synuclein–positive
Lewy bodies in 11% and 12% of transplanted neurons, re-
spectively (Fig. 4 B, C, and Q), higher than the percentages
reported previously (1.2–5% of transplanted neurons) in 12- to
22-y-old transplants (2, 3, 5).
Second, because the majority of the more than 40,000 grafted
neurons maintained TH immunoreactivity and provided exten-
sive dopaminergic reinnervation of the putamen, it is likely that
the complete lack of responsiveness to L-dopa and the con-
comitant loss of the graft effect were caused mainly by the severe
pathological changes postsynaptically, i.e., in the host brain
outside the graft. The patient displayed substantial general at-
rophy, with considerable widening of the lateral ventricles and
severe medial temporal lobe atrophy (Fig. 4A). Neuropathologically,
PD with dementia was diagnosed, owing to characteristics of
extensive Lewy pathology in all brain regions including the limbic
system and neocortex, corresponding to Braak stage 6 (15) (Fig.
4 D–P). Quantitative analysis showed the occurrence of Lewy
bodies in 20% of remaining pigment granule-containing neurons
in the host substantia nigra, higher than the percentage of Lewy
Fig. 4.
White matter atrophy and Lewy body pathology. (A) Luxol fast blue staining of a whole brain slice from the rostral part of the brain showing white
matter atrophy (asterisks) and enlarged lateral ventricles (LV). (B and C) Phosphorylated (S129) α-synuclein staining showing the presence of Lewy bodies in
the grafted cells (C) and in the host putamen surrounding the graft (B). (D–M) Quantification of phosphorylated α-synuclein showing that up to 12% of
neuromelanin-containing cells contain Lewy bodies. Extensive Lewy pathology appears in different brain regions, including amygdala (D and I), cortex (E and
J), hippocampus (F and K), substantia nigra (G and L) and the nongrafted putamen (H and M). (N–P) Confocal images illustrating a host nigral dopaminergic
neuron (red, TH positive) containing a typical Lewy body (green, α-synuclein positive). (Q) Ubiquitin-positive inclusions also appeared in the grafted cells. Up
to 11% of the neuromelanin-containing cells contained ubiquitin-positive aggregates. (Scale bars: 10 mm in A, 20 μm in B and C, 50 μm in D–H, 20 μm in I–Q.)
6548
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1605245113
Li et al.
 bodies in the grafted dopaminergic neurons (11–12%). α-Synu-
clein–positive neurites were widespread in the brain, commonly
involving limbic and neocortical regions, accompanied by de-
generation of white matter, which also was macroscopically
atrophic.
Conclusions
Our results demonstrate a complete graft-derived dopaminergic
reinnervation of the postcommissural putamen maintained for 24 y
after transplantation in a patient with PD. This finding is consistent
with observations in the same patient at 10 y posttransplantation,
when positron emission tomography revealed normalization of 18F-
dopa uptake and 11C-raclopride binding in the grafted putamen (7).
These findings provide the first evidence, to our knowledge, that a
rich dopaminergic innervation that develops over the first 3 y after
transplantation and gives rise to major motor improvement can be
preserved for a quarter of a century in PD. However, the clinical
outcome in this patient demonstrates that even such a viable graft
may lose its efficacy if widespread α-synucleinopathy and major
degenerative changes develop in the host brain.
Materials and Methods
The study protocol was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board of
Lund University (nr2014/631).
Postmortem Brain Preparation. The patient’s brain (obtained at 4 d post-
mortem) was fixed in 6% buffered formaldehyde solution for 1 mo and then
transferred to 20% sucrose solution. Regions were cut into coronal whole brain
sections and small specimens. The brain regions in sucrose were sliced into blocks
containing basal ganglia (four blocks from rostral to caudal), mesencephalon,
pons, cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and some other brain regions. The most
rostral block of the basal ganglia was paraffin-embedded, and the other three
blocks were used for frozen section preparation. All brain regions not set aside
for quantitative assessments were used for diagnostic analysis, including assess-
ment of synuclein pathology and viability of the tissue.
Immunohistochemistry. Basal ganglia blocks were cut into 40-μm-thick free-
floating frozen sections and 4-μm-thick slide-mounted paraffin sections. For
diaminobenzidine (DAB, Vector Laboratories) staining, free-floating sections
were quenched with 3% H2O2 in 10% methanol for 15 min before blocking (5%
normal horse or goat serum and 0.25% Triton X-100 in 0.1 M PBS, pH 7.4) for 1 h.
Sections were incubated in primary antibodies (diluted in 3% serum and 0.25%
Triton X-100 in PBS) overnight at 4 °C or room temperature. The antibodies used
in these experiments are listed in Table S1. After rinsing, biotinylated secondary
antibodies (horse anti-mouse, horse anti-rabbit, goat anti-rat; Jackson Immuno-
Research Laboratories) were applied for 2 h at room temperature, followed by
incubation with ABC complex (Vector Laboratories) for 30 min, rinsing, and then
incubation with DAB (Vector Laboratories) for 30 s or longer.
Paraffin sections were deparaffinized with xylene and then sequential
decreasing concentrations of ethanol before use in the immunohistochem-
istry procedure described above.
For immunofluorescence double labeling, two different primary anti-
bodies raised in rabbit and mouse followed by Alexa Fluor 488 anti-mouse
and Cy3-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibodies raised in donkey
(Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) were added. Autofluorescence
Eliminator reagent (EMD Millipore) was applied before mounting.
Before blocking, both free-floating frozen sections and slide-mounted paraffin
sections were treated with 10 mM citrate buffer (pH 6.4) to achieve effective
antigen retrieval. Free-floating sections were incubated in citrate buffer at 80 °C
for 30 min. Paraffin sections were boiled in citrate buffer in a microwave oven
for 14 min at 800 W. Sections were rinsed in PBS before staining.
Imaging and Quantification. Bright-field images were captured using an
Olympus DP73 camera, driven by CellSens software. Dark-field images were
obtained using an Olympus AX70 camera, driven by Leica DMI 6000B
software.
The numbers of surviving neuromelanin- and/or TH-positive grafted
neurons were assessed along each injection track in both paraffin and frozen
TH-stained sections. The Abercrombie formula was used to estimate the
number of cells in each graft. In this formula, cell diameter is assessed from an
average of 45 neurons in each graft (16).
The density of the TH-positive innervation was assessed using a modified
“sphere counting” technique of Mouton et al. (17, 18). Using a 100× oil-
immersion objective, in a bright-field microscope (Olympus AX70), a z-stack
was captured throughout the entire thickness of the section at 1-μm inter-
vals, using Velocity v5.4.2 image analysis software (PerkinElmer). Next, a
19-μm-diameter sphere (the “probe”) was created to measure fiber density
within the z-stack, and the points at which fibers passed through the cir-
cumference of the sphere at each z-level were counted. A score of 1 was
assigned for each fiber crossing. For each probe, the total number of fibers
passing through the sphere was expressed as a measure of fiber density
within the measured volume.
To quantify the VMAT2-positive fibers, staining intensity was measured
using ImageJ. Ten images from both grafted and nongrafted putamen were
chosen for analysis. Images were adjusted to gray scale, and a threshold was
set to exclude the background area. Intensity measurements were performed
within regions of interest and within the range of threshold limit (19).
For quantification of microglia, eight image fields were chosen from
sections of grafted and nongrafted putamen and from the putamen of a
normal subject immunostained with IBA1 antibody. The cell numbers in each
field were counted, and the IBA1-positive cells classified into four different
morphological phenotypes. In addition, five images were chosen in CD68-
stained sections and the total cell numbers in all fields were counted.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank A. Persson and A. Flasch for their excellent
technical support, and A. C. McCourt for the language editing. This work was
supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council, BAGADILICO-
Excellence in Parkinson and Huntington Research, the Swedish Parkinson
Foundation, the Torsten Söderberg Foundation, and the Strategic Research
Area MultiPark (multidisciplinary research focus on Parkinson’s disease at
Lund University).
1. Hallett PJ, et al. (2014) Long-term health of dopaminergic neuron transplants in
Parkinson’s disease patients. Cell Reports 7(6):1755–1761.
2. Kurowska Z, et al. (2011) Signs of degeneration in 12- to 22-year old grafts of mes-
encephalic dopamine neurons in patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Parkinsons Dis
1(1):83–92.
3. Kordower JH, Chu Y, Hauser RA, Freeman TB, Olanow CW (2008) Lewy body-like
pathology in long-term embryonic nigral transplants in Parkinson’s disease. Nat Med
14(5):504–506.
4. Li JY, et al. (2008) Lewy bodies in grafted neurons in subjects with Parkinson’s disease
suggest host-to-graft disease propagation. Nat Med 14(5):501–503.
5. Li JY, et al. (2010) Characterization of Lewy body pathology in 12- and 16-year-old
intrastriatal mesencephalic grafts surviving in a patient with Parkinson’s disease. Mov
Disord 25(8):1091–1096.
6. Mendez I, et al. (2005) Cell type analysis of functional fetal dopamine cell suspension
transplants in the striatum and substantia nigra of patients with Parkinson’s disease.
Brain 128(Pt 7):1498–1510.
7. Piccini P, et al. (1999) Dopamine release from nigral transplants visualized in vivo in a
Parkinson’s patient. Nat Neurosci 2(12):1137–1140.
8. Lindvall O, et al. (1992) Transplantation of fetal dopamine neurons in Parkinson’s
disease: One-year clinical and neurophysiological observations in two patients with
putaminal implants. Ann Neurol 31(2):155–165.
9. Langston JW, et al. (1992) Core assessment program for intracerebral transplantations
(CAPIT). Mov Disord 7(1):2–13.
10. Lindvall O, et al. (1994) Evidence for long-term survival and function of dopaminergic
grafts in progressive Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 35(2):172–180.
11. Wenning GK, et al. (1997) Short- and long-term survival and function of unilateral
intrastriatal dopaminergic grafts in Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 42(1):95–107.
12. Hagell P, et al. (2002) Dyskinesias following neural transplantation in Parkinson’s
disease. Nat Neurosci 5(7):627–628.
13. Piccini P, et al. (2005) Factors affecting the clinical outcome after neural trans-
plantation in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 128(Pt 12):2977–2986.
14. Thored P, et al. (2009) Long-term accumulation of microglia with proneurogenic
phenotype concomitant with persistent neurogenesis in adult subventricular zone
after stroke. Glia 57(8):835–849.
15. Braak H, Del Tredici K (2009) Neuroanatomy and pathology of sporadic Parkinson’s
disease. Adv Anat Embryol Cell Biol 201:1–119.
16. Abercrombie M (1946) Estimation of nuclear population from microtome sections.
Anat Rec 94:239–247.
17. Mouton PR, Gokhale AM, Ward NL, West MJ (2002) Stereological length estimation
using spherical probes. J Microsc 206(Pt 1):54–64.
18. Grealish S, et al. (2014) Human ESC-derived dopamine neurons show similar preclinical
efficacy and potency to fetal neurons when grafted in a rat model of Parkinson’s
disease. Cell Stem Cell 15(5):653–665.
19. Jensen EC (2013) Quantitative analysis of histological staining and fluorescence using
ImageJ. Anat Rec (Hoboken) 296(3):378–381.
Li et al.
PNAS
|
June 7, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 23
|
6549
NEUROSCIENCE
SEE COMMENTARY
