 Context Processing and the Neurobiology of Post-Traumatic 
Stress Disorder
Israel Liberzon, M.D.1,2 and James L. Abelson, M.D. Ph.D.1
1University of Michigan, Department of Psychiatry, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2700, USA
2Mental Health Service, Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor Health System, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA
Summary
Progress in clinical and affective neuroscience is redefining psychiatric illness as symptomatic 
expression of cellular/molecular dysfunctions in specific brain circuits. Post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) has been an exemplar of this progress, with improved understanding of 
neurobiological systems subserving fear learning, salience detection, and emotion regulation 
explaining much of its phenomenology and neurobiology. However, many features remain 
unexplained and a parsimonious model that more fully accounts for symptoms and the core 
neurobiology remains elusive. Contextual processing is a key modulatory function of 
hippocampal-prefrontal-thalamic circuitry, allowing organisms to disambiguate cues and derive 
situation-specific meaning from the world. We propose that dysregulation within this context-
processing circuit is at the core of PTSD pathophysiology, accounting for much of its 
phenomenology and most of its biological findings. Understanding core mechanisms like this, and 
their underlying neural circuits, will sharpen diagnostic precision and understanding of risk 
factors, enhancing our ability to develop preventive and “personalized” interventions.
Introduction
Historical perspective on the evolution of the PTSD concept
The past two decades have witnessed a fundamental transformation in our understanding and 
conceptualization of psychopathology. Cultural, clinical and scientific perspectives 
increasingly converge on a view of psychiatric disorders as dysfunction within specific 
components of the central nervous system, rather than “functional” disorders unrelated to 
neurobiological substrates. This shift has forced theoretical approaches to grapple with the 
biological underpinning of psychological processes, grounding our models of illness in 
growing understanding of neural circuits, cellular mechanisms and molecular processes. 
This conceptual shift has been challenging but also transformational in the study of post-
Corresponding author: Israel Liberzon, M.D., Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, 4250 Plymouth Road, Ann Arbor, 
MI, 48109-2700. Tel: 734 764 9527; liberzon@umich.edu. 
Conflicts of Interest: None
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Neuron. 2016 October 5; 92(1): 14–30. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2016.09.039.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which has seemed like a quintessentially psychological 
illness because it develops in reaction to specific environmental events.
The deleterious effects of severe trauma on the human psyche have been documented for 
centuries, generally depicted as “normative” responses to extraordinary circumstances. 
During the 19th and early 20th century, with emergence of psychiatry and psychology as 
clinical disciplines, the more debilitating consequences of trauma were re-conceptualized as 
clinical conditions, amenable to scientific inquiry and treatment (Jones, 2006). Conceptual 
challenges persisted, however, in sometimes controversial efforts to differentiate true 
psychopathology from normative responses to extreme circumstances. Resolution of these 
controversies awaits empirical documentation of causative neurobiological pathways, which 
will facilitate an understanding of how brain-based vulnerabilities lead to dysregulated 
psychological responses, and emergence of disorder-specific neurobiological abnormalities. 
PTSD has been studied intensively in recent decades; but despite important breakthroughs, 
we still lack a comprehensive, integrated model that coherently and parsimoniously explains 
both its phenomenology and its neurobiology. In this Perspective, we will describe PTSD as 
a clinical entity and touch on its well-established neurobiological findings. We will then try 
to organize emerging findings within existing conceptual frameworks, highlighting the value 
and limitations of those frameworks. Finally, we will describe a new framework, focused on 
the neural circuitry of context processing, which adds additional explanatory power and can 
potentially better integrate more of what we currently know about this important disorder.
PTSD as a clinical phenomenon
In the absence of scientific understanding of the pathophysiologic processes involved in 
PTSD development, the “gold standard” for defining it has been expert consensus as 
reflected in DSM criteria. These criteria have changed as clinical perspectives and scientific 
understanding have evolved, but they have remained phenomenological at their core since 
they are not yet grounded in biological processes and CNS neuro-circuitry. Despite periodic 
and sometimes substantial changes, there has been consistent agreement on three sets of 
symptom clusters considered characteristic of PTSD -- the intrusive, avoidant and 
hyperarousal clusters. These encompass unwanted and repeatedly re-experienced memories, 
sensations or dreams associated with the trauma (intrusive cluster); behavioral avoidance of 
trauma reminders; and excessive physiological arousal both in response to trauma cues or 
independently (e.g., sleep problems). These core clusters have been embraced in DSM III, 
IV, and 5, but other symptoms or criteria have been added (negative affect or reckless 
behavior in DSM-5), deleted (trauma outside of usual human experience), or included 
descriptively (shame/guilt, dissociation). Shifting criteria create scientific challenges to 
sample homogeneity across time and undermine clinical efficacy when targets for 
intervention are imprecise and continuously moving. As clinician-scientists, we will do 
better when we can target precisely defined dysregulations within specific neural circuits 
sub-serving particular, mechanistically relevant brain functions. As we identify underlying 
mechanisms rooted in specific neural circuits, diagnostic precision will sharpen and our 
ability to “personalize” interventions will be enhanced. For PTSD, we will also be able to go 
beyond treatment and apply preventive interventions before or immediately after trauma 
exposure.
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 2
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PTSD pathophysiology -- early studies
Prior to development of in vivo functional neuroimaging and valid animal models, allowing 
direct examination of CNS structure and function, biological study of PTSD focused on 
identification of abnormal peripheral markers. The best replicated of these have been 
psychophysiological indices of autonomic nervous system (ANS) function, and altered 
blood, saliva and urine concentration of stress hormones and catecholamines. Noradrenergic 
hyper-reactivity was the most reliably replicated finding in PTSD (Pitman et al., 2012), 
along with altered function of the hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis, where 
hypersensitivity of glucocorticoid receptors was accompanied by unaltered or decreased 
levels of circulating cortisol (Yehuda, 2001).
ANS abnormalities have been seen at rest and in reaction to trauma cue exposure (Agorastos 
et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2000; Lee and Theus, 2012; Minassian et al., 2014; Shah et al., 
2013) (for meta-analysis see Pole, 2007). Heart rate variability (HRV) is a sensitive index of 
ANS function (Bilchick and Berger, 2006; Malik and Camm, 1995) and reductions in it -- 
which suggest arousal dysregulation and autonomic inflexibility due to sympathetic 
overdrive and/or parasympathetic insufficiency (Shah et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2000) -- 
predict PTSD development whether measured prior to (Minassian et al., 2015) or 
immediately after trauma exposure (Shaikh al arab et al., 2012). PTSD is also associated 
with exaggerated catecholamine responses to trauma cues (Liberzon, Abelson, et al., 1999), 
and elevated levels of NE secretion in 24-hour urine collections (Wingenfeld et al., 2015). 
PTSD may thus reflect a “hyper-adrenergic state” (Krystal and Neumeister, 2009). 
Dysregulation is also evident in HPA axis function, but this appears more complex. The 
more consistent abnormalities involve enhanced dexamethasone suppression of cortisol 
(Yehuda et al., 1993), often attributed to glucocorticoid (GC) receptor hyper-sensitivity 
(Yehuda, 2001). This is supported by in vivo assay evidence of GC receptor hyper-sensitivity 
on lymphocytes (Yehuda, Boisoneau, et al., 1995). Measurement of cortisol levels in PTSD 
has generally suggested normal (Baker et al., 1999) or reduced levels (Yehuda et al., 1990; 
Yehuda, Kahana, et al., 1995; Yehuda et al., 1996), though there are some inconsistent 
reports (Meewisse et al., 2007; Lindley et al., 2004; Pitman and Orr, 1990). Reduced levels 
would be consistent with GC receptor hypersensitivity and early HPA axis “shutdown.”
Additional peripheral biological abnormalities linked to PTSD require replication, but are 
consistent with the changes reported above. These include alterations in serotonin systems 
(Southwick et al., 1999), DHEA (Yehuda et al., 2006), neuropeptide Y (Rasmusson et al., 
2000), neurosteroids (Morris et al., 2012), endocannabinoids (Wilker et al., 2016) and 
endogenous opioids (van der Kolk et al., 1989). Genetic work is rapidly expanding, and has 
identified PTSD-linked polymorphisms in genes encoding elements within the HPA axis 
(FKBP5 (Binder et al., 2008) and CRHR1 (Amstadter et al., 2011; White et al., 2013; Etkin 
et al., 2015)), and the sympatho-adrenal system (ADRB2 (Liberzon et al., 2014) and COMT 
(Boscarino et al., 2011)). These require confirmation in large-scale GWAS studies, but are 
consistent with the peripheral findings and suggest that PTSD is characterized by ANS 
hypersensitivity, associated with or leading to hyperadrenergic states, and a hypersensitive 
glucocorticoid receptor system. However, potential linkages between these abnormalities 
and the central mechanisms that drive them remain unknown.
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 3
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PTSD Neurocircuits
The development of in vivo neuroimaging methodologies and emergence of affective 
neuroscience have shifted the focus of contemporary neuropsychiatric inquiry to specific 
neural circuits that might govern the development of PTSD. Converging evidence from 
human imaging studies and animal models of complex behaviors like fear associated 
learning has generated powerful, neurocircuitry-based models of its pathophysiology. In the 
following sections, we selectively review the evolving picture, organizing it within dominant 
emergent models, identified as (1) an abnormal fear learning model (FL), which 
encompasses altered fear conditioning, fear extinction and fear generalization hypotheses; 
(2) an exaggerated threat detection model (TD) which postulates altered attention, 
anticipation, or “alarm” functions; and (3) a diminished emotional regulation/executive 
function (EF) model which postulates deficient regulatory capacity of cognitive/executive 
function regions over emotion generating limbic structures. These models are distinct in 
their focus on different aspects of PTSD psychopathology and different brain circuits, and 
may be driven by different cellular and molecular processes. However, they are not 
necessarily mutually exclusive. Each may explain different aspects of the disorder and a 
different subset of its biological abnormalities. We then identify important aspects of PTSD 
that are not explained by these models. Together they can explain much, but they invoke at 
least three independent pathophysiological processes while leaving some key symptoms and 
findings unexplained. This is not very parsimonious or conceptually satisfying. It is possible, 
or even likely, that PTSD is not a single homogeneous disorder but rather is a syndrome that 
“houses” within it a number of sub-categories with somewhat different presentations, 
endophenotypes, and pathophysiological mechanisms. Nevertheless the fact that important 
parts remain unexplained suggests a need for additional, alternative, or more mechanistically 
expansive models, which might parsimoniously explain both the complex symptomatology 
of PTSD and its existing neurobiological findings. Following discussion of the FL, TD and 
ER/EF models, we present a novel model that is both more general and more parsimonious, 
explaining multiple, not previously explained symptoms, and integrating neurobiological 
findings within the framework of a focal pathophysiologic process – altered contextual 
processing (CP). The CP model focuses our attention on dysfunction within specific brain 
circuits governing the critical adaptive function of contextualization – involving 
hippocampus (Hpc) prefrontal cortex (PFC), thalamic circuits that modulate activity in 
amygdala and other limbic and cortical regions. Prior work has identified clear abnormalities 
in PTSD in the Hpc, PFC, and amygdala, and we suggest that dysfunction within this circuit 
may be a key pathophysiologic process underlying expression of various PTSD symptoms, 
in a way that may be able to integrate the contributions of the altered noradrenergic and 
glucocorticoid functions that have been so consistently documented in this disorder.
Models of Pathophysiology
Abnormal Fear Learning
Learning what is threatening and what is safe is a critical, highly conserved function that had 
been extensively studied neurobiologically using fear associated learning paradigms and fear 
conditioning, fear extinction, and fear renewal, processes. PTSD has been conceptualized as 
heightened fear reactivity that develops in response to exposure to a threatening event, thus 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 4
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 abnormal fear learning was a logical initial place to look in searching for its neurobiology. 
Fear and safety learning studies have focused mechanistically on a key structure governing 
these processes – the amygdala – and the complex interplay within the amygdaloid complex 
(Figure 1) between various nuclei and cell types. Additional processes clearly participate in 
fear/safety learning, like memory consolidation, fear generalization, and extinction retention, 
and these involve additional brain mechanisms and regions (e.g., sensory cortex, thalamus, 
hippocampus, vmPFC). However, within the fear-associated learning framework, these 
processes and regions have been seen through the prism of their impact on amygdala 
function and output, rather than as key psychological/pathophysiologic processes shaping 
PTSD development. Other conceptual models (Threat Detection, Emotional Regulation and 
Contextual Processing) focus on these extra-amygdala processes as key contributors to 
PTSD pathophysiology, and they are discussed in subsequent sections.
Fear conditioning/acquisition—The basic circuits of fear conditioning/extinction have 
been well-worked out. They involve perceptual inputs to thalamus, then to amygdala and to 
effector systems (LeDoux et al., 1990). Within the amygdala, the basolateral complex 
(BLC), composed of the lateral (LA), basolateral (BLA), and accessory basal (AB) nuclei, 
provides the main input to the central nucleus (CE), which constitutes the “final relay” in 
coordinated outputs to physiological and behavioral effector systems that “express fear” 
(e.g., Campeau and Davis, 1995). The BLC is the region where associative fear learning, 
extinction learning, consolidation, and expression are thought to take place (Davis et al., 
1994; Fanselow and LeDoux, 1999; Davis, 1992). The cellular substrates for associative 
learning are long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) (Eichenbaum, 
1996; Matynia et al., 2002), whereby associative LTP at BLC principal neurons (Blair et al., 
2001; Goosens and Maren, 2002) creates a neural link between an unconditioned stimulus 
(US) and a conditioned stimulus (CS). The phenomenology of PTSD readily suggests 
disruption in this process, since so many “CSs” (e.g., a backfiring car) seem to be 
inappropriately linked to the sense of threat carried by traumatic memories. However, BLC 
sub-networks also have specific connections with prefrontal cortical regions that modulate 
fear expression, including prelimbic and infralimbic areas. Specific BLC neurons can 
activate prelimbic PFC during fear learning, while others target infralimbic PFC during 
extinction (Senn et al., 2014). The BLC can thus provide higher level processors with 
“information” about what is dangerous and what is safe, potentially for use in future 
situations that are ambiguous but carry threat potential.
Though intuitively appealing, evidence that PTSD is a disorder of fear conditioning itself is 
sparse. Trauma exposure itself is readily thought of as an explicit conditioning episode 
(Elzinga and Bremner, 2002; Jovanovic and Ressler, 2010; VanElzakker et al., 2014), but 
evidence for abnormalities in fear acquisition in PTSD is conflicting. In typical differential 
fear conditioning paradigms, where subjects are presented with a US-predicting CS (CS+) 
and a non-US-predicting CS (CS−), which acts as a safety signal (Lissek et al., 2005), PTSD 
patients have difficulty differentiating safety from threat (Grillon et al., 1998; Grillon, 2002), 
but they generally do not show abnormal acquisition of the conditioned response (to CS+) 
itself (Garfinkel et al., 2014; Milad et al., 2009). Enhanced fear potentiated startle or skin 
conductance responses have been reported during fear learning by some (Morgan et al., 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 5
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1995; Orr et al., 2000; Peri et al., 2000), but not others (Blechert et al., 2007; Milad et al., 
2008; Milad et al., 2009). Trauma that can cause PTSD is much more severe than the simple 
US “threats” used in laboratory studies, but these studies do suggest that the basic ability to 
acquire new fear conditioned responses is not inherently abnormal in PTSD.
Fear Extinction—Alternatively, it has been proposed that fear associative learning deficits 
in PTSD stem from abnormalities in extinction or safety learning rather than fear 
conditioning. A key feature of PTSD is inability to learn that cues once associated with 
trauma are no longer dangerous -- a process akin to fear extinction in animal models. 
Dysregulation of extinction, undermining ability to learn that something once dangerous is 
now safe, may contribute to safety learning deficits in PTSD (Jovanovic et al., 2012). In 
general, extinction is less robust than conditioning and does not erase an established fear 
memory. Rather, it creates a safety memory trace that “overlays” the fear memory trace. It is 
context specific, decays with time, and involves learned inhibition of fear expression. It is 
mediated by distinct and dedicated pathways within BLC (Jasnow et al., 2013). 
Dysregulation in the topographically organized BLC output systems may induce imbalances 
within the larger fear-on and extinction circuits, leading to extinction deficits and persistence 
of fear memories. Indeed, a number of fear extinction studies report heightened autonomic 
reactions during extinction learning in PTSD, including increased skin conductance and 
heart rate and sustained fear-potentiated startle (Orr et al., 2000; Peri et al., 2000; Blechert et 
al., 2007; Norrholm et al., 2011).
Problems with safety signal learning and inability to modulate fear responses with safety 
cues (Jovanovic et al., 2009; Jovanovic et al., 2012) also suggest impairment in inhibition of 
fear pathways. However, other work suggests intact extinction learning in PTSD, but 
impaired recall of fear extinction memories 24 hours later (Garfinkel et al., 2014; Milad et 
al., 2009). Intact extinction recall, however, requires cortical inputs from vmPFC to 
amygdala (Quirk and Mueller, 2008), and intact safety learning after fear conditioning 
involves inputs from vmPFC and hippocampus (Corcoran and Quirk, 2007). Prefrontal 
regions have well-traced inputs to the amygdala through which they can amplify (prelimibic) 
or inhibit (infralimbic) fear expression (Sierra-Mercado et al., 2011). The human homologue 
of IL (vmPFC) is linked to extinction recall and is smaller in volume and hypo-responsive in 
PTSD patients (Bremner et al., 2008). Reduced activation of this area is associated with 
impaired fear inhibition (Jovanovic et al., 2012), raising the possibility that core 
pathophysiologic processes contributing to deficits in extinction retention may be located in 
regions outside amygdala and involve neuro-behavioral functions beyond basic fear 
associated learning processes.
Fear generalization—Fear generalization is another aspect of fear learning implicated in 
PTSD. Fear generalization occurs when, following conditioning, stimuli other than the CS, 
but which share some similarities with CS, elicit a fear-related response. This is an adaptive 
process that facilitates protective responses to situations that are similar to but not identical 
with situations previously learned to be dangerous (Shepard, 1987). Disruption in 
generalization (e.g., over-generalization) could contribute to excessive fear expression in 
PTSD (Lissek and van Meurs, 2015). Generalization is demonstrated by stimulus “response 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 6
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 gradients” -- if during fear conditioning, the CS+ and CS− are chosen to represent two ends 
along a continuum, fear responses occur to the CS+ and to stimuli close to it on the 
continuum, with a declining response gradient as the cues approach the CS- end (Lissek et 
al., 2008). Importantly, the intensity of the US impacts the breadth of generalization beyond 
the CS+ (Baldi et al., 2004; Ghosh and Chattarji, 2015). A very strong US produces broad 
generalization. During PTSD-generative traumatic exposure the US (e.g., threat to life) may 
be sufficient to lead to broad generalization, undermining discrimination between dangerous 
and safe cues, contributing to high reactivity to “reminders” that bear any resemblance to 
trauma cues.
Neurobiological studies of generalization in fear conditioning paradigms have been sparse 
(Likhtik and Paz, 2015). Typical fear conditioning work uses easily discriminable stimuli to 
ensure strong CS+ vs. CS− differentiation, avoiding potential for generalization (Genud-
Gabai et al., 2013). Generalization studies demonstrate neuronally instantiated “tuning 
curves” that differentiate tones of differing frequencies within auditory cortex, auditory 
thalamus, and amygdala (Bordi and LeDoux, 1994; Resnik and Paz, 2015; Bordi and 
LeDoux, 1992). Multiple amygdalar regions are involved, including CE (Ciocchi et al., 
2010), other subnuclei (Shaban et al., 2006), and LA (Ghosh and Chattarji, 2015). The 
amygdala appears to play a role in generating graded generalization curves (Schechtman et 
al., 2010; Resnik et al., 2011; Laufer and Paz, 2012), and amygdala neurons show tuning 
properties that could account for behavioral generalization (Resnik and Paz, 2015), perhaps 
contributing to the broad fear generalization gradients suggested for PTSD. However, 
amygdala changes in these studies could be due to inputs coming from other brain regions. 
For example, there is conflicting evidence about the role of auditory cortex in stimulus 
discrimination and in overgeneralization (Aizenberg and Geffen, 2013; Letzkus et al., 2011). 
Complex interconnections make it difficult to isolate specific behavioral dysfunction, like 
overgeneralization, to disruptions at highly specific locations, and the complete circuit that 
mediates generalization of more complex real-life stimuli might involve interactions 
between microcircuits within the amygdala (Duvarci and Pare, 2014), the prefrontal-cortex 
(Likhtik et al., 2014; Klavir et al., 2013; Chavez et al., 2009; Dunsmoor et al., 2011; Courtin 
et al., 2014), hippocampus (Xu and Sudhof, 2013; Bergado-Acosta et al., 2008; Kaouane et 
al., 2012), and other regions.
Neuroimaging work has begun to examine the human neurocircuitry of fear generalization, 
revealing that activity in the amygdala and insula correlate selectively with generalized 
SCRs, and that functional connectivity between the amygdala and extra-striate visual cortex 
was selectively enhanced for a perceptually similar cue of high emotional intensity that was 
never paired with US (Dunsmoor et al., 2011). This suggests that amygdala-cortical 
communication might be active during generalization. Lissek et al. (2013) reported that 
gradients of fMRI activity are present in insula and dmPFC, with activity levels declining as 
similarity to CS+ declined, with a reverse gradient in vmPFC and hippocampus, where 
activity is greatest to the safety cue. Clinically, some evidence shows that PTSD patients 
show a failure to discriminate CS+ (threat) from CS− (safety), perhaps due to 
overgeneralization (Lissek et al., 2005; Jovanovic et al., 2012). However, there is very little 
experimental evidence specifically demonstrating overly broad generalization gradients in 
PTSD (Lissek and van Meurs, 2015). It is often assumed that patients with PTSD would 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 7
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exhibit broad generalization gradients based on their symptom profiles, but empirical 
documentation is still needed to substantiate this model.
Exaggerated Threat Detection (TD)
Disruptions in Fear/Safety learning or fear generalization can increase reactivity to 
potentially threatening stimuli. However, threat hyper-reactivity can also stem from 
processes independent of fear learning. One alternative potential source is in threat detection 
systems. An ability to detect “salience” in the environment, whether in the realm of threat or 
reward, is essential for survival, which requires a rapid detection system that can focus 
attention on salient cues, recruit multiple homeostatic systems to respond to them, and 
trigger automatic motor routines (Phelps and LeDoux, 2005). Hypersensitive salience 
detection could heighten vigilance and threat reactivity in PTSD, and activate fear and 
protective responses disproportionate to actual threats. Exaggerated threat detection has in 
fact been implicated in PTSD pathophysiology by some investigators (for review, see Shin 
and Liberzon, 2010; Sripada et al., 2012).
Functional neuroimaging and resting state studies have identified an interconnected network 
of brain regions, including amygdala, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and insula/
operculum (Seeley et al., 2007) that activate when salience is detected in the environment 
(Figure 2). The amygdala’s role in threat detection and fear expression (Ohman, 2005) is 
well established (see above), but human fMRI work has also demonstrated amygdala 
reactivity to positive, rewarding or social stimuli (e.g., human faces; Javanbakht et al., 2015). 
Similarly, dACC is implicated in error and conflict detection, and in autonomic arousal 
(Critchley, 2004); and anterior insula/operculum activity is associated with anticipation of 
meaningful events (Simmons et al., 2004), monitoring of internal states (Craig, 2009), and 
pain perception (Craig, 2003). Functional connectivity between regions of this network 
creates a circuit, identified as a Salience Network (SN), which activates in response to 
emotionally arousing information (Seeley et al., 2007). Hyper-reactivity in the nodes of this 
network, or enhanced connectivity between these nodes, could contribute to hypervigilance, 
exaggerated threat detection, exaggerated physiological reactivity and other core symptoms 
of PTSD.
Enhanced threat sensitivity expressed as hypervigilance is indeed a fundamental feature of 
PTSD. PTSD patients are biased to attend to threat (Buckley et al., 2000), at both 
supraliminal (Bryant and Harvey, 1995) and subliminal (Harvey et al., 1996) levels. Insula 
appears to be hyperactive in PTSD during anticipation (Lanius et al., 2007; R. J. L. Lindauer 
et al., 2008; Aupperle et al., 2012); and increased activation by threat cues is seen in the 
amygdala (Liberzon, Taylor, et al., 1999; Shin et al., 2004; Bryant et al., 2008). There is 
evidence that the SN might be hypersensitive to threat in PTSD patients even before trauma 
exposure, and this sensitivity can predict subsequent symptom development (Admon et al., 
2009). Increased dACC reactivity is also seen in PTSD in response to conditioned fear cues 
(Rougemont-Bucking et al., 2011), demonstrating heightened sensitivity in all of the main 
nodes of the salience network. Excessive activity in all three nodes (dACC, insula and 
amygdala) predicted poor response to treatment (van Rooij et al., 2016), suggesting that 
enhanced SN activity might be involved in symptom persistence. Resting state connectivity 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 8
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 studies have also demonstrated hyper-connectivity within SN regions, involving amygdala, 
insula, and ACC (Sripada et al., 2012). Such connectivity could enhance processing of threat 
cues. There thus may be sensitivities at multiple levels within the SN that could contribute to 
enhanced fear behaviors.
On the cellular/molecular level there is little information on specific processes supporting 
exaggerated Salience or Threat Detection. Neuronal sensitization within the amygdala to 
repeated cue exposure is one potential pathway to amygdala hyper-reactivity (Sandi and 
Richter-Levin, 2009; Li et al., 2010), but this has not yet been directly linked to enhanced 
Threat Detection or altered SN activity. A key challenge is the lack of animal models of SN 
hyperactivity, with amygdala reactivity models primarily focusing on conditioning and 
extinction processes. Another potential pathway to enhanced threat detection in PTSD 
patients could involve their peripheral ANS abnormalities. For example, low heart rate 
variability, which may reflect sympathetic-parasympathetic imbalance, is associated with 
increased threat detection (Melzig et al., 2009; Sevenster et al., 2015) and with risk for 
development of PTSD (Minassian et al., 2015). Abnormalities in adrenergic tone or 
glucocorticoids could also contribute to enhanced Threat Detection, as noradrenergic 
hyperactivity is linked to increased amygdala reactivity (Neumeister et al., 2006) and 
glucocorticoid receptors, which are abundant in amygdala, have been linked to enhanced 
anxiety and fear (Schulkin et al., 2005), but direct evidence for a mechanistic pathway 
through these systems to enhanced threat detection in PTSD is still missing.
Diminished Executive Function and Emotion Regulation
An additional mechanism that could contribute to PTSD pathophysiology involves 
regulatory processes that modulate responses to emotionally evocative stimuli like threat. 
Successful navigation in daily life, including avoidance of danger, requires holding 
information in mind, resisting distractors, switching between tasks, and planning -- tasks that 
are considered components of Executive Function (EF). EF is a family of capacities by 
which we manage cognitive processes, and includes mechanisms of working memory, 
attention, inhibition, and task shifting. Deficits in multiple EF domains are seen in 
psychiatric disorders and associated with poor social and occupational functioning (Chen 
and Etkin, 2013). The same mechanisms, and their neural substrates, are also involved in 
regulation of emotions (ER), in that these cognitive resources are used to modulate 
emotionally driven behavior. There are multiple aspects of PTSD that could stem from 
deficits in EF/ER, including memory deficits, exaggerated emotional responses to salient 
cues, irritability and impulsivity.
Neural activity in dorsal cortical networks, like fronto-parietal attentional networks, has been 
linked to EF (Niendam et al., 2012). EF participates in shifting neural engagement from a 
default mode network (DMN), involved in internally-oriented self-directed mentation, to 
salience and task networks. Imbalance and discoordination between DMN and task networks 
may contribute to lapses in attention and decrements in performance (Anticevic et al., 2012), 
as well as to psychiatric disorders (Sheline et al., 2009; Chen and Etkin, 2013; Bartova et al., 
2015). ER involves some of the same cognitive control systems, such as memory and 
attention (Ochsner et al., 2002; Ochsner et al., 2012), supporting the notion of a common set 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 9
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of prefrontal regions are implicated in the regulation of affective and non-affective responses 
(Figure 3). For example, the lPFC and mPFC regions activated by emotional regulation 
(Ochsner et al., 2002) overlap with those activated in working memory and response 
selection tasks (Miller and Cohen, 2001; Smith and Jonides, 1999; Buhle et al., 2014; Kohn 
et al., 2014). The most commonly studied type of emotion regulation is reappraisal, which 
involves conscious, volitional efforts to modulate emotional responses by imposing a “less 
emotional” cognitive frame on them. In concert with notion of common EF/ER mechanisms, 
reappraisal activates overlapping regions including dlPFC, vlPFC, dmPFC, dACC, lateral 
orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and the posterior parietal lobe (Buhle et al., 2014; Phan et al., 
2005).
There is considerable face validity to the idea that deficits in cognitive control and associated 
top-down inhibitory modulation of autonomic and emotional activation areas might play a 
role in PTSD. Deficits in EF and/or ER may contribute to functional impairment following 
trauma and underlie some manifestations of PTSD, including biased attention to trauma 
cues, heightened emotionality, deficits in memory processes, irritability and impulsivity 
(Powers et al., 2015). There is in fact growing evidence of dysfunction within EF/ER circuits 
in PTSD patients. For example, EF-related networks show impaired within-network 
connectivity in dorsal attention frontoparietal regions in PTSD (Huemer et al., Network 
architectural and gene expression mechanisms of cognitive dysfunction: insights from post-
traumatic stress disorder; under review) and others have reported altered connectivity within 
and between EF networks in PTSD (Sripada et al., 2012; Chen and Etkin, 2013; Du et al., 
2015; Dunkley et al., 2015; Kaiser et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015). However, few PTSD 
studies have examined volitional ER. Only two imaging studies examined cognitive 
reappraisal in PTSD, with evidence suggesting generally reduced lateral and medial 
prefrontal activation during reappraisal (Rabinak et al., 2014; New et al., 2009). Reappraisal-
related changes were also examined before and after PTSD treatment, with evidence that 
treatment with selective serotonin inhibitors can ameliorate initial deficits in ER prefrontal 
brain function, and pretreatment ER-region deficits negatively predict treatment-related 
gains (MacNamara et al., 2016).
The cellular/molecular mechanisms involved in deficient ER/EF are unknown, largely due to 
the fact that valid animal models of volitional (and involuntary) emotional regulation are yet 
to be developed. Noradrenergic hyper-reactivity, postulated to be characteristic of PTSD, has 
been linked to diminished frontal lobe-mediated executive capacities (e.g., working memory; 
Arnsten, 2009), and could contribute to diminished EF. Changes in ANS have been 
associated with reduced performance in a number of EF tasks (e.g., working memory, 
attention) (Thayer et al., 2009). Whether the peripheral changes “drive” these deficits in 
CNS function or are downstream effects that feed back is not known. In either case, they 
could be contributing to EF abnormalities in PTSD. However, while ER deficits are 
intuitively appealing and somewhat promising based on pilot data, direct evidence for them 
as contributing factors to PTSD pathophysiology, using established ER paradigms, remains 
sparse.
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 10
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Explanatory Gaps and Remaining Questions
The Fear Learning/Generalization, Threat Detection and Emotional Regulation models can 
account for many of the signs and symptoms of PTSD. Abnormal Fear Learning and 
generalization readily account for key features like the dominance of fear over safety 
memories, generalization of fear responses to any “trauma-related” stimuli, exaggerated 
psychophysiologic and adrenergic reactivity, and hypervigilance. Insofar as avoidance of 
trauma reminders represents a “defensive” strategy to prevent recurrence of these strong fear 
responses, avoidance symptoms could be explained as bi-products of altered fear learning. 
The Abnormal Fear Learning model, however, does not offer satisfying explanations for 
other key PTSD features such as spontaneous (non cue-triggered) intrusions, nightmares and 
other sleep disturbances, emotional numbing or pervasive negative affect, or the behavioral 
recklessness often seen in PTSD, leading to re-traumatization. Emotional numbing and re-
exposure to traumatic environments are in fact particularly difficult to reconcile with a view 
of PTSD as a disorder of exaggerated fear and diminished safety learning.
Exaggerated Threat Detection and Diminished EF/ER models, on the other hand, offer 
plausible explanation for the presence of threat-focused attentional bias, working memory 
deficits and hyperarousal in PTSD, which could lead to hypervigilance, and exaggerated 
emotional and physiologic responses. Exaggerated emotional responses and failure to 
regulate emotions could contribute to pervasive anger and impulsivity. They could also 
generate avoidance behavior and contribute to the emergence of intrusive memories in 
response to traumatic reminder cues. These models, however, have difficulty explaining the 
pervasiveness of trauma memories and, like the FL model, can not explain spontaneous 
recollections and intrusions, sleep abnormalities, emotional numbing or re-traumatization.
The main PTSD symptoms left unexplained by these three models are spontaneous (non-
cued) recollections, nightmares and other sleep abnormalities, emotional numbing and 
reckless behavior leading to re-traumatization. Neurobiologically, they can account for 
exaggerated psychophysiologic reactivity and a hyperadrenergic state, triggered by trauma 
or trauma-like cues. However, they cannot readily integrate other neurobiologic 
abnormalties, such as structural hippocampal deficits, HPA axis dysregulation, genetic risk 
factors like FKBP5 or ADRB2, and altered sleep physiology. These models also require a 
number of independent pathophysiologic processes in several areas of the CNS to explain as 
much as they can explain, while leaving important symptoms and findings unexplained. 
Furthermore, as described above, existing empirical evidence in support of the proposed 
mechanisms is limited in some places and often contradictory. PTSD could actually be a 
collection of somewhat distinct neurobiological entities. If so, the FL, TD and EF models 
might correspond to specific disorder subtypes. However, given the empirical gaps noted and 
important phenomenological and neurobiological features still unexplained, ongoing pursuit 
of a more general and parsimonious explanation of PTSD’s pathophysiology is clearly still 
warranted.
A New Model: Deficient Context Processing
In search of a more comprehensive and parsimonious explanation of the full range of PTSD 
symptoms and the disorder’s neurobiology, we have hypothesized a core pathophysiological 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 11
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 deficit within neural circuits that process the contextual information that is used to modulate 
emotional responses (Liberzon and Sripada, 2008; Maren et al., 2013). This model is firmly 
rooted in prior work but it expands upon previous models, by reframing them through the 
lens of context processing, in an effort to better integrate existing understanding and 
evidence with the “missing pieces” that remain unexplained.
Functionally, the concept of context has been used to refer to general cognitive, semantic or 
‘emotional’ backgrounds that allow one to derive situation-informed meaning from the 
world (Maren et al., 2013). Contexts are composed of many stimulus elements that are 
assembled into configural, or ‘contextual’, representations, perceived as a “gestalt” and 
acquired rapidly (Maren et al., 2013). Salient cues may require radically different responses 
in different situations – the critical function of context processing is to match cued responses 
to the “needs” of a given situation or context (Maren et al., 2013). For example, spotting a 
mountain lion in one’s back yard is life threatening, but in a zoo it is exciting (even though 
the safety features can be well hidden). Contextual information allows us to freeze, flee, or 
enjoy the view of the lion, depending on the situation. Considering the central role of context 
in the flexible representation and retrieval of information and in resolving ambiguity, 
contextual processing deficits would lead to cue-focused behavioral reactivity, which is less 
flexible and more likely to be situationally inappropriate, potentially contributing to a broad 
range of PTSD symptoms.
The neural circuits involved in context processing have been extensively studied, largely 
through studies of associative learning (Bouton, 1993, 1994), building foundation for CP 
models of psychopathology by revealing the fundamental mechanisms whereby contexts are 
encoded and how they modulate memory retrieval (Corcoran and Maren, 2001). These 
studies have shown that the hippocampus plays a critical role in contextual learning and 
memory (Holland and Bouton, 1999), which is consistent with its role in episodic memory 
and spatial representation. Unique contextual representations are established in the 
hippocampus by population coding of spatial properties of the environment, integrating them 
with non-spatial information (e.g., time, prior experience, internal states) into a gestalt that 
becomes context (Hayman et al., 2003). Converging findings from animal and human studies 
(Alvarez et al., 2008; Marschner et al., 2008) indicate that the role of the hippocampus is 
critical, although not exclusive, in context encoding, and that hippocampal and prefrontal 
cortical regions interact in context retrieval (Figure 4). The hippocampus establishes new 
memory representations, minimizing overlap with previous memories, but it also helps to 
retrieve old memory based on partial information. These processes are known as pattern 
separation and pattern completion, respectively (see Yassa and Stark, 2011 for review). The 
ability to differentiate the zoo’s diorama from a real mountain landscape, even though the 
former was designed to invoke the latter, depends upon this process of pattern separation, 
helping to differentiate safety from threat. In contrast, pattern completion processes allow 
one to retrieve memory based on partial or incomplete information, for example, allowing 
one to take quick, protective action with just a glimpse of a “lion-like” silhouette in the 
backyard. These processes have clear relevance to PTSD, where a bias towards pattern 
completion in the face of a partial threat cue, and difficulty “reading” the contextual nuances 
needed for pattern separation, would make it difficult to discriminate threat from safety and 
would foster threat generalization (Kheirbek and Hen, 2014; Kheirbek et al., 2012), 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 12
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contributing to hypervigilance and hyperarousal. Impairment in hippocampal subregions 
involved in pattern separation (i.e., the dentate gyrus) could result in recurrent retrieval of 
trauma memories in response to partial cues, leading to generalized fear responses that are 
incongruous with the current context.
The mPFC is another critical component of context processing circuitry. It is highly 
interconnected with hippocampus, and bidirectional interactions between hippocampus and 
mPFC have been implicated in contextual memory and in PTSD (Jin and Maren, 2015). 
Ensembles of mPFC neurons track environmental contexts (Hyman et al., 2012) and 
integrate contextual recognition and the context-US association during fear associated 
learning (Zelikowsky et al., 2014). Lesions in mPFC disrupt remote context memory (Quinn 
et al., 2008), suggesting that mPFC helps maintain context representations over time, since 
the role of the hippocampus in this function appears to be time-limited (see Sutherland and 
Lehmann, 2011). While ventral hippocampus is thought to encode non-spatial contextual 
information such as odors, bodily states, and emotions (Pennartz et al., 2011), mPFC creates 
associations between events, contexts, locations, and emotional responses (Euston et al., 
2012). Preston & Eichenbaum (2013) suggest that while hippocampus forms novel 
memories, the prefrontal cortex “…accumulates features of related memories that compose 
the ‘context’ of a set of connected experiences” (p. 766). In this role, mPFC both guides 
appropriate memory retrieval by using the context to resolve conflicting information, and 
participates in memory formation by resolving conflicts between pre-existing schemas and 
new events. This process of organizing multiple features into a single, coherent 
representation, integrating temporal and spatial information, involves theta-oscillations that 
functionally bind hippocampus and PFC (Herweg et al., 2016). If this system is not working 
well, (being a bit “unmoored” in time and space) it could create vulnerability to over-react to 
potential indicators of threat, enhancing vigilance, providing face validity for potential 
relevance to PTSD.
Indeed, evidence is accumulating that dysfunction within this interconnected context 
processing circuitry -- which involves hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, thalamus, and 
amygdala -- may play a central role in the pathophysiology of PTSD. With direct relevance 
to fear and safety learning, human studies have confirmed the engagement of mPFC regions 
(including subgenual ACC, vmPFC and OFC) (Gottfried and Dolan, 2004; Phelps et al., 
2004; Lang et al., 2009), dACC, rostral mPFC (LaBar et al., 1998; Veit et al., 2002; 
Gottfried and Dolan, 2004; Knight et al., 2004; Phelps et al., 2004; Milad et al., 2007; Lang 
et al., 2009), and hippocampus (Knight et al., 2004) in extinction of fear memory, a process 
that is inherently context dependent. At the same time, diminished mPFC signal had been 
repeatedly demonstrated in PTSD and diminished vmPFC signal is linked to PTSD deficits 
in extinction recall/retention (Shin and Liberzon, 2010; Etkin and Wager, 2007). In concert, 
abnormalities in processing of contextual information can lead to cue-elicited fear responses, 
in association with hypo-activation in vmPFC and hyper-activation of dACC (Rougemont-
Bucking et al., 2011). Diminished vmPFC activation is also seen during a Go/NoGo 
“inhibitory” task in PTSD subjects, and linked to enhanced fear-potentiated startle responses 
during safety signal learning (Jovanovic et al., 2013). Together, this emerging evidence 
suggested to us that abnormalities seen in PTSD in retention of extinction or in fear renewal, 
or failure to learn or recall safety cues, could all stem from a general deficit in contextual 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 13
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 processing, rooted in a hippocampal-prefrontal-thalamic circuitry dysfunction. As an initial 
test of this hypothesis, we extended a standard conditioning/extinction paradigm into a 
renewal phase, making the counter-intuitive prediction that PTSD patients would fail to 
detect “danger” signals, despite their continuous hypervigilance for threat, if those signals 
were contextual in nature. We hypothesized that extinction recall deficits and fear renewal 
deficits would both be present due to disrupted hippocampal functioning, since both 
extinction recall and fear renewal are context- and hippocampal-dependent processes. If 
PTSD patients indeed exhibit such a general deficit, then when presented again with the 
original conditioning context in a renewal test, they would “fail” to display an appropriate 
return of the conditioned fear response, similar to their reported inability to recall extinction 
when exposed to the extinction context. This is exactly what happened (Figure 5, bottom 
panel). PTSD patients failed to “properly” recall extinction and failed to renew conditioned 
fear, and they also displayed reduced activation in the hippocampus and vmPFC (Garfinkel 
et al., 2014).
Subsequent studies from other laboratories have corroborated contextual processing deficits 
in PTSD. In a similar SCR fear conditioning paradigm, PTSD patients failed to “properly” 
renew conditioned fear when re-exposed to the conditioning context following full 
extinction that occurred 24 hours after the conditioning phase (Shvil et al., 2014: Impaired 
contextual modulation in post-traumatic stress disorder; presented at the 34th annual 
meeting of the Anxiety & Depression Association of America, March 28th, 2014). Another 
laboratory further corroborated these results by showing that PTSD patients failed to utilize 
a contextual “warning” cue in a stop signal anticipation task, supporting the idea that the 
context processing deficit in PTSD is general and not isolated to fear-processing (van Rooij 
et al., 2015).
In addition to modulating fear associated learning, contextual processing plays a key role in 
shaping memory processes, emotional responses and regulation, and in shaping flexible 
behavioral choices. As such, a context processing deficit based in dysfunction of a 
hippocampal-prefrontal-thalamic network could contribute to multiple aspect of post-
traumatic psychopathology, beyond the documented specific deficits in extinction retention 
and fear renewal, and their associated symptomatology. For example, mPFC-Hpc circuitry 
creates associations between contexts, events, and corresponding emotional responses 
(Euston et al., 2012; Preston and Eichenbaum, 2013), so dysfunction in this system could 
link erroneous emotional contexts to a given situation, triggering emotional responses that 
are “inappropriate”. For example erroneous retrieval of an intensely negative emotional 
context of loss and pain during normally joyful/happy events will prevent experiencing the 
joyful event as happy, which can be experienced as “emotional numbing”. Similarly, 
excessive anger can emerge, following relatively innocuous triggers, if the context is 
perceived as dangerous or threatening. If context is identified as “unsafe”, attention is 
focused on potential threat cues, leading to hypervigilance; but if contextual information that 
should alert one to danger is missed, this might lead to recklessness and retraumatization. 
Being “unmoored” from current contexts that keeps trauma memories from emerging in 
response to partial cues can lead to the emergence of intrusive memories. These 
hypothesized links between CP and a broad range of PTSD symptomology are speculative, 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 14
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and extensive work is needed to test these ideas, but initial support linking connectivity 
within the CP circuit to specific PTSD symptoms has been emerging. For example, we have 
shown that diminished vmPFC/hippocampus connectivity at rest was associated with the 
severity of each of the three PTSD symptom clusters (i.e. intrusive, avoidant and 
hyperarousal), and that enhanced connectivity of these regions with SN regions was 
associated specifically with enhanced hyperarousal symptoms (Sripada et al., 2012). A more 
recent resting state connectivity study replicated these findings, reporting that re-
experiencing symptoms in PTSD are linked to “disconnection” of hippocampus from right 
PFC, interpreted by the authors as a failure of contextualization and associated 
overgeneralization of trauma memories (Spielberg et al., 2015).
In addition to providing a broad and parsimonious explanation of PTSD symptoms, the CP 
model also provides a robust framework for integrating much of what is known, 
neurobiologically, about this disorder. The cellular and molecular processes that underlie 
context-processing have been revealed in animal studies (Maren et al., 2013). These data, 
coupled with data from animal models of PTSD (Knox et al., 2012) and human genetic and 
genomic studies support the relevance of context processing and its neurobiology to PTSD 
pathophysiology. For example, mediation of contextual fear depends upon activation of 
glucocorticoid receptors in prefrontal cortex (Reis et al., 2015). Glucocorticoid receptor 
(GR) hypersensitivity (with enhanced HPA negative feedback) has been repeatedly 
demonstrated in PTSD. Diminished mPFC function has also been consistently reported in 
PTSD (Shin and Liberzon, 2010) and confirmed by meta-analyses (Etkin and Wager, 2007). 
In our PTSD animal model (SPS), which successfully replicates the enhanced HPA negative 
feedback seen in patients (Yamamoto et al., 2009), abnormalities in fear renewal are also 
seen (Figure 5, top panel), and upregulation of glucocorticoid receptors in mPFC has been 
shown to be critical for expression of the PTSD-like phenotype (George et al., 2015). 
Similarly, glucocorticoid signaling in Hpc plays a critical role in pattern separation and can 
induce PTSD-like memory abnormalities in a mouse model (Kaouane et al., 2012); and in 
our SPS rat model, upregulation of GR in Hpc also appears critical to emergence of the 
PTSD-like phenotype (Knox et al., 2012). In concert, the emerging genetic and genomic 
findings in PTSD implicate molecular pathways that might alter hippocampal-prefrontal-
thalamic circuitry – perhaps impacting hippocampal volume or context-relevant 
hippocampal function like neurogenesis and LTP. For example, polymorphisms in BDNF 
(Gatt et al., 2009; Aas et al., 2014), ADBR2 and FKBP5 (Fani et al., 2013), or methylation 
of SLC6A4 (Dannlowski et al., 2014) or FKBP5 (Fani et al., 2013), all have hippocampal 
effects, and each has evidence for association with PTSD. These findings resonate with 
reports of hippocampal size differences seen in PTSD, which may constitute a risk factor for 
PTSD development (Gilbertson et al., 2002; Bremner et al., 2003; Kitayama et al., 2005). 
Indeed, PTSD patients exhibit impaired performance on hippocampal-dependent tasks 
including visual memory recall tests and verbal memory tasks (R. J. Lindauer et al., 2006; 
Hayes et al., 2011), and these also may predate PTSD onset. Together these converging 
findings suggest a potential causative link between genetic and developmental factors that 
shape hippocampal-mPFC circuitry and the development of “signature” HPA abnormalities, 
and lead to contextual processing deficits that can create much of PTSD’s phenomenology.
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 15
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The CP model also nicely resonates with recent electrophysiologic and sleep findings. 
Hippocampal-prefrontal communication involves additional nodes in the midline thalamus, 
such as the reuniens and rhomboid nuclei, which participate in consolidation of enduring 
memories at a systems level (Pereira de Vasconcelos and Cassel, 2015). This process 
requires sleep-specific field-potential oscillations occurring during slow-wave rapid eye 
movement sleep (REM), which, in turn, rely upon specific function of locus coeruleus (LC) 
neurons (Vanderheyden et al., 2014). Thus effective encoding, consolidation, updating, and 
retrieval of contextual memory within hippocampal-prefrontal-thalamic circuitry likely 
require appropriate modulation by LC firing. This raises the possibility that adrenergic 
dysregulation, LC firing, and sleep problems might be contributing to disruption of the 
appropriate encoding and retrieval of contextual information, by affecting hippocampal-
prefrontal communication. This is obviously only one potential etiologic pathway to mPFC-
Hpc dysfunction (see below) and associated CP abnormalities, but these linkages pull 
adrenergic/autonomic function and sleep disruption into our context processing model, 
suggesting how sleep problems can play a key role in the emergence or perpetuation of CP 
deficits in a way that is consistent with sleep neurobiology in PTSD. Normal rewiring of 
memory networks in the hippocampus (including contextual memories) during sleep 
requires bidirectional plasticity (both synaptic strengthening (LTP) and weakening (DP) 
(Kemp and Manahan-Vaughan, 2004)) specifically during REM and transition to REM (TR). 
During REM and TR, to allow bi-directional plasticity (Poe et al., 2010), the noradrenergic 
(NE) neurons in the LC must turn off, which is essential for synaptic depotentiation 
(Thomas et al., 1996; Booth and Poe, 2006). If a hyperadrenergic state is present during 
REM and TR, the necessary synaptic depotentiation would be impaired, disrupting the 
rewiring of memory networks in the hippocampus (Vanderheyden et al., 2014), and 
potentially contributing to emergence of contextual processing abnormalities. The origins of 
the “hyperadrenergic state” could be partly genetic, given the ADRB2 findings in PTSD 
(Liberzon et al., 2014), which may thus contribute to development of deficits in 
hippocampal-prefrontal-thalamic circuit function. Indeed, there is evidence of linkage 
between disrupted REM and memory in PTSD (Lipinska et al., 2014) and evidence that 
REM abnormalities may play a mechanistic role in PTSD development (Marshall et al., 
2014). It is also possible that pre-existing CP deficits, rooted in Hpc-mPFC circuit disruption 
after trauma exposure (recent or past), undermine adaptive, post-traumatic processing and 
contribute to the nocturnal hyperadrenergic state, disrupting sleep-dependent synaptic 
remodeling, and perpetuating and exacerbating the CP deficits. There are thus multiple 
potential etiologic pathways to Hpc-mPFC dysfunction and CP deficits, but the CP model 
does offer a parsimonious way to integrate longstanding evidence that PTSD involves sleep, 
ANS and HPA axis abnormalities, noradrenergic/HPA axis interaction effects on memory 
processes (Kukolja et al., 2011), and understanding of specific roles played by hippocampal-
prefrontal-thalamic circuits in shaping episodic and contextual memory.
So what are the immediate implications and the next steps for development of the CP model, 
beyond improved conceptual coherence and explanatory power? A set of refutable 
hypothesis will need to be tested to enhance confidence in the model and demonstrate its 
utility in shaping future studies. First step will be to further document that the PTSD deficits 
seen in fear associated learning paradigms are also present in a broader range of tasks that 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 16
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 involve contextual processing and modulation. These include replication of fear renewal 
findings, and examination of fear reinstatement, contextual conditioning, and contextual 
modulation of responses to reward cues. Second, the hypothesized key role of Hpc-mPFC 
dysfunction should be examined by testing other Hpc-mPFC dependent functions in PTSD. 
These should include tasks that probe pattern separation and pattern completion capacities, 
visual-spatial navigation tasks, and tasks that require utilization of internal context (e.g., 
hunger, arousal). Finally the integrative, organizing concept of the CP deficit role predicts 
that other aspects of PTSD symptomatology, like emotional numbing, anger outbursts 
hypervigilance, etc. should be associated with CP deficits in both human studies and animal 
models.
Animal work will also be critical in determining the implications and value of this model, 
and it will require studies that directly examine contextual processing and Hpc-mPFC 
circuits. To date, animal studies have largely utilized paradigms rooted in fear conditioning/
extinction with a focus on amygdala function. These paradigms have face-validity and have 
contributed a great deal, but it may be time to develop models rooted in other theory-based 
constructs like CP. These models may offer great value in translational and back-
translational efforts. Indeed some steps in this direction have already been taken by various 
groups studying contextual processing (Jin and Maren, 2015), PTSD models (Knox et al., 
2012) and glucocorticoid modulation of memory processes (Kaouane et al., 2012).
Conclusions and Implications
The identification of neural circuits involved in PTSD pathophysiology and the development 
of comprehensive models -- to link dysfunction in these circuits to existing established 
findings (genetic, neuroendocrine, immunolological, psychophysiologic) and to mechanisms 
of symptom development and disease maintenance -- is an ongoing effort that has gathered 
substantial momentum in the past decade. This signifies both a paradigm shift and 
remarkable progress in the trauma field, and clinical neuroscience in general, as similar 
brain-based comprehensive models of psychopathology have yet to be developed in the 
fields of schizophrenia, depression or bipolar disorder research, despite longer and better 
funded efforts. Our progress promises both early translational and longer-term conceptual 
and more fundamental scientific benefits.
Among the early translational/clinical benefits are potential advancements in development of 
more specific, mechanism-based treatments. If, as we suggest, PTSD is actually a collection 
of somewhat distinct neurobiological entities, with the FL, TD and EF models perhaps 
representing somewhat different endophenotypes, then identification of the dominant 
phenotype in a given patient might lead to a specific type of treatment, moving us towards a 
personalized medicine approach. For a patient with an “Altered FL” phenotype, enhancing 
extinction training by using a pharmacological enhancer (e.g., D-cycloserine) in conjunction 
with prolong exposure might be the most promising avenue. For an individual with a CP 
phenotype, use of glucocorticoid/adrenergic agents in combination with contextual 
processing “retraining” might be more promising. Individually tailored treatment packages 
could be further augmented by development of behavioral treatments specifically designed 
to strengthen contextualizing skills via enhanced function in Hpc-mPFC circuitry.
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 17
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Improved pathophysiological models can also perhaps lead to better use of existing 
treatment strategies. For example, evidence for noradrenergic abnormalities in PTSD, along 
with evidence for their effects on memory, has led to efforts to treat or prevent PTSD using 
the beta receptor antagonist propranolol. Propranolol was administered immediately or soon 
after trauma exposure, to try to prevent consolidation of traumatic memories. While initial 
studies appeared promising (Pitman et al., 2002), subsequent reports did not support value of 
this approach (Sijbrandij et al., 2015). If, as the CP deficit model suggests, hyperadrenergic 
activity is most relevant to PTSD development during sleep, and REM in particular, the 
failure of some propranolol trials could be due to the wrong timing of propranolol 
administration. Adrenergic interventions might have to be directed toward nocturnal 
hyperadrenergic states. Similar logic might apply to attempts to treat/prevent PTSD using 
glucocorticoid administration. Glucocorticoids dose-dependently impacts learning processes 
with an inverted U-shaped dose-response curve (Salehi et al., 2010). Knowledge of a trauma 
exposed individual’s glucocorticoid “status” could be essential to insuring beneficial effects, 
since “over-treatment” in some cases could enhance trauma memory consolidation or 
contribute to fear learning generalization. On the other hand, with appropriate understanding 
of the brain mechanisms involved, glucocorticoid administration could perhaps be used to 
enhance context processing capacities, allowing traumatic memory to be better 
contextualized, in a flexible way, facilitating an appropriate balance between mechanisms of 
pattern separation and pattern completion in the hippocampus. Indeed evidence that 
glucocorticoid administration may enhance efficacy of prolonged exposure therapy for 
PTSD has been recently reported, but efficacy depends on the individual’s GC receptor 
sensitivity (Yehuda et al., 2015).
The long-term implications of this progress are more fundamental and more extensive. 
Developing comprehensive brain based models that describe abnormalities in memory 
deposition and retrieval as the result of specific neurobiological processes and molecular risk 
factors significantly advances our understanding of basic “cold” and “hot” memory 
mechanisms. It also deepens understanding of stress response systems and brain 
mechanisms underlying generation and modulation of emotions. This work has implications 
beyond PTSD translationally as well. The key brain pathways and physiological processes 
involved in PTSD pathophysiology likely have relevance to our understanding of other 
disorders, as well as stress sensitivity and resilience more generally. It is very unlikely that 
any psychiatric disorder can be fully explained by dysfunction of a single neurobiological 
circuit; and given the interconnected nature of these circuits, the disruption in functions of 
any particular circuit is likely to be seen in disorders, whose pathophysiology intersects with 
Hpc-mPFC circuits. Substance Dependence is one example, where contextual factors have 
already been invoked to explain relapse vulnerability (Crombag and Shaham, 2002). 
Exaggerated reactivity to drug cues, rather than trauma cues, may stem from CP deficits, in 
this case leading to abnormal approach behavior rather than the avoidance seen in PTSD. 
Determining the origins and roles of a particular Hpc-mPFC dysfunction in the etiological 
pathway of a specific disorder will require additional research, but examining CP broadly as 
a key brain function of relevance to a broad range of psychopathologies may facilitate 
progress.
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 18
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 As this work moves forward, we will be better able to define our disorders based on specific 
disruptions within particular brain circuits leading to impaired function, and this more 
precise, neurobiologically based understanding, will allow increasingly efficient, impactful, 
and individually tailored treatments. This progress will also slowly put to rest age-old 
debates about “nature vs. nurture” and “psychological vs. biological” in our study and 
understanding of psychiatric disorders, and thereby help to combat stigmatization and 
further open the door to better treatments for all who need them.
Acknowledgments
The writing of this manuscript was supported by grants to one or both authors from the Department of Defense 
(W81XWH-13-1-0377) and the National Institute of Mental Health (R24 MH075999 and RO1 MH093486). We 
also thank Jony Sheynin, PhD for invaluable help in preparation of this manuscript for publication, and Arieh 
Shalev, MD for help with conceptual development.
References
Aas M, Haukvik UK, Djurovic S, Tesli M, Athanasiu L, Bjella T, Hansson L, Cattaneo A, Agartz I, 
Andreassen OA, et al. Interplay between childhood trauma and BDNF val66met variants on blood 
BDNF mRNA levels and on hippocampus subfields volumes in schizophrenia spectrum and bipolar 
disorders. Journal of psychiatric research. 2014; 59:14–21. [PubMed: 25246365] 
Admon R, Lubin G, Stern O, Rosenberg K, Sela L, Ben-Ami H, Hendler T. Human vulnerability to 
stress depends on amygdala’s predisposition and hippocampal plasticity. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2009; 106:14120–14125. [Research 
Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. [PubMed: 19666562] 
Agorastos A, Boel JA, Heppner PS, Hager T, Moeller-Bertram T, Haji U, Motazedi A, Yanagi MA, 
Baker DG, Stiedl O. Diminished vagal activity and blunted diurnal variation of heart rate dynamics 
in posttraumatic stress disorder. Stress. 2013; 16:300–310. [PubMed: 23167763] 
Aizenberg M, Geffen MN. Bidirectional effects of aversive learning on perceptual acuity are mediated 
by the sensory cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2013; 16:994–996. [PubMed: 23817548] 
Alvarez RP, Biggs A, Chen G, Pine DS, Grillon C. Contextual fear conditioning in humans: cortical-
hippocampal and amygdala contributions. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:6211–6219. [PubMed: 18550763] 
Amstadter AB, Nugent NR, Yang BZ, Miller A, Siburian R, Moorjani P, Haddad S, Basu A, Fagerness 
J, Saxe G, et al. Corticotrophin-releasing hormone type 1 receptor gene (CRHR1) variants predict 
posttraumatic stress disorder onset and course in pediatric injury patients. Dis Markers. 2011; 
30:89–99. [PubMed: 21508513] 
Anticevic A, Cole MW, Murray JD, Corlett PR, Wang XJ, Krystal JH. The role of default network 
deactivation in cognition and disease. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2012; 16:584–592. [PubMed: 
23142417] 
Arnsten AFT. Stress signalling pathways that impair prefrontal cortex structure and function. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2009; 10:410–422.doi: 10.1038/nrn2648 [PubMed: 19455173] 
Aupperle RL, Allard CB, Grimes EM, Simmons AN, Flagan T, Behrooznia M, Cissell SH, Twamley 
EW, Thorp SR, Norman SB, et al. Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activation during emotional 
anticipation and neuropsychological performance in posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of 
general psychiatry. 2012; 69:360–371. [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Research Support, 
Non-U.S. Gov’t]. [PubMed: 22474105] 
Baker DG, West SA, Nicholson WE, Ekhator NN, Kasckow JW, Hill KK, Bruce AB, Orth DN, 
Geracioti TD Jr. Serial CSF corticotropin-releasing hormone levels and adrenocortical activity in 
combat veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 1999; 156:585–588. 
[PubMed: 10200738] 
Baldi E, Lorenzini CA, Bucherelli C. Footshock intensity and generalization in contextual and 
auditory-cued fear conditioning in the rat. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2004; 81:162–166. [Article]. 
[PubMed: 15082017] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 19
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Bartova L, Meyer BM, Diers K, Rabl U, Scharinger C, Popovic A, Pail G, Kalcher K, Boubela RN, 
Huemer J, et al. Reduced default mode network suppression during a working memory task in 
remitted major depression. J Psychiatr Res. 2015; 64:9–18. [PubMed: 25801734] 
Bergado-Acosta JR, Sangha S, Narayanan RT, Obata K, Pape HC, Stork O. Critical role of the 65-kDa 
isoform of glutamic acid decarboxylase in consolidation and generalization of Pavlovian fear 
memory. Learn Mem. 2008; 15:163–171. [PubMed: 18323571] 
Bilchick KC, Berger RD. Heart rate variability. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2006; 17:691–694. 
[PubMed: 16836727] 
Binder EB, Bradley RG, Liu W, Epstein MP, Deveau TC, Mercer KB, Tang Y, Gillespie CF, Heim CM, 
Nemeroff CB, et al. Association of FKBP5 polymorphisms and childhood abuse with risk of 
posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms in adults. JAMA. 2008; 299:1291–1305. [PubMed: 
18349090] 
Blair HT, Schafe GE, Bauer EP, Rodrigues SM, LeDoux JE. Synaptic plasticity in the lateral 
amygdala: a cellular hypothesis of fear conditioning. Learn Mem. 2001; 8:229–242. [PubMed: 
11584069] 
Blechert J, Michael T, Vriends N, Margraf J, Wilhelm FH. Fear conditioning in posttraumatic stress 
disorder: evidence for delayed extinction of autonomic, experiential, and behavioural responses. 
Behav Res Ther. 2007; 45:2019–2033. [PubMed: 17442266] 
Booth V, Poe GR. Input source and strength influences overall firing phase of model hippocampal CA1 
pyramidal cells during theta: relevance to REM sleep reactivation and memory consolidation. 
Hippocampus. 2006; 16:161–173. [PubMed: 16411243] 
Bordi F, LeDoux J. Sensory tuning beyond the sensory system: an initial analysis of auditory response 
properties of neurons in the lateral amygdaloid nucleus and overlying areas of the striatum. J 
Neurosci. 1992; 12:2493–2503. [PubMed: 1613543] 
Bordi F, LeDoux JE. Response properties of single units in areas of rat auditory thalamus that project 
to the amgydala. 1. acoustic discharge patterns and frequency receptive-fields. [Article]. 
Experimental Brain Research. 1994; 98:261–274. [PubMed: 8050512] 
Boscarino JA, Hoffman SN, Rukstalis M, Stewart WF. Association of FKBP5, COMT and CHRNA5 
polymorphisms with PTSD among outpatients at risk for PTSD. Psychiatry Research. 2011; 
188:173–174. [PubMed: 21440309] 
Bouton ME. Context, time, and memory retrieval in the interference paradigms of Pavlovian learning. 
Psychological Bulletin. 1993; 114:80–99. [PubMed: 8346330] 
Bouton ME. Context, Ambiguity, and Classical-Conditioning. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science. 1994; 3:49–53.
Bremner JD, Elzinga B, Schmahl C, Vermetten E. Structural and functional plasticity of the human 
brain in posttraumatic stress disorder. Prog Brain Res. 2008; 167:171–186. [PubMed: 18037014] 
Bremner JD, Vythilingam M, Vermetten E, Southwick SM, McGlashan T, Nazeer A, Khan S, 
Vaccarino LV, Soufer R, Garg PK, et al. MRI and PET study of deficits in hippocampal structure 
and function in women with childhood sexual abuse and posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2003; 160:924–932. [PubMed: 12727697] 
Bryant RA, Harvey AG. Processing threatening information in posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology. 1995; 104:537–541. [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. [PubMed: 
7673578] 
Bryant RA, Kemp AH, Felmingham KL, Liddell B, Olivieri G, Peduto A, Gordon E, Williams LM. 
Enhanced amygdala and medial prefrontal activation during nonconscious processing of fear in 
posttraumatic stress disorder: an fMRI study. Human brain mapping. 2008; 29:517–523. [Research 
Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. [PubMed: 17525984] 
Buckley TC, Blanchard EB, Neill WT. Information processing and PTSD: a review of the empirical 
literature. Clin Psychol Rev. 2000; 20:1041–1065. [PubMed: 11098399] 
Buhle JT, Silvers JA, Wager TD, Lopez R, Onyemekwu C, Kober H, Weber J, Ochsner KN. Cognitive 
reappraisal of emotion: a meta-analysis of human neuroimaging studies. Cereb Cortex. 2014; 
24:2981–2990. [PubMed: 23765157] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 20
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Campeau S, Davis M. Involvement of the central nucleus and basolateral complex of the amygdala in 
fear conditioning measured with fear-potentiated startle in rats trained concurrently with auditory 
and visual conditioned stimuli. J Neurosci. 1995; 15:2301–2311. [PubMed: 7891168] 
Chavez CM, McGaugh JL, Weinberger NM. The basolateral amygdala modulates specific sensory 
memory representations in the cerebral cortex. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2009; 91:382–392. 
[PubMed: 19028592] 
Chen AC, Etkin A. Hippocampal network connectivity and activation differentiates post-traumatic 
stress disorder from generalized anxiety disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013
Ciocchi S, Herry C, Grenier F, Wolff SB, Letzkus JJ, Vlachos I, Ehrlich I, Sprengel R, Deisseroth K, 
Stadler MB, et al. Encoding of conditioned fear in central amygdala inhibitory circuits. Nature. 
2010; 468:277–282. [PubMed: 21068837] 
Cohen H, Benjamin J, Geva AB, Matar MA, Kaplan Z, Kotler M. Autonomic dysregulation in panic 
disorder and in post-traumatic stress disorder: application of power spectrum analysis of heart rate 
variability at rest and in response to recollection of trauma or panic attacks. Psychiatry Research. 
2000; 96:1–13. [PubMed: 10980322] 
Corcoran KA, Maren S. Hippocampal inactivation disrupts contextual retrieval of fear memory after 
extinction. J Neurosci. 2001; 21:1720–1726. [PubMed: 11222661] 
Corcoran KA, Quirk GJ. Recalling safety: cooperative functions of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
and the hippocampus in extinction. CNS Spectr. 2007; 12:200–206. [PubMed: 17329980] 
Courtin J, Chaudun F, Rozeske RR, Karalis N, Gonzalez-Campo C, Wurtz H, Abdi A, Baufreton J, 
Bienvenu TC, Herry C. Prefrontal parvalbumin interneurons shape neuronal activity to drive fear 
expression. Nature. 2014; 505:92–96. [PubMed: 24256726] 
Craig AD. A new view of pain as a homeostatic emotion. Trends in neurosciences. 2003; 26:303–307. 
[Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, P.H.S. Review]. [PubMed: 12798599] 
Craig AD. How do you feel--now? The anterior insula and human awareness. [Research Support, Non-
U.S. Gov’t]. Nature reviews. Neuroscience. 2009; 10:59–70.
Critchley HD. The human cortex responds to an interoceptive challenge. [Comment]. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2004; 101:6333–6334. 
[PubMed: 15096592] 
Crombag HS, Shaham Y. Renewal of drug seeking by contextual cues after prolonged extinction in 
rats. Behav Neurosci. 2002; 116:169–173. [PubMed: 11895178] 
Dannlowski U, Kugel H, Redlich R, Halik A, Schneider I, Opel N, Grotegerd D, Schwarte K, Schettler 
C, Ambree O, et al. Serotonin transporter gene methylation is associated with hippocampal gray 
matter volume. Human brain mapping. 2014; 35:5356–5367. [PubMed: 24862560] 
Davis M. The role of the amygdala in fear and anxiety. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1992; 15:353–375. 
[PubMed: 1575447] 
Davis M, Rainnie D, Cassell M. Neurotransmission in the rat amygdala related to fear and anxiety. 
Trends Neurosci. 1994; 17:208–214. [PubMed: 7520203] 
Du MY, Liao W, Lui S, Huang XQ, Li F, Kuang WH, Li J, Chen HF, Kendrick KM, Gong QY. Altered 
functional connectivity in the brain default-mode network of earthquake survivors persists after 2 
years despite recovery from anxiety symptoms. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2015
Dunkley BT, Doesburg SM, Jetly R, Sedge PA, Pang EW, Taylor MJ. Characterising intra- and inter-
intrinsic network synchrony in combat-related post-traumatic stress disorder. Psychiatry Res. 2015
Dunsmoor JE, Prince SE, Murty VP, Kragel PA, LaBar KS. Neurobehavioral mechanisms of human 
fear generalization. Neuroimage. 2011; 55:1878–1888. [PubMed: 21256233] 
Duvarci S, Pare D. Amygdala microcircuits controlling learned fear. Neuron. 2014; 82:966–980. 
[PubMed: 24908482] 
Eichenbaum H. Learning from LTP: a comment on recent attempts to identify cellular and molecular 
mechanisms of memory. Learn Mem. 1996; 3:61–73. [PubMed: 10456077] 
Elzinga BM, Bremner JD. Are the neural substrates of memory the final common pathway in 
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? J Affect Disord. 2002; 70:1–17. [PubMed: 12113915] 
Etkin A, Buchel C, Gross JJ. The neural bases of emotion regulation. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015; 16:693–
700. [PubMed: 26481098] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 21
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Etkin A, Wager TD. Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: a meta-analysis of emotional processing in 
PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia. [Comparative Study Meta-Analysis]. The 
American journal of psychiatry. 2007; 164:1476–1488. [PubMed: 17898336] 
Euston DR, Gruber AJ, McNaughton BL. The role of medial prefrontal cortex in memory and decision 
making. Neuron. 2012; 76:1057–1070. [PubMed: 23259943] 
Fani N, Gutman D, Tone EB, Almli L, Mercer KB, Davis J, Glover E, Jovanovic T, Bradley B, Dinov 
ID, et al. FKBP5 and attention bias for threat: associations with hippocampal function and shape. 
JAMA Psychiatry. 2013; 70:392–400. [PubMed: 23407841] 
Fanselow MS, LeDoux JE. Why we think plasticity underlying Pavlovian fear conditioning occurs in 
the basolateral amygdala. Neuron. 1999; 23:229–232. [PubMed: 10399930] 
Garfinkel SN, Abelson JL, King AP, Sripada RK, Wang X, Gaines LM, Liberzon I. Impaired 
contextual modulation of memories in PTSD: an fMRI and psychophysiological study of 
extinction retention and fear renewal. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:13435–13443. [PubMed: 25274821] 
Gatt JM, Nemeroff CB, Dobson-Stone C, Paul RH, Bryant RA, Schofield PR, Gordon E, Kemp AH, 
Williams LM. Interactions between BDNF Val66Met polymorphism and early life stress predict 
brain and arousal pathways to syndromal depression and anxiety. Mol Psychiatry. 2009; 14:681–
695. [PubMed: 19153574] 
Genud-Gabai R, Klavir O, Paz R. Safety signals in the primate amygdala. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:17986–
17994. [PubMed: 24227710] 
George SA, Rodriguez-Santiago M, Riley J, Rodriguez E, Liberzon I. The effect of chronic phenytoin 
administration on single prolonged stress induced extinction retention deficits and glucocorticoid 
upregulation in the rat medial prefrontal cortex. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2015; 232:47–56. 
[PubMed: 24879497] 
Ghosh S, Chattarji S. Neuronal encoding of the switch from specific to generalized fear. Nature 
Neuroscience. 2015; 18:112–120. [PubMed: 25436666] 
Gilbertson MW, Shenton ME, Ciszewski A, Kasai K, Lasko NB, Orr SP, Pitman RK. Smaller 
hippocampal volume predicts pathologic vulnerability to psychological trauma. Nat Neurosci. 
2002; 5:1242–1247. [PubMed: 12379862] 
Goosens KA, Maren S. Long-term potentiation as a substrate for memory: evidence from studies of 
amygdaloid plasticity and Pavlovian fear conditioning. Hippocampus. 2002; 12:592–599. 
[PubMed: 12440575] 
Gottfried JA, Dolan RJ. Human orbitofrontal cortex mediates extinction learning while accessing 
conditioned representations of value. Nat Neurosci. 2004; 7:1144–1152. [PubMed: 15361879] 
Grillon C. Startle reactivity and anxiety disorders: aversive conditioning, context, and neurobiology. 
Biol Psychiatry. 2002; 52:958–975. [PubMed: 12437937] 
Grillon C, Morgan CA 3rd, Davis M, Southwick SM. Effects of experimental context and explicit 
threat cues on acoustic startle in Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol 
Psychiatry. 1998; 44:1027–1036. [PubMed: 9821567] 
Harvey AG, Bryant RA, Rapee RM. Preconscious processing of threat in posttraumatic stress disorder. 
Cognitive Therapy and Research. 1996; 20:613–623.
Hayes JP, LaBar KS, McCarthy G, Selgrade E, Nasser J, Dolcos F, Morey RA. Reduced hippocampal 
and amygdala activity predicts memory distortions for trauma reminders in combat-related PTSD. 
J Psychiatr Res. 2011; 45:660–669. [PubMed: 21047644] 
Hayman RM, Chakraborty S, Anderson MI, Jeffery KJ. Context-specific acquisition of location 
discrimination by hippocampal place cells. Eur J Neurosci. 2003; 18:2825–2834. [PubMed: 
14656331] 
Herweg NA, Apitz T, Leicht G, Mulert C, Fuentemilla L, Bunzeck N. Theta-Alpha Oscillations Bind 
the Hippocampus, Prefrontal Cortex, and Striatum during Recollection: Evidence from 
Simultaneous EEG-fMRI. J Neurosci. 2016; 36:3579–3587. [PubMed: 27013686] 
Holland PC, Bouton ME. Hippocampus and context in classical conditioning. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 
1999; 9:195–202. [PubMed: 10322181] 
Hyman JM, Ma L, Balaguer-Ballester E, Durstewitz D, Seamans JK. Contextual encoding by 
ensembles of medial prefrontal cortex neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:5086–5091. 
[PubMed: 22421138] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 22
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Jasnow AM, Ehrlich DE, Choi DC, Dabrowska J, Bowers ME, McCullough KM, Rainnie DG, Ressler 
KJ. Thy1-expressing neurons in the basolateral amygdala may mediate fear inhibition. J Neurosci. 
2013; 33:10396–10404. [PubMed: 23785152] 
Javanbakht A, King AP, Evans GW, Swain JE, Angstadt M, Phan KL, Liberzon I. Childhood Poverty 
Predicts Adult Amygdala and Frontal Activity and Connectivity in Response to Emotional Faces. 
Frontiers in behavioral neuroscience. 2015; 9:154. [PubMed: 26124712] 
Jin J, Maren S. Prefrontal-Hippocampal Interactions in Memory and Emotion. Front Syst Neurosci. 
2015; 9:170. [PubMed: 26696844] 
Jones E. Historical approaches to post-combat disorders. [Historical Article]. Philosophical 
transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B, Biological sciences. 2006; 361:533–542. 
[PubMed: 16687259] 
Jovanovic T, Ely T, Fani N, Glover EM, Gutman D, Tone EB, Norrholm SD, Bradley B, Ressler KJ. 
Reduced neural activation during an inhibition task is associated with impaired fear inhibition in a 
traumatized civilian sample. Cortex. 2013; 49:1884–1891. [PubMed: 23020899] 
Jovanovic T, Kazama A, Bachevalier J, Davis M. Impaired safety signal learning may be a biomarker 
of PTSD. Neuropharmacology. 2012; 62:695–704. [PubMed: 21377482] 
Jovanovic T, Norrholm SD, Fennell JE, Keyes M, Fiallos AM, Myers KM, Davis M, Duncan EJ. 
Posttraumatic stress disorder may be associated with impaired fear inhibition: relation to symptom 
severity. Psychiatry Res. 2009; 167:151–160. [PubMed: 19345420] 
Jovanovic T, Ressler KJ. How the neurocircuitry and genetics of fear inhibition may inform our 
understanding of PTSD. Am J Psychiatry. 2010; 167:648–662. [PubMed: 20231322] 
Kaiser RH, Andrews-Hanna JR, Wager TD, Pizzagalli DA. Large-Scale Network Dysfunction in Major 
Depressive Disorder: A Meta-analysis of Resting-State Functional Connectivity. JAMA psychiatry. 
2015; 72:603–611. [PubMed: 25785575] 
Kaouane N, Porte Y, Vallee M, Brayda-Bruno L, Mons N, Calandreau L, Marighetto A, Piazza PV, 
Desmedt A. Glucocorticoids Can Induce PTSD-Like Memory Impairments in Mice. Science. 
2012; 335:1510–1513. [PubMed: 22362879] 
Kemp A, Manahan-Vaughan D. Hippocampal long-term depression and long-term potentiation encode 
different aspects of novelty acquisition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:8192–8197. 
[PubMed: 15150407] 
Kheirbek MA, Hen R. Add neurons, subtract anxiety. Sci Am. 2014; 311:62–67.
Kheirbek MA, Klemenhagen KC, Sahay A, Hen R. Neurogenesis and generalization: a new approach 
to stratify and treat anxiety disorders. Nature Neuroscience. 2012; 15:1613–1620. [PubMed: 
23187693] 
Kitayama N, Vaccarino V, Kutner M, Weiss P, Bremner JD. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
measurement of hippocampal volume in posttraumatic stress disorder: a meta-analysis. J Affect 
Disord. 2005; 88:79–86. [PubMed: 16033700] 
Klavir O, Genud-Gabai R, Paz R. Functional Connectivity between Amygdala and Cingulate Cortex 
for Adaptive Aversive Learning. Neuron. 2013; 80:1290–1300. [PubMed: 24314732] 
Knight DC, Cheng DT, Smith CN, Stein EA, Helmstetter FJ. Neural substrates mediating human delay 
and trace fear conditioning. J Neurosci. 2004; 24:218–228. [PubMed: 14715954] 
Knox D, Nault T, Henderson C, Liberzon I. Glucocorticoid receptors and extinction retention deficits 
in the single prolonged stress model. Neuroscience. 2012; 223:163–173. [PubMed: 22863672] 
Kohn N, Eickhoff SB, Scheller M, Laird AR, Fox PT, Habel U. Neural network of cognitive emotion 
regulation--an ALE meta-analysis and MACM analysis. Neuroimage. 2014; 87:345–355. 
[PubMed: 24220041] 
Krystal JH, Neumeister A. Noradrenergic and serotonergic mechanisms in the neurobiology of 
posttraumatic stress disorder and resilience. Brain Res. 2009; 1293:13–23. [PubMed: 19332037] 
Kukolja J, Klingmuller D, Maier W, Fink GR, Hurlemann R. Noradrenergic-glucocorticoid modulation 
of emotional memory encoding in the human hippocampus. Psychological medicine. 2011; 
41:2167–2176. [Randomized Controlled Trial Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. [PubMed: 
21375794] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 23
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 LaBar KS, Gatenby JC, Gore JC, LeDoux JE, Phelps EA. Human amygdala activation during 
conditioned fear acquisition and extinction: a mixed-trial fMRI study. Neuron. 1998; 20:937–945. 
[PubMed: 9620698] 
Lang S, Kroll A, Lipinski SJ, Wessa M, Ridder S, Christmann C, Schad LR, Flor H. Context 
conditioning and extinction in humans: differential contribution of the hippocampus, amygdala and 
prefrontal cortex. Eur J Neurosci. 2009; 29:823–832. [PubMed: 19200075] 
Lanius RA, Frewen PA, Girotti M, Neufeld RWJ, Stevens TK, Densmore M. Neural correlates of 
trauma script-imagery in posttraumatic stress disorder with and without comorbid major 
depression: A functional MRI investigation. Psychiatry Research-Neuroimaging. 2007; 155:45–56.
Laufer O, Paz R. Monetary loss alters perceptual thresholds and compromises future decisions via 
amygdala and prefrontal networks. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:6304–6311. [PubMed: 22553036] 
LeDoux JE, Farb C, Ruggiero DA. Topographic organization of neurons in the acoustic thalamus that 
project to the amygdala. J Neurosci. 1990; 10:1043–1054. [PubMed: 2158523] 
Lee EA, Theus SA. Lower heart rate variability associated with military sexual trauma rape and 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Res Nurs. 2012; 14:412–418. [PubMed: 22899708] 
Letzkus JJ, Wolff SB, Meyer EM, Tovote P, Courtin J, Herry C, Luthi A. A disinhibitory microcircuit 
for associative fear learning in the auditory cortex. Nature. 2011; 480:331–335. [PubMed: 
22158104] 
Li CQ, Zhang JW, Dai RP, Wang J, Luo XG, Zhou XF. Surgical incision induces anxiety-like behavior 
and amygdala sensitization: effects of morphine and gabapentin. Pain research and treatment. 
2010; 2010:705874. [PubMed: 22110916] 
Liberzon I, Abelson JL, Flagel SB, Raz J, Young EA. Neuroendocrine and psychophysiologic 
responses in PTSD: a symptom provocation study. Neuropsychopharmacology. 1999; 21:40–50. 
[PubMed: 10379518] 
Liberzon I, King AP, Ressler KJ, Almli LM, Zhang P, Ma ST, Cohen GH, Tamburrino MB, Calabrese 
JR, Galea S. Interaction of the ADRB2 gene polymorphism with childhood trauma in predicting 
adult symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014; 71:1174–1182. 
[PubMed: 25162199] 
Liberzon I, Sripada CS. The functional neuroanatomy of PTSD: a critical review. [Review]. Progress in 
brain research. 2008; 167:151–169. [PubMed: 18037013] 
Liberzon I, Taylor SF, Amdur R, Jung TD, Chamberlain KR, Minoshima S, Koeppe RA, Fig LM. 
Brain activation in PTSD in response to trauma-related stimuli. Biol Psychiatry. 1999; 45:817–
826. [PubMed: 10202568] 
Likhtik E, Paz R. Amygdala-prefrontal interactions in (mal)adaptive learning. Trends in 
Neurosciences. 2015
Likhtik E, Stujenske JM, MAT, Harris AZ, Gordon JA. Prefrontal entrainment of amygdala activity 
signals safety in learned fear and innate anxiety. Nat Neurosci. 2014; 17:106–113. [PubMed: 
24241397] 
Lindauer RJ, Olff M, van Meijel EP, Carlier IV, Gersons BP. Cortisol, learning, memory, and attention 
in relation to smaller hippocampal volume in police officers with posttraumatic stress disorder. 
Biol Psychiatry. 2006; 59:171–177. [PubMed: 16154543] 
Lindauer RJL, Booij J, Habraken JBA, van Meijel EPM, Uylings HBM, Olff M, Carlier IVE, den 
Heeten GJ, van Eck-Smit BLF, Gersons BPR. Effects of psychotherapy on regional cerebral 
blood flow during trauma imagery in patients with post-traumatic stress disorder: a randomized 
clinical trial. Psychological Medicine. 2008; 38:543–554. [PubMed: 17803835] 
Lindley SE, Carlson EB, Benoit M. Basal and dexamethasone suppressed salivary cortisol 
concentrations in a community sample of patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2004; 55:940–945. [PubMed: 15110738] 
Lipinska M, Timol R, Kaminer D, Thomas KG. Disrupted rapid eye movement sleep predicts poor 
declarative memory performance in post-traumatic stress disorder. J Sleep Res. 2014; 23:309–
317. [PubMed: 24467663] 
Lissek S, Biggs AL, Rabin SJ, Cornwell BR, Alvarez RP, Pine DS, Grillon C. Generalization of 
conditioned fear-potentiated startle in humans: experimental validation and clinical relevance. 
Behav Res Ther. 2008; 46:678–687. [PubMed: 18394587] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 24
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lissek S, Bradford DE, Alvarez RP, Burton P, Espensen-Sturges T, Reynolds RC, Grillon C. Neural 
substrates of classically conditioned fear-generalization in humans: a parametric fMRI study. Soc 
Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2013
Lissek S, Powers AS, McClure EB, Phelps EA, Woldehawariat G, Grillon C, Pine DS. Classical fear 
conditioning in the anxiety disorders: a meta-analysis. Behav Res Ther. 2005; 43:1391–1424. 
[PubMed: 15885654] 
Lissek S, van Meurs B. Learning models of PTSD: Theoretical accounts and psychobiological 
evidence. Int J Psychophysiol. 2015; 98:594–605. [PubMed: 25462219] 
MacNamara A, Rabinak CA, Kennedy AE, Fitzgerald DA, Liberzon I, Stein MB, Phan KL. Emotion 
Regulatory Brain Function and SSRI Treatment in PTSD: Neural Correlates and Predictors of 
Change. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016; 41:611–618. [PubMed: 26111649] 
Malik, M.; Camm, AJ. Heart rate variability. New York: Futura Publishing; 1995. 
Maren S, Phan KL, Liberzon I. The contextual brain: implications for fear conditioning, extinction and 
psychopathology. [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Review]. Nature reviews. Neuroscience. 
2013; 14:417–428. [PubMed: 23635870] 
Marschner A, Kalisch R, Vervliet B, Vansteenwegen D, Buchel C. Dissociable roles for the 
hippocampus and the amygdala in human cued versus context fear conditioning. J Neurosci. 
2008; 28:9030–9036. [PubMed: 18768697] 
Marshall AJ, Acheson DT, Risbrough VB, Straus LD, Drummond SP. Fear conditioning, safety 
learning, and sleep in humans. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:11754–11760. [PubMed: 25164670] 
Matynia A, Kushner SA, Silva AJ. Genetic approaches to molecular and cellular cognition: a focus on 
LTP and learning and memory. Annu Rev Genet. 2002; 36:687–720. [PubMed: 12429705] 
Meewisse ML, Reitsma JB, de Vries GJ, Gersons BP, Olff M. Cortisol and post-traumatic stress 
disorder in adults: systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry. 2007; 191:387–392. 
[PubMed: 17978317] 
Melzig CA, Weike AI, Hamm AO, Thayer JF. Individual differences in fear-potentiated startle as a 
function of resting heart rate variability: implications for panic disorder. Int J Psychophysiol. 
2009; 71:109–117. [PubMed: 18708100] 
Milad MR, Orr SP, Lasko NB, Chang Y, Rauch SL, Pitman RK. Presence and acquired origin of 
reduced recall for fear extinction in PTSD: results of a twin study. J Psychiatr Res. 2008; 42:515–
520. [PubMed: 18313695] 
Milad MR, Pitman RK, Ellis CB, Gold AL, Shin LM, Lasko NB, Zeidan MA, Handwerger K, Orr SP, 
Rauch SL. Neurobiological basis of failure to recall extinction memory in posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 66:1075–1082. [PubMed: 19748076] 
Milad MR, Wright CI, Orr SP, Pitman RK, Quirk GJ, Rauch SL. Recall of fear extinction in humans 
activates the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus in concert. Biol Psychiatry. 2007; 
62:446–454. [PubMed: 17217927] 
Miller EK, Cohen JD. An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2001; 
24:167–202. [PubMed: 11283309] 
Minassian A, Geyer MA, Baker DG, Nievergelt CM, O’Connor DT, Risbrough VB. Marine Resiliency 
Study T. Heart rate variability characteristics in a large group of active-duty marines and 
relationship to posttraumatic stress. Psychosom Med. 2014; 76:292–301. [PubMed: 24804881] 
Minassian A, Maihofer AX, Baker DG, Nievergelt CM, Geyer MA, Risbrough VB. Marine Resiliency 
Study T. Association of Predeployment Heart Rate Variability With Risk of Postdeployment 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Active-Duty Marines. JAMA Psychiatry. 2015; 72:979–986. 
[PubMed: 26353072] 
Morgan CA 3rd, Grillon C, Southwick SM, Davis M, Charney DS. Fear-potentiated startle in 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 1995; 38:378–385. [PubMed: 8547457] 
Morris MC, Compas BE, Garber J. Relations among posttraumatic stress disorder, comorbid major 
depression, and HPA function: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev. 2012; 
32:301–315. [PubMed: 22459791] 
Neumeister A, Drevets WC, Belfer I, Luckenbaugh DA, Henry S, Bonne O, Herscovitch P, Goldman 
D, Charney DS. Effects of a [alpha]2C-Adrenoreceptor Gene Polymorphism on Neural 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 25
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Responses to Facial Expressions in Depression. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006; 31:1750–
1756. [PubMed: 16407897] 
New AS, Fan J, Murrough JW, Liu X, Liebman RE, Guise KG, Tang CY, Charney DS. A functional 
magnetic resonance imaging study of deliberate emotion regulation in resilience and 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 66:656–664. [PubMed: 19589502] 
Niendam TA, Laird AR, Ray KL, Dean YM, Glahn DC, Carter CS. Meta-analytic evidence for a 
superordinate cognitive control network subserving diverse executive functions. Cogn Affect 
Behav Neurosci. 2012; 12:241–268. [PubMed: 22282036] 
Norrholm SD, Jovanovic T, Olin IW, Sands LA, Karapanou I, Bradley B, Ressler KJ. Fear extinction in 
traumatized civilians with posttraumatic stress disorder: relation to symptom severity. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2011; 69:556–563. [PubMed: 21035787] 
Ochsner KN, Bunge SA, Gross JJ, Gabrieli JD. Rethinking feelings: an FMRI study of the cognitive 
regulation of emotion. J Cogn Neurosci. 2002; 14:1215–1229. [PubMed: 12495527] 
Ochsner KN, Silvers JA, Buhle JT. Functional imaging studies of emotion regulation: a synthetic 
review and evolving model of the cognitive control of emotion. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012; 
1251:E1–24. [PubMed: 23025352] 
Ohman A. The role of the amygdala in human fear: automatic detection of threat. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2005; 30:953–958. [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t Review]. 
[PubMed: 15963650] 
Orr SP, Metzger LJ, Lasko NB, Macklin ML, Peri T, Pitman RK. De novo conditioning in trauma-
exposed individuals with and without posttraumatic stress disorder. J Abnorm Psychol. 2000; 
109:290–298. [PubMed: 10895567] 
Pennartz CM, Ito R, Verschure PF, Battaglia FP, Robbins TW. The hippocampal-striatal axis in 
learning, prediction and goal-directed behavior. Trends Neurosci. 2011; 34:548–559. [PubMed: 
21889806] 
Pereira de Vasconcelos A, Cassel JC. The nonspecific thalamus: A place in a wedding bed for making 
memories last? Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2015; 54:175–196. [PubMed: 25451763] 
Peri T, Ben-Shakhar G, Orr SP, Shalev AY. Psychophysiologic assessment of aversive conditioning in 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2000; 47:512–519. [PubMed: 10715357] 
Phan KL, Fitzgerald DA, Nathan PJ, Moore GJ, Uhde TW, Tancer ME. Neural substrates for voluntary 
suppression of negative affect: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Biol Psychiatry. 
2005; 57:210–219. [PubMed: 15691521] 
Phelps EA, Delgado MR, Nearing KI, LeDoux JE. Extinction learning in humans: role of the 
amygdala and vmPFC. Neuron. 2004; 43:897–905. [PubMed: 15363399] 
Phelps EA, LeDoux JE. Contributions of the amygdala to emotion processing: from animal models to 
human behavior. Neuron. 2005; 48:175–187. [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Research 
Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t Review]. [PubMed: 16242399] 
Pitman RK, Orr SP. Twenty-four hour urinary cortisol and catecholamine excretion in combat-related 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 1990; 27:245–247. [PubMed: 2294983] 
Pitman RK, Rasmusson AM, Koenen KC, Shin LM, Orr SP, Gilbertson MW, Milad MR, Liberzon I. 
Biological studies of post-traumatic stress disorder. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012; 13:769–787. 
[PubMed: 23047775] 
Pitman RK, Sanders KM, Zusman RM, Healy AR, Cheema F, Lasko NB, Cahill L, Orr SP. Pilot study 
of secondary prevention of posttraumatic stress disorder with propranolol. Biol Psychiatry. 2002; 
51:189–192. [PubMed: 11822998] 
Poe GR, Walsh CM, Bjorness TE. Cognitive neuroscience of sleep. Prog Brain Res. 2010; 185:1–19. 
[PubMed: 21075230] 
Pole N. The psychophysiology of posttraumatic stress disorder: a meta-analysis. Psychol Bull. 2007; 
133:725–746. [PubMed: 17723027] 
Powers A, Etkin A, Gyurak A, Bradley B, Jovanovic T. Associations Between Childhood Abuse, 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, and Implicit Emotion Regulation Deficits: Evidence From a Low-
Income, Inner-City Population. Psychiatry. 2015; 78:251–264. [PubMed: 26391833] 
Preston AR, Eichenbaum H. Interplay of hippocampus and prefrontal cortex in memory. Curr Biol. 
2013; 23:R764–773. [PubMed: 24028960] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 26
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Quinn JJ, Ma QD, Tinsley MR, Koch C, Fanselow MS. Inverse temporal contributions of the dorsal 
hippocampus and medial prefrontal cortex to the expression of long-term fear memories. Learn 
Mem. 2008; 15:368–372. [PubMed: 18441294] 
Quirk GJ, Mueller D. Neural mechanisms of extinction learning and retrieval. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008; 33:56–72. [PubMed: 17882236] 
Rabinak CA, MacNamara A, Kennedy AE, Angstadt M, Stein MB, Liberzon I, Phan KL. Focal and 
aberrant prefrontal engagement during emotion regulation in veterans with posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Depress Anxiety. 2014; 31:851–861. [PubMed: 24677490] 
Rasmusson AM, Hauger RL, Morgan CA, Bremner JD, Charney DS, Southwick SM. Low baseline 
and yohimbine-stimulated plasma neuropeptide Y (NPY) levels in combat-related PTSD. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2000; 47:526–539. [PubMed: 10715359] 
Reis FM, Almada RC, Fogaca MV, Brandao ML. Rapid Activation of Glucocorticoid Receptors in the 
Prefrontal Cortex Mediates the Expression of Contextual Conditioned Fear in Rats. Cereb 
Cortex. 2015
Resnik J, Paz R. Fear generalization in the primate amygdala. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:188–190. 
[PubMed: 25531573] 
Resnik J, Sobel N, Paz R. Auditory aversive learning increases discrimination thresholds. Nat 
Neurosci. 2011; 14:791–796. [PubMed: 21552275] 
Rougemont-Bucking A, Linnman C, Zeffiro TA, Zeidan MA, Lebron-Milad K, Rodriguez-Romaguera 
J, Rauch SL, Pitman RK, Milad MR. Altered processing of contextual information during fear 
extinction in PTSD: an fMRI study. CNS neuroscience & therapeutics. 2011; 17:227–236. 
[Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. [PubMed: 20406268] 
Salehi B, Cordero MI, Sandi C. Learning under stress: the inverted-U-shape function revisited. 
Learning & memory. 2010; 17:522–530. [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. [PubMed: 
20884754] 
Sandi C, Richter-Levin G. From high anxiety trait to depression: a neurocognitive hypothesis. Trends 
in neurosciences. 2009; 32:312–320. [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. [PubMed: 19409624] 
Schechtman E, Laufer O, Paz R. Negative valence widens generalization of learning. J Neurosci. 2010; 
30:10460–10464. [PubMed: 20685988] 
Schulkin J, Morgan MA, Rosen JB. A neuroendocrine mechanism for sustaining fear. [Review]. 
Trends in neurosciences. 2005; 28:629–635. [PubMed: 16214230] 
Seeley WW, Menon V, Schatzberg AF, Keller J, Glover GH, Kenna H, Reiss AL, Greicius MD. 
Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control. J 
Neurosci. 2007; 27:2349–2356. [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Research Support, Non-
U.S. Gov’t Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S.]. [PubMed: 17329432] 
Senn V, Wolff SB, Herry C, Grenier F, Ehrlich I, Grundemann J, Fadok JP, Muller C, Letzkus JJ, Luthi 
A. Long-range connectivity defines behavioral specificity of amygdala neurons. Neuron. 2014; 
81:428–437. [PubMed: 24462103] 
Sevenster D, Hamm A, Beckers T, Kindt M. Heart rate pattern and resting heart rate variability 
mediate individual differences in contextual anxiety and conditioned responses. Int J 
Psychophysiol. 2015
Shaban H, Humeau Y, Herry C, Cassasus G, Shigemoto R, Ciocchi S, Barbieri S, van der Putten H, 
Kaupmann K, Bettler B, et al. Generalization of amygdala LTP and conditioned fear in the 
absence of presynaptic inhibition. Nat Neurosci. 2006; 9:1028–1035. [PubMed: 16819521] 
Shah AJ, Lampert R, Goldberg J, Veledar E, Bremner JD, Vaccarino V. Posttraumatic stress disorder 
and impaired autonomic modulation in male twins. Biol Psychiatry. 2013; 73:1103–1110. 
[PubMed: 23434412] 
Shaikh al arab A, Guedon-Moreau L, Ducrocq F, Molenda S, Duhem S, Salleron J, Chaudieu I, Bert D, 
Libersa C, Vaiva G. Temporal analysis of heart rate variability as a predictor of post traumatic 
stress disorder in road traffic accidents survivors. J Psychiatr Res. 2012; 46:790–796. [PubMed: 
22425487] 
Sheline YI, Barch DM, Price JL, Rundle MM, Vaishnavi SN, Snyder AZ, Mintun MA, Wang S, 
Coalson RS, Raichle ME. The default mode network and self-referential processes in depression. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:1942–1947. [PubMed: 19171889] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 27
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Shepard RN. Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological science. Science. 1987; 
237:1317–1323. [PubMed: 3629243] 
Shin LM, Liberzon I. The neurocircuitry of fear, stress, and anxiety disorders. [Review]. 
Neuropsychopharmacology: official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010; 35:169–191. [PubMed: 19625997] 
Shin LM, Orr SP, Carson MA, Rauch SL, Macklin ML, Lasko NB, Peters PM, Metzger LJ, Dougherty 
DD, Cannistraro PA, et al. Regional cerebral blood flow in the amygdala and medial prefrontal 
cortex during traumatic imagery in male and female Vietnam veterans with PTSD. Archives of 
general psychiatry. 2004; 61:168–176. [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t Research Support, 
U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S. Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, P.H.S.]. [PubMed: 14757593] 
Sierra-Mercado D, Padilla-Coreano N, Quirk GJ. Dissociable roles of prelimbic and infralimbic 
cortices, ventral hippocampus, and basolateral amygdala in the expression and extinction of 
conditioned fear. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011; 36:529–538. [PubMed: 20962768] 
Sijbrandij M, Kleiboer A, Bisson JI, Barbui C, Cuijpers P. Pharmacological prevention of post-
traumatic stress disorder and acute stress disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 
Psychiatry. 2015; 2:413–421. [PubMed: 26360285] 
Simmons A, Matthews SC, Stein MB, Paulus MP. Anticipation of emotionally aversive visual stimuli 
activates right insula. Neuroreport. 2004; 15:2261–2265. [Comparative Study Research Support, 
U.S. Gov’t, Non-P.H.S. Research Support, U.S. Gov’t, P.H.S.]. [PubMed: 15371746] 
Smith EE, Jonides J. Storage and executive processes in the frontal lobes. Science. 1999; 283:1657–
1661. [PubMed: 10073923] 
Southwick SM, Paige S, Morgan CA 3rd, Bremner JD, Krystal JH, Charney DS. Neurotransmitter 
alterations in PTSD: catecholamines and serotonin. Semin Clin Neuropsychiatry. 1999; 4:242–
248. [PubMed: 10553029] 
Spielberg JM, McGlinchey RE, Milberg WP, Salat DH. Brain network disturbance related to 
posttraumatic stress and traumatic brain injury in veterans. Biol Psychiatry. 2015; 78:210–216. 
[PubMed: 25818631] 
Sripada RK, King AP, Welsh RC, Garfinkel SN, Wang X, Sripada CS, Liberzon I. Neural 
dysregulation in posttraumatic stress disorder: evidence for disrupted equilibrium between 
salience and default mode brain networks. Psychosom Med. 2012; 74:904–911. [PubMed: 
23115342] 
Sutherland RJ, Lehmann H. Alternative conceptions of memory consolidation and the role of the 
hippocampus at the systems level in rodents. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2011; 21:446–451. [PubMed: 
21592780] 
Thayer JF, Hansen AL, Saus-Rose E, Johnsen BH. Heart rate variability, prefrontal neural function, 
and cognitive performance: the neurovisceral integration perspective on self-regulation, 
adaptation, and health. Ann Behav Med. 2009; 37:141–153. [PubMed: 19424767] 
Thomas MJ, Moody TD, Makhinson M, O’Dell TJ. Activity-dependent beta-adrenergic modulation of 
low frequency stimulation induced LTP in the hippocampal CA1 region. Neuron. 1996; 17:475–
482. [PubMed: 8816710] 
van der Kolk BA, Greenberg MS, Orr SP, Pitman RK. Endogenous opioids, stress induced analgesia, 
and posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychopharmacol Bull. 1989; 25:417–421. [PubMed: 2626517] 
van Rooij SJ, Geuze E, Kennis M, Rademaker AR, Vink M. Neural correlates of inhibition and 
contextual cue processing related to treatment response in PTSD. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2015; 40:667–675. [PubMed: 25154707] 
van Rooij SJ, Kennis M, Vink M, Geuze E. Predicting Treatment Outcome in PTSD: A Longitudinal 
Functional MRI Study on Trauma-Unrelated Emotional Processing. Neuropsychopharmacology: 
official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016; 41:1156–1165. 
[PubMed: 26289143] 
Vanderheyden WM, Poe GR, Liberzon I. Trauma exposure and sleep: using a rodent model to 
understand sleep function in PTSD. [Review]. Experimental brain research. 2014; 232:1575–
1584. [PubMed: 24623353] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 28
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 VanElzakker MB, Dahlgren MK, Davis FC, Dubois S, Shin LM. From Pavlov to PTSD: the extinction 
of conditioned fear in rodents, humans, and anxiety disorders. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2014; 
113:3–18. [PubMed: 24321650] 
Veit R, Flor H, Erb M, Hermann C, Lotze M, Grodd W, Birbaumer N. Brain circuits involved in 
emotional learning in antisocial behavior and social phobia in humans. Neurosci Lett. 2002; 
328:233–236. [PubMed: 12147314] 
White S, Acierno R, Ruggiero KJ, Koenen KC, Kilpatrick DG, Galea S, Gelernter J, Williamson V, 
McMichael O, Vladimirov VI, et al. Association of CRHR1 variants and posttraumatic stress 
symptoms in hurricane exposed adults. J Anxiety Disord. 2013; 27:678–683. [PubMed: 
24077033] 
Wilker S, Pfeiffer A, Elbert T, Ovuga E, Karabatsiakis A, Krumbholz A, Thieme D, Schelling G, 
Kolassa IT. Endocannabinoid concentrations in hair are associated with PTSD symptom severity. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2016; 67:198–206. [PubMed: 26923850] 
Wingenfeld K, Whooley MA, Neylan TC, Otte C, Cohen BE. Effect of current and lifetime 
posttraumatic stress disorder on 24-h urinary catecholamines and cortisol: results from the Mind 
Your Heart Study. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2015; 52:83–91. [PubMed: 25459895] 
Xu W, Sudhof TC. A neural circuit for memory specificity and generalization. Science. 2013; 
339:1290–1295. [PubMed: 23493706] 
Yamamoto S, Morinobu S, Takei S, Fuchikami M, Matsuki A, Yamawaki S, Liberzon I. Single 
prolonged stress: toward an animal model of posttraumatic stress disorder. Depress Anxiety. 
2009; 26:1110–1117. [PubMed: 19918929] 
Yassa MA, Stark CE. Pattern separation in the hippocampus. Trends Neurosci. 2011; 34:515–525. 
[PubMed: 21788086] 
Yehuda R. Biology of posttraumatic stress disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2001; 62(Suppl 17):41–46.
Yehuda R, Bierer LM, Pratchett LC, Lehrner A, Koch EC, Van Manen JA, Flory JD, Makotkine I, 
Hildebrandt T. Cortisol augmentation of a psychological treatment for warfighters with 
posttraumatic stress disorder: Randomized trial showing improved treatment retention and 
outcome. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2015; 51:589–597. [PubMed: 25212409] 
Yehuda R, Boisoneau D, Lowy MT, Giller EL Jr. Dose-response changes in plasma cortisol and 
lymphocyte glucocorticoid receptors following dexamethasone administration in combat veterans 
with and without posttraumatic stress disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1995; 52:583–593. 
[PubMed: 7598635] 
Yehuda R, Brand SR, Golier JA, Yang RK. Clinical correlates of DHEA associated with post-traumatic 
stress disorder. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2006; 114:187–193. [PubMed: 16889589] 
Yehuda R, Kahana B, Binder-Brynes K, Southwick SM, Mason JW, Giller EL. Low urinary cortisol 
excretion in Holocaust survivors with posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 1995; 
152:982–986. [PubMed: 7793468] 
Yehuda R, Southwick SM, Krystal JH, Bremner D, Charney DS, Mason JW. Enhanced suppression of 
cortisol following dexamethasone administration in posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J 
Psychiatry. 1993; 150:83–86. [PubMed: 8417586] 
Yehuda R, Southwick SM, Nussbaum G, Wahby V, Giller EL Jr, Mason JW. Low urinary cortisol 
excretion in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. J Nerv Ment Dis. 1990; 178:366–369. 
[PubMed: 2348190] 
Yehuda R, Teicher MH, Trestman RL, Levengood RA, Siever LJ. Cortisol regulation in posttraumatic 
stress disorder and major depression: a chronobiological analysis. Biol Psychiatry. 1996; 40:79–
88. [PubMed: 8793040] 
Zelikowsky M, Hersman S, Chawla MK, Barnes CA, Fanselow MS. Neuronal ensembles in amygdala, 
hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex track differential components of contextual fear. J Neurosci. 
2014; 34:8462–8466. [PubMed: 24948801] 
Zhang Y, Liu F, Chen H, Li M, Duan X, Xie B, Chen H. Intranetwork and internetwork functional 
connectivity alterations in post-traumatic stress disorder. J Affect Disord. 2015; 187:114–121. 
[PubMed: 26331685] 
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 29
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Existing models of PTSD pathophysiology implicate neurocircuits subserving fear 
learning, salience detection, and emotion regulation. However, much remains 
unexplained. Liberzon and Abelson offer a novel, parsimonious model of hippocampal-
prefrontal-thalamic dysregulation creating context processing deficits that contribute to 
PTSD symptom development.
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 30
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Neural circuits within the Basolateral Complex (BLC) of the Amygdala. Altered functioning 
within BLC circuits has been implicated in the Abnormal Fear Learning model of PTSD 
(see text). Interrupted lines represent distal inputs to and outputs from BLC.
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 31
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Brain regions of the Salience Network. Abnormal function within Salience Network regions 
is implicated in the Exaggerated Threat Detection model of PTSD (see text).
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 32
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Brain regions involved in executive function and emotional regulation. Abnormal function in 
these regions has been implicated in the Diminished Executive Function and Emotional 
Regulation model of PTSD (see text).
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 33
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Brain circuits involved in contextual processing functions. Abnormal function within these 
circuits is implicated in the Deficient Contextual Processing model of PTSD (see text). 
Information flow in this circuit includes Locus Coeruleus (LC) adrenergic neurons (shown 
in schematic but not visible in depicted brain slices).
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 34
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Contextual processing abnormalities in the Single Prolonged Stress animal model of PTSD 
(Panels A and B) and in PTSD patients (Panels C, D and E). Panel A – Schematic depiction 
of the SPS paradigm, which involves multiple stressors delivered sequentially in one day and 
then a 7 day “rest” period, followed by fear conditioning, extinction and renewal testing. 
Panel B – data using this paradigm show abnormal fear renewal in SPS animals (seen on the 
right, in line graph and summary bar graph). Panel C – Schematic depiction (including 
screen shots) of the paradigm used to examine fear conditioning, extinction, extinction recall 
and fear renewal in fMRI experiments with humans. Panels D and E – data using this 
paradigm with PTSD patients and combat control (CC) subjects show abnormal extinction 
recall (D) and abnormal fear renewal (E) in PTSD (skin conductance data shown on right in 
both panels). Differences in fMRI activations in PTSD compared to controls, in response to 
previously conditioned and then extinguished stimuli (CS+E), are shown on the left in both 
panels.
Liberzon and Abelson
Page 35
Neuron. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
