 100
Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
Key points
●
●
A simple ultrasonography unit is fully adequate, with minimal filters, and provides a unique probe for integrating the lung into a holistic, 
whole-body approach to the critically ill.
●
●
Interstitial syndrome is strictly defined. Its clinical relevance in the critically ill is standardised for defining haemodynamic pulmonary 
oedema, pneumonia and pulmonary embolism.
●
●
Pneumothorax is strictly and sequentially defined by the A′-profile (at the anterior wall in a supine or semirecumbent patient, abolished 
lung siding plus the A-line sign) and then the lung point.
●
●
The BLUE protocol integrates lung and venous ultrasound findings for expediting the diagnosis of acute respiratory failure, following 
pathophysiology, allowing prompt diagnosis of pneumonia, haemodynamic pulmonary oedema, exacerbated chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease or asthma, pulmonary embolism or pneumothorax, even in clinically challenging presentations.
Educational aims
●
●
To understand that the use of lung ultrasound, although long standardised, still needs educational efforts for its best use, a suitable 
machine, a suitable universal probe and an appropriate culture.
●
●
To be able to use a terminology that has been fully standardised to avoid any confusion of useless wording.
●
●
To understand the logic of the BLUE points, three points of interest enabling expedition of a lung ultrasound examination in acute 
respiratory failure.
●
●
To be able to cite, in the correct hierarchy, the seven criteria of the B-line, then those of interstitial syndrome.
●
●
To understand the sequential thinking when making ultrasound diagnosis of pneumothorax.
●
●
To be able to use the BLUE protocol for building profiles of pneumonia (or acute respiratory distress syndrome) and understand their limitations.
●
●
To understand that lung ultrasound can be used for the direct analysis of an acute respiratory failure (the BLUE protocol), an acute 
circulatory failure (the FALLS protocol) and even a cardiac arrest (SESAME protocol), following a pathophysiological approach.
●
●
To understand that the first sequential target in the SESAME protocol (search first for pneumothorax in cardiac arrest) can also be used in 
countless more quiet settings of countless disciplines, making lung ultrasound in the critically ill cost-, time- and radiation-saving.
●
●
To be able to perform a BLUE protocol in challenging patients, understanding how the best lung ultrasound can be obtained from 
bariatric or agitated, dyspnoeic patients.
Credit:  woodleywonderworks, Flickr
 http://doi.org/10.1183/20734735.004717 
Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
101
This review article is an update of what should be known for practicing basic lung ultrasound in the 
critically ill (LUCI) and is also of interest for less critical disciplines (e.g. pulmonology). It pinpoints 
on the necessity of a professional machine (not necessarily a sophisticated one) and probe. It lists 
the 10 main signs of LUCI and some of the main protocols made possible using LUCI: the BLUE 
protocol for a respiratory failure, the FALLS protocol for a circulatory failure, the SESAME protocol 
for a cardiac arrest and the investigation of a ventilated acute respiratory distress syndrome patient, 
etc. It shows how the field has been fully standardised to avoid confusion.
D.Licht@free.fr
Daniel Lichtenstein
Hopital Ambroise-Paré, Boulogne (Paris West), France.
Ultrasound was a quiet field. When ultrasonography 
of the heart became the domain of the cardiologists 
and that of the uterus, the purview of gynaeco-
obstetricians, the rest of the body was quietly given 
to the radiologists. The advent of lung ultrasound, 
a field ignored (and perhaps rejected [1]) by experts 
from the beginning, has changed the landscape. 
We are glad to see that pioneering work, such as 
that of CEURF (Cercle des Echographistes d’Urgence 
 
et de Réanimation Francophones), has contributed 
to taking ultrasound out of its traditional place as a 
“minor technique”, especially at the era of computed 
tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging, 
to become a first-line clinical tool.
Currently, lung ultrasound is used by increas-
ing numbers of physicians and, more interestingly, 
by increasing numbers of specialties. We are not 
keen on strong words and prefer to use soft ones: 
lung ultrasound has originated a change in clinical 
practice. Where are we now?
This review article is an opportunity to show that 
lung ultrasound has created a unique situation in 
medicine, from the biomedical engineering point 
of view: engineers are beginning to come back to 
older technologies, favouring more efficient use of 
lung ultrasound in the critically ill (LUCI).
The philosophy of LUCI
Doctors have used various tools for assessing lung 
function, from the stethoscope to CT [2–4]. After 
a long and cautious phase of observation, they 
increasingly began to adopt lung ultrasound, opening 
up a new “philosophy”. In fact, the inclusion of LUCI 
changes many aspects of the essence of ultrasound, 
Novel approaches to 
ultrasonography of the lung and 
pleural space: where are we now?
@ ERSpublications
What you need to know to practice basic lung ultrasound in the critically ill: the BLUE, FALLS 
and SESAME protocols http://ow.ly/uDx630aNUN1
Cite as: Lichtenstein D. Novel 
approaches to ultrasonography 
of the lung and pleural space: 
where are we now? Breathe 
2017; 13: 100–111.
 102
Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
and not only critical ultrasound (all doctors with a 
stethoscope in their pocket should be affected). In the 
philosophy of LUCI, there is no space for confusion; 
the machine, the probe, the signatures and the 
applications are considered with a holistic perspective.
The tools for practicing LUCI
The development of the tools for LUCI is the main 
change in the field in recent years. Previously, we 
had been using a 1982 technology (the ADR-4000) 
to develop, since 1989 (after underground years 
from 1984), critical care ultrasound, including of 
the lung. We still use everyday a 1992 Japanese 
technology (the latest update, being purely 
cosmetic, in 2008).
CEURF has defined seven criteria that an 
ultrasound machine must meet for you to be able 
to face the worst (i.e. cardiac arrest). Fortunately, the 
same equipment and approach are also perfect for 
other applications, from inserting a central venous 
line to checking bladder emptying, etc.). Although a 
given ultrasound machine may not necessarily meet 
all of our criteria, the more criteria your equipment 
does meet, the better prepared you will be for the 
greatest range of applications.
1) The machine must be small (for rapidly 
accessing the patient at the bedside). In 
hospitals, the obstacles are lateral, which 
means that a laptop is of use only if its lateral 
dimensions (cart included) are small (smaller 
than our 1992 reference of 32 cm wide). We 
ask the user to consider that they have never 
seen their laptops outside the cart. The cart, 
in addition, allows one to keep the machine 
clean (see later), to work with two hands (we 
are unable to perform critical ultrasound with 
only one hand), to have all of the equipment 
on site (interventional equipment, etc.) and to 
work at an ergonomic height. The cart is really 
a mandatory adjunct. Only few professions will 
take advantage of handheld machines (e.g. 
those working, like us, in medical aeroplanes).
2) The image must meet a minimal quality 
standard. Ultrasound is a nice example of 
vicious circle: when digital technologies came, 
this was a spectacular step backward in image 
quality. Now, they are little by little reaching 
the quality of the older analogue technologies. 
Hence, the need for compound and harmonics, 
which (see later) have sacrificed the lung to the 
advantage of less critical organs.
3) The machine must have a fast start-up time. 
Long delays must be avoided in cases of cardiac 
arrest. It helps if the machine is used many 
times a day. Ours has a 7-s start-up time, which 
is the fastest machine in the market.
4) A universal probe is needed. Fortunately, the 
Japanese microconvex probe we has use since 
1992 has quite perfect resolution (see figures), 
range (from 0.6 to 17 cm, i.e. a whole-body 
approach) and length (8 cm, giving the 
possibility to scan posterior areas in supine, 
ventilated patients).
5) A simple device is needed. While most clinicians 
do not have the skill of traditional experts 
(radiologists, cardiologists, etc.), in the event 
of a cardiac arrest, the comfort afforded by this 
skill is of no value. In our day-to-day practise, 
we use only three buttons (B mode/M mode, 
depth and gain). For cardiac arrest, we use no 
buttons at all (see later). We have never used 
Doppler ultrasonography in the past 28 years, 
including in other areas (venous assessment, 
etc.). The filters and facilities (dynamic noise, 
average, compound and harmonics), which are 
not bad for obtaining beautiful images of plain 
organs, can hinder LUCI: precious artefacts are 
erased and real-time imaging is affected by the 
informatic systems that rebuild the image, 
resulting in a confusing delay.
6) The unit must be compact, for efficient 
cleaning. Our 1982 and 1992 technologies 
have a flat keyboard. We developed a simple, 
fast and efficient cleaning protocol, detailed in 
all our textbooks [5].
7) The machine must be affordable. Criteria 4 
and 5 make this possible. Our machine cost 
€15 
000 in 1992.
We find many modern machines often make 
performing lung ultrasound a bit difficult, despite 
being accustomed to using them in many workshops. 
If we (with 28 years of experience in our intensive 
care unit (ICU) and 32 years in total) struggle, we 
would guess that doctors who have less experience 
will struggle more. In workshops, everything is quiet 
and calm. In extreme emergencies, every second 
is of the essence. We give here some tips for those 
who have laptops, since even the worst machine can 
be of help. We advise carefully deleting useless and 
deleterious filters, and bypassing all of them. I advise 
using the abdominal probe first, acknowledging also 
that it can rapidly becoming limiting (in posterior 
areas, in areas of difficult access, due to the need 
for a superficial resolution, etc.). However, we are 
glad to see that, increasingly since very recently, 
some manufacturers have begun to build machines 
with real simplicity. “Intelligent” machines are little 
by little elegantly competing with these laptops full 
of buttons and dust (and microbes), with endless 
start-up times, large widths, opaque algorithms, 
high cost, etc.
The seven principles of LUCI
The seven principles of LUCI have not changed since 
2001 [6], apart from a slight update to principle 7.
1) A simple technique is still suitable.
2) The thorax is an area where air and water 
(gas and fluids for purists) can mingle. 
 Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
103
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
They follow the rules of gravity. One can define a 
macro-gas/fluid ratio (e.g. pleural effusion and 
aerated lung) and a micro-gas/fluid ratio, for 
defining the situation where in a minute place, 
the two elements coexist (e.g. an oedematous 
subpleural interlobular septum surrounded 
by air).
3) The lung is the widest organ; areas of interest 
must be defined (the BLUE points).
4) All signatures arise from the pleural line.
5) Artefacts, although usually considered a 
hindrance, have critical relevance in lung 
ultrasound.
6) The lung is the most vital organ. Like all vital 
organs, it is dynamic. The main dynamic is 
referred to as lung sliding.
7) All life-threatening disorders abut the chest 
wall. Update: and almost all, even small ones, 
have an extensive location (e.g. a pneumothorax 
can be small but visible in a rather large 
projection).
The technical approach 
to a critically ill patient
We must first define the areas of investigation. Those 
we use in an emergency comprise three strictly 
defined points, although LUCI principle 7 allows 
a certain flexibility. These BLUE points are defined 
by applying one’s hands to the patient’s thorax, in 
order to make finding the ultrasonographic field 
easier (figure 1).
In critical settings, movement comes from the 
lung, the chest wall (severe dyspnoea) and the whole 
body of critically ill, anxious patients. The physician 
should not add their own movement and should 
hold the probe gently but firmly in order to be able to 
understand the dynamics of lung ultrasound. Severe 
dyspnoea generates contractions of the accessory 
muscles, in which case, some expertise is required, 
although the procedure is made easier by using a 
standardised analysis, mostly using the M-mode 
(describing Keye’s sign; the Avicenne sign would 
be too long in the given volume).
The main signatures seen 
in the critically ill
Considering the way LUCI is sometimes described 
and taught, we will take the opportunity here to 
remind you of the definitions of the disorders. 
Our training centre aims to explain our choice (of 
equipment, probe and signatures) with the result 
of demonstrating that all confusion, which is still 
frequent in this field, can be avoided because LUCI as 
taught by CEURF is completely standardised. There 
is no room for confusion in LUCI. Often, lectures 
on lung ultrasound deal with pleural effusion, lung 
consolidation, and more rarely, interstitial syndrome 
and pneumothorax, but the normal pattern is rarely 
described. A brief description of the normal lung 
surface is critical, since it is seen in various diseases.
Normal lung surface
Merlin’s space is defined in a longitudinal scan 
as the surface delimited by the pleural line, the 
shadow of the ribs and the bottom of the screen. 
Lung sliding is strictly defined as a homogeneous 
twinkling (shimmering, sparkling or glittering) of 
Merlin’s space. This definition indicates that lung 
sliding must begin at the pleural line. The A-line 
is a repetition of the pleural line in the Merlin’s 
space. At the anterior chest wall in a supine or 
semirecumbent patient, lung sliding with A-lines 
strictly defines the A-profile. The A-profile is a 
practical term for sharing maximal information in 
minimal time. See figure 2 for more details.
Pleural effusion
Pleural effusion is clearly defined using the concept 
of the lung line, a regular line roughly parallel to 
the pleural line. At CEURF, no tone (hypo- or 
hyperechoic) is needed, which is an advantage 
because then only anechoic effusions appear 
anechoic (if the pleural effusion was defined as an 
anechoic collection, the most life-threatening cases 
would not be diagnosed) (figure 3).
Lung consolidation
The shred sign (or fractal sign) is of value for 
immediately diagnosing nontranslobar cases of 
lung consolidation, which are the most frequent 
(figure 4). The term “subpleural” is useless in the 
world of LUCI: each time a consolidation is seen 
a)
b)
Posterior 
axillary line
Figure 1 The BLUE points. The BLUE points respect LUCI principles 3 and 7. They have been 
made simple for expediting protocols without loss of information. a) The upper BLUE hand (here 
the hand of the operator, who has checked that the patient’s hand is approximately the same 
size; if not, rough adaptations are performed) is applied just below the clavicle and parallel to 
it, the tips of fingers touching the midline. The upper BLUE point is defined at the middle of the 
upper BLUE hand. The lower BLUE hand is applied just below. The lower BLUE point is defined 
at the middle of the palm of the lower BLUE hand. The heart is usually avoided using this way. 
The lung usually stops at the lower finger. b) The PLAPS point is defined by drawing a transverse 
line from the lower BLUE point until the posterior axillar line is reached (or better, as posterior as 
possible). Note that the insertion of the probe between the (supine, ventilated) patient and bed 
sometimes makes perfect acquisition difficult but this makes the posterior lung of such patients 
accessible to ultrasound.
 104
Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
using ultrasound, whether it is minute or huge, 
it is subpleural. We would guess that those who 
use this term mean “small” consolidations, so we 
would advise the term “small” be used instead 
of “subpleural”. In translobar cases, no shred 
sign can be seen and the image observed is a 
whole anatomical lung with a tissue-like pattern 
that one may call, temporarily, the lung sign 
(figure 5). Atelectasis is a notion that generates 
some confusion. To begin with, many authors 
oppose atelectasis to consolidation: atelectasis 
is a (retractile) consolidation. Authors describe 
passive atelectasis, due to pleural effusion (and 
we ask, so where does the effusion come from?). 
The only worthwhile atelectasis is the obstructive 
form. Complete obstructive atelectasis (e.g. foreign 
body aspiration) generates immediate functional 
signs (abolition of lung sliding with, usually, lung 
pulse) and delayed morphological signs: usually no 
air bronchogram but if any, never dynamic ones; 
and loss of lung volume with attraction of the 
surrounding organs.
Posterolateral alveolar and/or 
pleural syndrome
The notion of posterolateral alveolar and/or pleural 
syndrome (PLAPS) has great relevance in the 
BLUE protocol. At the PLAPS point, the detection 
of an alveolar, pleural, mixed or even ill-defined 
but otherwise structural image is called a PLAPS 
(figures 3–5). This can simplify the use of LUCI, 
especially in difficult (bariatric) patients, since the 
distinction does not impact the accuracy of the BLUE 
protocol (subtle distinctions should be made once 
the BLUE protocol is perfectly mastered, not before). 
Figure 3 Pleural effusion. Longitudinal scan at the PLAPS 
point. The pleural effusion is defined not because of (as 
shown here) a hypoechoic tone but by the appearance of 
the lung line (lower white arrows), which indicates the vis-
ceral pleura. The pleural line, which is clearly visible (upper 
white arrows) indicates here only the parietal pleura. All 
effusions, anechoic or echoic, can be diagnosed using the 
lung line. The volume of this effusion can be measured using 
a simple index. Note the underlying nontranslobar lung con-
solidation (subpleural, of course) with the shred sign (black 
arrows). The quad sign just describes the rough trapezium 
defined by the pleural line, the shadow of the ribs and the 
lung line. This is a typical example of (mixed) PLAPS.
Figure 4 Nontranslobar lung consolidation. Longitudinal 
scan at the PLAPS point. No lung line is present, i.e. there is 
no pleural effusion. A tissue-like image with a mostly frac-
tal, deep boundary with the aerated underlying lung, the 
shred sign (or fractal sign), makes the diagnosis of a non-
translobar lung consolidation (which is, of course, subpleu-
ral). This is an example of PLAPS. If found anteriorly, this 
would be an example of the C-profile. Black arrows: fractal 
line. White arrows: ribs.
Figure 2 The A-profile. This single figure shows multiple data. The bat sign appears in the left 
image. The upper and lower ribs (black arrows) indicate the location of the pleural line (upper 
white arrows), which must be 0.5 cm (in adults) below the rib line. This works in extreme condi-
tions (major dyspnoea, agitation, etc.). The pleural line always indicates the parietal pleura but 
indicates the visceral pleura only when joined. Merlin’s space defines the area located between 
the pleural line, the shadow of the ribs and the bottom of the image. The A-line (lower white 
arrows) is the repetition of the pleural line at a standardised distance, the skin–pleural line dis-
tance. The A-line indicates gas below the pleural line. The seashore sign: on the right image, one 
can see an upper rectangle (called Keye’s space) with a stratified pattern and a lower rectangle 
with a sandy pattern (the M-mode of Merlin’s space) both separated exactly by the pleural line 
(continuation of the white arrows from the left image). Note that with intelligent technology, 
both images are not only aligned but, mostly, exactly aligned, unlike on many modern machines. 
The seashore sign demonstrates lung sliding. We can see that lung sliding arises strictly from 
the pleural line, not 1 mm above or below. The A-profile is the anterior association of both 
images, i.e. A-lines plus lung sliding. The A-profile indicates a pulmonary artery occlusion pres-
sure <18 mmHg, a basic datum in a circulatory failure (FALLS protocol).
 Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
105
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
Using the PLAPS point, very posterior disorders can 
be detected, which is better, of course, than with 
lateral views that are sometimes advised. Note that 
abdominal probes have a limited ergonomy, and the 
cardiac probes a limited resolution for the analysis 
of PLAPS in supine patients.
Interstitial syndrome
Interstitial syndrome is clearly defined when more 
than two B-lines are visible between two ribs. We 
propose a hierarchy of signs that allows universal 
definition (figure 6). Using this standardised 
definition, comet-tail artefacts such as the E-line 
(seen in the case of parietal emphysema) or Z-line 
(interference) will not be confused with B-lines. We 
would like to add that the expression “more than 
three B-lines” makes no sense for diagnosis.
Pneumothorax
Little has changed in the ultrasonographic 
diagnosis of pneumothorax. Pneumothorax is still 
S
Figure 5 Translobar lung consolidation. This is another 
example of PLAPS. Four points can be described here. 
First, in this longitudinal view at the PLAPS point, there is 
a huge, whole lower left lobe consolidation (subpleural, of 
course). Novice users often see here “a lung”, unaware that 
the normally aerated lung cannot be seen this anatomical 
way, so this sign may be called, simply, the “lung sign”. 
It indicates translobar consolidation. The deep border is 
rectilinear, not shredded: the mediastinal pleura. Second, 
no air bronchogram is visible: air bronchograms are not 
needed for the diagnosis (dynamic air bronchograms would 
allow consideration that this consolidation is not retractile, 
among several signs). Third, this consolidation is homo-
geneous (abscesses and necrosis can generate hypoechoic 
areas) and has no loss of volume: the spleen (S) is in the 
normal place, another sign that would demonstrate the 
nonretractile origin of this consolidation. Fourth, this 
image comes from an ADR-4000, a portable unit from 
1982, which we used to describe all of the signatures of 
lung ultrasound (which shows that the modern machines, 
especially the laptop units, were not necessary for the birth 
of bedside lung ultrasound). The diaphragm can be seen 
between the lung and spleen.
Figure 6 Interstitial syndrome and lung rockets. This fig-
ure presents most of the criteria of the B-line (the elemen-
tary sign). The B-line is defined using seven criteria, three 
of which are always present: a comet-tail artefact; arising 
from the pleural line; moving in concert with lung sliding 
(when lung sliding is present). The other four criteria are 
almost always present: long; well-defined; erasing A-lines; 
hyperechoic. This definition works in all situations and 
avoids confusion with other comet-tail artefacts that are 
not B-lines. The resulting sign, lung rockets, indicates that 
more than two B-lines are visible between two ribs. Three 
or four B-lines make the pattern called septal rockets and 
correlate with Kerley’s lines (subpleural interlobular septa). 
Five or more (the maximum seems to be 10) make a pattern 
called ground-glass rockets, as they correlate with ground-
glass lesions. It is easy to count here six B-lines, a pattern 
correlating with ground-glass lesions on computed tomog-
raphy. Lung rockets indicate interstitial syndrome.
Figure 7 Pneumothorax and the A′-profile. The A′-profile is defined anteriorly in supine 
patients. It comprises (anteriorly in supine patients) abolished lung sliding and the A-line sign 
(no B-line should be observed). Abolished lung sliding can be identified in M-mode (right image) 
by the stratospheric pattern, the “stratosphere sign”. Note the intelligent technology: both 
images are strictly aligned. The pleural line, which is impossible to detect by looking only at the 
right image, is clearly located using the left image (arrow). Note that there is no “barcode sign” 
at CEURF for several reasons, one of them being due to the recent introduction barcodes, which 
may add more confusion to the field.
 106
Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
defined by a sequential approach, first recognising 
the A′-profile (which is anterior, by definition). This 
A′-profile is constant (figure 7). Second, finding a 
lung point, i.e. extending from the area with the 
A′-profile laterally until this point is found. The 
lung point is defined as follows: once, and only 
once, an A′-profile has been detected, the probe 
is moved until one finds the sudden appearance of 
lung signs (lung sliding and B-lines), synchronous 
with respiration (figure 8). The lung point indicates 
pneumothorax. It also indicates its volume: radio-
occult and minor if anterior, moderate if lateral, 
substantial if seen at the PLAPS point, and major 
if para-Rachidian or not found. In this last case, 
the use of the extended BLUE protocol allows 
easy diagnosis, since major cases are recognised 
clinically and, here, ultrasound provides a critical, 
additional argument.
The main clinical applications 
in the critically ill
Three main protocols are taught at CEURF that 
summarise the main needs of the critical care 
physician, i.e. prompt diagnosis of respiratory 
failure, circulatory failure and cardiac arrest. These 
are defined below.
Respiratory failure: the BLUE 
protocol
The BLUE protocol (figure 9) draws on the experience 
of 18 years of use of lung and venous ultrasound 
for standardising prompt diagnosis of the cause of 
a respiratory failure. The decision tree shows the 
six main diseases, which were seen in 97% of the 
adult patients seen in our emergency department 
and admitted to our ICU. Countless rare diseases 
make up the remaining 3%.
Six profiles are defined at the anterior chest wall; 
one (the A-profile) giving three subprofiles, making 
eight profiles in all. The accuracy of each profile is 
presented in table 1.
●
●
The A-profile was described above (figure 2). It 
requires a venous analysis (the specific protocol 
is too long to describe here). The combination 
of the A-profile and a deep venous thrombosis 
(DVT), called the A-DVT profile, is associated with 
pulmonary embolism.
●
●
The B-profile combines lung sliding with lung 
rockets at the four anterior BLUE points. It 
is usually associated with haemodynamic 
pulmonary oedema.
●
●
The B′-profile combines abolished lung sliding 
with diffuse anterior lung rockets. It is associated 
with pneumonia.
●
●
The A/B-profile describes a half A-profile in 
one lung and a half B-profile in the other. It is 
associated with pneumonia.
●
●
The C-profile describes anterior lung 
consolidation (regardless of number or size), 
typically indicating pneumonia.
●
●
The A-profile with no DVT and with a PLAPS, 
called the A-V-PLAPS profile, is associated with 
pneumonia.
●
●
The A-profile with no DVT and no PLAPS, called 
the nude profile (everything normal) is linked 
to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
exacerbation or asthma.
●
●
The A′-profile combines anterior abolished lung 
sliding with exclusive A-lines. It is suggestive 
of pneumothorax, a definite diagnosis if a lung 
point is also present.
Many subtleties cannot be dealt with here, such 
as how to diagnose acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS) (briefly, the profiles are the 
same as for pneumonia [8]), how to manage rare 
diagnoses or multiple diagnoses, how to locate the 
heart when following the BLUE protocol (briefly, just 
after), and does the BLUE protocol work in children 
or neonates, in wealthy and poor areas of the world 
(briefly, yes) [5].
CEURF has attracted some attention regarding 
the terms seen in some of the literature and the use 
of the word “profile”, such as the B1, B2-profiles. 
Figure 8 Pneumothorax and the lung point. A character-
istic lung point is shown. This M-mode image shows one 
main pattern of the lung point. At the point where the col-
lapsed lung increases slightly its volume and touches more 
of the thoracic wall, one can see the lung pattern suddenly 
replacing the A′-profile, as shown using M-mode imaging. 
The lung point is a pathognomonic sign of pneumothorax. 
Never forget that a lung point must never be sought if no 
A′-profile has been identified in the first step (lest confusion 
occur, slowing the learning curve). Arrow: location of the 
pleural line.
 Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
107
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
These terms can cause confusion as they do not 
specify the quality of lung sliding, which is a critical 
datum. We use instead the simple and descriptive 
terms “septal rockets” and “ground-glass rockets” 
to avoid confusion (and aid memory). There is no 
confusion in the world of LUCI.
Acute circulatory failure: 
the FALLS protocol
In the absence of a firm gold standard for the 
clinical assessment of volaemia, we  present here 
the approach that we propose for the community 
Lung sliding
(Upper and lower BLUE points)
Any
Abolished
Present
A-profile
Thrombosed vein
Free veins
No PLAPS
PLAPS
B-profile
Pulmonary
oedema
A/B or
C-profile
Sequential
venous analysis
Pulmonary
embolism
Stage 3
(PLAPS point)
Pneumonia
COPD or asthma
Pneumonia
Pneumonia
B'-profile
A'-profile
Without
lung point
Need for other 
diagnostic 
modalities
Plus
lung point
Pneumothorax
Figure 9 Decision tree of the BLUE protocol. This decision tree, which has been made as simple as possible, may appear complex to some. In actual fact, it 
simplifies the huge body of knowledge that any physician dealing with respiratory failure should master (anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, clinical signs, 
imaging and biological or other paraclinical signs). It is not designed to provide 100% of diagnoses of acute dyspnoea; it has been simplified with a target overall 
accuracy just over 90% (90.5%). Reproduced and modified from [7] with permission from the publisher.
Table 1 Accuracy of BLUE protocol
Mechanism of dyspnoea
BLUE protocol profile
Sensitivity
Specificity
Positive 
predictive 
value
Negative 
predictive 
value
Acute haemodynamic 
pulmonary oedema
B-profile
97%
95%
87%
99%
Exacerbated COPD or 
severe acute asthma
Nude profile (A-profile with 
no DVT and no PLAPS)
89%
97%
93%
95%
Pulmonary embolism
A-profile with DVT
81%
99%
94%
98%
Pneumothorax
A′-profile (with lung point)
88%
100%
100%
99%
Pneumonia
All profiles#
89%
94%
88%
95%
 B′-profile
11%
100%
100%
70%
 A/B-profile
14.5%
100%
100%
71.5%
 C-profile
21.5%
99%
90%
73%
 A-V-PLAPS profile
42%
96%
83%
78%
COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; DVT: deep venous thrombosis. #: sensitivity calculated by adding the sensitivity of 
each of the four profiles. Reproduced and modified from [7] with permission from the publisher.
 108
Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
to work on. Briefly, in a case of circulatory failure 
of unknown cause, this protocol, which follows 
Weil’s classification of shock [9], harnesses the 
potential of lung ultrasound. Simple equipment, 
without Doppler, and the same probe as for the 
BLUE protocol are suitable. The FALLS (fluid 
administration limited by lung sonography) protocol 
(figure 10) begins with a pericardial analysis, 
followed by a simple evaluation of the right ventricle 
volume, then a search for a pneumothorax. If no 
disorder is found, an obstructive shock is thus 
rapidly ruled out. The absence of a B-profile makes 
the diagnosis of a cardiogenic shock with elevated 
pressures unlikely; in such cases, the patient usually 
has an A-profile or something equivalent. The 
only remaining causes of shock are hypovolaemic 
and distributive shock (i.e. usually septic shock in 
clinical practice). Fluid therapy is commenced at 
this step. Hypovolaemic shock resolves under fluid 
therapy. If the signs of shock remain, there is no 
Acute circulatory failure
Simple emergency
cardiac sonography
Tamponade,
pulmonary embolism
Lung ultrasound
(BLUE protocol)
FALLS protocol
(fluid therapy)
No clinical improvement
B-profile eventually generated
Septic shock
A-profile
Usually
Usually
Usually
Usually
Hypovolaemic
shock
Clinical improvement
Cardiogenic shock
(Investigate further if noncardiogenic 
oedema suspected)
Obstructive shock
Pneumothorax
B-profile
Figure 10 Decision tree of the FALLS protocol. The decision tree presented is here simplified in order to understand first the purpose of the FALLS protocol, to 
rapidly diagnose the cause of an unexplained circulatory failure. A full understanding of the FALLS protocol is needed to use this tool in clinical practice [5, 10]. 
Reproduced and modified from [11] with permission from the publisher.
 Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
109
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
clinical signal for discontinuing the fluid therapy, 
which is resumed with cautious analysis of the 
lung artefacts. If the fluid begins to saturate the 
interstitial compartment, an ultrasound interstitial 
syndrome appears, i.e. an early, infraclinical stage of 
pulmonary oedema [12–14]. Hypovolaemic shock 
resolves before saturating the lung interstitial 
compartment. When A-lines begin to turn into 
B-lines, the diagnosis of distributive (i.e. usually 
septic) shock is proposed as the likely cause of 
circulatory failure. Many common questions on 
this subject are answered in Chapter 30 of Lung 
Ultrasound of the Critically Ill: the BLUE Protocol [5]. 
The FALLS protocol is not proposed fully to solve the 
very expert question of haemodynamic assessment 
and is open to criticism.
Cardiac arrest: the SESAME protocol
The SESAME protocol requires an ultrasound 
machine with all of the advantages for optimal 
access to the patient, when each second matters 
(narrow machine, 7-s start-up time, only one probe 
and no buttons to set). Shockable causes are apart 
the SESAME protocol. The protocol begins by ruling 
out pneumothorax, a reversible cause of cardiac 
arrent, in a few seconds. It then assesses a particular 
vein that is involved in half of cases of massive 
pulmonary embolism, because we found it easier 
to see an on–off marker (DVT or no DVT) than a right 
ventricle enlargement, a finding that is less binary 
and is window-dependent; importantly, detecting a 
positive DVT by the BLUE protocol is 99% sensitive to 
pulmonary embolism. Then, the abdomen is explored 
to rule out a haemorrhage in a few seconds; then the 
pericardium, to rule out a pericardial tamponade, 
also easily and within a few seconds. If none of these 
four, highly reversible causes has been detected, the 
prognosis is worse. The heart is then imaged, window 
permitting. This usually occurs at the 40th second. 
We do not detail the cardiac data here; please read 
Chapter 31 of Lung Ultrasound of the Critically Ill: the 
BLUE Protocol [5] for details of this.
The SESAME protocol does not need any 
validation: each of the applications has been duly 
validated. We need only to highlight here the 
importance of an adapted ultrasound unit.
Only a few details will be explained here. Our 
microconvex probe is perfect for detecting both 
the pericardial effusion and the needle, which can 
therefore be promptly inserted and is far better than 
the cardiac probes. Inserting a venous line can be 
done very rapidly (better than with these vascular 
probes, which have unsuitable ergonomics).
The SESAME protocol can be used with no 
adaptation when a pneumothorax, a DVT, etc. are 
sought in less critical settings. The SESAME protocol 
is an opportunity to convince the community of the 
importance of a machine that is prepared for the 
worst but can perform the best with the same ease 
of use. Fortunately, some modern manufacturers 
begin to understand this.
The Extended BLUE protocol
The Extended BLUE (E-BLUE) protocol takes the 
best of the data extracted from history, physical 
examination, blood tests and other tests (if needed)
to improve the accuracy of the BLUE protocol. 
Blood gases do not feature in the E-BLUE protocol 
(this test is painful and the information from 
it is not critical once a BLUE protocol has been 
performed). Thoracocentesis is one tool of the 
E-BLUE protocol; we must mention here that we 
do not recommend ultrasound during the puncture 
(this is of limited interest once the physician knows 
where to insert the needle). In rare instances, the 
E-BLUE protocol will ask for tools such as Doppler, 
expert echocardiography and transoesophageal 
echocardiography. In these cases, we simply use the 
DIAFORA (Doppler intermittently asked from outside 
in rare applications) approach: we call an expert who 
comes, during clinic hours, with the sophisticated 
machine and the three traditional probes.
Other clinical applications in 
critically ill and less critically 
ill patients
The Pink, Fever and CLOT 
protocols
The Pink protocol regards patients who are not 
“blue” (dyspnoeic) because they are under high 
oxygen and sedation, namely those with ARDS. 
It is more comprehensive than the BLUE protocol 
(large scanning including the lateral wall and apex). 
For those who wish to score lung injuries, please 
read again our words on the B-profile (above). The 
air/fluid ratios of the BLUE profiles are as follows.
●
●
the A′-profile contains 100% air;
●
●
the A-profile contains ∼99.5% air;
●
●
in our opinion, the B-profile with septal rockets 
has no less than ∼98% air and the B-profile 
with ground-glass rockets not less than roughly 
75–95% air;
●
●
the B′-profiles will be a bit richer in fluids;
●
●
the C-profile indicates fluids; and
●
●
PLAPS indicate full loss of aeration.
The Fever protocol (not an acronym) details a simple 
way to search for the cause of a fever in a patient 
admitted to the ICU for a long time. The usual sites are: 
first, the lung; then the jugular or femoral veins, which 
appear often thrombosed; and the maxillary sinus.
Venous ultrasound can replace lung ultrasound 
in some cases. The CLOT (catheter-linked occult 
thromboses) protocol invites one to think differently 
when searching for a pulmonary embolism in 
ventilated patients (e.g. ARDS). If an internal jugular 
or femoral catheter is or has been present and if a 
DVT is present, we consider that the combination 
 110
Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
of a worsening of the clinical condition with the 
sudden disappearance of the DVT is a strong 
argument for evoking a pulmonary embolism.
The LUCIFLR project
Lung Ultrasound in the Critically Ill Favoring 
Limitation of Radiations (LUCIFLR) is a promising 
application, of major interest in paediatrics. It aims 
to decrease, in the three next decades, one-third 
of the bedside chest radiographs and two-thirds of 
urgent CTs, which is a reasonable target. Radiographs 
should of course not be eradicated (this would be 
suboptimal, as radiographs are sometimes of great 
interest; this would also result in a scary acronym).
LUCI can be applied in order to limit radiation 
dose in many instances, not only in the critically ill 
but also in less critical settings, including in family 
medicine. In many aspects, LUCI is superior to CT, 
such as for finding necrotising areas in pneumonia 
[15], assessing the dynamic of air bronchograms 
for distinguishing pneumonia from obstructive 
atelectasis [16], assessing lung compliance 
by studying lung sliding [17], and studying 
diaphragmatic disorders and anomalies in a pleural 
effusion. All these points of clear superiority, albeit 
with those of slight inferiority, can lead us to 
consider LUCI a reasonable bedside gold standard.
Which disciplines
In short, LUCI is of use in all those disciplines where 
the physician carries a stethoscope around the neck. 
This means, first, critical care, emergency medicine, 
pre-hospital medicine and all paediatric settings 
(the emergency department, neonatal ICU, etc.). 
Second, specialties such as cardiology, pulmonology, 
internal medicine, nephrology, gynaeco-obstetrics, 
geriatrics, etc. In fact, all disciplines that have to deal 
with the lung. Neonates and elderly patients benefit 
from the same approach, without real adaptation, 
since the signs are universal. In pulmonology, 
the puncture of superficial masses is an expert 
procedure that can be performed during clinic hours 
and we refer the reader to expert sources [18].
What of body habitus? Whether the patient is 
underweight or bariatric, the lung can be considered 
a superficial organ. In bariatric patients, the lung can 
be located confidently using the BLUE points. The 
anterior profiles of the BLUE protocol can usually be 
observed. The posterior disorders are more difficult 
to assess but the concept of the BLUE points allows 
precise definition of the boundary between the chest 
and abdomen (which is usually not well estimated 
clinically) and the concept of PLAPS allows detection 
of the presence of any structural image at this level.
LUCI can be performed in both wealthy and 
resource-scarce countries: the applications 
developed by CEURF were defined using a simple, 
easy-to-purchase machine with a single, universal 
probe, without Doppler or other facilities. That 
which is of value in a sophisticated ICU is performed 
the same way in any other setting.
Some words before 
concluding
Have we defined holistic ultrasound? A discipline is 
holistic when each component must be considered 
together with the others in order to be able to 
understand the whole; each of these components 
impacts the others to result in a logical entirety.
To understand holistic ultrasound, one must see 
that critical ultrasound without the lung is nothing; 
this is beyond doubt. However, lung ultrasound is 
nothing without being integrated into a whole-body 
approach; this is why we use a system that naturally 
integrates the lung (same probe, same settings and 
the same philosophy of use, i.e. looking at the heart 
when the lung does not inform and looking at the 
lung when the heart does not inform).
This being said, let us focus on a peculiar point. 
It is increasingly seen in modern ultrasounds 
machines that there is a “lung” setting. We have 
mixed feelings about this. On the one hand, it 
indicates that some manufacturers are beginning 
to understand the spirit of critical ultrasound (which 
must include the lung to be a real discipline). On 
the other hand, we do not really understand the 
purpose of this setting because when making a 
whole-body ultrasound in critical situations, we 
use the same setting for everything (i.e. devoid of 
any filters) and this gives the best compromise for 
assessing all targets of the SESAME protocol. Instead 
of a “lung” setting, might we suggest a “SESAME”, 
“whole body” or “critical” setting?
Conclusions
In writing this article, the title of which turns around 
modernity, we were once more obliged to describe 
what we do daily with an “old” machine. Even the 
machine we used initially, the ADR-4000 of 1982, 
was able to make what clinicians of today call a 
revolution, even in the most modern settings. 
All applications of LUCI (and critical ultrasound, 
including simple heart ultrasound) were defined, 
assessed and developed using our “antique” 
technologies. There is no space for confusion in the 
world of LUCI. By considering the simplicity of the 
equipment, we have, in all, a tool that is the most 
suitable for dealing with the worst (SESAME protocol 
in cardiac arrest) but that also remains excellent 
in less critical settings (LUCIFLR programme), from 
sophisticated ICUs to more austere areas of the 
world. This is more than a point of view; this is a 
mandatory definition of critical ultrasound, a holistic 
discipline once the lung is included [19]. Fortunately, 
manufacturers are beginning to understand our 
requirements and our past (and present) will be the 
future of the next generation of physicians.
 Breathe | June 2017 | Volume 13 | No 2
111
Ultrasonography of the lung and pleural space
Acknowledgements and notes 
on videos
I thank François Jardin (Medical ICU, Boulogne, 
France), who made this project possible by allowing 
us to formally join his ICU.
Videos of the A-profile (normal anterior lung 
surface), B-profile (usually seen in haemodynamic 
pulmonary oedema), B′-profile (pneumonia/
acute respiratory distress syndrome) and A′-profile 
(usually pneumothorax) mentioned in this article 
can be seen at will at http://www.ceurf.net/en/
blueprotocol.htm
Conflict of interest
None declared.
References
 1. Weinberger SE, Drazen JM. Diagnostic procedures in respiratory 
diseases. In: Harrison’s principles of internal medicine. 16th 
Edn. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2005; pp. 1505–1508.
 2. Laënnec RTH. Traité de l’Auscultation Médiate, ou Traité du 
Diagnostic des Maladies des Poumons et du Cœur. Paris, J.A. 
Brosson & J.S. Chaudé, 1819.
 3. Williams FH. A method for more fully determining the outline 
of the heart by means of the fluoroscope together with other 
uses of this instrument in medicine. Boston Med Surg J 1896; 
135: 335–337.
 4. Hounsfield GN. Computerized transverse axial scanning. Br J 
Radiol 1973; 46: 1016–1022.
 5. Lichtenstein D. Lung Ultrasound in the Critically Ill: the BLUE 
Protocol. Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 2016.
 6. Lichtenstein D. Lung ultrasound in the intensive care unit. Res 
Signpost Recent Res Devel Respir Critical Care Med 2001; 1: 83–93.
 7. Lichtenstein DA, Mezière GA. Relevance of lung ultrasound in 
the diagnosis of acute respiratory failure: the BLUE protocol. 
Chest 2008; 134: 117–125.
 8. Pesenti A, Musch G, Lichtenstein D, et al. Imaging in acute 
respiratory distress syndrome. Intensive Care Med 2016; 42: 
686–698.
 9. Weil MH, Shubin H. Proposed reclassification of shock states 
with special reference to distributive defects. Adv Exp Med Biol 
1971; 23: 13.
 
10. Lichtenstein DA. BLUE-protocol and FALLS-protocol: 
two applications of lung ultrasound in the critically ill. Chest 
2015; 147: 1659–1670.
 
11. Lichtenstein D. Fluid administration limited by lung 
sonography: the place of lung ultrasound in assessment of 
acute circulatory failure (the FALLS-protocol). Expert Rev Respir 
Med 2012; 6: 155–162.
 
12. Staub NC. Pulmonary edema. Physiol Rev 1974; 54: 
678–811.
 
13. Guyton CA, Hall JE. Textbook of medical physiology. 
9th Edn. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Company, 1996.
 
14. Gargani L, Lionetti V, Di Cristofano C, et al. Early 
detection of acute lung injury uncoupled to hypoxemia in 
pigs using ultrasound lung comets. Crit Care Med 2007; 35: 
2769–2774.
 
15. Lichtenstein D, Peyrouset O. Is lung ultrasound 
superior to CT? The example of a CT occult necrotizing 
pneumonia. Intensive Care Med 2006; 32: 334–335.
 
16. Lichtenstein D, Mezière G, Seitz J. The dynamic air 
bronchogram. A lung ultrasound sign of alveolar consolidation 
ruling out atelectasis. Chest 2009; 135: 1421–1425.
 
17. Lichtenstein D. Lung ultrasound (in the critically ill) 
superior to CT: the example of lung sliding. Korean J Crit Care 
Med 2017; 32: 1–8.
 
18. Mathis G. Chest Sonography. Heidelberg, Springer 
Verlag, 2008.
 
19. van der Werf TS, Zijlstra JG. Ultrasound of the lung: 
just imagine. Intensive Care Med 2004; 30: 183–184.
