  
http://pps.sagepub.com/
Science
Perspectives on Psychological
 
http://pps.sagepub.com/content/2/1/53
The online version of this article can be found at:
 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1745-6916.2007.00029.x
 2007 2: 53
Perspectives on Psychological Science
Scott O. Lilienfeld
Psychological Treatments That Cause Harm
 
 
Published by:
 
http://www.sagepublications.com
On behalf of:
 
 
 
Association For Psychological Science
 can be found at:
Perspectives on Psychological Science
Additional services and information for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://pps.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Email Alerts: 
 
 
http://pps.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Subscriptions: 
 
 
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Reprints: 
 
 
http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Permissions: 
 
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Psychological Treatments That
Cause Harm
Scott O. Lilienfeld
Emory University
ABSTRACT—The phrase primum non nocere (‘‘first, do no
harm’’) is a well-accepted credo of the medical and mental
health professions. Although emerging data indicate that
several psychological treatments may produce harm in
significant numbers of individuals, psychologists have
until recently paid little attention to the problem of haz-
ardous treatments. I critically evaluate and update earlier
conclusions regarding deterioration effects in psycho-
therapy, outline methodological obstacles standing in the
way of identifying potentially harmful therapies (PHTs),
provide a provisional list of PHTs, discuss the implications
of PHTs for clinical science and practice, and delineate
fruitful areas for further research on PHTs. A heightened
emphasis on PHTs should narrow the scientist–practi-
tioner gap and safeguard mental health consumers against
harm. Moreover, the literature on PHTs may provide in-
sight into underlying mechanisms of change that cut across
many domains of psychotherapy. The field of psychology
should prioritize its efforts toward identifying PHTs and
place greater emphasis on potentially dangerous than on
empirically supported therapies.
The phrase primum non nocere—‘‘first, do no harm’’—captures
the essence of the physician’s familiar Hippocratic Oath. The
Ethics Code of the American Psychological Association (APA)
features a similar injunction: Psychologists ‘‘take reasonable
steps to avoid harming their clients/patients’’ (APA, 2002, p.
1065; see also p. 1062).
Despite these admonitions, the field of clinical psychology has
until fairly recently shown little concern with the problem of
harmful treatments (Rhule, 2005). For example, Bergin and
Garfield’s authoritative and remarkably comprehensive Hand-
book of Psychotherapy and Behavior Therapy (Lambert, 2003),
which psychologists have ranked as the premier book on psy-
chotherapy (Boisvert & Faust, 2003), contains approximately
2.5 pages (out of a total of 821 pages of text) on the topic of
adverse effects in therapy. The recent APA position paper on
evidence-based practice (APA Presidential Task Force on Evi-
dence-based Practice, 2006) does not even mention explicitly
the problem of potentially harmful psychotherapies. Moreover,
the assessment of indicators of failing treatment has until re-
cently received little attention (Mash & Hunsley, 1993; but see
Lambert et al., 2003, for a notable exception).
This state of relative neglect concerning harmful psycholog-
ical treatments contrasts sharply with the marked recent sci-
entific and media interestˇin the potential negative effects (e.g.,
suicidality) of psychotropic medications, particularly fluoxetine
(Prozac) and other selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(Sharp & Chapman, 2004). Psychology, of course, has no formal
equivalent of medicine’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
to conduct Phase I or Phase II trials, both of which help to
identify safety problems with novel treatments before they are
disseminated to the public. As a consequence, the systematic
monitoring of unsafe psychological interventions devolves
largely or entirely to the profession of psychology itself. I will
argue that because the field of psychology has been reluctant to
police itself (Meehl, 1993), the consequences for mental health
consumers and the profession at large have been problematic.
This article represents an effort to focus attention on an un-
deservedly neglected topic of inestimable scientific and prag-
matic importance. Specifically, in this article, I review the
current scientific status of potentially harmful therapies (PHTs),
identify methodological obstacles to identifying PHTs, offer a
provisional list of PHTs, outline the implications of PHTs for
clinical practice and research, and delineate fruitful directions
for further investigation on PHTs.
THE EFFICACY OF PSYCHOTHERAPY
Some might maintain that concern with harmful treatments is
largely unnecessary given the overwhelming evidence for the
efficacy of psychotherapy. Indeed, meta-analyses consistently
demonstrate that the positive effects of psychotherapy exceed
those of no treatment or placebo treatments for a wide range of
conditions, including mood disorders, anxiety disorders, sexual
Address correspondence to Scott O. Lilienfeld, Department of Psy-
chology, Room 206, Emory University, 532 Kilgo Circle, Atlanta, GA
30322, e-mail: slilien@emory.edu.
PERSPECTIVES ON PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Volume 2—Number 1
53
Copyright r 2007 Association for Psychological Science
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 dysfunction, bulimia, and insomnia (Westen, Novotny, &
Thompson-Brenner, 2004). At least when posed as a simple and
perhaps overly simplistic question concerning statistical main
effects, psychotherapy clearly ‘‘works’’ (Dawes, 1994).
Empirically Supported Therapies (ESTs)
The accumulating data on the efficacy of psychotherapies for
specific conditions have been a primary impetus underlying the
recent movement toward ESTs. ESTs are lists of treatments that
have been found in controlled trials or systematic single-case
designs to be efficacious for specific disorders, such as major
depressive disorder, panic disorder, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, and bulimia (Chambless & Hollon, 1998).
In the eyes of many psychotherapy scholars, the EST
movement has helped to place the field of psychotherapy on
firmer scientific footing (Barlow, 2004; Chambless & Ollendick,
2001). Nevertheless, ESTs remain controversial (Arkowitz &
Lilienfeld, 2006), with some critics maintaining that they
are based on an inadequate research foundation (Westen, No-
votny, & Thompson-Brenner, 2004) and that they unduly restrict
clinicians’ freedom to administer promising interventions that
have been insufficiently researched (Bohart, 2000).
The Dodo Bird Verdict
Most meta-analyses show that, with some exceptions, well-es-
tablished psychotherapies tend be approximately equivalent in
efficacy (Wampold, Mondin, Moody, Stich, Benson, & Ahn,
1997). This finding has been termed the Dodo Bird verdict, after
the Dodo Bird in Alice and Wonderland, who declared following
a race that ‘‘Everyone has won, and all must have prizes.’’ In its
extreme form, the Dodo Bird verdict implies that the therapeutic
modalities selected by practitioners for adult disorders (e.g.,
behavioral, cognitive, psychodynamic) are essentially irrele-
vant; the variance in psychotherapy outcomes is almost entirely
a function of therapist-specific variables (e.g., warmth, genu-
ineness), client-specific variables (e.g., psychological-minded-
ness, stress reactivity), and their interaction (Wampold, 2001).
Indeed, some have argued that lists of ESTs are unnecessary
given that virtually all psychotherapies work about equally well
(Lundeen, 2005).
Yet emerging findings from the psychotherapy outcome liter-
ature demonstrate that not all therapies are equally efficacious.
For example, behavioral therapies, such as exposure and re-
sponse prevention, tend to be more efficacious than nonbehav-
ioral therapies for obsessive-compulsive disorder, generalized
anxiety disorder, and specific phobia, as well as for most
childhood disorders (Chambless & Ollendick, 2001; Hunsley &
DiGuilio, 2002). More disconcertingly, recent evidence—much
of it emerging only over the past decade—suggests that certain
psychological treatments can produce harm in a nontrivial
number of individuals (Beutler, Bongar, & Shurkin, 1998;
Lambert & Miller, 2001; Rhule, 2005).
Reasons Why Harmful Treatments Are Important
There are two major reasons why all psychotherapy researchers
and practitioners should be concerned about PHTs.
First, as noted in the APA (2002) Ethics Code, all clinicians
are obliged to avoid procedures that place clients at undue
risk of deterioration. Knowledge regarding PHTs can help
psychotherapists to avoid harming their clients inadvertently
through well-intentioned but deleterious interventions. More-
over, even psychotherapists who do not administer PHTs will
surely encounter at least some clients who seek out PHTs as
adjunctive treatments. By learning more about PHTs, these
clinicians can help their clients to make more informed deci-
sions about which treatments to approach with caution or avoid
entirely.
Second, research on the harmful effects of treatment can
provide valuable leads regarding the mediators (mechanisms)
underlying client deterioration in psychotherapy. Some of
these mechanisms, such as premature termination of exposure
to anxiety-provoking stimuli or vicarious modeling of mala-
daptive behavior (see ‘‘Mediators’’ section), may operate even
in psychotherapies that are typically efficacious. As a conse-
quence, these mechanisms may contribute to either short-term
client deterioration or slower overall client progress even in
treatments that generally produce improvement. A better
understanding of these mechanisms may therefore yield
insights into the sources of unanticipated roadblocks in
psychotherapy.
HARMFUL EFFECTS IN PSYCHOTHERAPY: EARLIER
CONCLUSIONS
The possibility of treatment-induced deterioration among psy-
chiatric patients was first observed nearly 7 decades ago
(Masserman & Carmichael, 1938) and has been noted by a
number of authors since then (e.g., Stuart, 1970). Over the
past several decades, two lines of evidence have traditionally
been invoked to buttress the assertion that psychotherapy
can sometimes be harmful: (a) deterioration effects and (b)
negative effect sizes from meta-analyses of psychotherapy out-
come. Neither line of evidence is as straightforward as is often
claimed.
Deterioration Effects
First, the psychotherapy outcome literature on deterioration
effects suggests that a relatively small but nontrivial minority of
clients, with estimates often ranging from 3 to 6% or 5 to 10%,
become worse following psychotherapy (Mohr, 1995; Strupp,
Hadley, & Gomez-Schwartz, 1977). In the substance abuse
treatment literature, the estimates of client deterioration have
generally been on the high end of this range, averaging about
10% or even 15% (Ilgen & Moos, 2005; Moos, 2005). Indeed,
an international survey of 12 leading psychotherapy outcome
54
Volume 2—Number 1
Harmful Treatments
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 researchers revealed strong agreement (a mean of 5.7 on a 7-
point scale) with the assertion, ‘‘Approximately 10% of clients
get worse as a result of therapy’’ (Boisvert & Faust, 2003).
Nevertheless, the percentages of deterioration effects gener-
ated by psychotherapy outcome studies are potentially mis-
leading, as they are too broad in some respects and too narrow in
others. As a consequence, they can result in an overestimation of
certain harmful effects and an underestimation of others. These
percentages are too broad because they may include clients
whose deterioration was unrelated to psychotherapy; such cli-
ents might have become worse even without treatment. By re-
garding these percentages as evidence for therapy-induced
deterioration, numerous authors in this literature have com-
mitted the post hoc ergo proper hoc (‘‘after this, therefore because
of this’’) fallacy (see Friedman, 2006, for a recent example in the
popular press). The percentages of deterioration derived from
psychotherapy outcome studies are also too narrow because they
may miss clients who improved following therapy but who would
have improved even more had they not received therapy. In such
cases, therapy may have produced harm by slowing the pace of
naturally occurring improvement.
The most valid estimates of deterioration effects can be ob-
tained from comparisons of randomly assigned treatment and
no-treatment groups (Mays & Franks, 1980). If significantly
more clients exhibit lower end-state functioning following
therapy than following no treatment, one can confidently con-
clude that the deterioration or decelerated rate of improvement
was a consequence of therapy. Nevertheless, few good estimates
of the prevalence of deterioration effects in psychotherapy are
available from such designs.
Negative Effect Sizes in Meta-Analyses
Second, meta-analyses of treatment outcome consistently reveal
negative effect sizes in a notable minority of studies. For ex-
ample, the seminal Smith, Glass, and Miller (1980) meta-anal-
ysis of 475 therapy outcome studies revealed that 9% of effect
sizes were negative. Some subsequent meta-analyses revealed
comparable or perhaps slightly higher percentages of negative
effect sizes (e.g., Shapiro & Shapiro, 1982), and a meta-analysis
of studies of treatments for adolescent behavioral problems in-
dicated that as many as 29% of effect sizes were negative
(Lipsey, 1992; see also McCord, 2003, and Rhule, 2005). These
numbers raise the distinct possibility that certain psychother-
apies are harmful to some individuals.
Nevertheless, even these percentages are difficult to interpret
because they could represent largely random variation around a
mean effect size of zero or even around a slightly positive effect
size. Given a sufficiently large sample of studies of either inef-
fective or only minimally effective treatments, one would an-
ticipate a certain proportion of effect sizes to be negative (Weiss
et al., 2005). Therefore, findings of harmful effects for specific
treatments should be replicated by independent investigative
teams to minimize the possibility of chance results. Neverthe-
less, this desideratum entails complex ethical considerations
(see ‘‘Independent Replication’’ below).
IDENTIFYING PHTS: METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES
A myriad of methodological obstacles stand in the way of
identifying PHTs. I discuss several of the most central here.
Increases in Variance
A treatment may make certain clients better and others worse,
thereby increasing the variance of outcomes beyond that in a no-
treatment control group (May, Tuma, & Dixon, 1977). In such
cases, reliance on group means alone may mask the presence of
harmful effects. When a treatment increases the variance in
outcomes, the identification of moderators of treatment outcome
is necessary to predict who will improve as opposed to deteri-
orate (or remain unchanged) as a consequence of psychotherapy.
Of course, increases in variance do not necessarily reflect
negative effects, as they can be produced by efficacious treat-
ments that increase the variance of positive outcomes relative to
control treatments.
As a consequence, journal editors should require psycho-
therapy researchers to report the full ranges of scores on the
principal dependent variables, broken down by quartile or some
similarly user-friendly metric. For dependent measures that are
dichotomous (e.g., a suicide attempt during the course of
treatment), journal editors should require researchers to report
the ‘‘number needed to harm’’ (i.e., the number of patients one
would need to expose to the intervention to obtain one harmful
outcome compared with the control intervention; March, Klee, &
Kremer, 2006; Sierra, 2005).
Differences Across Symptom Domains
Some treatments may make certain symptoms better but others
worse. Therefore, negative effects should be examined across
multiple symptom domains. When a treatment is associated with
improvements in some symptom domains but worsening in
others, clinicians must carefully consider the cost–benefit ratio
of this intervention and discuss the potential risks of deterior-
ation with their clients. The issues here are not easily resolved
and often require a consideration of client values and prefer-
ences in addition to scientific evidence (APA Task Force on
Evidence-Based Practice, 2006).
Moreover, decrements in functioning following treatment may
be reported by some individuals but not others, underscoring the
importance of obtaining outcome data from diverse informants
(Mash & Hunsley, 1993). For example, classic research on en-
counter-group ‘‘casualties’’ suggests that group members per-
ceive deterioration that therapist leaders do not (Yalom &
Lieberman, 1971).
Volume 2—Number 1
55
Scott O. Lilienfeld
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Multiple Forms of Harm
On a related note, the harmful effects of psychotherapy are al-
most certainly multidimensional. They include symptom wors-
ening, the appearance of new symptoms, heightened concern
regarding extant symptoms, excessive dependency on therap-
ists, reluctance to seek future treatment (Boisvert, 2003), and
even physical harm (Mercer, Sarner, & Rosa, 2003). Hence, the
assessment of treatment failures should incorporate multiple
domains of the individuals’ functioning, not merely deterioration
in target symptoms (Mash & Hunsley, 1993).
Harm to Relatives or Friends
Some treatments may produce harm in the relatives or friends of
clients in addition to, or instead of, clients themselves. For ex-
ample, some treatments that are otherwise innocuous or even
effective with clients could produce a heightened risk of false
abuse allegations against family members. As a consequence,
the largely ubiquitous equation of harmful treatments with iat-
rogenic (meaning doctor-induced) treatments in the psycho-
therapy deterioration literature is problematic, as the latter term
typically refers only to negative effects in clients.
The inclusion of harm to others in a definition of therapy-in-
duced harm implies the need to consider extrascientific factors,
such as value judgments concerning the appropriate goals of
psychotherapy. For example, if a specific type of individual
psychotherapy targeted for individuals with marital distress
tends to produce improvements in clients but increased distress
in the spouses of clients, should this side effect of treatment be
considered harmful? Moreover, in marital therapy, separation or
even divorce can arguably be a desirable outcome when both
partners are experiencing extreme marital distress. As a con-
sequence, the very definition of a harmful effect may be influ-
enced by value-laden considerations that lie outside the scope of
this article. The issues here are again not readily resolved and
hinge on often-unarticulated a priori assumptions regarding
what types of change are more or less desirable. These com-
plexities underscore the need for psychotherapy researchers to
report the full scope of outcomes so that readers can draw their
own conclusions regarding the presence of harmful effects.
Short-Term Versus Long-Term Deterioration
Some treatments may make clients worse in the short term yet
prove efficacious in the long term. For example, a minority
(perhaps 10–20%) of clients with posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) display clear evidence of transient symptom exacerba-
tion following the introduction of exposure treatment. Never-
theless, these individuals go on to improve at the same rate as
clients who do not exhibit exacerbation (Foa, Zoellner, Feeny,
Hembree, & Alvarez-Conrad, 2002; Tarrier et al., 1999).
Moreover, some efficacious marital therapies produce time-
limited increases in marital conflict and distress early in treat-
ment (Hunsley & Lee, 1995).
Nevertheless, one must be careful not to conclude from these
findings that ‘‘clients must get worse before they can get better.’’
Indeed, this claim has sometimes been advanced by proponents
of PHTs as a rationalization for failing treatments (see Lilienfeld
& Lynn, 2003). Although certain efficacious treatments, espe-
cially those that teach clients to confront previously avoided
stimuli or conflicts, sometimes produce increases in anxiety in
initial sessions, there is no evidence that this is the case for all
efficacious treatments. Therefore, clinicians should be skeptical
of treatments that produce early increases in anxiety that do not
habituate.
In addition, one may suspect that some ESTs could be PHTs if
administered improperly. For example, many standard texts
warn that an insufficient duration of exposure and response
prevention—that is, termination of exposure before adequate
habituation of anxiety has occurred—may result in a worsening
of clients’ anxiety symptoms, although systematic data on this
issue are scant (Shipley & Boudewyns, 1980; Stone & Borkovec,
1975).
Client Drop-Out
Psychotherapies that are harmful may yield high rates of pre-
mature client termination (drop-outs). The causes of premature
termination are heterogeneous. In certain cases, drop-out is
attributable to financial exigencies, personal changes (e.g.,
moves to other states), or other variables unrelated to the efficacy
of therapy. Nevertheless, in other cases client drop-out appears
to be related to either especially successful or unsuccessful
treatment. Some clients who drop out of therapy have improved
quickly and no longer perceive a need for therapy, whereas
others have deteriorated and are dissatisfied with treatment
(Garfield, 1994; Tehrani, Krussel, Borg, & Munk-Jorgensen,
1996). Moreover, weak therapeutic alliance is sometimes a
predictor of client drop-out (Beckham, 1992), and a weak alli-
ance itself can be an indicator or byproduct of failing therapy. As
a consequence, studies that compare only therapy completers
(using ‘‘on treatment analyses’’) in treatment versus no-treat-
ment groups may underestimate the prevalence of harmful
effects.
In studies with nontrivial drop-out rates, therapy outcome
investigators must therefore conduct analyses that account for
missing data, which sometimes result from client deterioration.
Several statistical methods for addressing missing data are
available, including (a) multiple imputation and (b) ‘‘intent-to-
treat’’ analyses, which include all patients randomized to treat-
ment and control groups. Intent-to-treat analyses, in turn, can be
based on either last-observation-carried-forward analyses, which
treat the final measurement from each patient as the final obser-
vation on that individual, or noncompleter-equals-failure analy-
ses, which treat therapy drop-outs as failures (Gilden, 1998).
None of these approaches yields the most veridical estimate of
56
Volume 2—Number 1
Harmful Treatments
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 client deterioration, as each hinges on its own set of assumptions
regarding the causes of client drop-outs.
Independent Replication
As noted earlier, preliminary findings that certain therapies
produce harmful effects should be interpreted with caution
pending replication by independent investigative teams. Never-
theless, ethical issues present serious obstacles to replicating
iatrogenic effects, because researchers may understandably be
reluctant to conduct further studies on therapies that have been
found to be potentially iatrogenic in initial studies. Moreover, it
may often be unethical to randomly assign clients to treatments
that pose a significant risk of harm.
Therefore, the requirement for independent replication puts
investigators in an ethical bind. If they attempt to replicate
previous findings of iatrogenic effects, they place clients at risk
for harm; if they do not attempt to replicate such findings, they
leave researchers, practitioners, and mental health consumers
uncertain of how to interpret initial reports of iatrogenic effects.
There is no straightforward solution to this dilemma other than
to encourage researchers who have adventitiously identified
iatrogenic effects in their investigators to report them fully.
There are no good estimates of the magnitude of the file-drawer
effect (Rosenthal, 1979) in the literature on the iatrogenic ef-
fects of psychotherapy. In contrast to the traditional use of this
term in psychology, the file-drawer effect in this body of research
refers to the tendency of investigators to selectively withhold
(i.e., not publish) studies or selected study findings yielding
results opposite to the predicted direction, as opposed to merely
null results. Some statisticians have referred to significant
findings that run opposite to the predicted direction as Type III
errors (Leventhal & Huynh, 1996). Enrolling all intervention
studies in a centralized data bank that is publicly accessible
(McCord, 2003; Rhule, 2005) would be a partial solution to the
possible underreporting of Type III errors, as this data bank
would increase the likelihood that all relevant results from these
studies are reported. Moreover, journals should require full
access to all outcome data from psychotherapy outcome trials,
not merely the portion of outcome data that has been published.
Strength of Evidence
The strength of evidence concerning harmful treatments varies
markedly across investigations. We can rank order the evidence
for harmful therapeutic effects along a hierarchy of evidentiary
certainty, with the most definitive evidence deriving from ran-
domized controlled trials (RCTs), less definitive evidence de-
riving
from
quasi-experimental
studies
using
matched
comparison groups, and still less definitive evidence deriving
from naturalistic designs or multiple case reports (see Ghaemi &
Hsu, 2005). Nevertheless, when low-base-rate negative events
(e.g., false allegations of severe sexual abuse, initial emergence
of ‘‘alter’’ personalities, initial onset of panic attacks) consist-
ently appear shortly after the introduction of treatment, such
evidence should be accorded considerable weight even when it
does not derive from RCTs.
Identifying and Operationalizing PHTs
To identify PHTs, I conducted a search of the PsycINFO data-
base using the terms psychotherapy, therapy, and treatment, on
the one hand, and harmful, harm, iatrogenic, worse, and
deterioration, on the other. In addition, I consulted major pub-
lished reviews of psychotherapy deterioration effects (e.g.,
Mohr, 1995; Rhule, 2005; Strupp et al., 1977; Werch & Owen,
2002). Because none of these reviews attempted to provide a list
of PHTs or classify PHTs in terms of levels of evidence for harm,
the present article goes well beyond previous narrative reviews
of dangerous treatments.
I operationalize treatments as PHTs if they fulfill the following
three conjunctive criteria:
1. They have demonstrated harmful psychological or physical
effects in clients or others (e.g., relatives)
2. The harmful effects are enduring and do not merely reflect a
short-term exacerbation of symptoms during treatment
3. The harmful effects have been replicated by independent
investigative teams
For criterion 1, I define psychological harm as including not only
deterioration but also a decelerated rate of improvement that is a
consequence of psychotherapy.
I have limited the definition of harm to include only relatively
direct effects of treatment. Treatments that are by themselves
ineffective but innocuous can produce harm indirectly, most
notably by exacting ‘‘opportunity costs’’such as lost time and the
energy and effort expended in seeking out interventions that are
not beneficial (Lilienfeld, 2002). Moreover, opportunity costs
may preclude clients from obtaining efficacious interventions.
Hence, one should bear in mind that a wide variety of psycho-
logical treatments can produce significant indirect harm. The
dangers generated by opportunity costs should not be under-
estimated. For example, a client with a specific phobia who
forgoes flooding or systematic desensitization (both of which
have been found to be efficacious for this condition; Barlow,
2001) in favor of insight-oriented therapies, which have not been
found to be efficacious for specific phobia, may endure years or
even decades of needless anxiety. Indeed, Williams, Turner, and
Peer (1985) reported that some clients with acrophobia (severe
fear of heights) who had sought out suboptimal treatments had
tolerated several decades of disabling anxiety symptoms, only to
be treated successfully in less than 3 hr of exposure-based
therapy.
Nevertheless, all ineffective or even effective-but-suboptimal
treatments can generate opportunity costs. As a consequence,
incorporating opportunity costs into a definition of harmful
treatments would result in the inclusion of all treatments that are
Volume 2—Number 1
57
Scott O. Lilienfeld
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 less efficacious than the most efficacious treatment, rather than
treatments that produce negative effects. As a consequence, I
have excluded such treatments from the list of PHTs satisfying
my definition of harm.
Moreover, some treatments may not be on the provisional list
of PHTs because they have not been adequately investigated. As
a consequence, a treatment’s absence from the provisional PHT
list does not necessarily imply its safety. For example, there are
preliminary indications that (a) certain self-help programs
(Rosen, 1987); (b) court-mandated treatment for spouse abusers
(Feder & Wilson, 2005); (c) psychodynamic treatments for
schizophrenia (Mueser & Berenbaum, 1990); (d) school-based
prevention programs for antisocial behaviors, such as school
counseling that is not cognitive-behavioral in nature (Wilson,
Gottfredson, & Najaka, 2001); and (e) home-based psychosocial
nursing-visitation programs for individuals recuperating from
heart attacks (Frasure-Smith et al., 1997; Frasure-Smith, Les-
perance, Gravel, Masson, Juneau, & Bourassa, 2002) produce
harmful effects in at least some individuals. Nevertheless, these
findings should be regarded as tentative given the absence of
independent replication in controlled studies.
Finally, in delineating PHTs, I have excluded somatic treat-
ments for psychological disorders, including psychopharmaco-
logical interventions. Nevertheless, in doing so, I do not intend
to minimize the hazards posed by certain somatic interventions.
For example, chelation therapy and hyperbaric oxygen therapy
for autism and other developmental disabilities may carry sig-
nificant risks of physical harm (Herbert, Sharp, & Gaudiano,
2002; Levy & Hyman, 2005; Romanczyk, Arnstein, Soorya, &
Gillis, 2003).
In accord with the hierarchy of evidentiary certainty outlined
earlier, I have grouped PHTs into two broad and admittedly
coarse ‘‘levels’’ on the basis of the strength of evidence for
harmful effects: (a) those that probably produce harm in some
clients and (b) those that possibly produce harm in some clients
(see Table 1). In distinguishing between these two levels, I have
placed particular weight on three factors: (a) the internal validity
of studies (see Ghaemi & Hsu, 2005), (b) the replication of
findings by independent investigators, and (c) the appearance
of new symptoms shortly following the introduction of psycho-
therapy.
Specifically, I have placed PHTs into Level 1 (probable harm)
if the evidence for harm derives from (a) RCTs that have been
replicated by at least one independent investigative team, (b)
meta-analyses of RCTs, or (c) the consistent and sudden emer-
gence of low-base-rate adverse events following the introduction
of therapy. I have placed PHTs into Level 2 (possible harm) if the
evidence from harm derives from (a) quasi-experimental designs
that have been replicated by at least one independent investi-
gative team or (b) replicated single-case designs. Nevertheless,
readers should understand that the distinction between these
two levels is preliminary given the current state of the research
literature.
The list of PHTs offered here is intended to be provisional and
open to revision. Indeed, one can expect this list to evolve over
time following constructive criticism from psychotherapy re-
searchers and clinicians, and with the addition of new treatment
outcome data. Nor is this list necessarily exhaustive given that
certain investigations may have yielded unexpected harmful
effects (Type III errors) that went unreported by the authors.
TABLE 1
Provisional List of Potentially Harmful Therapies
Intervention
Potential harm
Primary source of evidence
Level I (probably harmful for some individuals)
Critical incident stress debriefing
Heightened risk for posttraumatic stress
symptoms
RCTs
Scared Straight interventions
Exacerbation of conduct problems
RCTs
Facilitated communication
False accusations of child abuse against family
members
Low base rate events in replicated case reports
Attachment therapies (e.g., rebirthing)
Death and serious injury to children
Low base rate events in replicated case reports
Recovered-memory techniques
Production of false memories of trauma
Low base rate events in replicated case reports
DID-oriented therapy
Induction of ‘‘alter’’ personalities
Low base rate events in replicated case reports
Grief counseling for individuals with normal
bereavement reactions
Increases in depressive symptoms
Meta-analysis
Expressive-experiential therapies
Exacerbation of painful emotions
RCTs
Boot-camp interventions for conduct disorder
Exacerbation of conduct problems
Meta-analysis
DARE programs
Increased intake of alcohol and other
substances (e.g., cigarettes)
RCTs
Level II (possibly harmful for some individuals)
Peer-group interventions for conduct disorder
Exacerbation of conduct problems
Quasi-experimental studies
Relaxation treatments for panic-prone patients
Induction of panic attacks
Replicated single-case designs
Note. RCTs 5 randomized controlled trials; DID 5 dissociative-identity disorder; DARE 5 drog abuse and resistance education.
58
Volume 2—Number 1
Harmful Treatments
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Nevertheless, this list represents an initial effort in the peer-
reviewed psychological literature to provide a systematic tax-
onomy of PHTs (see also Lilienfeld, Fowler, Lohr, & Lynn, 2005,
for a preliminary list). I refer to these treatments as ‘‘potentially’’
harmful for two reasons: (a) The evidence of harmful effects for
some treatments on this list is highly suggestive but not defini-
tive, and (b) it is unlikely that any of the treatments on this list
are harmful for all individuals exposed to them.
A PROVISIONAL LIST OF PHTs
Level I: Treatments That Probably Produce Harm in Some
Individuals
Critical Incident Stress Debriefing (CISD)
CISD is designed to prevent symptoms of PTSD and related
anxiety disorders among individuals exposed to extreme
stressors. It is typically a single-session procedure that lasts 3 to
4 hr, although it is occasionally conducted across several ses-
sions. CISD is usually performed in groups and administered
within 24 to 72 hr of the traumatic event (Lohr, Hooke, Gist, &
Tolin, 2003). CISD therapists (a) strongly encourage group
members to discuss and ‘‘process’’ their negative emotions, (b)
delineate the PTSD symptoms that group members are likely to
experience, and (c) discourage members from discontinuing
participation once the session has begun.
Litz, Gray, Bryant, and Adler’s (2002) meta-analysis of RCTs
of CISD versus no treatment or alternative-treatment control
conditions yielded an overall effect size of d 5 –.11 for PTSD
symptoms. Several controlled studies indicate that CISD is in-
effective in warding off PTSD symptoms in trauma-exposed in-
dividuals.
Moreover, two RCTs suggest that CISD has harmful long-term
effects, perhaps by impeding natural recovery processes (see
McNally, Bryant, & Ehlers, 2003; Rose, Bisson, & Wessely,
2001, for reviews). Bisson, Jenkins, Alexander, and Bannister
(1997) found that burn victims randomly assigned to CISD
evidenced significantly higher PTSD and overall anxiety
symptoms at a 13-month follow-up than did burn victims ran-
domly assigned to an assessment-only control group. Mayou,
Ehlers, and Hobbs (2000) performed a 3-year follow-up from an
RCT of victims of motor-vehicle accidents. Individuals who re-
ceived CISD exhibited significantly higher levels of global
psychopathology and travel anxiety, but not PTSD symptoms per
se, than did individuals in an assessment-only control group. A
third RCT by Sijbrandij, Olff, Reitsma, Carlier, and Gersons
(2006) examined the effects of CISD on trauma-exposed indi-
viduals at 2-week, 6-week, and 6-month follow-ups. The authors
found that CISD produced no significant effects on PTSD
symptoms compared with a control condition at any of the three
time points. Nevertheless, at the 6-week follow-up period only,
individuals with high baseline levels of hyperarousal exhibited
significantly more PTSD symptoms following CISD relative to
the control condition. Because this subgroup analysis was per-
formed on a post-hoc basis and revealed evidence of harm at
only one time point, it should be interpreted with caution.
Interestingly, most recipients of CISD report that they found it
helpful even when objective indices reveal otherwise (Carlier,
Lamberts, von Uchelen, & Gersons, 1998; McNally et al., 2003).
This paradox is most parsimoniously explained by two facts: (a)
Most clients randomly assigned to CISD groups, like most
trauma-exposed individuals, tend to improve on their own ac-
cord, and (b) the evidence from RCTs suggests that these clients
would probably have improved even more without treatment. As
a consequence, clients who have received CISD may misat-
tribute naturally occurring improvement to the intervention.
‘‘Scared Straight’’ Programs
Scared Straight programs attempt to frighten at-risk adolescents
away from a life of future crime by exposing them to the harsh
realities of prison life. These programs began in the early 1970s
in New Jersey and became popular following a highly publicized
documentary in 1979. In 1982, an RCT examining the initial
New Jersey program revealed that the Scared Straight condition
resulted in a significant increase in arrests compared with a no-
treatment control condition. Researchers reported similar re-
sults with ‘‘kids spend the day in prison’’ programs (Lipsey,
1992). A recent meta-analytic review of seven randomized and
controlled quasi-experimental studies of Scared Straight Pro-
grams
demonstrated
that
these
interventions
increased
the odds of offending by a ratio of between 1.6 and 1.7 to 1
(Petrosino, Turpin-Petrosino, & Buehler, 2003).
Facilitated Communication (FC)
FC is premised on the notion that autistic children’s communi-
cation defects are attributable primarily to motor, not cognitive,
problems (Biklen, 1990). Hence, with the aid of a facilitator who
offers resistance to the child’s hands, children with autism and
with other serious developmental disabilities can ostensibly
produce communications using a computer keyboard. Never-
theless, carefully controlled studies conclusively demonstrate
that the ‘‘facilitated communications’’ purportedly produced by
autistic children are unknowingly generated by facilitators
themselves, who are unintentionally guiding autistic children’s
hands over the keyboard (Herbert, Sharp, & Gaudiano, 2002;
Romanczyk et al., 2003).
FC has been associated with at least five dozen allegations of
child sexual abuse against the parents of autistic children, the
substantial majority of which have never been corroborated
(Jacobson, Mulick, & Schwartz, 1995). In these cases, the fa-
cilitated communications were ostensibly generated by facili-
tators themselves, who may have either suspected familial abuse
or harbored implicit causal theories about a link between early
abuse and subsequent autism. Nevertheless, it is not known
whether FC generates more false abuse allegations than other
Volume 2—Number 1
59
Scott O. Lilienfeld
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 suggestive techniques (e.g., repeated questioning and prompt-
ing of children) for unearthing abuse (Botash et al., 1994).
Attachment Therapies
Attachment therapists maintain that separation from biological
parents often produces enduring adverse effects, including
intense anger, in children. This rage, attachment therapists
maintain, must be released for children to achieve adaptive
functioning. The techniques used by these therapists are
sometimes intrusive and aggressive and can include verbal
abuse and physical restraint. One variant of attachment therapy,
holding therapy, requires therapists or caregivers to physically
hold children until they look into the adult’s eyes. Another
worrisome version of attachment therapy, rebirthing, is based on
the notion that the birth trauma can generate unprocessed rage
that must be released by reenacting this trauma.
During rebirthing sessions, therapists may wrap children in
blankets, sit on them, and squeeze them repeatedly in an effort to
simulate the birth process. Several children, including 10-year-
old Candace Newmaker in Colorado in 2000, have been suffo-
cated to death during rebirthing sessions (Mercer et al., 2003).
No RCTs have been conducted to determine whether rebirthing,
holding, or other attachment therapies yield any positive effects
for childhood behavioral problems (Mercer, 2002).
Recovered-Memory Techniques
Although data from controlled studies are lacking, there is
considerable evidence that suggestive therapeutic methods,
such as repeated therapist prompting of memories, hypnosis,
and guided imagery, can produce subjectively compelling but
false memories in some individuals (Lynn, Lock, Loftus, Kra-
ckow, & Lilienfeld, 2003). Specifically, there are numerous re-
ports of adult clients reporting histories of childhood sexual
abuse, satanic ritual abuse, and even alien abductions for the
first time following the introduction of recovered-memory
methods. The finding that recovered-memory techniques can
yield memories of alien abductions (Clancy, 2005) and even
past-life child abuse appears to provide an ‘‘existence proof’’
that at least some of the memories generated by these methods
are false.
Moreover, there is reason to believe that such memories can
be deleterious to both clients and their family members. Data
from recovered-memory legal claims filed in Washington State
reveals that suicidal ideation increased nearly seven-fold and
that psychiatric hospitalizations increased over five-fold over
the course of therapy (see Dineen, 2001). Nevertheless, because
these data derive from uncontrolled studies and unrepresenta-
tive samples marked by selection bias (e.g., legal involvement),
the true degree of harm generated by recovered-memory meth-
ods is difficult to estimate. Moreover, recovered-memory cases
have been associated with thousands, perhaps tens of thousands,
of uncorroborated allegations against close family members
(Australian Psychological Society, n.d.).
The question of whether certain recovered memories of
trauma are genuine remains unresolved. It is at present unclear
whether recovered-memory techniques unearth at least some
genuine memories in addition to creating false ones (e.g.,
Schooler, Ambadar, & Bendikson, 1997; but see Loftus & Guyer,
2002). Nevertheless, there appears to be little disagreement that
such techniques are associated with false-memory production in
at least some individuals (Lynn et al., 2003).
Dissociative Identity Disorder (DID)-Oriented Psychotherapy
Proponents of DID-oriented therapy believe that patients with
DID, known formerly as multiple personality disorder, harbor
latent indwelling identities (‘‘alters’’) that must be brought to
light for treatment to progress successfully. Many DID alters are
associated with self-injurious behavior, suicide attempts, and
verbal and physical aggression toward others (American Psy-
chiatric Association, 2000). Moreover, many of these behaviors
are specific to only one alter (Putnam, Guroff, Silberman, Bar-
ban, & Post, 1986). Although the extant data are strictly cor-
relational, there is reason to suspect that the presence of alters
can impede treatment progress. In one study of DID patients in
treatment, the number of alters correlated significantly (r 5 .48)
with the length of time to ‘‘fusion,’’ that is, the reintegration of
alters into a ‘‘single’’ personality (Coons, 1984).
Many advocates of DID-oriented therapy use suggestive
methods, including prompting and contacting purported alters
through hypnosis, introducing alters to one another, and map-
ping out the interrelations among alters (Spanos, 1994). Some
also attempt to recover memories of childhood sexual or physical
abuse, which many DID-oriented therapists believe to be a
strong risk factor for DID (but see Lilienfeld & Lynn, 2003, and
Lilienfeld et al., 1999, for challenges to this claim). At least one
prominent DID-oriented therapist advocates the use of a ‘‘bul-
letin board’’ in which DID alters can post written messages to
one another (Putnam, 1989); another prominent DID-oriented
therapist encourages the use of ‘‘inner board meetings’’ as ‘‘a
good way to map the system [of alters], resolve issues, and
recover memories’’ (Ross, 1997, p. 351). These and other
suggestive techniques are prevalent in the DID treatment
community (see Piper, 1997, pp. 61–68).
There are numerous reasons to believe that these techniques
can create alters in addition to, or perhaps instead of, discov-
ering them. Only about 20% of DID patients exhibit clear-cut
alters prior to treatment, and full-blown alters emerge in the
remaining 80% only following psychotherapy (Kluft, 1991).
Moreover, the number of alters tends to increase over the course
of DID-oriented therapy (Piper, 1997; Ross, Norton, & Wozney,
1989).
Although DID-oriented therapists typically claim that these
findings reflect the discovery rather than creation of alters,
multiple lines of converging evidence suggest that many and
perhaps most alters are products of inadvertent therapist sug-
gestion (Lilienfeld & Lynn, 2003). For example, most diagnoses
60
Volume 2—Number 1
Harmful Treatments
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 of DID derive from a relatively small number of therapists, most
of whom are DID specialists (Mai, 1995); therapists who use
hypnosis tend to have more DID patients in their caseloads than
therapists who do not use hypnosis (Powell & Gee, 1999); and
laboratory studies indicate that nonclinical participants pro-
vided with appropriate cues can readily reproduce the core
features of DID (Spanos, Weekes, & Bertrand, 1985).
Grief Counseling for Normal Bereavement
Studies of grief therapy for individuals who have suffered losses
of loved ones suggest the possibility of harmful effects, at least
among those experiencing relatively normal bereavement re-
actions.
Neimeyer (2000) reported the results of a meta-analysis of 23
RCTs of grief therapy. He found a mean effect size of d 5 .13,
which, although low, differed significantly from zero. Never-
theless, grief counseling appeared to increase the variance in
outcomes among clients relative to no treatment. Specifically,
Neimeyer (2000) found that 38% of clients who received grief
therapy would have achieved superior end-state functioning had
they been assigned to the no-treatment control condition, sug-
gesting the distinct possibility of iatrogenic effects among a
sizeable subset of individuals exposed to grief counseling. These
effects appeared to be most marked among individuals who
experienced ‘‘normal’’ as opposed to ‘‘traumatic’’ grief reactions,
with the latter operationalized as reactions to deaths that were
sudden or unexpected or in which grief was long lasting. Spe-
cifically, the percentages of deteriorated clients (those who
showed worse functioning following therapy than at the outset of
therapy) approached 50% in the former group but were only
17% in the latter group. Considerably more research is needed
to identify moderators of treatment effects in grief counseling.
Expressive-Experiential Psychotherapies
Research suggests that although expressive-experiential psy-
chotherapies (e.g., focused expressive psychotherapy, Daldrup,
Beutler, Engle, & Greenberg, 1988; gestalt therapy, Perls,
1969), which focus on releasing and experiencing powerful af-
fects, can be helpful for some clients, such therapies may result
in deterioration for others (Mohr, 1995). Two RCTs revealed that
clients exposed to expressive-experiential therapies exhibited
higher rates of deterioration than did those in either no-treat-
ment (Beutler, Frank, Schieber, Calvert, & Gaines, 1984) or
alternative-treatment conditions (Mohr et al., 1990). Because
the latter study did not contain a no-treatment control group,
however, conclusions regarding therapy-induced deterioration
must be viewed cautiously. Moreover, although in the latter
study the percentage of deterioration in patients assigned to an
expressive-experiential (gestalt) group was higher (19%) than
that in patients assigned to a cognitive-therapy group (5%), it
was identical to the deterioration in patients assigned to a self-
help book group (19%).
The possibility of harm resulting from experiential-expressive
therapies accords with results from psychotherapy-analogue
studies suggesting that releasing pent-up anger often engenders
increased hostility (Lewis & Bucher, 1992). More broadly, these
results dovetail with research demonstrating that emotional
catharsis, especially when not accompanied by a constructive
cognitive restructuring of troubling situations, often backfires
to produce heightened long-term negative emotions (Littrell,
1998).
Boot Camp Interventions for Conduct Disorder
Like Scared Straight programs, military-style boot camps were
widely promoted as a cost-effective ‘‘get tough’’ approach for
antisocial adolescents. These programs emphasize discipline,
obedience to authority, and acquisition of appropriate social
skills. Nevertheless, the evidence concerning the effects of boot
camps on criminal recidivism has been exceedingly mixed
(Bottcher & Ezell, 2005; Parent, 2003). A recent meta-analysis
of both RCTs and quasi-experimental studies revealed no sig-
nificant overall effects of boot camps on antisocial behavior.
When examined individually, 9 studies showed positive effects
(see also Weiss, Wilson, & Whitemarsh, 2005, for positive
findings), 8 showed iatrogenic effects (higher recidivism), and
12 studies showed no significant effects. The meta-analysis did
not detect any moderators (e.g., experimental vs. quasi-experi-
mental nature of design; adolescent vs. adult offenders) that
could account for these striking discrepancies across studies
(MacKenzie, Wilson, & Kider, 2001).
Boot camps have also been associated with several highly
publicized deaths of adolescents (8 charged in teen’s boot camp
death, 2006), most of which appear to have been a consequence
of physical violence or excessive physical restraint. Similarly,
wilderness therapy programs, which attempt to teach troubled
adolescents coping skills by exposing them to challenging nat-
ural environments, have been associated with several deaths
due to dehydration, drowning, and other causes (Utah wilder-
ness therapy deaths, 2003). Nevertheless, it is not known whe-
ther the death rates in boot camps or wilderness programs
exceed those in other treatment programs or in typical detention
facilities.
Drug Abuse and Resistance Education (DARE) Programs
A number of controlled studies of substance-abuse-prevention
programs, particularly those targeted at preventing drug use,
have shown iatrogenic effects (Werch & Owen, 2002). The best
known and most popular of these programs is DARE, which uses
uniformed police officers to teach schoolchildren (a) about the
risks of drug use and (b) social skills to resist peer pressure to try
drugs. Most research indicates that DARE is largely or entirely
ineffective (Lynam et al., 1999; MacKillop, Lisman, Weinstein,
& Rosenbaum, 2003), with many studies yielding null results.
Moreover, the results of several RCTs and quasi-experimental
studies suggest that DARE and similar programs based on
Volume 2—Number 1
61
Scott O. Lilienfeld
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 resisting social influence may actually increase intake of alcohol
and perhaps other drugs (Werch & Owen, 2002).
Level II: Treatments That Possibly Produce Harm in Some
Individuals
Peer-Group Interventions for Conduct Disorder
Dishion and Andrews (1995) found that adolescents enrolled in
peer groups showed higher levels of antisocial behaviors and
tobacco than matched adolescents enrolled in parent-focused
groups, at 1- and 3-year follow-ups (Dishion, McCord, & Poulin,
1999). In addition, the results of several quasi-experimental
studies suggest that ‘‘deviancy training’’—that is, the re-
inforcement of antisocial behavior by group discussions—is
associated with significant increases in adolescent externalizing
behavior (Dishion, Eddy, Haas, Li, & Spracklen, 1997).
Nevertheless, a recent meta-analysis of quasi-experimental
studies of peer-group interventions for conduct problems found
little support for iatrogenic effects, with the possible exception
of interventions administered in early adolescence (Weiss et al.,
2005). The reasons for these marked discrepancies in study
outcomes require clarification.
Relaxation Treatments for Panic-Prone Patients
Small-sample controlled experimental data and numerous case
reports suggest that some patients with panic disorder experi-
ence paradoxical increases in anxiety and even unexpected
panic attacks during relaxation and other procedures charac-
terized by a heightened focus on bodily sensations (Adler,
Craske, & Barlow, 1987; A.S. Cohen, Barlow, & Blanchard,
1985; Lynn, Martin, & Frauman, 1996). In one experimental
study (Heide & Borkevec, 1984), substantial percentages of
patients with generalized anxiety similarly experienced in-
creases in subjective and physiological tension during either
progressive relaxation (31%) or meditation (54%). Neverthe-
less, because no attempts were made to habituate patients to
relaxation or meditation by means of prior graded exposure or
other procedures, these findings do not demonstrate that relax-
ation or meditation are inevitably associated with negative ef-
fects.
Nevertheless, controlled studies are needed to confirm the
occurrence of higher rates of panic and anxiety among patients
exposed to relaxation as opposed to no treatment and to deter-
mine whether these increases endure beyond therapy sessions.
Moreover, there is controlled research evidence that relaxation
is often an effective treatment adjunct for individuals with panic
disorder, phobias, and other anxiety disorders (Ost, 1987).
Therefore, it is likely that relaxation is useful for some anxiety-
disordered patients but harmful for others.
IMPLICATIONS OF RESEARCH ON PHTs
Some psychotherapists have assumed that ‘‘doing something is
always better than doing nothing’’ and that therapy is at worst
innocuous (Lilienfeld, Lynn, & Lohr, 2003). The literature re-
viewed here challenges this presumption and provides grounds
for concern regarding the continued proliferation of ‘‘fad’’ and
‘‘fringe’’ psychotherapies (Beyerstein, 2001; Singer & Lalich,
1996). There are well over 500 ‘‘brands’’ of psychotherapy
(Eisner, 2000), most of which have not been examined in con-
trolled trials. The literature reviewed here suggests that it would
be erroneous to presume that these treatments are safe prior to
subjecting them to adequate tests.
Is the Dodo Bird Extinct?
The finding that some treatments are iatrogenic indicates that
the Dodo Bird verdict, at least in its strong form of the null
hypothesis of equivalence of all psychotherapies, is untenable,
because certain treatments appear to be ineffective and even
harmful. In addition to findings of treatment specificity for at
least some disorders (e.g., exposure and response prevention for
obsessive-compulsive disorder), the results reviewed here are
another reason to declare the Dodo Bird extinct (see Beutler,
2002). Why, then, have many previous authors accepted the
Dodo Bird verdict as correct? To some extent, it is probably
because the magnitude of nonspecific effects (e.g., therapist
factors) typically does greatly outweigh specific effects (e.g.,
therapeutic modality) for most conditions (Wampold, 2001).
Nevertheless, uncritical acceptance of this verdict probably
also stems from influential research on ‘‘bona fide’’ psycho-
therapies, that is, treatments that are already well established
and derived from known psychological principles (e.g., Wamp-
old et al., 1997). By restricting meta-analyses to bona fide
therapies, such as cognitive, behavioral, interpersonal, hu-
manistic, and short-term psychodynamic treatments, some re-
searchers have almost certainly restricted the range of
psychotherapy outcomes and thereby minimized the likelihood
of detecting ineffective or even harmful treatments. In essence,
the conclusion that can be drawn from these studies is this:
When we examine therapies that all appear to be reasonably well
accepted or that are based on plausible theoretical premises, the
differences among therapies tend to be minimal. Although this
conclusion is not itself trivial, it overlooks the crucial point that
some widely administered therapies (see ‘‘Prevalence’’ section)
are neither widely accepted in the scientific community nor
derived from especially plausible theoretical principles. Al-
though typically regarded as fringe psychotherapies within the
confines of the Ivory Tower, these ‘‘outlier’’ treatments excluded
from some meta-analyses are important from both a scientific
and pragmatic perspective.
PHTs Should Come Before ESTs
The findings reported here also imply that the field’s nearly
exclusive emphasis on identifying ESTs is misplaced. Some
might contend that the EST list should be sufficient to address
the problem of PHTs, because clinicians who restrict their
62
Volume 2—Number 1
Harmful Treatments
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 treatments to ESTs will necessarily avoid PHTs. Nevertheless,
surveys of practitioners demonstrate that substantial pluralities
or even majorities do not use ESTs or other scientifically based
interventions. This appears to be the case even for the treatment
of anxiety disorders (e.g., obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic
disorder, phobias), for which there is compelling evidence that
behavioral and cognitive-behavioral interventions (e.g., expos-
ure and response prevention) are superior to most other inter-
ventions (e.g., Freiheit, Vye, Swan, & Cady, 2004; Goisman,
Warshaw, & Keller, 1999).
The effort to identify ESTs has considerable merit for many
purposes. For example, the EST movement has helped to place
the field of psychotherapy on more solid scientific footing and
has assisted therapists and mental health consumers with the
often bewildering task of distinguishing efficacious from ineffi-
cacious treatments (Barlow, Levitt, & Bufka, 1999; Chambless
& Ollendick, 2001; but see Westen et al., 2004, for a demurral).
Moreover, a focus on PHTs is in no way inconsistent with the
effort to identify and disseminate ESTs to the clinical commu-
nity, as both efforts can comfortably proceed simultaneously.
Nevertheless, we need not resolve the contentious scientific,
conceptual, and pragmatic issues surrounding ESTs to make
significant headway in the effort to curtail the use of PHTs.
Given the clinician’s prime responsibility to do no harm, the
effort to identify PHTs is considerably more pressing than the
need to identify ESTs and should be accorded higher priority. As
already noted, research demonstrates that a broad array of
psychotherapies work fairly well for numerous psychological
conditions (Wampold et al., 1997). Hence, in effect, much of the
contemporary EST movement probably represents an attempt to
detect relatively minor differences in efficacy among treatments
that are likely to be reasonably safe and effective.
Our field should therefore instead prioritize its efforts toward
pinpointing treatments that are demonstrably harmful or inef-
fective and disseminating this information to current practi-
tioners, students in training, potential clients, managed-care
organizations, and the media. In addition, therapists who ad-
minister techniques that are associated with a significant risk of
harm should be required to explicitly inform their clients of this
risk. From the standpoint of the safety of mental health con-
sumers, the lowermost end of the distribution of treatment effi-
cacy is probably more critical than the uppermost end.
Moreover, from a purely pragmatic standpoint, it may be
easier to proscribe than to prescribe clinical practices. This
approach may also be a more efficient means of safeguarding
clients from treatments that can make them worse. That is,
asking practitioners to refrain from administering a circum-
scribed number of harmful or demonstrably ineffective inter-
ventions may be a more realistic short-term goal than asking
them to effect a sea-change in their long preferred modes of
psychotherapy. Indeed, one of the most oft-heard criticisms of
the EST movement is its stifling of therapists’ freedom and
flexibility to administer their favored interventions and to
experiment with potentially useful variants of these interven-
tions (Bohart, 2000; Fox, 2000). The merits and demerits of this
argument notwithstanding, it seems likely that a heightened
emphasis on PHTs relative to ESTs would be more easily and
rapidly implemented, as well as more readily embraced by
practitioners whose preferred therapeutic modalities (e.g.,
psychodynamic, humanistic; see Westen, Novotny, & Thomp-
son-Brenner, 2004) are conspicuously underrepresented on the
EST list.
Both proponents and opponents of the EST movement should
be able to find common ground on one central point: Treatments
that have the potential to produce harm should either be avoided
or, in the case of treatments that yield both positive and negative
effects, implemented only with caution. A heightened emphasis
on PHTs may therefore help to narrow the scientist–practitioner
gap (Fox, 1996; Tavris, 2003) by focusing the efforts of both EST
proponents and opponents on a significant point of consensus—
namely, the ethical injunction to first do no harm.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In many respects, the still-nascent literature on harmful treat-
ments generates more questions than answers. Here, I address
five major unresolved questions regarding PHTs.
Prevalence of PHTs
As noted earlier, few good data on the prevalence of deterior-
ation effects are available from studies comparing treatments
with no-treatment control conditions. Similarly, surprisingly few
data are available concerning the prevalence of PHTs. Never-
theless, there are ample reasons to believe that at least some
PHTs are widely administered, even by therapists with advanced
education and training.
For example, surveys of doctoral-level (Ph.D. and Psy.D.)
psychotherapists in the mid 1990s indicated that about 25%
regularly use two or more recovered-memory techniques, such
as hypnosis and guided imagery, to uncover child sexual
abuse in female clients (Polusny & Folette, 1996; Poole, Lind-
say, Memon, & Bull, 1995). Nevertheless, systematic data on the
contemporary use of these methods are lacking. Counselors
who administer CISD probably number in the thousands; in
the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, one
CISD firm in Atlanta dispatched therapists to 200 companies in
New York City (McNally et al., 2003). FC remains popular in
many U.S. communities; professionals are using it with
approximately 200 schoolchildren in Whittier, California alone
(Rubin & Rubin, 2005). As of the early to mid 1990s, DARE
programs were being implemented in about half of all U.S. local
school districts (MacKillop et al., 2003). As of 1996, 48 military-
style boot camps for behavior-disordered adolescents were
operating in 27 states (MacKenzie, Gover, Armstrong, &
Mitchell, 2001).
Volume 2—Number 1
63
Scott O. Lilienfeld
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Nevertheless, considerably more data are needed to ascertain
the prevalence of these and other PHTs, as well as the variables
correlated with their use. A comprehensive survey of PHTuse in
the broader clinical community is sorely needed. For example, it
is not known whether the use of PHTs correlates with therapists’
level of education (e.g., doctoral vs. master’s level) or theoretical
orientation (e.g., behavioral vs. humanistic).
Nevertheless, even were these data to demonstrate that PHT
use is more widespread among nonpsychologists (e.g., social
workers, marital and family counselors, psychiatric nurses,
trained paraprofessionals) than among psychologists, such a
finding would not absolve psychologists from the responsibility
of becoming aware of these treatments and their potential risks.
As noted earlier, a number of clients seen by psychologists may
seek out PHTs as adjunctive interventions. Moreover, many
practicing psychologists may collaborate with or interact with
nonpsychologist colleagues who administer PHTs. In addition,
such findings would provide a powerful impetus for major pro-
fessional organizations within psychology, such as the Associ-
ation for Psychological Science and APA, to establish alliances
with organizations in other mental health professions to min-
imize the administration and dissemination of PHTs.
Reasons for the Continued Popularity of PHTs
Why do some PHTs remain popular in certain sectors of the
clinical community despite evidence for their potentially dam-
aging effects? The answer to this question itself warrants in-
vestigation. Most or all of these interventions surely arise from a
perceived need within the mental health community, and it is
likely that the overwhelming majority of practitioners who ad-
minister them do so with the best of intentions.
Nevertheless, social-psychological research on belief perse-
verance demonstrates that firmly held beliefs can be surprisingly
resistant to contradictory evidence (Anderson, Lepper, & Ross,
1980). Persistent beliefs concerning the efficacy of PHTs may, in
turn, be mediated by attributions regarding the causes of client
deterioration. For example, the literature on dispositional bias in
psychotherapy (e.g., Chen, Froehle, & Morran, 1997) suggests
that individuals may often attribute client deterioration to indi-
vidual-difference variables even when therapeutic factors are
responsible. Moreover, a plethora of variables can lead individ-
uals to be fooled into concluding that useless or even harmful
treatments are efficacious (see Beyerstein, 1997, for an article
that should be required reading for all clinical and counseling
psychology students). In the case of PHTs, it seems plausible that
treatmentsthat producea deceleratedpace of improvement, such
as CISD, are more likely to deceive observers than are those that
produce deterioration, as the former interventions are followed
by an alleviation in symptoms. This intriguing possibility should
be examined in controlled research.
Moreover, some PHTs may appear to be efficacious because
many individuals overestimate the prevalence of negative ef-
fects without treatment (see also P. Cohen & Cohen, 1984, for a
discussion of the clinician’s illusion). For example, many mental
health professionals believe that the majority of individuals
exposed to severe trauma develop PTSD, when in fact controlled
data indicate that 75% or more of trauma-exposed individuals
typically do not develop PTSD (Sommers & Satel, 2005). As a
result, some practitioners may erroneously attribute the negative
effects of CISD, for example, to the effects of trauma rather than
to the intervention itself. Many parents and proponents of DARE
programs may similarly conclude that these interventions are
efficacious because they overestimate the number of children
and adolescents who engage in drug abuse (Lynam et al., 1999).
Consequently, advocates of DARE may accurately observe that
some children and adolescents engage in problematic behaviors
following this intervention, but fail to attribute these behaviors
to the negative effects of treatment.
Therapist Variables
It will be important to identify therapist variables that predis-
pose to therapy-induced deterioration and to examine their
potential interactions with PHTs. Paralleling findings in the
psychotherapy outcome literature for efficacious therapies
(Wampold, 2001), therapist variables may turn out to account for
considerably more variance than therapeutic modality in treat-
ment-induced deterioration. For example, there are indications
that therapists or encounter-group leaders who are charismatic
yet highly confrontational and intrusive can place clients at risk
for deterioration (Mohr, 1995; Yalom & Lieberman, 1971).
Perhaps not surprisingly, low levels of therapist empathy and
warmth, whether rated by clients or therapists themselves, are
predictive of client deterioration (Lafferty, Beutler, & Crago,
1989; Mohr, 1995). As some authors have observed, the iden-
tification of potentially harmful therapists may ultimately prove
to be even more important than the identification of potentially
harmful therapies (C. Boisvert, personal communication, Feb-
ruary 2006). Nevertheless, it seems probable that the variance in
client deterioration, like the variance in client improvement
following efficacious therapies, is attributable to both therapy
and therapist effects measured independently. It is not known
whether these two sources of variance are additive, multi-
plicative (interactive), or both, in their influence.
Client Variables
There are also suggestions that client individual differences,
such as high levels of borderline personality disorder traits
(Mohr, 1995) and perhaps psychopathic personality traits
(Harris, Rice, & Cormier, 1994; but for a competing view, see
D’Silva, Duggan, & McCarthy, 2004; Skeem, Monahan, & Mu-
lvey, 2002) sometimes contribute to deterioration. Nevertheless,
many of the conclusions commonly drawn from these studies are
questionable, because the deterioration observed in clients with
high levels of these traits may have occurred even without
treatment. To ascertain whether the deterioration among these
clients is attributable to psychotherapy, it will be necessary to
64
Volume 2—Number 1
Harmful Treatments
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 detect replicable statistical interactions between client indi-
vidual-difference variables and the presence versus absence of
treatment. These interactions address the question of whether
clients with certain traits become worse as a result of, rather than
merely following, psychotherapy.
Moreover, it will be important to examine client variables as
potential moderators of PHT outcome, as some PHTs may be
harmful for certain clients but not for others. For example, CISD
may be especially harmful for clients whose preferred coping
strategy is suppression of emotion but less harmful or perhaps
even slightly efficacious for clients whose preferred coping
strategy is emotional expression. Moreover, relaxation may be
especially likely to induce panic attacks in anxiety-prone in-
dividuals with high levels of absorption (Tellegen & Atkinson,
1974), a disposition to become immersed in sensory or im-
aginative experiences (Lilienfeld, 1997).
Mediators
Finally, it will be necessary to uncover mediators of harmful
effects in psychotherapy (see Bootzin & Bailey, 2005, for a
thoughtful discussion). The identification of such mediators
should afford considerable insight into the etiological mecha-
nisms underpinning treatment-induced deterioration. As noted
earlier, many of these mediators may operate from time to time,
albeit in attenuated form, even in therapies that are generally
efficacious. As a consequence, these mediators may help in
identifying harmful treatment mechanisms that cut across a
broad swath of treatment modalities.
For example, the negative effects of CISD may be attributable
to premature termination of exposure to anxiety-provoking
stimuli, which may leave many clients more anxious at the end
than beginning of sessions. Similar processes may be operative
in expressive-experiential therapies, which may encourage
some clients to express intensely anxiety-producing affect be-
fore they have had the opportunity to habituate to it adequately.
Alternatively, the negative effects of CISD may be due to the
tendency of therapists to prime trauma-exposed clients to an-
ticipate PTSD symptoms, thereby creating a self-fulfilling
prophecy in which clients passively accept symptoms rather
than attempt to overcome them (Bootzin & Bailey, 2005; Sij-
brandij et al., 2006; see also Boisvert & Faust, 2002). The
harmful effects of Scared Straight and boot-camp programs may
be attributable to juvenile offenders’ vicarious exposure to
criminal role models, to the increased resentment engendered in
them by confrontational interactions, or both. The probable
negative effects of some DARE programs on substance abuse
intake may be attributable to the inadvertent normalization of
the use of relatively mild substances (e.g., alcohol) resulting
from an excessive focus on severe substances (e.g., cocaine,
heroin; see Rhule, 2005; Werch & Owen, 2002). Finally, the
possible negative effects of relaxation in panic-prone patients
may be attributable to increasing these individuals’ focus on
interoceptive sensations (e.g., breathing) that they misinterpret
as symptoms of anxiety (Adler et al., 1987).
As intriguing as these explanations are, they are merely
conjectural, because few researchers have examined mediators
of harmful effects. The aforementioned list of potential media-
tors barely scratches the surface of the possible mechanisms
underlying therapy-induced deterioration. Nevertheless, further
discussion of such mediators would be premature given the
absence of controlled investigations that have incorporated
measures of potential mediators of deterioration. Investigators
who conduct research on PHTs or variants of these interventions
should therefore incorporate measures of potential mediators
of deterioration. The search for such mediators may help re-
searchers and therapists to better understand the reasons for
therapy-induced deterioration and permit them to design novel
treatments, or redesign existing treatments, to minimize the risk
of harm to clients. Indeed, at least some PHTs might become
efficacious treatments following modifications. For example,
variants of CISD that incorporate prolonged exposure and en-
sure adequate habituation to anxiety-provoking imagery might
prove to be efficacious, although controlled research is neces-
sary to investigate this possibility.
Moreover, the identification of such mediators may ultimately
point researchers in the direction of underlying principles of
negative change, such as premature termination of exposure,
vicarious exposure to negative role models, and induction of
false traumatic memories, that cut across numerous specific
techniques (for discussions of overarching principles of thera-
peutic change, see Castonguay & Beutler, 2006; Rosen &
Davison, 2003). In the long term, a catalogue of such underlying
principles could prove to be more informative and parsimonious
than a catalogue of PHTs, although it remains to be seen whether
a set of higher-order principles underlying most or all forms of
therapy-induced deterioration can be identified.
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
In closing, the time has come for clinical researchers and psy-
chotherapists to become more familiar with fringe and fad
treatments, including PHTs, at least some of which continue to
be administered widely in the clinical community (Beyerstein,
2001; Lilienfeld, 1998; Tavris, 2003). It may be tempting to turn
a blind eye to these treatments on the grounds that they do not
pass the ‘‘smell test’’ for scientific plausibility and therefore do
not merit serious consideration. Nevertheless, the research on
potential harm presented here suggests that this complacent
attitude is likely to be detrimental to client welfare and to the
credibility of mental health professionals.
Because psychology lacks an FDA to ensure safety monitoring
and quality control of treatments, the profession at large must be
considerably more aggressive in self-policing and in confronting
the hazards posed by PHTs. In the recent past, the principal
impetus for constraining the use of some PHTs, particularly
Volume 2—Number 1
65
Scott O. Lilienfeld
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 recovered-memory techniques and DID-oriented therapy, has
come not from within the psychological profession but rather
from outside of it, in the form of widely publicized lawsuits
against practitioners (Lynn et al., 2003). Therefore, major pro-
fessional organizations in psychology should play a more active
role in educating clinicians regarding the hazards posed by
PHTs. Regrettably, training in some PHTs, including CISD and
rebirthing, has been eligible for continuing-education credit
from APA (Wood, Garb, Lilienfeld, & Nezworski, 2002).
Moreover, exposure to research on PHTs and other treatments
of questionable efficacy (see Norcross, Koocher, & Garofalo,
2006) should become a required component of the education
and training of mental health professionals, including clinical,
counseling, and school psychologists; social workers; counsel-
ors; psychiatrists; and psychiatric nurses. Students in training
also need to understand that even well-intentioned interventions
can sometimes produce harm. Nevertheless, considerably more
research is needed to identify PHTs and mediators and moder-
ators of PHT outcome.
The provisional PHT list presented here should be considered
a work in progress, to be revised and refined over time. This list
should provide helpful signposts to therapists regarding which
treatments to avoid or administer only with considerable cau-
tion. Nevertheless, this list per se is in many respects less im-
portant than the overarching conclusion that should be drawn
from it: Some psychological treatments can exert harmful effects
on certain individuals. Clinicians must therefore become more
vigilant regarding the possibility of therapy-induced harm in
their everyday practices.
Fortunately, recent work by Lambert and his colleagues (e.g.,
see Lambert et al., 2003, for a meta-analysis) points to a partial
potential antidote against PHTs. Specifically, this research
suggests that (a) tracking client outcomes using standardized
questionnaires administered every session and (b) providing
prompt feedback to clinicians regarding clients’ failure to make
expected treatment gains significantly enhance therapeutic ef-
ficacy relative to a no-feedback control condition. In addition,
such feedback reduces the rates of symptom deterioration by 4 to
8%. Presumably, this warning system permits therapists to make
midcourse corrections in treatment that had been generating
negative effects. The increasing influence of managed care may
make adoption of Lambert’s system mandatory in many clinical
settings and may help to minimize the risks posed by PHTs.
A number of years ago, an undergraduate in one of my classes
asked me, in all earnestness, whether all physicians were still
required to take the ‘‘Hypocritical Oath.’’ Fortunately, psych-
ologists who implicitly pledge to ‘‘do no harm’’ by embracing the
APA (2002) Ethics Code can readily avoid behaving hypocrit-
ically in their clinical practice. By becoming aware of research
on PHTs and keeping abreast of the still-emerging literature on
unsafe psychological interventions, practicing clinicians can
aspire to the laudable goals of the Hippocratic Oath and thereby
fulfill their solemn mandate to do no harm.
Acknowledgments—The author thanks Hal Arkowitz, Gayle
Beck, Charles Boisvert, Joanne Davis, Susan Himes, Glenn
Hutchinson, Jeffrey Lohr, William O’Donohue, Harry Reis, John
Riolo, Richard Stuart, and several anonymous reviewers for
their extremely helpful comments on an earlier draft of this
article, and Drew Westen and Jill Littrell for useful suggestions
and discussions.
REFERENCES
Adler, C.M., Craske, M.G., & Barlow, D.H. (1987). Relaxation-in-
duced panic (RIP): When resting isn’t peaceful. Integrative
Psychiatry, 5, 94–100.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders, 4th edition, text revision. Washington,
DC: Author
American Psychological Association. (2002). Ethical principles of
psychologists and code of conduct. American Psychologist, 57,
1060–1073.
Anderson, C.A., Lepper, M.R., & Ross, L. (1980). The perseverance of
social theories: The role of explanation in the persistence of
discredited information. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 39, 1037–1049.
APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice (2006).
Evidence-based practice in psychology. American Psychologist,
61, 271–285.
Arkowitz, H., & Lilienfeld, S.O. (2006, April). Psychotherapy on trial.
Scientific American Mind, 2, 42–49.
Australian Psychological Society (n.d.). Recovered memory therapy in
Australia. Retrieved October 17, 2006, from http://recovered-
memorytherapy.blogspot.com/.
Barlow, D.H. (Ed.). (2001). Clinical handbook of psychological disor-
ders: A step-by-step treatment manual (3rd ed.). New York: Guil-
ford Press.
Barlow, D.H. (2004). Psychological treatments. American Psychologist,
59, 869–878.
Barlow, D.H., Levitt, J.T., & Bufka, L.F. (1999). The dissemination of
empirically supported treatments: A view to the future. Behavior
Research and Therapy, 37(Suppl. 1), S147–S162.
Beckham, E.E. (1992). Predicting patient dropout in psychotherapy.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 29, 177–
182.
Beutler, L.E. (2002). The dodo bird is extinct. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 9, 30–34.
Beutler, L.E., Bongar, B., & Shurkin, J.L. (1998). Am I crazy or is it my
shrink? New York: Oxford University Press.
Beutler, L.E., Frank, M., Schieber, S.C., Calvert, S., & Gaines, J.
(1984). Comparative effects of group psychotherapies in a short-
term inpatient setting: An experience with deterioration effects.
Psychiatry, 44, 67–76.
Beyerstein, B.L. (1997). Why do bogus therapies seem to work?
Skeptical Inquirer, 29, 29–34.
Beyerstein, B.L. (2001). Fringe psychotherapies: The public at risk.
Scientific Review of Alternative Medicine, 5, 70–79.
Biklen, D. (1990). Communication unbound: Autism and praxis.
Harvard Educational Review, 60, 291–314.
Bisson, J.L., Jenkins, P.L., Alexander, J., & Bannister, C. (1997). A
randomized controlled trial of psychological debriefing for vic-
tims of acute harm. British Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 78–81.
66
Volume 2—Number 1
Harmful Treatments
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Bohart, A.C. (2000). Paradigm clash: Empirically supported treat-
ments versus empirically supported psychotherapy practices.
Psychotherapy Research, 10, 488–493.
Boisvert, C. (2003). Negative effects in psychotherapy: Research
findings and clinical implications. Directions in Clinical and
Counseling Psychology, 15, 37–48.
Boisvert, C.M., & Faust, D. (2002). Iatrogenic symptoms in psycho-
therapy: A theoretical exploration of the potential impact of
labels, language, and belief systems. American Journal of Psy-
chotherapy, 546, 244–259.
Boisvert, C.M., & Faust, D. (2003). Leading researchers’ consensus on
psychotherapy research findings: Implications for the teaching
and conduct of psychotherapy. Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 34, 508–513.
Bootzin, R.R., & Bailey, E.T. (2005). Understanding placebo, nocebo,
and iatrogenic treatment effects. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
61, 871–880.
Botash, A.S., Babuts, D., Mitchell, N., O’Hara, M., Lynch, L., &
Manuel, J. (1994). Evaluations of children who have disclosed
sexual abuse via facilitated communication. Archives of Pediatric
and Adolescent Medicine, 148, 1282–1287.
Bottcher, J., & Ezell, M.E. (2005). Examining the effectiveness of
boot camps: A randomized experiment with a long-term
follow-up. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 42,
309–322.
Carlier, I.V., Lamberts, R.D., Van Uchelen, A.J., & Gersons, B.P.
(1998). Clinical utility of a brief diagnostic test for posttraumatic
stress disorder. Psychosomatic Medicine, 60, 42–47.
Castonguay, L.G., & Beutler, L.E. (2006). Principles of therapeutic
change that work. New York: Oxford University Press.
Chambless, D.L., & Hollon, S. (1998). Defining empirically supported
therapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66,
7–18.
Chambless, D.L., & Ollendick, T.H. (2001). Empirically supported
psychological interventions: Controversies and evidence. Annual
Review of Psychology, 52, 685–716.
Chen, M.-W., Froehle, T., & Morran, K. (1997). Deconstructing dis-
positional bias in clinical inference: Two interventions. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 76, 74–81.
Clancy, S. (2005). Abducted: How people come to believe they were
kidnapped by aliens. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cohen, A.S., Barlow, D.H., & Blanchard, E.B. (1985). Psychophysio-
logy of relaxation-associated panic attacks. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 94, 96–101.
Cohen, P., & Cohen, J. (1984). The clinician’s illusion. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 41, 1178–1182.
Coons, P.M. (1984). The differential diagnosis of multiple personality:
A comprehensive review. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 7,
51–57.
Daldrup, R.J., Beutler, L.E., Engle, D., & Greenberg, L.S. (1988).
Focused expressive psychotherapy: Freeing the overcontrolled pa-
tient. New York: Guilford.
Dawes, R.M. (1994). House of cards: Psychology and psychotherapy
built on myth. New York: Free Press.
Dineen, T. (2001). Manufacturing victims: What the psychotherapy
industry is doing to people (3rd ed.). Montreal, ON, Canada:
Robert Davies.
Dishion, T.J., & Andrews, D.W. (1995). Preventing escalation in
problem behaviors with high-risk young adolescents: Immediate
and 1-year outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 63, 538–548.
Dishion, T.J., Eddy, J.M., Haas, E., Li, F., & Spracklen, K. (1997).
Friendships and violent behavior during adolescence. Social
Development, 6, 207–223.
Dishion, T.J., McCord, J., & Poulin, F. (1999). When interventions
harm: Peer groups and problem behavior. American Psychologist,
54, 755–754.
D’Silva, K.D., Duggan, C., & McCarthy, L. (2004). Does treatment
really make psychopaths worse? Journal of Personality Disorders,
18, 163–177.
8 charged in teen’s boot camp death. (2006, November 28). CBS News
[electronic version]. Retrieved January 20, 2007, from http://
www.cbsnews.com/stories/2006/11/28/national/main2211680.
shtml.
Eisner, D.A. (2000). The death of psychotherapy: From Freud to alien
abductions. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Feder, L., & Wilson, D.B. (2005). A meta-analytic review of court-
mandated batterer intervention programs: Can courts affect
abusers’ behavior? Journal of Experimental Criminology, 1, 239–
262.
Foa, E.B., Zoellner, L.A., Feeny, N.C., Hembree, E.A., & Alvarez-
Conrad, J. (2002). Does imaginal exposure exacerbate PTSD
symptoms? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 70,
1022–1028.
Fox, R.E. (1996). Charlatanism, scientism and psychology’s social
contract. American Psychologist, 51, 777–784.
Fox, R.E. (2000, Winter). The dark side of evidence-based treatment.
Practitioner Focus [electronic version] Retrieved October 17,
2006, from http://www.apa.org/practice/pf/jan00/cappchair.html.
Frasure-Smith, N., Lesperance, F., Gravel, G., Masson, A., Juneau, M.,
& Bourassa, M.G. (2002). Long-term survival differences among
low-anxious, high-anxious and repressive copers enrolled in the
Montreal heart attack readjustment trial. Psychosomatic Medi-
cine, 64, 571–579.
Frasure-Smith, N., Lesperance, F., Prince, R.H., Verrier, P., Garber,
R.A., Juneau, M., Wolfson, C., & Bourassa, M.G. (1997). Ran-
domized trial of home-based psychological nursing intervention
for patients recovering from myocardial infarction. Lancet, 350,
473–479.
Freiheit, S.R., Vye, D., Swan, R., & Cady, M. (2004). Cognitive-
behavioral therapy for anxiety: Is dissemination working?
Behavior Therapist, 27, 25–32.
Friedman, R.A. (2006, May 30). A case in point for the maxim ‘‘Do no
harm.’’ New York Times, D6.
Garfield, S. (1994). Research on client variables in psychotherapy. In
A. Bergin & S. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and
behavior change (4th ed., pp. 190–228). New York: Wiley.
Ghaemi, S.N., & Hsu, D.J. (2005). Evidence-based pharmacotherapy
of bipolar disorder. In D.J. Stein, B. Lerer, & S.M. Stahl (Eds.),
Evidence-based pharmacotherapy (pp. 22–55). New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Gilden, D. (1998, July/August). The search for more intelligent ther-
apy. The body: The complete HIV/AIDS resource. Retrieved
October 17, 2006, from http://www.thebody.com/gmhc/issues/
julaug98/haart.html.
Goisman, R.M., Warshaw, M.G., & Keller, M.B. (1999). Psychosocial
treatment prescriptions for generalized anxiety disorder, social
phobia, and panic disorder, 1991–1996. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 156, 1819–1821.
Harris, G.T., Rice, M.E., & Cormier, C.A. (1994). Psychopaths: Is a
therapeutic community therapeutic? Therapeutic Communities,
15, 283–299.
Volume 2—Number 1
67
Scott O. Lilienfeld
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Heide, F.J., & Borkovec, T.D. (1984). Relaxation-induced anxiety:
Mechanisms and theoretical implications. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 22, 1–12.
Herbert, J.D., Sharp, I.R., & Gaudiano, B.A. (2002). Separating fact
from fiction in the etiology and treatment of autism: A scientific
review of the evidence. Scientific Review of Mental Health
Practice, 1, 23–43.
Hunsley, J., & DiGuilio, G. (2002). Dodo bird, phoenix, or urban
legend? Scientific Review of Mental Health Practice, 1, 11–22.
Hunsley, J., & Lee, C.M. (1995). The marital effects of individually
oriented psychotherapy: Is there evidence for the deterioration
hypothesis? Clinical Psychology Review, 15, 1–22.
Ilgen, M., & Moos, R. (2005). Deterioration following alcohol-use
disorder treatment in Project MATCH. Journal of Studies on Al-
cohol, 66, 517–525.
Jacobson, J.W., Mulick, J.A., & Schwartz, A.A. (1995). A history of
facilitated communication. American Psychologist, 50, 750–765.
Kluft, R.P. (1991). Clinical presentations of multiple personality dis-
order. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 14, 605–629.
Lafferty, P., Beutler, L.E., & Crago, M. (1989). Differences between
more and less effective psychotherapists: A study of select
therapist variables. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 57, 76–80.
Lambert, M.J. (Ed). (2003). Bergin & Garfield’s handbook of psycho-
therapy and behavior change (5th ed.). New York: Wiley.
Lambert, M.J., & Miller, M.J. (2001). Helping prospective patients
avoid harmful psychotherapies. Contemporary Psychology, 46,
386–388.
Lambert, M.J., Whipple, J.L., Hawkins, E.J., Vermeersch, D.A.,
Nielsen, S.L., & Smart, D.W. (2003). Is it time for clinicians to
routinely track patient outcome? A meta-analysis. Clinical Psy-
chology: Science and Practice, 10, 288–301.
Leventhal, L., & Huynh, C. (1996). Directional decisions for two-tailed
tests: Power, error rates, and sample size. Psychological Methods,
1, 278–292.
Levy, S.E., & Hyman, S.L. (2005). Novel treatments for autism spec-
trum disorders. Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabili-
ties Research Reviews, 11, 131–142.
Lewis, W
.A., & Bucher, A.M. (1992). Anger, catharsis, the reformu-
lated frustration-aggression hypothesis, and health consequen-
ces. Psychotherapy, 29, 385–392.
Lilienfeld, S.O. (1997). The relation of anxiety sensitivity to higher and
lower order personality dimensions: Implications for the etiology
of panic attacks. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 106, 539–544.
Lilienfeld, S.O. (1998). Pseudoscience in contemporary clinical psy-
chology: What it is and what we can do about it. Clinical
Psychologist, 51, 3–9.
Lilienfeld, S.O. (2002). The Scientific Review of Mental Health Prac-
tice. Our raison d’etre. Scientific Review of Mental Health Prac-
tice, 1, 5–10.
Lilienfeld, S.O., Fowler, K.A., Lohr, J.M., & Lynn, S.J. (2005).
Pseudoscience, nonscience, and nonsense in clinical psychology:
Dangers and remedies. In R.H. Wright & N.A. Cummings (Eds.),
Destructive trends in mental health: The well-intentioned path to
harm (pp. 187–218). New York: Routledge.
Lilienfeld, S.O., & Lynn, S.J. (2003). Dissociative identity disorder:
Multiple personalities, multiple controversies. In S.O. Lilienfeld,
S.J. Lynn, & J.M. Lohr (Eds.), Science and pseudoscience in
clinical psychology (pp. 109–142). New York: Guilford.
Lilienfeld, S.O., Lynn, S.J., Kirsch, I., Chaves, J., Sarbin, T., Ganaway,
G., & Powell, R. (1999). Dissociative identity disorder and the
sociocognitive model: Recalling the lessons of the past. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 125, 507–523.
Lilienfeld, S.O., Lynn, S.J., & Lohr, J.M. (Eds.). (2003). Science and
pseudoscience in clinical psychology. New York: Guilford.
Lipsey, M.W. (1992). The effect of treatment on juvenile delinquents:
Results from meta-analysis. In F. Loesel, D. Bender, & T. Blie-
sener (Eds.), Psychology and law: International perspectives (pp.
131–143). Berlin, NY: Walter de Gruyter.
Littrell, J. (1998). Is the experience of painful emotion therapeutic?
Clinical Psychology Review, 18, 71–102.
Litz, B.T., Gray, M.J., Bryant, R.A., & Adler, A.B. (2002). Early in-
tervention for trauma: Current status and future directions.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 9, 112–134.
Loftus, E.F., & Guyer, M. (2002). Who abused Jane Doe? The hazards
of the single case history. Skeptical Inquirer, 26, 24–32.
Lohr, J.M., Hooke, W., Gist, R., & Tolin, D.F. (2003). Novel and
controversial treatments for trauma-related stress disorders. In
S.O. Lilienfeld, S.J. Lynn, & J.M. Lohr (Eds.), Science and
pseudoscience in clinical psychology (pp. 243–272). New York:
Guilford.
Lundeen, E. (2005, Fall). EBT and EVT: Can we please stop? Inde-
pendent Practitioner, 25, 1–3.
Lynam, D.R., Milich, R., Zimmerman, R., Novak, S.P., Logan, T.K.,
Martin, C., Leukefeld, C., & Clayton, R. (1999). Project DARE:
No effects at 10-year follow-up. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 67, 590–593.
Lynn, S.J., Lock, T., Loftus, E.F., Krackow, E., & Lilienfeld, S.O.
(2003). The remembrance of things past: Problematic memory
recovery techniques in psychotherapy. In S.O. Lilienfeld, S.J.
Lynn, & J.M. Lohr (Eds.), Science and pseudoscience in clinical
psychology (pp. 205–239). New York: Guilford.
Lynn, S.J., Martin, D.J., & Frauman, D.C. (1996). Does hypnosis pose
special risks for negative effects? International Journal of Clin-
ical and Experimental Hypnosis, 44, 7–19.
MacKenzie, D.L., Gover, A.R., Armstrong, G.A., & Mitchell, O. (2001,
August). A national study comparing the environments of boot
camps with traditional facilities for juvenile offenders (National
Institute of Justice Research in Brief). Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Justice.
MacKenzie, D.L., Wilson, D.B., & Kider, S.B. (2001). Effects of cor-
rectional boot camps on offending. Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science, 578, 126–143.
MacKillop, J., Lisman, S.A., Weinstein, A., & Rosenbaum, D. (2003).
Controversial treatments for alcoholism. In S.O. Lilienfeld, S.J.
Lynn, & J.M. Lohr (Eds.), Science and pseudoscience in clinical
psychology (pp. 273–305). New York: Guilford Press.
Mai, F.M. (1995). Psychiatrists’ attitudes to multiple personality dis-
order: A questionnaire study. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 40,
154–157.
March, J.S., Klee, B.J., & Kremer, C.M.E. (2006). Treatment
benefit and the risk of suicidality in multicenter, randomized,
controlled trials of sertraline in children and adolescents.
Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 16, 91–
102.
Mash, E.J., & Hunsley, J. (1993). Assessment considerations in the
identification of failing psychotherapy: Bringing the negatives out
of the darkroom. Psychological Assessment, 5, 292–301.
Masserman, T.H., & Carmichael, H.T. (1938). Diagnosis and prognosis
in psychiatry. Journal of Mental Science, 84, 893–946.
May, P., Tuma, H., & Dixon, W. (1977). For better or for worse? Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 165, 231–239.
68
Volume 2—Number 1
Harmful Treatments
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Mayou, R.A., Ehlers, A., & Hobbs, M. (2000). Psychological de-
briefing for road and traffic accident victims. British Journal of
Psychiatry, 176, 589–593.
Mays, D.T., & Franks, C.M. (1980). Getting worse: Psychotherapy or no
treatment—the jury should still be out. Professional Psychology,
11, 78–92.
McCord, J. (2003). Cures that harm: Unanticipated outcomes of crime
prevention programs. Annals of the American Academy of Political
and Social Science, 587, 16–30.
McNally, R.J., Bryant, R.A., & Ehlers, A. (2003). Does early psy-
chological intervention promote recovery from posttraumatic
stress? Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 4, 45–79.
Meehl, P.E. (1993). Philosophy of science: Help or hindrance? Psy-
chological Reports, 72, 707–733.
Mercer, J. (2002). Attachment therapy: A treatment without empirical
support. Scientific Review of Mental Health Practice, 1, 105–112.
Mercer, J., Sarner, L., & Rosa, L. (2003). Attachment therapy on trial.
Westport, CT: Praeger.
Mohr, D.C. (1995). Negative outcome in psychotherapy: A critical
review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 2, 1–27.
Mohr, D.C., Beutler, L.E., Shoham-Salomon, V., Bergan, J., Kaszniak,
A.W.,
Yost,
E.B.,
&
Engle,
D.
(1990).
Identification
of
patients at risk for non-response and negative outcome in psy-
chotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58,
622–628.
Moos, R. (2005). Iatrogenic effects of psychosocial interventions for
substance use disorders: Prevalence, predictors, prevention.
Addiction, 100, 595–604.
Mueser, K.T., & Berenbaum, H. (1990). Psychodynamic treatment of
schizophrenia: Is there a future? Psychological Medicine, 20,
253–262.
Neimeyer, R. (2000). Searching for the meaning of meaning: Grief
therapy and the process of reconstruction. Death Studies, 24,
541–558.
Norcross, J.C., Koocher, G.P., & Garofalo, G.P. (2006). Discredited
psychological treatments and tests: A Delphi poll. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 37, 515–522.
Ost, L.G. (1987). Applied relaxation: Description of a coping tech-
nique and review of controlled studies. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 25, 397–409.
Parent, D.G. (2003). Correctional boot camps: Lessons from a decade of
research. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Justice.
Perls, F.S. (1969). Gestalt therapy verbatim. Moab, UT: Real People
Press.
Petrosino, A., Turpin-Petrosino, C., & Buehler, J. (2003). ‘‘Scared
Straight’’ and other juvenile awareness programs for preventing
juvenile delinquency. Annals of the American Academy of Polit-
ical and Social Science, 589, 41–62.
Piper, A. (1997). Hoax and reality: The bizarre world of multiple per-
sonality disorder. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.
Polusny, M.A., & Folette, V.M. (1996). Remembering childhood sexual
abuse: A national survey of psychologists’ clinical practices,
beliefs, and personal experiences. Professional Psychology: Re-
search and Practice, 27, 41–52.
Poole, D.A., Lindsay, D.S., Memon, A., & Bull, R. (1995). Psycho-
therapists’ opinions, practices, and experiences with memories of
incestuous abuse. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
68, 426–437.
Powell, R.A., & Gee, T.L. (1999). The effects of hypnosis on disso-
ciative identity disorder: A reexamination of the evidence.
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 44, 914–916.
Putnam, F.W. (1989). Diagnosis and treatment of multiple personality
disorder. New York: Guilford.
Putnam, F.W., Guroff, J.J., Silberman, E.K., Barban, L., & Post, R.M.
(1986). The clinical phenomenology of multiple personality dis-
order: Review of 100 recent cases. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
47, 285–293.
Rhule, D.M. (2005). Take care to do no harm: Harmful interventions
for youth problem behavior. Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 36, 618–625.
Romanczyk, R.G., Arnstein, L., Soorya, L.V., & Gillis, J. (2003). The
myriad of controversial treatments for autism: A critical evalu-
ation of efficacy. In S.O. Lilienfeld, S.J. Lynn, & J.M. Lohr (Eds.),
Science and pseudoscience in clinical psychology (pp. 363–398).
New York: Guilford Press.
Rose, S., Bisson, J.I., & Wessely, S. (2001). Psychological debriefing
for preventing post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (Cochrane
Review). In The Cochrane Library, 4. Oxford, England: Update
Software.
Rosen, G.M. (1987). Self-help treatment books and the commercial-
ization of psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 42, 46–51.
Rosen, G.M., & Davison, G.C. (2003). Psychology should list empir-
ically supported principles of change (ESPs) and not credentialed
trademarked therapies or other treatment packages. Behavior
Modification, 27, 300–312.
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The ‘‘file drawer problem’’ and tolerance for null
results. Psychological Bulletin, 86, 638–641.
Ross, C.A. (1997). Dissociative identity disorder: Diagnosis, clinical
features, and treatment of multiple personality. New York:
Wiley.
Ross, C.A., Norton, G.R., & Wozney, K. (1989). Multiple personality
disorder: An analysis of 236 cases. Canadian Journal of Psy-
chiatry, 34, 413–418.
Rubin, R., & Rubin, R.A. (2005). Response to ‘‘Scientifically sup-
ported and unsupported interventions for childhood psychopa-
thology: A summary.’’ Pediatrics, 116, 289.
Schooler, J.W., Ambadar, Z., & Bendiksen, M. (1997). A cognitive
corroborative case study approach for investigating discovered
memories of sexual abuse. In J.D. Read & D.S. Lindsay (Eds.),
Recollections of trauma: Scientific research and clinical practices
(pp. 379–388). New York: Plenum.
Shapiro, D.A., & Shapiro, D. (1982). Meta-analysis of comparative
therapy outcome studies: A replication and refinement. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 92, 581–604.
Sharp, I.R., & Chapman, J.E. (2004). Antidepressants and increased
suicidality: The media portrayal of the controversy. Scientific
Review of Mental Health Practice, 3, 71–75.
Shipley, R.H., & Boudewyns, P.A. (1980). Flooding and implosive
therapy: Are they harmful? Behavior Therapy, 11, 503–508.
Sierra, F. (2005). Evidence-based medicine (EBM) in practice: Ap-
plying number needed to treat and number needed to harm.
American Journal of Gastroenterology, 100, 1661–1663.
Sijbrandij, M., Olff, M., Reitsma, J.B., Carlier, I.V.E., & Gersons,
B.P.R. (2006). Emotional or educational debriefing after psy-
chological trauma. British Journal of Psychiatry, 189, 150–155.
Singer, M., & Lalich, J. (1996). Crazy therapies: What are they? How do
they work? San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Skeem, J., Monahan, J., & Mulvey, E. (2002). Psychopathy, treatment
involvement, and subsequent violence among civil psychiatric
patients. Law and Human Behavior, 26, 577–603.
Smith, M.L., Glass, G.V., & Miller, T.I. (1980). The benefits of psy-
chotherapy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Volume 2—Number 1
69
Scott O. Lilienfeld
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Sommers, C.H., & Satel, S. (2005). One nation under therapy: How the
helping culture is eroding self-reliance. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Spanos, N.P. (1994). Multiple identity enactments and multiple per-
sonality disorder: A sociocognitive perspective. Psychological
Bulletin, 116, 143–165.
Spanos, N.P., Weekes, J.R., & Bertrand, L.D. (1985). Multiple per-
sonality: A social psychological perspective. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 94, 362–376.
Stone, N., & Borkovec, T.D. (1975). The paradoxical effect of brief CS
exposure on an analogue phobic subject. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 13, 51–54.
Strupp, H.H., Hadley, S.W., & Gomez-Schwartz, B. (1977). Psycho-
therapy for better or worse: The problem of negative effects. New
York: Wiley.
Stuart, R.B. (1970). Trick or treatment: How and when psychotherapy
fails. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Tarrier, N., Pilgrim, H., Sommerfeld, C., Faragher, B., Reynolds, M.,
Graham, E., & Barrowclough, C. (1999). A randomized trial of
cognitive therapy and imaginal exposure in the treatment of
chronic posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 67, 13–18.
Tavris, C. (2003). Mind games: Psychological warfare between
therapists
and
scientists.
Chronicle
Review,
February
28,
B7–B9.
Tehrani, E., Krussel, J., Borg, L., & Munk-Jorgensen, P. (1996).
Dropping out of psychiatric treatment: A prospective study of a
first-admission cohort. Acta Psychiatric Scandinavica, 94, 266–
271.
Tellegen, A., & Atkinson, G. (1974). Openness to absorbing and self-
altering experiences (‘‘absorption’’), a trait related to hypnotic
susceptibility. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 83, 268–277.
Utah wilderness therapy deaths. (2003, July 13). Salt Lake Tribune
[electronic version]. Retrieved October 17, 2006, from http://
www.sltrib.com/2003/jul/07132003/utah/75064.asp.
Wampold, B.E. (2001). The great psychotherapy debate: Models,
methods, and findings. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wampold, B.E., Mondin, G.W., Moody, M., Stich, F., Benson, K., &
Ahn, H. (1997). A meta-analysis of outcome studies comparing
bona fide psychotherapies: Empirically, ‘‘All have won and all
must have prizes. Psychological Bulletin, 122, 203–215.
Weiss, B., Caron, A., Ball, S., Tapp, J., Johnson, M., & Weisz, J.R.
(2005). Iatrogenic effects of group treatment for antisocial youth.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73, 1001–1008.
Weiss, R., Wilson, N.L., & Whitemarsh, S.M. (2005). Evaluation of a
voluntary, military-style residential treatment program for ado-
lescents with academic and conduct problems. Journal of Clin-
ical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 34, 692–705.
Werch, C.E., & Owen, D. (2002). Iatrogenic effects of alcohol and drug
prevention programs. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 63, 581–590.
Westen, D., Novotny, C.M., & Thompson-Brenner, H. (2004). The
empirical status of empirically supported psychotherapies: As-
sumptions, findings, and reporting in controlled clinical trials.
Psychological Bulletin, 130, 631–663.
Williams, S.L., Turner, S.M., & Peer, D.F. (1985). Guided mastery and
performance desensitization treatments for severe acrophobia.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 53, 237–247.
Wilson, D.B., Gottfredson, D.C., & Najaka, S.S. (2001). School-based
prevention of problem-behaviors: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Quantitative Criminology, 17, 247–272.
Wood, J.M., Garb, H.N., Lilienfeld, S.O., & Nezworski, M.T. (2002).
Clinical assessment. Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 519–543.
Yalom, I.D., & Lieberman, M.A. (1971). A study of encounter group
casualties. Archives of General Psychiatry, 25, 16–30.
70
Volume 2—Number 1
Harmful Treatments
 at Edinburgh University on May 8, 2012
pps.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
