 Leading Edge
Review
The Principles of Engineering Immune Cells
to Treat Cancer
Wendell A. Lim1,* and Carl H. June2,*
1Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
2Center for Cellular Immunotherapies, the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine at the Perelman School of Medicine,
and the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
*Correspondence: wendell.lim@ucsf.edu (W.A.L.), cjune@exchange.upenn.edu (C.H.J.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.016
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells have proven that engineered immune cells can serve as a
powerful new class of cancer therapeutics. Clinical experience has helped to define the major chal-
lenges that must be met to make engineered T cells a reliable, safe, and effective platform that can
be deployed against a broad range of tumors. The emergence of synthetic biology approaches for
cellular engineering is providing us with a broadly expanded set of tools for programming immune
cells. We discuss how these tools could be used to design the next generation of smart T cell pre-
cision therapeutics.
Introduction
The emergence of engineered T cells as a form of cancer therapy
marks the beginning of a new era in medicine, providing a trans-
formative way to combat complex diseases such as cancer.
Within the past few years, clinical trials using T cells engineered
to recognize B cell cancers have shown high rates of response
(70%–90%) and durability of response that are unprecedented
in acute (Brentjens et al., 2013; Maude et al., 2014; Turtle
et al., 2016) and chronic leukemia (Kalos et al., 2011). In 2017,
we expect to see the first approved engineered T cell therapies
coming to market. While poised to revolutionize cancer therapy,
the optimism about T cell cancer therapies remains tempered by
concerns about safety and off-target toxicity, as well as the
development of resistance. Meanwhile, the field also awaits a
clear demonstration of clinical efficacy in solid tumors. The de-
velopments in this field over the coming years—in the areas of
safety, reliability, and efficacy against solid tumors—will ulti-
mately determine how disruptive this new modality can be in
the broader battle against cancer.
Living Therapies Can Uniquely Perform Complex
Sensing and Response Functions
Engineered T cells are part of a much broader explosion in
immuno-oncology, but what perhaps makes these therapies
most revolutionary is the concept of using a living cell as the ther-
apeutic platform. Living cells are radically different from inani-
mate platforms, such as small molecules or antibodies, in that
cells are capable of intelligent sensing and response behaviors.
At the same time, these cellular devices are more challenging to
manipulate, manufacture, and control. In theory, combining a
living platform that is capable of complex sensing-response be-
haviors with the ability to genetically reprogram these behaviors
is what generates the disruptive therapeutic potential of this
approach.
Engineered T Cells Represent a Convergence of Diverse
Areas of Medicine and Science
The engineered T cell therapies of today and the future represent
the convergence of diverse areas of medicine and basic science
(Figure 1). This new approach combines concepts from three
long-standing therapeutic strategies. Engineered antibodies
have become a standard platform for recognizing and targeting
disease but are largely used to block target protein activity or to
target a toxic payload. Vaccination, which uses various methods
to awaken the native immune system, has long illustrated the
therapeutic power of unleashing complex immune responses.
Finally, transplantation has established the paradigm of using a
living therapeutic platform (cells or organs), though usually for re-
placing a defective system rather than for deploying novel, user-
targeted functions.
Today, we can now integrate these different therapeutic stra-
tegies into a single, more powerful cell therapy platform. The
emerging field of synthetic biology is providing us with the com-
ponents and technology to systematically engineer customized
cell regulatory circuits that can generate the sophisticated sense
and response behaviors that may be required to effectively com-
bat a complex disease such as cancer (Bashor et al., 2008;
Fischbach et al., 2013) (Figure 1).
Envisioning the Next Generation of T Cell Therapies
In this review, we summarize the field of engineered therapeutic
T cells and where it is headed. We have focused on forecasting
how the tools of synthetic biology could be used to design the
best therapeutic cell programs for treating cancer. The funda-
mental issues that we focusing on in this review—what kinds
of sensing and response programs can be encoded into a
therapeutic T cell—are very general and therefore largely
agnostic to type of cell used, the source of cell, and how it was
manufactured.
724
Cell 168, February 9, 2017 ª 2017 Published by Elsevier Inc.
 Experience with T Cell Therapy: Lessons Learned
The feasibility and safety of therapeutically infusing non-geneti-
cally modified T cells has been validated over the last 20 years.
Infusion of ex-vivo-expanded T cells was first used in melanoma
patients (Rosenberg et al., 1988) and, shortly thereafter, in
patients with disseminated CMV infection (Riddell et al., 1992)
and HIV/AIDs (Levine et al., 2002).
Tumor-Infiltrating Lymphocytes
Infusions with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)—T cells iso-
lated from tumors—have been used for several decades in pa-
tients with melanoma (Rosenberg et al., 1988). The recent
demonstration that TILs can target tumor neo-antigens pro-
vides a rationale to target tumors with high mutational loads
such as melanoma and lung cancer (Robbins et al., 2013).
Several issues, however, have limited the widespread usage
of TILs. First, manufacturing of TILs is logistically complex.
Second, TILs are dependent on the endogenous T cell receptor
(TCR) for cancer recognition. The TCR is an unusual receptor in
that the antigen receptor recognizes peptide and self MHC
molecules (Figure 2). An advantage of the TCR is that a vast
array of distinct peptides can be recognized (Zhang et al.,
2016), including tumor-specific mutations (Schumacher and
Schreiber, 2015). Thus, the intracellular proteome of cancer
cells may represent the largest set of currently untapped tar-
gets for new cancer therapies. From a therapeutic perspective,
however, there are two principal limitations of the TCR as a
recognition modality for T cells given as a cancer therapeutic:
(1) the requirement for MHC matching to each patient, as it is
currently estimated that humans have > 10,000 HLA alleles
(http://hla.alleles.org/nomenclature/index.html) and (2) the af-
Figure 1. Engineered Therapeutic T Cells
Provide a Transformative New Platform for
Interfacing with Complex Diseases such as
Cancer
Therapeutic T cells combine elements of more
traditional therapeutic approaches to yield an in-
tegrated smart sense-and-response agent. The
emerging field of synthetic biology is providing
tools and approaches to program therapeutic cells
in diverse ways.
finity of the TCR for cancer targets is
typically in the low micromolar range,
which can limit the activation and cyto-
toxicity of tumor specific T cells, as
opposed to efficient recognition and
discrimination of viral peptides that elicit
TCRs with nanomolar affinity (Aleksic
et al., 2012).
CD19 CAR T Cells: A Success Story
Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) are
synthetic molecules that allow more flex-
ible user-specified retargeting of T cells
(Figure 2). CARs overcome some limita-
tions of the TCR, such as the need
for
MHC
expression,
MHC
identity,
and costimulation. Kuwana and Eshaar
first demonstrated that these types of
synthetic receptor molecules enabled MHC-independent target
recognition by T cells (Gross et al., 1989; Kuwana et al., 1987).
One limitation of current CAR T cell strategies is that they require
extracellular surface targets on the tumor cells.
CAR T cells targeting CD19 have emerged as the lead para-
digm for engineered T cell therapies in cancer and illustrate the
synergies of combining synthetic biology with T cell biology.
There are several features that have contributed to the success
in the clinical studies targeting CD19. CD19 was chosen as the
initial target not only for its frequent and high-level expression
in B cell malignancies, but also because it is required for normal
B cell development in mice and humans (Engel et al., 1995; van
Zelm et al., 2006). CD19 is a nearly ideal target, since a loss
of normal B cells is tolerable given replacement antibody therapy
(IVIG). Patients successfully treated with CD19 CARs have pro-
found B cell aplasia (Porter et al., 2011), and loss of B
cell aplasia often heralds relapse (Kochenderfer et al., 2010).
These results demonstrate that CAR T cells can have on-target
off-tumor effects, a feature that may be mitigated by employing
on-off gated CAR T cells, as described below. Preliminary results
with other CARs indicates that the CD19 off-tumor cross-reac-
tions will not be a singular example but may be generally
observed with other lineage-dependent targets. For example,
in ongoing trials (clinicaltrials.gov NCT02546167) with CARs tar-
geting B cell maturation antigen (BCMA, TNFRSF17, or CD269),
multiple myeloma patients have shown eradication of non-malig-
nant plasma cells that also express BCMA, in addition to eradi-
cation of the myeloma cells (Ali et al., 2016). How tolerable this
kind of off-tumor reaction is will depend on the types of non-tu-
mor cells that are targeted.
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
725
 CD19 CAR T Cells: The Remaining Issues
Despite their success, several issues remain for CD19 CAR
T cells (Figure 2C). In acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), since
> 80% of patients enter remission, the issues are to decrease in-
fusional toxicity and increase durability of responses (Maude
et al., 2014; Turtle et al., 2016). Infusional toxicities have been
limited to cytokine release syndrome (Fitzgerald et al., 2016;
Teachey et al., 2016) and a poorly understood neurological syn-
drome. Cytokine release syndrome occurs more frequently in
patients with higher disease burdens at time of infusion and
rapidly resolves after cytokine directed therapy that targets
IL-6 (Lee et al., 2014).
In contrast, in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), approxi-
mately 50% of patients benefit from CARs, and the remissions
have been durable for more than 5 years in the responding pa-
tients (Porter et al., 2015); however, further research is required
to increase response rates. One approach currently undergoing
clinical evaluation is to combine CAR infusions with targeted
therapies such as ibrutinib or with checkpoint therapies such
as PD1 antagonists. Another approach is to use allogeneic sour-
ces of T cells (Brudno et al., 2016), which may overcome cell-
intrinsic mechanisms of resistance such as T cell exhaustion or
senescence in patients with CLL (Riches et al., 2013).
An evolving issue is understanding and managing the long-
term consequences of acquired B cell aplasia in patients with
persisting CARs. In patients with congenital B cell aplasia, live
viral vaccines are contraindicated, and most patients are
managed with intravenous immunoglobulin replacement therapy
(Winkelstein et al., 2006). Thus, the consequences of CAR-
induced B cell aplasia may be more severe in children who
have not fully established memory B cells and long-lived plasma
cells before receiving ablative CAR therapy. The use of switch-
able rather than constitutive CARs should overcome the limita-
tions of B cell aplasia, as discussed below (in Anti-cancer Cell
Therapies Must Solve Multi-dimensional Challenges).
In the case of B-cell-directed CARs, two forms of resistance
have emerged in patients with ALL. In a subset of patients, the
CAR T cells become undetectable, followed by loss of B cell
aplasia and leukemia recurrence within the first 3 months after
infusion (Maude et al., 2014). Early loss of engineered T cells is
often due to induction of host immunity to the transgene. In
contrast, in 10%–20% of patients, the patients relapse late after
treatment with target loss, manifested by ALL blasts comprised
of CD19 loss variants (Yu et al., 2017). In more extreme cases,
tumor escape has occurred by lineage switch from lymphoid to
myeloid leukemia (Jacoby et al., 2016).
The Solid Tumor Challenge
The largest challenge to the field of immuno-oncology is
designing T cell therapies to effectively and safely treat solid tu-
mors such as adenocarcinoma and sarcoma (Figure 2D). Here,
we consider the evidence that the immune system can kill the
cells comprising solid tumors, the lessons from trials conducted
with adoptive T cell transfer, and opportunities for the design of
T cells optimized for solid tumor immunotherapy.
Lessons from Previous Immunotherapy of Solid Tumors
with Natural T Cells
The powerful antitumoreffects ofallogeneic (non-self)hematopoi-
etic stem cell (HSC) transplantation were initially thought to be due
to the use of super lethal chemotherapy and irradiation with stem
cell rescue. Only later, when identical HSC transplantation pro-
cedures were performed using monozygotic twin or sibling do-
nors, was it realized that the antitumor effects were due to alloge-
neic immune responses because the leukemia-free survival of
twin transplant recipients was unexpectedly found to be inferior
compared to the survival of sibling transplants (Weiden et al.,
1979). Definitive evidence for the antitumor effect of allogeneic
T cells was finally provided when the adoptive transfer of donor
T cells was shown to be sufficient to induce complete remissions
in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (Collins et al., 1997).
The primary toxicity of allogeneic T cell infusions is graft versus
host disease (GVHD), which occurs when donor T cells respond
Figure 2. Platforms for Redirecting T Cells to Cancer
(A) T cell receptors (e.g., anti-NY-ESO1) or chimeric antigen receptors (e.g.,
anti-CD19 CAR).
(B) CAR structure includes an extracellular antigen recognition domain fused
to intracellular TCR signaling domains (CD3z) and co-stimulatory domains
(e.g., CD28 or 4-1BB).
(C) Current status of CD19 CAR therapies.
(D) Current status of engineered T cells directed toward solid tumors.
726
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 to host antigens. GVHD can be rapidly lethal, with prominent
immunopathology occurring in skin, gastrointestinal track, liver,
lymph nodes, bone marrow, and lungs, with sparing of kidneys,
muscle, and brain (Ferrara et al., 2009). The relative sensitivity
and resistance of various tissues to the effects of allogeneic
T cell infusions is relevant to strategies attempting to generate
antitumor effects using genetically engineered autologous
T cells, as discussed below. The mechanisms for the allogeneic
effect are complex and relate to the direct effects of foreign
T cells on targets in the host, as well as an indirect effect of the
allogeneic T cells reawakening host T cells (Symons et al., 2008).
Based on the discovery of the powerful antitumor effects
conveyed by the allogeneic immune effects, patients with
various solid tumors have been treated with allogeneic HSCs
on several clinical trials. The overall results were disappointing
after allogeneic HSCs and allogenic T cell infusions (Bregni
et al., 2006), although there are a small number of patients with
long-term survival (Omazic et al., 2016).
Trials with Engineered T Cells to Date: A Note for
Cautious Optimism?
To date, the most powerful immune effect ever provoked by nat-
ural T cells has been the induction of alloimmunity: in a matter of
weeks, the infusion of donor T cells can lead to the eradication of
leukemia or lethal GVHD. However, as was noted above, not all
cancers regress, and some organs are spared from the effects of
allogeneic T cells. Infusions of T cells with altered TCRs or with
CARs are now showing that these rules can be broken.
The first tests were performed with T cells expressing modified
TCRs targeted to antigens that are expressed at high levels on
various cancers, but also expressed on normal tissues. A series
of trials were conducted in melanoma patients, testing T cells
transduced with TCRs targeting MART-1 (melanoma antigen
recognized by T cells). One low-affinity TCR that was HLA-A2
restricted was found to be well tolerated but had low antitumor
effects (Morgan et al., 2006). A higher-affinity TCR, tested in a
second trial, showed very different results: most patients devel-
oped severe toxicity, including sloughing of skin, inflamed eyes,
and loss of hearing that required treatment with steroids (John-
son et al., 2009). In addition, increased antitumor efficacy was
suggested with the higher-affinity TCR.
The avidity of a TCR for its target cell is determined by several
contributing factors, including the number of TCRs on the sur-
face, the density of cognate antigen on the target cell, the pres-
ence of co-receptors such as CD4 or CD8, as well as the affinity
of the TCR for the peptide-MHC complex. Many basic immu-
nology studies have shown that affinity is important for speci-
fying T cell function, so there may be a defined affinity window
that optimizes tumor recognition while avoiding the emergence
of autoimmunity (Zhong et al., 2013). Studies have shown that,
in humans, the affinity of TCRs targeting self-antigens often ex-
pressed on tumors cells are, on average, 30-fold lower in affinity
of TCRs for foreign pathogens (Aleksic et al., 2012).
A trial is ongoing in the Netherlands, testing a TCR that binds to
MART-1 and HLA-A*0201 that is not affinity enhanced. One pa-
tient died from cytokine release with a clinical syndrome like that
observed with CAR T cells (van den Berg et al., 2015). Whether
MART-1 is a valid target for engineered T cells remains an
open question. Experiments testing a TCR redirected to the
onco-fetal antigen carcinoembryonic antigen CEA were con-
ducted in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (Parkhurst
et al., 2009). After treating three patients, although anti-tumor ac-
tivity was observed in one patient, all three patients developed
severe inflammatory colitis in the colon, resulting in early termi-
nation of the trial due to toxicity (Parkhurst et al., 2011).
Given the anti-tumor activity observed in the above results,
cancer testis antigens have become one of the most promising
classes of targets for cancer immunotherapy (Coulie et al.,
2014). The first clinical trial conducted with an affinity-engi-
neered TCR was done with the NY-ESO-1 HLA-A*02-restricted
TCR developed by Jakobsen and colleagues (Zhao et al.,
2007). Objective clinical responses were observed in synovial
cell sarcoma, melanoma, and myeloma in the first two trials (Ra-
poport et al., 2015; Robbins et al., 2011). Per clinicaltrials.gov,
there are currently nine clinical trials using gene-engineered
T cells redirected with the affinity engineered NY-ESO-1 TCR
to treat a variety of cancers, and none have reported severe
toxicity.
Cross-Reactive Toxicity
However, the results have not been as optimistic in patients
treated with T cells redirected to the MAGE family of cancer
testis antigens. Three trials are ongoing or have been reported
with three different TCRs. At the NCI, a TCR was isolated from
transgenic mice vaccinated with MAGE-A3 peptides, and pa-
tients treated with T cells expressing this TCR developed severe
neurotoxicity. At autopsy, extensive necrotizing leukoencephal-
opathy associated with T cell infiltration was observed (Morgan
et al., 2013). The TCR was shown to cross-react with several ho-
mologous proteins, including MAGE-A12, which is normally ex-
pressed in human brain (Chinnasamy et al., 2011). In a second
trial testing an independently derived MAGE-A3 TCR isolated
from a patient that was affinity enhanced by phage display, pa-
tients died from cardiac toxicity (Linette et al., 2013). The toxicity
was due to off-target recognition of an unrelated muscle-specific
protein, Titin, leading to a new form of molecular mimicry
(Cameron et al., 2013; Raman et al., 2016). A trial testing,
T cells transduced recognizing MAGE-A4 and HLA-A24 in pa-
tients with esophageal cancer has been safe (Kageyama et al.,
2015); however, no significant tumor regressions were observed.
CAR Engineered T Cells Move beyond CD19
The first CAR T cell trials for solid tumors were conducted in
patients with ovarian, neuroblastoma, and kidney cancer. CAR
T cells targeting folate receptor 1 alpha and CD171 in advanced
ovarian cancer and neuroblastoma did not have toxicity or
efficacy; however, the short persistence of the infused CAR
T cells precludes interpretations on the safety of these targets
(Kershaw et al., 2006). In contrast, a study using a more physio-
logic T cell culture methodology of patients with metastatic renal
cell carcinoma testing CAR T cells directed against carbonic an-
hydrase IX encountered severe liver toxicity, while paradoxically,
there were no objective antitumor responses (Lamers et al.,
2006, 2013). There were host-directed immune responses
against the CAR T cells in these trials (Lamers et al., 2011), indi-
cating that immunogenicity will be a more serious limitation in tri-
als not targeting B cells.
Two groups have reported trials testing CARs targeting the
receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2 (also referred to as
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
727
 ERBB2, human epidermal growth factor, or HER2). In a trial using
a high dose of CAR T cells and a third generation signaling
domain comprised of CD28 and 4-1BB, a patient died with se-
vere toxicity consisting of cytokine storm and, potentially, on-
and off-tumor target recognition of HER2 (Morgan et al., 2010).
In contrast, a trial using a lower-affinity CAR targeting HER2 us-
ing a second-generation signaling domain and lower doses of
T cells was safely completed with evidence of clinically beneficial
antitumor effects (Ahmed et al., 2015).
Looking Forward: Lessons to Target Solid Tumors
There are several lessons from the trials to date targeting solid
tumors with engineered T cells. First, specificity of the infused
T cells is of paramount importance. For decades, investigators
have attempted to induce tumor regression using approaches
that target antigens shared on tumors and normal tissue (Pardoll,
1999), hoping that the T cells will somehow ignore the normal tis-
sue expression. It is now retrospectively appreciated that those
approaches were largely ineffective and would induce unaccept-
able toxicity if it were not for the nature of the low-affinity TCRs
that were induced and the induction of checkpoint resistance
that prevented ongoing effector activity. Thus, engineered
T cells for solid tumors that will be endowed with high-affinity re-
ceptors and that will be resistant to checkpoint inhibition will
require precision targeting and control mechanisms to avoid
off-tumor effects while retaining on-target effects.
Second, the results from initial trials suggest that toxicity from
T cells employing high-affinity TCRs is difficult to predict. Two
types of toxicity may be especially problematic. First, the occur-
rence of cardiac destruction from an engineered T cell that ac-
quired off-target recognition of a related peptide expressed
only in muscle points to a need for improved preclinical testing
methods. The large size of the human proteome expressed on
the genetically heterogeneous MHC complex in humans makes
this a daunting task. In physiology, the thymus screens T cells for
endogenous reactivity so that presumably, TCRs that are recov-
ered from other healthy humans can be safely deployed in pa-
tients with cancer. Various investigators are now developing
screens to test for off-target recognition of engineered TCRs
(Hickman et al., 2016; Stone et al., 2015). In contrast, for
CARs, unexpected toxicity is less of an issue because robust
technology has been developed to screen for antibody reactivity
to normal tissues. The other issue with the use of engineered het-
erodimeric TCRs is that they can potentially pair with the endog-
enous TCR chains, creating novel specificity for unknown targets
that were not previously selected for tolerance in the host
(Bendle et al., 2010). This theoretically serious issue has not
yet occurred in human trials, but it remains as a serious concern.
One approach to obviate this risk is the use of various gene
editing technologies to ablate the endogenous TCR (Provasi
et al., 2012).
Third, as noted above, in some cases, unexpected toxicities
have emerged in the trials to date with engineered T cells. This
is not unexpected given the history of drug therapy, where new
toxicities are often revealed, not in preclinical testing, but rather,
only upon clinical testing in humans. However, to date with engi-
neered T cells, the mechanisms for the toxicities are rapidly un-
covered so that improved technologies can be developed. For
example, regarding the cardiac toxicity that emerged from a
MAGE A3 TCR and the molecular mechanism that was rapidly
uncovered (Cameron et al., 2013). It is instructive to compare
this to cardiac toxicity from anthracycline therapy, where the
mechanisms that cause cumulative dose-dependent anthracy-
cline-cardiotoxicity remain controversial and incompletely un-
derstood after more than 40 years of investigation (Gianni
et al., 2008). Thus, an important and distinct advantage of engi-
neered T cells is that when toxicities or other problems are un-
covered, they can be ‘‘debugged’’—their engineered sensing
and response programs can be systematically and iteratively
improved in a rational way.
Anti-cancer Cell Therapies Must Solve Multi-
dimensional Challenges
The explosive growth of knowledge in the field of immuno-
oncology, including the recent clinical experiences with engi-
neered T cells described above, has led to a much deeper under-
standing of which functions a T cell must have in order to serve
as an effective cancer therapy. An overarching point is that all
cancers are complex multifaceted diseases (Hanahan and Wein-
berg, 2011), and thus, any effective T cell therapy will always
need to simultaneously solve multiple functional challenges.
Some of these challenges may be more important than others,
depending on the type and class of cancer. Here, we review
the five major classes of functional challenges that most T cell
therapies will need to address (Figures 3A and 3B).
Trafficking
It goes without saying that a T cell therapy must be able to traffic
to the site of the tumor cells in order to kill them. While trafficking
is not a major issue for blood cancers (such as those targeted by
CD19 CAR T cells), this is likely to be a more significant issue for
solid tumors. Some tumors are thought to be more fibrotic and
more difficult to penetrate physically, while other tumors may
also suppress chemokine signaling that helps to mediate T cell
infiltration. It is clear that in many patients that do not respond
to other forms of immunotherapy (e.g., checkpoint inhibitors),
there is often a dearth of T cell infiltration into the tumor. How-
ever, it is difficult to say how much migration and trafficking is
the problem as opposed to cell proliferation and survival once
the T cells enter the tumor. Some work has indicated that intro-
duction of chemokine receptors into CAR T cells can improve
their trafficking to tumors that produce the cognate chemokines
(Di Stasi et al., 2009; Moon et al., 2011). However, overall, rela-
tively little work has been done to develop more generalized stra-
tegies for improving trafficking. It seems likely that our basic
understanding of immune cell chemotaxis and migration could
be harnessed in novel ways to generate T cell detection and
homing circuits.
Tumor Recognition and Bystander Discrimination
The ability to redirect T cell recognition to user-specified anti-
gens represents one of the core advances of CARs. Engineered
CARs and TCRs provide a way to retarget T cells, both in their
activation and their cytotoxic action. Yet today, the fundamental
question is no longer whether it is possible to redirect T cells to
new targets (we can), but rather, whether we can identify new
disease targets that provide sufficient discrimination. In nearly
all T cell therapies brought to trial, there has been evidence for
some cross-reaction and killing of bystander non-cancer cells.
728
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 In the case of the CD19 CAR T cell, this cross-reaction encom-
passes killing of normal B cells, which also express CD19,
although the resulting B cell aplasia is not life threatening. On
the other hand, there have been a handful of trials involving
CAR and TCR cells targeted to solid tumors, in which cross-re-
action with bystander cells has led to lethal side effects caused
by T cell attack of essential tissues. In principle, there are two
forms of bystander cross-reaction that are possible. ON-target
OFF-tissue cross-reaction occurs when a targeted tumor anti-
gen (e.g., HER2) is also expressed on other tissues at a level
that can still be recognized by the engineered T cell. In these
cases, the antigen is simply not truly tumor specific. OFF-target
cross-reaction occurs when the engineered receptor simply
cross-reacts with an unanticipated stereochemically related an-
tigen that is present on an essential tissue.
Thus, it remains unclear as to whether there exists for any
tumor an absolutely tumor-unique ‘‘magic bullet’’ antigen that
could be safely targeted by CARs (Klebanoff et al., 2016). There
are many constraints that limit identification of an ideal single an-
tigen target: CAR recognition is only restricted to surface anti-
gens; many ‘‘tumor-specific’’ antigens are unique, but are ex-
pressed heterogeneously in only a subpopulation of tumor
cells (e.g., the EGFR-viii splice variant antigen that is found in
glioblastoma); finally, many overexpressed tumor antigens are
expressed more widely in a number of normal tissues, albeit at
lower levels. Thus, it is imperative that improved methods of
recognition be developed. The doubts regarding suitably spe-
cific CAR antigens have led some to suggest that engineered
TCRs, which have the potential to recognize the broader range
of intracellular tumor neoantigens, might provide a better solu-
tion for tumor cell targeting (Robbins et al., 2013; Klebanoff
et al., 2016). However, as we will discuss below, exciting new
strategies are being developed to engineer MHC-independent
T cells that recognize multi-antigen signatures or antigen den-
sities, which have the potential to dramatically improve tumor
recognition specificity.
Proliferation and Persistence
The history of CAR T cells has empirically shown the absolute
clinical importance of T cell proliferation and persistence. An
effective proliferative response is the best predictor of clinical ef-
ficacy. Without the addition of co-stimulatory domains in the
intracellular portion of the receptor, one does not observe
T cell proliferation, persistence, or clinical efficacy, either
in vitro or in vivo. Simply put, the T cells need to expand to
achieve the required effector:target ratio to eliminate the tumor
in vivo. In the case of the CD19 CAR T cells, when the T cells
Figure 3. Functional Needs for Optimal Anti-cancer T Cell Therapy
(A) Five major functional challenges for a therapeutic T cell.
(B) Breaking down how, when, and where these five challenges arise as a therapeutic T cell interacts with cancer.
(C) Diagram of different types of therapeutic T cells and how well they address these five challenges. The distance of points from the center indicate how effective
a cell is at addressing a particular challenge. The overlaid plots trace early generations of CAR T cells, as well as ongoing and projected next-generation im-
provements.
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
729
 are infused, they rapidly encounter CD19 targets and begin to be
activated and to proliferate. Yet what happens in solid tumors?
How can we ensure that sufficient proliferation takes place to
accumulate enough T cells to eliminate the tumor? Moreover,
how can we ensure that cells persist for the weeks or more
time that could be required to eliminate a tumor? Improvement
of proliferation is, thus, a major focus area of current research.
Overcoming the Suppressive Microenvironment
Particularly for solid tumors, it is clear that only focusing on tar-
geting a T cell population to the tumor is unlikely to be sufficient
for clinical efficacy. Many solid tumors have an immunosuppres-
sive microenvironment. In cases where tumors downregulate an-
tigen presentation, it is possible that engineered T cells targeted
to tumor-specific antigens would be effective. However, in cases
where the tumors produce an immunosuppressive environment
that directly downregulates T cells (Joyce and Fearon, 2015), it is
likely that additional functionality would be required to allow en-
gineered T cells to persist, proliferate, and effectively execute
their cytotoxic program. Thus, a major question is whether there
are ways to engineer T cells that are resistant to the suppressive
microenvironment. In addition, there is also the opportunity to
engineer T cells that more proactively remodel the microenviron-
ment to prime the endogenous immune system, enhancing its
ability to recognize and respond to the tumor (i.e., for the engi-
neered T cell to act, in part, like a vaccine).
Control Mechanisms
So far, most efforts at T cell engineering have been focused on
redirecting their targeting to tumor antigens and enhancing the
strength of their response and proliferation. However, in almost
all clinical trials, there have been serious adverse effects—
some tolerable, and others lethal—indicative of the incredible
power of activated T cells. Moreover, as we begin to engineer
T cells with the enhanced proliferation and activity that is likely
to be required for solid tumors, the potential for adverse side ef-
fects will increase. Thus, although less effort has been put into
learning how to control the amplitude and timing of T cell activity,
such regulatory capabilities are now appreciated as increasingly
important. After all, much of the natural regulatory machinery
that has evolved in T cells is used to keep T cell activity in check.
Control is a major issue because T cells are autonomous—
once they are transferred to the patient, there is little that can
be done to control them. Thus, researchers are developing a
growing number of user-control regulatory strategies that will
potentially allow a physician to modulate the survival of T cells,
as well as the timing, strength, and location of their activity.
Looking even further ahead, it may ultimately be possible to en-
gineer feedback control systems into therapeutic T cells, which
allow them to autonomously monitor when adverse outcomes
reach a critical stage.
Different Cancers, Different T Cell Needs
Any effective T cell therapy will need to address the above five
functional areas shown in Figure 3C, where the distance along
each radial line represents how potent a T cell therapy is at ad-
dressing each of the functional areas. However, since every can-
cer is different, it is possible that particular facets will be more
critical for each target disease (Teng et al., 2015). Identifying
the most critical challenges that must be overcome for each can-
cer type will be important—the size of genetic payloads that can
be inserted into T cells is currently limited. A major constraint will
be determining how to most efficiently use the payload so that
the T cells are equipped with the most essential capabilities.
Early CAR T cells focused unidimensionally on targeting tumor
antigens and little else; hence, they were ineffective (Figure 3C).
However, the current generation of CD19 CAR T cells, by incor-
porating co-stimulatory motifs into their receptors, improved cell
proliferation and persistence, leading to clinical efficacy. Current
preclinical prototypes of engineered T cells are now expanding
capabilities in many of these functional dimensions, but we
anticipate that the most challenging solid tumors will require
significantly enhanced function in all of the dimensions. Below,
we discuss some of the areas in which significant new capabil-
ities have been developed, and we discuss how they may help
shape the next generation of therapies.
Improving Recognition: New Receptors and Recognition
Programs
Exciting new developments in engineering more sophisticated
recognition receptors and recognition circuits may lead to dra-
matic improvements in our ability to design therapeutic T cells
that can effectively recognize target tumor cells yet discriminate
against normal cells (Figure 4A). As mentioned above, advances
in engineering TCRs or CARs that recognize peptide MHC com-
plexes are providing powerful new ways to potentially recognize
a broader range of intracellular tumor neoantigens, although this
recognition will be restricted to specific MHCs. Here, we focus
on advances in engineering CAR-based circuits that improve
recognition specificity by integrating information about multiple
antigens: combinatorial antigen recognition. Bioinformatic anal-
ysis suggests that even recognizing relatively simple combina-
tions of two or three antigens would dramatically improve the
capability for discriminating most tumor cells from normal tis-
sues (Lim and Troyanskaya, personal communication).
AND-Gate Circuits: Recognition of Multi-antigen
Combinations
Several strategies have emerged to engineer CAR T cells that
require a specific combination of two or more antigens for acti-
vation. One general strategy has been to express two separate
CARs—one for each target antigen—but where one receptor
bears the CD3zeta signaling chain of the TCR and the other
bears the co-stimulatory motif (Kloss et al., 2013; Lanitis et al.,
2013; Wilkie et al., 2012). The rationale here is that full activation,
including proliferation, will only take place when both receptors
are engaged at the immune synapse, not unlike normal TCR +
co-stimulatory signaling. While such dual CAR AND-gates can
indeed show much stronger activation by cells expressing both
target antigens, there is often significant activation with a single
antigen alone, and tuning of antigen expression and affinity is
often required to observe strong discrimination between dual-
and single-antigen target cells.
A newer strategy for AND-gate recognition involves a two-re-
ceptor circuit in which activation of one receptor induces the
expression of a second receptor (a CAR or TCR) that mediates
cell killing. Only when both antigens are present does the priming
and T cell activation occur in a sustained manner. This kind of
priming function can be executed by using the recently devel-
oped synthetic Notch receptor (Morsut et al., 2016; Roybal
730
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 et al., 2016a). This powerful new class of chimeric receptors rec-
ognizes a target surface antigen, but upon engagement, the
class of receptors activates transcription. synNotch receptors
contain the regulatory transmembrane region of Notch but
bear a novel extracellular recognition domain and a novel intra-
cellular transcriptional activator domain. Like Notch, when the
synNotch receptor engages its ligand on an opposing cell
(juxtracrine signaling), this induces intramembrane cleavage,
releasing the intracellular transcriptional domain, allowing it to
enter the nucleus to activate transcription of target genes. Proto-
types of this type of synNotch / CAR priming-killing dual-anti-
gen recognition circuit have shown robust discrimination be-
tween dual- and single-antigen tumors, clearing a dual-antigen
tumor while leaving the single-antigen bystander tumor in the
same animal virtually untouched. Similar preclinical results
have been observed in synNotch circuits that drive expression
of other targeted cytotoxic proteins, such as bispecific anti-
bodies rather than CARs (Roybal et al., 2016b). Identification of
combination antigens that can be targeted by such AND gate cir-
cuits provides a promising avenue for far more precise recogni-
tion that will be required for solid tumors.
NOT-Gate Circuits: Negative Discrimination against
Normal Cell Antigens
It may also be possible to achieve more precise tumor recogni-
tion by minimizing the ability of T cells to mistarget cross-reactive
cells. One promising strategy to achieve this is through engineer-
ing the T cells to override activation when they encounter a cell
that has a positive targeting antigen but also a negative antigen
that is present on bystander cells, but not the cancer cells. An
elegant strategy for constructing this kind of NOT-gate circuit in-
volves combining a CAR for one antigen (the killing antigen) with
an inhibitory CAR (iCAR) for a second antigen, the overriding an-
tigen (Fedorov et al., 2013). iCARs have an extracellular antigen
recognition domain, but their intracellular domains, instead of
containing activating TCR derived domains, have the signaling
domains from immune inhibitory receptors such as PD-1 and
CTLA-4. When a T cell expressing both the CAR and the iCAR
encounters a cell expressing only the CAR antigen, the T cell kills
the target, but when both the CAR and iCAR antigens are
encountered at the same immune synapse, the iCAR negative
regulatory signaling will override or dampen the CAR signaling,
resulting in poor T cell activation. Such NOT gates could, in prin-
ciple, achieve specific recognition through negative discrimina-
tion of non-cancer signals.
OR-Gate Circuits and Dual-Antigen Targeting CARs
A number of researchers have now also constructed CARs that
contain two independent antigen recognition domains (Grada
et al., 2013; Zah et al., 2016). Interestingly, these dual-headed
CARs appear to serve as OR-gates, in that they can be activated
by two different antigen ligands. This kind of OR-gate function-
ality might be particularly useful for preventing the development
of resistance through loss of the target antigen. For example,
CARs that target two B cell specific antigens CD19 or CD22 (or
CD19 or CD20) appear to be less sensitive to resistance via
loss of CD19. The detailed geometry for optimal target recogni-
tion is still poorly understood, and the configuration of the recep-
tor and location of the recognized antigen epitope may deter-
mine how effective dual-targeting CARs can be.
Affinity-Tuned Receptor: Improving Sensing of Antigen
Densities
Another approach for improving recognition specificity is to
enhance CAR T cell discrimination of cancer from normal cells
based on antigen density. Common oncogenic proteins such
as the surface antigen HER2 are highly overexpressed in many
Figure 4. Emerging New Engineering Solutions for Addressing the Functional Challenges of Anti-cancer T Cells
(A–D) New molecular tools for improving therapeutic T cell tumor recognition (A), proliferation and persistence (B), remodeling of the tumor microenvironment (C),
and control (D).
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
731
 cancers, but HER2 is expressed at lower levels in a number of
normal epithelial tissues. Most CARs have been built based on
high-affinity therapeutic antibodies, like the HER2 antibody tras-
tuzumab (Herceptin). Not unexpectedly, such high-affinity CARs
can be relatively poor at density discrimination, as they are trig-
gered by normal cells expressing lower levels of the HER2 anti-
gen. Improved discrimination based on HER2 expression levels
can be achieved, however, by affinity tuning the receptor—CARs
built using anti-HER2 scFv’s, with affinities reduced by several
orders of magnitude, show significantly improved ability to
discriminate between high HER2 or EGFR cancer cells and low
HER2 or EGFR normal cells in mouse models (Caruso et al.,
2015; Liu et al., 2015). The idea that the highest affinity recogni-
tion domains may not make the most ideal receptors seems
obvious in hindsight, but to harness this, we will need to screen
for antibodies that have lower affinities but still maintain high
epitope specificity, a goal that is challenging given current
methods for antibody screening.
Driving Proliferation and Persistence
The proliferation and persistence of CAR T cells in vivo correlates
with durable remission of leukemia (Porter et al., 2015). Thus,
different ways to stimulate proliferation present an important
opportunity to improve the function of adoptively transferred
T cells.
Incorporation of Costimulatory Domains
CAR T cells expressing a zeta chain in the absence of a costimu-
latory domain have been shown to persist for more than a
decade without adverse effects after adoptive transfer in pa-
tients with acquired immunodeficiency (Mitsuyasu et al., 2000;
Scholler et al., 2012), providing a proof of concept that engi-
neered T cells can engraft and persist for years with safety in hu-
mans. However, in cancer patients, CAR T cells expressing the
same intracellular signaling domain in the absence of costimula-
tion had only brief persistence (Kershaw et al., 2006), likely due in
part to the toxic nature of the tumor microenvironment (Rooney
et al., 2015).
To date, the recent successes with CAR T cells in the clinic
have been with CARs that incorporate CD28 or 4-1BB costimula-
tory domains. In preclinical studies, these CARs induced more
IL-2 secretion, increased T cell proliferation, and mediated
greater tumor rejection. In patients with refractory ALL, both
CAR designs have similar rates of remission; however, some dif-
ferences in the clinical responses are emerging. The time until the
onset of fever and the rapidity of remission induction appear to be
earlier with the CD28 CARs. In contrast, the persistence of T cells
expressing 4-1BB CARs is greater than in patients treated with
CARs expressing CD28 signaling domains. Thus, it is possible
that CD28-based CARs may be better for remission induction
or as a ‘‘bridge to transplant,’’ while 4-1BB based CARs may
be more useful as a definitive therapy or to serve for immunosur-
veillance to prevent tumor recurrence, where the CARs persist
beyond the initial tumor elimination. However, with the advent
of switchable CAR technologies, it is possible that a single
T cell infusion could accomplish both features, i.e., rapid tumor
elimination and long-term persistence with immunosurveillance.
In addition to CD28 and 4-1BB, many other costimulatory do-
mains, including CD27, OX40, and ICOS, have been incorpo-
rated into CARs to further enhance the costimulatory properties
(Guedan et al., 2014; Hombach et al., 2013; Song et al., 2012).
ICOS costimulation drives human T cells to a Th17 cell pheno-
type (Paulos et al., 2010), and in certain models, Th17 cells are
preferable for adoptive transfer (Muranski et al., 2008). Signaling
modules derived from the innate immune system such as MyD88
and CD40 have also been used in CAR domains (Narayanan
et al., 2011). Inducible CARs with split signaling domains have
been developed with a MyD88 and CD40 costimulatory switch
that provides user-controlled induction of CAR T cell proliferation
and the potential for regulated long-term CAR T cell engraftment
(Spencer et al., 2016).
Considerations on Human T Cell Replicative Lifespan
There are fundamental differences in the regulation of immuno-
senescence and replicative capacity in T cells of mice and hu-
mans that have important implications for adoptive cell transfer
(June, 2007). p53 isoforms regulate T cell senescence in human,
but not mouse, T cells (Mondal et al., 2013). Human T cells have
finite clonal lifespans in vitro, and human naive CD4+ T cells have
telomeres that are, on average, 1.4 kb longer than those of hu-
man memory T cells (Weng et al., 1995). Subsets of human
T cells with longer telomeres may be preferable for adoptive ther-
apy (Fritsch et al., 2005; Pulko et al., 2016), as studies have
shown that telomere length correlates with persistence and anti-
tumor efficacy in melanoma patients after TIL therapy (Zhou
et al., 2005). Gene transfer can enhance telomere length in
T cells (Rufer et al., 2001), which may be an attractive strategy
for adoptive transfer, particularly in elderly patients with a limited
telomere reserve. In addition, CD28 costimulation can enhance
telomere lengths in T cells (Barrett et al., 2014), and restoration
of CD28 expression has been proposed as a strategy to regen-
erate senescent T cells (Topp et al., 2003). IL-15 activates telo-
merase activity in human memory CD8+ T cells (Li et al., 2005)
and, when expressed in T cells, promotes a stem cell memory
phenotype (Hurton et al., 2016).
Modulation of T Cell Exhaustion
Under conditions of chronic antigen exposure and inflammation,
T cells become functionally incapable of performing effector ac-
tivities, a condition now termed T cell exhaustion (Wherry, 2011).
T cell exhaustion and senescence are often used interchange-
ably; however, they are now considered as distinct states of
differentiation (Akbar and Henson, 2011; Crespo et al., 2013).
Increasing evidence indicates that tumor-specific T cells in
many patients are in various states of exhaustion (Lee et al.,
1999; Schietinger and Greenberg, 2014). Studies indicate that
T cells acquire characteristics of exhaustion early in tumorigen-
esis and that, in advanced states, the exhaustion is irreversible
(Schietinger et al., 2016). A hallmark of the exhausted state is
that the T cells eventually lose the capacity to proliferate (Im
et al., 2016). Interruption of PD-1 ligand binding early in the pro-
cess can restore T cell function and tumor targeting, although
rescue may be incomplete or transient (Schietinger et al.,
2012). In mice, the adoptive transfer of PD-1-deficient T cells
leads to enhanced function and resistance to exhaustion (Odor-
izzi et al., 2015).
Recent studies suggest that exhausted T cells represent a
distinct lineage of lymphocytes that is different at the transcrip-
tional and epigenetic levels from TCM and TEM subsets of
732
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 memory T cells (Peng et al., 2015; Roychoudhuri et al., 2016).
The transcriptional status of exhausted and tumor-tolerant
T cells differs from healthy TCM and TEM cells; however, the
gene signature reports differ, likely reflecting tumor-specific ef-
fects (Schietinger et al., 2016; Singer et al., 2016). The transcrip-
tion factor Bach2 may have a central role in the differentiation
process toward exhaustion (Richer et al., 2016; Roychoudhuri
et al., 2013). Exhausted human and mouse T cells have sus-
tained expression of PD-1 that is regulated by an exhaustion-
specific enhancer that contains motifs from RAR, T-bet, and
Sox3 (Sen et al., 2016), and the stability of the epigenetic
changes leads to resistance to PD-1 antagonists (Pauken
et al., 2016). These results suggest that genetic and epigenetic
modulation of T cells has the potential to delay or prevent the in-
duction of exhaustion by tumors, presenting a large opportunity
for the field of cellular engineering.
Reinforcing Lymphocyte Metabolism
T cell subsets cycle through states of metabolic quiescence and
activation. Mature naive T cells are quiescent cells that primarily
oxidize glucose-derived pyruvate in their mitochondria via oxida-
tive phosphorylation or fatty acid oxidation to generate ATP.
Upon TCR activation and costimulation, the naive T cells un-
dergo metabolic remodeling and a switch to aerobic glycolysis
to convert to rapidly dividing effector T cells (Fox et al., 2005).
In contrast, memory T cells undergo mitochondrial biogenesis
and a switch to oxidative metabolism (van der Windt et al.,
2012). The changes can be detected by ultrastructural analysis:
effector T cells have small distinct mitochondria, an indication
of mitochondrial fission, whereas memory T cells have densely
packed fused mitochondria (Buck et al., 2016). Mitochondrial
membrane potential is a marker of cells with enhanced stemness
and function after adoptive transfer (Sukumar et al., 2016).
Tumors can inhibit antitumor immunity by nutrient depletion. In
the tumor microenvironment, there is a competition for glucose
between tumors and T cells (Chang et al., 2015). In glucose-
limiting microenvironments, T cells have insufficient phospho-
enolpyruvate (PEP), and T cells with genetically increased PEP
production have enhanced effector functions and restricted tu-
mor growth in mice (Ho et al., 2015).
T cells not only rely on glucose but also depend on amino acids
for survival and function. Depletion of glutamine in culture me-
dium blocks T cell proliferation and cytokine production (Carr
et al., 2010), and it is likely that glutamine competition in the tu-
mor microenvironment also influences their anti-tumor function.
In natural T cells, glutamine and glucose import are CD28 depen-
dent (Carr et al., 2010; Frauwirth et al., 2002). Initial studies indi-
cate that T cell engineering enables the installation of desired
metabolic phenotypes. CAR T cells with CD28 signaling domains
have enhanced aerobic glycolysis, while CAR T cells with 4-1BB
signaling domains have enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis and
increased fatty acid oxidation (Kawalekar et al., 2016).
L-arginine is considered as a conditionally essential amino
acid. Recent studies indicate that L-arginine has an important
role in regulating T cell metabolism, as supplementation of the
culture medium with L-arginine resulted in decreased protein
expression of glycolytic enzymes, while Krebs cycle and serine
biosynthetic pathway enzyme expression was increased (Geiger
et al., 2016). T cells cultured with increased L-arginine promoted
TCM differentiation and increased arginine levels in the culture
medium also resulted in enhanced T cell survival and improved
antitumor activity. The effects of L-arginine on T cell survival
were mediated in part by the nuclear proteins BAZ1B, PSIP1,
and TSN, as CRISPR/Cas9-mediated deletion of these genes
was sufficient to abrogate the effects of arginine on T cell
survival.
A recent study showed that adenosine, which is a byproduct of
metabolic activity and is enriched in the tumor microenviron-
ment, suppresses TCR signaling in a dose-dependent manner
(Cekic et al., 2013). The level of potassium ions, the main intra-
cellular cation, in the tumor microenvironment is five to ten times
higher than those encountered by T cells in the bloodstream.
Potassium released from dying tumor cells potently inhibits
T cell activation, and enhancing the removal of potassium from
T cells by overexpressing the voltage-gated K+-channel protein
Kv1.3 (encoded by the KCNA3 gene) or the calcium-activated
K+-channel protein KCa3.1 (encoded by the KCNN4 gene)
restores their antitumor activity (Eil et al., 2016). Thus, the
decreased availability of certain amino acids and the accumula-
tion of metabolic waste products act in concert to alter the
microenvironment and adversely influence T cell function.
The epigenetic state of T cells can modulate T cell proliferative
capacity, at least in part through cellular metabolites. Gain-of-
function mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 or 2 lead to
accumulation
of
the
oncometabolite
2-hydroxygluatarate.
Recent studies show that the S enantiomer of 2-hydroxygluata-
rate can inhibit T cell effector differentiation, an effect mediated
by the epigenetic modifiers Utx and Tet2 (Tyrakis et al., 2016).
TCR triggering induces a loss of 5hmC in genomic DNA of
T cells, and adoptively transferred T cells supplemented with
S-2-hydroxygluatarate have enhanced proliferative capacity
and antitumor effects. Thus, improving T cell fitness through
control of cellular metabolism has emerged as a key goal in the
design of adoptive cellular immunotherapies.
Remodeling the Microenvironment
Perhaps the largest unmet need in engineered anti-cancer
T cells is the ability of the cells to overcome or remodel the immu-
nosuppressive microenvironment found in many solid tumors
(Figure 4C). Even if an engineered T cell can traffic to and pre-
cisely recognize tumor cells, if they are efficiently downregulated
by a suppressive microenvironment, they will not be able to
effectively attack the cancer. An additional confounding issue
is that tumors are heterogeneous in nature; there are likely
many different ways to create a immunosuppressive micro-
environment, and appropriate countermeasures may need to
be tumor specific.
Combination Therapy with Checkpoint Inhibitors
An obvious first way to address this problem is by taking advan-
tage of checkpoint inhibitor antibodies, such as anti-PD-1, PD-
L1, and CTLA-4 (and others in development), that have been
successful in a significant fraction of melanoma and lung cancer
patients. It is possible that some of the non-checkpoint respond-
ing patients simply lack an endogenous T cell population that
can recognize the tumor, even after the checkpoint proteins
are inhibited. Thus, combining engineered CAR T cells with
checkpoint inhibitors makes a great deal of sense, and initial
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
733
 trials appear promising, where PD-1 or PD-L1 antagonists are
being co-administered with engineered T cells (Chong et al.,
2016), based on synergy observed in pre-clinical models (John
et al., 2013).
Engineering Cells to Ignore Suppressive Signals
Several efforts have been made to engineer T cells that are inert
to potential suppressive signals. For example, to reduce sup-
pression by TGFbeta, one can express a dominant-negative
form of the TGFbeta receptor in T cells (Foster et al., 2008). Simi-
larly, chimeric receptors have been engineered that can reduce
suppression by the checkpoint protein ligand, PD-L1. In this
case, the extracellular domain of the checkpoint receptor PD-1
has been fused to intracellular costimulatory domains, leading
to a receptor that will lead to enhanced T cell activity when
it engages the normally suppressive PD-L1 signal (Prosser
et al., 2012). Finally, several recent efforts have been made to
use CRISPR genome editing to remove the PD-1 receptor from
T cells, rendering them non-responsive to PD-L1-mediated sup-
pression (Ren et al., 2016; Schumann et al., 2015). These types
of non-suppressive T cells appear to function well and appear
to show enhanced anti-cancer cell activity. Nonetheless, these
suppressive pathways may play an important role in modulating
and downregulating T cell function, especially after a potent
response has been mounted, and it is unclear whether such stra-
tegies may lead to increased challenges with control. There are
many checkpoint molecules that are induced on activated
T cells that limit their effector functions (Mahoney et al., 2015),
and genetic editing tools permit the efficient disruption of these
molecules (Ren et al., 2016). However, it is likely that unexpected
toxicities will be encountered, as, for example, when ipilimumab
was coadministered with an inhibitor of B-raf (Ribas et al., 2013).
Equipping T Cells with the Ability to Remodel the
Microenvironment
Another general strategy is to equip the engineered T cells them-
selves with new capabilities to counteract the suppressive
microenvironment. For examples, so-called ‘‘armored’’ CAR
T cells constitutively express the potent cytokine IL-12 (Kerkar
et al., 2010; Pegram et al., 2012). IL-12 is one of the most potent
anti-cancer cytokines, which acts through pleiotropic action on
both innate and adaptive immune cells and thus can be a power-
ful agent to remodel a tumor microenvironment. TILs with engi-
neered NFAT-inducible IL-12 have antitumor activity in mela-
noma and severe toxicity (Zhang et al., 2015). CAR T cells
expressing IL-18 may be a safer version of ‘‘armored’’ CARs
and TILs. In a recent example, constitutive CAR T cells have
been designed that secrete a soluble form of HVEM and remodel
the tumor microenvironment (Boice et al., 2016).
More recently, new strategies for delivering agents that can
remodel the microenvironment have been developed. For
example, the synNotch receptor system described earlier can
be used to engineer T cells that produce specific secreted pay-
loads in response to recognition of a target antigen (Roybal et al.,
2016b). Thus, the T cells can in principle be programmed to serve
as local delivery agents, or ‘‘pharmacytes.’’ synNotch T cells can
be engineered to locally express a range of interesting payloads,
including IL-12, other pro-inflammatory cytokines, checkpoint
antibodies, and bispecific antibodies. They can also be engi-
neered to produce adjuvants (e.g., flaggelin) that are expected
to stimulate the innate immune response, thus potentially aug-
menting the host-mediated immune response. Given the flexi-
bility of the synNotch system, it may be possible to drive the de-
livery of many different payloads, customized for the needs of a
particular cancer type. Some of these payloads could act in con-
cert with CAR-killing activity or might act independently to
remodel the environment and engage the native host-immune
system. Significantly, the localized production of secreted fac-
tors driven by synNotch cells might avoid the toxicities observed
with systemic or constitutive production of potent factors such
as IL12. Such strategies, while promising, are still untested in
the clinic.
Engineering Tighter Control Systems in Therapeutic
T Cells
Control systems that can increase the safety of therapeutic T cell
treatments have now become a clinical priority. Many control
switches are focused on user-control, whereby through the addi-
tion of a small molecule or biologic, a physician can negatively or
positively regulate T cell function (Figure 4D).
Suicide or Elimination Switches
The earliest types of control systems developed have been sui-
cide or elimination switches, which can be triggered by physi-
cians to eliminate T cells that are mediating overly toxic effects.
One suicide switch, called iCasp9, has been clinically validated
in limiting graft versus host disease in patients undergoing he-
matopoietic stem cell transplants (Di Stasi et al., 2011). iCasp9
has a split form of the apoptotic protein Caspase, which must
be homodimerized to become active. In this construct, addition
of a small molecule triggers assembly and apoptosis. Another
strategy for removing T cells involves expressing a tag that can
be used for elimination: expression of the extracellular domain
of EGFR allows the T cells to be eliminated by adding the
cognate antibody cetuximab (Wang et al., 2011).
Drug-Controlled ON-Switch CARs
A distinct class of control strategies involve engineering T cells
that are inactive but then can be switched on by the addition of
specific activating agents. For example, a drug inducible version
of a CAR can be constructed in which the recognition scFV and
the signaling domains (CD3z and costimulatory motifs) are on
separate polypeptides, with each containing a partner drug-
inducible heterodimerization domain. The split CAR is inactive
until the heterodimerizing drug is added, assembling a fully func-
tional receptor. The activity of this split ON-switch CAR can be
rapidly titrated and reversed, allowing in principle for a high level
of physician remote control (Wu et al., 2015). New constructs
optimized for clinical use can be controlled by FDA approved
drugs (W.A.L., unpublished data).
Adaptor-Mediated CARs
Adaptor mediated CARs require the addition of an adaptor mole-
cule to target it to the cancer. For example, a CAR with an Fc re-
ceptor domain can be targeted to a specific cancer by addition of
an antibody that targets a cancer antigen so that the Fc receptor
domain will bind the antibody (Kudo et al., 2014). More orthog-
onal versions of such adaptor CARs have been engineered in
which the CAR has a binding domain that recognizes a cognate
ligand or peptide (Ma et al., 2016; Rodgers et al., 2016). In this
case, targeting antibodies can be converted into highly specific
734
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 adaptor molecules by fusing them to the cognate ligand or pep-
tide. With this strategy, the CAR T cell should be inert until the
adaptor antibody is added. An advantage of these adaptor-
mediated CARs is their targeting flexibility; they could be retar-
geted to different targets based on what adaptor antibody
is used.
Feedback Control
Most efforts in engineering control over therapeutic T cells have
focused on providing ways for the physician to intervene and
either eliminate or modulate the T cell function in response to po-
tential side effects. However, ultimately, it may be most powerful
to engineer autonomous feedback circuits into T cells that home-
ostatically control their activity. Full-on maximal effector activity
may not be optimal both in eliminating the cancer and certainly
not in terms of minimizing adverse effects. For example, activa-
tion responses that reach a setpoint or that are pulsatile and
dynamically controlled may be optimal for anti-tumor effects.
In addition, it would be desirable to engineer feedback control
based on signs of toxicity. For example, IL-6 is a major marker
of cytokine release syndrome, and it might be possible to engi-
neer synthetic downregulatory feedback circuits that respond
autonomously to an excess of IL-6 or other signatures of hyper-
activity. Such feedback circuits, which are the subject of much
interest in the fields of systems and synthetic biology, have
largely been unexplored in the context of therapeutic T cells
and represent an area of future growth.
Conclusion: Vision of Immune Cell Therapies in
Precision Medicine
The last few years have been an era of exuberance in cancer
immunotherapy in general and in the use of engineered immune
cells more specifically. At present, the power of T cells as a ther-
apeutic is remarkable, as well as the fact that we can redirect
them, but this early clinical experience has revealed the major
challenges that must be met to make engineered immune cells
Figure 5. Smart Cell Therapies May Fulfill
Promise of Precision Medicine
(A) The design and implementation of therapeutic
immune cells will, in principle, combine tumor
informatics with systems and synthetic biology to
construct cell therapies strategically optimized to
recognize discriminating features and to attack
tumor vulnerabilities.
(B) The emerging synthetic biology toolkit for cell
engineering may allow modular construction of
precision therapeutic programs (here modeled by
an illustrative program inspired by the Scratch
graphical programming language).
(C) Precision informatics combined with custom
engineered therapeutic cells has the potential to
provide true precision therapies.
a reliable, safe, and effective platform
for treating cancer, especially in the realm
of solid tumors. Treating cancers is a
complex multifactorial problem, in which
multiple
problems
must
be
simulta-
neously addressed. Moreover, individual
cancer
types
present
different
chal-
lenges, and thus, the types of engineered behaviors that they
need will be different.
Fortunately, the rise of immunotherapy coincides with the
maturation of the fields of synthetic biology and genome engi-
neering, and thus, powerful tools and approaches, outlined
here, are being developed to address the engineering needs of
T-cell-mediated cancer therapy. It is likely that engineered cell
therapies will be one of the major testbeds for the application
of synthetic biology.
We envision that an array of modular genetically encoded tools
will be developed that will allow cell engineers to address the
array of functional challenges outlined here. This toolbox will
include new molecules (e.g., sensors, switches, etc.) that can
be deployed together in different types of circuits to execute
sensing-response behaviors that are optimized for the target
cancer (Figure 5).
A therapeutic T cell can provide far more multi-faceted actions
than a targeted molecular therapeutic. Engineered cells also
have the advantage that their response programs can be
systematically debugged and improved in an iterative fashion
as toxicities and issues arise, potentially providing a more
stable risk profile than the development pipeline normally asso-
ciated with traditional small molecule therapeutics (Fischbach
et al., 2013).
Therapeutic immune cells are thus one of the first examples of
precision therapeutics (Figure 5A). We have entered an era of
remarkable precision bioinformatics, in which we are beginning
to access highly detailed information about tumors—which anti-
gens are present, which types of suppressor molecules are pre-
sent, and how these are distributed in the different cells that
make up the tumor ecosystem (Tirosh et al., 2016). We now
have the potential to use informatics data to design optimized
therapeutic response systems that harness discriminating mo-
lecular features and attack the vulnerabilities of a tumor. We
can also construct these systems using our emerging synthetic
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
735
 biology toolkit (Figure 5B). The concept of precision medicine will
ultimately be even more fulfilling if we can successfully combine
precision informatics with precision cell therapies that make this
information more directly actionable (Figure 5C).
Finally, although we have limited our discussion here only on
using engineered immune cells to treat cancer, the principles
discussed here could also be used to design cell therapies tar-
geted to treat other diseases. Autoimmunity, infection, inflam-
mation, degeneration, and fibrosis are all examples of diseases
that, like cancer, could dramatically benefit from a smart cell
therapy that can recognize and locally respond to complex tis-
sue pathologies (Fischbach et al., 2013).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors apologize to colleagues for work that we are unable to cite due to
space constraints. We thank members of the Lim and June labs for comments.
W.A.L. is supported by grants from the NIH (P50GM081879, R01 CA196277),
the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, and the Howard Hughes Med-
ical Institute. C.H.J. is supported by grants from the NIH (5R01CA120409) and
is a member of the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, which supports
the University of Pennsylvania Cancer Immunotherapy Program. W.A.L. is a
founder of Cell Design Labs and a member of its scientific advisory board.
C.H.J. is a founder of Tmunity Therapeutics and a member of its scientific advi-
sory board.
REFERENCES
Ahmed, N., Brawley, V.S., Hegde, M., Robertson, C., Ghazi, A., Gerken, C.,
Liu, E., Dakhova, O., Ashoori, A., Corder, A., et al. (2015). Human Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) –Specific Chimeric Antigen Receptor-Modi-
fied T Cells for the Immunotherapy of HER2-Positive Sarcoma. J. Clin. Oncol.
33, 1688–1696.
Akbar, A.N., and Henson, S.M. (2011). Are senescence and exhaustion inter-
twined or unrelated processes that compromise immunity? Nat. Rev. Immu-
nol. 11, 289–295.
Aleksic, M., Liddy, N., Molloy, P.E., Pumphrey, N., Vuidepot, A., Chang, K.M.,
and Jakobsen, B.K. (2012). Different affinity windows for virus and cancer-spe-
cific T-cell receptors: implications for therapeutic strategies. Eur. J. Immunol.
42, 3174–3179.
Ali, S.A., Shi, V., Maric, I., Wang, M., Stroncek, D.F., Rose, J.J., Brudno, J.N.,
Stetler-Stevenson, M., Feldman, S.A., Hansen, B.G., et al. (2016). T cells ex-
pressing an anti-B-cell maturation antigen chimeric antigen receptor cause re-
missions of multiple myeloma. Blood 128, 1688–1700.
Barrett, D.M., Singh, N., Liu, X., Jiang, S., June, C.H., Grupp, S.A., and Zhao, Y.
(2014). Relation of clinical culture method to T-cell memory status and efficacy
in xenograft models of adoptive immunotherapy. Cytotherapy 16, 619–630.
Bashor, C.J., Helman, N.C., Yan, S., and Lim, W.A. (2008). Using engineered
scaffold interactions to reshape MAP kinase pathway signaling dynamics. Sci-
ence 319, 1539–1543.
Bendle, G.M., Linnemann, C., Hooijkaas, A.I., Bies, L., de Witte, M.A.,
Jorritsma, A., Kaiser, A.D.M., Pouw, N., Debets, R., Kieback, E., et al.
(2010). Lethal graft-versus-host disease in mouse models of T cell receptor
gene therapy. Nat. Med. 16, 565–570, 1p, 570.
Boice, M., Salloum, D., Mourcin, F., Sanghvi, V., Amin, R., Oricchio, E., Jiang,
M., Mottok, A., Denis-Lagache, N., and Ciriello, G. (2016). Loss of the HVEM
Tumor Suppressor in Lymphoma and Restoration by Modified CAR-T Cells.
Cell 167, 405–418.
Bregni, M., Ueno, N.T., and Childs, R. (2006). The second international meeting
on allogeneic transplantation in solid tumors. Bone Marrow Transplant. 38,
527–537.
Brentjens, R.J., Davila, M.L., Riviere, I., Park, J., Wang, X., Cowell, L.G., Bar-
tido, S., Stefanski, J., Taylor, C., Olszewska, M., et al. (2013). CD19-targeted
T cells rapidly induce molecular remissions in adults with chemotherapy-re-
fractory acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 177ra38.
Brudno, J.N., Somerville, R.P., Shi, V., Rose, J.J., Halverson, D.C., Fowler,
D.H., Gea-Banacloche, J.C., Pavletic, S.Z., Hickstein, D.D., Lu, T.L., et al.
(2016). Allogeneic T Cells That Express an Anti-CD19 Chimeric Antigen Recep-
tor Induce Remissions of B-Cell Malignancies That Progress After Allogeneic
Hematopoietic Stem-Cell Transplantation Without Causing Graft-Versus-
Host Disease. J. Clin. Oncol. 34, 1112–1121.
Buck, M.D., O’Sullivan, D., Klein Geltink, R.I., Curtis, J.D., Chang, C.H., Sanin,
D.E., Qiu, J., Kretz, O., Braas, D., van der Windt, G.J., et al. (2016). Mitochon-
drial Dynamics Controls T Cell Fate through Metabolic Programming. Cell 166,
63–76.
Cameron, B.J., Gerry, A.B., Dukes, J., Harper, J.V., Kannan, V., Bianchi, F.C.,
Grand, F., Brewer, J.E., Gupta, M., Plesa, G., et al. (2013). Identification of a
Titin-derived HLA-A1-presented peptide as a cross-reactive target for engi-
neered MAGE A3-directed T cells. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 197ra103.
Carr, E.L., Kelman, A., Wu, G.S., Gopaul, R., Senkevitch, E., Aghvanyan, A.,
Turay, A.M., and Frauwirth, K.A. (2010). Glutamine uptake and metabolism
are coordinately regulated by ERK/MAPK during T lymphocyte activation.
J. Immunol. 185, 1037–1044.
Caruso, H.G., Hurton, L.V., Najjar, A., Rushworth, D., Ang, S., Olivares, S., Mi,
T., Switzer, K., Singh, H., Huls, H., et al. (2015). Tuning Sensitivity of CAR to
EGFR Density Limits Recognition of Normal Tissue While Maintaining Potent
Antitumor Activity. Cancer Res. 75, 3505–3518.
Cekic, C., Sag, D., Day, Y.-J., and Linden, J. (2013). Extracellular adenosine
regulates naive T cell development and peripheral maintenance. J. Exp.
Med. 210, 2693–2706.
Chang, C.H., Qiu, J., O’Sullivan, D., Buck, M.D., Noguchi, T., Curtis, J.D.,
Chen, Q., Gindin, M., Gubin, M.M., van der Windt, G.J., et al. (2015). Metabolic
Competition in the Tumor Microenvironment Is a Driver of Cancer Progression.
Cell 162, 1229–1241.
Chinnasamy, N., Wargo, J.A., Yu, Z., Rao, M., Frankel, T.L., Riley, J.P., Hong,
J.J., Parkhurst, M.R., Feldman, S.A., Schrump, D.S., et al. (2011). A TCR tar-
geting the HLA-A*0201-restricted epitope of MAGE-A3 recognizes multiple
epitopes of the MAGE-A antigen superfamily in several types of cancer.
J. Immunol. 186, 685–696.
Chong, E.A., Melenhorst, J.J., Lacey, S.F., Ambrose, D.E., Gonzalez, V., Lev-
ine, B., June, C.H., and Schuster, S.J. (2016). PD-1 Blockade Modulates
Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) Modified T Cells and Induces Tumor
Regression: Refueling the CAR. Blood. blood-2016-09-738245, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1182/blood-2016-09-738245.
Collins, R.H., Jr., Shpilberg, O., Drobyski, W.R., Porter, D.L., Giralt, S., Cham-
plin, R., Goodman, S.A., Wolff, S.N., Hu, W., Verfaillie, C., et al. (1997). Donor
leukocyte infusions in 140 patients with relapsed malignancy after allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation. J. Clin. Oncol. 15, 433–444.
Coulie, P.G., Van den Eynde, B.J., van der Bruggen, P., and Boon, T. (2014).
Tumour antigens recognized by T lymphocytes: at the core of cancer immuno-
therapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 14, 135–146.
Crespo, J., Sun, H., Welling, T.H., Tian, Z., and Zou, W. (2013). T cell anergy,
exhaustion, senescence, and stemness in the tumor microenvironment.
Curr. Opin. Immunol. 25, 214–221.
Di Stasi, A., De Angelis, B., Rooney, C.M., Zhang, L., Mahendravada, A., Fos-
ter, A.E., Heslop, H.E., Brenner, M.K., Dotti, G., and Savoldo, B. (2009). T lym-
phocytes coexpressing CCR4 and a chimeric antigen receptor targeting CD30
have improved homing and antitumor activity in a Hodgkin tumor model. Blood
113, 6392–6402.
Di Stasi, A., Tey, S.K., Dotti, G., Fujita, Y., Kennedy-Nasser, A., Martinez, C.,
Straathof, K., Liu, E., Durett, A.G., Grilley, B., et al. (2011). Inducible apoptosis
as a safety switch for adoptive cell therapy. N. Engl. J. Med. 365, 1673–1683.
Eil, R., Vodnala, S.K., Clever, D., Klebanoff, C.A., Sukumar, M., Pan, J.H.,
Palmer, D.C., Gros, A., Yamamoto, T.N., Patel, S.J., et al. (2016). Ionic immune
suppression within the tumour microenvironment limits T cell effector function.
Nature 537, 539–543.
736
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 Engel, P., Zhou, L.J., Ord, D.C., Sato, S., Koller, B., and Tedder, T.F. (1995).
Abnormal B lymphocyte development, activation, and differentiation in mice
that lack or overexpress the CD19 signal transduction molecule. Immunity 3,
39–50.
Fedorov, V.D., Themeli, M., and Sadelain, M. (2013). PD-1- and CTLA-4-based
inhibitory chimeric antigen receptors (iCARs) divert off-target immunotherapy
responses. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 215ra172.
Ferrara, J.L., Levine, J.E., Reddy, P., and Holler, E. (2009). Graft-versus-host
disease. Lancet 373, 1550–1561.
Fischbach, M.A., Bluestone, J.A., and Lim, W.A. (2013). Cell-based therapeu-
tics: the next pillar of medicine. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 179ps7.
Fitzgerald, J.C., Weiss, S.L., Maude, S.L., Barrett, D.M., Lacey, S.F., Melen-
horst, J.J., Shaw, P., Berg, R.A., June, C.H., Porter, D.L., et al. (2016). Cytokine
Release Syndrome After Chimeric Antigen Receptor T Cell Therapy for Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia. Crit. Care Med. 45, e124–e131.
Foster, A.E., Dotti, G., Lu, A., Khalil, M., Brenner, M.K., Heslop, H.E., Rooney,
C.M.,andBollard,C.M.(2008).AntitumoractivityofEBV-specific T lymphocytes
transduced with a dominant negative TGF-beta receptor. J. Immunother. 31,
500–505.
Fox, C.J., Hammerman, P.S., and Thompson, C.B. (2005). Fuel feeds function:
energy metabolism and the T-cell response. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5, 844–852.
Frauwirth, K.A., Riley, J.L., Harris, M.H., Parry, R.V., Rathmell, J.C., Plas, D.R.,
Elstrom, R.L., June, C.H., and Thompson, C.B. (2002). The CD28 signaling
pathway regulates glucose metabolism. Immunity 16, 769–777.
Fritsch, R.D., Shen, X., Sims, G.P., Hathcock, K.S., Hodes, R.J., and Lipsky,
P.E. (2005). Stepwise differentiation of CD4 memory T cells defined by expres-
sion of CCR7 and CD27. J. Immunol. 175, 6489–6497.
Geiger, R., Rieckmann, J.C., Wolf, T., Basso, C., Feng, Y., Fuhrer, T., Koga-
deeva, M., Picotti, P., Meissner, F., Mann, M., et al. (2016). L-Arginine Modu-
lates T Cell Metabolism and Enhances Survival and Anti-tumor Activity. Cell
167, 829–842.
Gianni, L., Herman, E.H., Lipshultz, S.E., Minotti, G., Sarvazyan, N., and
Sawyer, D.B. (2008). Anthracycline cardiotoxicity: from bench to bedside.
J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 3777–3784.
Grada, Z., Hegde, M., Byrd, T., Shaffer, D.R., Ghazi, A., Brawley, V.S., Corder,
A., Scho
¨ nfeld, K., Koch, J., Dotti, G., et al. (2013). TanCAR: A Novel Bispecific
Chimeric Antigen Receptor for Cancer Immunotherapy. Mol. Ther. Nucleic
Acids 2, e105.
Gross, G., Waks, T., and Eshhar, Z. (1989). Expression of immunoglobulin-T-
cell receptor chimeric molecules as functional receptors with antibody-type
specificity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 10024–10028.
Guedan, S., Chen, X., Madar, A., Carpenito, C., McGettigan, S.E., Frigault,
M.J., Lee, J., Posey, A.D., Jr., Scholler, J., Scholler, N., et al. (2014). ICOS-
based chimeric antigen receptors program bipolar TH17/TH1 cells. Blood
124, 1070–1080.
Hanahan, D., and Weinberg, R.A. (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next gener-
ation. Cell 144, 646–674.
Hickman, E.S., Lomax, M.E., and Jakobsen, B.K. (2016). Antigen Selection
for Enhanced Affinity T-Cell Receptor-Based Cancer Therapies. J. Biomol.
Screen. 21, 769–785.
Ho, P.C., Bihuniak, J.D., Macintyre, A.N., Staron, M., Liu, X., Amezquita, R.,
Tsui, Y.C., Cui, G., Micevic, G., Perales, J.C., et al. (2015). Phosphoenolpyr-
uvate Is a Metabolic Checkpoint of Anti-tumor T Cell Responses. Cell 162,
1217–1228.
Hombach, A.A., Rappl, G., and Abken, H. (2013). Arming cytokine-induced
killer cells with chimeric antigen receptors: CD28 outperforms combined
CD28-OX40 ‘‘super-stimulation’’. Mol. Ther. 21, 2268–2277.
Hurton, L.V., Singh, H., Najjar, A.M., Switzer, K.C., Mi, T., Maiti, S., Olivares, S.,
Rabinovich, B., Huls, H., Forget, M.A., et al. (2016). Tethered IL-15 augments
antitumor activity and promotes a stem-cell memory subset in tumor-specific
T cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E7788–E7797.
Im, S.J., Hashimoto, M., Gerner, M.Y., Lee, J., Kissick, H.T., Burger, M.C.,
Shan, Q., Hale, J.S., Lee, J., Nasti, T.H., et al. (2016). Defining CD8(+) T cells
that provide the proliferative burst after PD-1 therapy. Nature 537, 417–421.
Jacoby, E., Nguyen, S.M., Fountaine, T.J., Welp, K., Gryder, B., Qin, H., Yang,
Y., Chien, C.D., Seif, A.E., Lei, H., et al. (2016). CD19 CAR immune pressure
induces B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia lineage switch exposing
inherent leukaemic plasticity. Nat. Commun. 7, 12320.
John, L.B., Devaud, C., Duong, C.P., Yong, C.S., Beavis, P.A., Haynes, N.M.,
Chow, M.T., Smyth, M.J., Kershaw, M.H., and Darcy, P.K. (2013). Anti-PD-1
antibody therapy potently enhances the eradication of established tumors
by gene-modified T cells. Clin. Cancer Res. 19, 5636–5646.
Johnson, L.A., Morgan, R.A., Dudley, M.E., Cassard, L., Yang, J.C., Hughes,
M.S., Kammula, U.S., Royal, R.E., Sherry, R.M., Wunderlich, J.R., et al.
(2009). Gene therapy with human and mouse T-cell receptors mediates cancer
regression and targets normal tissues expressing cognate antigen. Blood 114,
535–546.
Joyce, J.A., and Fearon, D.T. (2015). T cell exclusion, immune privilege, and
the tumor microenvironment. Science 348, 74–80.
June, C.H. (2007). Principles of adoptive T cell cancer therapy. J. Clin. Invest.
117, 1204–1212.
Kageyama, S., Ikeda, H., Miyahara, Y., Imai, N., Ishihara, M., Saito, K., Sugino,
S., Ueda, S., Ishikawa, T., Kokura, S., et al. (2015). Adoptive transfer of MAGE-
A4 T-cell receptor gene-transduced lymphocytes in patients with recurrent
esophageal cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 21, 2268–2277.
Kalos, M., Levine, B.L., Porter, D.L., Katz, S., Grupp, S.A., Bagg, A., and June,
C.H. (2011). T cells with chimeric antigen receptors have potent antitumor
effects and can establish memory in patients with advanced leukemia. Sci.
Transl. Med. 3, 95ra73.
Kawalekar, O.U., O’Connor, R.S., Fraietta, J.A., Guo, L., McGettigan, S.E.,
Posey, A.D., Jr., Patel, P.R., Guedan, S., Scholler, J., Keith, B., et al. (2016).
Distinct Signaling of Coreceptors Regulates Specific Metabolism Pathways
and Impacts Memory Development in CAR T Cells. Immunity 44, 380–390.
Kerkar, S.P., Muranski, P., Kaiser, A., Boni, A., Sanchez-Perez, L., Yu, Z.,
Palmer, D.C., Reger, R.N., Borman, Z.A., Zhang, L., et al. (2010). Tumor-spe-
cific CD8+ T cells expressing interleukin-12 eradicate established cancers in
lymphodepleted hosts. Cancer Res. 70, 6725–6734.
Kershaw, M.H., Westwood, J.A., Parker, L.L., Wang, G., Eshhar, Z., Mavrou-
kakis, S.A., White, D.E., Wunderlich, J.R., Canevari, S., Rogers-Freezer, L.,
et al. (2006). A phase I study on adoptive immunotherapy using gene-modified
T cells for ovarian cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 12, 6106–6115.
Klebanoff, C.A., Rosenberg, S.A., and Restifo, N.P. (2016). Prospects for
gene-engineered T cell immunotherapy for solid cancers. Nat. Med. 22, 26–36.
Kloss, C.C., Condomines, M., Cartellieri, M., Bachmann, M., and Sadelain, M.
(2013). Combinatorial antigen recognition with balanced signaling promotes
selective tumor eradication by engineered T cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 71–75.
Kochenderfer, J.N., Wilson, W.H., Janik, J.E., Dudley, M.E., Stetler-Steven-
son, M., Feldman, S.A., Maric, I., Raffeld, M., Nathan, D.A., Lanier, B.J.,
et al. (2010). Eradication of B-lineage cells and regression of lymphoma in a pa-
tient treated with autologous T cells genetically engineered to recognize CD19.
Blood 116, 4099–4102.
Kudo, K., Imai, C., Lorenzini, P., Kamiya, T., Kono, K., Davidoff, A.M., Chng,
W.J., and Campana, D. (2014). T lymphocytes expressing a CD16 signaling re-
ceptor exert antibody-dependent cancer cell killing. Cancer Res. 74, 93–103.
Kuwana, Y., Asakura, Y., Utsunomiya, N., Nakanishi, M., Arata, Y., Itoh, S., Na-
gase, F., and Kurosawa, Y. (1987). Expression of chimeric receptor composed
of immunoglobulin-derived V regions and T-cell receptor-derived C regions.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 149, 960–968.
Lamers, C.H., Sleijfer, S., Vulto, A.G., Kruit, W.H., Kliffen, M., Debets, R., Gra-
tama, J.W., Stoter, G., and Oosterwijk, E. (2006). Treatment of metastatic renal
cell carcinoma with autologous T-lymphocytes genetically retargeted against
carbonic anhydrase IX: first clinical experience. J. Clin. Oncol. 24, e20–e22.
Lamers, C.H., Willemsen, R., van Elzakker, P., van Steenbergen-Langeveld,
S., Broertjes, M., Oosterwijk-Wakka, J., Oosterwijk, E., Sleijfer, S., Debets,
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
737
 R., and Gratama, J.W. (2011). Immune responses to transgene and retroviral
vector in patients treated with ex vivo-engineered T cells. Blood 117, 72–82.
Lamers, C.H., Sleijfer, S., van Steenbergen, S., van Elzakker, P., van Krimpen,
B., Groot, C., Vulto, A., den Bakker, M., Oosterwijk, E., Debets, R., and Gra-
tama, J.W. (2013). Treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with CAIX
CAR-engineered T cells: clinical evaluation and management of on-target
toxicity. Mol. Ther. 21, 904–912.
Lanitis, E., Poussin, M., Klattenhoff, A.W., Song, D., Sandaltzopoulos, R.,
June, C.H., and Powell, D.J., Jr. (2013). Chimeric antigen receptor T Cells
with dissociated signaling domains exhibit focused antitumor activity with
reduced potential for toxicity in vivo. Cancer Immunol. Res. 1, 43–53.
Lee, P.P., Yee, C., Savage, P.A., Fong, L., Brockstedt, D., Weber, J.S.,
Johnson, D., Swetter, S., Thompson, J., Greenberg, P.D., et al. (1999). Char-
acterization of circulating T cells specific for tumor-associated antigens in mel-
anoma patients. Nat. Med. 5, 677–685.
Lee, D.W., Gardner, R., Porter, D.L., Louis, C.U., Ahmed, N., Jensen, M.,
Grupp, S.A., and Mackall, C.L. (2014). Current concepts in the diagnosis and
management of cytokine release syndrome. Blood 124, 188–195.
Levine, B.L., Bernstein, W.B., Aronson, N.E., Schlienger, K., Cotte, J., Perfetto,
S., Humphries, M.J., Ratto-Kim, S., Birx, D.L., Steffans, C., et al. (2002). Adop-
tive transfer of costimulated CD4+ T cells induces expansion of peripheral
T cells and decreased CCR5 expression in HIV infection. Nat. Med. 8, 47–53.
Li, Y., Zhi, W., Wareski, P., and Weng, N.P. (2005). IL-15 activates telomerase
and minimizes telomere loss and may preserve the replicative life span of
memory CD8+ T cells in vitro. J. Immunol. 174, 4019–4024.
Linette, G.P., Stadtmauer, E.A., Maus, M.V., Rapoport, A.P., Levine, B.L., Em-
ery, L., Litzky, L., Bagg, A., Carreno, B.M., Cimino, P.J., et al. (2013). Cardio-
vascular toxicity and titin cross-reactivity of affinity-enhanced T cells in
myeloma and melanoma. Blood 122, 863–871.
Liu, X., Jiang, S., Fang, C., Yang, S., Olalere, D., Pequignot, E.C., Cogdill, A.P.,
Li, N., Ramones, M., Granda, B., et al. (2015). Affinity-Tuned ErbB2 or EGFR
Chimeric Antigen Receptor T Cells Exhibit an Increased Therapeutic Index
against Tumors in Mice. Cancer Res. 75, 3596–3607.
Ma, J.S., Kim, J.Y., Kazane, S.A., Choi, S.H., Yun, H.Y., Kim, M.S., Rodgers,
D.T., Pugh, H.M., Singer, O., Sun, S.B., et al. (2016). Versatile strategy for con-
trolling the specificity and activity of engineered T cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 113, E450–E458.
Mahoney, K.M., Rennert, P.D., and Freeman, G.J. (2015). Combination cancer
immunotherapy and new immunomodulatory targets. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
14, 561–584.
Maude, S.L., Frey, N., Shaw, P.A., Aplenc, R., Barrett, D.M., Bunin, N.J., Chew,
A., Gonzalez, V.E., Zheng, Z., Lacey, S.F., et al. (2014). Chimeric antigen re-
ceptor T cells for sustained remissions in leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 371,
1507–1517.
Mitsuyasu, R.T., Anton, P.A., Deeks, S.G., Scadden, D.T., Connick, E., Downs,
M.T., Bakker, A., Roberts, M.R., June, C.H., Jalali, S., et al. (2000). Prolonged
survival and tissue trafficking following adoptive transfer of CD4zeta gene-
modified autologous CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in human immunodeficiency
virus-infected subjects. Blood 96, 785–793.
Mondal, A.M., Horikawa, I., Pine, S.R., Fujita, K., Morgan, K.M., Vera, E., Ma-
zur, S.J., Appella, E., Vojtesek, B., Blasco, M.A., et al. (2013). p53 isoforms
regulate aging- and tumor-associated replicative senescence in T lympho-
cytes. J. Clin. Invest. 123, 5247–5257.
Moon, E., Carpenito, C., Sun, J., Wang, L., Kapoor, V., Predina, J., Powell, D.,
Jr., Riley, J., June, C.H., and Albelda, S.M. (2011). Expression of a functional
CCR2 receptor enhances tumor localization and tumor eradication by retar-
geted human T cells expressing a mesothelin-specific chimeric antibody re-
ceptor. Clin. Cancer Res. 17, 4719–4730.
Morgan, R.A., Dudley, M.E., Wunderlich, J.R., Hughes, M.S., Yang, J.C.,
Sherry, R.M., Royal, R.E., Topalian, S.L., Kammula, U.S., Restifo, N.P., et al.
(2006). Cancer regression in patients after transfer of genetically engineered
lymphocytes. Science 314, 126–129.
Morgan, R.A., Yang, J.C., Kitano, M., Dudley, M.E., Laurencot, C.M., and
Rosenberg, S.A. (2010). Case report of a serious adverse event following the
administration of T cells transduced with a chimeric antigen receptor recog-
nizing ERBB2. Mol. Ther. 18, 843–851.
Morgan, R.A., Chinnasamy, N., Abate-Daga, D., Gros, A., Robbins, P.F.,
Zheng, Z., Dudley, M.E., Feldman, S.A., Yang, J.C., Sherry, R.M., et al.
(2013). Cancer regression and neurological toxicity following anti-MAGE-A3
TCR gene therapy. J. Immunother. 36, 133–151.
Morsut, L., Roybal, K.T., Xiong, X., Gordley, R.M., Coyle, S.M., Thomson, M.,
and Lim, W.A. (2016). Engineering Customized Cell Sensing and Response
Behaviors Using Synthetic Notch Receptors. Cell 164, 780–791.
Muranski, P., Boni, A., Antony, P.A., Cassard, L., Irvine, K.R., Kaiser, A.,
Paulos, C.M., Palmer, D.C., Touloukian, C.E., Ptak, K., et al. (2008). Tumor-
specific Th17-polarized cells eradicate large established melanoma. Blood
112, 362–373.
Narayanan, P., Lapteva, N., Seethammagari, M., Levitt, J.M., Slawin, K.M.,
and Spencer, D.M. (2011). A composite MyD88/CD40 switch synergistically
activates mouse and human dendritic cells for enhanced antitumor efficacy.
J. Clin. Invest. 121, 1524–1534.
Odorizzi, P.M., Pauken, K.E., Paley, M.A., Sharpe, A., and Wherry, E.J. (2015).
Genetic absence of PD-1 promotes accumulation of terminally differentiated
exhausted CD8+ T cells. J. Exp. Med. 212, 1125–1137.
Omazic, B., Remberger, M., Barkholt, L., So
¨ derdahl, G., Pota
´ cova
´ , Z., Wersa
¨ ll,
P., Ericzon, B.G., Mattsson, J., and Ringde
´ n, O. (2016). Long-Term Follow-Up
of Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation for Solid Cancer. Biol.
Blood Marrow Transplant. 22, 676–681.
Pardoll, D.M. (1999). Inducing autoimmune disease to treat cancer. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 96, 5340–5342.
Parkhurst, M.R., Joo, J., Riley, J.P., Yu, Z., Li, Y., Robbins, P.F., and Rosen-
berg, S.A. (2009). Characterization of genetically modified T-cell receptors
that recognize the CEA:691-699 peptide in the context of HLA-A2.1 on human
colorectal cancer cells. Clin. Cancer Res. 15, 169–180.
Parkhurst, M.R., Yang, J.C., Langan, R.C., Dudley, M.E., Nathan, D.A.,
Feldman, S.A., Davis, J.L., Morgan, R.A., Merino, M.J., Sherry, R.M., et al.
(2011). T cells targeting carcinoembryonic antigen can mediate regression of
metastatic colorectal cancer but induce severe transient colitis. Mol. Ther.
19, 620–626.
Pauken, K.E., Sammons, M.A., Odorizzi, P.M., Manne, S., Godec, J., Khan, O.,
Drake, A.M., Chen, Z., Sen, D.R., Kurachi, M., et al. (2016). Epigenetic stability
of exhausted T cells limits durability of reinvigoration by PD-1 blockade. Sci-
ence 354, 1160–1165.
Paulos, C.M., Carpenito, C., Plesa, G., Suhoski, M.M., Varela-Rohena, A.,
Golovina, T.N., Carroll, R.G., Riley, J.L., and June, C.H. (2010). The inducible
costimulator (ICOS) is critical for the development of human T(H)17 cells.
Sci. Transl. Med. 2, 55ra78.
Pegram, H.J., Lee, J.C., Hayman, E.G., Imperato, G.H., Tedder, T.F., Sadelain,
M., and Brentjens, R.J. (2012). Tumor-targeted T cells modified to secrete IL-
12 eradicate systemic tumors without need for prior conditioning. Blood 119,
4133–4141.
Peng, D., Kryczek, I., Nagarsheth, N., Zhao, L., Wei, S., Wang, W., Sun, Y.,
Zhao, E., Vatan, L., Szeliga, W., et al. (2015). Epigenetic silencing of TH1-
type chemokines shapes tumour immunity and immunotherapy. Nature 527,
249–253.
Porter, D.L., Levine, B.L., Kalos, M., Bagg, A., and June, C.H. (2011). Chimeric
antigen receptor-modified T cells in chronic lymphoid leukemia. N. Engl. J.
Med. 365, 725–733.
Porter, D.L., Hwang, W.T., Frey, N.V., Lacey, S.F., Shaw, P.A., Loren, A.W.,
Bagg, A., Marcucci, K.T., Shen, A., Gonzalez, V., et al. (2015). Chimeric antigen
receptor T cells persist and induce sustained remissions in relapsed refractory
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 303ra139.
Prosser, M.E., Brown, C.E., Shami, A.F., Forman, S.J., and Jensen, M.C.
(2012). Tumor PD-L1 co-stimulates primary human CD8(+) cytotoxic T cells
738
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
 modified to express a PD1:CD28 chimeric receptor. Mol. Immunol. 51,
263–272.
Provasi, E., Genovese, P., Lombardo, A., Magnani, Z., Liu, P.-Q., Reik, A., Chu,
V., Paschon, D.E., Zhang, L., Kuball, J., et al. (2012). Editing T cell specificity
towards leukemia by zinc finger nucleases and lentiviral gene transfer. Nat.
Med. 18, 807–815.
Pulko, V., Davies, J.S., Martinez, C., Lanteri, M.C., Busch, M.P., Diamond,
M.S., Knox, K., Bush, E.C., Sims, P.A., Sinari, S., et al. (2016). Human memory
T cells with a naive phenotype accumulate with aging and respond to persis-
tent viruses. Nat. Immunol. 17, 966–975.
Raman, M.C., Rizkallah, P.J., Simmons, R., Donnellan, Z., Dukes, J., Bossi, G.,
Le Provost, G.S., Todorov, P., Baston, E., Hickman, E., et al. (2016). Direct mo-
lecular mimicry enables off-target cardiovascular toxicity by an enhanced af-
finity TCR designed for cancer immunotherapy. Sci. Rep. 6, 18851.
Rapoport, A.P., Stadtmauer, E.A., Binder-Scholl, G.K., Goloubeva, O., Vogl,
D.T., Lacey, S.F., Badros, A.Z., Garfall, A., Weiss, B., Finklestein, J., et al.
(2015). NY-ESO-1-specific TCR-engineered T cells mediate sustained anti-
gen-specific antitumor effects in myeloma. Nat. Med. 21, 914–921.
Ren, J., Liu, X., Fang, C., Jiang, S., June, C.H., and Zhao, Y. (2016). Multiplex
genome editing to generate universal CAR T cells resistant to PD1 inhibition.
Clin. Cancer Res. Published online November 4, 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1158/1078-0432.ccr-16-1300.
Ribas, A., Hodi, F.S., Callahan, M., Konto, C., and Wolchok, J. (2013). Hepato-
toxicity with combination of vemurafenib and ipilimumab. N. Engl. J. Med. 368,
1365–1366.
Richer, M.J., Lang, M.L., and Butler, N.S. (2016). T Cell Fates Zipped Up: How
the Bach2 Basic Leucine Zipper Transcriptional Repressor Directs T Cell Dif-
ferentiation and Function. J. Immunol. 197, 1009–1015.
Riches, J.C., Davies, J.K., McClanahan, F., Fatah, R., Iqbal, S., Agrawal, S.,
Ramsay, A.G., and Gribben, J.G. (2013). T cells from CLL patients exhibit fea-
tures of T-cell exhaustion but retain capacity for cytokine production. Blood
121, 1612–1621.
Riddell, S.R., Watanabe, K.S., Goodrich, J.M., Li, C.R., Agha, M.E., and Green-
berg, P.D. (1992). Restoration of viral immunity in immunodeficient humans by
the adoptive transfer of T cell clones. Science 257, 238–241.
Robbins, P.F., Morgan, R.A., Feldman, S.A., Yang, J.C., Sherry, R.M., Dudley,
M.E., Wunderlich, J.R., Nahvi, A.V., Helman, L.J., Mackall, C.L., et al. (2011).
Tumor regression in patients with metastatic synovial cell sarcoma and mela-
noma using genetically engineered lymphocytes reactive with NY-ESO-1.
J. Clin. Oncol. 29, 917–924.
Robbins, P.F., Lu, Y.C., El-Gamil, M., Li, Y.F., Gross, C., Gartner, J., Lin, J.C.,
Teer, J.K., Cliften, P., Tycksen, E., et al. (2013). Mining exomic sequencing
data to identify mutated antigens recognized by adoptively transferred tu-
mor-reactive T cells. Nat. Med. 19, 747–752.
Rodgers, D.T., Mazagova, M., Hampton, E.N., Cao, Y., Ramadoss, N.S.,
Hardy, I.R., Schulman, A., Du, J., Wang, F., Singer, O., et al. (2016). Switch-
mediated activation and retargeting of CAR-T cells for B-cell malignancies.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113, E459–E468.
Rooney, M.S., Shukla, S.A., Wu, C.J., Getz, G., and Hacohen, N. (2015). Mo-
lecular and genetic properties of tumors associated with local immune cyto-
lytic activity. Cell 160, 48–61.
Rosenberg, S.A., Packard, B.S., Aebersold, P.M., Solomon, D., Topalian, S.L.,
Toy, S.T., Simon, P., Lotze, M.T., Yang, J.C., Seipp, C.A., et al. (1988). Use of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and interleukin-2 in the immunotherapy of pa-
tients with metastatic melanoma. A preliminary report. N. Engl. J. Med. 319,
1676–1680.
Roybal, K.T., Rupp, L.J., Morsut, L., Walker, W.J., McNally, K.A., Park, J.S.,
and Lim, W.A. (2016a). Precision Tumor Recognition by T Cells With Combina-
torial Antigen-Sensing Circuits. Cell 164, 770–779.
Roybal, K.T., Williams, J.Z., Morsut, L., Rupp, L.J., Kolinko, I., Choe, J.H.,
Walker, W.J., McNally, K.A., and Lim, W.A. (2016b). Engineering T Cells with
Customized Therapeutic Response Programs Using Synthetic Notch Recep-
tors. Cell 167, 419–432.e16.
Roychoudhuri, R., Hirahara, K., Mousavi, K., Clever, D., Klebanoff, C.A., Bone-
lli, M., Sciume
` , G., Zare, H., Vahedi, G., Dema, B., et al. (2013). BACH2 re-
presses effector programs to stabilize T(reg)-mediated immune homeostasis.
Nature 498, 506–510.
Roychoudhuri, R., Clever, D., Li, P., Wakabayashi, Y., Quinn, K.M., Klebanoff,
C.A., Ji, Y., Sukumar, M., Eil, R.L., Yu, Z., et al. (2016). BACH2 regulates CD8(+)
T cell differentiation by controlling access of AP-1 factors to enhancers. Nat.
Immunol. 17, 851–860.
Rufer, N., Migliaccio, M., Antonchuk, J., Humphries, R.K., Roosnek, E., and
Lansdorp, P.M. (2001). Transfer of the human telomerase reverse transcrip-
tase (TERT) gene into T lymphocytes results in extension of replicative poten-
tial. Blood 98, 597–603.
Schietinger, A., and Greenberg, P.D. (2014). Tolerance and exhaustion:
defining mechanisms of T cell dysfunction. Trends Immunol. 35, 51–60.
Schietinger, A., Delrow, J.J., Basom, R.S., Blattman, J.N., and Greenberg,
P.D. (2012). Rescued tolerant CD8 T cells are preprogrammed to reestablish
the tolerant state. Science 335, 723–727.
Schietinger, A., Philip, M., Krisnawan, V.E., Chiu, E.Y., Delrow, J.J., Basom,
R.S., Lauer, P., Brockstedt, D.G., Knoblaugh, S.E., Ha
¨ mmerling, G.J., et al.
(2016). Tumor-Specific T Cell Dysfunction Is a Dynamic Antigen-Driven Differ-
entiation Program Initiated Early during Tumorigenesis. Immunity 45, 389–401.
Scholler, J., Brady, T., Binder-Scholl, G., Hwang, W.-T., Plesa, G., Hege, K.,
Vogel, A., Kalos, M., Riley, J., Deeks, S., et al. (2012). Decade-long safety
and function of retroviral-modified chimeric antigen receptor T cells. Science
Translational Medicine 4, 132Ra153.
Schumacher, T.N., and Schreiber, R.D. (2015). Neoantigens in cancer immu-
notherapy. Science 348, 69–74.
Schumann, K., Lin, S., Boyer, E., Simeonov, D.R., Subramaniam, M., Gate,
R.E., Haliburton, G.E., Ye, C.J., Bluestone, J.A., Doudna, J.A., and Marson,
A. (2015). Generation of knock-in primary human T cells using Cas9 ribonu-
cleoproteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 10437–10442.
Sen, D.R., Kaminski, J., Barnitz, R.A., Kurachi, M., Gerdemann, U., Yates,
K.B., Tsao, H.W., Godec, J., LaFleur, M.W., Brown, F.D., et al. (2016). The
epigenetic landscape of T cell exhaustion. Science 354, 1165–1169.
Singer, M., Wang, C., Cong, L., Marjanovic, N.D., Kowalczyk, M.S., Zhang, H.,
Nyman, J., Sakuishi, K., Kurtulus, S., Gennert, D., et al. (2016). A distinct gene
module for dysfunction uncoupled from activation in tumor-infiltrating T cells.
Cell 166, 1500–1511.
Song, D.-G., Ye, Q., Poussin, M., Harms, G.M., Figini, M., and Powell, D.J., Jr.
(2012). CD27 costimulation augments the survival and antitumor activity
of redirected human T cells in vivo. Blood 119, 696–706.
Spencer,
D.,
Foster,
A.E.,
and
Slawin,
K.
(2016).
Costimulation
of
chimeric antigen receptors by MYD88 and CD40 polypeptides. US Patent
20,160,058,857, filed September 1, 2015, and published March 10, 2016.
Stone, J.D., Harris, D.T., and Kranz, D.M. (2015). TCR affinity for p/MHC
formed by tumor antigens that are self-proteins: impact on efficacy and
toxicity. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 33, 16–22.
Sukumar, M., Liu, J., Mehta, G.U., Patel, S.J., Roychoudhuri, R., Crompton,
J.G., Klebanoff, C.A., Ji, Y., Li, P., Yu, Z., et al. (2016). Mitochondrial Membrane
Potential Identifies Cells with Enhanced Stemness for Cellular Therapy. Cell
Metab. 23, 63–76.
Symons, H.J., Levy, M.Y., Wang, J., Zhou, X., Zhou, G., Cohen, S.E., Luznik,
L., Levitsky, H.I., and Fuchs, E.J. (2008). The allogeneic effect revisited: exog-
enous help for endogenous, tumor-specific T cells. Biol. Blood Marrow Trans-
plant. 14, 499–509.
Teachey, D.T., Lacey, S.F., Shaw, P.A., Melenhorst, J.J., Maude, S.L., Frey, N.,
Pequignot, E., Gonzalez, V.E., Chen, F., Finklestein, J., et al. (2016). Identifica-
tion of Predictive Biomarkers for Cytokine Release Syndrome after Chimeric
Antigen Receptor T-cell Therapy for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia. Cancer
Discov. 6, 664–679.
Teng, M.W., Ngiow, S.F., Ribas, A., and Smyth, M.J. (2015). Classifying Can-
cers Based on T-cell Infiltration and PD-L1. Cancer Res. 75, 2139–2145.
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
739
 Tirosh, I., Izar, B., Prakadan, S.M., Wadsworth, M.H., 2nd, Treacy, D.,
Trombetta, J.J., Rotem, A., Rodman, C., Lian, C., Murphy, G., et al. (2016). Dis-
secting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic melanoma by single-cell
RNA-seq. Science 352, 189–196.
Topp, M.S., Riddell, S.R., Akatsuka, Y., Jensen, M.C., Blattman, J.N., and
Greenberg, P.D. (2003). Restoration of CD28 expression in CD28- CD8+ mem-
ory effector T cells reconstitutes antigen-induced IL-2 production. J. Exp.
Med. 198, 947–955.
Turtle, C.J., Hanafi, L.-A., Berger, C., Gooley, T.A., Cherian, S., Hudecek, M.,
Sommermeyer, D., Melville, K., Pender, B., Budiarto, T.M., et al. (2016). CD19
CAR-T cells of defined CD4+:CD8+ composition in adult B cell ALL patients.
J. Clin. Invest. 126, 2123–2138.
Tyrakis, P.A., Palazon, A., Macias, D., Lee, K.L., Phan, A.T., Velic
¸ a, P., You, J.,
Chia, G.S., Sim, J., Doedens, A., et al. (2016). S-2-hydroxyglutarate regulates
CD8(+) T-lymphocyte fate. Nature 540, 236–241.
van den Berg, J.H., Gomez-Eerland, R., van de Wiel, B., Hulshoff, L., van den
Broek, D., Bins, A., Tan, H.L., Harper, J.V., Hassan, N.J., Jakobsen, B.K., et al.
(2015). Case Report of a Fatal Serious Adverse Event Upon Administration of
T Cells Transduced With a MART-1-specific T-cell Receptor. Mol. Ther. 23,
1541–1550.
van der Windt, G.J., Everts, B., Chang, C.H., Curtis, J.D., Freitas, T.C., Amiel,
E., Pearce, E.J., and Pearce, E.L. (2012). Mitochondrial respiratory capacity is
a critical regulator of CD8+ T cell memory development. Immunity 36, 68–78.
van Zelm, M.C., Reisli, I., van der Burg, M., Castan
˜ o, D., van Noesel, C.J., van
Tol, M.J., Woellner, C., Grimbacher, B., Patin
˜ o, P.J., van Dongen, J.J., and
Franco, J.L. (2006). An antibody-deficiency syndrome due to mutations in
the CD19 gene. N. Engl. J. Med. 354, 1901–1912.
Wang, X., Chang, W.C., Wong, C.W., Colcher, D., Sherman, M., Ostberg, J.R.,
Forman, S.J., Riddell, S.R., and Jensen, M.C. (2011). A transgene-encoded
cell surface polypeptide for selection, in vivo tracking, and ablation of engi-
neered cells. Blood 118, 1255–1263.
Weiden, P.L., Flournoy, N., Thomas, E.D., Prentice, R., Fefer, A., Buckner,
C.D., and Storb, R. (1979). Antileukemic effect of graft-versus-host disease
in human recipients of allogeneic-marrow grafts. N. Engl. J. Med. 300,
1068–1073.
Weng, N.P., Levine, B.L., June, C.H., and Hodes, R.J. (1995). Human naive and
memory T lymphocytes differ in telomeric length and replicative potential.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 11091–11094.
Wherry, E.J. (2011). T cell exhaustion. Nat. Immunol. 12, 492–499.
Wilkie, S., van Schalkwyk, M.C., Hobbs, S., Davies, D.M., van der Stegen, S.J.,
Pereira, A.C., Burbridge, S.E., Box, C., Eccles, S.A., and Maher, J. (2012). Dual
targeting of ErbB2 and MUC1 in breast cancer using chimeric antigen recep-
tors engineered to provide complementary signaling. J. Clin. Immunol. 32,
1059–1070.
Winkelstein, J.A., Marino, M.C., Lederman, H.M., Jones, S.M., Sullivan, K.,
Burks, A.W., Conley, M.E., Cunningham-Rundles, C., and Ochs, H.D. (2006).
X-linked agammaglobulinemia: report on a United States registry of 201 pa-
tients. Medicine (Baltimore) 85, 193–202.
Wu, C.Y., Roybal, K.T., Puchner, E.M., Onuffer, J., and Lim, W.A. (2015).
Remote control of therapeutic T cells through a small molecule-gated chimeric
receptor. Science 350, aab4077.
Yu, H., Sotillo, E., Harrington, C., Wertheim, G., Paessler, M., Maude, S.L.,
Rheingold, S.R., Grupp, S.A., Thomas-Tikhonenko, A., and Pillai, V. (2017).
Repeated loss of target surface antigen after immunotherapy in primary medi-
astinal large B cell lymphoma. Am. J. Hematol. 92, E11–E13.
Zah, E., Lin, M.-Y., Silva-Benedict, A., Jensen, M.C., and Chen, Y.Y. (2016).
T Cells Expressing CD19/CD20 Bispecific Chimeric Antigen Receptors Pre-
vent Antigen Escape by Malignant B Cells. Cancer Immunol. Res. 4, 498–508.
Zhang, L., Morgan, R.A., Beane, J.D., Zheng, Z., Dudley, M.E., Kassim, S.H.,
Nahvi, A.V., Ngo, L.T., Sherry, R.M., Phan, G.Q., et al. (2015). Tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes genetically engineered with an inducible gene encoding inter-
leukin-12 for the immunotherapy of metastatic melanoma. Clin. Cancer Res.
21, 2278–2288.
Zhang, S.-Q., Parker, P., Ma, K.-Y., He, C., Shi, Q., Cui, Z., Williams, C.M.,
Wendel, B.S., Meriwether, A.I., and Salazar, M.A. (2016). Direct measurement
of T cell receptor affinity and sequence from naı
¨ve antiviral T cells. Sci. Trans.
Med. 8, 341ra77.
Zhao, Y., Bennett, A.D., Zheng, Z., Wang, Q.J., Robbins, P.F., Yu, L.Y., Li, Y.,
Molloy, P.E., Dunn, S.M., Jakobsen, B.K., et al. (2007). High-affinity TCRs
generated by phage display provide CD4+ T cells with the ability to recognize
and kill tumor cell lines. J. Immunol. 179, 5845–5854.
Zhong, S., Malecek, K., Johnson, L.A., Yu, Z., Vega-Saenz de Miera, E.,
Darvishian, F., McGary, K., Huang, K., Boyer, J., Corse, E., et al. (2013).
T-cell receptor affinity and avidity defines antitumor response and autoimmu-
nity in T-cell immunotherapy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 6973–6978.
Zhou, J., Shen, X., Huang, J., Hodes, R.J., Rosenberg, S.A., and Robbins, P.F.
(2005). Telomere length of transferred lymphocytes correlates with in vivo
persistence and tumor regression in melanoma patients receiving cell transfer
therapy. J. Immunol. 175, 7046–7052.
740
Cell 168, February 9, 2017
