 August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
1
Review
published: 22 August 2017
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00153
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Stefan Borgwardt, 
 
University of Basel, Switzerland
Reviewed by: 
Serge Brand, 
 
University of Basel, Switzerland 
 
Sergueï O. Fetissov, 
 
University of Rouen, France 
 
Michael Deuschle, 
Central Institute of Mental Health, 
Germany
*Correspondence:
Juan M. Lima-Ojeda  
juan.lima-ojeda@medbo.de
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Received: 22 June 2017
Accepted: 02 August 2017
Published: 22 August 2017
Citation: 
Lima-Ojeda JM, Rupprecht R and 
Baghai TC (2017) “I Am I and My 
Bacterial Circumstances”: Linking 
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, 
and Depression. 
Front. Psychiatry 8:153. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00153
“i Am i and My Bacterial 
Circumstances”: Linking Gut 
Microbiome, Neurodevelopment,  
and Depression
Juan M. Lima-Ojeda*, Rainer Rupprecht and Thomas C. Baghai
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany
Recently, there has been renewed interest in the role played by microbiome in both 
human health and human disease. A correct equilibrium between the human host and 
their microorganisms is important for an appropriate physiological function. Extensive 
research has shown that microbes that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract—or gut micro-
biota—are involved not only in both nutritive and digestive activities but also in immuno-
logical processes. Moreover, the gut microbiome influences both central nervous system 
and energy homeostasis. An altered gut microbiome has been associated with the 
pathophysiology of different diseases, including neuropsychiatric disorders. Apparently, 
both environmental—diet, exposition to antibiotics, and infections—and host-genetic 
factors have a strong influence on gut microbiome, modulating the risk for neuropsy-
chiatric illness. Also, early life disruption of the microbiome–gut–brain (MGB) axis has 
been associated with an increased risk of developing depression later in life, suggesting 
a link between gut microbiome, neurodevelopment, and depression. This review aims to 
contribute to this growing area of research by exploring the role played by the gut micro-
biome in neurodevelopment and in the etiology of the depressive syndrome, including 
nutritional, immunological, and energy homeostasis approaches.
Keywords: gut microbiome, neurodevelopment, depression, neuroimmune–endocrine system, microbiome– 
gut–brain axis, hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, energy homeostasis, nutrition
The title of this review is a paraphrase of the maxim from Ortega y Gasset: Yo soy yo y mi circunstan-
cia, y si no la salvo a ella no me salvo yo (“I am I and my circumstance; and, if I do not save it, I do 
not save myself”) (1).
iNTRODUCTiON
Our world has an extraordinary diversity of life forms. A key aspect of them is their individuality; 
each creature on Earth—unicellular or multicellular—has its own characteristics. So, on our planet, 
it is possible to identify, in different ecosystems (Table 1), numerous animals, bacteria, plants, fungi, 
and archaea. Each creature plays an important and unique role in its habitat. On Earth, there are 
several ecosystems and all of them are characterized by complex interactions between different 
organisms.
Microorganisms such as bacteria are important for the human life. Some products are obtained 
because of fermentation (2), including bread, beer, wine, cheese, and yogurt (2). In general, bacteria 
have influence not only in our eating culture (3) but also in different sociocultural and economical 
aspects of human life (3). Microbiome (Table 1) in and on human bodies is a dominant feature 
 TABLe 1 | Brief glossary.
Glossary
Anaerobic bacteria: microorganisms that have the characteristic that they are 
able to growth without oxygen
Anorexigenic cells: cells associated with the loss of appetite
Binary fission: in bacteria, it is an asexual reproduction where the bacterium 
duplicates its deoxyribonucleic acid, generating a new daughter cell—or more 
than one daughter cell—with the same characteristics that the mother or original 
bacterium
Dysbiosis: term employed to refer to important disruptions at the indigenous 
bacterial level, including both structural and compositional alterations
ecosystem: a complex system where living creatures interact with 
their environment and its physical components, being all its constituent 
interconnected elements
Germ-free (GF) mice: GF mice are animals without microorganisms’ 
colonization in or on their bodies
Gnotobiotic: it refers to an environment where all its microorganisms are 
controlled or known
Gut-brain axis: a complex network characterized for a strong connection 
between the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous system (CNS). It is a 
bidirectional system
immunosenescence: age-related chronic and progressive process at the 
immune level that is associated with an increased pro-inflammatory activity
inflamm-aging: an increased inflammatory response associated with the 
development
Lactic acid bacteria: microorganisms that produce lactic acid
Meconium: earliest feces from infants
Microbiome: term employed to refer to the combination of microorganisms and 
their genetic materials. Sometimes this term is used in the scientific literature as 
synonym of microbiota
Microbiome-gut-brain (MGB) axis: bidirectional connection between the 
gastrointestinal tract and the CNS, including the gastrointestinal microbiome. 
Frequently this term is used as synonym of microbiota–gut–brain axis
Microbiota: microorganisms that inhabit a particular environment, e.g., a 
specific anatomical region
Microbiota-gut-brain (MGB) axis: a bidirectional axis that communicates the  
intestinal microbiota with the brain
Minor physical anomalies: congenital physical changes associated with insults 
during the development
Orexigenic cells: cells that are associated with the induction of appetite
Polyphenols: compounds of chemical kind that are produced by plants
Prebiotics: kind of dietary fibers that are beneficial for both microbiota 
development and function
Probiotics: term used to refer to living microorganisms which ingestion has 
been associated with host’s benefits at the health level
Xenobiotics: foreign substances that are founded in the environment and that 
are usually synthetic chemicals
2
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
of our individuality (3), increasing the number of publications 
about microbiome–human bodies interactions (3). In general, 
host–microbiota (Table 1) ecosystem is a story of cooperation (4, 
5), reflecting past and present of both host and their microorgan-
isms (4, 5). In order to avoid any confusion, in this paper, we 
will use the term “microbiome” to refer to both the microbes and 
their genetic materials, as unit, and not as synonym of the term 
“microbiota.” Also, for the purpose of this manuscript, we will 
focus on gastrointestinal bacterial microbiome.
There are differences in the microbiome composition among 
vertebrates (6). Also, individuals from the same species show 
some variations in their microbiome (4, 6). Each anatomical 
region has its microbiome (6), which has its own characteristics 
(6). The gastrointestinal tract in humans is a sanctuary of living 
organisms, the most of our microbiota inhabit this region (7). 
It has been pointed out that if we are born sterile, bacteria that 
inhabit our gastrointestinal tract may come from the external 
environment—outside the boundaries of our bodies—(4).
Gastrointestinal microorganisms proliferate by binary fis-
sion (Table 1) (4). This ecosystem is a dynamic one (4), where 
changes at the level of the microbiota composition have been 
associated with physiological dysfunction and health alterations 
(8, 9). Recently, there has been renewed interest in the role played 
by microbiome in the neuropsychiatric sphere (10). It has been 
noted that gastrointestinal bacteria have influence on behavioral 
and cognitive processes (11). Moreover, there is a growing body 
of literature that recognizes the importance of gut microbiome in 
neurodevelopment (12).
If we want to understand our individuality, we should accept 
the importance of the innumerable creatures that are around 
us and to understand the interactions between the different 
individuals that are part of the numerous ecosystems on Earth. 
In general, the world that surrounds us is important to define 
our individuality. This situation is better expressed by the famous 
maxim of the illustrious philosophe José Ortega y Gasset, a well-
known intellectual who wrote at the beginning of the twentieth 
century: Yo soy yo y mi circunstancia, y si no la salvo a ella no 
me salvo yo (“I am I and my circumstance; and, if I do not save 
it, I do not save myself”) (1). The main goal of this review is to 
explore the relationship between gut microbiome, neurodevel-
opment, and depression. Also nutritional, immunological and 
energy homeostasis approaches with relevance in the neurobiol-
ogy of the depressive syndrome are explored. We conducted an 
English language literature search using the biomedical database 
PubMed. To improve the quality of our manuscript, we included 
complementary information.
MiCROBeS iN HUMAN HeALTH AND  
iN HUMAN DiSeASe: A STORY OF  
CO-evOLUTiON
For centuries, humans and bacteria have evolved together (8). We 
have a strong interaction with our indigenous microbiota (8, 13). 
From a gnotobiotic (Table 1) condition during the intrauterine 
life to a complex microbiome–human interaction with a begin 
at birth (8), bacteria in and on human bodies are influenced by 
both environmental and host-genetic factors (8). The constitu-
tion of microorganisms that inhabit our organism is defined by 
host-genetic material (9). Evidence suggests that microbiome is 
able to mediate host gene expression (11). Surprisingly, most of 
the cells in and on human body are microorganisms or microbes 
(14). Also, microorganisms in humans have complex genomes. 
For example, the gastrointestinal microbiome has a genome that 
is around 100 times more numerous than human’s one (15), 
being the products of a large number of these microorganism 
 3
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
genes significantly important for the physiology of the host (16). 
Using deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extraction from a European 
human fecal sample collection with 124 individuals it has been 
characterized the human gut microbiome (17), which has 3.3 
million genes (17), being the most of them from bacteria—99.1% 
(17). Interestingly, bacteria have the ability to obtain genes that 
they need to continue to live (4). Since microorganisms that 
cohabit within the same environment are able to swap genes (4), 
the dominant bacterial population gain control over processes of 
swapping genetic material (4). Also, inheritance of the microbiota 
has been suggested (6), particularly this one associated with the 
mother (6), which is a stable vertical inheritance (4). It has been 
proposed that if we wish to have a better knowledge about our-
selves, we should look at our genome, including our indigenous 
bacterial genome (13). In general, humans and their indigenous 
microbiota have co-evolved together, establishing a dynamic 
ecosystem.
There is evidence about interactions between animal hosts 
and their microbiome (6, 9, 18–20). Environmental factors, such 
as diet (6, 9, 18, 19), infections (6, 9), and antibiotics (6, 9, 18), 
may alter these interactions (6, 9, 18, 19). Early in development, 
the acquisition of bacteria in body structures such as the gastro-
intestinal tract is important to develop an adequate tolerance to 
antigens (13). Moreover, it has been suggested that indigenous 
microbiome is important for an appropriate host development 
during extrauterine life (13). The growth of microorganisms in 
the host’s gastrointestinal tract depends also of both gut physi-
cal—intestinal movements (19)—and chemical—both digestive 
enzymes and acid secretions (19), oxygen quantity (21), pH 
(potential of hydrogen) level (21)—factors (19, 21). It has been 
proposed that our daily intake modulates gut microbiome 
 
(19, 22), being carbohydrates an important source of nutrients 
for gut bacteria (9, 18). Since gut microorganisms require nutri-
ents for their development (19) and the bacteria’s host is the 
most important supplier of nutrients for them (19), then host’s 
feelings such as satiety and hunger are important factors defin-
ing gut bacterial composition (19). In general, host–microbiota 
interaction is an important factor modulating bacterial energy 
homeostasis at the gut level (19). A hypothesis from the second 
half of the twentieth century pointed out that the composition of 
the indigenous organisms that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract 
is limited by the effective management of nutrients between 
species of bacteria (23). More recently, it has been noted that 
the inclusion of vegetables, whole grains, fish, and fruits in our 
diet is positive for our gastrointestinal microbiome (22). Intake 
of omega-3 fatty acids, folic acid, S-adenosyl-methionine, 
l-tryptophan, vitamin B12, and vitamin D has been associated 
with a mental health improvement (22). Interestingly, dietary 
interventions, including supplements of minerals, essential fatty 
acids (EFAs) and vitamins, have been associated with a better 
behavior in humans (24). For example, results from a double 
blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study with adult prison-
ers showed that a nutritional supplementation of EFAs, miner-
als, and vitamins was associated with an antisocial behavior 
improvement (24).
One of the most significant findings to emerge from different 
studies about human microbiome is that perturbations of the 
host–microbiota are associated with an increased risk for differ-
ent diseases (6, 10, 25), including gastrointestinal diseases (6, 25), 
dermatological illness (6), obesity (6, 25), type 1 diabetes (25), 
 
neurodegenerative illness (26), neuropsychiatric diseases (10), 
neuroimmune diseases (26, 27), and rheumatic disorders (6, 25), 
where changes in the interactions between microbiome and host 
immune system have been proposed as important etiological 
factors (6). Sometimes our immune system is unsuccessful in 
restricting our indigenous microbiota (8, 13), then the micro-
organisms are not more positive at all. Microbes are considered 
pathogens when they are able to produce a disease (8, 13). Despite 
the importance of microbiota–human host cooperation, there 
remains a paucity of knowledge on microbes–human host equi-
librium. The Nash equilibrium—a concept from the game theory 
(8)—has been used to try to explain “the rule” of this cooperation 
(8). According to this concept, the players—or both indigenous 
bacteria and human body—know the rules of the game—or 
equilibrium—(8). When one of the players departs from the 
established rules, this player will be sanctioned—maybe by host 
immunity—, taking a weak position (8). However, biological 
interactions, such as this one observed between microorganisms 
and human body, are “more dynamic and complex games” to be 
clarified under this theory.
The microorganisms that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract, 
including their genome are known as gut microbiome (25). 
 
A significant number of microorganisms—10 trillion (9) to 100 
trillion (9, 15–17)—is part of the adult gut (15). The most of 
them are anaerobic bacteria (Table 1)—99.9% (11, 16, 20)—and 
inhabit the distal part of the gastrointestinal tract (15). The gas-
trointestinal tract is entirely inhabited by microorganisms (21), 
in ascendant quantity from the duodenum to the last part of the 
colon (21). There is an important presence of cytophaga–flavo-
bacterium–bacteroides (9, 15, 16, 18, 28) and Firmicutes (9, 15, 
16, 18, 28). Other examples of dominant habitants of the gas-
trointestinal tract are: Streptococcus in the distal esophagus and 
Helicobacter in the gastric region (18). In general, the gut flora 
has subjects from Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Verrucomicrobia, 
Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Fusobacteria phyla (29), 
being the most of the intestinal microorganisms part of the first 
two phyla (29). Normally, the gut offers a stable environment to 
these bacteria (11). These microorganisms are able to communi-
cate with each other (13, 15) and they have a strong connection 
with the host’s organism (15). Gut microorganisms are dynamic 
inhabitants of the gastrointestinal tract (19), processes of grow-
ing, lysis, and elimination are part of the mechanisms that stabi-
lize the bacterial population (19). In general, gut microbiome is 
beneficial for the human host (11, 18, 25); these microorganisms 
are involved with digestive and nutritive processes (11, 18, 20, 
25). For example, gut bacteria are related to the metabolism of 
lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, and vitamins such as B and K 
(18). Interestingly, there is evidence that gastrointestinal micro-
organisms play a crucial role in metabolizing medicaments and 
xenobiotic substances (Table 1) (18). Also, the gut microbiome 
reinforces host immunity (11, 18, 20, 25) and influences the 
formation of gut vasculature (20). In the intestine, gut micro-
biome modulates both adaptive and innate immunity (18, 25). 
For an adequate gastrointestinal epithelium, the gut microbiome 
 FiGURe 1 | The MGB axis, including the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis. The MGB axis is a bidirectional system that links the gastrointestinal tract with 
the brain. It is a complex system characterized by a neuroendocrine–immune communication. The gut microbiome influences the function of the brain by modulation 
of both immune and endocrine systems, HPA axis, neurotransmitter pathways, and growth factors. Alterations of this network—that includes numerous molecules 
and cells—may be the basis of pathological processes.
4
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
is important (27). At the gastrointestinal level, bacteria are 
involved in the presence of a “physiological inflammation” (11), 
which is important for a gut in good health (11). However, gut 
microbiome dysbiosis (Table 1)—or important changes at the 
level of the structure and the composition of the microorganisms 
(9)—has been linked with pathological autoimmune processes 
in the nervous system (27).
It is important to note that it has been suggested that the first 
36 months of extrauterine life are fundamental defining host–
bacterial composition (28) and that the sequence of the bacterial 
transition during the first months of life is difficult to define (30). 
Environmental factors, including vaginal delivery and breast 
milk (6, 28), influence strongly early exposition to bacterial 
communities in humans (6, 28), especially to lactic acid bacteria 
(Table 1) (6). Also, environmental factors are able to alter the gut 
microbiome equilibrium (7, 28, 31). Some other environmental 
factors that have been reported as elements that could influence 
gut microbiome characteristics are factors, such as prebiotics and 
probiotics (Table 1) consumption, family composition, cultural 
practices, locality, antibiotics, and mother–infant interactions 
(30). Together, these data indicate that microbiome–human 
interaction is a story of diversity and adaptability (15). However, 
the whole association between microbiome and different diseases 
is still unknown (6).
The Gut Microbiome and the Nervous 
System: The Microbiome–Gut–Brain Axis
The gut–brain (GB) axis (Table 1) is a complex system that 
integrates the gut with the nervous system (10, 16). A main 
characteristic of this system is its bidirectionality (10, 11, 16, 
26, 31), where a neuro-endocrino-immunological connec-
tion is implicated (16) (Figure 1). In general, the GB axis is 
important regulating gastric and intestinal function and energy 
homeostasis (11). The tenth cranial nerve or vagus nerve, with 
its both afferent and efferent fibers (32), is a link between the 
gastrointestinal tract and the brain (32, 33). The anterior vagal 
trunk bifurcates into three limbs: hepatic, anterior or ventral 
gastric, and celiac branches (34). In the gastrointestinal tract, at 
the gastric level, in the lamina propria or mucosa lamina propria, 
in both external muscularis propria, and in the myenteric plexus 
are neuronal terminals (34). In the gastric mucosa, afferent fibers 
of the vagus nerve are able to identify the presence of ghrelin 
and leptin (33). Also, at the level of the small intestine, it has 
been noted a complex net of vagal afferent fibers (34), which 
has similarities to these observed at the gastric level (34). 
It has been suggested that afferent fibers of the vagus nerve 
could identify the presence of luminal contents (33, 34), being 
this possible by the presence of mechanosensors (e.g., serosal 
 5
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
receptors, mucosal touch receptors, muscular tension receptors) 
 
(33, 34). Apparently, chemoreceptors of the vagal afferent fibers 
are reactive to different molecules, such as glucagon-like pep-
tide-1 (GLP-1) (33, 34), interleukin-1β (IL-1β) (34), serotonin 
(5-HT) (33, 34), somatostatin or growth hormone inhibiting 
hormone (34), and cholecystokinin (CCK) (33, 34), being duo-
denal vagal afferent fibers reactive to both 5-HT and CCK (33), 
and at the level of the ileum, colon, and rectum, afferent fibers of 
the vagus are reactive to peptide YY and GLP-1 (33).
The nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) of the dorsal vagal 
complex of the brainstem integrates nervous signals from the 
gastrointestinal tract (34, 35). Also, these vagal and spinal sig-
nals are later transmitted to the hypothalamus (35). Seemingly, 
the activation of nerve cells from the NTS associated with the 
afferent vagal system is mainly dependent on N-methyl-d-
aspartate receptors (35), but this is not clear (34). Also both 
the infundibular or arcuate nucleus (ARC)—the third largest 
hypothalamic aggregation of nerve cells (36)—and the para-
ventricular nucleus (PVN) in the hypothalamus receive projec-
tions from the NTS (35). There is evidence that signals from 
the afferent vagal system are also transmitted to brain regions 
outside the hypothalamus, such as insula, stria terminalis, and 
amygdalae (34).
Since the gut microbiome may influence the central nervous 
system (CNS) (10, 31), it has been proposed to include the micro-
biome as part of this axis (10), being known as microbiome–gut–
brain (MGB) axis (10) or microbiota–gut–brain axis (Table 1) 
(16). Gut microbiome is able to mediate host gene expression 
(11). This is particularly important if we consider that this could 
include genes related to CNS function (11). It has been suggested 
that gut microbiome influences the CNS by modulation of the 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, immune system, 
neurotransmitter pathways, and growth factors (Figure 1) (10). 
A link between disrupted gastrointestinal microbiome and both 
behavioral and cognitive alterations has been noted (10, 37). Also, 
an adequate performance at the learning and memory level has 
been related to a functional microbiome (37). Changes at the level 
of the HPA axis have been associated with microbiome composi-
tion (16), including both behavioral and cognitive alterations that 
are apparently linked with molecules, such as norepinephrine 
(NE), 5-HT, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and 
dopamine (DA) (16). Apparently, gut microbiome is able to 
modulate the function of limbic system (37), including regions 
such as amygdala and hypothalamus (37). Emotional stress 
appears to impact gut microbiome composition (11, 16, 31). 
 
Also, the pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders, such 
as depression (10, 37), schizophrenia (10), anxiety (37), and 
autism (37), appears to involve gut microbiome changes (10, 37). 
Interestingly, behavior appears to play a role to define the char-
acteristics of gastrointestinal microbiome (37). Individual level 
of social interaction has been linked directly with microbiome 
composition (37), including behavioral characteristics on the 
list of modulation factors for gut microorganisms (37). In this 
bidirectional system, the gastrointestinal microbiota seems to 
modulate both neuronal function and behavior (38), including 
behaviors such as anxiety and appetite behavior (38). Apparently, 
these processes involve the interaction of both the MGB and HPA 
axis (38). Also, appetite regulation could be modulated—via a 
endocrino-neuronal vagal-hypothalamic communication (19)—
by molecules that are produced by gut microorganisms (19). It 
has been noted that brain reactions via stress are able to alter 
gastrointestinal function (16), including gut microbiome compo-
sition changes (16), and early life disruption of the MGB axis have 
been associated with later life neuropsychiatric disorders such as 
depression (10).
To date, numerous studies using probiotics have attempted to 
demonstrate MGB axis’ communication (16). Administration of 
probiotics has been associated with neurophysiological changes 
(16), where it seems to include the participation of different 
 
molecules, such as 5-HT, BDNF, DA, NE, and corticotropin 
releasing factor (16). Between the different species that are 
employed as probiotics to improve gastrointestinal equilibrium 
Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus are well-known (38). Bacterial 
reconstitution of B. infantis has been associated with an improved 
HPA axis’ response to stress in a neurodevelopmental animal 
model (39). Also, probiotic administration of Lactobacillum 
rhamnosus, for a month (40), is enough to modulate both neu-
ronal gene expression and behavior in animals (40). In general, 
this information tries to expose the importance of the MGB axis 
at the neurobiological level (39, 40).
The Microbiome–Gut–Brain Axis and the 
immune System
The immune system is an important part of the MGB axis. The 
immune system, including both adaptive and innate immune 
systems (27), mediates the communication between bacteria, 
gastrointestinal tract, and CNS (27). Also, a gastrointestinal 
microbiome is of great significance for an adequate gut immu-
nity (41). Host’s microbiota is the main source of microorgan-
ism antigens for the host (20). In humans, during development 
host’s microbiota is an important element modulating the 
immune system maturation (20), being host’s intestinal micro-
organisms involved in the formation of the lymphoid tissue at 
the gut level (20).
It is important to remember that the intestine is an anatomi-
cal barrier that makes possible the separation between visceral 
systems and indigenous bacteria (42). Most of the cells that are 
part of the intestinal epithelium are columnar epithelial cells 
(41). Proteins related to the innate immune system, such as 
toll-like receptor (TLR) 1–3 (TLR1-TLR3), TLR5, TLR9, and 
nucleotide oligomerization domain 2—which are part of the 
pattern recognition receptors (41)—, and chemotactic factors 
are expressed by epithelial cells (41). In the small intestine, 
T-lymphocytes—which are known as intraepithelial lympho-
cytes (41)—are part of the epithelium (41). Interestingly, gut 
microorganisms are able to modulate epithelial gene expression 
via molecules related to the immune system such as TLR (20). 
Peyer’s patches are well-known lymphoid structures that are 
part of the small intestine (41), being important gut-associated 
immune structures (41). The mucus produced by goblet cells in 
the intestine, in both large and small portions (41), integrates 
a functional barrier that has an important role as defensive 
layer against pathogens (9, 41). Both the glycoprotein mucin 
 6
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
and different polysaccharides are the main components of this 
mucus (9), which is degraded principally by gut microbiota (9). 
The large intestine is a B-lymphocytes-rich zone (41). Dysbiosis 
at the gastrointestinal level has been associated with an elevated 
activity of molecules associated to the immune system such as 
cytokines (42). As consequence of this elevated activity, it has 
been recognized an intestinal barrier dysfunction (42), which is 
accompanied for chronic inflammation (42). Gut immunoglob-
ulin (Ig) A is an important regulator of microbiome composition 
(41). Epithelial cells are provided with antimicrobial molecules 
that together with IgA improve both transport and anti-bacterial 
protection at the intestinal level (43). The intestinal epithelial 
barrier—which is a barrier against pathological microorganisms 
(44)—reduces the risk of intestinal inflammation (44). Mucosal 
enteric glial cells (EGCs) are important part of the immune-
homeostasis of the gut microenvironment (44). EGCs are 
immune cells that are able to present antigens to T-lymphocytes 
(44). It is known that these cells are implicated in the produc-
tion of different factors—such as neurotrophins, glial-derived 
s-nitrosoglutathione, glial-derived neurotrophic factor, trans-
forming growth factor-β1, and 15-deoxy-Δ12,14-prostaglandin J2 
(15dPGJ2) (44)—associated with the homeostasis of the neu-
roimmune system (44). Moreover, neurotransmitter signaling 
alterations of the serotonergic system in both nervous system 
and gastrointestinal tract have been associated with intestinal 
inflammatory disorders (45), suggesting a link trough 5-HT 
between gut and brain (45).
Different microorganisms that are part of the gut microbi-
ome have been linked with anti-inflammatory or inflammatory 
immune reactions (41). Bacteroides fragilis and Lactobacillus 
have been associated with anti-inflammatory responses (41). 
Also, protective intestinal inflammation has been linked with 
gut microorganisms such as segmented filamentous bacteria 
(41). A positive inflammatory modulation has been related 
to bacteria such as Clostridia (41). Apparently, indigenous 
microbiota has an immunomodulatory potential in gut mucosa 
(41), regulating both immune cells and molecules (41). 
Interestingly, it has been observed that there is a link between 
chronic inflammation and gut microbiota (21), where high 
level of intestinal oxygen alters normal bacterial composition 
and induces inflammation (21). Apparently, high level of gut 
oxygen drastically damages gut-microbiota equilibrium (21), 
reducing anaerobic population and increasing aerobic inhabit-
ants (21). In general, the MGB axis has a strong link to the 
immune system.
The Microbiome–Gut–Brain Axis and 
energy Homeostasis
The gastrointestinal tract is an important organ that has different 
functions, such as nutritional, absorptive, and homeostatic. The 
small intestine has numerous enzymes that mediate nutritional 
and digestive processes (21), being in the intestine the small seg-
ment where the most of the absorptive and digestive activities 
take place (21). Reabsorption of water, degradation of dietary 
fiber, and vitamins’ uptake occur mainly in the large intestine 
(21). The gastrointestinal tract has its own microbiome. Gut 
microorganisms are important for both homeostasis and car-
bohydrate metabolism in human host (9). Around 10% of host’s 
caloric intake has a bacterial origin (20). Gastrointestinal micro-
biome can be directly influenced by our habitual food (46), being 
diet a complex environmental factor that plays an important role 
shaping gut microbiota (46). Apparently, host’s feeding behavior 
rhythms have an impact in the gut bacterial distribution (19), 
being host’s circadian rhythm alterations able to trigger a change 
in the quantity of intestinal microorganism that normally pre-
dominates during the diurnal period (19). Complex molecules 
such as polysaccharides are metabolized for bacteria that inhabit 
the gastrointestinal tract (9), working altogether as a metabolic 
organ in the human body (9). Moreover, gut microbiota makes 
these polymeric carbohydrate molecules an energy source for 
the host (9). Intestinal bacteria are involved in the metabolism of 
macronutrients and the metabolites produced for these microor-
ganisms are able to modulate epigenetic changes in the host (46). 
A diet, including a high amount of fiber, polyphenols (Table 1)—
present in green tea, nuts, and fruits (46)—and omega-3 fatty 
acids—available in fish oil (46)—has been linked with bacterial 
changes—e.g., a rise in the number of both Lactobacillus and 
Bifidobacteria (46)—at the gastrointestinal level (46). Gut 
microbiota—including microorganism, such as Clostridium coc-
coides, Actinobacteria, Roseburia, Bifidobacteria, Lactobacillus, 
Escherichia coli, Peptostreptococcus, B. thetaiotaomicron, and 
Enterococcus faecalis (46)—is associated with the metabolism of 
these dietary components (46). Interestingly, alterations at the 
level of the gut bacterial population’s growth have been linked 
with the presence of a disrupted metabolic control (19). It has 
been suggested that the intestinal microorganisms could regulate 
their own homeostatic control of energy balance by using their 
host’s energy homeostasis mechanisms (19). An increment or 
reduction in the number of gut bacteria could induce a feeling of 
lack of food or satiety in the host (19).
The CNS has a pivotal role in the homeostatic regulation of 
energy balance (35, 47). Different chemical and neuronal signals 
from peripheral organs are involved in the energy homeostasis 
process (32, 35, 47). In the brain, the hypothalamus plays an 
important role regulating body metabolism (32, 35, 47). This 
brain region is involved in the control of body weight, food 
intake, and thermoregulation (47). Both peripheral hormones, 
such as insulin and leptin, and numerous nutrients modulate—
via hypothalamus—the control of energy homeostasis (48). 
Leptin and insulin are implicated in the CNS in the food reward 
system (48). Also, there are pieces of evidence about the expres-
sion of receptors for leptin and insulin in diverse brain areas (48), 
including a complex system in the CNS for energy regulation 
(48). The initial contact with consumed food takes place in the 
gastrointestinal tract (35), being the GB axis fundamental to pre-
serve—as product of neuroendocrine communication (35)—the 
balance between energy intake and energy expenditure in the 
body (35). Apparently, the homeostasis of gut microorganisms 
plays an important role in the energy homeostasis of the host 
(19), being appetite control a fundamental mechanism for 
host–bacteria homeostasis (19). The integration of this micro-
biota–host communications appears to be via gastrointestinal 
tract-hypothalamus (19).
 7
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
In general, neuronal population from the ARC and the PVN 
is important regulating energy homeostasis (47). Both orexigenic 
and anorexigenic cells (Table 1) are present in the ARC (47). 
Agouti-related protein (AgRP) and neuropeptide Y (NPY) are 
expressed for the first kind of neurons (47), while anorexigenic 
nerve cells express proopiomelanocortin (POMC) (47). In the 
brain, orexigenic and anorexigenic neurons have projections to 
both hypothalamic—lateral hypothalamus, PVN, ventromedial 
nucleus, and dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus—and extra-
hypothalamic areas (32). An increased need for food has been 
associated with AgRP—by melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) 
related action—and NPY—by NPY receptor linked activity—(32). 
Both POMC and NPY neurons are known as main sites of expres-
sion of leptin receptors (49). Leptin, which body concentration is 
depended of adipose tissue grade (50), is a hormone with implica-
tions in both body weight and metabolism (50). Leptin has a satiety 
factor function through inhibition of both AgRP and NPY cells and 
activation of POMC neurons (32). In the case of POMC cells, it 
has been proposed that the effect of leptin on this kind of neurons 
occurs in the ARC (49, 50), where the frequency of action poten-
tials is increased by leptin (49). As mechanism for this action, 
it has been proposed that leptin induces both depolarization of 
POMC nerve cells and decrement of gamma-aminobutyric acid 
release onto POMC cells (49). Also, the peptide hormone known 
as α-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH), an agonist of the 
MC4R (32), is produced by POMC neurons from the ARC (47). 
The NTS and the vagal system are involved increasing appetite 
by ghrelin action (32). Ghrelin activates orexigenic neurons and 
suppresses anorexigenic cells (32). In general, gut microbiota play 
an important role in human energy homeostasis.
THe GUT MiCROBiOMe AND 
NeURODeveLOPMeNT
Our bacterial composition, this one that we have during our 
adult life, starts to be acquired during our early life (42), being 
the mother the main element defining the characteristics of the 
infant’s microbiome (30). Normally, the gut is firstly exposed 
to microbes at birth (7). Apparently, human’s first bacteria 
come from mother’s vagina and excrement (4). There is some 
evidence to suggest that the placenta has a microbiome (51, 
52). Data from metagenomic information indicate the pres-
ence of an indigenous microbiota in human placenta (51, 52). 
Since bacteria—such as E. coli, Staphylococcus epidermidis and 
E. faecalis (53)—have been isolated from meconium (Table 1) 
from healthy newborns (53), it is believed that there is an 
intrauterine contact between healthy fetus and microorganisms 
(53). Also, it is believed that there is a fetus–maternal–bacteria 
interaction (52), since it has been noted a bacterial presence 
in the amniotic fluid, from mothers, and meconium, from 
neonates, both without antibiotic contact (52). However, 
with little scientific experiences, very few data available and 
discussible methodologies, caution must be applied, and the 
question about a possible prenatal human microbiome is still 
open. In general, the physiological gut composition is not 
clear (30), but it is known that the gastrointestinal bacterial 
composition is different during childhood and adulthood (30). 
 
It is important to note that E. coli is one of the first microorgan-
isms that inhabit the infant gut (30).
A link between microbiome composition and neurodevelop-
ment has been proposed (16, 38), where functional changes 
in different brain regions (e.g., hypothalamus, amygdala, hip-
pocampus, and striatum) are present (16). Microorganisms 
could influence neurodevelopment (16, 31). Development of 
the enteric nervous system (ENS)—which have EGCs as main 
component (44)—is regulated by gastrointestinal microorgan-
isms (38). EGCs are important transmitting signals related to the 
ENS (44). Gut microbiome composition has been associated with 
neuronal connectivity development (16). Also, bacteria seem to 
be associated with the quality of neuronal circuitries during the 
postnatal life (28). It has been discussed that alterations of the 
gut microbiome, during the prenatal and the postnatal period 
(10), may affect the normal neurodevelopment (10). It has been 
hypothesized that neurodevelopment could be mediated by host–
microorganisms via MGB axis (42). Since molecules involved in 
the neural development such as neurotrophic factors, including 
BDNF (54), have been related with the MGB and HPA axis (16), 
and they are susceptible of modulation via epigenetic regulation 
(54), microbiome alterations could influence strongly on the 
neurodevelopment. This epigenetic regulation may be result of 
gut microbiota-host chemical communication (55), where bacte-
rial bioactive metabolites—e.g., butyrate (55)— and signaling 
molecules—e.g., peptides and endotoxins (55)—make possible 
this communication (55). Moreover, brain development may be 
modulated by the MGB axis involving the participation of the 
neuro-endocrino-immunological system (43).
Recently, an association between a disrupted microbiome and 
abnormal neurodevelopment has been noted (56). Germ-free 
(GF) mice (Table 1)—which are animals with a microbiota deficit 
from birth (56), being a helpful tool to study microbiome–brain 
interactions (56)—have showed neuroanatomical changes in 
brain areas, such as amygdala and hippocampus, during the late 
adolescent/early adulthood period (56). These changes included 
neuronal morphological aberrations, such as basilar dendrites 
with thin spines (56), hypertrophy of aspiny interneurons from 
the basolateral complex (BLA) (56), pyramidal neurons with 
long dendrites (56), short pyramidal neurons in the ventral hip-
pocampus (56), and reduction of stubby spines of the hippocam-
pal pyramidal neurons (56). Also, it has been proposed that gut 
bacteria have an important impact in early neurodevelopment 
(42), with the participation of both microglia and endocrine 
molecules as modulator factor (42) and emotional stress and/or 
antibiotics—for example—as risk factors (42). Published in 2004, 
results from experiments from a developmental model using GF 
mice have reported that alterations at the level of early postnatal 
microbiota affect both the HPA axis and the limbic system (39), 
including both elevated level of plasma adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone and corticosterone after stress exposition and reduced level 
of BDNF in brain regions, such as hippocampus and cortex (39). 
All these data where observed when GF mice were compared with 
mice having a specific microbiota (39), suggesting an important 
neurodevelopmental role for indigenous microbiota regulating 
HPA axis (39). In general, in the human life cycle, there are pre-
natal and postnatal environmental factors that play an important 
 8
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
role defining the characteristics of each microbiome (6, 31), and 
during the different host life cycles have been observed microbiota 
age-related changes that could be determined by microbiota’s 
genes (6).
Evidence suggests that there is an important role played by gut 
microbiome in human brain development. However, the whole 
association between the MGB and human neurodevelopment is 
still unknown.
THe GUT MiCROBiOMe AND THe 
DePReSSive SYNDROMe, FROM A 
NeURODeveLOPMeNTAL PeRSPeCTive
Human intestine formation is concluded around the 12th week 
of intrauterine life (57). Early during the prenatal period begins 
the formation of the MGB axis (57, 58). Main cells of the ENS 
are product of the migration of neural crest cells (57). Neural 
crest cells can be observed in the early gastrointestinal organ 
around 7–12 weeks of gestation (57). It is important to note that 
the interstitial cells of Cajal have a different origin (57), being of 
mesenchymal basis (57). It has been reported that neurons such 
as 5-HT enteric cells are born early during the intrauterine life 
(58). In general, 5-HT is an important neurotransmitter in the 
MGB axis (45). This molecule is susceptible of modulation via 
gut bacteria (45). Together with 5-HT, molecules such as TLRs 
and short chain fatty acids have been proposed as participants 
in the GB axis’ function that show a strong link to gut micro-
biota composition (43). In the newborn, during the first weeks 
of extrauterine life (58), there is a strong functional connection 
between both enteric neuronal cells and glial cells (58), being a 
critical period for alterations induced by environmental factors 
(58). Expression and activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase 
RET seem fundamental for ENS development (58). During the 
early development the immune system and its molecules—e.g., 
cytokines (58)—and cells—e.g., macrophages (58)—play an 
important role modulating the formation of neuronal circuits 
at the gastrointestinal level (58). During the neonatal period, a 
positive modulation of the immune system has been associated 
with breastfeeding (59). It seems that the basis of the MGB axis 
and its link with the neurodevelopment is by modulation of cells 
and molecules that integrate the neuroendocrine-immunological 
system (43).
It has been suggested that the presence of a neuropsychiatric 
disorder is frequently associated with the existence of a gastro-
intestinal illness (16, 31). Also, gastrointestinal diseases have 
been linked with gut microbiome dysbiosis (60). Early life stress 
such as neonatal maternal separation has been connected with 
intestinal dysfunction (61). A characteristic gut microbiota in 
depression has been reported in humans (62, 63), including both 
high level of Bacteroidales and low Lachnospiraceae composition 
in a first study (62), and both an increased Alistipes population 
and Enterobacteriaceae level and low grade of Faecalibacterium 
in a second one (63) in depression (62, 63). Interestingly, it has 
been noted that Faecalibacterium has a protective effect for 
neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression (63). In general, 
this information suggests a relation between the gastrointestinal 
system and the nervous system, with a strong communication at 
the level of the MGB axis.
The development of our MGB axis begins early in life, includ-
ing a complex neuroendocrine-immunological modulation. It 
seems that stress factors, such as emotional stress and gut micro-
biota alterations, play an important role modulating the risk for 
diseases such as depression.
The Neurodevelopmental Theory  
of Depression: An Overview
Neurodevelopment is an important process to understand the 
depressive syndrome. It is a dynamic process with a long trajec-
tory (64), from gestation to adulthood (64). The neurodevelop-
mental theory of the depressive syndrome has been reviewed 
recently elsewhere (65). Each human brain region has its matu-
ration time period (65), being the most relevant morphological 
modifications during the prenatal period, childhood, and early 
adolescence (65). The beginning of the human neurodevelop-
ment is around the third and fourth week of intrauterine life 
(66, 67) with the neurulation as first event (66–68). It has been 
reported that the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is one of the final 
brain regions to mature (69).
It has been noted that the depressive syndrome and both 
structural and functional abnormalities at the level of the limbic 
system, which are associated with the disease, are product of 
early neurodevelopmental alterations (65). Risk factors, such as 
altered fetal period (70), maternal malnutrition (71), maternal 
stress (71), child abuse (72), and malnutrition (73, 74), are able to 
trigger these early neurodevelopment disruptions (65). A multi-
genetic susceptibility for depression (75) can be modulated by 
one or more of these risk factors (76). Also, gene expression is 
susceptible of alterations by epigenetic mechanisms (77) such 
as DNA methylation (78–80). As consequence of these genetic 
dysfunctions both endocrinological alterations—e.g., HPA 
axis changes (81) and leptin alterations (65)—and immuno-
logical aberrations—e.g., elevated immune activity (82, 83)—are 
responsible for the disorder observed at the level of monoamines 
in depression—e.g., noradrenergic and serotonergic neurotrans-
mission alterations (65, 84), being a BDNF modulation suggested 
as link between the endocrino-immunological alterations and the 
depressive phenotype (65).
In general, the neurodevelopmental theory of depression points 
out that very early and early stress factors in life are able to trigger 
the depressive phenotype later in life (65), which is accompanied 
by signs and symptoms, such as hippocampal (85) and amygdala 
atrophy (86), emotional and behavioral changes (87–90), and 
minor physical anomalies (Table 1) (91). Since microbiota has the 
potential to influence the brain during the development (92) and 
changes at the level of indigenous gut bacteria could be produced 
by stress (92), it has been noted that the MGB axis could be linked 
to the pathophysiology of depression.
The Microbiome–Gut–Brain Axis and the 
etiology of the Depressive Syndrome
The evidence presented above suggests that both the com-
munication of the MGB axis and the bacterial modulation of 
 9
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
the neurodevelopment involve three different systems that at 
the same time are strongly linked: the neurological system, the 
endocrine system, and the immune system. But, where could 
be the association between the MGB axis and the etiology of 
the depressive syndrome? There is, in the neurodevelopment! 
For example, very early exposition to valproic acid during the 
intrauterine life has been linked to both indigenous microbial 
alterations and behavioral changes later in life (93). Also, it has 
been demonstrated that early bacterial composition modulates 
neurodevelopment (94), including changes at the level of genetic 
expression of genes associated with brain function (94). This 
early neurodevelopmental modulation has the effect to influence 
adult behavior later in life (94). Moreover, it has been proposed, 
after hippocampal experimental results (95), that limbic system’s 
neurogenesis can be modulated by indigenous microbiota (95).
In the bidirectionality of the MGB axis, both gastrointestinal 
and neuropsychiatric pathological entities could be both origin and 
consequence of stress modulation (96). Stress factors during critical 
periods in the neurodevelopment—such as prenatal, postnatal/early 
childhood, and adolescence (65)—seem to be enough to develop 
the depressive phenotype (65). Since gastrointestinal bacteria have 
a strong communication with the brain via the MGB axis (96), gut 
microbiome alterations can be ideal etiological factors related to 
depression. As it is exposed above, it is not clear if there is a host–
bacterial communication in the intrauterine life. If we consider the 
results published from a Spanish research group that suggest that the 
meconium from healthy neonates is not a sterile stool (53), being 
inhabit for bacteria such as Enterococcus and Staphylococcus (53), 
the GB communication could include the direct participation of 
bacteria, integrating a very early MGB axis in humans. Microglia 
are present early in the development (97). Microglia together with 
cytokines have a neuro-immune function in the early development 
(97, 98), being involved in the process of neuronal cytoarchitectural 
configuration (97, 98). If scientific results from studies in vivo 
suggest that very early immune activation has been linked with 
depressive symptoms later in life (99) and that gut bacteria can have 
an influence in early neurodevelopment via immune–endocrine 
communication (42), it could be possible to think that very early 
environmental stress factors associated with the etiology of depres-
sion modulate the risk to develop depression later in life via GB axis. 
Both microbiome alterations and MGB axis dysfunction have been 
linked to changes at the level of the HPA axis (100). Also, a normal 
HPA axis development requires an adequate gut indigenous bacteria 
composition early in life (43). The human development, including 
the neurodevelopment, is joined by systemic inflammation or 
inflamm-aging (Table 1) (101), which is part of a dysfunction of the 
immune system or immunosenescence (Table 1) (101). Apparently, 
there is an association between this systemic inflammation and the 
MGB axis (101), where stress is a risk factor for molecular, cellular, 
and behavioral alterations (101), including HPA axis dysfunction 
(101). Data from clinical reports suggest an association between 
the MGB axis and depression (102, 103), it has been reported that 
subjects with depression have elevated levels of IgA and IgM and the 
presence of gastrointestinal symptoms (102, 103). Animal studies 
have found that chronic gastrointestinal inflammation is linked to 
altered hippocampal neurogenesis (104). Also, a chronic elevated 
level of Il-6 was reported (104).
It has been established that a diet rich in fast-food, such as 
pizza, hamburgers, and donuts, has been connected to depres-
sion (105), increasing the risk for this syndrome (105). A diet, 
including fish and enough vegetables and fruits, can be a pro-
tective factor for depression (106), maybe because this kind of 
diet has an anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory impact (106). 
Also, the inclusion of probiotics could have a positive effect for 
depressive patients (107), being suggested an anti-inflammatory 
and anti-oxidative effect induced by probiotics (107). Moreover, 
probiotics could have the potential to modulate growth factors 
(107), including the increment of BDNF levels (107).
CONCLUSiON
The evidence presented above suggests that the link between 
the MGB axis, the neuroendocrine–immune system—including 
energy homeostasis mechanisms—and the neurodevelopment 
is strong. Human neurodevelopment is a dynamic and long 
process that begins very early, during the intrauterine life, and 
continues during years, into the adulthood. These characteristics 
of the nervous system’s development—both its chronicity and 
dynamisms—make this process susceptible for alterations. 
Moreover, the origin of the GB axis takes place early during the 
prenatal period, directly after the beginning of the neurodevel-
opment. The GB bidirectional connection is present early in 
development, playing this network a key role modulating the 
formation of the brain. Numerous peripheral neurochemical 
signals together with intestinal microorganisms—which are 
host’s energy homeostasis elements—and a vagal communica-
tion are active regulator of both metabolism and immunity, 
mainly via the limbic system. Since the gastrointestinal tract has 
the first contact with diet elements—including the very early 
consumption of elements from mother’s vagina and excrement 
at birth—and diet is an important element defining human’s 
bacterial composition, then the interaction of host–bacteria via 
MGB axis is important regulating the neurodevelopment. The 
immune system regulates gastrointestinal bacterial composi-
tion. Very early nervous formation in the gastrointestinal tract 
is modulated for both immune cells and molecules. The origin 
of a depressive syndrome could be possible only in a disrupted 
brain. Apparently, the MGB axis plays an important role in the 
pathophysiology of depression. Gut microbiome modulation by 
environmental stress factors seems to contribute, together with 
genetic risk factors, to the development of this illness. Probably, 
these risk factors, which are potentialized by the combination 
of one or more other risk factors, induce a neuroendocrine–
immune dysfunction that is the basis of the alterations observed 
in depressed subjects. The strong communication between 
the gastrointestinal system and the brain via the GB axis is 
present very early in the human development. This axis has a 
characteristic bidirectionality that seems to be attractive as 
antidepressant therapeutic target, being drugs that are able to 
induce changes at the inflammatory cascade proposed as anti-
depressants. Also, it has been recognized that gut microbiota 
play an important role in inflammation. Since gut bacteria 
have an important effect at the level of the GB axis and they are 
involved in both inflammatory and anti-inflammatory human 
 10
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
functions, microbiota modulation by diet, probiotics, and drugs 
has been proposed recently as treatment strategy to improve the 
symptoms associated with the depressive syndrome. Antibiotics 
are environmental factors in the industrialized countries that 
induce important microbiota changes (108). However, interest-
ing data have suggested that antibiotics such as minocycline 
have psycho-modulator effects (109), including antipsychotic 
and antidepressant functions (109). Apparently, these effects are 
associated with the anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative, neuro-
modulator, and neuroprotective actions induced by minocycline 
(109). By an international systematic review and meta-analysis, 
it has been reported that anti-inflammatory drugs improve 
depressive symptoms (110). Interestingly, it has been reported 
that drugs, such as mood stabilizers, antipsychotics, and anti-
depressants, have anti-inflammatory effects (109). Moreover, an 
improvement of the pathways associated with the inflammatory 
cascades has been proposed as drug target in the treatment 
of depressed patients (111). Also, as results from different 
host–microbiota studies both innovative drug targets and new 
therapeutic strategies have been proposed with the objective of 
manipulate the human microbiome. These include: intestinal 
oxygen as therapeutic target (21), direct manipulation of human 
microbiota by fecal microbiota transplantation (21), alteration 
of microbiota products by diet (21), and improvement of drugs’ 
metabolism by microbiota’s modification (21).
Hippocrates of Kos, who lived around the fourth century 
BC (112), pointed out that diet plays an important role in 
the mental health (112). Hippocrates expressed this idea by 
his maxim: “Let food be thy medicine, and medicine be thy 
food” (112). Interestingly, this maxim is still being in our time 
of actuality. Individual lifestyles influence gut microbiota 
 
(5, 113), being our personal diet—e.g., a diet including food 
of plant and/or animal origin (113)—an important element 
to shape our own microbiome (5, 113). It has been noted that, 
during the extrauterine life, there are numerous transformations 
at the level of the gastrointestinal bacterial composition (96). 
Apparently, our diet has influenced the genome and the micro-
biome (5). Moreover, a better knowledge of our microbiome and 
how to modulate it could be helpful to improve existing medical 
strategies (9). Since the above evidence suggests that our early 
diet has a strong influence in our gut microbiome composition 
and in the susceptibility to develop different disorders, dietary 
practices such as breastfeeding during the first months of life, 
which improve our indigenous gastrointestinal bacteria and 
reduce the risk to develop future illness (114), should be intensely 
promoted. During the development, delivery mode plays an 
important role defining the characteristics of human microbiota 
(115, 116), being important differences in the acquired micro-
biota from vaginal delivered neonates compared to C-section 
delivered newborns (115, 116). Since early microbiota changes 
have been associated with the development of neurological 
alterations later in life, it could be possible that, in case of an 
elective delivery mode, a vaginal delivery should be strongly 
suggested to our patients, with the objective to reduce—since a 
neurobiological perspective—the risk for depression in the new-
born. This is especially important if we consider that the delivery 
mode modulates gut microbiota composition particularly during 
the first 3 days of extrauterine life (116), an important period in 
human neurodevelopment.
A better perception of the significance of the MGB axis in the 
etiology of depression will help us to obtain a better understand-
ing about the pathophysiology of this syndrome. Also, it opens 
the possibility to offer better treatment strategies to our patients. 
This will be possible only if we accomplish to decipher the genetic, 
anatomical, functional, and behavioral characteristics of the 
human microbiota. The most important limitation in the area 
of the MGB axis’ research lies in the fact that there is very little 
knowledge about the gut microbiome. There is necessary more 
scientific research that helps us to understand the relationship 
between the different microorganisms that inhabit the gastroin-
testinal tract. With the objective to understand the role played 
by microbiome in both human health and human disease, there 
are born different research consortiums around the world such 
as the “International Human Microbiome Consortium”1 (117), 
the Irish “Eldermet Project”2 (118), the German Verbund OptiMD 
im Forschungsnetz für psychische Erkrankungen or “OptiMD 
Consortium”3 (119), the international project “Metagenomics of 
the Human Intestinal Tract” or “MetaHIT Project”4 (120), and the 
American “NIH Human Microbiome Project”5 (121). In general, 
current scientific information is not able to explain the entire 
physiology of the MGB axis (122). Recently, it has increased the 
scientific research trying to elucidate the effects of gut microor-
ganism in human behavior (122), including the link between both 
the vagal system and the neuroendocrine–immune system in 
brain function (122). There is still a wide scientific gap about the 
role played for the MGB axis in the etiology of different disorders, 
including neuropsychiatric illness. It is important to mention that 
the most of the scientific information about the MGB axis are 
product of animal research, being necessary the development of 
more human research to understand the host–microbiome inter-
action. However, it is evident that there is a strong host–micro-
biome connection, where environmental factors are important 
modulators of host’s gut microbiota. Apparently, our habits are 
able to modulate the MGB axis. Thus, an appropriate diet is of 
central importance for both a suitable neurodevelopment and an 
adequate mental health.
AUTHOR CONTRiBUTiONS
JL-O, RR, and TB contributed equally to this work.
FUNDiNG
This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research (Bundesministerium für Bildung 
und Forschung, BMBF), Research Grant No. 01EE1401B to RR 
 
and TB.
1 http://www.human-microbiome.org/.
2 http://eldermet.ucc.ie/.
3 http://www.optimd.de/.
4 http://www.metahit.eu/.
5 http://www.hmpdacc.org.
 11
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
ReFeReNCeS
1. Ortega y Gasset J. Meditaciones del Quijote. Ideas sobre la novela. 3rd ed. 
Madrid: Espasa-Calpe (1976).
2. Alkema W, Boekhorst J, Wels M, van Hijum SA. Microbial bioinformatics 
for food safety and production. Brief Bioinform (2016) 17(2):283–92. 
doi:10.1093/bib/bbv034 
3. Benezra A, DeStefano J, Gordon JI. Anthropology of microbes. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A (2012) 109(17):6378–81. doi:10.1073/pnas.1200515109 
4. Ley RE, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. Ecological and evolutionary forces shaping 
microbial diversity in the human intestine. Cell (2006) 124(4):837–48. 
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.017 
5. Ley RE, Lozupone CA, Hamady M, Knight R, Gordon JI. Worlds within 
worlds: evolution of the vertebrate gut microbiota. Nat Rev Microbiol (2008) 
6(10):776–88. doi:10.1038/nrmicro1978 
6. Cho I, Blaser MJ. The human microbiome: at the interface of health and 
disease. Nat Rev Genet (2012) 13(4):260–70. doi:10.1038/nrg3182 
7. Savage DC. Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract. Annu Rev 
Microbiol (1977) 31:107–33. doi:10.1146/annurev.mi.31.100177.000543 
8. Blaser MJ, Falkow S. What are the consequences of the disappearing 
human microbiota? Nat Rev Microbiol (2009) 7(12):887–94. doi:10.1038/
nrmicro2245 
9. Pacheco AR, Sperandio V. Enteric pathogens exploit the microbiota-gen-
erated nutritional environment of the gut. Microbiol Spectr (2015) 3(3). 
doi:10.1128/microbiolspec.MBP-0001-2014 
10. Rogers GB, Keating DJ, Young RL, Wong ML, Licinio J, Wesselingh S. 
From gut dysbiosis to altered brain function and mental illness: mech-
anisms and pathways. Mol Psychiatry (2016) 21(6):738–48. doi:10.1038/
mp.2016.50 
11. Collins SM, Bercik P. The relationship between intestinal microbiota and 
the central nervous system in normal gastrointestinal function and disease. 
Gastroenterology (2009) 136(6):2003–14. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2009.01.075 
12. Sharon G, Sampson TR, Geschwind DH, Mazmanian SK. The central nervous 
system and the gut microbiome. Cell (2016) 167(4):915–32. doi:10.1016/j.
cell.2016.10.027 
13. Hooper LV, Gordon JI. Commensal host-bacterial relationships in the gut. 
Science (2001) 292(5519):1115–8. doi:10.1126/science.1058709 
14. Pflughoeft KJ, Versalovic J. Human microbiome in health and disease. Annu 
Rev Pathol (2012) 7:99–122. doi:10.1146/annurev-pathol-011811-132421 
15. Backhed F, Ley RE, Sonnenburg JL, Peterson DA, Gordon JI. Host-bacterial 
mutualism in the human intestine. Science (2005) 307(5717):1915–20. 
doi:10.1126/science.1104816 
16. Collins SM, Surette M, Bercik P. The interplay between the intestinal micro-
biota and the brain. Nat Rev Microbiol (2012) 10(11):735–42. doi:10.1038/
nrmicro2876 
17. Qin J, Li R, Raes J, Arumugam M, Burgdorf KS, Manichanh C, et al.  
A human gut microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic 
sequencing. Nature (2010) 464(7285):59–65. doi:10.1038/nature08821 
18. Jandhyala SM, Talukdar R, Subramanyam C, Vuyyuru H, Sasikala M, 
Nageshwar Reddy D. Role of the normal gut microbiota. World J Gastroenterol 
(2015) 21(29):8787–803. doi:10.3748/wjg.v21.i29.8787 
19. Fetissov SO. Role of the gut microbiota in host appetite control: bacterial 
growth to animal feeding behaviour. Nat Rev Endocrinol (2017) 13(1):11–25. 
doi:10.1038/nrendo.2016.150 
20. Elson CO, Alexander KL. Host-microbiota interactions in the intestine. Dig 
Dis (2015) 33(2):131–6. doi:10.1159/000369534 
21. Wlodarska M, Kostic AD, Xavier RJ. An integrative view of microbiome-host 
interactions in inflammatory bowel diseases. Cell Host Microbe (2015) 
17(5):577–91. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2015.04.008 
22. Jacka FN. Nutritional psychiatry: where to next? EBioMedicine (2017) 
17:24–9. doi:10.1016/j.ebiom.2017.02.020 
23. Freter R, Brickner H, Botney M, Cleven D, Aranki A. Mechanisms that 
control bacterial populations in continuous-flow culture models of mouse 
large intestinal flora. Infect Immun (1983) 39(2):676–85. 
24. Gesch CB, Hammond SM, Hampson SE, Eves A, Crowder MJ. Influence of 
supplementary vitamins, minerals and essential fatty acids on the antisocial 
behaviour of young adult prisoners. Randomised, placebo-controlled trial. 
 
Br J Psychiatry (2002) 181:22–8. doi:10.1192/bjp.181.1.22 
25. Cenit MC, Matzaraki V, Tigchelaar EF, Zhernakova A. Rapidly expanding 
knowledge on the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease. Biochim 
Biophys Acta (2014) 1842(10):1981–92. doi:10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.05.023 
26. Tremlett H, Bauer KC, Appel-Cresswell S, Finlay BB, Waubant E. The gut 
microbiome in human neurological disease: a review. Ann Neurol (2017) 
81:369–82. doi:10.1002/ana.24901 
27. Colpitts SL, Kasper LH. Influence of the gut microbiome on autoimmunity in 
the central nervous system. J Immunol (2017) 198(2):596–604. doi:10.4049/
jimmunol.1601438 
28. Tognini P. Gut microbiota: a potential regulator of neurodevelopment. Front 
Cell Neurosci (2017) 11:25. doi:10.3389/fncel.2017.00025 
29. Eckburg PB, Bik EM, Bernstein CN, Purdom E, Dethlefsen L, 
 
Sargent M, et al. Diversity of the human intestinal microbial flora. Science 
(2005) 308(5728):1635–8. doi:10.1126/science.1110591 
30. Matamoros S, Gras-Leguen C, Le Vacon F, Potel G, de La Cochetiere 
MF. Development of intestinal microbiota in infants and its impact on 
health. Trends Microbiol (2013) 21(4):167–73. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2012. 
12.001 
31. Aroniadis OC, Drossman DA, Simren M. A perspective on brain-gut 
communication: the American Gastroenterology Association and American 
Psychosomatic Society joint symposium on brain-gut interactions and 
the intestinal microenvironment. Psychosom Med (2017). doi:10.1097/
PSY.0000000000000431 
32. Ueno H, Nakazato M. Mechanistic relationship between the vagal afferent 
pathway, central nervous system and peripheral organs in appetite regula-
tion. J Diabetes Investig (2016) 7(6):812–8. doi:10.1111/jdi.12492 
33. Berthoud HR. The vagus nerve, food intake and obesity. Regul Pept (2008) 
149(1–3):15–25. doi:10.1016/j.regpep.2007.08.024 
34. Berthoud HR, Neuhuber WL. Functional and chemical anatomy of the 
afferent vagal system. Auton Neurosci (2000) 85(1–3):1–17. doi:10.1016/
S1566-0702(00)00215-0 
35. Bauer PV, Hamr SC, Duca FA. Regulation of energy balance by a gut-
brain axis and involvement of the gut microbiota. Cell Mol Life Sci (2016) 
73(4):737–55. doi:10.1007/s00018-015-2083-z 
36. Chronwall BM. Anatomy and physiology of the neuroendocrine arcuate 
nucleus. Peptides (1985) 6(Suppl 2):1–11. doi:10.1016/0196-9781(85) 
90128-7 
37. Vuong HE, Yano JM, Fung TC, Hsiao EY. The microbiome and host 
behavior. Annu Rev Neurosci (2017) 40:21–49. doi:10.1146/annurev-neuro- 
072116-031347 
38. Mu C, Yang Y, Zhu W. Gut microbiota: the brain peacekeeper. Front Microbiol 
(2016) 7:345. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2016.00345 
39. Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, Sonoda J, Oyama N, Yu XN, et al. Postnatal 
microbial colonization programs the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system 
for stress response in mice. J Physiol (2004) 558(Pt 1):263–75. doi:10.1113/
jphysiol.2004.063388 
40. Borrelli L, Aceto S, Agnisola C, De Paolo S, Dipineto L, Stilling RM, et al. 
Probiotic modulation of the microbiota-gut-brain axis and behaviour in 
zebrafish. Sci Rep (2016) 6:30046. doi:10.1038/srep30046 
41. McDermott AJ, Huffnagle GB. The microbiome and regulation of mucosal 
immunity. Immunology (2014) 142(1):24–31. doi:10.1111/imm.12231 
42. Rea K, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. The microbiome: a key regulator of stress 
and neuroinflammation. Neurobiol Stress (2016) 4:23–33. doi:10.1016/j.
ynstr.2016.03.001 
43. Kelly JR, Kennedy PJ, Cryan JF, Dinan TG, Clarke G, Hyland NP. Breaking 
down the barriers: the gut microbiome, intestinal permeability and stress-re-
lated psychiatric disorders. Front Cell Neurosci (2015) 9:392. doi:10.3389/
fncel.2015.00392 
44. Yu YB, Li YQ. Enteric glial cells and their role in the intestinal epithelial 
barrier. World J Gastroenterol (2014) 20(32):11273–80. doi:10.3748/wjg.v20.
i32.11273 
45. O’Mahony SM, Clarke G, Borre YE, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Serotonin, tryp-
tophan metabolism and the brain-gut-microbiome axis. Behav Brain Res 
(2015) 277:32–48. doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.027 
46. Hullar MA, Fu BC. Diet, the gut microbiome, and epigenetics. Cancer J 
(2014) 20(3):170–5. doi:10.1097/PPO.0000000000000053 
47. Roh E, Kim MS. Brain regulation of energy metabolism. Endocrinol Metab 
(2016) 31(4):519–24. doi:10.3803/EnM.2016.31.4.519 
 12
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
48. Konner AC, Klockener T, Bruning JC. Control of energy homeostasis by 
insulin and leptin: targeting the arcuate nucleus and beyond. Physiol Behav 
(2009) 97(5):632–8. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.03.027 
49. Cowley MA, Smart JL, Rubinstein M, Cerdan MG, Diano S, Horvath TL, 
et al. Leptin activates anorexigenic POMC neurons through a neural net-
work in the arcuate nucleus. Nature (2001) 411(6836):480–4. doi:10.1038/ 
35078085 
50. Cheung CC, Clifton DK, Steiner RA. Proopiomelanocortin neurons 
are direct targets for leptin in the hypothalamus. Endocrinology (1997) 
138(10):4489–92. doi:10.1210/endo.138.10.5570 
51. Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, Ganu R, Petrosino J, Versalovic J. The pla-
centa harbors a unique microbiome. Sci Transl Med (2014) 6(237):237ra65. 
doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3008599 
52. Collado MC, Rautava S, Aakko J, Isolauri E, Salminen S. Human gut 
colonisation may be initiated in utero by distinct microbial communities 
in the placenta and amniotic fluid. Sci Rep (2016) 6:23129. doi:10.1038/ 
srep23129 
53. Jimenez E, Marin ML, Martin R, Odriozola JM, Olivares M, Xaus J, et al. 
Is meconium from healthy newborns actually sterile? Res Microbiol (2008) 
159(3):187–93. doi:10.1016/j.resmic.2007.12.007 
54. Park H, Poo MM. Neurotrophin regulation of neural circuit development 
and function. Nat Rev Neurosci (2013) 14(1):7–23. doi:10.1038/nrn3379 
55. Krautkramer KA, Rey FE, Denu JM. Chemical signaling between gut micro-
biota and host chromatin: what is your gut really saying? J Biol Chem (2017) 
292:8582–93. doi:10.1074/jbc.R116.761577 
56. Luczynski P, Whelan SO, O’Sullivan C, Clarke G, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, 
et al. Adult microbiota-deficient mice have distinct dendritic morphological 
changes: differential effects in the amygdala and hippocampus. Eur J Neurosci 
(2016) 44(9):2654–66. doi:10.1111/ejn.13291 
57. Montgomery RK, Mulberg AE, Grand RJ. Development of the human 
gastrointestinal tract: twenty years of progress. Gastroenterology (1999) 
116(3):702–31. doi:10.1016/S0016-5085(99)70193-9 
58. Kabouridis PS, Pachnis V. Emerging roles of gut microbiota and the 
immune system in the development of the enteric nervous system. J Clin 
Invest (2015) 125(3):956–64. doi:10.1172/JCI76308 
59. Verhasselt V. Neonatal tolerance under breastfeeding influence: the presence 
of allergen and transforming growth factor-beta in breast milk protects 
the progeny from allergic asthma. J Pediatr (2010) 156(2 Suppl):S16–20. 
doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2009.11.015 
60. Marchesi JR, Adams DH, Fava F, Hermes GD, Hirschfield GM, Hold G, 
et al. The gut microbiota and host health: a new clinical frontier. Gut (2016) 
65(2):330–9. doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2015-309990 
61. Lennon EM, Maharshak N, Elloumi H, Borst L, Plevy SE, Moeser AJ. Early life 
stress triggers persistent colonic barrier dysfunction and exacerbates colitis 
in adult IL-10-/- mice. Inflamm Bowel Dis (2013) 19(4):712–9. doi:10.1097/
MIB.0b013e3182802a4e 
62. Naseribafrouei A, Hestad K, Avershina E, Sekelja M, Linlokken A, 
 
Wilson R, et al. Correlation between the human fecal microbiota and 
depression. Neurogastroenterol Motil (2014) 26(8):1155–62. doi:10.1111/ 
nmo.12378 
63. Jiang H, Ling Z, Zhang Y, Mao H, Ma Z, Yin Y, et al. Altered fecal microbiota 
composition in patients with major depressive disorder. Brain Behav Immun 
(2015) 48:186–94. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2015.03.016 
64. Lima-Ojeda JM. Neurodevelopment and Schizophrenia: Pharmacological and 
Behavioral Animal Models [Doctoral Thesis]. Mannheim: Ruperto Carola 
University of Heidelberg (2014).
65. Lima-Ojeda JM, Rupprecht R, Baghai TC. Neurobiology of depression: 
a neurodevelopmental approach. World J Biol Psychiatry (2017) 3:1–11. 
 
doi:10.1080/15622975.2017.1289240 
66. Semple BD, Blomgren K, Gimlin K, Ferriero DM, Noble-Haeusslein LJ. 
 
Brain development in rodents and humans: identifying benchmarks of 
maturation and vulnerability to injury across species. Prog Neurobiol (2013) 
106-107:1–16. doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.04.001 
67. Volpe JJ. Overview: normal and abnormal human brain develop-
ment. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev (2000) 6(1):1–5. doi:10.1002/
(SICI)1098-2779(2000)6:1<1:AID-MRDD1>3.0.CO;2-J 
68. Pomeroy SL, Kim JY. Biology and pathobiology of neuronal develop-
ment. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev (2000) 6(1):41–6. doi:10.1002/
(SICI)1098-2779(2000)6:1<41:AID-MRDD6>3.0.CO;2-V 
69. Casey BJ, Giedd JN, Thomas KM. Structural and functional brain devel-
opment and its relation to cognitive development. Biol Psychol (2000) 
54(1–3):241–57. doi:10.1016/S0301-0511(00)00058-2 
70. Thompson C, Syddall H, Rodin I, Osmond C, Barker DJ. Birth weight and 
the risk of depressive disorder in late life. Br J Psychiatry (2001) 179:450–5. 
doi:10.1192/bjp.179.5.450 
71. Bale TL, Baram TZ, Brown AS, Goldstein JM, Insel TR, McCarthy MM, et al. 
Early life programming and neurodevelopmental disorders. Biol Psychiatry 
(2010) 68(4):314–9. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.05.028 
72. Nanni V, Uher R, Danese A. Childhood maltreatment predicts unfavorable 
course of illness and treatment outcome in depression: a meta-analysis. Am 
J Psychiatry (2012) 169(2):141–51. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.11020335 
73. Handel AE, Ebers GC, Ramagopalan SV. Epigenetics: molecular mecha-
nisms and implications for disease. Trends Mol Med (2010) 16(1):7–16. 
doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2009.11.003 
74. Murgatroyd C, Spengler D. Epigenetics of early child development. Front 
Psychiatry (2011) 2:16. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2011.00016 
75. Levinson DF. The genetics of depression: a review. Biol Psychiatry (2006) 
60(2):84–92. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.08.024 
76. Lopizzo N, Bocchio Chiavetto L, Cattane N, Plazzotta G, Tarazi FI, 
 
Pariante CM, et al. Gene-environment interaction in major depression: focus 
on experience-dependent biological systems. Front Psychiatry (2015) 6:68. 
doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2015.00068 
77. Powell WT, LaSalle JM. Epigenetic mechanisms in diurnal cycles of 
metabolism and neurodevelopment. Hum Mol Genet (2015) 24(R1):R1–9. 
doi:10.1093/hmg/ddv234 
78. Essex MJ, Boyce WT, Hertzman C, Lam LL, Armstrong JM, 
 
Neumann SM, et al. Epigenetic vestiges of early developmental adversity: 
childhood stress exposure and DNA methylation in adolescence. Child Dev 
(2013) 84(1):58–75. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01641.x 
79. Kundakovic M, Gudsnuk K, Herbstman JB, Tang D, Perera FP, Champagne FA. 
 
DNA methylation of BDNF as a biomarker of early-life adversity. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A (2015) 112(22):6807–13. doi:10.1073/pnas.1408355111 
80. Booij L, Szyf M, Carballedo A, Frey EM, Morris D, Dymov S, et al. DNA meth-
ylation of the serotonin transporter gene in peripheral cells and stress-related 
changes in hippocampal volume: a study in depressed patients and healthy 
controls. PLoS One (2015) 10(3):e0119061. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0119061 
81. Brambilla F. Psychoneurendocrinology: a science of the past or a new path-
way for the future? Eur J Pharmacol (2000) 405(1–3):341–9. doi:10.1016/
S0014-2999(00)00564-1 
82. Dantzer R, O’Connor JC, Freund GG, Johnson RW, Kelley KW. From inflam-
mation to sickness and depression: when the immune system subjugates the 
brain. Nat Rev Neurosci (2008) 9(1):46–56. doi:10.1038/nrn2297 
83. Bilbo SD, Schwarz JM. The immune system and developmental program-
ming of brain and behavior. Front Neuroendocrinol (2012) 33(3):267–86. 
doi:10.1016/j.yfrne.2012.08.006 
84. Massart R, Mongeau R, Lanfumey L. Beyond the monoaminergic hypothesis: 
neuroplasticity and epigenetic changes in a transgenic mouse model of 
depression. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci (2012) 367(1601):2485–94. 
doi:10.1098/rstb.2012.0212 
85. Cole J, Costafreda SG, McGuffin P, Fu CH. Hippocampal atrophy in first 
episode depression: a meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging studies. 
J Affect Disord (2011) 134(1–3):483–7. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2011.05.057 
86. Hamilton JP, Siemer M, Gotlib IH. Amygdala volume in major depressive 
disorder: a meta-analysis of magnetic resonance imaging studies. Mol 
Psychiatry (2008) 13(11):993–1000. doi:10.1038/mp.2008.57 
87. Fava GA, Grandi S, Canestrari R, Molnar G. Prodromal symptoms in 
primary major depressive disorder. J Affect Disord (1990) 19(2):149–52. 
doi:10.1016/0165-0327(90)90020-9 
88. Judd LL, Akiskal HS, Paulus MP. The role and clinical significance of 
subsyndromal depressive symptoms (SSD) in unipolar major depressive 
disorder. J Affect Disord (1997) 45(1–2):5–17; discussion 17–8. doi:10.1016/
S0165-0327(97)00055-4 
89. Jackson A, Cavanagh J, Scott J. A systematic review of manic and 
depressive prodromes. J Affect Disord (2003) 74(3):209–17. doi:10.1016/
S0165-0327(02)00266-5 
90. Skjelstad DV, Malt UF, Holte A. Symptoms and signs of the initial prodrome 
of bipolar disorder: a systematic review. J Affect Disord (2010) 126(1–2):1–13. 
doi:10.1016/j.jad.2009.10.003 
 13
Lima-Ojeda et al.
Gut Microbiome, Neurodevelopment, and Depression
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org
August 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 153
91. Tenyi T, Trixler M, Csabi G. Minor physical anomalies in affective disorders. 
A review of the literature. J Affect Disord (2009) 112(1–3):11–8. doi:10.1016/j.
jad.2008.04.025 
92. Foster JA, McVey Neufeld KA. Gut-brain axis: how the microbiome influences 
anxiety and depression. Trends Neurosci (2013) 36(5):305–12. doi:10.1016/j.
tins.2013.01.005 
93. de Theije CG, Wopereis H, Ramadan M, van Eijndthoven T, Lambert J, 
 
Knol J, et al. Altered gut microbiota and activity in a murine model of autism 
spectrum disorders. Brain Behav Immun (2014) 37:197–206. doi:10.1016/j.
bbi.2013.12.005 
94. Diaz Heijtz R, Wang S, Anuar F, Qian Y, Bjorkholm B, Samuelsson A, 
et al. Normal gut microbiota modulates brain development and behavior. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011) 108(7):3047–52. doi:10.1073/pnas. 
1010529108 
95. Ogbonnaya ES, Clarke G, Shanahan F, Dinan TG, Cryan JF, O’Leary OF. 
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is regulated by the microbiome. Biol 
Psychiatry (2015) 78(4):e7–9. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.12.023 
96. Borre YE, O’Keeffe GW, Clarke G, Stanton C, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. 
Microbiota and neurodevelopmental windows: implications for brain dis-
orders. Trends Mol Med (2014) 20(9):509–18. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2014. 
05.002 
97. Bilbo SD, Frank A. Beach award: programming of neuroendocrine function 
by early-life experience: a critical role for the immune system. Horm Behav 
(2013) 63(5):684–91. doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2013.02.017 
98. Boulanger LM. Immune proteins in brain development and synaptic plas-
ticity. Neuron (2009) 64(1):93–109. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2009.09.001 
99. Khan D, Fernando P, Cicvaric A, Berger A, Pollak A, Monje FJ, et al. 
Long-term effects of maternal immune activation on depression-like 
behavior in the mouse. Transl Psychiatry (2014) 4:e363. doi:10.1038/tp. 
2013.132 
100. Moloney RD, Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. The microbi-
ome: stress, health and disease. Mamm Genome (2014) 25(1–2):49–74. 
doi:10.1007/s00335-013-9488-5 
101. Prenderville JA, Kennedy PJ, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Adding fuel to the fire: 
the impact of stress on the ageing brain. Trends Neurosci (2015) 38(1):13–25. 
doi:10.1016/j.tins.2014.11.001 
102. Maes M, Kubera M, Leunis JC, Berk M. Increased IgA and IgM responses 
against gut commensals in chronic depression: further evidence for increased 
bacterial translocation or leaky gut. J Affect Disord (2012) 141(1):55–62. 
doi:10.1016/j.jad.2012.02.023 
103. Maes M, Kubera M, Leunis JC. The gut-brain barrier in major depression: 
intestinal mucosal dysfunction with an increased translocation of LPS from 
gram negative enterobacteria (leaky gut) plays a role in the inflammatory 
pathophysiology of depression. Neuro Endocrinol Lett (2008) 29(1):117–24. 
104. Zonis S, Pechnick RN, Ljubimov VA, Mahgerefteh M, Wawrowsky K, 
 
Michelsen KS, et al. Chronic intestinal inflammation alters hippo-
campal neurogenesis. J Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:65. doi:10.1186/
s12974-015-0281-0 
105. Sanchez-Villegas A, Toledo E, de Irala J, Ruiz-Canela M, Pla-Vidal J, 
Martinez-Gonzalez MA. Fast-food and commercial baked goods consump-
tion and the risk of depression. Public Health Nutr (2012) 15(3):424–32. 
doi:10.1017/S1368980011001856 
106. Jacka FN, Cherbuin N, Anstey KJ, Butterworth P. Dietary patterns and 
depressive symptoms over time: examining the relationships with socioeco-
nomic position, health behaviours and cardiovascular risk. PLoS One (2014) 
9(1):e87657. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0087657 
107. Logan AC, Katzman M. Major depressive disorder: probiotics may be 
an adjuvant therapy. Med Hypotheses (2005) 64(3):533–8. doi:10.1016/j.
mehy.2004.08.019 
108. Costello EK, Stagaman K, Dethlefsen L, Bohannan BJ, Relman DA. The 
application of ecological theory toward an understanding of the human 
microbiome. Science (2012) 336(6086):1255–62. doi:10.1126/science. 
1224203 
109. Fond G, Hamdani N, Kapczinski F, Boukouaci W, Drancourt N, Dargel A, 
et al. Effectiveness and tolerance of anti-inflammatory drugs’ add-on therapy 
in major mental disorders: a systematic qualitative review. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand (2014) 129(3):163–79. doi:10.1111/acps.12211 
110. Rosenblat JD, Kakar R, Berk M, Kessing LV, Vinberg M, Baune BT, et al. Anti-
inflammatory agents in the treatment of bipolar depression: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Bipolar Disord (2016) 18(2):89–101. doi:10.1111/
bdi.12373 
111. Schmidt FM, Kirkby KC, Lichtblau N. Inflammation and immune regulation 
as potential drug targets in antidepressant treatment. Curr Neuropharmacol 
(2016) 14(7):674–87. doi:10.2174/1570159X14666160115130414 
112. Wegener G. ’Let food be thy medicine, and medicine be thy food’: hip-
pocrates revisited. Acta Neuropsychiatr (2014) 26(1):1–3. doi:10.1017/ 
neu.2014.3 
113. Thomas S, Izard J, Walsh E, Batich K, Chongsathidkiet P, Clarke G, et al. 
The host microbiome regulates and maintains human health: a primer and 
perspective for non-microbiologists. Cancer Res (2017) 77(8):1783–812. 
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-2929 
114. Verhasselt V. Neonatal tolerance under breastfeeding influence. Curr Opin 
Immunol (2010) 22(5):623–30. doi:10.1016/j.coi.2010.08.008 
115. Dominguez-Bello MG, Costello EK, Contreras M, Magris M, Hidalgo G, 
Fierer N, et al. Delivery mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the 
initial microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A (2010) 107(26):11971–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.1002601107 
116. Biasucci G, Rubini M, Riboni S, Morelli L, Bessi E, Retetangos C. Mode of 
delivery affects the bacterial community in the newborn gut. Early Hum Dev 
(2010) 86(Suppl 1):13–5. doi:10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2010.01.004 
117. Available from: http://www.human-microbiome.org/ [accessed on 05.30.2017].
118. Available from: http://eldermet.ucc.ie/ [accessed on 05.30.2017].
119. Available from: http://www.optimd.de/ [accessed on 05.30.2017].
120. Available from: http://www.metahit.eu/ [accessed on 05.30.2017].
121. Available from: http://www.hmpdacc.org [accessed on 05.30.2017].
122. Cryan JF, O’Mahony S. The microbiome-gut-brain axis: from bowel to behav-
ior. Neurogastroenterol Motil (2011) 23(3):187–92. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2982. 
2010.01664.x 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors report no biomedical financial inter-
ests or potential conflicts of interest.
The reviewer, SB, and handling editor declared their shared affiliation and the 
handling editor states that the process nevertheless met the standards of a fair and 
objective review.
Copyright © 2017 Lima-Ojeda, Rupprecht and Baghai. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). 
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the 
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this 
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution 
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
