 Are American Surgical Residents Prepared for
Humanitarian Deployment?: A Comparative
Analysis of Resident and Humanitarian Case Logs
Authors
Lin, Y; Dahm, J; Kushner, A; Lawrence, J; Trelles, M; Dominguez,
L; Kuwayama, D
Citation
Are American Surgical Residents Prepared for Humanitarian
Deployment?: A Comparative Analysis of Resident and
Humanitarian Case Logs. 2017 World J Surg
DOI
10.1007/s00268-017-4137-x
Publisher
Springer International Publishing
Journal
World Journal of Surgery
Rights
Archived with thanks to World Journal of Surgery
Download date
04/06/2019 13:36:30
Link to Item
http://hdl.handle.net/10144/618988
 ORIGINAL SCIENTIFIC REPORT
Are American Surgical Residents Prepared for Humanitarian
Deployment?: A Comparative Analysis of Resident
and Humanitarian Case Logs
Yihan Lin1,2 • James S. Dahm2,3 • Adam L. Kushner4,5 • John P. Lawrence6,7 •
Miguel Trelles8 • Lynette B. Dominguez8 • David P. Kuwayama1
� Socie
´te
´ Internationale de Chirurgie 2017
Abstract
Background Effective humanitarian surgeons require skills in general surgery, OB/GYN, orthopedics, and urology.
With increasing specialization, it is unclear whether US general surgery residents are receiving exposure to these
disparate fields. We sought to assess the preparedness of graduating American surgical residents for humanitarian
deployment.
Methods We retrospectively analyzed cases performed by American College of Graduate Medical Education general
surgery graduates from 2009 to 2015 and cases performed at select Me
´decins Sans Frontie
`res (MSF) facilities from
2008 to 2012. Cases were categorized by specialty (general surgery, orthopedics, OB/GYN, urology) and compared
with Chi-squared testing. Non-operative care including basic wound and drain care was excluded from both data sets.
Results US general surgery residents performed 41.3% MSF relevant general surgery cases, 1.9% orthopedic cases,
0.1% OB/GYN cases, and 0.3% urology cases; the remaining 56.4% of cases exceeded the standard MSF scope of
care. In comparison, MSF cases were 30.1% general surgery, 21.2% orthopedics, 46.8% OB/GYN, and 1.9%
urology. US residents performed fewer OB/GYN cases (p \ 0.01) and fewer orthopedic cases (p \ 0.01). Differ-
ences in general surgery and urology caseloads were not statistically significant. Key procedures in which residents
lacked experience included cesarean sections, hysterectomies, and external bony fixation.
Conclusion Current US surgical training is poorly aligned with typical MSF surgical caseloads, particularly in OB/
GYN and orthopedics. New mechanisms for obtaining relevant surgical skills should be developed to better prepare
American surgical trainees interested in humanitarian work.
& Yihan Lin
yihan.lin@ucdenver.edu; yihan.lin@mail.harvard.edu
James S. Dahm
jsdahm@wisc.edu
Adam L. Kushner
adamkushner@yahoo.com
John P. Lawrence
johnlawrence159@gmail.com
Miguel Trelles
Miguel.Trelles@brussels.msf.org
Lynette B. Dominguez
Lynette.Dominguez@brussels.msf.org
David P. Kuwayama
david.kuwayama@ucdenver.edu
1
Department of Surgery, University of Colorado Denver,
12631 E. 17th Ave, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
2
Program in Global Surgery and Social Change, Harvard
Medical School, 641 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115,
USA
3
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, 750 Highland Ave, Madison 53726, WI, USA
4
Surgeons OverSeas, 99 Avenue B, Suite 5E,
New York 10009, NY, USA
123
World J Surg
DOI 10.1007/s00268-017-4137-x
 Introduction
Surgical humanitarianism has risen in popularity in recent
years. Increased interest has been documented in surgeons,
residents, and medical students from many high-income
countries. After the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, more than 550
surgeons registered to volunteer through the American Col-
lege of Surgeons (ACS) Operation Giving Back program [1].
A survey of ACS residents showed that 85% were interested
in practicing internationally during their careers [2].
Because of geographical differences in the epidemiol-
ogy of surgical disease and the relative lack of surgeons in
most low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) [3], sur-
geons who practice internationally must be capable in
many surgical specialties, including trauma, pediatrics,
orthopedics, neurosurgery, urology, and obstetrics [4].
However, with increasing specialization in US surgical
residencies and fellowships, many specialty fields are no
longer a component of US general surgical training. A
study on the change in general surgery chief resident
operative experiences found that case mix has narrowed in
the last two decades [5]. Residents perform an increasing
number of alimentary tract and intra-abdominal cases, but
exposure to other kinds of surgery is diminishing [5].
In contrast, surgical programs of medical humanitarian
organizations such as Me
´decins Sans Frontie
`res (MSF)
typically provide a broad spectrum of care, though tailored
to particular contexts [4]. For example, classic emergency
surgical interventions (reacting to war, epidemics, or natural
catastrophe) may be heavily focused on trauma in an urban
or warzone environment. In contrast, choice interventions
(responding to endemics, exclusion, and underserved pop-
ulations) may require a surgical program to manage all
surgical cases arriving in a district hospital, or to staff a
maternity hospital focused on complicated obstetric inter-
ventions. Both types of programs require surgeons to pos-
sess a wide range of skills, some of which an American
surgeon may not have accrued during his or her training.
The aim of this study was to assess the preparedness of
American-trained
general
surgeons
for
humanitarian
deployment. To do so, we compared ACGME case logs of
graduating general surgery residents with MSF case logs
from a wide array of surgical interventions, and identified
specialty areas of mismatch.
Materials and methods
Two sets of data were used for the analysis: American
College of Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) general
surgery chief resident case logs spanning 2009–2015 [6],
and previously published summary data of MSF-Brussels
(MSF-OCB) case logs spanning June 2008 to December
2012 [7].
The ACGME is the accreditation body for medical resi-
dency and fellowship programs in the USA. The ACGME
case logs analyzed in this study report the national average of
procedures performed throughout general surgery resi-
dency training programs by graduating US general surgery
residents, categorized by procedure type. While most
ACGME procedure categories were operative in nature (e.g.,
‘‘cholecystectomy,’’ ‘‘enterectomy’’), some procedure cate-
gories involved perioperative or bedside care (e.g., ‘‘organ
dysfunction,’’ ‘‘invasive line management/monitoring’’).
Such non-operative categories were considered irrelevant to
this study and were excluded. With the remaining 114 pro-
cedure categories, case volumes were averaged over the
7 years of data.
MSF-Brussels is one of MSF’s five Operational Centers;
the surgical logs used here covered operations performed at
MSF-Brussels projects in 21 countries (14 in Africa, 1 in
the Americas, 6 in the Middle East and South and East
Asia) and comprised 93,385 procedures [7]. These were
categorized into 28 procedure categories (6 obstetric/gy-
necologic, 1 urologic, 5 visceral, 10 orthopedic, 6 other).
Three categories, ‘‘Wound debridement, abscess drainage,
circumcision,’’ ‘‘Drain insertion, chest tube insertion,
dressing change,’’ and ‘‘Dressing change (burns),’’ were
excluded from analysis, as they were either not captured by
ACGME case logs or were technically basic enough to
assume surgical trainee proficiency.
In instances where multiple ACGME procedure cate-
gories corresponded to a single MSF procedure category
(e.g., ACGME: ‘‘Open reduction of open/closed fracture,’’
‘‘Closed reduction of fracture’’; MSF: ‘‘Fracture reduc-
tion’’), the ACGME categories were summed into a single
data point for purposes of comparative analysis. The cat-
egory groupings and equivalencies used to generate com-
parable data are delineated in Table 1.
Compiled procedure category data were grouped into five
specialty categories: general surgery, obstetrics and gyne-
cology, orthopedics, urology, and other procedures. Spe-
cialty category volumes in each data set were converted to
percentages
of
total
operative
volume
to
facilitate
5
Center for Humanitarian Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, 615 N Wolfe St,
Baltimore 21205, MD, USA
6
Maimonides Medical Center, 4802 10th Ave,
Brooklyn 11219, NY, USA
7
Me
´decins Sans Frontie
`res (MSF-USA), 333 7th Avenue,
New York 10001, NY, USA
8
Me
´decins Sans Frontie
`res (MSF), Operational Center -
Brussels, Rue de l’Arbre Be
´nit 46, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
World J Surg
123
 Table 1 Procedure classifications
MSF category
ACGME category
General surgery
Herniorrhaphy, other anogenital
Hemorrhoidectomy (all)
Sphincterotomy/
sphincteroplasty
Drainage proc for
anorectal abscess
Repair anorectal fistula
Other operations for anal
incontinence
Repair rectal prolapse
Other major anorectal
Inguinal-femoral (all)-open
Inguinal-femoral (all)-laparos
Ventral
Other major hernias
Herniorrhaphy, inguinal/
umbilical
Define op for Hirschsprungs/
Imperf anus
Minor tumor resection
Remove skin moles, small
tumors, etc
Removal subcut small tumors, cysts, fbs
Exploratory laparotomy
Gastric trauma-closure/
resect/exclusion
Duodenal trauma-closure/
resect/exclusion
Sm bowel trauma-closure/
resect/exclusion
Colon trauma-closure/
resect/exclusion
Explor laparotomy-open
Drainage pancreatic injury
Resection of pancreatic
injury
Repair of abdominal
aorta/vena cava
Exp lap exclusive of
trauma-open
Drainage intra-abdominal
abscess
Maj retroperit/pelvic node
dissec-open
Other major ab-general-
lap complex
Esophago-gastrectomy
Antireflux proc-open
Gastrostomy (all types)-
open
Gastric resect, partial-
open
Gastric resect, total
Vagotomy, trun/sel
w/drainage/res-open
Repair perf-gastric dis
Prox gast vagotomy, highly select-open
Gastric reduc for morbid obesity (all)
Enterolysis - open
Repair perf-duodenal dis
Repair perf-small bowel dis
Ileostomy (not assoc w/colectomy)-open
Diverticulectomy
Appendectomy-open
Colostomy (all types)
Repair perf-colon dis Lobectomy or
segmentectomy
Wedge resection/open biopsy
Drainage liver abscess
Cholecystostomy
Cholecystectomy w/wo oper grams-open
Common bile duct explor-open
Choledochoenteric anastomosis
Sphincteroplasty (oddi)
Drainage pancreatic abscess
Resection for pancreatic necrosis
Panc resection, distal
Panc resection, whipple
Panc resection, total
Drainage pseudocyst (all
types)
Pancreaticojejunostomy
Open repair infrarenal a-i
aneurysm, ruptured
Open repair infrarenal a-i
aneurysm, elective
Repair suprarenal aortic
aneurysm
Celiac/sma endarterectomy,
bypass
Renal endarterectomy,
bypass
Embolectomy/
thrombectomy, renal
Antireflux procedure-open
(peds)
Rep intestinal atresia/
stenosis
Repair pyloric stenosis
Operation for malrotation/
intussuscept
Proc for meconium ileus/nec
enterocolit
Exc wilms tumor/
neuroblastoma
Rep
omphalocele/gastroschisis
Bowel resection
Enterectomy - open
Colectomy/proctectomy-
open
Colectomy/proctectomy-laparoscopic
Colectomy w/ileoanal pull-thru
Colectomy w/continent
reconstruct
Abdomino-perineal resection
Skin/muscle graft
Skin-grafting, non-burn
(all)
Composite tissue transfer
Burn debridement and/or
grafting
World J Surg
123
 comprehension of case distribution across specialties and to
enable comparison between the two data sets. Differences
across specialty categories were assessed for statistical sig-
nificance using Chi-squared testing (RStudio Version
0.99.903).
Results
From 2008 to 2012, MSF-OCB performed a total of 93,385
procedures. Of these, 21.9% were minor cases and exclu-
ded from further analysis. Of major cases, 46.8% were
obstetrics and gynecology, 30.1% were general surgery,
21.2% were orthopedics, and 1.9% were urology (Table 2).
The most common general surgery cases were hernior-
rhaphy (13.5%), bowel resection (6.8%), and minor tumor
resection (4.5%). The most common obstetrics and gyne-
cology cases included cesarean delivery (33.1%), complex
delivery (4.1%), dilation and curettage (3.4%), and hys-
terectomy (3.1%). The most common orthopedic proce-
dures included fasciotomy or amputation of fingers and
toes (11.7%), fracture reduction (4.0%), and external fix-
ation of fracture (1.3%).
From 2009 to 2015, general surgery residents performed
an average of 1328 cases by the completion of their resi-
dency. Of these, 25.8% were non-major cases, endoscopic,
or perioperative management, and excluded from further
analysis (Table 3). Of the remaining 985 cases, 430
(43.6%) corresponded to surgeries done at MSF facilities,
and the remaining 555 (56.4%) had no corollary in the
MSF case logs. The majority of cases that corresponded to
MSF surgeries were general surgery procedures (41.3%),
followed by orthopedics (1.9%), obstetrics and gynecology
(0.1%), and urology (0.3%). The most common general
surgery
procedures
included
herniorrhaphy
(16.6%),
exploratory laparotomy (12.7%), and bowel resection
(8.0%). The only recorded obstetrics and gynecology pro-
cedure was hysterectomy (0.1%). The only recorded
orthopedic procedures included major amputation (1.2%)
and fasciotomy or amputation of fingers and toes (0.5%).
In comparison with MSF surgeons, residents of ACGME
programs performed fewer orthopedic procedures (1.9 vs.
Table 1 continued
MSF category
ACGME category
Repair/resection of spleen, liver,
kidney
Lobectomy or
segmentectomy
Wedge resection/open
biopsy
Splenectomy for disease-
open
Splenectomy for disease-lapar
Splenectomy/splenorrhaphy-open Repair/
drainage hepatic lacs-open
Hepatic resection for injury
Repair/resect for kidney
trauma
Lobectomy or
segmentectomy
Obstetrics and gynecology
Cesarean delivery
–
Complex delivery, episiotomy,
perineal laceration repair
–
Curettage
–
Hysterectomy, oophorectomy,
pelvic tumorectomy
Hysterectomy (all)
Salpingo-oophorectomy
Other major gynecology
Other major gynecology -
laparoscopic
Orthopedics
Fasciotomy, amputation
Fasciotomy
Fasciotomy for injury
Amputation, digit
Fracture reduction
Closed reduction of
fracture
Internal fixation of fracture
Open reduction of
open/closed fracture
Limb amputation
Amputation,
transmetatarsal
Amputation, below knee
Amputation, above knee
Amputation, upper extremity
Debridement of osteomyelitis
–
Urology
Urological procedures
Hydrocelectomy
Cystostomy
Cystectomy
Ileal urinary conduit
Other major genito-urinary
Other major genito-urinary - lap basic
Other major genito-urinary -
lap complex
Repair epi- and hypo-spadias
Orchiopexy
World J Surg
123
 21.2%, p \ 0.01) and fewer obstetric and gynecologic
procedures (0.1 vs. 46.8%, p \ 0.01). US residents per-
formed relatively more general surgery procedures (41.3
vs. 30.1%, p = 0.10) and fewer urology procedures (0.3 vs.
1.9%, p = 0.29), although these differences were not sta-
tistically significant (Fig. 1).
Discussion
Our study found that less than one-half of cases performed
in ACGME general surgical residencies are directly rele-
vant to surgical practice in MSF projects. Furthermore,
only one-third of major surgery performed in MSF projects
corresponds to typical ACGME general surgical training.
ACGME general surgery residents spend a majority
of their training (56%) engaged in advanced general sur-
gical or specialty procedures with no direct corollary in
MSF projects. Furthermore, they receive minimal exposure
to orthopedic surgery (2% of cases), even though ortho-
pedic procedures comprise a significant portion of the
surgical work in MSF facilities (21%). The discrepancy is
even greater in obstetrics and gynecology, while obstetric
and gynecologic case volume totaled 47% of MSF cases, it
totaled less than 1% of ACGME cases. Most striking, while
the single most commonly performed surgery in MSF
Table 2 Comparison of ACGME case logs with MSF case logs
Specialty
MSF
ACGME
Procedures
Number of procedures
%
Number of procedures
%
General surgery
Herniorrhaphy, other anogenital
9873
13.5
163.38
16.6
Bowel resection
4949
6.8
78.63
8.0
Minor tumor resection
3316
4.5
11.17
1.1
Exploratory laparotomy
2498
3.4
125.60
12.7
Skin/muscle graft
789
1.1
14.00
1.4
Repair or resection of spleen, liver, kidney
570
0.8
14.78
1.5
Total
21,995
30.1
407.38
41.3
Obstetrics and gynecology
Cesarean delivery
24,182
33.1
0
0.0
Complex delivery, episiotomy, or perineal laceration repair
3002
4.1
0
0.0
Curettage (obstetric)
2462
3.4
0
0.0
Hysterectomy, oophorectomy, pelvic tumorectomy
2228
3.1
1.32
0.1
Obstetrical fistula repair
1585
2.2
0
0.0
Ectopic pregnancy
663
0.9
0
0.0
Total
34,122
46.8
1.32
0.1
Orthopedics
Fasciotomy, amputation of fingers or toes
8566
11.7
4.53
0.5
Fracture reduction
2945
4.0
0.37
0.0
External fixation of fracture
974
1.3
0
0.0
Limb amputation
841
1.2
11.72
1.2
Internal fixation of fracture
803
1.1
0.30
0.0
Other (corrective procedure, ortho)
624
0.9
0.97
0.1
Internal fixation removal
464
0.6
0
0.0
Curettage for osteomyelitis
193
0.3
0
0.0
Joint procedure
35
0.0
0
0.0
Bone graft
35
0.0
0
0.0
Nerve repair
18
0.0
0.30
0.0
Total
15,498
21.2
18.18
1.9
Urology
Urological procedures
1354
1.9
3.12
0.3
Total
1354
1.9
3.12
0.3
Total for analysis
72,969
78.1
430.00
43.6
World J Surg
123
 projects is cesarean section, the average graduating general
surgery resident reported never having participated in a
single one.
While these data suggest a significant mismatch between
US surgical training and surgical needs abroad, they fail to
capture yet another layer of training deficiency. Even with
common surgical procedures such as inguinal herniorrha-
phy, the approach and technique utilized in limited-re-
source environments may differ dramatically from that
taught to residents at tertiary training facilities in the USA.
The lack of access to mesh, laparoscopic equipment, sur-
gical staplers, and at times electric dermatomes, requires
that surgeons be familiar with alternative, low-technology
methods for completing the same general surgical proce-
dures one may perform routinely at home. Furthermore,
diagnostic tools upon which US surgeons rely routinely,
such as CT scans and interventional radiology services, are
notably absent in humanitarian environments. Although
ultrasound is widely available, few general surgery resi-
dents graduate with advanced familiarity in utilizing
ultrasound technology for either diagnostic or therapeutic
purposes.
Given
such
training
disparities,
US
surgeons
in
humanitarian contexts may find themselves incompletely
prepared to meet the broad demands made of them. To
address key deficiencies and augment essential skills,
several focused training courses are available to surgeons
preparing for humanitarian missions. For its own volun-
teers, MSF offers a 4-day cadaver-based surgical skills
workshop in Du
¨sseldorf, Germany. The Royal College of
Surgeons (London) offers its Surgical Training in Austere
Environments (STAE) course, an intensive 5-day cadaver-
based course open to civilian and military surgeons. Other
courses include Stanford University’s Continuing Medical
Education (CME)-accredited International Humanitarian
Table 3 Excluded non-major and perioperative procedure categories
MSF
ACGME
Wound debridement, abscess
drainage, circumcision
Drain insertion, chest tube insertion,
dressing change
Dressing change (burns)
Laryngoscopy
Bronchoscopy
Sclerotherapy/banding esoph
varices
Esophago-gastro-
duodenoscopy
Percutan endo gastrostomy
(peg)
ERCP w/wo papillotomy
Sigmoidoscopy, rigid/
flexible
Flexible colonoscopy w/wo
bx/polypect
Choledochoscopy
Cysto/urethroscopy
Other endoscopy
Repair minor wounds and
grafts
Banding/incision thrombosed
hemorrhoid
Endorectal ultrasound
[miscellaneous]
Other endorectal procedures
Non-operative trauma
Ventilatory management
Bleed (non-trauma) [
3 units
Hemodynamic instability
Organ dysfunction
Dysrhythmias
Invasive line
manage/monitoring
Parenteral/enteral nutrition
Fig. 1 Comparison of MSF and
ACGME surgical cases
World J Surg
123
 Aid Skills Course, and the American College of Surgeons’
(ACS) International Humanitarian Aid Surgery course
offered during the annual ACS Clinical Conference. For
surgical and obstetrical residents interested in global health
careers following graduation, the University of Colorado
holds its annual Humanitarian Surgical Skills Workshop, a
2-day cadaver-based course focused exclusively on training
senior-level residents.
Efforts are also being made to create more integrated
training in global health within the structure of surgical
residency. Vanderbilt University has created a global acute
care surgery fellowship, a 2-year experience for residents
to gain technical and research skills to practice in under-
served
settings
[8].
Numerous
surgical
residencies
throughout the country are adding formal global health
tracks to their curricula, designed to augment interest in
and exposure to the science and research aspects of global
surgical care delivery. As of 2015, 34 general surgery
residency programs had incorporated international rota-
tions into their curricula [9]. Residents may alternatively
seek training through one of the ten rural surgery residency
tracks recognized by the ACS; these programs generally
expose trainees to a wider spectrum of surgical specialties,
notably including obstetrics, gynecology, and orthopedics
[10].
The disparities identified here may suggest that organi-
zations like MSF ought to focus on expanding its portfolio
of specialist surgeons in its many surgical projects across
the globe. While seemingly a straight forward solution, this
approach fails to take account of the multiple other con-
straints facing MSF humanitarian interventions, including
the logistics of inserting, housing, and extracting practi-
tioners in potentially tenuous security contexts, and human
resources issues such as the reliable availability of desired
practitioner types. Rather, our belief is that the most flex-
ible, durable, and efficient solution to this issue remains a
focus on expanding the portfolio of procedures performable
by the cadre of current and future MSF general surgeons.
There are several limitations to this study. First, the
primary data set relies on the reporting accuracy of both
ACGME and MSF surgical case logs. ACGME case
reporting is closely monitored by surgical program direc-
tors, and studies suggest case log reporting accuracy of
more than 95% among chief residents [11]. MSF case log
generation involves a chain of information transfer from
surgical theater to project office to MSF Operational Center
headquarters, a multi-step process that may be compara-
tively more prone to error. To our knowledge, external
auditing of the fidelity of this process has either not been
performed or not been made public.
A second limitation pertains to the granularity of our
data sets. The ACGME data set was de-identified and did
not permit us to subgroup analyze case logs by urban or
rural training programs. Possibly, case log data from rural
programs would have been more on par with MSF data,
particularly with respect to critical procedures such as
cesarean section and bony external fixation. However, we
were unable to assess this possibility. With respect to the
MSF data set, we were unable to subgroup analyze cases by
type of surgical practitioner. MSF projects occasionally
employ specialist surgeons; in such projects, specialists are
more likely to perform the bulk of procedures germane to
their specialty, thereby reducing or obviating the burden of
such cases on general surgeons. Our inability to remove
case log data pertaining to specialists may have resulted in
overestimating the true orthopedic, obstetric, and gyneco-
logic operative burden on MSF general surgeons. However,
the presence of specialists in MSF missions remains the
exception, and, in the authors’ experience, the case log data
remain a qualitatively accurate reflection of the overall
demands placed upon MSF general surgeons.
A third limitation has to do with the narrow scope of our
comparison: case logs of surgical trainees from a single
country, and one wing of a large humanitarian non-gov-
ernmental organization. With respect to case logs of trai-
nees, we did make attempts to obtain similar case log data
from other national training systems, including those of the
College of Surgeons of East, Central and Southern Africa;
the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons; the United
Kingdom’s Joint Committee on Surgical Training, and the
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland. However, despite
our efforts, we were unable to convince these organizations
to share proprietary data. While such data would have been
useful to explore the variability in training across national
health systems, our impression is that the advanced degree
of specialization in American surgical training likely rep-
resents a ‘‘worst case’’ comparison with respect to the
needs of humanitarian organizations. With respect to the
MSF data, there is some variability in surgical projects
across MSF’s six Operational Centers; our data pertained
only to the case logs of MSF OC-Brussels. The general-
izability of this data to the broader context of humanitarian
surgery is difficult to verify. However, the high burden of
orthopedic and obstetric cases identified here is not unique
to MSF projects and has been reported in other humani-
tarian and austere surgical contexts. A systematic literature
review on surgical care during humanitarian crises found
that the most common procedures were soft tissue surgery,
orthopedic surgery, cesarean sections, hernia repairs, and
appendectomies [12]. In a military context, US Forward
Surgical Teams (FSTs) in Afghanistan reported that 17% of
all cases were orthopedic and 23% were subspecialty in
nature, while only 20% were classic general surgery [13].
Still, future research comparing surgical trainee experience
from multiple national health systems with case logs of
other international aid agencies or standardized criteria
World J Surg
123
 such as the DCP-3 Essential Surgery [14] categories may
be useful.
Conclusion
A rising generation of American surgical trainees is
increasingly expressing interest in global surgical volun-
teerism and humanitarian work. However, our study raises
serious questions about the ability of current US surgical
training to adequately prepare graduates to be effective in
such environments. Graduates of US general surgical
training programs spend a majority of their time in
advanced general surgery and specialty care impractical in
most humanitarian settings. US trainees are also critically
deficient in exposure to basic and essential obstetrical,
gynecological, and orthopedic care. New mechanisms for
obtaining relevant surgical skills must be developed to
better prepare the many American surgical trainees who
now express a profound interest in humanitarian work as
part of their professional careers.
Acknowledgements The following individuals participated in a
previously published paper on MSF case volumes. This analysis
relied heavily upon their prior work: Evan Wong MD, Shailvi Gupta
MD, and Gilbert Burnham MD PhD.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflicts of interest There are no financial or personal relationships
which could potentially and inappropriately influence this work and
conclusions.
References
1. Leow JJ, Kingham TP, Casey KM et al (2010) Global surgery:
thoughts on an emerging surgical subspecialty for students and
residents. J Surg Educ 67(3):143–148
2. Powell AC, Casey K, Liewehr DJ et al (2009) Results of a
national survey of surgical resident interest in international
experience,
electives,
and volunteerism.
J
Am Coll Surg
208(2):304–312
3. Meara JG, Leather AJM, Hagander L et al (2015) Global Surgery
2030: evidence and solutions for achieving health, welfare, and
economic development. Lancet 386:569–624
4. Chu K, Rosseel R, Trelles M et al (2010) Surgeons Without
borders: a brief history of surgery at Medecins Sans Frontieres.
World J Surg 34:411–414. doi:10.1007/s00268-009-0187-z
5. Drake FT, Horvath KD, Goldin AB et al (2013) The general
surgery chief resident operative experience: 23 years of national
ACGME Case logs. JAMA Surg 148(9):841–847
6. Accreditation
Council
for
Graduate
Medical
Education
(ACGME) ACGME Case Log Statistical Reports. Chicago. http://
www.acgme.org/Data-Collection-Systems/Case-Logs-Statistical-
Reports. Accessed Aug 1 2016
7. Wong EG, Trelles M, Dominguez L et al (2014) Surgical skills
needed for humanitarian missions in resource-limited settings:
common operative procedures performed at Medecins Sans
Frontieres facilities. Surgery 156(3):642–649
8. Merchant A, Valenzuela JY, Lyon C et al (2016) Creating a
Global acute care surgery fellowship to meet international need.
JACS 223(4):e120–e121
9. Knudson MM, Tarpley MJ, Numann PJ (2015) Global surgery
opportunities for U.S. surgical residents: an interim report. J Surg
Educ 72(4):e60–e65
10. Rural Surgery Program. https://www.facs.org/education/resour
ces/residency-search/specialties/rural. Accessed Feb 15 2017
11. Nygaard RM, Daly SR, Van Camp JM (2015) General surgery
resident case logs: do they accurately reflect resident experience?
J Surg Educ 72(6):e178–e183
12. Nickerson JW, Chackungal S, Knowlton L et al (2012) Surgical
care during humanitarian crises: a systematic review of published
surgical caseload data from foreign medical teams. Prehospital
Disaster Med 27(2):184–189
13. Peoples GE, Gerlinger T, Craig R et al (2005) Combat casualties
in afghanistan cared for by a single forward surgical team during
the initial phases of operation enduring freedom. Mil Med
170(6):462
14. Mock CN, Donkor P, Gawande A et al (2015). Essential surgery:
key messages from Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition.
Lancet 385(9983):2209–2219
World J Surg
123
