 CAP Laboratory Improvement Programs
Updated Molecular Testing Guideline for the Selection of
Lung Cancer Patients for Treatment With Targeted
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors
Guideline From the College of American Pathologists, the International Association
for the Study of Lung Cancer, and the Association for Molecular Pathology
Neal I. Lindeman, MD; Philip T. Cagle, MD; Dara L. Aisner, MD, PhD; Maria E. Arcila, MD; Mary Beth Beasley, MD;
Eric H. Bernicker, MD; Carol Colasacco, MLIS, SCT(ASCP); Sanja Dacic, MD, PhD; Fred R. Hirsch, MD, PhD; Keith Kerr, MB, ChB;
David J. Kwiatkowski, MD, PhD; Marc Ladanyi, MD; Jan A. Nowak, MD, PhD; Lynette Sholl, MD; Robyn Temple-Smolkin, PhD;
Benjamin Solomon, MBBS, PhD; Lesley H. Souter, PhD; Erik Thunnissen, MD, PhD; Ming S. Tsao, MD;
Christina B. Ventura, MPH, MT(ASCP); Murry W. Wynes, PhD; Yasushi Yatabe, MD, PhD
� Context.—In 2013, an evidence-based guideline was
published by the College of American Pathologists, the
International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer, and
the Association for Molecular Pathology to set standards
for the molecular analysis of lung cancers to guide
treatment decisions with targeted inhibitors. New evi-
dence has prompted an evaluation of additional laboratory
technologies, targetable genes, patient populations, and
tumor types for testing.
Objective.—To systematically review and update the
2013 guideline to affirm its validity; to assess the evidence
of new genetic discoveries, technologies, and therapies;
and to issue an evidence-based update.
Design.—The College of American Pathologists, the
International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer,
and the Association for Molecular Pathology convened an
expert panel to develop an evidence-based guideline to
help define the key questions and literature search terms,
review abstracts and full articles, and draft recommenda-
tions.
Results.—Eighteen new recommendations were drafted.
The panel also updated 3 recommendations from the 2013
guideline.
Conclusions.—The 2013 guideline was largely reaf-
firmed with updated recommendations to allow testing of
cytology samples, require improved assay sensitivity, and
recommend against the use of immunohistochemistry for
EGFR testing. Key new recommendations include ROS1
testing for all adenocarcinoma patients; the inclusion of
additional genes (ERBB2, MET, BRAF, KRAS, and RET) for
laboratories that perform next-generation sequencing
panels; immunohistochemistry as an alternative to fluores-
cence in situ hybridization for ALK and/or ROS1 testing;
use of 5% sensitivity assays for EGFR T790M mutations in
patients with secondary resistance to EGFR inhibitors; and
the use of cell-free DNA to ‘‘rule in’’ targetable mutations
when tissue is limited or hard to obtain.
(Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2018;142:321–346; doi: 10.5858/
arpa.2017-0388-CP)
Accepted for publication November 29, 2017.
Published as an Early Online Release January 22, 2018.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article at www.
archivesofpathology.org in the March 2018 table of contents.
From the Departments of Pathology (Drs Lindeman and Sholl) and
Medicine (Dr Kwiatkowski), Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts; the Cancer Center (Dr Bernicker) and the Department of
Pathology and Genomic Medicine, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston,
Texas (Dr Cagle); the Department of Pathology, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Denver (Dr Aisner); the Diagnostic and Molecular
Pathology Laboratory (Dr Arcila) and the Molecular Diagnostics Service
(Dr Ladanyi), Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New Y
ork, New
York; the Department of Pathology & Medicine, Pulmonary, Critical Care
and Sleep Medicine, New York, New Y
ork (Dr Beasley); the Pathology and
Laboratory Quality Center, College of American Pathologists, Northfield,
Illinois (Mss Colasacco and Ventura); the Department of Pathology,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (Dr Dacic); the
Department of Medicine and Pathology, University of Colorado, Denver
(Dr Hirsch); the Department of Pathology, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, Scotland (Dr Kerr); the Department of Molecular Pathology,
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York (Dr Nowak); the Clinical
and Scientific Affairs Division, Association for Molecular Pathology,
Bethesda, Maryland (Dr Temple-Smolkin); the Molecular Therapeutics and
Biomarkers Laboratory, Peter Maccallum Cancer Center, Melbourne,
Australia (Dr Solomon); the Department of Pathology, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands (Dr Thunnissen); the
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Princess Margaret
Cancer Center, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (Dr Tsao); Scientific Affairs,
International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer, Aurora, Colorado
(Dr Wynes); and the Department of Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics,
Aichi Cancer Center, Nagoya, Japan (Dr Yatabe). Dr Souter is in private
practice in Wellanport, Ontario, Canada.
This guideline was developed through collaboration among the
College of American Pathologists, the International Association for
the Study of Lung Cancer and the Association for Molecular
Pathology and has been jointly published by invitation and consent
in the Archives of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Journal of
Thoracic Oncology, and The Journal of Molecular Diagnostics.
Copyright 2018 College of American Pathologists, International
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer, Association for Molecular
Pathology, and American Society for Investigative Pathology.
Authors’ disclosures of potential conflicts of interest and author
contributions are found in the Appendix at the end of this article.
Reprints: Neal I. Lindeman, MD, Brigham and Women’s Hospital,
Department of Pathology, 75 Francis St, Shapiro 5, Room 020,
Boston, MA 02115 (email: nlindeman@partners.org).
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
321
 P
atients with advanced lung cancer have a poor progno-
sis, with a median survival of 1 year. However, for many
patients whose tumors harbor certain specific molecular
alterations (eg, activating alterations in the EGFR, ALK, and
ROS1 genes), particularly in lung adenocarcinoma, targeted
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy provides significant
improvement in survival and quality. Accordingly, patients
with the types of advanced lung cancer in which these
targetable molecular alterations typically occur should
receive the molecular testing required to identify them,
and thereby receive appropriate targeted treatments. Im-
portantly, this testing should extend beyond those molec-
ular alterations for which targeted therapies are approved by
regulatory agencies such as the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) to include molecular alterations for
which there is compelling evidence of effective investiga-
tional targeted therapies (and, more recently, immunother-
apies) from published clinical trials.
In 2010, 3 professional societies—the College of American
Pathologists (CAP), the International Association for the
Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC), and the Association for
Molecular Pathology (AMP)—recruited specialists in the
biology, diagnosis, and treatment of lung cancer to form a
joint working group to systematically assess the evidence
supporting the clinical utility of molecular analysis of lung
cancer samples. In 2013, this working group published an
evidence-based guideline1–3 for standard-of-care clinical
practice concerning which lung cancer patients and samples
should be tested, which genes should be tested, and how
these tests should be designed, validated, and executed. This
guideline was subsequently endorsed by the American
Society of Clinical Oncology,4 and has been cited in
guidelines developed by numerous professional societies
around the world.5–26 However, the field has continued to
advance rapidly, with the emergence of new genetic
discoveries, new therapies, and new technologies, such that
these same 3 organizations convened a second working
group to systematically assess new evidence and to issue an
evidence-based revision of the lung cancer molecular
pathology practice guideline.
The revision focuses on new recommendations in 5
specific content areas: (1) Which new genes should routinely
be tested for alterations in lung cancers? (2) What methods
are appropriate for lung cancer testing, with particular
emphases on the use of immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
next-generation sequencing (NGS)? (3) Is there a need to
test patients with squamous cell, small cell, or other
nonadenocarcinoma lung cancers? (4) What testing should
be performed for patients with a targetable alteration who
have progressed following initial response to appropriately
targeted therapy? (5) What is the role of testing circulating
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) in lung cancer patient management?
In addition, new evidence supporting the original 2013
guideline was reviewed and used to either modify the
strength
of
those
recommendations
or
change
them
entirely. Finally, a sixth question, regarding diagnostic
support for the role of immunomodulatory therapies (eg,
programmed death ligand-1 or PD-L1), emerged during the
revision process. Although this topic was not subject to the
systematic review of evidence, the expert panel decided to
issue an opinion statement addressing this question, aware
that separate efforts are currently underway to develop
evidence-based recommendations regarding the use of
biomarkers
to
select
patients
for
immunomodulatory
therapies.
One particular challenge for this evidence-based guideline
revision was the rapid pace of discovery in this field. During
the time between literature review and guideline drafting,
major new discoveries were published and treatment
advanced for BRAF-mutant lung cancers and for the use of
immunotherapies. We expect that many additional advances
will emerge in the fields of targeted therapy, cfDNA
diagnostics,
and
immunotherapies
in
the
near
term.
Although
we
make
strong
recommendations
for
the
molecular biomarkers for which there was good evidence
at the time we conducted our analysis, we also fully
recognize the importance of emerging biomarkers to enable
lung cancer patients to be eligible for clinical trials of
investigational therapies. Accordingly, we have stratified the
biomarkers in this guideline into 3 categories, rather than 2.
The first are ‘‘must-test’’ biomarkers, which are standard of
care for all patients with advanced lung cancer with an
adenocarcinoma component who are being considered for
an approved targeted therapy. Second are ‘‘should-test’’
biomarkers, which are used to direct patients to clinical trials
and which should be included in any large sequencing panel
that is performed for lung cancer patients, but which are not
required for laboratories that perform only single-gene
assays. All remaining candidate biomarkers are investiga-
tional and are not appropriate for clinical use at this time.
PANEL COMPOSITION
The CAP, IASLC, and AMP convened an expert panel
consisting of practicing pathologists and oncologists with
expertise and experience in lung carcinoma. The CAP,
IASLC, and AMP approved the appointment of the project
cochairs and expert panel members. In addition, a meth-
odologist experienced in systematic review and guideline
development consulted with the panel throughout the
project.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST POLICY
Prior to
acceptance on
the
expert panel,
potential
members completed a joint conflict of interest disclosure
process, whose policy and form require disclosure of
material financial interest in, or potential for benefit of
significant value from, the guideline’s development or its
recommendations. The potential members completed the
conflict of interest disclosure form, listing any relationship
that could be interpreted as constituting an actual, potential,
or apparent conflict. Potential conflicts were managed by
the cochairs. All expert and advisory panel members were
required to disclose conflicts prior to beginning and
continuously throughout the project’s timeline. Disclosed
conflicts of the expert panel members are listed in the
Appendix. The CAP, IASLC, and AMP provided funding for
the administration of the project; no industry funds were
used in the development of the guideline. All panel
members volunteered their time and were not compensated
for their involvement. Please see the supplemental digital
content (SDC) at www.archivesofpathology.org in the
March 2018 table of contents for full details on the conflict
of interest policy.
OBJECTIVE
The expert panel was charged with the review and update
of the CAP-IASLC-AMP molecular testing guideline for
selection of lung cancer patients for EGFR and ALK tyrosine
kinase inhibitors. The panel reviewed any new studies that
322
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 would change or refute the statements from the 2013
guideline. In addition, the panel also addressed additional
key questions:
1. Which new genes should be tested for lung cancer
patients?
2. What methods should be used to perform molecular
testing?
3. Is molecular testing appropriate for lung cancers that do
not have an adenocarcinoma component?
4. What testing is indicated for patients with targetable
mutations who have relapsed on targeted therapy?
5. What is the role of testing for circulating cell-free DNA
for lung cancer patients?
Key questions 1 through 3 relate to patients diagnosed with
nonsquamous non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) of all
stages. The key questions are included in full detail in the
SDC.
METHODS
A detailed account of the methods used to create this guideline
can be found in the SDC, including additional scope questions.
Systematic Literature Review and Analysis
A systematic literature review was completed with 2 compre-
hensive searches. The first search was designed to assess the 2013
guideline statements and was based on the original search strategy.
It included medical subject headings and keywords to address the
concepts lung cancer, tumor biomarkers, and laboratory testing and
was run in Ovid MEDLINE (Ovid Technologies, Inc, New York
City, New York) on May 17, 2015, to locate studies published in
English with publication dates from January 1, 2012 through May
17, 2015. Publication filters were applied to identify guidelines,
systematic reviews, meta-analyses (MAs), and randomized clinical
trials. The search was rerun on June 27, 2016, to identify relevant
new literature published since May 17, 2015.
The second search was based on new key questions that focused
on additional biomarkers not included in the 2013 guideline, with
specific search strategies designed for each key question. All
searches were performed in Ovid MEDLINE and PubMed (US
National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland) (June 28, 2015)
and were limited to English-language studies. Supplemental
searches were run in Scopus (Amsterdam, Netherlands) (June 25,
2015) to identify relevant publications not indexed in MEDLINE. A
search for relevant clinical trials was completed using the
clinicaltrials.gov Web site, and focused searches on guideline
repository sites (eg, guideline.gov, g-i-n.net) and organizations’
Web sites were undertaken to identify relevant publications.
Further detail about the systematic literature search, including the
Ovid search strings, can be found in the SDC.
Eligible Study Designs
Studies were not limited to randomized controlled trials but also
included other study types, including cohort designs, case series,
evaluation studies, and comparative studies. Letters, commentaries,
editorials, narrative reviews, case reports, studies in mouse models,
in vitro studies, consensus documents, abstracts, and non-English
articles were excluded a priori.
Inclusion Criteria
Published studies were selected for inclusion in the systematic
review of evidence if they were peer-reviewed full-text articles that
met the following criteria:
1. The study population consisted of patients with nonsquamous,
non–small cell lung adenocarcinoma, small cell lung carcinoma,
or squamous cell lung cancer of any stage.
2. The study evaluated, prospectively or retrospectively, sensitivity,
specificity, negative predictive value, or positive predictive value
of EGFR, ALK, KRAS, ROS1, RET, MET, BRAF, or ERBB2 (HER2)
tests for detection of gene-specific mutation, rearrangement,
translocation, amplification, overexpression, or response to a
targeted gene-specific therapy.
3. The study examined potential testing algorithms for NSCLC
molecular testing.
4. The study examined the correlation of EGFR, ALK, KRAS, ROS1,
RET, MET, BRAF, or ERBB2 (HER2) status in primary or
metastatic tumors from the same patients.
5. The study included primary outcomes such as accuracy,
sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative
predictive value of tests and concordance across platforms to
determine EGFR, ALK, KRAS, ROS1, RET, MET, BRAF, or ERBB2
(HER2) status or treatment response, alone or in combination.
Quality Assessment
An assessment of the quality of the evidence was performed for
all retained studies following application of the inclusion and
exclusion criteria. Using this method, studies deemed low quality
would not be excluded from the systematic review, but would be
retained and their methodologic strengths and weaknesses
discussed where relevant. Each guideline statement includes a
rating of the strength of the evidence as described in Table 1 (also
in SDC Table 1). The process used to assess the quality of the
evidence base is fully detailed in the SDC.
Assessing the Strength of Recommendations
In order to articulate recommendation statements that were
clearly written and easy to implement, the expert panel used
GLIDES (Guidelines Into Decision Support) methodology and
accompanying BridgeWiz software (Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut).27 This methodology prioritizes the use of active
language; however, in some situations, the person responsible for
ensuring guidance is implemented is dependent on the organiza-
tion of the clinic and/or laboratory. To ensure clarity of guidance in
these situations, the expert panel used passive-voice language to
emphasize the recommended action. Development of recommen-
dations required that the panel review the identified evidence and
make a series of key judgments (using procedures described in the
SDC). This guideline uses a 3-tier system to rate the strength of
recommendations, as well as a ‘‘no recommendation’’ category
when there is insufficient evidence to support a recommendation.
Table 2 (also in SDC Table 2) summarizes the strength of evidence
and net benefits and harms, as well as obligatory language that was
used for each of the recommendation types.
Guideline Revision
This guideline will be reviewed every 4 years or earlier in the
event of publication of substantive and high-quality evidence that
could potentially alter the original guideline statements. If
necessary, the entire panel will reconvene to discuss potential
changes and, if indicated, recommend revision of the guideline to
CAP, IASLC, and AMP.
Disclaimer
Practice guidelines and consensus statements reflect the best
available evidence and expert consensus supported in practice.
They are intended to assist physicians and patients in clinical
decision making and to identify questions and settings for further
research. With the rapid flow of scientific information, new
evidence may emerge between the time a practice guideline or
consensus statement is developed and when it is published or read.
Guidelines and statements are not continually updated and may
not reflect the most recent evidence. Guidelines and statements
address only the topics specifically identified therein and are not
applicable to other interventions, diseases, or stages of diseases.
Furthermore, guidelines and consensus statements cannot account
for individual variation among patients and cannot be considered
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
323
 inclusive of all proper methods of care or exclusive of other
treatments. It is the responsibility of the treating physician or other
health care provider, relying on independent experience and
knowledge, to determine the best course of treatment for the
patient. Accordingly, adherence to any practice guideline or
consensus statement is voluntary, with the ultimate determination
regarding its application to be made by the physician in light of
each patient’s individual circumstances and preferences. The CAP,
IASLC, and AMP make no warranty, express or implied, regarding
guidelines and statements and specifically exclude any warranties
of merchantability and fitness for a particular use or purpose. The
CAP, IASLC, and AMP assume no responsibility for any injury or
damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any use
of this statement or for any errors or omissions.
RESULTS
For the reaffirmation of the 2013 guideline recommenda-
tions,
a
total
of
610
studies
met
the
search
term
requirements. Following a review of the 610 abstracts, the
full texts of 77 studies that met the inclusion criteria and
were likely to refute or change the 2013 recommendations
were reviewed. A total of 21 articles were included for data
extraction. Excluded articles were available as discussion or
background references.
For the new key questions, 1654 articles met the search
term requirements. Based on review of these abstracts, 488
articles met the inclusion criteria and continued to full-text
review. Articles that addressed any of the new key questions
were moved to a second-level full-text–review phase. A total
of 118 articles were included for data extraction. Excluded
articles were available as discussion or background refer-
ences.
The panel convened 5 times (3 times by teleconference
and 2 face-to-face meetings) to develop the scope, draft
recommendations, review and respond to solicited feed-
back, and assess the quality of evidence that supports the
final recommendations. A nominal group technique was
used by the panel for consensus decision making to
encourage unique input with balanced participation among
group members. An open comment period was held from
June 28 to August 2, 2016, during which the 2013 guideline
statements and new draft recommendations and statements
were posted for public comment. The public comment
period was posted on the AMP Web site at www.amp.org.
All 2013 recommendations received strong agreement
(95%–99%) from the open comment period participants.
There were 20 new draft statements with strong agreement,
ranging from 86% to 97%, from the open comment period
participants (refer to Outcomes in the SDC for full details).
The expert panel members were assigned to review the
public comments in small groups. The panel modified the
draft statements and recommended the deletion of 1 expert
consensus opinion and a no recommendation statement
based on the feedback during the considered judgment
process. The final recommendations were approved by the
expert panel with a vote. The panel considered benefits and
harms, required resources, feasibility, and acceptability
throughout the entire process, although neither cost nor
Table 1.
Grades for Strength of Evidencea
Designation
Description
Quality of Evidence
Convincing
High confidence that available evidence reflects true effect. Further
research is very unlikely to change the confidence in the estimate
of effect.
High/intermediate quality of evidence.
Adequate
Moderate confidence that available evidence reflects true effect.
Further research is likely to have an important impact on the
confidence in estimate of effect and may change the estimate.
Intermediate/low quality of evidence.
Inadequate
Little confidence that available evidence reflects true effect. Further
research is very likely to have an important impact on the
confidence in the estimate of effect and is likely to change the
estimate.
Low/insufficient evidence and expert panel uses formal
consensus process to reach recommendation.
Insufficient
Evidence is insufficient to discern net effect. Any estimate of effect
is very uncertain.
Insufficient evidence and expert panel uses formal
consensus process to reach recommendation.
a Adapted from J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64(4):401–406, Balshem H, Helfand M, Schunemann HJ, et al. GRADE guidelines: 3. Rating the quality of
evidence, copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.262
Table 2.
Strength of Recommendationsa
Designation
Recommendation
Rationale
Strong recommendation
Recommend for or against a particular molecular
testing practice in lung cancer (can include must
or should).
Supported by convincing (high) or adequate (intermediate)
quality of evidence and clear benefit that outweighs any
harms.
Recommendation
Recommend for or against a particular molecular
testing practice in lung cancer (can include
should or may).
Some limitations in quality of evidence (adequate
[intermediate] or inadequate [low]), balance of benefits
and harms, values, or costs, but panel concludes that
there is sufficient evidence to inform a
recommendation.
Expert consensus opinion
Recommend for or against a particular molecular
testing practice in lung cancer (can include
should or may).
Serious limitations in quality of evidence (inadequate
[low, very low] or insufficient), balance of benefits and
harms, values, or costs, but panel consensus is that a
statement is necessary.
No recommendation
No recommendation for or against a particular
molecular testing practice in lung cancer.
Insufficient evidence, confidence, or agreement to provide
a recommendation.
a Data derived from Andrews et al.263
324
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 cost-effectiveness analyses were performed. A description of
the benefits and harms of implementing the guideline
statements is included in the SDC (SDC Table 3).
Each organization instituted a review process to approve
the guideline. For the CAP, an independent review panel
representing the Council on Scientific Affairs was assembled
to review and approve the guideline. The independent
review panel was masked to the expert panel and vetted
through the conflict of interest process. The IASLC approval
process required review and approval by the IASLC Board of
Directors. The AMP approval process required content
review by an independent subject matter expert panel, led
by the Publications & Communications chair, with repre-
sentation from the Clinical Practice Committee and Solid
Tumors Subdivision leadership, and organizational approval
by the AMP Executive Committee.
GUIDELINE STATEMENTS
Reaffirmation of 2013 Recommendations
The 2013 guideline recommended universal testing of
lung cancer patients with advanced-stage cancers with an
adenocarcinoma component, using molecular diagnosis for
activating ‘‘hot-spot’’ mutations in EGFR exons 18 to 21 with
at least 1% prevalence (ie, codons 709 and 719, exon 19
deletion 768, and exon 20 insertions 790, 858, and 861), and
using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for rear-
rangements involving ALK. Any methodology or testing
algorithm with suitable analytic sensitivity (ability to detect
mutations in formalin-fixed samples with 50% or more
malignant cells) and turnaround time (10 days between
sample receipt and reporting of all results), with appropriate
validation and deployment under the Clinical Laboratory
Improvement Act of 1988, was acceptable.
The 2013 guideline recommended against applying
clinical parameters (eg, tobacco exposure, age, sex, ethnicity)
to select patients for testing, testing pure squamous
carcinomas, using KRAS negativity as a determinant of
anti-EGFR therapy, using IHC for EGFR or ALK testing, and
using FISH for EGFR testing.
The 2013 guideline left several decisions open to each
institution to set policy, such as whether or not to test early-
stage patients, whether or not to use clinical predictors to
select patients with minimally sampled squamous carcino-
ma biopsies such that a mixed adenosquamous carcinoma
could not be excluded, and whether or not to use a
simultaneous or sequential testing approach. Of these, the
question concerning testing early-stage disease remains
open, and awaits data from more clinical trials before an
evidence-based recommendation can be made. Although
the American Society of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice
Guidelines Committee highlighted consideration of molec-
ular testing for early-stage lung cancer patients,4 our
opinion remains that each institution should set its own
policy regarding testing patients with early-stage disease,
balancing the benefit of having results on record from
testing a high-quality resection sample for alterations that
are likely to become necessary at a time of future
progression when a high-quality sample could be hard to
obtain against the cost of testing patients for whom a subset
will be surgically cured and never need the test result.
Accordingly, the testing recommended below applies to
patients with advanced-stage (stages IIIB and IV) lung
cancer.
Following review of literature published since 2013, the
original recommendations are largely reaffirmed. Several
statements have gained strength with the publication of
additional supporting evidence (SDC Tables 4a, 4b, and 5).
Some warranted a complete reevaluation in this revision,
and will appear subsequently (Table 3); these include the
use of IHC for ALK, the use of multigene NGS panels, and
the question of testing nonadenocarcinoma samples.
Of the remaining 2013 recommendations, the following
changes are made:
1. Any Cytology Sample With Adequate Cellularity
and Preservation May Be Tested.—The original recom-
mendation preferred cell blocks over smears. A recent
systematic review28 identified by the literature search has
indicated that numerous studies have been published
showing excellent performance of smear preparations,
such that this preference is no longer appropriate. It is
incumbent upon any laboratory that tests cytopathology
specimens to perform appropriate validation studies of
these as separate sample types, distinct from tissue and
blood samples.
2. Analytic Methods Must Be Able to Detect Mutation
in a Sample With 20% or More Malignant Cell
Content.—Although the original studies demonstrating
response of EGFR-mutated lung cancers to treatment with
EGFR inhibitors used unmodified Sanger sequencing with a
sensitivity limit of 50% tumor cellularity, this is insufficient
in practice because many lung cancer samples are small and
comprise a majority of benign stromal cells, and most of the
larger phase III clinical trials that confirmed the clinical
Table 3.
Summary of the Updated Statements With Strength of Recommendationsa
2013 Statement
2018 Statement
Expert consensus opinion: Cytologic samples are also suitable for
EGFR and ALK testing, with cell blocks being preferred over
smear preparations.
Recommendation: Pathologists may use either cell blocks or other
cytologic preparations as suitable specimens for lung cancer
biomarker molecular testing.
Expert consensus opinion: Laboratories should use EGFR test
methods that are able to detect mutations in specimens with at
least 50% cancer cell content, although laboratories are strongly
encouraged to use (or have available at an external reference
laboratory) more sensitive tests that are able to detect mutations in
specimens with as little as 10% cancer cells.
Expert consensus opinion: Laboratories should use, or have available
at an external reference laboratory, clinical lung cancer biomarker
molecular testing assays that are able to detect molecular
alterations in specimens with as little as 20% cancer cells.
Recommendation: Immunohistochemistry for total EGFR is not
recommended for selection of EGFR TKI therapy.
Strong recommendation: Laboratories should not use total EGFR
expression by IHC testing to select patients for EGFR-targeted TKI
therapy.
Abbreviations: IHC, immunohistochemistry; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
a Supplemental Table 4b includes a list of the 2013 reaffirmed statements.
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
325
 utility of EGFR mutation testing used polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)–based methods that were more sensitive
than unmodified Sanger sequencing. Given the widespread
availability of technology capable of reliably detecting
lower-frequency mutational events in small samples, it is
no longer appropriate to offer a low-sensitivity test that
cannot test tumors with 20% to 50% tumor content and
requires patients to undergo more procedures, and poten-
tially more invasive procedures, solely to procure a tissue
sample with high tumor content.
3. It Is Not Appropriate to Use IHC for EGFR
Mutation Testing.—There is no role whatsoever for IHC
against total EGFR protein as a determinant of treatment
with an EGFR kinase inhibitor. The targetable mutations
lead to activation of the cytoplasmic kinase of this
transmembrane protein, but that has no bearing on the
Table 4.
Summary of 2018 Guideline Statements
Guideline Statements
Strength of Recommendation
Key Question 1: Which new genes should be tested for lung cancer patients?
1. ROS1 testing must be performed on all lung adenocarcinoma patients, irrespective of clinical
characteristics.
Strong recommendation
2. ROS1 IHC may be used as a screening test in lung adenocarcinoma patients; however, positive ROS1
IHC results should be confirmed by a molecular or cytogenetic method.
Expert consensus opinion
3. BRAF molecular testing is currently not indicated as a routine stand-alone assay outside the context of a
clinical trial. It is appropriate to include BRAF as part of larger testing panels performed either initially
or when routine EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 testing are negative.
Expert consensus opinion
4. RET molecular testing is not recommended as a routine stand-alone assay outside the context of a
clinical trial. It is appropriate to include RET as part of larger testing panels performed either initially or
when routine EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 testing are negative.
Expert consensus opinion
5. ERBB2 (HER2) molecular testing is not indicated as a routine stand-alone assay outside the context of a
clinical trial. It is appropriate to include ERBB2 (HER2) mutation analysis as part of a larger testing
panel performed either initially or when routine EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 testing are negative.
Expert consensus opinion
6. KRAS molecular testing is not indicated as a routine stand-alone assay as a sole determinant of targeted
therapy. It is appropriate to include KRAS as part of larger testing panels performed either initially or
when routine EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 testing are negative.
Expert consensus opinion
7. MET molecular testing is not indicated as a routine stand-alone assay outside the context of a clinical
trial. It is appropriate to include MET as part of larger testing panels performed either initially or when
routine EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 testing are negative.
Expert consensus opinion
Key Question 2: What methods should be used to perform molecular testing?
8. IHC is an equivalent alternative to FISH for ALK testing.
Recommendation
9. Multiplexed genetic sequencing panels are preferred over multiple single-gene tests to identify other
treatment options beyond EGFR, ALK, and ROS1.
Expert consensus opinion
10. Laboratories should ensure test results that are unexpected, discordant, equivocal, or otherwise of low
confidence are confirmed or resolved using an alternative method or sample.
Expert consensus opinion
Key Question 3: Is molecular testing appropriate for lung cancers that do not have an adenocarcinoma
component?
11. Physicians may use molecular biomarker testing in tumors with histologies other than adenocarcinoma
when clinical features indicate a higher probability of an oncogenic driver.
Expert consensus opinion
Key Question 4: What testing is indicated for patients with targetable mutations who have relapsed
on targeted therapy?
12. In lung adenocarcinoma patients who harbor sensitizing EGFR mutations and have progressed after
treatment with an EGFR-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor, physicians must use EGFR T790M mutational
testing when selecting patients for third-generation EGFR-targeted therapy.
Strong recommendation
13. Laboratories testing for EGFR T790M mutation in patients with secondary clinical resistance to EGFR-
targeted kinase inhibitors should deploy assays capable of detecting EGFR T790M mutations in as little
as 5% of viable cells.
Recommendation
14. There is currently insufficient evidence to support a recommendation for or against routine testing for
ALK mutational status for lung adenocarcinoma patients with sensitizing ALK mutations who have
progressed after treatment with an ALK-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
No recommendation
Key Question 5: What is the role of testing for circulating cell-free DNA for lung cancer patients?
15. There is currently insufficient evidence to support the use of circulating cell-free plasma DNA
molecular methods for the diagnosis of primary lung adenocarcinoma.
No recommendation
16. In some clinical settings in which tissue is limited and/or insufficient for molecular testing, physicians
may use a cell-free plasma DNA assay to identify EGFR mutations.
Recommendation
17. Physicians may use cell-free plasma DNA methods to identify EGFR T790M mutations in lung
adenocarcinoma patients with progression or secondary clinical resistance to EGFR-targeted tyrosine
kinase inhibitors; testing of the tumor sample is recommended if the plasma result is negative.
Expert consensus opinion
18. There is currently insufficient evidence to support the use of circulating tumor cell molecular analysis
for the diagnosis of primary lung adenocarcinoma, the identification of EGFR or other mutations, or the
identification of EGFR T790M mutations at the time of EGFR TKI resistance.
No recommendation
Abbreviations: FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; IHC, immunohistochemistry; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
326
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 extent of expression at the cell surface, which is what is
detected by the total EGFR immunostain. Although EGFR
expression by IHC was performed for some of the very
early studies of EGFR kinase inhibitors in the start of this
century, clinical responses were seen in patients with
mutations but absent/weak IHC expression, and poor
responses were seen in patients with strong IHC expres-
sion but no mutations.
Following the discovery of EGFR mutations, antibodies
were developed for IHC directed at the most common
mutated forms of the protein, most notably the L858R
substitution and the 746 to 750 ELREA deletion. The
original guideline allowed for the use of the mutant-specific
EGFR antibodies by IHC in a setting with extremely limited
material. Although published evidence for these antibodies
shows good accuracy for the L858R activating mutation and
for some of the exon 19 deletions, these antibodies have
poor sensitivity for other exon 19 deletions, insensitivity to
less common mutations (eg, codon 719 mutations), and
false-positive results with exon 20 insertions.29 Overall, the
performance is suboptimal for reliable detection of EGFR
mutations. Given that advances in molecular diagnostic
technology now enable analysis of very limited samples as
well as circulating tumor DNA (see below), at this time
there is no role for routine use of mutant-specific IHC in
selecting anti-EGFR treatment for lung cancer patients.
New Recommendations
Question 1: Which New Genes Should Be Tested for
Lung Cancer Patients?—In the 2013 guideline, genes fell
into 1 of 2 categories: testing is necessary (EGFR, ALK), or
testing is investigational. One gene, KRAS, was considered
conditionally necessary in the context of sequential testing
algorithms because of its ease of analysis and mutual
exclusivity with EGFR and ALK. By 2018, however, we
believe that there are now 3 categories into which genes
should be placed. One set of genes must be offered by all
laboratories that test lung cancers, as an absolute minimum:
EGFR, ALK, and ROS1. A second group of genes should be
included in any expanded panel that is offered for lung
cancer patients: BRAF, MET, RET, ERBB2 (HER2), and
KRAS, if adequate material is available. KRAS testing may
also be offered as a single-gene test to exclude patients from
expanded panel testing. All other genes are considered
investigational at the time of publication.
In this context, institutions providing care for lung cancer
patients have a choice: (1) offer a comprehensive cancer
panel that includes all of the genes in the first 2 categories
(EGFR, ALK, ROS1, BRAF, MET, ERBB2 [HER2], KRAS, RET)
for all appropriate patients, or (2) offer targeted testing for
the genes in the must-test category (EGFR, ALK, ROS1) for
all appropriate patients and offer as a second test an
expanded panel containing the second-category genes
(BRAF, MET, ERBB2 [HER2], and RET) for patients who
are suitable candidates for clinical trials, possibly after
performing a single-gene KRAS test to exclude patients with
KRAS-mutant cancers from expanded panel testing. Table 4
includes a list of the recommendation statements with the
strength of recommendations.
1. Strong Recommendation.—ROS1 testing must be per-
formed on all lung advanced-stage adenocarcinoma pa-
tients, irrespective of clinical characteristics.
The strength of evidence was convincing to support the
use of ROS1 molecular (ie, reverse transcription PCR [RT-
PCR] or sequencing) or cytogenetic (ie, FISH or other in situ
hybridization) testing to identify ROS1 rearrangements. The
strength of evidence supporting the use of any clinical
characteristic to identify patients who should receive ROS1
testing was adequate. This recommendation is evidence-
based and supported by 9 studies,30–38 6 of which informed
on the association between ROS1 rearrangement and
patient or tumor characteristics30,31,34–37 and consisted of 1
prospective cohort study (PCS),35 1 prospective-retrospec-
tive cohort study (PRCS),31 and 4 retrospective cohort
studies (RCSs).30,34,36,37 The 3 remaining studies assessed
clinical outcomes of patients treated with the ROS1-targeted
therapy crizotinib32,33,38 and included 1 nonrandomized
clinical trial33 and 3 RCSs.32,38 All included studies were
assessed for quality and none were found to have
methodologic flaws that would raise concerns about the
studies’ findings (SDC Table 6). Refer to SDC Table 7 for a
summary of findings from studies supporting the use of
ROS1 molecular or cytogenetic testing to enable selection of
patients for ROS1-targeted therapy.
Although relatively rare, accounting for less than 2% of
non–small cell lung carcinomas30,31,34 and 2% to 3% of lung
adenocarcinomas,30,34,35 structural rearrangements involving
the ROS1 gene generate an oncogenic fusion that can be
treated successfully with targeted inhibitors. A single phase I
clinical trial of 50 NSCLC patients demonstrated that the
presence of a ROS1 rearrangement by FISH or RT-PCR
predicts response to targeted inhibition using crizotinib,
with a response rate of 72% and median progression-free
survival of 19.2 months.33 Based on this trial, the FDA
approved the expanded use of crizotinib in patients with
ROS1-rearranged NSCLC in 2016. A European multi-
institutional retrospective study of 32 patients with ROS1-
rearranged NSCLC treated with crizotinib demonstrated an
80% response rate and 9.1-month progression-free surviv-
al.32 Overall survival for patients with ROS1-rearranged
tumors irrespective of use of targeted therapy appears
longer than that for patients with other molecular alter-
ations undergoing targeted therapy.38,39
As with ALK, ROS1 activation is driven by structural
variants, with multiple different partners fusing to the C-
terminal portion of ROS1 containing the cytoplasmic
tyrosine kinase and driving downstream signaling through
MAPK, JAK/STAT, and PI3K pathways. Common fusion
Table 5.
Emerging Markers for Molecular Testing in
Lung Cancer
Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 (MEK1/MAP2K1)
Fibroblast growth factor receptor 1–4 (FGFR 1–4)
Neurotrophic tyrosine kinase, receptor, type 1–3 (NTRK1-3)
Neuregulin 1 (NRG1)
Ras-like without CAAX 1 (RIT1)
Neurofibromin 1 (NF1)
Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit
alpha (PIK3CA)
AKT serine/threonine kinase 1 (AKT1)
NRAS proto-oncogene, GTPase (NRAS)
Mechanistic target of rapamycin (MTOR)
Tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1)
Tuberous sclerosis 2 (TSC2)
KIT proto-oncogene receptor tyrosine kinase (KIT)
Platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA)
Discoidin domain receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (DDR2)
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
327
 partners include SLC34A2, CD74, and TPM3, among others.
The role of wild-type ROS1 is still being elucidated, but it
shares similar structure with ALK, albeit with significant
differences, notably absence of a dimerization domain, an
extracellular domain with some resemblance to cell adhe-
sion molecules, and no clear ligand.
As with EGFR mutations and ALK rearrangements, light to
never smoking history has been associated with an increased
incidence of ROS1 rearrangements in patients with lung
adenocarcinoma.30,37 However, this association has not been
consistently observed across studies.34 Other clinical charac-
teristics, such as younger age, female sex, and non-Asian
ethnicity, have been associated with ROS1 rearrangement in
isolated studies only.30,31,35 Therefore, clinical characteristics
should not be used to either select or exclude patients from
testing for ROS1 rearrangements. ROS1 rearrangements
occur in a mutually exclusive fashion with other oncogenic
driver alterations (such as EGFR and KRAS mutation and ALK
rearrangement). In recognition of the rarity of ROS1
rearrangement, it may be reasonable to perform sequential
testing of EGFR and ALK followed by ROS1 testing. Indeed,
the frequency of ROS1 rearrangements is enriched to 5% to
10% in otherwise driver (ie, EGFR, ALK, KRAS, BRAF)-
negative lung adenocarcinomas.31,37
Notably, in the United States in 2016, crizotinib therapy in
ROS1-rearranged tumors does not require the use of an
FDA-approved companion diagnostic. Published methods
that have established clinical utility of testing ROS1 in order
to choose ROS1-targeted therapy have relied primarily upon
FISH and RT-PCR. Outside the United States, a diagnostic
test using RT-PCR was used for an international phase II
clinical trial,40 involving mainly East Asian countries, for
selection of tumors with ROS1 rearrangement. This assay
has been approved as an in vitro diagnostic in Europe and
China, and may be recognized as a companion diagnostic
test in some countries. Although targeted RT-PCR assays
may be challenging because of variation in ROS1 break
points (typically introns 31–35) and partner genes, capture-
based sequencing strategies for RNA or DNA may be used,
provided they are properly validated on known positive
samples. Within the United States, FISH methods have been
published more frequently. Fluorescence in situ hybridiza-
tion testing should be performed with a break-apart probe
design given the multiple fusion partners, and should show
rearrangement, defined as signals split by at least 1 probe
diameter, in 15% or more of tumor cells.41
2. Expert Consensus Opinion.—ROS1 IHC may be used as a
screening test in advanced-stage lung adenocarcinoma
patients; however, positive ROS1 IHC results should be
confirmed by a molecular or cytogenetic method.
The strength of evidence is inadequate supporting the use
of IHC as a screening assay for ROS1 molecular testing. This
statement is evidence-based and supported by 6 studies,42–47
consisting of 2 PCSs,43,44 1 PRCS,42 and 3 RCSs.45–47 Five
studies compared ROS1 IHC with a FISH reference
test42–45,47 and 1 study compared ROS1 IHC with an RT-
PCR reference test.46 Using reported true-positive, false-
positive, true-negative, and false-negative data from studies
comparing IHC with FISH, an MA was conducted to
determine a pooled estimate of sensitivity and specificity for
ROS1 IHC (Figure 1). All included studies were assessed for
quality and none were found to have methodologic flaws
that would raise concerns about the studies’ findings (SDC
Table 8). Refer to SDC Table 9 for a summary of findings
from studies supporting the use of IHC as a screening assay
for ROS1 molecular testing.
In light of the relative rarity of ROS1 rearrangement
events in NSCLC, screening by IHC may be preferable to
FISH or molecular techniques in some settings. Interpreta-
tion of ROS1 IHC is challenging, however, as expression can
be seen in a patchy pattern, typically at weak intensity, in up
to a third of tumors that do not have an underlying
rearrangement.44,45,48 Although some studies suggest that
ROS1 expression in the absence of a rearrangement may
have prognostic significance,48 focal or patchy expression in
tumor cells is rarely associated with a ROS1 rearrangement
and therefore is unlikely to predict response to ROS1-
targeted therapy. Moreover, the pattern of staining can vary
among fusion types, including granular to globular staining
in CD74-ROS1 fusions, weak membranous staining in EZR-
ROS1 fusions, and vesicular localization staining in GOPC-
ROS1 fusions.45
A single commercially available antibody clone (D4D6, Cell
Signaling Technology, Danvers, Massachusetts) has been
used in studies published to date. Most retrospective studies
of ROS1 IHC using the D4D6 antibody demonstrate a
sensitivity of 100% relative to FISH or RT-PCR.35,42–47 Tumors
lacking ROS1 expression can be safely interpreted as lacking
a ROS1 fusion. However, the specificity of ROS1 IHC is more
variable, ranging from 92% to 100% using different methods
and interpretive cutoffs.35,42–47 Meta-analysis of 5 studies
identified by the literature search determined a pooled
sensitivity of 96% (95% CI, 71%–99%) and specificity of
94% (95% CI, 89%–96%) for IHC compared with FISH when
the D4D6 antibody with a staining intensity of at least 2þ (as
defined within the study) was used (Figure 1). Several cutoffs
have been proposed using intensity alone or H score
(intensity 3 percentage of tumor cells staining). In most
studies, FISH- or molecularly confirmed ROS1-rearranged
tumors have at least moderate-intensity ROS1 protein
expression, but published evidence is insufficient to recom-
mend one specific cutoff or scoring system,42,45 and each
laboratory must validate its own interpretive cutoff from
known positive and negative samples.
Because of imperfect specificity and challenges related to
interpretation of nonspecific expression, we recommend
that all ROS1 IHC positive results undergo confirmation by
FISH or a molecular method (ie, RT-PCR, NGS) prior to
considering a patient for ROS1-targeted therapy. Given the
high sensitivity of IHC, however, tumors that clearly lack
ROS1 staining can be interpreted as negative for ROS1
fusion.
Additional Genes
Of the genes newly included in this guideline, only ROS1
testing must be offered to all appropriate lung cancer
patients. Testing for the following genes should be included
with any expanded multigene panel testing performed for
lung cancer patients, whether or not the panel is offered for
all lung cancer patients, or if the panel is reserved as a
second-line test for EGFR/ALK/ROS1 wild-type patients
seeking clinical trials.
3. Expert Consensus Opinion.—BRAF molecular testing is
currently not indicated as a routine stand-alone assay outside
the context of a clinical trial. It is appropriate to include BRAF
as part of larger testing panels performed either initially or
when routine EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 testing is negative.
The strength of evidence was inadequate to support the
use of BRAF molecular testing. This statement was
328
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 evidence-based and supported by 9 studies: 4 PCSs49–52 and
3 RCSs,53–55 all of which informed on the association
between BRAF mutation and patient or tumor characteris-
tics,49–55 and 2 additional nonrandomized clinical trials that
assessed the activity of a BRAF inhibitor in p.V600E mutant
patients.56,57 All included studies were assessed for quality
and none were found to have methodologic flaws that
would raise concerns about the studies’ findings (SDC Table
10). Refer to SDC Table 11 for a summary of findings from
studies supporting the use of BRAF molecular testing.
Activating mutations in BRAF, especially p.V600E, lead to
oncogenic signaling through MAPK, and are rare recurrent
alterations in lung adenocarcinoma, seen in 0.5% to 4.9% of
tumors.49–52,54 In lung cancer, data from a 2016 phase II
single-arm clinical trial56 showed that (1) single-agent
dabrafenib given in second line to stage IV BRAF p.V600E
mutant NSCLC had a partial response rate of 33% and
disease control rate of 58% and (2) combination dabrafenib-
trametinib therapy given in second line to stage IV BRAF
p.V600E mutant lung adenocarcinoma had a partial
response rate of 63% and disease control rate of 75%.
Based on these data, the FDA conferred a breakthrough
therapy designation for the combination treatment in BRAF
p.V600E mutation–positive NSCLC, and FDA approval was
granted in 2017. Hence, this was the most controversial of
all recommendations among the working panel. Although
Figure 1.
Forest plot of sensitivity and specificity for immunohistochemistry (IHC)-based determination of ROS1 rearrangement positivity compared
with fluorescence in situ hybridization. Pooled estimate of sensitivity and specificity based on bivariate analysis of included studies. All included
studies used an IHC staining intensity of at least 2þ with a D4D6 antibody to define ROS1 rearrangement positivity. Abbreviations: FN, false-negative;
FP
, false-positive; TN, true-negative; TP
, true-positive.
Figure 2.
Forest plot of sensitivity and specificity for immunohistochemistry-based determination of ALK translocation positivity compared with
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Pooled estimate of sensitivity and specificity based on bivariate analysis of included studies. Included studies
assessed 5A4, D5F3, or either 5A4 or D5F3 antibodies with positivity cutoffs based on either presence of any staining or staining intensity.
Abbreviations: FN, false-negative; FP
, false-positive; neg, negative; pos, positive; TN, true-negative; TP
, true-positive.
Figure 3.
Forest plot of sensitivity and specificity for various assays determining EGFR mutation positivity with cell-free DNA compared with tumor
tissue. Pooled estimate of sensitivity and specificity based on bivariate analysis of included studies. Four included studies compared tumor tissue
samples with plasma samples using the same detection system,234,235,242,243 and a fifth study232 obtained plasma samples from patients with known
EGFR and KRAS tumor mutation status. Abbreviations: ARMs, amplification refractory mutation system; ddPCR, droplet digital PCR; FN, false-
negative; FP
, false-positive; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PNA/LNA, peptide nucleic acid–locked nucleic acid; TN, true-negative; TP
, true-
positive.
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
329
 there was a strong opinion in the working group that BRAF
mutation analysis should be performed at the time of initial
molecular testing in lung adenocarcinoma, the published
evidence available at the time of publication lacked
controlled prospective trials, and therefore lacked the
strength to warrant an international recommendation for
single-gene testing for BRAF for all lung adenocarcinoma
patients. We anticipate the publication of stronger evidence
supporting the utility of BRAF inhibition in BRAF-mutant
lung cancer, and our opinion is that BRAF testing will be
proven necessary. We expect that the next revision of this
guideline will include a recommendation to include single-
gene testing for BRAF alongside EGFR, ALK, and ROS1, but
we are unable to make that recommendation in the spring
of 2017. Although stand-alone single-gene testing for BRAF
is not currently recommended, if a panel strategy is used,
either initially or for patients who are known wild type for
EGFR, ALK, and ROS1, then BRAF should be included.
As with EGFR and KRAS mutations, selected hot-spot
mutations in BRAF exert an oncogenic effect. The V-raf
murine sarcoma homolog b (BRAF) gene encodes for a
nonreceptor serine-threonine kinase in the MAPK kinase
signaling pathway, between RAS and MEK. The most
common BRAF mutation in NSCLC is the c.1799T.A
(p.V600E) point mutation that is the predominant mutation
in many other cancers, including melanoma, papillary
thyroid cancer, colorectal cancer, hairy cell leukemia, and
ganglioglioma. However, in contrast to other cancers with
BRAF mutations, lung cancers frequently have non-p.V600E
BRAF mutations, including other mutations at codon 600
(eg, p.V600K) and nearby codons in exon 15, and
substitutions at codons 466 and 469 in exon 11.
Like many other targetable oncogenes in lung cancer,
BRAF mutations are more frequent in adenocarcinomas
than in squamous cell carcinomas. BRAF p.V600E mutation
is more frequent in females52,54 and never smokers54 in some
studies, but several studies failed to show these associa-
tions.49,50,53,58 One distinction between BRAF mutations and
other targetable oncogenes is that non-p.V600E BRAF
mutations (particularly the exon 11 mutations) may coexist
with mutations in KRAS,49,52,53,59 whereas the p.V600E
mutations are mutually exclusive of KRAS, EGFR, or ALK
alterations.
Single-gene assays for BRAF are in wide use for other
cancer types, particularly for melanoma patients being
considered for targeted therapy, but most of these methods
cannot detect the exon 11 mutations that are seen in lung
cancer. Although the evidence supporting utility of BRAF
testing was restricted to the p.V600E mutations, our opinion
is that testing for BRAF, done as part of a large panel or for
clinical trial enrollment, should use a method that evaluates
at a minimum exons 11 and 15.
A similar challenge arises concerning the use of mutation-
specific IHC using antibodies against the p.V600E mutant
protein (VE1), which have been widely used in melanoma
diagnosis. Reported data on small numbers of lung cancer
cases58,60 demonstrate the VE1 clone can stain between 90%
and 100% of p.V600E-mutant adenocarcinomas. In 1 of
these studies, all non-p.V600E cases were negative on IHC
testing,61 whereas in another, a single non-p.V600–mutated
case out of 21, with a unique 599 insertion T mutation,
showed positive staining. There is currently insufficient
evidence to support a recommendation either for or against
BRAF p.V600E IHC (VE1) testing in NSCLC.
4. Expert Consensus Opinion.—RET molecular testing is not
recommended as a routine stand-alone assay outside the
context of a clinical trial. It is appropriate to include RET as
part of larger testing panels performed either initially or
when routine EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 testing is negative.
The strength of evidence to support the use of RET
molecular testing was inadequate. This statement is
evidence-based and supported by 3 studies,37,62,63 consisting
of 1 PCS62 and 2 RCSs.37,63 All included studies were
assessed for quality and none were found to have
methodologic flaws that would raise concerns about the
studies’ findings (SDC Table 12). Refer to SDC Table 13 for a
summary of findings from studies supporting the use of RET
molecular testing.
Structural variants causing RET fusions are rare, being
found in 0.6% to 0.9% of NSCLCs and in 1.2% to 2% of
adenocarcinomas.62,64–67 The potential to treat RET-positive
lung cancers with inhibitors of the RET kinase is being
explored in phase II clinical trials,68,69 although small series
and case reports have shown promise.70,71 Given the rarity
of RET rearrangements and limited evidence of therapeutic
benefit, testing for RET alterations is not recommended as a
stand-alone test for all lung adenocarcinoma patients.
However, any large multigene panel test developed for lung
cancer patients, either for initial workup or for patients who
are wild type for EGFR, ALK, and ROS1, should include RET.
As with ALK and ROS1 rearrangements, RET is activated
by rearrangements that fuse the tyrosine kinase domain of
RET with coiled-coil dimerization domains of one of a
variety of recurring partner genes, including KIF5B (the most
common, at 90%),64,72,73 CCDC6,65,74 NCOA4,62 and
TRIM33.72 RET rearrangement is mutually exclusive with
aberrations in EGFR, KRAS, ALK, HER2, and BRAF in lung
cancer.62,64,65
RET fusion occurs more frequently in never smokers than
ever smokers.37,62,64,66,72 Patients with RET fusion harboring
tumors are usually younger than patients with an EGFR
mutation and have an equal sex distribution.67 RET fusion
proteins have been detected in adenocarcinoma37,62,64 and in
adenosquamous carcinoma.62 Histologic subtypes in ade-
nocarcinomas include those with mucinous/signet ring cells
and those with a cribriform37,62,65 or solid growth pattern.37,62
However, no clinical or histologic features (other than
excluding from testing pure squamous histology cases)
should be used to select a patient for RET testing.
Multiple methods have been applied for RET analysis,
including break-apart FISH analysis,75 IHC,37 RT-PCR,75 and
NGS.37 RET FISH is particularly challenging, however,
because of the narrow spacing between the split probe
signals seen in the common fusion types, and a pattern of
split RET signals separated by as little as 1 signal diameter
distance is interpreted as positive.37 Similar to ALK
rearrangement testing by FISH, the threshold for RET FISH
positivity for rearrangement is 15% of cells with split signals
or single 30 probe signals. In another study, a 4-colored RET
FISH assay was used62; samples were positive for RET
rearrangement or KIF5B-RET fusion if more than 20% of
tumor cells exhibited split red-green signals or touching
golden-green signals, respectively.
One recent retrospective study used RET IHC (anti-RET
antibody ab134100, Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom)
showing diffusely granular cytoplasm staining and occa-
sionally membranous or perinuclear staining, with moderate
to strong intensity. A sensitivity of 100% and specificity of
330
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 88% were reported,37 although corroborating evidence is
not strong enough to warrant a recommendation.
Although multiplex RT-PCR may be successful for
common fusions involving KIF5B-RET and CCDC6-RET,75
as with ALK and ROS1, targeted RT-PCR alone is usually
insufficient to detect new partners or isoforms. However,
although the diversity of treatable rearrangements in ALK
and ROS1 has matured sufficiently through years of testing
and clinical trials, such that targeted RT-PCR assays for
these genes can be designed with adequate clinical
sensitivity, the diversity of treatable RET rearrangements is
earlier in evolution. A capture-based sequencing approach,
involving DNA or RNA, may be more sensitive and more
readily integrated into a large multigene panel.76
5. Expert Consensus Opinion.—ERBB2 (HER2) molecular
testing is not indicated as a routine stand-alone assay
outside the context of a clinical trial. It is appropriate to
include ERBB2 (HER2) mutation analysis as part of a larger
testing panel performed either initially or when routine
EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 testing is negative.
The strength of evidence was inadequate to support the
use of ERBB2 (HER2) molecular testing. This recommenda-
tion was evidence-based and supported by 10 studies, 9 that
reported on the association between ERBB2 (HER2) and
patient or tumor characteristics49,77–84 and 1 that assessed
the use of ERBB2-targeted therapy (dacomitinib)85 in
patients with ERBB2 (HER2) mutations and amplifications.
All included studies were assessed for quality and none were
found to have methodologic flaws that would raise concerns
about the studies’ findings (SDC Table 14). Refer to SDC
Table 15 for a summary of findings from studies supporting
the use of ERBB2 (HER2) molecular testing.
Alterations in the human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 gene (HER2, ERBB2) have emerged as oncogenic
drivers and as potential therapeutic targets in lung
cancer.81,83,84,86 Sequence alterations and gene amplification
occur in this setting and constitute approximately 2% to 3%
and 2% to 5% of reported recurrent alterations, respectively.
Therapeutic targeting of HER2 (the protein product of the
ERBB2 gene) remains an area of active investigation at this
time. Earlier clinical trials selecting patients based on protein
expression by IHC or ERBB2 amplification by FISH did not
demonstrate a clear benefit.87,88 An additional phase II trial
using ERBB2 mutation and ERBB2 amplification for patient
selection demonstrated durable responses to dacomitinib,
but only in patients with specific HER2 mutations.85
In-frame insertions in exon 20 and substitutions at S310
are the most common mutations seen, and are typically
mutually exclusive with other recurrent alterations, includ-
ing mutations in EGFR, KRAS, and BRAF, as well as
rearrangements involving ALK and ROS1. Insertions in
exon 20 are variable, with most being a 12–base pair
duplication of codons 775–778 encoding amino acids
YVMA,81 and are more commonly observed in younger
patients and patients with no smoking history. De novo
ERBB2 amplification may occur with or without ERBB2
mutation,82,84,86 with highly variable reported rates of co-
occurrence from 0% to 87%.81,84,86 Although differences in
methods and criteria defining amplification levels may be
responsible for these observed discrepancies and require
standardization, the higher prevalence of ERBB2 amplifica-
tion independent of ERBB2 mutation suggests that mutation
and amplification could represent distinct markers and
therapeutic targets in lung cancer.89 ERBB2 amplification has
also been reported rarely as a secondary event in patients
with sensitizing EGFR mutations and as a potential
mechanism of resistance following treatment with EGFR
inhibitors.90
In this context and with current evidence, routine stand-
alone testing for ERBB2 mutations is not indicated outside a
clinical trial. Nevertheless, when broader testing is per-
formed through a multiplex assay or NGS, it is appropriate
to include ERBB2 as part of the testing, as it may identify
patients to be directed to clinical trials—in this context,
testing for sequence alterations in ERBB2, particularly
insertions/duplications in exon 20, which have been
associated with response to treatment with targeted
inhibitors of ERBB2 in case reports and small series.85,91
6. Expert Consensus Opinion.—KRAS molecular testing is
not indicated as a routine stand-alone assay as a sole
determinant of targeted therapy. It is appropriate to include
KRAS molecular testing as part of larger testing panels
performed either initially or when routine EGFR, ALK, and
ROS1 testing is negative.
The strength of evidence was adequate to support the use
of KRAS molecular testing when selecting patients for
targeted therapy. The strength of evidence supporting the
use of any clinical characteristic to identify patients who
should receive KRAS testing was inadequate. This statement
is evidence-based and supported by 7 studies,49,51,52,92–95
comprising 2 MAs,93,94 4 PCSs,49,51,52,92 and 1 RCS.95 Five
studies attempted to identify associations between patient
or tumor characteristics and KRAS mutational sta-
tus.49,52,92,93,95 Two MAs93,94 reported on overall survival
and EGFR-TKI response rates when KRAS mutation–
positive patients were treated with standard care. All
included studies were assessed for quality and none were
found to have methodologic flaws that would raise concerns
about the studies’ findings (SDC Table 16). Refer to SDC
Table 17 for a summary of findings from studies supporting
the use of KRAS molecular testing.
KRAS mutations are reported in 20% to 30% of lung
adenocarcinomas. KRAS mutations are encountered more
frequently in people with tobacco exposure, but have been
reported in approximately 5% of lung cancer patients who
have never used tobacco. Most studies indicate an increased
incidence in males and those of white or African ancestry, in
comparison with females and those of Asian ancestry. KRAS
mutations occur most frequently in codon 12 and 13, much
less commonly in codon 61, and rarely in codon 146, and
can readily be detected by quick targeted hot-spot assays (ie,
real-time PCR, droplet digital PCR, or pyrosequencing)
interrogating these codons, as well as incorporated into
larger panel tests. They are typically mutually exclusive with
other driver mutations such as EGFR mutations and ALK
rearrangements.49,51,92,93,95–101
Therapies directed against mutated KRAS have not been
proven clinically effective. For example, although promising
results (37% objective response rate) were obtained in a
phase II study of selumetinib, an inhibitor of MEK1
(downstream of KRAS), plus docetaxel102 in KRAS-mutant
advanced lung cancer, this combination failed to demon-
strate an outcome benefit in the Selumetinib Evaluation as
Combination Therapy-1 (SELECT-1) phase III trial,103 and a
phase II study of selumetinib þ erlotinib in KRAS-mutant
lung cancers failed to show response to selumetinib
independent of erlotinib.104 Hence, intense research inves-
tigation into therapeutic strategies against this common
mutation continues, and it is appropriate to include KRAS in
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
331
 a larger testing panel used for directing patients to
investigational therapies.
Another application of KRAS mutation testing is in a
sequential testing algorithm, with a positive result greatly
diminishing the likelihood of another, targetable oncogenic
alteration. If the KRAS test is performed prior to EGFR, ALK,
or ROS1 testing, however, the laboratory must ensure that
sufficient tumor is available for EGFR, ALK, and ROS1
testing within the recommended time frame, particularly in
the event of a negative KRAS result. Similarly, the presence
of a KRAS mutation renders unlikely the other oncogenes
recommended for larger panels, such as RET, ERBB2
(HER2), and BRAF. In this context, a rapid, targeted assay
for KRAS may have value in helping to determine whether
or not an EGFR/ALK/ROS1 wild-type patient would benefit
from expanded panel testing, in that panel testing would be
less likely to benefit KRAS-mutant cancer patients. This
model may, however, change as technology evolves, as
newer ultrasensitive methods have shown co-occurrence of
driver oncogenes, including KRAS, in subpopulations within
tumors that previously had not been detected by less
sensitive methods.105,106
7. Expert Consensus Opinion.—MET molecular testing is
not indicated as a routine stand-alone assay outside the
context of a clinical trial. It is appropriate to include MET as
part of larger testing panels performed either initially or
when routine EGFR, ALK, and ROS1 testing is negative.
The strength of evidence is inadequate supporting the use
of MET molecular testing. This statement was evidence-
based and supported by 7 studies,107–113 comprising 1 MA,107
1 phase II randomized controlled trial,109 1 PCS,110 and 4
RCSs.108,111–113 All included studies were assessed for quality
and none were found to have methodologic flaws that
would raise concerns about the studies’ finding (SDC Table
18). Refer to SDC Table 19 for a summary of findings from
studies supporting the use of MET molecular testing.
Initially reported as a mechanism of secondary resistance
to EGFR TKI therapy in EGFR-mutant lung cancer,114,115
both the understanding of the mechanism of activation of
MET and the utility of MET testing in lung cancer have gone
through several phases. MET copy gain was initially
recognized in association with secondary resistance to
EGFR inhibitors,114 prompting the development of targeted
therapies that showed disappointing results.116 More re-
cently, interest in targeting MET has been rekindled by the
discovery of activating mutations that may respond to
targeted inhibition.
The MET gene encodes for the receptor for hepatocyte
growth factor (HGFR), and its activation has pleotropic
functions in promoting cell survival, proliferation, motility,
invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition.117–120
HGFR can become activated and drive oncogenesis through
several different mechanisms, including (1) amplification
resulting in high expression of the receptor,121,122 (2) tyrosine
kinase domain mutations resulting in constitutive activation
of the receptor,123 and (3) splicing mutations resulting in
skipping of exon 14 and loss of Y1003, the Casitas B-lineage
lymphoma proto-oncogene (CBL) binding site required for
the ubiquitin-mediated degradation of the protein.124
Although most of the exon-skipping mutations involve
canonical splice sites, some are located further into the
intronic sequence, and thus can be difficult to interpret or
may be missed by assays examining only exons and the
immediately adjacent 50 and 30 splice acceptor and donor
sites.
Activating MET alterations are inhibited by crizotinib, a
treatment for ALK- and ROS1-rearranged lung cancers.
Despite the reported association of the MET gene amplifi-
cation and high protein expression as a poor prognostic
marker107,125 and recent reports that patients with MET
amplification or MET exon 14 mutation are sensitive to
crizotinib in some cases, there is as yet no approved targeted
therapy to treat patients whose tumor harbor these MET
genomic aberrations.126–130 In this context, a routine stand-
alone testing for these MET genomic aberrations or HGFR
protein level is not indicated outside a clinical trial.
Nevertheless, when multiplex testing for putative oncogenic
driver mutations is applied to lung cancer patients, either
initially when testing for EGFR/ALK/ROS1 or after they are
found to be negative, these MET gene aberrations should be
included in the test panels.
To date, more than 100 somatic splice site alterations
resulting in MET exon 14 skipping have been described.
Mutations exhibit a highly diverse sequence composition,
encompassing small insertions, deletions, complex indels,
and single-nucleotide variants, which are primarily located
in splice donor and acceptor sites. Point mutations deeper in
the introns, up to 25 base pairs into the intronic noncoding
regions, adjacent to the splice acceptor sites, have also been
reported at a lower frequency, although many assays do not
interrogate this region. In general, the overall incidence and
the effect of these less common mutations in exon splicing
have not been defined.
Given the wide variability and complexity of mutations
affecting MET exon 14, comprehensive diagnostic testing
could prove challenging depending on the method used.
Targeted NGS-based assays interrogating MET as part of a
wider gene panel are preferred for screening purposes. For
DNA-based testing, assay design should be such as to allow
accurate and full sequencing of exon 14 and its flanking
introns. Novel mutations, particularly those alterations
affecting regions adjacent to splice sites but deeper into
the introns, may require confirmation of exon 14 skipping
using an RNA-based assay. Alternatively, up-front RNA-
based testing interrogating MET as part of a wider gene
panel designed for comprehensive assessment of structural
variants or gene expression may also be used.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization has been traditionally
used for detection of gene amplification in clinical practice.
Currently, there is no guideline for cutoff of MET positivity
in lung cancer specimens. MET amplification has been
classified by using MET:CEP7 ratio as low (�1.8 to �2.2),
intermediate (.2.2 to ,5), and high (�5).131 Other
examples of MET FISH-positive criteria include 5 or more
MET signals per cell132 and a MET:CEP7 ratio of 2 or higher
(PathVysion, Abbott Park, Illinois). Low and intermediate
levels of MET amplification can occur synchronously with
other oncogenic mutations and gene rearrangements
(KRAS, EGFR, BRAF, ERBB2 [HER2], ALK, ROS1, RET) in
up to 63% of lung carcinomas.133 However, this overlap has
not been observed in high–MET-amplification tumors
(MET:CEP7 ratio �5), suggesting that MET amplification
is probably a true oncogenic driver.133 This group of tumors,
with high-level amplification, showed a response to
crizotinib, whereas no response was seen in tumors with
low- or intermediate-level amplification. Importantly, about
20% of lung adenocarcinomas with MET exon 14–skipping
mutations have concurrent high-level MET amplification,
confounding the interpretation of each.125,126,129 Regarding
332
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 the significance of amplification alone, case reports have
shown response to crizotinib.134,135
The same challenges defining a clinically valid cutoff of
MET amplification positivity exist in the setting of acquired
resistance to EGFR TKI. A recent phase II study showed
40% response rate in patients with acquired EGFR TKI
resistance and a MET copy number of 5 or higher when
treated with a combination of gefitinib and capmatinib; no
response was observed in a group with a MET copy number
less than 5.136
Immunohistochemistry for MET protein expression per-
formed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sam-
ples has been the most frequently used method in lung
cancer specimens. A number of commercially available
monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies are directed against
various epitopes of MET, with different sensitivities and
specificities for both total and phosphorylated MET.
Immunohistochemistry procedures and scoring methods
for MET assessment have not been standardized. As a result,
MET protein overexpression in unselected NSCLC cases has
been reported to range from 20% to 70%.137,138 An MA has
found that MET expression by IHC in NSCLC is a negative
prognostic factor in patients with surgically resected
NSCLC.107 A frequently used commercially available anti-
body, particularly in clinical trials, is the CONFIRM anti-
total MET (SP44) rabbit monoclonal primary antibody
(Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, Arizona) directed
against a membranous and cytoplasmic epitope of MET.109
At the time of publication, it remains unclear whether total
MET or phosphoMET protein overexpression represents a
reliable indicator of MET activation. Both MET IHC and
FISH are not predictive of efficacy of onartuzumab
combined with erlotinib in advanced NSCLC patients.116
Other Genes.—The spectrum of recurring alterations in
lung cancer continues to evolve, and several promising
alterations have been reported that were not included in this
recommendation. This includes fusions involving genes in
the NTRK and FGFR families, both of which have
experimental targeted inhibitors with supporting in vitro
data and case reports. No guideline can be completely up to
date, and practitioners of lung cancer care are advised to
keep abreast of these and other developments. Table 5
includes a list of emerging biomarkers for molecular testing
in lung cancer.
Question 2: What Methods Should Be Used to
Perform Molecular Testing?
8. Recommendation.—Immunohistochemistry is an equiv-
alent alternative to FISH for ALK testing.
The strength of evidence supporting the use of IHC for
ALK testing was adequate. This recommendation is evi-
dence-based and was supported by 20 studies,61,111,139–156
comprising 6 PCSs,61,139,141–143,154 3 PRCSs,140,146,155 and 11
RCSs.* Of the 20 studies, 19 used FISH as the reference
standard when assessing the diagnostic potential of
IHC.111,145,147–153,156 The remaining study used IHC as the
reference standard and FISH as the index test.144 Using
reported true-positive, false-positive, true-negative, and
false-negative data from 14 studies using FISH as the
reference standard, an MA was conducted to determine a
pooled estimate of sensitivity and specificity for ALK IHC
(Figure 2). All included studies were assessed for quality and
none were found to have methodologic flaws that would
raise concerns about the studies’ findings (SDC Table 20).
Refer to SDC Table 21 for a summary of findings from studies
supporting the use of the IHC assay for ALK testing.
At the time of the original guideline, the only assay that
had evidence of clinical utility from prospective studies to
select patients for crizotinib therapy was an ALK FISH
break-apart assay, which is interpreted as positive if at least
15% of tumor cells show signals separated by at least 2
probe diameters or a single 30 signal (deleted 50). The ALK
FISH assay can be technically challenging, particularly with
tumors showing positive signals near the cutoff of 15%.
FISH assays in general are limited by high cost, need for
specialized personnel for interpretation, and limited avail-
ability of equipment, space, and testing personnel. Howev-
er, ALK IHC can also show variation in staining among
antibodies, protocols, and interpretation.
For all of these reasons, different assay approaches have
been proposed for identification of ALK rearrangements in
lung carcinoma. Many studies have focused on IHC as a
widely available and cost-effective screening assay. In 2013,
IHC had been shown comparable with FISH in some
studies, but significant variations among antibodies and
methods, and limited market availability of some of the
more accurate antibodies, precluded making an evidence-
based recommendation at that time.
By 2016, however, numerous publications61,111,139–156 had
established the technical performance of several ALK IHC
assays and their correlation with ALK FISH results. An
important early observation was that the amount of ALK
fusion protein expression in the ALK rearranged non–small
cell carcinomas tends to be lower than is found in anaplastic
large cell lymphoma, from which the gene gets its name and
for which the first IHC antibodies were developed.157 The
ALK1 antibody (mouse monoclonal anti-human CD246,
clone ALK1) typically used to diagnose anaplastic large cell
lymphoma failed to identify a significant number of the ALK
rearranged NSCLCs using standard techniques.140,158–161 To
overcome this problem, several technical steps have been
applied, such as tyramide amplification and enhanced
polymer-based detection systems. Despite these advances,
although the ALK1 antibody has good specificity (91%–
99%), sensitivity is still poor, ranging from 67% to 100%,
and therefore the ALK1 antibody is not recommended for
ALK rearrangement screening in lung carcinoma.
Subsequently, 2 commercially available clones, mouse
monoclonal 5A4 (Novocastra, Leica Biosystems, Buffalo
Grove, Illinois)– and rabbit monoclonal D5F3 (Ventana)–
based assays, showed clinically acceptable sensitivities and
specificities, ranging from 95% to 100%, when compared
with ALK FISH results.61,111,139,141–156 Studies also showed
that IHC-positive ALK protein expression correlates with
tumor response to ALK inhibitors even in ALK FISH–
negative cases.162 In the United States, an assay using the
D5F3 antibody (Ventana) is now approved by the FDA for
selection of lung cancer patients to receive treatment with
crizotinib.
Based on published evidence with 5A4 and D5F3
monoclonal antibodies, properly validated IHC assays are
an equivalent alternative to ALK FISH. A meta-analysis that
pooled 14 studies using FISH as a reference standard
determined a pooled sensitivity of 97% (95% CI, 93%–98%)
and a pooled specificity of 99% (95% CI, 97%–100%) for
ALK IHC for both the 5A4 or D5F3 assays (Figure 2). The
laboratory may choose which antibody to use based on
analytic precision, clinical sensitivity, and clinical specificity
* References 111, 144, 145, 147–153, 156.
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
333
 in accordance with published standards. ALK IHC is an
acceptable alternative to FISH and treatment decisions can
be made when IHC results are clearly positive, as
manifested by strong granular cytoplasmic staining with/
without membrane accentuation, or negative; however,
weak staining can be challenging to interpret, and the
specificity of weak staining relative to FISH should be
determined in each laboratory during validation. Occasional
cases may be difficult to interpret because of heterogeneous
fixation/preservation and/or nonspecific staining artifacts,
such as light cytoplasmic staining in alveolar macrophages,
neural cells, extracellular mucin, necrosis, and glandular
epithelium. In these settings, these cases should also be
tested by a validated method (eg, ALK FISH, RT-PCR,
NGS).141,146
Discordant results between ALK FISH and IHC assays
have been described in rare cases. ALK IHC–negative cases
were reported in association with ALK FISH–positive assays
that showed a lower percentage of tumor cells with
rearrangement (15%–20%). Technical errors cannot be
reliably excluded in a case with a lower percentage of nuclei
positive for rearrangement. Recent studies suggest that a 50
deletion FISH pattern may more commonly represent a
false-positive result with discrepant IHC results than cases
with a split FISH signal.163–165 Importantly, however, clinical
outcomes of patients with discrepant FISH and IHC results
have not shown a consistent pattern of superiority of one
method over the other.156,166
Although at the time of writing RT-PCR and NGS are not
approved by the FDA in the United States as first-line
methods for determining ALK status in selection of patients
for ALK inhibitor therapy, these approaches have shown
comparable performance with IHC163–165 when designed to
detect the majority of fusions, and are standard practice in
many other countries.163–165,167 These methods are highly
specific for most fusions,97,168,169 and patients with positive
results should be treated with an ALK inhibitor, although
patients with negative results may benefit from a more
sensitive method to exclude the possibility of a variant
fusion. Similarly, amplicon-based NGS assays of DNA may
likewise fail to detect all fusion variants, and therefore a
capture-based DNA or RNA approach is preferred for NGS
testing for ALK fusions. Current data are still too limited to
develop a specific recommendation either for or against the
use of NGS for ALK fusions as a sole determinant of ALK-
TKI therapy.
Next-Generation Sequencing.
9. Expert Consensus Opinion.—Multiplexed genetic se-
quencing panels are preferred over multiple single-gene
tests to identify other treatment options beyond EGFR, ALK,
and ROS1.
The strength of evidence is inadequate supporting the use
of multiplexed genetic sequencing panels compared with
single-gene tests. The statement is evidence-based and
supported by 5 studies,169–173 comprising 1 PCS,172 2
PRCSs,171,173 and 2 RCSs.169,170 All included studies were
assessed for quality and none were found to have
methodologic flaws that would raise concerns about the
studies’ findings (SDC Table 22). Refer to SDC Table 23 for a
summary of findings from studies supporting the use of
multiplexed genetic sequencing panels.
The rapid recent emergence of so-called NGS, or
massively parallel sequencing, has changed the practice of
molecular diagnostics considerably, in lung cancer and in
other contexts. This technology involves spatial separation
of individual DNA molecules from a sample, PCR ampli-
fication (either with or without a preceding hybridization
capture step) of predetermined regions of the genome, and
parallel sequencing by synthesis of each of the amplified
single DNA molecules on a massive scale, followed by
computational data processing to recombine and identify
the sequences and provide a digital display of each sample’s
genomic features. This technology enables sensitive and
specific assessment of multiple genomic regions at once, up
to and including the entire genome. The resources necessary
for clinical NGS implementation are substantial and the
assays are complex in design, performance, and interpreta-
tion. Consequently, this technology is not universally
deployed. Nonetheless, multiple academic institutions and
private companies have used this technology at scale,
providing a relatively DNA- and cost-efficient method for
assessment of cancer gene mutations as compared with
performing multiple single-gene analyses. In the first
guideline, this was a new and unproven technology, but it
is now well established. In early 2017, professional practice
guidelines were published regarding the validation174 and
interpretation/reporting17 of NGS assays for cancer.
NGS enables the simultaneous assessment of all 3 of the
‘‘must-test’’ genes in lung cancer—EGFR, ALK, ROS1—as
well as each of the genes suggested for inclusion in larger
panels—BRAF, RET, ERBB2 (HER2), KRAS, MET—and
hundreds to thousands of other genes that may have
potential roles in cancer development. In addition to small
mutations, NGS assays are able to detect fusions/rearrange-
ments and copy number changes in the targeted genes, if
designed with these alterations in mind.
Numerous studies169–173 have demonstrated the excellent
sensitivity of NGS methods relative to single-gene targeted
assays, particularly for single-nucleotide–substitution muta-
tions. Next-generation sequencing methods typically re-
quire less input DNA and can accommodate smaller
samples with lower concentrations of malignant cells, and,
although typically slower than 1 single-gene assay, can
often be performed more rapidly than sequential multiple
single-gene assays.175,176 A reduced need for repeat biopsy is
an additional benefit of panel testing.
Two basic designs of NGS assays are used in molecular
oncology: amplicon based and hybrid capture based. Both of
these designs generate a ‘‘library’’ of amplified DNA that is
sequenced as single molecules, using one of several
sequencing platforms. Amplicon sequencing uses multiple
PCR reactions to generate the library, which is generally
easier, faster, and able to detect mutations at lower allele
frequencies (ie, subclonal populations). However, it is more
suitable for simpler assays of fewer genes, and typically used
for analysis of oncogene hot spots or small, selected regions
of selected genes of interest. In its basic form, it cannot
reliably detect fusions or copy number variations. The
greater analytic sensitivity of this method makes it suitable
for very small or heterogeneous samples. Capture-based
methods, by contrast, use hybridization to generate the
library and are more complex and involve more steps,
resulting in a longer turnaround time, but are better for
larger set of genes or genomic regions to be analyzed;
however, these methods typically are less sensitive in highly
heterogeneous or small samples. In general, capture-based
methods may be preferable for initial testing of lung cancer
samples in order to detect rearrangements, such as in ALK
and ROS1, as well as a broader range of potential genetic
markers. For monitoring during secondary clinical resistance
334
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 (ie, EGFR), where a more narrow range of possible
mutations is needed and smaller or more heterogeneous
samples may be desired, amplicon sequencing may be
preferred; however, either method may be designed and
deployed, successfully, for either application.
10. Expert Consensus Opinion.—Laboratories should en-
sure test results that are unexpected, discordant, equivocal,
or otherwise of low confidence are confirmed or resolved
using an alternative method or sample.
The strength of evidence supporting the routine use of
orthogonal methods to confirm results for any of the
molecular markers is insufficient. However, our opinion is
that good laboratory practice for somatic alterations is to
perform confirmatory testing for results that are unusual,
suboptimal, or inconsistent with other laboratory findings or
clinical information.
All assays should be appropriately validated before being
offered for clinical use. This typically includes an assessment
of sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility, in addition to
other performance characteristics, as required by most
laboratory-certifying authorities. The performance charac-
teristics of sequencing-based assays can be readily deter-
mined for the more common alterations. The reliability of
infrequently encountered mutations or specific categories of
chromosomal alterations may be more challenging to
document, and laboratories using such technologies should
have procedures in place to verify any results that are
unexpected, discordant with other results, equivocal, or of
compromised confidence in order to provide an optimal
result for patient care and to better understand any intrinsic
assay limitations. Corroboration of such questionable results
might be sought by evaluating a separate specimen from the
same lesion, confirmatory testing in another laboratory, or
evaluation using an orthogonal methodology.
Question 3: Is Molecular Testing Appropriate for
Lung Cancers That Do Not Have an Adenocarcinoma
Component?
11. Expert Consensus Opinion.—Physicians may use mo-
lecular biomarker testing in tumors with histologies other
than adenocarcinoma when clinical features indicate a
higher probability of an oncogenic driver.
The strength of evidence supporting the use of molecular
biomarker testing in lung cancers that lack an adenocarci-
noma component is insufficient. This statement is based on
expert consensus opinion.
Upon systematic review, no new evidence established the
routine molecular testing of any genes for typical squamous
cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, or other neuroendo-
crine lung tumors. Although small studies have reported
rare EGFR mutations in squamous cell carcinoma biopsies,
these may have represented partial sampling of adenosqu-
amous cancers and have not been borne out in fully resected
samples with confirmed squamous histology.177 Evidence
from controlled and well-powered studies, supporting the
clinical utility of molecular testing of lung cancers for
selection of targeted therapies, remains confined to non-
squamous non–small cell lung carcinomas, predominantly
adenocarcinomas or mixed cancers with an adenocarcinoma
component. However, strict reliance upon adenocarcinoma
histology may occasionally exclude some patients who do
not have a definitive diagnosis of adenocarcinoma (eg, non–
small cell lung carcinoma, not otherwise specified), and
might benefit from targeted therapy, particularly for small
biopsies that partially sample a larger tumor. Although
actionable mutations have been reported in biopsies with
nonadenocarcinoma non–small cell types, the frequency of
such findings is low enough that it is not recommended to
test all small biopsy samples with nonadenocarcinoma
histology. In this context, molecular testing is appropriate to
perform in lung cancers with non–small cell histologies
other than adenocarcinoma when clinical features are
atypical and/or consistent with a higher likelihood of a
targetable mutation.
Chief among these clinical factors that may indicate a
higher probability of a targetable oncogenic driver in the
setting of a nonadenocarcinoma histology are young age
and absence of tobacco exposure. In nonadenocarcinoma
non–small cell histologies, the finding of EGFR, ALK, or
ROS1 alterations has been most commonly reported in
situations in which patients had a minimal (1–10 packs per
year) or no history of tobacco exposure.30,159–161,178–214 Thus,
across the spectrum of lung carcinomas, light or absent
tobacco exposure should be sufficient rationale to prompt
testing, regardless of sampling methodology or complete-
ness of exclusion of adenocarcinoma component.
Similarly, some studies have suggested associations
between the presence of ALK or ROS1 alterations and
younger patient age.30,35,181,215,216 Although other studies
have indicated that these findings may reflect testing bias,217
the documentation of an association between younger
patient age and an actionable biomarker is another
consideration in selecting patients for testing. The boundary
between young and not young is not well defined, however,
and a clear evidence-based cutoff for this guideline cannot
be established. Systematic review from the original (2013)
guideline1 demonstrated that adenocarcinoma patients with
EGFR mutations had a significantly lower mean age than
patients without mutations (56 versus 63, P ¼ .03), although
the difference in mean ages for patients with and without
ALK fusions was not significant (60 versus 66), nor is the
difference in mean ages for patients with and without ROS1
fusions from this review (65 versus 62), and the difference in
means does not completely capture the distribution of ages
and, accordingly, the sensitivity and specificity of any given
age cutoff. In the absence of published evidence, our
opinion is that a reasonable strategy would be to test
patients younger than 50 years with nonadenocarcinoma
histology.
Of note, reflex testing algorithms initiated and/or man-
aged by pathologists need to accommodate intricacies of
clinical management, which can be challenging as sufficient
clinical information is often not available for pathologists to
incorporate into their evaluation. Establishing a program for
reflex molecular testing of lung cancer samples should be an
institutional decision, and should include an open dialogue
between pathologists and oncology teams, in order to put in
place an optimal strategy. Once those practices are
established by the team, however, reflex testing initiated
by the pathologist is reasonable.
Lastly, in the context of increasing use of panel-based/
NGS-based testing, it may become unnecessary to identify
specific analytes of interest in specific clinical situations,
instead identifying clinical situations in which panel-based
testing may be beneficial.
Question 4: What Testing Is Indicated for Patients
With Targetable Mutations Who Have Relapsed on
Targeted Therapy?
12. Strong Recommendation.—In lung adenocarcinoma
patients who harbor sensitizing EGFR mutations and have
progressed after treatment with an EGFR-targeted TKI,
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
335
 EGFR T790M mutational testing should be used to guide
selection of treatment with third-generation EGFR inhibi-
tors.
The strength of evidence was adequate to support the use
of EGFR T790M mutation testing when selecting patients for
third-generation EGFR-targeted therapy. This recommen-
dation is evidence-based and supported by 5 studies,218–222
including 1 MA,222 2 single-arm phase I nonrandomized
clinical trials,220,221 1 PCS,219 and 1 RCS.218 All studies were
assessed for quality and none were found to have
methodologic flaws that would raise concerns about the
studies’ findings (SDC Table 24). Refer to SDC Table 25 for a
summary of findings from the studies supporting the use of
EGFR T790M mutation testing when selecting patients for
third-generation EGFR-targeted therapy.
13. Recommendation.—Laboratories testing for EGFR
T790M mutation in patients with secondary clinical resis-
tance to EGFR-targeted kinase inhibitors should deploy
assays capable of detecting EGFR T790M mutations in as
little as 5% of EGFR alleles.
The strength of evidence supporting this recommendation
is insufficient. This recommendation is based on the
analytical sensitivity of the allele-specific real-time PCR
assay used in clinical trials that established the utility of
third-generation EGFR inhibitors directed against the
T790M mutant protein.
The major mechanism of secondary clinical resistance to
the first-generation EGFR TKIs erlotinib and gefitinib is the
development of T790M mutation on the same EGFR allele
that harbors the original sensitizing mutation, blocking
inhibition of the mutant protein by these TKIs. The
detection of the EGFR T790M mutation in this setting has
become clinically necessary because of the development of
third-generation EGFR TKIs, such as osimertinib, which are
active in the presence of this mutation.223,224 However,
although rare responses have been reported to third-
generation inhibitors in EGFR T790M–negative disease,225
such cases may harbor other resistance mechanisms such as
MET or ERBB2 amplification90,114,226 that may be more
effectively targeted by other agents. Therefore, determining
appropriate therapy in the setting of secondary clinical
resistance to an EGFR inhibitor requires knowledge of the
presence or absence of the T790M mutation.
Importantly, genetic mechanisms of secondary clinical
resistance arise in a subclonal fashion because they confer
resistance to the subpopulation of cells in which they are
present, and this subclone expands gradually under the
selective pressure of the EGFR TKI. Experimental studies
have shown that the presence of an EGFR T790M mutation
in small proportion of a bulk tumor cell population (as little
as 5%), often undetectable by Sanger sequencing, can lead
to increased growth in spite of treatment with EGFR
TKI.225,227 Detection is made even more challenging when
biopsies contain a high proportion of nontumor cells. These
considerations lead us to recommend that laboratories
should have a high sensitivity assay available for the
detection of the EGFR T790M mutation in posttreatment
biopsies from patients who demonstrate progression or
relapse after an initial response to EGFR TKI.
The clinical trials221,228–230 that established the clinical
utility of T790M testing in predicting response to osimerti-
nib used a commercial allele-specific real-time PCR assay
with a reported lower limit of detection of 5% mutant allele
fraction.231 Several studies232,233 have shown comparable, if
not superior, analytical sensitivity with droplet digital PCR,
and NGS methods234,235 can also provide this level of
sensitivity, given the appropriate assay design. It is
important, however, to recognize that unmodified Sanger
sequencing, which was an acceptable method in the original
2013 guideline,1 does not provide adequate sensitivity for
this application. Regardless of the method chosen, careful
validation must be performed to establish appropriate
sensitivity.
Finally, it should be noted that trials are currently
underway to assess the value of these third-generation
EGFR inhibitors as first-line treatment of EGFR-mutant lung
adenocarcinoma.220,221,236 Data are emerging237 that a second
acquired resistance mutation, C797S, can arise in tumors
that have progressed after osimertinib treatment for T790M
disease, but these cases are so far rare and this mutation is
poorly studied and not currently treatable, so testing for
C797S is not recommended for routine management at this
time.
14. No Recommendation.—There is currently insufficient
evidence to support a recommendation for or against
routine testing for ALK mutational status for lung adeno-
carcinoma patients with sensitizing ALK mutations who
have progressed after treatment with an ALK-targeted TKI.
The evidence was insufficient to inform a recommenda-
tion on the association between pretreatment or rebiopsy
discovery of ALK secondary resistance and clinical out-
comes.
Several groups have reported a diverse set of secondary
mutations in ALK that confer acquired resistance to
crizotinib (eg, L1152R, C1156Y, F1174L, L1196M, L1198P,
D1203N, and G1269A).238 For second-line ALK inhibitors,
other acquired mutations have been reported (G1202R,
G1202del, V1180L, S1206Y, E1201K) as well.
However, although some studies238 have suggested that
different secondary ALK mutations may show sensitivity or
resistance to different ALK inhibitors, these data are still
limited and insufficient to guide selection of treatment in the
setting of acquired resistance. Moreover, second-generation
ALK inhibitors also show activity in NSCLC without ALK
resistance mutations, suggesting that a significant propor-
tion of ALK-rearranged lung carcinomas become resistant
to crizotinib because of inadequate suppression of ALK.
Accordingly, current practice is to administer one of several
second-generation ALK inhibitors (ceritinib, brigatinib,
lorlatinib, and alectinib) that have received FDA approval
for the treatment of crizotinib-refractory, ALK-rearranged
NSCLC, without testing for secondary ALK mutations. As
more patients experience resistance and receive second-
generation inhibitors, we anticipate maturation of data to
strengthen the association between secondary mutation and
sensitivity/resistance to different inhibitors.
For now, however, we believe there is insufficient clinical
utility to warrant routine testing for secondary ALK
mutations in patients who have relapsed after initial
response to an ALK inhibitor.
Question 5: What Is the Role of Testing for Circulat-
ing cfDNA for Lung Cancer Patients?—Numerous recent
studies99,100,239 have demonstrated that lung cancer cells
shed their DNA into the circulation at levels that are
detectable with several modern technologies, such as
droplet digital PCR, allele-specific PCR, and NGS. This
event enables testing of plasma cfDNA obtained from
peripheral blood samples, at least in some instances, as an
alternative to a biopsy sample, to identify mutations
336
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 occurring in lung cancer both at diagnosis and during the
course of disease.
A theoretical advantage of these assays is the derivation of
circulating tumor DNA from multiple disease sites, and
therefore it may represent an integrative measure of all sites
of disease. Although not formally proven, this potential
advantage of cfDNA is particularly important in the setting
of secondary clinical resistance,236 to enable broad sampling
of different tumor subclones.232,240,241
Analytical methods for cfDNA have high analytical
specificity, with very low (,5%–20%) false-positive
rates,232,234,235,242,243 such that demonstration of a mutation,
in the proper clinical context, can be used to guide treatment
with a targeted inhibitor. However, sensitivity of cfDNA
analysis is lower (60%–70%),232,234,235,242,243 such that the
absence of mutation finding does not exclude the possibility
of a mutation.
It is also important to understand that, despite the
promise afforded by this technology, much is still unknown
about the dynamics of release of DNA from cancer cells.
Factors that increase or decrease the release of DNA from
cells, and its half-life in circulation and mechanisms of
elimination, are poorly understood.244–246 There is, however,
an overall correlation between burden of disease (both
volume and number of metastatic sites) and prevalence of
mutations in cfDNA.
Finally, other methods of analysis can be applied to blood
samples. Circulating tumor cells can be isolated from the
blood, as can exosomes bearing DNA that have been
released by cancer cells. Analysis of these latter 2 samples is
more challenging technically, and has not been sufficiently
studied in lung cancer to warrant consideration in this
guideline. Similarly, data are emerging regarding the
analysis of cfDNA in other body fluids, particularly urine,
but are similarly insufficient to warrant a recommendation
at this time. Most of the data to date, and the subject of the
comments that follow, apply to plasma cfDNA.
15. No Recommendation.—There is currently insufficient
evidence to support the use of circulating plasma cfDNA
molecular methods for establishing a primary diagnosis of
lung adenocarcinoma.
The evidence was insufficient to inform a recommenda-
tion on the use of cfDNA for diagnosis of primary lung
adenocarcinoma.
Theoretically, because sensitizing mutations in EGFR are
characteristic and specific alterations in lung cancers, one
may question whether the combination of a cfDNA result
showing such a mutation in an appropriate clinical context,
with radiographic evidence of a lung lesion, could enable a
diagnosis of EGFR-mutant lung cancer without requiring an
anatomic pathology diagnosis. However, no studies in the
medical literature have rigorously evaluated this approach in
a prospective manner.
16. Recommendation.—In some clinical settings in which
tissue is limited and/or insufficient for molecular testing,
physicians may use a cfDNA assay to identify EGFR
mutations.
The strength of evidence supporting the use of cfDNA to
determine EGFR mutation status in situations where tissue
is limited or insufficient is adequate. This recommendation
is evidence-based and supported by 6 studies,† comprising 2
MAs,243,247 2 PCSs,235,242 and 2 PRCSs.232,234 The identified
studies used various EGFR detection methods, but all
verified the results from cfDNA with results from tumor
tissue. Using reported true-positive, false-positive, true-
negative, and false-negative data from 4 studies, a meta-
analysis was conducted to determine a pooled estimate of
sensitivity and specificity for cfDNA detection of EGFR
mutation (Figure 3). All included studies were assessed for
quality and none were found to have methodologic flaws
that would raise concerns about the studies’ findings (SDC
Table 26). Refer to SDC Table 27 for a summary of findings
from studies supporting the use of cfDNA to determine
EGFR mutational status in situations where tissue is limited
or insufficient.
Analysis of cfDNA for EGFR mutations has intermediate
sensitivity (66.4%; 95% CI, 62.7%–69.9%) and high speci-
ficity (95.6%; 95% CI, 83.3%–99.0%) in lung adenocarcino-
ma (Figure 3). In some clinical settings in which tissue
biopsy material is unavailable or insufficient and tissue
rebiopsy is not feasible, so that a tissue-based EGFR analysis
cannot be performed, then a cfDNA assay for an activating
EGFR mutation may be conducted as an alternative
molecular diagnostic procedure. Because the sensitivity of
this assay is less than 80% in all reports, it should be
recognized that not all lung adenocarcinoma patients with
EGFR mutation–positive disease will have the mutation
detected in their cfDNA, so that a negative result by cfDNA
analysis is not reliable evidence that there is not an EGFR
mutation in a given patient’s cancer. In this context,
physicians should renew efforts to obtain an adequate
tissue sample for analysis.
17. Expert Consensus Opinion.—Physicians may use plasma
cfDNA methods to identify EGFR T790M mutations in lung
adenocarcinoma patients with progression or secondary
clinical resistance to EGFR-targeted TKIs; testing of the
tumor sample is recommended if the plasma result is
negative.
The strength of evidence supporting the use of cfDNA
methods to identify EGFR T790M mutation is inadequate.
This statement is evidence-based and supported by 4
studies,233,236,248,249 comprising 2 PCSs233,236 and 2
RCSs.248,249 All included studies were assessed for quality
and none were found to have methodologic flaws that
would raise concerns about the studies’ findings (SDC Table
28). Refer to SDC Table 29 for a summary of findings from
studies supporting the use of cfDNA methods to identify
EGFR T790M mutation.
Molecular testing for EGFR T790M mutation should be
performed in lung adenocarcinoma patients with sensitizing
EGFR mutations whose disease progresses on, or shows
secondary clinical resistance to, EGFR TKI. Such testing is
particularly appropriate because third-generation EGFR
inhibitors (eg, osimertinib) are proven to have significant
benefit for T790M mutant cancers221 and have been
approved for this indication by health authorities around
the world. Analysis of cfDNA or analysis of a new tissue
biopsy is appropriate for EGFR T790M detection. Cell-free
DNA may be preferred for patients unwilling or unable to
undergo a biopsy at the time of progression; moreover, as
progression may represent subclonal processes, cfDNA
testing may represent a more global sampling of disease
as compared with a tissue biopsy. However, cfDNA analysis
for EGFR T790M has intermediate sensitivity (0.40–0.78) and
high specificity.233,236,248,249 Hence, a negative result does not
rule out the possibility that EGFR T790M mutation is the
mechanism of resistance to TKI therapy, and a new tissue
† References 232, 234, 235, 242, 243, 247.
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
337
 biopsy from a site of progressive disease should be
considered if the cfDNA result is wild type.
Note that acquired T790M mutations are often subclonal,
and a cfDNA sample could show the original sensitizing
EGFR mutation (eg, L858R) and still have a false-negative
result for T790M, requiring a tissue or cytology sample for
confirmation; implicit in this is the benefit of including the
original sensitizing mutation (eg, exon 19 deletion, L858R)
in the assay to confirm that tumor DNA is being shed into
the circulation, although this may not be practical for less
common sensitizing mutations. On the other hand, because
of the high specificity of cfDNA, a positive T790M finding in
cfDNA is equivalent to a tissue biopsy finding of T790M,236
and can be used to guide therapy with osimertinib.
18. No Recommendation.—There is currently insufficient
evidence to support the use of circulating tumor cell
molecular analysis for the diagnosis of primary lung
adenocarcinoma, the identification of EGFR or other
mutations, or the identification of EGFR T790M mutations
at the time of EGFR TKI resistance.
The evidence was insufficient to inform a recommenda-
tion on the use of circulating tumor cells for diagnosis of
primary lung adenocarcinoma.
What Is the Role of Testing to Select Patients for
Treatment With Immunomodulatory Therapies?—Opin-
ion.—Tissue should be preserved to enable testing for
immunomodulatory therapies.
Evidence.—Subject of upcoming guideline.
Since publication of the last guideline, immunotherapy in
lung cancer has rapidly evolved to become a part of standard
of care for many patients with advanced NSCLC. Recent
studies250–254 have shown significant benefits in a subset of
advanced lung cancer patients when treated with these
agents. Government regulatory agencies have approved
immunomodulatory therapies as second-line agents for
advanced lung cancer patients,255–257 as well as first-line
therapy for patients with high level of PD-L1 expression and
absence of sensitizing EGFR mutations or ALK rearrange-
ments. For some of these agents, selection of patients with a
companion diagnostic is required,258 for others a comple-
mentary diagnostic is recommended,259–261 and for some no
biomarker selection is indicated. Putative biomarkers to
predict response to these agents, and the methods used to
assess them, are varied and not yet standardized.
The principle of the immunomodulatory therapies is their
ability to disrupt inhibitory signaling between tumor cells
and immune cells (typically T cells), which occurs when
tumor cells express proteins that induce immunologic
tolerance and prevent the immune system from attacking
the tumor. Normally this mechanism is used to control the
immune response and prevent autoimmune disease. Several
such inhibitory signaling processes exist, although the
greatest progress in clinical therapy in lung cancer involves
the interaction between PD-L1 on tumor cells and
programmed death receptor-1 (PD-1) on T cells. This
interaction effectively silences the T-cell response to a
tumor. By blocking PD-1 with so-called immune checkpoint
inhibitors, T cells become enabled to recognize and respond
to foreign antigens presented on the cancer cells.
Because most lung cancer cells contain many mutations
beyond their oncogenic drivers, they typically express a large
number of mutant proteins, some of which can be displayed
on the cell surface by human leukocyte antigen molecules as
‘‘foreign’’ neoantigens. The more mutations in a cell, the
more neoantigens are probably expressed, and the more
likely the immune system is to destroy the cells, provided
that the tolerance mechanisms, such as PD-L1/PD-1, are
not activated. Expression of PD-L1 by tumor cells (or local
macrophages), expression of PD-1 by tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes, number of mutations and neoantigens, and
evidence of an immune infiltrate (‘‘inflamed tumor’’) are all
candidates to predict response to these treatments. Other
inhibitory signaling pathways may also be involved, such as
the interaction between cytotoxic T-lymphocyte–associated
protein 4 (CTLA-4) and CD80/86, which is targeted by the
immunomodulatory agent ipilimumab, typically given to
patients with melanoma.
The results of treatment with these agents have been
impressive,250–254 with some patients experiencing durable
responses that have lasted years. However, unlike the
targeted therapies, the frequency with which patients
respond, even in biomarker-selected populations, is closer
to 20% to 30% in the second line and 50% in the first line
(as opposed to 80% for targeted therapies),252–254 although
radiographic response may not be the best indicator of
effectiveness of an immunomodulatory therapy because of
the impact of active inflammation on the size of a tumor as
assessed by standard imaging. In this regard, better
biomarkers are needed, as the companion diagnostic
biomarkers do not fully address the clinical need to
determine, with sensitivity and specificity, who should
receive these drugs. Complicating this further are the
multitude of different biomarkers, with different methodol-
ogies developed in parallel by competing companies for
competing drugs, such that no clear message emerges, with
evidentiary basis, regarding which biomarkers should be
tested or how to test for them. Studies are currently
underway to compare a variety of candidate markers and
to attempt to harmonize different assays targeting each
biomarker (eg, different IHC methods for PD-L1).
Because of the lack of firm evidence supporting specific
methodology or agents, we cannot make evidence-based
recommendations regarding testing for these drugs in this
guideline. A subsequent practice guideline is being planned
to focus specifically on evidence-based assessment of
methods for selecting patients to receive immunomodula-
tory therapies.
Despite the exclusion of this question from our systematic
literature review, it is our opinion that samples should be
preserved for assessment of biomarkers that predict
response to immunomodulatory therapies, in accordance
with the labeling requirements of the drugs under consid-
eration. Importantly, often the ideal section of a tumor for
this application is different from the ideal section of tumor
required for molecular testing. For molecular testing,
especially sequencing, an ideal sample of cancer has nearly
‘‘pure cancer,’’ with little intervening or adjacent stroma or
inflammation. Assessment of biomarkers for immunomod-
ulatory therapies, theoretically, should be performed on a
section of tumor containing intervening and adjacent
stroma, particularly if rich in infiltrating T cells; however,
there are no guideline recommendations and this has not
been prospectively studied. Response to some drugs250 has
been shown to associate with the nature of the inflamma-
tory cells within a tumor more than with the tumor cells
themselves. This distinction, with the operational implica-
tions of needing, potentially, to identify and recut 2 sections
from each cancer (1 for molecular testing, 1 for the IHC
assessment of immune-regulatory molecules) is essential for
338
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 surgical pathologists and histology laboratories to under-
stand.
For most applications, the necessary analysis is IHC for
PD-L1, although the exact antibody and staining protocol
used and the interpretive criteria vary for different treat-
ments. Other candidate IHC biomarkers may be required,
however, as well as characterization of reactive cell
populations within a tumor. The potential validity and
utility of mutational burden calculations (mutations/base
pair of total genomic sequence) as assessed by NGS panels
are being explored as an investigational biomarker, as are
neoantigen prediction algorithms derived from whole-
exome sequencing data.
CONCLUSIONS
The importance of molecular diagnostics for the care of
lung cancer patients continues to develop at a rapid pace.
Many of the guideline recommendations for clinical practice
that were published in 2013 were subject for reconsideration
by 2015. Similarly, this guideline will likely need revision
within a relatively short period of time. Relying upon
published prospective studies to serve as a basis for practice
recommendations will always lag behind the latest discov-
eries and advancing edge of care as presented in meetings of
professional societies. Practitioners today, and those of us
making recommendations, are faced with the daunting
challenge of balancing precision oncology, the notion that
each patient has a unique combination of factors that should
be incorporated into determining individual treatment
plans, with evidence-based medicine, the notion that
appropriate treatment decisions should be based upon large
interventional
studies
of
otherwise
identical
patients.
Compounding this is the increasingly small sizes of the
populations being defined by large-scale genomic analyses
today, which makes designing effective large controlled
interventional studies exceptionally difficult. When a dra-
matic clinical response is seen in 0.5% of patients with a
condition—even a common condition such as lung cancer—
how do we recruit enough patients to study to prove that
the dramatic response is a general truth that should change
practice, and how do we decide that everyone in the world
should get the test that can determine if they are in that
0.5%?
We have updated the 2013 recommendations to recognize
the changes that have passed this threshold—the impor-
tance of ROS1 testing, the value of IHC for ALK, and the
importance of testing for T790M mutations in patients who
progress on anti-EGFR therapy. In addition, we have laid
out the emerging and promising molecular alterations that
are ‘‘1 step lower’’—alterations in BRAF, MET, ERBB2
(HER2), and RET—which we anticipate will pass this bar in
a short time, and which we believe should be included in the
expanded
analyses
that
are
possible
because
of
the
emergence of NGS technology. We also see the promise
and results obtained with immunomodulatory therapies and
await the systematic review that will be conducted to
identify and recommend best practices to select patients for
these
therapies.
We
look
forward
to
the
continuing
evolution in diagnostics and care for lung cancer patients
as technology, scientific understanding, and clinical practice
evolve.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the following: advisory panel
members Timothy Craig Allen, MD, JD, Julia A. Bridge, MD, Lukas
Bubendorf, MD, Paul Bunn, MD, Federico Cappuzzo, MD, Edmund
S. Cibas, MD, Dhananjay A. Chitale, MD, Marileila Varella Garcia,
PhD, A. John Iafrate, MD, PhD, Pasi A. Janne, MD, PhD, Mark G.
Kris, MD, Antonio Marchetti, MD, PhD, Tetsuya Mitsudomi, MD,
PhD, Tony Mok, MD, Marina Nikiforova, MD, Suresh Ramalin-
gam, MD, Natasha Rekhtman, MD, PhD, Charles Powell, MD,
Juan-Sebastian Saldivar, MD, Yi-Long Wu, MD, David Yankelevitz,
MD, and patient advocates Bonnie J. Addario and Kim Norris, BA,
for their review of the key questions, recommendations, and draft
manuscript; and Lisa A. Fatheree, SCT(ASCP), Pia Hirsch, Mrudula
Pullambhatla,
MS,
and
Mary
Steele
Williams,
MNA,
MT(ASCP)SM, CAE, for their support throughout the guideline
development process.
References
1. Lindeman NI, Cagle PT, Beasley MB, et al. Molecular testing guideline for
selection of lung cancer patients for EGFR and ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors:
guideline from the College of American Pathologists, International Association for
the Study of Lung Cancer, and Association for Molecular Pathology. Arch Pathol
Lab Med. 2013;137(6):828–860.
2. Lindeman NI, Cagle PT, Beasley MB, et al. Molecular testing guideline for
selection of lung cancer patients for EGFR and ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors:
guideline from the College of American Pathologists, International Association for
the Study of Lung Cancer, and Association for Molecular Pathology. J Thorac
Oncol. 2013;8(7):823–859.
3. Lindeman NI, Cagle PT, Beasley MB, et al. Molecular testing guideline for
selection of lung cancer patients for EGFR and ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors:
guideline from the College of American Pathologists, International Association for
the Study of Lung Cancer, and Association for Molecular Pathology. J Mol Diagn.
2013;15(4):415–453.
4. Leighl NB, Rekhtman N, Biermann WA, et al. Molecular testing for
selection of patients with lung cancer for epidermal growth factor receptor and
anaplastic lymphoma kinase tyrosine kinase inhibitors: American Society of
Clinical Oncology endorsement of the College of American Pathologists/
International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer/Association for Molecular
Pathology guideline. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(32):3673–3679.
5. Ettinger DS, Wood DE, Aisner DL, et al. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines
in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines): non-small cell lung cancer. Version 6.2017.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network, Inc. https://www.nccn.org. Accessed
June 12, 2017.
6. Camps C, Felip E, Garcia-Campelo R, Trigo JM, Garrido P. SEOM clinical
guidelines for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 2013. Clin
Transl Oncol. 2013;15(12):977–984.
7. Cooper W, Fox S, O’Toole S, et al. National Working Group Meeting on
ALK diagnostics in lung cancer. Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2014;10(suppl):211–217.
8. Dietel M, Bubendorf L, Dingemans AM, et al. Diagnostic procedures for
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC): recommendations of the European Expert
Group. Thorax. 2016;71(2):177–184.
9. Duffy MJ, Sturgeon CM, Soletormos G, et al. Validation of new cancer
biomarkers: a position statement from the European group on tumor markers. Clin
Chem. 2015;61(6):809–820.
10. Felip E, Concha A, de Castro J, et al. Biomarker testing in advanced non-
small-cell lung cancer: a National Consensus of the Spanish Society of Pathology
and the Spanish Society of Medical Oncology. Clin Transl Oncol. 2015;17(2):
103–112.
11. Garcia-Campelo R, Bernabe R, Cobo M, et al. SEOM clinical guidelines
for the treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 2015. Clin Transl Oncol.
2015;17(12):1020–1029.
12. Gridelli C, Balducci L, Ciardiello F, et al. Treatment of elderly patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer: results of an International Expert Panel Meeting of the
Italian Association of Thoracic Oncology. Clin Lung Cancer. 2015;16(5):325–333.
13. Joseph L, Cankovic M, Caughron S, et al. The spectrum of clinical utilities
in molecular pathology testing procedures for inherited conditions and cancer: a
report of the Association for Molecular Pathology. J Mol Diagn. 2016;18(5):605–
619.
14. Kim H, Shim HS, Kim L, et al. Guideline recommendations for testing of
ALK gene rearrangement in lung cancer: a proposal of the Korean Cardiopul-
monary Pathology Study Group. Korean J Pathol. 2014;48(1):1–9.
15. Kerr KM, Bubendorf L, Edelman MJ, et al. Second ESMO consensus
conference on lung cancer: pathology and molecular biomarkers for non-small-
cell lung cancer. Ann Oncol. 2014;25(9):1681–1690.
16. Layfield LJ, Roy-Chowdhuri S, Baloch Z, et al. Utilization of ancillary
studies in the cytologic diagnosis of respiratory lesions: the Papanicolaou Society
of Cytopathology consensus recommendations for respiratory cytology. Diagn
Cytopathol. 2016;44(12):1000–1009.
17. Li MM, Datto M, Duncavage EJ, et al. Standards and guidelines for the
interpretation and reporting of sequence variants in cancer: a joint consensus
recommendation of the Association for Molecular Pathology, American Society of
Clinical Oncology, and College of American Pathologists. J Mol Diagn. 2017;
19(1):4–23.
18. Liu SV, Miller VA, Lobbezoo MW, Giaccone G. Genomics-based early-
phase clinical trials in oncology: recommendations from the Task Force on
Methodology for the Development of Innovative Cancer Therapies. Eur J Cancer.
2014;50(16):2747–2751.
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
339
 19. Melosky B, Agulnik J, Albadine R, et al. Canadian consensus: inhibition of
ALK-positive tumours in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Curr Oncol. 2016;
23(3):196–200.
20. Monso E, Montuenga LM, Sanchez de Cos J, Villena C; Lung Cancer
CIBERES-RTICC-SEPAR-Plataforma Biobanco Pulmonar. Biological marker anal-
ysis as part of the CIBERES-RTIC Cancer-SEPAR Strategic Project on Lung Cancer.
Arch Bronconeumol. 2015;51(9):462–467.
21. Popper HH, Gruber-Mosenbacher U, Hutarew G, et al. Recommendations
of the Austrian Working Group on Pulmonary Pathology and Oncology for
predictive molecular and immunohistochemical testing in non-small cell lung
cancer. Memo. 2016;9(4):191–200.
22. Sepulveda AR, Hamilton SR, Allegra CJ, et al. Molecular biomarkers for
the evaluation of colorectal cancer: guideline from the American Society for
Clinical Pathology, College of American Pathologists, Association for Molecular
Pathology, and the American Society of Clinical Oncology. J Clin Oncol. 2017;
35(13):1453–1486.
23. van der Heijden EH, Casal RF, Trisolini R, et al. Guideline for the
acquisition and preparation of conventional and endobronchial ultrasound-
guided transbronchial needle aspiration specimens for the diagnosis and
molecular testing of patients with known or suspected lung cancer. Respiration.
2014;88(6):500–517.
24. Villar Alvarez F, Muguruza Trueba I, Belda Sanchis J, et al. Executive
summary of the SEPAR recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of non-
small cell lung cancer. Arch Bronconeumol. 2016;52(7):378–388.
25. von Laffert M, Schirmacher P, Warth A, et al. ALK-testing in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC): immunohistochemistry (IHC) and/or fluorescence in-situ
hybridisation (FISH)?: statement of the Germany Society for Pathology (DGP) and
the Working Group Thoracic Oncology (AIO) of the German Cancer Society e.V.
(Stellungnahme der Deutschen Gesellschaft fur Pathologie und der AG Thorakale
Onkologie der Arbeitsgemeinschaft Onkologie/Deutsche Krebsgesellschaft e.V.).
Lung Cancer. 2017;103:1–5.
26. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN). Management of lung
cancer. Edinburgh: SIGN; 2014. SIGN publication no. 137. http://www.sign.ac.
uk. Accessed June 12, 2017.
27. Yale University School of Medicine. GuideLines Into DEcision Support
(GLIDES). http://medicine.yale.edu/cmi/glides/index.aspx. Accessed June 21,
2017.
28. Ellison G, Zhu G, Moulis A, Dearden S, Speake G, McCormack R. EGFR
mutation testing in lung cancer: a review of available methods and their use for
analysis of tumour tissue and cytology samples. J Clin Pathol. 2013;66(2):79–89.
29. Kitamura A, Hosoda W, Sasaki E, Mitsudomi T, Yatabe Y. Immunohisto-
chemical detection of EGFR mutation using mutation-specific antibodies in lung
cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;16(13):3349–3355.
30. Bergethon K, Shaw AT, Ou SH, et al. ROS1 rearrangements define a
unique molecular class of lung cancers. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(8):863–870.
31. Go H, Kim DW, Kim D, et al. Clinicopathologic analysis of ROS1-
rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer and proposal of a diagnostic algorithm. J
Thorac Oncol. 2013;8(11):1445–1450.
32. Mazieres J, Zalcman G, Crino L, et al. Crizotinib therapy for advanced
lung adenocarcinoma and a ROS1 rearrangement: results from the EUROS1
cohort. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(9):992–999.
33. Shaw AT, Ou SH, Bang YJ, et al. Crizotinib in ROS1-rearranged non-small-
cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(21):1963–1971.
34. Cai W, Li X, Su C, et al. ROS1 fusions in Chinese patients with non-small-
cell lung cancer. Ann Oncol. 2013;24(7):1822–1827.
35. Chen YF, Hsieh MS, Wu SG, et al. Clinical and the prognostic
characteristics of lung adenocarcinoma patients with ROS1 fusion in comparison
with other driver mutations in East Asian populations. J Thorac Oncol. 2014;9(8):
1171–1179.
36. Warth A, Muley T, Dienemann H, et al. ROS1 expression and
translocations in non-small-cell lung cancer: clinicopathological analysis of
1478 cases. Histopathology. 2014;65(2):187–194.
37. Lee SE, Lee B, Hong M, et al. Comprehensive analysis of RET and ROS1
rearrangement in lung adenocarcinoma. Mod Pathol. 2015;28(4):468–479.
38. Scheffler M, Schultheis A, Teixido C, et al. ROS1 rearrangements in lung
adenocarcinoma: prognostic impact, therapeutic options and genetic variability.
Oncotarget. 2015;6(12):10577–10585.
39. Kim HR, Lim SM, Kim HJ, et al. The frequency and impact of ROS1
rearrangement on clinical outcomes in never smokers with lung adenocarcino-
ma. Ann Oncol. 2013;24(9):2364–2370.
40. Kemner A. Phase II safety and efficacy study of crizotinib in East Asian
patients with ROS1 positive, ALK negative advanced NSCLC (NCT01945021).
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/results/NCT01945021?term¼NCT01945021&
rank¼1. Accessed June 12, 2017.
41. US Food and Drug Administration. XALKORI prescribing information.
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2016/202570s016lbl.pdf.
Accessed June 12, 2017.
42. Cha YJ, Lee JS, Kim HR, et al. Screening of ROS1 rearrangements in lung
adenocarcinoma by immunohistochemistry and comparison with ALK rearrange-
ments. PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e103333. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0103333.
43. Mescam-Mancini L, Lantuejoul S, Moro-Sibilot D, et al. On the relevance
of a testing algorithm for the detection of ROS1-rearranged lung adenocarcino-
mas. Lung Cancer. 2014;83(2):168–173.
44. Sholl LM, Sun H, Butaney M, et al. ROS1 immunohistochemistry for
detection of ROS1-rearranged lung adenocarcinomas. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013;
37(9):1441–1449.
45. Yoshida A, Tsuta K, Wakai S, et al. Immunohistochemical detection of
ROS1 is useful for identifying ROS1 rearrangements in lung cancers. Mod Pathol.
2014;27(5):711–720.
46. Boyle TA, Masago K, Ellison KE, Yatabe Y, Hirsch FR. ROS1
immunohistochemistry among major genotypes of non-small-cell lung cancer.
Clin Lung Cancer. 2015;16(2):106–111.
47. Shan L, Lian F, Guo L, et al. Detection of ROS1 gene rearrangement in
lung adenocarcinoma: comparison of IHC, FISH and real-time RT-PCR. PLoS
One. 2015;10(3):e0120422. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0120422.
48. Wiesweg M, Eberhardt WE, Reis H, et al. High prevalence of concomitant
oncogene mutations in prospectively identified patients with ROS1-positive
metastatic lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2017;12(1):54–64.
49. Hsu KH, Ho CC, Hsia TC, et al. Identification of five driver gene mutations
in patients with treatment-naive lung adenocarcinoma in Taiwan. PLoS One.
2015;10(3):e0120852. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0120852.
50. Kinno T, Tsuta K, Shiraishi K, et al. Clinicopathological features of
nonsmall cell lung carcinomas with BRAF mutations. Ann Oncol. 2014;25(1):
138–142.
51. Li H, Pan Y, Li Y, et al. Frequency of well-identified oncogenic driver
mutations in lung adenocarcinoma of smokers varies with histological subtypes
and graduated smoking dose. Lung Cancer. 2013;79(1):8–13.
52. Li S, Li L, Zhu Y, et al. Coexistence of EGFR with KRAS, or BRAF, or
PIK3CA somatic mutations in lung cancer: a comprehensive mutation profiling
from 5125 Chinese cohorts. Br J Cancer. 2014;110(11):2812–2820.
53. Cardarella S, Ogino A, Nishino M, et al. Clinical, pathologic, and biologic
features associated with BRAF mutations in non-small cell lung cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2013;19(16):4532–4540.
54. Marchetti A, Felicioni L, Malatesta S, et al. Clinical features and outcome
of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer harboring BRAF mutations. J Clin
Oncol. 2011;29(26):3574–3579.
55. Brustugun OT, Khattak AM, Tromborg AK, et al. BRAF-mutations in non-
small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer. 2014;84(1):36–38.
56. Planchard D, Kim TM, Mazieres J, et al. Dabrafenib in patients with
BRAF(V600E)-positive advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a single-arm,
multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(5):642–650.
57. Planchard D, Besse B, Groen HJ, et al. Dabrafenib plus trametinib in
patients with previously treated BRAF(V600E)-mutant metastatic non-small cell
lung cancer: an open-label, multicentre phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(7):
984–993.
58. Ilie M, Long E, Hofman V, et al. Diagnostic value of immunohistochem-
istry for the detection of the BRAFV600E mutation in primary lung adenocarci-
noma Caucasian patients. Ann Oncol. 2013;24(3):742–748.
59. Smit E. BRAF mutations in non-small-cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol.
2014;9(11):1594–1595.
60. Sasaki H, Shimizu S, Tani Y, et al. Usefulness of immunohistochemistry for
the detection of the BRAF V600E mutation in Japanese lung adenocarcinoma.
Lung Cancer. 2013;82(1):51–54.
61. Ilie MI, Bence C, Hofman V, et al. Discrepancies between FISH and
immunohistochemistry for assessment of the ALK status are associated with ALK
‘‘borderline’’-positive rearrangements or a high copy number: a potential major
issue for anti-ALK therapeutic strategies. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(1):238–244.
62. Wang R, Hu H, Pan Y, et al. RET fusions define a unique molecular and
clinicopathologic subtype of non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2012;
30(35):4352–4359.
63. Tsai TH, Wu SG, Hsieh MS, Yu CJ, Yang JC, Shih JY. Clinical and
prognostic implications of RET rearrangements in metastatic lung adenocarcino-
ma patients with malignant pleural effusion. Lung Cancer. 2015;88(2):208–214.
64. Kohno T, Ichikawa H, Totoki Y, et al. KIF5B-RET fusions in lung
adenocarcinoma. Nat Med. 2012;18(3):375–377.
65. Takeuchi K, Soda M, Togashi Y, et al. RET, ROS1 and ALK fusions in lung
cancer. Nat Med. 2012;18(3):378–381.
66. Suehara Y, Arcila M, Wang L, et al. Identification of KIF5B-RETand GOPC-
ROS1 fusions in lung adenocarcinomas through a comprehensive mRNA-based
screen for tyrosine kinase fusions. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;18(24):6599–6608.
67. Lipson D, Capelletti M, Yelensky R, et al. Identification of new ALK and
RET gene fusions from colorectal and lung cancer biopsies. Nat Med. 2012;18(3):
382–384.
68. Yoh K, Seto T, Satouchi M, et al. Vandetanib in patients with previously
treated RET-rearranged advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (LURET): an open-
label, multicentre phase 2 trial. Lancet Respir Med. 2017;5(1):42–50.
69. Drilon A, Rekhtman N, Arcila M, et al. Cabozantinib in patients with
advanced RET-rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer: an open-label, single-
centre, phase 2, single-arm trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(12):1653–1660.
70. Gautschi O, Milia J, Filleron T, et al. Targeting RET in patients with RET-
rearranged lung cancers: results from the global, multicenter RET registry. J Clin
Oncol. 2017;35(13):1403–1410.
71. Gautschi O, Zander T, Keller FA, et al. A patient with lung
adenocarcinoma and RET fusion treated with vandetanib. J Thorac Oncol.
2013;8(5):e43–e44.
72. Drilon A, Wang L, Hasanovic A, et al. Response to cabozantinib in
patients with RET fusion-positive lung adenocarcinomas. Cancer Discov. 2013;
3(6):630–635.
340
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 73. Thunnissen E, van der Oord K, den Bakker M. Prognostic and predictive
biomarkers in lung cancer: a review. Virchows Arch. 2014;464(3):347–358.
74. Li F, Feng Y, Fang R, et al. Identification of RET gene fusion by exon array
analyses in ‘‘pan-negative’’ lung cancer from never smokers. Cell Res. 2012;22(5):
928–931.
75. Sasaki H, Shimizu S, Tani Y, et al. RET expression and detection of KIF5B/
RET gene rearrangements in Japanese lung cancer. Cancer Med. 2012;1(1):68–
75.
76. Zheng Z, Liebers M, Zhelyazkova B, et al. Anchored multiplex PCR for
targeted next-generation sequencing. Nat Med. 2014;20(12):1479–1484.
77. Aleric I, Razumovic JJ, Koprivica B. HER-2/neu oncogene and estrogen
receptor expression in non small cell lung cancer patients. Med Pregl. 2012;
65(5–6):210–215.
78. Calikusu Z, Yildirim Y, Akcali Z, Sakalli H, Bal N, Ozyilkan O. Prognostic
significance of the C-erbB-2 expression in Turkish non-small cell lung cancer
patients. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2009;10(3):479–482.
79. Liu L, Shao X, Gao W, et al. The role of human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 as a prognostic factor in lung cancer: a meta-analysis of published
data. J Thorac Oncol. 2010;5(12):1922–1932.
80. Tomizawa K, Suda K, Onozato R, et al. Prognostic and predictive
implications of HER2/ERBB2/neu gene mutations in lung cancers. Lung Cancer.
2011;74(1):139–144.
81. Arcila ME, Chaft JE, Nafa K, et al. Prevalence, clinicopathologic
associations, and molecular spectrum of ERBB2 (HER2) tyrosine kinase mutations
in lung adenocarcinomas. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;18(18):4910–4918.
82. Yoshizawa A, Sumiyoshi S, Sonobe M, et al. HER2 status in lung
adenocarcinoma: a comparison of immunohistochemistry, fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), dual-ISH, and gene mutations. Lung Cancer. 2014;85(3):
373–378.
83. Shan L, Qiu T, Ling Y, et al. Prevalence and clinicopathological
characteristics of HER2 and BRAF mutation in Chinese patients with lung
adenocarcinoma. PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0130447. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0130447.
84. Suzuki M, Shiraishi K, Yoshida A, et al. HER2 gene mutations in non-small
cell lung carcinomas: concurrence with Her2 gene amplification and Her2
protein expression and phosphorylation. Lung Cancer. 2015;87(1):14–22.
85. Kris MG, Camidge DR, Giaccone G, et al. Targeting HER2 aberrations as
actionable drivers in lung cancers: phase II trial of the pan-HER tyrosine kinase
inhibitor dacomitinib in patients with HER2-mutant or amplified tumors. Ann
Oncol. 2015;26(7):1421–1427.
86. Li C, Sun Y, Fang R, et al. Lung adenocarcinomas with HER2-activating
mutations are associated with distinct clinical features and HER2/EGFR copy
number gains. J Thorac Oncol. 2012;7(1):85–89.
87. Gatzemeier U, Groth G, Butts C, et al. Randomized phase II trial of
gemcitabine-cisplatin with or without trastuzumab in HER2-positive non-small-
cell lung cancer. Ann Oncol. 2004;15(1):19–27.
88. Krug LM, Miller VA, Patel J, et al. Randomized phase II study of weekly
docetaxel plus trastuzumab versus weekly paclitaxel plus trastuzumab in patients
with previously untreated advanced nonsmall cell lung carcinoma. Cancer. 2005;
104(10):2149–2155.
89. Li BT, Ross DS, Aisner DL, et al. HER2 amplification and HER2 mutation
are distinct molecular targets in lung cancers. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(3):414–
419.
90. Takezawa K, Pirazzoli V, Arcila ME, et al. HER2 amplification: a potential
mechanism of acquired resistance to EGFR inhibition in EGFR-mutant lung
cancers that lack the second-site EGFRT790M mutation. Cancer Discov. 2012;
2(10):922–933.
91. Chuang JC, Stehr H, Liang Y, et al. ERBB2-mutated metastatic non-small
cell lung cancer: response and resistance to targeted therapies. J Thorac Oncol.
2017;12(5):833–842.
92. Fiala O, Pesek M, Finek J, Benesova L, Belsanova B, Minarik M. The
dominant role of G12C over other KRAS mutation types in the negative prediction
of efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-
small cell lung cancer. Cancer Genet. 2013;206(1–2):26–31.
93. Mao C, Qiu LX, Liao RY, et al. KRAS mutations and resistance to EGFR-
TKIs treatment in patients with non-small cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis of 22
studies. Lung Cancer. 2010;69(3):272–278.
94. Meng D, Yuan M, Li X, et al. Prognostic value of K-RAS mutations in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer: a systematic review with meta-analysis.
Lung Cancer. 2013;81(1):1–10.
95. Yeung SF, Tong JH, Law PP, et al. Profiling of oncogenic driver events in
lung adenocarcinoma revealed MET mutation as independent prognostic factor. J
Thorac Oncol. 2015;10(9):1292–1300.
96. Leidner RS, Fu P, Clifford B, et al. Genetic abnormalities of the EGFR
pathway in African American patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2009;27(33):5620–5626.
97. Reinersman JM, Johnson ML, Riely GJ, et al. Frequency of EGFR and KRAS
mutations in lung adenocarcinomas in African Americans. J Thorac Oncol. 2011;
6(1):28–31.
98. Shigematsu H, Lin L, Takahashi T, et al. Clinical and biological features
associated with epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutations in lung cancers.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97(5):339–346.
99. Riely GJ, Kris MG, Rosenbaum D, et al. Frequency and distinctive
spectrum of KRAS mutations in never smokers with lung adenocarcinoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2008;14(18):5731–5734.
100. Thu KL, Vucic EA, Chari R, et al. Lung adenocarcinoma of never smokers
and smokers harbor differential regions of genetic alteration and exhibit different
levels of genomic instability. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33003. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0033003.
101. Broet P, Dalmasso C, Tan EH, et al. Genomic profiles specific to patient
ethnicity in lung adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17(11):3542–3550.
102. Janne PA, Shaw AT, Pereira JR, et al. Selumetinib plus docetaxel for KRAS-
mutant advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomised, multicentre,
placebo-controlled, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(1):38–47.
103. Janne PA, van den Heuvel MM, Barlesi F, et al. Selumetinib plus docetaxel
compared with docetaxel alone and progression-free survival in patients with
KRAS-mutant advanced non-small cell lung cancer: the SELECT-1 randomized
clinical trial. JAMA. 2017;317(18):1844–1853.
104. Carter CA, Rajan A, Keen C, et al. Selumetinib with and without erlotinib
in KRAS mutant and KRAS wild-type advanced nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Ann
Oncol. 2016;27(4):693–699.
105. Guibert N, Barlesi F, Descourt R, et al. Characteristics and outcomes of
patients with lung cancer harboring multiple molecular alterations: results from
the IFCT study Biomarkers France. J Thorac Oncol. 2017;12(6):963–973.
106. Scheffler M, Ihle MA, Hein R, et al. Genetic heterogeneity of KRAS-
mutated NSCLC: co-occurrence of potentially targetable aberrations and
evolutionary background [ASCO meeting abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2016;
34(suppl):9018.
107. Guo B, Cen H, Tan X, Liu W, Ke Q. Prognostic value of MET gene copy
number and protein expression in patients with surgically resected non-small cell
lung cancer: a meta-analysis of published literatures. PLoS One. 2014;9(6):
e99399. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0099399.
108. Jin Y, Sun PL, Kim H, et al. MET gene copy number gain is an independent
poor prognostic marker in Korean stage I lung adenocarcinomas. Ann Surg
Oncol. 2014;21(2):621–628.
109. Spigel DR, Ervin TJ, Ramlau RA, et al. Randomized phase II trial of
Onartuzumab in combination with erlotinib in patients with advanced non-
small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(32):4105–4114.
110. Kowalczuk O, Kozlowski M, Niklinska W, Kisluk J, Niklinska BJ, Niklinski
J. Increased MET gene copy number but not mRNA level predicts postoperative
recurrence in patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Transl Oncol. 2014;7(5):
605–612.
111. Jurmeister P, Lenze D, Berg E, et al. Parallel screening for ALK, MET and
ROS1 alterations in non-small cell lung cancer with implications for daily routine
testing. Lung Cancer. 2015;87(2):122–129.
112. Noro R, Seike M, Zou F, et al. MET FISH-positive status predicts short
progression-free survival and overall survival after gefitinib treatment in lung
adenocarcinoma with EGFR mutation. BMC Cancer. 2015;15:31. doi:10.1186/
s12885-015-1019-1.
113. Weingertner N, Meyer N, Voegeli AC, et al. Correlation between MET
protein expression and MET gene copy number in a Caucasian cohort of non-
small cell lung cancers according to the new IASLC/ATS/ERS classification.
Pathology. 2015;47(4):320–328.
114. Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, et al. MET amplification leads to
gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling. Science. 2007;
316(5827):1039–1043.
115. Piotrowska Z, Sequist LV. Epidermal growth factor receptor-mutant lung
cancer: new drugs, new resistance mechanisms, and future treatment options.
Cancer J. 2015;21(5):371–377.
116. Spigel DR, Edelman MJ, O’Byrne K, et al. Results from the phase III
randomized trial of onartuzumab plus erlotinib versus erlotinib in previously
treated stage IIIB or IV non-small-cell lung cancer: METLung. J Clin Oncol. 2017;
35(4):412–420.
117. Trusolino L, Bertotti A, Comoglio PM. MET signalling: principles and
functions in development, organ regeneration and cancer. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2010;11(12):834–848.
118. Gherardi E, Birchmeier W, Birchmeier C, Vande Woude G. Targeting MET
in cancer: rationale and progress. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012;12(2):89–103.
119. Sierra JR, Tsao MS. c-MET as a potential therapeutic target and biomarker
in cancer. Ther Adv Med Oncol. 2011;3(1)(suppl):S21–S35.
120. Feng Y, Thiagarajan PS, Ma PC. MET signaling: novel targeted inhibition
and its clinical development in lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2012;7(2):459–467.
121. Lutterbach B, Zeng Q, Davis LJ, et al. Lung cancer cell lines harboring
MET gene amplification are dependent on Met for growth and survival. Cancer
Res. 2007;67(5):2081–2088.
122. Gainor JF, Niederst MJ, Lennerz JK, et al. Dramatic response to
combination erlotinib and crizotinib in a patient with advanced, EGFR-mutant
lung cancer harboring de novo MET amplification. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(7):
e83–e85.
123. Jeffers M, Schmidt L, Nakaigawa N, et al. Activating mutations for the met
tyrosine kinase receptor in human cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;94(21):
11445–11450.
124. Ma PC. MET receptor juxtamembrane exon 14 alternative spliced variant:
novel cancer genomic predictive biomarker. Cancer Discov. 2015;5(8):802–805.
125. Tong JH, Yeung SF, Chan AW, et al. MET Amplification and exon 14 splice
site mutation define unique molecular subgroups of non-small cell lung
carcinoma with poor prognosis. Clin Cancer Res. 2016;22(12):3048–3056.
126. Paik PK, Drilon A, Fan PD, et al. Response to MET inhibitors in patients
with stage IV lung adenocarcinomas harboring MET mutations causing exon 14
skipping. Cancer Discov. 2015;5(8):842–849.
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
341
 127. Frampton GM, Ali SM, Rosenzweig M, et al. Activation of MET via diverse
exon 14 splicing alterations occurs in multiple tumor types and confers clinical
sensitivity to MET inhibitors. Cancer Discov. 2015;5(8):850–859.
128. Heist RS, Shim HS, Gingipally S, et al. MET exon 14 skipping in non-small
cell lung cancer. Oncologist. 2016;21(4):481–486.
129. Awad MM, Oxnard GR, Jackman DM, et al. MET exon 14 mutations in
non-small-cell lung cancer are associated with advanced age and stage-
dependent MET genomic amplification and c-Met overexpression. J Clin Oncol.
2016;34(7):721–730.
130. Liu X, Jia Y, Stoopler MB, et al. Next-generation sequencing of pulmonary
sarcomatoid carcinoma reveals high frequency of actionable MET gene
mutations. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(8):794–802.
131. Dziadziuszko R, Wynes MW, Singh S, et al. Correlation between MET
gene copy number by silver in situ hybridization and protein expression by
immunohistochemistry in non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2012;7(2):
340–347.
132. Cappuzzo F, Marchetti A, Skokan M, et al. Increased MET gene copy
number negatively affects survival of surgically resected non-small-cell lung
cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(10):1667–1674.
133. Noonan SA, Berry L, Lu X, et al. Identifying the appropriate FISH criteria
for defining MET copy number-driven lung adenocarcinoma through oncogene
overlap analysis. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(8):1293–1304.
134. Ou SH, Kwak EL, Siwak-Tapp C, et al. Activity of crizotinib (PF02341066),
a dual mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase
(ALK) inhibitor, in a non-small cell lung cancer patient with de novo MET
amplification. J Thorac Oncol. 2011;6(5):942–946.
135. Caparica R, Yen CT, Coudry R, et al. Responses to crizotinib can occur in
high-level MET-amplified non-small cell lung cancer independent of MET exon
14 alterations. J Thorac Oncol. 2017;12(1):141–144.
136. Wu Y-L, Yang JC-H, Kim D-W, et al. Safety and efficacy of INC280 in
combination with gefitinib (gef) in patients with EGFR-mutated (mut), MET-
positive NSCLC: a single-arm phase Ib/II study. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(5s):8017.
137. Tsuta K, Kozu Y, Mimae T, et al. c-MET/phospho-MET protein expression
and MET gene copy number in non-small cell lung carcinomas. J Thorac Oncol.
2012;7(2):331–339.
138. Koeppen H, Yu W, Zha J, et al. Biomarker analyses from a placebo-
controlled phase II study evaluating erlotinib 6 onartuzumab in advanced non-
small cell lung cancer: MET expression levels are predictive of patient benefit.
Clin Cancer Res. 2014;20(17):4488–4498.
139. McLeer-Florin A, Moro-Sibilot D, Melis A, et al. Dual IHC and FISH testing
for ALK gene rearrangement in lung adenocarcinomas in a routine practice: a
French study. J Thorac Oncol. 2012;7(2):348–354.
140. Sholl LM, Weremowicz S, Gray SW, et al. Combined use of ALK
immunohistochemistry and FISH for optimal detection of ALK-rearranged lung
adenocarcinomas. J Thorac Oncol. 2013;8(3):322–328.
141. Park HS, Lee JK, Kim DW, et al. Immunohistochemical screening for
anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangement in advanced non-small cell
lung cancer patients. Lung Cancer. 2012;77(2):288–292.
142. Minca EC, Portier BP, Wang Z, et al. ALK status testing in non-small cell
lung carcinoma: correlation between ultrasensitive IHC and FISH. J Mol Diagn.
2013;15(3):341–346.
143. To KF, Tong JH, Yeung KS, et al. Detection of ALK rearrangement by
immunohistochemistry in lung adenocarcinoma and the identification of a novel
EML4-ALK variant. J Thorac Oncol. 2013;8(7):883–891.
144. Blackhall FH, Peters S, Bubendorf L, et al. Prevalence and clinical
outcomes for patients with ALK-positive resected stage I to III adenocarcinoma:
results from the European Thoracic Oncology Platform Lungscape Project. J Clin
Oncol. 2014;32(25):2780–2787.
145. Conde E, Suarez-Gauthier A, Benito A, et al. Accurate identification of
ALK positive lung carcinoma patients: novel FDA-cleared automated fluores-
cence in situ hybridization scanning system and ultrasensitive immunohisto-
chemistry. PLoS One. 2014;9(9):e107200. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0107200.
146. Cutz JC, Craddock KJ, Torlakovic E, et al. Canadian anaplastic lymphoma
kinase study: a model for multicenter standardization and optimization of ALK
testing in lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2014;9(9):1255–1263.
147. Tantraworasin A, Lertprasertsuke N, Kongkarnka S, Euathrongchit J,
Wannasopha Y, Saeteng S. Retrospective study of ALK rearrangement and
clinicopathological implications in completely resected non-small cell lung
cancer patients in northern Thailand: role of screening with D5F3 antibodies.
Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(7):3057–3063.
148. Wang J, Cai Y, Dong Y, et al. Clinical characteristics and outcomes of
patients with primary lung adenocarcinoma harboring ALK rearrangements
detected by FISH, IHC, and RT-PCR. PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e101551. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0101551.
149. Yang P, Kulig K, Boland JM, et al. Worse disease-free survival in never-
smokers with ALKþ lung adenocarcinoma. J Thorac Oncol. 2012;7(1):90–97.
150. Ying J, Guo L, Qiu T, et al. Diagnostic value of a novel fully automated
immunochemistry assay for detection of ALK rearrangement in primary lung
adenocarcinoma. Ann Oncol. 2013;24(10):2589–2593.
151. Shan L, Lian F, Guo L, Yang X, Ying J, Lin D. Combination of conventional
immunohistochemistry and qRT-PCR to detect ALK rearrangement. Diagn Pathol.
2014;9:3. doi:10.1186/1746-1596-9-3.
152. Zwaenepoel K, Van Dongen A, Lambin S, Weyn C, Pauwels P. Detection
of ALK expression in non-small-cell lung cancer with ALK gene rearrangements—
comparison of multiple immunohistochemical methods. Histopathology. 2014;
65(4):539–548.
153. Gruber K, Kohlhaufl M, Friedel G, Ott G, Kalla C. A novel, highly sensitive
ALK antibody 1A4 facilitates effective screening for ALK rearrangements in lung
adenocarcinomas by standard immunohistochemistry. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;
10(4):713–716.
154. Lantuejoul S, Rouquette I, Blons H, et al. French multicentric validation of
ALK rearrangement diagnostic in 547 lung adenocarcinomas. Eur Respir J. 2015;
46(1):201–218.
155. Savic S, Diebold J, Zimmermann AK, et al. Screening for ALK in non-small
cell lung carcinomas: 5A4 and D5F3 antibodies perform equally well, but
combined use with FISH is recommended. Lung Cancer. 2015;89(2):104–109.
156. Ali G, Proietti A, Pelliccioni S, et al. ALK rearrangement in a large series of
consecutive non-small cell lung cancers: comparison between a new immuno-
histochemical approach and fluorescence in situ hybridization for the screening
of patients eligible for crizotinib treatment. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014;138(11):
1449–1458.
157. Hutarew G, Hauser-Kronberger C, Strasser F, Llenos IC, Dietze O.
Immunohistochemistry as a screening tool for ALK rearrangement in NSCLC:
evaluation of five different ALK antibody clones and ALK FISH. Histopathology.
2014;65(3):398–407.
158. Mino-Kenudson M, Chirieac LR, Law K, et al. A novel, highly sensitive
antibody allows for the routine detection of ALK-rearranged lung adenocarcino-
mas by standard immunohistochemistry. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;16(5):1561–
1571.
159. Rodig SJ, Mino-Kenudson M, Dacic S, et al. Unique clinicopathologic
features characterize ALK-rearranged lung adenocarcinoma in the western
population. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15(16):5216–5223.
160. Shaw AT, Yeap BY, Mino-Kenudson M, et al. Clinical features and outcome
of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer who harbor EML4-ALK. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27(26):4247–4253.
161. Kim H, Yoo SB, Choe JY, et al. Detection of ALK gene rearrangement in
non-small cell lung cancer: a comparison of fluorescence in situ hybridization
and chromogenic in situ hybridization with correlation of ALK protein
expression. J Thorac Oncol. 2011;6(8):1359–1366.
162. Marchetti A, Di Lorito A, Pace MV, et al. ALK protein analysis by IHC
staining after recent regulatory changes: a comparison of two widely used
approaches, revision of the literature, and a new testing algorithm. J Thorac
Oncol. 2016;11(4):487–495.
163. Pekar-Zlotin M, Hirsch FR, Soussan-Gutman L, et al. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization, immunohistochemistry, and next-generation sequencing for
detection of EML4-ALK rearrangement in lung cancer. Oncologist. 2015;20(3):
316–322.
164. Gao X, Sholl LM, Nishino M, Heng JC, Janne PA, Oxnard GR. Clinical
Implications of variant ALK FISH rearrangement patterns. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;
10(11):1648–1652.
165. Dacic S, Villaruz LC, Abberbock S, Mahaffey A, Incharoen P, Nikiforova
MN. ALK FISH patterns and the detection of ALK fusions by next generation
sequencing in lung adenocarcinoma. Oncotarget. 2016;7(50):82943–82952.
166. Cabillic F, Gros A, Dugay F, et al. Parallel FISH and immunohistochemical
studies of ALK status in 3244 non-small-cell lung cancers reveal major
discordances. J Thorac Oncol. 2014;9(3):295–306.
167. Li Y, Zhang R, Peng R, et al. Reliability assurance of detection of EML4-
ALK rearrangement in non-small cell lung cancer: the results of proficiency
testing in China. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(6):924–929.
168. Soda M, Isobe K, Inoue A, et al. A prospective PCR-based screening for the
EML4-ALK oncogene in non-small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;
18(20):5682–5689.
169. Drilon A, Wang L, Arcila ME, et al. Broad, hybrid capture-based next-
generation sequencing identifies actionable genomic alterations in lung
adenocarcinomas otherwise negative for such alterations by other genomic
testing approaches. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;21(16):3631–3639.
170. Su J, Zhang XC, An SJ, et al. Detecting the spectrum of multigene
mutations in non-small cell lung cancer by Snapshot assay. Chin J Cancer. 2014;
33(7):346–350.
171. Han JY, Kim SH, Lee YS, et al. Comparison of targeted next-generation
sequencing with conventional sequencing for predicting the responsiveness to
epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI) therapy in
never-smokers with lung adenocarcinoma. Lung Cancer. 2014;85(2):161–167.
172. Tuononen K, Maki-Nevala S, Sarhadi VK, et al. Comparison of targeted
next-generation sequencing (NGS) and real-time PCR in the detection of EGFR,
KRAS, and BRAF mutations on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor material
of non-small cell lung carcinoma—superiority of NGS. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer. 2013;52(5):503–511.
173. Scarpa A, Sikora K, Fassan M, et al. Molecular typing of lung
adenocarcinoma on cytological samples using a multigene next generation
sequencing panel. PLoS One. 2013;8(11):e80478. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0080478.
174. Jennings LJ, Arcila ME, Corless C, et al. Guidelines for validation of next-
generation sequencing-based oncology panels: a joint consensus recommenda-
tion of the Association for Molecular Pathology and College of American
Pathologists. J Mol Diagn. 2017;19(3):341–365.
175. Endris V, Penzel R, Warth A, et al. Molecular diagnostic profiling of lung
cancer specimens with a semiconductor-based massive parallel sequencing
342
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 approach: feasibility, costs, and performance compared with conventional
sequencing. J Mol Diagn. 2013;15(6):765–775.
176. Head SR, Komori HK, LaMere SA, et al. Library construction for next-
generation sequencing: overviews and challenges. Biotechniques. 2014;56(2):
61–77.
177. Rekhtman N, Paik PK, Arcila ME, et al. Clarifying the spectrum of driver
oncogene mutations in biomarker-verified squamous carcinoma of lung: lack of
EGFR/KRAS and presence of PIK3CA/AKT1 mutations. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;
18(4):1167–1176.
178. Ludovini V, Bianconi F, Pistola L, et al. Phosphoinositide-3-kinase catalytic
alpha and KRAS mutations are important predictors of resistance to therapy with
epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2011;6(4):707–715.
179. Hirsch FR, Varella-Garcia M, Cappuzzo F, et al. Combination of EGFR
gene copy number and protein expression predicts outcome for advanced non-
small-cell lung cancer patients treated with gefitinib. Ann Oncol. 2007;18(4):
752–760.
180. Massarelli E, Varella-Garcia M, Tang X, et al. KRAS mutation is an
important predictor of resistance to therapy with epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in non-small-cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2007;13(10):2890–2896.
181. Inamura K, Takeuchi K, Togashi Y, et al. EML4-ALK lung cancers are
characterized by rare other mutations, a TTF-1 cell lineage, an acinar histology,
and young onset. Mod Pathol. 2009;22(4):508–515.
182. Shaw AT, Yeap BY, Solomon BJ, et al. Effect of crizotinib on overall survival
in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer harbouring ALK gene
rearrangement: a retrospective analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2011;12(11):1004–1012.
183. Girard N, Sima CS, Jackman DM, et al. Nomogram to predict the presence
of EGFR activating mutation in lung adenocarcinoma. Eur Respir J. 2012;39(2):
366–372.
184. Dogan S, Shen R, Ang DC, et al. Molecular epidemiology of EGFR and
KRAS mutations in 3,026 lung adenocarcinomas: higher susceptibility of women
to smoking-related KRAS-mutant cancers. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;18(22):6169–
6177.
185. Wu CC, Hsu HY, Liu HP, et al. Reversed mutation rates of KRAS and EGFR
genes in adenocarcinoma of the lung in Taiwan and their implications. Cancer.
2008;113(11):3199–3208.
186. Marks JL, Broderick S, Zhou Q, et al. Prognostic and therapeutic
implications of EGFR and KRAS mutations in resected lung adenocarcinoma. J
Thorac Oncol. 2008;3(2):111–116.
187. Molina-Vila MA, Bertran-Alamillo J, Reguart N, et al. A sensitive method
for detecting EGFR mutations in non-small cell lung cancer samples with few
tumor cells. J Thorac Oncol. 2008;3(11):1224–1235.
188. Kawada I, Soejima K, Watanabe H, et al. An alternative method for
screening EGFR mutation using RFLP in non-small cell lung cancer patients. J
Thorac Oncol. 2008;3(10):1096–1103.
189. Lee YJ, Park IK, Park MS, et al. Activating mutations within the EGFR
kinase domain: a molecular predictor of disease-free survival in resected
pulmonary adenocarcinoma. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2009;135(12):1647–1654.
190. Soh J, Toyooka S, Ichihara S, et al. Impact of HER2 and EGFR gene status
on gefitinib-treated patients with nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Int J Cancer. 2007;
121(5):1162–1167.
191. Cohen V, Agulnik JS, Ang C, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor
mutations detected by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography in
nonsmall cell lung cancer: impact on response to therapy with epidermal growth
factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Cancer. 2010;116(18):4309–4317.
192. Harada T, Lopez-Chavez A, Xi L, Raffeld M, Wang Y, Giaccone G.
Characterization of epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in non-small-cell
lung cancer patients of African-American ancestry. Oncogene. 2011;30(15):
1744–1752.
193. Hotta K, Kiura K, Toyooka S, et al. Clinical significance of epidermal
growth factor receptor gene mutations on treatment outcome after first-line
cytotoxic chemotherapy in Japanese patients with non-small cell lung cancer. J
Thorac Oncol. 2007;2(7):632–637.
194. Kondo M, Yokoyama T, Fukui T, et al. Mutations of epidermal growth
factor receptor of non-small cell lung cancer were associated with sensitivity to
gefitinib in recurrence after surgery. Lung Cancer. 2005;50(3):385–391.
195. Porta R, Sanchez-Torres JM, Paz-Ares L, et al. Brain metastases from lung
cancer responding to erlotinib: the importance of EGFR mutation. Eur Respir J.
2011;37(3):624–631.
196. Sasaki H, Endo K, Okuda K, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor gene
amplification and gefitinib sensitivity in patients with recurrent lung cancer. J
Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2008;134(5):569–577.
197. Satouchi M, Negoro S, Funada Y, et al. Predictive factors associated with
prolonged survival in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
treated with gefitinib. Br J Cancer. 2007;96(8):1191–1196.
198. Taron M, Ichinose Y, Rosell R, et al. Activating mutations in the tyrosine
kinase domain of the epidermal growth factor receptor are associated with
improved survival in gefitinib-treated chemorefractory lung adenocarcinomas.
Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11(16):5878–5885.
199. Uramoto H, Sugio K, Oyama T, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor
mutations are associated with gefitinib sensitivity in non-small cell lung cancer in
Japanese. Lung Cancer. 2006;51(1):71–77.
200. Wang Z, Wu YL, Zhang GC, Zhou Q, Xu CR, Guo AL. EGFR/KRAS
mutations and gefitinib therapy in Chinese NSCLC patients. Onkologie. 2008;
31(4):174–178.
201. Xu JM, Han Y, Duan HQ, et al. EGFR mutations and HER2/3 protein
expression and clinical outcome in Chinese advanced non-small cell lung cancer
patients treated with gefitinib. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2009;135(6):771–782.
202. Wu JY, Shih JY, Chen KY, Yang CH, Yu CJ, Yang PC. Gefitinib therapy in
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer with or without testing for
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations. Medicine (Baltimore). 2011;
90(3):159–167.
203. Asahina H, Yamazaki K, Kinoshita I, et al. A phase II trial of gefitinib as
first-line therapy for advanced non-small cell lung cancer with epidermal growth
factor receptor mutations. Br J Cancer. 2006;95(8):998–1004.
204. Bae NC, Chae MH, Lee MH, et al. EGFR, ERBB2, and KRAS mutations in
Korean non-small cell lung cancer patients. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007;
173(2):107–113.
205. Haneda H, Sasaki H, Lindeman N, et al. A correlation between EGFR gene
mutation status and bronchioloalveolar carcinoma features in Japanese patients
with adenocarcinoma. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2006;36(2):69–75.
206. Riely GJ, Pao W, Pham D, et al. Clinical course of patients with non-small
cell lung cancer and epidermal growth factor receptor exon 19 and exon 21
mutations treated with gefitinib or erlotinib. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12(3 Pt 1):
839–844.
207. Sugio K, Uramoto H, Onitsuka T, et al. Prospective phase II study of
gefitinib in non-small cell lung cancer with epidermal growth factor receptor
gene mutations. Lung Cancer. 2009;64(3):314–318.
208. Sunaga N, Tomizawa Y, Yanagitani N, et al. Phase II prospective study of
the efficacy of gefitinib for the treatment of stage III/IV non-small cell lung cancer
with EGFR mutations, irrespective of previous chemotherapy. Lung Cancer. 2007;
56(3):383–389.
209. Tang X, Varella-Garcia M, Xavier AC, et al. Epidermal growth factor
receptor abnormalities in the pathogenesis and progression of lung adenocarci-
nomas. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2008;1(3):192–200.
210. Cote ML, Haddad R, Edwards DJ, et al. Frequency and type of epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations in African Americans with non-small cell lung
cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2011;6(3):627–630.
211. Moiseyenko VM, Procenko SA, Levchenko EV, et al. High efficacy of first-
line gefitinib in non-Asian patients with EGFR-mutated lung adenocarcinoma.
Onkologie. 2010;33(5):231–238.
212. Sahoo R, Harini VV, Babu VC, et al. Screening for EGFR mutations in lung
cancer, a report from India. Lung Cancer. 2011;73(3):316–319.
213. Otani H, Toyooka S, Soh J, et al. Detection of EGFR gene mutations using
the wash fluid of CT-guided biopsy needle in NSCLC patients. J Thorac Oncol.
2008;3(5):472–476.
214. Dacic S, Shuai Y, Yousem S, Ohori P, Nikiforova M. Clinicopathological
predictors of EGFR/KRAS mutational status in primary lung adenocarcinomas.
Mod Pathol. 2010;23(2):159–168.
215. Boland JM, Erdogan S, Vasmatzis G, et al. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase
immunoreactivity correlates with ALK gene rearrangement and transcriptional
up-regulation in non-small cell lung carcinomas. Hum Pathol. 2009;40(8):1152–
1158.
216. Kwak EL, Bang YJ, Camidge DR, et al. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase
inhibition in non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;363(18):1693–1703.
217. Guerin A, Sasane M, Zhang J, et al. ALK rearrangement testing and
treatment patterns for patients with ALK-positive non-small cell lung cancer.
Cancer Epidemiol. 2015;39(3):307–312.
218. Hata A, Katakami N, Yoshioka H, et al. Rebiopsy of non-small cell lung
cancer patients with acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor-
tyrosine kinase inhibitor: Comparison between T790M mutation-positive and
mutation-negative populations. Cancer. 2013;119(24):4325–4332.
219. Sun JM, Ahn MJ, Choi YL, Ahn JS, Park K. Clinical implications of T790M
mutation in patients with acquired resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Lung Cancer. 2013;82(2):294–298.
220. Janjigian YY, Smit EF, Groen HJ, et al. Dual inhibition of EGFR with
afatinib and cetuximab in kinase inhibitor-resistant EGFR-mutant lung cancer
with and without T790M mutations. Cancer Discov. 2014;4(9):1036–1045.
221. Janne PA, Yang JC, Kim DW, et al. AZD9291 in EGFR inhibitor-resistant
non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(18):1689–1699.
222. Ding D, Yu Y, Li Z, Niu X, Lu S. The predictive role of pretreatment
epidermal growth factor receptor T790M mutation on the progression-free
survival of tyrosine-kinase inhibitor-treated non-small cell lung cancer patients: a
meta-analysis. Onco Targets Ther. 2014;7:387–393.
223. Cross DA, Ashton SE, Ghiorghiu S, et al. AZD9291, an irreversible EGFR
TKI, overcomes T790M-mediated resistance to EGFR inhibitors in lung cancer.
Cancer Discov. 2014;4(9):1046–1061.
224. Politi K, Ayeni D, Lynch T. The next wave of EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitors enter the clinic. Cancer Cell. 2015;27(6):751–753.
225. Chmielecki J, Foo J, Oxnard GR, et al. Optimization of dosing for EGFR-
mutant non-small cell lung cancer with evolutionary cancer modeling. Sci Transl
Med. 2011;3(90):90ra59. doi:1126/scitranslmed.3002356.
226. Bean J, Brennan C, Shih JY, et al. METamplification occurs with or without
T790M mutations in EGFR mutant lung tumors with acquired resistance to
gefitinib or erlotinib. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104(52):20932–20937.
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
343
 227. Engelman JA, Mukohara T, Zejnullahu K, et al. Allelic dilution obscures
detection of a biologically significant resistance mutation in EGFR-amplified lung
cancer. J Clin Invest. 2006;116(10):2695–2706.
228. Thress KS, Brant R, Carr TH, et al. EGFR mutation detection in ctDNA
from NSCLC patient plasma: a cross-platform comparison of leading technologies
to support the clinical development of AZD9291. Lung Cancer. 2015;90(3):509–
515.
229. Kim TM, Song A, Kim DW, et al. Mechanisms of acquired resistance to
AZD9291: a mutation-selective, irreversible EGFR inhibitor. J Thorac Oncol.
2015;10(12):1736–1744.
230. Yu HA, Tian SK, Drilon AE, et al. Acquired resistance of EGFR-mutant lung
cancer to a T790M-specific EGFR inhibitor: emergence of a third mutation
(C797S) in the EGFR tyrosine kinase domain. JAMA Oncol. 2015;1(7):982–984.
231. cobast EGFR Mutation Test v2 [package insert]. Branchburg, NJ: Roche
Molecular Systems Inc; 2015.
232. Oxnard GR, Paweletz CP, Kuang Y, et al. Noninvasive detection of
response and resistance in EGFR-mutant lung cancer using quantitative next-
generation genotyping of cell-free plasma DNA. Clin Cancer Res. 2014;20(6):
1698–1705.
233. Wei Z, Shah N, Deng C, Xiao X, Zhong T, Li X. Circulating DNA addresses
cancer monitoring in non small cell lung cancer patients for detection and
capturing the dynamic changes of the disease. Springerplus. 2016;5:531. doi:10.
1186/s40064-016-2141-5.
234. Kukita Y, Uchida J, Oba S, et al. Quantitative identification of mutant
alleles derived from lung cancer in plasma cell-free DNA via anomaly detection
using deep sequencing data. PLoS One. 2013;8(11):e81468. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0081468.
235. Mok T, Wu YL, Lee JS, et al. Detection and dynamic changes of EGFR
mutations from circulating tumor DNA as a predictor of survival outcomes in
NSCLC patients treated with first-line intercalated erlotinib and chemotherapy.
Clin Cancer Res. 2015;21(14):3196–3203.
236. Oxnard GR, Thress KS, Alden RS, et al. Association between plasma
genotyping and outcomes of treatment with osimertinib (AZD9291) in advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(28):3375–3382.
237. Wang S, Tsui ST, Liu C, Song Y, Liu D. EGFR C797S mutation mediates
resistance to third-generation inhibitors in T790M-positive non-small cell lung
cancer. J Hematol Oncol. 2016;9(1):59. doi:10.1186/s13045-016-0290-1.
238. Huang D, Kim DW, Kotsakis A, et al. Multiplexed deep sequencing
analysis of ALK kinase domain identifies resistance mutations in relapsed patients
following crizotinib treatment. Genomics. 2013;102(3):157–162.
239. Douillard JY, Shepherd FA, Hirsh V, et al. Molecular predictors of outcome
with gefitinib and docetaxel in previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer:
data from the randomized phase III INTEREST trial. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(5):744–
752.
240. Schwarzenbach H, Hoon DS, Pantel K. Cell-free nucleic acids as
biomarkers in cancer patients. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011;11(6):426–437.
241. Bettegowda C, Sausen M, Leary RJ, et al. Detection of circulating tumor
DNA in early- and late-stage human malignancies. Sci Transl Med. 2014;6(224):
224ra224. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3007094.
242. Douillard JY, Ostoros G, Cobo M, et al. Gefitinib treatment in EGFR
mutated Caucasian NSCLC: circulating-free tumor DNA as a surrogate for
determination of EGFR status. J Thorac Oncol. 2014;9(9):1345–1353.
243. Li Z, Zhang Y, Bao W, Jiang C. Insufficiency of peripheral blood as a
substitute tissue for detecting EGFR mutations in lung cancer: a meta-analysis.
Targeted Oncology. 2014;9(4):381–388.
244. Jiang P, Chan CW, Chan KC, et al. Lengthening and shortening of plasma
DNA in hepatocellular carcinoma patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;
112(11):E1317–E1325.
245. Mouliere F, Robert B, Arnau Peyrotte E, et al. High fragmentation
characterizes tumour-derived circulating DNA. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e23418.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0023418.
246. Wang BG, Huang HY, Chen YC, et al. Increased plasma DNA integrity in
cancer patients. Cancer Res. 2003;63(14):3966–3968.
247. Luo J, Shen L, Zheng D. Diagnostic value of circulating free DNA for the
detection of EGFR mutation status in NSCLC: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Sci Rep. 2014;4:6269. doi:10.1038/srep06269.
248. Sakai K, Horiike A, Irwin DL, et al. Detection of epidermal growth factor
receptor T790M mutation in plasma DNA from patients refractory to epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Cancer Sci. 2013;104(9):1198–
1204.
249. Wang Z, Chen R, Wang S, et al. Quantification and dynamic monitoring of
EGFR T790M in plasma cell-free DNA by digital PCR for prognosis of EGFR-TKI
treatment in advanced NSCLC. PLoS One. 2014;9(11):e110780. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0110780.
250. Rittmeyer A, Barlesi F, Waterkamp D, et al. Atezolizumab versus docetaxel
in patients with previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer (OAK): a phase 3,
open-label, multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2017;389(10066):
255–265.
251. Herbst RS, Baas P, Kim DW, et al. Pembrolizumab versus docetaxel for
previously treated, PD-L1-positive, advanced non-small-cell lung cancer
(KEYNOTE-010): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2016;387(10027):1540–
1550.
252. Reck M, Rodriguez-Abreu D, Robinson AG, et al. Pembrolizumab versus
chemotherapy for PD-L1-positive non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med.
2016;375(19):1823–1833.
253. Borghaei H, Paz-Ares L, Horn L, et al. Nivolumab versus docetaxel in
advanced nonsquamous non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(17):
1627–1639.
254. Brahmer J, Reckamp KL, Baas P, et al. Nivolumab versus docetaxel in
advanced squamous-cell non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2015;373(2):
123–135.
255. FDA approves KEYTRUDA for advanced non-small cell lung cancer [press
release]. Silver Spring, MD: US Food and Drug Administration; October 2, 2015.
256. FDA expands approved use of Opdivo in advanced lung cancer [news
release]. Silver Spring, MD; US Food and Drug Administration. October 9, 2015.
257. US Food and Drug Administration. Atezolizumab (TECENTRIQ). US Food
and
Drug
Administration
Web
site.
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
informationondrugs/approveddrugs/ucm525780.htm. Updated October 19,
2016. Accessed June 14, 2017.
258. Sholl LM, Aisner DL, Allen TC, et al. Programmed death ligand-1
immunohistochemistry—a new challenge for pathologists: a perspective from
members of the Pulmonary Pathology Society. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2016;140(4):
341–344.
259. KEYTRUDA [package insert]. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck & Co, Inc;
2014.
260. OPDIVO [package insert]. Princeton, NJ: Bristol-Myers Squibb Company;
2015.
261. TECENTRIQ [package insert]. South San Francisco, CA: Genentech, Inc;
2016.
262. Balshem H, Helfand M, Schunemann HJ, et al. GRADE guidelines, 3:
rating the quality of evidence. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64(4):401–406.
263. Andrews J, Guyatt G, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE guidelines, 14: going from
evidence to recommendations: the significance and presentation of recommen-
dations. J Clin Epidemiol. 2013;66(7):719–725.
344
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
 APPENDIX.
Disclosed Interests and Activities January 2015–June 2017a
Name
Interest/Activity Type
Entity
Dara L. Aisner, MD, PhD
Consulting/advisory fees
Oxford Oncology
Casdin Capital
Speaker fees/honoraria
Clovis Oncology
AstraZeneca
Maria E. Arcila, MD
Speaker fees/honoraria
Raindance Technologies
Mary Beth Beasley, MD
Consulting/advisory fees
Roche/Genentech
Eric H. Bernicker, MD
Speaker fees/honoraria
Myriad Genetics
Consulting/advisory fees
Foundation Medicine
Philip T. Cagle, MD
Position of Influence
Editor in chief, Archives of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine
Research funding
Roche
Fred R. Hirsch, MD, PhD
Advisory board
Pfizer
AstraZeneca
Consulting/advisory fees
Novartis
Bristol Meyers Squibb
Merck Sharp Dohme
HTG Molecular
Pfizer
Eli Lilly
Roche
AstraZeneca
Boehringer Ingelheim
Research grants
Lilly/Imclone
Celgene
Research grants, advisory
board
Bristol Meyers Squibb
Research grants, consulting/
advisory fees
Amgen
Roche/Genentech
Position of Influence
Chief executive officer, IASLC, 2013–current
Keith Kerr, MB ChB
Advisory board, consulting/
advisory fees
Roche/Genentech
Speaker fees/honoraria
Boehringer Ingelheim
Pfizer
Eli Lilly
Consulting/advisory fees,
speakers fees/honoraria
Pfizer
Boehringer Ingelheim
Roche
AstraZeneca
Novartis
Position of Influence
Board member, IASLC
Member, Scottish NHS Molecular Pathology Evaluation Panel
David J. Kwiatkowski, MD, PhD
Consulting/advisory fees
AstraZeneca
Novartis
Marc Ladanyi, MD
Consulting/advisory fees
NCCN/Boehringer-Ingelheim Afatinib Targeted Therapy
Advisory Committee
Stock options/bonds
Foundation Medicine
Research grants
LOXO Pharmaceuticals
Jan A. Nowak, MD, PhD
Employment
Chief medical officer, OmniSeq, LLC
Position of Influence
CAP Center Committee, Pathology and Laboratory Quality Center,
2009–2015
Council on Governmental and Professional Affairs–PHC Working
Group, 2012–2016, CAP PHC
Archives of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, associate editor for
Clinical Pathology, 2012–current
CAP Guideline Metrics Expert Panel, member, 2014–current
AMA CPT Editorial Panel member (American Hospital Association)
2015–current
AMA CPT MPAG 2015–current
AMP Economic Affairs Committee 2009–current; (co-chair 2013–2014)
Pathology Coding Caucus–AMP representative 2005–2008; 2013–2015
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
345
 APPENDIX.
Continued
Name
Interest/Activity Type
Entity
Lynette Sholl, MD
Research grants, consulting/
advisory fees
Roche/Genentech
Consulting/advisory fees
Eli Lilly
Benjamin Solomon, MBBS, PhD
Advisory board
Bristol Meyers Squibb
Roche/Genentech
Royalties
University of Colorado for (Veristrat) Biodesix
Consulting/advisory fees, speakers
fees/honoraria
Bristol Meyers Squibb
AstraZeneca
Pfizer
Erik Thunnissen, MD, PhD
Research grants
Pfizer
Speaker fees/honoraria
Pfizer
Consulting/advisory fees
Merck Sharp Dohme
Clovis Oncology
Bristol Meyers Squibb
Ming S. Tsao, MD
Research grants, consulting/
advisory fees
Pfizer Canada
AstraZeneca
Merck Canada
Consulting/advisory fees
Ventana/Hoffmann La Roche
Boehringer Ingelheim Canada
Bristol Meyers Squibb
Position of Influence
Member, Advisory Committee on Research, Canadian Cancer
Society Research Institute
Co-chair, Correlative Science and Tumor Biology Committee,
Canadian Cancer Trials Group
Yasushi Yatabe, MD, PhD
Speaker fees/honoraria
AstraZeneca
Pfizer
Chugai-pharm
Yakuruto-pharm
Novartis
Roche
Merck Sharp Dohme
Abbreviations: AMA, American Medical Association; AMP, Association for Molecular Pathology; CAP, College of American Pathologists; CPT,
Current Procedural Terminology; IASLC, International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer; MPAG, Molecular Pathology Advisory Group; PHC,
Personalized Healthcare Committee.
a Carol Colasacco, MLIS, SCT(ASCP), Sanja Dacic, MD, PhD, Neal I. Lindeman, MD, Robyn Temple-Smolkin, PhD, Lesley H. Souter PhD, Christina
B. Ventura, MPH, MT(ASCP), and Murry W. Wynes, PhD, have no reported conflicts of interest to disclose.
346
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 142, March 2018
Lung Cancer Molecular Testing Guideline Update—Lindeman et al
