 393
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2016
Study Objectives: Although nightmares appear to be related to suicidal behaviors, the mechanisms which underpin this relationship are unknown. We 
sought to address this gap by examining a multiple mediation hypothesis whereby nightmares were predicted to have an indirect effect on suicidal behaviors 
through perceptions of defeat, entrapment, and hopelessness.
Methods: Data were collected from 91 participants who had experienced trauma and symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Nightmares 
were measured by summing the frequency and intensity ratings of relevant items on the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale. Participants also completed 
questionnaire measures of suicidal behavior, hopelessness, defeat, and entrapment. Given the interrelations between insomnia, PTSD, and suicide, a 
measure of insomnia was included as a covariate. Furthermore, analyses were conducted with and without those participants who had comorbid depression.
Results: Suicidal behaviors were higher in those participants who experienced nightmares (62%), in comparison to those who did not (20%). Bootstrapped 
analyses provided support for the hypothesized multistep mediational model. Specifically, nightmares were both directly and indirectly associated with 
suicidal behaviors, through perceptions of defeat, entrapment, and hopelessness, independent of comorbid insomnia and depression.
Conclusions: For the first time we show that the relationship between nightmares and suicidal behaviors is partially mediated by a multistep pathway via 
defeat, entrapment, and hopelessness. Clinically, our work highlights the importance of monitoring and targeting nightmares and perceptions of defeat, 
entrapment, and hopelessness when working with clients who have experienced trauma.
Commentary: A commentary on this article appears in this issue on page 289.
Keywords: nightmares, suicidal ideation, posttraumatic stress disorder, defeat, entrapment; hopelessness, insomnia, depression
Citation: Littlewood DL, Gooding PA, Panagioti M, Kyle SD. Nightmares and suicide in posttraumatic stress disorder: the mediating role of defeat, 
entrapment, and hopelessness. J Clin Sleep Med 2016;12(3):393–399.
INTRODUCTION
Suicide is a major public health concern accounting for approxi-
mately 800,000 deaths worldwide each year.1 In order to develop 
effective clinical prevention strategies, it is crucial to under-
stand how risk factors and psychological mechanisms interact 
within suicidal pathways. Sleep problems, have been identified 
as a modifiable risk factor for suicidal behaviors, such as, sui-
cidal thoughts, plans, and attempts.2 While there is a growing 
body of research reporting robust associations between sleep 
problems and suicidal behaviors,2 such work has not elucidated 
the psychological mechanisms which underpin this relationship.
One specific type of sleep problem that is associated with 
suicidal behaviors is the experience of nightmares.3–11 A recent 
meta-analysis based on 14 studies, including both clinical and 
non-clinical samples, indicated that individuals who experi-
enced nightmares were 2.61 times more likely to experience sui-
cidal behaviors than those who did not experience nightmares.2 
Moreover, a longitudinal study of people who had previously at-
tempted suicide found that having frequent nightmares at both 
baseline and two months later, was associated with a greater risk 
of a subsequent suicide attempt within the following two-year 
period.6 While nightmares have been associated with a range 
of mental illnesses, they appear to be particularly prevalent in 
SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATIONS
Nightmares and Suicide in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: The Mediating Role 
of Defeat, Entrapment, and Hopelessness
Donna L. Littlewood, MRes1; Patricia A. Gooding, PhD1; Maria Panagioti, PhD2; Simon D. Kyle, PhD3
1School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, UK; 2Institute of Population Health, University of Manchester, UK; 3Sleep and Circadian Neuroscience Institute, 
University of Oxford, UK
pii: jc-00402-15 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5664/jcsm.5592
those with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Estimates in-
dicate that up to 90% of individuals experience nightmares in 
the acute phase following trauma.12 Nightmares and sleep dis-
turbance are included within the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for 
PTSD and are repeatedly referred to as core or hallmark symp-
toms of PTSD.13–15 Furthermore, PTSD substantially increases 
the risk of suicidal thoughts or behaviors,16 with one large pop-
ulation-based study indicating that individuals with PTSD were 
almost three times more likely to experience suicidal thoughts 
or behaviors than those without PTSD.17 Surprisingly, despite 
BRIEF SUMMARY
Current Knowledge/Study Rationale: Empirical evidence indicates 
that nightmares are a risk factor for suicidal behaviors, yet no study 
to date has examined the psychological mechanisms underpinning 
the association between nightmares and suicidal behaviors in those 
experiencing PTSD. This study tested a theoretically-based multi-
step mediational pathway whereby nightmares are related to suicidal 
behavior, through defeat, entrapment and hopelessness.
Study Impact: Analyses supported the hypothesis that the 
relationship between nightmares and suicidal behavior, partially 
operates via defeat, entrapment and hopelessness. Clinically, these 
findings highlight the importance of incorporating assessment 
and interventions targeting nightmares and perceptions of defeat, 
entrapment and hopelessness, when working with suicidal clients.
 394
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2016
DL Littlewood, PA Gooding, M Panagioti et al. Nightmares and Suicide in PTSD
the interrelationships between nightmares, PTSD, and suicide, 
no study to date has examined the psychological mechanisms 
underpinning the association between nightmares and suicidal 
behaviors in those experiencing PTSD.
So far, research investigating psychological mechanisms is 
confined to one study that examined the extent to which the re-
lationship between nightmares and suicide could be explained 
by Joiner’s18 Interpersonal-Psychological Theory of Suicide 
(IPTS).5 Data from two different samples of college students 
consistently indicated that nightmares were significantly as-
sociated with suicide attempts, independent of depression 
and constructs identified by the IPTS, namely perceived bur-
densomeness, thwarted belongingness, and acquired suicide 
capability. Therefore, it is important to examine the role of ex-
planatory psychological processes, or factors, within the con-
text of the relationship between nightmares and suicide.
Three plausible factors are defeat, entrapment, and hopeless-
ness, which feature across different contemporary psychologi-
cal models of suicidal behaviors.19–22 Defeat and entrapment 
stem from an evolutionary model of depression, whereby de-
feat is purported to refer to a feeling of failed struggle which is 
associated with a loss of social status.23 Entrapment is thought 
to be associated with a desire to escape, especially when there 
is a perception that escape routes are blocked.23 Indeed, Bau-
meister’s early work highlighted that suicide may represent an 
escape from the self.24 When applied to suicide, theoretical ac-
counts provide a broadly similar postulation; that detrimental 
perceptions of defeat and entrapment drive suicidal behaviors 
as a means of escaping from extreme negative feelings and 
distress.19–21 This is supported by the extant literature, which 
has reported associations between defeat and entrapment, and 
suicidal behaviors in those with PTSD.25,26
Hopelessness is a robust risk factor for suicidal behaviors, 
representing pessimism for the future.27 The Cry of Pain model 
theorized a suicidal pathway whereby defeat triggers entrap-
ment, which in turn elicits hopelessness when perceptions of 
thwarted escape are projected into the future.19,20 Based on the 
Cry of Pain model, nightmares may be related to suicidal be-
havior indirectly through defeat, entrapment, and hopelessness. 
From this perspective, nightmares act as a stressor and directly 
trigger perceptions of defeat. In lieu of any empirical evidence 
examining the relationship between defeat and nightmares, 
it can be posited that nightmares may trigger perceptions of 
defeat due to their trauma-related content. Within the context 
of PTSD, nightmares are often based on the initial traumatic 
event that the individual experienced, and consequently indi-
viduals may re-experience the emotions associated with this 
trauma.28 It is possible that nightmares may reactivate percep-
tions of defeat, entrapment, and hopelessness. Alternatively, it 
is possible that negative appraisals of the ability to cope with, 
or manage, these ongoing nightmares may give rise to defeat.21
The current study had two main aims. The first was to in-
vestigate whether nightmares were associated with suicidal 
behaviors. The second aim was to examine possible multistep 
indirect pathways of the association between nightmares and 
suicidal behaviors through (i) defeat, (ii) entrapment, and (iii) 
hopelessness (as depicted in Figure 1). Specifically, it was hy-
pothesized that nightmares would be associated with suicidal 
behavior. Furthermore, this association was hypothesized to 
operate via an indirect pathway whereby nightmares would 
lead to defeat, defeat would lead to entrapment, entrapment 
would lead to hopelessness, and hopelessness would lead to 
suicidal behavior (as illustrated in bold in Figure 1). Finally, 
it was hypothesized that indirect and direct pathways would 
pertain, even when controlling for depression and insomnia.
METHODS
Participants
Data were collected as part of an earlier study examining the 
associations between suicidal behavior, hopelessness, defeat, 
and entrapment, in people experiencing PTSD symptoms.25 
Inclusion criteria were: (a) have experienced a serious trau-
matic event in the past and meet criterion A of the Posttrau-
matic Stress Diagnostic Scale,29 which refers to the severity 
of a traumatic event and its consequential impact; (b) aged 
18–65 years; (c) English-speaking. Participants with dementia, 
organic brain disorder, or an active psychotic disorder were 
excluded from the study. Data from 4 participants were ex-
cluded because they did not complete the defeat and entrap-
ment scales. The remaining sample of 91 participants (mean 
age = 28.87, standard deviation [SD] = 10.64), included 66 fe-
males (73%, mean age = 28.56, SD = 10.75), 24 males (26%, 
mean age = 30.08, SD = 10.56), and one participant who did not 
specify gender. Participants reported a range of PTSD symp-
toms, with the sample comprised of 50 participants who met 
criteria for a clinical diagnosis of PTSD.
Measures
Nightmare severity was measured by summing the 2 recurrent 
or distressing dreams items within the Clinician-Administered 
PTSD Scale for DSM-IV (CAPS).30 The first item measured 
the amount of distress the dreams caused by asking whether 
the dreams caused the individual to wake up, on waking what 
feelings they had, and subsequent problems returning to sleep 
related to distress caused by the dream. The second item refers 
to the frequency of nightmares over the past month.
Suicidal behaviors were measured by the 4-item Suicidal Be-
haviors Questionnaire-Revised (SBQ-R).31 This questionnaire 
assesses lifetime level of suicidal behaviors, level of suicidal 
thoughts within the past year, communication of suicidal intent 
to others, and likelihood of a future suicide attempt. Possible total 
scores range from 3 to 18, with higher scores reflecting more sui-
cidal behaviors. In the current sample, the α coefficient was 0.87.
Defeat was assessed by a 16-item scale,23 designed to measure 
the extent to which participants have felt defeated during the 
previous week (e.g., “I feel that I have not made it in life”). Total 
scores range from 0 to 64, with higher scores indicating greater 
levels of defeat. Cronbach α for the current sample was 0.96.
Entrapment was measured with a 16-item scale that assesses 
feelings of entrapment (e.g., “I would like to get away from 
other more powerful people in my life”).23 The total score 
ranges from 0 to 64, with higher scores indicating greater lev-
els of entrapment. In this current study Cronbach α for the en-
trapment scale was 0.95.
 395
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2016
DL Littlewood, PA Gooding, M Panagioti et al. Nightmares and Suicide in PTSD
Hopelessness was measured with the 20-item Beck Hope-
lessness Scale (BHS) which assesses perceptions of pessimism 
for the future.32 Participants score each statement true or false 
to indicate whether the given statement reflects their experi-
ences across the past week (e.g., “I look forward to the future 
with hope and enthusiasm”). Possible total scores range from 0 
to 20, with higher scores indicating greater levels of hopeless-
ness. In the current sample, the α coefficient was 0.89.
Insomnia was measured by summing the 2 difficulty in fall-
ing or maintaining sleep items within the CAPS, in accordance 
with the scoring procedure for the full scale.30 The first item as-
sesses how frequently participants had problems falling or main-
taining sleep within the past month. The second item measures 
the intensity of the sleep problem, including amount of sleep lost.
Comorbid depression was based on whether participant re-
ported a previous diagnosis of depression. Responses to this 
question were used to allocate participants to a comorbid de-
pression group within the exploratory analyses.
Procedure
The CAPS interview was administered first, by the third author 
(MP), to confirm a clinical diagnosis of PTSD. Participants 
completed a battery of questionnaire measures in a specified 
order, namely, defeat, entrapment, hopelessness, and suicidal 
behavior. On completion of the study, participants were pro-
vided with a debriefing sheet including contact information for 
appropriate support services. Furthermore, participants who 
met the specified criteria for suicidal risk (i.e., SBQ-R item 
1 ≥ 3; item 2 ≥ 3; item 3 ≥ 2; item 4 ≥ 4) were referred to their 
healthcare contact, provided they had earlier given consent for 
this protocol. Ethics approval for this study was obtained from 
the relevant NHS research ethics committee.
Analysis Strategy
Prior to testing the hypotheses the normality of the data was as-
sessed by calculating the Z score for skew and kurtosis values, 
which indicated that the suicidal behavior data were positively 
skewed, and the nightmare data was negatively skewed. Trans-
formations failed to normalize the data. Therefore, a nonpara-
metric resampling technique, known as bootstrapping was 
applied in all analyses (correlations, regression, and mediation 
models) as an appropriate statistical technique.33 Bootstrap-
ping refers to the repeated re-sampling from the initial dataset 
to generate the statistic of interest for the additional number of 
subsamples.33 In this study, bootstrapped confidence intervals 
were calculated based on 5,000 bootstrap replications.
Descriptive statistics and Pearson product-moment cor-
relational analyses were calculated for all study variables. 
Hierarchical regression analyses were conducted to test the 
first hypothesis, that nightmares would be associated with 
suicidal behaviors, independent of insomnia and depression. 
The predictor variable, nightmares, and control variable, in-
somnia, were standardized prior to entry into the hierarchi-
cal regression models. Suicidal behaviors was entered as the 
outcome variable. Insomnia was entered into the first step of 
the model, followed by nightmares which was entered into 
the second step.
Serial multiple-mediational analyses were performed given 
the hypothesized relationships between the 3 mediating vari-
ables, whereby perception of defeat was postulated to trigger 
entrapment, which subsequently may lead to the development 
of hopelessness. As the model includes 3 mediator variables, 
there are 8 possible pathways in which nightmares may be 
associated with suicidal behaviors, 1 direct and 7 indirect (as 
illustrated in Figure 1). All mediational analyses were con-
ducted using the SPSS macro PROCESS,34 with bias-corrected 
bootstrap replications to generate 95% confidence intervals. 
Indirect effects were interpreted as significant when zero was 
not included within the 95% CIs.34
Effects of comorbid depression were examined by remov-
ing the data of participants with a diagnosis of depression 
(n = 27) and then recalculating the hierarchical regression 
Figure 1—Multiple mediation model for nightmares and suicidal behavior, via defeat, entrapment, and hopelessness 
(controlling for insomnia).
Predicted mediational pathway highlighted in bold.
 396
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2016
DL Littlewood, PA Gooding, M Panagioti et al. Nightmares and Suicide in PTSD
and mediation analyses. Data management and analyses were 
performed using SPSS 22.0 (2013).
RESULTS
Sample Characteristics
Although participants were recruited based on their experi-
ence of trauma, 51 reported a current diagnosis of PTSD and a 
further 24 participants stated that they had a past diagnosis of 
PTSD. Presence of a comorbid mental illness was also reported 
by 36 participants (depression n = 27, bipolar disorder n = 4, 
borderline personality disorder n = 3, other n = 2). A total of 
63% of participants experienced nightmares at least once a week 
during the past month. A χ2 test indicated that suicidal thoughts, 
plans, or attempts were significantly higher among those who 
experienced nightmares within the past month (62%) than par-
ticipants without nightmares (20%; χ2(1) = 12.87, p < 0.001).
Preliminary Analyses 
Descriptive statistics and correlational analyses are presented 
in Table 1 for all study variables. Correlation coefficients be-
tween all variables were positive and significant.
A hierarchical regression model indicated that after control-
ling for insomnia, nightmares explained an additional 12.8% 
of the variance in suicidal behaviors (R² = 0.24, ΔR² = 0.13, 
F(change)1, 88 = 14.91, p < 0.001). In line with the first prediction, 
nightmares significantly predicted suicidal behaviors, indepen-
dent of insomnia (β = 0.43, t = 3.86, p < 0.001, B = 1.71 [95% 
CI = 1.05–2.45]). Participants with a comorbid diagnosis of de-
pression were then removed from the sample, and the regression 
model was then recalculated. The pattern of findings remained 
the same (after controlling for insomnia, nightmares explained 
an additional 11.5% of the variance in suicidal behaviors 
[R² = 0.18, ΔR² = 0.12, F(change)1, 61 = 8.56, p < 0.01]), indicating 
a positive association between nightmares and suicidal behav-
iors (β = 0.38, t = 2.93, p < 0.01, B = 1.22 [95% CI = 0.50–1.97]).
Multiple Mediation Analyses
The total effect for the entire model was significant (point esti-
mate = 1.71; 95% CI: 0.83–2.58). Direct effect point estimates 
are presented for the full mediational model in Figure 2. Point 
estimates and bootstrapped 95% CI for the total indirect effect 
and 7 specific indirect pathways are provided in Table 2. The 
mediational analysis indicated that the total indirect effect and 
2 specific indirect effects were significant. First, nightmares 
were associated with suicidal behaviors indirectly through de-
feat, to entrapment, to hopelessness. Second, nightmares were 
associated with suicidal behaviors indirectly through defeat, 
to hopelessness.
Table 1—Means (with standard deviations in parenthesis), ranges and Pearson product-moment correlational coefficients for 
nightmares, suicide, defeat, entrapment, hopelessness, and insomnia
Mean (SD)
Min
Max
2
3
4
5
6
1. Nightmares (CAPS Q)
3.37 (2.36)
0
7
0.48***
0.53***
0.48***
0.48***
0.54***
2. Suicide (SBQR) 
5.95 (4.01)
3
18
0.52***
0.55***
0.62***
0.34***
3. Defeat 
43.87 (17.03)
3
64
0.82***
0.83***
0.45***
4. Entrapment 
41.40 (17.85)
3
64
0.80***
0.45***
5. Hopelessness (BHS) 
12.64 (5.92)
0
20
0.44***
6. Insomnia (CAPS Q)
4.14 (2.12)
0
8
***p < 0.001.
Figure 2—Multiple mediation model for nightmares and suicidal behavior, via defeat, entrapment and hopelessness (controlling 
for insomnia).
Significant pathways highlighted in bold. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
 397
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2016
DL Littlewood, PA Gooding, M Panagioti et al. Nightmares and Suicide in PTSD
Finally, the mediational analysis was recalculated, after re-
moving participants with a comorbid diagnosis of depression, 
which produced the same patterns of results. Significant ef-
fects reported as follows, total effect (point estimate = 1.22; 
95% CI: 0.39–2.05), total direct effect between nightmares and 
suicidal behaviors (point estimate = 0.84; 95% CI: 0.03–1.65), 
total indirect effect (point estimate = 0.38; 95% CI: 0.06–0.99), 
indirect effects for nightmares to defeat, to entrapment, to 
hopelessness to suicidal behavior (point estimate = 0.13; 95% 
CI: 0.01–0.52), indirect effects for nightmares to defeat, to 
hopelessness to suicidal behavior (point estimate = 0.14; 95% 
CI: 0.02–0.61).
DISCUSSION
The current study sought to advance the understanding of the 
association between nightmares and suicidal behaviors in peo-
ple with symptoms of PTSD, by examining theoretically based 
mediational pathways.19–21 Analyses supported the predicted 
four-step indirect pathway, whereby nightmares have an indi-
rect effect on suicidal behaviors through perceptions of defeat, 
entrapment, and hopelessness. Furthermore, this pathway op-
erated independent of comorbid insomnia, and of a comorbid 
diagnosis of depression.
In line with the first prediction, and corroborating earlier 
research,3,7 nightmares were associated with suicidal behaviors 
independent of the effects of comorbid insomnia and depres-
sion. Moreover, suicidal behavior was more frequent among 
those people who reported experiencing nightmares than in 
those who did not experience nightmares. These findings fur-
ther validate the extant literature which suggests that night-
mares are a risk factor for suicidal behavior.3–11
Results from the mediational analyses indicated that the 
association between nightmares and suicidal behaviors oper-
ated both directly and indirectly via a four-step mediational 
pathway of (i) defeat, and (ii) entrapment, and (iii) hopeless-
ness, supporting our second prediction. The indirect pathway 
was based on the hypothesis that nightmares may trigger de-
feat, which in turn may be associated with entrapment and 
hopelessness based on perceptions of the inability to escape 
from defeat.19,20 Suicide may then be considered as a possible 
escape strategy.19–21,24 As this is the first study to examine the 
role of defeat, entrapment and hopelessness in the context of 
the nightmares/suicide association, replication is important. 
Furthermore, research should seek to examine the nature of 
the relationship between nightmares and defeat. It is possible 
that defeat may emerge from the actual content of the night-
mare. This may be particularly relevant in instances where 
nightmares, based on the memory of the traumatic event, re-
activate associated emotions and symptoms.28 For example, 
where nightmare content is based on an instance of abuse, as 
a victim the individual may consequently feel that they have 
been defeated by the perpetrator of the abuse as re-experi-
enced through the nightmare. Alternatively, negative self-ap-
praisals may mediate the relationship between nightmares and 
defeat, whereby an individual negatively appraises their ability 
to cope or manage nightmares, which triggers defeat. Indeed, 
proponents of the Schematic Appraisals Model of Suicidal be-
havior (SAMS), emphasize the deleterious nature of negative 
self-related appraisals which give rise to defeat and entrap-
ment.21 This suggestion is supported by findings from research 
investigating rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, the sleep stage 
where nightmares generally occur.35 Specifically, individuals 
with depression and anxiety show a bias towards negative self-
appraisals when woken from REM sleep, in comparison with 
self-appraisals following non-REM sleep awaking.36
It is important to note that within the full mediational model 
presented in this paper, nightmares maintained a direct asso-
ciation with suicidal behaviors. This finding points towards 
the likelihood of additional pathways which underpin this re-
lationship. Subsequent research may build on the current study, 
and that conducted by Nadorff and colleagues,5 by integrating 
the underlying psychological and neurobiological processes to 
identify candidate mediators suitable for hypotheses testing. In 
addition to the suggested role of negative cognitive appraisals, 
the frequent re-experiencing of the traumatic event via night-
mares as typified in PTSD, may also hinder emotional and 
mood regulation as a consequence of disrupted REM sleep.37 
Moreover, emotional dysregulation,38 and disturbed REM 
sleep are both associated with suicidal behaviors.39 Accord-
ingly, research should examine the role of emotional regula-
tion and self-appraisals, within the context of the nightmares/
suicide relationship.
Findings from the current study have two important clinical 
implications. First, results further corroborate the association 
Table 2—Point estimates for indirect effects and 95% bias-corrected confidence intervals for multiple mediational analysis 
in which defeat, entrapment, and hopelessness were represented as mediators in the association between nightmares and 
suicidal behavior (controlling for insomnia).
Path
Estimate
Lower
Upper
Nightmares > Defeat > Suicidal behaviors
−0.23
−0.95
0.13
Nightmares > Defeat > Entrapment > Suicidal behaviors
0.21
−0.03
0.70
Nightmares > Defeat > Hopelessness > Suicidal behaviors
0.41
0.14
1.04
Nightmares > Defeat > Entrapment > Hopelessness > Suicidal behaviors
0.21
0.05
0.65
Nightmares > Entrapment > Suicidal behaviors
0.02
−0.09
0.20
Nightmares > Entrapment > Hopelessness > Suicidal behaviors
0.02
−0.10
0.16
Nightmares > Hopelessness > Suicidal behaviors
0.05
−0.28
0.36
Total indirect effects
0.68
0.27
1.22
 
 398
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2016
DL Littlewood, PA Gooding, M Panagioti et al. Nightmares and Suicide in PTSD
between nightmares and increased suicidal risk.3–5,7–11 Hence, 
clinicians should explore the presence and effects of night-
mares routinely with individuals who are experiencing symp-
toms of PTSD. Furthermore, levels of defeat, entrapment and 
hopelessness should also be monitored in those who report 
nightmares. Second, it may be insufficient to solely administer 
interventions for PTSD, given that research indicates that sleep 
problems may persist post-intervention.40 Rather, clinicians 
may consider incorporating sleep-targeted interventions into 
treatment provision.41 For example, there is strong empirical 
evidence to support the efficacy of Imagery Rehearsal Therapy 
(IRT) in treating nightmares.41 IRT alleviates nightmares by 
asking the patient to recall the nightmare and then rescript it 
into something less distressing. This new content is then re-
hearsed with the aid of supporting imagery. Alternatively, pra-
zosin is the leading pharmacological agent advocated for use 
to treat PTSD-related nightmares.41 However, there is currently 
insufficient evidence to suggest whether these sleep-focused 
psychological or pharmacological treatments may generate ad-
ditional positive outcomes in associated levels of suicidal be-
haviors, defeat, entrapment, and hopelessness.
The current pattern of results should be viewed within the 
context of four limitations. First, the cross-sectional nature of 
the data prevents causal interpretations. Future studies should 
examine the identified mediational pathways using longitudi-
nal designs. Second, the sample size within the current study 
is relatively small, which may limit the extent to which these 
findings generalize to more widely to people with symptoms 
of PTSD. However, bootstrapping was applied as the most ap-
propriate technique for mediation analysis with small sample 
sizes.33 Third, details regarding use of psychotropic medica-
tion were not collected. This should be routinely included in 
future studies given that certain types of psychotropic medi-
cation may impact sleep architecture and in particular REM 
sleep. Fourth, as this study is based on an analysis of existing 
data, measures of nightmares and insomnia were drawn from 
frequency and intensity items within the CAPS. Therefore, it 
is appropriate for these findings to be replicated using specific 
validated measures of nightmares and insomnia. This may also 
permit a finer analysis of the specific aspects of nightmares, 
such as frequency versus distress, which are often only weakly 
correlated.35 Moreover, nightmares within the context of this 
study were specific to the traumatic event. Therefore, it is pos-
sible that findings from this study may not generalize more 
widely to idiopathic nightmares. In addition, we did not as-
sess for other sleep disorders within our sample, such as sleep 
disordered breathing or other parasomnias; thus, future work 
should incorporate more comprehensive sleep measurement 
in future studies of the sleep-suicide relationship. Finally, de-
pression diagnosis was based on responses to a single question, 
future studies should account for this limitation with use of 
validated measures.
CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, the present study is novel and important in that 
it is the first to report that the association between nightmares 
and suicidal behaviors, operates via defeat, entrapment, and 
hopelessness. However, nightmares maintained a direct ef-
fect on suicidal behaviors, independent of the specified indi-
rect pathways. Therefore, it is imperative that future research 
focuses on identifying additional pathways which account for 
this association. Furthermore, it is worth noting that both the 
direct and indirect association between nightmares and sui-
cidal behaviors operated independent of comorbid insomnia 
and depression. From a therapeutic perspective, clinicians 
should consider targeting interventions at co-occurring night-
mares and suicidal behaviors, while monitoring levels of de-
feat, entrapment, and hopelessness.
ABBREVIATIONS 
BHS, Beck Hopelessness Scale
CAPS, Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale for DSM-IV
IPTS, Interpersonal-Psychological Theory of Suicide
IRT, Imagery Rehearsal Therapy
PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder
REM, rapid eye movement
SAMS, Schematic Appraisals Model of Suicidal behavior
SBQ-R, Suicidal Behaviors Questionnaire-Revised
REFERENCES
1. World Health Organization. Preventing suicide: a global imperative. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2014. http://www.who.int/mental_
health/suicide-prevention/world_report_2014/en/.
2. Pigeon WR, Pinquart M, Conner K. Meta-analysis of sleep disturbance and 
suicidal thoughts and behaviors. J Clin Psychiatry 2012;73:e1160–7.
3. Cukrowicz KC, Otamendi A, Pinto JV, Bernert RA, Krakow B, Joiner TE Jr. 
The impact of insomnia and sleep disturbances on depression and suicidality. 
Dreaming 2006;16:1–10.
4. Agargun MY, Besiroglu L, Cilli AS, et al. Nightmares, suicide attempts, and 
melancholic features in patients with unipolar major depression. J Affect 
Disord 2007;98:267–70.
5. Nadorff MR, Anestis MD, Nazem S, Claire Harris H, Samuel Winer E. Sleep 
disorders and the interpersonal-psychological theory of suicide: independent 
pathways to suicidality? J Affect Disord 2014;152-154:505–12.
6. Sjostrom N, Hetta J, Waern M. Persistent nightmares are associated with 
repeat suicide attempt: a prospective study. Psychiatry Res 2009;170:208–11.
7. Nadorff MR, Nazem S, Fiske A. Insomnia symptoms, nightmares, and suicidal 
ideation in a college student sample. Sleep 2011;34:93–8.
8. Nadorff MR, Nazem S, Fiske A. Insomnia symptoms, nightmares, and 
suicide risk: duration of sleep disturbance matters. Suicide Life Threat Behav 
2013;43:139–49.
9. Agargun MY, Cilli AS, Kara H, Tarhan N, Kincir F, Oz H. Repetitive and 
frightening dreams and suicidal behavior in patients with major depression. 
Compr Psychiatry 1998;39:198–202.
10. Krakow B, Ribeiro JD, Ulibarri VA, Krakow J, Joiner TE Jr. Sleep disturbances 
and suicidal ideation in sleep medical center patients. J Affect Disord 
2011;131:422–7.
11. Marinova P, Koychev I, Laleva L, et al. Nightmares and suicide: predicting risk 
in depression. Psychiatr Danub 2014;26:159–64.
12. Levin R, Nielsen TA. Disturbed dreaming, posttraumatic stress disorder, 
and affect distress: a review and neurocognitive model. Psychol Bull 
2007;133:482–528.
13. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders, 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013.
 399
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 12, No. 3, 2016
DL Littlewood, PA Gooding, M Panagioti et al. Nightmares and Suicide in PTSD
14. Pigeon WR, Campbell CE, Possemato K, Ouimette P. Longitudinal 
relationships of insomnia, nightmares, and PTSD severity in recent combat 
veterans. J Psychosom Res 2013;75:546–50.
15. Germain A. Sleep disturbances as the hallmark of PTSD: where are we now? 
Am J Psychiatry 2013;170:372–82.
16. Panagioti M, Gooding PA, Tarrier N. A meta-analysis of the association 
between posttraumatic stress disorder and suicidality: the role of comorbid 
depression. Compr Psychiatry 2012;53:915–30.
17. Sareen J, Houlahan T, Cox BJ, Asmundson GJ. Anxiety disorders associated 
with suicidal ideation and suicide attempts in the National Comorbidity Survey. 
J Nerv Ment Dis 2005;193:450–4.
18. Joiner T. Why people die by suicide. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2005.
19. Williams JMG. Cry of pain. England: Penguin Books, 1997.
20. Williams JMG, Crane C, Barnhofer T, Duggan DS. Psychology and suicidal 
behaviour: elaborating the entrapment model In: Hawton K, ed. Psychology 
and suicidal behaviour: elaborating the entrapment model. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2005:71–89.
21. Johnson J, Gooding P, Tarrier N. Suicide risk in schizophrenia: explanatory 
models and clinical implications, The Schematic Appraisal Model of Suicide 
(SAMS). Psychol Psychother 2008;81:55–77.
22. O’Connor RC. The integrated motivational-volitional model of suicidal behavior. 
Crisis 2011;32:295–8.
23. Gilbert P, Allan S. The role of defeat and entrapment (arrested flight) 
in depression: an exploration of an evolutionary view. Psychol Med 
1998;28:585–98.
24. Baumeister RF. Suicide as escape from self. Psychol Rev 1990;97:90–113.
25. Panagioti M, Gooding PA, Tarrier N. Hopelessness, defeat, and entrapment 
in posttraumatic stress disorder: their association with suicidal behavior and 
severity of depression. J Nerv Ment Dis 2012;200:676–83.
26. Panagioti M, Gooding PA, Tarrier N. A prospective study of suicidal ideation 
in posttraumatic stress disorder: the role of perceptions of defeat and 
entrapment. J Clin Psychol 2015;71:50–61.
27. O’Connor RC, Nock MK The psychology of suicidal behaviour. Lancet 
Psychiatry 2014;1:73–85.
28. Ehlers A, Clark DM. A cognitive model of posttraumatic stress disorder. Behav 
Res Ther 2000;38:319–45.
29. Foa EB, Cashman L, Jaycox L, Perry K. The validation of a self-report 
measure of posttraumatic stress disorder: the Posttraumatic Diagnostic Scale. 
Psychol Assess 1997;9:445–51.
30. Blake DD, Weathers FW, Nagy LM, et al. The development of a Clinician-
Administered PTSD Scale. J Trauma Stress 1995;8:75–90.
31. Osman A, Bagge CL, Gutierrez PM, Konick LC, Kopper BA, Barrios FX. The 
Suicidal Behaviors Questionnaire-Revised (SBQ-R): validation with clinical 
and nonclinical samples. Assessment 2001;8:443–54.
32. Beck AT, Weissman A, Lester D, Trexler L The measurement of pessimism: 
the hopelessness scale. J Consult Clin Psychol 1974;42:861–5.
33. Shrout PE, Bolger N. Mediation in experimental and nonexperimental studies: 
new procedures and recommendations. Psychol Methods 2002;7:422–45.
34. Hayes AF. Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process 
analysis: a regression-based approach. New York, NY: Guildford Press, 2013.
35. Nielsen T, Levin R. Nightmares: a new neurocognitive model. Sleep Med Rev 
2007;11:295–310.
36. McNamara P, Auerbach S, Johnson P, Harris E, Doros G. Impact of REM 
sleep on distortions of self-concept, mood and memory in depressed/anxious 
participants. J Affect Disord 2010;122:198–207.
37. Goldstein AN, Walker MP. The role of sleep in emotional brain function. Annu 
Rev Clin Psychol 2014;10:679–708.
38. Bradley B, DeFife JA, Guarnaccia C, et al. Emotion dysregulation and 
negative affect: association with psychiatric symptoms. J Clin Psychiatry 
2011;72:685–91.
39. Agargun MY, Cartwright R. REM sleep, dream variables and suicidality in 
depressed patients. Psychiatry Res 2003;119:33–9.
40. Belleville G, Guay S, Marchand A. Persistence of sleep disturbances following 
cognitive-behavior therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder. J Psychosom 
Res 2011;70:318–27.
41. Nadorff MR, Lambdin KK, Germain A. Pharmacological and non-
pharmacological treatments for nightmare disorder. Int Rev Psychiatry 
2014;26:225–36.
SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION
Submitted for publication September, 2015
Submitted in final revised form October, 2015
Accepted for publication October, 2015
Address correspondence to: Donna Littlewood, School of Psychological Sciences, 
Coupland Building 1, Coupland Street, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, 
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK; Tel: 0044 161 275 8300; Email: donna.littlewood@
postgrad.manchester.ac.uk
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
This was not an industry supported study. The authors have indicated no financial 
conflicts of interest. Data were collected and analyzed at the University of 
Manchester. The authors would like to thank the Medical Research Council and the 
University of Manchester Presidential Scholar Award for funding the PhD research 
of the first author.
