 Understanding the role of sleep in
suicide risk: qualitative interview study
Donna L Littlewood,1 Patricia Gooding,1 Simon D Kyle,2 Daniel Pratt,1
Sarah Peters1,3
To cite: Littlewood DL,
Gooding P, Kyle SD, et al.
Understanding the role of
sleep in suicide risk:
qualitative interview study.
BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113.
doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-
012113
▸ Prepublication history for
this paper is available online.
To view these files please
visit the journal online
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2016-012113).
Received 31 March 2016
Revised 15 May 2016
Accepted 12 July 2016
1School of Health Sciences,
University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK
2Sleep and Circadian
Neuroscience Institute,
Nuffield Department of
Clinical Neurosciences,
University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK
3Manchester Centre for
Health Psychology, University
of Manchester, Manchester,
UK
Correspondence to
Donna L Littlewood;
donna.littlewood@postgrad.
manchester.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Objective: Sleep problems are associated with
increased risk of suicide, independent of depression.
This analysis explores narrative accounts of the role of
sleep in relation to suicidal thoughts and behaviours.
Design: Qualitative study, based on in-depth
semistructured interviews which were analysed with an
inductive, latent thematic analysis.
Participants: A maximum variation sample of 18
people with experience of a major depressive episode,
and suicidal thoughts and behaviours.
Setting: Primary care, North West England.
Results: Respondents emphasised the importance of
sleep for recovery and management of their mental
well-being. Moreover, three inter-related pathways were
identified, whereby beliefs about sleep contributed to
suicidal thoughts and behaviours. First, being awake
during the biological night heightened risk of suicidal
behaviours, as this was perceived to be an opportune
time for a suicide attempt due to the decreased
chances that a friend of family member would
intervene during a suicide attempt. Additionally, the
reduction in available support at night added to suicide
risk. Second, failure to achieve good sleep was
perceived to make life harder through contributing to
core features of depression, such as negative thinking,
attention difficulties and inactivity. Third, sleep acted as
an alternative to suicide, by providing an escape from
problems, including mental health problems, in waking
life. However, this desire to sleep to escape was
associated with excessive daytime sleeping, which
subsequently may reinforce disturbed sleeping
patterns.
Conclusions: Sleep problems should be an important
treatment target when working with suicidal clients.
More broadly, night-time service provision should be
considered when developing suicide prevention
initiatives.
INTRODUCTION
Suicide is a prominent cause of preventable
death, accounting for ∼800 000 deaths each
year.1 Recent research highlights that indivi-
duals who experience sleep problems are at
an elevated risk of suicidal thoughts and
behaviours.2–6 This is particularly noteworthy
given the high prevalence of sleep problems
in
healthy
and
clinical
populations.7
8
Specifically, it is estimated that up to 90% of
people with depressive disorders experience
sleep problems.9 Therefore, it is important
to examine the putative mechanisms under-
lying the relationship between sleep pro-
blems and suicidality, which, thus far, have
received only limited attention. It is plausible
that depressed symptoms are a key driver in
the sleep–suicide relationship, but a recent
meta-analysis indicated that sleep problems
are associated with suicidal thoughts and
behaviours,
independent
of
depression.2
However, it is noteworthy that more recent
evidence
investigating
the
association
between insomnia and suicidality has pro-
duced
mixed
results.10–12
The
linkage
between
nightmares
and
suicide
appears
somewhat clearer, with consistent reports of
a direct relationship between nightmares and
suicidal thoughts and behaviours, independ-
ent of psychopathology and comorbid insom-
nia.11 13 14 Nightmares have also been shown
to mediate the relationship between insom-
nia and suicidal ideation.15 This suggests that
there may be specific differences in the
mechanisms
which
account
for
the
Strengths and limitations of this study
▪ This is the first qualitative, in-depth investigation
of the role of sleep problems within suicidal
pathways.
▪ A service user research group was actively
involved in the development of the interview
topic guide, recruitment strategy and supporting
materials.
▪ Purposive sampling ensured participants with a
range of sleeping problems were included within
the study.
▪ Analysis was supported by a multidisciplinary
team, which included researchers with differing
areas of expertise and backgrounds.
▪ The sample was confined to people with experi-
ence of a major depressive episode, which may
limit the transferability of the findings to other
clinical groups.
Littlewood DL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113
1
Open Access
Research
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113 on 22 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 nightmares–suicide relationship, in comparison to the
insomnia–suicide relationship. However, it also remains
possible that core mechanisms underpin more generic
features of sleep problems such as sleep discontinuity,
altered sleep architecture and poor sleep quality. For
instance, a large longitudinal case–control cohort study
found that poor sleep quality predicted an increased
risk of suicide, across a 10-year period.16 In addition,
recent research has indicated that a state of hyperarou-
sal, which may be common to insomnia and nightmares,
interacted with a person’s sense of fearlessness about
death to predict suicidal risk.17
In order to advance understanding of the relationship
between sleep problems and suicide, further examin-
ation of inter-related psychological processes is war-
ranted.4–6 Indeed, suicidal thoughts and behaviours are
hypothesised to develop from interactions between psy-
chological processes and sociodemographic factors.18 19
Therefore, identifying the specific psychological pro-
cesses which underpin the sleep–suicide relationship is
important to the development of interventions targeted
at reducing suicidal thoughts and behaviours.18 20
Although research in this area is in its infancy, prelim-
inary studies suggest that cognitive–emotional apprai-
sals,14
15
21 and coping
and
emotional
regulation
strategies,22
may
partially
mediate
the
relationship
between sleep problems and suicidal thoughts and beha-
viours. However, findings in this area have relied solely on
cross-sectional questionnaire designs, which are unlikely
to capture the complexity and variance associated with
the experience of sleep problems and the pathways
underlying suicidal thoughts and behaviours. In addition,
work to date has examined mechanisms that were
hypothesised a priori and hence, fail to allow for the
identification of novel or additional underlying mechan-
isms and processes. Therefore, we conducted the first
qualitative study in this area, with a view to investigating
the perceptions of the role of sleep problems in suicidal
pathways, and to identify the core processes which under-
pin
this
relationship.
Owing
to
the
inter-relations
between sleep problems, suicidality and depression,2 9 23
this research was conducted with individuals who had
experienced a major depressive episode(s).
METHODS
Study sample
To be included in the study, all participants had to have
experienced a major depressive episode as specified by the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV;
had self-reported suicidal thoughts, feelings and/or beha-
viours within the past year; were aged 18–65 years; and
were fluent in English. The Structured Clinical Interview
for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
IV24 was administered by the first author to confirm past
or current experience of a major depressive episode(s).
A maximum variation approach25 to sampling was
taken
to
gain
perspectives
from
participants
with
experiences of different sleeping problems (eg, delayed
sleep onset, nightmares). Recruitment was conducted
across North West England, UK, and promoted via a
number of National Health Service Trust services and
mental health charities. In addition, the study was adver-
tised
through
websites
and
social
media,
such
as,
Gumtree, Twitter and Facebook.
Procedure
Semistructured interviews followed a topic guide which
was developed in consultation with a service user refer-
ence group, the members of which had experience of
depression and suicidality. Questions largely focused on
three domains: (1) sleep experiences at different times,
that is, in general, when feeling well, during period(s)
of depression and during times of suicidal thoughts and
behaviours; (2) the perceived importance of sleep; (3)
the consequences of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ sleep.
Interviews were conducted face-to-face by the first
author (DLL) at the participants’ preferred location of a
private room at the University of Manchester, or at a
local medical or community centre. All participants were
given the opportunity to ask questions prior to signing
the consent form. Interviews were audio recorded and
then transcribed verbatim by the first author and any
identifying information (eg, names and places) was
removed at this stage.
A series of questionnaires were administered post
interview
to
aid
characterisation
of
the
sample.
Specifically, data were collected about sleep parameters
(sleep disorders and quality), suicidal thoughts and
behaviours, and inter-related psychological well-being
factors, such as depression, anxiety and alcohol intake
(see table 1).
Analysis
An inductive and latent thematic analysis was used to
analyse the data.26 A cyclical approach was taken to data
analysis and subsequent data collection, whereby each
interview was initially coded prior to subsequent data
generation. This allowed tentative codes and themes to
be explored and developed further, as interviews pro-
gressed.
Data
analysis
was
guided
by
the
process
described by Braun and Clarke.26 First, data familiarisa-
tion was achieved by repeatedly reading the transcripts.
Second, transcripts were coded, by conducting a cyclical
process, coding both forwards through transcripts, and as
new codes emerged returning back to earlier transcripts
and recoding. All authors conducted initial coding inde-
pendently for the first three interview transcripts. These
initial codes were then discussed and compared within
the research team, which captured the perspectives influ-
enced by the different backgrounds of this multidisciplin-
ary team. This triangulation of viewpoints improved the
trustworthiness of the data.27 Third, initial themes were
generated by grouping the identified codes based on
their similarities and differences. Fourth, the themes
were reviewed against the data extracted through the
2
Littlewood DL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113
Open Access
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113 on 22 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 coding process. Instances where the data appeared to
contradict the initial analysis were highlighted and subse-
quently discussed by members of the team to establish
whether refinement of the wider analysis was neces-
sary.28 29 When new data failed to give further insight into
the evolving themes, this was considered to signify the-
matic saturation and recruitment ceased.
RESULTS
Participant characteristics
Means and ranges for clinical characteristics of the
sample are provided in table 1. Although all had experi-
enced suicidal thoughts or behaviours in the past year,
12 participants (67%) had previously made one or more
suicide attempts. Most participants (n=16; 89%) had
experienced multiple major depressive episodes during
their lifetime, and ten participants were experiencing a
current major depressive episode. At the time of the
interviews, 13 participants reported current symptoms
consistent with the threshold criteria for Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders V Insomnia
Disorder, as indicated by the Sleep Condition Indicator
(SCI).31 Of these 13, 3 met quantitative criteria for sleep
onset insomnia (SCI items 1) and 9 met quantitative cri-
teria for sleep onset and maintenance insomnia (SCI
items 1 and 2). Furthermore, current sleep quality for
the majority of the sample was poor, based on scores
from the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Inventory32 (n=15;
83%). In addition, eight participants reported difficulty
sleeping due to bad dreams at least once per week in
the month prior to interview. Sociodemographic infor-
mation about the participants is presented in table 2.
Thematic analysis of beliefs about the sleep–suicide
relationship
Participants placed high importance on sleep, reporting
that poor sleep had detrimental consequences on their
waking lives. For some, problematic sleep directly con-
tributed to previous suicide attempts.
What’s no coincidence that the times that I did jump off,
or cut myself, or run in front of cars or went to the train
station, one of the massive reasons of that was that I
hadn’t been sleeping. Just total lack of sleep. Majorly. It
fucks you up. (ID1, male)
Generally, participants described more indirect and
complex inter-relationships between sleep and suicidal
thoughts and behaviours. Three distinct, but inter-
related pathways were identified whereby a belief about
sleep contributed to suicidal thoughts and behaviours.
Table 1
Means and ranges of participant clinical characteristics
Questionnaire
Score interpretation guidance
Mean, range
Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation30
Higher scores indicate greater levels of suicidal ideation,
possible score range 0–38.
8.5, 0–24
Sleep Condition Indicator31
≤16 indicates possible insomnia disorder, as per
diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders V
diagnostic criteria, possible score range 0–32.
13.8, 4–32
The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index32
>5 indicates poor sleep quality, maximum score=21.
9.9, 1–17.5
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test-1033
>7 indicates possible hazardous and harmful alcohol
use, maximum score=40.
6.8, 0–39
Beck Depression Inventory-II34
Higher scores indicate greater severity of depression,
possible score range 0–63.
23.0, 0–51
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory-Trait portion35
Higher scores indicate greater levels of anxiety, possible
score range 20–80.
55.3, 34–75
Brief Sleep Screen36
Assessment of symptoms present in other sleep
disorders such as narcolepsy, sleep breathing disorder,
periodic limb movement in sleep/ restless leg syndrome,
circadian rhythm sleep disorder and parasomnia.
NA
NA, not applicable.
Table 2
Overview of participant sociodemographic
characteristics
Characteristic, n=18
Gender, n
Male
10
Female
8
Age, years
Mean
33
Range, years
20–60
Relationship status, n
Single
12
Divorced/separated
3
Married/cohabiting
3
Ethnicity, n
White British
16
Mixed
1
Chinese
1
Employment status, n
Full time
3
Part time
7
Volunteering
3
Unemployed
3
Sick/disability
2
Littlewood DL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113
3
Open Access
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113 on 22 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 These pathways were being awake during the biological
night; failure to achieve ‘good’ sleep makes life harder;
sleep provides an escape from waking life. An overview
of a conceptual model depicting these three pathways is
provided in figure 1.
1. Being awake during the biological night
For participants who experienced difficulty in getting to
sleep or in maintaining sleep, being awake during the
biological night was associated with greater vulnerability
for suicidal thoughts and behaviours. Central to this was
the perception of inactivity in the surrounding world.
When participants were awake during the night, they
noticed that the world around them was quiet and sleep-
ing, with no visible signs of activity. Consequently, partici-
pants found it harder to effectively redirect themselves
from their negative thoughts. In this sense, night-time
acted as a barrier to obtaining social support and to
engaging in distracting activities such as going for a
walk.
Without
support
or
distractions,
participants
described how they were more likely to dwell on negative
thoughts.
I just think because it’s quiet. It’s dark. Lonely. [5 second
pause] it’s just, different. I’ve always thought I wished it
was light all the time, I wished we didn’t need sleep, I
wished the world carried on going 24/7, I wished it
didn’t stop at night you know because when the world
stops, my heads still going and my worlds still going and,
there’s nobody there you know and you can’t ring your
mates up in the night and say you know I feel, I feel
depressed. (ID8, female)
As
a
consequence
of
the
inactivity
in
the
sur-
rounding world, participants reported increased feelings
of
isolation,
which
in
turn
perpetuated
negative
thinking.
It had something to do with feeling that everyone was
gone at night. [Suicide] Just felt easier to do, I don’t
know. When I was generally feeling low, it’s something I’d
think about more. Guess the whole, like, there’s no one
here, no one cares, would come in to it and that would
encourage it. (ID13, male)
Perceiving inactivity in their immediate world made
the night an opportune time for a suicide attempt for
some individuals. Participants explained that because
other people were asleep, this would prevent them from
intervening if they attempted suicide. Therefore, night-
time could facilitate suicide plans and hide the conse-
quences of the suicidal behaviours.
I think if I’m having those feelings [suicidal] it can be
any time of the day or night it’s just there’s a slight
increase of possibility at night because as I said before
about, you could just take the pills and go to sleep,
although I’m not going to ‘cos it doesn’t work but, there
is that slight possibility that at night you have the oppor-
tunity, whereas you could do that in the day even if you
took the pills in the day you can’t fall asleep or someone
will find you or something, whereas they wouldn’t find
you at night, so suppose there’s slightly more opportunity
at night. (ID15, male)
2. Failure to achieve good sleep makes life harder
Participants had a strong desire to sleep well, driven by
the belief that there were ‘good’ types of sleep that
could provide the mental and physical resources needed
Figure 1
Conceptual model of beliefs about sleep and suicidal thoughts and behaviours.
4
Littlewood DL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113
Open Access
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113 on 22 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 to cope with everyday life. ‘Good’ sleep was described as
long-lasting, uninterrupted, deep and coupled with a
sense of feeling refreshed or energised on waking.
However, in general, participants felt they were failing to
achieve ‘good’ sleep. Instead, they reported dissatisfac-
tion with their sleep, feeling they slept too little at night,
or too much during the daytime, or experienced night-
mares, or felt groggy as a consequence of medicated
sleep. This failure to achieve ‘good’ kinds of sleep made
life harder in numerous ways. First, failing to sleep well
at night was associated with increased feelings of frustra-
tion, irritability and anger. Participants reported that
they struggled to contain their anger, snapping at others
and making aggressive outbursts. Consequently, these
feelings and associated emotional exchanges acted as a
barrier to obtaining to social support.
Cos when I’ve had like insomnia where I’ve like, not slept
at all, like literally not slept all night, and I’ve been up all
night long, and the next day, I’m all right for a period of
time but then like in the afternoon it just hits me, and I
just feel grumpy, moody, don’t talk to me I’m tired, and
I’ll snap at people and I just think I’m so tired and then
like in the evening, I feel like when I speak to anybody
I’m just no company because I’m just so tired. (ID8,
female)
In this sense, sleep problems or anything else which
compromised access to social support was seen as prob-
lematic, given that participants felt that the absence of
understanding and supportive relationships increased
risk of suicidal thoughts and behaviours.
So in both, all three times its happened [has felt sui-
cidal] is because someone or some people in my life
decided not to be there any more if you get me, left me,
threw me away, cast me aside, so that’s what leads to the
suicidal thing, as well as all the other stuff you know like
with the natural depression or with the nightmares or
whatever it is. (ID18, male)
Second, a further perceived consequence of not
getting enough sleep at night was a reduction in mental
strength and cognitive resources. This made it harder to
control
thoughts,
focus
and
process
information.
Subsequently, participants became less active, which
then fed into negative thoughts and feelings.
It’s really difficult sort of keeping yourself occupied,
keep yourself focused and that doesn’t help coupled
with the sort of lacking resources mentally, lacking the
energy and again all the slump in posture, so yeah it’s
very difficult after a poor night’s sleep to stay positive.
(ID4, male)
Third, sleeping too much or too little was perceived to
negatively impact activity levels. Participants who slept a
lot during the day had little time for activities. This,
then, fuelled negative thoughts about self-worth because
the lack of activity was viewed as signifying laziness and a
waste of life. Moreover, those who slept too little at night
had reduced energy to partake in any activities. As a
result of this, participants were less likely to engage in
activities which help to protect against suicidal thoughts,
such as socialising with friends. In this sense, some parti-
cipants perceived excessive daytime sleeping as indirectly
contributing to low mood.
My problem was oversleeping rather than under-sleeping
erm. Yeah I think. I don’t know, a balance because if
you’re sleeping too much then you’re just sleeping your
life away which is what I feel that I’ve done in many ways.
(ID9, female)
[on why the participant believes sleeping too much is
negative] in terms of my overall health and managing my
housework and seeing friends and doing all the other
things I could be doing instead of spending three odd
hours sleeping in an afternoon. (ID12, female)
3. Sleep provides an escape from waking-life problems
When participants wanted to escape from problems in
their waking life, going to sleep was perceived to be one
way to achieve this. In this sense, sleep provided short-
term respite from low mood or negative thoughts.
Getting a break from their waking life was fundamental
to the ways in which participants coped with their
mental well-being. Here, sleep stopped the momentum
of negative thoughts or prevented a further escalation of
low mood.
It feels like a blessed release that you’re unconscious for,
how many hours and that you’re no longer thinking
about your worthlessness and that you don’t want to
exist. (ID11, male)
For some participants, sleep was identified as an alter-
native to suicide, providing an escape, albeit temporary.
I feel depressed I feel like. You’ll probably think it
sounds mad but, when I wanna die and I have the
reasons to live if you know what I mean and I have to
keep living for the purpose of my nanna and for looking
after her and everything else what I’m doing. Sleep is the
next best thing to being dead. So it’s almost like, being
asleep is like being dead and then when you wake up it’s
like reality hits you, and you wake up and it’s like oh I
need to go back to sleep just to get away from it all. (ID8,
female)
And you know it’s the closest thing you can get to death
without actually dying. (ID17, male)
However, it is possible that the ‘escape of sleep’ may
seem less attractive to those who fear sleep as a conse-
quence of experiencing distressing nightmares. One par-
ticipant spoke of the conflict between the desire to
escape from her thoughts, but the reluctance of going
to sleep due to the fear of experiencing more distressing
nightmares.
Littlewood DL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113
5
Open Access
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113 on 22 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 [On why sleep is important to her] it takes me away from
my thoughts, but I get a lot of nightmares so sometimes I
don’t wanna sleep like, I have a fear of falling asleep.
Like I lie there and I think urgh, especially if I’ve had a
nightmare the night before and its played on my mind
all day, then I’ll be like I don’t want to sleep. (ID8,
female)
The impact that sleep had on participants’ subsequent
waking state differed. Some viewed sleep as having a
‘resetting’
function,
enabling
them
to
return
to
waking-life with an improved ability to manage their
moods and thoughts.
It’s kind of like the anxiety rises all throughout the day,
then after a good 8 or 9 hours sleep it goes right back
down again, so that through the next day if it goes up its
not reaching it- going really high. (ID2, female)
For others, they preferred sleeping to their waking
lives, and consequently, dreaded waking up. One partici-
pant viewed sleep as a safer environment than being
awake, allowing him to experience emotions during
dreaming without any repercussions, unlike the reality
of the waking world.
It means I’m not here erm its means I’m kind of err, I’m
in control, but I’m still, I can still feel these different
emotions, you know, fear, err, ecstasy, you know, kind of
everything in between, erm but you’re safe the whole
time. (ID17, male)
Although sleeping was generally viewed as an effective
way to escape problems in waking life, sleeping during
the daytime was viewed negatively by some participants.
This triggered a pathway, in which sleeping during the
day was regarded as a barrier to activity. Participants
explained that this type of daytime sleeping may contrib-
ute to disturbed night-time sleeping patterns. Here, par-
ticipants described a vicious circle whereby increased
daytime sleeping impaired ability to sleep at night.
[On sleeping in afternoon] I can see that it is something
that I’ll be tempted to do but I’ve got to keep it in my
mind now that it’s perhaps not going to do me any
favours. It’s a short term crutch. It’s not doing me any
long term favours. (ID12, female)
The use of drugs and alcohol was related to the desire
to sleep and to escape problems in participants’ waking
life.
However,
perceptions
regarding
the
effects
of
alcohol and drug use on sleep and mental health varied.
For some, the effects were viewed as positive, bringing
relaxation, aiding sleep and facilitating their ability to
cope and manage their emotions and mental health.
I chose me a natural relaxation [cannabis] and pain
relief it gives me, and the mental pain relief, people
don’t understand but that’s what it gives me and that
allows me to sleep and get, and be able to regularly sleep
you know. (ID18, male)
However, others viewed alcohol and drug use nega-
tively, and as contributing to psychological and physical
pain, nightmares and worsening of mood. One partici-
pant commented that drinking alcohol with their medi-
cation increased risk of death, although they perceived
this to be a potentially advantageous consequence.
I’ve used it [alcohol] to like help me fall asleep, you
know like, oh I’ll drink some wine or drink some vodka
and you know it’ll like knock me out or I’ll take it with a
sleeping tablet and then I’ve been advised, you shouldn’t
be doing that with that medication, you shouldn’t be
drinking with your medication it’s dangerous, and you
shouldn’t mix and I’m just thinking oh I don’t care cos
you know just, I don’t know, you just, stop caring, and I
don’t know you just, don’t care as long as you’re sleeping
and, if you die it’s a bonus [laughs] that’s the way I was
seeing it. (ID8, female)
Furthermore, some participants explained that the
decision to overdose with drugs or/and alcohol was
driven by an underlying preference to die in bed,
during sleep, because this form of death was associated
with a naturally occurring death. Dying during sleep was
also perceived to be a less physically painful method of
death than other alternatives.
I think because my brain accepts if I go to bed and just
drifted off and died its more. It’s not going to come out
right this but its more right to do it that way. (ID7, male)
I suppose it must have been the idea that you’d drift off
into sleep, I guess. I’m not one of those persons that
could err, I’m not very good with physical pain so I
couldn’t slit my wrists in the bath, I couldn’t do that, so
the idea of just drifting off to sleep would’ve been quite a
welcome thing, yeah. (ID15, male)
DISCUSSION
Principal findings
This study was the first to use a qualitative design to
explore the role of sleep in relation to suicidal thoughts
and behaviours. A conceptual model was developed to
illustrate the ways in which sleep problems were per-
ceived to contribute to suicidal thoughts and behaviours
via three distinct, but inter-related, pathways. These were
as follows: being awake during the biological night;
failure to achieve ‘good’ sleep makes life harder; and
sleep provides an escape from problems in waking life.
An important finding was that being awake during the
night, when biologically ‘unprepared’ for wakefulness,
was perceived to increase suicidal thoughts and beha-
viours. Lack of access to support during the night was
central to increased suicidal behaviours in two ways.
First, social support was perceived to be reduced, or
unavailable, throughout the night. Second, night-time
decreased the chance that a friend, or family member,
would notice signs of a suicide attempt (eg, facial pallor,
unresponsiveness). Indeed, this is consistent with a large
6
Littlewood DL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113
Open Access
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113 on 22 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 literature which suggests that social isolation and lack of
social support are associated with mental illnesses, and
suicidal thoughts and behaviours.37–41 Studies examining
temporal patterning of suicide across the 24-hour day
consistently indicate that suicides are more frequent
during daytime hours.42–45 However, recent work by
Perlis and colleagues suggests that when adjusting for
the proportion of the population awake at different
times of the day, relative risk of suicide is greater during
the night.46
Disturbed sleep appeared to contribute to the develop-
ment, and maintenance, of core features of depression,
such as, attention difficulties and inactivity, which subse-
quently
perpetuated
negative
thinking.
Additionally,
being awake at night provided more time for negative
thinking, with reduced opportunities to access social
support or distractions. Two specific types of negative
thinking dominated participants’ narratives: (1) rumin-
ation and (2) negative self-appraisals, both of which were
associated with suicidal thoughts and behaviours, which is
in
accord
with
the
broader
suicide
literature.20
47
Furthermore, this is consistent with findings from a
recent cross-sectional questionnaire study in which rumin-
ation partially mediated the relationship between sleep
problems and suicidal behaviour.22
Participants in our study indicated that sleep could act
as an alternative to suicide, because it provided a tem-
porary escape from problems in waking life. This is the
first time in the literature that this function of sleep has
been documented. Entrapment reflects the desire to
escape coupled with the perception that escape routes
are blocked,48 which may trigger suicidal thoughts as a
means to escape.20 40 41 Our results show that sleep may
be seen as an alternative way to escape perceptions of
entrapment. The potential downside to this occurs when
people start ‘escaping’ via sleep in the daytime, because
this can disrupt night-time sleep. Subsequently, this may
reinforce disturbed sleep patterns, which in turn con-
tribute to increased suicidal thoughts and behaviours.
Furthermore, data from the current study suggested that
nightmares may trigger fear of sleep, which then made
the ‘escape of sleep’ seem less attractive. Consequently,
without the escape of ‘good sleep’, perceptions of
entrapment, and suicidal thoughts and behaviours may
escalate. Indeed, results from a recent cross-sectional
study with individuals who had experienced trauma,
indicated that the relationship between nightmares and
suicidal behaviour operated indirectly via defeat, entrap-
ment and hopelessness.14 Taken together, these findings
lay the groundwork for future studies to investigate the
extent to which the role of entrapment in explaining sui-
cidal pathways varies as a function of the specific type of
sleep problem experienced.
Limitations
There are two limitations to this study. First, although it
is considered a strength that this conceptual model was
developed
from
a
purposive,
maximum
variation
sample, findings should be complemented with empir-
ical investigation to determine the extent to which these
pathways extend to other mental illness, different levels
of depression severity and across different duration and
severity of sleep problems.
Second, to minimise problems with recall, the inclu-
sion criteria specified that participants must have had
experience of suicidal thoughts or behaviours in the
past year.38 For some participants, memories regarding
sleep in the more distant past were often more general-
ised in comparison with recollections of suicidal experi-
ences. Therefore, it is important for future research to
focus on the experiences of those individuals currently
exhibiting poor sleep and suicidal behaviours.
Future research
Our conceptual model included four psychological pro-
cesses which may underpin the relationship between
sleep problems, and suicidal thoughts and behaviours.
These
were
social
isolation,
negative
self-appraisals,
rumination and entrapment. Six testable predictions can
be generated from our conceptual model, which present
potentially promising avenues for further investigation.
First, sleep disturbances may strengthen relationships
between social isolation, and suicidal thoughts and acts.
Second,
insufficient
sleep
may
be
associated
with
increased negative self-appraisals of the ability to cope
with emotions and solve problems, which in turn may
increase the likelihood of suicidal thoughts and beha-
viours. Third, sleep problems may compromise the
ability to inhibit negative thoughts, which may then
increase suicidal thoughts indirectly, via rumination.
Fourth, sleep may alleviate suicidal thoughts and beha-
viours through reducing perceptions of entrapment.
Fifth, perceptions of entrapment may trigger excessive
daytime sleeping and reinforce disturbed sleeping pat-
terns,
which
could
subsequently
increase
suicidal
thoughts and behaviour via other psychological pro-
cesses such as social isolation, negative self-appraisals
and rumination. Sixth, to what extent does fear of sleep
moderate the role of entrapment in the relationship
between sleep problems and suicide. Furthermore, while
the goal of the current study was to investigate core pro-
cesses across different types of sleep problems, future
empirical work is required to determine whether the
proposed conceptual model extends to explain the rela-
tionship between suicide and specific types of sleep pro-
blems (eg, nightmares, insomnia, hypersomnia). Finally,
while outwith the scope of this qualitative study, further
research should also consider the possible role of bio-
logical mechanisms in understanding the sleep–suicide
relationship.6
For
instance,
based
on
inter-relations
between suicide, serotonin and sleep regulation it has
been suggested that a reduction in sleep may lead to or
potentiate underlying serotonergic dysfunction, which in
turn may contribute to suicidal thoughts and behaviours
via impaired decision-making and reduced cognitive
control of emotion.6
Littlewood DL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113
7
Open Access
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113 on 22 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 Clinical implications
There are four key clinical implications of our findings
for those working with people experiencing sleep pro-
blems and suicidality. First, night-time service provision
should be a key consideration within suicide prevention
strategies, given that those who are awake in the night
are at an increased risk of suicide.46 Second, it seems
prudent to help patients evaluate and identify sources of
support during the night (eg, the Samaritans in the UK,
Lifeline in Australia and National Suicide Prevention
Lifeline in the USA). Third, the importance of resolving
sleep problems in relation to recovery was emphasised,
and consequently, interventions targeting poor sleep
should be included within treatment plans. Fourth, clin-
ical techniques should be used which redress rumin-
ation, especially in the context of lack of distractions
during the night.
Twitter Follow Donna Littlewood at @donnalittlewood
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the people who took
part in this study for sharing their personal experiences. In addition, they
would like to thank staff at Pennine Care National Health Service Foundation
Trust and Self-Help Services who supported recruitment for this study and
members of the service user research group for their support in developing
the topic guide and participant resources.
Contributors All authors contributed to the development of the protocol and
interview topic guide. DLL conducted the clinical diagnostic interviews and
research interviews. All authors independently coded the first three transcripts
and discussed initial codings. DLL and SP led the qualitative analysis
thereafter. All authors contributed to the writing of the final version of the
paper. DLL is the study guarantor.
Funding DLL is supported by doctoral studentship funding from the Medical
Research Council and the University of Manchester Presidential Scholar
Award.
Competing interests None declared.
Ethics approval Ethical approval for this study was granted by the local
National Health Service research ethics committee for Greater Manchester
(reference number 15/NW/0147) and informed consent was given by all
participants.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement Additional research data will be made available to the
scientific community with as few restrictions as possible. Please email donna.
littlewood@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for
commercial use, provided the original work is properly cited. See: http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
REFERENCES
1.
World Health Organisation. Preventing suicide: a global imperative.
WHO, 2014. http://www.who.int/mental_health/suicide-prevention/
world_report_2014/en/
2.
Pigeon WR, Pinquart M, Conner K. Meta-analysis of sleep
disturbance and suicidal thoughts and behaviors. J Clin Psychiatry
2012;73:e1160–7.
3.
Bernert RA, Joiner TE. Sleep disturbances and suicide risk: a review
of the literature. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2007;3:735.
4.
Winsper C, Tang NK. Linkages between insomnia and suicidality:
prospective associations, high-risk subgroups and possible
psychological mechanisms. Int Rev Psychiatry 2014;26:189–204.
5.
Woznica AA, Carney CE, Kuo JR, et al. The insomnia and suicide
link: toward an enhanced understanding of this relationship. Sleep
Med Rev 2015;22:37–46.
6.
McCall WV, Black CG. The link between suicide and insomnia:
theoretical mechanisms. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2013;15:389.
7.
Roth T, Jaeger S, Jin R, et al. Sleep problems, comorbid mental
disorders, and role functioning in The National comorbidity survey
replication. Biol Psychiatry 2006;60:1364–71.
8.
Sivertsen B, Krokstad S, Øverland S, et al. The epidemiology of
insomnia: associations with physical and mental health. The
HUNT-2 study. J Psychosom Res 2009;67:109–16.
9.
Tsuno N, Besset A, Ritchie K. Sleep and depression. J Clin
Psychiatry 2005;66:1254–69.
10.
Nadorff MR, Fiske A, Sperry JA, et al. Insomnia symptoms,
nightmares, and suicidal ideation in older adults. J Gerontol
B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2013;68:145–52.
11.
Nadorff MR, Nazem S, Fiske A. Insomnia symptoms, nightmares, and
suicidal ideation in a college student sample. Sleep 2011;34:93–8.
12.
Nadorff MR, Anestis MD, Nazem S, et al. Sleep disorders and the
interpersonal-psychological theory of suicide: independent pathways
to suicidality? J Affect Disord 2014;152-154:505–12.
13.
Golding S, Nadorff MR, Winer ES, et al. Unpacking Sleep and
Suicide in Older Adults in a Combined Online Sample. J Clin Sleep
Med 2015;11:1385–92.
14.
Littlewood DL, Gooding PA, Panagioti M, et al. Nightmares and
Suicide in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: The Mediating Role of
Defeat, Entrapment, and Hopelessness. J Clin Sleep Med
2016;12:393–9.
15.
McCall WV, Batson N, Webster M, et al. Nightmares and
dysfunctional beliefs about sleep mediate the effect of insomnia
symptoms on suicidal ideation. J Clin Sleep Med 2013;9:135–40.
16.
Bernert RA, Turvey CL, Conwell Y, et al. Association of poor
subjective sleep quality with risk for death by suicide during a
10-year period: a longitudinal, population-based study of late life.
JAMA Psychiatry 2014;71:1129–37.
17.
Ribeiro JD, Silva C, Joiner TE. Overarousal interacts with a sense of
fearlessness about death to predict suicide risk in a sample of
clinical outpatients. Psychiatry Res 2014;218:106–12.
18.
O’Connor RC, Nock MK. The psychology of suicidal behaviour.
Lancet Psychiatry 2014;1:73–85.
19.
Steeg S, Haigh M, Webb RT, et al. The exacerbating influence of
hopelessness on other known risk factors for repeat self-harm and
suicide. J Affect Disord 2016;190:522–8.
20.
Johnson J, Gooding P, Tarrier N. Suicide risk in schizophrenia:
explanatory models and clinical implications, The Schematic
Appraisal Model of Suicide (SAMS). Psychol Psychother
2008;81:55–77.
21.
Woosley JA, Lichstein KL, Taylor DJ, et al. Hopelessness mediates
the relation between insomnia and suicidal ideation. J Clin Sleep
Med 2014;10:1223–30.
22.
Weis D, Rothenberg L, Moshe L, et al. The effect of sleep problems
on suicidal risk among young adults in the presence of depressive
symptoms and cognitive processes. Arch Suicide Res
2015;19:321–34.
23.
Tarrier N, Gooding P, Pratt D, et al. Cognitive behavioural prevention
of suicide in psychosis: a treatment manual. East Sussex:
Routledge, 2013.
24.
First MB, Spitzer RL, Gibbon M, et al. User’s guide for the structured
clinical interview for DSM-IV axis I disorders SCID-I: clinician
version. Washington DC: American Psychiatric Pub, 1997.
25.
Patton MQ. Qualitative evaluation and research methods.CA: SAGE
Publications, Inc, 1990.
26.
Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res
Psychol 2006;3:77–101.
27.
Peters S. Qualitative research methods in mental health. Evid Based
Ment Health 2010;13:35–40.
28.
Henwood KL, Pidgeon NF. Qualitative research and psychological
theorizing. Br J Psychol 1992;83(Pt 1):97–111.
29.
Mays N, Pope C. Qualitative research in health care. Assessing
quality in qualitative research. BMJ 2000;320:50–2.
30.
Beck AT, Steer RA, Ranieri WF. Scale for suicide ideation:
psychometric properties of a self-report version. J Clin Psychol
1988;44:499–505.
31.
Espie CA, Kyle SD, Hames P, et al. The Sleep Condition Indicator:
a clinical screening tool to evaluate insomnia disorder. BMJ Open
2014;4:e004183.
32.
Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, Monk TH, et al. The Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and
research. Psychiatry Res 1989;28:193–213.
33.
Saunders JB, Aasland OG, Babor TF, et al. Development of the
alcohol use disorders identification test (AUDIT): WHO collaborative
8
Littlewood DL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113
Open Access
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113 on 22 August 2016. Downloaded from 
 project on early detection of persons with harmful alcohol
consumption—II. Addiction 1993;88:791–804.
34.
Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. BDI-II, beck depression inventory:
manual. San Antonio: Psychological Corporation, 1996.
35.
Spielberger CD. State-trait anxiety inventory. Wiley Online Library,
2010.
36.
Wilson SJ, Nutt DJ, Alford C, et al. British Association for
Psychopharmacology consensus statement on evidence-based
treatment of insomnia, parasomnias and circadian rhythm disorders.
J Psychopharmacol 2010;24:1577–601.
37.
Bearman PS, Moody J. Suicide and friendships among American
adolescents. Am J Public Health 2004;94:89–95.
38.
Owen R, Gooding P, Dempsey R, et al. A qualitative investigation
into the relationships between social factors and suicidal thoughts
and acts experienced by people with a bipolar disorder diagnosis.
J Affect Disord 2015;176:133–40.
39.
Van Orden KA, Witte TK, Cukrowicz KC, et al. The interpersonal
theory of suicide. Psychol Rev 2010;117:575–600.
40.
Williams JMG. Cry of pain. Penguin Books, 1997.
41.
Williams JMG, Crane C, Barnhofer T, et al. Psychology and suicidal
behaviour: elaborating the entrapment model. In: Hawton K, ed.
Prevention and treatment of suicidal behaviour: from science to
practice. Oxford University Press, 2005:71–89.
42.
van Houwelingen CA, Beersma DG. Seasonal changes in 24-h
patterns of suicide rates: a study on train suicides in The
Netherlands. J Affect Disord 2001;66:215–23.
43.
Erazo N, Baumert J, Ladwig KH. Sex-specific time patterns of
suicidal acts on the German railway system. An analysis of 4003
cases. J Affect Disord 2004;83:1–9.
44.
Altamura C, VanGastel A, Pioli R, et al. Seasonal and circadian
rhythms in suicide in Cagliari, Italy. J Affect Disord 1999;53:77–85.
45.
Preti A, Miotto P. Diurnal variations in suicide by age and gender in
Italy. J Affect Disord 2001;65:253–61.
46.
Perlis ML, Grandner MA, Chakravorty S, et al. Suicide and sleep: Is
it a bad thing to be awake when reason sleeps? Sleep Med Rev
2015;29:101–7.
47.
Morrison R, O’Connor RC. A systematic review of the relationship
between rumination and suicidality. Suicide Life Threat Behav
2008;38:523–38.
48.
Gilbert P, Allan S. The role of defeat and entrapment (arrested flight)
in depression: an exploration of an evolutionary view. Psychol Med
1998;28:585–98.
Littlewood DL, et al. BMJ Open 2016;6:e012113. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113
9
Open Access
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012113 on 22 August 2016. Downloaded from 
