 Pathways through which Asthma Risk Factors Contribute to 
Asthma Severity in Inner-City Children
Andrew H. Liu1, Denise C. Babineau2, Rebecca Z. Krouse2, Edward M. Zoratti3, Jacqueline 
A. Pongracic4, George T. O’Connor5, Robert A. Wood6, Gurjit K. Khurana Hershey7, 
Carolyn M. Kercsmar7, Rebecca S. Gruchalla8, Meyer Kattan9, Stephen J. Teach10, Melanie 
Makhija4, Dinesh Pillai10, Carin I. Lamm9, James E. Gern11, Steven M. Sigelman12, Peter J. 
Gergen12, Alkis Togias12, Cynthia M. Visness2, and William W. Busse11
1National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, and Children’s Hospital Colorado and University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO
2Rho Federal Systems Division, Chapel Hill, NC
3Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI
4Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL
5Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
6Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
7Cincinnati Children’s Hospital, Cincinnati, OH
8University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
9College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY
10Children’s National Health System and the George Washington University School of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Washington, DC
11University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI
12National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD
Abstract
Background—Pathway analyses can be used to determine how host and environmental factors 
contribute to asthma severity.
Objective—Investigate pathways explaining asthma severity in inner-city children.
Corresponding Author: Andrew H. Liu, M.D., Children’s Hospital Colorado, 13123 East 16th Avenue, Box B395, Aurora CO 
80045, Telephone: (720) 777-2127, FAX: (720) 777-7284, Andrew.liu@childrenscolorado.org. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Clinical Implications: In children with asthma and rhinitis, allergen sensitization, allergic inflammation, pulmonary physiology, 
environmental tobacco smoke exposure and rhinitis severity are related through specific pathways to asthma severity.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 October ; 138(4): 1042–1050. doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2016.06.060.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods—Based on medical evidence in the published literature, we developed a conceptual 
model to describe how eight risk-factor domains (allergen sensitization, allergic inflammation, 
pulmonary physiology, stress, obesity, vitamin D, environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) exposure 
and rhinitis severity) are linked to asthma severity. To estimate the relative magnitude and 
significance of hypothesized relationships among these domains and asthma severity, we applied a 
causal network analysis to test our model in an Inner-City Asthma Consortium study. Participants 
comprised 6–17 year old children (n=561) with asthma and rhinitis from 9 U.S. inner-cities who 
were evaluated every two months for one year. Asthma severity was measured by a longitudinal 
composite assessment of day and night symptoms, exacerbations, and controller usage.
Results—Our conceptual model explained 53.4% of the variance in asthma severity. An allergy 
pathway (linking allergen sensitization, allergic inflammation, pulmonary physiology, and rhinitis 
severity domains to asthma severity) and ETS exposure pathway (linking ETS exposure and 
pulmonary physiology domains to asthma severity) exerted significant effects on asthma severity. 
Among the domains, pulmonary physiology and rhinitis severity had the largest significant 
standardized total effects on asthma severity (−0.51 and 0.48 respectively), followed by ETS 
exposure (0.30) and allergic inflammation (0.22). While vitamin D had modest but significant 
indirect effects on asthma severity, its total effect was insignificant (0.01).
Conclusions—The standardized effect sizes generated by a causal network analysis quantify the 
relative contributions of different domains and can be used to prioritize interventions to address 
asthma severity.
Graphical abstract
Liu et al.
Page 2
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Keywords
asthma; children; inner-city; allergy; sensitization; inflammation; lung function; pulmonary 
physiology; rhinitis; environmental tobacco smoke exposure
INTRODUCTION
Inner-city children experience a high burden of asthma symptoms and morbidity despite 
guidelines-directed care.1,2 NIH/NIAID sponsored the Inner-City Asthma Consortium 
(ICAC) Asthma Phenotypes in the Inner City (APIC) study to investigate how host and 
environmental factors contribute to asthma severity among children carefully monitored 
while prospectively receiving optimal, guidelines-based care. Results of the primary 
objectives of the APIC study are presented in the publications entitled “Asthma Phenotypes 
in the Inner City: Distinguishing Characteristics of Difficult-to-Control Asthma in 
Children”3 and “Asthma Phenotypes in Inner City Children” that appear in this issue of the 
Journal.4
Based on clinical and mechanistic evidence in the published literature that we have detailed 
in the Online Repository, we developed a conceptual model to describe how eight risk factor 
domains (allergen sensitization, allergic inflammation, pulmonary physiology, stress, 
obesity, Vitamin D, environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) exposure and rhinitis severity) are 
linked to asthma severity (Figure 1). This model allows us to conceptualize which domains 
have a direct influence on asthma severity and/or an indirect influence on asthma severity by 
acting through another domain(s). We then tested this conceptual model in the APIC cohort 
and dataset using a causal network analysis, a quantitative approach that is commonly used 
to describe the effects of genomics, metabolomics or biochemical pathway influences on 
disease phenotypes but, to our knowledge, has never been applied in the context of 
explaining asthma severity. Understanding the relative contributions of these risk factors to 
asthma severity in inner-city children, via direct and/or indirect pathways, can provide a 
basis for further investigations into linking mechanisms while also guiding personalized 
asthma management and population health policy.
METHODS
Conceptual Model of Risk Factors Contributing to Asthma Severity
A conceptual model was developed to hypothetically describe how 8 risk factor domains of 
allergen sensitization, allergic inflammation, pulmonary physiology, stress, obesity, Vitamin 
D, environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) exposure and rhinitis severity are linked to asthma 
severity in children (Figure 1). These domains were based on variables ascertained on at 
least the large majority of APIC study participants, and justified by clinical and mechanistic 
evidence in the published literature. The literature review substantiating the links of this 
model is described in the Online Repository.
Liu et al.
Page 3
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Study Participants
All study participants included in this investigation were in the NIAID-sponsored ICAC 
APIC study. Details of the APIC cohort are reported in this issue of the Journal in Pongracic 
et al.3 Briefly, APIC included 6 to 17 year old children with a broad spectrum of asthma 
residing in low income census tracts in 9 U.S. cities (Baltimore MD, Boston MA, Chicago 
IL, Cincinnati OH, Dallas TX, Denver CO, Detroit MI, New York NY, Washington DC). For 
inclusion, study participants had to have a diagnosis of asthma by a physician and 
demonstrate adequate adherence to study-prescribed daily asthma controller therapies. The 
protocol was approved by institutional review boards from each participating center and 
written informed consent was obtained by the legal guardians of participating children.
Study and Assessments
APIC participants received a comprehensive assessment at Screening and had their asthma 
and rhinitis managed based on the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program 
Expert Panel Report 35 and the Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma6,7 guidelines-
derived treatment algorithms. Clinical assessment and medication adjustments occurred 
every two months for one year, denoted by V0, V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, and V6, as described in 
Pongracic et al.3 All medications (except montelukast) were provided free of charge to the 
study participants.
The variables used to define the domains of asthma severity and its risk factors are shown in 
Table I. The Asthma Severity, Rhinitis Severity, Allergen Sensitization, Allergic 
Inflammation, Pulmonary Physiology and ETS Exposure domains were comprised of 
multiple variables, while Vitamin D, Stress and Obesity domains were comprised of single 
variables (Table I and Table E1 in the Online Repository). The Asthma Severity domain was 
comprised of 4 Composite Asthma Severity Index (CASI) components (day symptoms and 
albuterol use, night symptoms and albuterol use, daily controller treatment step level, and 
exacerbations) measured at V0 – V6 and summarized using the mean and variance across all 
visits, 8 as well as by the Asthma Control Test / Childhood Asthma Control Test (ACT/
cACT) categories (well controlled, not well controlled, very poorly controlled) at V6.9–12 
The Rhinitis Severity domain included the mean and variance of both a symptom score and a 
medication use score across the visits. The Allergen Sensitization domain was comprised of 
total serum IgE, the number of allergen sensitizations, and determination of allergen 
sensitization to molds, dust mites, cockroaches, rodents, pets, pollen/peanut and foods as 
described.3 The Allergic Inflammation domain included fractional exhaled nitric oxide 
(FeNO) and blood eosinophil counts. The Pulmonary Physiology domain was comprised of 
spirometry measures (FEV1 (% predicted) and FEV1/FVC) at V0 – V6 that were 
summarized using the mean and variance across the visits, as well as the FEV1 
bronchodilator response at V6. The ETS Exposure domain was comprised of the number of 
smokers in the home and urine cotinine, as measured by NicAlert™ test strips (Nymox 
Pharmaceutical Corp).
Total serum IgE and allergen-specific IgE (ImmunoCAP, Phadia, Uppsala Sweden) to a 
panel of 20 allergens (17 common inhalant allergens and egg, milk, peanut) were measured 
from blood drawn at V0. Prick skin testing was performed at Screening for 12 common 
Liu et al.
Page 4
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 indoor and outdoor allergens. Allergen sensitization was defined by a wheal ≥ 3mm larger 
than the saline control on prick skin testing or specific IgE ≥ 0.35 kUA/L. A total of 22 
allergen sensitizations were assessed and grouped in clusters (described in Pongracic et al).3 
The blood sample at V0 was also used to measure blood eosinophil count (cells/mm3) and 
serum vitamin D concentration, determined by serum total 25-hydroxyvitamin D using high 
performance liquid chromatography.
Spirometry was performed at every asthma/rhinitis management visit, and bronchodilator 
reversibility was performed at V6. Acceptability was determined by American Thoracic 
Society/European Respiratory Society guidelines.13 For children under 8 years of age, 
American Thoracic Society Preschool Guidelines were used.14 FeNO was measured at V0 
and V6 using the NIOX MINO device (Aerocrine, Stockholm Sweden).
Obesity was determined at Screening by Body Mass Index z-score based on CDC 
guidelines.15 Stress was measured in the caretaker at V0 using the 10-item Perceived Stress 
Scale.16 ETS exposure was assessed at Screening by the number of smokers in the home, 
and urine cotinine was measured using NicAlert™test strips (Nymox Pharmaceutical Corp). 
The NicAlert™test semi-quantitatively tests for cotinine using levels, which correspond to 
concentration ranges. Levels 0–2 (<100 ng/ml) indicate a non-user of tobacco products and 
levels 3–6 (>100 ng/ml) indicate a user of tobacco products. The lower limit of detection is 
10 ng/ml or level 1.17 Compared to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-
MS/MS), NicAlert® test strips have 91% specificity, 92% sensitivity, 94% positive 
predictive value, and 88% negative predictive value.18
Statistical methods
To test our conceptual model of asthma severity in Figure 1, a causal network analysis was 
implemented using structural equation models19 to simultaneously perform: 1) a 
confirmatory factor analysis of each domain in Table I to estimate the relationship between 
the domain of interest and each observed variable used to measure the domain; and 2) a 
series of regression models to estimate the standardized direct effect of each independent 
domain on a dependent domain (represented by arrows in Figure 1). To interpret the 
estimated effects from this model, note that: 1) increases in the domains of Asthma Severity, 
Allergen Sensitization, Allergic Inflammation, Rhinitis Severity, ETS Exposure and Obesity 
are interpreted as poorer outcomes while increases in the domains of Pulmonary Physiology 
and Vitamin D are interpreted as better outcomes; and 2) a positive direct effect is 
interpreted as the standard deviation increase in the dependent domain for every one 
standard deviation increase in the independent domain while a negative (or inverse) direct 
effect is interpreted as the standard deviation decrease in the dependent domain for every 
one standard deviation increase in the independent domain.. To account for potential 
confounding from demographic variables, all estimates were adjusted for age at Screening, 
sex and race. All models were fit using Mplus Version 7.320.
In cases where our conceptual model indicated that the association between the independent 
and dependent domains could be mediated by another domain, we tested for mediated 
effects using the approach of Baron and Kenny,21 which splits the estimated total effect of 
the independent domain on the dependent domain into a sum of two parts: 1) The indirect 
Liu et al.
Page 5
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 effect of the independent domain on the dependent domain acting through a mediating 
domain or pathway; and 2) The direct effect of the independent domain on the dependent 
domain, adjusting for the effect of any other domains that are hypothesized to be associated 
with the dependent domain. Evidence of mediation was found if the following three effects 
were statistically significant at the 0.05 significance level: 1) The total effect of the 
independent domain on the dependent domain; 2) The direct effect of the independent 
domain on the mediating domain or pathway; and 3) The direct effect of the mediating 
domain or pathway on the dependent domain. In cases where our conceptual model only 
indicated an indirect effect between distal domains (and so no test of mediation could be 
conducted), only the indirect effect between the domains was estimated.
Because controller treatment step level is partially determined by measures of Pulmonary 
Physiology, a sensitivity analysis was performed in which Asthma Severity was re-defined 
by removing the mean and variance of controller treatment step level between V0 and V6.
RESULTS
Participant Characteristics
To ensure adequate longitudinal data on clinical asthma severity and rhinitis severity, of 717 
APIC participants enrolled, 98 participants (13.7%) were excluded because they did not 
complete at least 4 of the 6 Evaluation & Management visits, and 40 additional participants 
(5.6%) were excluded because they did not have rhinitis. Participants without rhinitis were 
excluded because rhinitis severity, a domain in our hypothetical model of asthma severity, 
was not measured. An additional 18 study participants (2.5%) were excluded due to missing 
race classification, Caretaker Perceived Stress Scale at V0, BMI z-score at Screening or total 
25-hydroxyvitamin D at V0. This resulted in an analytic sample size of 561 participants 
(78.2% of the APIC cohort). Characteristics of the 561 participants are reported in Table E1 
in the Online Repository. Overall, the median age at Screening was 10.8 years, 57.8% were 
male and 64.4% self-identified as non-Hispanic Black while 28.5% self-identified as 
Hispanic. Additionally, 55.1% were from households with annual income less than $15,000.
Domains
Standardized estimates of the effect of each domain on each of the observed variables 
comprising each domain are shown in Figures E1A – E1F in the Online Repository. All 
variables were significantly associated with their respective domains except for one variable 
in Asthma Severity (variability in controller treatment step across V0 – V6).
Pathways
Figure 2 provides standardized estimates of the direct effects of each independent domain on 
each dependent domain for all pathways in our conceptual model using the APIC data; 
significant indirect effects are also indicated by the thick arrows. To address potential 
confounding arising from demographic covariates, all estimates were adjusted for age, sex 
and race. Table E2 in the Online Repository provides standardized estimates of the effects of 
age, sex and race on each domain. This model accounted for 53.4% of the variation in 
Asthma Severity. Root Mean Square Error of Approximation, a commonly used measure of 
Liu et al.
Page 6
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 how well a structural equation model fits the observed data, was 0.063 (90% CI: (0.060, 
0.067)), indicating an adequate fit.22 Interpretation of these results by pathways is discussed 
in the following sections.
Allergy Pathway
Figure 3A highlights the pathways to Asthma Severity through Allergen Sensitization, 
Allergic Inflammation, Pulmonary Physiology and Rhinitis Severity. Our results showed 
that:
•
Allergen Sensitization was positively associated with Allergic Inflammation. 
Specifically, for every 1 standard deviation increase in Allergen Sensitization, 
Allergic Inflammation increased by 0.78 standard deviations (direct effect: 
0.78±0.04; p<0.001). Comparing this standardized estimate to all others, this 
association is the strongest one detected.
•
Allergic Inflammation was inversely associated with Pulmonary Physiology 
(direct effect: −0.47±0.05; p<0.001) and positively associated with Rhinitis 
Severity (direct effect: 0.39±0.06; p<0.001).
•
Pulmonary Physiology was inversely associated with Asthma Severity (direct 
effect: −0.51±0.06; p<0.001).
•
Rhinitis Severity was positively associated with Asthma Severity (direct effect: 
0.52±0.06; p<0.001).
Analysis of indirect effects within the Allergy Pathway domains on Asthma Severity showed 
that Allergen Sensitization was positively associated with Asthma Severity via Allergic 
Inflammation, Pulmonary Physiology and Rhinitis Severity such that the standardized total 
effect was 0.18±0.05; (p<0.001; Table E3 in the Online Repository). While Allergic 
Inflammation was inversely associated with Asthma Severity (direct effect: −0.20±0.08; 
p=0.01), the total effect of Allergic Inflammation on Asthma Severity was positive 
(0.22±0.06; p<0.001; Table E4 in the Online Repository) because the effect of Allergic 
Inflammation on Asthma Severity was mediated by Pulmonary Physiology and Rhinitis 
Severity (Table E4 in the Online Repository).
ETS Pathway
Figure 3B highlights the pathways from ETS exposure to Asthma Severity. Our results 
showed that ETS exposure was inversely associated with Pulmonary Physiology (direct 
effect: −0.28±0.07; p<0.001) and positively associated with Asthma Severity (direct effect: 
0.17±0.08; p=0.03). Additionally, the total effect of ETS exposure on Asthma Severity was 
mediated by Pulmonary Physiology (Table E4 in the Online Repository). There was no 
evidence of an indirect effect of ETS exposure on Asthma Severity via Allergic 
Inflammation.
Vitamin D Pathway
Figure 3C highlights the pathways from Vitamin D to Asthma Severity. Our results showed 
that Vitamin D was inversely associated with Allergic Inflammation (direct effect: 
Liu et al.
Page 7
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 −0.14±0.06; p=0.02), but not directly associated with Pulmonary Physiology (−0.06±0.05; 
p=0.23) or Asthma Severity (0.01±0.05; p=0.82). Mediation analyses (Table E4 in the 
Online Repository) revealed modest indirect associations between Vitamin D and Asthma 
Severity via Allergic Inflammation and Pulmonary Physiology (−0.04±0.02; p=0.03), and 
through Allergic Inflammation and Rhinitis Severity (−0.03±0.01; p=0.04). However, the 
total effect of Vitamin D on Asthma Severity was insignificant (0.01±0.05; p=0.89).
Stress Pathway
Figure 3D highlights the pathways from Stress to Asthma Severity. Our results showed that 
Stress was not directly associated with Allergic Inflammation (0.07±0.05; p=0.19), 
Pulmonary Physiology (−0.01±0.05; p=0.90), or Asthma Severity (0.06±0.05; p=0.22), nor 
were there significant indirect or total effects on Asthma Severity (Table E4 in the Online 
Repository).
Obesity Pathway
Figure 3E highlights the pathways from Obesity to Asthma Severity. Our results showed that 
Obesity was not directly associated with Pulmonary Physiology (0.01±0.05; p=0.77) or 
Asthma Severity (0.06±0.04; p=0.11), nor were there significant indirect or total effects on 
Asthma Severity (Table E4 in the Online Repository). While previous literature in the inner 
city has suggested that the effect of obesity on asthma control was significant in females but 
not in males,23 a similar effect was not seen in national data.24 Because this effect was not 
consistent within the literature, we tested if the direct effect of Obesity on Asthma Severity 
differed by sex by including an interaction between sex and Obesity. However, our results 
showed no evidence that the effect of Obesity on Asthma Severity differed by sex (p=0.42) 
and so we did not account for this effect in our final model.
Sensitivity Analysis
Because controller treatment step at each visit was partially determined by measures 
included in the Pulmonary Physiology domain, a sensitivity analysis that re-defined Asthma 
Severity without the mean and variance of controller treatment step across V0 and V6 was 
performed and showed similar results (results not shown).
DISCUSSION
We sought to integrate host and environmental factors known to influence asthma severity 
into pathways so that we can focus on important pathophysiologic aspects of the disease and 
target interventions for improvement of asthma management. To our knowledge, this is the 
first study to develop and test a pathways construct of asthma severity and determine the 
relative contributions of these factors and their pathways using a structural equation 
modeling approach. We had the benefit of applying this analytical approach to a large cohort 
of children with asthma living in 9 geographically distributed U.S. inner cities, which was 
designed to define phenotypic characteristics of asthma. The APIC study differed from most 
asthma phenotypes studies in that it included prospective, standardized guidelines-based 
asthma and rhinitis management aimed at achieving optimal control of both lower and nasal 
airways disease activity. The APIC study also included participants with a wide range of 
Liu et al.
Page 8
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 asthma severity (i.e., not limited to children with severe asthma), allowing for wide ranges of 
all outcomes of interest in our model.3,4 Characterizations of asthma and rhinitis severity 
were based on conventional composite assessments of day and night symptoms, 
exacerbations, and controller usage.5–7,25 Altogether, this pathways construct accounted for 
53.4% of the observed variance in asthma severity in this study, a remarkable effect 
considering the complexity of this condition.
Our model supported the concept that multiple pathways contribute significantly to asthma 
severity and, importantly, that allergen sensitization is perhaps the originating domain in this 
pathophysiologic chain. Based on the model:
Allergy acts through more than one pathway to exert its effect on asthma severity
Our analysis verified sequential links to asthma severity, from allergen sensitization to 
allergic inflammation, and subsequently through pulmonary physiology or through rhinitis 
severity to asthma severity. This implies that conventional management does not adequately 
mitigate the effects of allergen sensitization on downstream airways inflammation, 
obstruction and dysfunction. We can infer that more focus should be directed to 
interventions to suppress the allergy pathway to ameliorate asthma above and beyond the 
improvement achieved by current guidelines-based care.
ETS exposure exerts significant direct and indirect (via pulmonary physiology) effects on 
asthma severity
There are significant direct and indirect effects of ETS exposure on asthma severity. ETS 
exposure was based on two semi-quantitative measures: number of smokers in the home by 
self-report and urine cotinine (a nicotine metabolite) by NicAlert test strips as an indicator of 
any ETS exposure. Studies using both measures have ranged from finding a high correlation 
between them, while other studies have found substantial discordance, with health effects 
being associated with one measure or the other, leading some investigators to conclude that 
both measures are useful and relevant when investigating the impact of ETS exposure on 
respiratory disease in children.26 Accordingly, ETS exposure assessments for this study 
included both and have been compared in Table E5 in the Online Repository. We found a 
significant association between self-reported smokers in the home and urine cotinine levels 
(p<0.001); however, urine cotinine was detectable in 80% of study participants reporting no 
tobacco smokers in the home. This reiterates the importance of both assessments of as well 
as measures to reduce ETS exposure to improve asthma in the context of guidelines-based 
care.
Rhinitis severity had a remarkably strong direct effect on asthma severity
This supports the relevance of the “one airway” concept of disease (“from nostrils to 
alveoli”) for rhinitis in asthma6,27 and represents an important observation for investigators 
and clinicians that are studying and aiming to optimize asthma control. It is interesting that 
rhinitis severity not directly impact pulmonary physiology, as some of the proposed 
mechanisms of the nose-lung interaction would predict.22 The effect may be driven by the 
physiologic consequences of oral breathing that is quite common in children in the presence 
of rhinitis. By losing the filtering and other air-conditioning capacity of the nasal passages, 
Liu et al.
Page 9
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the lower airways may be rendered more susceptible to environmental stimuli, including 
allergens, irritants and infectious agents.
Other pathways contributed less to asthma severity
While Vitamin D had modest but significant indirect effects on asthma severity mediated by 
allergic inflammation, pulmonary physiology and rhinitis severity, the direct and total effect 
of Vitamin D on asthma severity were both insignificant. We also tested multiple pathways 
from stress to asthma severity and found them to be insignificant. Similarly, obesity was not 
significantly associated with asthma severity, nor was the effect of obesity on asthma 
severity modified by gender (data not shown). The lack of evidence regarding the effect of 
these domains on asthma severity does not mean that these are insignificant factors and 
might have been limited by our choice of variable(s) used to represent these domains or the 
conceptual model itself. For example, our choice of caretaker Perceived Stress Scale is a 
standard measure often used and recommended to assess the effect of stress on asthma.16,28 
While other aspects of psychosocial stress not measured by this scale might have greater 
effects on asthma severity, they were not obtained in APIC. As well, our study sample 
consisted primarily of Black or Hispanic children with higher BMIs. Consequently, our 
inability to detect significant effects of BMI on asthma severity may be due to a sample that 
is not representative of other study populations where this type of effect has been detected.
An important element of this analysis is that we can report standardized total, as well as 
direct and indirect effects of each domain on asthma severity. Comparing the standardized 
total effect sizes on asthma severity (Table E4 in the Online Repository), we found that 
pulmonary physiology and rhinitis severity had the largest standardized total effect sizes 
(−0.51 and 0.48, respectively, p<0.001), followed by ETS exposure (0.30, p<0.001) and 
allergic inflammation (0.22, p<0.001). We were also able to determine whether some 
domains were significant mediators of the effects of others. Indeed, as we had hypothesized 
in constructing the model, the APIC dataset confirmed an indirect effect of allergen 
sensitization on asthma severity via allergic inflammation, which then branched out into 
effects on pulmonary physiology and rhinitis severity; and the ETS effect on asthma severity 
is partially mediated through pulmonary physiology.
This investigation has limitations. Because this is an observational study, the direct, indirect 
and total effects are estimates of statistical association rather than causation or clinical 
relevance. Exclusion of 18 participants with missing covariate data could also limit the 
generalizability of these findings. Compared to included participants, excluded participants 
had lower rhinitis symptom scores, lower variance of FEV1 (% predicted), higher mean 
FEV1/FVC, lower variance of FEV1/FVC and lower CASI night symptoms & albuterol use. 
Their influence on the results is limited because they represent only 18/579=3.1% of 
participants in our study. The domains, and the observed variables used to measure each 
domain, could be missing potentially important host and environmental factors such as other 
relevant environmental exposures and aspects of diet/nutrition. For example, cockroach 
allergen sensitization with high levels of exposure has been shown to have greater effects on 
asthma severity in inner-city children than sensitization alone,29 so including allergen 
exposure in this model could have strengthened the allergy pathway. Since allergen 
Liu et al.
Page 10
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measurements in house dust samples were obtained in only a subset of APIC participants, 
we did not include allergen exposure in this model. Some of our variables may lack adequate 
precision, validity and/or domain representation to observe significant or strong pathway 
associations. For example, the Stress domain is represented by the 10-question caretaker 
Perceived Stress Score (PSS), which was recommended in the NIH/AHRQ-sponsored 
Asthma Outcomes Workshop Expert Report as a brief, well-validated, and simply 
administered measure of global stress.28 However, the PSS does not necessarily capture 
other psychosocial mediators of asthma outcomes that are common in inner-city living and 
have been linked to asthma severity, such as violence and severely negative life events.30–33 
Some potential associations were not tested (e.g., stress affecting asthma severity via BMI 
and/or ETS exposure) and could be explored in future work. Family history of asthma was 
not included in our conceptual model since, to our knowledge, family history of asthma has 
not been associated with asthma severity as it has with asthma prevalence. We recognize that 
clear evidence of the genetic contribution to asthma severity exists, such as the association of 
the CDHR3 gene locus to severe asthma exacerbations in young children.34 Another 
potential limitation of this study is its conduct in children with asthma living in U.S. inner 
cities; extrapolation to children living in other locales and/or to adults would benefit from 
validation in those populations.
In conclusion, our causal network analysis is a rigorous investigative approach to develop 
and test a literature-based model of essential factors underlying asthma severity. This 
approach provides standardized effect sizes that are useful comparators of the relative 
contributions of different domains and can be used as a basis for prioritizing interventions to 
improve disease severity and management. With our complete model explaining more than 
half of the variability in asthma severity, the strong contributors are high priority targets for 
improving asthma outcomes in addition to standard care: allergen sensitization, allergic 
inflammation, ETS exposure, pulmonary physiology and rhinitis. These findings 
demonstrate the usefulness of causal network analysis in formulating a blueprint for 
pathway-targeted interventional studies to improve future guidelines-directed care.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgements: We are grateful to the APIC study participants and their families who gave of themselves to 
be our investigational partners; our study staff personnel who are dedicated to our inner-city asthma mission and 
clinical research excellence; and Christine Sorkness and Patrick Heinritz in the ICAC Administrative Center 
(Madison, WI) and Samuel Arbes, Michelle Walter, and Herman Mitchell at Rho, Inc. for their leadership, 
commitment to excellence despite all of the challenges, and their legacies in inner-city asthma research.
Funding Sources: This project has been funded in whole or in part with Federal funds from the National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, under 
contract numbers HHSN272200900052C and HHSN272201000052I, and 1UM1AI114271-01. Additional support 
was provided by the National Center for Research Resources, and National Center for Advancing Translational 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, under grants NCRR/NIH UL1TR000451, UL1RR025780, UL1TR000075 
and NCATS/NIH UL1TR000154, UL1TR001082, UL1TR000077-04, UL1TR000040, UL1TR000150, and 
UL1TR001105. Glaxo SmithKline (GSK) provided Ventolin, Flovent, Advair and Flonase under a clinical trial 
agreement with NIH NIAID; GSK did not have a role in the development or approval of the protocol, conduct of 
the trial, data analysis, manuscript preparation, or the decision to submit for publication.
Liu et al.
Page 11
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Abbreviations
NIH
National Institutes of Health
NIAID
National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
ICAC
Inner City Asthma Consortium
APIC
Asthma Phenotypes in the Inner City
ETS
Environmental Tobacco Smoke
CASI
Composite Asthma Severity Index
ACT/cACT Asthma Control Test/Childhood Asthma Control Test
FeNO
Fractional exhaled Nitric Oxide
FEV1
Forced Expiratory Volume in the first second
FEV1/FVC Ratio of Forced Expiratory Volume in the first second to forced vital 
capacity
IgE
Immunoglobulin E
References
1. Szefler SJ, Mitchell H, Sorkness CA, et al. Management of asthma based on exhaled nitric oxide in 
addition to guideline-based treatment for inner-city adolescents and young adults: a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2008; 372:1065–72. [PubMed: 18805335] 
2. Teach SJ, Gergen PJ, Szefler SJ, et al. Seasonal risk factors for asthma exacerbations among inner-
city children. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015; 135:1465–73e5. [PubMed: 25794658] 
3. Pongracic JA, Krouse RZ, Babineau DC, et al. Asthma Phenotypes in the Inner City: Distinguishing 
Characteristics of Difficult-to-Control Asthma in Children. J Aller Clin Immunol Submitted 
simultaneously. 
4. Zoratti EM, Krouse RZ, Babineau DC, et al. Asthma phenotypes in inner-city children. J Aller Clin 
Immunol Submitted simultaneously. 
5. National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert Panel Report 3: Guidelines for the 
Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2007. 
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/
6. Bousquet J, Van Cauwenberge P, Khaltaev N, Aria Workshop G, World Health O. Allergic rhinitis 
and its impact on asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001; 108:S147–334. [PubMed: 11707753] 
7. Brozek JL, Bousquet J, Baena-Cagnani CE, et al. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma 
(ARIA) guidelines: 2010 revision. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010; 126:466–76. [PubMed: 
20816182] 
8. Wildfire JJ, Gergen PJ, Sorkness CA, et al. Development and validation of the Composite Asthma 
Severity Index–an outcome measure for use in children and adolescents. The Journal of allergy and 
clinical immunology. 2012; 129:694–701. [PubMed: 22244599] 
9. Liu AH, Zeiger R, Sorkness C, et al. Development and cross-sectional validation of the Childhood 
Asthma Control Test. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007; 119:817–25. [PubMed: 17353040] 
10. Liu AH, Zeiger RS, Sorkness CA, et al. The Childhood Asthma Control Test: retrospective 
determination and clinical validation of a cut point to identify children with very poorly controlled 
asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010; 126:267–73. 73 e1. [PubMed: 20624640] 
Liu et al.
Page 12
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11. Schatz M, Sorkness CA, Li JT, et al. Asthma Control Test: reliability, validity, and responsiveness 
in patients not previously followed by asthma specialists. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006; 117:549–
56. [PubMed: 16522452] 
12. Schatz M, Mosen DM, Kosinski M, et al. Validity of the Asthma Control Test completed at home. 
Am J Manag Care. 2007; 13:661–7. [PubMed: 18069909] 
13. Standardization of Spirometry, 1994 Update. American Thoracic Society. American journal of 
respiratory and critical care medicine. 1995; 152:1107–36. [PubMed: 7663792] 
14. Miller MR, Hankinson J, Brusasco V, et al. Standardisation of spirometry. The European 
respiratory journal. 2005; 26:319–38. [PubMed: 16055882] 
15. Kuczmarski RJ, Ogden CL, Guo SS, et al. 2000 CDC Growth Charts for the United States: 
methods and development. Vital and health statistics Series 11, Data from the national health 
survey. 2002:1–190.
16. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of health and 
social behavior. 1983; 24:385–96. [PubMed: 6668417] 
17. NicAlert®: Product Insert (Urine Samples). 2016. Accessed 2132016 at http://www.nymox.com/
default.action?itemid=47
18. Yeh E, Levasseur G, Kaiserman MJ. Evaluation of urinary cotinine immunoassay test strips used to 
assess smoking status. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research 
on Nicotine and Tobacco. 2011; 13:1045–51. [PubMed: 21778149] 
19. MacKinnon, DP. Introduction to statistical mediation analysis. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates; 2008. 
20. Muthén LKM, BO. Mplus User’s Guide. 7th. Los Angeles, CA: Muthén & Muthén; p. 1998-2015.
21. Baron RM, Kenny DA. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psychological 
research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1986; 51:1173–
82. [PubMed: 3806354] 
22. MacCallum RC, Brown MW, Sugawara HM. Power Analysis and Determination of Sample Size 
for Covariance Structure Modeling. Psychological Methods. 1996; 1:130–49.
23. Kattan M, Kumar R, Bloomberg GR, et al. Asthma control, adiposity, and adipokines among inner-
city adolescents. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010; 125:584–92. [PubMed: 20226295] 
24. Visness CM, London SJ, Daniels JL, et al. Association of childhood obesity with atopic and 
nonatopic asthma: results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1999–2006. 
The Journal of asthma : official journal of the Association for the Care of Asthma. 2010; 47:822–
9. [PubMed: 20707763] 
25. Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention. Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) 
2015. 2015. Accessed October 10, 2015, 2015, at http://www.ginasthma.org
26. Gergen PJ. Environmental tobacco smoke as a risk factor for respiratory disease in children. 
Respiration physiology. 2001; 128:39–46. [PubMed: 11535261] 
27. Togias A. Rhinitis and asthma: evidence for respiratory system integration. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2003; 111:1171–83. quiz 84. [PubMed: 12789212] 
28. Rand CS, Wright RJ, Cabana MD, et al. Mediators of asthma outcomes. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2012; 129:S136–41. [PubMed: 22386506] 
29. Rosenstreich DL, Eggleston P, Kattan M, et al. The role of cockroach allergy and exposure to 
cockroach allergen in causing morbidity among inner-city children with asthma. The New England 
journal of medicine. 1997; 336:1356–63. [PubMed: 9134876] 
30. Sandberg S, Jarvenpaa S, Penttinen A, Paton JY, McCann DC. Asthma exacerbations in children 
immediately following stressful life events: a Cox’s hierarchical regression. Thorax. 2004; 
59:1046–51. [PubMed: 15563703] 
31. Sandberg S, Paton JY, Ahola S, et al. The role of acute and chronic stress in asthma attacks in 
children. Lancet. 2000; 356:982–7. [PubMed: 11041399] 
32. Wright RJ, Mitchell H, Visness CM, et al. Community violence and asthma morbidity: the Inner-
City Asthma Study. Am J Public Health. 2004; 94:625–32. [PubMed: 15054016] 
Liu et al.
Page 13
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 33. Wright RJ, Steinbach SF. Violence: an unrecognized environmental exposure that may contribute 
to greater asthma morbidity in high risk inner-city populations. Environmental health perspectives. 
2001; 109:1085–9. [PubMed: 11675274] 
34. Bonnelykke K, Sleiman P, Nielsen K, et al. A genome-wide association study identifies CDHR3 as 
a susceptibility locus for early childhood asthma with severe exacerbations. Nature genetics. 2014; 
46:51–5. [PubMed: 24241537] 
35. Nathan RA, Sorkness CA, Kosinski M, et al. Development of the asthma control test: a survey for 
assessing asthma control. The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology. 2004; 113:59–65. 
[PubMed: 14713908] 
Liu et al.
Page 14
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Capsule Summary
This analysis demonstrates how allergen sensitization and inflammation, pulmonary 
physiology, environmental tobacco smoke exposure and rhinitis severity explain asthma 
severity, and may serve as a roadmap to improve asthma outcomes.
Liu et al.
Page 15
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FIGURE 1. 
Conceptual Model of Asthma Severity. This model was generated in advance of any 
analyses based on observations derived from the medical literature and became the test 
object of this study. Oval boxes indicate domains defined by multiple observed variables, 
while rectangles indicate domains defined by one observed variable only. An arrow 
connecting two domains represents the direction of the hypothesized relationship between 
the two domains.
Liu et al.
Page 16
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FIGURE 2. 
Direct and Indirect Effects of All Pathways. Estimates are standardized direct effects that are 
interpreted as the standard deviation increase in the dependent domain for every one 
standard deviation increase in the independent domain. Estimates with associated p-values 
that are less than 0.05 are denoted by * and solid lines. Thick lines further denote 
statistically significant pathways by tests of indirect effects and mediation. Statistically 
insignificant estimates are denoted by dashed lines. All estimates are adjusted for age, sex 
and race.
Liu et al.
Page 17
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FIGURE 3. 
Pathways to Asthma Severity. Estimates are standardized direct effects that are interpreted as 
the standard deviation increase in the dependent domain for every one standard deviation 
increase in the independent domain. Estimates with associated p-values that are less than 
0.05 are denoted by * and solid lines. Thick lines further denote statistically significant 
pathways by tests of indirect effects and mediation. Statistically insignificant estimates are 
denoted by dashed lines. All estimates are adjusted for age, sex and race.
Liu et al.
Page 18
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 19
TABLE I
Observed variables used to measure each domain
Domain
Observed Variables
Asthma Severity
Mean and variance of CASI component - Day symptoms & albuterol use1 between V0 and V6
Mean and variance of CASI component - Night symptoms & albuterol score2 between V0 and V6
Mean and variance of CASI component -Exacerbations3 between V0 and V6
Mean and variance of controller treatment step between V0 and V6
ACT/cACT at V6 (categorized4)
Rhinitis Severity
Mean and variance of rhinitis symptom score5 between V0 and V6
Mean and variance of rhinitis medication score6 between V0 and V6
Allergen Sensitization8
Total serum IgE7 at V0
Number of allergic sensitizations (panel of 22)9 at V0
Sensitized to molds10 at V0
Sensitized to dust mites11 at V0
Sensitized to roaches12 at V0
Sensitized to rodents13 at V0
Sensitized to pets14 at V0
Sensitized to pollen/peanut15 at V0
Allergic Inflammation
Blood eosinophil count7 at V0
FeNO7 at V0 and V6
Pulmonary Physiology
Bronchodilator response at V6
Mean and variance of FEV1 (% predicted) between V0 and V6
Mean and variance of FEV1/FVC between V0 and V6
Environmental Tobacco Smoke Exposure
Number of smokers in the home at Screening (categorized17)
NicAlert result18 at Screening
Vitamin D
Total 25-hydroxyvitamin D at V0
Stress
Caretaker Perceived Stress Scale at V0
Obesity
BMI z-score at Screening
1Composite Asthma Severity Index (CASI) component – Day symptoms includes measures of day asthma symptoms and albuterol use in the last 2 
weeks (scoring range between 0 and 3).
2CASI component – Night symptoms includes measures of night asthma symptoms and albuterol use in the last 2 weeks (scoring range between 0 
and 3).
3CASI component – Exacerbations includes hospitalizations and/or oral corticosteroid bursts in the last 2 months.
4ACT is categorized as very poorly controlled (≤15), not well controlled (≥16 & ≤19), and well controlled (≥20)5,11,12,35. cACT is categorized 
as very poorly controlled (≤12), not well controlled (≥13 & ≤19), and well controlled (≥20) 9,10.
5Rhinitis medication score is set to 0 for no medications, 5 for antihistamines only, 10 for nasal steroids only, and 15 for antihistamines and nasal 
steroids.
6Rhinitis symptom score is based on the Modified Rhinitis Symptom Utility Index.3
7Variable is log10 transformed in the structural equation model.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 20
8Positive skin prick test and/or a positive specific IgE.
9Alternaria tenuis (skin prick test) or Alternaria alternata (specific IgE), Aspergillus fumigatus (both skin prick test and specific IgE), 
Cladosporium herbarum (specific IgE only), Dermatophagoides farinae, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, German cockroach, American 
cockroach, mouse, rat, cat, dog, oak, pecan, birch, maple, Eastern 8 tree mix, ragweed mix (giant/short; skin prick test) or short ragweed (specific 
Ige), Timothy grass, Kentucky Blue/June, Orchard and Timothy (K-O-T) grass mix, peanut, egg and milk.
10Alternaria tenuis (skin prick test) or Alternaria alternata (specific IgE), Aspergillus fumigatus (both skin prick test and specific IgE), 
Cladosporium herbarum (specific IgE only).
11Dermatophagoides farinae and Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus.
12German cockroach and American cockroach.
13Mouse and rat.
14Cat and dog.
15Oak, pecan, birch, maple, Eastern 8 tree mix, ragweed, Timothy grass, K-O-T grass mix and peanut.
16Egg and milk.
17Number of smokers in the home is categorized as 0, 1 and >1.
18Analyzed as a continuous variable in the structural equation model.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 October 01.
