 Is Sex Good for Your Health? A National Study on Partnered 
Sexuality and Cardiovascular Risk Among Older Men and 
Women
Hui Liu,
Department of Sociology, Michigan State University
Linda Waite,
Department of Sociology & NORC, University of Chicago
Shannon Shen, and
Department of Sociology, Michigan State University
Donna Wang
Department of Medicine, Michigan State University
Abstract
Working from a social relationship and life course perspective, we provide generalizable 
population-based evidence on partnered sexuality linked to cardiovascular risk in later life using 
national longitudinal data from the NSHAP (N=2204). We consider characteristics of partnered 
sexuality of older men and women, particularly sexual activity and sexual quality, as they affect 
cardiovascular risk. Cardiovascular risk is defined as hypertension, rapid heart rate, elevated CRP, 
and general cardiovascular events. We find that older men are more likely to report being sexually 
active, report having sex more often and more enjoyably than are older women. Results from 
cross-lagged models suggest that high frequency of sex is positively related to later risk of 
cardiovascular events for men but not women, whereas good sexual quality seems to protect 
women but not men from cardiovascular risk in later life. We find no evidence that poor 
cardiovascular health interferes with later sexuality for either gender.
Involvement in social relationships has long been demonstrated to promote health 
(Umberson and Montez 2010). The sexual relationship, which we define here as either a 
long- or short-term connection with a partner that includes sex, particularly sexual activity 
and sexual intimacy, is one of the most fundamental types of social relationships, and it has 
long been recognized as an essential part of human life (Masters and Johnson 1966; Satcher 
2001; Schnarch 1991). Yet, our scientific understanding of sexual relationships, especially 
the consequences of partnered sexuality for health, is in its nascent stage both theoretically 
and empirically. We focus on sexuality with a partner since, especially in the current cohorts 
of older adults, the vast majority of sex takes place with another person in a relationship 
(Galinsky, McClintock & Waite 2014). We work from a social relationship and life course 
Address correspondence to Hui Liu, Department of Sociology, Michigan State University, 509 E. Circle Drive 316 Berkey Hall, East 
Lansing, MI, 48824. Telephone: (517) 353-3265; Fax: (517) 432-2856; and liuhu@msu.edu. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Published in final edited form as:
J Health Soc Behav. 2016 September ; 57(3): 276–296. doi:10.1177/0022146516661597.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 perspective to consider how partnered sexuality modifies individuals’ life context at older 
ages and thus shapes cardiovascular risk. Cardiovascular risk, defined as “the presence of 
any physiological or functional state that is a step on the way to cardiovascular disease” (Liu 
and Waite 2014:404), is the leading cause of death in the U.S. (Mozzafarian et al. 2015). A 
large body of work points to the important role of social relationships in the development 
and progression of this disease (Liu and Waite 2014; Zhang and Hayward 2006).
There are several reasons to expect partnered sexuality to affect cardiovascular health. First, 
sexual activity is a form of exercise. During sexual intercourse as well as foreplay, both men 
and women experience stretching of muscles and tendons, flexion of joints, and hormone 
fluctuation (Frappier et al. 2013), which may promote cardiovascular fitness (Levin 2007). 
Yet, there are also clinical concerns that sexual activity may precipitate acute cardiac events 
for patients with a prior history of cardiovascular disease (Cheitlin 2003; Dahabreh and 
Paulus 2011; Muller et al. 1996; Stein 2000). Second, the intimacy built into a sexual 
relationship is a source of emotional and social support, which is a key component that 
defines life context and in turn shapes health (Schnarch 1991). Third, partnered sexuality 
and satisfaction with it may reduce exposure to stress, modify response to stress and 
promote recovery from stress (Ein-Dor and Hirschberger 2012), thereby reducing the risk of 
cardiovascular disease (Schwartz et al. 2003).
The present study provides the first generalizable, population-based evidence of the 
longitudinal links between partnered sexuality and cardiovascular risk in later life. Using a 
nationally representative longitudinal dataset from the National Social Life, Health and 
Aging Project (NSHAP), we assess how partnered sexual activity and sexual quality are 
related to cardiovascular risk for older men and women over time. The findings speak to 
health policy and practice as well as to our understanding of sexuality in later life.
PARTNERED SEXUALITY OF OLDER ADULTS: A SOCIAL RELATIONSHIP 
AND LIFE COURSE PERSPECTIVE
Increasingly, scholars build on a life course perspective to view the status and transitions of 
social relationships as one ages (Elder and O’Rand 1995). According to the life course 
perspective, the developmental tasks and challenges of life change from childhood through 
young adulthood, middle and older ages; men and women differ in their pathways and 
relationship transitions across life course stages. While much research has studied various 
social relationships over the life course, the sexual relationship has been largely ignored, 
perhaps because sex is often considered to be a private or individual behavior (Harvey, 
Wenzel, and Sprecher 2004). We work from the life course perspective to conceptualize 
partnered sexuality as a unique type of social relationship that defines the life context over 
the life course. As a consequence, the sexual relationship may shape individuals’ health.
Sexuality varies dynamically through the socially and biologically defined stages of life 
(Carpenter and DeLamater 2012; Waite and Charme 2015). Previous studies on sex and 
sexuality often focus on adolescence and young and middle adulthood, which are usually 
considered to be the most sexually active stages of life (DeLamater and Sill 2005). Scientific 
understanding of sexual relationships in later life is limited. A common conception is that 
Liu et al.
Page 2
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 older people do not have sex as often as their younger counterparts, and that the quality of 
sexual life tends to decline at older ages due to biological challenges that accompany aging 
(DeLamater 2012; Kinsey, Pomeroy and Martin 1998). However, recent studies show that 
sexuality remains important to the quality of life of many older adults (Iveniuk, Cagney, and 
O’Muircheartaigh 2015; Lindau et al. 2007; Stroope, McFarland and Uecker 2015). A 
sizeable share of both older men and older women agree that sex is a key part of their 
relationship and well-being (DeLamater 2012; DeLamater and Sill 2005). Indeed, some 
scholars argue that despite a decrease in sexual frequency, the quality of sexual life 
sometimes improves with age because men may gain greater voluntary control over 
ejaculation (DeLamater and Karraker 2009).
Sexuality at older ages, especially among the cohorts now in these ages, is almost 
exclusively experienced within long-established couples, virtually all of them married. Data 
from the National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project show that 95% of sex is within a 
partnered relationship for older adults. Thus, we focus here on sexual activity with a partner, 
mostly the spouse, and satisfaction with that experience. Although we look at partnered sex 
from the perspective of the individuals involved, we speak of sexual relationships, as these 
are the context for sex. Note that especially at older ages, not all those with partners are 
sexually active; among partnered men and women aged 75 and older fewer than half had any 
sex with their partner in the past year (Karraker and Delamater 2014; Lindau and Gavrilova 
2010).
SEXUALITY AND CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH: LIMITED CLINICAL AND 
COMMUNITY EVIDENCE
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death and disability for both men and 
women in the U.S. (Mozzafarian et al. 2015). According to the U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control (CDC), about 600,000 Americans die of CVD every year; this is about one in every 
four deaths. This problem becomes increasingly prevalent with advancing age (Go et al. 
2014; Lakatta and Levy 2003). Researchers from a wide range of fields are devoted to 
identifying the key risk factors for CVD. However, we know little about whether and how 
involvement in a sexual relationship shapes cardiovascular risk.
Both empirical and theoretical research on the effects of sexuality on cardiovascular health is 
still rare (Dahabreh and Paulus 2011; Levine et al. 2012), and almost all focuses on the 
effect of sexual activity on risks of cardiovascular events (Brody 2010; Dahabreh and Paulus 
2011; Levine et al. 2012). Moreover, the current limited empirical evidence on this topic is 
restricted to small, non-representative clinical or community samples (Dahabreh and Paulus 
2011; Levine et al. 2012). For example, a Welsh longitudinal study of 914 men aged 45–59 
recruited between 1979 and 1983 finds that men with more frequent sexual intercourse tend 
to have lower risks of experiencing ischemic stroke and coronary heart disease events during 
the twenty-year follow up (Ebrahim et al. 2002). Another study based on the same Welsh 
dataset finds that men who experience more orgasms have lower risks of dying from 
coronary heart disease (Smith, Frankel, and Yarnell 1997). Other clinical-based studies also 
find evidence of health benefits from sexual activity and suggest that increased frequency of 
Liu et al.
Page 3
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 vaginal intercourse is associated with better mental health outcomes as well as healthier 
heart rate variability and lower risk of mortality (see a review in Brody 2010). At the same 
time, there are also some clinical concerns that sexual activity may trigger acute cardiac 
events especially for patients with a prior history of CVD (Cheitlin 2003; Dahabreh and 
Paulus 2011; Muller et al. 1996; Stein 2000). Nevertheless, most clinical studies conclude 
that the triggering effect of sexual activities on acute cardiac events is minimal and can be 
alleviated through regular physical exercise (Cheitlin 2003; Dahabreh and Paulus 2011; 
Muller et al. 1996; Stein 2000).
Clinical studies usually consider sex as a form of physical activity, suggesting that sexual 
activity is equivalent to mild to moderate physical activity such as “climbing 2 flights of 
stairs or walking briskly” (Levine et al. 2012:1058). The premise is that sexual foreplay, 
stimulation and intercourse require both men and women to engage in stretching and 
physical movement. Regular physical activities enhance endothelial nitric-oxide synthase 
(eNOS) expression and function leading to increased nitric-oxide (NO) production and 
thereby vasodilation (Dimmeler and Zeiher 2003). This process improves the efficiency of 
the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to body cells and tissues, thus keeping the tissues 
healthy and strong (Butt 1990).
Although clinical studies represent a step forward in this line of investigation, both the 
quantity and quality of the research is limited. Studies to date have failed to demonstrate 
basic patterns for known populations. The fundamental weaknesses of these studies, which 
include small, unrepresentative samples, a focus only on younger adults, cross-sectional 
designs, and lack of control covariates (Brody 2010), make causal inference difficult. More 
importantly, these clinical studies mainly utilize a medical perspective that emphasizes the 
physical and behavioral traits of sex in the disease development processes, and tend to 
overlook the social and psychological context in which partnered sex occurs. Therefore, this 
line of literature suffers from its intellectual fragmentation and does not provide a theoretical 
frame to guide empirical analysis and integrate research findings (Hammack 2005).
TOWARD AN INTEGRATED MODEL: A SOCIAL RELATIONSHIP AND LIFE 
COURSE PERSPECTIVE ON PARTNERED SEXUALITY LINKED TO 
CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH
The life course perspective on social relationships lays a broad theoretical foundation to 
expect that partnered sexuality holds significant meaning for individuals and functions to 
shape life context which, in turn, affects health. This perspective directs attention to both the 
resources and support that flow from relationships as well as the strain and demands that 
they carry, all of which constitute key components of the life course (Umberson and Montez 
2010).
Resources and Support—Involvement in partnered sexuality increases access to social, 
psychological and behavioral resources. In terms of behavioral resources, sex is the central 
activity in a sexual relationship. However, in most cases, especially among older adults, 
involvement in partnered sexuality goes beyond the physical act of sex to include emotional 
Liu et al.
Page 4
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 closeness, availability of a confidant, and the benefits of physical touch (Iveniuk et al. 2015). 
Similar to other types of social relationships like marriage and parenthood, partnered 
sexuality may promote health via increasing social integration and social and emotional 
support (Burman and Margolin 1992; Cohen 2004), which are all important resources that 
promote health (Waite and Joyner 2001). Intimate relationships, whether sexually active or 
no longer so, are more likely to provide emotional support to men than to women (Erickson 
2005; Kalmijn 2003) but women seem to be more sensitive to the quality of the relationship 
than are men (Kiecolt-Glaser and Newton 2001).
Stress Relief—Stress triggers the sympathetic nervous system to metabolize glucose and 
induces the release of stress hormones, specifically catecholamines and cortisol, which, in 
turn, results in increased blood pressure and heart rate, accelerated breathing, and 
constriction of blood vessels. This “fight or flight” process characterizes the general human 
response to stress which may increase allostatic load and foster wear and tear on the 
regulatory mechanisms, leading to chronic conditions, such as CVD and hypertension 
(Everson-Rose and Lewis 2005; McEwen and Stellar 1993; Taylor et al. 2000). Clinical 
scientists contend that physical exercise, including sexual activity, helps to reduce both 
women’s and men’s stress hormone levels (e.g., adrenaline, cortisol) and to stimulate the 
production of endorphins, a natural mood elevator. Sexual activity, especially orgasm, also 
triggers the release of oxytocin, which promotes bonding (Magon and Kalra 2011) and may 
help to relieve stress, thus enhancing cardiovascular health. Not only is stress relieved during 
intercourse and the moment of orgasm, but elevated mood may persist for some time, and 
have a positive impact on health (Exton et al. 1999; Kashdan et al. 2014; Kruger et al. 1998). 
The physical act of sex may alleviate stress directly in the same way as does any exercise 
(Salmon 2001). Sex may also work indirectly through the increased access to coping 
resources such as emotional support from a sexual relationship, which may alleviate the 
negative effect of stress. The efficacy of sexual activity for relieving stress may depend on 
the quality of the experience, with only satisfying sex reducing stress, in much the same way 
as only marriages of high quality improve physical health (Liu and Waite 2014).
Strain and Demands—While partnered sexuality may provide health-promoting 
resources, it may also constitute a source of emotional and physical strain and demands 
(Walen and Lachman 2000). The demands may come from the expectations and social 
norms related to gender and sexuality. For example, cultural scripts of masculinity may 
encourage men to enact their masculinity through sexual activities such as high frequency of 
sex and high expectation for their sexual performance (Carpenter 2015). This is consistent 
with the observations that men tend to report having sex more often than do women, and that 
men are more likely than women to suffer sexual performance anxiety and to take 
performance enhancing drugs (Laumann, Das & Waite 2008; Lindau et al. 2007). Given that 
a large proportion of older adults, especially men, suffer some problems of sexual 
dysfunction and/or sexual performance anxiety (Lindau et al. 2007), the social norms of 
masculinity may increase older men’s exposure to both emotional stress and physical 
demands as they try to adhere to the norms of frequent sex in the face of health challenges or 
sexual problems (Lindau et al. 2007). Yet, a sexual relationship that produces high physical 
Liu et al.
Page 5
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pleasure and emotional satisfaction may promote relationship quality and minimize the 
consequences of strain and demands, thus promoting cardiovascular health.
THE PRESENT STUDY AND RESEARCH HYPOTHESES
We move beyond the medical perspective by integrating a social relationship and life course 
perspective to view partnered sexuality that constitutes the life context of individuals and in 
turn shapes cardiovascular health. Given the long standing observation that involvement in 
social relationships promotes health and that men receive more health benefits from an 
intimate relationship than do women (Liu and Umberson 2008), our general hypothesis is 
that: people who are sexually active with a partner will have lower cardiovascular risk than 
people who are sexually inactive, with stronger effects for men than for women (Hypothesis 
1).
Social relationship scholars further distinguish quantitative (e.g., sexual frequency) and 
qualitative (e.g., sexual quality) dimensions of a relationship, and argue that both dimensions 
have significant implications for health (Umberson and Montez 2010).
Sexual Frequency—Frequency of partnered sex is a key mechanism through which 
sexual relationships may produce health outcomes. Medical researchers have reinforced 
scientific evidence linking regular physical exercise to various measures of cardiovascular 
health and emphasize frequency of exercise as a key component to developing 
cardiovascular fitness of older adults (Myers 2003). Similar to other forms of physical 
exercise, having sex frequently may enhance the capacity of the blood vessels to dilate, 
improve vascular wall function, more efficiently provide oxygen to the muscles and in turn 
promote cardiovascular health (Myers 2003). Moreover, moderate frequency of sex may 
promote intimacy in the relationship and thus overall relationship quality (Galinsky and 
Waite 2014), which has positive effects on health. However, a high frequency of sex may 
indicate potential problems of sexual obsessions or unmet sexual need of either partner, or 
may signal the presence of an extramarital sexual relationship. These may lead to stress and 
physical exhaustion and thus be detrimental to cardiovascular health (Safi et al. 2002). In 
addition, sexual intercourse per se is physically and biologically demanding and entails 
moderate stress on the cardiovascular system (Safi et al. 2002), perhaps more so for men’s 
bodies than for women’s due to biologically-based sex differences of genetic and hormonal 
origins (Fisher 2012). Taken together, we hypothesize that both men and women who have 
moderately frequent sex will have lower cardiovascular risk than those who are sexually 
inactive (Hypothesis 2a), but high frequency of sex will be related to increased 
cardiovascular risk especially for men (Hypothesis 2b).
Sexual Quality—Compared with objective measures of sexual frequency, clinical studies 
have paid less attention to subjective feelings of sexual well-being in linkages to health 
(Brody 2010). In contrast, social relationship scholars have consistently highlighted the 
importance of relationship quality in shaping health (Umberson and Montez 2010). Sexual 
quality broadly refers to individuals’ subjective appraisal of their sexual relationships, with 
physical dimensions differentiated from emotional (Lawrance and Byers 1992; Laumann et 
al., 2006). Both dimensions of sexual quality are seen as components of relationship 
Liu et al.
Page 6
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 satisfaction and stability (Galinsky and Waite 2014; Sprecher 2002), and thus modify the 
social support and stress processes and shape cardiovascular health. Greater satisfaction with 
one’s sexual relationship, both physically and emotionally, may improve relationship quality, 
promote access to social support, and enhance life satisfaction and happiness (Dogan, Tugut 
and Golbasi 2013; Galinsky and Waite 2014)—all factors that promote cardiovascular 
health. Because women are more sensitive to the quality of a relationship than are men, they 
may experience stronger effects of relationship quality on their cardiovascular health than do 
men (Kiecolt-Glaser and Newton 2001; Liu and Waite 2014; Zhang and Hayward 2006). 
This view is supported by clinical studies suggesting that multiple domains of relationship 
quality have stronger effects on women’s health—including immune system and 
cardiovascular function—than on men’s (Kiecolt-Glaser and Newton 2001; Liu and Waite 
2014). Recent studies also find that sexual quality is more important for women’s happiness 
and life satisfaction than for men’s (Dogan et al. 2013). Taken together, we expect that better 
sexual quality will be related to lower cardiovascular risk, and this relationship will be 
stronger for women than for men (Hypothesis 3).
Potential Reversal Causality—Although our primary research question is about how 
partnered sexuality affects cardiovascular risk, it is also possible that poor cardiovascular 
health interferes with individuals’ sexual life. Despite limited empirical evidence, especially 
population-based, several clinical studies have examined how sexuality is affected by heart 
disease and suggested that the onset of cardiovascular disease is associated with a decline in 
sexual desire and frequency (Jaarsma et al. 1996; Schwarz and Rodriguez 2005). For 
example, Jaarsma and collegaues (1996) studied 62 patients with advanced heart failure and 
found that most patients reported a marked decrease in sexual interest and sexual frequency 
as well as decreases in the feeling of pleasure or satisfaction they normally experienced from 
sex after the event of heart failure. Given this literature, we expect that higher cardiovascular 
risk at one point will be related to both lower frequency and lower quality of sex at a later 
point for both men and women (Hypothesis 4).
DATA
We use the first two waves of nationally representative longitudinal data, which lie at the 
foundation of a life course perspective, from the National Social Life, Health and Aging 
Project (NSHAP). The NSHAP, one of the first national-scale population-based studies of 
health and intimate relationships at older ages, was conducted by NORC at the University of 
Chicago. A nationally representative probability sample of community-dwelling individuals 
ages 57–85 was selected from households across the U.S. and screened in 2004. African 
Americans, Latinos, men, and those 75–84 years old were over-sampled. All analyses are 
weighted and further adjusted for clustering and stratification of the complex sampling 
design using the complex analysis commands in MPLUS software (Muthén and Muthén 
2007).
The first wave of the NSHAP (Wave 1) included a sample of 3,005 adults ages 57–85 who 
were interviewed during 2005–2006 (Waite, Laumann, et al. 2014). Both in-home interviews 
and lab tests and assays were conducted. Wave 2 consisted of 2,261 Wave 1 respondents 
who were re-interviewed during 2010–2011 (Waite, Cagney, et al. 2014). Because our study 
Liu et al.
Page 7
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 focuses on partnered sexuality, we exclude 57 respondents who reported having had sex in 
the past year but were not in a partnered relationship including marriage, cohabitation, and 
other intimate or sexual relationships at Wave 1. Thus, our final sample includes 1,046 men 
and 1,158 women who were interviewed in both waves.
MEASURES
Partnered Sexual Activity—We start with a basic measure of whether a respondent is 
sexually active with a partner. This is based on the question asking whether the respondent 
had sex with the partner in the last year (1 = Yes, 0 = No). Sex is defined as any “mutually 
voluntary activity with another person that involves sexual contact, whether or not 
intercourse or orgasm occurs” (Lindau et al. 2007:763). Then, we measure sexual frequency 
based on the question asking respondents how often they had sex with the partner during the 
last 12 months. The response includes: none (reference), about once a month, 2–3 times a 
month, and once a week or more.
Sexual Quality—Sexuality scholars distinguish two dimensions of sexual quality: physical 
pleasure and emotional satisfaction (Laumann et al. 2006; Waite and Joyner 2001). 
Respondents were asked how physically pleasurable they found their sexual relationship to 
be. They were also asked in a separate question how emotionally satisfying they found their 
sexual relationship to be. If the respondent was not sexually active last year, the questions 
referred to their most recent partnered sexual relationship. Because these two measures are 
left-skewed, we collapse the lower end categories and recode the variables into three 
categories: not very pleasurable/satisfying (including none, slightly and moderately), very 
pleasurable/satisfying, and extremely pleasurable/satisfying. We analyze these two variables 
as separate measures for the physical and emotional dimensions of sexual quality, 
respectively.
Cardiovascular Health Outcomes—We include four measures of cardiovascular risk: 
hypertension, rapid heart rate, elevated C-reactive protein (CRP), and general CVD events.
Hypertension is a key risk factor for CVD. Elevated blood pressure is associated with an 
increased risk of hypertensive heart disease, stroke, heart attack, and heart failure (Izzo and 
Black 2003). Hypertension increases the pressure on blood vessels and the heart, and can 
lead to inflammation of arteries, atherosclerosis and clogging, narrowing, and damaging of 
the blood vessels, all of which create multiple risks for CVD (Izzo and Black 2003). To 
measure hypertension, we combine both the biological and self-reported measures collected 
by the NSHAP (Cornwell and Waite 2012). The NSHAP measured the blood pressure of 
each respondent twice, using a LifeSource digital blood pressure monitor (model 
UA-767PVL). Hypertension is identified when the mean of the two readings is greater than 
140 mm Hg systolic or 90 mm Hg diastolic. For respondents who have been diagnosed with 
diabetes, we use the recommended lower cutoff of either 130 mm Hg systolic or 80 mm Hg 
diastolic (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 2003). In addition, respondents were 
asked whether they had ever been told by a medical doctor that they had high blood pressure 
or hypertension. Based on responses to this question, along with the measures of blood 
pressure, we categorize respondents into four groups: (1) normal blood pressure reading and 
Liu et al.
Page 8
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 no diagnosis of hypertension (referred to as the “normal” blood pressure group), (2) normal 
blood pressure reading but diagnosed with hypertension (referred to as “controlled” 
hypertensive group), (3) high blood pressure reading but no diagnosis of hypertension 
(referred to as “undiagnosed” hypertensive group), and (4) high blood pressure reading and 
diagnosed hypertension (referred to as “uncontrolled” hypertensive group). The normal 
blood pressure group is the reference group.
The second measure of cardiovascular risk is rapid heart rate. Heart rate is measured as the 
number of times the heart beats per minute. When the heart cannot effectively deliver blood 
and oxygen to meet the needs of the body it will beat abnormally fast. A long-term resting 
heart rate greater than 80 beats per minute is linked to a significant risk of hypertension, 
heart disease, and mortality (Izzo and Black 2003). Heart rate was measured twice for the 
NSHAP respondents. Rapid heart rate (coded as 1) is identified if the mean reading is 
greater than 80 beats per minute, and all others are identified as normal heart rate (coded as 
0).
The third measure of cardiovascular risk is C-reactive protein (CRP). Elevated CRP is often 
used as a marker for systemic inflammation, and it has emerged as an important predictor of 
CVD (Nallanathan et al. 2008; Ridker 2003). Ridker (2003) suggests that CRP is a stronger 
predictor of cardiovascular events than are other traditional markers, such as low-density-
lipoprotein cholesterol. During the home interviews, blood was obtained via a single finger-
stick using a retractable-tip, single-use disposable lancet and then applied to filter paper. The 
filter paper was allowed to dry for the remainder of the interview before being placed in a 
plastic bag with desiccant for transport and storage. High-sensitivity CRP (mg/L) was 
derived from the dried blood. Details about the procedures of NSHAP dried blood spot CRP 
measurement are described by Nallanathan et al. (2008). We follow the recommendations of 
the CDC with respect to classification of cardiovascular risk when interpreting CRP values: 
low and normal risks exist when CRP <= 3 mg/L, high risk exists when CRP > 3 mg/L but 
<= 10 mg/L, and presence of acute infection when CRP > 10 mg/L (Pearson et al. 2003). 
CRP is analyzed as an ordinal categorical variable with higher values indicating higher 
levels of CRP.
Finally, we include a measure of self-reported general CVD events. During the home 
interviews, all NSHAP respondents were asked whether they had ever been told by a 
medical doctor that they had had a heart attack, heart failure, or stroke. These events are the 
most common forms of CVD among older adults. Respondents who reported any of these 
CVD events are coded as 1, and others are coded as 0.
Other Covariates—We include two types of covariates (all measured at Wave 1) that are 
related to both sexuality and cardiovascular risk: socio-demographic covariates and health-
related covariates.
Socio-Demographic Covariates—We stratify all analyses by gender. Age is measured 
as a continuous variable in years. Marital status includes the married (coded as 0) and 
unmarried (coded as 1). Race-ethnicity includes non-Hispanic white (reference), non-
Hispanic black, Hispanic, and other. Education is grouped into four categories: less than 
Liu et al.
Page 9
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 high school (reference), high school graduate, some college, and college graduate. Family 
income is derived from the question that asked respondents to compare their family income 
levels with other American families. Responses range from below average (reference), 
average, to above average.
Health-Related Covariates—We control for general measures of both mental and 
physical health. Physical health is measured based on self-reported physical health, ranging 
from 1 poor/fair to 5 excellent. Mental health is measured by psychological distress using an 
11-question subset of the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) 
(Radloff 1977). Respondents were asked how often in the past week they experienced any of 
the following: (1) I did not feel like eating; (2) I felt depressed; (3) I felt that everything I did 
was an effort; (4) My sleep was restless; (5) I was happy; (6) I felt lonely; (7) People were 
unfriendly; (8) I enjoyed life; (9) I felt sad; (10) I felt that people disliked me; and (11) I 
could not get “going”. Response categories range from (0), rarely or none of the time, to (3), 
most of the time. The items are recoded such that higher values indicate higher levels of 
depression (i.e., poorer mental health). The final scale is the sum of the 11 scores.
We also control for a number of health behaviors. Because respondents may take 
medications for hypertension or sexual hormones, we include an indicator for taking any 
antihypertensive medicine (1 = Yes, 0 = No) and another separate indicator for taking sex 
hormones (e.g., estrogen, progestin, and testosterone, 1 = Yes, 0 = No). We also include 
body mass index (BMI), a significant predictor of CVD, as an indicator of obesity (Izzo and 
Black 2003). BMI is calculated from measured height and weight, grouped into four 
categories: normal or underweight (BMI < 25), overweight (25 <= BMI < 30), obese (30 <= 
BMI < 40), and morbidly obese (BMI >= 40) (World Health Organization 1995). In 
addition, we include indicators for currently smoke (1 = Yes, 0 = No), currently drink 
alcohol (1 = Yes, 0 = No), and physical exercise (1= vigorous physical activity or exercise 
three times or more per week, 0 = others).
ANALYTIC APPROACH
We apply cross-lagged models (illustrated in Figure 1), widely used in the analysis of 
longitudinal data, to account for the possibility of reversal causality (Finkel 2004). 
Specifically, we use Wave 1 sexuality to predict Wave 2 cardiovascular risk outcomes, and 
use Wave 1 cardiovascular risks to predict Wave 2 sexuality. In each prediction equation, we 
control for Wave 1 cardiovascular risks, Wave 1 sexuality and all other covariates. We run 
four separate cross-lagged models to assess the status of being sexually active (i.e., had sex 
last year) (Model A), sexual frequency (Model B), physical (Model C) and emotional 
(Model D) dimensions of sexual quality, respectively, in relation to all cardiovascular risks. 
The specific prediction equation varies by the measurement of the endogenous variables. 
Specifically, we estimate multinomial logistic regression models to predict hypertension, 
binary logistic regression models to predict rapid heart rate, general CVD events and being 
sexually active, and ordinal logistic regression models to predict CRP, sexual frequency, 
physical pleasure and emotional satisfaction. Because women and men play different roles in 
a sexual relationship and their CVD risks also differ, we stratify all analyses by gender and 
assess statistical significance of gender differences in the regression coefficients using Z-
Liu et al.
Page 10
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tests (Agresti and Finley 2009). Results from the Z-tests (not shown but available upon 
request) suggested that gender differences in all key findings were statistically significant. 
All models are estimated using MPLUS (Muthén and Muthén 2007).
We use the Full Information Maximum Likelihood (FIML) methods provided by MPLUS to 
handle missing values of all endogenous variables such as CVD risks and sexuality factors. 
The FIML approach maximizes a casewise likelihood function using only those observed 
variables with the assumption of missing at random (Muthén and Muthén 2007). Missing 
values for categorical exogenous covariates are flagged as separate missing categories. Cases 
with missing values (about 1%) on continuous exogenous covariates are replaced with the 
mean.
Correction for Sample Attrition Due to Mortality—Our analysis sample includes 
only respondents who were interviewed in both waves of NSHAP. Sample attrition between 
waves, especially due to mortality, is not random. Therefore, we apply the approach, 
developed by Heckman (1979), to adjust the sample selection biases that are due to selection 
through mortality. See Liu and Waite (2014) for similar applications. This approach consists 
of modeling the probability that a respondent would die between Waves 1 and 2 using 
logistic regression models, conditional on a set of predictors measured at Wave 1. Then, for 
individuals who did not die, cardiovascular risk outcomes are modeled as a function of a set 
of independent variables, including the estimated probabilities of dying. Following this 
Heckman-type correction, estimates of cardiovascular risk should be interpreted as being 
adjusted for factors that may affect that risk as well as the tendency to die.
RESULTS
We start our discussion with descriptive results, shown in Tables 1–2 for men and women 
separately. Clearly, we can see that men are more likely to report having had partnered sex 
last year (70% at Wave 1 and 49% at Wave 2) than are women (39% at Wave 1 and 23% at 
Wave 2). Men also report a higher frequency of sex than do women. Specifically, 25% and 
20% of men in contrast to 11% and 11% of women report that they had sex once a week or 
more in the past year at Wave 1 and Wave 2 respectively. Moreover, men are more likely 
than women to report their sexual relationship as extremely physically pleasurable (36% vs. 
23% at Wave 1, 33% vs. 17% at Wave 2) and extremely emotionally satisfying (37% vs. 
25% at Wave 1, 34% vs. 15% at Wave 2). Tables 1 and 2 also show moderate gender 
differences in cardiovascular risks, but the differences are much smaller than the gender 
differences in the sexuality variables.
Results from Cross-Lagged Models for Men
Next, we move to the results from the cross-lagged models for men. We first discuss the 
results for sexuality predicting later cardiovascular risks (shown in Table 3) followed by the 
results for cardiovascular risks predicting later sexuality (shown in Table 4).
Sexuality Predicting Cardiovascular Risks—From Model A of Table 3 we can see 
that men who were sexually active with a partner at Wave 1 are less likely to be in a higher 
CRP category five years later than men who were sexually inactive (OR = 0.61, p < 0.05), 
Liu et al.
Page 11
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 although sexually active men are not significantly different from sexually inactive men in 
other cardiovascular outcomes.
Results in Model B of Table 3 further suggest that only sexually active men who had sex 
once a month at Wave 1 have significantly lower odds of being in a higher CRP category 
than men who had no sex last year at Wave 1 (OR = 0.43, p < 0.01). Yet, higher frequency of 
sex (i.e., 2–3 times a month or once a week or more) is not related to CRP for men. 
Moreover, as shown in Model B of Table 3, the odds of experiencing CVD events by Wave 2 
for men who had sex once a week or more at Wave 1 are nearly double (OR = 1.90, p < 
0.05) the odds for men who were sexually inactive, although lower frequency of sex (i.e., 2–
3 times a month or once a month) at Wave 1 is not significantly related to CVD events at 
Wave 2 for men.
Furthermore, results in Table 3 also suggest that reporting a sexual relationship extremely 
pleasurable (Model C) and extremely satisfying (Model D) at Wave 1 are both related to 
higher odds of experiencing CVD events by Wave 2 for men. Specifically, men who reported 
that that their sexual relationship was extremely pleasurable have 65% higher odds of 
experiencing CVD events five years later than men who reported it not very physically 
pleasurable; men who reported their sexual relationship extremely satisfying face about 
twice of the odds of experiencing CVD events within the next five years compared to men 
who were not very emotionally satisfied (OR = 2.04, p < 0.05).
Cardiovascular Risks Predicting Sexuality—Table 4 shows the results for the reverse 
causal pathway in which cardiovascular risks predict later sexuality for men. This table 
shows only one significant effect: men who had undiagnosed hypertension at Wave 1 tend to 
report higher sex frequency five years later than men with normal blood pressure initially 
(OR = 1.94, p < 0.05), but other CVD risks at Wave 1 are unrelated to later sexual activity at 
Wave 2 for men.
Results from Cross-Lagged Models for Women
Results from the cross-lagged models for women are shown in Table 5 for sexuality 
predicting cardiovascular risks and in Table 6 for cardiovascular risks predicting sexuality.
Sexuality Predicting Cardiovascular Risks—Results from Table 5 suggest that 
neither the status of having partnered sex (Model A) nor the frequency of sex (Model B) at 
Wave 1 is a significant predictor of women’s cardiovascular risks at Wave 2. However, both 
higher levels of physical pleasure (Model C) and emotional satisfaction (Model D) seem to 
protect women from developing cardiovascular risks, particularly hypertension. Specifically, 
results from Model C of Table 5 suggest that women who assessed their sexual relationship 
as extremely physically pleasurable at Wave 1 have significantly lower odds of both 
undiagnosed (OR = 0.53, p < 0.05) and uncontrolled (OR = 0.42, p < 0.05) hypertension at 
Wave 2 than women who reported not very physically pleasurable. Results from Model D of 
Table 5 suggest that women who reported that they felt extremely satisfied with their sexual 
relationship at Wave 1 have significantly lower odds of uncontrolled hypertension (OR = 
0.44, p < 0.05) at Wave 2 than women who did not feel very emotionally satisfied.
Liu et al.
Page 12
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cardiovascular Risks Predicting Sexuality—Table 6 shows the estimated odds ratios 
of Wave 1 cardiovascular risks predicting Wave 2 sexuality for women. These results suggest 
that women who had uncontrolled hypertension at Wave 1 tend to report both higher 
frequency of sex (Model B) and higher levels of emotional satisfaction (Model D) in their 
sexual relationship at Wave 2 than women whose blood pressure were normal at Wave 1. 
Other cardiovascular risks at Wave 1 are unrelated to sexuality at Wave 2 for women.
DISCUSSION
Although sex is generally viewed as good for one’s health (Brody 2010), the health 
consequences of sex for older adults are less scientifically understood. We conceptualize 
partnered sex within a social relationship framework and argue that partnered sex shapes 
individuals’ life context over time and in turn evokes cardiovascular response. We make a 
further contribution by providing the first population-based evidence of the longitudinal 
association between partnered sexuality and cardiovascular health in later life using a 
nationally representative longitudinal data set. Below, we outline our major findings and 
implications.
His and Her Sex in Later Life
Consistent with previous studies (e.g., Lindau et al. 2007; Lindau and Gavrilova 2010), our 
results suggest that a fairly large proportion of older adults are sexually active, but the 
patterns vary significantly by gender. We find, as have others, that older men are more likely 
to report being sexually active than are older women. But in addition, older men report a 
higher frequency of partnered sex than do older women, and more men than women say that 
they enjoy their sexual relationship, both physically and emotionally. It is likely that gender 
differences in sexual enjoyment lead to gender differences in sexual frequency. Because we 
use self-reported measures of sexuality, it is also possible that men tend to over-report while 
women tend to under-report their sexual activities (Fisher 2012). This may be related to the 
social and cultural pressures of expression of masculinity through sexual activities for men, 
as well as our social conventions that usually suppress women’s openness to discussion of 
sex (Milhausen and Herold 1999). Despite such potential biases due to misreporting by 
gender, the observed gender difference in sexuality in later life is consistent with the long-
observed cultural norms of a “sexual double standard” that encourages men’s sexual 
activities but suppresses women’s (Milhausen and Herold 1999). More importantly, our 
results suggest important gender differences in the linkages between partnered sexuality and 
cardiovascular risk, as we will discuss shortly.
Partnered Sexuality and Cardiovascular Risk in Later Life
Working from a social relationship and life course perspective, we hypothesized that people, 
especially men, who were sexually active with a partner would have lower cardiovascular 
risk than those who were sexually inactive (Hypothesis 1). Consistent with this hypothesis, 
we find that sexually active men have lower levels of CRP five years later than sexually 
inactive men. Yet, we did not find evidence for differences between the sexually active and 
the inactive in other cardiovascular risks for either men or women. More importantly, our 
Liu et al.
Page 13
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 results suggest that the benefits and costs of partnered sexuality highly depend on the nature 
of the sexual relationship, with substantial variation by gender.
Does Sexual Frequency Matter?
We find that men who had sex once a week or more are more likely to experience CVD 
events (e.g., heart attack, heart failure and stroke) in the following five years than men who 
did not have sex in the past year (consistent with Hypothesis 2b), although infrequent sex 
(e.g., once or 2–3 times a month) is not related to CVD risks but instead, even lower risks in 
some measures (e.g., CRP) (consistent with Hypothesis 2a). This suggests that while 
infrequent sex may bring some health benefits, having sex too frequently may be detrimental 
to health, especially for older men. This result is in contrast with the general notion, mostly 
based on clinical or community-based research, that higher frequency of sex as a form of 
physical exercise may uniformly promote health on various dimensions (Brody 2010; 
Ebrahim et al. 2002).
Several factors may explain the difference between our findings and ideas posed by others. 
First, our study sample is nationally representative of a relatively older population in the 
U.S., while most previous studies focus on relatively younger age groups without a 
nationally representative population-based sample (e.g., Ebrahim et al. 2002). It is likely that 
the risks related to high sexual frequency tend to increase at older ages due to physiological 
changes over the aging process. Indeed, some clinical studies suggest that sexual activity 
may trigger sudden cardiovascular events such as myocardial infarction especially among 
people who have a sedentary lifestyle (Cheitlin 2003; Dahabreh and Paulus 2011; Mittleman 
et al. 1993; Muller et al. 1996; Stein 2000), which is more prevalent among older than 
younger adults. At the same time, we want to note that the amount of physical exercise from 
sex may not be enough to affect the cardiovascular system significantly. Future studies 
should test the possibility of lifestyle and age variation using other datasets that include a 
sample with a wider age range. Moreover, our analysis controls for a number of important 
social and health-related covariates often overlooked in previous studies. Indeed, our 
additional analysis without controlling for any covariates (not shown but available upon 
request) reveals a similar finding to previous studies suggesting a negative relationship 
between sexual frequency and risks of CVD for men. However, once we control for all 
covariates, we find that a higher sexual frequency is related to a higher risk of CVD events 
for older men. This suggests that the covariates may have confounded the true relationship 
between sexual frequency and cardiovascular health. For example, men in better health tend 
to have sex more frequently than men in poorer health and they also experience lower CVD 
risks. Without controlling health status as well as other related covariates, estimation of the 
relationship between sexuality and cardiovascular risk may be biased. Interestingly, we did 
not find similar patterns among women. Neither being sexually active nor frequency of sex 
is significantly related to women’s later cardiovascular risks.
A social relationship and life course perspective directs attention to both benefits and costs 
of a sexual relationship for health (Umberson and Montez 2010), and suggests that the 
processes differ for men and women (Fuhrera and Stansfeld 2002). On the one hand, men 
are more likely than women to receive the benefits of the social and psychological resources 
Liu et al.
Page 14
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 provided by an intimate relationship (Erickson 2005; Kalmijn 2003), which may promote 
men’s cardiovascular health more so than women’s. On the other hand, the social norms of 
gender and masculinity may indicate greater demands for men in a sexual relationship, 
which may lead to greater physical and emotional stress and thus poorer health. Our results 
suggest that for men, especially at older ages, the “demands” from a sexual relationship, 
particularly with a high frequency of sex, overweigh the “resources” it provides for health.
The strain and demands from a sexual relationship may be more relevant for men as they get 
older, become increasingly frail and suffer more sexual problems. Because older men have 
more difficulties reaching an orgasm for medical or emotional reasons than do their younger 
counterparts (Levine et al. 2012; Lindau et al. 2007), they may exert themselves to a greater 
degree of exhaustion and create relatively more stress on their cardiovascular system in order 
to achieve a climax (Levine et al. 2012). Moreover, periodically stimulated sympathetic 
nervous system and testosterone may play a synergetic role leading to adverse 
cardiovascular health for men (Curtis and O’Keefe 2002; Xu et al. 2013). Another 
possibility is that due to the gendered social expectations in a sexual relationship and/or sex 
differences in human biology, men are more likely to use medication or supplements to 
improve sexual function (Lindau et al. 2007). Although scientific evidence is still rare, it is 
likely that such sexual medication or supplements may have negative effects on their 
cardiovascular health. Moreover, having quite a high frequency of sex may indicate 
problems of sexual addiction, sexual compulsivity or sexual impulsivity, related to 
psychological states such as anxiety or depression (Bancroft and Vukadinovic 2004), which 
may lead to negative cardiovascular health.
Does Sexual Quality Matter?
A growing body of literature on social relationships points to the importance of relationship 
quality in shaping health outcomes over one’s life, which might be more important than 
whether one is involved in a relationship per se (Liu and Waite 2014; Robles and Kiecolt-
Glaser 2003). Consistent with this view as well as Hypothesis 3, we find that women who 
reported that their sexual relationship was extremely physically pleasurable and/or extremely 
emotionally satisfying tend to have lower risks of hypertension in the following five years 
than women who were not physically or emotionally satisfied. A good quality sexual 
relationship may enhance emotional closeness and intimacy between partners. Previous 
studies suggest that a strong, deep and close relationship is an important source of social and 
emotional support (Wellman and Worley 1990), which may reduce stress and promote 
psychological well-being and, in turn, cardiovascular health. This may be more relevant to 
women than to men because men in all relationships, regardless of the quality, are more 
likely to receive support from their partner than are women (Erickson 2005; Kalmijn 2003); 
while only women in good quality relationships may acquire such benefits from their partner 
(Gallo et al. 2003). Moreover, the female sexual hormone released during orgasm, which is 
more likely to happen when they feel pleasure and satisfaction in the process of sex, may 
also promote women’s health. Future studies should examine the specific social, 
psychological, behavioral and biological mechanisms under which sexual quality affects 
women’s cardiovascular health.
Liu et al.
Page 15
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Surprisingly, better sexual quality seems not to protect men’s cardiovascular health. Indeed, 
our results suggest that men who felt extremely pleasured and extremely satisfied in their 
sexual relationship even have higher risk of experiencing CVD events five years later than 
men who did not feel very pleasured or satisfied in their relationship. These results are 
consistent with our suspicion that older men who reported that they had sex frequently and 
those who reported very high levels of physical and/or emotional satisfaction with sex may 
also use sexual medication or supplements, or have some type of sexual addiction, sexual 
compulsivity or sexual impulsivity. These may damage cardiovascular health directly or lead 
to behaviors that do so.
Reverse Causation
Although we develop a causal framework from which we draw hypotheses on how partnered 
sexuality affects cardiovascular risk, it is also likely that poor cardiovascular health disrupts 
later sexual life (Hypothesis 4). Surprisingly, we find no evidence for this reverse causation. 
Indeed, the only significant reverse effects we find indicate an opposite direction. We find 
that men who had undiagnosed hypertension and women who had uncontrolled hypertension 
tend to report higher frequency of sex and/or higher levels of emotional satisfaction in their 
sexual relationship five years later in comparison to those with normal blood pressure 
initially. Although not well understood yet, one possibility is that reproductive steroids, 
especially testosterone, may increase both sexual behavior/motivation and arterial 
hypertension by stimulating the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (dos Santos, Silva, 
Ribeiro and Stefanon 2014). In addition, recent clinical studies suggest that hypertension per 
se does not predispose men to erection problems (Korhonen et al. 2015). This is especially 
true for undiagnosed or uncontrolled hypertension that is often at an early stage of the 
disease, in which the blood vessels are functionally but not structurally (or permanently) 
constricted (i.e. the vessels are dilatable). Moreover, given that our measures of sexual 
frequency and sexual quality are based on self-reported measures, it is likely that 
hypertensive people have relatively lower expectations for their sex life than others and 
therefore are more likely to overestimate their activity and look on that activity more 
positively than would others. Given the relatively sparse evidence we found, future research 
is clearly warranted to confirm these findings.
Limitations
Several study limitations should be considered. First, although we attempt to tease out the 
possibility of the reciprocal relationships between sexuality and cardiovascular health by 
applying one of the most widely used statistical methods, cross-lagged models, to analyze 
longitudinal panel data, this approach is limited in fully determining causality (Finkel 2004). 
Second, our analyses are based on two waves of panel data with a five-year interval. To 
better understand the causal processes linking partnered sexuality and cardiovascular risk, 
future studies should employ longitudinal data with shorter intervals as well as more waves 
of follow-up. The NSHAP is currently collecting the third wave of data, which will provide 
opportunities to further untangle causality. Third, our study focuses on later life. We want to 
caution readers not to extend the interpretation of the findings to a broader age range. Some 
of the patterns may be different among younger adults. Future studies should examine a 
broader range of ages to understand whether the association between sexual relationships 
Liu et al.
Page 16
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and cardiovascular risk varies across age. Fourth, due to data limitations, our measures for 
CVD risk lack important markers such as low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL). Future research should examine a broader range of measures for CVD 
risk. Fifth, sexual quality is one dimension of overall relationship quality. The enjoyment of 
sex may interact with other dimensions of relationship quality, such as conflict or support, to 
determine overall quality. Future research should examine the role of sexuality in 
relationship quality more generally. Sixth, the relatively small number of significant effects 
identified in this study may indicate Type 1 error by chance. Future studies are clearly 
warranted to further investigate health links with sexuality among older adults. Finally, 
various social, biological, psychological, and behavioral mechanisms underlie the link 
between sexuality and cardiovascular risk. Future studies should seek to identify the precise 
mechanisms and processes through which sexuality affects men and women’s cardiovascular 
health.
CONCLUSION
Despite a large body of evidence pointing to a strong linkage between social relationships 
and health (Umberson and Montez 2010), partnered sexuality, as a fundamental type of 
social relationship, has been relatively ignored. Our understanding of this unique 
relationship is even less advanced among older adults. This is important given that adults 
aged 65 and over account for 13 percent of the U.S. population, with this share projected to 
grow substantially over the next several decades (U.S. Census 2010). In this study, we 
provide some of the first generalizable population-based evidence of linkages between 
partnered sexuality and cardiovascular health in later life using nationally representative 
longitudinal data. We find that for women, partnered sex of good quality seems to promote 
cardiovascular health, specifically reducing the risks of hypertension. Although growing 
evidence suggests that women are especially vulnerable to cardiovascular problems from 
poor relationship quality or marital loss (Liu and Waite 2014; Zhang and Hayward 2006), 
our results show the positive side, with benefits to women’s cardiovascular health from a 
rewarding sexual relationship. Unfortunately, good sexual quality does not protect men’s 
cardiovascular risk. Indeed, for men especially at older ages, although moderate frequency 
of sex may also bring some health benefits, having sex too frequently or extremely high 
levels of physical and/or emotional enjoyment from sex might be a risk factor for 
experiencing CVD events over time. Strikingly, we find that having sex once a week or more 
puts older men at a risk for experiencing CVD events that is almost two times greater than 
older men who are sexually inactive. These findings challenge the assumption that sex 
brings uniform health benefits to everyone (Brody 2010).
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the National Institute on Aging K01 Award K01AG043417 to Hui Liu, the MERIT 
Award R37AG030481 to Linda Waite, and by Grants R01 AG043538, R01 AG033903, and P30 AG012857 from 
the National Institute on Aging, Grant R03 HD078754 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child 
Health and Human Development and the Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research, and Grant R01 
HL073287 from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
Liu et al.
Page 17
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 References
Agresti, Alan; Finley, Barbara. Statistical Methods for the Social Sciences. 4. Prentice Hall; 2009. 
Bancroft, John; Vukadinovic, Zoran. Sexual Addition, Sexual Compulsivity, Sexual Impulsivity, or 
What? Toward a Theoretical Model. Journal of Sex Research. 2004; 41(3):225–34. [PubMed: 
15497051] 
Brody, Stuart. The Relative Health Benefits of Different Sexual Activities. Journal of Sexual Medicine. 
2010; 7(4pt1):1336–61. [PubMed: 20088868] 
Burman B, Margolin G. Analysis of the Association between Marital Relationships and Health 
Problems: An Interactional Perspective. Psychological Bulletin. 1992; 112(1):39–63. [PubMed: 
1529039] 
Butt, Dorcas Susan. The Sexual Response as Exercise. Sports Medicine. 1990; 9(6):330–43. [PubMed: 
2192423] 
Carpenter, Laura M. Studying Sexualities from a Life Course Perspective. In: DeLamater, John; Plante, 
Rebecca F., editors. Handbook of the Sociology of Sexualities. New York: Springer; 2015. 
Carpenter, Laura M.; DeLamater, John, editors. Sex for Life: From Virginity to Viagra, How Sexuality 
Changes Throughout our Lives. New York: New York University Press; 2012. 
Cheitlin, Melvin D. Sexual Activity and Cardiovascular Disease. American Journal of Cardiology. 
2003; 92(9):3–8.
Cohen S. Social Relationships and Health. American Psychologist. 2004; 59(8):676–84. [PubMed: 
15554821] 
Cornwell, Erin York; Waite, Linda J. Social Network Resources and Management of Hypertension. 
Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 2012; 53(2):215–231. [PubMed: 22660826] 
Curtis, Brian M.; O’Keefe, James H, Jr. Autonomic Tone as a Cardiovascular Risk Factor: The 
Dangers of Chronic Fight or Flight. Mayo Clinic Proceedings. 2002; 77(1):45–54. [PubMed: 
11794458] 
Dahabreh, Issa J.; Paulus, Jessica K. Association of Episodic Physical and Sexual Activity with 
Triggering of Acute Cardiac Events Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA. 2011; 305(12):
1225–33. [PubMed: 21427375] 
DeLamater, John. Sexual Expression in Later Life: A Review and Synthesis. The Journal of Sex 
Research. 2012; 49(2–3):125–41. [PubMed: 22380585] 
John, DeLamater; Karraker, Amelia. Sexual Functioning in Older Ddults. Current Psychiatry Reports. 
2009; 11(1):6–11. [PubMed: 19187702] 
DeLamater, John; Sill, Morgan. Sexual Desire in Later Life. The Journal of Sex Research. 2005; 42(2):
138–49. [PubMed: 16123844] 
DeLamater, John; Moorman, Sara M. Sexual Behavior in Later Life. Journal of Aging and Health. 
2007; 19(6): 921–46. [PubMed: 18165289] 
DeLamater, John; Friedrich, William N. Human Sexual Development. The Journal of Sex Research. 
2002; 39(1):10–4. [PubMed: 12476250] 
Dimmeler, Stefanie; Zeiher, Andreas M. Exercise and Cardiovascular Health Get Active to “AKTivate” 
Your Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase. Circulation. 2003; 107(25):3118–20. [PubMed: 
12835404] 
Dogan, Tayfun; Tugut, Nilufer; Golbasi, Zehra. The Relationship between Sexual Quality of Life, 
Happiness, and Satisfaction with Life in Married Turkish Women. Sex Disability. 2013; 31(3):
239–47.
dos Santos, Roger Lyrio; da Silva, Fabrício Bragança; Ribeiro, Rogério Faustino; Stefanon, Ivanita. 
Sex Hormones in the Cardiovascular System. Hormone Molecular Biology and Clinical 
Investigation. 2014; 18(2):89–103. [PubMed: 25390005] 
Ebrahim, Shah; May, Margaret; Ben Shlomo, Y.; McCarron, P.; Frankel, S.; Yarnell, J.; Davey Smith, 
G. Sexual Intercourse and Risk of Ischaemic Stroke and Coronary Heart Disease: The Caerphilly 
Study. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health. 2002; 56(2): 99–102. [PubMed: 
11812807] 
Liu et al.
Page 18
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Ein-Dor, Tsachi; Hirschberger, Gilad. Sexual Healing: Daily Diary Evidence That Sex Relieves Stress 
for Men and Women in Satisfying Relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships. 
2012; 29(1): 126–139.
Elder, Glen H., Jr; O’Rand, Angela M. Adult Lives in a Changing Society. In: Cook, KS.; Fine, GA.; 
House, JS., editors. Sociological Perspectives on Social Psychology. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn 
and Bacon; 1995. p. 452-75.
Erickson, Rebecca J. Why Emotion Work Matters: Sex, Gender, and the Division of Household Labor. 
Journal of Marriage and Family. 2005; 67:337–351.
Everson-Rose, Susan A.; Lewis, Tené T. Psychosocial Factors and Cardiovascular Diseases. Annual 
Review of Public Health. 2005; 26:469–500.
Exton, Michael S.; Bindert, Anne; Kruger, Tillmann; Scheller, Friedmann; Hartmann, Uwe; 
Schedlowski, Manfred. Cardiovascular and Endocrine Alterations after Masturbation-Induced 
Orgasm in Women. Psychosomatic Medicine. 1999; 61(3):280–9. [PubMed: 10367606] 
Finkel, Steven E. Cross-Lagged. In: Lewis-Beck, Michael S.; Bryman, Alan; Liao, Tim Futing, editors. 
The SAGE Encyclopedia of Social Science Research Methods. SAGE Publications, Inc; 2004. 
Fisher, Terri D. Publication of The Society for the Scientific Study of Sexuality. 2012. What Sexual 
Scientists Know About Gender Differences and Similarities in Sexuality. 
Frappier, Julie; Toupin, Isabelle; Levy, Joseph J.; Aubertin-Leheudre, Mylene; Karelis, Antony D. 
Energy Expenditure during Sexual Activity in Young Healthy Couples. PLoS one. 2013; 
8(10):e79342. [PubMed: 24205382] 
Fuhrera, Rebecca; Stansfeld, Stephen A. How Gender affects Patterns of Social Relations and the 
Impact on Health: A comparison of One or Multiple Souces of Support from ‘Close Persons.’. 
Social Science & Medicine. 2002; 54(5):811–25. [PubMed: 11999495] 
Galinsky, Adena M.; Waite, Linda J. Sexual Activity and Psychological Health as Mediators of the 
Relationship Between Physical Health and Marital Quality. Journals of Gerontology: Social 
Sciences. 2014; 69:482–92.
Galinsky, Adena M.; McClintock, Martha K.; Waite, Linda J. Sexuality and Physical Contact in 
National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project Wave 2. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: 
Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 2014; 69(2):S83–S98.
Gallo, Linda C.; Troxel, Wendy M.; Matthews, Karen A.; Kuller, Lewis H. Marital Status and Quality 
in Middle-aged Women: Associations with Levels and Trajectories of Cardiovascular Risk Factors. 
Health Psychology. 2003; 22(5):453–63. [PubMed: 14570528] 
Go, Alan S., et al. on behalf of the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke 
Statistics. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2014 Update: A Report from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2014; 129:e28–292. [PubMed: 24352519] 
Hammack, Phillip L. The Life Course Development of Human Sexual Orientation: An Integrative 
Paradigm. Human Development. 2005; 48:267–90.
Harvey, John; Wenzel, Amy; Sprecher, Susan. Introduction. In: Harvey, John; Wenzel, Amy; Sprecher, 
Susan, editors. The Handbook of Sexuality in Close Relationships. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum; 2004. 
p. 3-6.
Heckman, James J. Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error. Econometrica. 1979; 47(1):153–61.
Iveniuk, James; Cagney, Kathleen A.; O’Muircheartaigh, Colm. Religious Influence on Older 
American’s Sexual Lives: A Nationally Representative Profile. Archives of Sexual Behavior. 2015; 
doi: 10.1007/s10508-015-0534-0
Izzo, Joseph L., Jr; Black, Henry R., editors. Hypertension Primer: The Essentials of High Blood 
Pressure. 3. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003. 
Jaarsma, Tiny; Dracup, Kathleen; Walden, Julie; Stevenson, Lynne Warner. Sexual Function in Patients 
with Advanced Heart Failure. Heart & Lung: The Journal of Acute and Critical Care. 1996; 25(4):
262–70. [PubMed: 8836742] 
Kalmijn, Matthijs. Shared Friendship Networks and the Life Course: An Analysis of Survey Data on 
Married and Cohabiting Couples. Social Networks. 2003; 25:231–249.
Kashdan, Todd B.; Adams, Leah M.; Farmer, Antonina S.; Ferssizidis, Patty; McKnight, Patrick E.; 
Nezlek, John B. Sexual Healing: Daily Diary Investigation of the Benefits of Intimate and 
Liu et al.
Page 19
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Pleasurable Sexual Activity in Socially Anxious Adults. Archives of Sexual Behavior. 2014; 43(7):
1417–1429. [PubMed: 23982567] 
Kiecolt-Glaser, Janice K.; Newton, Tamara L. Marriage and Health: His and Hers. Psychological 
Bulletin. 2001; 127(4): 472–503. [PubMed: 11439708] 
Kinsey, Alfred Charles; Pomeroy, Wardell Baxter; Martin, Clyde Eugene. Sexual Behavior in the 
Human Male. Bloomington, IL: Indiana University Press; 1998. 
Korhonen PE, Ettala O, Kautiainen H, Kantola I. Factors Modifying the Effect of Blood Pressure on 
Erectile Function. Journal of Hypertension. 2015; 33(5):975–980. [PubMed: 25668346] 
Kruger, Tillmann; Exton, Michael S.; Pawlak, Cornelius; von zur Muhlen, Alexander; Hartmann, Uwe; 
Schedlowski, Manfred. Neuroendocrine and Cardiovascular Response to Sexual Arousal and 
Orgasm in Men. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1998; 23(4):401–411. [PubMed: 9695139] 
Lakatta, Edward G.; Levy, Daniel. Arterial and Cardiac Aging: Major Shareholders in Cardiovascular 
Disease Enterprises Part I: Aging Arteries: A “Set Up” for Vascular Disease. Circulation. 2003; 
107(1):139–46. [PubMed: 12515756] 
Laumann, Edward O.; Paik, Anthony; Glasser, Dale B.; Kang, Joeng-Han; Wang, Tianfu; Levinson, 
Bernard; Moreira, Edwon D.; Nicolosi, Alfredo; Gingell, Clive. A Cross-National Study pf 
Subjective Sexual Well-Being Among Older Women and Men: Findings from the Global Study of 
Sexual Attitudes and Behaviors. Archives of Sexual Behavior. 2006; 35(2):145–61. [PubMed: 
16752118] 
Laumann, Edward O.; Das, Aniruddha; Waite, Linda J. Sexual Dysfunction among Older Adults: 
Prevalence and Risk Factors from a Nationally Representative U.S. Probability Sample of Men and 
Women 57 to 85 Years of Age. Journal of Sexual Medicine. 2008; 5:2300–2311. [PubMed: 
18702640] 
Lawrance, Kelli-an; Sandra Byers, E. Development of the Interpersonal Exchange Model of Sexual 
Satisfaction in Long Term Relationships. Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality. 1992; 1(3):123–8.
Levin, Roy J. Sexual Activity, Health and Well-Being – The Beneficial Roles of Coitus and 
Masturbation. Sexual and Relationship Therapy. 2007; 22(1):135–48.
Levine, Glenn N., et al. on behalf of the American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology 
Council on Cardiovascular Nursing Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and 
Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research. Sexual Activity and Cardiovascular Disease: 
A Scientific Statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2012; 125:1058–72. 
[PubMed: 22267844] 
Lindau, Stacy Tessler; Gavrilova, Natalia. Sex, Health, and Years of Sexually Active Life Gained Due 
to Good Health: Evidence from Two US Population Based Cross Sectional Surveys of Ageing. 
British Medical Journal. 2010; 340:c810. [PubMed: 20215365] 
Lindau, Stacy Tessler; Philip Schumm, L.; Laumann, Edward O.; Levinson, Wendy; 
O’Muircheartaigh, Colm A.; Waite, Linda J. A Study of Sexuality and Health among Older Adults 
in the United States. The New England Journal of Medicine. 2007; 357(8):762–74. [PubMed: 
17715410] 
Liu, Hui; Umberson, Debra. The Times They Are A Changin’: Marital Status and Health Differentials 
From 1972 to 2003. Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 2008; 49(3):239–53. [PubMed: 
18771061] 
Liu, Hui; Waite, Linda. Bad Marriage, Broken Heart? Age and Gender Differences in the Link 
between Marital Quality and Cardiovascular Risks among Older Adults. Journal of Health and 
Social Behavior. 2014; 55(4):403–423. [PubMed: 25413802] 
Magon, Navneet; Kalra, Sanjay. The Orgasmic History of Oxytocin: Love, Lust, and Labor. Indian 
Journal of Endocrinology & Metabolism. 2011; 15(Suppl 3):S156–S161. [PubMed: 22029018] 
Masters, William H.; Johnson, Virginia E. Human Sexual Response. Toronto; New York: Bantam 
Books; 1966. 
McEwen, Bruce S.; Stellar, Eliot. Stress and the Individual: Mechanisms Leading to Disease. Archives 
of Internal Medicine. 1993; 153(18):2093–101. [PubMed: 8379800] 
Milhausen, Robin R.; Herold, Edward S. Does the Sexual Double Standard Still Exist? Perceptions of 
University Women. The Journal of Sex Research. 1999; 36(4): 361–368.
Liu et al.
Page 20
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mittleman, Murray A.; Maclure, Malcolm; Tofler, Geoffrey H.; Sherwood, Jane B.; Goldberg, Robert 
J.; Muller, James E. for the Determinants of Myocardial Infarction Onset Study Investigators. 
Triggering of Acute Myocardial Infarction by Heavy Physical Exertion -- Protection against 
Triggering by Regular Exertion. New England Journal of Medicine. 1993; 329(23):1677–83. 
[PubMed: 8232456] 
Mozzafarian, Dariush; Benjamin, Emelia J.; Go, Alan S., et al. Heart Disease and Stroke 
Statistics-2015 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015; 131: 
e29–322. [PubMed: 25520374] 
Muller, James E.; Mittleman, Murray A.; Maclure, Malcolm; Sherwood, Jane B.; Tofler, Geoffrey H. 
Triggering Myocardial Infarction by Sexual Activity: Low Absolute Risk and Prevention by 
Regular Physical Exertion. The Journal of the American Medical Association. 1996; 275(18):
1405–9. [PubMed: 8618365] 
Muthén, L.; Muthén, B. Mplus User’s Guide. 3. Los Angeles: Authors; 2007. 
Myers, Jonathan. Exercise and Cardiovascular Health. Circulation. 2003; 107(1):e2–e5. [PubMed: 
12515760] 
Nallanathan, Bhairavi; McDade, Thomas; Williams, Sharon; Lindau, Stacy Tessler. NORC and the 
University of Chicago. 2008. Dried Blood Spot Measurement of C-reactive Protein in Wave I of 
the National Social Life, Health & Aging Project (NSHAP). 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on 
Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. Bethesda, MD: U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services; 2003. 
Pearson, Thomas A.; Mensah, George A.; Wayne Alexander, R.; Anderson, Jeffrey L.; Cannon, 
Richard O., III; Criqui, Michael; Fadl, Yazid Y.; Fortmann, Stephen P.; Hong, Yuling; Myers, Gary 
L.; Rifai, Nader; Smith, Sidney C., Jr; Taubert, Kathryn; Tracy, Russell P.; Vinicor, Frank. Markers 
of Inflammation and Cardiovascular Disease: Application to Clinical and Public Health Practice: 
A Statement for Healthcare Professionals from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2003; 107(3):499–511. [PubMed: 12551878] 
Radloff, Lenore Sawyer. The CES-D Scale: A Self-Report Depression Scale for Research in the 
General Population. Applied Psychological Measurement. 1977; 1(3):385–401.
Ridker, Paul M. Clinical Application of C-reactive Protein for Cardiovascular Disease Detection and 
Prevention. Circulation. 2003; 107(3):363–69. [PubMed: 12551853] 
Safi, Arshad M.; Rachko, Maurice; Yeshou, Dima; Stein, Rishard A. Sexual Activity as a Trigger for a 
Ventriclar Tachycardia in a Patient with Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator. Archives of Sexual 
Behavior. 2002; 31(3):295–9. [PubMed: 12049025] 
Salmon, Peter. Effects of Physical Exercise on Anxiety, Depression, and Sensitivity to Stress: A 
Unifying Theory. Clinical Psychology Review. 2001; 21(1):33–61. [PubMed: 11148895] 
Satcher, David. The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Promote Sexual Health and Responsible 
Sexual Behavior. American Journal of Health Education. 2001; 32(6):356–368.
Schnarch, David M. Constructing the Sexual Crucible: An Integration of Sexual and Marital Therapy. 
New York: Norton; 1991. 
Schwartz, Amy R.; Gerin, William; Davidson, Karina W.; Pickering, Thomas G.; Brosschot, Jos F.; 
Thayer, Julian F.; Christenfeld, Nicholas; Linden, Wolfgang. Toward a Causal Model of 
Cardiovascular Responses to Stress and the Development of Cardiovascular Disease. 
Psychosomatic Medicine. 2003; 65(1): 22–35. [PubMed: 12554813] 
Schwarz ER, Rodriguez J. Sex and the Heart. International Journal of Impotence Research. 2005; 
17:S4–S6. [PubMed: 16391542] 
Smith, George Davey; Frankel, Stephen; Yarnell, John. Sex and Death: Are they Related? Findings 
from the Caerphilly Cohort Study. BMJ. 1997; 315(7123):1641–4. [PubMed: 9448525] 
Susan, Sprecher. Sexual Satisfaction in Premarital Relationships: Associations with Satisfaction, Love, 
Commitment, and Stability. Journal of Sex Research. 2002; 39(3):190–6. [PubMed: 12476266] 
Stein, Richard A. Cardiovascular Response to Sexual Activity. The American Journal of Cardiology. 
2000; 86(2):27–9.
Liu et al.
Page 21
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Stroope, Samuel; McFarland, Michael J.; Uecker, Jeremy E. Marital Characteristics and the Sexual 
Relationships of U.S. Older Adults: An Analysis of National Social Life, Health, and Aging 
Project Data. Archives of Sexual Behavior. 2015; 44(1): 233–247. [PubMed: 25267576] 
Taylor, Shelley E.; Klein, Laura Cousino; Lewis, Brian P.; Gruenewald, Tara L.; Gurung, Regan AR.; 
Updegraff, John A. Biobehavioral Responses to Stress in Females: Tend-and-Befriend, not Fight-
or-Flight. Psychological Review. 2000; 107(3):411–29. [PubMed: 10941275] 
Umberson, Debra; Montez, Jennifer Karas. Social Relationships and Health: A Flashpoint for Health 
Policy. Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 2010; 51(1 suppl):S54–S66. [PubMed: 20943583] 
Waite, Linda J.; Charme, Cameron. Sexuality over the Lifecourse. In: Wright, J., editor. 
Heterosexuality. International Encyclopedia for the Behavioral and Social Sciences. 2. Vol. 21. 
Elsevier Ltd; 2015. p. 840-5.
Waite, Linda J.; Laumann, Edward O.; Levinson, Wendy; Lindau, Stacy Tessler; O’Muircheartaigh, 
Colm A. National Social Life, Health, and Aging Project (NSHAP): Wave 1. Ann Arbor, MI: 
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]; 2014. ICPSR20541-v6
Waite, Linda J.; Joyner, Kara. Emotional Satisfaction and Physical Pleasure in Sexual Unions: Time 
Horizon, Sexual Behavior and Sexual Exclusivity. Journal of Marriage and the Family. 2001; 
63(1):247–64.
Waite, Linda J.; Cagney, Kathleen; Dale, William; Huang, Elbert; Laumann, Edward O.; McClintock, 
Martha; O’Muircheartaigh, Colm A.; Phillip Schumm, L.; Cornwell, Benjamin. National Social 
Life, Health, and Aging Project (NSHAP): Wave 2 and Partner Data Collection. Ann Arbor, MI: 
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor]; 2014. ICPSR34921-v1
Walen, Heather R.; Lachman, Margie E. Social Support and Strain from Partner, Family, and Friends: 
Costs and Benefits for Men and Women in Adulthood. Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships. 2000; 17(1):5–30.
Wellman, Barry; Wortley, Scot. Different Strokes from Different Folks: Community Ties and Social 
Support. American Journal of Sociology. 1990; 96(3):558–88.
World Health Organization. Physical Status: The Use and Interpretation of Anthropometry. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 1995. WHO Technical Report Series 854
Xu, Lin; Freeman, Guy; Cowling, Benjamin J.; Mary Schooling, C. Testosterone Therapy and 
Cardiovascular Events among Men: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Placebo-controlled 
Randomized Trials. BMC Medicine. 2013; 11(1):108. [PubMed: 23597181] 
Zhang, Zhenmei; Hayward, Mark D. Gender, the Marital Life Course, and Cardiovascular Health in 
Late Midlife. Journal of Marriage and Family. 2006; 68(3):639–657.
Liu et al.
Page 22
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Structural Path Diagram of Cross-lagged Model for Sexuality and Cardiovascular Risks.
Note: Bolded paths are the focus of this study with results reported in tables.
Liu et al.
Page 23
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 24
Table 1
Weighted Descriptive Statistics for Men (N=1,046)
%/mean(SD)
%/mean(SD)
Sexuality Variables at Wave 1
Sexuality Variables at Wave 2
Respondent had sex last year
Respondent had sex last year
 No (ref)
30.5
 No (ref)
51.3
 Yes
69.5
 Yes
48.7
Sex frequency in past year
Sex frequency in past year
 Never (ref)
30.5
 Never (ref)
40.0
 Once a month
22.0
 Once a month
19.5
 2–3 times a month
20.0
 2–3 times a month
18.3
 Once a week or more
24.9
 Once a week or more
19.8
 Missing
2.6
 Missing
2.4
Physical pleasure of relationship
Physical pleasure of relationship
 None/slightly/moderately pleasurable (ref)
19.2
 None/slightly/moderately pleasurable (ref)
17.3
 Very pleasurable
41.3
 Very pleasurable
34.6
 Extremely pleasurable
35.7
 Extremely pleasurable
33.4
 Missing
3.8
 Missing
14.7
Emotional satisfaction of relationship
Emotional satisfaction of relationship
 None/slightly/moderately satisfying (ref)
18.6
 None/slightly/moderately satisfying (ref)
16.4
 Very satisfied
42.7
 Very satisfied
36.2
 Extremely satisfied
36.7
 Extremely satisfied
34.1
 Missing
2.0
 Missing
13.3
Cardiovascular Risk Outcomes at Wave 1
Cardiovascular Risk Outcomes at Wave 2
Hypertension
Hypertension
 Normal (ref)
30.0
 Normal (ref)
23.9
 Controlled hypertension
20.3
 Controlled hypertension
22.5
 Undiagnosed hypertension
16.6
 Undiagnosed hypertension
16.1
 Uncontrolled hypertension
31.6
 Uncontrolled hypertension
32.9
 Missing
1.5
 Missing
4.6
Rapid heart rate
Rapid heart rate
 No (ref)
80.4
 No (ref)
75.8
 Yes
17.8
 Yes
19.0
 Missing
1.8
 Missing
5.2
CRP level
CRP level
 ≤3 (ref)
52.6
 ≤3 (ref)
60.7
 >3 and ≤10
12.9
 >3 and ≤10
22.8
 >10
1.8
 >10
7.1
 Missing
32.7
 Missing
9.4
CVD events
CVD events
 No (ref)
79.3
 No (ref)
77.9
 Yes
20.3
 Yes
21.4
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 25
%/mean(SD)
%/mean(SD)
 Missing
0.4
 Missing
0.7
Covariates at Wave 1
Race-ethnicity
BMI
 Non-Hispanic white (ref)
80.8
 Normal or underweight (ref)
19.4
 Non-Hispanic black
8.6
 Overweight
38.6
 Hispanic
7.1
 Obesity
33.3
 Others
3.5
 Morbidly obese
3.3
Education
 Missing
5.4
 Less than high school (ref)
15.4
Smoke
 High school
22.7
 No (ref)
84.0
 Some college
27.3
 Yes
16.0
 College graduate
34.6
Drink
Relative family income
 No (ref)
31.8
 Below average (ref)
20.9
 Yes
68.2
 Average
31.9
Sexual hormones use
 Above average
30.1
 No (ref)
97.7
 Missing
17.1
 Yes
2.3
Marital status
Antihypertensive medication use
 Not married (ref)
19.5
 No (ref)
4.4
 Married
80.5
 Yes
55.6
Physical activity
Self-rated health
2.4(1.0)
 < 3 times per week (ref)
28.7
Psychological distress
4.5(4.5)
 >= 3 times per week
71.3
Age
66.7(7.5)
Probability of death at Wave 2
0.1(0.1)
ref indicates the reference category.
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 26
Table 2
Weighted Descriptive Statistics for Women (N=1,158)
%/mean(SD)
%/mean(SD)
Sexual Variables at Wave 1
Sexual Variables at Wave 2
Respondent had sex last year
Respondent had sex last year
 No (ref)
60.5
 No (ref)
77.0
 Yes
39.3
 Yes
22.9
 Missing
0.2
 Missing
0.1
Sex frequency in past year
Sex frequency in past year
 Never (ref)
60.5
 Never (ref)
67.2
 Once a month
13.6
 Once a month
9.7
 2–3 times a month
11.7
 2–3 times a month
11.2
 Once a week or more
11.4
 Once a week or more
10.8
 Missing
2.8
 Missing
1.1
Physical pleasure of relationship
Physical pleasure of relationship
 None/slightly/moderately pleasurable (ref)
36.6
 None/slightly/moderately pleasurable (ref)
19.4
 Very pleasurable
35.1
 Very pleasurable
17.7
 Extremely pleasurable
22.5
 Extremely pleasurable
16.5
 Missing
5.8
 Missing
46.4
Emotional satisfaction of relationship
Emotional satisfaction of relationship
 None/slightly/moderately satisfying (ref)
36.3
 None/slightly/moderately satisfying (ref)
18.4
 Very satisfied
33.8
 Very satisfied
21.1
 Extremely satisfied
24.8
 Extremely satisfied
14.9
 Missing
5.1
 Missing
45.6
Cardiovascular Risk Outcomes at Wave 1
Cardiovascular Risk Outcomes at Wave 2
Hypertension
Hypertension
 Normal (ref)
27.6
 Normal (ref)
23.1
 Controlled hypertension
21.8
 Controlled hypertension
24.4
 Undiagnosed hypertension
16.9
 Undiagnosed hypertension
16.5
 Uncontrolled hypertension
31.8
 Uncontrolled hypertension
32.6
 Missing
1.9
 Missing
3.4
Rapid heart rate
Rapid heart rate
 No (ref)
76.7
 No (ref)
74.2
 Yes
21.4
 Yes
21.6
 Missing
1.9
 Missing
4.2
CRP level
CRP level
 ≤3 (ref)
44.9
 ≤3 (ref)
51.1
 >3 and ≤10
17.1
 >3 and ≤10
31.3
 >10
3.3
 >10
8.9
 Missing
34.7
 Missing
8.7
CVD events
CVD events
 No (ref)
86.5
 No (ref)
84.7
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 27
%/mean(SD)
%/mean(SD)
 Yes
13.1
 Yes
14.6
 Missing
0.4
 Missing
0.7
Covariates at Wave 1
Race-ethnicity
BMI
 Non-Hispanic white (ref)
80.8
 Normal or underweight (ref)
24.7
 Non-Hispanic black
10.4
 Overweight
33.3
 Hispanic
6.5
 Obesity
30.2
 Others
2.3
 Morbidly obese
6.2
Education
 Missing
5.6
 Less than high school (ref)
17.8
Smoke
 High school
27.8
 No (ref)
87.2
 Some college
35.0
 Yes
12.8
 College graduate
19.4
Drink
Relative family income
 No (ref)
47.5
 Below average (ref)
29.5
 Yes
52.5
 Average
35.7
Sexual hormones use
 Above average
19.1
 No (ref)
87.5
 Missing
15.7
 Yes
12.5
Marital status
Antihypertensive medication use
 Not married (ref)
47.1
 No (ref)
41.4
 Married
52.9
 Yes
58.6
Physical activity
Self-rated health
2.4(1.0)
 < 3 times per week (ref)
38.6
Psychological distress
5.4(5.1)
 >= 3 times per week
61.4
Age
68.0(7.5)
Probability of death at Wave 2
0.1(0.1)
ref indicates the reference category.
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 28
Table 3
Estimated Odds Ratios of Wave 1 Sexuality Predicting Wave 2 Cardiovascular Risks from Cross-Lagged Models for Men (N=1,046)
Hypertension (multinomial logit)
Rapid heart 
rate (binary 
logit)
High CRP 
(ordinal logit)
CVD events 
(binary logit)
Controlled v.s. normal
Undiagnosed v.s. normal
Uncontrolled v.s. normal
Model A: Sexually Active (ref: no)
 Had sex last year
1.04
1.29
0.96
1.19
0.61*
1.18
Model B: Sex frequency (ref: none)
 Once a month
1.48
1.80
1.66
0.62
0.43**
1.11
 2–3 times a month
0.91
1.57
0.85
1.00
0.73
1.37
 Once a week or more
1.11
1.02
0.83
1.42
0.66
1.90*
Model C: Physical pleasure (ref: not very 
pleasurable)
 Very pleasurable
1.44
1.65
1.46
1.07
0.85
1.32
 Extremely pleasurable
1.09
1.11
1.39
1.23
0.72
1.65*
Model D: Emotional satisfaction (ref: not very 
satisfying)
 Very satisfying
0.64
0.69
0.78
0.78
0.83
1.33
 Extremely satisfying
0.59
0.67
0.68
0.97
0.73
2.04*
Two-tailed tests:
***p<0.001,
**p<0.01,
*p<0.05. In all models, we control for age, race-ethnicity, marital status, education, relative family income, self-rated physical health, psychological distress, smoking, drinking, BMI, physical activity, 
antihypertensive medication use, and sexual hormones use (all measured at Wave 1) as well as probability of death at W2. Cardiovascular risks and sexuality at W1 are also controlled.
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 29
Table 4
Estimated Odds Ratios of Wave 1 Cardiovascular Risks Predicting Wave 2 Sexuality from Cross-Lagged Models for Men (N=1,046)
Model A Sexually Active (binary logit)
Model B Sex frequency (ordinal logit)
Model C Physical pleasure (ordinal logit)
Model D Emotional satisfaction (ordinal 
logit)
Hypertension (ref: normal)
 Controlled
0.91
1.04
0.80
0.72
 Undiagnosed
0.68
1.94*
1.43
1.09
 Uncontrolled
1.20
0.92
0.81
0.86
Rapid heart rate (ref: no)
 Yes
0.68
1.27
1.51
1.20
CRP (ref: <3)
 >3 and ≤10
0.94
0.98
0.92
0.69
 >10
1.61
0.95
0.76
0.83
CVD events (ref: no)
 Yes
1.00
1.13
1.34
0.96
Two-tailed tests:
***p<0.001,
**p<0.01,
*p<0.05. In all models, we control for age, race-ethnicity, marital status, education, relative family income, self-rated physical health, psychological distress, smoking, drinking, BMI, physical activity, 
antihypertensive medication use, and sexual hormones use (all measured at Wave 1) as well as probability of death at W2. Cardiovascular risks and sexuality at W1 are also controlled.
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 30
Table 5
Estimated Odds Ratios of Wave 1 Sexuality Predicting Wave 2 Cardiovascular Risks from Cross-Lagged Models for Women (N=1,158)
Hypertension (multinomial logit)
Rapid heart rate 
(binary logit)
High CRP 
(ordinal logit)
CVD events 
(binary logit)
Controlled v.s. normal
Undiagnosed v.s. normal
Uncontrolled v.s. normal
Model A: Sexually Active (ref: no)
 Had sex last year
1.20
1.28
1.22
0.86
0.91
1.60
Model B: Sex frequency (ref: none)
 Once a month
0.98
0.86
0.74
0.63
0.90
1.91
 2–3 times a month
2.01
1.17
1.78
1.51
1.18
1.23
 Once a week or more
2.02
1.82
1.58
0.93
1.48
1.16
Model C: Physical pleasure (ref: not very 
pleasurable)
 Very pleasurable
1.70
1.00
1.13
0.68
1.07
1.17
 Extremely pleasurable
0.86
0.53*
0.42*
1.08
0.88
0.71
Model D: Emotional satisfaction (ref: not very 
satisfying)
 Very satisfying
1.09
0.97
0.77
1.14
0.84
1.34
 Extremely satisfying
0.79
0.71
0.44**
1.24
0.70
1.14
Two-tailed tests:
***p<0.001,
**p<0.01,
*p<0.05. In all models, we control for age, race-ethnicity, marital status, education, relative family income, self-rated physical health, psychological distress, smoking, drinking, BMI, physical activity, 
antihypertensive medication use, and sexual hormones use (all measured at Wave 1) as well as probability of death at W2. Cardiovascular risks and sexuality at W1 are also controlled.
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Liu et al.
Page 31
Table 6
Estimated Odds Ratios of Wave 1 Cardiovascular Risks Predicting Wave 2 Sexuality from Cross-Lagged Models for Women (N=1,158)
Model A Sexually Active (binary logit)
Model B Sex frequency (ordinal logit)
Model C Physical pleasure (ordinal logit)
Model D Emotional satisfaction (ordinal 
logit)
Hypertension (ref: normal)
 Controlled
0.54
1.24
1.65
1.30
 Undiagnosed
0.98
0.89
0.95
1.40
 Uncontrolled
0.53
2.01*
1.73
1.92*
Rapid heart rate (ref: no)
 Yes
0.98
0.83
1.06
1.21
CRP (ref: <3)
 >3 and ≤10
1.07
0.86
0.83
0.91
 >10
0.69
1.98
1.06
1.51
CVD events (ref: no)
 Yes
0.93
0.78
0.90
0.79
Two-tailed tests:
***p<0.001,
**p<0.01,
*p<0.05. In all models, we control for age, race-ethnicity, marital status, education, relative family income, self-rated physical health, psychological distress, smoking, drinking, BMI, physical activity, 
antihypertensive medication use, and sexual hormones use (all measured at Wave 1) as well as probability of death at W2. Cardiovascular risks and sexuality at W1 are also controlled.
J Health Soc Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 06.
