 C A N C E R
Copyright © 2017
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim
to original U.S.
Government Works
Mechanoresponsive stem cells to target cancer
metastases through biophysical cues
Linan Liu,1,2,3,4,5,6* Shirley X. Zhang,1,2,3,4,5,6* Wenbin Liao,1,2,3,4,5,6 Henry P. Farhoodi,1,2,3,4,5,6
Chi W. Wong,1,2,3,4,5,6 Claire C. Chen,1,2,3,4,5,6 Aude I. Ségaliny,1,2,3,4,5,6 Jenu V. Chacko,5
Lily P. Nguyen,1,2,3,4,5,6 Mengrou Lu,1,2,3,4,5,6 George Polovin,1,2,3,4,5,6 Egest J. Pone,1,2,3,4,5,6
Timothy L. Downing,1,5 Devon A. Lawson,1,3,7 Michelle A. Digman,5,8,9 Weian Zhao1,2,3,4,5,6†
Despite decades of effort, little progress has been made to improve the treatment of cancer metastases. To leverage
the central role of the mechanoenvironment incancermetastasis,we present amechanoresponsive cell system (MRCS)
to selectively identify and treat cancer metastases by targeting the specific biophysical cues in the tumor niche in vivo.
Our MRCS uses mechanosensitive promoter–driven mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)–based vectors, which selectively
home to and target cancer metastases in response to specific mechanical cues to deliver therapeutics to effectively
kill cancer cells, as demonstrated in a metastatic breast cancer mouse model. Our data suggest a strong correlation
between collagen cross-linking and increased tissue stiffness at the metastatic sites, where our MRCS is specifically
activated by the specific cancer–associated mechano-cues. MRCS has markedly reduced deleterious effects compared
to MSCs constitutively expressing therapeutics. MRCS indicates that biophysical cues, specifically matrix stiffness, are
appealing targets for cancer treatment due to their long persistence in the body (measured in years), making them
refractory to the development of resistance to treatment. Our MRCS can serve as a platform for future diagnostics and
therapies targeting aberrant tissue stiffness in conditions such as cancer and fibrotic diseases, and it should help to
elucidate mechanobiology and reveal what cells “feel” in the microenvironment in vivo.
INTRODUCTION
Cancer metastases account for more than 90% of cancer deaths. How-
ever, there are currently no effective and selective treatments that di-
rectly target metastatic cancer. In particular, about 20 to 30% of
women worldwide will develop invasive breast cancer during their
lifetime, leading to more than 500,000 deaths a year due to metastasis
from the breast to other organs (1, 2), with a median survival of only 2
to 3 years (3, 4). Surgical resection of widespread metastases is generally
not feasible, whereas various classes of chemotherapeutic drugs are in-
effective at treating disseminated cancer and often have severe side
effects. Current therapy for metastatic breast cancer therefore focuses
on prolonging survival and providing palliative care (1, 4–6). In addi-
tion, tumors can develop resistance to many existing drugs through var-
ious mechanisms that are, in part, due to cancer heterogeneity (1, 7).
Cells constantly interact with their surrounding niche, which in-
cludes an array of complex biochemical and biophysical signals from
the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). Although not appreciated
historically, it has recently become evident that the physical and
mechanical properties of cellular microenvironments (the so-called
“mechano-niche”) regulate essential cell functions (8–12). Important
roles for matrix stiffness in driving breast cancer metastasis have been
elucidated (13, 14). Specifically, increased matrix stiffness, which is pri-
marily driven by increased collagen deposition and cross-linking by lysyl
oxidase (LOX) proteins, promotes breast cancer migration, invasion,
cell plasticity, and eventual metastasis, primarily through regulation of
integrin signaling (15). LOX accumulation spatially correlates with the
presence of metastases in both mouse models of metastasis and human
patients (13, 16). In mouse models of breast cancer metastasis, secretion
of LOX by the primary breast tumor stimulates collagen cross-linking in
discrete areas of the lung that promote formation of metastases (16–20).
Deposition of LOX at the metastatic niche correlates with both collagen
linearization and formation of collagen-collagen covalent bonds in the
lung parenchyma, both of which markedly increase matrix stiffness
(15). Therefore, we reasoned that the distinctive mechanical properties
of the metastatic niche might offer a viable target for the development of
diagnostics and therapeutics specifically targeting metastases.
We hypothesized that a cell-based system, specifically mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs), can be used for such an approach to generate a
mechanoresponsive cell system (MRCS) that responds specifically to
mechanoenvironmental cues to target breast cancer metastases (fig. S1).
MSCs are multipotent cells that can be derived from multiple adult tis-
sues, including bone marrow and fat (21, 22). MSCs are the basis for the
first approved stem cell treatment in humans outside of bone marrow
transplant (Prochymal, Osiris Therapeutics) and for more than 400
ongoing trials listed on ClinicalTrials.gov with widely demonstrated
safety (23, 24). Systemically infused MSCs preferentially home to and
integrate with tumors in vivo, including both primary breast tumors
and lung metastases (25, 26). Mounting evidence now suggests that
MSCs have leukocyte-like, active homing mechanisms for tumor tro-
pism involving a variety of adhesion molecules and tumor-derived cy-
tokines, chemokines, and growth factors (27). This selective and active
homing ability makes MSCs an appealing vector for localized delivery of
therapeutics in cancer treatment (25, 26).
Tissue mechanical properties regulate MSC fate: Tissue and matrix
stiffness is sufficient to drive expression of genes involved in MSC
differentiation (28–30). Specifically, soft matrices, similar to the brain
1Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Research Center, 845 Health Sciences Road, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. 2Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. 3Chao Family Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. 4Edwards Life
Sciences Center for Advanced Cardiovascular Technology, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. 5Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. 6Department of Biological Chemistry, Univer-
sity of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. 7Department of Physiology and Bio-
physics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. 8Laboratory for
Fluorescence Dynamics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. 9Centre
for Bioactive Discovery in Health and Ageing, School of Science and Technology, Uni-
versity of New England, Armidale, New South Wales 2351, Australia.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: weianz@uci.edu
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
1 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (Young’s modulus of less than 1 kPa), direct MSCs into a neurogenic
lineage, whereas stiffer matrices (5 to 75 kPa), similar to muscle and
bone, direct them into myogenic and osteogenic lineages through integrin-
and focal adhesion–dependent mechanisms (28). The range of stiffness
to which MSCs respond encompasses those found in normal breast and
lung tissues (less than 1 kPa), as well as invasive cancers and metastases
(10- to 15-fold higher stiffness) (31). MSC differentiation is inherently a
transcriptional program, which allows us to use promoters regulating
genes involved in MSC mechanotransduction/differentiation cascades
to drive expression of downstream reporters or therapeutics (28).
In particular, Yes-associated protein (YAP)/transcriptional coactiva-
tor with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ) have previously been reported as
sensors and mediators of mechanical cues via, for instance, the cyto-
skeleton and Rho guanosine triphosphatase (32, 33). On soft substrates
in vitro (<1 kPa), YAP remains inactivated in the cytoplasm, but on stiff
substrates in vitro (>10 kPa), YAP localizes to the nucleus and becomes
activated as a transcriptional factor (32–34). YAP/TAZ have greater nu-
clear accumulation in samples from breast cancer patients associated
with enhanced desmoplasia (35). YAP/TAZ have also been reported
to be key upstream factors that regulate lineage-specific transcription
factors (including RUNX2, an osteogenic marker) and drive MSC dif-
ferentiation, including osteogenesis (36).
In light of the tight correlation between tissue stiffness, breast cancer
metastasis, and mechanotransduction-mediated MSC differentiation,
we have developed an MRCS to directly target the mechanoenviron-
mental cues of breast cancer metastases for specific delivery of an anti-
tumor agent, cytosine deaminase (CD), which locally activates the
prodrug 5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) to kill cancer (fig. S1). Our study dem-
onstrates that the MRCS, which is engineered to be inducible by bio-
physical and mechanical cues, specifically responds to matrix stiffness
in vitro and can selectively target and kill cancer metastases with
minimal side effects in vivo.
RESULTS
MRCS and in vitro validation
We have established an MRCS using a YAP/TAZ stiffness-sensing
promoter. When activated, YAP/TAZ can drive the expression of
downstream reporters such as enhanced green fluorescent protein
(eGFP) (MRCS-eGFP) for in vitro imaging, firefly luciferase (MRCS-
Luc) for later in vivo imaging, or antitumor agents (MRCS-CD) as
cancer treatment (Fig. 1A and fig. S2). In effect, YAP/TAZ serves as
an on/off switch for the MRCS gene expression triggered by the sub-
strate stiffness in our study. For this text, cells that constitutively express
a gene, such as CD-MSC or Luc-MSC, will have the gene being
expressed first in the nomenclature. For MRCS cells such as MRCS-
CD or MRCS-eGFP, MRCS will come first in the name to indicate that
it is the engineered stiffness-sensing promoter system that is driving the
expression of the downstream gene.
To validate the selective activation of our MRCS in response to stiff-
ness, we seeded MRCS-eGFP on tunable polyacrylamide hydrogels with
various stiffness (~1, ~10, and ~40 kPa) (28, 32). As expected, on soft
hydrogel (~1 kPa), YAP remained in the cytoplasm, and no eGFP signal
could be detected (Fig. 1B and fig. S3A), whereas on stiffer hydrogels
(>10 kPa), YAP localized to the nuclei and eGFP was expressed, typi-
cally within 24 to 48 hours after cell seeding (Fig. 1B and fig. S3, B and
C).As acontrol, MRCS-eGFPplatedon glass (the highest stiffness used)
showed strong activation of YAP/TAZ and eGFP expression (fig. S3D).
MRCS-eGFP treated with blebbistatin, an inhibitor of mechanotrans-
duction, which impedes signaling downstream of matrix stiffness and
integrin activation (28, 32), showed no eGFP expression, and YAP re-
mained in the cytoplasm, even on stiff substrates (fig. S3E). Two other
mechanotransduction inhibitors, PF228 and ML-7, a focal adhesion ki-
nase (FAK) inhibitor and a myosin light-chain kinase (MLCK) inhibi-
tor, respectively, similarly deactivated YAP and downstream eGFP
expression (fig. S3, F and G). A more comprehensive view of the cells
in Fig. 1B can be found in fig. S4. Quantification of the stiffness-
mediated eGFP expression of MRCS confirms that the intensity of re-
porter expression correlates positively with the substrate stiffness, such
that stiffer hydrogel resulted in stronger eGFP signal, with attenuated
expression in the presence of mechanotransduction inhibitors (Fig.
1C). This set of data demonstrates that YAP activation in response to
altered stiffness is MLCK/FAK-dependent. We used reverse tran-
scription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) to fur-
ther characterize the expression of eGFP mRNA and two additional
genes (CTGF and ANKRDI) that are transcriptionally regulated by
YAP/TAZ. Consistent with the imaging data, expression of eGFP,
CTGF, and ANKRDI was specifically activated on stiffer hydrogels
(Fig. 1D). It is interesting to note the differences in expression of
eGFP versus the other YAP-induced markers, which are likely due
to different sensitivities of YAP binding to exogenous and endoge-
nous promoters, because we are using a synthetic promoter for eGFP.
We similarly prepared and characterized MRCS engineered to pro-
duce firefly luciferase (MRCS-Luc) (fig. S5). Collectively, these data
indicate that our MRCS is stiffness-specific and can respond to a
range of matrix stiffness to drive downstream gene expression.
MRCS-CD killing breast cancer cells in response to matrix
stiffness in vitro
To use MRCS to locally treat breast cancer metastasis in the lung, we
engineered the cells to express CD instead of a reporter gene (fig. S2).
CD is a prodrug convertase that converts the inactive prodrug 5-FC to
the active drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) (37). This leads to localized tumor
killing via the bystander effect in which the apoptotic MRCS locally re-
leases CD (fig. S1) (38). This promising technique is currently being
used in clinical trials, for example, with 5-FU delivery by neural stem
cells for treatment of glioblastoma (38). To validate the effectiveness of
this prodrug system, we first confirmed that MSCs engineered to
constitutively express CD (abbreviated as CD-MSC) are able to suffi-
ciently convert 5-FC to kill MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in vitro
(fig. S6). We next constructed MRCS-CD with the YAP/TAZ promoter
to drive the expression of CD in response to matrix stiffness. To validate
the stiffness-specific regulation of CD expression and conversion of 5-FC,
we seeded MRCS-CD on polyacrylamide hydrogels with different stiff-
ness. On soft hydrogel (~1 kPa), a minimal amount of CD was expressed
(fig. S7A), but on stiffer hydrogels and glass (>10 kPa), CD expression was
turned on (fig. S7, B to D). This expression pattern also correlated well
with the localization of YAP. In the presence of mechanotransduction in-
hibitors, CD expression was turned off even on stiff hydrogel (~40 kPa)
(fig. S7, E to G). Quantification of stiffness-dependent CD expression was
alsoperformedandshowedincreasedCDexpressedfromMRCSonstiffer
substrates (Fig. 2A). Additionally, we calculated the proportion of MRCS
activated by substrates of varied stiffness from fluorescent signals. On soft
substrate (~1 kPa), only about 2% of MRCS was activated, compared to
13% on ~10 kPa, 56% on ~40 kPa substrate, and 100% on glass.
To test whether MRCS-CD could kill cancer specifically on high-
stiffness substrates, we cocultured MRCS-CD with MDA-MB-231
breast cancer cells on polyacrylamide hydrogels with or without 5-FC
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
2 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 1. MRCS in vitro validation. (A) Schematic of a proposed mechanism of how MRCS works. When the stiffness of ECM increases, YAP/TAZ are activated and localize to the
nucleus. Then, YAP/TAZ will bind to the synthetic stiffness-sensing promoter in MRCS and drive the expression of downstream reporters (such as eGFP and Luc) and/or ther-
apeutics. Note: This schematic is simplified to clarify the major components in MRCS mechanism. (B) Representative images of MRCS-eGFP plated on soft (~1 kPa) and firm (~40 kPa)
polyacrylamide gels. eGFP (stained with anti-eGFP; green) was turned on in response to higher stiffness. YAP (stained with anti-YAP; red) localization is also regulated by stiffness, such
that it concentrates in the nuclei on stiffer substrates. 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (blue; nuclear counterstain) is displayed. Scale bars, 25 mm. (C) Quantification of fluores-
cence intensityofeGFP(stainedwithantibody)fromMRCS-eGFPseededon substrateswithdifferent stiffnessor on firm(~40kPa)substratestreatedwith10mMML-7(MLCKinhibitor)
or 20 mM PF228 (FAK inhibitor). Blebb., blebbistatin. Data are means ± SEM. (D) RT-qPCR analysis of MRCS-eGFP on hydrogels. Expression of eGFP (green) and YAP/TAZ downstream
factors (CTGF, purple; ANKRDI, black) was increased on stiff substrate and was down-regulated on soft substrate or with mechanosensing inhibitors, showing that MRCS is stiffness-
specific. Quadruplicate samples were used for the analysis. Data are means ± SD. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
3 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 and performed XTT assay to quantify total cell proliferation (Fig. 2B).
On soft hydrogel (~1 kPa), there was no significant difference in cancer
cell proliferation with or without the addition of 5-FC, consistent with
the low expression of CD under these soft matrix conditions. When
seeded on hydrogels with increased stiffness (~10 and ~40 kPa) or on
glass, cell proliferation was significantly decreased in the presence of
5-FC in proportion to stiffness (P < 0.05), suggesting that CD was ex-
pressed and converted the prodrug to its active form to kill the cancer
cells. CD-MSC without a stiffness-sensing promoter showed signifi-
cantly reduced cell proliferation in the presence of 5-FC due to con-
stitutive expression of CD (P < 0.001), whereas native MSCs (N-MSC)
showed no difference in total cellproliferation, as expected, because they
do not produce CD. These data demonstrate that MRCS-CD can selec-
tively activate CD expression in response to matrix stiffness and convert
5-FC to kill adjacent cancer cells in vitro. To quantify the conversion of
5-FC to 5-FU, we seeded MRCS-CD on substrates with different stiff-
ness with 5-FC in the growth medium for 1, 2, or 5 days, at which point
the amount of 5-FU in the growth medium was detected by liquid
chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (Fig. 2C)
(37). The data show that the conversion to 5-FU is stiffness-dependent,
with no detectable conversion on soft substrate (~1 kPa) and increased
conversion with increased stiffness (~10 and ~40 kPa). This also dem-
onstrates that MRCS-CD can continue to express CD and convert 5-FC
to 5-FU over a period of at least several days in vitro.
To further characterize the timing of cancer killing, we cocultured
MRCS-CD with MDA-MB-231 using Transwell in the presence of
5-FC (fig. S8). XTT assay was performed to quantify cell proliferation
for both celltypes. The decreased proliferation of MDA-MB-231 express-
ing firefly luciferase plus red fluorescent protein (RFP) (Luc-RFP-231)
indicates that MRCS-CD began to kill cancer cells (or attenuate cancer
growth) within 2 days, with the MRCS-CD themselves dying after. The
bystander effect of MRCS-CD also lasted after they were removed from
the cancer cells, with a significant decrease in cancer proliferation
measured on day 9 (P < 0.01) even when the MRCS-CD were removed
asearlyasday2(fig.S9).Thissuggeststhat,evenifMRCSonlytransiently
interacts with tumor microenvironments and gets cleared after 2 days,
cancer growth can be attenuated over a longer period of time.
MRCS homing to and specifically activated at the metastatic
niche in vivo
As a model of breast cancer metastasis to the lung, we used an MDA-
MB-231 xenotransplantation model in mice. We chose MDA-MB-231
cells because they secrete large amounts of LOX, which increases the
cross-linking of collagen fibrils in the lung that is essential for metastasis
(16). MDA-MB-231 cells were engineered to express reporters includ-
ing eGFP (eGFP-231) or firefly luciferase plus RFP (Luc-RFP-231) and
seeded via tail vein injection in immunocompromised mice to establish
tumor foci in the lung (4 to 6 weeks after cancer infusion) (Fig. 3, A and
B, animals on day 0) before MSC infusion. Here, we used two sets of
immunocompromised mice: Foxn1nu (nude) and nonobese diabetic/
severe combined immunodeficiency gamma (NSG). We primarily
focused on the nude mouse system because it is partially immuno-
compromised and therefore more likely recapitulates the clinical setting
than NSG. They also have better health condition than NSG mice after
cancer seeding, allowing us to monitor the course of treatment for a
longer period (39). On the other hand, NSG mice establish tumors more
robustly and rapidly and therefore were also used when we examined
MRCS tumor homing and correlation between collagen cross-linking,
tumor cells, and MRCS activation in ex vivo immunofluorescence and
second harmonic generation (SHG) experiments (39, 40).
MSCs home to both primary tumor and metastatic sites including
breast cancers (26, 41, 42). Here, we first examined whether MSCs en-
gineered to constitutively express firefly luciferase (Luc-MSC) are able
to home to the lungs. We systemically infused Luc-MSC into mice host-
ing human eGFP-231 breast cancer cells in the lung and tumor-free
controls. We found that Luc-MSC homed to and persisted in the lungs
(fig. S10). Next, we investigated whether MRCS can home to and be
specifically activated at the tumor sites using MRCS-Luc, which served
as a surrogate for MRCS-CD and allowed us to readily track trans-
planted MRCS and monitor their activation using induced luciferase
in vivo. We demonstrated that systemically infused MRCS-Luc homed
to and were induced to express luciferase only in the tumor sites in the
lung of eGFP-231 tumor-bearing mice (fig. S11, A and B). The observed
luciferase signal, which reflects the collective functional outcome of
MRCS homing and activation at tumor sites, persisted in tumor-bearing
Fig. 2. MRCS-CD activation dependent on substrate stiffness in vitro. (A) Quantification of fluorescent signals of CD shows MRCS-CD responding to matrix stiffness in vitro.
MRCS-CD were stained with antibody after plating on tunable polyacrylamide gels or glass as indicated, or treated with 50 mM blebbistatin, 10 mM ML-7 (MLCKinhibitors), or 20 mM
PF228 (FAK inhibitor). The fluorescent signal of CD was analyzed, and the relative fluorescence intensity is shown. Data are means ± SEM. Triplicate samples were used for the analysis.
(B)MRCS-CDkillcancercellsinresponse tomatrixstiffnessand5-FCinvitro. MRCS-CDwerecoculturedwith MDA-MB-231breastcancer cells(231:MRCS=2:1)with(800mg/ml;green)
or without (black) 5-FC on substrates with different stiffness. Total cell proliferation (XTT assay) is displayed. The data were normalized to breast cancer only (231: MRCS = 1:0)
with or without 5-FC on each stiffness. Triplicate samples were used for the analysis. Data are means ± SD. n.s., not significant. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001. (C) Conversion
of 5-FC to 5-FU by MRCS-CD in response to matrix stiffness in vitro. MRCS-CDwere seeded on substrates with different stiffness, with 5-FC (800 mg/ml) in growth medium for 1, 2, or
5 days. The concentration of 5-FU in the conditioned medium was detected by LC-MS/MS.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
4 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 mice for up to 1 to 2 days (fig. S11B). Given that previous studies, includ-
ing our own, have consistently demonstrated that systemically trans-
planted MSCs can persist in tumor sites for up to a week, we suspect
that some residual MRCS might exist in tumors after 2 days following
transplantation but become undetectable because of the limited sen-
sitivity of in vivo luciferase imaging (42). Finally, we confirmed the in
vivo homing and activation of MRCS-CD in Luc-RFP-231 tumor-
bearing mice using ex vivo immunohistochemistry (IHC). We demon-
strated that MRCS-CD colocalized with and were locally activated to
express CD at cancer sites in lung sections of tumor-bearing (but not
tumor-free) mice (fig. S11, C and D). Similar results were observed with
the infusion of MRCS-eGFP (fig. S12). Collectively, these data suggest
that MRCS selectively homes to and is specifically activated at the meta-
static niche in vivo. This set of experiments also allowed us to identify
time points at which MRCS persisted and was activated in tumors in vivo
to guide the schedule of treatment (5-FC).
MRCS-CD killing cancer specifically and with minimal side
effects in vivo
To evaluate the efficacy of MRCS-CD for treating breast cancer lung
metastasis, mice seeded with Luc-RFP-231 cancer cells for 6 weeks
were given MRCS-CD (on day 0), followed by the prodrug 5-FC,
and were monitored for therapeutic outcomes (Fig. 3A). MRCS-CD
were administered 1 day before the start of prodrug treatment to allow
time for colocalization with tumors in the lungs. 5-FC was given in
multiple doses for 7 days, which is consistent with the typical MSC
persistence period in the tumor (41, 42). The amount of cancer within
the lungs was quantified by measuring the cancer luciferase signal
Fig. 3. MRCS-CD killing cancer cells in vivo. (A) Design and timeline of animal experiment to test MRCS-CD with 5-FC in vivo. iv, intravenous; ip, intraperitoneal. (B) Repre-
sentative images of nude mice that received MRCS-CD treatments show that MRCS-CD decreased lung metastasis signals in vivo. Luciferase imaging was taken before (day 0, left)
and after short-term 5-FC treatment (day 9, middle), as well as long-term 5-FC treatment (6 weeks, right). Quantification of luciferase signals in the lungs in vivo after (C) short-term
and (D) long-term treatments. (E) Mouse survival after MRCS-CD treatment. In (C), relative growth index = luciferase read on day 9 (after)/luciferase read on day 0 (before). In (D),
lung metastasis index = log10 [(luciferase read of the tested mouse)/(luciferase read of average for tumor-free mice)]; the lung metastasis index of tumor-free mice = 0. The
differences between “week 0” groups are not statistically significant. n = 9 for each group. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ***P < 0.001. In (E), P = 0.0382, CD-MSC versus DPBS; P = 0.0429,
MRCS-CD versus N-MSC; and P = 0.0211, MRCS-CD versus DPBS. Median survival (days): CD-MSC, 260; MRCS-CD, 260; N-MSC, 141; DPBS, 137.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
5 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 usinginvivoimaging(Fig.3B).Comparedtoinitialvaluesbeforeprodrug
treatment, luciferase signals were decreased in mice treated with MRCS-
CD and MSCs engineered to constitutively express CD (CD-MSC), both
shortly after treatment (day 9) and at 6 weeks after treatment (Fig. 3, C
and D). N-MSC and Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) con-
trol groups failed to decrease lung metastasis signals and showed increase
in cancer mass over time as cancer continued to grow, as expected.
Cancer signals after prodrug treatment (day 9) were normalized to cancer
signalsbeforetreatment(day0)foreachmouse,whichquantitativelydem-
onstrated that CD-MSC and MRCS-CD significantly decreased the
amount of cancer compared to N-MSC and DPBS groups (P < 0.001;
Fig. 3C). Long-term (6 weeks after treatment) CD-MSC– and MRCS-
CD–treated groups maintained a lower amount of lung metastasis com-
pared to the day 0 baseline values (P < 0.05), whereas N-MSC and DPBS
groups saw an overall increase in cancer signals over time (Fig. 3D). Sur-
vivaloutcomeswere also significantly improvedby CD-MSCandMRCS-
CD treatments compared to N-MSC and DPBS groups (P < 0.05; Fig. 3E).
Note that, without 5-FC injection, MRCS-CD could not attenuate cancer
growth in vivo (fig. S13). Note that, starting from day 120 (week 18), the
survival rate of the MRCS-treated group started to decline (Fig. 3E),
suggesting that, in some animals, lung tumors were decreased rather than
totally cleared out by a single MRCS treatment. This demonstrates the
potential need for repeated cell infusion together with prodrug admin-
istration (37).
Because intravenous delivery of MSCs, used in most clinical trials,
results in initial entrapment of large numbers of MSCs in the pulmo-
nary vasculature (43), localized activation of a prodrug, rather than
constitutively expressing a drug, at only the metastatic niche is desirable
to reduce off-target toxicity in the pulmonary and other organ systems.
Although CD-MSC and MRCS-CD had similar treatment outcomes in
terms of efficacy, constitutively expressing CD would convert system-
ically infused 5-FC indiscriminately in tumor-bearing and tumor-free
tissue alike. MRCS-CD, however, would only express CD to activate
5-FC conversion at sites of increased stiffness, as found in tumor sites,
and therefore have less damaging systemic side effects. To examine the
side effects of MRCS-CD and compare it to CD-MSC, we used immu-
nostaining of annexin V and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–
mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay
(Fig. 4A). Staining for annexin V to measure apoptosis showed the spe-
cific activation of MRCS-CD at tumor sites, whereas no comparable an-
nexin V signal could be seen on tumor-free tissue. CD-MSC–treated
group stained positive for annexin V nonspecifically, indicating exten-
sive tissue damage. Mice treated with N-MSC or DPBS stained positive
for tumor but not for annexin V, indicating that native MSC or DPBS
infusion does not cause cytotoxicity. TUNEL analysis for damaged
DNA further confirmed higher lung tissue damage in the CD-MSC group
than for any other group after treatment, including the MRCS-CD
group (Fig. 4B). Specifically, MRCS-CD caused localized cell apoptosis
only at the tumor sites with minimal lung tissue damage compared to
constitutively CD-expressing control. In tumor-free mice, there was
no significant increase in tissue damage after treatment with MRCS-
CD, demonstrating specificity of activation only at tumor sites. Col-
lectively, our data suggest that MRCS-CD kill cancer specifically with
minimized side effects in vivo compared to MSC constitutively ex-
pressing therapeutics.
Potential side effects to other tissues besides the lungs were also eval-
uated. In particular, we focused on damage to bone marrow, liver, and
brain because these are other sites to which MSCs may home (22). Flow
cytometry for bone marrow cells showed no significant increase in ap-
optosis or necrosis after treatment with MRCS-CD in nude mice (fig.
S14A). There was also no significant change in the bone marrow cell
population after treatment (fig. S14B), showing that the bone marrow
was not depleted by the MRCS-CD treatment, unlike in conventional
chemotherapy (44). There was also no observable damage in bone mar-
row (fig. S15), liver (fig. S16), or brain tissue (fig. S17) sections stained by
hematoxylin and eosin. The data suggest that MRCS-CD do not induce
nonspecific damage to other tissues.
The activation and tumor-killing functions of MRCS in vivo
mediated by tumor mechano-cues
Secretion of LOX by primary breast tumor increases the linearization
and cross-linking of collagen at the metastatic niche, resulting in
increased matrix stiffness (18). Therefore, collagen linearization and
cross-linking are robust surrogate markers of matrix stiffness. In addi-
tion, exogenous MSCs recruited to the metastatic lung assume an oste-
ogenic differentiation profile not observed in the normal lung (25),
although whether this is mediated by matrix stiffness is unclear. To
mechanistically elucidate the activation and function of MRCS in the
metastatic niche in vivo, we first validated the correlation between LOX
expression and collagen expression in metastatic tissues. Up-regulation
of LOX expression was observed in tumor-bearing lungs (day 0) com-
pared to that in tumor-free lungs, and it correlated with the location of
tumor cells (figs. S18 and S19, A and B). Tumor-bearing lungs (day 0)
had higher collagen expression than tumor-free lungs by Masson’s tri-
chrome staining (fig. S19, C and D), which is consistent with a previous
study (13). To further explore the correlation between collagen cross-
linking and the metastatic niche, we performed SHG imaging to colo-
calize collagen and lung metastases. SHG microscopy is a powerful
modality for imaging collagen fibers (fibrillar network and linearization)
in the tissue environment with high specificity (15). With SHG imaging,
high collagen expression was observed to colocalize with cancer metas-
tasis (figs. S19, A and B, and S20) and LOX expression (day 0, fig. S19,
A and B). We also observed that the collagen networks are significantly
(P < 0.0001) more linearized in cancer-specific regions of tumor-
bearing lungs than in noncancer regions of tumor-bearing lungs and
tumor-free lungs (day 0; Fig. 5, A to D, and fig. S20, A to F), which
indicates that the metastatic niches in the lungs have a distinctive me-
chanomicroenvironment. Tumor-bearing lungs (day 0) were also con-
firmed to have higher stiffness compared totumor-free lungsby atomic
force microscopy (AFM) (Fig. 5, E to H). Results from AFM microin-
dentation of tissue sections showed that, besides having higher overall
Young’s modulus (17.68 ± 25.63 kPa), tumor-bearing lungs are more
heterogeneous in stiffness than tumor-free lungs that were less stiff
(1.61 ± 3.97 kPa) (Fig. 5, G and H). Together, this set of data suggests
a strong correlation between metastasis, LOX expression, increased
collagen expression/cross-linking/linearization, and increased stiffness
at the metastatic sites.
To further study how our MRCS interacts with the metastatic niche,
we cotransduced the MRCS-CD to constitutively express eGFP as a cell
tracker. We then performed SHG imaging with ex vivo IHC staining
24 hours after the systemic infusion of MRCS to tumor-bearing (Fig. 5,
A and B) and tumor-free (Fig. 5C) mice (day 1). As observed on the
SHG-IHCoverlaidimages,moreMRCS(characterizedbytheconstitutively
expressedeGFP)wasobservedintumor-bearinglungs.CDofeGFP-labeled
MRCS-CD was preferentially activated in the cancer regions that are
associated with more linearized collagen cross-linking (Fig. 5A). By
contrast, few MRCS-CD were activated to express CD in less linearized
noncancer regions (Fig. 5B) or in tumor-free lungs (Fig. 5C). Additionally,
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
6 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 in Fig. 5A, although MRCS-CD was recruited to tumor regions, CD ex-
pression (magenta) was limited to direct contact with cancer (red) and
cross-linking (cyan). The MRCS-CD in the periphery of the tumor
region did not express CD, but only the constitutive eGFP (green).
Separate images for each color layer are shown in fig. S21. With
MRCS-CD, the apoptosis [visualized via poly(adenosine diphosphate–
ribose) polymerase (PARP) p85 antibody staining] is correlated with
the presence of cancer and increased cross-linked collagen (fig. S22).
With CD-MSC, there is apoptosis regardless of the tissue environment,
and PARP signals are present not only in highly cancerous and cross-
linked regions (fig. S23A) but also in less cross-linked regions (fig. S23B)
and in healthy controls (fig. S23C).
To demonstrate the translatability and broad applicability of our
MRCS platform, we also evaluated MRCS in a spontaneous model of
breast cancer metastasis to the lungs. The establishment of the sponta-
neous model is shown in fig. S24, demonstrating that lung metastasis
occurs within about 6 weeks after implantation of cancer cells to the
mouse fat pads. We then demonstrated that MRCS-CD can specifically
target cancer regions (RFP) with higher tissue collagen cross-linking
(SHG) and induce specific tissue damage (apoptosis via PARP p85
Fig. 4. MRCS-CD killing cancer cells in vivo with minimal side effects. (A) Frozen sections of lungs of Luc-RFP-231 tumor-bearing and tumor-free nude mice sacrificed 24 hours
after CD-MSC, N-MSC, DPBS, or MRCS-CD infusion were stained with anti–annexin V (green) and DAPI (blue). RFP signal (red) indicates the presence of lung metastasis. Scale bars,
100 mm. Representative images of frozen section samples of tumor-bearing lungs and tumor-free lungs from nude mice treated with CD-MSC, MRCS-CD, N-MSC, or DPBS before
and after 5-FC injections by TUNEL assays are shown. Horseradish peroxidase signals (brown) indicate damaged nuclei, and green signals are methyl green counterstain of normal
nuclei. Scale bars, 100 mm. (B) Quantification of TUNEL assay data measuring lung tissue damage in vivo. Ten representative images were used per group for quantification.
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, and ****P < 0.0001. Data are means ± SD.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
7 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. 5. Specific activation of MRCS in response to mechano-cues in the metastatic niche in vivo. (A to C) Frozen sections of lungs of Luc-RFP-231 tumor-bearing NSG mice
[cancer region in (A) and noncancer region in (B)] and tumor-free NSG mice (C) sacrificed 24 hours after infusion of MRCS-CD cotransfected with eGFP were stained with anti-Luc
(red) to detect lung metastasis, anti-CD (magenta) for CD expressed by MRCS-CD, and anti-eGFP (green) for MRCS-CD tracking. SHG imaging of collagen networks (cyan) was also
overlaid on IHC imaging. Scale bars, 50 mm. Multiple images were tiled into a larger composite image. Each representative image was then extracted from the tiled image.
(D) Quantification of collagen linearization using displacement-to-length ratio (DLR) of collagen fibers in SHG images. For a line, DLR = 1, and for a curve, DLR < 1. Representative
images are shown in fig. S20. Forty-five fibers per group were used for this analysis. Box and whisker plots are shown as minimum, 25th percentile, median, 75th percentile, and
maximum. ****P < 0.0001. (E and F) Representative AFM stiffness maps (50 mm × 50 mm) of tumor-bearing (E) and tumor-free (F) lungs. (G and H) Frequency of Young’s modulus
values of tumor-bearing (G) and tumor-free (H) lungs from AFM microindentation in the range of 0 to 40 kPa (bin size = 1 kPa), whereas the inset graphs show the frequency within
the range of 0 to 10 kPa (bin size = 0.5 kPa). Five hundred measurements per group were analyzed. P < 0.001 (Young’s modulus of tumor-bearing lungs versus tumor-free lungs).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
8 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 staining) in the metastatic niches in vivo (Fig. 6A). In contrast, we ob-
served minimal off-target damage in noncancer regions of tumor-
bearing lungs (Fig. 6B and fig. S25) or in healthy lungs (Fig. 6C and
fig. S25) where there is low cross-linking compared to the cancerregions
of the lungs.
DISCUSSION
Despite decades of effort, little progress has been made to improve the
diagnosis and treatment of cancer metastases. In particular, because of
the heterogeneity of cancer and its ability to develop resistance to cur-
rent treatments that target biochemical markers, new targeting strate-
gies are urgently needed. Inspired by the tight correlation between
increases in tissue stiffness and breast cancer metastatic niches found
in recent studies (13, 15, 17, 18, 45) and the fact that MSCs differentiate
to specific lineages depending on the stiffness of the microenvironment
(28), we have developed a class of cancer therapeutics that directly tar-
get the mechanoenvironmental cues of cancer metastases. The MRCS
isanattempttodirectly interrogatethemechano-niche in vivoandapply
it for localized delivery of agents including imaging reporters and
therapeutics.
Mechano-niches play vital roles in development, homeostasis, and
disease progression, including many types of cancer, and therefore serve
as an emerging target for next-generation therapeutics (14, 46). In par-
ticular, matrix stiffness is an appealing target for cancer therapeutics due
to its long persistence in the body (measured in years), making it refrac-
tory to development of resistance to treatments (47, 48). Furthermore,
cancer and cancer biomarkers are highly heterogeneous within the pop-
ulation, making it difficult to develop treatments that can accurately tar-
get the disease. Mechanical markers such as matrix stiffness, however,
manifest similarly in most cases and present a more universal target for
therapeutics (14, 49). Given the enormous challenge in the search of
specific cancer biomarkers, matrix stiffnessmay present an opportunity,
especially when used in combination with chemical biomarkers, to im-
prove the sensitivity and specificity in cancer targeting. In addition, the
natural ability of MRCS to actively home to and integrate into tumors
and metastases enables the efficient delivery of therapeutics to the target
site. Together, our MRCS could have major clinical implications in
increasing the effectiveness of therapies for patients with metastatic
cancer while also ameliorating the deleterious side effects associated
withchemotherapy (50)orotherlessspecific cell-baseddelivery systems
that are engineered to constitutively express therapeutics. In addition,
our system could potentially be used to prevent metastasis by targeting
the LOX-mediated, stiff premetastatic niche (13, 15, 18), for example, by
engineering the MRCS to secrete matrix remodeling enzymes, such as
metalloproteinases, to reduce the stiffness of the niche.
MSCs have been proven safe for transplantation into humans in the
clinic (23, 24), which paves the way for clinical translation of the pro-
posed MRCS. Transplanted MSCs themselves have previously been
proposed to regulate cancer progression, both positively and negatively
(21, 51, 52). We do not consider it as a major issue because MRCS only
staysin tumorstransiently (<7 days) and would be eliminated by suicide
genes (CD). Our data show that MRCS can continue to functionally
convert 5-FC to 5-FU for at least 5 days while in contact with stiff sub-
strate, although the process of cancer killing could begin as early as 2 days
after treatment, with the MRCS-CD themselves dying shortly after. This
suggests that MRCS can be a transient yet efficient drug delivery system
for treating cancer. Future studies will need to further investigate the
activity of both CD-MSC and MRCS-CD in vivo, in particular with re-
gard to conversion of 5-FC, to determine the time points of conversion
and killing of the drug source (MSCs), as well as dosages required to
ensure efficacy while still minimizing side effects.
Although several organs, including muscle (12 kPa) and bone (25 to
60kPa)(28, 53), approachorexceedthe tissuestiffnessof invasive breast
cancer and may promote activation of our MRCS, we anticipate that
this will not be a major issue because of the inherent homing ability
of MSCs to cancer and metastases and their rapid clearance from non-
inflamed or noninjured tissues (21, 22). Our data showed no significant
damage to bone, bone marrow, liver, or brain tissues as a result of sys-
temic treatment with MRCS (although we emphasize that MSC type
and administration route may affect their homing profile). Although
in transit to the metastatic niche MSCs will encounter blood vessel en-
dothelial cells, basement membrane, and ECM components, each with
their own characteristic stiffness, we do not expect this to irreversibly
Fig. 6. Cross-linking–specific tissue damage by MRCS in response to mechano-cues in the metastatic niche in vivo in spontaneous lung metastasis model.
Frozen sections of lungs of tumor-bearing NSG mice with Luc-RFP-231 spontaneous lung metastasis from primary tumors [cancer region in (A) and noncancer region in (B)] and
tumor-free NSG mice (C) sacrificed after MRCS-CD infusion and 5-FC treatment as indicated (day 9) were stained with anti-PARP p85 (green) for tissue apoptosis. RFP signal (red)
indicates the presence of lung metastasis, and colocalization of red and green appears yellow. SHG imaging of collagen networks (cyan) was presented and overlaid with IHC
imaging. Scale bars, 100 mm.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
9 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 influence MRCS activity (28). In particular, many of these mechanical
interactions involve shear stress, which does not regulate MSC differ-
entiation. Previous studies have also established that expression of
mechanoresponsive genes is rapidly reversible (28, 54). The specificity
of MRCS colocalization andactivation ontumors wasalso demonstrated
in our study, with targeted release of CD only in regions with cancer cells
and high collagen cross-linking, resulting in localized tissue damage in
these tumor regions, but not in other nontumor regions. This, combined
with data showing that MRCS will not release CD to convert 5-FC while
on soft substrates, demonstrates that MRCS should not result in off-
target damage in healthy tissues.
In contrast, treatment with CD-MSC resulted in increased tissue
damage in the lungs, which was not only restricted to tumor regions
but was also observed in healthy tissues. This could be at least partially
attributed to the initial entrapment of MSCs in the pulmonary vascula-
ture (43), where CD-MSC could still express CD to cause nonspecific
damage, whereas MRCS-CD would be inactive. Although CD-MSC
and MRCS-CD displayed similar in vivo treatment efficacy and similar
survival curves, this phenomenon may be attributed to the cell therapies
reaching a threshold level of cancer killing, beyond which survival
curves and whole-body imaging may not be sensitive enough to distin-
guish the two treatment groups. Further optimization of treatment
parameters such as initial tumor burden, timing, and dosage of treat-
ment and using more sensitive imaging modalities may elucidate these
differences in future studies. Future studies will also need to further in-
vestigate the activation of MRCS in vivo to fully characterize the con-
ditions in the tumor microenvironment, which trigger the conversion of
5-FC. However, it should be emphasized that MRCS-CD attenuated tu-
mor growth. Together, the data suggest that MRCS is effective as a
cancer therapeutic and has advantages over CD-MSC with respect to
reducing side effects.
Our approach to targeting the mechano-niche in vivo by MRCS may
also be relevant for the treatment of other types of fibrotic diseases
through, for example, delivery of metalloproteinases. Moreover, by using
cells engineered to respond to variations in matrix stiffness to drive ex-
pression of diagnostic reporters [such as the HSV-1-tk gene coupled with
positron emission tomography imaging (55)], the MRCS could also be
used to detect micrometastases at a higher resolution than current imag-
ing techniques. Oursystem potentially hasmajor advantagesovercurrent
methods of identifying micrometastases in that it can amplify the signal
from smaller numbers of cells by detecting the properties of the local mi-
croenvironment and that it can be used in vivo without a need for biopsy
or other invasive techniques. Finally, our MRCS could also serve as an
approach to elucidate mechanobiology, specifically the interplay of
biomechanical cues (56) with cells in their native environment in vivo
in the context of cancer and other conditions such as inflammation and
injury. Note that MRCS is not restricted to lung metastasis of breast
cancer, although it was the focus of this study due to its high morbidity
and its robustness as a model to test our hypothesis. However, future
studies using other models of metastasis, especially in sites other than
the lung, will need to be investigated to evaluate the broad applicability
of our approach. Although previous studies have established that matrix
stiffness is tightly linked to invasiveness and metastasis, current
methods of measuring stiffness rely on elastography or ex vivo measure-
ments with AFM or compression devices (14, 15). Unfortunately, these
techniques lack the resolution to directly measure the stiffness of the
ECM with which the cells interact; instead, they measure the average
stiffness of larger regions encompassing both ECM and cellular compo-
nents of the tissues of interest. A cell-based stiffness sensor should reveal
what cells actually “feel” in the microenvironment and dynamically
interrogate the mechanoenvironment of primary tumors, metastases,
and changes in matrix stiffness during disease progression and response
to therapies at a cellular resolution in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
This study was designed to investigate the hypothesis that a cell-based
system can be engineered to respond specifically to mechanoenvironmental
cues (MRCS) to target cancer metastases. In vitro experiments (including
tunable hydrogels, qPCR, cocultures, and mass spectrometry) and in vivo
and ex vivo experiments using nude and NSG mice (including luciferase
imaging, antibody staining, SHG, and AFM) were performed to dem-
onstrate that MRCS can sense and kill cancer cells in response to bio-
physical cues. For all in vitro studies except for mass spectrometry, three
independent experiments with at least three samples per condition were
performed. n = 9 for the in vivo cancer killing and survival assays. n ≥ 3
for ex vivo characterization of the biophysical cues in the metastatic
niche and the validation of MRCS. For the survival experiment, the
end point for mice was defined as “found dead” or euthanasia criteria
stated in University of California, Irvine (UCI) Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee protocol 2012-3062 described in Supplemen-
tary Materials and Methods. Groups for animal experiments were ran-
domized, except for the cancer killing study where manual group
adjustments were performed to keep the differences in initial cancer
burden between all “week 0” group animals not statistically significant.
In vitro experiments were not blinded. In vivo and ex vivo experiments
were blinded.
Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed by Student’s t test when comparing two groups and
by analysis of variance (ANOVA) when comparing more than two
groups. Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test was performed for animal survival
data analysis by two-way ANOVA, and Mann-Whitney test was used
for AFM data. Outliers in AFM data were removed by Grubbs’ test
(P < 0.05). Data were expressed as means ± SD or means ± SEM. Two-
sided testing with normal-based 95% confidence interval was performed
for each analysis, and differences were considered significant at P < 0.05.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/400/eaan2966/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Concept of MRCS for targeting breast cancer metastases in the lung.
Fig. S2. Construction of MRCS.
Fig. S3. MRCS-eGFP activation in response to substrate stiffness in vitro.
Fig. S4. MRCS-eGFP in vitro validation with immunostaining.
Fig. S5. Further MRCS-Luc in vitro validation.
Fig. S6. CD-MSC able to kill cancer cells in the presence of 5-FC in vitro.
Fig. S7. MRCS-CD responding to matrix stiffness in vitro.
Fig. S8. Bystander effect from MRCS-CD starting at 24 hours in vitro on stiff substrate.
Fig. S9. Bystander effect from MRCS-CD lasting after MSC removal in vitro on stiff substrate.
Fig. S10. Luc-MSC homing to the metastatic niche in vivo.
Fig. S11. MRCS homing and specific activation in response to the metastatic niche in vivo.
Fig. S12. Specific activation of MRCS-eGFP in response to the metastatic niche in vivo.
Fig. S13. MRCS-CD unable to attenuate cancer growth in the absence of 5-FC in vivo.
Fig. S14. No detectable side effects in bone marrow cell populations after systemic treatment
with MRCS-CD.
Fig. S15. MRCS-CD causing no detectable side effects in vivo in bone marrow.
Fig. S16. MRCS-CD causing no detectable side effects in vivo in livers.
Fig. S17. MRCS-CD causing no detectable side effects in vivo in brains.
Fig. S18. Up-regulation and colocalization of LOX expression with tumor in tumor-bearing lungs.
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
10 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Fig. S19. LOX expression up-regulated with increased collagen expression in the metastatic niche.
Fig. S20. SHG imaging showing up-regulated and more linearized collagen in tumor-bearing
lungs.
Fig. S21. Split-channel views of MRCS activation in the metastatic niche in vivo.
Fig. S22. Cross-linking–specific tissue damage by MRCS in response to mechano-cues in the
metastatic niche in vivo.
Fig. S23. Constitutively CD-expressing MSCs causing nonspecific tissue damage in vivo.
Fig. S24. Spontaneous lung metastasis model establishment.
Fig. S25. Split-channel views of cross-linking–specific tissue damage by MRCS in the metastatic
niche in vivo in spontaneous lung metastasis model.
Table S1. Primary antibodies.
Table S2. Secondary antibodies.
Table S3. Primers used in qPCR.
References (57–68)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. D. Hanahan, R. A. Weinberg, Hallmarks of cancer: The next generation. Cell 144, 646–674
(2011).
2. G. Poste, I. J. Fidler, The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis. Nature 283, 139–146 (1980).
3. S. M. Ali, H. A. Harvey, A. Lipton, Metastatic breast cancer: Overview of treatment.
Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 2003, S132–S137 (2003).
4. B. D. Hedley, A. F. Chambers, Tumor dormancy and metastasis. Adv. Cancer Res.
102, 67–101 (2009).
5. S. E. Jones, Metastatic breast cancer: The treatment challenge. Clin. Breast Cancer 8,
224–233 (2008).
6. W. Irvin Jr., H. B. Muss, D. K. Mayer, Symptom management in metastatic breast cancer.
Oncologist 16, 1203–1214 (2011).
7. A. Singh, J. Settleman, EMT, cancer stem cells and drug resistance: An emerging axis of
evil in the war on cancer. Oncogene 29, 4741–4751 (2010).
8. D. T. Butcher, T. Alliston, V. M. Weaver, A tense situation: Forcing tumour progression.
Nat. Rev. Cancer 9, 108–122 (2009).
9. D. E. Jaalouk, J. Lammerding, Mechanotransduction gone awry. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
10, 63–73 (2009).
10. D. Wirtz, K. Konstantopoulos, P. C. Searson, The physics of cancer: The role of physical
interactions and mechanical forces in metastasis. Nat. Rev. Cancer 11, 512–522 (2011).
11. J. D. Humphrey, E. R. Dufresne, M. A. Schwartz, Mechanotransduction and extracellular
matrix homeostasis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 15, 802–812 (2014).
12. T. L. Downing, J. Soto, C. Morez, T. Houssin, A. Fritz, F. Yuan, J. Chu, S. Patel, D. V. Schaffer,
S. Li, Biophysical regulation of epigenetic state and cell reprogramming. Nat. Mater.
12, 1154–1162 (2013).
13. T. R. Cox, D. Bird, A.-M. Baker, H. E. Barker, M. W.-Y. Ho, G. Lang, J. T. Erler, LOX-mediated
collagen crosslinking is responsible for fibrosis-enhanced metastasis. Cancer Res. 73,
1721–1732 (2013).
14. T. R. Cox, J. T. Erler, Remodeling and homeostasis of the extracellular matrix: Implications
for fibrotic diseases and cancer. Dis. Model. Mech. 4, 165–178 (2011).
15. K. R. Levental, H. Yu, L. Kass, J. N. Lakins, M. Egeblad, J. T. Erler, S. F. T. Fong, K. Csiszar,
A. Giaccia, W. Weninger, M. Yamauchi, D. L. Gasser, V. M. Weaver, Matrix crosslinking
forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling. Cell 139, 891–906 (2009).
16. C. C.-L. Wong, D. M. Gilkes, H. Zhang, J. Chen, H. Wei, P. Chaturvedi, S. I. Fraley,
C.-M. Wong, U.-S. Khoo, I. O.-L. Ng, D. Wirtz, G. L. Semenza, Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 is
a master regulator of breast cancer metastatic niche formation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 108, 16369–16374 (2011).
17. J. T. Erler, K. L. Bennewith, M. Nicolau, N. Dornhöfer, C. Kong, Q.-T. Le, J.-T. A. Chi,
S. S. Jeffrey, A. J. Giaccia, Lysyl oxidase is essential for hypoxia-induced metastasis.
Nature 440, 1222–1226 (2006).
18. J. T. Erler, K. L. Bennewith, T. R. Cox, G. Lang, D. Bird, A. Koong, Q.-T. Le, A. J. Giaccia,
Hypoxia-induced lysyl oxidase is a critical mediator of bone marrow cell recruitment to
form the premetastatic niche. Cancer Cell 15, 35–44 (2009).
19. A. Bondareva, C. M. Downey, F. Ayres, W. Liu, S. K. Boyd, B. Hallgrimsson, F. R. Jirik, The
lysyl oxidase inhibitor, b-aminopropionitrile, diminishes the metastatic colonization
potential of circulating breast cancer cells. PLOS ONE 4, e5620 (2009).
20. C. C.-L. Wong, H. Zhang, D. M. Gilkes, J. Chen, H. Wei, P. Chaturvedi, M. E. Hubbi,
G. L. Semenza, Inhibitors of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 block breast cancer metastatic
niche formation and lung metastasis. J. Mol. Med. 90, 803–815 (2012).
21. J. Ankrum, J. M. Karp, Mesenchymal stem cell therapy: Two steps forward, one step back.
Trends Mol. Med. 16, 203–209 (2010).
22. J. M. Karp, G. S. Leng Teo, Mesenchymal stem cell homing: The devil is in the details.
Cell Stem Cell 4, 206–216 (2009).
23. A. Trounson, R. G. Thakar, G. Lomax, D. Gibbons, Clinical trials for stem cell therapies.
BMC Med. 9, 52 (2011).
24. L. Liu, M. A. Eckert, H. Riazifar, D.-K. Kang, D. Agalliu, W. Zhao, From blood to the brain:
Can systemically transplanted mesenchymal stem cells cross the blood-brain barrier?
Stem Cells Int. 2013, 435093 (2013).
25. H. Wang, F. Cao, A. De, Y. Cao, C. Contag, S. S. Gambhir, J. C. Wu, X. Chen, Trafficking
mesenchymal stem cell engraftment and differentiation in tumor-bearing mice by
bioluminescence imaging. Stem Cells 27, 1548–1558 (2009).
26. M. R. Reagan, D. L. Kaplan, Concise review: Mesenchymal stem cell tumor-homing:
Detection methods in disease model systems. Stem Cells 29, 920–927 (2011).
27. A. Zlotnik, A. M. Burkhardt, B. Homey, Homeostatic chemokine receptors and
organ-specific metastasis. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11, 597–606 (2011).
28. A. J. Engler, S. Sen, H. L. Sweeney, D. E. Discher, Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage
specification. Cell 126, 677–689 (2006).
29. J. S. Park, J. S. Chu, A. D. Tsou, R. Diop, Z. Tang, A. Wang, S. Li, The effect of matrix stiffness
on the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells in response to TGF-b. Biomaterials
32, 3921–3930 (2011).
30. J. R. Tse, A. J. Engler, Stiffness gradients mimicking in vivo tissue variation regulate
mesenchymal stem cell fate. PLOS ONE 6, e15978 (2011).
31. A. Samani, J. Zubovits, D. Plewes, Elastic moduli of normal and pathological human
breast tissues: An inversion-technique-based investigation of 169 samples. Phys. Med.
Biol. 52, 1565–1576 (2007).
32. S. Dupont, L. Morsut, M. Aragona, E. Enzo, S. Giulitti, M. Cordenonsi, F. Zanconato,
J. Le Digabel, M. Forcato, S. Bicciato, N. Elvassore, S. Piccolo, Role of YAP/TAZ in
mechanotransduction. Nature 474, 179–183 (2011).
33. G. Halder, S. Dupont, S. Piccolo, Transduction of mechanical and cytoskeletal cues by YAP
and TAZ. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 13, 591–600 (2012).
34. J. Swift, I. L. Ivanovska, A. Buxboim, T. Harada, P. C. D. P. Dingal, J. Pinter, J. D. Pajerowski,
K. R. Spinler, J.-W. Shin, M. Tewari, F. Rehfeldt, D. W. Speicher, D. E. Discher, Nuclear
lamin-A scales with tissue stiffness and enhances matrix-directed differentiation. Science
341, 1240104 (2013).
35. B. R. Seo, P. Bhardwaj, S. Choi, J. Gonzalez, R. C. Andresen Eguiluz, K. Wang, S. Mohanan,
P. G. Morris, B. Du, X. K. Zhou, L. T. Vahdat, A. Verma, O. Elemento, C. A. Hudis,
R. M. Williams, D. Gourdon, A. J. Dannenberg, C. Fischbach, Obesity-dependent changes
in interstitial ECM mechanics promote breast tumorigenesis. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 301ra130
(2015).
36. J.-H. Hong, E. S. Hwang, M. T. McManus, A. Amsterdam, Y. Tian, R. Kalmukova, E. Mueller,
T. Benjamin, B. M. Spiegelman, P. A. Sharp, N. Hopkins, M. B. Yaffe, TAZ, a transcriptional
modulator of mesenchymal stem cell differentiation. Science 309, 1074–1078 (2005).
37. K. S. Aboody, J. Najbauer, M. Z. Metz, M. D’Apuzzo, M. Gutova, A. J. Annala, T. W. Synold,
L. A. Couture, S. Blanchard, R. A. Moats, E. Garcia, S. Aramburo, V. V. Valenzuela, R. T. Frank,
M. E. Barish, C. E. Brown, S. U. Kim, B. Badie, J. Portnow, Neural stem cell–mediated
enzyme/prodrug therapy for glioma: Preclinical studies. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 184ra59
(2013).
38. K. S. Aboody, J. Najbauer, N. O. Schmidt, W. Yang, J. K. Wu, Y. Zhuge, W. Przylecki,
R. Carroll, P. M. Black, G. Perides, Targeting of melanoma brain metastases using
engineered neural stem/progenitor cells. Neuro Oncol. 8, 119–126 (2006).
39. I. J. Fidler, Rationale and methods for the use of nude mice to study the biology and
therapy of human cancer metastasis. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 5, 29–49 (1986).
40. X. Xie, N. Briinnert, G. Jensen, J. Albrectsen, B. Gotthardsen, J. Rygaard, Comparative
studies between nude and scid mice on the growth and metastatic behavior of
xenografted human tumors. Clin. Exp. Metastasis 10, 201–210 (1992).
41. S. Kidd, E. Spaeth, J. L. Dembinski, M. Dietrich, K. Watson, A. Klopp, V. L. Battula, M. Weil,
M. Andreeff, F. C. Marini, Direct evidence of mesenchymal stem cell tropism for
tumor and wounding microenvironments using in vivo bioluminescent imaging.
Stem Cells 27, 2614–2623 (2009).
42. L. Liu, S. X. Zhang, R. Aeran, W. Liao, M. Lu, G. Polovin, E. J. Pone, W. Zhao, Exogenous
marker-engineered mesenchymal stem cells detect cancer and metastases in a simple
blood assay. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 6, 181 (2015).
43. M. L. Sos, K. Michel, T. Zander, J. Weiss, P. Frommolt, M. Peifer, D. Li, R. Ullrich, M. Koker,
F. Fischer, T. Shimamura, D. Rauh, C. Mermel, S. Fischer, I. Stückrath, S. Heynck,
R. Beroukhim, W. Lin, W. Winckler, K. Shah, T. LaFramboise, W. F. Moriarty, M. Hanna,
L. Tolosi, J. Rahnenführer, R. Verhaak, D. Chiang, G. Getz, M. Hellmich, J. Wolf, L. Girard,
M. Peyton, B. A. Weir, T.-H. Chen, H. Greulich, J. Barretina, G. I. Shapiro, L. A. Garraway,
A. F. Gazdar, J. D. Minna, M. Meyerson, K.-K. Wong, R. K. Thomas, Predicting drug
susceptibility of non-small cell lung cancers based on genetic lesions. J. Clin. Invest.
119, 1727–1740 (2009).
44. A. Shaikh, D. Bhartiya, S. Kapoor, H. Nimkar, Delineating the effects of 5-fluorouracil and
follicle-stimulating hormone on mouse bone marrow stem/progenitor cells. Stem Cell Res.
Ther. 7, 59 (2016).
45. J. T. Erler, A. J. Giaccia, Lysyl oxidase mediates hypoxic control of metastasis. Cancer Res.
66, 10238–10241 (2006).
46. J. Z. Gasiorowski, C. J. Murphy, P. F. Nealey, Biophysical cues and cell behavior: The big
impact of little things. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 15, 155–176 (2013).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
11 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 47. M. J. Sherratt, Tissue elasticity and the ageing elastic fibre. Age 31, 305–325 (2009).
48. J. M. McPherson, S. J. Sawamura, A. Conti, Preparation of [3H]collagen for studies of the
biologic fate of xenogenic collagen implants in vivo. J. Invest. Dermatol. 86, 673–677
(1986).
49. C. Frantz, K. M. Stewart, V. M. Weaver, The extracellular matrix at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 123,
4195–4200 (2010).
50. J. M. Hall, M. A. Barhoover, D. Kazmin, D. P. McDonnell, W. F. Greenlee, R. S. Thomas,
Activation of the aryl-hydrocarbon receptor inhibits invasive and metastatic features
of human breast cancer cells and promotes breast cancer cell differentiation.
Mol. Endocrinol. 24, 359–369 (2010).
51. I. A. Droujinine, M. A. Eckert, W. Zhao, To grab the stroma by the horns: From biology to
cancer therapy with mesenchymal stem cells. Oncotarget 4, 651–664 (2013).
52. C. P. El-Haibi, G. W. Bell, J. Zhang, A. Y. Collmann, D. Wood, C. M. Scherber, E. Csizmadia,
O. Mariani, C. Zhu, A. Campagne, M. Toner, S. N. Bhatia, D. Irimia, A. Vincent-Salomon,
A. E. Karnoub, Critical role for lysyl oxidase in mesenchymal stem cell-driven breast
cancer malignancy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 17460–17465 (2012).
53. N. Huebsch, E. Lippens, K. Lee, M. Mehta, S. T. Koshy, M. C. Darnell, R. M. Desai, C. M. Madl,
M. Xu, X. Zhao, O. Chaudhuri, C. Verbeke, W. S. Kim, K. Alim, A. Mammoto, D. E. Ingber,
G. N. Duda, D. J. Mooney, Matrix elasticity of void-forming hydrogels controls transplanted-
stem-cell-mediated bone formation. Nat. Mater. 14, 1269–1277 (2015).
54. C. Yang, M. W. Tibbitt, L. Basta, K. S. Anseth, Mechanical memory and dosing influence
stem cell fate. Nat. Mater. 13, 645–652 (2014).
55. P. Brader, K. Kelly, S. Gang, J. P. Shah, R. J. Wong, H. Hricak, R. G. Blasberg, Y. Fong,
Z. Gil, Imaging of lymph node micrometastases using an oncolytic herpes virus and
[18F]FEAU PET. PLOS ONE 4, e4789 (2009).
56. A. K. Singh, R. C. Upadhyay, D. Malakar, S. Kumar, S. V. Singh, Effect of thermal stress
on HSP70 expression in dermal fibroblast of zebu (Tharparkar) and crossbred (Karan-Fries)
cattle. J. Therm. Biol. 43, 46–53 (2014).
57. J. E. Vick, E. T. Johnson, S. Choudhary, S. E. Bloch, F. Lopez-Gallego, P. Srivastava, I. B. Tikh,
G. T. Wawrzyn, C. Schmidt-Dannert, Optimized compatible set of BioBrickTM vectors
for metabolic pathway engineering. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 92, 1275–1286 (2011).
58. M. R. Patel, Y.-F. Chang, I. Y. Chen, M. H. Bachmann, X. Yan, C. H. Contag, S. S. Gambhir,
Longitudinal, noninvasive imaging of T-cell effector function and proliferation in living
subjects. Cancer Res. 70, 10141–10149 (2010).
59. J. R. Tse, A. J. Engler, Preparation of hydrogel substrates with tunable mechanical
properties. Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. Chapter 10, Unit 10.16 (2010).
60. B. Mangeat, P. Turelli, G. Caron, M. Friedli, L. Perrin, D. Trono, Broad antiretroviral defence
by human APOBEC3G through lethal editing of nascent reverse transcripts. Nature 424,
99–103 (2003).
61. L. Kucerova,M.Matuskova, A. Pastorakova, S. Tyciakova, J. Jakubikova, R.Bohovic, V.Altanerova,
C. Altaner, Cytosine deaminase expressing human mesenchymal stem cells mediated
tumour regression in melanoma bearing mice. J. Gene Med. 10, 1071–1082 (2008).
62. P. Bianchini, A. Diaspro, Three-dimensional (3D) backward and forward second harmonic
generation (SHG) microscopy of biological tissues. J. Biophotonics 1, 443–450 (2008).
63. P. J. Campagnola, A. C. Millard, M. Terasaki, P. E. Hoppe, C. J. Malone, W. A. Mohler,
Three-dimensional high-resolution second-harmonic generation imaging of endogenous
structural proteins in biological tissues. Biophys. J. 82, 493–508 (2002).
64. H. Altendorf, E. Decencière, D. Jeulin, P. De sa Peixoto, A. Deniset-Besseau, E. Angelini,
G. Mosser, M.-C. Schanne-Klein, Imaging and 3D morphological analysis of collagen
fibrils. J. Microsc. 247, 161–175 (2012).
65. J. S. Bredfeldt, Y. Liu, C. A. Pehlke, M. W. Conklin, J. M. Szulczewski, D. R. Inman, P. J. Keely,
R. D. Nowak, T. R. Mackie, K. W. Eliceiri, Computational segmentation of collagen fibers from
second-harmonic generation images of breast cancer. J. Biomed. Opt. 19, 16007 (2014).
66. J. S. Bredfeldt, Y. Liu, M. W. Conklin, P. J. Keely, T. R. Mackie, K. W. Eliceiri, Automated
quantification of aligned collagen for human breast carcinoma prognosis. J. Pathol.
Inform. 5, 28 (2014).
67. F. Liu, D. J. Tschumperlin, Micro-mechanical characterization of lung tissue using atomic
force microscopy. J. Vis. Exp. 2011, e2911 (2011).
68. M. Plodinec, M. Loparic, C. A. Monnier, E. C. Obermann, R. Zanetti-Dallenbach, P. Oertle,
J. T. Hyotyla, U. Aebi, M. Bentires-Alj, R. Y. H. Lim, C.-A. Schoenenberger, The
nanomechanical signature of breast cancer. Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 757–765 (2012).
Acknowledgments: We thank D.-K. Kang, M. M. Ali, and J. Zimak for discussion and
comments. We are grateful to K. Zhang and X. E. Guo for help on in vitro experiments
and discussion. We thank F. Grun, the director of the UCI Mass Spectrometry Facility
(Department of Chemistry, UCI), for his advice and help with the mass spectrometry
training and analysis. We thank K. Aboody, T. Synold, and M. Metz from the City of Hope
for sharing their LC-MS/MS method for prodrug conversion. We thank C. Schmidt-Dannert,
C. Contag, S. Piccolo, and D. Trono for the plasmids. We thank California NanoSystems Institute
at the University of California, Los Angeles for AFM. Funding: This work was supported by
the NIH (1DP2CA195763-01) and the Department of Defense (W81XWH-13-1-0326 to W.Z.),
NIH (2P41GM103540 to M.A.D.), and American Cancer Society (IRG-98-279-10) and NIH/
National Cancer Institute (1K22CA190511-01A1 to D.A.L.) S.X.Z. was supported by a
Cardiovascular Applied Research and Entrepreneurship fellowship [NIH/National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute (T32)]. W.L. was supported by a California Institute for Regenerative
Medicine (CIRM) fellowship (TG2-01152). C.C.C. was supported by NSF Graduate Research
Fellowship. A.I.S. received a fellowship from the Fondation ARC pour la recherche sur le cancer
(SAE20150602901). G.P. was supported by a CIRM training grant (TB1-01182). Author
contributions: L.L. designed and performed experiments, analyzed and interpreted data,
drafted the manuscript, and coordinated the project. S.X.Z. performed the in vivo experiments,
tissue processing, histology, mass spectrometry exams, and AFM microindentation test,
analyzed data, and drafted the manuscript. W.L. designed and performed the in vivo
experiments and edited the manuscript. H.P.F. performed tissue processing, IHC, and SHG
imaging and participated in the in vivo experiments. C.W.W. engineered the cells, conducted
the immunocytochemistry, qPCR, XTT and Transwell assays, in vitro luciferase assays, mass
spectrometry exams, bone marrow flush, and flow cytometry and analyzed the data. C.C.C.
carried out the qPCR and XTT and in vitro luciferase assays, analyzed the data, and participated
in the mass spectrometry exams. A.I.S. designed and performed the mass spectrometry
exams, designed the histology assays, conducted the flow cytometry assay, and analyzed
the data. J.V.C. and M.A.D. performed SHG imaging and edited the manuscript. L.P.N.
participated in the in vivo experiments and the mass spectrometry exams, performed the
histology assays, and acquired the data. M.L. engineered the cells, helped to prepare the
figures, and performed cloning and manuscript editing. G.P. contributed to in vivo
experiments and participated in IHC and manuscript editing. T.L.D. edited the manuscript.
D.A.L. edited the manuscript. E.J.P. conducted the flow cytometry assay, edited the
manuscript, and interpreted the data. W.Z. was responsible for conception and design of
the research, interpreted the results, revised the manuscript, and supervised the overall
project. Competing interests: W.Z., L.L., S.X.Z., W.L., E.J.P., and M.L. are inventors on patent
application (PCT/US2016/028675) held/submitted by the Regents of the University of
California that covers making and uses of mechanosensing cells. The other authors declare
that they have no competing interests.
Submitted 19 February 2016
Resubmitted 23 March 2017
Accepted 6 June 2017
Published 26 July 2017
10.1126/scitranslmed.aan2966
Citation: L. Liu, S. X. Zhang, W. Liao, H. P. Farhoodi, C. W. Wong, C. C. Chen, A. I. Ségaliny,
J. V. Chacko, L. P. Nguyen, M. Lu, G. Polovin, E. J. Pone, T. L. Downing, D. A. Lawson,
M. A. Digman, W. Zhao, Mechanoresponsive stem cells to target cancer metastases through
biophysical cues. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017).
S C I E N C E T R A N S L A T I O N A L M E D I C I N E | R E S E A RC H A R T I C L E
Liu et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaan2966 (2017)
26 July 2017
12 of 12
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Mechanoresponsive stem cells to target cancer metastases through biophysical cues
A. Digman and Weian Zhao
Chacko, Lily P. Nguyen, Mengrou Lu, George Polovin, Egest J. Pone, Timothy L. Downing, Devon A. Lawson, Michelle 
Linan Liu, Shirley X. Zhang, Wenbin Liao, Henry P. Farhoodi, Chi W. Wong, Claire C. Chen, Aude I. Ségaliny, Jenu V.
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aan2966
, eaan2966.
9
Sci Transl Med 
the tumors activated the drug, providing local anticancer activity with no off-target damage in mice.
cytosine deaminase. A drug called 5-fluorocytosine was then delivered systemically, and cytosine deaminase in
engineered stem cells accumulated in tumors, delivering the first half of a two-part cancer therapy: the enzyme 
 engineered mechanoresponsive mesenchymal stem cells to act as vehicles for cancer drug delivery. These
et al.
which typically has a greater stiffness in tumors than in surrounding normal tissues. To take advantage of this, Liu 
matrix,
but also by interactions with their microenvironment. A key part of the microenvironment is the extracellular 
In patients, tumor cells do not grow in isolation, and their behavior is regulated not only by their own biology
A stiff punishment for tumors
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/400/eaan2966
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2017/07/24/9.400.eaan2966.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/442/eaaq1011.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/433/eaar1916.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/422/eaao0475.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/375/eaah6510.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/301/301ra130.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/7/301/301fs34.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/8/360/360ra135.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/9/400/eaan2966#BIBL
This article cites 68 articles, 12 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
