 Antibiotic-mediated gut microbiome perturbation accelerates 
development of type 1 diabetes in mice
Alexandra E. Livanos1, Thomas U. Greiner2, Pajau Vangay3, Wimal Pathmasiri4, Delisha 
Stewart4, Susan McRitchie4, Huilin Li5, Jennifer Chung1, Jiho Sohn1, Sara Kim1, Zhan 
Gao1, Cecily Barber1, Joanne Kim1, Sandy Ng1, Arlin B. Rogers6, Susan Sumner4, Xue-
Song Zhang1, Ken Cadwell7,8, Dan Knights9,10, Alexander Alekseyenko1,11, Fredrik 
Bäckhed2,12, and Martin J. Blaser1,13,*
1Departments of Medicine and Microbiology, Human Microbiome Program, New York University 
Langone Medical Center, Medical Service, New York, New York 10016, USA
2Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, University of Gothenburg, 40530 Gothenburg, 
Sweden
3Biomedical Informatics and Computational Biology Program, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minneapolis 55455, USA
4Systems and Translational Sciences, RTI International, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 
27709, USA
5Departments of Population Health, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, New 
York 10016, USA
6Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, Tufts University, 
North Grafton, Massachusetts 01536, USA
7Department of Microbiology, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, New York 
10016, USA
8Skirball Institute, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA
9Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minneapolis 55455, 
USA
10Biotechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minneapolis 55108, USA
Reprints and permissions information is available online at www.nature.com/reprints.
* martin.blaser@nyumc.org.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.J.B.
Author contributions
A.E.L. and M.J.B. conceived and designed the study. A.E.L., T.U.G., P.V., W.P., D.S., J.C., J.S., S.K., Z.G., C.B., J.K., S.N., A.R. and 
X.-S.Z. acquired the data. A.E.L., S.M., H.L., A.B.R., S.S., X.-S.Z., K.C., D.K., A.A., F.B. and M.J.B. analysed and interpreted the 
data. A.E.L., T.U.G., S.M., H.L., A.B.R., S.S., X.-S.Z., K.C., D.K., A.A., F.B. and M.J.B. drafted or revised the article. A.E.L., T.U.G., 
P.V., W.P., D.S., S.M., H.L., J.C., J.S., S.K., Z.G., C.B., J.K., S.N., A.B.R., S.S., X.-S.Z., K.C., D.K., A.A., F.B. and M.J.B. approved 
the final manuscript.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available online.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Microbiol. ; 1(11): 16140. doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2016.140.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11CHIBI, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA
12Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Section for Metabolic 
Receptology and Enteroendocrinology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen DK-2200, Denmark
13New York Harbor Veterans Affairs Medical Center, New York, New York 10010, USA
Abstract
The early life microbiome plays important roles in host immunological and metabolic 
development. Because the incidence of type 1 diabetes (T1D) has been increasing substantially in 
recent decades, we hypothesized that early-life antibiotic use alters gut microbiota, which 
predisposes to disease. Using non-obese diabetic mice that are genetically susceptible to T1D, we 
examined the effects of exposure to either continuous low-dose antibiotics or pulsed therapeutic 
antibiotics (PAT) early in life, mimicking childhood exposures. We found that in mice receiving 
PAT, T1D incidence was significantly higher, and microbial community composition and structure 
differed compared with controls. In pre-diabetic male PAT mice, the intestinal lamina propria had 
lower Th17 and Treg proportions and intestinal SAA expression than in controls, suggesting key 
roles in transducing the altered microbiota signals. PAT affected microbial lipid metabolism and 
host cholesterol biosynthetic gene expression. These findings show that early-life antibiotic 
treatments alter the gut microbiota and its metabolic capacities, intestinal gene expression and T-
cell populations, accelerating T1D onset in non-obese diabetic mice.
Type 1 diabetes (T1D), an autoimmune disease characterized by pancreatic β-cell 
destruction, is increasing in incidence worldwide1, with decreasing age of onset2, suggesting 
that early-life environmental exposures are critical. Early-life interactions between hosts and 
their microbiota, key for immunological development, may have lasting effects3. 
Epidemiological studies support a ‘window of opportunity’: microbial exposures during 
pregnancy/early childhood may protect against developing allergic disorders4, whereas 
caesarean section and early-life antibiotic use, perturbing the microbiome, may have 
opposite effects5,6, consistent with decreased gut microbial biodiversity with human 
socioeconomic development7 and in children at high risk for T1D who develop diabetes-
specific autoantibodies8. Epidemiological studies have associated prior antibiotic exposure 
with increased risk for T1D and type 2 diabetes (T2D)9.
In non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice that spontaneously develop autoimmune (T1D-like) 
diabetes, microbial exposures affect diabetes incidence, with increased exposures (‘dirty’ 
conditions) being protective10,11. Conversely, T1D incidence is higher in NOD mice reared 
in specific-pathogen-free facilities than in those raised conventionally12. Although Myd88−/− 
NOD mice have reduced T1D incidence, germ-free (GF) status or broad-spectrum antibiotic 
treatment from birth restores diabetes development11, indicating the interplay between 
microbiota and immunity. In C57BL/6 mice, antibiotic-induced early-life microbial 
perturbations alter metabolic phenotypes13–15, and recent NOD mouse studies show strong 
antibiotic effects on T1D development16–18. We now examine the effects of sub-therapeutic 
continuous (STAT) or therapeutic-dose pulsed (PAT) antibiotics on immune development 
Livanos et al.
Page 2
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and T1D in NOD mice. We propose that PAT alters the developing microbiome, affecting 
early-life immune responses, tipping the balance toward T1D.
Results
PAT-accelerated T1D and insulitis development
To determine whether antibiotic use affects T1D incidence, NOD mice were exposed to 
STAT, PAT or no antibiotics (control) (Fig. 1a). As expected12, control females developed 
higher T1D incidence than males, but among males, PAT mice had higher T1D incidence 
(53%) than controls (26%) (P < 0.05) (Fig. 1b). No significant effects were seen in PAT 
females or in the STAT groups. In a later cohort of females only (males were not studied) in 
a separate facility (experiment 2; Fig. 1c), T1D incidence was also significantly higher in 
PAT than in controls. With experiments providing evidence that PAT promotes T1D 
development, we focused subsequent analyses on the first experiment with the male-specific 
phenotype; we did not formally compare STAT and PAT.
Assessing insulitis in 6-week-old mice, 35% of pancreatic islets in control females had 
inflammation, versus 7% in males (Fig. 1d). Among females, there were no significant 
insulitis differences across treatment groups, but male PAT mice had significantly higher 
scores than controls. In total, the 6-week-old insulitis scores were consistent with the 
treatment and sex-specific differential T1D development rates.
Antibiotic treatment alters T-cell subtypes in the small intestinal lamina propria (SI-LP)
Examining the effects on immunological development, we focused on Treg and Th17 
cells19,20 in the spleen and SI-LP of 6-week-old mice. Splenic Treg and Th17 cell 
proportions did not significantly differ between treatment groups for either sex. In the 
control SI-LP, male mice had higher Th17 proportions (P < 0.01) than females, and trended 
towards higher numbers of Treg cells. PAT male, but not female, mice had reduced SI-LP 
Treg and Th17 cell proportions compared to controls (Fig. 1e,f and Supplementary Fig. 
1a,b). These T-helper population changes are consistent with the PAT-enhanced T1D 
incidence in males. In STAT males, Treg and Th17 cell proportions were intermediate 
between controls and PAT.
PAT alters ileal gene expression
Next, we hypothesized that the antibiotic-altered gut microbiota mediated systemic effects 
via altered ileal gene expression. After false discovery rate (FDR) correction, no genes were 
significantly altered in STAT compared with controls, versus >1,000 in PAT (Supplementary 
Table 1). Despite the identical antibiotic treatment, the proportions of up- and downregulated 
genes in male and female PAT mice compared to their controls differed significantly (χ2 < 
0.0001). Most differentially regulated genes were sex-specific (Fig. 2a), consistent with 
recent findings21. Of the male-specific gene functionality, sterol, lipid, steroid and 
cholesterol metabolic processes were the most significantly upregulated (Supplementary 
Tables 2 and 3).
Livanos et al.
Page 3
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Focusing on the differentially expressed genes in the PAT males compared with their 
controls (Supplementary Table 1), the serum amyloid A (SAA) genes were among the most 
downregulated. quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) analyses confirmed 
reduced SAA 1, 2 and 3 expression (Fig. 2b); all were significantly correlated with SI-LP 
Th17 and Treg proportions (Fig. 2c), consistent with the role of SAAs as immune 
mediators20. Segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) induce SAA expression20; that no 
control and PAT males were SFB-colonized (Supplementary Fig. 1c) indicates that the 
observed differences are SFB-independent.
The microarray identified other genes significantly impacted by the PAT exposure, including 
those involved in innate immunity (for example, amphiregulin (upregulated)) and in adaptive 
(CD8) immunity (granzyme A and B (downregulated)). RAB30, the most highly induced 
(19-fold) gene in PAT males participates in early Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation22. PAT 
exposure significantly affected T-cell function pathways including those unique to males or 
females, or shared (FDR-corrected P < 0.05) (Supplementary Table 4).
PAT upregulates cholesterol biosynthesis and altered metabolomic profiles
Gene expression in the cholesterol biosynthetic superpathway was significantly increased in 
PAT male ilea compared with controls (P < 0.0001) (Fig. 3a). The major transcription factor 
Srebf2, which controls cholesterol biosynthetic gene expression and pathway genes 
including the rate-limiting Hmgcr, was upregulated in PAT. Metabolomic analysis of caecal, 
hepatic and serum samples from two 6-week-old cohorts consistently separated PAT from 
control in all three matrices (Fig. 3b). The differences reflected numerous small changes; 
however, across experiments, caecal valine, hepatic lipoproteins, taurine, trimethylamine N-
oxide (TMAO) and betaine, and gut-microbiota-regulated23 serum leucine and isoleucine 
(Supplementary Table 5), were consistently increased (Fig. 3c).
Antibiotics alter intestinal microbial communities
To determine the antibiotic effects on the intestinal microbiota, we examined 16S rRNA 
genes. At all timepoints, all sample types and in both males and females, the phylogenetic 
diversity in PAT was lower than in controls (FDR-corrected P values <0.05) (Fig. 4a and 
Supplementary Fig. 2a). By 13 weeks of age, seven weeks after antibiotic cessation, richness 
partially recovered. For the STAT mice, richness was intermediate early, but recovered after 
cessation.
At all timepoints in both sexes, control and STAT faecal samples showed substantial overlap 
in community structure (β-diversity), but the PAT were distinct. Communities in all samples 
progressively matured, with PAT converging towards controls (Fig. 4b and Supplementary 
Table 6). In both control and STAT mice, community structure intragroup diversities were 
stable up to week 13, but were reduced early in life in PAT mice, recovering later (Fig. 4c 
and Supplementary Fig. 2b). At all timepoints and for both sexes, pairwise intergroup 
distances between control and PAT were significantly higher than the intragroup variation 
(Fig. 4c and Supplementary Fig. 2b). In total, these results indicate that PAT selected for 
distinctive microbial community structure, persisting weeks after antibiotic cessation, before 
T1D onset.
Livanos et al.
Page 4
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Using operational taxonomic unit (OTU) co-occurrence network analysis of faecal samples 
from 6-week-old males, PAT deviated substantially from controls, with fewer constituent 
OTUs and relatively little overlap (Fig. 4d), and lower diversity scores (P < 0.0001; 
Supplementary Fig. 2c,d). Hierarchical clustering of samples from 6-week-old males 
showed deep branching separating PAT from the intermixed control and STAT samples 
(Supplementary Fig. 3a). Although minor branches correspond to litters (Supplementary Fig. 
3b), each treatment group had ≥5 litters, reducing individual cage effects.
PAT effects on taxa abundances
Male and female control (and STAT) samples had similar, but not identical, compositions 
over time (Supplementary Fig. 3c). Notably, the 3-week-old PAT males had nearly complete 
caecal and ileal loss of Bacteroidetes and Actinobacteria, and increased Proteobacteria and 
Akkermansia mucinophila (Supplementary Figs 3c and 4a). Akkermansia relative abundance 
progressively decreased in PAT samples but remained significantly greater than in controls. 
The S24-7 family (Bacteroidales) was decreased in early PAT samples, recovering after 
antibiotic cessation (Supplementary Fig. 4a).
Using LDA effect size (LefSe) to determine differentially enriched taxa, at week 3, males 
and females were similar, as expected, because pups were co-housed and pre-pubertal. At 
weeks 6–13, particular taxa (including genus Bifidobacterium) were over-represented in 
control male faeces compared to PAT, and in control caecal and ileal samples at 6 weeks 
(Supplementary Figs 4b, 5 and 6). In contrast, Akkermansia was enriched in PAT males at 
all times (Supplementary Figs 4b, 5 and 6).
Three defined Bifidobacterium species were detected: adolescentis, animalis and 
pseudolongum, with abundances paralleling the composite genus Bifidobacterium 
(Supplementary Figs 4c and 7a). Ileal Bifidobacterium spp. including unnamed 
Bifidobacterium, which were present at higher relative abundances in control males than the 
named species, were much more abundant in males than females (Supplementary Fig. 7a,b). 
Bifidobacterium genus-specific qPCR correlated highly with 16S sequencing abundances 
(Supplementary Figs 4d and 7c). In mice that developed diabetes, Bifidobacterium levels 
determined by qPCR directly correlated with age of disease onset (Supplementary Fig. 4e).
Predictive microbial models for T1D
The extent of microbiota perturbation at 3-week-old PAT mice relative to controls was 
similar in those ultimately becoming diabetic or not (P = 0.11). By 6 weeks, mice that 
ultimately developed diabetes were more compositionally different from same-age controls 
than those not developing diabetes (P = 0.013, Fig. 5a). Faecal samples from 6-week-old 
PAT mice that later developed diabetes were more similar to their 3-week populations than 
mice that did not (P = 0.013, Fig. 5b). A predictive model for T1D development in the 6-
week-old PAT males (Fig. 5c) was significantly better than random, or than a model based 
on cage membership. The ten most predictive genera include Akkermansia, S24-7, 
Enterococcus and Dorea (Fig. 5d,e). In PAT males that developed diabetes, S24-7 was lower 
and Akkermansia and Enterococcus were higher than in those that did not develop diabetes 
(Fig. 5f). In experiment 2, the relative abundances of Akkermansia and Enterococcus were 
Livanos et al.
Page 5
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 increased and S24-7 reduced in PAT females (Supplementary Fig. 7d), paralleling 
experiment 1 diabetes development trends (Supplementary Fig. 7e).
PAT alters predicted intestinal metagenomic pathways
Predicting metagenomic content in faecal specimens using PICRUSt, we identified KEGG 
level 3 pathways enriched in 6-week-old PAT males (Supplementary Fig. 8a). Biosynthesis 
of total and unsaturated fatty acids and branched chain amino acid (BCAA) metabolism was 
significantly increased in PAT samples at all timepoints (Supplementary Fig. 8b–d). PAT 
significantly decreased the relative abundance of genes involved in metabolizing butanoate, 
with reciprocal changes for propionate (Supplementary Fig. 8e,f). By metabolomic analysis, 
caecal butyrate was found to be lower in PAT males, consistent with the PICRUSt findings 
(Supplementary Fig. 8g). In summary, PAT significantly affected intestinal metagenomic 
content, with both transient and long-lasting changes after antibiotic cessation.
Microbiota transfer to germ-free mice
We transferred caecal contents from 6-week-old male control or PAT mice (donor pools) to 
pregnant germ-free NOD recipients via oral gavage and studied their male pups (Fig. 6a). 
For pups receiving the control inoculum via their mothers, T1D development was as 
expected23, but for pups receiving the PAT inoculum, T1D development was not increased 
(Fig. 6b). As expected, the microbiota of recipient pups resembled that of their respective 
donors; however, the recipient communities overlapped (Fig. 6c). For the PAT recipients, 
early α-diversity was lower than for control recipients; however, the groups converged by 
week 9 (Fig. 6d). At early timepoints, the PAT recipient pups had higher Akkermansia, 
Blautia and Escherichia coli and lower S24-7 relative abundances compared with controls 
(Fig. 6e); thus, transfer of caecal contents from 6-week-old PAT mice to pregnant germ-free 
mice conventionalized pups with microbiota enriched in opportunistic organisms.
We performed a second transfer experiment to examine immune phenotypes in recipient 
germ-free animals, using C57BL/6 mice because they develop immunological abnormalities 
with early-life antibiotic exposure14 and because prior studies have shown that 
conventionalization across mouse strain types yields the expected phenotypes14. In this 
experiment, caecal contents from four (three female and one male) NOD mice at day of life 
(dol) 17 that had received only a single course of PAT from dol 10–15 (or were untreated 
controls) were transferred to 3-week-old germ-free C57BL/6 mice. Recipient mice were 
killed 6 weeks after conventionalization, and splenic and SI-LP lymphocytes were studied 
(Fig. 6f). In each of the four comparisons, the PAT microbiota recipients showed lower Treg 
and Th17 cell proportions than the recipients of the control microbiota; although the 
numbers were very small, the results in male and female recipients were similar 
(Supplementary Fig. 9). This experiment provides preliminary evidence that early-in-life 
antibiotic-altered microbiota are sufficient to confer the altered immune phenotypes.
Discussion
We have shown that when initiated early in life in NOD mice, therapeutic antibiotic pulses 
(PAT), based on the doses (and pharmacokinetics) used in young children, can increase 
Livanos et al.
Page 6
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 autoimmune diabetes (T1D) development and worsen its histopathological hallmark, 
insulitis. The macrolide-based PAT15 model had consistently greater effects than the β-
lactam-based STAT model13,14 on intestinal microbiota, ileal gene expression, T-helper 
subtypes and T1D development, but we are not comparing them directly because they differ 
in both dose and antibiotic class. The PAT model is clinically relevant, because US children 
receive approximately one antibiotic course annually, frequently macrolides24. Previous T1D 
studies involving antibiotic exposures, differing in design, yielded inconsistent 
results11,25,26. Although multiple T1D-protective factors are known12, fewer disease-
accelerating factors have been identified in NOD mice. However, three recent studies16–18 
have shown that antibiotic regimens severely disrupting the microbiota enhance T1D in 
NOD mice. Exposure to the STAT regimen13,14 produced few immunological effects, 
consistent with the reduced intensity of antibiotic exposure and microbiome effects; 
therapeutic antibiotic doses have more profound and long-lasting effects15.
In our first experiment, PAT increased T1D development in males but not females. Because 
T1D rates are lower in NOD males than in females10,21, our findings suggest that males may 
have protective microbiota that are eliminated by PAT; this is consistent with the finding that 
transfer of adult male microbiota to female NOD mice conferred T1D protection21. Future 
experiments could test this directly, by including PAT exposure before the transfer. However, 
among female mice bred elsewhere, PAT also promoted T1D, illustrating facility-dependent 
differences10 and showing that the antibiotic effects were not male-restricted. Despite 
environmental differences, this work provides evidence that early-in-life PAT exposures 
accelerate T1D development in NOD mice.
By studying tissues of 6-week-old mice, we examined events in the intestine and pancreas 
before T1D development. We focused on the ileum because microbial colonization is more 
variable than in the colon, with multiple genes being inducible27. The PAT-mediated 
decreased proportions of intestinal FOXP3+ Treg and RORγt+ Th17 cells in male, but not 
female, mice were consistent with the experiment 1 sex-specific T1D incidence differences. 
Treg cell imbalances may promote autoimmune diseases, including T1D28, with defective 
small intestinal FOXP3+ T-cell differentiation29. Although Th17 cells contribute to other 
autoimmune diseases30, both protection and pathogenicity have been reported for T1D30,31. 
In a recent study, intensive antibiotic exposure reduced ileal and colonic lamina propria 
Th17 populations and increased diabetes development16. SI-LP Th17 cell differentiation 
induced by SFB and Lactobacillus johnsonii has been associated with T1D protection32,33, 
consistent with our inverse finding of reduced Th17 cells with T1D acceleration. Because 
Th17 cells promote intestinal barrier function34, their diminution may lead to defective 
barrier function in T1D patients35.
Although partially recovered by 13 weeks, the PAT-exposed microbiota remained reduced in 
α-diversity and compositionally distinct from control mice, paralleling observations in 
human children with T1D36 and autoantibodies before onset8. Our analyses identified taxa 
that may modulate T1D development. Bifidobacterium was enriched in the relatively 
protected control males, but essentially absent in all three relatively at-risk groups. In 
humans and other mammals, more than 30 Bifidobacterium species have been identified37, 
and broad conservation suggests functional importance. Bifidobacterium species dominate 
Livanos et al.
Page 7
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the gut microbiota of healthy infants38, especially when breast-fed38, consistent with 
Bifidobacterium digesting breast milk oligosaccharides. Both breast-feeding39 and vaginal 
birth40 protect against T1D development, and B. adolescentis levels inversely correlate with 
diabetes-associated autoantibody prevalence41. Bifidobacterium induction of Treg cells and 
REGIIIγ secretion correlates with their reduced levels in PAT males. Thus, both 
epidemiological and mechanistic studies suggest potential Bifidobacterium protection 
against T1D. The less well-known S24-7 family42 was associated with decreased T1D 
development in both experiments, warranting further investigation. S24-7 was the most 
highly over-represented taxon in uncontacted Amerindians compared to US subjects7, 
suggesting its continuing disappearance with modernization. Conversely, informatic 
analyses identified Akkermansia and Enterococcus as significantly T1D-accelerating in PAT, 
consistent with the concept that ‘dirty’ protects in NOD mice12. These studies also indicate 
both microbial population-specific and immune-specific differences between male and 
female mice that might explain the sex differences in T1D incidence.
We found significant differences between control and PAT males in microbiome-predicted 
functions, affecting carbohydrate, lipid and amino-acid metabolism. Increased representation 
of BCAA metabolism genes in the PAT metagenome as well as increased serum levels of 
leucine and isoleucine is consistent with higher BCAA serum levels in mice43 and in 
humans who progress T1D44. The choline metabolites, TMAO and betaine, derived from gut 
microbiota, have associations with atherosclerosis45. Previous work has suggested that the 
microbiome can alter lipid metabolism46. Here, PAT significantly increased the 
representation of pro-inflammatory free fatty acid lipids and increased the expression of 
cholesterol biosynthesis in the ileum, a major inducible site of cholesterol biosynthesis. 
Cholesterol enhances inflammation47 and inhibition of their synthesis by statins, HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors, is anti-inflammatory and counters autoimmunity47. In total, the 
increased ileal cholesterol synthesis and metabolites in PAT may promote inflammation.
In addition to global PAT effects, we observed decreased caecal 48 and consistent butyrate, 
known to induce Treg cell differentiation with the reduced intestinal Treg cells in PAT. The 
parallel reduction in predicted butanoate metabolism we observed is consistent with reduced 
butyrate-producing bacteria in T1D children49. NOD progressors to T1D had elevated 
circulating lipids43, consistent with our observation of increased liver-specific and serum-
detectable lipid species in PAT mice. In total, the metabolic characteristics we observed in 
the PAT mice are consistent with findings in both humans and in NOD models for 
accelerated T1D. Nevertheless, these changes are only associations, and causal relationships 
must be established.
In our agnostic approach to identify ileal genes affected by PAT, the SAAs, acute phase 
reactants produced by intestinal epithelial cells that also promote Th17 cell differentiation20 
were strongly differentiating. The consistent decreases in PAT of SAA1, SAA2 and SAA3 
ileal expression suggest reductions in stimulatory bacterial species, consortia and/or 
metabolites50. Because our mice lack the stimulatory SFB20, other bacteria must be relevant 
to this pathway. We propose that intestinal SAA proteins are important innate effectors 
connecting the microbiota to adaptive immunity. We speculate that PAT reduces antigenic 
stimulation during a critical window in immunological development, leading to reduced 
Livanos et al.
Page 8
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 intestinal immune effectors, including innate molecules such as SAAs, antimicrobial 
peptides (REGIIIγ) and altering particular T-helper populations (for example, via 
RAB30)22, with important effector functions. Such changes could reduce intestinal barrier 
function, allowing translocation of luminal bacteria or products promoting systemic 
inflammation. Barrier function loss, suspected in human T1D and in animal models35, has 
been related to microbiota composition and presumed functions49.
To isolate the effects of the microbiota from those directly mediated through antibiotics, we 
transferred caecal contents from either PAT or control mice to germ-free recipient pregnant 
NOD dams, so that pups would be exposed from birth. We did not observe accelerated T1D 
in the PAT caecal-content recipients, but three non-exclusive hypotheses might be operant. 
First, conventionalizing pregnant dams may have direct immunological effects. Second, the 
initial microbial selection occurred in the mothers, affecting the inocula the pups actually 
received. Such phenomena could explain the observed intermediate microbial state in the 
pups, regardless of donor source, and are consistent withT1D protection in offspring of NOD 
mothers treated during gestation17. A third explanation is that >5 weeks after PAT initiation, 
opportunistic bacteria had already bloomed in the PAT mice, providing a compromised 
inoculum derived after the critical immunological window. The trend to protection in the 
recipient mice is consistent with earlier observations that ‘dirty protects’, specifically 
Akkermansia25, and with our informatic findings in PAT mice without transfer (Fig. 5f). 
Performing caecal transfers from younger mice (dol 17), immediately after antibiotic 
exposure may be more germane to the pathogenesis of PAT-induced accelerated T1D. Our 
experiment, although across mouse strains and of small size (Fig. 6f), provides preliminary 
evidence supporting this point. Previously, antibiotic-altered microbiota transferred 
diminished Th17 phenotypes across strain lines (C57BL/6 to Swiss Webster)14. Together, 
these findings suggest that despite the genetic differences between the tested mouse strains, 
the antibiotic-altered microbiota might differentially signal immunological effectors, 
providing preliminary evidence that early-life microbiome changes due to PAT may be 
sufficient for the T1D effect.
In conclusion, this work shows that early-in-life antibiotic exposure in NOD mice can 
accelerate T1D development, modifying the disease. This study, along with other recent 
investigations16–18, raises questions regarding widespread antibiotic use in early 
childhood24. However, in other studies, antibiotics were found to have the opposite 
effects24,25; thus, antibiotic type, dose and timing are all relevant variables that might 
influence effects. Environmental changes, independent of antibiotic-induced effects, could 
also contribute to increasing T1D incidence in human children1,2. Roles for altered 
environmental exposures and microbiota need not be exclusive. We identify potentially 
important intestinal bacterial taxa affected by antibiotic exposures and downstream immune 
and metabolic pathways. Additional targeted metabolomic and metagenomic analyses are 
warranted to extend these findings. Further studies will help understand generalizability, 
pathway independence or synergy, and whether such pathways can be modified to prevent or 
delay T1D development.
Livanos et al.
Page 9
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Methods
Mice
For experiment 1, male and female 8- to 10-week-old NOD/Shiltj mice (no. 001976, Jackson 
Labs) were bred in an SPF vivarium at New York University Langone Medical Center 
(NYULMC) to obtain sufficient litters. The pups used for experiments were born in the first 
litter of each dam and were randomly assigned to each of the three experimental groups. The 
litters were not intermixed following weaning, and this determined the cages in which post-
weaning mice were housed. Mice were housed in autoclaved Thoren polycarbonate cages 
(Hazelton PA) with autoclaved bedding, and maintained on a 12 h light/dark cycle at 70 
± 2 °F, according to the guidelines of the Division of Laboratory Animal Resources (DLAR) 
at NYULMC. Mice were fed ad libitum using an irradiated laboratory chow (LabDiet JL Rat 
and Mouse/Irr 6F 5LG4). All animal procedures were approved by the NYULMC 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC protocol no. 110711).
In experiment 2, mice were bred and housed at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center 
(MSKCC) animal facility. As above, NOD dams and their litters were randomly assigned to 
either control or PAT groups. The female pups were monitored for diabetes development and 
the other methods are as described for experiment 1.
Antibiotic treatments
Dams and their litters had been randomly divided into control, STAT (sub-therapeutic 
antibiotic treatment) and PAT (pulsed antibiotic treatment) groups (Fig. 1a). The control 
mice received non-acidified sterilized water (NASW) until the end of the antibiotic 
treatments, and for the two antibiotic groups (STAT and PAT) the antibiotics were dissolved 
in NASW. For STAT13,14, penicillin V potassium salt (Sigma Aldrich) was used at a 
concentration of 6.67 mg l–1 to a dose of ~1 mg per kg bodyweight per day (based on a 
mouse average consumption of 150 ml water per kg body weight51), which is a sub-
therapeutic dose approved by the FDA for agriculture52. STAT was begun in late pregnancy, 
and then continued until day 84 of the pups’ lives. For PAT15, three pulses of therapeutic 
doses of the macrolide tylosin tartrate (Sigma Aldrich) were given to the mice in their 
drinking water, dissolved at a concentration of 333 mg l–1 to achieve a dose of about 50 mg 
per kg body weight per day, as routinely given as a therapeutic to rodents53. The first pulse 
was given on dol 10–15, so pups received the antibiotic via their mothers’ milk, and the 
following two pulses were given post-weaning, on dol 28–31 and 37–40.
Diabetes monitoring
By measuring blood glucose (FreeStyle Lite meter and test strips; Abbott) obtained via a tail 
vein nick starting at week 10 of life, all mice were monitored for diabetes onset, defined as 
two consecutive values >250 mg dl–1 (refs 11,54).
Histology
Pancreata from 6-week-old control, STAT and PAT mice were fixed in modified Bouin’s 
fixative, paraffin-embedded, cut, and stained with aldehyde fuchsin for insulitis scoring12. 
Each of five sections of each pancreas was 5 μm thick, with a 70 μm gap between sections. 
Livanos et al.
Page 10
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Insulitis was evaluated on a 0–4 scale (0, normal islet; 1, peri-insular leukocyte aggregates; 
2, leukocyte infiltration <25%; 3, leukocyte infiltration >25%, but <75%; 4, leukocyte 
infiltration >75% and β-cell destruction)55. Thirty islets per mouse were scored by a board-
certified veterinary pathologist (ABR) blinded to treatment groups. The distributions of 
insulitis severity scores in each treatment group were compared with the same-sex control 
group using the generalized Wald-type test56 in the HMP R package57.
Tissue collection
The distal ileum (1 cm) with Peyer’s patches removed was collected from each mouse at 
sacrifice for RNA extraction. The tissue was placed in RNAlater (Life Technologies) 
overnight at 4 °C and then after RNAlater removal, stored at −80 °C, until RNA extraction 
was performed.
Microarray gene expression profiling
Ileal gene expression profiling was performed using the Affymetrix Genechip system. Total 
RNA was extracted from mouse tissues using the RNeasy Mini Kit with on-column DNase 
treatment to remove contaminating gDNA (Qiagen). Total RNA quality and quantity were 
determined using the Nanodrop ND-1000 (Wilmington DE), agarose gel and Agilent 2100 
Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). Total RNA (100 ng) was used to prepare cDNA using 
the Affymetrix 3′IVT Express Kit labelling protocol. Standardized array processing 
procedures recommended by Affymetrix were performed, including hybridization, fluidics 
processing and scanning of the Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array chips. Raw probe 
intensities were normalized by Robust Multi-array Average (RMA) algorithm R58 using the 
affy package in R and the limma package used to identify regulated genes using linear 
models and empirical Bayes methods with FDR cutoff of P < 0.05 (ref. 59). Gene expression 
pathway analysis was performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and 
Integrated Discovery (DAVID, NIH)60 Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Qiagen)61 and 
clusterProfiler62.
Gene expression analysis by qPCR
From the total extracted RNA described above, 1 μg was reverse transcribed to cDNA using 
Super Script II (Life Technologies). To generate standards for expression analysis of each 
target gene, the cDNA region of interest was PCR-amplified and the product cloned into 
pGEM-T easy (Promega). qPCR was performed (primer sequences are provided in 
Supplementary Table 7) with Power SYBR Green PCR Master mix (Roche) and run in a 
LightCycler 480 system (Roche). Target mRNA was normalized to 18S rRNA as an internal 
control in each sample. For group mean comparisons, the Kruskal–Wallis test followed by 
Dunn’s multiple comparison test was performed, and for correlations, non-parametric 
Spearman methods were used.
Metabolomics
Serum and liver samples were prepared as described in ref. 63, with minor adjustments. 
Briefly, serum samples were thawed on ice and vortexed for 30 s. An aliquot (50 μl) of each 
study sample was transferred into labelled tubes. Three aliquots (50 μl each) of study-
Livanos et al.
Page 11
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 independent mouse sera (Sigma, no. S7273) were also transferred into labelled tubes for use 
as analytical quality control (QC) samples. Freshly prepared 0.9% saline (wt/vol) solution in 
deuterium oxide (D2O) was added to each tube (150 μl), with vortexing for 30 s. Freshly 
prepared 10 mM formate solution containing 0.2% (wt/vol) NaN3 was added to each tube 
(50 μl) to serve as an internal standard. Tubes were vortexed for 30 s, centrifuged at 12,000 
r.c.f. for 5 min at 4 °C and a 200 μl aliquot of each supernatant was transferred into 3 mm 
NMR tubes (Bruker-Biospin).
Frozen liver samples were weighed (50–100 mg) into labelled homogenizer bead tubes 
(stainless-steel beads). Cold acetonitrile:water (1:1) was added to tissue based on weight to 
make 100 mg ml–1 homogenates, then samples were extracted by homogenization (Spex 
Geno/Grinder) for two 45 s pulses at 1,750 r.p.m., then centrifuged at 12,000 r.c.f. for 5 min, 
and total liver supernatants were transferred into new labelled tubes. A 500 μl aliquot (50 mg 
tissue equivalent) of supernatant/sample was transferred into a second set of labelled tubes 
for further processing. Study-independent homogenized liver supernatants were pooled, and 
three aliquots were transferred into labelled tubes for use as analytical QC samples. All 
samples were dried on a SpeedVac (Eppendorf, V-AL setting) at 30 °C and stored at −80 °C 
overnight. The dried liver extracts were reconstituted in 630 μl D2O. Chenomx Internal 
Standard solution (Chenomx ISTD) containing 5 mM 4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonic 
acid (DSS, chemical shift indicator), 100 mM Imidazole (pH indicator) and 0.2% NaN3 was 
added, and samples were vortex-mixed on a multi-tube vortexer for 10 min at speed 5. Tubes 
were centrifuged at 12,000 r.c.f. for 5 min, and a 600 μl aliquot of each sample supernatant 
was transferred into 5 mm NMR tubes (Bruker-BioSpin).
Caecal content samples were prepared as described in ref. 64, with minor adjustments. 
Briefly, frozen samples were weighed into labelled homogenizer bead tubes. D2O was added 
(500 μl) and the samples were homogenized for two 30 s pulses at 1,750 r.p.m., centrifuged 
at 12,000 r.c.f. for 5 min and 450 μl supernatants transferred into 2.0 ml tubes containing 0.2 
μm nylon filters and centrifuged at 16,000 r.c.f. until the homogenate was completely 
filtered. Study-independent homogenized caecal supernatants were pooled and filtered, and 
three aliquots were transferred into labelled tubes for use as analytical QC samples. A 
volume of filtered supernatant equal to 50 mg per sample and a calculated volume of D2O to 
bring the total sample volume to 630 μl was transferred into new labelled tubes. Chenomx 
ISTD was added (70 μl) and the tubes were vortexed for 30 s, centrifuged at 12,000 r.c.f. for 
5 min and a 600 μl aliquot of each supernatant was transferred into 5 mm NMR tubes.
1H NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker Avance III 700 MHz NMR spectrometer 
(Bruker-Biospin) located at the David H. Murdock Research Institute at Kannapolis (NC) 
using a cryogenically cooled 5 mm ATMA probe and an ambient temperature of 25 °C. For 
liver and caecal samples, a standard 1D pulse sequence (noesypr1d; ref. 63) of a NOESY 
pulse program was used with water pre-saturation during a relaxation delay of 2 s and 
mixing time of 100 ms. For serum samples, a CPMG pulse sequence with water pre-
saturation (cpmgpr1d; ref. 63) was used. For each serum sample, 256 transients were 
collected into 64,000 data points using a spectral width of 19.5 kHz (20.5 ppm), 2 s 
relaxation delay, 400 μs fixed echo time, loop for T2 filter (l4) = 80 and an acquisition time 
of 2.32 s per free induction decay (FID). For each liver or caecal sample, 64 transients were 
Livanos et al.
Page 12
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 collected into 64,000 data points using a spectral width of 19.5 kHz (20.5 ppm), 2 s 
relaxation delay and an acquisition time of 2.32 s per FID. FIDs were zero-filled by a factor 
of 2, and a line broadening factor of 0.5 Hz was applied before Fourier transformation. 
Spectra were manually phased, baseline corrected, and calibrated to DSS (δ 0) for liver and 
caecal samples and to formate (δ 8.43) for serum samples.
Metabolomics analysis was performed as described in refs 63 and 65–70. Briefly, following 
data acquisition, spectra were binned (0.50–9.0 ppm) using intelligent bucketing integration 
with a 0.04 ppm bucket width and a 50% looseness factor in ACD NMR Processor 12.0 
(ACD Labs) software. Chemical shift regions for water (caecal: 4.70–4.90 ppm; liver: 4.70–
4.85 ppm; serum: 4.7–6.35 ppm), imidazole (caecal: 7.22–7.34 ppm; liver: 7.25–7.39 ppm) 
and formate (8.40–8.5 in serum) were excluded from binning. Each of the bin integrals was 
normalized to the total integral of each spectrum. Principal component analysis (PCA) and 
orthogonal partial least-squares projection (OPLS-DA) of binned data were performed using 
pareto-scaling and mean centring, using SIMCA 13.0 (Umetrics). Variable importance for 
projection plots (VIP ≥1.0) were used to identify the important bins responsible for the 
separation of the study groups. These bins were matched to the metabolites using the 
metabolite library in Chenomx NMR Suite 7.7 Professional (Edmonton) software.
Isolation of SI-LP leukocytes
After euthanasia of the mice by CO2 narcosis followed by cervical dislocation, the small 
intestines were dissected and immediately placed in cold calcium and magnesium-free 
Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (dPBS), followed by removal of mesenteric fat and 
Peyer’s patches. The intestines were opened longitudinally and the contents were removed 
by washing thoroughly with cold dPBS, then cut into 2 cm pieces and treated with 1 mM 
dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich) in dPBS, for 10 min at room temperature, to remove 
contaminating mucus and intraepithelial lymphocytes. The intestinal tissue was then treated 
twice with 30 mM EDTA and 10 mM HEPES in dPBS to remove epithelial cells. To isolate 
lamina propria lymphocytes, intestinal tissue was incubated for 1.5 h at 37 °C in digestion 
mix (0.5 mg ml−1 collagenase/dispase (Roche), 150 μg ml−1 DNase 1 (Sigma Aldrich) in 
complete RPMI (RPMI 1640 containing 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, penicillin 
(100 IU ml−1), streptomycin (100 μg ml−1) and 0.05 mM 2-mercaptoethanol), then cells 
passed through a 100 μm diameter nylon mesh filter (BD Bioscience). For further 
purification of leukocytes, intestinal cell suspensions were resuspended in 40% Percoll, 
under-layered with 80% Percoll (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and centrifuged at 974g for 
25 min at room temperature. The leukocytes, collected at the interphase of the 40/80% 
discontinuous Percoll gradient, were washed and resuspended in dPBS for staining, as 
described, with minor modifications, in ref. 71.
Isolation of splenic leukocytes
Spleens were homogenized between frosted slides into RPMI and then passed through a 40 
μm nylon mesh filter (BD Biosciences). Cells were pelleted at 300g for 5 min, supernatants 
were removed, followed by red blood cell lysis with ACK (ammonium-chloride-potassium) 
lysis buffer (Life Technologies) for 7 min at room temperature. Cells were washed with 
RPMI and then resuspended in dPBS for staining.
Livanos et al.
Page 13
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Lymphocyte staining and subset analysis
Cells were incubated with LIVE/DEAD Fixable Blue dead cell stain (Life Technologies) for 
10 min at 4 °C to identify live cells. Intestinal leukocytes were phenotyped using the 
following antibodies: CD3-APC-Cy 7 (BD Biosciences), CD4-PE-Alexa Fluor 610 
(Invitrogen), CD8-V500 (BD Biosciences), RORγt-PE (eBioscience) and FOXP3-PE-Cy7 
(eBioscience). Cells were first incubated with surface antibodies (each at 1:50 in FACS 
buffer) along with FC block (anti-mouse CD16/CD32, eBioscience) at 1:200 for 30 min at 
4 °C, then fixed and permeabilized with fixation/permeabilization buffer (eBioscience) and 
subsequently incubated with the nuclear antibodies in permeabilization buffer (eBioscience) 
for 30 min at 4 °C. All cells were acquired on an LSRII cell analyser (Becton-Dickinson) 
and analysed using FlowJo software (Tree Star). To determine statistical significance 
between groups, we used the Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison 
test.
Microbiome assessment
Freshly voided faecal pellets were collected at weaning (day 22 of life) and then weekly for 
the remainder of the experiments, by placing each mouse in a plastic container in a fume 
hood. Between each mouse, the container was cleaned with MB-10. The pellets were placed 
into sterilized microcentrifuge tubes with forceps cleaned in 70% ethanol and frozen at 
−80 °C. Caecal and ileal samples were collected following necropsy then frozen at −80 °C; 
contents and tissue were collected together to allow sampling of both mucosal-associated 
and luminal bacteria. DNA was extracted from faecal, caecal and ileal samples using the 
PowerLyzer PowerSoil DNA isolation kit and the PowerSoil-htp 96 Well Soil DNA isolation 
kit (MoBio), and DNA concentration was quantified using the Nanodrop ND-1000. 
Sequencing analysis was conducted for experiment 1. The microbiota associated with the 
enhanced phenotype in experiment 2 have not been determined. The V4 region of the 
bacterial 16S rRNA gene was amplified by triplicate PCR (F515/R806) using barcoded 
fusion primers, as described in ref. 72. The DNA concentration of the V4 amplicons for each 
sample was measured using the Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA assay kit and the Tecan infinite 
plate reader or the PerkinElmer plate reader. Samples were pooled in sets with a maximum 
of 96 samples in equal quantities. These set pools were then purified using the Qiaquick 
PCR purification kit (Qiagen) to remove primers, quantified using the high-sensitivity 
dsDNA assay kit and the Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (Life Technologies) and then combined at 
equal concentrations to form the sequencing library. Paired-end sequencing of the amplicon 
library was performed on the Illumina MiSeq plateform, with a 15% PhiX spike to improve 
the signal from a low-diversity library. The sequencing generated 151-base-pair forward and 
reverse reads and a 12-base-pair barcode read; reads passing the Illumina quality filter were 
used for downstream analysis.
Bioinformatic analysis of microbiome sequences
The forward and reverse paired-end reads were trimmed using fastq-mcf, then joined using 
the fastq-join function from EA-utils73. Only reads with a minimum overlap of 30 bases and 
with perfect matching of bases between reads were retained, then demultiplexed, filtered and 
analysed using QIIME74. Reads with more than three consecutive low-quality bases (Phred 
Livanos et al.
Page 14
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 score <20) were truncated and retained only if the read was >75% of the original length. 
Open reference OTU picking was performed using the uclust method and taxonomy was 
assigned using the RDP classifier with a confidence interval of 50%, using the GreenGenes 
May 2013 database release as reference75.
Unweighted UniFrac distances and α-diversity metrics (richness and phylogenetic diversity) 
were calculated and principal coordinate (PCoA) and relative abundance analyses were 
generated using QIIME. The R vegan package Adonis test was used to determine β-diversity 
differences76,77. Statistical significance of the inter-and intra-group β-diversity was 
determined by permutation testing. The P value was calculated using the fraction of the 
random permutations out of 10,000 that yielded a greater difference than in the one observed 
(t-statistic), followed by Bonferroni’s correction for multiple comparisons. For α-diversity, 
statistical significance was determined using the non-parametric t-test with 999 Monte Carlo 
permutations at a depth of 4,000 followed by Bonferroni’s correction.
OTU co-occurrence and diversity in male control and PAT samples
To identify co-association of mouse intestinal microbiome samples with sets of taxonomic 
groups (OTUs), we visualized the sample–OTU co-occurrence network in Cytoscape 
(version 3.1.0) with edge-weighted spring-embedded layout. The input files were from the 
QIIME script make_otu_network.py performed on male control and PAT 6-week-old faecal 
samples.
Determination of differential taxa
To determine significantly different taxa between sexes and treatment groups, the linear 
discriminate analysis (LDA) effect size (LEfSe) algorithm on the Galaxy browser was 
used78. LEfSe first performs the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test to determine taxa that 
were significantly different in abundances and then uses LDA to determine the effect size. 
Taxa were considered significantly different if the P value for the factorial Kruskal–Wallis 
sum-rank test was <0.05 and the logarithmic LDA score was >2.0.
Bifidobacterium quantitation by qPCR
Bifidobacterium species were quantified in faecal samples using genus-specific primers as 
described previously (F 5′ CTCCTGGAAACGGGTGG 3′; R 5′ 
GGTGTTCTTCCCGATATCTACA 3′)79. Bifidobacterium breve genomic DNA (AATC 
15700-D5) was used as the standard to absolutely quantitate Bifidobacterium abundance. 
qPCR was performed with LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master mix (Roche) and run in a 
LightCycler 480 system (Roche) with an annealing temperature of 55 °C. Under these 
conditions, Bifidobacterium was quantifiable in a dynamic range from 101 to 106 copies.
SFB quantitation
SFB were quantified by qPCR in faecal samples using the described 736F/844R primer set80 
(Supplementary Table 7). To obtain absolute quantities of SFB, the PCR product was cloned 
using the pGEM-T easy Vector System I (Promega). Colonies were confirmed to have the 
correct insert by PCR followed by sequencing. The plasmid was then purified using the 
Qiagen Plasmid Midi kit and DNA concentration was determined by Nanodrop. qPCR was 
Livanos et al.
Page 15
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 performed with LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master mix (Roche) and run in a 
LightCycler 480 system (Roche) with an annealing temperature of 62 °C. Under these 
conditions, SFB were quantifiable in a dynamic range from 102 to 106 copies.
Measurement of PAT-induced microbial perturbation
To test the hypothesis that non-species-specific perturbation of the microbiota was related to 
the increase in subsequent diabetes risk, we used the Mann–Whitney U-test to compare the 
weighted UniFrac β-diversity in mice that ultimately developed diabetes or not. We 
measured perturbation in terms of weighted UniFrac distances, comparing faecal samples 
from control mice at 6 weeks to PAT mice at 6 weeks that develop diabetes or not. Similarly, 
we compared those distances from paired samples of PAT mice obtained at 3 and 6 weeks by 
whether the mice ultimately developed diabetes or not.
Development of a predictive model for T1D in PAT male mice
We built a classifier for predicting the development of T1D using 6-week-old male faecal 
samples, determined using the randomForest package in R with 2,000 trees and default 
settings81,82. In contrast to traditional classification models, supervised learning methods are 
inherently designed to generalize to unseen input data rather than optimal model fit. When 
benchmarked against other supervised learning methods, random forest was the strongest 
performer in classifying human microbiome data83 and has been used robustly to classify 
western and non-western human gut microbiomes38. The mean and standard deviation of the 
expected classifier accuracy were calculated using tenfold cross-validation error estimates 
nested within a tenfold jackknifing procedure. Microbiome compositions, represented by the 
relative abundances of species-level taxon tables, were used as predictors of T1D 
development. We assessed accuracy by training the classifier on 90% of the samples 
(‘training set’), then measuring the accuracy in predicting the correct label for the other 10% 
of the samples (‘test set’), repeating this process ten times, so that every sample was 
included in the test set exactly once. This cross-validation procedure produced a single 
estimation of the expected predictive accuracy of the model. To determine both the final 
estimate of the expected accuracy and the standard deviation of this estimate, we nested this 
tenfold cross-validation procedure within tenfold jackknifing. As such, we performed the 
entire train/test tenfold cross-validation procedure ten times while withholding a different 
10% of the data each time, to produce ten accuracy estimates. The mean and standard error 
of the accuracy (76.5 ± 6.2%) were calculated from these ten jackknifed estimates. We 
measured feature importance as the mean decrease in model accuracy when that feature’s 
values were permuted randomly. The feature importance scores were reported by the 
randomForest package. Genera with mean 1% accuracy decrease (corresponding to an 
importance score of 0.01) were considered highly discriminative.
Metagenomic predictions
The PICRUSt bioinformatics tool was used to predict the metagenomic content from the 16S 
rRNA sequencing data of the gut microbial samples, with slight modifications, including 
closed-reference OTU picking, as suggested by the developers84. The predicted KEGG 
orthologues were summarized at hierarchy level 3, then differential abundances by group 
were determined and displayed using the STAMP algorithm85. For pairwise comparisons, 
Livanos et al.
Page 16
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 White’s non-parametric t-test was used, and for multiple group comparisons, the Kruskal–
Wallis H-test was used followed by the Tukey–Kramer post-hoc test. All P values were 
corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR correction.
Microbiota transfer
At age 6 weeks, control and PAT male NOD mice (n = 5 each) raised at NYULMC were 
killed, and caecal samples were collected and frozen at −80 °C. From each mouse, one-third 
of the caecal contents with tissue was thawed in an anaerobic chamber and diluted in pre-
reduced anaerobically sterilized liquid dental transport media (Anaerobe Systems), the tissue 
was removed, and the supernatants were pooled to yield control or PAT caecal inoculum (7 
ml). These suspensions were transferred into NOD germ-free pregnant dams at random by 
oral gavage (150 μl per breeder), and these now-conventionalized mice and their pups were 
raised in sterilized ventilated cages with autoclaved food and drinking water at the 
University of Gothenburg (Sweden) until weaning, when the male pups were transferred to 
new sterilized cages. The male pups were designated the control or PAT recipient mice (Ctrl-
R, n = 18; PAT-R, n = 10) and were monitored for diabetes development weekly by blood 
glucose measurement, as defined above. From faecal samples collected at weeks of life 4, 6, 
9, 13 and 17, and caecal and ileal samples at sacrifice at 31 weeks of life, DNA was 
extracted and analysed as described above. In a second experiment, caecal contents were 
collected from dol 17 NOD male or female mice that had received the PAT tylosin regime 
from dol 10–15 or untreated controls, creating two pools (PAT and control), and each was 
transferred to recipient 3-week-old germ-free C57BL/6 mice (n = 4 recipients per pool). 
These now-conventionalized mice were followed for the next six weeks, then killed, and 
flow cytometry was performed on isolated splenocytes and SI-LP cells, as already described. 
Because our a priori hypothesis was that the PAT-altered microbiota would reduce Th17 and 
Treg populations, we used a one-tailed t-test to determine statistical significance.
Accession codes
16S rRNA sequencing data has been deposited at EBI with accession number ERP016357 
or using Qiita with accession number 10508. Microarray data has been deposited in GEO 
with accession number GSE81648.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Research support funding was provided by the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, the Diane Belfer Program 
for Human Microbial Ecology, the Knapp Family, the Ziff Family and C&D Funds (to M.J.B.), the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute and the Defendi Fellowship (to A.E.L.). Sequencing was performed at the NYUMC Genome 
Technology Center, partially supported by a Cancer Center Support Grant (P30CA016087) at the Laura and Isaac 
Perlmutter Cancer Center. The authors thank T. Battaglia and P. Meyn for informatic and technical assistance.
References
1. Diamond Project Group. Incidence and trends of childhood type 1 diabetes worldwide 1990–1999. 
Diabetic Med. 2006; 23:857–866. [PubMed: 16911623] 
Livanos et al.
Page 17
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2. Patterson CC, et al. Incidence trends for childhood type 1 diabetes in Europe during 1989–2003 and 
predicted new cases 2005–20: a multicentre prospective registration study. Lancet. 2009; 373:2027–
2033. [PubMed: 19481249] 
3. Olszak T, et al. Microbial exposure during early life has persistent effects on natural killer T cell 
function. Science. 2012; 336:489–493. [PubMed: 22442383] 
4. Azad MB, Kozyrskyj AL. Perinatal programming of asthma: the role of gut microbiota. Clin Dev 
Immunol. 2012; 2012:932072. [PubMed: 22110540] 
5. Kozyrskyj AL, Ernst P, Becker AB. Increased risk of childhood asthma from antibiotic use in early 
life. Chest. 2007; 131:1753–1759. [PubMed: 17413050] 
6. Thavagnanam S, Fleming J, Bromley A, Shields MD, Cardwell CR. A meta-analysis of the 
association between caesarean section and childhood asthma. Clin Exp Allergy. 2008; 38:629–633. 
[PubMed: 18352976] 
7. Clemente JC, et al. The microbiome of the uncontacted Amerindians. Sci Adv. 2015; 1:e1500183. 
[PubMed: 26229982] 
8. Kostic AD, et al. The dynamics of the human infant gut microbiome in development and in 
progression toward type 1 diabetes. Cell Host Microbe. 2015; 17:260–273. [PubMed: 25662751] 
9. Boursi B, Mamtani R, Haynes K, Yang YX. The effect of past antibiotic exposure on diabetes risk. 
Eur J Endocrinol. 2015; 172:639–648. [PubMed: 25805893] 
10. Pozzilli P, Signore A, Williams AJ, Beales PE. NOD mouse colonies around the world—recent 
facts and figures. Immunol Today. 1993; 14:193–196. [PubMed: 8517916] 
11. Wen L, et al. Innate immunity and intestinal microbiota in the development of type 1 diabetes. 
Nature. 2008; 455:1109–1113. [PubMed: 18806780] 
12. Leiter EH. The NOD mouse: a model for insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Curr Protoc 
Immunol. 2001; Ch. 15(Unit 15.9)
13. Cho I, et al. Antibiotics in early life alter the murine colonic microbiome and adiposity. Nature. 
2012; 488:621–626. [PubMed: 22914093] 
14. Cox LM, et al. Altering the intestinal microbiota during a critical developmental window has 
lasting metabolic consequences. Cell. 2014; 158:705–721. [PubMed: 25126780] 
15. Nobel YR, et al. Metabolic and metagenomic outcomes from early-life pulsed antibiotic treatment. 
Nat Commun. 2015; 6:7486. [PubMed: 26123276] 
16. Candon S, et al. Antibiotics in early life alter the gut microbiome and increase disease incidence in 
a spontaneous mouse model of autoimmune insulin-dependent diabetes. PLoS ONE. 2015; 
10:e0125448. [PubMed: 25970503] 
17. Hu Y, et al. Maternal antibiotic treatment protects offspring from diabetes development in 
nonobese diabetic mice by generation of tolerogenic APCs. J Immunol. 2015; 195:4176–4184. 
[PubMed: 26401004] 
18. Brown K, et al. Prolonged antibiotic treatment induces a diabetogenic intestinal microbiome that 
accelerates diabetes in NOD mice. ISME J. 2016; 10:321–332. [PubMed: 26274050] 
19. Atarashi K, et al. Induction of colonic regulatory T cells by indigenous Clostridium species. 
Science. 2011; 331:337–341. [PubMed: 21205640] 
20. Ivanov II, et al. Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell. 2009; 
139:485–498. [PubMed: 19836068] 
21. Markle JG, et al. Sex differences in the gut microbiome drive hormone-dependent regulation of 
autoimmunity. Science. 2013; 339:1084–1088. [PubMed: 23328391] 
22. Lund RJ, et al. Genome-wide identification of novel genes involved in early Th1 and Th2 cell 
differentiation. J Immunol. 2007; 178:3648–3660. [PubMed: 17339462] 
23. Greiner TU, Hyotylainen T, Knip M, Backhed F, Oresic M. The gut microbiota modulates 
glycaemic control and serum metabolite profiles in non-obese diabetic mice. PLoS ONE. 2014; 
9:e110359. [PubMed: 25390735] 
24. Chai G, et al. Trends of outpatient prescription drug utilization in US children, 2002–2010. 
Pediatrics. 2012; 130:23–31. [PubMed: 22711728] 
Livanos et al.
Page 18
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 25. Hansen CH, et al. Early life treatment with vancomycin propagates Akkermansia muciniphila and 
reduces diabetes incidence in the NOD mouse. Diabetologia. 2012; 55:2285–2294. [PubMed: 
22572803] 
26. Tormo-Badia N, et al. Antibiotic treatment of pregnant non-obese diabetic mice leads to altered gut 
microbiota and intestinal immunological changes in the offspring. Scand J Immunol. 2014; 
80:250–260. [PubMed: 24965690] 
27. Larsson E, et al. Analysis of gut microbial regulation of host gene expression along the length of 
the gut and regulation of gut microbial ecology through MyD88. Gut. 2012; 61:1124–1131. 
[PubMed: 22115825] 
28. Buckner JH. Mechanisms of impaired regulation by CD4+CD25+FOXP3+ regulatory T cells in 
human autoimmune diseases. Nat Rev Immunol. 2010; 10:849–859. [PubMed: 21107346] 
29. Badami E, et al. Defective differentiation of regulatory FoxP3+ T cells by small-intestinal dendritic 
cells in patients with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes. 2011; 60:2120–2124. [PubMed: 21646390] 
30. Bedoya SK, Lam B, Lau K, Larkin J. III Th17 cells in immunity and autoimmunity. Clin Dev 
Immunol. 2013; 2013:986789. [PubMed: 24454481] 
31. Emamaullee JA, et al. Inhibition of Th17 cells regulates autoimmune diabetes in NOD mice. 
Diabetes. 2009; 58:1302–1311. [PubMed: 19289457] 
32. Kriegel MA, et al. Naturally transmitted segmented filamentous bacteria segregate with diabetes 
protection in nonobese diabetic mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011; 108:11548–11553. 
[PubMed: 21709219] 
33. Lau K, et al. Inhibition of type 1 diabetes correlated to a Lactobacillus johnsonii N6.2-mediated 
Th17 bias. J Immunol. 2011; 186:3538–3546. [PubMed: 21317395] 
34. Blaschitz C, Raffatellu M. Th17 cytokines and the gut mucosal barrier. J Clin Immunol. 2010; 
30:196–203. [PubMed: 20127275] 
35. Bosi E, et al. Increased intestinal permeability precedes clinical onset of type 1 diabetes. 
Diabetologia. 2006; 49:2824–2827. [PubMed: 17028899] 
36. Giongo A, et al. Toward defining the autoimmune microbiome for type 1 diabetes. ISME J. 2011; 
5:82–91. [PubMed: 20613793] 
37. Turroni F, van Sinderen D, Ventura M. Genomics and ecological overview of the genus 
Bifidobacterium. Int J Food Microbiol. 2011; 149:37–44. [PubMed: 21276626] 
38. Yatsunenko T, et al. Human gut microbiome viewed across age and geography. Nature. 2012; 
486:222–227. [PubMed: 22699611] 
39. Cardwell CR, et al. Breast-feeding and childhood-onset type 1 diabetes: a pooled analysis of 
individual participant data from 43 observational studies. Diabetes Care. 2012; 35:2215–2225. 
[PubMed: 22837371] 
40. Cardwell CR, et al. Caesarean section is associated with an increased risk of childhood-onset type 
1 diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Diabetologia. 2008; 51:726–735. 
[PubMed: 18292986] 
41. De Goffau MC, et al. Fecal microbiota composition differs between children with β-cell 
autoimmunity and those without. Diabetes. 2013; 62:1238–1244. [PubMed: 23274889] 
42. Salzman NH, et al. Analysis of 16S libraries of mouse gastrointestinal microflora reveals a large 
new group of mouse intestinal bacteria. Microbiology. 2002; 148:3651–3660. [PubMed: 
12427955] 
43. Grapov D, et al. Diabetes associated metabolomic perturbations in NOD mice. Metabolomics. 
2015; 11:425–437. [PubMed: 25755629] 
44. Oresic M, et al. Dysregulation of lipid and amino acid metabolism precedes islet autoimmunity in 
children who later progress to type 1 diabetes. J Exp Med. 2008; 205:2975–2984. [PubMed: 
19075291] 
45. Wang Z, et al. Gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. 
Nature. 2011; 472:57–63. [PubMed: 21475195] 
46. Martin FP, et al. A top-down systems biology view of microbiome-mammalian metabolic 
interactions in a mouse model. Mol Syst Biol. 2007; 3:112. [PubMed: 17515922] 
Livanos et al.
Page 19
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 47. Youssef S, et al. The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, atorvastatin, promotes a Th2 bias and reverses 
paralysis in central nervous system autoimmune disease. Nature. 2002; 420:78–84. [PubMed: 
12422218] 
48. Furusawa Y, et al. Commensal microbe-derived butyrate induces the differentiation of colonic 
regulatory T cells. Nature. 2013; 504:446–450. [PubMed: 24226770] 
49. Brown CT, et al. Gut microbiome metagenomics analysis suggests a functional model for the 
development of autoimmunity for type 1 diabetes. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e25792. [PubMed: 
22043294] 
50. Lowell CA, Stearman RS, Morrow JF. Transcriptional regulation of serum amyloid A gene 
expression. J Biol Chem. 1986; 261:8453–8461. [PubMed: 2424896] 
51. Harkness, JE., Wagner, JE. The Biology and Medicine of Rabbits and Rodents. Lea & Febiger; 
1989. 
52. Jukes TH. The present status and background of antibiotics in the feeding of domestic animals. 
Ann NY Acad Sci. 1971; 182:362–379. [PubMed: 5285294] 
53. Lewicki, J. Tylosin: a review of pharmacokinetics, residues in food animals and analytical 
methods. United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization; 2006. ftp://ftp.fao.org/ag/agn/food/
tylosin_2006.pdf
54. Ize-Ludlow D, et al. Progressive erosion of β-cell function precedes the onset of hyperglycemia in 
the NOD mouse model of type 1 diabetes. Diabetes. 2011; 60:2086–2091. [PubMed: 21659497] 
55. Forestier C, et al. Improved outcomes in NOD mice treated with a novel Th2 cytokine-biasing 
NKT cell activator. J Immunol. 2007; 178:1415–1425. [PubMed: 17237389] 
56. Wilson JR, Koehler KJ. Testing of equality of vectors of proportions for several cluster samples. 
Proc Joint Statist Assoc Meet Surv Res Meth. 1984; 39:201–206.
57. La Rosa PS, et al. Hypothesis testing and power calculations for taxonomic-based human 
microbiome data. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e52078. [PubMed: 23284876] 
58. Irizarry RA, et al. Exploration, normalization, and summaries of high density oligonucleotide array 
probe level data. Biostatistics. 2003; 4:249–264. [PubMed: 12925520] 
59. Smyth GK. Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing differential expression in 
microarray experiments. Statist Appl Genet Mol Biol. 2004; 3:1–25.
60. Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists 
using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:44–57. [PubMed: 19131956] 
61. Kramer A, Green J, Pollard J Jr, Tugendreich S. Causal analysis approaches in ingenuity pathway 
analysis. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:523–530. [PubMed: 24336805] 
62. Yu G, Wang LG, Han Y, He Q. Y clusterProfiler: an R package for comparing biological themes 
among gene clusters. Omics. 2012; 16:284–287. [PubMed: 22455463] 
63. Beckonert O, et al. Metabolic profiling, metabolomic and metabonomic procedures for NMR 
spectroscopy of urine, plasma, serum and tissue extracts. Nat Protoc. 2007; 2:2692–2703. 
[PubMed: 18007604] 
64. Le Gall G, et al. Metabolomics of fecal extracts detects altered metabolic activity of gut microbiota 
in ulcerative colitis and irritable bowel syndrome. J Proteome Res. 2011; 10:4208–4218. [PubMed: 
21761941] 
65. Banerjee R, Pathmasiri W, Snyder R, McRitchie S, Sumner S. Metabolomics of brain and 
reproductive organs: characterizing the impact of gestational exposure to butylbenzyl phthalate on 
dams and resultant offspring. Metabolomics. 2012; 8:1012–1025.
66. Church RJ, et al. A systems biology approach utilizing a mouse diversity panel identifies genetic 
differences influencing isoniazid-induced microvesicular steatosis. Toxicol Sci. 2014; 140:481–
492. [PubMed: 24848797] 
67. Pathmasiri W, et al. Integrating metabolomic signatures and psychosocial parameters in 
responsivity to an immersion treatment model for adolescent obesity. Metabolomics. 2012; 
8:1037–1051.
68. Sumner S, et al. Metabolomics in the assessment of chemical-induced reproductive and 
developmental outcomes using non-invasive biological fluids application to the study of 
butylbenzyl phthalate. J Appl Toxicol. 2009; 29:703–714. [PubMed: 19731247] 
Livanos et al.
Page 20
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 69. Sumner SC, Fennell TR, Snyder RW, Taylor GF, Lewin A. H 14 Distribution of carbon-14 labeled 
C60 ([ C]C60) in the pregnant and in the lactating dam and the effect of C60 exposure on the 
biochemical profile of urine. J Appl Toxicol. 2010; 30:354–360. [PubMed: 20063269] 
70. Sumner SJ, Burgess JP, Snyder RW, Popp JA, Fennell TR. Metabolomics of urine for the 
assessment of microvesicular lipid accumulation in the liver following isoniazid exposure. 
Metabolomics. 2010; 6:238–249. [PubMed: 21057652] 
71. Ivanov II, et al. The orphan nuclear receptor RORγt directs the differentiation program of 
proinflammatory IL-17+ T helper cells. Cell. 2006; 126:1121–1133. [PubMed: 16990136] 
72. Caporaso JG, et al. Ultra-high-throughput microbial community analysis on the Illumina HiSeq 
and MiSeq platforms. ISME J. 2012; 6:1621–1624. [PubMed: 22402401] 
73. Aronesty E. Comparison of sequence utility programs. Open Bioinformatics. 2013; 7:1–8.
74. Caporaso JG, et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data. Nat 
Methods. 2010; 7:335–336. [PubMed: 20383131] 
75. McDonald D, et al. An improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for ecological and 
evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. ISME J. 2012; 6:610–618. [PubMed: 22134646] 
76. Anderson MJ. A new method for non-parametric multivariate analysis of variance. Austral Ecol. 
2001; 26:32–46.
77. McArdle BH, Anderson MJ. Fitting multivariate models to community data: a comment on 
distance-based redundancy analysis. Ecology. 2001; 82:290–297.
78. Segata N, et al. Metagenomic biomarker discovery and explanation. Genome Biol. 2011; 12:R60. 
[PubMed: 21702898] 
79. Matsuki T, et al. Quantitative PCR with 16S rRNA-gene-targeted species specific primers for 
analysis of human intestinal bifidobacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2004; 70:167–173. [PubMed: 
14711639] 
80. Barman M, et al. Enteric salmonellosis disrupts the microbial ecology of the murine 
gastrointestinal tract. Infect Immun. 2008; 76:907–915. [PubMed: 18160481] 
81. Breiman L. Random forests. Machine Learning. 2001; 45:5–32.
82. Breiman, L. Manual on setting up, using, and understanding random forests v3.1. 2002. https://
www.stat.berkeley.edu/~breiman/Using_random_forests_V3.1.pdf
83. Knights D, Costello EK, Knight R. Supervised classification of human microbiota. FEMS 
Microbiol Rev. 2011; 35:343–359. [PubMed: 21039646] 
84. Langille MGI, et al. Predictive functional profiling of microbial communities using 16S rRNA 
marker gene sequences. Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:814–821. [PubMed: 23975157] 
85. Parks DH, Beiko RG. Identifying biologically relevant differences between metagenomic 
communities. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:715–721. [PubMed: 20130030] 
Livanos et al.
Page 21
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Effect of PAT/STAT on the development of T1D and insulitis severity in NOD mice
a, Schematic of NOD PAT/STAT study design. Pregnant NOD/ShiLTj mice were 
randomized into three groups: control, STAT and PAT, and maintained and treated as 
described in the Methods. At 6 weeks of age, mice were killed for immune-phenotyping by 
flow cytometry, and ileal gene expression analysis by microarray and qPCR. From 10 to 31 
weeks of age, mice were tested weekly for diabetes by blood glucose measurement. *Weeks 
at which faecal samples were sequenced. #Timepoint at which a subset of mice were killed 
for collection of ileal and caecal samples for sequencing. b, T1D incidence in female and 
male NOD mice. Diabetes incidence curves were compared using the log-rank test (*P < 
0.05). c, T1D incidence in control and PAT female NOD mice housed at a different animal 
facility (experiment 2). NOD dams and their litters were randomized into either control or 
PAT groups and treated and maintained as described in the Methods. Statistical significance 
was determined by the log-rank test. d, Pancreatic insulitis in female and male NOD mice. 
Upon necropsy, pancreata were preserved, stained, and insulitis was scored and compared in 
control (C), STAT (S) and PAT (P) mice, as described in the Methods. *P < 0.05. e,f, 
Proportions of CD4+ FOXP3+ T-regulatory (Treg) cells and CD4+ RORγT+ Th17 cells in the 
small intestinal lamina propria (SI-LP) in 6-week-old mice. CD3 and CD4 surface stains and 
a viability stain were used to gate on live Thelper cells. Nuclear staining for FOXP3 and 
RORγT was performed to identify Treg and Th17 cells, respectively. Cells were gated 
Livanos et al.
Page 22
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sequentially on singlets, total lymphocytes, live cells, CD3+, CD4+ cells and finally on the 
nuclear stains. For all groups, n = 5, except for STAT males, n = 3. Quantitation of the 
proportion of Treg cells (e) or Th17 cells (f) in the SI-LP. Statistical analysis was performed 
using the Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test. Error bars 
represent the mean + standard error of the mean (s.e.m.) for the biological replicates. **P < 
0.01, ***P < 0.001.
Livanos et al.
Page 23
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. PAT alters ileal gene expression
The microarray experiment was performed on RNA extracted from the terminal ileum of 
biological replicate control, STAT and PAT mice (female, n = 3 per group; male, n = 5 per 
group; except STAT, n = 3). a, Comparison of PAT-mediated ileal gene expression changes 
in male and female mice. Venn diagram of number of genes upregulated (left) and 
downregulated (right) in PAT samples compared with controls. b, Expression of SAA1, 
SAA2 and SAA3 in male control, STAT and PAT mice. RT-qPCR was used to verify the 
expression of serum amyloid A1 (SAA1), 2 (SAA2) and 3 (SAA3). Expression values were 
determined using known standards and normalized to 18S rRNA expression. Statistical 
significance was determined using the Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple 
comparison test. The horizontal bar represents the median. *P < 0.05. c, Correlation of 
SAA1, SAA2 and SAA3 expression with the proportion of Th17 and Treg cells determined 
by flow cytometry. r and P values were determined using non-parametric Spearman 
correlations.
Livanos et al.
Page 24
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. PAT alters metabolic gene expression pathways as well as metabolite composition in 
caecum, liver and serum
Analyses were performed on 6-week-old male control and PAT NOD mice (biological 
replicates). a, PAT increases the expression of ileal genes involved in cholesterol 
biosynthesis. Microarray analysis as described in Fig. 2. Ingenuity pathway analysis was 
performed to identify differentially regulated gene pathways. Acetoacetyl-CoA synthetase, 
AACS; HMG-CoA synthase 1, HMGCS1; HMG-CoA reductase, HMGCR; isopentenyl 
diphosphate isomerase 1, IDI1; squalene epoxidase, SQLE; lanosterol synthase, LSS; 
lanosterol 14 α-demethylase, CYP51A1; methylsterol monooxygenase 1, MSMO1; 17-β-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, HSD17B7. b, Metabolomic composition in caecal, liver and 
serum samples of control and PAT mice. Score plots of OPLS-DA analysis of caecal, liver 
and serum samples show separation of PAT (black circles, left) from control mice (red 
circles, right). The statistics for the model fits of the OPLS-DA: caecal samples: [Cohort 1, 
R2X = 0.912, R2Y = 0.968, Q2 = 0.892; Cohort 2, R2X = 0.952, R2Y = 0.972, Q2 = 0.906]; 
Livanos et al.
Page 25
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 liver samples: [Cohort 1, R2X = 0.859, R2Y = 0.992, Q2 = 0.956; Cohort 2, R2X = 0.886, 
R2Y = 0.991, Q2 = 0.891]; serum samples: [Cohort 1, R2X = 0.734, R2Y = 0.953, Q2 = 
0.776; Cohort 2, R2X = 0.732, R2Y = 0.758, Q2 = 0.120]. c, Select differential metabolites 
(using NMR bin intensities) in caecum, liver and serum of control and PAT mice. Error bars 
represent mean + s.d.
Livanos et al.
Page 26
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Microbiota characteristics of control, STAT and PAT NOD mice
a, Phylogenic diversity (PD) over time. Samples (n = 555) were rarefied to a depth of 4,150, 
which only excluded five (<1%) samples with lower coverage from the analysis. PD from 
biological replicate female and male mice for four faecal time points is presented. Statistical 
significance was determined using the non-parametric t-test with 999 Monte Carlo 
permutations, followed by Bonferroni’s correction for multiple comparisons. Error bars 
represent mean + s.e.m., *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. b, Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) of 
unweighted UniFrac distances. PCoA of unweighted UniFrac distances was performed to 
visualize differences in community structure at sequence depth >4,150. Each point 
represents the microbiota in a single sample: controls (blue), STAT (green) and PAT (pink). 
All faecal sample timepoints are displayed together and colour-coded in shades of blue, 
green or pink as indicated in the key. c, β-diversity, as measured by unweighted UniFrac 
Livanos et al.
Page 27
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analysis of samples from control (C), STAT- (S) and PAT- (P) treated mice. Statistical 
significance of the inter- and intra-group β-diversity was determined by permutation testing. 
The P value was calculated using the fraction of the random permutations of 10,000 that 
yielded a greater difference than in the one observed (t-statistic), followed by Bonferroni’s 
correction for multiple comparisons. Error bars represent mean + s.e.m., **P < 0.01. d, OTU 
co-occurrence network. Cytoscape was used to visualize sample-OTU co-occurrence 
patterns for male PAT and control mice at 6 weeks. In the network, samples were coloured 
by treatment group (control samples, blue; PAT samples, red). Individual OTUs are 
represented by small black nodes. Lines connecting a sample to an OTU, coloured by 
treatment group, indicate that that particular OTU was observed in that specific sample, 
forming the network.
Livanos et al.
Page 28
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Microbiota perturbation and composition in relation to the development of T1D
a, Pairwise weighted UniFrac distances of faecal samples from 6 week control versus PAT 
mice that developed diabetes or not. Boxes represent median and interquartile range (IQR) 
and whiskers represent 1.5 IQR intervals. b, Pairwise intragroup weighted UniFrac distances 
of faecal samples from PAT mice at 3 (3w PAT) and 6 weeks (6w PAT) that developed 
diabetes or not. Boxes and whiskers are as in a. c, Histogram of null distribution of classifier 
accuracy levels. Use of random forests analysis for classification of taxa in faecal samples 
from 6-week-old males, associated with protection against diabetes development. The 
histogram shows the expected distribution of accuracy levels from classifiers predicting 
diabetes onset, if the microbiome contained no useful information. To generate this null 
distribution, we used bacterial genera as the predictors and randomized class labels as the 
outcome to be predicted. Vertical lines indicate the observed accuracy of the classifier 
compared with true outcomes, when trained on bacterial genera (red line) or on cage 
Livanos et al.
Page 29
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 membership alone (blue line). The area on the tail to the right of each vertical line represents 
the reported P value corresponding to the test that that classifier is better than random. In this 
analysis, the P value for microbiome (P = 0.017) is smaller than for cage (P = 0.149), 
indicating that the microbiome provides significant predictive information. d, Feature 
importance scores for the ten most predictive genera in the random forests classifier. Feature 
importance was measured as the mean decrease in model accuracy when that feature’s 
values were permuted randomly. e, Heatmap of predictive taxa in the PAT samples. The heat 
map is coloured by the relative abundance (standardized to have mean 0 and variance 1 for 
each identified taxon) of the ten bacterial genera most highly predictive of diabetes onset. 
Samples were first stratified (by diabetes development, columns) and hierarchical clustering 
was performed within each outcome group. f, Relative abundances for three discriminative 
taxa: Akkermansia, S24-7 and Enterococcus. Different symbols for the PAT samples 
represent different cages. The Mann–Whitney U test was used to determine significance, 
comparing those that develop diabetes and those that do not. Error bars represent median + 
IQR. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
Livanos et al.
Page 30
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Inoculation of germ-free NOD mice with control or PAT microbiota
a, Microbiota transfer experimental design. Donor mice: controls (Ctrl) were maintained on 
non-acidified sterilized water; PAT mice were given three courses of tylosin, as described. At 
6 weeks of age, control and PAT donor male mice (n = 5 each) were euthanized, and caecal 
contents were collected and separately pooled (control and PAT inoculum, respectively), 
then transferred into NOD germ-free pregnant dams by oral gavage. The male pups of these 
dams were designated the control and PAT recipient mice (Ctrl-R, n = 18; PAT-R, n = 10) 
and monitored for diabetes development. For microbiome analysis, faecal samples were 
collected from the biological replicate recipient mice between 4 and 17 weeks of life, and 
caecal and ileal samples at sacrifice (30 weeks). b, Diabetes incidence in germ-free NOD 
recipients of control or PAT caecal microbiota. Mice were tested for diabetes weekly as 
above: 33% (6/18) of the control recipients developed diabetes versus 10% (1/10) of the PAT 
recipients (P = 0.17, log-rank test). c, Intestinal microbial composition of control and PAT 
donors and recipients. PCoA was performed on unweighted UniFrac distances to visualize 
Livanos et al.
Page 31
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 community structure differences. Each point represents the microbiota in a single sample, 
coloured by group: donors, control samples (dark blue), PAT samples (red); recipients, 
control samples (light blue), PAT samples (orange). Statistical significance was determined 
using the Adonis test, *P < 0.05. d, Phylogenetic diversity of control and PAT donors and 
recipients. Statistical significance was determined using the non-parametric t-test with 999 
Monte Carlo permutations, *P < 0.05. e, Taxa relative abundances in donor inocula and 
control and PAT recipients over time. f, Transfer of caecal microbiota from NOD mice at 17 
days of life (two days after a single PAT or control exposure) to germ-free C57BL/6 
recipients. Graphs show proportions of CD4+ FOXP3+ Treg cells and CD4+ RORγT+ Th17 
cells in the spleens or SI-LP in biological replicate recipient mice 6 weeks after transfer, 
using flow cytometry, as indicated in Fig. 1. For both PAT and control groups, n = 4. 
Statistical analysis of the a priori hypothesis was performed using the one-tailed t-test. Error 
bars represent mean + s.d.
Livanos et al.
Page 32
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
