 Atypical fracture with long-term bisphosphonate
therapy is associated with altered cortical composition
and reduced fracture resistance
Ashley A. Lloyda, Bernd Gludovatzb, Christoph Riedelc, Emma A. Luengoa, Rehan Saiyedd, Eric Martyd,
Dean G. Lorichd,e,f, Joseph M. Laned,e,f, Robert O. Ritchieg,h, Björn Bussec, and Eve Donnellya,i,1
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850; bSchool of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, UNSW
Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia; cDepartment of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center Hamburg, D-22529 Hamburg, Germany;
dDepartment of Orthopedic Surgery, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY 10021; eOrthopedic Surgery, Weill Medical College, Cornell University,
New York, NY 10065; fMedical Orthopedic Trauma Service, NewYork–Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, NY 10065; gMaterials
Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720; hDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720; and iResearch Division, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY 10021
Edited by John T. Potts, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, and approved June 29, 2017 (received for review March 18, 2017)
Bisphosphonates are the most widely prescribed pharmacologic
treatment for osteoporosis and reduce fracture risk in postmeno-
pausal women by up to 50%. However, in the past decade these
drugs have been associated with atypical femoral fractures (AFFs),
rare fractures with a transverse, brittle morphology. The unusual
fracture morphology suggests that bisphosphonate treatment
may impair toughening mechanisms in cortical bone. The objective
of this study was to compare the compositional and mechanical
properties of bone biopsies from bisphosphonate-treated patients
with AFFs to those from patients with typical osteoporotic fractures
with and without bisphosphonate treatment. Biopsies of proximal
femoral cortical bone adjacent to the fracture site were obtained
from postmenopausal women during fracture repair surgery (frac-
ture groups, n = 33) or total hip arthroplasty (nonfracture groups,
n = 17). Patients were allocated to five groups based on fracture
morphology and history of bisphosphonate treatment [+BIS Atypi-
cal: n = 12, BIS duration: 8.2 (3.0) y; +BIS Typical: n = 10, 7.7 (5.0) y;
+BIS Nonfx: n = 5, 6.4 (3.5) y; −BIS Typical: n = 11; −BIS Nonfx: n =
12]. Vibrational spectroscopy and nanoindentation showed that tis-
sue from bisphosphonate-treated women with atypical fractures
was harder and more mineralized than that from bisphosphonate-
treated women with typical osteoporotic fractures. In addition, frac-
ture mechanics measurements showed that tissue from patients
treated with bisphosphonates had deficits in fracture toughness,
with lower crack-initiation toughness and less crack deflection at
osteonal boundaries than that of bisphosphonate-naïve patients.
Together, these results suggest a deficit in intrinsic and extrinsic
toughening mechanisms, which contribute to AFFs in patients treated
with long-term bisphosphonates.
atypical fracture | bisphosphonates | subtrochanteric fracture |
fracture toughness | FTIR imaging
B
isphosphonates, a widely prescribed class of antiresorptive
drug that inhibits osteoclast-mediated bone resorption, play
a key role in management of bone diseases including postmeno-
pausal osteoporosis and skeletal metastases (1–3). Bisphospho-
nates minimize bone loss and reduce the risk of fracture in patients
with postmenopausal osteoporosis (4, 5). However, in the last
decade, long-term bisphosphonate treatment has been associated
with side effects that include atypical femoral fractures (AFFs),
rare, transverse fractures of the femoral shaft. The subtrochanteric
cortical site and transverse morphology characteristic of a brittle
fracture contrast with the cancellous site and intertrochanteric or
femoral neck morphologies observed in typical fragility fractures
at the hip (6, 7) (Fig. 1). Patient anxieties about side effects have
contributed to a crisis in osteoporosis treatment arising from a
50% decrease in use of oral bisphosphonates between 2008 and
2012, raising the specter of a return to high rates of hip fracture
previously thought to have been reduced following the wide-
spread prescription of bisphosphonates for postmenopausal osteo-
porosis (8–10).
Thus, AFFs represent an apparent paradox in the treatment of
osteoporosis. These catastrophic fractures are a rare side effect of
a class of pharmacologic agents that, for the vast majority of pa-
tients, substantially reduces fracture risk. This complexity of
treatment responses highlights a need for further understanding of
how antiresorptive treatments modulate the properties of bone.
Prior studies examining the mechanical properties of
bisphosphonate-treated bone have focused primarily on the role
of turnover suppression in preventing bone loss at cancellous sites
of typical osteoporotic fractures (4, 11, 12). In contrast, AFFs
occur in cortical bone and seem to propagate through a stress
fracture-like mechanism, suggesting that by reducing turnover
bisphosphonates may impair toughening mechanisms in cortical
bone, which act as important barriers to clinical fracture in healthy
bone (7, 13). At the micro scale, bisphosphonate treatment can
potentially impair toughening through several mechanisms: by
decreasing osteonal density, which could alter extrinsic toughening
by reducing crack deflection at osteonal interfaces (14–16); by
reducing compositional heterogeneity, which potentially reduces
Significance
Since the first reports of atypical femoral fractures (AFFs), a clin-
ical phenomenon in which patients experience catastrophic brittle
fractures of the femoral shaft with minimal trauma, the risk as-
sociated with bisphosphonates, the most widely prescribed
pharmaceuticals for osteoporosis, has become increasingly well-
established. However, the underlying cause of AFFs and their
causal relationship to bisphosphonates is unknown. Here we
examine bone tissue from women with AFFs and show that long-
term bisphosphonate treatment degrades the fracture-resistance
toughening mechanisms that are inherent to healthy bone. Our
work resolves the apparent paradox of AFFs as a side effect of
the most common osteoporosis treatment by clarifying the dif-
fering effects of bisphosphonates on bone tissue structure and
mechanical properties across multiple length scales.
Author contributions: A.A.L., J.M.L., R.O.R., B.B., and E.D. designed research; A.A.L., B.G.,
C.R., E.A.L., R.S., E.M., D.G.L., J.M.L., and E.D. performed research; A.A.L., B.G., C.R., E.A.L.,
R.S., E.M., and B.B. analyzed data; and A.A.L., R.O.R., and E.D. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: J.M.L. consults for Bone Therapeutics, SA, CollPlant, Ltd.,
Grafty’s, Inc., Kuros Biosurgery AG, RadiusHealth, Inc., Terumo BCT, Inc., and Wright
Medical Technology. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: eve.donnelly@cornell.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1704460114/-/DCSupplemental.
8722–8727
|
PNAS
|
August 15, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 33
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704460114
 the intrinsic plasticity that nanoscale heterogeneity provides (17, 18);
and by increasing nonenzymatic collagen cross-linking, which may
lead to loss of postyield (intrinsic) toughness through reduced
collagen fibrillar sliding (14, 19). Although each of these putative
effects of bisphosphonate treatment has been observed separately,
there has been no definitive demonstration that the combination
of these degradation mechanisms on the fracture behavior of
cortical bone can be directly linked to the origin of AFFs.
Since the first case reports of atypical fractures (20) many studies
have addressed the epidemiology (21, 22), radiographic morphol-
ogy (23, 24), and clinical management of atypical fractures (sum-
marized in refs. 6 and 7). Compositional studies of bone from
patients with AFFs showed that the femoral cortices had elevated
mineralization relative to those with typical osteoporotic fractures
(17). However, there has so far been no direct assessment of
fracture properties of bone tissue in patients with AFFs, and few
studies have differentiated altered tissue composition and me-
chanical properties arising from two key interrelated variables:
bisphosphonate treatment and atypical fracture morphology.
Thus, the objectives of this study were (i) to assess the com-
positional and mechanical properties of biopsies from long-term
bisphosphonate-treated patients with AFFs across several length
scales and (ii) to compare these properties to those from patients
with differing fracture morphologies and bisphosphonate treat-
ment histories to discern the differential contributions of these
variables to the measured bone tissue properties.
Results
Patient Characteristics. In the bisphosphonate-treated (+BIS)
groups, duration of bisphosphonate treatment did not differ across
groups (+BIS Atypical 8.3 ± 3.3 y; +BIS Typical 7.7 ± 5.0 y; +BIS
Nonfx 6.4 ± 3.5 y; Table 1). The ages of the +BIS Atypical frac-
ture patients were similar to those in the other groups (P > 0.05
+BIS Atypical vs. all other groups; Table 1). The −BIS Nonfx
patients were younger than patients in both typical groups (−BIS
Nonfx 71 ± 5.8 y vs. −BIS Typical 83 ± 4.9 y, P = 0.013; vs. +BIS
Typical 81 ± 12 y, P = 0.032). Patient ages were similar across
all other groups. A linear fixed effects model was used to isolate
the effects of patient variables (fracture morphology and
bisphosphonate treatment history) while adjusting for the ef-
fects of patient age on the measured geometric, microstructural,
and mechanical properties (Materials and Methods).
Cortical Biopsies from Atypical Fracture Patients Show Increased
Cortical Thickness and Reduced Intracortical Bone Volume Fraction
Compared with Those from Typical Fracture Patients. Radiographs
were used to assess cortical thickness and cortical ratio (ratio of
cortical thickness to femoral diameter) at 30 mm and 100 mm distal
to the lesser trochanter. At 30 mm distal to the lesser trochanter,
femora from patients with atypical fractures had greater cortical
thickness and cortical ratio compared with those from patients with
typical fractures (Atypical medial thickness at 30 mm +18% vs.
Typical, P = 0.03; lateral thickness at 30 mm +19% vs. Typical, P =
0.05; cortical ratio at 30 mm +19% vs. Typical, P < 0.01).
Femora from patients without fractures were also more robust
overall than those from patients with typical or atypical fractures.
Femora from nonfracture patients had greater cortical thickness
and cortical ratio at both 30 mm and 100 mm distal to the lesser
trochanter compared with femora from patients with typical
fractures and greater cortical thickness and cortical ratio at
100 mm distal to the lesser trochanter compared with femora from
patients with AFFs. Additionally, femora from patients without
fractures trended toward greater diameter at 30 mm compared
with those from both fracture groups (Fig. S1 and Table S1).
Microcomputed tomography (μCT) of the entire bone biopsies
was used to assess the cortical microarchitecture. Bone from
patients with atypical fractures had a smaller intracortical bone
volume fraction compared with that from patients with typical
fractures (Atypical −40% vs. Typical, P = 0.03). High-resolution
μCT of the cortical microbeams that had undergone in situ
fracture toughness testing was used to characterize the tissue
microstructure at the crack tip. At this length scale, no differ-
ences in intracortical bone volume fraction, Haversian canal
density, or Haversian canal diameter were observed between
patient groups, likely reflecting that microbeams were necessarily
cut preferentially from dense regions of cortex, excluding any
large pores (greater than ∼100 μm), which significantly reduced
the cross-section of the beam. Thus, whereas the whole-biopsy
CT measures all cortical porosity, the microbeam CT measures
only the porosity of a dense section of the cortex and does not
include the large-scale porosity observed in the whole biopsies.
Bone Tissue from Patients with Atypical Fractures Has Elevated Mineral
Content and Collagen Maturity Assessed by Vibrational Spectroscopic
Imaging. To examine how the compositional properties of bone
Fig. 1.
Radiographs showing morphology of a typical intertrochanteric
fragility fracture (A), compared with an AFF (B). Whereas the typical fracture
has a tortuous crack path indicative of interaction with microstructural
features that act as toughening mechanisms, the atypical fracture has a
transverse morphology indicative of a brittle fracture process.
Table 1.
Patient characteristics for bisphosphonate-treated atypical fracture, bisphosphonate-treated typical fracture,
bisphosphonate-treated nonfracture, bisphosphonate-naïve typical fracture, and bisphosphonate-naïve nonfracture groups
Characteristic
+BIS Atypical
+BIS Typical
+BIS Nonfx
−BIS Typical
−BIS Nonfx
No.
12
10
5
11
12
% female
100
100
100
100
100
Age, y, mean (SD)
72 (9.1)
81 (12)
75 (11)
83 (4.9)
71 (5.8)
Fracture morphology
12 atypical subtrochanteric
9 intertrochanteric
N/A
10 intertrochanteric
N/A
1 spiral subtrochanteric
1 spiral subtrochanteric
Bisphosphonate treatment
duration, y, mean (SD)
8.2 (3.0)
7.7 (5.0)
6.4 (3.5)
N/A
N/A
Bisphosphonate treatment
type
10 alendronate
5 alendronate
2 alendronate
N/A
N/A
2 ibandronate
5 risedronate
3 risedronate
N/A, not applicable.
Lloyd et al.
PNAS
|
August 15, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 33
|
8723
ENGINEERING
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 tissue from patients with atypical fractures differed from those of
the tissue from typically fractured or nonfractured patients,
Raman and FTIR imaging were used. FTIR images were first
analyzed to assess the means of four compositional parameters
(mineral-to-matrix ratio, carbonate-to-phosphate ratio, collagen
maturity, and crystallinity) across patient groups. Cortical bone
from patients with atypical fractures had a greater mean miner-
alization compared with that from typical fracture patients and
trended toward greater mean mineralization than that from non-
fracture patients (Atypical +14% vs. Typical, P = 0.03; Atypical
+11% vs. Nonfx, P = 0.08; Fig. 2). Cortical bone from patients
with AFFs also had greater collagen maturity than that from pa-
tients without fractures and trended toward greater collagen ma-
turity than that from patients with typical fractures (Atypical
+11% vs. Typical, P = 0.08; Atypical +14% vs. Nonfx, P = 0.04).
Similarly to FTIR, Raman images of cortical bone were ana-
lyzed to compare the means of three compositional parameters
(mineral-to-matrix ratio, carbonate-to-phosphate ratio, and crys-
tallinity) across groups. Cortical bone from patients with atypical
fractures had greater mean mineral-to-matrix ratio compared with
that from typical and nonfracture groups (Atypical +15% vs.
Typical, P = 0.02; Atypical +30% vs. Nonfx, P < 0.01; Fig. 2).
In addition, quantitative backscattered electron images were
used to calculate the mean and peak values of the calcium dis-
tribution, CaMean and CaPeak, respectively, for all patient groups.
The quantitative backscattered electron imaging (qBEI) pa-
rameters did not differ across groups (Table S1).
Bone Tissue from Patients with Atypical Fractures Has Elevated
Hardness. Once elevated tissue mineralization in bone tissue
from atypical fracture patients was confirmed, nanoindentation
was used to assess the nanomechanical properties at the same
locations. Maps of nanoindentation points were analyzed to
calculate the mean values of indentation modulus and hardness
for all groups. Cortical bone from patients with atypical fractures
had greater mean hardness than that from typically fractured and
nonfractured patients (Atypical +18% vs. Typical, P = 0.03;
Atypical +42% vs. Nonfx, P < 0.01), consistent with the elevated
mineralization in the atypically fractured patient group (Fig. 2).
Bone Tissue from Patients with History of Long-Term Bisphosphonate
Treatment
Shows
Elevated
Mean
Mineralization
and
Narrower
Distributions of Nanomechanical Properties. To examine how the
compositional properties of bone tissue from patients treated with
bisphosphonates differs from that of bisphosphonate-naïve pa-
tients, Raman and FTIR imaging were used. Bone tissue from
patients treated with bisphosphonates showed elevated mean
mineralization assessed by both Raman and FTIR imaging. When
compositional properties were assessed with FTIR imaging,
cortical bone from patients treated with bisphosphonates had el-
evated mineralization compared with that from bisphosphonate-
naïve patients (+BIS mineral:matrix +8% vs. −BIS, P = 0.04).
When compositional properties were assessed with Raman
imaging, cortical bone from bisphosphonate-treated patients had
higher mean mineralization and trended toward lower mean
crystallinity than that from bisphosphonate-naïve patients (+BIS
mineral:matrix +13% vs. −BIS, P = 0.02; XST −2% vs. −BIS, P =
0.08). The observed greater mean mineralization in the cortices of
patients treated with bisphosphonates is consistent with greater
tissue maturity arising from reduced remodeling and consistent
with previous studies showing changes in compositional properties
of bone tissue from patients treated with bisphosphonates (17, 25).
When tissue mechanical properties were examined with
nanoindentation, cortical tissue from patients treated with
bisphosphonates had narrower distributions of hardness and
modulus compared with cortical tissue from bisphosphonate-
naïve patients (+BIS hardness FWHM −19% vs. −BIS, P < 0.01;
modulus FWHM −17% vs. −BIS, P = 0.05; Fig. S2). Paralleling
the compositional differences, these local mechanical differences
are also consistent with reduced remodeling.
Bone Tissue from Patients with History of Long-Term Bisphosphonate
Treatment Shows Lower Crack Initiation Toughness and Overall
Toughness, with Less Crack Deviation. In situ fracture toughness
testing in a variable-pressure scanning electron microscope allowed
measurement of fracture toughness through crack-resistance curves
(R-curves), which directly measure the fracture resistance proper-
ties, specifically the crack-initiation toughness and crack-growth
toughness, of bone tissue. Cortical bone microbeams from patients
treated with bisphosphonates had reduced crack-initiation tough-
ness, assessed with the y-intercept of the R-curves (+BIS −79%
vs. −BIS, P = 0.01) and decreased overall toughness (+BIS −23%
vs. −BIS, P = 0.03) compared with those from bisphosphonate-
naïve patients (Fig. 3). Additionally, cortical microbeams from
patients without fractures had greater overall toughness compared
with those from patients with typical or atypical fractures (Nonfx vs.
Atypical, P = 0.03; Nonfx vs. Typical, P = 0.05; Fig. 3).
After fracture toughness testing, μCT scans of the cortical
microbeams allowed evaluation of the crack path to assess the
longer-range, extrinsic toughening generated by the interaction
of the crack trajectory with respect to the bone microstruc-
ture. Specifically, tissue from bisphosphonate-treated patients
trended toward cracks with lower tortuosity than that from
bisphosphonate-naive patients (+BIS −40% vs. −BIS, P = 0.10;
Fig. 4), indicating less deviation and deflection of crack paths, in
particular involving less delamination along osteonal boundaries.
Fig. 2.
Parameter means for compositional (mineral-to-matrix ratio, MM; collagen maturity, XLR; and crystallinity, XST) and nanomechanical (reduced modulus
E; hardness H) properties, showing differences between cortical bone from bisphosphonate-treated (+BIS) or -untreated (−BIS) patients with atypical, typical, or
no fracture. Data are shown raw (not age-adjusted), and only effects of fracture status (Atypical, Typical, or Nonfracture) that reached significance (*P < 0.05) or
had a nonsignificant trend (#P < 0.10) are reported here. For a connecting letters report showing pairwise differences between all groups see Fig. S2.
8724
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704460114
Lloyd et al.
 Discussion
Summary. Since the first reports of AFFs the risk associated with
long-term bisphosphonate treatment has become increasingly
well-established (21, 22). However, the etiology of this rare frac-
ture type and its causal relationship to bisphosphonate treatment
was unknown. In the current study, using tissue from women who
experienced AFFs after long-term bisphosphonate treatment, we
have shown evidence that long-term bisphosphonate treatment
acts to degrade the fracture-resistance toughening mechanisms
inherent to healthy bone.
Loss of Intrinsic Toughening with Long-Term Bisphosphonate Treatment.
Using in situ fracture toughness testing to measure crack propaga-
tion in cortical microbeams from bisphosphonate-naïve and
bisphosphonate-treated patients (including those with AFFs),
we report that bisphosphonate treatment reduces fracture toughness
of cortical bone. In this study, analysis of tissue fracture toughness as
a function of crack extension (R-curves) shows that bone tissue from
patients treated with bisphosphonates has an overall decrease in the
stress intensity required to propagate a crack, and decreased crack-
initiation toughness, which indicates a deficit in intrinsic toughening
mechanisms in bisphosphonate-treated bone (26, 27).
This finding is corroborated by the nanoscale compositional and
mechanical data. Cortical bone from patients with atypical frac-
tures had greater tissue mineral content as assessed by Raman and
FTIR imaging and greater collagen maturity as assessed by FTIR
imaging, as well as greater hardness, relative to that from patients
without fractures, all of which are expected to diminish the duc-
tility and hence decrease intrinsic toughness in bone (28). Con-
sistent with these results, increased FTIR mineralization and
collagen maturity are associated with increased fracture risk (29).
Clinically, AFFs often occur with prodromal pain and form a
stress callus, indicating that they are likely stress fractures caused
by fatigue loading (23, 24). The decreased crack-initiation
toughness in combination with a higher degree of mineraliza-
tion and reduced turnover due to bisphosphonate treatment is
consistent with a fatigue fracture.
Loss of Extrinsic Toughening with Long-Term Bisphosphonate
Treatment. In addition to decreases in crack-initiation toughness,
tissue from patients treated with bisphosphonates had lower crack
tortuosity than that from bisphosphonate-naïve patients, meaning
that the cracks in these beams were less likely to split or delami-
nate along osteonal boundaries. Crack splitting, deflection, and
twist are extrinsic toughening mechanisms that consume energy
that would otherwise be used to propagate the crack forward,
thereby decreasing the local stress intensity actually experienced at
the crack tip, essentially doubling the fracture toughness of cor-
tical bone (26, 30). The loss of this toughening mechanism in
bisphosphonate-treated bone suggests that unlike in untreated
bone, where highly mineralized cement line boundaries sur-
rounding osteons represent the most favorable crack path, in
bisphosphonate-treated tissue the greater homogenization of
mineralization may lead to cement lines not acting as a boundary
to direct transverse crack propagation, resulting in a correspond-
ing loss in fracture resistance (30–32).
Clinically, AFFs are seen radiographically to have transverse,
brittle fracture morphology, where the crack path cuts through the
cortical osteonal structure, with minimal deviation. The observed
reduction of crack deviation at osteons and decreased overall
toughness in tissue from patients treated with bisphosphonates is
consistent with this transverse, flatter fracture plane.
Relationship of Current Findings
to Clinical Experience with
Bisphosphonates and AFFs. The current work illuminates complex
effects of bisphosphonates on bone tissue structure and mechanical
Fig. 3.
Fracture resistance R-curves of stress intensity, K, as a function of crack
extension, Δa, for all microbeams tested in in situ fracture toughness
tests. Lines represent a fit of the data for each group. Tissue from patients
treated with bisphosphonates (+BIS groups) was less tough than that from
bisphosphonate-naïve patients (−BIS groups); *P = 0.01. In addition, tissue from
patients without fractures (−BIS Nonfx) was tougher than that from patients
with typical or atypical fractures (P = 0.03 by linear fixed effects model).
Fig. 4.
Reconstructed microbeam μCT crack paths and SEM images of propagated cracks in cortical tissue, with notches and crack paths highlighted in red, from
an (A) atypical fracture patient (+BIS Atypical), (B) a typical fracture patient with (+BIS Typical) and (C) without (−BIS Typical) history of bisphosphonate treatment,
and (D) a patient without a history of fragility fracture or bisphosphonate treatment (−BIS Nonfx), showing (E) trend toward lower crack tortuosity in
bisphosphonate-treated groups (#P < 0.10 by Mann–Whitney U test), suggesting less deviation at osteonal interfaces. (Scale bars, 50 μm.)
Lloyd et al.
PNAS
|
August 15, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 33
|
8725
ENGINEERING
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 properties across multiple length scales. At the whole-bone scale,
bisphosphonate treatment has long been known to reduce fracture
risk by preventing postmenopausal bone loss and microarchitectural
deterioration, reducing structural weakness at trabecular sites (11).
At the millimeter to micro scales examined here, reductions in
turnover with long-term bisphosphonate treatment contributed to
decreased cortical resistance to crack propagation. The large re-
ductions in fracture risk observed in clinical trials of bisphospho-
nates (4, 12) suggest that the macroscopic mechanisms promoting
fracture reduction at trabecular sites dominate in the majority of
patients; however, the microscopic mechanisms that promote frac-
ture susceptibility in the cortex may be critical to the subset of
patients at risk for AFFs. In addition, the durations of bisphosph-
onate treatment examined in the current study represent relatively
long durations currently recommended only for patients at the
highest risk of fracture (33); therefore, changes in tissue properties
in response to shorter durations of bisphosphonate treatment are
expected to be more moderate. Indeed, risk of AFFs seems to in-
crease with treatment duration and decrease with cessation (21).
However, a patient’s predisposition to experiencing an AFF
depends on more factors than just reduced cortical toughening
mechanisms: these rare fractures likely require the convergence of
several disadvantageous events, representing a “perfect storm” of
risk. First, increased curvature of the femoral diaphysis increases
the cyclic mechanical loads on the lateral femoral cortex. Retro-
spective radiographic review demonstrated that patients with AFFs
had greater femoral curvature than nonfracture controls, which
would contribute to greater tensile stresses on the lateral corti-
ces of the AFF patients (34). Next, reductions in toughening
mechanisms in cortical bone, caused by long-term bisphosphonate
treatment, or other genetic, pharmacologic, or metabolic factors,
allow initiation and the start of propagation of a crack through the
cortex. Finally, crack growth that outstrips healing is required for
continued crack propagation. The incidence of “incomplete” AFFs
in asymptomatic patients is much higher than that of complete
catastrophic atypical fractures (35), suggesting that the majority of
patients who experience a partial AFF may recover through heal-
ing of the incomplete fracture before it propagates.
Together, these lines of evidence suggest that reduced cortical
toughness with bisphosphonate therapy is one of many factors
contributing to AFFs. Identification of the subset of patients at
risk for the confluence of these deleterious factors will assist in
risk stratification of patients at greatest risk of AFFs (33).
This study has several important limitations and strengths. First,
the sample size is relatively small because of the rarity of AFFs,
which may limit statistical power. In addition, the cross-sectional
study design prevents discernment of whether the observed dif-
ferences in bone tissue properties in bisphosphonate-treated pa-
tients already existed in these patients before treatment. Finally,
although AFFs do occur in bisphosphonate-naïve patients (6), none
were observed in the 5 y during which patients for this study were
enrolled; thus, the study lacked a bisphosphonate-naïve atypical
fracture group. Despite these limitations, this study is an important
step in understanding the etiology of AFFs. In particular, direct
assessment of fracture properties of human biopsies taken adjacent
to a clinically relevant fracture site allowed discernment of the
effects of long-term bisphosphonate treatment on toughening
mechanisms in bone tissue.
Conclusion. This study suggests that decreasing bone turnover
through long-term antiresorptive treatment not only changes
bone’s nanoscale material properties but also affects toughness
on the length scale of hundreds of micrometers through reduc-
tions in extrinsic and intrinsic toughening mechanisms. Despite
this, the risk-to-benefit ratio of bisphosphonate treatment re-
mains highly favorable for patients with osteoporosis (36). Thus,
our work contributes to an evolving understanding of the com-
plex effects of long-term bisphosphonate treatment on bone
tissue properties and can inform guidelines for timing and du-
ration of treatment for patients at risk for fracture.
Materials and Methods
Patient Cohort and Study Design. Postmenopausal women with (i) inter-
trochanteric and subtrochanteric femoral fragility fractures scheduled for open
reduction and internal fixation using a cephalomedullary device (fracture
groups) or (ii) osteoarthritis scheduled for total hip arthroplasty (nonfracture
groups) were considered for inclusion. The following exclusion criteria were
applied: high-energy traumatic fracture, prior fragility fracture, metabolic
bone diseases (other than osteoporosis), hyperparathyroidism, bone metasta-
sis, renal or hepatic failure, or history of treatment with bone-active agents
other than bisphosphonates. Patients were allocated to groups (Table 1) based
on fracture morphology and history of bisphosphonate use: bisphosphonate-
treated atypical fracture (+BIS Atypical, n = 12); bisphosphonate-treated typical
fracture (+BIS Typical, n = 10); bisphosphonate-treated nonfracture (+BIS
Nonfx, n = 5); bisphosphonate-naïve typical fracture (−BIS Typical, n = 11); or
bisphosphonate-naïve nonfracture (−BIS Nonfx, n = 12).
For patients with fractures, preoperative radiographs were evaluated in a
blinded fashion to classify fractures as typical (intertrochanteric or spiral sub-
trochanteric) or atypical (6). For patients with fractures, 8-mm-diameter cor-
ticocancellous biopsies were collected during fracture repair from the lateral
aspect of the proximal femur, at the insertion site for the spiral blade of the
cephalomedullary device. For patients without fractures, identically sized bi-
opsies were collected from an anatomically matched site. All procedures were
approved by the institutional review boards of the Hospital for Special Surgery
and New York-Presbyterian Hospital. All patients provided informed consent.
Biopsies were embedded in polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA). All biopsies
were analyzed by FTIR imaging, Raman imaging, nanoindentation, and
whole-biopsy μCT. A subset (total n = 40; +BIS Atypical n = 7; +BIS Typical n =
9; −BIS Typical n = 11; +BIS Nonfx n = 2; −BIS Nonfx n = 11) were analyzed
with qBEI (Supporting Information). All biopsies that had a rectangular
section of cortex with minimum dimensions of 5 × 0.5 × 0.5 mm undamaged
by retrieval underwent fracture testing (total n = 21; +BIS Atypical n = 6;
+BIS Typical n = 3; −BIS Typical n = 7; +BIS Nonfx n = 0; −BIS Nonfx n = 5).
The bisphosphonate-treated nonfracture group was not included in micro-
beam analyses, because this group had no biopsies with sections of cortex
large enough to excise an undamaged microbeam.
Radiographic Analysis. Cortical thicknesses were measured from the post-
operative radiographs of the fractured femur at 30 mm and 100 mm distal to
the lesser trochanter. Cortical ratio was calculated as the ratio of medial and
lateral cortical thickness to the total diameter.
FTIR Imaging. Foreach biopsyFTIR imageswerecollectedfromthreenonconsecutive
1-μm-thick sections with an FTIR imaging system (Spotlight 400; Perkin-Elmer) over
the range of 800–2,000 cm−1 with a spatial resolution of ∼6.25 μm (17), to obtain
the mineral-to-matrix ratio, carbonate-to-phosphate ratio, collagen maturity (XLR),
and the mineral crystallinity (XST). For each FTIR image, the values of each calcu-
lated parameter were used to generate a distribution, which was used to calculate
the mean, and fit with a Gaussian curve to calculate the FWHM for each parameter.
Raman Imaging. Each PMMA-embedded bone biopsy was polished (37), and
three cortical and three trabecular regions of 400 μm × 400 μm were imaged
with a Raman imaging system (InVia Confocal Raman Microscope; Renishaw Inc.).
Spectra were collected with a spacing of 50 μm. over the range 800–1,800 cm−1
with a 785-nm laser collecting for 90 s at 50% power with cosmic ray correction.
Each spectrum was baseline-corrected, normalized to the absorbance of PMMA
at 813 cm−1, and had the PMMA contribution subtracted (MATLAB; MathWorks).
Data that were collected from an area of PMMA, had significant contribution
from cosmic rays, or that had a low signal-to-noise ratio were excluded. For each
spectrum, three experimental outcomes were calculated: mineral-to-matrix ratio
(area ratio of phosphate ν1 and amide III), carbonate-to-phosphate ratio (area
ratio of carbonate ν1 to phosphate ν1), and mineral crystallinity (the inverse of the
FWHM of a Gaussian fit of the phosphate ν1 peak) (38).
Nanoindentation. Nanoindentation (TriboIndenter; Hysitron) was performed
with a Berkovich tip loaded at 100 μN/s, held at 1,000 μN for 10 s, and
unloaded at 100 μN/s, on the same points where Raman measurements were
taken. Measurement locations were aligned using an alignment grid on
each sample surface, as well as fiducial markers. The unloading curve of each
indent was analyzed to find the hardness and reduced modulus (39). Optical
images were used to exclude indents that fell on PMMA.
In Situ Fracture Toughness Testing. Microbeams of cortical bone were machined
from PMMA-embedded biopsies, such that the bone tissue was exposed on the
beam surface, and polished to final dimensions ∼5 mm ×0.5 mm ×0.5 mm. PMMA
8726
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1704460114
Lloyd et al.
 contributes minimally to fracture toughness measurements of hydrated samples
(40). A sharp notch was introduced into the beam with a razor blade irrigated
with 1-μm-particle-size alumina slurry. The PMMA-embedded microbeams were
then rehydrated in HBSS for 2 h before testing (at which point they were fully
rehydrated, as assessed by a plateau in their weight following placement in HBSS).
The rehydrated microbeams were tested in situ in a variable-pressure scanning
electron microscope (Hitachi S-4300SE/N; Hitachi America) in three-point bending
using a 2-kN bending stage (MicroTest; Gatan) with a loading span, S, of 2 mm
and a displacement rate of 0.55 μm/s. Crack initiation and extension were imaged
during testing; force-displacement data were recorded simultaneously. Crack-
resistance curves (R-curves) were determined in general accordance with the
current nonlinear-elastic J-based ASTM Standard E1820-15a for the measurement
of fracture toughness (41), which incorporates the role of plastic deformation in
the determination of the material’s resistance to failure (Supporting Information).
3D Morphometric Assessment via μCT. μCT scans (Xradia VersaXRM-520; Zeiss)
of the postfracture-toughness-testing microbeams was performed at a voxel
size of 1–1.6 μm, giving a field of view of 1 mm3 around the crack tip.
Samples were scanned in PBS. Reconstructed grayscale slices of the 3D data
were used to threshold and segment the microbeam image with MATLAB.
The segmented data were used to calculate intracortical bone volume
fraction, Haversian canal density, and Haversian canal diameter (BoneJ; NIH).
μCT images were also used to find the crack path and analyze its direction
relative to the osteonal orientation within the microbeams. Crack tortuosity
was calculated as the average ratio of crack length (measured in ImageJ by
tracing the crack path) to chord length (measured as the straight line length
from notch tip to the tip of the crack) across six 2D longitudinal cross-
sections that spanned the width of each microbeam.
Statistical Analysis. For all demographic, compositional, and nanomechanical
measures a nonparametric linear fixed effects model with Mann–Whitney
U post hoc (α = 0.05) was used to examine differences across groups, isolate
the effects of bisphosphonate treatment and fracture morphology, and adjust
for patient age. For R-curve analysis, both fixed effect linear and linear mixed
models were used to assess the differences in R-curves across groups, with a
Mann–Whitney U post hoc test (α = 0.05). Statistical analysis was performed
with R (42). Data are available on request.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Dr. Mathias Bostrom and Dr. Charles Cornell
for assistance with obtaining biopsies, Dr. Michael Hahn for technical support,
and Amy Cao and Carmen Ngai for collection and analysis of Raman data. This
work was supported by NSF Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
Grant 1452852 and an American Society for Bone and Mineral Research Junior
Faculty Osteoporosis Research Award (to E.D.), and the German Research Foun-
dation (DFG) under Grant BU 2562/2-1/3-1 (to B.B.). This material is based upon
the work supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (to A.A.L.) under
Grant DGE-1144153. This work made use of the Cornell Center for Materials
Research Shared Facilities, which are supported through the NSF Materials Re-
search Science and Engineering Centers program (Grant DMR-1120296).
1. Kavanagh KL, et al. (2006) The molecular mechanism of nitrogen-containing bi-
sphosphonates as antiosteoporosis drugs. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:7829–7834.
2. Eastell R, Walsh JS, Watts NB, Siris E (2011) Bisphosphonates for postmenopausal
osteoporosis. Bone 49:82–88.
3. Clézardin P, Benzaïd I, Croucher PI (2011) Bisphosphonates in preclinical bone on-
cology. Bone 49:66–70.
4. Black DM, et al.; Fracture Intervention Trial Research Group (1996) Randomised trial of effect of
alendronate on risk of fracture in women with existing vertebral fractures. Lancet 348:1535–1541.
5. Harris ST, et al.; Vertebral Efficacy With Risedronate Therapy (VERT) Study Group (1999)
Effects of risedronate treatment on vertebral and nonvertebral fractures in women with
postmenopausal osteoporosis: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA 282:1344–1352.
6. Shane E, et al.; American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (2010) Atypical
subtrochanteric and diaphyseal femoral fractures: Report of a task force of the
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research. J Bone Miner Res 25:2267–2294.
7. Shane E, et al. (2014) Atypical subtrochanteric and diaphyseal femoral fractures:
Second report of a task force of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
J Bone Miner Res 29:1–23.
8. Khosla S, Shane E (2016) A crisis in the treatment of osteoporosis. J Bone Miner Res 31:
1485–1487.
9. Jha S, Wang Z, Laucis N, Bhattacharyya T (2015) Trends in media reports, oral bi-
sphosphonate prescriptions, and hip fractures 1996-2012: An ecological analysis.
J Bone Miner Res 30:2179–2187.
10. Kolata G (June 1, 2016) Fearing drugs’ rare side effects, millions take their chances
with osteoporosis. NY Times.
11. Rodan GA, Fleisch HA (1996) Bisphosphonates: Mechanisms of action. J Clin Invest 97:
2692–2696.
12. Cummings SR, et al. (1998) Effect of alendronate on risk of fracture in women with
low bone density but without vertebral fractures: Results from the Fracture In-
tervention Trial. JAMA 280:2077–2082.
13. Launey ME, Buehler MJ, Ritchie RO (2010) On the mechanistic origins of toughness in
bone. Annu Rev Mater Res 40:25–53.
14. Acevedo C, et al. (2015) Alendronate treatment alters bone tissues at multiple
structural levels in healthy canine cortical bone. Bone 81:352–363.
15. Bajaj D, Geissler JR, Allen MR, Burr DB, Fritton JC (2014) The resistance of cortical bone
tissue to failure under cyclic loading is reduced with alendronate. Bone 64:57–64, and
erratum (2016) 83:283.
16. Zimmermann EA, et al. (2016) Intrinsic mechanical behavior of femoral cortical bone
in young, osteoporotic and bisphosphonate-treated individuals in low- and high
energy fracture conditions. Sci Rep 6:21072.
17. Donnelly E, et al. (2012) Reduced cortical bone compositional heterogeneity with
bisphosphonate treatment in postmenopausal women with intertrochanteric and
subtrochanteric fractures. J Bone Miner Res 27:672–678.
18. Tai K, Dao M, Suresh S, Palazoglu A, Ortiz C (2007) Nanoscale heterogeneity promotes
energy dissipation in bone. Nat Mater 6:454–462.
19. Tang SY, Allen MR, Phipps R, Burr DB, Vashishth D (2009) Changes in non-enzymatic
glycation and its association with altered mechanical properties following 1-year
treatment with risedronate or alendronate. Osteoporos Int 20:887–894.
20. Odvina CV, et al. (2005) Severely suppressed bone turnover: A potential complication
of alendronate therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 90:1294–1301.
21. Schilcher J, Michaëlsson K, Aspenberg P (2011) Bisphosphonate use and atypical frac-
tures of the femoral shaft. N Engl J Med 364:1728–1737, and erratum (2011) 365:1551.
22. Abrahamsen B, Eiken P, Eastell R (2009) Subtrochanteric and diaphyseal femur frac-
tures in patients treated with alendronate: A register-based national cohort study.
J Bone Miner Res 24:1095–1102.
23. Lenart BA, Lorich DG, Lane JM (2008) Atypical fractures of the femoral diaphysis in
postmenopausal women taking alendronate. N Engl J Med 358:1304–1306.
24. Neviaser AS, Lane JM, Lenart BA, Edobor-Osula F, Lorich DG (2008) Low-energy femoral
shaft fractures associated with alendronate use. J Orthop Trauma 22:346–350.
25. Roschger P, et al. (2001) Alendronate increases degree and uniformity of minerali-
zation in cancellous bone and decreases the porosity in cortical bone of osteoporotic
women. Bone 29:185–191.
26. Nalla RK, Kinney JH, Ritchie RO (2003) Mechanistic fracture criteria for the failure of
human cortical bone. Nat Mater 2:164–168.
27. Nalla RK, Stölken JS, Kinney JH, Ritchie RO (2005) Fracture in human cortical bone:
Local fracture criteria and toughening mechanisms. J Biomech 38:1517–1525.
28. Currey JD, Brear K, Zioupos P (2004) Notch sensitivity of mammalian mineralized
tissues in impact. Proc Biol Sci 271:517–522.
29. Gourion-Arsiquaud S, et al. (2009) Use of FTIR spectroscopic imaging to identify pa-
rameters associated with fragility fracture. J Bone Miner Res 24:1565–1571.
30. Koester KJ, Ager JW, 3rd, Ritchie RO (2008) The true toughness of human cortical
bone measured with realistically short cracks. Nat Mater 7:672–677.
31. Burr DB, Schaffler MB, Frederickson RG (1988) Composition of the cement line and its
possible mechanical role as a local interface in human compact bone. J Biomech 21:939–945.
32. Yeni YN, Norman TL (2000) Calculation of porosity and osteonal cement line effects
on the effective fracture toughness of cortical bone in longitudinal crack growth.
J Biomed Mater Res 51:504–509.
33. Adler RA, et al. (2016) Managing osteoporosis in patients on long-term bi-
sphosphonate treatment: Report of a task force of the American Society for Bone and
Mineral Research. J Bone Miner Res 31:16–35, and erratum (2016) 31:1910.
34. Sasaki S, Miyakoshi N, Hongo M, Kasukawa Y, Shimada Y (2012) Low-energy di-
aphyseal femoral fractures associated with bisphosphonate use and severe curved
femur: A case series. J Bone Miner Metab 30:561–567.
35. La Rocca Vieira R, et al. (2012) Frequency of incomplete atypical femoral fractures in
asymptomatic patients on long-term bisphosphonate therapy. AJR Am J Roentgenol
198:1144–1151.
36. Black DM, et al.; Fracture Intervention Trial Steering Committee; HORIZON Pivotal
Fracture Trial Steering Committee (2010) Bisphosphonates and fractures of the sub-
trochanteric or diaphyseal femur. N Engl J Med 362:1761–1771.
37. Donnelly E, Baker SP, Boskey AL, van der Meulen MCH (2006) Effects of surface
roughness and maximum load on the mechanical properties of cancellous bone
measured by nanoindentation. J Biomed Mater Res A 77:426–435.
38. Akkus O, Adar F, Schaffler MB (2004) Age-related changes in physicochemical properties of
mineral crystals are related to impaired mechanical function of cortical bone. Bone 34:443–453.
39. Oliver WC, Pharr GM (1992) An improved technique for determining hardness and
elastic modulus using load and displacement sensing indentation experiments.
J Mater Res 7:1564–1583.
40. Busse B, et al. (2013) Vitamin D deficiency induces early signs of aging in human bone,
increasing the risk of fracture. Sci Transl Med 5:193ra88.
41. ASTM International
(2015) E1820-15a standard test method for measurement of
fracture toughness (ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA).
42. R Core Team
(2017) R: A language and environment for statistical computing (R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna).
43. Hengsberger S, Kulik A, Zysset P (2002) Nanoindentation discriminates the elastic properties
of individual human bone lamellae under dry and physiological conditions. Bone 30:178–184.
44. Boskey AL, et al. (2016) Examining the relationships between bone tissue composi-
tion, compositional heterogeneity, and fragility fracture: A matched case-controlled
FTIRI study. J Bone Miner Res 31:1070–1081.
Lloyd et al.
PNAS
|
August 15, 2017
|
vol. 114
|
no. 33
|
8727
ENGINEERING
MEDICAL SCIENCES
