 Public Health and Economic Consequences
of Vaccine Hesitancy for Measles in the United States
Nathan C. Lo, BS; Peter J. Hotez, MD, PhD
IMPORTANCE Routine childhood vaccination is declining in some regions of the United States
due to vaccine hesitancy, which risks the resurgence of many infectious diseases with public
health and economic consequences. There are ongoing policy debates on the state and
national level, including legislation around nonmedical (personal-belief) exemptions for
childhood vaccination and possibly a special government commission on vaccine safety,
which may affect vaccine coverage.
OBJECTIVE To estimate the number of measles cases in US children and the associated
economic costs under scenarios of different levels of vaccine hesitancy, using the case
example of measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccination and measles.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Publicly available data from the US Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention were used to simulate county-level MMR vaccination coverage in
children (age 2-11 years) in the United States. A stochastic mathematical model was adapted
for infectious disease transmission that estimated a distribution for outbreak size as it relates
to vaccine coverage. Economic costs per measles case were obtained from the literature. The
predicted effects of increasing the prevalence of vaccine hesitancy as well as the removal of
nonmedical exemptions were estimated. The model was calibrated to annual measles cases in
US children over recent years, and the model prediction was validated using an independent
data set from England and Wales.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Annual measles cases in the United States and the
associated public sector costs.
RESULTS A 5% decline in MMR vaccine coverage in the United States would result in an
estimated 3-fold increase in measles cases for children aged 2 to 11 years nationally every
year, with an additional $2.1 million in public sector costs. The numbers would be substantially
higher if unvaccinated infants, adolescents, and adult populations were also considered.
There was variation around these estimates due to the stochastic elements of measles
importation and sensitivity of some model inputs, although the trend was robust.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE This analysis predicts that even minor reductions in childhood
vaccination, driven by vaccine hesitancy (nonmedical and personal belief exemptions), will
have substantial public health and economic consequences. The results support an urgent
need to address vaccine hesitancy in policy dialogues at the state and national level, with
consideration of removing personal belief exemptions of childhood vaccination.
JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(9):887-892. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.1695
Published online July 24, 2017.
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: MD/PhD
Candidate, Division of Epidemiology,
Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California (Lo);
Texas Children’
s Hospital Center for
Vaccine Development, National
School of Tropical Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston
(Hotez); Department of Biology,
Baylor University, Waco, Texas
(Hotez); James A. Baker III Institute
for Public Policy, Rice University,
Houston, Texas (Hotez); Scowcroft
Institute of International Affairs,
The Bush School of Government and
Public Service, Texas A&M University,
College Station (Hotez).
Corresponding Author: Nathan C.
Lo, BS, Division of Epidemiology,
Stanford University School of
Medicine, 300 Pasteur Dr, Lane L-134,
Stanford, CA 94305 (nathan.lo
@stanford.edu).
Research
JAMA Pediatrics | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
887
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 T
he routine vaccination of children is declining in Texas
and other areas of the United States where they allow
for personal belief and other nonmedical exemptions
to childhood vaccination requirements.1-4 In these areas, there
is growing vaccine hesitancy—defined as a delay or refusal to
accept vaccination based on personal beliefs despite availabil-
ity—that could accelerate gaps in vaccine coverage across the
United States.1-3 The determinants of the parental decision-
making process on whether to vaccinate their child are com-
plex and context specific,5 but are often influenced by misin-
formation, false claims regarding vaccine safety, and a low
perceived risk of infectious diseases among other factors.1,5,6
While the sources driving vaccine hesitancy (eg, the “anti-
vaxxer” movement, celebrity endorsement, and online con-
tent) have historically been outside of science and govern-
ment, there have recently been calls for a special government
commission on vaccine safety, despite overwhelming
scientific consensus on the safety and effectiveness of
vaccinations.6-10 If the panel were to draft policies that relax
childhood vaccinations requirements, the already declining
trends in vaccination coverage in US children may decline fur-
ther. The aim of this study was to estimate the potential pub-
lic health and economic consequences of declining child-
hood vaccination, a result of a growing vaccine hesitancy
movement, using the case example of measles, mumps, and
rubella (MMR) vaccination and measles virus.
Methods
Data Source
We used publicly available data from the US Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention (CDC) to simulate county-level
MMR vaccine coverage for children aged 2 to 11 years in the
United States for the present day.3,11 For primary school chil-
dren (kindergarten to fifth grade; age 5-11 years), we used state-
leveldatafromSchoolVaxViewfrom2010to2015.3Foryounger
children (age 2-5 years), we used state-level data from Child-
VaxView from 2013 to 2015.3 These age groups were chosen
based on availability of data, role in transmission, and strength
of social mixing patterns.12 To simulate county-level vaccine
coverage, we used the most recent publicly available data for
257 counties in the United States from the CDC (2007-2008
survey) to compute state-specific variance for MMR vaccine
coverage.11 These counties were chosen as a subset of the es-
timated 3141 counties in the United States, based on their suf-
ficientreportingduringtheNationalImmunizationSurvey,and
provide a sampling of multiple counties per state.11 We then
applied the state-specific variances to current state-level cov-
erage estimates to simulate counties in the United States, as-
suming coverage was normally distributed. The simulation of
county-level coverage estimates is important because of the
heterogeneity in vaccine coverage and the corresponding im-
plicationtooutbreaksinhighlyimmunizedpopulations.1,4,13-15
Although historical, our county-level variances estimates are
likely to be conservative since variance is expected to have
increased over time given focal regions of vaccine
hesitancy.1,4,14,15 When vaccine coverage data were unavail-
able, we used the mean of neighboring years. Data on the state-
level prevalence of vaccine hesitancy, defined as nonmedical
(eg,personalbelief)exemptionsofchildhoodvaccination,were
sourced from the CDC SchoolVaxView.3
We estimated a cost (2016 US$) of $20 000 per case of
measles from the perspective of the public sector (ie, local and
state public health institutions) based on the literature.16,17
These costs included state and local expenses to the public sec-
tor, including personnel wages and salaries, contact tracing,
transportation,laboratoryanalysis,vaccination,overhead,and
other costs. These estimates did not account for costs of ill-
ness, loss productivity to the parent, hospitalization (com-
mon in the prevaccine era), or other societal aspects, and our
base case cost may represent a conservative estimate.18,19
This study was not human subject research as deter-
mined by the Stanford University School of Medicine Institu-
tional Review Board.
Statistical Analysis
WeestimatedtheannualnumberofmeaslescasesintheUnited
States and the associated public sector costs under increas-
ing levels of vaccine hesitancy. We modeled a measles out-
break following 2 chance events. First, we simulated impor-
tation of measles cases into US counties (often a US traveler
returning from an endemic country) with the possibility for
multiple introductions within the same county. We used a cali-
brated number of individuals with imported measles interact-
ing with children in the United States, which can be thought
of as a static force of infection. We weighted the probability
of introduction by the state’
s population, where more popu-
lated states had a higher probability of receiving an imported
measles case (eMethods in the Supplement).
Second, in scenarios where an imported measles case was
successfully introduced in a county with contact of a child, we
simulated the ensuing size of the outbreak. We adapted a sto-
chastic mathematical model that estimated a probability dis-
tribution for the size of a measles outbreak following intro-
duction of an imported case as it relates to vaccine coverage
in a population (eMethods in the Supplement).20 The model
implemented a simple random walk, which is a mathemati-
cal approach to simulating a series of random events (ie, in-
teraction of children and subsequent transmission of an in-
fectious disease). In this model, we computed the probability
of an infectious child transmitting the virus to another child
Key Points
Question How does vaccine hesitancy affect annual measles
cases and economic costs in the United States?
Findings In this modeling study of children (age 2-11 years), a 5%
reduction in measles, mumps, and rubella vaccination coverage
resulted in a 3-fold increase in annual measles cases with an
additional US$2.1 million in public sector costs.
Meaning Even small declines in vaccination coverage in children
owing to vaccine hesitancy may have substantial public health and
economic consequences that will be larger when considering
unvaccinated infants, adolescents, and adults.
Research Original Investigation
Public Health and Economic Consequences of Vaccine Hesitancy for Measles
888
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 basedontheeffectivereproductivenumber,whichisthemean
number of secondary cases caused by 1 infectious person in a
population with some level of immunity (eMethods in the
Supplement). We computed the effective reproductive num-
ber as a simple function of both the calibrated basic reproduc-
tive number (R0) for measles and the proportion of children
whoareimmune(accountingforbothcounty-levelvaccinecov-
erage and imperfect vaccine efficacy).12,21 The model as-
sumed that the outbreak is small relative to the entire popu-
lation (ie, no population-wide outbreaks) and the overall
proportion of susceptible individuals will not be significantly
changed with respect to the effective reproductive number
(eMethods in the Supplement). This assumption is supported
by disease surveillance data from developed countries with
high vaccine coverage.20,22
Wesimulatedincreasingvaccinehesitancy(ie,nonmedical
exemptions) to estimate the predicted effect of declining child-
hood vaccination coverage in the study population on measles
outbreaks.Wesimulatedhypotheticalreductionsinvaccination
coverage in the entire study population of children aged 2 to 11
yearsandcomputedmeaslesoutbreaksoverthetimehorizonof
1 year following traditional reporting of annual case counts. We
estimatedthepredictedeffectofreducingmeanvaccinecover-
ageforeachstateby1%to8%,whichrepresentedacorrespond-
ingincreaseintheprevalenceofnonmedicalexemptionsacross
the entire study population. This percentage change in vaccine
hesitancy was atop the current 2% national prevalence of non-
medicalexemptions.3 UsingCDCdataoncurrentstate-leveles-
timatesfornonmedicalexemptions,wealsoquantifiedthepre-
dictedeffectofremovingnonmedicalexemptionsforchildren.
Removalofallnonmedicalexemptionsequatedwithestimated
national vaccine coverage of only 95% in eligible children; this
gap in coverage was likely due to children who are not required
tofollowschoolvaccinationpolicy(eg,homeschooling).There
wasasmallsubsetofchildrenwhowereineligibleowingtomedi-
cal exemptions (eg, immunocompromised, receiving chemo-
therapy;<0.1%ofthepopulation),andthesechildrenweremod-
eled as fully susceptible. The data and model code are available
online.23
Calibration and Validation
We calibrated the model to annual measles cases in US children
inrecentyearsandfitted2modelparameters:theR0formeasles
(forthestudypopulationofchildrenage2-11years)andnumber
of imported measles cases with successful contact of a child
(eMethodsintheSupplement).Wecalibratedthemedianmodel
outputtoannualmeaslescasesinchildren(age2-11years)from
recentyears(anestimated48casesannually)(Table1)andnum-
ber of outbreaks in this group (4 based on CDC definition of a
transmission chain of ≥3) in the United States.22 The stochastic
mathematicalmodelreproducedtheobserveddataandprovided
a90%predictionintervalthatcapturedthewiderangeofrecent
measles case counts in children (Figure).
We validated the model prediction using an independent
datasetonnationalMMRvaccinecoverageandannualmeasles
casesfromEnglandandWales(eMethodsintheSupplement).20
Most notably, this data set allowed for characterization of the
model validity across the broad range of vaccine coverage and
across the range of vaccine coverage evaluated in the main
analysis in a highly immunized population comparable to that
of the United States.
Sensitivity Analysis
We conducted a series of 1-way sensitivity analyses to mea-
sure the influence of varying individual model parameters on
Table 1. Model Variables for Measles Epidemiology, Vaccination,
and Public Sector Costs
Variable
Base Case Value
Comments
Fixed model parameters
Estimated annual cases
in US children in recent
years22
48
28% Total cases were
in ages 2-11 y
Estimated annual No.
of outbreaks in US
children (≥3 cases)22
4
MMR efficacy for
measles, %21
95
Assume some with 2 doses
Cost per measles case,
$16,17,24
20 000
Fitted model parameters
Basic R0, measles
in children
5.7a
No. of measles
importations in
US children
16b
Abbreviations: CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention;
MMR, measles, mumps, and rubella; R0, reproductive number.
a The model accounts for transmission among children who represent
approximately 30% of the cases.
bThe CDC estimates approximately 35 cases of imported measles per year,
which broadly aligns with our findings because children account
for approximately 30% of the cases.
Figure. Public Health Consequences and Public Sector Costs
of Childhood Measles in the United States With Increasing Prevalence
of Vaccine Hesitancy
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
10
8
6
Annual Cases, No.
Annual Costs, US$ in Millions
Nonmedical Exemptions, Prevalence %
4
2
The line indicates the predicted number of annual measles cases in US children
(ages 2-11 years) and the associated public sector costs across a range of
prevalences for vaccine hesitancy (ie, nonmedical exemptions). The shaded
area provides the 90% prediction interval. The vertical dashed line indicates
the predicted annual measles cases in children for present day (2% prevalence
of vaccine hesitancy). The datapoints represent the observed number of annual
cases in recent years. We estimated the consequence of increasing national
nonmedical exemptions from 2% to 10% prevalence, and the removal of
nonmedical exemptions (0% prevalence).
Public Health and Economic Consequences of Vaccine Hesitancy for Measles
Original Investigation Research
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
889
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 theoverallstudyoutcomestoassesstherobustnessofourfind-
ings.Weevaluatedarangeofalternativevaluesaroundthecali-
brated parameters, including the R0 for measles and number
of imported measles cases in, and also the per-case public sec-
tor cost of a measles case, and other model assumptions
(Table2).16,17,24Weexaminedmodelinganexpandedagegroup
(0-11 years) that added children 0 to 2 years (eMethods in the
Supplement). While the mixing structure in this group is more
complex than our primary study population, we evaluated this
alternative age specification to understand the robustness of
study conclusions. We also modeled a slow phase-in of vac-
cine hesitancy in the youngest age group alone over a 10-year
period (eMethods in the Supplement).
Results
For the United States, the baseline national coverage for MMR
vaccination in children aged 2 to 11 years was 93% prevalence
(state variation, 87%-97%), and nonmedical exemptions were
a 2% prevalence (state variation, 0.4%-6.2%). We estimated
an R0 for measles of 5.7 for transmission within US children
(age 2-11 years), with 48 annual measles cases under current
vaccine coverage estimates. Reduction in MMR vaccine cov-
erage due to increasing vaccine hesitancy increased the an-
nualmeaslesincidenceandassociatedeconomiccosts(Figure).
We found that a 5% decline in MMR vaccine coverage in
USchildrenwouldresultina3-foldincreaseinnationalmeasles
cases in this age group, for a total of 150 cases and an addi-
tional $2.1 million in economic costs to the public sector
(Figure). With declining vaccination coverage, the size of out-
breaks increased. Increased MMR vaccine coverage in chil-
dren, through elimination of children with nonmedical ex-
emptions or other mechanisms, increased national MMR
coverageto95%prevalence(statevariation,91%-98%).Wepre-
dicted that this strategy would reduce annual cases of measles
by 20% (from 48 to 38 cases) and was an effective strategy to
mitigate annual measles cases and costs.
For validation, we used independent data from England
and Wales and found that the model prediction for rise in
measles incidence with declining vaccine coverage corre-
lated well with the observed data within the constraints of the
stochastic nature of measles outbreaks and wide prediction in-
tervals (eMethods and eTable 1 in the Supplement).
There was variation around these estimates due to the sto-
chastic elements of measles importation, although the rela-
tionship between declining MMR vaccine coverage and in-
creasing measles cases was robust and model assumptions
were conservative. The 1-way sensitivity analyses found that
varying individual model parameters, including the R0 (from
R0 5-8), public sector costs per measles case (from US$5000-
US$30 000), and expanded age groups (0-11 years), resulted
in a range of values for increases in measles cases and eco-
nomic costs associated with a 5% reduction in MMR vaccine
coverage (Table 2, eFigure in the Supplement). We also evalu-
ated a slow phase-in of a 5% reduction in MMR vaccine cov-
erageintheyoungestagegroupover10yearsandfounda2-fold
increase in total measles cases, with an additional 480 cases
costing $7.9 million over this period. Overall, the study con-
clusion that minor reductions in vaccine coverage resulted in
multifold increases in measles cases with large public sector
costs remained robust in most cases.
Discussion
Inthisstudy,weestimatedthepublichealthandeconomiccon-
sequences of increasing vaccine hesitancy based on nonmedi-
calandpersonal-beliefexemptionsonchildhoodmeaslesinthe
UnitedStates.Wefoundthatevenamodest5%declineinMMR
vaccine coverage could result in a 3-fold increase in annual
measles cases, with an additional US$2.1 million in economic
costsinchildrenaged2to11years.Theseestimateswouldbesub-
stantiallyhigherifunvaccinatedinfants,adolescents,andadult
populationsarealsoconsidered.Wepredictthatremovalofnon-
medical(eg,personalbelief)vaccineexemptionsforchildhood
vaccination will mitigate this trend and substantially reduce
measles and other infectious diseases in the United States.
VaccinehesitancyintheUnitedStatesandgloballyhashis-
torically reflected a number of complex and context-specific
determinantsthatareoftenvaccinespecific.InthecaseofMMR
vaccination in the United States, parental refusal to vaccinate
theirchildmaybelargelyinfluencedbymisinformationonvac-
cine safety and the low perceived risk of measles in the United
States.1,5,6 Our study conclusions find that measles still poses
asubstantialthreatforlargeoutbreaksinchildren,despitepub-
lic perception that measles is no longer a risk to children in the
United States, especially under scenarios with further de-
cline in vaccine coverage. Furthermore, the safety of MMR and
other vaccines is well established in the scientific literature,
Table 2. One-Way Sensitivity Analysis of Measles Cases
and Public Sector Costs
Description
Base Case
Range of
Values
Outcome With 5%
Decline in Vaccine
Coverage, Range
No. of Cases (fold increase)
Measles cases
Base case
3.1
Basic R0
5.7
5-8
2.2-4.5
No. of measles
importations in US
children
16
10-25
1.5-4.0
Expanded age
group, range, y
2-11
0-11a
2.7
Additional Cost, US$ million
Public sector costs
Base case
2.1
Basic R0
5.7
5-8
1.2-3.2
No. of measles
importations in US
children
16
10-25
0.5-2.7
Per-case cost, US$
20 000
5000-30 000
0.5-3.1
Expanded age
group, y
2-11
0-11a
2.5
Abbreviation: R0, reproductive number.
a Only the age group 0 to 11 years was tested in the analysis; thus, there is no
range for the outcomes.
Research Original Investigation
Public Health and Economic Consequences of Vaccine Hesitancy for Measles
890
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 including the finding that MMR vaccination has no associa-
tion with the development of autism.7-10
TherecentdeclinesinvaccinecoverageintheUnitedStates
are increasingly driven by parental nonmedical exemptions of
vaccinerecommendations.1-3Presently,18statesallowfornon-
medical personal belief exemptions to childhood vaccination.2
In addition, all but 2 states offer nonmedical exemption on re-
ligiousorphilosophicalgrounds.2Giventrendsindecliningvac-
cinecoverage,ourstudypredictsthatremovalofnonmedicalper-
sonal belief exemptions would substantially reduce the risk of
measlesintheUnitedStates.Thisconclusionisfurthersupported
byarecentstudythatexaminedtheassociationbetweenvaccine
coverageandmeaslesoutbreaksinDenver,Colorado,andfound
thatareductioninnonmedicalexemptionsthroughstricterpolicy
would reduce measles cases and economic consequences.25
Measlesisahighlyinfectiousviralillnessthatrequireshigh
vaccinecoverage(>90%-95%)toachieveherdimmunityandpre-
vent large outbreaks, based on an estimated 95% vaccine
efficacy.12,21,26,27 The current empirical data on state-level vac-
cinecoveragesuggestthatmanysettingsareontheborderofthe
desired threshold for herd immunity.3,11,22 Substantial within-
statevariationmeansthattherearelikely“hotspots”wherevac-
cinecoverageisespeciallylowcomparedwiththestateaverage
and outbreaks will be large following importation of a measles
case (commonly from a returning US citizen after traveling
internationally).1,4,14,15,27Thisgeographicclusteringoflowvac-
cinecoverage(hotspot)andoutbreaksintheUnitedStatesissup-
portedbydataonlowdiphtheria,tetanus,andacellularpertus-
sisvaccinecoverageandoutbreaksofpertussis,whichprovides
further evidence for the study conclusions.4,14,15
The mechanism of measles outbreaks in the United States,
whicharedrivenbyimportationofcasesfromoutsidethecoun-
try,isastochasticprocesswithsubstantialvariationaroundthe
numberofannualcases.Thisvariationcanbereadilyseeninre-
cent annual case counts for measles in the United States, rang-
ing from 55 to 667 annual cases across all age groups in recent
years, across a time period with relatively similar vaccine cov-
erage (eTable 2 in the Supplement).22 The wide range of annual
measlescasesfromrecentyearsiscapturedinourmodelthrough
the large prediction interval for present-day vaccine coverage
(Figure;seepresent-dayprevalenceof2%vaccinehesitancy).Be-
yondthestochasticnatureofmeaslesimportationandoutbreaks,
themodelpredictionwassensitivetosomeinputparametersthat
maybeheterogeneousbetweensettings,buttheoverallconclu-
sionremainedrobust.Wevalidatedourmodelwithindependent
data from England and Wales over a similar vaccine coverage
range, which increases our confidence in the model trend
prediction.20Furthermore,thehistoricaldatafromEnglandand
Wales found a comparable relation between declining vaccine
coverage and a rise in measles cases.20
This modeling analysis likely predicts a conservative es-
timate for a rise in measles cases associated with declining im-
munization status because of foundational model assump-
tions and since we limited our analysis to US children (age 2-11
years). The model is designed to simulate outbreaks in highly
immunized population and nonendemic settings. However,
large reductions in MMR vaccine coverage could allow for
measles to become endemic again, which is not accounted for
in this model, and would likely result in thousands of annual
measles cases.18 Owing to constraints on data for immuniza-
tion status in the adult population and social mixing struc-
tures, we limited our analysis to children ages 2-11 years who
contribute approximately 30% of the annual measles cases.22
However,thenumberofcasesofmeasleswouldbemuchlarger
when accounting for other age groups, such as infants, ado-
lescents, and adults. This increased number would be, in part,
driven by infants younger than 12 months who are not yet eli-
gible to receive measles vaccines, as illustrated in the sensi-
tivity analysis modeling an expanded age group (0-11 years).
Finally, the upper limit of the prediction interval in the base
case analysis (Figure) demonstrated substantial nonlinearity,
suggesting the possibility for large outbreaks due to random
chance with small reductions in vaccine coverage.
Limitations
The study findings should be understood within the limita-
tion of the model assumptions and data. We simulated county-
level differences in vaccine coverage and assumed homoge-
neous mixing of children within this ecologic zone, although
there are important spatial and age-based heterogeneities in
measles transmission that were not accounted for in the model
owing to limitations in data. We estimated an R0 for measles
of 5.7, which is lower than historically estimated values of 10
to 18, although we only modeled children who account for ap-
proximately 30% of the cases, so the R0 is intuitively lower
since we did not include transmission with adolescents and
adults (reducing the population for transmission). Although
ourestimatealignswithoutbreaksinschoolchildren,28wecau-
tion against overinterpretation of this R0 value that may be un-
derestimated because of the ecologic nature of the estimate.
Finally, there are key limitations in CDC data for vaccination
coverage, including variation in reporting standards from in-
dividual states and that vaccine exemption estimates may in-
clude children who were partially vaccinated.
Conclusions
The results of our study find substantial public health and eco-
nomic consequences with even minor reductions in MMR cov-
erageduetovaccinehesitancyanddirectlyconfrontthenotion
that measles is no longer a threat in the United States. Removal
ofthenonmedicalpersonalbeliefexemptionsforchildhoodvac-
cinationmaymitigatetheseconsequences.Thesefindingsshould
play a key role in any policies adapted by state or national gov-
ernments that relate to childhood vaccination.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: April 18, 2017.
Published Online: July 24, 2017.
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.1695
Author Contributions: Mr Lo had full access to all
the data in the study and takes responsibility for the
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data
analysis.
Public Health and Economic Consequences of Vaccine Hesitancy for Measles
Original Investigation Research
jamapediatrics.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
891
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
 Study concept and design: Both authors.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Both
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Both authors.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Both authors.
Statistical analysis: Lo.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: No disclosures
were reported.
Funding/Support: Mr Lo is supported by the
Medical Scientist Training Program (Stanford
University School of Medicine).
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: Stanford University
School of Medicine had no role in the design and
conduct of the study; collection, management,
analysis, and interpretation of the data; and
preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript;
and decision to submit the manuscript for
publication.
REFERENCES
1. Hotez PJ. Texas and its measles epidemics. PLoS
Med. 2016;13(10):e1002153.
2. National Conference of State Legislatures. States
with religious and philosophical exemptions from
school immunization requirements. http://www
.ncsl.org/research/health/school
-immunization-exemption-state-laws.aspx.
Published August 23, 2016. Accessed February 6,
2017.
3. VaxView. United States Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov
/vaccines/vaxview/. Accessed February 6, 2017.
4. Omer SB, Enger KS, Moulton LH, Halsey NA,
Stokley S, Salmon DA. Geographic clustering of
nonmedical exemptions to school immunization
requirements and associations with geographic
clustering of pertussis. Am J Epidemiol. 2008;168
(12):1389-1396.
5. Larson HJ, Jarrett C, Eckersberger E, Smith DM,
Paterson P. Understanding vaccine hesitancy
around vaccines and vaccination from a global
perspective: a systematic review of published
literature, 2007-2012. Vaccine. 2014;32(19):
2150-2159.
6. Report of the SAGE Working Group on Vaccine
Hesitancy. World Health Organization.
http://www.who.int/immunization/sage/meetings
/2014/october/1_Report_WORKING_GROUP_vaccine
_hesitancy_final.pdf. Published October 1, 2014.
Accessed June 12, 2017.
7. American Academy of Pediatrics. Vaccine safety:
examine the evidence. https://www.aap.org/en-us
/Documents/immunization_vaccine_studies.pdf.
Updated April 2013. Accessed March 25, 2017.
8. Jain A, Marshall J, Buikema A, Bancroft T, Kelly
JP, Newschaffer CJ. Autism occurrence by MMR
vaccine status among US children with older
siblings with and without autism. JAMA. 2015;313
(15):1534-1540.
9. Taylor LE, Swerdfeger AL, Eslick GD. Vaccines
are not associated with autism: an evidence-based
meta-analysis of case-control and cohort studies.
Vaccine. 2014;32(29):3623-3629.
10. Uno Y, Uchiyama T, Kurosawa M, Aleksic B,
Ozaki N. Early exposure to the combined
measles-mumps-rubella vaccine and
thimerosal-containing vaccines and risk of autism
spectrum disorder. Vaccine. 2015;33(21):2511-2516.
11. Smith PJ, Singleton JA; National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases; Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). County-level
trends in vaccination coverage among children
aged 19-35 months—United States, 1995-2008.
MMWR CDC Surveill Summ. 2011;60(4):1-86.
12. Keeling MJ, Rohani P. Modeling Infectious
Diseases in Humans and Animals. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press; 2008.
13. Glasser JW, Feng Z, Omer SB, Smith PJ,
Rodewald LE. The effect of heterogeneity in uptake
of the measles, mumps, and rubella vaccine on the
potential for outbreaks of measles: a modelling
study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016;16(5):599-605.
14. Atwell JE, Van Otterloo J, Zipprich J, et al.
Nonmedical vaccine exemptions and pertussis in
California, 2010. Pediatrics. 2013;132(4):624-630.
15. Omer SB, Salmon DA, Orenstein WA, deHart
MP, Halsey N. Vaccine refusal, mandatory
immunization, and the risks of vaccine-preventable
diseases. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(19):1981-1988.
16. Ortega-Sanchez IR, Vijayaraghavan M, Barskey
AE, Wallace GS. The economic burden of sixteen
measles outbreaks on United States public health
departments in 2011. Vaccine. 2014;32(11):1311-1317.
17. Sugerman DE, Barskey AE, Delea MG, et al.
Measles outbreak in a highly vaccinated population,
San Diego, 2008: role of the intentionally
undervaccinated. Pediatrics. 2010;125(4):747-755.
18. Orenstein WA, Papania MJ, Wharton ME.
Measles elimination in the United States. J Infect Dis.
2004;189(suppl 1):S1-S3.
19. Strebel PM, Papania MJ, Fiebelkorn AP, Halsey
NA. Measles vaccine. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA,
Offit PA. Vaccines. 6th ed. New York: Elsevier
Saunders; 2013:352-387.
20. Jansen VA, Stollenwerk N, Jensen HJ, Ramsay
ME, Edmunds WJ, Rhodes CJ. Measles outbreaks in
a population with declining vaccine uptake. Science.
2003;301(5634):804.
21. Yap P, Wu FW, Du ZW, et al. Effect of
deworming on physical fitness of school-aged
children in Yunnan, China: a double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. PLoS Negl
Trop Dis. 2014;8(7):e2983.
22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Measles cases and outbreaks: 2010-2015.
https://www.cdc.gov/measles/cases-outbreaks
.html. Updated June 2, 2017. Accessed June 12,
2017.
23. Lo N. Publication codes. https://github.com
/NathanLo3/Publication-codes. May 2017. Accessed
June 19, 2017.
24. Parker AA, Staggs W, Dayan GH, et al.
Implications of a 2005 measles outbreak in Indiana
for sustained elimination of measles in the United
States. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(5):447-455.
25. Whittington MD, Kempe A, Dempsey A, Herlihy
R, Campbell JD. Impact of nonmedical vaccine
exemption policies on the health and economic
burden of measles. Acad Pediatr. 2017;
S1876-2859(17)30068-2.
26. Durrheim DN, Crowcroft NS, Strebel PM.
Measles—the epidemiology of elimination. Vaccine.
2014;32(51):6880-6883.
27. Wallinga J, Heijne JC, Kretzschmar M.
A measles epidemic threshold in a highly vaccinated
population. PLoS Med. 2005;2(11):e316.
28. Mossong J, Muller CP. Estimation of the basic
reproduction number of measles during an
outbreak in a partially vaccinated population.
Epidemiol Infect. 2000;124(2):273-278.
Research Original Investigation
Public Health and Economic Consequences of Vaccine Hesitancy for Measles
892
JAMA Pediatrics
September 2017
Volume 171, Number 9
(Reprinted)
jamapediatrics.com
© 2017 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: https://jamanetwork.com/ on 06/01/2019
