 Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e495
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements 
◼ electronic health records ◼ exercise 
◼ healthy lifestyle ◼ prevention and 
control ◼ risk factors
ABSTRACT: Physical inactivity is one of the most prevalent major health 
risk factors, with 8 in 10 US adults not meeting aerobic and muscle-
strengthening guidelines, and is associated with a high burden of 
cardiovascular disease. Improving and maintaining recommended levels 
of physical activity leads to reductions in metabolic, hemodynamic, 
functional, body composition, and epigenetic risk factors for 
noncommunicable chronic diseases. Physical activity also has a significant 
role, in many cases comparable or superior to drug interventions, in the 
prevention and management of >40 conditions such as diabetes mellitus, 
cancer, cardiovascular disease, obesity, depression, Alzheimer disease, 
and arthritis. Whereas most of the modifiable cardiovascular disease risk 
factors included in the American Heart Association’s My Life Check - Life’s 
Simple 7 are evaluated routinely in clinical practice (glucose and lipid 
profiles, blood pressure, obesity, and smoking), physical activity is typically 
not assessed. The purpose of this statement is to provide a comprehensive 
review of the evidence on the feasibility, validity, and effectiveness of 
assessing and promoting physical activity in healthcare settings for 
adult patients. It also adds concrete recommendations for healthcare 
systems, clinical and community care providers, fitness professionals, the 
technology industry, and other stakeholders in order to catalyze increased 
adoption of physical activity assessment and promotion in healthcare 
settings and to contribute to meeting the American Heart Association’s 
2020 Impact Goals.
Felipe Lobelo, MD, PhD, 
FAHA, Chair
Deborah Rohm Young, 
PhD, FAHA, Vice Chair
Robert Sallis, MD
Michael D. Garber, MPH
Sandra A. Billinger, PT, 
PhD, FAHA
John Duperly, MD, PhD
Adrian Hutber, PhD, MSc
Russell R. Pate, PhD, FAHA
Randal J. Thomas, MD, 
MS, FAHA
Michael E. Widlansky, MD, 
MPH, FAHA
Michael V. McConnell, 
MD, MSEE, FAHA
Elizabeth A. Joy, MD, MPH
On behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association 
Physical Activity Com-
mittee of the Council 
on Lifestyle and Car-
diometabolic Health; 
Council on Epidemiol-
ogy and Prevention; 
Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; Council on 
Genomic and Precision 
Medicine; Council on 
Cardiovascular Surgery 
and Anesthesia; and 
Stroke Council
© 2018 American Heart Association, Inc.
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Routine Assessment and Promotion of 
Physical Activity in Healthcare Settings
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
Circulation
http://circ.ahajournals.org
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e496
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
P
hysical inactivity is a persistent public health prob-
lem associated with a high burden of cardiovas-
cular disease (CVD) and other noncommunicable 
chronic diseases (NCDs).1,2 Recent estimates indicate 
that one third of the global population fails to meet 
physical activity (PA) guidelines3 and that 9% of the 
overall global premature mortality, ≈5.3 million deaths, 
is directly attributable to physical inactivity, a figure 
comparable to the global smoking-related mortality 
(5.1 million).4 In addition, inadequate PA commands 
a substantial economic burden, recently quantified as 
11% of the aggregated healthcare expenditures in the 
United States or about $120 billion per year.5
Improving and maintaining recommended levels of 
PA leads to reductions in the metabolic, hemodynamic, 
body composition, epigenetic, and functional status 
risk factors that contribute heavily to the development 
of many leading NCDs. Therefore, PA has a significant 
role, in many cases comparable or superior to drug 
interventions,6 in the prevention and management of 
>40 diseases beyond CVD such as obesity, diabetes 
mellitus, cancer, depression, Alzheimer disease, arthri-
tis, and osteoporosis.7–9
Although a plethora of research and initiatives 
strongly recommend PA for the prevention and man-
agement of CVD, population levels of PA have re-
mained flat for decades.10 Only 52% of US adults report 
meeting the aerobic component of the PA guidelines 
(150 min/wk of moderate-intensity PA, 75 min/wk of 
vigorous-intensity PA, or an equivalent combination).9 
In addition, only 30% of adults report meeting the 
muscle-strengthening component of the PA guidelines 
(activities that are moderate or high intensity and in-
volve all major muscle groups on ≥2 d/wk). When the 
2 components of the guidelines are considered, 80% 
of US adults fail to achieve recommended levels of PA, 
making it one of the most prevalent major CVD risk 
factors.11,12 Consequently, given its high prevalence and 
health and economic burdens, combating physical in-
activity constitutes 1 of the 4 priority objectives in the 
World Health Organization’s global action plan to con-
trol NCDs.13 In this context, healthcare systems around 
the world are being called on to incorporate evidence-
based PA assessment and promotion strategies14 as part 
of the solution to the physical inactivity pandemic.15–18
A physically active lifestyle is 1 of 7 factors promoted 
by the American Heart Association’s (AHA’s) My Life 
Check - Life’s Simple 7 to reduce the risk of CVD and to 
improve overall health.19,20 PA also plays a central role 
in the AHA’s 2020 Impact Goals to improve by 20% the 
cardiovascular health of all Americans and to reduce 
deaths caused by CVD and stroke by 20% by achieving 
goals that are similar to those included in Life’s Sim-
ple 7.20 Indeed, achievement of the 2020 AHA Impact 
Goals will be highly dependent on an increase in the 
percentage of Americans who meet the PA guidelines.9
The AHA has a long and rich history of scientific state-
ments on the role of exercise, PA, and sedentary behavior 
for primordial, primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention 
of CVD.21–26 PA and public health recommendations for 
adults,27–29 older adults,30 and children and youth,31 as 
well as the risk of exercise-related acute CVD events,22 
and the role of exercise testing in various populations 
have also been published.32,33 Other AHA statements 
have assessed the evidence on clinical and population-
level lifestyle interventions for CVD prevention,34–37 as 
well as a multisectorial policy approach for PA promotion 
in the form of the National Physical Activity Plan.16 How-
ever, no scientific statements have addressed the routine 
assessment and promotion of PA in healthcare settings.
Although the National Physical Activity Plan includes 
some recommendations for clinicians and the healthcare 
sector on PA promotion, it does not include a detailed as-
sessment of the evidence and the process for standard-
izing PA-related care in clinical settings. Whereas most 
of the modifiable CVD risk factors included in the AHA’s 
Life’s Simple 7 are assessed routinely in clinical practice 
(glucose and lipid profiles, blood pressure, obesity, and 
smoking),38 PA is typically not assessed,39 with the excep-
tion of a few healthcare systems.40,41 In addition, Ross et 
al42 recently published an AHA statement summarizing 
the evidence on the importance of assessing cardiorespi-
ratory fitness as a “vital sign” in clinical practice.
The purpose of this statement is to provide a com-
prehensive review of the evidence on the feasibility, va-
lidity, and effectiveness of PA promotion in healthcare 
settings for adult patients. It complements and extends 
a previous AHA statement that provided a guide to the 
assessment of PA for clinical and research applications.38 
It also adds concrete recommendations for healthcare 
systems, clinical and community care providers, fitness 
professionals, the technology industry, and other stake-
holders in order to catalyze increased adoption of PA 
promotion in healthcare settings and to contribute to 
meeting the AHA 2020 Impact Goals and beyond.
PHYSICAL INACTIVITY AS MAJOR RISK 
FACTOR FOR CVD
Epidemiological data examining the association be-
tween physical inactivity and cardiometabolic risk sug-
gest an increased risk of developing diabetes mellitus 
and CVD.43,44 By the same token, increasing sedentary 
activities such as television watching is independently 
associated with increased cardiometabolic risk and in-
sulin resistance.45–51
The favorable impact of regular PA on traditional car-
diovascular risk factors explains a significant portion of its 
salutatory impact. These favorable effects on traditional 
risk factors include increasing high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, reducing body mass index, improving insulin 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e497
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
sensitivity, and reducing blood pressure, which, although 
often modest, significantly reduce risk at the population 
level.52–56 However, a significant portion of the cardio-
vascular benefits of habitual PA are independent of its 
effects on traditional modifiable cardiovascular risk fac-
tors.57–69 Increased occupational and leisure-time PA re-
duced cardiovascular risk across the entire spectrum of 
Framingham risk scores, further underscoring the abil-
ity of PA to modify risk beyond its impact on traditional 
markers.70 Although the exact mechanisms behind PA 
as an independent modifiable risk factor remain incom-
pletely elucidated, strong evidence suggests that regular 
PA slows and even reverses adverse vascular remodeling 
associated with aging, a critical factor in the eventual 
clinical manifestations of CVD.71,72
At the cellular level, repeated bouts of PA lead to fa-
vorable effects on vascular homeostasis in part through 
exposure to increased laminar shear stress, leading to 
increased endothelium-dependent vasodilation and 
reduced vascular inflammation.60,73–78 PA also appears 
to have favorable systemic anti-inflammatory effects.79 
Physical inactivity results in impaired vascular endothe-
lial function and increased vascular stiffness, character-
ized by impaired nitric oxide bioavailability, increased 
vascular inflammation, and increased pulse-wave veloc-
ity and secondary adverse vascular remodeling.80–88 Ad-
verse vascular remodeling of sedentary aging adults in-
creases the risk of adverse cardiovascular events.80,87,89,90 
Cross-sectional and intervention studies suggest that 
regular PA appears to protect against this vascular ag-
ing.91–96 Therefore, PA should be viewed as an impor-
tant, modifiable cardiovascular risk factor with a favor-
able impact that is mediated by both its direct effects 
on cardiac function, the vasculature, and its impact on 
traditional risk factors and systemic inflammation. Un-
derstanding more fully the molecular transducers of the 
benefits of PA is the focus of a recent large, multicenter 
National Institutes of Health research program.97
Economic Burden of Physical Inactivity
Insufficient PA also poses a huge economic burden on 
economies and health systems.13,98 According to na-
tional estimates, inadequate PA was responsible for 
>11% of the US aggregated healthcare expenditures 
in 2014, with an excess per-capita cost of $1437 for 
inactive versus active adults (30% difference).5 Analyses 
suggest that meeting PA guidelines is associated with a 
20% reduction in healthcare expenditures and resource 
use among patients with CVD and with a 50% reduc-
tion in a comparison of individuals with CVD and those 
without CVD but with poor risk factor control.99 The ex-
cess healthcare expenditure resulting from inadequate 
PA was estimated at $2500 among those with estab-
lished CVD and $1200 among those without CVD but 
with underlying poor risk factor profiles.
Worldwide, physical inactivity was conservatively 
estimated to cost $53.8 billion to healthcare systems, 
with $13.7 billion in productivity losses and 13.4 million 
disability-adjusted life-years lost in 2013.100 Although 
low- and middle-income countries account for 75% of 
the disease burden associated with physical inactivity, 
>80% of healthcare costs and 60% of indirect costs 
occur in high-income countries.100
EVIDENCE IN SUPPORT OF ROUTINE 
PA ASSESSMENT AND PROMOTION  
IN HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
To help healthcare professionals work together with pa-
tients to improve their PA, several effective approaches 
to increase PA have been developed, ranging from work-
place, healthcare, and community-based interventions to 
policy and environmental strategies.101 However, single-
setting interventions typically result in only low to mod-
est improvements in PA (0.16 to 0.68 effect size), leading 
to the conclusion that no single intervention will solve 
the problem of insufficient PA in the United States.102 
Rather, improving population levels of PA requires com-
prehensive efforts to maximize the potential benefits of 
setting-specific interventions under a coordinated multi-
level approach.8,11
Different strategies with various levels of effective-
ness have been used to incorporate PA promotion into 
healthcare settings.103 Brief PA counseling, initiated by 
the physician or other healthcare provider (HCP), and the 
“green prescription” (written prescription plus behavior-
al change and follow-up strategies) have been used.104 
A recent review including 5 meta-analyses, 3 system-
atic reviews, and 2 literature reviews published over 
the last decade confirms that PA counseling by primary 
care providers has a small to moderate positive effect 
on increasing PA levels (standardized mean effect range, 
0.17–0.28; risk ratio/odds ratio range, 1.22–1.42).103 
Better results have been obtained when interventions 
include multiple behavior-change resources and target 
insufficiently active patients with CVD risk factors and 
motivational readiness to change.103,105,106 The number 
needed to treat for 1 sedentary adult to meet PA rec-
ommendations at 1 year was 12.104 This is comparable 
to other preventive counseling interventions in primary 
care such as alcohol (number needed to treat, 9.1)107 
and smoking cessation (number needed to treat, 14).108
Furthermore, the US Preventive Services Task Force 
recommends lifestyle counseling by HCPs to promote PA 
(and healthy dietary habits) for individuals with CVD risk 
factors (Level of Evidence B)14,109 and those without CVD 
or its risk factors (Level of Evidence C).109,110 These rec-
ommendations are based on the results of a number of 
clinical research studies that have shown moderate but 
statistically beneficial effects of medium- to high-inten-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e498
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
sity lifestyle counseling therapy on reduction of various 
CVD risk factors, including blood pressure, blood cho-
lesterol, and body fat. Benefits appear to be strongest 
when a structured program of dietary and PA counseling 
is provided by healthcare professionals. As a Level of Evi-
dence B recommendation, this strategy must be included 
in new health plans under the Affordable Care Act’s Pre-
vention and Health Promotion activities,111 but until now, 
it has not been widely implemented or standardized.
Linking multiple settings where PA can be promot-
ed is critical for improving the likelihood of influenc-
ing behavior.112,113 In response to common barriers to 
effectively delivering complex PA counseling solely in 
clinical settings, programs have integrated referral of 
patients to community-based PA resources and pro-
grams. These exercise referral schemes have also shown 
modest effectiveness.114,115 Compared with usual care, 
more patients who received referrals for exercise by 
their primary care providers achieved PA recommenda-
tions (relative risk, 1.16), and reduced depression was 
noted.115 Heath and colleagues116 examined the feasi-
bility of a clinic-based Physical Activity Vital Sign (PAVS) 
assessment and referral protocol to YMCA exercise 
programming compared with PAVS alone in a sample 
of adult patients seen for primary care visits in a south-
eastern US health system. They found improvements in 
self-reported PA after 12 weeks in the PAVS plus refer-
ral group (P<0.02). Another pilot implementation study 
in Mexico’s largest healthcare system compared the ef-
fectiveness of brief counseling and an exercise refer-
ral program with increased moderate to vigorous PA 
(MVPA) among 220 adult hypertensive patients. After 
24 weeks, minutes per week of objectively measured 
(accelerometer) MVPA increased by 40 and 53 minutes, 
respectively, in both intervention groups. However, 
participants attending at least 50% of the referral pro-
gram sessions increased both their MVPA by 104 min/
wk and compliance with aerobic PA recommendations 
(by 23.8%) compared with the brief counseling group 
(both P<0.05). Other meta-analyses and systematic re-
views have shown that physician counseling (odds ra-
tio, 1.42; 95% confidence interval, 1.17–1.73) and ex-
ercise referral systems (risk ratio, 1.20; 95% confidence 
interval, 1.06–1.35) promote improvements in patients’ 
PA for up to 12 months.103,104,114
Cost-Effectiveness of PA Promotion in 
Healthcare Settings
Brief counseling, the green prescription, and exercise-
referral strategies have also been found to be cost-ef-
fective.117–119 For example, an economic analysis of the 
national exercise referral program in Wales showed a 
cost-effectiveness ratio of £12 
111 per quality-adjusted 
life-year gained. Patients are referred by primary care 
professionals to a 16-week program delivered by quali-
fied exercise professionals at local centers. There were 
significant cost savings in fully adherent participants 
(62% of the sample), and as a whole, the program was 
cost-effective with respect to existing payer thresholds 
in Wales, particularly for participants with mental health 
and CVD risk factors.118 In a review, the cost to move 
1 person to the “active” category at 12 months was 
estimated to range from €331 to €3673 and the cost 
utility from €348 to €86 
877 per quality-adjusted life-
year.119 Therefore, many PA promotion interventions in 
primary care show similar or better cost-effectiveness 
than drug-based interventions that are well established 
in primary care such as cholesterol lowering (€58 
882 
per quality-adjusted life-year) or intensive glucose con-
trol (€32 
610 per quality-adjusted life-year), despite 
these being above the cost-effectiveness threshold 
(£30 
000) established by the UK National Institute for 
Health and Clinical Excellence.119 In addition, claims 
data from older adults with and without diabetes mel-
litus in US Medicare plans show a 1-year reduction in 
total healthcare use and costs (about $1600 to $1900 
lower than controls) among adults attending plan-
sponsored fitness club benefits.120–122
Summary and Conclusions: Evidence in Support 
of Routine PA Assessment and Promotion in 
Clinical Practice
• Evidence supports the effectiveness and feasibil-
ity of PA promotion strategies in routine clinical 
practice.123,124
• Patient PA counseling helps improve patient 
outcomes.
• PA counseling and referral strategies can help 
lower healthcare use and costs.120,121
• Clinical-community links for PA promotion can 
augment effectiveness and help promote the 
maintenance of intervention effects.17,125,126
• PA promotion protocols are acceptable among 
HCPs127 and have been successfully scaled to 
national levels with adequate sustainability.118
• Multicomponent lifestyle intervention approaches 
that include PA promotion for patients with CVD 
risk factors are supported by the US Preventive 
Services Task Force and can be implemented by 
leveraging clinical and community-based program-
matic resources and personnel.
• Despite a growing body of evidence and policy 
support, more pragmatic implementation experi-
ences are needed to deliver proven and sustain-
able models that can be successfully integrated 
into the modern fabric of US healthcare delivery.
Assessment of PA in Healthcare Settings 
and Electronic Health Records
A recommendation by the National Academies high-
lights the value of the electronic health record (EHR) 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e499
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
to provide information to the healthcare team related 
to health and treatment.128 Providing information per-
taining to PA in the EHR creates an opportunity for the 
HCP to discuss patients’ or clients’ PA habits. Discussion 
about PA can occur only if these measures are collected 
in a similar method across time and can be used be-
tween health record systems.
Two suggested methods adequate for capturing PA 
for the EHR are self-reports and wearable devices such 
as pedometers or accelerometers. An example of a self-
report questionnaire that can ascertain compliance with 
the PA guidelines is called the Exercise Vital Sign (EVS), 
modified from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance 
System.129 The EVS consists of 2 questions that take ap-
proximately ≤1 minute to administer. Wearable activ-
ity monitoring (WAM) devices provide information on 
activity such as accelerometers counts, steps, and esti-
mated minutes of PA at various intensity levels. These 
devices can be worn on clothing or the waist, wrist, or 
ankle to measure PA. There are numerous devices avail-
able, with many wrist-based devices or smartwatches 
now also tracking heart rate to enhance PA intensity 
estimation. However, to date, there is no widespread 
integration of patient-generated data from wearable 
devices into the EHR.130 No matter which method is 
used, self-report or wearable devices, linking PA data to 
the EHR provides a forum for healthcare professionals 
to initiate discussion and counseling on increasing PA. 
In the following sections, we summarize the evidence 
on the most appropriate self-report and objective PA 
assessment methods in healthcare settings
SELF-REPORT TOOLS FOR ASSESSING 
PA IN HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
Using a review-of-reviews methodology, we considered 
systematic reviews of the validity, reliability, or feasibil-
ity of physical-activity questionnaires either developed 
for clinical settings or feasible to be used in clinical set-
tings that were published by 2016. This search strategy 
yielded 6 reviews (Figure 1).38,131–135 We then evaluated 
the validity, reliability, and clinical feasibility of the re-
sulting questionnaires. Candidate PA self-reported tools 
were intended for adult populations and were exclud-
ed if their focus was solely on occupational PA, bone-
loading, or walking PA. A questionnaire was included 
if its validity had been concurrently evaluated against a 
criterion measure (eg, accelerometry or doubly labeled 
water) and if at least 1 of its corresponding measures 
of validity (including Pearson correlation, Spearman 
correlation, sensitivity, specificity, Cohen κ, and intra-
class correlation and excluding predictive values) was 
reported to be >0.5. To limit candidate questionnaires 
to those that would be feasible to use in clinical set-
tings, only tools containing ≤12 items were included. 
Questionnaires were excluded if the authors could not 
find the original questionnaire.
After applying the initial inclusion and exclusion cri-
teria for the questionnaires in the 6 mentioned system-
atic reviews,38,131–135 we identified 129 unique question-
naires. Then, to ensure that we discovered all relevant 
questionnaires intended for the clinical setting, we used 
snowball searches for questionnaires intended for the 
clinical setting as reported by Strath et al.38 This search 
led us to 2 additional questionnaires,136,137 bringing the 
total candidate questionnaires to 131. We then exclud-
ed questionnaires with ≥13 items or without at least 
1 concurrent criterion validity score >0.5, yielding 14 
unique questionnaires.
Criteria for Scoring Self-Reported Tools
For each included questionnaire, the following informa-
tion was collected: concurrent criterion validity, ability 
to assess compliance with the aerobic component of 
the PA guidelines, ability to assess compliance with the 
muscle-strengthening component of the PA guidelines, 
test-retest reliability, and clinical feasibility. The target 
population was also documented. This information was 
collected from the original article or validation studies. 
Figure 1. Overview of the litera-
ture search to identify candidate 
physical activity self-reported 
tools originally developed for or 
feasible to deploy in healthcare 
settings.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e500
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Information on each domain was then categorized with 
a 3-star system (1 star=worst; 3 stars=best) based on 
prespecified criteria for each domain (detailed in Data 
Supplement 1). When multiple pieces of information 
for each domain were available from many studies, the 
results were averaged and presented to 1 decimal point 
(eg, 2.3 of 3 stars). Overall scores were averaged across 
categories with available data.
Characteristics of Top Questionnaires for 
Assessing PA in Healthcare Settings
We identified 14 PA questionnaires that met our cri-
teria, which are summarized in Table 1. Eight of these 
tools were originally developed for clinical use. Length 
of the questionnaires ranged from 1 to 12 items, and 
questionnaires took from <1 to 5 minutes to complete. 
Assessment populations included ranged from middle-
aged155 and older adults136 and a small sample of black 
women137 to large samples of adults in primary care 
clinics150 and a small sample of Mexican Americans.156
Reliability was reported for most questionnaires and 
ranged from a κ of 0.39 to 0.88. Criterion-referenced 
validity assessed against concurrent accelerometer use 
ranged from a Spearman correlation of 0.09 to 0.61. 
Sensitivity and specificity estimates were reported in 
7 of the questionnaires (Rapid Assessment of Physical 
Activity, PAVS, EVS, General Practice Physical Activity 
Questionnaire, Marshall-Smith, Speedy Nutrition and 
Physical Activity Assessment, Stanford Brief Activity Sur-
vey).136,137,150,155–157 Sensitivity ranged from 46% to 91% 
and specificity from 10% to 100%. Only 1 instrument 
had survey items for assessing muscle-strengthening 
activities.138
Based on the grading criteria previously described, 
the questionnaires average scores ranged from 1.8 to 
2.6 (Table 1). The highest-scoring questionnaire was the 
Rapid Assessment of Physical Activity (average, 2.6),138 
followed by the single question by Milton et al135,140 
(average, 2.4), the PAVS (average 2.3),41 and the EVS 
(average, 2.2). The information summarized from these 
instruments provides health systems and healthcare 
professionals the option to choose which self-report as-
sessment is most feasible in their particular setting.
Best Practice Examples Integrating PA 
Questionnaires in Healthcare Settings
Given the competing priorities of HCPs, the best meth-
od to ensure that a PA assessment is administered at 
clinic visits is to integrate it into the clinical workflow. 
This can be done at patient check-ins, when vital signs 
are administered, or as part of the rooming process. 
Heron et al145 tested different methods of administer-
ing the General Practice Physical Activity Questionnaire 
in 4 general practice clinics in Belfast, Northern Ireland. 
They found that the General Practice Physical Activ-
ity Questionnaire was most often completed (26.9%) 
when a receptionist distributed a paper copy during 
patient check-in, with the lowest completion (1.6%) 
when providers/nurses administered the paper form 
to patients. Time pressure was the primary reason that 
care providers cited for not completing the General 
Practice Physical Activity Questionnaire.
Kaiser Permanente Southern California imbedded 
the EVS into the workflow of administering vital signs 
before rooming (Figure 2). While patients are being 
assessed for blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, 
weight, and alcohol and tobacco use, nurses or medical 
assistants ask the 2 EVS questions “How many days a 
week do you engage in moderate to strenuous exercise 
(like a brisk walk)?” and “On average, how many min-
utes per day do you exercise at this level?”
The EVS questions are imbedded into the EHR system 
with the other measures, and providers cannot com-
plete the workflow until these questions are answered. 
This process eliminates the need for paper, handwrit-
ing interpretation, and resulting data entry errors. The 
system multiplies the responses of the 2 questions by 
the number of minutes of weekly MVPA and flags pa-
tients with PA levels below the recommended levels. 
This information is available to the clinician on the EHR 
vital section dashboard when she/he sees the patient. 
Product placement for the EVS is important because 
feedback indicates higher likelihood of use if located in 
the vitals section as opposed to social history or other 
EHR sections. The organization has an internal Wiki 
web page that provides resources for the EVS imple-
mentation and patient resources for increasing PA. Also 
desirable is combining the EVS with clinical decision 
support system features to enable adequate risk strati-
fication and provision of appropriate patient education 
material tailored to the patient’s clinical diagnosis and 
preferences. The EVS has been deployed into 5 Kaiser 
Permanente medical regions, with variations in work-
flow depending on regional preferences. In 2015, the 
percentage of adult members with an outpatient visit in 
which the EVS was documented ranged from 80% to 
96% across regions. Furthermore, implementation of 
the EVS has been shown to promote favorable changes 
in PA-related care practices, with patients 14% more 
likely to report having discussed exercise with their pri-
mary care physician and a 14% increase in providing 
exercise referrals and resources to patients.129 In addi-
tion, statistically significant improvements in metabolic 
outcomes and weight loss were detected from baseline 
to follow-up visits among patients served at medical 
centers that implemented EVS compared with patients 
in control medical centers.40
The predictive validity of EVS in relation to CVD risk 
factors was reported for a large sample (n=622 
897) of 
adult patients.158 Consistently active women had lower 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e501
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Table 1. Characteristics of Self-Reported Tools for Assessing PA in Healthcare Settings
PA Questionnaire
Description
Target Age 
Group
Concurrent 
Criterion 
Validity
Can Assess 
Compliance 
With PAG 
Aerobic 
Component
Can Assess 
Compliance 
With PAG 
Muscle-
Strength 
Component
Test-
Retest 
Reliability
Clinical 
Feasibility
Average
Score
Rapid Assessment of 
Physical Activity138,139
A 9-item questionnaire with the 
response options of yes or no to 
questions covering the range of 
levels of PA from sedentary to regular 
vigorous PA, as well as strength 
training and flexibility
Older adults
2.7
3
2
2.5
2.8
2.6
Single question 
(Milton et al135,140)
“In the past week/past month, on 
how many days have you done a total 
of 30 minutes or more of physical 
activity, which was enough to raise 
your breathing rate? This may include 
sport, exercise, and brisk walking or 
cycling for recreation or to get to and 
from places, but should not include 
housework or physical activity that 
may be part of your job.”
Adults
2.0
3
1
2.8
2.8
2.4
PAVS (Greenwood 
et al41)
2 Questions:
“How many days during the past week 
have you performed physical activity 
where your heart beats faster and 
your breathing is harder than normal 
for 30 minutes or more?”
“How many days in a typical week do 
you perform activity such as this?”
Adults
2.2
3
1
NR
2.8
2.3
Kaiser Permanente 
Southern California 
EVS (Coleman et al129)
2 Modified questions from BRFSS:
“On average, how many days per 
week do you engage in moderate 
to strenuous exercise (like walking 
fast, running, jogging, dancing, 
swimming, biking, or other activities 
that cause a light or heavy sweat)?”
“On average, how many minutes do 
you engage in exercise at this level?”
Adults
2.1
3
1
NR
2.8
2.2
Physical Activity 
Assessment Tool 
(Merriweather et al141) 
12-Item questionnaire including 
multiple choice and open response 
questions
Adults
2.5
3
1
2.2
2.2
2.1
Godin-Shephard 
2-week PA recall142,143
Asks the participant to recall the 
amount of time in the previous 
week he/she spent in strenuous-, 
moderate-, and mild-intensity 
exercise. Examples for each intensity 
level are provided, including general 
PAs (eg, walking, dancing) in 
addition to structured exercise and 
sport examples (eg, aerobic dance, 
running, soccer) (description from 
this validation study)
Adults
1.8
3
1
2
2.6
2.1
Short Questionnaire 
to Assess Health- 
Enhancing Physical 
Activity144
11-Item questionnaire assessing 
habitual PA
Adults
1.3
3
1
2.5
2.4
2.0
General Practice 
Physical Activity
Questionnaire136,145
2-Item questionnaire with multiple 
choices on PA during work and 
leisure time:
“Please tell us the type and amount of 
physical activity involved in your work.”
“During the last week, how many 
hours did you spend on each of the 
following activities?”
Adults, 
older adults
1.8
3
1
2
2.4
2.0
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e502
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
systolic (−4.60 mm 
Hg) and diastolic (−3.28 mm 
Hg) 
blood pressures than inactive women. Consistently ac-
tive patients also had lower fasting glucose (women, 
−5.27 mg/dL; men, −1.45 mg/dL) and random glucose 
and hemoglobin A1c compared with consistently inac-
tive patients, whereas active men had lower diastolic 
blood pressure than inactive men.158
PA questions similar to those in the EVS are also used 
to assess PA in the AHA’s My Life Check - Life’s Simple 
7 and Heart360 tools19 and the MyHeart Counts smart-
phone cardiovascular health study.159 Details on the 
experience developing and implementing the PAVS at 
Kaiser Permanente and in other US healthcare systems 
have been published.160,161
BRFSS 2001 Physical 
Activity
Questionnaire146–148
7 Questions used in the BRFSS on a 
rotating basis from 2001–2009
Adults
1.25
3
1
2.7
2.2
2.0
2-Question PA 
assessment (Marshall 
et al,149 Smith et al150)
2 Questions:
How many times a week do you 
usually do ≥20 min of vigorous-
intensity PA that makes you sweat 
or puff and pant (eg, heavy lifting, 
digging, jogging, aerobics, or fast 
bicycling)? Circle 1: ≥3 times a week, 
1–2 times a week, none.
How many times a week do you 
usually do ≥30 min of moderate-
intensity PA or walking that increases 
your heart rate or makes you breathe 
harder than normal (eg, carrying 
light loads, bicycling at a regular 
pace, or doubles tennis)? Circle 1: ≥5 
times a week, 3–4 times a week, 1–2 
times a week, none.
Adults
2
2.5
1
2
2.4
2.0
Stanford 7-Day 
Recall, aka Stanford 
Usual Activity 
Questionnaire151,152
9-Item questionnaire originally used 
in 1985 in the Five-City Project
Adults, 
older adults
2
3
1
1.9
1.8
1.9
Suzuki 
questionnaire153
5-Item questionnaire designed to 
assess both energy expenditure and 
PA at work and at leisure; asks about 
time spent in activities by moderate, 
vigorous, strenuous intensity
Adults
2.5
1.5
1
2.3
2.4
1.9
Speedy Nutrition 
and Physical Activity 
Assessment137
Asks 1 question with 4 options: 
“Are you active for 30 minutes on 
5 days of the week?” (1) No, and I 
have no plans to be more active. (2) 
No, but I have been thinking about 
being more active. (3) Sometimes I 
am active for 30 min but not all the 
time. (4) Yes, I am active for 30 min 
on 5 d/wk.
Examples of activity are provided.
Adults
1.8
2
1
NR
2.8
1.9
Stanford Brief Activity 
Survey154
2 Items designed to assess 
occupational and leisure-time PA 
levels; separately classifies the level 
of occupational and leisure-time PA 
performed by an individual; each 
item provides examples of activities 
with increasing degree of intensity 
ranging from sedentary to high 
intensity
Older adults
2
2
1
2
2.2
1.8
Each column represents a scoring domain ranked from 1 (worst) to 3 (best) according to prespecified criteria detailed in Data Supplement 1. BRFSS indicates 
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System; EVS, Exercise Vital Sign; NR, not reported; PA, physical activity; PAG, physical activity guidelines; and PAVS, Physical 
Activity Vital Sign.
Table 1. Continued
PA Questionnaire
Description
Target Age 
Group
Concurrent 
Criterion 
Validity
Can Assess 
Compliance 
With PAG 
Aerobic 
Component
Can Assess 
Compliance 
With PAG 
Muscle-
Strength 
Component
Test-
Retest 
Reliability
Clinical 
Feasibility
Average
Score
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e503
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Summary and Conclusions: Self-Reported Tools 
for Assessing PA in Healthcare Settings
• Routine PA assessment in clinical settings is fea-
sible and valid and gives providers important infor-
mation about their patients’ cardiometabolic risk 
and general health status.
• Strategies are needed to catalyze increased adop-
tion and consistent use of simple tools (eg, PAVS, 
EVS) to screen for physical inactivity and to become 
standard of care.
• Future work is needed to develop appropriate 
instruments to assess the muscle-strengthening 
component of the PA guidelines and to test their 
validity and clinical utility.
• On the basis of the collective experience of large 
healthcare systems pilot testing the PAVS and EVS, 
EHR companies should consider integration into 
the technology solutions they offer to healthcare 
systems so that interested providers have easily 
adoptable technologies available.
WAM DEVICES FOR USE IN 
HEALTHCARE SETTINGS
We aimed to identify and evaluate consumer-oriented 
WAM devices for potential integration into healthcare 
settings. Similar to the process for evaluating self-re-
ported tools, we evaluated WAMs on the basis of their 
validity, ability to assess compliance with PA guidelines, 
patient feasibility, feasibility for healthcare system inte-
gration, and incorporation of evidence-based methods 
of behavior change. We focused on consumer-oriented 
rather than pure research-grade accelerometers by con-
sidering patient burden (cost, summary feedback, inclu-
sion of behavior-change strategies) and feasibility for 
healthcare system integration.
To identify candidate WAMs, we initially considered 
key references and reviews of validity testing and be-
havior change features published by 2016. This yielded 
9 WAM validation studies162–169 and 2 reviews on the 
elements of behavior change in WAMs.37,170 From these 
reviews, we used a snowball strategy to search aca-
demic (PubMed), gray (Google Scholar, manufacturer 
websites), and consumer-facing (technical reviews, 
manufacturer websites, and white papers) literature 
for additional sources of information (including man-
ufacturer-sponsored validity testing) considered to be 
appropriate. In addition, we attempted to contact 9 
WAM manufacturers with a request to communicate 
electronically, to schedule an interview, or to collect in-
formation via an online form we created. The goal of 
contacting the manufacturers was to request the infor-
mation we aimed to collect for each device. Of the 9, 1 
granted an interview. We also interviewed a technology 
professional from a southeast healthcare system that 
has incorporated WAMs into its patient portal to un-
Figure 2. Exercise Vital Signs in the Kaiser Permanente EPIC electronic medical record.  
BMI indicates body mass index; BP
, blood pressure; BSA, body surface area; Dx, diagnosis; EPIC, Epic Systems Corporation 
Electronic Medical Records; H, height; PCP
, primary care provider; and W, weight. 
Reproduced with permission of Kaiser Permanente.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e504
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
derstand its approach, as well as a representative from 
a large data-aggregation organization.
From this initial search, we identified 49 candidate 
WAMs. We included a WAM in our final assessment if 
its validity had been evaluated, prioritizing independent 
studies. We also preferred validity testing that measured 
devices 
against 
a 
criterion 
measure 
such 
as 
double-labeled 
water or indirect calorimetry, but we accepted validation 
against a research-grade monitoring device such as the 
ActiGraph accelerometer, given the limited number of 
criterion-based validation studies. From this search, 23 
WAMs were eligible for our final assessment (Figure 3). 
The remaining WAMs were no longer manufactured, 
did not have readily available validity testing, or did not 
have enough information available to complete the 
 
evaluation (Figure 3).
Criteria for Scoring WAM Devices for Use 
in Healthcare Settings
For each included WAM, the following information was 
collected: concurrent criterion validity estimates; ability 
to assess compliance with the aerobic component of the 
PA guidelines (no device assessed compliance with the 
muscle-strengthening component of the PA guidelines); 
patient feasibility, including WAM battery life, cost, sum-
mary feedback, and ability to download data; health-
care integration feasibility (open or available application 
program interface); and behavior-change strategies in 
the WAM or companion application (app) or software.
The above information was collected from the 
original article or validation studies. Information on 
each domain was then categorized with the use of a 
3-star system (1 star=worst; 3 stars=best) based on 
prespecified criteria for each domain (detailed in Data 
Supplement 2). When multiple pieces of information 
for each domain were available from many studies, 
the results were averaged and presented to 1 decimal 
point (eg, 2.3 of 3 stars). Overall scores were averaged 
across categories with available data and presented to 
1 decimal point.
Characteristics of Top WAM Devices for 
Use in Healthcare Settings
For the consumer-oriented WAMs, of a maximum score 
of 3, 2 WAMs scored >2.5, the Fitbit Zip (2.8) and Fitbit 
One (2.7). Up to 10 WAMs scored within the 2-plus 
range, and 10 scored in the 1 to 2 range. Of the 23 
WAMs devices in the final assessment, 4 of them were 
Fitbit models.
The WAMs with a well-established and mainstream 
position in the consumer marketplace performed well 
in this evaluation. A good amount of information was 
readily available on these devices to facilitate their 
scoring.
As it becomes increasingly apparent what informa-
tion healthcare organizations require, other devices 
may score better by making the information more 
prominent on their websites.
Almost all devices have a basic security premise avail-
able online, causing us to remove security as an evalua-
tion criterion. These privacy policies outlined basic mea-
sures of data security.
Figure 3. Overview of the litera-
ture search to identify candidate 
wearable activity monitoring 
(WAM) devices feasible to use in 
healthcare settings.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e505
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Challenges in Identifying WAM Devices 
for Use in Healthcare Settings
In conducting this wearable device review, we encoun-
tered several challenges. First, we recognize the limita-
tions of the validity assessment. We observed a high 
degree of heterogeneity in validation studies with study 
populations (age, functional status, clinical and sociode-
mographic characteristics), validity protocols (free-living 
versus laboratory, equipment), and study methods (ref-
erence criterion and validity assessment approach, PA 
metrics, etc) all varying significantly. Partially because 
of this heterogeneity, we found that well-established, 
mainstream WAMs are more frequently tested for dif-
ferent use cases and that this may have resulted in low-
er validity scores for these devices.
Other important WAM information such as data pro-
cessing algorithms for derived PA metrics and details on 
application program interfaces, data access, sensor type, 
and technical specifications was not always available. It 
was difficult to determine whether devices measured to-
tal calories or only active calories. We therefore simply 
reported calories rather than total or active calories in 
the final assessment. In addition, in our review of valida-
tion studies, it was not always clear which exact model 
of a WAM the authors were analyzing. Furthermore, on 
occasion, some WAMs changed names or were discon-
tinued. Therefore, it was difficult to determine whether 
researchers were analyzing the device of interest or if 
anything other than the name had changed with the de-
vice that might affect its scoring. This lack of clarity led to 
a best guess in some cases based on the year the study 
was conducted. Descriptions of behavioral techniques 
were also not always clear. Because correspondence 
with manufacturers proved to be challenging, additional 
information on these techniques was difficult to find. It 
also would have been beneficial to speak directly with 
manufacturers to gain a deeper understanding of their 
security practices apart from the privacy policies listed 
on their websites. Finally, a degree of subjectivity was in-
cluded in the scoring for certain categories. In summary, 
we propose this scoring system as a starting point that 
can be refined as more information on the validity and 
feasibility of these devices is reported.
Integration of Patient-Generated WAM  
Data Into Clinical Workflow: 
Considerations and Best Practice 
Examples
The recent adoption by consumers of WAM devices has 
moved the discussion of PA to the forefront of preven-
tive care in both the popular and medical media. The 
healthcare sector can leverage this cultural shift to bet-
ter integrate PA assessment and promotion into routine 
care. This also aligns well with shifts toward care sys-
tems and payment models that promote health, pre-
vention, and comprehensive disease management over 
episodic and reactive health care.
The initial challenge for HCPs is assessing the level of 
PA in their patients. As summarized in Table 1, several 
questionnaires are appropriate for use in healthcare set-
tings and constitute adequate screening tools that can 
facilitate evaluation, tracking, and referrals to commu-
nity-based PA programs.
Despite the growing use of WAMs, an ongoing 
challenge is that few of them collect and report PA 
data in a manner that enables assessment of compli-
ance with the PA guidelines.171,172 Most WAMs and 
mobile apps focus on daily step counting, with the 
somewhat arbitrary goal of 10 000 steps a day, rather 
than reporting the World Health Organization, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, and AHA guideline 
metric of MVPA minutes per week,130 largely because 
step counting is easier technically, with studies show-
ing good accuracy. Estimating PA intensity has been 
more challenging, with suboptimal results when de-
vices are studied systematically.173,174 Many WAMs and 
smartphone apps report active minutes and calories 
burned as indicators of PA intensity, but little informa-
tion has been available on the specific algorithms used 
and how these measures correspond to the guideline-
based MVPA minutes.130
There are multiple challenges for HCPs to prescribe 
WAMs with confidence, despite the potential positive 
impact. First, as noted above, the feedback they pro-
vide often does not align clearly with the broadly ac-
cepted clinical and public health PA guidelines. There 
are also frequent updates to WAMs/apps and their 
firmware/software with no systematic way to ensure 
consistency and accuracy. Studies of their validity and 
clinical utility are valuable but are invariably several gen-
erations out of date by the time they are published. 
Although there has been discussion about having an 
organization, agency, or consortium perform routine 
validation studies, the logistics for doing so are chal-
lenging. The Consumer Technology Association, which 
develops standards across the electronics industry, has 
a Health and Fitness subdivision with a Physical Activ-
ity Standards Working Group, which has published a 
standard for step-counting accuracy of WAMs and is 
currently working on a heart rate accuracy (ANSI/CTA-
2056).175 Standardization of the output PA measures 
from WAMs and apps has been a goal for years but 
would be particularly important for broader adoption 
in healthcare settings and would facilitate EHR integra-
tion and privacy/security considerations. Organizations 
such as the Healthcare Information and Management 
Systems Society and Open mHealth.org176 can help this 
effort by promoting guideline-based standardized data 
schemas and developing tools for data aggregation 
and visualization within the clinical workflow. Smart-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e506
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
phone operating system providers could also require 
manufacturers to adhere to certain guidelines. These 
steps could help increase confidence for consumers 
and HCPs and systems. Ongoing dialogue involving cli-
nicians, patients, researchers, and technology providers 
can be facilitated by organizations such as the AHA and 
Personal Connected Health Alliance and collaborative 
efforts such as Xcertia, involving the American Medi-
cal Association, AHA, and Healthcare Information and 
Management Systems Society.177
The other major practical challenge to routine PA 
assessment and prescription is how to review PA data 
within the clinical workflow. Consumer devices provide 
near-continuous daily measures of PA, which would be 
overwhelming for the provider to review on a regular 
basis or in the context of a clinic visit. Thus, software 
solutions are needed to summarize average PA and 
trends. Efforts are ongoing to integrate PA data from 
WAMs/apps into the EHR, which should make the data 
as easy to review as a laboratory result. Similarly, ef-
forts are needed to make it easy to “prescribe” PA and 
to provide referrals to community programs and fitness 
professionals through the EHR. For example, EPIC, the 
Mayo Clinic, Stanford, and others have integrated Ap-
ple’s HealthKit178 data into the EHR. This step enabled 
HCPs to monitor the patient’s objective PA and other 
data collected through iPhones, the Apple Watch, and 
other apps/WAMs that link to the Apple HealthKit eco-
system to support clinical counseling and to monitor 
lifestyle interventions. Other health systems have be-
gun integrating HealthKit data into their Cerner EMR in 
2015.179 Google’s similar Fit platform has also recently 
integrated PA and other health data with EPIC. The 
Ochsner Health System has developed a prescription 
system that refers patients to their “O Bar” for guid-
ance on downloading and using mobile health devices/
apps to monitor PA, sleep, blood pressure, glucose, and 
weight.180
Of course, measuring and prescribing PA, while 
critical, does not automatically translate into behavior 
change. To this end, UnitedHealthCare in collaboration 
with Qualcomm recently rolled out the United Motion 
program in which eligible participants can track their 
daily goals and earn financial incentives that can be ap-
plied toward their healthcare plan.181 Participants can 
earn up to $4/d in credits by achieving 300 steps in 
5 minutes an hour apart at least 6 times per day (fre-
quency), completing 3000 steps in 30 minutes at least 
once per day (intensity), or completing at least 10 
000 
steps per day (tenacity). Other insurers and employers 
are leveraging the popularity of WAMs by providing in-
centives for their broad use. Many large employers have 
become self-insured to try to manage rising healthcare 
costs, so they are incentivizing healthy behaviors such 
as regular PA. Employers have seen secondary benefits 
of increased employee productivity and satisfaction.
Summary and Conclusions: Consumer-Oriented 
WAM Devices in Healthcare Settings
• The recent explosion of WAMs and improved soft-
ware and technology partnerships open opportu-
nities for integrating objective PA data to improve 
the quality of care and health status of patients 
with CVD risk.
• However, it is important to note that consumer-
oriented WAMs rarely summarize PA data consis-
tently with public health recommendations (eg, 
MVPA) and in a way that clinicians can understand 
and use to guide clinical management; in addition, 
work is still needed to ensure sound validation 
efforts.
• There is a need to develop software platforms that 
can process data in a clinically meaningful way and 
integrate data into EHRs for maximum reach and 
meaningful use of the data.
• There is also a need for validation efforts tied to 
guideline-recommended PA metrics for newer 
technologies and pragmatic trials exploring fea-
sibility, adoption, and effectiveness for CVD risk 
reduction clinical applications. The model pro-
posed in this document is a starting point.
BARRIERS FOR ROUTINE INTEGRATION 
OF PA ASSESSMENT AND PROMOTION 
INTO US CLINICAL PRACTICE
Although conceptually simple, the implementation of 
protocols for PA assessment and promotion in US clini-
cal settings, as well as standardized community links 
for PA referrals, is hindered by barriers at multiple lev-
els. For instance, barriers include inadequate provider 
reimbursement, training, and self-efficacy; insufficient 
healthcare system support; and scarcity of certified 
community resources to refer for evidence-based PA 
programming.182,183 Similarly, poor care coordination 
and the inability to follow the progress of a referred pa-
tient are important barriers to establishing sustainable 
clinical-community links for PA-related care.184
These barriers are perpetuated by fragmentation of 
preventive care in the United States and may explain 
the lack of standardized PA community-referral pro-
grams. The US national health promotion objectives 
have included a specific target to increase the propor-
tion of primary care providers who routinely assess and 
counsel their patients on PA. Occasional surveys of pri-
mary care practitioners and patients suggest that there 
has been little improvement over the last decade in PA 
assessment and promotion in clinical visits. The rates of 
provider-initiated PA counseling continue to be unac-
ceptably low (<35%), particularly among women and 
racial minorities.39 Rates for PA counseling among pa-
tients with CVD (41.2%), hypertension, (44.2%), obe-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e507
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
sity (46.9%), and diabetes mellitus (56.3%) are also 
suboptimal.39 These persist even though PA counseling 
is a national Healthy People 2020 objective (PA-11)185 
and is included in the National Physical Activity Plan,186 
the National Prevention Strategy,187 and recommenda-
tions by many leading professional/scientific organi-
zations.27,188 PA counseling rates are also lower in the 
United States than in countries with private, public, or 
mixed healthcare systems that have integrated PA pro-
motion in primary care, including Brazil, Switzerland, 
Canada, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Not sur-
prisingly, the prevalence and economic burden of physi-
cal inactivity and NCDs are significantly higher in the 
United States than in most high-income countries.1,5,98
Financial Barriers, Quality of Care, and 
Payment Models
Among the multitude of barriers faced by providers in 
assessing and promoting patient PA is financial reim-
bursement for the time spent counseling at the point 
of care.183 Reimbursement for medical services is de-
pendent on a number of factors, including diagnostic 
codes (International Classification of Diseases, 10th Re-
vision); consultation, prevention, and treatment (CPT) 
codes; and medical record documentation in support 
of these codes. Although International Classification of 
Diseases, 10th Revision codes for lack of physical ex-
ercise (Z72.3) and exercise counseling (Z71.89) exist, 
commercial and government payers do not recognize 
them as standalone billable diagnostic codes.
CPT codes are used to indicate the medical service 
provided. In the ambulatory setting, these include, 
among others, codes for preventive care, as well as 
evaluation and management (E&M) codes. Additional 
codes for nutritional counseling exist, but there is no 
specific CPT code for PA counseling. Physicians and 
physical therapists may use therapeutic exercise codes 
(CPT 97110) when teaching patients exercises to de-
velop muscle strength and endurance, joint range of 
motion, and flexibility.
Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set 
metrics are used to determine practice quality. There 
are Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set 
measures for PA counseling for pediatric and older 
adult populations, but there is no measure for adults 
between 18 and 65 years of age. Furthermore, there 
are no Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information 
Set metrics to track PA referrals. These factors result in 
a cascade of barriers to routine delivery of PA preventive 
counseling. The introduction of appropriate CPT codes 
for PA-related care may provide a reasonable starting 
point for improvement.
PA assessment has been recommended as part of the 
health risk assessment for Medicare patients,189 and PA 
counseling can be incorporated into routine well-adult 
visits, Medicare annual wellness visits, and the care for 
chronic disease management. In a representative sam-
ple of US primary care physicians, only 45% reported 
billing for energy balance (PA and diet counseling activi-
ties), and just 3% received incentive payments for this 
care. Healthcare practices with full EMRs or those that 
bill for energy balance care provided this service more 
often and more comprehensively.190
The work relative value unit (wRVU) system of re-
imbursement is an additional barrier to office-based 
PA counseling. Providers paid on wRVUs have little fi-
nancial incentive to spend time counseling patients on 
healthy lifestyle given the low wRVU value assigned to 
counseling compared with other medical services. For 
example, a knee joint aspiration and injection has a 
wRVU of 0.79,191 in contrast to a wRVU value of 0 for a 
follow-up visit solely to assess a patient’s progress with 
his or her exercise prescription. When one considers the 
amount of time required and the complexity of coun-
seling a patient on behavior change, the wRVU system 
that provides a “value” based on the relative level of 
time, skill, training, and intensity to provide a given ser-
vice falls far short.
However, physicians have adopted other billing and 
coding mechanisms to achieve adequate reimburse-
ment for the time spent counseling patients on PA and 
other aspects of healthy lifestyle. One such strategy is 
to “bill for time” with E&M codes. For example, 99214 
(established patient E&M visit) can be used to bill if 
>50% of the 25-minute office visit was spent face-
to-face with the patient counseling and coordinating 
care.192 The wRVU value for a 99214 E&M visit is 3.014. 
To use the 99214 code, the International Classification 
of Diseases, 10th Revision codes for lack of physical 
exercise must be combined with additional diagnostic 
codes denoting CVD and metabolic risk factors such 
as obesity, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension. In ad-
dition, the physician must adequately document in the 
medical record what was discussed and prescribed to 
the patient.
More recently, another financial barrier to office-
based PA counseling has arisen: high-deductible health 
plans. In this instance, patients typically have lower 
monthly premiums but higher out-of-pocket costs as-
sociated with higher deductibles. PA counseling done 
within the context of a preventive care visit is likely 
covered without charge to the patient.193 However, 
subsequent visits aimed at assessing progress on PA 
goals would count against a patient’s deductible. With 
a charge of $108 for a 99214, 25-minute office visit, 
patients are less inclined to return for follow-up visits if 
they are personally responsible for the cost of that visit.
As healthcare shifts from a largely revenue-based sys-
tem to a cost-based system in which value is prioritized 
over volume, the incentives start to shift from disease 
management to health promotion and disease preven-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e508
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
tion because a healthy person costs less than a sick one. 
In this scenario, physician reimbursement is likely to be 
dependent in part on keeping patients healthy. Inter-
mountain Healthcare includes as a component of physi-
cian remuneration the achievement of clinical excellence 
goals. For several years, clinicians in the employed physi-
cian division (Intermountain Medical Group) have had PA 
assessment and counseling as a clinical excellence goal. 
Physicians who meet the threshold for both PA assess-
ment and counseling are paid 100% of the value for 
achieving clinical excellence in this designated area.
Strategies exist in support of reasonable reimburse-
ment to physicians for time spent counseling patients 
about PA. In the context of a preventive care examina-
tion, such counseling is an imperative. For subsequent 
E&M visits, whether for chronic disease management or 
follow-up on preventive care recommendations, physi-
cians should consider the “bill for time” approach and 
ensure that their documentation is in support of the 
level of care, complexity, and face-to-face time spent 
with the patient.
Logistical and Workflow Barriers for PA 
Assessment and Referrals
The Exercise Is Medicine Global Health Initiative was 
cofounded by the presidents of the American College 
of Sports Medicine and the American Medical Asso-
ciation in 2007 with a goal of making PA assessment 
and exercise prescription a standard part of the disease 
prevention and treatment paradigm around the world. 
Therefore, it provides an excellent opportunity to un-
derstand barriers and to develop best practices for the 
logistical implementation of the 3 core elements of PA 
integration into health care: assessment, counseling, 
and referral.
HCPs working in a variety of settings and specialties 
report that requiring physicians to facilitate the EHR-
based PA assessment can be too burdensome with the 
limited time available during an office visit. However, 
this barrier can be overcome by delegating the actu-
al assessment of PA levels to another member of the 
healthcare team such as a nurse or medical assistant. 
After the PA assessment is done and recorded in the 
EHR, it is hoped that the physician or other provider will 
review each patient’s self-reported minutes per week of 
PA and use this either to congratulate the patient for 
meeting guidelines or to provide the patient with brief 
PA counseling (1–2 minutes) and, when possible, use 
motivational interviewing, shared decision making, and 
other proven behavior-change strategies.160,161
However, some HCPs report time or knowledge bar-
riers that make it unlikely that anything beyond brief 
physician counseling could be currently scalable as a 
healthcare system solution without engaging other 
members of the healthcare team. For this reason, some 
large healthcare systems are pilot testing programs link-
ing healthcare teams with local resources by providing 
the patient with a PA “navigator.” The role of the navi-
gator is to assess the physician-referred patients’ physi-
cal and motivational readiness to change, determine 
exercise preparticipation risk,194 and then either encour-
age patients to engage in self-directed PA or refer them 
to appropriate community resources to increase their 
likelihood of compliance with the PA prescription and 
behavior change.160
Although patients can be referred to either self-man-
aged or community-based PA professionals/programs, 
Exercise Is Medicine has found that healthcare systems 
are often unwilling to refer patients outside their sys-
tem unless the professional/program referred to is part 
of a network where quality can be ensured and con-
trolled. Such assurances are provided by the Exercise Is 
Medicine network and its credentialed exercise profes-
sionals,195 which appears to be a major factor in its ap-
peal to healthcare systems such as the Greenville Health 
System. Implementing solutions for integrating certified 
fitness professionals registries and clinical workflow 
can also facilitate the referral process.196 Furthermore, 
the development of relational geo-coded databases of 
PA programming and other health ecology resources 
(medical fitness centers, gyms with certified program-
ming and personnel, parks, trails, community centers, 
etc) classified by age, clinical conditions, insurance ben-
efits, and other factors (cost, activities offered, etc) can 
enable the provision of a robust, personalized list of po-
tential places and programs when integrating into the 
clinical workflow, EHR, and patient portals.197
Skills, Self-Efficacy, and Role Modeling
Although recommended as the first line of prevention 
and management of chronic disease, HCPs often do 
not deliver effective behavioral-change counseling in 
their clinical practice. Adequate knowledge, attitudes, 
and specific counseling skills are frequently lacking for 
most practicing clinicians.183,198 Medical education in 
lifestyle medicine has been proposed by the AHA,199 
the American College of Lifestyle Medicine, the Exer-
cise Is Medicine Initiative, and the Lifestyle Medicine 
Education Collaborative126,191,200 as an urgent and nec-
essary intervention to equip all providers with the nec-
essary knowledge, skills, and abilities to effectively and 
efficiently counsel their patients toward adopting and 
sustaining healthier behaviors. Lifestyle medicine cur-
ricula, including exercise, nutrition, behavioral change, 
and self-care, have recently evolved in all levels of 
medical education. Doctors’ and medical students’ 
PA habits are important predictors of their counsel-
ing practices, but the relevance that students give to 
PA counseling decreases significantly during medical 
school.201–206 These findings support the behavioral val-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e509
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ue of providers in practicing what they preach. Doctors 
should be encouraged to reflect on how their attitudes 
and behaviors may influence the care they give.207 This 
encouragement should be part of continuing medi-
cal education and become part of our professional 
standards, paying more attention to doctors’ personal 
health practices to advise their patients with commit-
ment and integrity.208.209
Although doctors and other HCPs are well positioned 
as role models and health counselors in most countries 
around the world, modern sedentary lifestyles are af-
fecting doctors and HCPs in a manner similar to the 
general population. Life as a doctor or medical student 
poses particular challenges and stressors, which can ad-
versely affect PA habits and quality of life.210–212 From an 
undergraduate level, practicing physicians, particularly 
those involved in academic medicine, should be role 
models for healthy and active lifestyles. Being aware 
of the physical and mental health benefits of exercise 
through regular personal experience can be a powerful 
determinant of counseling attitudes, empathy, and per-
sonal skills for PA practice. It also matters for patients; 
they perceive the counseling from self-consistent doc-
tors to be more powerful and motivating.213–216
Summary and Conclusions: Strategies for 
Overcoming Barriers for Routine Integration of PA 
Assessment and Promotion in US Clinical Practice
• The increasing emphasis on provision of preven-
tion-oriented care with the implementation of 
the Affordable Care Act, population health man-
agement frameworks, and latest US Preventive 
Services Task Force recommendations offers clear 
opportunities for integrating comprehensive PA 
assessment promotion strategies in US health care 
and accelerating its implementation.
• At the clinical level, incentivizing physicians to 
elevate the status of PA counseling for annual 
wellness and NCD management visits could be 
achieved by educating primary care providers, 
standardizing coding schemes, developing appro-
priate reimbursement strategies, establishing a 
Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set 
measure for adults, and implementing innovative 
payment models for PA-related care.
• Models should be used that leverage continued 
education and practice transformation initiatives 
to educate and empower providers and health 
systems and to drive implementation of PA assess-
ment and promotion strategies.
• At the community level, networks of certified PA 
programs with existing personnel and resources 
should be established to standardize exercise inter-
ventions for different clinical subpopulations and 
to accommodate the continuum of primordial to 
tertiary prevention programs.
ROLE OF HEALTHCARE SYSTEMS  
AND PROVIDERS IMPLEMENTING  
PA PROMOTION
We are currently faced with addressing the global crisis 
of NCDs and must adequately prepare healthcare pro-
fessionals to address the needs of those with higher 
risk.217,218 A recent expert review highlighted the urgent 
need for all healthcare professionals (physicians, physi-
cal/occupational therapists, nurses, dieticians, behav-
ioral therapists) to address the burgeoning NCD crisis 
using team-based and patient-centered medical home 
approaches for lifestyle management.217
Role of Physicians
Physicians, often the central coordinators for care 
teams, need to play an active role in supporting and 
integrating assessment of PA into vital sign assess-
ment. Physicians should have a clear understanding of 
the most current CVD risk reduction strategies to be-
gin this process.20 The next critical step for physicians 
is to determine, in collaboration with their care teams, 
the type of information on PA that is feasibly collect-
ible in their clinical settings, how this information is to 
be recorded, and how it is to be followed up. While 
using quantitative methods and longitudinal follow-
up is ideal, effective capture, collation, and reporting 
of these data require greater infrastructural, time, and 
human capital investments, which may make longitu-
dinal quantitative PA assessments problematic in less 
well-supported clinic settings. Physicians should work 
with their care team to select the methods for PA as-
sessment that best fit their clinical setting to allow 
meaningful, longitudinal follow-up (Tables 1 and 2). 
Regardless of methodology, physicians should com-
mit to the assessment of PA at each office visit and, 
if quantitative measurements can feasibly be con-
tinuously assessed, help create mechanisms for more 
 
frequent evaluation.
Role of Physical Therapists
Physical therapists are trained to conduct exercise 
tests, promote PA, and prescribe exercise to their pa-
tients with complex comorbid conditions and range of 
physical impairments and disabilities.218 Physical thera-
pists need to be proactive in addressing PA assessment 
and promotion with their patients or clients during pa-
tient care, including educating the public on the role 
of the physical therapist in the management of CVD 
and other NCDs through exercise. It has been reported 
that exercise is “one of the most important and effec-
tive interventions physical therapists can incorporate 
into every patient plan of care to promote health and 
wellness.”218
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e510
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Table 2. Characteristics of Consumer-Oriented WAM Devices for Use in Healthcare Settings
Wearable
Description
Activity Metrics
Validity
Compliance 
With 
Aerobic 
PAG
Patient 
Feasibility
Healthcare 
Data 
Integration 
Feasibility
Behavior-
Change 
Strategies
Average 
Score
Fitbit Zip163,165,219–223
WAM with visuals 
on WAM, App, and 
website; triaxial 
accelerometer
Calories, steps, distance, 
total EE, duration by 
active minutes, activity 
determined by MET level 
and manufacturer explains 
this online, can log activity, 
activity detected by device, 
thresholds
3
3
3
2
3
2.8
Fitbit One165,220,223
WAM with visuals 
on WAM, App, and 
website; triaxial 
accelerometer
Calories, steps, floors, 
distance, total EE, duration 
by active minutes for 
anything more than walking, 
activity determined by MET 
level and manufacturer 
explains this online, MET, 
can log activities, can turn 
on multisport mode, sleep 
duration, sleep efficiency, 
thresholds
3
3
2.33
2
3
2.67
Fitbit 
Flex163,166,220,223,224,225
WAM with visuals 
on WAM, App, and 
website; triaxial 
accelerometer
Calories, steps, distance, 
hourly activity, stationary 
time, estimated EE, 
duration by active minutes 
for anything more 
than walking, activity 
determined by MET level 
and manufacturer explains 
this online, MET level, 
can log activities, sleep 
duration, sleep quality, 
thresholds
2
3
2.33
2
3
2.47
Piezo Rx226,227
Research/consumer 
WAM; displays on 
WAM, mobile App/
website via software; 
uniaxial piezoelectric 
sensor
Steps, PA duration by active 
minutes, PA classification 
levels, bouts of activity 
measured by levels
3
3
2.33
1
2
2.27
Fitbit Charge HR223,224,228
Consumer WAM, 
App, and website; 
optical heart rate 
monitor, triaxial 
accelerometer, 
altimeter, vibration 
motor
Calories, steps, floors, 
distance, duration by MET 
and manufacturer explains 
online, MET, recognizes 
activity, heart rate, sleep 
duration, sleep efficiency, 
thresholds
1
3
2
2
3
2.2
Garmin Vivofit166,223,229,230
WAM with alternative 
heart rate strap and 
visuals on WAM, 
App, and website; 
accelerometer, heart 
rate monitor, step 
counter
Calories, steps, distance, 
heart rate, PA duration 
by active minutes, can 
purchase bike speed 
sensors to go with it, sleep 
duration
2
1
3
2
3
2.2
Tractivity231–233
Consumer WAM; 
triaxial accelerometer, 
advanced signal-
processing techniques
Calories, steps, distance, PA 
duration by active minutes
3
2
2
1
3
2.2
Jawbone  
UP 24163,166,170,223,225,234,235
WAM with visuals on 
App; tridimensional 
activity tracker
Calories, steps, distance, 
estimated EE (resting and 
active separately), PA and 
sedentary behavior, user can 
log duration and intensity 
with stopwatch mode, PA 
by classification level, sleep 
duration, sleep efficiency
2.2
1
2.67
2
3
2.17
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e511
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Basis Peak228,236
WAM with visuals 
on WAM, App, and 
website; optical heart 
rate engine, triaxial 
accelerometer, skin 
temperature, galvanic 
skin response
Calories, steps, distance, 
heart rate, PA duration by 
active minutes, describes 
how it tracks: uses sensors 
and needs at least 3 METs to 
track (trouble tracking yoga/
Pilates, weights, stationary 
bike, walking with stroller, 
and lap swimming), detects 
when walking/running/
biking outside, sleep 
duration, sleep efficiency
3
3
1.67
1
2
2.13
Withings  
Pulse Ox163,166,170,223,237–239
WAM with visuals 
on WAM and App; 
accelerometer, heart 
rate, blood oxygen 
monitor
Calories, steps, distance, 
elevation, run analyzer, 
heart rate monitor, blood 
oxygen monitor, PA, resting 
heart rate, sleep duration, 
sleep efficiency
2.33
1
2.33
2
3
2.13
Samsung Gear S240–242
Consumer WAM, 
displays on WAM and 
App; accelerometer, 
gyroscope, heart 
rate, ambient light, 
barometer
Calories, steps, distance, 
speed, heart rate, PA 
duration by active minutes, 
PA classification by level
1
3
1.33
2
2
2.07
Misfit  
Shine163,166,223,225,228,243,244
WAM with visuals 
on WAM and App; 
triaxial accelerometer
Calories, steps, distance, 
estimated EE, duration by 
active minutes, earn points 
for activity, can set for 
swimming/cycling/running/
walking, sleep duration, 
sleep quality (can swim 
with this device)
1.33
2
2.67
1
3
2.0
Omron  
HJ-203163,170,245
WAM with visuals 
on WAM, App, 
and website; 
2-dimensional smart 
sensor technology, 
advanced acceleration
Calories, steps, distance, 
duration by active minutes, 
user presses timer for active 
minutes, user can enter 
activity
1.5
2
3
1
2
1.9
Adidas MiCoach223,245–247
WAM with visuals 
on WAM and App; 
Fit Smart technology 
for heart rate, 
accelerometer
Calories, distance, speed, 
heart rate, stride rate for 
walking/jogging/running, 
PA duration by active 
minutes, PA level, explains 
how minutes are calculated 
but unsure if it was only for 
field sports
1
3
1.67
2
2
1.93
TANITA AM-160166,248
WAM with visuals 
on WAM and App; 
triaxial accelerometer
Calories, steps, distance, 
total energy, activity energy, 
resting calories, fat burned, 
total activity time, uses 
Calorism Engine PRO to 
classify into resting/daily 
activity/walking/running, 
movement analysis every 6 s
3
3
1.67
1
1
1.93
Metria IH1249,250
Consumer, disposable 
WAM that sticks to 
upper arm
Unclear; calories, 
classification levels, sleep
3
3
1.33
1
1
1.87
Omron CaloriScan  
HJA-403C166,170,223
WAM with visuals 
on WAM, App, 
and website; 
3-dimensional 
accelerometer
Calories, steps, fat burned
3
1
1.67
1
2
1.73
(Continued 
)
Table 2. Continued
Wearable
Description
Activity Metrics
Validity
Compliance 
With 
Aerobic 
PAG
Patient 
Feasibility
Healthcare 
Data 
Integration 
Feasibility
Behavior-
Change 
Strategies
Average 
Score
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e512
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Role of Nurses
Nurses and nurse practitioners have an important role 
in primary and secondary healthcare settings.260 Nurses 
and nurse practitioners are on the front line for ad-
dressing the increasing burden of NCD through educa-
tion. One study demonstrated that a team approach 
to lifestyle management improved outcomes related to 
chronic CVD management and PA behaviors compared 
with a program delivered with the current healthcare 
model (ie, usual care).
Role of Fitness Professionals
Community-based providers of exercise services consti-
tute a potentially powerful component of a comprehen-
sive healthcare system that is geared to the promotion 
of PA among clinical populations. Most communities 
include commercial health clubs and nonprofit organi-
zations (eg, the YMCA/YWCA, Jewish Community Cen-
ters) that employ fitness professionals who are trained 
to design and supervise individualized, effective exercise 
programs. In addition, in most communities, many such 
professionals work as personal trainers providing one-
on-one exercise services to individual clients. Despite the 
wide availability of these fitness professionals, they are 
rarely included in the healthcare delivery system.
An important step in establishing the fitness profes-
sional as an integral component of the healthcare sys-
tem is to institutionalize physician referral of patients 
to qualified community-based providers of exercise 
services. Through such a system, patients, having been 
screened in the clinical setting and provided with an 
exercise prescription, would be referred to fitness pro-
fessionals for translation and supervision of the recom-
mended exercise regimen. The referrals would be made 
to preidentified organizations (either nonprofit or for 
profit) or to individual providers. A key element of this 
system would be the provision of compensation by the 
patient’s health insurance entity to the providing orga-
nization or individual fitness professional.
A model for this system is the Diabetes Preven-
tion Program, which is currently being implemented 
through collaboration among the YMCA, selected 
health insurance entities, and HCPs.261 This program is 
currently being applied across the United States by link-
ing physicians and health insurance providers to com-
munity-based health promotion specialists, including 
fitness professionals. The Silver Sneakers program for 
Medicare-eligible individuals is another model in which 
health plans already include a fitness benefit at very re-
duced or no extra cost, including access to a personal 
trainer, fitness center, or exercise classes,120–122 showing 
Moves163,223,251,252
Smartphone App 
with visuals on App; 
acceleration sensors 
from smartphone, 
GPS
Calories, steps, distance, 
duration by activity, user 
can input activity, can 
detect running/walking/
cycling/transport, will map 
route
1
2
2.33
2
1
1.67
DirectLife165,247,253
WAM with visuals on 
WAM and website; 
triaxial accelerometer
Calories, activity EE, user 
can label activities on 
website, website explains 
how calories are calculated
2
1
1.67
1
2
1.53
Apple Watch228,254,255
Consumer 
WAM, display on 
WAM and App; 
photoplethysmography 
for heart and 
accelerometer
Calories, steps, distance, 
speed, heart rate, PA 
duration by active minutes; 
defines anything above 
brisk
1
2
1.33
1
2
1.47
Yamax Digiwalker  
SW-200163,256–258
WAM with visuals on 
WAM; pendulum, 
2-dimensional 
pedometer
Steps
1.5
1
2.33
1
1
1.37
Mio Alpha259
Consumer WAM, 
displays on WAM 
and App; optical 
heart rate and triaxial 
accelerometer
Calories, steps, distance, 
heart rate, pace
1
1
1.67
1
1
1.13
Each column represents a scoring domain ranked from 1 (worst) to 3 (best) according to prespecified criteria detailed in Data Supplement 2. App indicates 
application; EE, energy expenditure; GPS, global positioning system; MET, metabolic equivalent; PA, physical activity; PAG, physical activity guidelines; and WAM, 
wearable activity monitor. 
Fitbit Zip and Garmin Vivofit additional reference: E. Sprouse and A. Swelin, oral communication, September 2016.
Table 2. Continued
Wearable
Description
Activity Metrics
Validity
Compliance 
With 
Aerobic 
PAG
Patient 
Feasibility
Healthcare 
Data 
Integration 
Feasibility
Behavior-
Change 
Strategies
Average 
Score
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e513
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
that the potential for integrated PA-related care exists. 
Finally, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services 
has recently announced support for national coverage 
of supervised exercise therapy for patients with symp-
tomatic peripheral artery disease delivered by qualified 
exercise professionals.262 These efforts demonstrate the 
great potential associated with including fitness profes-
sionals and programs in the healthcare delivery system.
Suggestions for Clinicians Integrating PA 
Assessment and Promotion in Practice
• Make PA assessment a priority in all visits, in par-
ticular when the focus is CVD E&M or preventive 
care, using a simple, standardized tool such as the 
PAVS:
–
– “On average, how many days per week do you 
engage in moderate or greater intensity physical 
activity (like a brisk walk)?”
–
– “On average, how many minutes do you engage 
in this physical activity on those days?”
• If the product of those responses (MVPA in min-
utes per week) indicates a lack of compliance with 
the aerobic component of the US PA guideline rec-
ommendation of 150 min/wk, individuals should 
be advised of the health benefits of regular PA and 
encouraged to gradually increase either their fre-
quency or duration of activity.
• Consumer-oriented wearable devices or smart-
phones are feasible tools for objectively assessing 
PA levels. Self-tracking can help some individu-
als increase their PA levels in the short term, but 
a more robust PA promotion/referral/behavior 
change plan is needed for the maintenance of 
effects.
• The PA guidelines may be perceived by some inac-
tive individuals as too difficult to achieve. Explaining 
that accumulating at least 60 to 100 min/wk of PA 
(ideally in 10-minute bouts of at least moderate-
intensity PA) largely contributes to improved physi-
cal and mental health and CVD reduction.
• As recommended by the PA guidelines for 
Americans, a comprehensive assessment of PA 
should include engaging in muscle-strengthening, 
resistance, and flexibility exercises for major mus-
cle groups at least twice a week. The following 
question can be used:
–
– “How many days a week do you perform mus-
cle-strengthening exercises such as body weight 
exercises or resistance training?”
• Behavior is a dynamic phenomenon, and individu-
als attempting to change their behaviors often 
go through a series of stages. Identifying behav-
ioral readiness with the transtheoretical model of 
behavior change can help tailor the PA counseling.
–
– For individuals in precontemplation (no intention 
to become more physically active), discussing 
the health benefits of regular PA; exploring 
doubts, misconceptions, and myths about PA; 
and addressing barriers and facilitators for 
increased PA will be more appropriate than pro-
viding a specific PA prescription at this point.
–
– For individuals in contemplation and prepara-
tion (thinking about becoming physically active 
and have made small changes but not sustained 
yet to meet guidelines), a written PA prescrip-
tion using the FITT principle (recommended fre-
quency, intensity, time, and type of PA) with or 
without a referral to a trusted exercise profes-
sional/program constitutes an appropriate step.
• In addition to behavioral readiness, assessment 
of physical readiness for exercise constitutes an 
important step for PA promotion. Although the 
deleterious health effects of inactivity far outweigh 
the risks of an adverse CVD event trigged by exer-
cise, following a pre-exercise screening protocol 
can reduce these risks and build trust between the 
provider and the patient.194
• To make PA promotion efforts more credible and 
motivating, physicians should ensure that they 
“walk the talk” themselves. Personal experience 
makes a difference in PA promotion.
CONCLUSIONS
There are now ample evidence and widespread recog-
nition of the pivotal role that PA plays in the preven-
tion and management of CVD and other NCDs. Several 
clinical recommendations and policy statements sup-
port the integration of PA assessment and promotion 
in healthcare settings. Substantial evidence, including 
from large healthcare systems and country-level imple-
mentation experience, emphasizes that multifaceted 
PA assessment, counseling, and referral strategies are 
scalable and cost-effective. Those linking health care 
to community-based PA resources may be particularly 
so. These strategies should be part of CVD and NCD 
management and control programs. Given their bene-
fit, large-scale implementation of these strategies could 
significantly contribute to the AHA 2020 Impact Goals 
and the US National Prevention Strategy and to global 
NCD control goals, which call for a 10% reduction in 
the global prevalence of physical inactivity.13 However, 
despite some innovative implementation examples, 
policies and recommendations are not being sufficient-
ly translated into pragmatic implementation and sus-
tained programs in real-life healthcare settings.
For PA assessment and promotion to be embraced 
by health systems, clinical and community care provid-
ers, patients, payers, and technology and community 
care stakeholders, it needs to be incorporated into the 
modern fabric of healthcare delivery in a sustainable 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e514
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Disclosures
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Felipe Lobelo
Emory University 
Rollins School of 
Public Health
None
None
None
None
None
None
Director, Exercise Is 
Medicine Research 
Center, American 
College of Sports 
Medicine*
Deborah Rohm 
Young
Kaiser Permanente 
Southern California 
Research and 
Evaluation
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sandra A. Billinger
University of Kansas 
Medical Center
American Heart 
Association 
(grant-in-aid 
pays 15% of 
salary)*
None
None
None
None
None
None
John Duperly
Fundación Santa Fe de 
Bogotá–Universidad 
de los Andes
(Colombia)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Michael D. Garber
Emory University 
Rollins School of 
Public Health
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Adrian Hutber
American College 
of Sports Medicine 
Exercise Is Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
American 
College of Sports 
Medicine*
None
Elizabeth A. Joy
Intermountain 
Healthcare 
Community Health
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Michael V. 
McConnell
Stanford University 
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
Verily/
Alphabet*
None
Verily/Alphabet 
(head, CV Health)*
fashion. A “systems change” approach is necessary 
to spark the vital institutional and personal impetus 
for healthcare systems and providers, respectively, to 
break the barriers that impede integration of clinical-
community links for PA promotion. Resource alloca-
tion for executing clinical, community, and data in-
tegration components is critical. Experience in other 
countries shows that this can be done and should 
yield positive results. Finally, this scientific statement 
strongly supports the importance of cross-national 
learning, knowledge transfer, and adaptation of suc-
cessful models to make PA promotion a standard in 
health care and to contribute to meeting global CVD 
and NCD control targets.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or po-
tential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or 
a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. 
Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete and 
submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be 
perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science 
Advisory and Coordinating Committee on October 15, 2017, and the Ameri-
can Heart Association Executive Committee on December 11, 2017. A copy of 
the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using 
either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. 
To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@
wolterskluwer.com.
Online Data Supplements are available with this article: Data Supplement 1: 
http://circ.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559/-/
DC1 and Data Supplement 2: http://circ.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000559/-/DC2.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as 
follows: Lobelo F, Young DR, Sallis R, Garber MD, Billinger SA, Duperly J, 
Hutber A, Pate RR, Thomas RJ, Widlansky ME, McConnell MV, Joy EA; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Physical Activity Committee of 
the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health; Council on Epidemiol-
ogy and Prevention; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Functional 
Genomics and Translational Biology; Council on Cardiovascular Surgery 
and Anesthesia; and Stroke Council. Routine assessment and promotion of 
physical activity in healthcare settings: a scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000559.
The expert peer review of AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific 
statements, clinical practice guidelines, systematic reviews) is conducted by 
the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and 
guidelines development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select 
the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication 
Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/
or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express permis-
sion of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission 
are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-
Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions 
 
Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e515
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Russell R. Pate
University of South 
Carolina Exercise 
Science Public Health 
Research Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Robert Sallis
Kaiser Permanente 
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Randal J. Thomas
Mayo Clinic
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Michael E. 
Widlansky
Medical College of 
Wisconsin
NHLBI (R01)*; 
Medtronic, 
Inc*; Merck, 
Sharp, Dohme* 
(investigator-
initiated 
research 
projects)
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on 
the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if 
(a) the person receives $10 
000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the 
voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than 
“significant” under the preceding definition.
*Significant.
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
George E. Billman
The Ohio State University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Benjamin D. Levine
University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical 
Center, Texas Health 
Presbyterian Hospital Dallas 
Institute for Exercise and 
Environmental Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Antonio Pelliccia
Institute of Sports Medicine 
and Science (Italy)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 
000 or more 
during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns 
$10 
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
REFERENCES
 1. Lee IM, Shiroma EJ, Lobelo F
, Puska P
, Blair SN, Katzmarzyk PT; Lancet Physical 
Activity Series Working Group. Effect of physical inactivity on major non-com-
municable diseases worldwide: an analysis of burden of disease and life expec-
tancy. Lancet. 2012;380:219–229. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61031-9.
 2. Global health risks: mortality and burden of disease attributable to se-
lected major risks. World Health Organization 2009 Report. http://www.
who.int/iris/handle/10665/44203. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 3. Hallal PC, Andersen LB, Bull FC, Guthold R, Haskell W, Ekelund U; Lan-
cet Physical Activity Series Working Group. Global physical activity levels: 
surveillance progress, pitfalls, and prospects. Lancet. 2012;380:247–257. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60646-1.
 4. Wen CP
, Wu X. Stressing harms of physical inactivity to promote exercise. 
Lancet. 2012;380:192–193. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60954-4.
 5. Carlson SA, Fulton JE, Pratt M, Yang Z, Adams EK. Inadequate physical 
activity and health care expenditures in the United States. Prog Cardiovasc 
Dis. 2015;57:315–323. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2014.08.002.
 6. Huseyin N, John PAI. Comparative effectiveness of exercise and drug 
interventions on mortality outcomes: metaepidemiological study. BMJ. 
2013;347:f5577. doi:10.1136/bmj.f5577.
 7. Blair SN. Physical inactivity: the biggest public health problem of the 21st 
century. Br J Sports Med. 2009;43:1–2.
 8. Vuori IM, Lavie CJ, Blair SN. Physical activity promotion in the health 
care system. Mayo Clin Proc. 2013;88:1446–1461. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2013.08.020.
 9. US Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 Physical activity 
guidelines for Americans. Pres Counc Phys Fit Sport Res Dig. 2008;9:1–8. 
doi:10.4085/1062-6050-44.1.5.
 10. Carlson SA, Densmore D, Fulton JE, Yore MM, Kohl HW 3rd. Differences 
in physical activity prevalence and trends from 3 U.S. surveillance systems: 
NHIS, NHANES, and BRFSS. J Phys Act Health. 2009;6(suppl 1):S18–S27.
 11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. State Indicator Report on 
Physical Activity. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices; 2014.
 12. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, Cushman M, 
Das SR, de Ferranti S, Després JP
, Fullerton HJ, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, 
Isasi CR, Jiménez MC, Judd SE, Kissela BM, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Liu 
S, Mackey RH, Magid DJ, McGuire DK, Mohler ER 3rd, Moy CS, Muntner 
P
, Mussolino ME, Nasir K, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Palaniappan L, Pandey 
DK, Reeves MJ, Rodriguez CJ, Rosamond W, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi 
A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Woo D, Yeh RW, Turner MB; on behalf of the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e516
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
American Heart Association Statistics Committee; Stroke Statistics Sub-
committee. Executive summary: heart disease and stroke statistics—2016 
update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2016;133:447–454. doi:10.1161/cir.0000000000000366.
 13. Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable 
 
Diseases 2013-2020. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2013. 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/94384/1/9789241506236_eng.
pdf?ua=1. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 14. Lin JS, O’Connor E, Evans CV, Senger CA, Rowland MG, Groom HC. Be-
havioral counseling to promote a healthy lifestyle in persons with car-
diovascular risk factors: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Ser-
vices Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:568–578. doi: 10.7326/
M14-0130.
 15. Global Advocacy Council for Physical Activity, International Society for Physical 
Activity and Health. The Toronto Charter for Physical Activity: A Global Call to 
Action. 2010. http://www.interamericanheart.org/images/PHYSICALACTIVITY/ 
TorontoCharterPhysicalActivityENG.pdf. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 16. Kraus WE, Bittner V, Appel L, Blair SN, Church T, Després JP, Franklin 
BA, Miller TD, Pate RR, Taylor-Piliae RE, Vafiadis DK, Whitsel L; on be-
half of the American Heart Association Physical Activity Committee of 
the Council on Lifestyle and Metabolic Health, Council on Clinical Car-
diology, Council on Hypertension, and Council on Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Nursing. The National Physical Activity Plan: a call to action from 
the American Heart Association: a science advisory from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131:1932–1940. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000203.
 17. Patrick K, Pratt M, Sallis RE. The healthcare sector’s role in the U.S. Nation-
al Physical Activity Plan. J Phys Act Health. 2009;6(suppl 2):S211–S219.
 18. Kohl HW 3rd, Craig CL, Lambert EV, Inoue S, Alkandari JR, Leetongin 
G, Kahlmeier S; Lancet Physical Activity Series Working Group. The 
pandemic of physical inactivity: global action for public health. Lancet. 
2012;380:294–305. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60898-8.
 19. Life’s Simple 7. American Heart Association. http://www.heart.org/
HEARTORG/Conditions/My-Life-Check—Lifes-Simple-7_UCM_471453_
Article.jsp#.WR45sYeGOUk. Accessed June 27, 2017.
 20. Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong Y, Labarthe D, Mozaffarian D, Appel LJ, Van Horn 
L, Greenlund K, Daniels S, Nichol G, Tomaselli GF, Arnett DK, Fonarow 
GC, Ho PM, Lauer MS, Masoudi FA, Robertson RM, Roger V, Schwamm 
LH, Sorlie P
, Yancy CW, Rosamond WD; on behalf of the American Heart 
Association Strategic Planning Task Force and Statistics Committee. Defin-
ing and setting national goals for cardiovascular health promotion and 
disease reduction: the American Heart Association’s strategic Impact Goal 
through 2020 and beyond. Circulation. 2010;121:586–613. doi:10.1161/
circulationaha.109.192703.
 21. Thompson PD, Buchner D, Pina IL, Balady GJ, Williams MA, Marcus BH, 
Berra K, Blair SN, Costa F, Franklin B, Fletcher GF, Gordon NF, Pate RR, 
Rodriguez BL, Yancey AK, Wenger NK. Exercise and physical activity in 
the prevention and treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a 
statement from the Council on Clinical Cardiology (Subcommittee on Exer-
cise, Rehabilitation, and Prevention) and the Council on Nutrition, Physical 
Activity, and Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physical Activity). Circulation. 
2003;107:3109–3116. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000075572.40158.77.
 22. Thompson PD, Franklin BA, Balady GJ, Blair SN, Corrado D, Estes NA 3rd, 
Fulton JE, Gordon NF, Haskell WL, Link MS, Maron BJ, Mittleman MA, 
Pelliccia A, Wenger NK, Willich SN, Costa F; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism; 
American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology; American Col-
lege of Sports Medicine. Exercise and acute cardiovascular events: placing 
the risks into perspective: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism and 
the Council on Clinical Cardiology. Circulation. 2007;115:2358–2368. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.181485.
 23. Billinger SA, Arena R, Bernhardt J, Eng JJ, Franklin BA, Johnson CM, 
MacKay-Lyons M, Macko RF, Mead GE, Roth EJ, Shaughnessy M, Tang A; 
on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on 
Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometa-
bolic Health; Council on Epidemiology and Prevention; Council on Clinical 
Cardiology. Physical activity and exercise recommendations for stroke sur-
vivors: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:2532–2553. 
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000022.
 24. Balady GJ, Williams MA, Ades PA, Bittner V, Comoss P
, Foody JM, Frank-
lin B, Sanderson B, Southard D. Core components of cardiac rehabilita-
tion/secondary prevention programs: 2007 update: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and 
Prevention Committee, the Council on Clinical Cardiology; the Councils 
on Cardiovascular Nursing, Epidemiology and Prevention, and Nutrition, 
Physical Activity, and Metabolism; and the American Association of Car-
diovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation. Circulation. 2007;115:2675–
2682. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.180945.
 25. Marwick TH, Hordern MD, Miller T, Chyun DA, Bertoni AG, Blumenthal 
RS, Philippides G, Rocchini A; on behalf of the Council on Clinical Car-
diology, American Heart Association Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, 
and Prevention Committee; Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the 
Young; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; Council on Nutrition, Physi-
cal Activity, and Metabolism; Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care 
and Outcomes Research. Exercise training for type 2 diabetes mellitus: 
impact on cardiovascular risk: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2009;119:3244–3262. doi: 10.1161/ 
CIRCULATIONAHA.109.192521.
 26. Young DR, Hivert MF, Alhassan S, Camhi SM, Ferguson JF, Katzmarzyk 
PT, Lewis CE, Owen N, Perry CK, Siddique J, Yong CM; on behalf of the 
Physical Activity Committee of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometa-
bolic Health; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Epidemiology and 
Prevention; Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology; 
and Stroke Council. Sedentary behavior and cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality: a science advisory from the American Heart Association. Circu-
lation. 2016. doi:10.1161/cir.0000000000000440.
 27. Fletcher GF, Balady G, Blair SN, Blumenthal J, Caspersen C, Chaitman 
B, Epstein S, Sivarajan Froelicher ES, Froelicher VF, Pina IL, Pollock ML. 
Statement on exercise: benefits and recommendations for physical ac-
tivity programs for all Americans: a statement for health professionals 
by the Committee on Exercise and Cardiac Rehabilitation of the Coun-
cil on Clinical Cardiology, American Heart Association. Circulation. 
1996;94:857–862.
 28. Haskell WL, Lee IM, Pate RR, Powell KE, Blair SN, Franklin BA, Macera CA, 
Heath GW, Thompson PD, Bauman A; on behalf of the American College 
of Sports Medicine; American Heart Association. Physical activity and pub-
lic health: updated recommendation for adults from the American Col-
lege of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2007;116:1081–1093. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.185649.
 29. Williams MA, Haskell WL, Ades PA, Amsterdam EA, Bittner V, Franklin 
BA, Gulanick M, Laing ST, Stewart KJ. Resistance exercise in individuals 
with and without cardiovascular disease: 2007 update: a scientific state-
ment from the American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology 
and Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism. Circulation. 
2007;116:572–584. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.185214.
 30. Physical activity and public health in older adults: recommendation from the 
American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2007;116:1094–1105. doi:10.1161/circulationaha.107.185650.
 31. Pate RR, Davis MG, Robinson TN, Stone EJ, McKenzie TL, Young JC. 
Promoting physical activity in children and youth: a leadership role for 
schools: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association 
Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism (Physical Activity 
Committee) in collaboration with the Councils on Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young and Cardiovascular Nursing. Circulation. 2006;114:1214–
1224. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.177052.
 32. Fletcher GF, Ades PA, Kligfield P, Arena R, Balady GJ, Bittner VA, Coke 
LA, Fleg JL, Forman DE, Gerber TC, Gulati M, Madan K, Rhodes J, 
Thompson PD, Williams MA; on behalf of the American Heart Asso-
ciation Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention Committee 
of the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council on Nutrition, Physical 
Activity and Metabolism, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nurs-
ing, and Council on Epidemiology and Prevention. Exercise standards 
for testing and training: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;128:873–934. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e31829b5b44.
 33. Guazzi M, Adams V, Conraads V, Halle M, Mezzani A, Vanhees L, Arena 
R, Fletcher GF, Forman DE, Kitzman DW, Lavie CJ, Myers J; on behalf of 
the European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation; 
American Heart Association. EACPR/AHA Scientific Statement. Clinical 
recommendations for cardiopulmonary exercise testing data assessment 
in specific patient populations. Circulation. 2012;126:2261–2274. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0b013e31826fb946.
 34. Artinian NT, Fletcher GF, Mozaffarian D, Kris-Etherton P
, Van Horn L, Li-
chtenstein AH, Kumanyika S, Kraus WE, Fleg JL, Redeker NS, Meininger 
JC, Banks J, Stuart-Shor EM, Fletcher BJ, Miller TD, Hughes S, Braun LT, 
Kopin LA, Berra K, Hayman LL, Ewing LJ, Ades PA, Durstine JL, Houston-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e517
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Miller N, Burke LE; on behalf of the American Heart Association Preven-
tion Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Nursing. Interventions 
to promote physical activity and dietary lifestyle changes for cardiovascu-
lar risk factor reduction in adults: a scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. Circulation. 2010;122:406–441. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e3181e8edf1.
 35. Marcus BH, Williams DM, Dubbert PM, Sallis JF, King AC, Yancey AK, 
Franklin BA, Buchner D, Daniels SR, Claytor RP
. Physical activity interven-
tion studies: what we know and what we need to know: a scientific state-
ment from the American Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical 
Activity, and Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physical Activity); Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; and the Interdisciplinary Working 
Group on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research [published correction 
appears in Circulation. 2010;122:e8]. Circulation. 2006;114:2739–2752. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.179683.
 36. Mozaffarian D, Afshin A, Benowitz NL, Bittner V, Daniels SR, Franch 
HA, Jacobs DR Jr, Kraus WE, Kris-Etherton PM, Krummel DA, Popkin 
BM, Whitsel LP, Zakai NA; on behalf of the American Heart Associa-
tion Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on Nutrition, 
Physical Activity and Metabolism, Council on Clinical Cardiology, 
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, Council on the Kid-
ney in Cardiovasc. Population approaches to improve diet, physical ac-
tivity, and smoking habits: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2012;126:1514–1563. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e318260a20b.
 37. Burke LE, Ma J, Azar KM, Bennett GG, Peterson ED, Zheng Y, Riley W, 
Stephens J, Shah SH, Suffoletto B, Turan TN, Spring B, Steinberger J, 
Quinn CC; on behalf of the American Heart Association Publications 
Committee of the Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Behavior 
Change Committee of the Council on Cardiometabolic Health, Council 
on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Functional Genomics 
and Translational Biology, Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Re-
search, and Stroke Council. Current science on consumer use of mobile 
health for cardiovascular disease prevention: a scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association [published correction appears in Circula-
tion. 2015;132:e233]. Circulation. 2015;132:1157–1213. doi:10.1161/
cir.0000000000000232.
 38. Strath SJ, Kaminsky LA, Ainsworth BE, Ekelund U, Freedson PS, Gary 
RA, Richardson CR, Smith DT, Swartz AM; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Physical Activity Committee of the Council on Life-
style and Cardiometabolic Health and Cardiovascular, Exercise, Cardiac 
Rehabilitation and Prevention Committee of the Council on Clinical Car-
diology, and Council. Guide to the assessment of physical activity: clini-
cal and research applications: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;128:2259–2279. doi: 10.1161/01.
cir.0000435708.67487.da.
 39. Barnes P
, Schoenborn C. Trends in adults receiving a recommendation for 
exercise or other physical activity from a physician or other health profes-
sional. NCHS Data Brief. 2011:1–8.
 40. Grant RW, Schmittdiel JA, Neugebauer RS, Uratsu CS, Sternfeld B. Exer-
cise as a vital sign: a quasi-experimental analysis of a health system in-
tervention to collect patient-reported exercise levels. J Gen Intern Med. 
2014;29:341–348. doi:10.1007/s11606-013-2693-9.
 41. Greenwood JL, Joy EA, Stanford JB. The Physical Activity Vital Sign: 
a primary care tool to guide counseling for obesity. J Phys Act Health. 
2010;7:571–576.
 42. Ross R, Blair SN, Arena R, Church TS, Després JP
, Franklin BA, Haskell WL, 
Kaminsky LA, Levine BD, Lavie CJ, Myers J, Niebauer J, Sallis R, Sawada SS, 
Sui X, Wisløff U; on behalf of the American Heart Association Physical Ac-
tivity Committee of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health; 
Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Epidemiology and Prevention; 
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Functional Ge-
nomics and Translational Biology; Stroke Council. Importance of assessing 
cardiorespiratory fitness in clinical practice: a case for fitness as a clinical vital 
sign: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2016;134:e653–e699. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000461.
 43. Shiroma EJ, Lee IM. Physical activity and cardiovascular health: lessons 
learned from epidemiological studies across age, gender, and race/eth-
nicity. Circulation. 2010;122:743–752. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
109.914721.
 44. Wilmot EG, Edwardson CL, Achana FA, Davies MJ, Gorely T, Gray LJ, 
Khunti K, Yates T, Biddle SJ. Sedentary time in adults and the association 
with diabetes, cardiovascular disease and death: systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Diabetologia. 2012;55:2895–2905. doi: 10.1007/s00125-
012-2677-z.
 45. Warren TY, Barry V, Hooker SP
, Sui X, Church TS, Blair SN. Sedentary be-
haviors increase risk of cardiovascular disease mortality in men. Med Sci 
Sports Exerc. 2010;42:879–885. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181c3aa7e.
 46. Held C, Iqbal R, Lear SA, Rosengren A, Islam S, Mathew J, Yusuf S. Physical 
activity levels, ownership of goods promoting sedentary behaviour and 
risk of myocardial infarction: results of the INTERHEART study. Eur Heart J. 
2012;33:452–466. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehr432.
 47. Healy GN, Matthews CE, Dunstan DW, Winkler EA, Owen N. Sedentary 
time and cardio-metabolic biomarkers in US adults: NHANES 2003-06. Eur 
Heart J. 2011;32:590–597. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq451.
 48. Helmerhorst HJ, Wijndaele K, Brage S, Wareham NJ, Ekelund U. Objec-
tively measured sedentary time may predict insulin resistance indepen-
dent of moderate- and vigorous-intensity physical activity. Diabetes. 
2009;58:1776–1779. doi: 10.2337/db08-1773.
 49. Katzmarzyk PT, Church TS, Craig CL, Bouchard C. Sitting time and mor-
tality from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc. 2009;41:998–1005. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181930355.
 50. Owen N, Healy GN, Matthews CE, Dunstan DW. Too much sitting: the 
population health science of sedentary behavior. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 
2010;38:105–113. doi: 10.1097/JES.0b013e3181e373a2.
 51. Wijndaele K, Duvigneaud N, Matton L, Duquet W, Delecluse C, Thomis 
M, Beunen G, Lefevre J, Philippaerts RM. Sedentary behaviour, physical 
activity and a continuous metabolic syndrome risk score in adults. Eur J 
Clin Nutr. 2009;63:421–429. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejcn.1602944.
 52. Leon AS, Sanchez OA. Response of blood lipids to exercise training 
alone or combined with dietary intervention. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2001;33(suppl):S502–S515.
 53. Lehmann R, Kaplan V, Bingisser R, Bloch KE, Spinas GA. Impact of 
physical activity on cardiovascular risk factors in IDDM. Diabetes Care. 
1997;20:1603–1611.
 54. Kraus WE, Houmard JA, Duscha BD, Knetzger KJ, Wharton MB, McCart-
ney JS, Bales CW, Henes S, Samsa GP
, Otvos JD, Kulkarni KR, Slentz CA. 
Effects of the amount and intensity of exercise on plasma lipoproteins. N 
Engl J Med. 2002;347:1483–1492. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa020194.
 55. Whelton SP
, Chin A, Xin X, He J. Effect of aerobic exercise on blood pres-
sure: a meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Ann Intern Med. 
2002;136:493–503.
 56. Thompson PD, Crouse SF, Goodpaster B, Kelley D, Moyna N, Pescatello L. 
The acute versus the chronic response to exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2001;33(suppl):S438–S445.
 57. Hakim AA, Petrovitch H, Burchfiel CM, Ross GW, Rodriguez BL, White 
LR, Yano K, Curb JD, Abbott RD. Effects of walking on mortality among 
nonsmoking retired men. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:94–99. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM199801083380204.
 58. Sesso HD, Paffenbarger RS Jr, Lee IM. Physical activity and coronary 
heart disease in men: the Harvard Alumni Health Study. Circulation. 
2000;102:975–980.
 59. Paffenbarger RS Jr, Hyde RT, Wing AL, Hsieh CC. Physical activity, all-cause 
mortality, and longevity of college alumni. N Engl J Med. 1986;314:605–
613. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198603063141003.
 60. Green DJ, Walsh JH, Maiorana A, Best MJ, Taylor RR, O’Driscoll JG. Exer-
cise-induced improvement in endothelial dysfunction is not mediated by 
changes in CV risk factors: pooled analysis of diverse patient populations. 
Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2003;285:H2679–H2687. doi: 10.1152/
ajpheart.00519.2003.
 61. Bijnen FC, Caspersen CJ, Feskens EJ, Saris WH, Mosterd WL, Krom-
hout D. Physical activity and 10-year mortality from cardiovascular 
diseases and all causes: the Zutphen Elderly Study. Arch Intern Med. 
1998;158:1499–1505.
 62. Manson JE, Greenland P
, LaCroix AZ, Stefanick ML, Mouton CP
, Oberman 
A, Perri MG, Sheps DS, Pettinger MB, Siscovick DS. Walking compared 
with vigorous exercise for the prevention of cardiovascular events in wom-
en. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:716–725. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa021067.
 63. Yu S, Yarnell JW, Sweetnam PM, Murray L; Caerphilly Study. What level 
of physical activity protects against premature cardiovascular death? The 
Caerphilly Study. Heart. 2003;89:502–506.
 64. Meisinger C, Löwel H, Heier M, Kandler U, Döring A. Association of sports 
activities in leisure time and incident myocardial infarction in middle-aged 
men and women from the general population: the MONICA/KORA Augs-
burg cohort study. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil. 2007;14:788–792. doi: 
10.1097/HJR.0b013e32828641be.
 65. Smith TC, Wingard DL, Smith B, Kritz-Silverstein D, Barrett-Connor E. Walking 
decreased risk of cardiovascular disease mortality in older adults with diabe-
tes. J Clin Epidemiol. 2007;60:309–317. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2006.06.013.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e518
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 66. Inoue M, Iso H, Yamamoto S, Kurahashi N, Iwasaki M, Sasazuki S, Tsugane 
S; Japan Public Health Center-Based Prospective Study Group. Daily total 
physical activity level and premature death in men and women: results from 
a large-scale population-based cohort study in Japan (JPHC study). Ann 
Epidemiol. 2008;18:522–530. doi: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2008.03.008.
 67. Blair SN, Kohl HW 3rd, Paffenbarger RS Jr, Clark DG, Cooper KH, Gibbons 
LW. Physical fitness and all-cause mortality: a prospective study of healthy 
men and women. JAMA. 1989;262:2395–2401.
 68. Hu FB, Willett WC, Li T, Stampfer MJ, Colditz GA, Manson JE. Adi-
posity as compared with physical activity in predicting mortality 
among women. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2694–2703. doi: 10.1056/ 
NEJMoa042135.
 69. Matthews CE, George SM, Moore SC, Bowles HR, Blair A, Park Y, Troia-
no RP
, Hollenbeck A, Schatzkin A. Amount of time spent in sedentary 
behaviors and cause-specific mortality in US adults. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2012;95:437–445. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.111.019620.
 70. Hu G, Tuomilehto J, Borodulin K, Jousilahti P
. The joint associations of 
occupational, commuting, and leisure-time physical activity, and the Fram-
ingham risk score on the 10-year risk of coronary heart disease. Eur Heart 
J. 2007;28:492–498. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehl475.
 71. Rowley NJ, Dawson EA, Birk GK, Cable NT, George K, Whyte G, Thijssen 
DH, Green DJ. Exercise and arterial adaptation in humans: uncoupling lo-
calized and systemic effects. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011;110:1190–1195. 
doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01371.2010.
 72. Thijssen DH, Green DJ, Hopman MT. Blood vessel remodeling and physical 
inactivity in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011;111:1836–1845. doi: 
10.1152/japplphysiol.00394.2011.
 73. Niebauer J, Cooke JP
. Cardiovascular effects of exercise: role of endothelial 
shear stress. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;28:1652–1660. doi: 10.1016/S0735-
1097(96)00393-2.
 74. Hamburg NM, McMackin CJ, Huang AL, Shenouda SM, Widlansky ME, 
Schulz E, Gokce N, Ruderman NB, Keaney JF Jr, Vita JA. Physical inac-
tivity rapidly induces insulin resistance and microvascular dysfunction in 
healthy volunteers. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007;27:2650–2656. 
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.107.153288.
 75. Tinken TM, Thijssen DH, Hopkins N, Dawson EA, Cable NT, Green DJ. Shear 
stress mediates endothelial adaptations to exercise training in humans. 
Hypertension. 2010;55:312–318. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA. 
109.146282.
 76. Thijssen DH, Maiorana AJ, O’Driscoll G, Cable NT, Hopman MT, Green DJ. 
Impact of inactivity and exercise on the vasculature in humans. Eur J Appl 
Physiol. 2010;108:845–875. doi: 10.1007/s00421-009-1260-x.
 77. Widlansky ME. The danger of sedenterism: endothelium at risk. Am J Physiol 
Heart Circ Physiol. 2010;299:H243–H244. doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00505.2010.
 78. Lesniewski LA, Durrant JR, Connell ML, Henson GD, Black AD, Donato 
AJ, Seals DR. Aerobic exercise reverses arterial inflammation with aging 
in mice. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011;301:H1025–H1032. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.01276.2010.
 79. Mora S, Cook N, Buring JE, Ridker PM, Lee IM. Physical activity and 
reduced risk of cardiovascular events: potential mediating mechanisms. 
Circulation. 2007;116:2110–2118. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
107.729939.
 80. Meaume S, Benetos A, Henry O, Rudnichi A, Safar ME. Aortic pulse wave 
velocity predicts cardiovascular mortality in subjects >70 years of age. 
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001;21:2046–2050.
 81. Celermajer DS, Sorensen KE, Spiegelhalter DJ, Georgakopoulos D, Rob-
inson J, Deanfield JE. Aging is associated with endothelial dysfunction in 
healthy men years before the age-related decline in women. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1994;24:471–476.
 82. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Mattei P
, Sudano I, Bernini G, Pinto S, Sal-
vetti A. Menopause is associated with endothelial dysfunction in women. 
Hypertension. 1996;28:576–582.
 83. van der Loo B, Labugger R, Skepper JN, Bachschmid M, Kilo J, Powell JM, 
Palacios-Callender M, Erusalimsky JD, Quaschning T, Malinski T, Gygi D, 
Ullrich V, Lüscher TF. Enhanced peroxynitrite formation is associated with 
vascular aging. J Exp Med. 2000;192:1731–1744.
 84. Taddei S, Virdis A, Ghiadoni L, Magagna A, Favilla S, Pompella A, Salvetti 
A. Restoration of nitric oxide availability after calcium antagonist treat-
ment in essential hypertension. Hypertension. 2001;37:943–948.
 85. Donato AJ, Black AD, Jablonski KL, Gano LB, Seals DR. Aging is associated 
with greater nuclear NF kappa B, reduced I kappa B alpha, and increased 
expression of proinflammatory cytokines in vascular endothelial cells 
of healthy humans. Aging Cell. 2008;7:805–812. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-
9726.2008.00438.x.
 86. Avolio AP
, Deng FQ, Li WQ, Luo YF, Huang ZD, Xing LF, O’Rourke MF. 
Effects of aging on arterial distensibility in populations with high and low 
prevalence of hypertension: comparison between urban and rural com-
munities in China. Circulation. 1985;71:202–210.
 87. Laurent S, Boutouyrie P
, Asmar R, Gautier I, Laloux B, Guize L, Ducimetiere 
P
, Benetos A. Aortic stiffness is an independent predictor of all-cause 
and cardiovascular mortality in hypertensive patients. Hypertension. 
2001;37:1236–1241.
 88. Seals DR, Desouza CA, Donato AJ, Tanaka H. Habitual exercise and arte-
rial aging. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008;105:1323–1332. doi: 10.1152/
japplphysiol.90553.2008.
 89. Sutton-Tyrrell K, Najjar SS, Boudreau RM, Venkitachalam L, Kupelian V, 
Simonsick EM, Havlik R, Lakatta EG, Spurgeon H, Kritchevsky S, Pahor 
M, Bauer D, Newman A; Health ABC Study. Elevated aortic pulse wave 
velocity, a marker of arterial stiffness, predicts cardiovascular events in 
well-functioning older adults. Circulation. 2005;111:3384–3390. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.104.483628.
 90. Widlansky ME, Gokce N, Keaney JF Jr, Vita JA. The clinical implications of 
endothelial dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:1149–1160.
 91. Vaitkevicius PV, Fleg JL, Engel JH, O’Connor FC, Wright JG, Lakatta LE, 
Yin FC, Lakatta EG. Effects of age and aerobic capacity on arterial stiff-
ness in healthy adults. Circulation. 1993;88(pt 1):1456–1462.
 92. DeSouza CA, Shapiro LF, Clevenger CM, Dinenno FA, Monahan KD, 
Tanaka H, Seals DR. Regular aerobic exercise prevents and restores age-
related declines in endothelium-dependent vasodilation in healthy men. 
Circulation. 2000;102:1351–1357.
 93. Tanaka H, Dinenno FA, Monahan KD, Clevenger CM, DeSouza CA, 
Seals DR. Aging, habitual exercise, and dynamic arterial compliance. 
Circulation. 2000;102:1270–1275.
 94. Pierce GL, Eskurza I, Walker AE, Fay TN, Seals DR. Sex-specific effects 
of habitual aerobic exercise on brachial artery flow-mediated dilation 
in middle-aged and older adults. Clin Sci (Lond). 2011;120:13–23. doi: 
10.1042/CS20100174.
 95. Rywik TM, Blackman MR, Yataco AR, Vaitkevicius PV, Zink RC, Cottrell 
EH, Wright JG, Katzel LI, Fleg JL. Enhanced endothelial vasoreactivity 
in endurance-trained older men. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1999;87:2136–
2142. doi: 10.1152/jappl.1999.87.6.2136.
 96. Nguyen PK, Terashima M, Fair JM, Varady A, Taylor-Piliae RE, Iribarren C, 
Go AS, Haskell WL, Hlatky MA, Fortmann SP
, McConnell MV. Physical 
activity in older subjects is associated with increased coronary vasodila-
tion: the ADVANCE study. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2011;4:622–629. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2011.05.001.
 97. National Institutes of Health. Molecular transducers of physical activity 
in humans. https://www.commonfund.nih.gov/moleculartransducers. 
Accessed January 23, 2018.
 98. Pratt M, Norris J, Lobelo F, Roux L, Wang G. The cost of physical inactiv-
ity: moving into the 21st century. Br J Sports Med. 2014;48:171–173. doi: 
10.1136/bjsports-2012-091810.
 99. Valero-Elizondo J, Salami JA, Osondu CU, Ogunmoroti O, Arrieta A, 
Spatz ES, Younus A, Rana JS, Virani SS, Blankstein R, Blaha MJ, Veledar 
E, Nasir K. Economic impact of moderate-vigorous physical activity 
among those with and without established cardiovascular disease: 2012 
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e003614. 
doi:10.1161/jaha.116.003614.
 100. Ding D, Lawson KD, Kolbe-Alexander TL, Finkelstein EA, Katzmarzyk 
PT, van Mechelen W, Pratt M; Lancet Physical Activity Series 2 Executive 
Committee. The economic burden of physical inactivity: a global analy-
sis of major non-communicable diseases. Lancet. 2016;388:1311–1324. 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30383-X.
 101. Kahn EB, Ramsey LT, Brownson RC, Heath GW, Howze EH, Powell 
KE, Stone EJ, Rajab MW, Corso P
. The effectiveness of interventions 
to increase physical activity: a systematic review. Am J Prev Med. 
2002;22(suppl):73–107.
 102. Heath GW, Parra DC, Sarmiento OL, Andersen LB, Owen N, Goenka 
S, Montes F, Brownson RC; Lancet Physical Activity Series Working 
Group. Evidence-based intervention in physical activity: lessons from 
 
around the world. Lancet. 2012;380:272–281. doi: 10.1016/S0140- 
6736(12)60816-2.
 103. Sanchez A, Bully P
, Martinez C, Grandes G. Effectiveness of physical 
 
activity promotion interventions in primary care: A review of reviews. 
Prev Med. 2015;76(suppl):S56–S67. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.09.012.
 104. Orrow G, Kinmonth AL, Sanderson S, Sutton S. Effectiveness of physical 
activity promotion based in primary care: systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2012;344:e1389.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e519
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 105. Sanchez A, Grandes G, Ortega Sánchez-Pinilla R, Torcal J, Montoya I; 
PEPAF Group. Predictors of long-term change of a physical activity pro-
motion programme in primary care. BMC Public Health. 2014;14:108. 
doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-108.
 106. Grandes G, Sánchez A, Torcal J, Sánchez-Pinilla RO, Lizarraga K, Serra J; 
PEPAF Group. Targeting physical activity promotion in general practice: 
characteristics of inactive patients and willingness to change. BMC Public 
Health. 2008;8:172. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-8-172.
 107. Jonas DE, Garbutt JC, Brown JM, Amick HR, Brownley KA, Council CL, 
Viera AJ, Wilkins TM, Schwartz CJ, Richmond ER, Yeatts J, Swinson Evans 
T, Wood SD, Harris RP
. Screening, Behavioral Counseling, and Referral 
in Primary Care to Reduce Alcohol Misuse: Comparative Effectiveness 
Review No. 64. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality; 2012. Report No. 12-EHC055-EF.
 108. Moore RA, Gavaghan DJ, Edwards JE, Wiffen P
, McQuay HJ. Pooling 
data for number needed to treat: no problems for apples. BMC Med Res 
Methodol. 2002;2:2.
 109. LeFevre ML; US Preventive Services Task Force. Behavioral Counseling to 
Promote a Healthful Diet and Physical Activity for Cardiovascular Disease 
Prevention in Adults With Cardiovascular Risk Factors: U.S. Preventive 
Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med. 
2014;161:587–593. doi:10.7326/M14-1796.
 110. Lin JS, O’Connor E, Whitlock EP
, Beil TL, Zuber SP
, Perdue LA, Plaut 
D, Lutz K. Behavioral Counseling to Promote Physical Activity and a 
Healthful Diet to Prevent Cardiovascular Disease in Adults: Update of 
the Evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality; Rockville, MD; 2010.
 111. US Preventive Services Task Force. USPSTF A and B recommendations. 
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/uspstf-a-
and-b-recommendations/. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 112. Spence JC, Lee RE. Toward a comprehensive model of physical activity. 
Psychol Sport Exerc. 2003;4:7–24.
 113. Haggis C, Sims-Gould J, Winters M, Gutteridge K, McKay HA. 
Sustained impact of community-based physical activity interven-
tions: key elements for success. BMC Public Health. 2013;13:892. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2458-13-892.
 114. Williams NH, Hendry M, France B, Lewis R, Wilkinson C. Effectiveness of exer-
cise-referral schemes to promote physical activity in adults: systematic review. 
Br J Gen Pract. 2007;57:979–986. doi: 10.3399/096016407782604866.
 115. Pavey TG, Taylor AH, Fox KR, Hillsdon M, Anokye N, Campbell JL, Foster 
C, Green C, Moxham T, Mutrie N, Searle J, Trueman P
, Taylor RS. Effect 
of exercise referral schemes in primary care on physical activity and im-
proving health outcomes: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 
2011;343:d6462.
 116. Heath GW, Kolade VO, Haynes JW. Exercise Is Medicine: a pilot study 
linking primary care with community physical activity support. Prev Med 
Rep. 2015;2:492–497. doi:10.1016/j.pmedr.2015.06.004.
 117. Dalziel K, Segal L, Elley CR. Cost utility analysis of physical activity coun-
selling in general practice. Aust N Z J Public Health. 2006;30:57–63.
 118. Edwards RT, Linck P
, Hounsome N, Raisanen L, Williams N, Moore L, 
Murphy S. Cost-effectiveness of a national exercise referral programme 
for primary care patients in Wales: results of a randomised controlled trial. 
BMC Public Health. 2013;13:1021. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-13-1021.
 119. Garrett S, Elley CR, Rose SB, O’Dea D, Lawton BA, Dowell AC. Are physical 
activity interventions in primary care and the community cost-effective? 
A systematic review of the evidence. Br J Gen Pract. 2011;61:e125–e133. 
doi: 10.3399/bjgp11X561249.
 120. Nguyen HQ, Ackermann RT, Maciejewski M, Berke E, Patrick M, Williams 
B, LoGerfo JP
. Managed-Medicare health club benefit and reduced health 
care costs among older adults. Prev Chronic Dis. 2008;5:A14.
 121. Ackermann RT, Williams B, Nguyen HQ, Berke EM, Maciejewski ML, 
LoGerfo JP
. Healthcare cost differences with participation in a commu-
nity-based group physical activity benefit for Medicare managed care 
health plan members. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008;56:1459–1465. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2008.01804.x.
 122. Nguyen HQ, Maciejewski ML, Gao S, Lin E, Williams B, Logerfo JP
. Health 
care use and costs associated with use of a health club membership ben-
efit in older adults with diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2008;31:1562–1567. 
doi: 10.2337/dc08-0624.
 123. Eakin EG, Brown WJ, Marshall AL, Mummery K, Larsen E. Physical activity 
promotion in primary care: bridging the gap between research and practice. 
Am J Prev Med. 2004;27:297–303. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2004.07.012.
 124. Grandes G, Sanchez A, Sanchez-Pinilla RO, Torcal J, Montoya I, 
Lizarraga K, Serra J; PEPAF Group. Effectiveness of physical activity ad-
vice and prescription by physicians in routine primary care: a cluster 
randomized trial. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169:694–701. doi: 10.1001/
archinternmed.2009.23.
 125. Estabrooks PA, Glasgow RE. Translating effective clinic-based physical 
activity interventions into practice. Am J Prev Med. 2006;31(suppl):S45–
S56. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2006.06.019.
 126. Lobelo F, Stoutenberg M, Hutber A. The Exercise is Medicine global 
health initiative: a 2014 update. Br J Sports Med. 2014;48:1627–1633. 
doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2013-093080.
 127. Aittasalo M, Miilunpalo S, Kukkonen-Harjula K, Pasanen M. A random-
ized intervention of physical activity promotion and patient self-moni-
toring in primary health care. Prev Med. 2006;42:40–46. doi: 10.1016/j.
ypmed.2005.10.003.
 128. Institute of Medicine. Capturing Social and Behavioral Domains and 
Measures in Electronic Health Records. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press; 2014.
 129. Coleman KJ, Ngor E, Reynolds K, Quinn VP
, Koebnick C, Young DR, 
Sternfeld B, Sallis RE. Initial validation of an exercise “vital sign” in elec-
tronic medical records. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44:2071–2076. doi: 
10.1249/MSS.0b013e3182630ec1.
 130. Lobelo F, Kelli HM, Tejedor SC, Pratt M, McConnell MV, Martin SS, Welk 
GJ. The wild wild west: a framework to integrate mHealth software ap-
plications and wearables to support physical activity assessment, coun-
seling and interventions for cardiovascular disease risk reduction. Prog 
Cardiovasc Dis. 2016;58:584–594. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2016.02.007.
 131. Helmerhorst HJ, Brage S, Warren J, Besson H, Ekelund U. A system-
atic review of reliability and objective criterion-related validity of physi-
cal activity questionnaires. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2012;9:103. doi: 
10.1186/1479-5868-9-103.
 132. van Poppel MN, Chinapaw MJ, Mokkink LB, van Mechelen W, Terwee 
CB. Physical activity questionnaires for adults: a systematic review 
of measurement properties. Sports Med. 2010;40:565–600. doi: 
10.2165/11531930-000000000-00000.
 133. Silsbury Z, Goldsmith R, Rushton A. Systematic review of the mea-
surement properties of self-report physical activity questionnaires in 
healthy adult populations. BMJ Open. 2015;5:e008430. doi: 10.1136/
bmjopen-2015-008430.
 134. Forsén L, Loland NW, Vuillemin A, Chinapaw MJ, van Poppel MN, 
Mokkink LB, van Mechelen W, Terwee CB. Self-administered physical ac-
tivity questionnaires for the elderly: a systematic review of measurement 
properties. Sports Med. 2010;40:601–623. doi: 10.2165/11531350- 
000000000-00000.
 135. Milton K, Bull FC, Bauman A. Reliability and validity testing of a single-
item physical activity measure. Br J Sports Med. 2011;45:203–208. doi: 
10.1136/bjsm.2009.068395.
 136. Ahmad S, Harris T, Limb E, Kerry S, Victor C, Ekelund U, Iliffe S, Whincup 
P
, Beighton C, Ussher M, Cook DG. Evaluation of reliability and validity 
of the General Practice Physical Activity Questionnaire (GPPAQ) in 60-
74 year old primary care patients. BMC Fam Pract. 2015;16:113. doi: 
10.1186/s12875-015-0324-8.
 137. Ball TJ, Joy EA, Goh TL, Hannon JC, Gren LH, Shaw JM. Validity of two 
brief primary care physical activity questionnaires with accelerometry in 
clinic staff. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2015:16:100–108. doi: 10.1017/
S1463423613000479.
 138. Topolski TD, LoGerfo J, Patrick DL, Williams B, Walwick J, Patrick MB. The 
Rapid Assessment of Physical Activity (RAPA) among older adults. Prev 
Chronic Dis. 2006;3:A118.
 139. Health Promotion Research Center. Rapid Assessment of Physical Activity 
(RAPA). http://www.depts.washington.edu/hprc/rapa. Accessed January 
23, 2018.
 140. Milton K, Clemes S, Bull F. Can a single question provide an accurate 
measure of physical activity? Br J Sports Med. 2013;47:44–48. doi: 
10.1136/bjsports-2011-090899.
 141. Meriwether RA, McMahon PM, Islam N, Steinmann WC. Physical activ-
ity assessment: validation of a clinical assessment tool. Am J Prev Med. 
2006;31:484–491. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2006.08.021.
 142. Godin 
G. 
The 
Godin-Shephard 
Leisure-Time 
Physical 
Activity 
Questionnaire. Heal Fit J Canada. 2011;4:18–22.
 143. Godin G, Shephard RJ. A simple method to assess exercise behavior in 
the community. Can J Appl Sport Sci. 1985;10:141–146.
 144. Wendel-Vos GC, Schuit AJ, Saris WH, Kromhout D. Reproducibility and 
relative validity of the short questionnaire to assess health-enhancing 
physical activity. J Clin Epidemiol. 2003;56:1163–1169.
 145. Heron N, Tully MA, McKinley MC, Cupples ME. Physical activity assess-
ment in practice: a mixed methods study of GPPAQ use in primary care. 
BMC Fam Pract. 2014;15:11. doi: 10.1186/1471-2296-15-11.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e520
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 146. Harris C, Watson K. A data users guide to the BRFSS physical activity 
questions. http://www.cdc.gov/brfss/pdf/PA RotatingCore_BRFSSGuide_
508Comp_07252013FINAL.pdf. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 147. Yore MM, Ham SA, Ainsworth BE, Kruger J, Reis JP
, Kohl HW 3rd, 
Macera CA. Reliability and validity of the instrument used in BRFSS to 
assess physical activity. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007;39:1267–1274. doi: 
10.1249/mss.0b013e3180618bbe.
 148. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2013 Behavioral Risk Factor 
Surveillance System Questionnaire. 2013. https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/
questionnaires/pdf-ques/2013-BRFSS_English.pdf. Accessed January 23, 
2018.
 149. Marshall AL, Smith BJ, Bauman AE, Kaur S. Reliability and validity of a 
brief physical activity assessment for use by family doctors. Br J Sports 
Med. 2005;39:294–297. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2004.013771.
 150. Smith BJ, Marshall AL, Huang N. Screening for physical activity in fam-
ily practice: evaluation of two brief assessment tools. Am J Prev Med. 
2005;29:256–264. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2005.07.005.
 151. Sallis JF, Haskell WL, Wood PD, Fortmann SP
, Rogers T, Blair SN, 
Paffenbarger RS Jr. Physical activity assessment methodology in the Five-
City Project. Am J Epidemiol. 1985;121:91–106.
 152. Blair SN, Haskell WL, Ho P
, Paffenbarger RS Jr, Vranizan KM, Farquhar 
JW, Wood PD. Assessment of habitual physical activity by a seven-day re-
call in a community survey and controlled experiments. Am J Epidemiol. 
1985;122:794–804.
 153. Suzuki I, Kawakami N, Shimizu H. Reliability and validity of a question-
naire for assessment of energy expenditure and physical activity in epide-
miological studies. J Epidemiol. 1998;8:152–159.
 154. Taylor-Piliae RE, Norton LC, Haskell WL, Mahbouda MH, Fair JM, Iribarren 
C, Hlatky MA, Go AS, Fortmann SP
. Validation of a new brief physical ac-
tivity survey among men and women aged 60-69 years. Am J Epidemiol. 
2006;164:598–606. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwj248.
 155. Fitzgerald L, Ozemek C, Jarrett H, Kaminsky LA. Accelerometer validation 
of questionnaires used in clinical settings to assess MVPA. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc. 2015;47:1538–1542. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000565.
 156. Vega-López S, Chavez A, Farr KJ, Ainsworth BE. Validity and reliability 
of two brief physical activity questionnaires among Spanish-speaking 
individuals of Mexican descent. BMC Res Notes. 2014;7:29. doi: 
10.1186/1756-0500-7-29.
 157. Joseph RP
, Keller C, Adams MA, Ainsworth BE. Validity of two brief physi-
cal activity questionnaires with accelerometers among African-American 
women. Prim Health Care Res Dev. 2016;17:265–276. doi: 10.1017/
S1463423615000390.
 158. Young DR, Coleman KJ, Ngor E, Reynolds K, Sidell M, Sallis RE. 
Associations between physical activity and cardiometabolic risk factors 
assessed in a southern California health care system, 2010–2012. Prev 
Chronic Dis. 2014;11:E219. doi:10.5888/pcd11.140196.
 159. McConnell MV, Shcherbina A, Pavlovic A, Homburger JR, Goldfeder 
RL, Waggot D, Cho MK, Rosenberger ME, Haskell WL, Myers J, 
Champagne MA, Mignot E, Landray M, Tarassenko L, Harrington 
RA, Yeung AC, Ashley EA. Feasibility of obtaining measures of life-
style from a smartphone app: the MyHeart Counts Cardiovascular 
Health Study. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:67–76. doi: 10.1001/jamacardio. 
2016.4395.
 160. Sallis R, Franklin B, Joy L, Ross R, Sabgir D, Stone J. Strategies for 
promoting physical activity in clinical practice. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 
2015;57:375–386. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2014.10.003.
 161. Sallis RE, Baggish AL, Franklin BA, Whitehead JR. The call for a physical 
activity vital sign in clinical practice. Am J Med. 2016;129:903–905. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjmed.2016.05.005.
 162. Evenson KR, Goto MM, Furberg RD. Systematic review of the validity and 
reliability of consumer-wearable activity trackers. Int J Behav Nutr Phys 
Act. 2015;12:159. doi: 10.1186/s12966-015-0314-1.
 163. Kooiman TJ, Dontje ML, Sprenger SR, Krijnen WP
, van der Schans CP
, de 
Groot M. Reliability and validity of ten consumer activity trackers. BMC 
Sports Sci Med Rehabil. 2015;7:24. doi: 10.1186/s13102-015-0018-5.
 164. Kim Y, Welk GJ. Criterion validity of competing accelerometry-based 
activity monitoring devices. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015;47:2456–2463. 
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000691.
 165. Lee J-M, Kim Y, Welk GJ. Validity of consumer-based physical activ-
ity monitors. Med Sci Sport Exerc. 2014;46:1840–1848. doi:10.1249/
MSS.0000000000000287.
 166. Murakami H, Kawakami R, Nakae S, Nakata Y, Ishikawa-Takata K, Tanaka 
S, Miyachi M. Accuracy of wearable devices for estimating total energy 
expenditure: comparison with metabolic chamber and doubly labeled 
water method. JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176:702–703. doi: 10.1001/
jamainternmed.2016.0152.
 167. Trost SG, O’Neil M. Clinical use of objective measures of physical activity. 
Br J Sports Med. 2014;48:178–181. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2013-093173.
 168. Van Remoortel H, Raste Y, Louvaris Z, Giavedoni S, Burtin C, Langer D, 
Wilson F, Rabinovich R, Vogiatzis I, Hopkinson NS, Troosters T; PROactive 
Consortium. Validity of six activity monitors in chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease: a comparison with indirect calorimetry. PLoS One. 
2012;7:e39198. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039198.
 169. Wallen MP
, Gomersall SR, Keating SE, Wisløff U, Coombes JS. Accuracy 
of heart rate watches: implications for weight management. PLoS One. 
2016;11:e0154420. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154420.
 170. Lyons EJ, Lewis ZH, Mayrsohn BG, Rowland JL. Behavior change tech-
niques implemented in electronic lifestyle activity monitors: a system-
atic content analysis. J Med Internet Res. 2014;16:e192. doi: 10.2196/
jmir.3469.
 171. research2guidance. mHealth App Developer Economics 2014. https:// 
research2guidance.com/product/mhealth-app-developer-economics-2014/. 
 
Accessed January 23, 2018.
 172. Knight E, Stuckey MI, Prapavessis H, Petrella RJ. Public health guidelines 
for physical activity: is there an app for that? A review of Android and 
Apple app stores. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2015;3:e43. doi: 10.2196/
mhealth.4003.
 173. Case MA, Burwick HA, Volpp KG, Patel MS. Accuracy of smartphone ap-
plications and wearable devices for tracking physical activity data. JAMA. 
2015;313:625–626. doi:10.1001/jama.2014.17841.
 174. Rosenberger ME, Buman MP
, Haskell WL, McConnell MV, Carstensen 
LL. Twenty-four hours of sleep, sedentary behavior, and physical activity 
with nine wearable devices. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2016;48:457–465. 
doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000778.
 175. Physical Activity Monitoring for Fitness Wearables: Step Counting. 
Consumer Technology Association. Vol ANSI/CTA-2.; 2016. https:// 
standards.cta.tech/kwspub/published_docs/CTA-2056-Preview.pdf. 
Accessed January 23, 2018.
 176. Open mHealth. Open mHealth: the first and only open standard for mo-
bile health data. http://www.openmhealth.org/. 2015. Accessed January 
23, 2018.
 177. Personal Connected Health Alliance. Personal connected health. http://
www.pchalliance.org/. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 178. Versel N. Apple’s HealthKit connects With Mayo and Epic, but don’t 
call it revolutionary. http://www.forbes.com/sites/neilversel/2014/06/03/
apples-healthkit-connects-with-mayo-and-epic-but-dont-call-it- 
revolutionary/. 2014. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 179. Pennic F. Cerner launches Apple watch app, push HealthKit data to 
Cerner Millennium. http://www.hitconsultant.net/2015/04/10/cerner-
launches-apple-watch-app/. 2015. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 180. MobiHealth News. Ochsner’s O Bar connects patients with more than 
200 health apps. 2015. http://www.mobihealthnews.com/40565/
ochsners-o-bar-connects-patients-with-more-than-200-health-apps. 
Accessed January 23, 2018.
 181. MobiHealth News. UnitedHealthCare to offer customized Fitbit Charge 
2 for incentive-based employee wellness program. 2017. http://www.
mobihealthnews.com/content/unitedhealthcare-offer-customized- 
fitbit-charge-2-incentive-based-employee-wellness-program. Accessed 
January 23, 2018.
 182. Horner-Johnson W, Krahn G, Andresen E, Hall T; Rehabilitation Research 
and Training Center Expert Panel on Health Status Measurement. 
Developing summary scores of health-related quality of life for a popula-
tion-based survey. Public Health Rep. 2009;124:103–110. doi: 10.1177/ 
003335490912400113.
 183. Hébert ET, Caughy MO, Shuval K. Primary care providers’ perceptions of 
physical activity counselling in a clinical setting: a systematic review. Br J 
Sports Med. 2012;46:625–631. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2011-090734.
 184. Holtrop JS, Dosh SA, Torres T, Thum YM. The Community Health 
Educator Referral Liaison (CHERL): a primary care practice role for pro-
moting healthy behaviors. Am J Prev Med. 2008;35(suppl):S365–S372. 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.012.
 185. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 
2020. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services. 
https://www.healthypeople.gov/. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 186. Pate RR. A national physical activity plan for the United States. J Phys Act 
Health. 2009;6(suppl):S157–S158.
 187. National Prevention Strategy. Washington, DC: National Prevention 
Council; 2011.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559 
May 1, 2018
e521
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 188. Jacobson DM, Strohecker L, Compton MT, Katz DL. Physical activity 
counseling in the adult primary care setting: position statement of the 
American College of Preventive Medicine. Am J Prev Med. 2005;29:158–
162. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2005.04.009.
 189. Goetzel RZ, Staley P
, Ogden L, Stange P
, Fox J, Spangler J, Tabrizi M, 
Beckowski M, Kowlessar N, Glasgow RE, Taylor MV, Richards C. A frame-
work for patient-centered health risk assessments: providing health 
promotion and disease prevention services to Medicare beneficiaries. 
Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention; 2011. https://www.cdc.gov/policy/hst/
hra/frameworkforhra.pdf. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 190. Klabunde CN, Clauser SB, Liu B, Pronk NP
, Ballard-Barbash R, Huang TT, 
Smith AW. Organization of primary care practice for providing energy 
balance care. Am J Health Promot. 2014;28:e67–e80. doi: 10.4278/
ajhp.121219-QUAN-626.
 191. Polak R, Pojednic RM, Phillips EM. Lifestyle medicine education. Am J 
Lifestyle Med. 2015;9:361–367. doi: 10.1177/1559827615580307.
 192. American Academy of Pediatrics. Using time as the key factor for 
evaluation and management visits. https://www.aap.org/en-us/profes-
sional-resources/practice-support/Coding-at-the-AAP/Pages/Using-Time-
to-Report-Outpatient-EM-Services.aspx. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 193. HealthCare.gov. Preventive care benefits for adults. https://www.health-
care.gov/preventive-care-adults/.
 194. Riebe D, Franklin BA, Thompson PD, Garber CE, Whitfield GP
, Magal M, 
Pescatello LS. Updating ACSM’s recommendations for exercise prepartici-
pation health screening. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2015;47:2473–2479. doi: 
10.1249/MSS.0000000000000664.
 195. American College of Sports Medicine. ACSM Exercise Is Medicine Credential. 
http://certification.acsm.org/exercise-is-medicine-credential. Accessed 
January 23, 2018.
 196. American College of Sports Medicine. ACSM ProFinder. http:// 
certification.acsm.org/pro-finder. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 197. Atlanta Community fitness program relational database. https://www.
eimsc.eimconnection.com/. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 198. Lewis CE, Clancy C, Leake B, Schwartz JS. The practices of internists. Ann 
Intern Med. 1991;114:54–58.
 199. Hivert MF, Arena R, Forman DE, Kris-Etherton PM, McBride PE, Pate 
RR, Spring B, Trilk J, Van Horn LV, Kraus WE; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Physical Activity Committee of the Council on Lifestyle 
and Cardiometabolic Health; the Behavior Change Committee, a joint 
committee of the Council on Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health and 
the Council on Epidemiology and Prevention; the Exercise, Cardiac 
Rehabilitation, and Secondary Prevention Committee of the Council 
on Clinical Cardiology; and the Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke 
Nursing. Medical training to achieve competency in lifestyle counseling: 
an essential foundation for prevention and treatment of cardiovascular 
diseases and other chronic medical conditions: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e308–e327. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000442.
 200. Dacey ML, Kennedy MA, Polak R, Phillips EM. Physical activity counsel-
ing in medical school education: a systematic review. Med Educ Online. 
2014;19:24325.
 201. Duperly J, Lobelo F, Segura C, Sarmiento F, Herrera D, Sarmiento OL, 
Frank E. The association between Colombian medical students’ healthy 
personal habits and a positive attitude toward preventive counsel-
ing: cross-sectional analyses. BMC Public Health. 2009;9:218. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2458-9-218.
 202. Lobelo F, Duperly J, Frank E. Physical activity habits of doctors and 
medical students influence their counselling practices. Br J Sports Med. 
2009;43:89–92. doi: 10.1136/bjsm.2008.055426.
 203. Frank E, Carrera JS, Elon L, Hertzberg VS. Predictors of US medical stu-
dents’ prevention counseling practices. Prev Med. 2007;44:76–81. doi: 
10.1016/j.ypmed.2006.07.018.
 204. Frank E, Dresner Y, Shani M, Vinker S. The association between physi-
cians’ and patients’ preventive health practices. CMAJ. 2013;185:649–
653. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.121028.
 205. Yu Y, Yang Y, Li Z, Zhou B, Zhao Y, Yuan S, Zhang R, Sebranek M, 
Veerman L, Li M, Gong E, Chen S, Ma W, Huang L, Cho K, Leeder S, Yan 
L. The association between medical students’ lifestyles and their attitudes 
towards preventive counseling in different countries. BMC Public Health. 
2015;15:1124. doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-2458-y.
 206. Frank E, Tong E, Lobelo F, Carrera J, Duperly J. Physical activity levels 
and counseling practices of U.S. medical students. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2008;40:413–421. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31815ff399.
 207. Fletcher J. Exemplary medicine: why doctors should practise what they 
preach. CMAJ. 2013;185:635. doi:10.1503/cmaj.130514.
 208. Hauer KE, Carney PA, Chang A, Satterfield J. Behavior change coun-
seling curricula for medical trainees: a systematic review. Acad Med. 
2012;87:956–968. doi: 10.1097/ACM.0b013e31825837be.
 209. Garry JP
, Diamond JJ, Whitley TW. Physical activity curricula in medical 
schools. Acad Med. 2002;77:818–820.
 210. Banday AH, Want FA, Alris FF, Alrayes MF, Alenzi MJ. A cross-section-
al study on the prevalence of physical activity among primary health 
care physicians in Aljouf region of Saudi Arabia. Mater Sociomed. 
2015;27:263–266. doi: 10.5455/msm.2015.27.263-266.
 211. Biernat E, Poznańska A, Gajewski AK. Is physical activity of medi-
cal personnel a role model for their patients. Ann Agric Environ Med. 
2012;19:707–710.
 212. Henning MA, Hawken SJ, Hill AG. The quality of life of New Zealand 
doctors and medical students: what can be done to avoid burnout? N Z 
Med J. 2009;122:102–110.
 213. Abramson S, Stein J, Schaufele M, Frates E, Rogan S. Personal exercise 
habits and counseling practices of primary care physicians: a national 
survey. Clin J Sport Med. 2000;10:40–48.
 214. Morishita Y, Miki A, Okada M, Tsuboi S, Ishibashi K, Ando Y, Kusano 
E. Association of primary care physicians’ exercise habits and their age, 
specialty, and workplace. J Multidiscip Healthc. 2013;6:409–414. doi: 
10.2147/JMDH.S52262.
 215. Lee IM, Hennekens CH, Berger K, Buring JE, Manson JE. Exercise and risk 
of stroke in male physicians. Stroke. 1999;30:1–6.
 216. Stevenson LM, McKenzie DC. Physicians’ exercise habits: most be-
lieve in exercise but don’t do enough. Can Fam Physician. 1992;38: 
2015–2018.
 217. Arena R, Lavie CJ, Hivert MF, Williams MA, Briggs PD, Guazzi M. Who 
will deliver comprehensive healthy lifestyle interventions to combat non-
communicable disease? Introducing the healthy lifestyle practitioner dis-
cipline. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2016;14:15–22. doi:10.1586/14779
072.2016.1107477.
 218. Benzer JK, Cramer IE, Burgess JF Jr, Mohr DC, Sullivan JL, Charns MP
. 
How personal and standardized coordination impact implementation 
of integrated care. BMC Health Serv Res. 2015;15:448. doi: 10.1186/
s12913-015-1079-6.
 219. Tully MA, McBride C, Heron L, Hunter RF. The validation of Fibit Zip™ 
physical activity monitor as a measure of free-living physical activity. BMC 
Res Notes. 2014;7:952. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-952.
 220. Fitbit, Inc. Fitbit extends corporate wellness offering with HIPAA com-
pliant capabilities. https://www.investor.fitbit.com/press/press-releases/
press-release-details/2015/Fitbit-Extends-Corporate-Wellness-Offering-
with-HIPAA-Compliant-Capabilities/default.aspx. Accessed June 26, 
2017.
 221. Bennett B. Fitbit Zip review: a capable, affordable health tracker. http://
www.cnet.com/products/fitbit-zip/. 2013. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 222. Fitbit. Help. https://www.help.fitbit.com/. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 223. Validic. Validic delivers one connection to a world of mobile health data. 
https://www.validic.com/. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 224. Fitbit Developer API. https://www.dev.fitbit.com/. Accessed June 26, 
2017.
 225. Bai Y, Welk GJ, Nam YH, Lee JA, Kim Y, Meier NF, Dixon PM. Comparison of 
consumer and research monitors under semistructured settings. Med Sci 
Sport Exerc. 2015;48:151–158. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000727.
 226. PiezoRx. 
StepsCount. 
https://www.stepscount.com/product/piezorx/. 
Accessed June 26, 2017.
 227. Wojcik WR. Validity of Step Count and Intensity Related Physical Activity 
Measures of Several Physical Activity Monitoring Devices [thesis]. 
Wofville, Nova Scotia, Canada: Acadia University; 2016.
 228. Hickey AM, Freedson PS. Utility of consumer physical activity trackers 
as an intervention tool in cardiovascular disease prevention and treat-
ment. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2016;58:613–619. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad. 
2016.02.006.
 229. Rainmaker DC. Garmin Vivofit in-depth review. http://www.dcrainmaker.
com/2014/03/garmin-vivofit-review.html. 2014. Accessed January 23, 
2018.
 230. Garmin. 
vivofit®. 
https://www.buy.garmin.com/en-US/US/p/143405. 
Accessed June 26, 2017.
 231. Tractivity [software]. http://www2.tractivityonline.com/software/. Accessed 
 
June 26, 2017.
 232. Kineteks Corp. Tractivity. http://www.kinetekscorp.com/Products/tractivity. 
html. Accessed June 26, 2017.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Lobelo et al 
PA Promotion in Health Care
May 1, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e495–e522. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000559
e522
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 233. Body moment. Tractivity review. https://www.bodymoment.org/tractivity- 
review/. Accessed July 16, 2017.
 234. Stackpool CM, Porcari JP
, Mikat R, Gillette C, Foster C. ACE-sponsored re-
search: are activity trackers accurate? 2015. https://www.acefitness.org/
education-and-resources/professional/prosource/january-2015/5216/
ace-sponsored-research-are-activity-trackers-accurate. Accessed January 
23, 2018.
 235. UP by Jawbone. Find the best fitness tracker for you. https://www. 
jawbone.com/up/trackers. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 236. Intel. Safety recall notice for all Basis Peak watches. http://www.mybasis.
com/. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 237. Nokia. Nokia Steel HR. https://health.nokia.com/us/en/steel-hr. Accessed 
January 23, 2018.
 238. Langley H. Withings Pulse Ox tips: get more from your lifestyle tracker. 
http://www.wareable.com/fitness-trackers/withings-pulse-tips-tricks-
guide. 2014. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 239. Temple R. Withings Pulse Ox review: pulse tracking and blood oxygen 
tracking add little but this is still an inviting wrist wrangler. http://www.
techradar.com/us/reviews/wearables/withings-pulse-ox-1280917/review. 
2015. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 240. Samsung. Samsung Gear S2. http://www.samsung.com/global/galaxy/
gear-s2/. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 241. Samsung. Samsung Gear S2 SM-R720 User Manual. http://www.down-
loadcenter.samsung.com/content/UM/201607/20160726045448842/
WEA_SM-R720__GEAR-S2-Sport_EN_UM_TZ_FINAL_WAC.pdf. 
Accessed June 26, 2017.
 242. Samsung Developers. Samsung Gear watch designer now covers all Gear 
devices. http://www.developer.samsung.com/gear. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 243. Stein S. Misfit Shine review: fitness tracker as futuristic jewelry. Cnet. 
https://www.cnet.com/products/misfit-shine/review/. 2013. Accessed 
January 23, 2018.
 244. Misfit. Misfit Shine Fitness + Sleep Tracker. https://www.misfit.com/ 
misfit-shine. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 245. Amazon. Omron HJ-203 pedometer with activity tracker. https://
www.amazon.com/Omron-HJ-203-Pedometer-Activity-Tracker/dp/
B003IHWKVY?th=1. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 246. Lamkin P
. Adidas miCoach Fit Smart review. http://www.wareable.
com/fitness-trackers/adidas-micoach-fit-smart-review. 2015. Accessed 
January 23, 2018.
 247. Branscombe M. Fitness and health gadgets: tracking your life. http://www.
tomsguide.com/us/Fitbit-Adidas-Health-and-Fitness,review-1673-3.html. 
2011. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 248. Tanita. AM-160 Bluetooth Activity Monitor. http://www.tanita.com/es/
am-160/. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 249. Vandrico Inc. Metria IH1 Wearable Device. http://www.vandrico.com/
wearables/device/metria-ih1. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 250. Vancive Medical Technologies. MetriaTM Wearable Sensor Technology 
Sensing the future. https://www.vancive.averydennison.com/content/
dam/averydennison/Avery-Dennison-Medical-Solutions/Global/English/
Documents/BROC-Vancive-Metria-Oct2012.pdf. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 251. Moves. https://www.moves-app.com/. 2016. Accessed January 23, 
2018.
 252. Duffy J. Moves (for iPhone). http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817, 
2454045,00.asp. 2014. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 253. Philips. DirectLife Activity Program DL8700/01. http://www.usa.philips.
com/c-p/DL8700_01/-. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 254. Jary S. Fitbit trackers vs Apple Watch: battle of the fitness smartwatches 
and activity trackers. https://www.techadvisor.co.uk/feature/wearable-
tech/fitbit-vs-apple-watch-2018-3612954/. 2016. Accessed January 23, 
2018.
 255. Apple. Watch series 3. https://www.apple.com/watch/. Accessed June 
26, 2017.
 256. Bumgardner W. Yamax Digi-Walker SW-200 Pedometer. https://www.
verywell.com/yamax-digi-walker-sw-200-pedometer-3432940. 2016. 
Accessed January 23, 2018.
 257. Crosby K. Yamax Digi-walker SW700, 10,000 steps pedometer review. 
http://www.pedometersaustralia-blog.com/yamax-digi-walker-sw700-
10000-steps-pedometer-review/. 2011. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 258. Yamax. http://www.yamaxx.com/. 2016. Accessed January 23, 2018.
 259. Mio Global: Strapless Heart Rate Monitor Watch and Activity Fitness 
Tracker. https://www.mioglobal.com/. Accessed June 26, 2017.
 260. Brownie SM, Thomas J. A single competency-based education and train-
ing and competency-based career framework for the Australian health 
workforce: discussing the potential value add. Int J Health Policy Manag. 
2014;3:215–221. doi: 10.15171/ijhpm.2014.88.
 261. Ely EK, Gruss SM, Luman ET, Gregg EW, Ali MK, Nhim K, Rolka DB, 
Albright AL. A national effort to prevent type 2 diabetes: participant-level 
 
evaluation of CDC’s National Diabetes Prevention Program. Diabetes 
Care. 2017;40:1331–1341. doi:10.2337/dc16-2099.
 262. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Proposed national cover-
age determination for supervised exercise therapy (SET) for symp-
tomatic peripheral artery disease (PAD) (CAG-00449N). 2017. https://
www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/details/nca-decision-memo.
aspx?NCAId=287. Accessed January 23, 2018.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
