 Original Article
Pain control in orthodontics using a micropulse vibration device:
A randomized clinical trial
Wendy D. Lobrea; Brent J. Callegarib; Gary Gardnerc; Curtis M. Marshd; Anneke C. Bushe;
William J. Dunnf
ABSTRACT
Objective: To investigate the relationship between a micropulse vibration device and pain
perception during orthodontic treatment.
Materials and Methods: This study was a parallel group, randomized clinical trial. A total of 58
patients meeting eligibility criteria were assigned using block allocation to one of two groups: an
experimental group using the vibration device or a control group (n 5 29 for each group). Patients
used the device for 20 minutes daily. Patients rated pain intensity on a visual analog scale at
appropriate intervals during the weeks after the separator or archwire appointment. Data were
analyzed using repeated measures analysis of variance at a 5 .05.
Results: During the 4-month test period, significant differences between the micropulse vibration
device group and the control group for overall pain (P 5 .002) and biting pain (P 5 .003) were
identified. The authors observed that perceived pain was highest at the beginning of the month,
following archwire adjustment.
Conclusion: The micropulse vibration device significantly lowered the pain scores for overall pain
and biting pain during the 4-month study period. (Angle Orthod. 2016;86:625–630.)
KEY WORDS: Pain; Vibration; Orthodontics
INTRODUCTION
Pain is a common side effect of orthodontic treatment.
It is a complex phenomenon involving multiple variants
and is influenced by factors such as age, gender,
individual pain threshold, and amount of force applied.1
In orthodontics, a mechanical stimulus is introduced by
placing fixed appliances on the teeth resulting in tooth
movement. To achieve this movement, forces are
applied to the dentoalveolar complex resulting in
inflammation or ischemia to the periodontal ligament
(PDL) with subsequent release of histamine, bradykinin,
prostaglandins, substance P, and serotonin.2 These
mediators stimulate local nerve endings and send pain
signals to the brain.
Many methods have been used to alleviate pain
arising from orthodontic origins. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) are the most common
method employed for pain relief. NSAIDS block the
formation of arachidonic acid in the production cycle of
prostaglandin, which would lead to pain.3 Other
methods include low-level laser therapy,4 acupunc-
ture,5 transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation,6
vibratory stimulation of the PDL,7 viscoelastic bite
wafers8, and even chewing gum.9 These methods can
relieve compression of the PDL and restore normal
vascular and lymphatic circulation to eliminate edema
and inflammation, reducing pain.10
The focus of this study is vibratory stimulation to
reduce pain. Previous studies have demonstrated that
vibration effectively reduces pain originating from teeth
or the surrounding tissues.11 Vibration may help relieve
a Orthodontic Resident, Tri-Service Orthodontic Program, Air
Force Postgraduate Dental School, JBSA-Lackland, Tex.
b Program Director, Tri-Service Orthodontic Program, Air
Force Postgraduate Dental School, JBSA-Lackland, Tex.
c Senior Orthodontic Training Officer, Tri-Service Orthodontic
Program, Air Force Postgraduate Dental School, JBSA-Lack-
land, Tex.
d Air Force Consultant in Orthodontics, Tri-Service Orthodon-
tic Program, Air Force Postgraduate Dental School, JBSA-
Lackland, Tex.
e Clinical Research Administrator and Epidemiologist, Wilford
Hall Ambulatory Surgical Center, JBSA-Lackland, Tex.
f Air Force Consultant in Materials, Devices and Investiga-
tions, JBSA-Lackland, Tex.
Corresponding author: Dr William Dunn, Air Force Consultant
in Materials, Devices and Investigations, 1615 Truemper Street,
JBSA-Lackland, TX 78236
(e-mail: William.dunn@us.af.mil)
Accepted: September 2015. Submitted: July 2015.
Published Online: October 23, 2015
G 2016 by The EH Angle Education and Research Foundation,
Inc.
DOI: 10.2319/072115-492.1
625
Angle Orthodontist, Vol 86, No 4, 2016
 compression of the PDL, promoting normal circulation
to prevent the proliferation of inflammatory by-prod-
ucts. Another possibility is the “gate control” theory,
which suggests that pain can be reduced by simulta-
neous activation of nerve fibers that conduct non-
noxious stimuli.12
AcceleDentH (OrthoAccel Technologies Inc, Bellaire,
TX) is patented as a “vibrating orthodontic remodeling
device” (U.S. Department of Commerce’s United
States Patent and Trademark Office, 2013). It is
a U.S. Food and Drug Administration–approved, Class
II medical device designed for faster orthodontic
treatment.13 The manufacturer states that the device
applies cyclic forces to the dentition for the safe
acceleration of the bone remodeling process to
complement conventional orthodontic treatment. In
a series of rabbit experiments, Mao14 demonstrated
that cyclical forces applied at 2 N with frequencies of
0.2 and 1 Hz for 20 minutes daily, in conjunction with
typical static orthodontic forces 24 hours per day,
induced increased cranial growth, sutural separation,
and proliferation of osteoblast-like cells. The primary
purpose for using AcceleDentH is to decrease overall
orthodontic treatment time.
There are reports from clinicians who have noticed
pain reduction as an additional benefit for those
patients using AcceleDentH. The purpose of this clinical
study was to investigate the relationship between
micropulse vibration therapy for pain relief compared
to a control group of no pain therapy during the first 4
months of orthodontic tooth movement and adjustment
and to investigate whether age and gender were
significant factors in the perception of orthodontic pain.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This parallel group, randomized clinical trial was
approved by the local institutional review board (IRB)
and was determined to be no greater than minimal risk.
Informed consent was obtained from each patient in
the study, and a medical monitor was assigned to the
study. The power/sample size calculation was based
on Student’s t-test and compared the overall change
from baseline between the two groups. It was de-
termined that a sample size of 30 participants per
group would be sufficient to answer the research
question at the 95% confidence interval. Other data
were compared graphically and, if indicated, statisti-
cally over the various time points.
The study was carried out during a 4-month period
with adjustments and wire changes made at the
beginning of each month. Pain data from a visual
analog scale (VAS) were collected from each patient
daily on the first 7 days of each month after the
adjustment appointment. These scores were averaged
to determine the first week pain score. After the first
week, pain was scored once weekly for the remainder
of the month. The four weekly pain scores were
averaged to represent a monthly score for compar-
isons. Each patient had a data set of 40 pain scores
total: seven data points for the first week plus one data
point for the following 3 weeks multiplied by 4 months.
Age and gender were recorded as subvariables.
A total of 70 participants (35 per treatment group)
were selected from patients who presented for initial
orthodontic treatment. Participants were selected
based on the following inclusion criteria: healthy child
(aged 10 years and older) and adult patients approved
for comprehensive orthodontic treatment. For adoles-
cent patients meeting the requirements for inclusion,
the parent or guardian and child were informed of the
research study. Adult patients willing to participate in
the study were enrolled; adolescent patients willing to
participate were enrolled only with parent or guardian
permission. Participants were excluded from recruit-
ment if they currently had any pre-existing pain
conditions or if they were not able to comply with the
restriction on using any analgesic drugs during the
course of the study.
Participants were assigned to comparison groups
using a block allocation sequence. This sequence was
concealed from the investigators. Participants were
randomized in blocks of 10 with five patients being
allocated to each arm of the trial until all 70 patients
were randomized. For participant allocation, a comput-
er-generated list of random numbers was used. The
randomization sequence was created using Stata 9.0
statistical software (StataCorp, College Station, Tex)
with a 1:1 allocation using a random block size of 10. A
designated individual (not part of the investigative
team) performed the allocation. All participants were
given an informed consent form that was approved by
the IRB. Only the primary investigator (PI) and
associate investigators with approved human subjects
training were allowed to obtain informed consent. For
patients younger than 18 years of age, both parental or
legal guardian consent and patient assent were
required. All participants were given routine posttreat-
ment instructions and asked to complete a pain scale
survey at appropriate intervals during the weeks after
the separator or archwire appointment. The pain VAS
was in the format of a multipage booklet that contained
a series of 10-cm horizontal scales on which the
patient marked the degree of discomfort (none to worst
pain imaginable) at the indicated time periods. The
patients were instructed to make a mark on a new
scale sheet at each time interval to record the
perceived severity of pain in two categories: chewing/
biting and overall pain. Patients using the AcceleDentH
Aura micropulse vibration device were instructed to
626
LOBRE, CALLEGARI, GARDNER, MARSH, BUSH, DUNN
Angle Orthodontist, Vol 86, No 4, 2016
 mark the pain scales within 1 hour after using the
device. Patients had archwires placed and adjusted
each month. Incidence and severity of pain were
recorded by the patient after the separator or archwire
placement appointment daily for the first 7 days and
then weekly for the remainder of the month for 4
months. The PI monitored compliance regarding
usage of the device via the integrated Universal Serial
Bus (USB) interface of the AcceleDentH Aura.
Patients in both groups were directed not to take any
pain medication or analgesics, including over-the-
counter (OTC) medications and topical ointments. If
“rescue” medication was needed for pain control of any
kind, the patient was instructed to indicate on the pain
scale survey the date, time, dosage, reason, and
specific rescue medication taken. The patient re-
mained in the study if rescue medication was not used
on the day of or the day after adjustment and if the
patient did not take more than one dose of medication.
The hands-free micropulse vibration device was
used following the manufacturer’s recommendations.
The primary components of the device are the activator
and mouthpiece. The activator is battery powered and
delivers gentle micropulses (0.25 N at 30 Hz). It
includes a USB interface for downloading usage
history. The rigid inner frame of the device is made of
Makrolon 2458, a polycarbonate material. The occlusal
surface is VersaflexH CL 2250 (Vista Technologies,
Stillwater, MN), a soft, thermoplastic elastomer that is
commonly used in pacifiers and teethers. Biting on the
mouthpiece activated the device, and the vibration was
transferred to the teeth. Patients assigned to the
experimental group were instructed to use the device
for 20 minutes daily beginning on the day separators
were placed and continuing daily for the first 4 months
of leveling and aligning.
Participants were continuously reminded to complete
their VAS and record pain scores and whether they were
taking rescue medications. At the end of the 4-month
trial, patients returned the pain scale data to the PI.
Collected data were kept in a locked cabinet in a room
with restricted card-badge access. The VAS was
selected as the measurement tool because it has been
validated and used extensively in randomized trials15,16
and has shown good construct validity in comparison
with other pain measures.17 The pain VAS is a continu-
ous scale composed of a horizontal line, usually 10 cm
(100 mm) in length, anchored by two verbal descriptors,
one for each symptom extreme. For pain intensity, the
scale is most commonly anchored by “no pain” (score of
0) and “pain as bad as it could be” or “worst imaginable
pain” (score of 100 on the 100-mm scale). Data were
collected from participants who had no exclusion criteria
(n 5 29 for both groups) and were analyzed to see if
differences existed among the groups using the
vibratory device and the control groups and also
between subgroups for gender and age. Repeated-
measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to
detect differences among groups at a 5 .05.
RESULTS
Average monthly pain scores were numerically
generated from the patients’ VAS information and are
reported in Table 1. In each group, 29 of 35
participants (83%) remained in the study after the 4-
month trial. Six patients from each group were
excluded from the study. Four of six patients from
the device groups used a quantity of rescue medica-
tion that was considered excessive, mostly for non-
dental pain. The other two patients were noncompliant
with their pain diary. In the control group, three patients
used rescue medication too often (headache, body
pain) and three others were noncompliant with respect
to the pain diary. Usage compliance was verified
electronically by the USB interface in the device.
During the 4-month test period, repeated-measures
ANOVA detected significant differences between the
micropulse vibration device group and the control
group for overall pain (P 5 .002) and for biting pain
(P 5 .003) at a 5 .05. The authors also observed from
graphical data that perceived pain was highest at the
beginning of the month, following archwire adjustment.
Graphical representation of average overall pain
scores for the device and control groups during the
4-month study period is shown in Figure 1. Graphical
representation of average biting pain for the device
and control groups during the 4-month study period is
depicted in Figure 2. Stratified analysis was used for
gender and age; however, the study was not powered
adequately to look at subgroup differences. No harms
or unintended effects were noticed. All participants
Table 1.
Mean Pain Scores Numerically Generated From Patient
Visual Analog Scale Information (0–100)a
Overall Pain
Biting Pain
Month
With Device
Control
With Device
Control
1
8.78 (P b 5 .039)
17.20
14.28 (P 5 .068)
23.65
2
4.62 (P 5 .005)
13.11
8.33 (P 5 .016)
17.01
3
3.83 (P 5 .012)
9.22
5.83 (P 5 .008)
12.37
4
2.54 (P 5 .003)
8.80
4.45 (P 5 .001)
13.22
a Pain scores from the first 7 days were averaged to make the first
week score. After the first week, pain was scored once weekly for the
following 3 weeks. The four weekly pain scores were averaged again
to represent a monthly score. Univariate analysis of variance of
between-subject effects were used to detect differences between the
control groups and the groups that used the micropulse vibration
device (a 5 0.05).
b P values are compared to the corresponding control groups.
PAIN CONTROL USING MICROPULSE VIBRATION
627
Angle Orthodontist, Vol 86, No 4, 2016
 who were given a device reported that they were in
less pain when using the device.
DISCUSSION
Researchers attribute initial and delayed pain
responses following orthodontic treatment to compres-
sion and hyperalgesia of the periodontal ligament,
respectively.18 The periodontal ligament becomes
sensitive to released substances such as histamine,
bradykinin, prostaglandins, and serotonins.19 These
pain mediators are found in high levels when a pain
response occurs. Given that pain is a subjective
experience, it is difficult to assess and few in vivo
studies have measured and quantified it. In our study,
pain quickly increased and peaked at approximately 24
hours postinitial archwire or separator insertion.
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the differences in pain
perception during the 4-month study period for device
and control groups for overall and biting pain, re-
spectively. Pain scores were higher throughout the
course of treatment for biting pain. This agrees with the
current concept that sustained PDL pressure from
orthodontic adjustment decreases blood flow and
recruitment of the pain-producing substances over
time.19 Therefore, increasing blood flow to the PDL by
vibratory stimulation at regular intervals may be
effective in reducing the perception of orthodontic pain.
The lack of a placebo group is a limitation of the
study. We cannot dismiss the possibility that a placebo
effect from the device may have influenced the results.
A sham device was not used in the current study for
several reasons. First, possible skewed results could
have occurred because a bite plate could essentially
function as a bite wafer and, second, a sham device
could be interpreted as misleading or deceptive to the
patient. Murdock et al.20 found that plastic bite wafers
chewed by the patient were as effective as OTC pain
medications after initial archwire placement. Hwang et
al.21 found that pain relief occurred in 56% of patients
after using a bite wafer; however, the other 44% of the
patients reported increased discomfort. In contrast,
Otasevic et al.22 found that their bite wafer group
reported more pain than the group that avoided
masticatory activity. Because of possible unwanted
treatment effects of bite wafers on pain reporting, the
authors chose not to use a sham device that may have
a bite wafer effect.
A VAS was used in the current study for pain
assessment. This scaled survey gives the respondent
the freedom to choose the exact intensity of the pain,
and it is a reliable and sensitive method of measuring
pain and the effect of pain-reducing methods. Test–
Figure 1. Visual analog scale pain scores for overall pain.
628
LOBRE, CALLEGARI, GARDNER, MARSH, BUSH, DUNN
Angle Orthodontist, Vol 86, No 4, 2016
 retest reliability for the VAS has been shown to be very
good.17 In the absence of a gold standard for pain,
criterion validity unfortunately cannot be reliably
evaluated. For construct validity, the VAS has been
shown to be highly correlated with a five-point verbal
descriptive scale (“nil,” “mild,” “moderate,” “severe,”
and “very severe”) and a numeric rating scale (with
response options from “no pain” to “unbearable
pain”).16
Table 1 compares the pain data for the study groups
and indicates whether there were significant differ-
ences by month. The data reveal that for all groups
except one there were significantly lower pain scores
for the device groups when compared with the control
groups for overall pain and biting pain. Only the first
month data set for biting pain was not statistically
different (P 5 .068). However, when repeated-mea-
sures ANOVA was performed on all 4 months of data,
significantly lower pain scores were recorded for
overall pain and biting pain when the device was used.
Gender and age data were collected, but there was not
a sufficient number of participants to make statistical
conclusions.
Several authors have found that vibration diminishes
pain responses.23,24 However, at least one study
demonstrated no pain relief with the use of a vibratory
device.25 Vibration therapy in this randomized clinical
trial resulted in significantly lower perceived pain and
less OTC medication use. Therefore, it may be a safer,
more effective means of postorthodontic adjustment
pain control. More study is needed in this area of
vibratory stimulus and pain modulation.
CONCLUSION
N Based on the parameters of this randomized clinical
trial, the use of a micropulse vibration device
significantly reduced the perception of overall and
biting pain in patients undergoing orthodontic treat-
ment.
N Future studies on micropulse vibration are needed.
The use of a device without any occlusal extension
could be used as a placebo.
REFERENCES
1. Scheurer PA, Firestone AR, Bu
¨rgin WB. Perception of pain
as a result of orthodontic treatment with fixed appliances.
Eur J Orthod. 1996;18:349–357.
2. Lo
¨kken P, Skoglund LA, Skjelbred P. Anti-inflammatory
efficacy of treatments with aspirin and acetaminophen. Pain.
1995;60:231–233.
Figure 2. Visual analog scale pain scores for biting pain.
PAIN CONTROL USING MICROPULSE VIBRATION
629
Angle Orthodontist, Vol 86, No 4, 2016
 3. Ngan P, Wilson S, Shanfeld J, Amini H. The effect of
ibuprofen on the level of discomfort in patients undergoing
orthodontic treatment. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop.
1994;106:88–95.
4. Tortamano A, Lenzi DC, Haddad AC, Bottino MC, Do-
minguez GC, Vigorito JW. Low-level laser therapy for pain
caused by placement of the first orthodontic archwire:
a randomized clinical trial. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop.
2009;136:662–667.
5. Vachiramon A, Wang WC. Acupuncture and acupressure
techniques for reducing orthodontic post-adjustment pain.
J Contemp Dent Pract. 2005;6:163–167.
6. Roth PM, Thrash WJ. Effect of transcutaneous electrical
nerve
stimulation
for
controlling
pain
associated
with
orthodontic tooth movement. Am J Orthod Dentofacial
Orthop. 1986;90:132–138.
7. Marie SS, Powers M, Sheridan JJ. Vibratory stimulation as
a method of reducing pain after orthodontic appliance
adjustment. J Clin Orthod. 2003;37:205–208.
8. Farzanegan F, Zebarjad SM, Alizadeh S, Ahrari F. Pain
reduction after initial archwire placement in orthodontic
patients: a randomized clinical trial. Am J Orthod Dentofacial
Orthop. 2012;141:169–173.
9. Proffit WR, Fields HW. Occlusal forces in normal and long-
face children. J Dent Res. 1983;62:571–574.
10. Furstman L, Bernick S. Clinical considerations of the
periodontium. Am J Orthod. 1972;61:138–155.
11. Ottoson D, Ekblom A, Hansson P. Vibratory stimulation for
the relief of pain of dental origin. Pain. 1981;10:37–45.
12. Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain mechanisms: a new theory.
Science. 1965;150:971–979.
13. Lowe MK. Vibrating orthodontic remodeling device. US
Patent 8,939,762 filed Aug 22, 2013, issued Jan 27, 2015.
14. Mao JJ, Nah HD. Growth and development: hereditary and
mechanical modulations. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop.
2004;125:676–689.
15. Conti PC, dos Santos CN, Kogawa EM, de Castro Ferreira
Conti AC, de Araujo Cdos R. The treatment of painful
temporomandibular joint clicking with oral splints: a random-
ized clinical trial. J Am Dent Assoc. 2006;137:1108–1114.
16. Ferraz MB, Quaresma MR, Aquino LR, Atra E, Tugwell P,
Goldsmith CH. Reliability of pain scales in the assessment
of literate and illiterate patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
J Rheumatol. 1990;17:1022–1024.
17. Joyce CR, Zutshi DW, Hrubes VF, Mason RM. Comparison
of fixed interval and visual analogue scales for rating chronic
pain. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1975;8:415–420.
18. Burstone CJ. Rationale of the segmented arch. Am J Orthod.
1962;48:805–822.
19. Polat O, Karaman AI. Pain control during fixed orthodontic
appliance therapy. Angle Orthod. 2005;75:214–219.
20. Murdock S, Phillips C, Khondker Z, Hershey HG. Treatment
of pain after initial archwire placement: a noninferiority
randomized clinical trial comparing over-the-counter analge-
sics and bite-wafer use. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop.
2010;137:316–323.
21. Hwang JY, Tee CH, Huang AT, Taft L. Effectiveness of thera-
bite wafers in reducing pain. J Clin Orthod. 1994;28:291–292.
22. Otasevic M, Naini FB, Gill DS, Lee RT. Prospective
randomized clinical trial comparing the effects of a mastica-
tory bite wafer and avoidance of hard food on pain
associated
with
initial
orthodontic
tooth
movement.
Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2006;130:6.e9–e15.
23. Lundeberg T, Nordemar R, Ottoson D. Pain alleviation by
vibratory stimulation. Pain. 1984;20:25–44.
24. Roy EA, Hollins M, Maixner W. Reduction of TMD pain by
high-frequency vibration: a spatial and temporal analysis.
Pain. 2003;101:267–274.
25. Miles P, Smith H, Weyant R, Rinchuse DJ. The effects of
a vibrational appliance on tooth movement and patient
discomfort: a prospective randomized clinical trial. Aust
Orthod J. 2012;28:213–218.
630
LOBRE, CALLEGARI, GARDNER, MARSH, BUSH, DUNN
Angle Orthodontist, Vol 86, No 4, 2016
