 Lipidomics reveals diurnal lipid oscillations in human
skeletal muscle persisting in cellular myotubes
cultured in vitro
Ursula Loizides-Mangolda,b,c, Laurent Perrina,b,c, Bart Vandereyckend, James A. Bettse, Jean-Philippe Walhine,
Iain Templemane, Stéphanie Chanonf, Benjamin D. Wegerg, Christine Durandf, Maud Roberth, Jonathan Paz Montoyai,
Marc Moniattei, Leonidas G. Karagounisj,k, Jonathan D. Johnstonl, Frédéric Gachong,m, Etienne Lefaif,
Howard Riezmann,o,1, and Charna Dibnera,b,c,1
aDivision of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Hypertension and Nutrition, Department of Internal Medicine Specialties, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva,
Switzerland; bDepartment of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland; cFaculty Diabetes Centre, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland; dSection of Mathematics, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland; eDepartment
for Health, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, United Kingdom; fCarMeN Laboratory, INSERM U1060, INRA 1397, University Lyon 1, 69600 Oullins, France;
gDepartment of Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; hDepartment of Digestive Surgery,
Center of Bariatric Surgery, Edouard Herriot Hospital, 69003 Lyon, France; iProteomics Core Facility, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015
Lausanne, Switzerland; jExperimental Myology and Integrative Biology Research Cluster, Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences, Plymouth Marjon University,
Plymouth PL6 8BH, United Kingdom; kInstitute of Nutritional Science, Nestlé Research Centre, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; lFaculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, United Kingdom; mSchool of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; nDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland; and oNational Centre of Competence in
Research Chemical Biology, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva, Switzerland
Edited by Joseph S. Takahashi, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, and approved August 31, 2017
(received for review April 10, 2017)
Circadian clocks play an important role in lipid homeostasis, with
impact on various metabolic diseases. Due to the central role of
skeletal muscle in whole-body metabolism, we aimed at studying
muscle lipid profiles in a temporal manner. Moreover, it has not been
shown whether lipid oscillations in peripheral tissues are driven by
diurnal cycles of rest–activity and food intake or are able to persist in
vitro in a cell-autonomous manner. To address this, we investigated
lipid profiles over 24 h in human skeletal muscle in vivo and in pri-
mary human myotubes cultured in vitro. Glycerolipids, glycerophos-
pholipids, and sphingolipids exhibited diurnal oscillations, suggesting
a widespread circadian impact on muscle lipid metabolism. Notably,
peak levels of lipid accumulation were in phase coherence with core
clock gene expression in vivo and in vitro. The percentage of oscillating
lipid metabolites was comparable between muscle tissue and cultured
myotubes, and temporal lipid profiles correlated with transcript profiles
of genes implicated in their biosynthesis. Lipids enriched in the outer
leaflet of the plasma membrane oscillated in a highly coordinated
manner in vivo and in vitro. Lipid metabolite oscillations were
strongly attenuated upon siRNA-mediated clock disruption in human
primary myotubes. Taken together, our data suggest an essential role
for endogenous cell-autonomous human skeletal muscle oscillators in
regulating lipid metabolism independent of external synchronizers,
such as physical activity or food intake.
lipid metabolism | circadian clock | human skeletal muscle |
human primary myotubes | lipidomics
C
ircadian oscillations are daily cycles in behavior and physiology
that are driven by the existence of underlying intrinsic biological
clocks with near 24-h periods. This anticipatory mechanism has
evolved to ensure that all aspects of behavior and physiology, in-
cluding metabolic pathways, are temporally coordinated with daily
cycles of rest–activity and feeding to provide the organism with an
adaptive advantage (1). In mammals, circadian oscillations are driven
by a master pacemaker, located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) of the hypothalamus, which orchestrates subsidiary oscilla-
tors in peripheral organs via neuronal, endocrine, and metabolic
signaling pathways (2, 3).
Large-scale gene expression datasets suggest that, in mammals,
the vast majority of circadian-gene expression is highly organ-specific
(4–6). Key metabolic functions in peripheral organs are subject to
daily oscillations, such as carbohydrate and lipid metabolism by the
liver, skeletal muscle, and endocrine pancreas (7).
Skeletal muscle is a major contributor of whole-body metabo-
lism and is the main site of glucose uptake in the postprandial state
(8). Therefore, perturbations in glucose sensing and metabolism in
skeletal muscle are strongly associated with insulin resistance in
type 2 diabetes (T2D) (9). Recent data support a fundamental role
for the circadian muscle clock in the regulation of glucose uptake,
with a significant reduction in Glut4 mRNA and protein levels in
two muscle specific Bmal1 knockout models (10, 11). In addition,
rhythmic genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism were down-
regulated while those involved in lipid metabolic processes were
up-regulated in mice bearing a muscle-specific Bmal1 KO (12). In
line with these observations, it has been noted that disruption of
Significance
Our experiments provide the analysis of lipid metabolite circadian
oscillations in a cellular system synchronized in vitro, suggesting
cell-autonomous diurnal changes in lipid profiles independent of
feeding. Moreover, our work represents a comprehensive com-
parison between the lipid composition of human skeletal muscle
derived from sedentary healthy adults, receiving hourly isocaloric
solutions, and human primary skeletal myotubes cultured in vitro.
A substantial number of lipid metabolites, in particular membrane
lipids, exhibited oscillatory patterns in muscle tissue and in myo-
tube cells, where they were blunted upon cell-autonomous clock
disruption. As lipid oscillations in skeletal muscle membrane lipids
may impact on insulin signaling and on the development of in-
sulin resistance, studying the temporal lipid composition of hu-
man muscle is therefore of utmost importance.
Author contributions: U.L.-M., J.A.B., J.D.J., F.G., E.L., H.R., and C. Dibner designed re-
search; U.L.-M., L.P., J.-P.W., I.T., S.C., B.D.W., C. Durand, M.R., and J.P.M. performed re-
search; J.P.M., M.M., and L.G.K. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; U.L.-M. and B.V.
analyzed data; and U.L.-M. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: B.D.W. and F.G. are employees of Nestlé Institute of Health
Sciences SA; L.G.K. is an employee of Nestec Ltd. J.A.B. has been a consultant for PepsiCo
(Quaker) and Kellogg’s. The other authors have no conflict of interest to declare.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: Howard.Riezman@unige.ch or
charna.dibner@hcuge.ch.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1705821114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1705821114
PNAS
|
Published online September 25, 2017
|
E8565–E8574
BIOCHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
 circadian rhythmicity is associated with hyperlipidemia and hepatic
steatosis in ClockΔ19 mice (13), with obesity in mice that bear an
adipocyte-specific deletion of Bmal1 (14), and with reduced whole-
body weight and reduction of total triglycerides and fatty acids in
blood plasma of Per2-deficient mice (15).
Lipidomic analysis of liver from WT and clock-disrupted Per1/
Per2 KO mice demonstrated a comparable fraction of oscillating
lipids in the presence or absence of a functional clock. However,
substantial differences in their composition and peak phase of
oscillation were observed, suggesting that both endogenous clocks
and fasting–feeding cycles contribute to the observed profile (16).
Furthermore, quantitative characterization of the nuclear and
mitochondrial lipidome of mouse liver uncovered daily lipid os-
cillations with distinct phases in these intracellular organelles (17).
In humans, diurnal variations in glucose tolerance have long been
described (18), and rhythmic profiles of plasma glucose, insulin, and
triglycerides have been detected (19, 20). Furthermore, a lipidomic
analysis of human plasma has shown that ∼18% of all lipid profiles
oscillate in a circadian manner independent of sleep and food intake
(19). Similarly, metabolomics studies of plasma, saliva, and urine
revealed that around 20% of all identified metabolites, among them
many fatty acids, were oscillating (21–23).
Fasting–feeding cycles accompanying rest–activity rhythms rep-
resent major timing cues in the synchronization of peripheral clocks
(24). However, whether lipids in peripheral tissues oscillate in a cell-
autonomous manner has not yet been resolved. As the existence of
self-sustained circadian oscillators operative in human primary
skeletal myotubes established from muscle biopsies, cultured and
synchronized in vitro, has been recently demonstrated (25–27), we
sought to address this question. In this study, we explored the
regulation of lipid metabolite oscillations in human skeletal muscle
in vivo and in vitro, focusing on lipids involved in membrane or-
ganization (phospholipids and sphingolipids) and those involved in
energy metabolism, such as triglycerides. Serial human muscle biopsies
were analyzed, using a controlled protocol designed to minimize the
effect of confounding factors, and were compared with primary
myotubes established from human donor biopsies. Using a large-
scale lipidomic approach, we monitored the time course of skeletal
muscle lipid metabolites under physiological conditions and under
siRNA-mediated cellular clock disruption, allowing us to dissect the
impact of the cell-autonomous muscle clock from external factors.
Results
The Temporal Lipidome of Human Skeletal Muscle in Vivo. To investigate
the time course of lipid metabolites in human skeletal muscle, we
analyzed serial biopsies from the vastus lateralis muscle, taken every
4 h across 24 h (Fig. 1A). Samples were obtained from 10 healthy
volunteers (see SI Appendix, Table S1 for donor characteristics),
using a controlled protocol designed to minimize the effect of
confounding factors (SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods). Blood
samples were drawn every hour, starting on the testing day over a
span of 24 h. Plasma concentration profiles of melatonin and cor-
tisol were highly synchronized across subjects, with the melatonin
zenith reached at 0300 hours ± 38 min (SD) and the cortisol nadir
at 0000 hours ± 40 min (SD) (Fig. 1B).
Using a targeted lipidomics-based approach, we next examined
the diurnal profiles of triacylglycerides (TAGs), glycerophospholipids
(PLs), and sphingolipids (SLs) in human skeletal muscle. Out of
Fig. 1.
Temporal analysis of human skeletal muscle lipids in vivo. (A) Experimental design for the collection of muscle tissue samples (vastus lateralis) from healthy human
subjects (n = 10, asterisks indicate muscle-sampling times). One standardized meal was provided on the evening before the testing day, as illustrated. The hourly intake of
isocaloric solutions during the testing day is indicated by black dots. For protocol details, see Materials and Methods and SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods. (B) Time
course of plasma cortisol (Left) and melatonin (Right). (C) Temporal profiles of major PC species (Left; mean ± SEM, n = 10) and major SLs (Right, mean of total GlcCer, SM,
Cer ± SD). (D) RT-qPCR results for ARNTL, PER2, and DBP on mRNA samples extracted from human skeletal muscle biopsies. Data were normalized to GAPDH (mean ± SEM).
(E) Temporal profiles of lipid metabolites clustered by lipid class. Only lipid species that were detected in all participants are shown. Values were normalized to the lipid
mean value per individual analysis and then averaged across all subjects (n = 10) for each time point. The thick colored line represents the average of each lipid class.
E8566
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1705821114
Loizides-Mangold et al.
 1,058 lipid metabolites analyzed, 532 lipids were detected in all
participants at all time points (32 TAGs, 181 SLs, and 319 PLs).
Lipid raw data were normalized to the phosphorus content of each
lipid extract to correct for differences in the amount of starting
material. Each lipid value was then divided by its daily mean value,
calculated individually for each biopsy. Examples of normalized
and unnormalized lipid profiles are shown in SI Appendix, Fig. S1.
Normalized lipid values were averaged for each time point across
all donors (n = 10). The major phosphatidylcholine (PC) profile,
representing the most abundant PC lipids, as well as the major SL
profile, representing the most abundant sphingomyelins (SMs),
ceramides (Cers), and glycosylceramides (GlcCers), showed enrich-
ment at 0400 hours (Fig. 1C). The SL profile varied up to 20% in
amplitude across 24 h, with the valley reached at 1600 hours and the
peak reached at 0400 hours (Fig. 1C). In parallel to the lipidomic
analysis, core clock transcript levels were monitored by quantitative
reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR), with RNA extracted from the
same human skeletal muscle biopsy material. As shown in Fig. 1D,
core clock transcript expression was highly rhythmic, with ARNTL
(BMAL1) exhibiting an oscillatory profile antiphasic to PER2 and DBP.
The zenith of ARNTL expression was reached around 2000 hours,
preceding the 0400 hours peak of PC and SL lipid accumulation by
about 8 h.
Next, all lipid metabolite profiles, including low abundant lipids,
were clustered by lipid class (Fig. 1E and Dataset S1). Phosphati-
dylinositol (PI), PC, SM, GlcCer, and Cer lipids exhibited peak
levels around 0400 hours while phosphatidylethanolamine (PE),
phosphatidylserine (PS), and TAG levels peaked at earlier time
points, with zeniths reached on average at 2000 hours and 0000 hours,
respectively (Fig. 1E and Dataset S1). Overall, lipid levels changed
more than 20% over the course of 24 h, with variability observed
among lipid classes (Fig. 1E and Dataset S1).
Lipidomes of Human Skeletal Muscle and Primary Myotubes Are Comparable,
with Main Differences Seen for CL and PS. We next aimed to assess
whether the in vivo lipid oscillations, observed in skeletal muscle
biopsies, persist in vitro. To this end, human primary myoblasts
were established from skeletal muscle biopsies (gluteus maximus)
obtained from 10 healthy donors (see SI Appendix, Table S2 for
donor characteristics). Cells were synchronized in vitro with a pulse
of forskolin, and samples were collected every 4 h over 24 h, as
shown in Fig. 2A.
Fig. 2.
Comparison between the lipidome of human skeletal muscle and primary myotubes. (A) Experimental design: Human primary myoblasts were differ-
entiated into myotubes, synchronized with forskolin, and harvested at the indicated seven time points (asterisks). (B) Lipid concentrations of muscle tissue and
myotubes; Sum of PL plus SL (Left), SL (Middle), PL (Right). Data represent the average across all time points. Mean ± SD; ***P < 0.001. (C) Logarithmic scale heat
map of lipid concentration (pmol/nmol phosphate), shown for in vitro (n = 10) and in vivo (n = 10). Lipids were sorted by lipid class (PE, PC, PI, PS, CL, SM, Cer, and
GlcCer) and lipid name, and separated for each lipid class into two columns (left columns, in vitro; right columns, in vivo). Data represent the mean concentration of
each metabolite across all time points per individual participant. Colors indicate the log concentration of each metabolite.
Loizides-Mangold et al.
PNAS
|
Published online September 25, 2017
|
E8567
BIOCHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
 Out of 1,058 analyzed lipid metabolites, 637 were detected in
all myotube cultures at all time points (20 TAGs, 215 SLs, 402
PLs). When averaged across all time points, lipid levels were
comparable between human skeletal muscle and primary myo-
tubes. Combined PL and SL levels (Fig. 2 B, Left), as well as SL
levels alone (Fig. 2 B, Middle), were not significantly different.
However, a decrease in mitochondria-specific cardiolipin (CL) and
an increase in PS were observed in human primary myotubes com-
pared to muscle tissue (Fig. 2 B, Right). Overall, the lipid com-
position was highly homogenous among the 10 muscle and primary
myotube samples but differed with regard to lipid chain length and
degree of desaturation (Fig. 2C and Dataset S2). The strongest
difference was observed for CLs, where the most abundant CL of
skeletal muscle (CL72:8_C18:2) was not detected on average in
primary myotubes (Fig. 2C, SI Appendix, Fig. S2, and Dataset S2).
TAGs were not absolutely quantified but analyzed in a relative
manner, and are therefore not included in Fig. 2 B and C.
Lipid Metabolite Oscillations Persist in Vitro in Synchronized Human
Myotubes. Human primary myotube lipids were analyzed as de-
scribed for the in vivo analysis (for normalization, see SI Appendix,
Fig. S3). To monitor core clock properties in synchronized human
primary myotubes, circadian bioluminescence was continuously
recorded for several days, using a lentiviral Bmal1-luc reporter (27).
Bmal1-luc reporter profiles recorded from all 10 myotube cultures
demonstrated a high degree of alignment (Fig. 3A). The first peak of
Bmal1-luc reporter activity was observed about 8 h after forskolin
synchronization (Fig. 3 A, Inset), and as previously demonstrated for
endogenous BMAL1 in human primary myotubes (27). The Bmal1-
luc reporter activity peak recorded 8 h after synchronization (Fig.
3B) was followed about 8 h later by a peak of the most abundant PL
and SL lipids. This phase coherence was consistent with human
skeletal muscle (Fig. 1 C and D). The most abundant PC lipids also
exhibited enrichment at the 16-h time point; however, a second peak
was observed 28 h following synchronization (SI Appendix, Fig. S4).
When temporal profiles of lipid metabolites were averaged across
all myotube cultures, individual lipid profiles were oscillating for
each lipid class (Fig. 3C and Dataset S3). However, the amplitude of
the mean (colored lines in Figs. 1E and 3C) was smaller in vitro than
in vivo for some lipid classes (compare PC and PI in Figs. 1E and 3C
and Dataset S3). This observed reduction in fold change might be
in part attributed to the weaker effect of in vitro synchronization of
primary myotubes by a single forskolin pulse, compared with the
combination of central and peripheral synchronizing stimuli driving
the skeletal muscle clock in vivo. The average PE, TAG, and CL
profiles displayed a single peak 16 to 20 h following synchronization
whereas PC and GlcCer profiles peaked twice within a 24-h period,
at 16 h and 28 h, respectively (Fig. 3C and Dataset S3).
A Similar Percentage of Lipid Metabolites Exhibit Circadian Oscillations
in Vivo and in Vitro. We next identified rhythmic lipid metabolites in
human skeletal muscle and primary myotubes based on individu-
ally analyzed lipid profiles, using a widely used nonparametric al-
gorithm, JTK_CYCLE (28). As the in vivo sample collection was
incomplete (55 out of 60 samples were available), the calculation
could only be performed on the basis of seven subjects for whom
complete datasets were available. The percentage of circadian lipids
per lipid class was determined as the number of cycling lipids vs. the
total number of lipids detected per lipid class, averaged across the
seven participants (Fig. 4A and Dataset S4). Rhythmic lipids were
identified for each lipid class, suggesting a widespread circadian
regulation of lipid metabolism (Fig. 4A and Dataset S4). A similar
analysis was performed for human primary myotubes. Here, the
percentage of rhythmic lipids per lipid class was calculated based on
seven time points (Fig. 4B and Dataset S5). Strikingly, the average
percentage of rhythmic lipids across the nine lipid classes was com-
parable between skeletal muscle and myotubes (12.7% vs. 12.4%,
respectively). With regard to specific lipid classes, SM was the most
rhythmic one in vivo whereas TAGs were the most rhythmic lipids in
vitro (Fig. 4 A and B and Datasets S4 and S5).
If oscillating lipids were sorted according to their peak phase
and plotted for each individual participant separately, the inter-
individual variability with regard to the total number of rhythmic
metabolites and their phase preference became visible (Fig. 4 C
and D and Datasets S4 and S5). Across all seven in vivo partici-
pants, the average percentage of rhythmic lipids in human skeletal
muscle was 20.3% (based on the number of cycling lipids vs. de-
tected lipids in each donor). For the in vitro study, the average
percentage of rhythmic lipids was 18.6% (based on the number of
cycling lipids vs. detected lipids per myotube culture).
The most rhythmic metabolites in vitro were TAG54:6 and
GlcCer34:1, significantly oscillating in eight and seven myotube
cultures, respectively (Fig. 4 E, Lower). However, if averaged across
all 10 cultures, those lipids were not circadian (Fig. 4 E, Upper), due
to phase differences between individual cultures (Fig. 4 E, Lower)
and noncircadian oscillations in the remaining cultures. In contrast,
PE lipids showed a higher degree of alignment, with PE34:4 being
rhythmic on average across all myotube cultures and being one of
the most rhythmic PE lipids on an individual level (Fig. 4E and
Dataset S5). The most rhythmic lipids in human muscle and pri-
mary myotubes are listed in SI Appendix, Table S3.
Metabolic Clustering of Rhythmic Lipid Metabolites. Based on the
observed variance within the in vivo and in vitro donor cohorts
(Fig. 4 C and D), we next investigated whether rhythmic lipids can
be clustered into different subgroups based on their temporal
Fig. 3.
Lipid oscillations are preserved in human skeletal myotubes. (A)
Average detrended Bmal1-luc bioluminescence profile of all human myo-
tube cultures (n = 10). Mean ± SEM. (Inset) Bmal1-luc bioluminescence
profile between 0 and 36 h. (B) Average temporal profile of major phos-
pholipid PC, PE, PI, PS, and CL species (Upper; mean ± SD), and major
sphingolipid SM, GlcCer, and Cer species (Lower, mean ± SD). (C) Temporal
profiles of lipid metabolites clustered by lipid class. Only lipid species that
were detected in all cultures are shown. Values were normalized to the lipid
mean value per individual analysis and then averaged across all for each
time point. The thick colored line represents the average of each lipid class.
E8568
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1705821114
Loizides-Mangold et al.
 profile. To assess this point, we applied nearest-neighbor clustering
on the phase and amplitude of each profile to identify distinct lipid
clusters within one lipid class both in vivo and in vitro. Following
this approach, individual PC profiles of skeletal muscle (Fig. 5 A,
Left and Dataset S6) could be separated into two clusters, with a
single sinusoid fitted for all profiles in each cluster, exhibiting ze-
nith levels at 1600 hours and 0400 hours, respectively (Fig. 5 A,
Right). Lipid clusters were further dissected by investigating individ-
ual lipid metabolites (Fig. 5B and Dataset S6). PC32:2, which was
identified as highly rhythmic in skeletal muscle upon JTK_CYCLE
analysis (rhythmic in five out of seven muscle donors), was not sig-
nificantly rhythmic if averaged across all participants, due to the
phase variance between individual profiles (Fig. 5 B, Top and
Middle and Dataset S6). However, individual profiles could be
clustered into two major oscillatory subgroups with zeniths reached
at 1600 hours and 0400 hours, respectively (Fig. 5 B, Middle and
Bottom and Dataset S6).
Similarly, when PC lipids derived from human primary myo-
tubes (Fig. 5 C, Left and Dataset S6) were analyzed using this
algorithm, two major subgroups emerged with zenith levels reached
at 16 to 20 h and 28 h after synchronization (Fig. 5 C, Right). Such
clustering was further validated on a single lipid level for the highly
rhythmic PC42:6 (Fig. 5D and Dataset S6). PC32:2 was less
rhythmic in primary myotubes (cycling in 3 out of 10 cultures) but
could also be sorted according to phase into two subclusters (SI
Appendix, Fig. S5A).
Overlapping lipid profiles were also observed within other
lipid classes, including TAGs. Indeed, the total TAG profile of
primary myotubes clustered into two groups, with zenith levels
reached at 20 h and 28 h after synchronization (Fig. 5E and
Dataset S6). TAG52:2 was not rhythmic across all myotube
cultures; however, it became rhythmic upon subgroup analysis,
with zeniths reached at 20 h and 28 to 32 h after synchronization
(Fig. 5F and Dataset S6). Due to limitations of the in vivo TAG
dataset (lower number of technical replicates), those could not
be sorted using the here-described clustering algorithm; how-
ever, certain TAG lipids, such as TAG58:9, displayed subgroup
oscillations upon individual analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S5B).
Fig. 4.
Identification of rhythmic lipid metabolites in myotubes and skeletal muscle. (A) Percentage of diurnal lipid metabolites per lipid class in skeletal muscle
(n = 7). (B) Percentage of circadian lipids per lipid class in primary myotubes (n = 10). The average across all lipid classes was 12.7% for skeletal muscle and 12.4%
for primary myotubes. (C) Heat maps of rhythmic lipids in human skeletal muscle biopsies (n = 7). The average percentage of rhythmic lipids was 20.3% across all
muscle donors based on the number of cycling lipids vs. detected lipids in each donor. (D) Heat maps of rhythmic lipid species in primary skeletal myotubes (n =
10). The average percentage of rhythmic lipids was 18.6%. Normalized z-scores of lipid metabolites are indicated in yellow (high) and blue (low). (E) Repre-
sentative rhythmic lipids of skeletal myotube cultures: TAG54:6 (rhythmic in eight cultures), GlcCer34:1 (rhythmic in seven), and PE34:4 (rhythmic in six). (Upper)
Average lipid profiles (mean ± SEM). (Lower) Individual lipid profiles, adjusted P value according to JTK_CYCLE.
Loizides-Mangold et al.
PNAS
|
Published online September 25, 2017
|
E8569
BIOCHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
 Diurnal Lipid Metabolite Levels Correlate with Transcript Profiles Encoding
for Key Enzymes Involved in Their Biosynthesis. In human skeletal
muscle, all three major SL classes (GlcCer, Cer, and SM) reached
their zenith levels around 0400 hours (Figs. 1E and 6 A, Left). A
similar accumulation pattern was found on a single metabolite level
for GlcCer34:1, Cer42:2, and SM42:2 (Fig. 6 A, Middle and Right).
Importantly, GlcCer34:1 was also one of the most rhythmic SLs in
primary myotubes (Fig. 4E and SI Appendix, Table S3).
Next, we investigated the temporal gene expression profile of
enzymes involved in de novo SL biosynthesis, using the same biopsy
material used for the lipidomic analysis. Remarkably, the temporal
expression profiles of SPTLC2 and UGCG, coding for subunit 2 of
serine palmitoyltransferase and UDP-Glucose ceramide glucosyl-
transferase, respectively, correlated with the diurnal profiles of the
three major SL classes (Fig. 6B). The transcripts of both key en-
zymes of de novo SL biosynthesis reached their peak levels between
0000 hours and 0400 hours, similar to the profile of their corre-
sponding lipid metabolites (Fig. 6 A and B).
Moreover, we assessed whether a similar correlation could also be
made for other lipid classes by analyzing the temporal mRNA profile
of choline phosphotransferase 1 (CHPT1), involved in PC biosynthesis.
While, on average, transcript levels of CHPT1 exhibited no clear os-
cillatory pattern (Fig. 6C), individually analyzed CHPT1 transcript
levels were oscillating in a subset of muscle biopsy donors with distinct
phases (Fig. 6 D, Upper). Strikingly, the oscillatory transcript expression
pattern of CHPT1 and the diurnal profiles of the most rhythmic PC
lipid (PC32:2) were highly similar in a subset of muscle donors (Fig. 6
D, Lower), with profile II and VIII being significantly correlated.
Chain Length, but Not the Degree of Desaturation, Influences the
Circadian Profile of Lipid Metabolites. PC and SM lipid classes
share the same head group, phosphocholine, and their bio-
synthesis pathways are interconnected. We noticed that temporal
profiles of PC and SM showed similarities in vivo (Fig. 7A and
Dataset S7) and in vitro (SI Appendix, Fig. S6A). When lipid
profiles were clustered according to chain length, lipids that
carried very long chain fatty acids (PC40-44, SM40-44) were
oscillating in a synchronized manner, with zenith levels reached
at 0400 hours (Fig. 7A and Dataset S7) compared with shorter
chain PC an SM species. In contrast, PE lipids were not further
synchronized upon lipid elongation. Shorter chain PEs (PE28-
32) were well synchronized while very long chain PEs (PE40-44)
were less synchronized and not enriched at the 0400 hours time
point. Similar observations were made in vitro for PC, SM, and
PE lipids of primary myotubes (SI Appendix, Fig. S6A).
Human long chain acyl-CoA synthetases activate fatty acids to
form acyl-CoAs. The activated fatty acids can then be used for the
biosynthesis of triglycerides and phospholipids, or for the generation
Fig. 5.
Overlapping lipid clusters exist within different lipid classes in vivo and
in vitro. (A) The total PC profile of skeletal muscle (Left) can be separated into
two major PC clusters (Right) with zenith levels reached at 1600 hours and
0400 hours, respectively. The dashed line indicates the 95% confidence interval
of the calculated fit. (B) PC32:2 is not rhythmic on average across all muscle
donors (Top) but becomes rhythmic upon subcluster analysis (Middle and
Bottom). (C) The total PC profile of human myotubes (Left) can be separated
into two major PC clusters (Right) with zenith levels reached between 16 and
20 h and 28 h after synchronization, respectively. (D) PC42:6 is not rhythmic
on average across all myotube cultures (Top) but becomes rhythmic upon
subcluster analysis (Middle and Bottom). (E) The total TAG profile of myo-
tubes (Left) can be separated into two major clusters (Right) with zenith
levels reached at 20 h and 28 h, respectively. (F) TAG52:2 is not rhythmic on
average across all myotube cultures (Top) but becomes rhythmic upon sub-
cluster analysis (Middle and Bottom).
Fig. 6.
Temporal lipid profiles and mRNA profiles of genes implicated in their
biosynthesis are correlated in vivo. (A) Total profiles of GlcCer, Cer, SM (Left,
mean ± SEM); profiles of GlcCer34:1, Cer42:2, and SM42:2 (mean ± SEM; Middle);
individual profiles of GlcCer34:1, Cer42:2, and SM42:2 that were identified as
circadian (Right). (B) RT-qPCR gene expression profile of SPTLC2, and UGCG
normalized to GAPDH (mean ± SEM). (C) RT-qPCR gene expression profile of
CHPT1 normalized to GAPDH (mean ± SEM). (D) Individual gene expression
profile of CHPT1 normalized to GAPDH in four subjects and temporal profile of
PC32:2 in the same four subjects. The r numerical value indicates the corre-
sponding Pearson correlation coefficient; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
E8570
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1705821114
Loizides-Mangold et al.
 of energy via β-oxidation. Moreover, these fatty acyl-CoAs can be
elongated by fatty acid elongases (ELOVLs). We therefore investi-
gated the temporal transcript levels of long chain fatty acyl-CoA
synthetases (ACSL3-5), fatty acid elongase 5 (ELOVL5), and acyl-
CoA dehydrogenases, responsible for the oxidation of long and very
long chain fatty acids (ACAD and ACADVL). As shown in Fig. 7B,
ELOVL5, ACSL4, and ACSL5 transcript levels oscillate with zenith
levels reached at 0400 hours, coinciding with the peak accumulation
of very long chain PC and SM lipids (Fig. 7A), whereas ACSL3,
ACAD, and ACADVL did not oscillate (SI Appendix, Fig. S6B).
In contrast, the degree of desaturation did not have an effect on
lipid rhythmicity, both in vivo and in vitro. Completely saturated
lipids, or lipids bearing one or multiple double bonds in their fatty
acyl chains, were equally aligned in skeletal muscle and in primary
myotubes (Fig. 7C, SI Appendix, Fig. S6C, and Datasets S7 and S9).
Lipid Rhythms Are Driven by the Cell-Autonomous Molecular Circadian
Clock. Finally, to investigate the effect of a functional molecular
clock operative in human skeletal myotubes on lipid metabolism, we
applied an efficient siClock transfection protocol, resulting in ∼80%
knockdown of CLOCK transcript levels (Fig. 8 A, Left). Circadian
amplitude of the Bmal1-luc reporter activity profile was strongly
blunted in siClock-transfected myotubes, compared with cells trans-
fected with nontargeting sequences (siControl) in four independent
experiments, validating clock disruption (Fig. 8 A, Right). Following
siRNA transfection, human primary myotubes were synchronized in
vitro with a pulse of forskolin, and samples were collected every 4 h
over 24 h in four independent experiments to monitor the effect of
CLOCK depletion on lipid metabolite oscillations (see SI Appendix,
Table S2 for donor characteristics). Importantly, the number of
oscillating lipid metabolites was reduced on average for all four
myotube cultures by 39.4 ± 7.8% (mean ± SEM) upon CLOCK
depletion, and as individually shown by heat map analysis (Fig. 8B
and Dataset S8). The analysis of lipidomic data from three major
lipid classes (PC, PE, and SM) by ARSER algorithm (29) suggested
a significant reduction in the frequency of oscillations with a period
between 20 and 28 h upon siClock, as shown by period density plotted
against the period length (Fig. 8C). Moreover, the mean amplitude of
all circadian lipids was reduced in clock-disrupted myotubes, com-
pared with their control counterparts for PC, PE, and SM (Fig. 8D).
Discussion
This study provides a systematic analysis of lipid metabolite oscil-
lations in human skeletal muscle and in human primary myotubes.
Moreover, it represents a comprehensive comparison between the
lipid composition of human skeletal muscle in vivo and human
primary myotube cells cultured in vitro. Importantly, rhythmic pro-
files of the lipid metabolites were blunted in myotubes upon clock
perturbation, suggesting an essential role of the cell-autonomous
oscillators for orchestrating circadian lipidomics.
Globally, lipid quantities were highly comparable between skel-
etal muscle and human primary myotubes (Fig. 2B), with the ex-
ception of CL and PS levels (Fig. 2 B, Right). Muscle biopsy donors
were similar with regard to body mass index (BMI) but differed in
age and muscle fiber type composition between the in vivo and in
vitro cohorts (SI Appendix, Tables S1 and S2), as confirmed by
myosin isoform analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). While biopsies for
the in vivo study originated from the vastus lateralis muscle (∼43%
slow-twitch type I fibers) (30), samples for the in vitro study were
established from the gluteus maximus that has a higher percentage
of slow-twitch type I fibers (52 to 60%) (31).
CL, a lipid exclusively found in mitochondrial membranes, was
reduced in human skeletal myotubes compared with muscle tissue
(Fig. 2 B, Right), implying that the overall number of mitochondria
is diminished in cell culture compared with muscle tissue, similar to
mouse skeletal muscle and C2C12 myotubes (32). This effect might
have been further enhanced by aging (33), due to the significant
age difference between the older in vitro and younger in vivo cohorts
in our study. Moreover, cells in culture rely mostly on glycolysis,
leading to a further reduction in mitochondrial respiration (34).
Additionally, a significant increase in PS was observed in primary
myotubes compared with muscle tissue (Fig. 2 B, Right). Mamma-
lian skeletal muscle is formed by the proliferation, differentiation,
and fusion of myogenic precursor myoblast cells into multinucleated
myotubes, and PS greatly enhances this fusion event (35, 36).
Overall, the lipid composition was more complex in primary
myotubes (637 species) compared with skeletal muscle (532 metab-
olites), in particular for the lipid class of PCs (Fig. 2C). The fatty
acid composition of skeletal muscle is reflected by the dietary intake
of lipids in humans (37). The same holds true for the fatty acid
composition of cells in culture where changes in serum influence the
lipid composition of established cell lines. Of note, FBS is enriched
in arachidonic (C20) and docosahexanoic (C22) acid (38) whereas a
standard western diet mostly relies on C16- and C18-containing lipids.
Consistently, very long chain PCs (PC40-44), containing C20 and C22
fatty acids in their fatty acyl chains, were highly abundant in primary
myotubes, but less abundant or not detected in skeletal muscle (in
Fig. 2C, compare the left and right columns of the PC heat map).
The data presented here demonstrate diurnal lipid oscillations
of 20.3% in human skeletal muscle (Fig. 4). This value is similar to
a study in human plasma, which showed 17.8% of oscillating lipid
metabolites when analyzed on an individual basis (19). To unravel
whether these metabolite oscillations are solely driven by diurnal
cycles of rest–activity and food intake, or are controlled in a cell-
autonomous manner, we conducted a similar temporal analysis in
primary human skeletal myotubes synchronized in vitro. Recent
studies conducted in other types of isolated human primary cells
have demonstrated that peripheral clocks are functional in vitro, as
shown for skin fibroblasts (39), thyrocytes (40), and pancreatic islets
Fig. 7.
Lipid chain length but not desaturation influences the circadian
profile of PC and SM lipid metabolites. (A) Average temporal profile of PC,
SM, and PE lipids, sorted by chain length in skeletal muscle (n = 10). PC, PE:
28-32 and 40-44 represents the sum of carbon atoms in both fatty acyl
chains; SM lipids: 28-32 and 40-44 represents the sum of carbon atoms in the
sphingoid base (C18) plus fatty acyl chain. (B) RT-qPCR results for ELOVL5,
ACSL4, and ACSL5 on mRNA samples extracted from human skeletal muscle
biopsies. Data were normalized to GAPDH (mean ± SEM). (C) Average PC
lipid profiles (skeletal muscle) sorted by their degree of desaturation. The
number of double bonds is indicated by the suffix 0, 1, 2, and 3.
Loizides-Mangold et al.
PNAS
|
Published online September 25, 2017
|
E8571
BIOCHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
 (41–43). Moreover, cell-autonomous oscillators of human primary
skeletal myotubes have been recently assessed (25–27). Remarkably,
we observed that lipid oscillations persisted in human primary
myotubes synchronized in vitro, with a comparable percentage of
oscillating lipid species (18.6%) (Fig. 4). However, as the in vivo
biopsy collection was incomplete, with samples collected at six time
points compared with seven time points in vitro, the percentage of
oscillating metabolites in muscle tissue might be higher if analyzed
in an identical manner. Furthermore, we cannot exclude that the
results presented here are in part influenced by differences in fiber
type composition between vastus lateralis and gluteus maximus, as
demonstrated by myosin isoform analysis (SI Appendix, Fig. S7).
Globally, the percentage of lipid oscillations might even be under-
estimated as whole-cell lipid measurements can mask oscillations
within subcellular compartments. Recent studies by Asher and
coworkers identified that 17% of lipid metabolites oscillate when
assessed in whole liver (16) whereas separate analyses of liver
nuclei and mitochondria identified 34% and 31% of oscillating
lipids, respectively, with distinct circadian phases between these
organelles (17). However, it should be noted that participants in
this study were confined to a semirecumbent position throughout
the testing day while, in the mouse liver study, the data were col-
lected from mice freely moving until the sampling point. Given that
physical activity can modulate the level and oscillatory parameters
of lipids, this may partly account for the observed differences.
The oscillation amplitude of individual lipid metabolite profiles was
up to 30% across 24 h both in vivo and in vitro (Fig. 5), similar to
previous analyses in mouse liver (17). Whereas such changes in am-
plitude are smaller than for diurnal transcript oscillations, they rep-
resent substantial differences in membrane homeostasis across 24 h.
How transcriptional rhythms are translated into lipid metabo-
lites oscillations has not been addressed so far. Notably, peak
levels of major PLs and SLs correlated with ARNTL (BMAL1)
gene expression both in vivo (Fig. 1 C and D) and in vitro (Fig. 3 A
and B), with phase coherence kept between core clock gene ex-
pression and lipid profiles indicating a potential role for the endog-
enous skeletal muscle clock in the regulation of lipid metabolism. In
vivo, lipid levels peaked in the early morning hours, near the usual
wake time, supporting a major role for the muscle clock in anticipating
sleep-to-wake transition as has been proposed previously (44). To
directly test the effect of cell-autonomous oscillators on lipid metabolic
changes, we subsequently disrupted the endogenous clock, operative in
human skeletal myotubes (27). Clock disruption had a strong impact
on lipid metabolite oscillations. The number of oscillating lipid species
was significantly reduced upon CLOCK depletion, as confirmed by
JTK_CYCLE (Fig. 8B) and ARSER (Fig. 8C) analyses, with a
strong impact on both PL and SL metabolites. Furthermore, am-
plitudes of the remaining oscillating lipid species were reduced (Fig.
8D), suggesting an overall blunting of the circadian rhythmicity in
the absence of a functional cell-autonomous myotube clock.
Fig. 8.
siClock-mediated clock disruption attenuates circadian lipid oscillations in human skeletal myotubes. (A, Left) CLOCK mRNA was measured in human
myotubes transfected with siControl or siClock by RT-qPCR and normalized to the mean of 9S and HPRT (mean ± SEM, n = 4; **P < 0.01). (Right) Average
detrended Bmal1-luc bioluminescence profile (n = 4, mean ± SEM). Average Bmal1-luc oscillation profiles are shown for siControl (blue line) and siClock (red
line) transfected myotubes. (B) Heat maps of rhythmic lipid species in primary skeletal myotubes transfected with either siControl or siClock in donors 1, 2, 3,
and 4. Normalized z-scores of lipid metabolites are indicated in yellow (high) and blue (low). (C) Distribution of periodicity of oscillating PC, PE, and SM lipids
for siControl (CTL) and siClock (CLK) (ARSER analysis, P value < 0.05). CLOCK knockdown induces a shift to include longer periods but mostly reduces the
number of cycling lipids overall. (D) Box plot of amplitudes for PC, PE and SM raw lipid data for siControl and siClock of cycling lipids with a period between
22 and 26 (ARSER, P value < 0.05) after log transform. Knockdown lowers the amplitudes, with PC having the most pronounced effect.
E8572
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1705821114
Loizides-Mangold et al.
 Remarkably, zenith levels of enzymes involved in de novo SL
biosynthesis (SPTLC2, UGCG) correlated well with the accumu-
lation of SL species at the early morning hours in human skeletal
muscle (Fig. 6). This correlation was not restricted to SLs alone as
also the transcriptional regulation of PL biosynthesis showed en-
richment at the early morning hours, with peak levels of ELOVL5,
ACSL4, and ACSL5 transcripts correlating with peak levels of very
long chain PC lipids (Fig. 7 A and B). Although the gene expression
profile of choline phosphotransferase 1 (CHPT1), which catalyzes
PC biosynthesis from CDP-choline, was not rhythmic on average,
individual CHPT1 transcripts oscillated with profiles similar to the
most rhythmic PC lipid metabolite in skeletal muscle (PC32:2) in a
subset of biopsy donors (Fig. 6D and SI Appendix, Table S3).
Interestingly, we observed an effect of the circadian clock on
lipid chain length but not on desaturation (Fig. 7 and SI Ap-
pendix, Fig. S6). This effect was characteristic for long and very
long chain PC and SM lipids, which were highly synchronized in
both skeletal muscle and primary myotubes, whereas other PLs
like PE did not show this preference. Remarkably, a correlation
based on chain length was also observed for long and very long
chain PC and SM species in WT and Per1/2 KO mice whereas the
contribution of desaturation was less prominent (17). Consistent
with this observation is the rhythmic gene expression of ELOVL5,
ACSL4, and ACSL5 in human skeletal muscle tissue, whose peak
of expression correlated with peak levels of very long chain PC
and SM lipids (Fig. 7 A and B). Importantly, all seven mammalian
elongase family members are either rhythmically expressed or their
expression is affected by core clock gene alterations in peripheral
mouse tissues, with Elovl1, Elovl5, and Elovl6 being circadian in
mouse skeletal muscle (5, 12, 45). Moreover, ACSL4 was shown to
be rhythmic in mouse liver, and its rhythmicity was attenuated in
ClockΔ19 mutant mice (46). We therefore hypothesize that enzymes
involved in long chain fatty acid activation and elongation are im-
portant drivers of lipid oscillations. As very long chain PC and SM
lipids make up a significant proportion of the outer leaflet of the
plasma membrane (47, 48), these data suggest that the circadian
clock might impact on plasma membrane function, with important
consequences on receptor signaling and membrane glucose uptake.
Fasting–feeding and rest–activity cycles are major timing cues
in the synchronization of peripheral clocks (24). The SCN mo-
lecular clock communicates with peripheral tissues, such as
skeletal muscle, using neurohumoral, metabolic, and tempera-
ture signals (49–51). In our in vivo study, core clock alignment
was demonstrated by plasma cortisol and melatonin profiles, as
well as by muscle core clock gene expression (Fig. 1). In human
primary myotubes, highly synchronized Bmal1-luc activity pro-
files showed alignment of the molecular clock also in the absence
of the SCN (Fig. 3A). However, despite core clock alignment, we
observed extensive variability among the individual participants
with regard to lipid oscillations. This heterogeneity persisted in
vitro, allowing us to identify oscillatory subgroups within differ-
ent lipid classes (Fig. 5). Such variability with regard to lipid
profiles has been previously observed in human plasma (19) and
supports the existence of distinct diurnal metabolic phenotypes within
the human population, possibly controlled on an epigenetic level.
Taken together, this work is a detailed characterization of the
temporal human skeletal muscle lipidome, highlighting the es-
sential role of the molecular oscillator in the circadian orches-
tration of muscle lipid metabolism. The observed substantial
lipid oscillations further contribute to lipid complexity and could
affect membrane properties and signaling. Given the current gap
in understanding the enormous complexity of cellular lipids,
circadian lipidomics may allow deciphering networks of coregu-
lated lipids, due to their temporal regulation. Genetic animal
models of clock disruption as well as nutritional studies have
shown that the circadian clockwork is associated with altered
lipid homeostasis, fatty liver, and obesity (52). Although various
clock mutant mouse models exhibit altered lipid metabolism
(53), it is challenging to dissect the contribution of the circadian
clock on lipid metabolism from the impact of fasting–feeding
cycles and rest–activity. In vitro synchronized primary cells may
therefore pave the way for future studies that link circadian clock
defects to insulin resistance, obesity, and T2D, and constitute a
powerful model for studying peripheral oscillators in other hu-
man tissues. Of note, human primary myotubes established from
donor muscle biopsies preserve their metabolic phenotype with
regard to glucose metabolism (54) and insulin signaling (55, 56).
As metabolic disorders, including obesity and T2D, are growing
rapidly in modern societies (57), future studies aimed at deci-
phering clock functions in the regulation of lipid metabolism in
context of these pathologies are therefore urgently warranted.
Materials and Methods
Human Skeletal Muscle Biopsies for the in Vivo Study. Ten healthy volunteers
were recruited for the in vivo study (see SI Appendix, Table S1 for donor
characteristics). One week before the scheduled laboratory visit, participants
had to adhere to a consistent daily feeding and sleeping routine.
Six 100-mg biopsy samples were acquired from the vastus lateralis muscle at
4-h intervals (1200, 1600, 2000, 0000, 0400, and 0800 hours) and immediately
snap frozen under liquid nitrogen. The study was conducted in accordance with
the Declaration of Helsinki and with the approval of the Health Research
Authority [National Research Ethics Service (NRES) Committee South West; 14/
SW/0123] and the Commission cantonale (Canton de Vaud) d’Éthique de la
Recherche (Cer-VD). See SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods for further
details of study procedure.
Human Skeletal Muscle Biopsies for the in Vitro Study and Primary Myotube
Cell Culture. Muscle biopsies were derived from healthy donors with informed
consent obtained from all participants (see SI Appendix, Table S2 for donor
characteristics). The study conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki and the
experimental protocol (“DIOMEDE”) was approved by the Ethical Commit-
tee SUD EST IV (Agreement 12/111) and performed according to the French
legislation (Huriet’s law). All donors had HbAc1 levels inferior to 6.0% and
fasting glycemia inferior to 7 mmol/L, were not diagnosed for T2D, neo-
plasia, or chronic inflammatory diseases, and were not doing shift work.
Biopsies were taken from the gluteus maximus (n = 10) during planned
surgeries. Human myoblasts were cultured in growth medium composed of
HAM F-10 supplemented with 20% FBS, and 1% penicillin–streptomycin at
37 °C. After reaching confluence, myoblasts were differentiated into myo-
tubes during 7 to 10 d in differentiation medium (DMEM supplemented with
2% FBS). Muscle differentiation was characterized by the fusion of myoblasts
into polynucleated myotubes as previously described (27).
In Vitro Skeletal Myotube Synchronization, siRNA Transfection, and Real-Time
Bioluminescence Recording. Myotube cells were synchronized by 10 μM for-
skolin (Sigma) for 1 h once differentiation was achieved. Differentiated human
myotubes were transfected with 20 nM siRNA targeting CLOCK (siClock) or
with nontargeting siControl (Dharmacon; GE Healthcare), using HiPerFect
transfection reagent (Qiagen) 24 h before synchronization, following the
manufacturer’s protocol. Myotube bioluminescence recording was performed
as described in ref. 27 and detailed in SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods.
Quantitative RT-PCR. RNA from human skeletal muscle samples (550 ng) was
reverse-transcribed using a SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific).
mRNA levels were determined by TaqMan real-time qPCR using a LightCycler
480 (Roche) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Copy numbers were
normalized using GAPDH. The following TaqMan probes were used: PER2,
Hs00256143_m1; ARNTL, Hs00253876_m1; DBP, Hs00609747_m1; CHPT1,
Hs01012468_m1; ELOVL5, Hs01094711_m1; SPTLC2, Hs01027014_m1; UGCG,
Hs00916612_m1; GAPDH, Hs02758991_m1; ACSL3, Hs00244853_m1; ACSL4,
Hs00244871_m1; ACSL5, Hs01061754_m1; ACAD, Hs00155630_m1; ACADVL,
Hs00825606_g1; MYH1, Hs00428600_m1; MYH2, Hs00430042_m1; MYH4,
Hs00757977_m1; and MYH7, Hs01110632_m1.
RNA from human primary myotubes was reverse-transcribed, using Super-
Script III reverse transcriptase (Thermo Scientific) and random hexamers, and
then PCR-amplified on a LightCycler 480 (Roche). Values were normalized to the
mean of two housekeeping genes (HPRT and 9S) as described previously (27).
Lipidomics Analysis. The lipidomics analysis was performed as described in ref.
58 and detailed in SI Appendix, SI Materials and Methods.
Loizides-Mangold et al.
PNAS
|
Published online September 25, 2017
|
E8573
BIOCHEMISTRY
PNAS PLUS
 Data Analysis. Actimetrics LumiCycle analysis software (Actimetrics LTD) was used
for bioluminescence data analysis. Normalized lipid values (fold change mean)
were defined as the lipid value (phosphate normalized) for each time point di-
vided by the lipid mean value, calculated separately for each donor. To identify
circadian variations within the lipidomic dataset, phosphate values were
z-scored within subjects and then further analyzed using the JTK_CYCLE (28)
and ARSER (29) algorithms. The period width for the JTK_CYCLE analysis was
set to fit a time frame of 20 to 28 h and a P value of ≤0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
Statistical analyses concerning absolute lipid quantities were performed
using a paired Student’s t test. Differences were considered significant for
P ≤ 0.05 (*), P ≤ 0.01 (**), and P ≤ 0.001 (***) if not noted otherwise.
To determine the clustering, k-NN (nearest neighbors with k clusters) was
applied to the phases and amplitudes in polar coordinates of all circadian signals
for k = 1, 2, and 3 clusters. For further details, see SI Appendix, SI Materials
and Methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Jacques Philippe and Anton Alekseev (University
of Geneva) for constructive discussions, Dylan Thompson and Keith Stokes (University
of Bath) for their assistance with data collection, and Isabelle Riezman (University of
Geneva) for sample processing. This work was funded by Sinergia Swiss National
Science Foundation Grant CRSII3-154405 (to H.R., C. Dibner, and E.L.); by
Swiss National Science Foundation Grants 31003A-166700 (to C. Dibner)
and 310030B_166686 (to H.R.); by SystemsX.ch (evaluated by the Swiss National
Science Foundation) (H.R.); by the National Centre of Competence in Research
Chemical Biology (H.R.); by the Fondation Romande pour la Recherche sur le
Diabète; by the Fondation Ernst et Lucie Schmidheiny; by the Société Académ-
ique de Genève (C. Dibner); and by United Kingdom Biotechnology and Bio-
logical Sciences Research Council Grant BB/I008470/1 (to J.D.J.).
1. Asher G, Sassone-Corsi P (2015) Time for food: The intimate interplay between nu-
trition, metabolism, and the circadian clock. Cell 161:84–92.
2. Albrecht U (2012) Timing to perfection: The biology of central and peripheral circa-
dian clocks. Neuron 74:246–260.
3. Dibner C, Schibler U, Albrecht U (2010) The mammalian circadian timing system: Orga-
nization and coordination of central and peripheral clocks. Annu Rev Physiol 72:517–549.
4. Storch KF, et al. (2002) Extensive and divergent circadian gene expression in liver and
heart. Nature 417:78–83.
5. Zhang R, Lahens NF, Ballance HI, Hughes ME, Hogenesch JB (2014) A circadian gene
expression atlas in mammals: Implications for biology and medicine. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 111:16219–16224.
6. Panda S, et al. (2002) Coordinated transcription of key pathways in the mouse by the
circadian clock. Cell 109:307–320.
7. Gachon F, Loizides-Mangold U, Petrenko V, Dibner C (2017) Glucose homeostasis:
Regulation by peripheral circadian clocks in rodents and humans. Endocrinology,
10.1210/en.2017-00218.
8. DeFronzo RA, et al. (1981) The effect of insulin on the disposal of intravenous glucose.
Results from indirect calorimetry and hepatic and femoral venous catheterization.
Diabetes 30:1000–1007.
9. Muoio DM, Newgard CB (2008) Mechanisms of disease: Molecular and metabolic
mechanisms of insulin resistance and beta-cell failure in type 2 diabetes. Nat Rev Mol
Cell Biol 9:193–205.
10. Dyar KA, et al. (2013) Muscle insulin sensitivity and glucose metabolism are controlled
by the intrinsic muscle clock. Mol Metab 3:29–41.
11. Harfmann BD, et al. (2016) Muscle-specific loss of Bmal1 leads to disrupted tissue
glucose metabolism and systemic glucose homeostasis. Skelet Muscle 6:12.
12. Hodge BA, et al. (2015) The endogenous molecular clock orchestrates the temporal
separation of substrate metabolism in skeletal muscle. Skelet Muscle 5:17.
13. Turek FW, et al. (2005) Obesity and metabolic syndrome in circadian clock mutant
mice. Science 308:1043–1045.
14. Paschos GK, et al. (2012) Obesity in mice with adipocyte-specific deletion of clock
component Arntl. Nat Med 18:1768–1777.
15. Grimaldi B, et al. (2010) PER2 controls lipid metabolism by direct regulation of PPARγ.
Cell Metab 12:509–520.
16. Adamovich Y, et al. (2014) Circadian clocks and feeding time regulate the oscillations
and levels of hepatic triglycerides. Cell Metab 19:319–330.
17. Aviram R, et al. (2016) Lipidomics analyses reveal temporal and spatial lipid organi-
zation and uncover daily oscillations in intracellular organelles. Mol Cell 62:636–648.
18. Kalsbeek A, la Fleur S, Fliers E (2014) Circadian control of glucose metabolism. Mol
Metab 3:372–383.
19. Chua EC, et al. (2013) Extensive diversity in circadian regulation of plasma lipids and
evidence for different circadian metabolic phenotypes in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 110:14468–14473.
20. Morgan L, Hampton S, Gibbs M, Arendt J (2003) Circadian aspects of postprandial
metabolism. Chronobiol Int 20:795–808.
21. Dallmann R, Viola AU, Tarokh L, Cajochen C, Brown SA (2012) The human circadian
metabolome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:2625–2629.
22. Davies SK, et al. (2014) Effect of sleep deprivation on the human metabolome. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 111:10761–10766.
23. Giskeødegård GF, Davies SK, Revell VL, Keun H, Skene DJ (2015) Diurnal rhythms in the
human urine metabolome during sleep and total sleep deprivation. Sci Rep 5:14843.
24. Dibner C, Schibler U (2015) Circadian timing of metabolism in animal models and
humans. J Intern Med 277:513–527.
25. Hansen J, et al. (2016) Synchronized human skeletal myotubes of lean, obese and type
2 diabetic patients maintain circadian oscillation of clock genes. Sci Rep 6:35047.
26. Loizides-Mangold U, et al. (2016) Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) and pomegranate influence
circadian gene expression and period length. Chronobiol Int 33:453–461.
27. Perrin L, et al. (2015) Human skeletal myotubes display a cell-autonomous circadian
clock implicated in basal myokine secretion. Mol Metab 4:834–845.
28. Hughes ME, Hogenesch JB, Kornacker K (2010) JTK_CYCLE: An efficient non-
parametric algorithm for detecting rhythmic components in genome-scale data sets.
J Biol Rhythms 25:372–380.
29. Yang R, Su Z (2010) Analyzing circadian expression data by harmonic regression based
on autoregressive spectral estimation. Bioinformatics 26:i168–i174.
30. Staron RS, et al. (2000) Fiber type composition of the vastus lateralis muscle of young
men and women. J Histochem Cytochem 48:623–629.
31. Johnson MA, Polgar J, Weightman D, Appleton D (1973) Data on the distribution of
fibre types in thirty-six human muscles. An autopsy study. J Neurol Sci 18:111–129.
32. Deshmukh AS, et al. (2015) Deep proteomics of mouse skeletal muscle enables
quantitation of protein isoforms, metabolic pathways, and transcription factors. Mol
Cell Proteomics 14:841–853.
33. Murgia M, et al. (2017) Single muscle fiber proteomics reveals fibertype-specific
features of human muscle aging. Cell Rep 19:2396–2409.
34. Aguer C, et al. (2011) Galactose enhances oxidative metabolism and reveals mito-
chondrial dysfunction in human primary muscle cells. PLoS One 6:e28536.
35. Jeong J, Conboy IM (2011) Phosphatidylserine directly and positively regulates fusion
of myoblasts into myotubes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 414:9–13.
36. van den Eijnde SM, et al. (2001) Transient expression of phosphatidylserine at cell-cell
contact areas is required for myotube formation. J Cell Sci 114:3631–3642.
37. Andersson A, Nälsén C, Tengblad S, Vessby B (2002) Fatty acid composition of skeletal
muscle reflects dietary fat composition in humans. Am J Clin Nutr 76:1222–1229.
38. Stoll LL, Spector AA (1984) Changes in serum influence the fatty acid composition of
established cell lines. In Vitro 20:732–738.
39. Brown SA, et al. (2005) The period length of fibroblast circadian gene expression
varies widely among human individuals. PLoS Biol 3:e338.
40. Mannic T, et al. (2013) Circadian clock characteristics are altered in human thyroid
malignant nodules. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:4446–4456.
41. Perelis M, et al. (2015) Pancreatic β cell enhancers regulate rhythmic transcription of
genes controlling insulin secretion. Science 350:aac4250.
42. Pulimeno P, et al. (2013) Autonomous and self-sustained circadian oscillators dis-
played in human islet cells. Diabetologia 56:497–507.
43. Saini C, et al. (2016) A functional circadian clock is required for proper insulin se-
cretion by human pancreatic islet cells. Diabetes Obes Metab 18:355–365.
44. Schiaffino S, Blaauw B, Dyar KA (2016) The functional significance of the skeletal
muscle clock: Lessons from Bmal1 knockout models. Skelet Muscle 6:33.
45. Dyar KA, et al. (2015) The calcineurin-NFAT pathway controls activity-dependent
circadian gene expression in slow skeletal muscle. Mol Metab 4:823–833.
46. Kudo T, Tamagawa T, Kawashima M, Mito N, Shibata S (2007) Attenuating effect of
clock mutation on triglyceride contents in the ICR mouse liver under a high-fat diet.
J Biol Rhythms 22:312–323.
47. Li G, et al. (2016) Efficient replacement of plasma membrane outer leaflet phos-
pholipids and sphingolipids in cells with exogenous lipids. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113:
14025–14030.
48. van Meer G, Voelker DR, Feigenson GW (2008) Membrane lipids: Where they are and
how they behave. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9:112–124.
49. Abraham U, et al. (2010) Coupling governs entrainment range of circadian clocks. Mol
Syst Biol 6:438.
50. Balsalobre A, Marcacci L, Schibler U (2000) Multiple signaling pathways elicit circadian
gene expression in cultured Rat-1 fibroblasts. Curr Biol 10:1291–1294.
51. Brown SA, Zumbrunn G, Fleury-Olela F, Preitner N, Schibler U (2002) Rhythms of mam-
malian body temperature can sustain peripheral circadian clocks. Curr Biol 12:1574–1583.
52. Adamovich Y, Aviram R, Asher G (2015) The emerging roles of lipids in circadian
control. Biochim Biophys Acta 1851:1017–1025.
53. Panda S (2016) Circadian physiology of metabolism. Science 354:1008–1015.
54. Bourlier V, et al. (2013) Enhanced glucose metabolism is preserved in cultured primary
myotubes from obese donors in response to exercise training. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
98:3739–3747.
55. Bouzakri K, et al. (2003) Reduced activation of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and in-
creased serine 636 phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 in primary culture
of skeletal muscle cells from patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 52:1319–1325.
56. Green CJ, Pedersen M, Pedersen BK, Scheele C (2011) Elevated NF-κB activation is con-
served in human myocytes cultured from obese type 2 diabetic patients and attenuated
by AMP-activated protein kinase. Diabetes 60:2810–2819.
57. Krug EG (2016) Trends in diabetes: Sounding the alarm. Lancet 387:1485–1486.
58. Loizides-Mangold U, David FP, Nesatyy VJ, Kinoshita T, Riezman H (2012) Glyco-
sylphosphatidylinositol anchors regulate glycosphingolipid levels. J Lipid Res 53:
1522–1534.
E8574
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1705821114
Loizides-Mangold et al.
