 February 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 17
1
PersPective
published: 13 February 2018
doi: 10.3389/fvets.2018.00017
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Sabine G. Gebhardt-Henrich, 
 
University of Bern, Switzerland
Reviewed by: 
Rowena Mary Anne Packer, 
 
Royal Veterinary College, 
 
United Kingdom 
 
Jacquelyn Ann Jacobs, 
 
Agricultural Research Service, 
Canada
*Correspondence:
Kevin J. McPeake 
 
kmcpeake@lincoln.ac.uk
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to Animal 
Behavior and Welfare, 
 
a section of the journal 
 
Frontiers in Veterinary Science
Received: 25 October 2017
Accepted: 29 January 2018
Published: 13 February 2018
Citation: 
Lopes Fagundes AL, Hewison L, 
McPeake KJ, Zulch H and Mills DS 
(2018) Noise Sensitivities in Dogs: An 
Exploration of Signs in Dogs with and 
without Musculoskeletal Pain Using 
Qualitative Content Analysis. 
 
Front. Vet. Sci. 5:17. 
 
doi: 10.3389/fvets.2018.00017
Noise sensitivities in Dogs: An 
exploration of signs in Dogs with 
and without Musculoskeletal Pain 
Using Qualitative content Analysis
Ana Luisa Lopes Fagundes1, Lynn Hewison2, Kevin J. McPeake2*, Helen Zulch2 and  
Daniel Simon Mills2
1 
Centro Universitário de Belo Horizonte, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 2 
Animal Behaviour Clinic, School of Life Sciences, University 
of Lincoln, Lincoln, United Kingdom
Noise sensitivity is a common behaviour problem in dogs. In humans, there is a well- 
established relationship between painful conditions and the development of fear-related 
avoidance responses. Whilst it is likely that a relationship exists between noise sensitivity 
and pain in dogs, this does not appear to have been investigated. The aim of this study 
was to explore the signs of noise sensitivity in dogs with and without musculoskeletal pain 
by comparing case histories using qualitative content analysis. Data were extracted from 
the clinical records of 20 cases of dogs presenting with noise sensitivity seen by clinical 
animal behaviourists at the University of Lincoln, composed of 2 groups—10 “clinical 
cases” with pain and 10 “control cases” without pain. Loud noises as a trigger of noise 
sensitivity were a common theme in both groups but ubiquitous among “clinical cases.” 
In “clinical cases” (i.e., those where pain was identified), the age of onset of the noise 
sensitivity was on average nearly 4 years later than “control cases.” In addition, strong 
themes emerged relating to widespread generalisation to associated environments and 
avoidance of other dogs in the “clinical cases,” which did not appear in the “control 
cases.” “Clinical cases” responded well to treatment once the involvement of pain had 
been identified. Veterinarians and behaviourists should carefully assess dogs with noise 
sensitivities for pain-related problems especially if presenting with these characteristics.
Keywords: anxiety, behaviour, dog, fear, noise sensitivity, pain
iNtrODUctiON
The term “noise sensitivities” encompasses fear, anxiety, and phobia-based responses to a range of 
sound-related stimuli, such as loudness, pitch, and suddenness (1). Fearful responses can range from 
panting, hiding, and escape attempts, to destructiveness and self-injury (1). Nearly half of owners 
report that their dog shows at least one sign of fear when exposed to loud noises (2), but these cases 
do not appear to be commonly referred for specialist treatment. In the canine behaviour referral 
caseload collated from the membership of the Association of Pet Behaviour Counsellors (3), only 8% 
of dogs were referred for a fear or phobia. This raises welfare concerns as fears/phobias are a welfare 
problem in their own right, and there are a range of medical considerations associated with the 
apparent onset of noise sensitivity. These include cognitive dysfunction (4) and less specific medical 
signs such as gastrointestinal problems (5) and potentially thyroid problems (6, 7) although the 
 tABLe 1 | Predefined subject areas for data extraction in “control cases” and 
“clinical cases.”
Predefined subject areas for 
data extraction
specific information
Details of noise sensitivity
• Age at onset
• Specific trigger(s)
• Physical signs shown
• Consistency of signs
• How the problem had changed from its 
initial manifestation
• Any tendency to avoid places associated 
with the occurrence of noise triggers
Occurrence of other potential 
behaviour problems
Broadly classified in terms of expressions of 
positive or negative affect in response to:
• Familiar and unfamiliar dogs
• Familiar and unfamiliar people
• Children
• Other animals
• New situations
• Car travel
• Separation from the owner
Nature of any musculoskeletal 
problem
• How any diagnoses were established (e.g., 
physical examination, radiography)
• Presence of overt signs of pain in specific 
situations/at specific times (e.g., after 
exercise)
Treatment-related findings
• Treatment(s) prior to the consultation
• Treatment(s) suggested after the 
consultation
• Available outcome information
2
Lopes Fagundes et al.
Noise Sensitivities and Pain in Dogs
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 17
causal nature of the association with thyroid function remains a 
matter of some debate (8). The problem may be iatrogenic, with 
exogenous corticosteroid administration potentially increasing 
sensitivity to noise (9, 10). In humans, there is a well-established 
but complex relationship between painful conditions and the 
development of fear-related avoidance responses (11, 12), and 
hypersensitivity to sound has been suggested as an indicator 
of pain (13). There are sex differences in pain sensitivity after 
exposure to noise. Rhud and Meagher (14) apparently associated 
with different sympathetic arousal responses in the two genders 
(increased arousal and fear in women and more surprise and pain 
but less arousal in men). Whilst there are grounds for believing 
that there may be a relationship between noise sensitivity and 
pain in dogs, this has not been explored empirically in the vet-
erinary literature.
Qualitative research methods, such as content analysis or 
thematic analysis of case histories, provide a potential way to 
initially extract important information prior to any quantifica-
tion of the phenomena identified (15, 16). This approach has been 
used to examine potential signs of occult musculoskeletal pain 
in aggressive dogs (17). The aim of this study is to explore the 
presenting signs related to dogs with noise sensitivity with and 
without musculoskeletal pain using qualitative content analysis.
MAteriALs AND MetHODs
The work was approved by the relevant University Ethics Com-
mittee. Owners had previously given informed written consent 
for the material to be used for research. All data were extracted 
from historic clinical records of cases seen by one of four clinical 
animal behaviourists from the University of Lincoln’s Animal 
Behaviour Clinic [DM, HZ, KM, or LH (where veterinary input 
was provided by DM, HZ, or KM)]. The cases were selected with 
a presenting complaint related to fear, anxiety, or phobia trig-
gered by noise. Twenty cases were selected: 10 with a focus on 
musculoskeletal pain (“clinical cases”) and 10 with no identified 
pain focus (“control cases”). “Control cases” were selected as the 
next (by date) in the historical records after the “clinical case” 
that met the matching criteria. Case records included the dog’s 
medical history, veterinary referral form, owner completed ques-
tionnaire (both forms available in supplementary files), clinician’s 
notes (taken during the consultation and through the follow-up 
period), and video footage from the consultations.
The Animal Behaviour Clinic works only on referral from 
other veterinarians who complete a form certifying the health 
of the patient at referral. During the behaviour consultation, the 
clinician observes the dog’s gait, posture(s), and mobility (e.g., 
getting in/out the car, moving around the clinic). Any concerns 
over musculoskeletal problems are then discussed with the 
referring veterinarian who carries out further investigations/
treatment as required.
Demographic data (breed type, gender, and owner-reported 
temperament) were collated from the owner-completed ques-
tionnaire. Data were extracted in relation to a range of subject 
areas predefined by DM and HZ, and these are shown in Table 1.
The case records were subjected to qualitative content analysis 
(18). Themes were agreed on consensus between DM and HZ 
based on the relative frequency of the occurrences of the pre-
defined subject areas. A codebook was established by AF and it 
was reviewed by DM, and a sample was checked for reliability 
between AF and DM, but not tested statistically.
resULts
Table 2 summarises extracted data in relation to the noise 
sensitivity and the occurrence of other behaviour problems. The 
age of dogs at presentation varied widely in both populations 
(“control cases”: ~2–9 years, average 4 years 7 months; “clinical 
cases”: 2–11 years, average 5 years 7 months). Both groups were 
similarly mixed in relation to breed and sex, and there were no 
entire females in either group. The age of the dogs at onset of 
the problem was notably higher in the “clinical cases” group. 
Loud noises (as defined by owners) were a feature of the primary 
presenting complaint in every subject among “clinical cases” but 
featured in this way in only 6 of 10 of the control group. Many 
dogs reacted to multiple triggers in both groups (2.7 triggers/
clinical case vs 2.6 triggers/control case).
The physical signs of the dogs in response to noises were simi-
lar with no strong themes in either group, which could separate 
“control cases” from “clinical cases.” The most common signs in 
both groups were shaking/trembling and hiding. However, in 8 
of 10 “clinical cases,” the response had generalised substantially 
(5 to the general location where the sound occurred and 3 to the 
point of avoiding going out in the car); by contrast, this sort of 
generalisation was only reported in 2 of 10 of the “control cases” 
 tABLe 2 | Data relating to the noise sensitivities and other related triggers in 
“control cases” and “clinical cases.”
Feature of noise sensitivities
control cases 
(n = 10)
clinical cases 
(n = 10)
Average age at onset of  
the noise sensitivity  
(range) (years and months)
2 years 8 months 
(7 months to 6 years)
6 years 6 months 
(5 months to 10 years)
Types of noise sensitivity forming primary complaint
“Loud” noises
6/10
10/10
Fireworks
7/10
7/10
Other triggers related to noise sensitivity response
Gunshots
4/10
0/10
Aeroplanes
3/10
2/10
Car
2/10
3/10
Motorbike
1/10
0/10
Busy area
1/10
0/10
Young children
1/10
0/10
Wind
1/10
0/10
Dark places
0/10
1/10
Birds
0/10
1/10
Walks
0/10
1/10
Traffic
0/10
1/10
3
Lopes Fagundes et al.
Noise Sensitivities and Pain in Dogs
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 17
(1 each to the location and car). Nine dogs in the clinical group 
showed signs of apprehension or avoidance of new situations, and 
seven dogs in the control group had similar difficulties.
One dog in each group suffered from a separation-related 
problem, and one dog from each group also exhibited aggres-
sion towards unfamiliar dogs. Two dogs within the “control 
cases” showed overt aggression towards children, and no other 
subjects showed overt aggressive behaviour towards any other 
subjects. However, 6 of 10 subjects in each group showed signs of 
anxiety/avoidance in at least one social situation involving people 
(familiar or unfamiliar adults or, more commonly, children). The 
two groups appeared to differ in their general response towards 
dogs. Eight of the “clinical cases” showed some anxiety/avoid-
ance towards at least some other dogs (this was always towards 
unfamiliar dogs and in one case was also towards familiar dogs), 
whereas this only occurred among two of the “control cases” (one 
dog towards both unfamiliar and familiar dogs and one towards 
just unfamiliar dogs). Problematic behaviour with car travel 
(which may or may not have been related to noise) was similar 
between the two groups, occurring in two “control cases” and 
three “clinical cases.”
General temperament appeared similar between the two 
groups: among the “clinical cases,” seven dogs were described 
as primarily positive and three primarily negative; among the 
controls, the distribution was 8:2.
In this study, concerns over musculoskeletal problems were 
confirmed using a range of procedures (some individuals having 
multiple procedures): four clearly demonstrated pain during 
physical examination in the clinic, eight were radiographed, 
and one underwent magnetic resonance imaging. The problems 
identified or inferred related to the hip (including dysplasia–five 
subjects), degenerative joint disease of the limbs (four subjects), 
and focal spondylosis in L2 and L3 (one subject). In six of these 
cases, the owner commented that the dog seemed to be in some 
pain and/or the pain worsened after exercise.
Prior to consultation, for noise sensitivity, three “clinical cases” 
and four controls had received no treatment. Some cases had been 
given multiple treatments. Of the “clinical cases,” three had been 
given nutraceuticals (one Zylkene™, one Calmex™, and one an 
unspecified mixture), one had been given a pheromone product 
(Adaptil™), and three had been given psychopharmacological 
medication (clomipramine in one, a combination of selegiline and 
alprazolam in one, and fluoxetine, amitriptyline, and selegiline 
in one case at different times prior to referral). Of the “control 
cases,” five had been given nutraceuticals (four Zylkene™, one 
Calmex™), two a pheromone product (Adaptil™), and three 
psychopharmacological medication (one alprazolam, one fluox-
etine, and one selegiline).
Following behaviour consultation, all subjects received an 
individualised behaviour modification plan, which included 
management strategies, and guidance on counterconditioning 
 
and/or desensitisation to certain noise characteristics. Psycho-
pharmacological intervention was recommended in eight of the 
“clinical cases” and all “control cases.” All “clinical cases” received 
analgesia and management advice to reduce the risk of exacer-
bating pain. Responsibility for the choice of analgesia was with 
the referring clinician, with advice provided by the veterinary 
behaviourists as required. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories 
were used on all “clinical cases.” Adjunctive psychopharmacol-
ogy was prescribed in eight of these cases (two imepitoin, two 
fluoxetine and alprazolam, one alprazolam alone, one selegiline, 
one clomipramine, and one imepitoin). Among the “control 
cases,” four were prescribed imepitoin and six were prescribed 
alprazolam used as required (as a sole agent in two, alongside 
fluoxetine in two, alongside selegiline in two). Selegiline was later 
replaced by clomipramine in one of these cases, and alprazolam 
as a sole agent later replaced with imepitoin in another case.
All cases were reported to improve with treatment, except 
one dog with hip dysplasia, who had been showing signs of noise 
sensitivity since 5 months of age and whose owner did not elect 
to administer analgesia for their dog. Eight “clinical cases” and 
seven “control cases” were considered resolved to the owner’s 
satisfaction, at the time of the review.
DiscUssiON
Qualitative studies such as these provide clinically useful insights 
where current knowledge is lacking, because they provide a level 
of detail of examination of the issue that is not often apparent in 
quantitative studies, especially when sample sizes are limited. No 
attempt should be made to ascribe any statistical significance to 
these qualitative findings, rather they should be considered the 
basis for further enquiry and reflection by both practitioners and 
researchers in the field.
Although the average ages of the dogs at presentation were 
similar, the average age of onset of the problem was nearly 4 years 
later in the “clinical cases.” This strong theme of an older age of 
onset suggests that the pain may develop later in life and that 
owners seek treatment more readily, perhaps because the appear-
ance of the problem is out of character in the subject. The average 
age of onset within the control population also suggests that the 
problem does not simply relate to a lack of habituation as a puppy 
 4
Lopes Fagundes et al.
Noise Sensitivities and Pain in Dogs
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 17
and that other mechanisms need to be considered for many cases 
[for a review, see the study by Levine (19)]. Nonetheless, in the 
absence of a medical problem, aversive experience or change in 
environment, it should be noted that many behavioural problems 
typically become evident in early life (20) although a recent 
exploration into noise reactivity among three dog breeds indicated 
that social maturity may be an important time of onset of these 
problems (21). These results are consistent with the suggestion 
that whenever there is a late age onset to a behaviour problem, 
medical issues including those related to pain should be carefully 
evaluated. Veterinarians should ensure that all dogs with behaviour 
problems and especially those with an unusual pattern of onset 
receive a thorough physical examination, with a particular focus 
on orthopaedic issues to detect any focus of pain. This is especially 
important as “clinical cases” could not be obviously distinguished 
on the basis of their presenting signs, which were similar to those 
noted in larger studies [e.g., see the study by Iimura (5)].
Although owners may often miss many signs of fear or anxiety 
(22), it should be noted that there was a strong theme among 
the “clinical cases” often generalising their responses to the much 
wider environment, and this may be a clearer prompt for closer 
medical evaluation. Avoidance of associated locations needs to be 
distinguished from the more general apprehension and avoidance 
of new situations, which was common within both groups (7/10 
“control cases” vs 9/10 “clinical cases”). The greater generalisation 
among cases could be derived from additional classical condition-
ing of fear-related avoidance associated with pain (11, 12). We 
hypothesise that noises resulting in a normal startle response may 
cause muscle tensing that can exacerbate pain. It is worth noting 
that although sensitivity to loud noises was commonly reported in 
both groups, this was a feature of all “clinical cases.” It is acknowl-
edged that the definition of “loud noises” was a subjective one 
based on owner report and not specifically measured. Therefore, 
it is possible that there may have been differences between owners 
concerning what “loud” noise constitutes. Auditory stimuli can 
in themselves be perceived as painful, and dogs may have a lower 
auditory pain threshold (approximately 95 dB) (23) compared to 
humans (approximately 130 dB) (24). Therefore, it is likely that if 
owners perceive the noises to be loud, it would also be loud and 
potentially painful for their dogs, whether there was a pain focus 
elsewhere. It is also possible that the presence of a musculoskel-
etal pain focus and sound sensitivity interact to lower reactivity 
thresholds to related stimuli.
Comorbidities with other behaviour problems have been 
described in dogs with noise sensitivities (25). The groups in this 
study appeared to differ in their general response towards dogs 
with a strong theme related to problematic behaviour with other 
dogs among the “clinical cases” that was not apparent among 
controls. In chronic pain, social play can decrease and aggres-
sion towards other dogs can potentially increase (26). A dog may 
use aggressive behaviour to end an interaction, which is painful 
(e.g., twisting and turning) or prevent an interaction that they 
anticipate may be painful (e.g., being approached by a bouncy 
dog). Both of these responses might contribute to the observation 
here and deserve further investigation.
The majority of cases in both groups had been administered at 
least one treatment to assist in the control of the noise sensitivity 
prior to referral, ranging from pheromones to nutraceuticals and 
prescription medications. Such a high proportion may suggest 
that owners are looking for adjuncts to “cure” the problem and 
only proceed to seek specialist professional advice from a refer-
ral clinic when these are ineffective. The chemical interventions 
described may provide a valuable and necessary adjunct to a suc-
cessful behaviour modification programmes, but should not be 
used alone in an attempt to effect a “quick fix” (27). Non-response 
to anxiolytic medication, while common (27), should also be 
considered as a prompt for closer medical scrutiny of the case. 
When considering welfare, it is a cause for concern that noise 
sensitivities had been present for such a long time before referral 
occurred.
In cases where pain is suspected, response to trial analgesia is 
important (26, 28), but failure to respond to one analgesic does 
not exclude the presence of pain (26). Therefore, it is important to 
establish the cause and type of pain involved as far as possible to 
ascertain the most appropriate treatment (which may be a com-
bination of analgesics) for that individual patient (28). Further 
investigations of the cause of pain (e.g., through diagnostic imag-
ing) is valuable for diagnosing a source of chronic pain, but pain 
cannot be excluded on the basis of normal radiographs nor can 
radiographic changes predict the degree of pain (26). A potential 
limitation of the study is that controls were not subjected to 
further investigations or trial analgesia. Whilst it is possible that 
some controls may have had a painful condition, there were no 
observable signs of a musculoskeletal problem when assessed at 
the clinic to warrant further investigation.
Whilst it might be diagnostically preferable to assess the 
response to analgesia before considering the use of anxiolytics, 
the welfare of the individual patient must be prioritised, and as 
such, it may be that both psychopharmacology and analgesia are 
administered concurrently or agents with multiple indications 
(e.g., amitriptyline) are used to exert multiple effects. It should 
be noted that once pain is successfully managed, the previously 
learned associations with noise may persist and require their own 
targeted behaviour modification programme.
There was a relatively high (for our behaviour clinic) usage of 
psychopharmacological intervention in the cases reported here 
(18 of 20). This may reflect a bias towards more severe cases being 
referred to us, including those who had been non-responsive to 
other treatments, and should not be considered the norm in 
general practice.
There was a large proportion of neutered dogs: 9 of 10 of both 
controls and “clinical cases,” whereas the Pet Animal Welfare 
Report (29) suggests that nationally only about 71% of dogs are 
neutered. A study by Spain et al. (30) found that decreasing age 
at gonadectomy in shelter dogs was associated with an increased 
risk of developing a noise phobia, but it could not be concluded 
that neutering is causative of noise phobias.
In conclusion, the most important clinical features identified 
in cases of noise sensitivity associated with pain were a ubiqui-
tous fearfulness of loud noises, an extensive generalisation of 
the problem to the wider environment and associated problems 
with other dogs. Unlike aggressive dogs in pain (17), we did not 
identify a moody temperament as a feature of these cases, and the 
age of onset was more typical in dogs older than the norm for this 
condition. Prognosis seems to be excellent if the case is properly 
managed following the identification of the role of pain. These 
 5
Lopes Fagundes et al.
Noise Sensitivities and Pain in Dogs
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
February 2018 | Volume 5 | Article 17
results should be considered preliminary until controlled stud-
ies with a larger sample size can further explore these identified 
themes and features.
etHics stAteMeNt
The work was approved by the relevant University Ethics 
Committee. Owners had previously given informed written 
consent for the material to be used for research.
AUtHOr cONtriBUtiONs
The idea for the study was devised by DM and HZ. Cases were all 
seen by DM, HZ, KM, and LH (with veterinary input from DM, 
HZ, or KM). AF performed the data extraction from case records. 
AF, LH, KM, DM, and HZ all contributed ideas to and reviewed 
the final manuscript.
AcKNOWLeDGMeNts
We would like to thank the organizers of the International 
Veterinary Behaviour Meeting for accepting an abstract relating 
to this work and presentation of a poster at their 11th meeting in 
Samorin, Slovakia (September 14–16, 2017).
sUPPLeMeNtArY MAteriAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online 
at http://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fvets.2018.00017/
full#supplementary-material.
reFereNces
1. Sherman BL, Mills DS. Canine anxieties and phobias: an update on separation 
anxiety and noise aversions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract (2008) 
38:1081–106. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2008.04.012 
2. Blackwell EJ, Bradshaw JW
, Casey RA. Fear responses to noises in domestic dogs: 
prevalence, risk factors and co-occurrence with other fear related behaviour. 
Appl Anim Behav Sci (2013) 145:15–25. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2012.12.004 
3. Association of Pet Behaviour Counsellors. Annual Review of Cases 2012. 
(2016). Available from: http://www.apbc.org.uk/system/files/apbc_annual_
report_2012.pdf
4. Landsberg GM, Deporter T, Araujo JA. Clinical signs and management of 
 
anxiety, sleeplessness, and cognitive dysfunction in the senior pet. Vet Clin 
North Am Small Anim Pract (2011) 41:565–90. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2011.03.017 
5. Iimura K. The Nature of Noise Fear in Domestic Dogs. Lincoln: University of 
Lincoln (2006).
6. Aronson LP, Dodds WJ. The effect of hypothyroid function on canine behav-
ior. Proc Int Vet Behav Med (2005) 228. 
7. Dodman NH, Aronson L, Cottam N, Dodds JW. The effect of thyroid replace-
ment in dogs with suboptimal thyroid function on owner-directed aggression: 
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J Vet Behav Clin 
Appl Res (2013) 8:225–30. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2012.12.059 
8. Overall KL. Medical differentials with potential behavioral manifestations. 
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract (2003) 33:213–29. doi:10.1016/
S0195-5616(02)00103-1 
9. Notari L, Mills D. Possible behavioral effects of exogenous corticosteroids on 
dog behavior: a preliminary investigation. J Vet Behav Clin Appl Res (2011) 6: 
321–7. doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2011.02.004 
10. Notari L, Burman O, Mills D. Behavioural changes in dogs treated with cortico-
steroids. Physiol Behav (2015) 151:609–16. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.08.041 
11. Vlaeyen JW, Linton SJ. Fear-avoidance model of chronic musculoskeletal 
 
pain: 12 years on. Pain (2012) 153:1144–7. doi:10.1016/j.pain.2011.12.009 
12. Vlaeyen JW, Linton SJ. Fear-avoidance and its consequences in chronic 
musculoskeletal pain: a state of the art. Pain (2000) 85:317–32. doi:10.1016/
S0304-3959(99)00242-0 
13. Nijs J, Van Houdenhove B, Oostendorp RA. Recognition of central sensitiza-
tion in patients with musculoskeletal pain: application of pain neurophysiol-
ogy in manual therapy practice. Man Ther (2010) 15:135–41. doi:10.1016/j.
math.2009.12.001 
14. Rhud JL, Meagher MW. Noise stress and human pain thresholds: divergent 
effects in men and women. J Pain (2001) 2:57–64. doi:10.1054/jpai.2000.19947 
15. Green J, Britten N. Qualitative research and evidence based medicine. BMJ 
(1998) 316:1230. doi:10.1136/bmj.316.7139.1230 
16. Pope C, Mays N. Reaching the parts other methods cannot reach: an introduc-
tion to qualitative methods in health and health services research. BMJ (1995) 
311:42. doi:10.1136/bmj.311.6996.42 
17. Barcelos A, Mills D, Zulch H. Clinical indicators of occult musculoskeletal 
pain in aggressive dogs. Vet Rec (2015) 176(18):465. doi:10.1136/vr.102823 
18. Bowen GA. Document analysis as a qualitative research method. Qual Res J 
(2009) 9:27–40. doi:10.3316/QRJ0902027 
19. Levine E. Sound sensitivities. 2nd ed. In: Horwitz D, Mills D, editors. BSAVA 
Manual of Canine and Feline Behavioural Medicine. Cheltenham, England: 
British Small Animal Veterinary Association (2009). p. 159–68.
20. Fatjó J, Bowen J. Medical and metabolic influences on behavioural disor-
ders. In: Horwitz D, Mills D, editors. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline 
Behavioural Medicine. Cheltenham, England: BSAVA (2009). p. 1–9.
21. Overall KL, Dunham AE, Juarbe-Diaz SV. Phenotypic determination of noise 
reactivity in 3 breeds of working dogs: A cautionary tale of age, breed, behav-
ioral assessment, and genetics. J Vet Behav Clin Appl Res (2016) 16:113–25. 
doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2016.09.007
22. Mariti C, Gazzano A, Moore JL, Baragli P, Chelli L, Sighieri C. Perception 
of dogs’ stress by their owners. J Vet Behav Clin Appl Res (2012) 7:213–9. 
doi:10.1016/j.jveb.2011.09.004 
23. Beerda B, Schilder MB, Van Hooff JA, De Vries HW. Manifestations of chronic 
and acute stress in dogs. Appl Anim Behav Sci (1997) 52:307–19. doi:10.1016/
S0168-1591(96)01131-8 
24. Howard DM, Angus J. Acoustics and Psychoacoustics. Oxford: Taylor & Francis 
(2009).
25. Overall KL, Dunham AE, Frank D. Frequency of nonspecific clinical signs in 
dogs with separation anxiety, thunderstorm phobia, and noise phobia, alone 
or in combination. J Am Vet Med Assoc (2001) 219:467–73.
26. Hielm-Björkman A. Recognition and assessment of chronic pain in dogs. In: 
Shilo Y, Pascoe PJ, editors. Pain Management in Veterinary Practice. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell (2013), 227–37.
27. Crowell-Davis S, Landsberg G. Pharmacology and pheromone therapy. 2nd 
ed. In: Horwitz D, Mills D, editors. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline 
Behavioural Medicine. Gloucester, England: British Small Animal Veterinary 
Association (2009). p. 245–58.
28. Epstein ME, Rodan I, Griffenhagen G, Kadrlik J, Petty MC, Robertson SA, 
et al. 2015 AAHA/AAFP pain management guidelines for dogs and cats. 
J Feline Med Surg (2015) 17:251–72. doi:10.1177/1098612X15572062 
29. Peoples Dispensary for Sick Animals. PAW (Pet Animal Welfare) PDSA Animal 
Wellbeing Report. (2016). Available from: https://www.pdsa.org.uk/~/media/
pdsa/files/pdfs/veterinary/paw-reports/pdsa-paw-report-2016-view-online.
ashx?la=en
30. Spain CV, Scarlett JM, Houpt KA. Long-term risks and benefits of early-age 
gonadectomy in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc (2004) 224:380–7. doi:10.2460/
javma.2004.224.372 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Lopes Fagundes, Hewison, McPeake, Zulch and Mills. This is an 
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 
License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, 
provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner are credited and that the 
original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply 
with these terms.
