 November 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 72
1
Original research
published: 16 November 2016
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2016.00072
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Doron Friedman, 
Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya, Israel
Reviewed by: 
Luciana Nedel, 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande 
do Sul, Brazil 
 
Juan Carlos Torres, 
University of Granada, Spain
*Correspondence:
Rajesh P
. N. Rao 
 
rao@cs.washington.edu
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to Virtual 
Environments, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Robotics and AI
Received: 04 July 2016
Accepted: 01 November 2016
Published: 16 November 2016
Citation: 
Losey DM, Stocco A, Abernethy JA 
and Rao RPN (2016) Navigating a 2D 
Virtual World Using Direct Brain 
Stimulation. 
Front. Robot. AI 3:72. 
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2016.00072
navigating a 2D Virtual World Using 
Direct Brain stimulation
Darby M. Losey1,2, Andrea Stocco3,4,5, Justin A. Abernethy3,4 and Rajesh P. N. Rao1,5*
1 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 2 
Department of 
Neurobiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 3 
Department of Psychology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA, 4 
Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 5 
Center for Sensorimotor 
Neural Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Can the human brain learn to interpret inputs from a virtual world delivered directly 
through brain stimulation? We answer this question by describing the first demonstration 
of humans playing a computer game utilizing only direct brain stimulation and no other 
sensory inputs. The demonstration also provides the first instance of artificial sensory 
information, in this case depth, being delivered directly to the human brain through 
non-invasive methods. Our approach utilizes transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) 
of the human visual cortex to convey binary information about obstacles in a virtual 
maze. At certain intensities, TMS elicits visual percepts known as phosphenes, which 
transmit information to the subject about their current location within the maze. Using 
this computer–brain interface, five subjects successfully navigated an average of 92% 
of all the steps in a variety of virtual maze worlds. They also became more accurate 
in solving the task over time. These results suggest that humans can learn to utilize 
information delivered directly and non-invasively to their brains to solve tasks that cannot 
be solved using their natural senses, opening the door to human sensory augmentation 
and novel modes of human–computer interaction.
Keywords: transcranial magnetic stimulation, brain–computer interface, virtual reality, phosphene, visual system, 
navigation, neural stimulation, sensory augmentation
inTrODUcTiOn
Considerable progress has been made in interpreting information recorded from the brain to build 
non-invasive brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) (Rao, 2013) that allow control over a wide variety 
of devices, such as cursors (Wolpaw et al., 1991), robots (Bell et al., 2008), and spellers (Xu et al., 
2013). While these efforts have focused on decoding information from the brain, an important 
question that has not received as much attention is: can novel information from artificial sensors 
or computer-generated virtual worlds be encoded and delivered non-invasively to the human brain 
to solve useful tasks? We address this question by showing that transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS) can be used to deliver useful information to the human brain to solve a simple navigation task 
in a virtual world. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that non-invasive human brain 
stimulation can be used for such a purpose, the most closely related previous demonstration being 
the work of Thomson et al. (2013) who used invasive stimulation of somatosensory cortex in rats to 
deliver infrared information for solving a discrimination task. Other research efforts, also in rats, 
have focused on the neural mechanisms of navigation in virtual reality using visual or auditory cues 
(Cushman et al., 2013; Aghajan et al., 2015) rather than direct sensory feedback through stimulation.
 FigUre 1 | This figure illustrates the starting position of the second 
maze (see Figure 2). The subject’s avatar starts in the upper-left corner of 
the maze. The goal is to move the avatar toward the bottom-rightmost 
position. The intensity of the TMS pulse is determined by the position of the 
closest wall in front of the avatar. If a wall is directly in front of the avatar, the 
subject receives an above-threshold pulse. A subthreshold pulse is fired if 
there is no wall directly in front of the avatar, as in this figure.
TaBle 1 | subject demographics and stimulation intensities.
subject gender
age subthreshold 
 
intensity (%)
above-threshold  
intensity (%)
stimulation site  
(relative to inion)
1
M
31
48
65
2 cm dorsal,  
1 cm left
2
M
39
41
65
2 cm dorsal,  
1 cm left
3
F
19
52
72
4 cm dorsal
4
F
28
42
72
4 cm dorsal,  
1 cm left
5
F
36
53
71
4 cm dorsal,  
1 cm left
2
Losey et al.
Virtual Navigation through Brain Stimulation
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
November 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 72
Transcranial magnetic stimulation has been and continues to 
be used as an important investigative tool for cortical “knockout” 
studies (Pascual-Leone et al., 1999; Devlin and Watkins, 2007), 
neurophysiology (Terhune et al., 2015), and medical treatment 
(Menkes et al., 1999; George et al., 2000). The realm of applica-
tions of TMS has recently expanded as it has emerged as a tool 
for non-invasive neural encoding of information via a computer–
brain interface (CBI), specifically within the context of human 
brain-to-brain communication (Grau et al., 2014; Rao et al., 2014; 
Stocco et al., 2015). Rao et al. (2014) utilized TMS over the pri-
mary motor cortex to elicit a hand movement in correspondence 
with changes in the motor rhythms (mu band power) of another 
subject. As with Rao and colleagues, Grau et al. (2014) transferred 
information through a brain-to-brain interface utilizing changes 
in mu band power and encoding information in TMS-produced 
phosphenes, though the information transfer was not in real 
time. The presence or absence of phosphenes, temporary visual 
percepts of lines or spots that can occur upon neuromodulation 
of the visual cortex represented a binary message that was used to 
build simple words. Stocco et al. (2015) also utilized phosphene 
perception in a different brain-to-brain interface that allowed 
2-way communication. In this case, Yes/No answers in a 20-ques-
tions game were decoded from one subject’s steady-state visually 
evoked potentials (SSVEPs) and sent in real-time to another 
subject, where this information was encoded in the presence or 
absence of phosphenes.
In the present study, phosphene elicitation via single pulse 
TMS over the primary visual cortex was utilized for augmenting 
human sensory capability. Information is relayed to the subject 
about obstacle depth in a virtual environment where the subject is 
deprived of visual information about the world they are navigat-
ing. The intensity of stimulation depends on the relative position 
of an avatar to the wall of the maze, such that being close to the 
wall causes the subject to perceive a phosphene and being far 
from a wall results in the absence of a phosphene. The subject 
advances in the maze if they correctly interpret the stimulation.
We demonstrate that the decision time in classification of 
phosphenes directly correlates with the probability of answer-
ing correctly. Subjects also became more accurate in solving 
the navigation task over the course of the experiment. Both of 
these results suggest that phosphene perception is an interpret-
able phenomenon, allowing subjects to learn to interpret and 
incorporate inputs from a CBI as a new artificial source of useful 
sensory signals.
MaTerials anD MeThODs
subject recruitment
Five healthy participants (age: M = 30.6, SD = 6.95, range 
19–39; 3 females; see Table 1) were recruited via word of mouth 
among the University of Washington student, staff, and faculty 
population. This study was carried out in accordance with the 
recommendations of the University of Washington Institutional 
Review Board under application #48773. All subjects gave written 
informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki 
prior to participation in the study. All subjects recruited success-
fully completed the experiment.
generation of Mazes
Fourteen experimental mazes and seven control mazes (see 
Control Conditions below) were generated and utilized for all 
participants. All mazes were 10 steps in length and consisted 
of a path that required a combination of forward or downward 
movements (Figure 1). The 14 experimental mazes comprised of 
two sets of seven mazes. Each set of seven mazes consisted of one 
maze with each of zero through six “turns” randomly distributed 
throughout the maze, where a turn is a switch between forward 
and downward movements. The second set of seven experimental 
mazes represented the mirror image of the first set, such that all 
forward movements were replaced with downward movements 
and vice versa. The control mazes were selected such that for each 
of the one through six turn conditions, a maze from the original 
 FigUre 2 | all subjects were tested on the same mazes in the same order. Each maze was 10 steps in length. Participants only advanced if they correctly 
interpreted the input from the CBI and made the correct movement.
3
Losey et al.
Virtual Navigation through Brain Stimulation
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
November 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 72
set or the mirrored set was randomly selected and added to the 
control set. The control maze with 0 turns was selected to include 
only downward movements to avoid the trivial case in which a 
subject would likely finish the maze under the control conditions. 
The order in which the mazes were presented to the subject was 
randomized once and kept consistent between subjects. Figure 2 
illustrates the mazes used in the experiment.
control conditions
In order to ensure that information came solely from the CBI, 
7 control games were randomly intermixed with the 14 experi-
mental games. During these control trials, a custom-made plastic 
prop, whose design was intended to mimic the shape and texture 
of the TMS coil, was placed over the coil, separating the coil from 
the scalp of the subject by 20 mm (Figure 3). This additional 
distance prevents the appearance of phosphenes while mimick-
ing other sensory cues that could provide information about the 
subject’s location in the maze, such as the noise and the vibration 
generated by the TMS machine upon firing. This prop was tested 
for each subject during the thresholding phase (described below) 
to ensure its effectiveness in preventing phosphene perception.
Prior to the experiment, subjects were made aware of the 
existence of the control condition but were not informed about 
which games the control condition would apply to or the ratio of 
experimental to control games. During the control condition, the 
TMS machine still fired at intensities appropriate to the avatar’s 
location within the maze, irrelevant of its designation as a control 
game. Upon completion of the control maze, the subject was 
notified of the game’s designation as part of the control set so as 
to not mislead the subject about their performance, which may 
impede their confidence in phosphene perception and influence 
their future performance.
The methodology with which the mazes were constructed 
ensured that one maze consisted of a straight hallway with no 
turns, which would cause all TMS pulses to be subthreshold, and 
would thus mimic the perception of a control condition while 
not actually being a control maze. This was done to help prevent 
subjects from trying to guess whether the control condition was 
in place from a prolonged lack of phosphenes.
Determination of Phosphene Thresholds
Prior to the experiment, each subject underwent a screening ses-
sion in order to determine the intensity and location at which they 
reliably perceived phosphenes from a single pulse TMS stimula-
tion. As convention, the intensity of stimulation is expressed as a 
percentage of the maximum output, which, in this case, is a 2.2-T 
 FigUre 5 | The phosphene threshold for each subject was found by 
first marking a 4 cm × 4 cm grid 1 cm dorsal to the inion. A candidate 
location was determined by stimulating at increasing intensities up to 75%. 
If a phosphene was not perceived, a new location was examined. The final 
above-threshold intensity was established as the minimum intensity for which 
subjects perceived a phosphene for 10 consecutive stimulations. Conversely, 
the subthreshold intensity was established as the maximum intensity for which 
a subject did not perceive a phosphene after 10 consecutive stimulations.
FigUre 4 | Depiction of the experimental setup. The subject sat on a 
BrainSight™ chair (Rogue Research, Montreal, QC, Canada) with a white 
swim cap in front of a touch screen monitor (a) with their head situated in a 
two-pronged head-and-chin-rest (B). The current maze was displayed to the 
experimenter on a separate monitor not visible to the subject (c). A 
figure-eight TMS coil (D) was situated over the stimulation site in the 
orientation shown. The angle of the coil was consistent across all subjects. In 
the control condition, the coil was covered by the control prop (partially 
visible in the figure; see Figure 3). The coil, powered by a MagStim Super 
Rapid2 stimulator (e), was positioned using a laser pointer (F) at the 
beginning of every maze game.
FigUre 3 | (a) The photo shows the prop used in the control condition. It is 
designed to mimic the texture and size of the TMS coil, but when applied to 
the coil (B), it separates the coil from the head by 20 mm, thus preventing 
the appearance of phosphenes.
4
Losey et al.
Virtual Navigation through Brain Stimulation
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
November 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 72
magnetic field from a 70-mm figure-of-8 coil (Double 70 mm 
Alpha coil, Magstim, UK; Figure 4) generated by a 660-V electric 
field from a biphasic transcranial magnetic stimulator (Super 
Rapid2, Magstim, UK; Figure 4). The subject wore a tight-fitting 
cap, in which the location of the inion was marked as a reference 
point for the stimulation process. A 4 cm × 4 cm grid of locations, 
arranged in 1-cm spaced rows and columns, was then drawn 1 cm 
dorsal to the inion (Figure 5). For a given location, the suitability 
as a candidate “hotspot” for stimulation was determined by 
administering seven pulses of increasing intensity, in increments 
of 5%, starting at 45%. If the subject did not perceive a phosphene 
by the 75% mark, a new location was examined. Based on the 
results of Stocco et al. (2015), the first stimulation site examined 
was 2 cm dorsal, 1 cm left of the inion. Subsequent sites were 
then examined at increasing distance from this starting point. 
The first location at which the subject could perceive phosphenes 
at intensities less than 75% was designated as the target site for 
the stimulation hotspot. For safety, the subject was not stimu-
lated more than once in a given 8 s interval, either during the 
thresholding procedure or during the experimental session. The 
above-threshold intensity was determined as the lowest intensity 
for which the subject reported phosphene perception for 10 con-
secutive stimulations. Conversely, the subthreshold intensity was 
determined as the largest intensity for which no phosphene was 
perceived for 10 consecutive stimulations. The control condition 
was then tested to ensure that participants could not perceive 
phosphenes when stimulated at the above-threshold intensity.
It should be noted that this method of phosphene perception 
implicitly accounts for minute individual differences between 
subjects, such as varying skull thickness or neural architecture. 
Additionally, only a subset of all possible stimulation locations 
and parameters are examined. While a more reliable stimulation 
site may exist, the first reliable location was selected in order to 
minimize the number of stimulations administered during the 
thresholding phase. Therefore, because the choice of the location 
was not optimized for each subject, our results are likely a con-
servative estimate and underestimate the participants’ achievable 
performance.
experimental Paradigm
The subject sat in a darkened room in front of a touch screen 
computer monitor that displayed a fixation cross. A pair of 36 dB 
 FigUre 6 | For each maze, the subject has ten opportunities for 
movement. An example of four hypothetical movements is shown above. 
Note that the maze is not visible to the subject until the end of the trial, and 
all movement decisions must be made based only on TMS pulses. (a) The 
avatar is directly in front of a wall, thus triggering an above-threshold TMS 
pulse. The subject identifies this pulse correctly and makes a discrete 
movement down to the location shown in (B). (B) Since no wall is in front of 
the avatar, a subthreshold pulse is triggered. The subject correctly identifies 
this pulse and advances to the location shown in (c). (c) No wall directly in 
front corresponds to another subthreshold pulse. This time, the subject 
misidentifies the pulse and does not advance. (D) The white dot marks the 
location the avatar would have occupied if the subject had answered with 
100% accuracy for the duration of current game (the white dot only marks 
this optimal location and has no influence on pulse intensity). As there is still 
no wall directly in front of the avatar, a subthreshold pulse is fired again. The 
subject correctly identifies that no obstacle is directly in the avatar’s path and 
advances one space forward. (e) This marks the end of the game. At this 
point, the maze is displayed on the subject’s screen to provide feedback on 
how far they progressed through the maze. Note that whenever the subject 
views the screen, either the avatar or the white dot will occupy the last 
location in the maze, corresponding to completing or not completing the 
maze, respectively.
5
Losey et al.
Virtual Navigation through Brain Stimulation
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
November 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 72
noise-canceling earplugs was used to help mask potential external 
cues and allow for better concentration. The TMS coil was placed 
over the subject’s occipital lobe at a location determined during 
the thresholding procedure (described above). The subject’s 
avatar started in the upper-left portion of the maze (Figure 1). 
If the avatar was directly in front of a wall, an above-threshold 
TMS pulse was fired; otherwise, a subthreshold pulse was fired. 
Note that the maze was displayed on a second screen visible 
only to the experimenter (Figure 4) and remained hidden from 
the participants until the end of each maze. Instead, the screen 
visible to participants displayed a fixation sign cross while they 
waited for the next stimulation. Two seconds after the TMS fired, 
a question box appeared asking if the subject wishes to move 
forward in the maze or down a ladder. To avoid potential confu-
sion, a reminder that the presence of a phosphene corresponds 
to a downward movement also displayed on screen. The subject 
answered the question by hitting one of two buttons on the touch 
screen computer monitor to move forward or downward. If the 
subject identified the necessary movement correctly, their avatar 
advanced one space in that direction. If the subject misinter-
preted the stimulation, they did not advance forward in the maze 
(Figure 6); in this case, the avatar remained in the same location, 
and the same intensity stimulation was fired in the next time step, 
effectively repeating the time step. Each maze required 10 correct 
steps to be traversed completely. Correspondingly, each subject 
was given 10 stimulations per maze, and thus 10 opportunities 
to move. After the 10 simulations, the maze was displayed on the 
subject’s screen to allow them to view their avatar’s final location 
within the maze, and the subject was notified if that game was 
part of the control set. The maze was then hidden from their view 
as the next game commenced. Prior to the start of each game, the 
experimenter examined the subject’s head position and relative 
coil position using a guiding laser pointed at the stimulation site 
(Figure 4). If the next maze was a part of the control set, the 
experimenter attached the control prop (Figure 3) to the TMS 
coil when readjusting head position. To keep the timing of the 
operations consistent across different conditions, the experi-
menter mimicked the procedure of inserting the control prop 
before every trial, including experimental trials.
resUlTs
On average, participants completely traversed 70% of the mazes 
under the experimental conditions and 0% in the control 
conditions. The difference was statistically significant [paired 
t(4) = 3.89, p < 0.02; Figure 7A]. Note that, as participants 
needed 10 consecutive correct categorizations in order to 
complete a maze, a single mistake caused them to fall short of 
traversing the entire maze. Therefore, this analysis is a conserva-
tive measure of performance. A more sensitive measure is the 
number of correct steps performed by participants under each 
condition. Participants completed an average of 92% of the steps 
in the experimental condition, significantly more than 15.4% 
of the steps in the control condition [t(4) = 11.59, p = 0.0003; 
Figure 7B]. In the control conditions, an ideal observer would 
always assume that, since no phosphenes are being perceived, he 
or she should always move forward. This would result in correctly 
performing only the initial forward movements for the control 
mazes and getting “stuck” at the first wall obstacle. This repre-
sents 14.2% of the total number of movements and is thus the 
baseline performance for the control condition. Two one-sided 
t-tests showed that participants performed above baseline in the 
experimental condition [t(4) = 14.15, p = 0.0001], but not in the 
control condition [t(4) = 1.00, p = 0.38].
Signal detection theory also provides another dimension of 
analysis. Specifically, the performance of each subject can be 
visually described using ROC curves (Fawcett and Tom, 2006), 
which plot the true positives rate vs. the false positives rate for 
both experimental and control conditions. In this analysis, the 
“signal” is the correct direction at each step, and the “predic-
tion” is the action selected by the participant. Figure 8 shows the 
ROC curves for each participant. Within this framework, the 
performance of each participant in both the experimental and 
control conditions can be quantified as the area under the curve 
 FigUre 7 | each line represents one subject, separately showing the experimental and control conditions. For all plots, the control condition is not 
statistically significant from baseline performance (dashed line). (a) The proportion of mazes solved (i.e., fully traversed) ranged from 0 to 100% in the experimental 
condition. In order to fully traverse a maze, subjects had to correctly classify all 10 consecutive pulses. (B) This figure shows the aggregate accuracy for the entirety 
of the experiment. One subject, despite not fully traversing any maze, still had an accuracy of over 70% for the experimental condition. (c) The AUC plot is the area 
under the curve of the ROC plots shown in Figure 8. (D) Mutual information is a measure of the amount of information successfully transferred from the CBI to the 
participant.
6
Losey et al.
Virtual Navigation through Brain Stimulation
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
November 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 72
(AUC) of the corresponding ROC plot (Figure 7C). The AUC 
value ranges from 1.0 (an ideal detector that recognizes all true 
positives with 0 false positives) to 0.5 (a random responder). 
Individual AUCs were calculated using the ROCR package for 
R (Sing et al., 2005). Because the AUC is inherently non-normal, 
the raw data were arcsin-root transformed before being ana-
lyzed. The mean raw AUC for the control condition was exactly 
at chance (0.50), whereas the raw AUC for the experimental 
condition was 0.93. This is significantly larger than chance 
[t(4) = 9.40, p = 0.0007].
A final measure of interest is the number of bits successfully 
transferred to the participant using the TMS stimulation by 
the CBI. This measure is best captured by the mutual informa-
tion between the series of TMS pulses and the participant’s 
responses. The mutual information values were calculated using 
the Infotheo package for R (Meyer, 2014), using the empiri-
cal probability distributions of zeros and ones to estimate the 
corresponding entropy (Cover and Thomas, 2005). The actual 
number of bits transferred can be calculated by first converting 
the mutual information into bits, and then multiplying it by 
the total number of pulses for each maze (in this case, 10), so 
that this measure can be compared between the two conditions 
(which have different numbers of mazes). In the experimental 
condition, the raw mean number of bits transferred per maze 
was 5.16, which was significantly greater than the mean of 0.01 
bits transferred during the control condition [paired t(4) = 5.18, 
p = 0.006; Figure 7D]. The raw number of bits transferred in 
the experimental condition was also greater than chance, which 
in the mutual information framework, corresponds to zero bits 
[t(4) = 5.25, p = 0.006]. The average of 0.01 bits transferred 
during the control condition was not significantly different than 
chance [t(4) = 1.00, p = 0.38].
The five participants in our study varied considerably in 
terms of performance during experimental conditions, rang-
ing from the 100% accuracy of Subject 2 to 70.7% accuracy 
of Subject 3. It is important to understand the origin of these 
differences, and how they might affect the use of TMS in a 
CBI. In principle, these differences could reflect two different 
 FigUre 8 | receiver operating characteristics (rOc) for the control games (gray) and experimental games (red). A perfect classifier (100% true positives 
and 0% false positives) occupies the upper-leftmost corner of the graph. In contrast, a random classifier is represented by a straight line across the diagonal. The 
experimental condition of Subject 2 is an example of a perfect classifier, while the control condition of Subject 2 exemplifies a random classifier.
FigUre 9 | Participants showed improved accuracy for mazes in the 
experimental condition as a function of time (i.e., with increasing 
experience with the navigational task, as evidenced by a significant 
correlation between mean group performance on a maze and the 
maze position within the experiment). The individual dots represent 
average performances for the specific mazes, the red line represents best 
fitting linear relationship (intercept: 0.81; beta = 0.011), and the shaded 
contour represents the 95% confidence interval of the estimate.
7
Losey et al.
Virtual Navigation through Brain Stimulation
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
November 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 72
phenomena, namely irreducible individual differences in sen-
sitivity to visual neuromodulation or individual differences 
in the rapidity of learning. To clarify this issue, we analyzed 
the data from the experimental mazes. As Subject 2 made no 
mistakes during the experimental condition, this subject’s data 
were excluded from this analysis.
A well-known psychological phenomenon is that decision 
times relate to the similarity between the available alternatives 
to choose from; the more similar the alternatives, the longer the 
decision time. In this instance, decision time represents the time 
that it takes to determine whether to move forward or down in 
the maze from the time the TMS machine fired. Decision times 
were measured from the moment the alternatives (i.e., the screen 
buttons corresponding to moving forward or downward) were 
presented to the subject, which occurred exactly 2 s after the TMS 
pulse fired. The mean decision times were calculated separately 
for correct and incorrect trials. In the case of errors, participants 
took significantly longer to respond than in the case of correct 
trials [4,102 ± 582 vs. 3,362 ± 423 ms, respectively; paired 
t(3) = 5.97, p = 0.01; Figure 9].
If errors were due to the difficulty in categorizing an unusual, 
stimulation-induced visual percept, then it becomes interesting 
to examine whether participants were able to familiarize them-
selves with phosphenes and learn how to recognize them over the 
course of the experiment. If the participants are indeed learning 
in this manner, then the number of errors should decline over 
time. To test this hypothesis, the mean accuracy for each of the 
14 experimental mazes across participants was calculated. As 
shown in Figure 9, a significant positive correlation was found 
between the probability of correctly classifying a phosphene and 
the position of a maze (maze index) within the experimental 
 FigUre 10 | Participants showed no tendency to commit more errors 
on turns (as opposed to continuation in the same direction) in the 
experimental condition as a function of increasing experience with 
mazes, suggesting that subjects were not relying on a learned 
strategy of persevering in the same direction (instead of deciding at 
random) when the stimulation resulted in an ambiguous percept.
8
Losey et al.
Virtual Navigation through Brain Stimulation
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
November 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 72
sequence [Pearson r = 0.57, t(12) = 2.42, p = 0.031]. This cor-
relation strongly suggests that some form of learning took place 
as participants progressed through the experimental mazes. This 
finding is consistent with the hypothesis that, as participants 
gained more experience, they become better at interpreting the 
initially unusual inputs from the CBI.
While it is possible that subjects could learn to improve accu-
racy by some other means, the notion that subjects exploited 
patterns within the maze is not supported by our data. Because 
half of our 14 experimental mazes were mirror images of the 
other half, subjects could not have relied on any asymmetry in 
the distribution of forward and downward moves, as they were 
bound to be equal (each forward move in one maze was converted 
into a downward move in its mirror image). The symmetry of the 
mazes also implies that there was an equal number of changes 
in direction, from forward to downward and from downward to 
forward. However, because the mazes were generated by vary-
ing the number of turns from 0 to 6, an intrinsic asymmetry in 
the distribution of moves is that there are more continuations 
(downward–downward and forward–forward) than changes 
of direction (downward–forward and forward–downward). 
Because of the asymmetry in the distribution of turns, only 
33.3% of all the moves (across all 14 experimental mazes) 
resulted in a change of direction. This percentage, however, is 
an imperfect representation of the true statistics experienced by 
participants. Because the software’s feedback (phosphene vs. no 
phosphene) depends on the actual position of the avatar on the 
screen, and because a mistake results in the participants’ avatar 
remaining stuck in the same position, the actual percentage of 
turns participants moved through represent 29.1% of the total 
moves. Thus, subjects could have learned the simple strategy 
of persevering in the same direction (instead of deciding at 
random) when the stimulation resulted in an ambiguous per-
cept. If this were the case, however, we would expect not only a 
decline of errors with practice but also an asymmetry in the error 
distribution. Specifically, the probability of an error occurring 
on a turn should be higher in the later mazes than in the earlier 
ones. To test this prediction, we calculated the conditional prob-
ability that the move where an error occurred was a turn [i.e., 
P(Turn | Error); note that, because a move is either a turn or a 
continuation, P(Turn | Error) = 1 − P(Continuation | Error)] for 
each maze where at least one error occurred. We averaged this 
probability across participants. As seen in Figure 10, no signifi-
cant correlation exists between maze index and the probability 
that an error occurred on a turn [Pearson r = 0.04, t(12) = 0.15, 
p = 0.88].
DiscUssiOn anD cOnclUsiOn
Our results suggest that human subjects can learn to interpret 
the information delivered via non-invasive brain stimulation to 
solve a task in a virtual world. In our experiments, a total of 72 
bits were transferred on average per subject in approximately 
60 min; to our knowledge, this is both the largest CBI infor-
mation transfer using TMS [superior to Rao et al. (2014) and 
Stocco et al. (2015)] as well as the largest CBI bit-rate to date. 
The type of information delivered to the brain was, however, 
quite restricted. Only a binary signal generated based on pre-
defined criteria was transmitted to a single region of the brain. 
Nevertheless, as the technology advances, we anticipate that 
more sophisticated transmission of information may become 
possible, facilitating more fluid communication between the 
computer and the brain. At present, there are some critical 
limitations that need to be overcome with regard to the spatial 
resolution of TMS (Walsh and Cowey, 2000) and the need for a 
better understanding of how complex and conceptual informa-
tion is processed in the brain.
There are also some practical limitations of our approach. 
TMS machines, at present, tend to be too large for portability. As 
this aspect of the technology improves, the paradigms presented 
here could be useful, for example, in developing a non-invasive 
sensory prosthesis for the blind. Patients with certain types of 
blindness have shown the ability to perceive phosphenes (Walsh 
and Cowey, 2000; Silvanto et al., 2007), suggesting that the 
technology presented here could eventually allow such subjects 
to better navigate their environment using phosphene-based 
feedback. This would require utilizing dynamic physical depth 
information instead of the static virtual depth information used 
in our study.
Four of the five subjects answered correctly for the experimen-
tal trials at a rate greater than 93%, with one subject correctly 
identifying all 140 stimulations. Accuracy for this task also 
improved over time. These results suggest that humans can learn 
to utilize information delivered non-invasively to their brains 
to solve tasks that cannot be solved using their natural senses. 
Exploring this emerging field of human sensory augmentation, 
with its technological as well as ethical and social implications, 
remains an active area of research.
aUThOr cOnTriBUTiOns
Designed the experiments: DL, AS, JA, and RR. Implemented 
the software: DL. Performed the experiments: DL, AS, and JA. 
 9
Losey et al.
Virtual Navigation through Brain Stimulation
Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org
November 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 72
Analyzed the data: AS and DL. Contributed materials: AS and RR. 
Contributed to the writing of the manuscript: DL, AS, and RR.
acKnOWleDgMenTs
The authors would like to thank Dr. Chantel Prat for contributing 
materials and Matt Elzinga for useful discussions.
FUnDing
This work was supported by an award from the W. M. 
Keck Foundation to AS and RR and by a Washington 
 
Research Foundation Innovation Undergraduate Fellowship in 
Neuroengineering to DL. RR was also supported by NSF grant 
EEC-1028725.
reFerences
Aghajan, Z. M., Acharya, L., Moore, J. J., Cushman, J. D., Vuong, C., and Mehta, 
M. R. (2015). Impaired spatial selectivity and intact phase precession in 
two-dimensional virtual reality. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 121–128. doi:10.1038/ 
nn.3884 
Bell, C. J., Shenoy, P., Chalodhorn, R., and Rao, R. P. N. (2008). Control of a human-
oid robot by a noninvasive brain-computer interface in humans. J. Neural Eng. 
5, 214–220. doi:10.1088/1741-2560/5/2/012 
Cover, T. M., and Thomas, J. A. (2005). Elements of Information Theory. Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Cushman, J. D., Aharoni, D. B., Willers, B., Ravassard, P., Kees, A., Vuong, C., 
et al. (2013). Multisensory control of multimodal behavior: do the legs know 
what the tongue is doing? PLoS ONE 8:e80465. doi:10.1371/journal.pone. 
0080465 
Devlin, J. T., and Watkins, K. E. (2007). Stimulating language: insights from TMS. 
Brain 130, 610–622. doi:10.1093/brain/awl331 
Fawcett, T., and Tom, F. (2006). An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recognit. 
Lett. 27, 861–874. doi:10.1016/j.patrec.2005.10.010 
George, M. S., Nahas, Z., Molloy, M., Speer, A. M., Oliver, N. C., Li, X. B., et al. 
(2000). A controlled trial of daily left prefrontal cortex TMS for treating 
depression. Biol. Psychiatry 48, 962–970. doi:10.1016/S0006-3223(00)01048-9 
Grau, C., Ginhoux, R., Riera, A., Nguyen, T. L., Chauvat, H., Berg, M., et al. (2014). 
Conscious brain-to-brain communication in humans using non-invasive 
technologies. PLoS ONE 9:e105225. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0105225 
Menkes, D. L., Bodnar, P., Ballesteros, R. A., and Swenson, M. R. (1999). Right 
frontal lobe slow frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (SF 
r-TMS) is an effective treatment for depression: a case-control pilot study of 
safety and efficacy. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 67, 113–115. doi:10.1136/
jnnp.67.1.113 
Meyer, P. E. (2014). Infotheo: Information-Theoretic Measures. R Package Version. 
Available at: http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=infotheo
Pascual-Leone, A., Bartres-Faz, D., and Keenan, J. P. (1999). Transcranial magnetic 
stimulation: studying the brain-behaviour relationship by induction of “virtual 
lesions”
. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 354, 1229–1238. doi:10.1098/
rstb.1999.0476 
Rao, R. P. N. (2013). Brain-Computer Interfacing: An Introduction. New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press.
Rao, R. P. N., Stocco, A., Bryan, M., Sarma, D., Youngquist, T. M., Wu, J., et al. 
(2014). A direct brain-to-brain interface in humans. PLoS ONE 9:e111332. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0111332 
Silvanto, J., Cowey, A., Lavie, N., and Walsh, V. (2007). Making the blindsighted see. 
Neuropsychologia 45, 3346–3350. doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.06.008 
Sing, T., Sander, O., Beerenwinkel, N., and Lengauer, T. (2005). ROCR: visualiz-
ing classifier performance in R. Bioinformatics 21, 3940–3941. doi:10.1093/
bioinformatics/bti623 
Stocco, A., Prat, C. S., Losey, D. M., Cronin, J. A., Wu, J., Abernethy, J. A., et al. 
(2015). Playing 20 questions with the mind: collaborative problem solving by 
humans using a brain-to-brain interface. PLoS ONE 10:e0137303. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0137303 
Terhune, D. B., Murray, E., Near, J., Stagg, C. J., Cowey, A., and Cohen Kadosh, 
R. (2015). Phosphene perception relates to visual cortex glutamate levels and 
covaries with atypical visuospatial awareness. Cereb. Cortex 25, 4341–4350. 
doi:10.1093/cercor/bhv015 
Thomson, E. E., Carra, R., and Nicolelis, M. A. L. (2013). Perceiving invisible 
light through a somatosensory cortical prosthesis. Nat. Commun. 4, 1482. 
doi:10.1038/ncomms2497 
Walsh, V., and Cowey, A. (2000). Transcranial magnetic stimulation and cognitive 
neuroscience. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1, 73–79. doi:10.1038/35036239 
Wolpaw, J. R., McFarland, D. J., Neat, G. W., and Forneris, C. A. (1991). An EEG-
based brain-computer interface for cursor control. Electroencephalogr. Clin. 
Neurophysiol. 78, 252–259. doi:10.1016/0013-4694(91)90040-B 
Xu, M., Qi, H., Wan, B., Yin, T., Liu, Z., and Ming, D. (2013). A hybrid BCI speller 
paradigm combining P300 potential and the SSVEP blocking feature. J. Neural 
Eng. 10, 026001. doi:10.1088/1741-2560/10/2/026001 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Losey, Stocco, Abernethy and Rao. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). 
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the 
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this 
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution 
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
