 1 3
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
DOI 10.1007/s00401-016-1545-1
REVIEW
The 2016 World Health Organization Classification of Tumors 
of the Central Nervous System: a summary
David N. Louis1 · Arie Perry2 · Guido Reifenberger3,4 · Andreas von Deimling4,5 · 
Dominique Figarella‑Branger6 · Webster K. Cavenee7 · Hiroko Ohgaki8 · 
Otmar D. Wiestler9 · Paul Kleihues10 · David W. Ellison11 
Received: 22 January 2016 / Revised: 8 February 2016 / Accepted: 9 February 2016 / Published online: 9 May 2016 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016
and the introduction of a soft tissue-type grading system for 
the now combined entity of solitary fibrous tumor / heman-
giopericytoma—a departure from the manner by which other 
CNS tumors are graded. Overall, it is hoped that the 2016 
CNS WHO will facilitate clinical, experimental and epide-
miological studies that will lead to improvements in the lives 
of patients with brain tumors.
Introduction
For the past century, the classification of brain tumors has 
been based largely on concepts of histogenesis that tumors 
can be classified according to their microscopic similarities 
with different putative cells of origin and their presumed 
levels of differentiation. The characterization of such his-
tological similarities has been primarily dependent on light 
microscopic features in hematoxylin and eosin-stained 
sections, immunohistochemical expression of lineage-
associated proteins and ultrastructural characterization. 
Abstract The 2016 World Health Organization Classi-
fication of Tumors of the Central Nervous System is both a 
conceptual and practical advance over its 2007 predecessor. 
For the first time, the WHO classification of CNS tumors 
uses molecular parameters in addition to histology to define 
many tumor entities, thus formulating a concept for how CNS 
tumor diagnoses should be structured in the molecular era. 
As such, the 2016 CNS WHO presents major restructuring of 
the diffuse gliomas, medulloblastomas and other embryonal 
tumors, and incorporates new entities that are defined by both 
histology and molecular features, including glioblastoma, 
IDH-wildtype and glioblastoma, IDH-mutant; diffuse midline 
glioma, H3 K27M–mutant; RELA fusion–positive epend-
ymoma; medulloblastoma, WNT-activated and medulloblas-
toma, SHH-activated; and embryonal tumour with multilay-
ered rosettes, C19MC-altered. The 2016 edition has added 
newly recognized neoplasms, and has deleted some entities, 
variants and patterns that no longer have diagnostic and/or 
biological relevance. Other notable changes include the addi-
tion of brain invasion as a criterion for atypical meningioma 
 
* David N. Louis 
 
dlouis@mgh.harvard.edu
1 
Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, WRN225, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA
2 
Department of Pathology, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
3 
Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich Heine University, 
Duesseldorf, Germany
4 
German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Partner Site Essen/
Duesseldorf, Germany
5 
Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, 
Ruprecht-Karls-University, Heidelberg, Germany
6 
Department of Pathology and Neuropathology, La Timone 
Hospital, Aix Marseille University, Marseille, France
7 
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University 
of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
8 
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), Lyon, 
France
9 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 
Germany
10 Medical Faculty, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
11 Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children’s Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA
 804
 
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
1 3
For example, the 2007 World Health Organization (WHO) 
Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System 
(2007 CNS WHO) grouped all tumors with an astrocytic 
phenotype separately from those with an oligodendroglial 
phenotype, no matter if the various astrocytic tumors were 
clinically similar or disparate [26].
Studies over the past two decades have clarified the 
genetic basis of tumorigenesis in the common and some rarer 
brain tumor entities, raising the possibility that such an under-
standing may contribute to classification of these tumors [25]. 
Some of these canonical genetic alterations were known as of 
the 2007 CNS WHO, but at that time it was not felt that such 
changes could yet be used to define specific entities; rather, 
they provided prognostic or predictive data within diagnostic 
categories established by conventional histology. In 2014, a 
meeting held in Haarlem, the Netherlands, under the auspices 
of the International Society of Neuropathology, established 
guidelines for how to incorporate molecular findings into 
brain tumor diagnoses, setting the stage for a major revision 
of the 2007 CNS WHO classification [28]. The current update 
(2016 CNS WHO) thus breaks with the century-old principle 
of diagnosis based entirely on microscopy by incorporating 
molecular parameters into the classification of CNS tumor 
entities [27]. To do so required an international collaboration 
of 117 contributors from 20 countries and deliberations on 
the most controversial issues at a three-day consensus con-
ference by a Working Group of 35 neuropathologists, neuro-
oncological clinical advisors and scientists from 10 countries. 
The present review summarizes the major changes between 
the 2007 and 2016 CNS WHO classifications.
Classification
The 2016 CNS WHO is summarized in Table 1 and offi-
cially represents an update of the 2007 4th Edition rather 
than a formal 5th Edition. At this point, a decision to 
undertake the 5th Edition series of WHO Blue Books has 
not been made, but given the considerable progress in the 
fields, both the Hematopoietic/Lymphoid and CNS tumor 
volumes were granted permission for 4th Edition updates. 
The 2016 update contains numerous differences from the 
2007 CNS WHO [26]. The major approaches and changes 
are summarized in Table 2 and described in more detail 
in the following sections. A synopsis of tumor grades for 
selected entities is given in Table 3. 
General principles and challenges
The use of “integrated” [28] phenotypic and genotypic 
parameters for CNS tumor classification adds a level of 
objectivity that has been missing from some aspects of the 
diagnostic process in the past. It is hoped that this addi-
tional objectivity will yield more biologically homogeneous 
and narrowly defined diagnostic entities than in prior clas-
sifications, which in turn should lead to greater diagnos-
tic accuracy as well as improved patient management and 
more accurate determinations of prognosis and treatment 
response. It will, however, also create potentially larger 
groups of tumors that do not fit into these more narrowly 
defined entities (e.g., the not otherwise specified/NOS des-
ignations, see below)—groups that themselves will be more 
amenable to subsequent study and improved classification.
A compelling example of this refinement relates to the 
diagnosis of oligoastrocytoma—a diagnostic category that 
has always been difficult to define and that suffered from 
high interobserver discordance [11, 47], with some centers 
diagnosing these lesions frequently and others diagnosing 
them only rarely. Using both genotype (i.e., IDH mutation 
and 1p/19q codeletion status) and phenotype to diagnose 
these tumors results in nearly all of them being compatible 
with either an astrocytoma or oligodendroglioma [6, 44, 
48], with only rare reports of molecularly “true” oligoas-
trocytomas consisting of histologically and genetically dis-
tinct astrocytic (IDH-mutant, ATRX-mutant, 1p/19q-intact) 
and oligodendroglial (IDH-mutant, ATRX-wildtype and 
1p/19q-codeleted) tumor populations [14, 49]. As a result, 
both the more common astrocytoma and oligodendroglioma 
subtypes become more homogeneously defined. In the 2016 
CNS WHO, therefore, the prior diagnoses of oligoastrocy-
toma and anaplastic oligoastrocytoma are now designated as 
NOS categories, since these diagnoses should be rendered 
only in the absence of diagnostic molecular testing or in the 
very rare instance of a dual genotype oligoastrocytoma.
The diagnostic use of both histology and molecular 
genetic features also raises the possibility of discordant 
results, e.g., a diffuse glioma that histologically appears 
astrocytic but proves to have IDH mutation and 1p/19q 
codeletion, or a tumor that resembles oligodendroglioma 
by light microscopy but has IDH, ATRX and TP53 muta-
tions in the setting of intact 1p and 19q. Notably, in each 
of these situations, the genotype trumps the histological 
phenotype, necessitating a diagnosis of oligodendroglioma, 
IDH-mutant and 1p/19q-codeleted in the first instance and 
diffuse astrocytoma, IDH-mutant in the second.
The latter example of classifying astrocytomas, oligo-
dendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas leads to the question 
of whether classification can proceed on the basis of geno-
type alone, i.e., without histology. At this point in time, this 
is not possible: one must still make a diagnosis of diffuse 
glioma (rather than some other tumor type) to understand 
the nosological and clinical significance of specific genetic 
changes. In addition, WHO grade determinations are still 
made on the basis of histologic criteria. Another reason why 
phenotype remains essential is that, as mentioned above, 
 805
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820 
1 3
there are individual tumors that do not meet the more nar-
rowly defined phenotype and genotype criteria, e.g., the rare 
phenotypically classical diffuse astrocytoma that lacks the 
signature genetic characteristics of IDH and ATRX muta-
tions. Nevertheless, it remains possible that future WHO 
classifications of the diffuse gliomas, in the setting of 
deeper and broader genomic capabilities, will require less 
histological evaluation—perhaps only a diagnosis of “dif-
fuse glioma.” For now, the 2016 CNS WHO is predicated on 
the basis of combined phenotypic and genotypic classifica-
tion, and on the generation of “integrated” diagnoses [28].
Lastly, it is important to acknowledge that changing the 
classification to include some diagnostic categories that 
require genotyping may create challenges with respect to 
testing and reporting, which have been discussed in detail 
elsewhere [28]. These challenges include: the availability 
and choice of genotyping or surrogate genotyping assays; 
the approaches that may need to be taken by centers with-
out access to molecular techniques or surrogate immu-
nostains; and the actual formats used to report such “inte-
grated” diagnoses [28]. Nonetheless, the implementation of 
combined phenotypic–genotypic diagnostics in some large 
centers and the growing availability of immunohistochemi-
cal surrogates for molecular genetic alterations suggest that 
most of these challenges will be overcome readily in the 
near future [9, 40].
Table 1  The 2016 World 
Health Organization 
Classification of Tumors of the 
Central Nervous System. Note 
that the WHO classifications 
use spellings that are hybrid 
between American and British 
English. The present review, 
however, has used American 
English spellings
 806
 
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
1 3
Nomenclature
Combining histopathological and molecular features into 
diagnoses necessarily results in portmanteau diagnostic 
terms and raises the need to standardize such terminol-
ogy in as practical a manner as possible. In general, the 
2016 CNS WHO decision was to approximate the nam-
ing conventions of the hematopoietic/lymphoid pathology 
community, which has incorporated molecular informa-
tion into diagnoses in the past. As detailed below, CNS 
tumor diagnoses should consist of a histopathological 
name followed by the genetic features, with the genetic 
features following a comma and as adjectives, as in: Dif-
fuse astrocytoma, IDH-mutant and Medulloblastoma, 
WNT-activated.
For those entities with more than one genetic deter-
minant, the multiple necessary molecular features are 
included in the name: Oligodendroglioma, IDH-mutant and 
1p/19q-codeleted.
For a tumor lacking a genetic mutation, the term 
wildtype can be used if an official “wildtype” entity exists: 
Glioblastoma, IDH-wildtype. However, it should be pointed 
Table 1  continued
The italicized entries are provisional, i.e., the WHO Working Group felt there was insufficient evidence to recognize these as distinct disease 
entities at this time. Reprinted from [27], with permission from the WHO
 807
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820 
1 3
out that in most such situations, a formal wildtype diagno-
sis is not available, and a tumor lacking a diagnostic muta-
tion is given an NOS designation (see below).
For tumor entities in which a specific genetic alteration 
is present or absent, the terms “positive” can be used if the 
molecular characteristic is present: Ependymoma, RELA 
fusion–positive.
For sites lacking any access to molecular diagnostic test-
ing, a diagnostic designation of NOS (i.e., not otherwise 
specified) is permissible for some tumor types. These have 
been added into the classification in those places where 
such diagnoses are possible. An NOS designation implies 
that there is insufficient information to assign a more spe-
cific code. In this context, NOS in most instances refers 
to tumors that have not been fully tested for the relevant 
genetic parameter(s), but in rare instances may also include 
tumors that have been tested but do not show the diagnostic 
genetic alterations. In other words, NOS does not define a 
specific entity; rather it designates a group of lesions that 
cannot be classified into any of the more narrowly defined 
groups. An NOS designation thus represents those cases 
about which we do not know enough pathologically, genet-
ically and clinically and which should, therefore, be subject 
to future study before additional refinements in classifica-
tion can be made.
With regard to formatting, italics are used for specific 
gene symbols (e.g., ATRX) but not for gene families (e.g., 
IDH, H3). To avoid numerous sequential hyphens, wildtype 
has been used without a hyphen and en-dashes have been 
used in certain designations (e.g., RELA fusion–positive). 
Finally, as in the past, WHO grades are written in Roman 
numerals (e.g., I, II, III and IV; not 1, 2, 3 and 4).
Definitions, disease summaries and commentaries
Entities within the 2016 classification begin with a Defini-
tion section that itself starts with an italicized definitional 
first clause that describes the necessary (i.e., entity-defin-
ing) diagnostic criteria. This is followed by characteristic 
associated findings. For example, the definition of oligo-
dendroglioma, IDH-mutant and 1p/19q-codeleted includes 
a first sentence: “A diffusely infiltrating, slow-growing 
glioma with IDH1 or IDH2 mutation and codeletion of 
chromosomal arms 1p and 19q” (which is the italicized, 
entity-defining criteria), followed by sentences such as 
“Microcalcifications and a delicate branching capillary net-
work are typical” (findings that are highly characteristic of 
the entity, but not necessary for the diagnosis). The diag-
nostic criteria and characteristic features are then followed 
by the remainder of the disease summary, in which other 
notable clinical, pathological and molecular findings are 
given. Finally, for some tumors, there is a commentary that 
provides information on classification, clarifying the nature 
of the genetic parameters to be evaluated and providing 
genotyping information for distinguishing overlapping 
histological entities. Notably, the classification does not 
mandate specific testing techniques, leaving that decision 
up to the individual practitioner and institution. Nonethe-
less, the commentary sections clarify certain genetic inter-
pretations, e.g., in what situations IDH status can be desig-
nated as wildtype (depending on tumor type and, in some 
instances, patient age) and what constitutes prognostically 
favorable 1p/19q codeletion (combined whole-arm losses, 
which in IDH-mutant and histologically classic tumors can 
be assumed even when only single loci on each arm have 
been tested by fluorescence in situ hybridization).
Table 2  Summary of the major changes in the 2016 CNS WHO
Formulating concept of how CNS tumor diagnoses are structured in 
the molecular era
Major restructuring of diffuse gliomas, with incorporation of geneti-
cally defined entities
Major restructuring of medulloblastomas, with incorporation of 
genetically defined entities
Major restructuring of other embryonal tumors, with incorporation 
of genetically defined entities and removal of the term “primitive 
neuroectodermal tumor”
Incorporation of a genetically defined ependymoma variant
Novel approach distinguishing pediatric look-alikes, including desig-
nation of novel, genetically defined entity
Addition of newly recognized entities, variants and patterns
 IDH-wildtype and IDH-mutant glioblastoma (entities)
 Diffuse midline glioma, H3 K27M–mutant (entity)
 Embryonal tumour with multilayered rosettes, C19MC-altered 
(entity)
 Ependymoma, RELA fusion–positive (entity)
 Diffuse leptomeningeal glioneuronal tumor (entity)
 Anaplastic PXA (entity)
 Epithelioid glioblastoma (variant)
 Glioblastoma with primitive neuronal component (pattern)
 Multinodular and vacuolated pattern of ganglion cell tumor (pattern)
Deletion of former entities, variants and terms
 Gliomatosis cerebri
 Protoplasmic and fibrillary astrocytoma variants
 Cellular ependymoma variant
 “Primitive neuroectodermal tumour” terminology
Addition of brain invasion as a criterion for atypical meningioma
Restructuring of solitary fibrous tumor and hemangiopericytoma 
(SFT/HPC) as one entity and adapting a grading system to accom-
modate this change
Expansion and clarification of entities included in nerve sheath 
tumors, with addition of hybrid nerve sheath tumors and separation 
of melanotic schwannoma from other schwannomas
Expansion of entities included in hematopoietic/lymphoid tumors of 
the CNS (lymphomas and histiocytic tumors)
 808
 
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
1 3
Newly recognized entities, variants and patterns
A number of newly recognized entities, variants and pat-
terns have been added. Variants are subtypes of accepted 
entities that are sufficiently well characterized pathologi-
cally to achieve a place in the classification and have poten-
tial clinical utility. Patterns are histological features that are 
readily recognizable but usually do not have clear clinico-
pathological significance. These newly recognized entities, 
variants and patterns are listed in Table 2 and discussed 
briefly in their respective sections below.
Diffuse gliomas
The nosological shift to a classification based on both phe-
notype and genotype expresses itself in a number of ways in 
the classification of the diffuse gliomas (Fig. 1). Most nota-
bly, while in the past all astrocytic tumors had been grouped 
together, now all diffusely infiltrating gliomas (whether 
astrocytic or oligodendroglial) are grouped together: based 
not only on their growth pattern and behaviors, but also 
more pointedly on the shared genetic driver mutations in the 
IDH1 and IDH2 genes. From a pathogenetic point of view, 
this provides a dynamic classification that is based on both 
phenotype and genotype; from a prognostic point of view, 
it groups tumors that share similar prognostic markers; and 
from the patient management point of view, it guides the use 
of therapies (conventional or targeted) for biologically and 
genetically similar entities.
In this new classification, the diffuse gliomas include 
the WHO grade II and grade III astrocytic tumors, the 
grade II and III oligodendrogliomas, the grade IV glio-
blastomas, as well as the related diffuse gliomas of child-
hood (see below). This approach leaves those astrocytomas 
that have a more circumscribed growth pattern, lack IDH 
gene family alterations and frequently have BRAF altera-
tions (pilocytic astrocytoma, pleomorphic xanthastrocy-
toma) or TSC1/TSC2 mutations (subependymal giant cell 
astrocytoma) distinct from the diffuse gliomas. In other 
words, diffuse astrocytoma and oligodendrogliomas are 
now nosologically more similar than are diffuse astrocy-
toma and pilocytic astrocytoma; the family trees have been 
redrawn.
Diffuse astrocytoma and anaplastic astrocytoma
The WHO grade II diffuse astrocytomas and WHO grade 
III anaplastic astrocytomas are now each divided into 
IDH-mutant, IDH-wildtype and NOS categories. For 
Table 3  Grading of selected CNS tumors according to the 2016 CNS WHO
Reprinted from [27], with permission from the WHO
 809
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820 
1 3
both grade II and III tumors, the great majority falls into 
the IDH-mutant category if IDH testing is available. If 
immunohistochemistry for mutant R132H IDH1 protein 
and sequencing for IDH1 codon 132 and IDH2 codon 
172 gene mutations are both negative, or if sequencing 
for IDH1 codon 132 and IDH2 codon 172 gene mutations 
alone is negative, then the lesion can be diagnosed as IDH-
wildtype. It is important to recognize, however, that dif-
fuse astrocytoma, IDH-wildtype is an uncommon diagnosis 
and that such cases need to be carefully evaluated to avoid 
misdiagnosis of lower grade lesions such as ganglioglio-
mas; moreover, anaplastic astrocytoma, IDH-wildtype is 
also rare, and most such tumors will feature genetic find-
ings highly characteristic of IDH-wildtype glioblastoma [6, 
38]. Finally, in the setting of a diffuse astrocytoma or ana-
plastic astrocytoma, if IDH testing is not available or can-
not be fully performed (e.g., negative immunohistochemis-
try without available sequencing), the resulting diagnosis 
would be diffuse astroctyoma, NOS, or anaplastic astrocy-
toma, NOS, respectively.
Historically, the prognostic differences between WHO 
grade II diffuse astrocytomas and WHO grade III anaplastic 
astrocytomas were highly significant [31]. Some recent 
studies, however, have suggested that the prognostic dif-
ferences between IDH-mutant WHO grade II diffuse astro-
cytomas and IDH-mutant WHO grade III anaplastic astro-
cytomas are not as marked [32, 39]. Nonetheless, this has 
not been noted in all studies [20]. At this time, it is recom-
mended that WHO grading is retained for both IDH-mutant 
and IDH-wildtype astrocytomas, although the prognosis 
of the IDH-mutant cases appears more favorable in both 
grades. Cautionary notes have been added to the 2016 clas-
sification in this regard.
Of note, two diffuse astrocytoma variants have been 
deleted from the WHO classification: protoplasmic 
astrocytoma, a diagnosis that was previously defined in 
only vague terms and is almost never made any longer 
given that tumors with this histological appearance are 
typically characterized as other more narrowly defined 
lesions; and fibrillary astrocytoma, since this diagno-
sis overlaps nearly entirely with the standard diffuse 
astrocytoma. As a result, only gemistocytic astrocytoma 
remains as a distinct variant of diffuse astrocytoma, 
IDH-mutant.
Fig. 1  A simplified algorithm for classification of the diffuse glio-
mas based on histological and genetic features (see text and 2016 
CNS WHO for details). A caveat to this diagram is that the diagnos-
tic “flow” does not necessarily always proceed from histology first 
to molecular genetic features next, since molecular signatures can 
sometimes outweigh histological characteristics in achieving an “inte-
grated” diagnosis. A similar algorithm can be followed for anaplastic-
level diffuse gliomas; * Characteristic but not required for diagnosis. 
Reprinted from [27], with permission from the WHO
 810
 
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
1 3
Gliomatosis cerebri has also been deleted from the 2016 
CNS WHO classification as a distinct entity, rather being 
considered a growth pattern found in many gliomas, includ-
ing IDH-mutant astrocytic and oligodendroglial tumors as 
well as IDH-wildtype glioblastomas [4, 13]. Thus, wide-
spread brain invasion involving three or more cerebral 
lobes, frequent bilateral growth and regular extension to 
infratentorial structures is now mentioned as a special 
pattern of spread within the discussion of several diffuse 
glioma subtypes. Further studies are needed to clarify the 
biological basis for the unusually widespread infiltration in 
these tumors.
Glioblastomas
Glioblastomas are divided in the 2016 CNS WHO into (1) 
glioblastoma, IDH-wildtype (about 90 % of cases), which 
corresponds most frequently with the clinically defined pri-
mary or de novo glioblastoma and predominates in patients 
over 55 years of age [30]; (2) glioblastoma, IDH-mutant 
(about 10 % of cases), which corresponds closely to so-
called secondary glioblastoma with a history of prior lower 
grade diffuse glioma and preferentially arises in younger 
patients [30] (see Table 4); and (3) glioblastoma, NOS, a 
diagnosis that is reserved for those tumors for which full 
IDH evaluation cannot be performed. The definition of 
full IDH evaluation can differ for glioblastomas in older 
patients relative to glioblastomas in younger adults and rel-
ative to WHO grade II and grade III diffuse gliomas: in the 
latter situations, IDH sequencing is highly recommended 
following negative R132H IDH1 immunohistochemis-
try, whereas the near absence of non-R132H IDH1 and 
IDH2 mutations in glioblastomas from patients over about 
55 years of age [7] suggests that sequencing may not be 
needed in the setting of negative R132H IDH1 immunohis-
tochemistry in such patients.
One provisional new variant of glioblastoma has been 
added to the classification: epithelioid glioblastoma. It joins 
giant cell glioblastoma and gliosarcoma under the umbrella 
of IDH-wildtype glioblastoma. Epithelioid glioblastomas 
feature large epithelioid cells with abundant eosinophilic 
cytoplasm, vesicular chromatin, and prominent nucleoli 
(often resembling melanoma cells), and variably pre-
sent rhabdoid cells (Fig. 2). They have a predilection for 
Table 4  Key characteristics of IDH-wildtype and IDH-mutant glioblastomas
Data from [29, 30]. Reprinted from [27], with permission from the WHO
 811
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820 
1 3
children and younger adults, typically present as superficial 
cerebral or diencephalic masses, and often harbor a BRAF 
V600E mutation (which can be detected immunohisto-
chemically) [5, 21, 22]. In one series, rhabdoid glioblas-
tomas were distinguished from their similarly appearing 
epithelioid counterparts on the basis of loss of INI1 expres-
sion [23]. IDH-wildtype epithelioid glioblastomas often 
lack other molecular features of conventional adult IDH-
wildtype glioblastomas, such as EGFR amplification and 
chromosome 10 losses; instead, there are frequent hemizy-
gous deletions of ODZ3. Such cases may have an associ-
ated low-grade precursor, often but not invariably showing 
features of pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma [1].
Glioblastoma with primitive neuronal component was 
added as a pattern in glioblastoma. This pattern, previously 
referred to in the literature as glioblastoma with PNET-like 
component, is usually comprised of a diffuse astrocytoma 
of any grade (or oligodendroglioma in rare cases) that has 
well-demarcated nodules containing primitive cells that dis-
play neuronal differentiation (e.g., Homer Wright rosettes, 
gain of synaptophysin positivity and loss of GFAP expres-
sion) and that sometimes has MYC or MYCN amplification 
(Fig. 3); these tumors have a tendency for craniospinal fluid 
dissemination [34]. About a quarter develop in patients with 
a previously known lower grade glioma precursor, a subset 
of which shows R132H IDH1 immunoreactivity in both the 
glial and primitive neuronal components [17]. From a clini-
cal point of view, the recognition of this pattern may prompt 
evaluation of the craniospinal axis to rule out tumor seeding.
Small cell glioblastoma/astrocytoma and granular cell 
glioblastoma/astrocytoma remain patterns, the former char-
acterized by uniform, deceptively bland small neoplastic 
Fig. 2  Epithelioid glioblastomas (Ep-GBM). Although the neu-
roimaging features are not specific, many cases show a superficial 
localization and sharp demarcation, as seen on this post-contrast 
T1-weighted MR image (a). Histologically, the Ep-GBM may also 
show a discrete border with adjacent brain, often suggestive of a 
metastasis (b). This mimicry is further complicated by the tumor 
cytology featuring large epithelioid cells with abundant eosinophilic 
cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei, and large melanoma-like nucleoli (c). 
Not uncommonly, a subset of tumor cells display eccentric nuclei 
and paranuclear inclusions that overlap with rhabdoid neoplasms 
(arrows). Some Ep-GBMs show features of a lower grade precursor 
in adjacent tissue; in this particular example, there was focal evi-
dence of pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, including bizarre giant 
cells despite lack of mitotic activity, numerous eosinophilic granular 
bodies, and xanthomatous appearing vacuolated astrocytes (d). GFAP 
expression is often limited (e) and may even be lacking entirely. In 
contrast, S100 protein is strongly expressed (f), whereas other mela-
noma markers are typically negative (not shown). Other glial mark-
ers, such as OLIG2 may also be positive (g), but many lack this pro-
tein as well. Roughly half of Ep-GBMs express BRAF V600E mutant 
protein as seen in this example (h)
 812
 
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
1 3
cells often resembling oligodendroglioma and frequently 
demonstrating EGFR amplification, and the latter by mark-
edly granular to macrophage-like, lysosome-rich tumor 
cells. In both examples, there is a particularly poor glio-
blastoma-like prognosis even in the absence of microvascu-
lar proliferation or necrosis.
Oligodendrogliomas
The diagnosis of oligodendroglioma and anaplastic oli-
godendroglioma requires the demonstration of both an 
IDH gene family mutation and combined whole-arm 
losses of 1p and 19q (1p/19q codeletion). In the absence 
of positive mutant R132H IDH1 immunohistochemistry, 
sequencing of IDH1 codon 132 and IDH2 codon 172 is 
recommended. In the absence of testing capabilities or 
in the setting of inconclusive genetic results, a histologi-
cally typical oligodendroglioma should be diagnosed as 
NOS. In the setting of an anaplastic oligodendroglioma 
with non-diagnostic genetic results, careful evaluation 
for genetic features of glioblastoma may be undertaken 
[6]. It is also recognized that tumors of childhood that 
histologically resemble oligodendroglioma often do 
not demonstrate IDH gene family mutation and 1p/19q 
codeletion; until such tumors are better understood at a 
molecular level, they should be included in the oligoden-
droglioma, NOS category. However, care should be taken 
to exclude histological mimics like pilocytic astrocy-
toma, dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor and clear 
cell ependymoma.
Fig. 3  Glioblastomas with primitive neuronal components (GBM-
PNC;  b and e–g show the astrocytic component on the left and the 
primitive neuronal component on the right). In this GBM-PNC, 
the imaging was essentially identical to that of conventional GBM, 
including a rim-enhancing mass; however, the markedly restricted 
diffusion on this DWI MR image highlights the more cellular primi-
tive component (a). The primitive clone in this GBM-PNC is evi-
dent as a highly cellular nodule within an otherwise classic diffuse 
astrocytoma (b). Well-formed Homer Wright rosettes were seen in 
the primitive portion of this GBM-PNC (c). Large cell/anaplastic 
features (similar to those of medulloblastoma) are seen in a subset of 
GBM-PNC; note the increased cell size, vesicular chromatin, macro-
nucleoli, and cell–cell wrapping (arrows) in this case (d). The primi-
tive component typically displays loss of glial marker expression, 
including GFAP (not shown) and OLIG2 (e), along with gain of neu-
ronal features, such as synaptophysin positivity (f; note also staining 
of Homer Wright rosettes). A subset of cases demonstrates features 
of secondary glioblastoma, including IDH1 R132H mutant protein 
expression (g). FISH revealed MYCN gene amplification limited to 
the primitive foci of this GBM-PNC (h; centromere 2 signals in red 
and MYCN signals in green)
 813
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820 
1 3
Oligoastrocytomas
In the 2016 CNS WHO, the diagnosis of oligoastrocytoma 
is strongly discouraged. Nearly all tumors with histological 
features suggesting both an astrocytic and an oligodendro-
glial component can be classified as either astrocytoma or 
oligodendroglioma using genetic testing [44, 48]. The diag-
noses of WHO grade II oligoastrocytoma and WHO grade 
III anaplastic oligoastrocytoma are, therefore, assigned 
NOS designations, indicating that they can only be made 
in the absence of appropriate diagnostic molecular testing. 
Notably, rare cases of “true” oligoastrocytomas have been 
reported in the literature, with phenotypic and genotypic 
evidence of spatially distinct oligodendroglioma and astro-
cytoma components in the same tumor [14, 49]; until fur-
ther reports confirming such tumors are available for evalu-
ation as part of the next WHO classification, they should be 
included under the provisional entities of oligoastrocytoma, 
NOS, or anaplastic oligoastrocytoma, NOS. In addition, in 
such settings, particular care should be taken to avoid mis-
interpretation of regional heterogeneity due to technical 
problems with ancillary techniques, such as false-negative 
ATRX immunostaining or false-positive FISH results for 
1p/19q codeletion, which can occur regionally within tissue 
specimens.
Pediatric diffuse gliomas
In the past, pediatric diffuse gliomas were grouped with 
their adult counterparts, despite known differences in 
behavior between pediatric and adult gliomas with simi-
lar histological appearances. Information on the distinct 
underlying genetic abnormalities in pediatric diffuse glio-
mas is beginning to allow the separation of some entities 
from histologically similar adult counterparts [24, 37, 52]. 
One narrowly defined group of tumors primarily occurring 
in children (but sometimes in adults too) is characterized 
by K27M mutations in the histone H3 gene H3F3A, or less 
commonly in the related HIST1H3B gene, a diffuse growth 
pattern, and a midline location (e.g., thalamus, brain stem, 
and spinal cord) (Fig. 4) [19, 51]. This newly defined entity 
is termed diffuse midline glioma, H3 K27M–mutant and 
includes tumors previously referred to as diffuse intrinsic 
pontine glioma (DIPG). The identification of this pheno-
typically and molecularly defined set of tumors provides a 
rationale for therapies directed against the effects of these 
mutations.
Other astrocytomas
Anaplastic pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, WHO grade 
III, has been added to the 2016 CNS WHO as a distinct 
entity, as opposed to the descriptive title of pleomorphic 
xanthoastrocytoma with anaplastic features in the past. 
Grading of a pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma as anaplas-
tic requires 5 or more mitoses per 10 high-power fields; 
necrosis may be present, but the significance of necrosis 
in the absence of elevated mitotic activity is unclear [16]. 
Patients with such tumors have shorter survival times 
when compared to those with WHO grade II pleomorphic 
xanthoastrocytomas.
The grading of pilomyxoid astrocytoma has also been 
changed. While previously designated as WHO grade 
II, recent studies have shown extensive histological and 
genetic overlap between pilomyxoid and pilocytic astro-
cytomas, with some of the former maturing into the latter 
over time and less certainty that the pilomyxoid variant 
always follows a more aggressive course than a more clas-
sic appearing suprasellar pilocytic astrocytoma. For these 
reasons, it is not clear that pilomyxoid astrocytoma should 
automatically be assigned to WHO grade II and the sugges-
tion was made to suppress grading of pilomyxoid astrocy-
tomas until further studies clarify their behavior.
Ependymomas
While it was recognized that the grading of ependymo-
mas according to existing WHO criteria is difficult to 
apply and of questionable clinical utility [10], a more 
prognostic and reproducible classification and grad-
ing scheme is yet to be published. As a result, the dif-
ficulty in assigning clinical significance to ependymoma 
histological grades is discussed in the grading sections 
of both the Ependymoma and Anaplastic Ependymoma 
chapters. Nonetheless, it is expected that continuing stud-
ies of the molecular characteristics of ependymoma will 
provide more precise and objective means of subdivid-
ing these tumors, allowing for more narrowly defined 
tumor groups. In the meanwhile, one genetically defined 
ependymoma subtype has been accepted: Ependymoma, 
RELA fusion–positive [33, 36]. This variant accounts for 
the majority of supratentorial tumors in children. The 
specificity of L1CAM expression, a potential immuno-
histochemical surrogate for this variant [33], has yet to 
be fully elucidated. Lastly, one ependymoma variant, cel-
lular ependymoma, has been deleted from the classifica-
tion, since it was considered to overlap extensively with 
standard ependymoma.
Neuronal and mixed neuronal‑glial tumours
The newly recognized entity diffuse leptomeningeal gli-
oneuronal tumor is an entity known in the literature 
 814
 
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
1 3
under a variety of similar terms, perhaps most notably as 
disseminated oligodendroglial-like leptomeningeal tumor 
of childhood [42]. These tumors present with diffuse 
leptomeningeal disease, with or without a recognizable 
parenchymal component (commonly in the spinal cord), 
most often in children and adolescents, and histologically 
demonstrate a monomorphic clear cell glial morphol-
ogy, reminiscent of oligodendroglioma (Fig. 5), although 
often with expression of synaptophysin in addition to 
OLIG2 and S-100 [42]. An additional neuronal compo-
nent can be detected in a subset of cases. The lesions 
commonly harbor BRAF fusions as well as deletions of 
chromosome arm 1p, either alone or occasionally com-
bined with 19q [43]. However, IDH mutations are absent. 
Nonetheless, the nosological position of these tumors 
remains somewhat unclear at the present time, with some 
pathological and genetic features suggesting a relation-
ship to pilocytic astrocytoma or to glioneuronal tumors. 
The prognosis is variable, with tumors showing relatively 
slow growth but considerable morbidity from secondary 
hydrocephalus.
A newly recognized architectural appearance is the 
multinodular and vacuolated pattern that may be related 
to ganglion cell tumors. Reported as multinodular and 
vacuolated tumor of the cerebrum [15], these are low-
grade lesions that may even be malformative in nature. 
They are comprised of multiple nodules of tumor with a 
conspicuous vacuolation, and the tumor cells show glial 
and/or neuronal differentiation, including ganglion cells 
in some cases. Further characterization of these lesions 
is needed to understand its nosological place among CNS 
neoplasms.
Medulloblastomas
The classification of medulloblastomas produced the 
greatest conceptual challenges in devising a marriage of 
Fig. 4  Diffuse midline gliomas, H3 K27M–mutant. These tumors 
most often involve the brain stem (especially pons), spinal cord (a–
d), and thalamus (e–f) in children and young adults. The morphologic 
spectrum varies widely, as in these two examples. This spinal lesion 
presented as a non-enhancing intramedullary mass with expansion 
and signal abnormalities on T2-weighted MRI (a). There was only 
minimal hypercellularity and cytologic atypia (b), but tumor cells 
strongly expressed the H3 K27–mutant protein (c) and also showed 
loss of ATRX expression (d). In contrast, the thalamic example 
showed a rim-enhancing mass on post-contrast T1 MRI (e) and his-
tology demonstrated classic features of glioblastoma with prominent 
multinucleated giant cells (f). In addition to H3 K27M–mutant pro-
tein expression (g), there was strong p53 staining (h)
 815
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820 
1 3
histological and molecular classification schemes. There 
are long-established histological variants of medulloblas-
toma that have clinical utility (e.g., desmoplastic/nodular, 
medulloblastoma with extensive nodularity, large cell, and 
anaplastic) and it is now widely accepted that there are four 
genetic (molecular) groups of medulloblastoma: WNT-
activated, SHH-activated, and the numerically designated 
“group 3” and “group 4” [46]. Some of these histological 
and genetic variants are associated with dramatic prognostic 
and therapeutic differences. Rather than providing a long list 
of the many possible histological–molecular combinations, 
the classification lists “genetically defined” and “histologi-
cally defined” variants, with the expectation that a patholo-
gist with the ability to undertake the molecular classification 
will generate an integrated diagnosis that includes both the 
molecular group and histological phenotype. In this regard, 
it was emphasized that there is a group of the most clinically 
relevant integrated diagnoses, which are given in Table 5.
This modular and integrated approach to diagnosis is 
novel, but likely represents a method that will become more 
common as knowledge of tumor genetics and phenotype–
genotype correlation grows. It is also anticipated that such 
a modular approach will allow greater flexibility for future 
changes in classification as such knowledge expands.
Other embyronal tumors
The embryonal tumors other than medulloblastoma have 
also undergone substantial changes in their classifica-
tion, with removal of the term primitive neuroectodermal 
tumor or PNET from the diagnostic lexicon. Much of the 
reclassification was driven by the recognition that many 
of these rare tumors display amplification of the C19MC 
region on chromosome 19 (19q13.42). C19MC-amplified 
tumors include the lesions previously known as ETANTR 
Fig. 5  Diffuse leptomeningeal glioneuronal tumors (DLGNT). At 
autopsy, this DLGNT patient had widespread expansion and fibrosis 
of spinal (a) and cerebral (b) subarachnoid spaces, along with intra-
ventricular masses and variably cystic, mucoid intraparenchymal 
extensions along perivascular Virchow-Robin spaces (gross photos 
courtesy of Dr. William McDonald, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The 
DLGNT biopsy specimen showed a leptomeningeal infiltrate (d) 
with oligodendroglioma-like cytologic features (d). DLGNT cells are 
OLIG2-positive (e), along with variable synaptophysin immunoreac-
tivity (f). Common genetic alterations detected by fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) include chromosome 1p deletion (g; tumor cells 
showing roughly half as many red 1p as green 1q signals) and BRAF 
fusion/duplication (h; increased red BRAF and green KIAA1549 
copy numbers, in addition to yellow fusion signals)
 816
 
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
1 3
(embryonal tumors with abundant neuropil and true 
rosettes, but also referred to as embryonal tumors with 
multilayered rosettes), ependymoblastoma and, in some 
cases, medulloepithelioma [24]. In the 2016 CNS WHO, 
the presence of C19MC amplification results in a diagno-
sis of embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes (ETMR), 
C19MC-altered. In the absence of C19MC amplification, a 
tumor with histological features conforming to ETANTR/
ETMR should be diagnosed as embryonal tumor with 
multilayered rosettes, NOS, and a tumor with histologi-
cal features of medulloepithelioma should be diagnosed 
as medulloepithelioma (recognizing that some appar-
ently bona fide medulloepitheliomas do not have C19MC 
amplification).
Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is now 
defined by alterations of either INI1 or, very rarely, BRG1 
[2, 12, 18, 50]. These alterations can be evaluated using 
immunohistochemistry for the corresponding proteins, 
with loss of nuclear expression correlating with genetic 
alteration (in the setting of adequate control expression). 
If a tumor has histological features of AT/RT but does not 
harbor either of the diagnostic genetic alterations, only 
a descriptive diagnosis of CNS embryonal tumour with 
rhabdoid features is available; in other words, the diag-
nosis of AT/RT requires confirmation of the characteristic 
molecular defect.
The understanding of other embryonal tumors is under-
going changes, with an expectation that molecular markers 
could lead to more precise cataloging of these tumors and 
their subtypes. In the meanwhile, the 2016 CNS WHO has 
created a probable wastebasket category of CNS embryonal 
tumor, NOS that includes tumors previously designated as 
CNS PNET.
Nerve sheath tumors
The classification of cranial and paraspinal nerve sheath 
tumors is similar to that of the 2007 CNS WHO, although a 
few changes have been made. Given that melanotic schwan-
noma is both clinically (e.g., malignant behavior in a signifi-
cant subset) and genetically (e.g., associations with Carney 
Table 5  Summary of the most common integrated medulloblastoma diagnoses, with clinical correlates
Reprinted from [27], with permission from the WHO
LC/A large cell/anaplastic, DN desmoplastic/nodular, MBEN medulloblastoma with extensive nodularity
 817
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820 
1 3
Complex and the PRKAR1A gene) distinct from conven-
tional schwannoma, it is now classified as a distinct entity 
rather than as a variant. Hybrid nerve sheath tumors have 
been included in the 2016 CNS WHO because such tumors 
are increasingly being recognized in a variety of combina-
tions; as such, this broad category was separated out as an 
entity, although it may well represent a group of tumors 
rather than one distinct subtype. Lastly, the 2016 CNS 
WHO now designates two subtypes of malignant periph-
eral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST): epithelioid MPNST and 
MPNST with perineurial differentiation. These were consid-
ered sufficiently distinct clinically to warrant designation 
as variants, whereas other subtypes such as MPNST with 
divergent differentiation (malignant Triton tumor, glandular 
MPNST, etc.) simply represent histologic patterns.
Meningiomas
The classification and grading of meningiomas did not 
undergo revisions, save for the introduction of brain inva-
sion as a criterion for the diagnosis of atypical meningi-
oma, WHO grade II. While it has long been recognized that 
the presence of brain invasion in a WHO grade I menin-
gioma confers recurrence and mortality rates similar to 
those of a WHO grade II meningioma in general [35], prior 
WHO classifications had considered invasion a staging fea-
ture rather than a grading feature and opted to discuss brain 
invasion as a separate heading. In the 2016 classification, 
brain invasion joins a mitotic count of 4 or more as a his-
tological criterion that can alone suffice for diagnosing an 
atypical meningioma, WHO grade II. As in the past, atypi-
cal meningioma can also be diagnosed on the basis of the 
additive criteria of 3 of the other 5 histological features: 
spontaneous necrosis, sheeting (loss of whorling or fascicu-
lar architecture), prominent nucleoli, high cellularity and 
small cells (tumor clusters with high nuclear:cytoplasmic 
ratio).
Solitary fibrous tumor / hemangiopericytoma
Over the past decade, soft tissue pathologists have 
moved away from the designation hemangiopericytoma, 
diagnosing such tumors within the spectrum of solitary 
fibrous tumors, whereas neuropathologists have retained 
the term hemangiopericytoma given its historical under-
standing and distinct clinicopathologic correlations, such 
as high recurrence rates and long-term risk of systemic 
metastasis. Nonetheless, both solitary fibrous tumors 
and hemangiopericytomas, including those occurring in 
the neuraxis, share inversions at 12q13, fusing the NAB2 
and STAT6 genes [8, 41], which leads to STAT6 nuclear 
expression that can be detected by immunohistochem-
istry [45]. It has thus become clear that solitary fibrous 
tumors and hemangiopericytomas are overlapping, if not 
identical entities. For this reason, the 2016 CNS WHO 
has created the combined term solitary fibrous tumor / 
hemangiopericytoma to describe such lesions. It is recog-
nized that this term is cumbersome and it is likely that it 
will be shortened in the next WHO classification of CNS 
tumors.
The creation of a single designation for tumors in the 
spectrum of low-grade solitary fibrous tumor and the higher 
grade lesions previously designated as hemangiopericy-
toma and anaplastic hemangiopericytoma created a grading 
challenge relative to other CNS tumors. The WHO classi-
fications of CNS tumors have always included grading as 
a malignancy scale, with a specific grade assigned to each 
entity rather than multiple grades within an entity (i.e., 
glioblastoma is grade IV, whereas a ductal carcinoma of 
the breast can be assigned a grade within the diagnosis of 
ductal carcinoma). To address this challenge in the context 
of solitary fibrous tumor / hemangiopericytoma, the 2016 
CNS WHO has broken with the typical WHO CNS tradi-
tion and assigns three grades within the entity of solitary 
fibrous tumor / hemangiopericytoma: a grade I that cor-
responds most often to the highly collagenous, relatively 
low cellularity, spindle cell lesion previously diagnosed as 
solitary fibrous tumor; a grade II that corresponds typically 
to the more cellular, less collagenous tumor with plump 
cells and “staghorn” vasculature that was previously diag-
nosed in the CNS as hemangiopericytoma; and a grade III 
that most often corresponds to what was termed anaplastic 
hemangiopericytoma in the past, diagnosed on the basis of 
5 or more mitoses per 10 high-power fields. Nonetheless, 
some tumors with a histological appearance more similar 
to traditional solitary fibrous tumor can also display malig-
nant features and be assigned a WHO grade III, using the 
cutoff of 5 or more mitoses per 10 high-power fields. Addi-
tional studies will, therefore, be required to fine-tune this 
grading system [3]. Nonetheless, it is hoped that this break 
from how CNS tumors were usually graded in the past will 
allow for greater flexibility in grading CNS tumors in the 
future, which may be important as molecular characteriza-
tion improves (see discussion of IDH-mutant diffuse astro-
cytic tumors, above).
Lymphomas and histiocytic tumours
Given the changes that have occurred in the classification 
of systemic lymphomas and histiocytic neoplasms over the 
past decade, the 2016 CNS WHO has expanded these cat-
egories to parallel those in the corresponding Hematopoi-
etic/Lymphoid WHO classifications.
 818
 
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
1 3
Summary
The 2016 CNS WHO represents a substantial step forward 
over its 2007 ancestor in that, for the first time, molecular 
parameters are used to establish brain tumor diagnoses. 
While this has introduced challenges in nomenclature, nosol-
ogy and reporting structure, and while it is likely that the 
next CNS WHO classification will view the present one as 
an intermediate stage to the further incorporation of objec-
tive molecular data in classification, the 2016 CNS WHO 
sets the stage for such progress. It is hoped that these more 
objective and more precisely defined entities will allow for 
improved tailoring of patient therapy, better classification for 
clinical trials and experimental studies, and more precise cat-
egorization for epidemiological purposes. Moreover, while 
the classification has left some “wastebasket” categories, it 
allows for more focused study of these less defined groups 
that will eventually lead to clarification of their status. In 
addition, while the classification still enables diagnoses to be 
made in the absence of molecular data in many situations, 
those settings are clearly designated, allowing distinction of 
molecularly defined and non-molecularly defined groups. In 
the long run, we trust that the 2016 CNS WHO will facilitate 
the clinical, experimental and epidemiological studies that 
will lead to improvements in the lives of patients with brain 
tumors.
Acknowledgments The authors thank all of the participants of the 
Consensus and Editorial Conference, held from June 21 through June 
24, 2015 at the German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) in Heidel-
berg, Germany, without whose input the 2016 CNS WHO edition 
would not have been possible. The participants were: Kenneth D. 
Aldape (Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada); Cris-
tina R. Antonescu (Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY); Mitchel Berger (University of California San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA); Michael Brada (University of Liverpool Clat-
terbridge Cancer Centre, Wirral, United Kingdom); Daniel J. Brat 
(Emory University, Atlanta, GA); Peter C. Burger (Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD); David Capper (Ruprecht-Karls Uni-
versität, Heidelberg, Germany); Webster K. Cavenee (University of 
California San Diego, San Diego, CA); V. Peter Collins (University 
of Cambridge Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United King-
dom); Charles Eberhart (Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD); 
David W. Ellison (St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, 
TN); Dominique Figarella-Branger (Hôpital de la Timone, Mar-
seille, France); Gregory Fuller (MD Anderson Cancer Center, Hou-
ston, TX); Felice Giangaspero (Università di Roma “La Sapienza”, 
Rome, Italy); Caterina Giannini (Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN); Taka-
nori Hirose (Hyogo Cancer Center/Kobe University, Akashi, Japan); 
Cynthia Hawkins (The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada); Anne Jouvet (Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France); Paul 
Kleihues (University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland); Takashi Komori 
(Tokyo Metropolitan Neurological Hospital, Tokyo, Japan); Johan M. 
Kros (Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands); David 
N. Louis (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA); Roger E. 
McLendon (Duke University, Durham, NC); Ho Keung Ng (Prince 
of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong, China); Hiroko Ohgaki (International 
Agency for Research on Cancer/IARC, Lyon, France); Werner Pau-
lus (University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany); Arie Perry 
(University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA); Stefan 
Pfister (German Cancer Research Center/DKFZ, Heidelberg, Ger-
many); Torsten Pietsch (University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany); Guido 
Reifenberger (University Hospital Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany); 
Brian Rous (Eastern Cancer Registration and Information Centre, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom); Andreas von Deimling (Institut für 
Pathologie, Heidelberg, Germany); Pieter Wesseling (VU University 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands); Wolfgang Wick (Uni-
versity Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany); Otmar D. Wiestler (German 
Cancer Research Center/DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany). The authors 
also thank many of the administrative staff who supported the meet-
ing, particularly Esther Breunig from DKFZ and Kees Kleihues-van 
Tol, Asiedua Asante and Anne-Sophie Hameau from IARC, as well 
as Jessica Cox from IARC for help with establishing nomenclature 
styles.
References
 1. Alexandrescu S, Korshunov A, Lai SH, Dabiri S, Patil S, Li 
R, Shih CS, Bonnin JM, Baker JA, Du E et al (2015) Epithe-
lioid glioblastomas and anaplastic epithelioid pleomorphic xan-
thoastrocytomas—same entity or first cousins? Brain Pathol. 
doi:10.1111/bpa.12295
 2. Biegel JA (2006) Molecular genetics of atypical teratoid/rhab-
doid tumor. Neurosurg Focus 20:E11
 3. Bouvier C, Metellus P, de Paula AM, Vasiljevic A, Jouvet A, 
Guyotat J, Mokhtari K, Varlet P, Dufour H, Figarella-Branger D 
(2012) Solitary fibrous tumors and hemangiopericytomas of the 
meninges: overlapping pathological features and common prog-
nostic factors suggest the same spectrum of tumors. Brain Pathol 
22:511–521. doi:10.1111/j.1750-3639.2011.00552.x
 4. Broniscer A, Chamdine O, Hwang S, Lin T, Pounds S, Onar-
Thomas A, Shurtleff S, Allen S, Gajjar A, Northcott P et al 
(2016) Gliomatosis cerebri in children shares molecular char-
acteristics with other pediatric gliomas. Acta Neuropathol 
131:299–307. doi:10.1007/s00401-015-1532-y
 5. Broniscer A, Tatevossian RG, Sabin ND, Klimo P Jr, Dalton 
J, Lee R, Gajjar A, Ellison DW (2014) Clinical, radiological, 
histological and molecular characteristics of paediatric epithe-
lioid glioblastoma. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 40:327–336. 
doi:10.1111/nan.12093
 6. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, Brat DJ, Verhaak RG, 
Aldape KD, Yung WK, Salama SR, Cooper LA, Rheinbay E, 
Miller CR, Vitucci M et al (2015) Comprehensive, integrative 
genomic analysis of diffuse lower-grade gliomas. N Engl J Med 
372:2481–2498. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1402121
 7. Chen L, Voronovich Z, Clark K, Hands I, Mannas J, Walsh M, 
Nikiforova MN, Durbin EB, Weiss H, Horbinski C (2014) Pre-
dicting the likelihood of an isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 or 2 
mutation in diagnoses of infiltrative glioma. Neurooncology 
16:1478–1483. doi:10.1093/neuonc/nou097
 8. Chmielecki J, Crago AM, Rosenberg M, O’Connor R, Walker 
SR, Ambrogio L, Auclair D, McKenna A, Heinrich MC, Frank 
DA et al (2013) Whole-exome sequencing identifies a recur-
rent NAB2-STAT6 fusion in solitary fibrous tumors. Nat Genet 
45:131–132. doi:10.1038/ng.2522
 9. Ellison DW, Dalton J, Kocak M, Nicholson SL, Fraga C, Neale 
G, Kenney AM, Brat DJ, Perry A, Yong WH et al (2011) Medul-
loblastoma: clinicopathological correlates of SHH, WNT, 
and non-SHH/WNT molecular subgroups. Acta Neuropathol 
121:381–396. doi:10.1007/s00401-011-0800-8
 
10. Ellison DW, Kocak M, Figarella-Branger D, Felice G, 
Catherine G, Pietsch T, Frappaz D, Massimino M, Grill 
J, Boyett JM et al (2011) Histopathological grading of 
 819
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820 
1 3
pediatric ependymoma: reproducibility and clinical relevance 
in European trial cohorts. J Negat Results Biomed 10:7. 
doi:10.1186/1477-5751-10-7
 
11. Giannini C, Scheithauer BW, Weaver AL, Burger PC, Kros JM, 
Mork S, Graeber MB, Bauserman S, Buckner JC, Burton J et al 
(2001) Oligodendrogliomas: reproducibility and prognostic 
value of histologic diagnosis and grading. J Neuropathol Exp 
Neurol 60:248–262
 
12. Hasselblatt M, Gesk S, Oyen F, Rossi S, Viscardi E, Giangaspero 
F, Giannini C, Judkins AR, Fruhwald MC, Obser T et al (2011) 
Nonsense mutation and inactivation of SMARCA4 (BRG1) in an 
atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor showing retained SMARCB1 
(INI1) expression. Am J Surg Pathol 35:933–935. doi:10.1097/
PAS.0b013e3182196a39
 
13. Herrlinger U, Jones DT, Glas M, Hattingen E, Gramatzki D, Stu-
plich M, Felsberg J, Bahr O, Gielen GH, Simon M et al (2015) 
Gliomatosis cerebri: no evidence for a separate brain tumor 
entity. Acta Neuropathol. doi:10.1007/s00401-015-1495-z
 
14. Huse JT, Diamond EL, Wang L, Rosenblum MK (2015) Mixed 
glioma with molecular features of composite oligodendroglioma 
and astrocytoma: a true “oligoastrocytoma”? Acta Neuropathol 
129:151–153. doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1359-y
 
15. Huse JT, Edgar M, Halliday J, Mikolaenko I, Lavi E, Rosenblum 
MK (2013) Multinodular and vacuolating neuronal tumors of 
the cerebrum: 10 cases of a distinctive seizure-associated lesion. 
Brain Pathol 23:515–524. doi:10.1111/bpa.12035
 
16. Ida CM, Rodriguez FJ, Burger PC, Caron AA, Jenkins SM, 
Spears GM, Aranguren DL, Lachance DH, Giannini C (2014) 
Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma: natural history and long-term 
follow-up. Brain Pathol. doi:10.1111/bpa.12217
 
17. Joseph NM, Phillips J, Dahiya S, M Felicella M, Tihan T, Brat 
DJ, Perry A (2013) Diagnostic implications of IDH1-R132H 
and OLIG2 expression patterns in rare and challenging glio-
blastoma variants. Mod Pathol. 26:315–326. doi:10.1038/
modpathol.2012.173
 
18. Judkins AR (2007) Immunohistochemistry of INI1 expression: a 
new tool for old challenges in CNS and soft tissue pathology. Adv 
Anat Pathol 14:335–339. doi:10.1097/PAP.0b013e3180ca8b08
 
19. Khuong-Quang DA, Buczkowicz P, Rakopoulos P, Liu XY, Fon-
tebasso AM, Bouffet E, Bartels U, Albrecht S, Schwartzentruber 
J, Letourneau L et al (2012) K27M mutation in histone H3.3 
defines clinically and biologically distinct subgroups of pediat-
ric diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas. Acta Neuropathol 124:439–
447. doi:10.1007/s00401-012-0998-0
 
20. Killela PJ, Pirozzi CJ, Healy P, Reitman ZJ, Lipp E, Rasheed 
BA, Yang R, Diplas BH, Wang Z, Greer PK et al (2014) Muta-
tions in IDH1, IDH2, and in the TERT promoter define clini-
cally distinct subgroups of adult malignant gliomas. Oncotarget 
5:1515–1525
 
21. Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK, Aisner DL, Birks DK, Foreman 
NK (2013) Epithelioid GBMs show a high percentage of BRAF 
V600E mutation. Am J Surg Pathol 37:685–698. doi:10.1097/
PAS.0b013e31827f9c5e
 
22. Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK, Aisner DL, Foreman NK (2015) 
BRAF VE1 immunoreactivity patterns in epithelioid glioblas-
tomas positive for BRAF V600E mutation. Am J Surg Pathol 
39:528–540. doi:10.1097/PAS.0000000000000363
 
23. Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK, Alassiri AH, Birks DK, Newell 
KL, Moore W, Lillehei KO (2010) Epithelioid versus rhabdoid 
glioblastomas are distinguished by monosomy 22 and immuno-
histochemical expression of INI-1 but not claudin 6. Am J Surg 
Pathol 34:341–354. doi:10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181ce107b
 
24. Korshunov A, Ryzhova M, Hovestadt V, Bender S, Sturm D, 
Capper D, Meyer J, Schrimpf D, Kool M, Northcott PA et al 
(2015) Integrated analysis of pediatric glioblastoma reveals 
a subset of biologically favorable tumors with associated 
molecular prognostic markers. Acta Neuropathol 129:669–678. 
doi:10.1007/s00401-015-1405-4
 
25. Louis DN (2012) The next step in brain tumor classification: 
“Let us now praise famous men”… or molecules? Acta Neuro-
pathol 124:761–762. doi:10.1007/s00401-012-1067-4
 
26. Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK (2007) World 
Health Organization histological classification of tumours of the 
central nervous system. International Agency for Research on 
Cancer, Lyon
 
27. Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK (2016) World 
Health Organization Histological Classification of Tumours of 
the Central Nervous System. International Agency for Research 
on Cancer, France
 
28. Louis DN, Perry A, Burger P, Ellison DW, Reifenberger G, von 
Deimling A, Aldape K, Brat D, Collins VP, Eberhart C et al 
(2014) International Society Of Neuropathology-Haarlem con-
sensus guidelines for nervous system tumor classification and 
grading. Brain Pathol 24:429–435. doi:10.1111/bpa.12171
 
29. Nonoguchi N, Ohta T, Oh JE, Kim YH, Kleihues P, Ohgaki H 
(2013) TERT promoter mutations in primary and secondary 
glioblastomas. Acta Neuropathol 126:931–937. doi:10.1007/
s00401-013-1163-0
 
30. Ohgaki H, Kleihues P (2013) The definition of primary 
and secondary glioblastoma. Clin Cancer Res 19:764–772. 
doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3002
 
31. Ohgaki H, Kleihues P (2005) Population-based studies on inci-
dence, survival rates, and genetic alterations in astrocytic and oli-
godendroglial gliomas. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64:479–489
 
32. Olar A, Wani KM, Alfaro-Munoz KD, Heathcock LE, van Thuijl 
HF, Gilbert MR, Armstrong TS, Sulman EP, Cahill DP, Vera-
Bolanos E et al (2015) IDH mutation status and role of WHO 
grade and mitotic index in overall survival in grade II–III dif-
fuse gliomas. Acta Neuropathol 129:585–596. doi:10.1007/
s00401-015-1398-z
 
33. Parker M, Mohankumar KM, Punchihewa C, Weinlich R, Dal-
ton JD, Li Y, Lee R, Tatevossian RG, Phoenix TN, Thiruven-
katam R et al (2014) C11orf95-RELA fusions drive oncogenic 
NF-kappaB signalling in ependymoma. Nature 506:451–455. 
doi:10.1038/nature13109
 
34. Perry A, Miller CR, Gujrati M, Scheithauer BW, Zambrano SC, 
Jost SC, Raghavan R, Qian J, Cochran EJ, Huse JT et al (2009) 
Malignant gliomas with primitive neuroectodermal tumor-like 
components: a clinicopathologic and genetic study of 53 cases. 
Brain Pathol 19:81–90. doi:10.1111/j.1750-3639.2008.00167.x
 
35. Perry A, Stafford SL, Scheithauer BW, Suman VJ, Lohse CM 
(1997) Meningioma grading: an analysis of histologic param-
eters. Am J Surg Pathol 21:1455–1465
 
36. Pietsch T, Wohlers I, Goschzik T, Dreschmann V, Denkhaus 
D, Dorner E, Rahmann S, Klein-Hitpass L (2014) Supratento-
rial ependymomas of childhood carry C11orf95-RELA fusions 
leading to pathological activation of the NF-kappaB signal-
ing pathway. Acta Neuropathol 127:609–611. doi:10.1007/
s00401-014-1264-4
 
37. Ramkissoon LA, Horowitz PM, Craig JM, Ramkissoon SH, Rich 
BE, Schumacher SE, McKenna A, Lawrence MS, Bergthold G, 
Brastianos PK et al (2013) Genomic analysis of diffuse pediatric 
low-grade gliomas identifies recurrent oncogenic truncating rear-
rangements in the transcription factor MYBL1. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA 110:8188–8193. doi:10.1073/pnas.1300252110
 
38. Reuss DE, Kratz A, Sahm F, Capper D, Schrimpf D, Koelsche 
C, Hovestadt V, Bewerunge-Hudler M, Jones DT, Schittenhelm J 
et al (2015) Adult IDH wild type astrocytomas biologically and 
clinically resolve into other tumor entities. Acta Neuropathol. 
doi:10.1007/s00401-015-1454-8
 
39. Reuss DE, Mamatjan Y, Schrimpf D, Capper D, Hovestadt V, 
Kratz A, Sahm F, Koelsche C, Korshunov A, Olar A et al (2015) 
 820
 
Acta Neuropathol (2016) 131:803–820
1 3
IDH mutant diffuse and anaplastic astrocytomas have similar age 
at presentation and little difference in survival: a grading prob-
lem for WHO. Acta Neuropathol 129:867–873. doi:10.1007/
s00401-015-1438-8
 
40. Reuss DE, Sahm F, Schrimpf D, Wiestler B, Capper D, Koels-
che C, Schweizer L, Korshunov A, Jones DT, Hovestadt V et al 
(2015) ATRX and IDH1-R132H immunohistochemistry with 
subsequent copy number analysis and IDH sequencing as a 
basis for an “integrated” diagnostic approach for adult astrocy-
toma, oligodendroglioma and glioblastoma. Acta Neuropathol 
129:133–146. doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1370-3
 
41. Robinson DR, Wu YM, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Cao X, Lonigro 
RJ, Sung YS, Chen CL, Zhang L, Wang R, Su F et al (2013) 
Identification of recurrent NAB2-STAT6 gene fusions in solitary 
fibrous tumor by integrative sequencing. Nat Genet 45:180–185. 
doi:10.1038/ng.2509
 
42. Rodriguez FJ, Perry A, Rosenblum MK, Krawitz S, Cohen KJ, 
Lin D, Mosier S, Lin MT, Eberhart CG, Burger PC (2012) Dis-
seminated oligodendroglial-like leptomeningeal tumor of child-
hood: a distinctive clinicopathologic entity. Acta Neuropathol 
124:627–641. doi:10.1007/s00401-012-1037-x
 
43. Rodriguez FJ, Schniederjan MJ, Nicolaides T, Tihan T, Burger 
PC, Perry A (2015) High rate of concurrent BRAF-KIAA1549 
gene fusion and 1p deletion in disseminated oligodendroglioma-
like leptomeningeal neoplasms (DOLN). Acta Neuropathol 
129:609–610. doi:10.1007/s00401-015-1400-9
 
44. Sahm F, Reuss D, Koelsche C, Capper D, Schittenhelm J, Heim 
S, Jones DT, Pfister SM, Herold-Mende C, Wick W et al (2014) 
Farewell to oligoastrocytoma: in situ molecular genetics favor 
classification as either oligodendroglioma or astrocytoma. Acta 
Neuropathol 128:551–559. doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1326-7
 
45. Schweizer L, Koelsche C, Sahm F, Piro RM, Capper D, Reuss 
DE, Pusch S, Habel A, Meyer J, Gock T et al (2013) Menin-
geal hemangiopericytoma and solitary fibrous tumors carry 
the NAB2-STAT6 fusion and can be diagnosed by nuclear 
expression of STAT6 protein. Acta Neuropathol 125:651–658. 
doi:10.1007/s00401-013-1117-6
 
46. Taylor MD, Northcott PA, Korshunov A, Remke M, Cho YJ, 
Clifford SC, Eberhart CG, Parsons DW, Rutkowski S, Gajjar A 
et al (2012) Molecular subgroups of medulloblastoma: the cur-
rent consensus. Acta Neuropathol 123:465–472. doi:10.1007/
s00401-011-0922-z
 
47. van den Bent MJ (2010) Interobserver variation of the histo-
pathological diagnosis in clinical trials on glioma: a clinician’s 
perspective. Acta Neuropathol 120:297–304. doi:10.1007/
s00401-010-0725-7
 
48. Wiestler B, Capper D, Sill M, Jones DT, Hovestadt V, Sturm D, 
Koelsche C, Bertoni A, Schweizer L, Korshunov A et al (2014) 
Integrated DNA methylation and copy-number profiling iden-
tify three clinically and biologically relevant groups of ana-
plastic glioma. Acta Neuropathol 128:561–571. doi:10.1007/
s00401-014-1315-x
 
49. Wilcox P, Li CC, Lee M, Shivalingam B, Brennan J, Suter CM, 
Kaufman K, Lum T, Buckland ME (2015) Oligoastrocytomas: 
throwing the baby out with the bathwater? Acta Neuropathol 
129:147–149. doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1353-4
 
50. Woehrer A, Slavc I, Waldhoer T, Heinzl H, Zielonke N, Czech T, 
Benesch M, Hainfellner JA, Haberler C, Austrian Brain Tumor 
R (2010) Incidence of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors in chil-
dren: a population-based study by the Austrian Brain Tumor 
Registry, 1996–2006. Cancer 116:5725–5732. doi:10.1002/
cncr.25540
 
51. Wu G, Broniscer A, McEachron TA, Lu C, Paugh BS, Becks-
fort J, Qu C, Ding L, Huether R, Parker M et al (2012) Somatic 
histone H3 alterations in pediatric diffuse intrinsic pontine glio-
mas and non-brainstem glioblastomas. Nat Genet 44:251–253. 
doi:10.1038/ng.1102
 
52. Zhang J, Wu G, Miller CP, Tatevossian RG, Dalton JD, Tang B, 
Orisme W, Punchihewa C, Parker M, Qaddoumi I et al (2013) 
Whole-genome sequencing identifies genetic alterations in pedi-
atric low-grade gliomas. Nat Genet 45:602–612. doi:10.1038/
ng.2611
