 1 
 
 
 
Physical activity promotion in physiotherapy practice: A systematic scoping 
review of a decade of literature 
 
Corresponding author 
Anna Lowe 
Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, S10-2BP.  a.lowe@shu.ac.uk 01142255569 
Co-authors 
Melanie Gee, Centre for Health and Social Care Research, Sheffield Hallam 
University, Sheffield, UK. 
Dr Chris Littlewood, School of Health and Related Research, University of Sheffield, 
Sheffield, and Clinical Trials Unit & Research Institute for Primary Care & Health 
Sciences, Keele University, Staffordshire, UK . 
Dr Sionnadh McLean, Health and Wellbeing, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, 
UK. 
Carolyn Lindsay, Health and Wellbeing, Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, UK 
Simon Everett, Physiotherapy Department, Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS 
Foundation Trust, Sheffield, UK 
 
Key words: physical activity, exercise, physiotherapy, physical therapy, inactivity. 
 
Word Count (exc. title page, abstract, refs, figures, tables):2343 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
Physical activity promotion in physiotherapy practice: A systematic scoping 
review of a decade of literature 
ABSTRACT 
Background   
The health benefits of physical activity (PA) have been extensively documented.  
Globally PA levels are low with only a small proportion of the population reaching 
recommended levels. Insufficient PA is seen as a major public health problem with 
high cost to society.  Physiotherapists work with people to manage long-term 
conditions and are well-placed to deliver individual interventions to increase PA. 
Despite this little is known about the evidence that exists in this field. 
Methods 
This scoping review comprises a comprehensive search of key databases using pre-
determined search terms.  This is supplemented with a parallel search that 
incorporated novel social media strands.  In-line with current guidance, a robust 
screening process took place using agreed inclusion and exclusion criteria. 
Results 
Thirty one studies met the inclusion criteria.  The number of studies published 
annually increased over the decade.  Ireland and USA yielded the largest number of 
publications with only one study from the UK.  The target populations included 
physiotherapists and service users from a range of clinical populations.  The studies 
were mainly quantitative and observational in design with a predominance of studies 
that scoped attitudes, perceptions, barriers and current practice. 
Conclusions  
This reconnaissance has shown the state of the evidence to be sparse and 
disparate.  However, the sharp rise in published work in recent years is encouraging. 
The predominance of scoping studies and the clear social, economic and political 
drivers for change in this area highlights a need for more pragmatic, interventional 
studies that can inform clinical practice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 
BACKGROUND 
The positive effects of physical activity (PA) on physical and mental health,1,2  health-
related quality of life,3  and healthy ageing4 have been extensively documented. 
Many of the leading causes of ill health could be prevented if more inactive people 
were to become active.5   
Insufficient PA is seen as a major public health problem, which puts a high demand 
on society due to the high costs it generates.1  In developed countries physical 
inactivity accounts for 1.5% –3.0% of total direct healthcare costs.6  In the UK in 
2006-7 physical inactivity cost the NHS an estimated £0.9 billion.7  
Physical activity is described as any body movement produced by the skeletal 
muscles that results in a substantial increase over resting energy expenditure.8    
Physical inactivity (PI) is described as doing no or very little physical activity at work, 
at home, for transport or during discretionary time and not reaching physical activity 
guidelines deemed necessary to benefit public health.9  
In 2010 the World Health Organization published global recommendations on 
physical activity for health.5 These were followed, in 2011, by UK guidelines for 
participation in physical activity across the life course.10   Despite the well reported 
health and economic benefits of  PA, levels of participation are low.  Globally in 
2010, around 23% of adults aged 18+ years were insufficiently physically active.5   In 
the UK fewer than 40% of men and fewer than 30% of women met the 
recommended the PA guidelines across England, Scotland, Wales and Northern 
Ireland.11   
In order to increase physical activity worldwide it has been identified that a systems 
approach is required that focuses on populations and the complex interactions 
among the correlates of physical inactivity, rather than solely a behavioural science 
approach focusing on individuals.12  
Healthcare is part of this system and within healthcare there is a need for 
organisational, environmental and individual approaches promoting PA. Current UK 
guidance recommends that behaviour change is promoted by all health and social 
care professionals who have contact with the general public.13  It has been identified 
that opportunities exist to promote the benefits of healthy lifestyles (including 
increasing PA) through routine contacts that people have with health services, by 
engaging individuals in conversations which support them in the steps they wish to 
take towards a healthier lifestyle.14  
However, despite these aspirations, it has been suggested that there is little 
evidence that PA is being comprehensively promoted in healthcare settings.15  The 
barriers to increasing health promotion and preventative care in healthcare settings 
are consistent across professional groups and include lack of time, perceived lack of 
knowledge, lack of confidence and lack of organisational support.16-18  
 4 
 
It has been suggested that Physiotherapists have a professional and ethical 
responsibility to ensure that health promotion opportunities are maximally 
exploited.19,20   The opportunities are significant with Physiotherapy outpatient 
contacts numbering 3 million in 2012 in the UK alone.21   However little is known 
about the extent to which physiotherapists embed PA promotion in routine/usual 
care.  This type of PA promotion has been termed "non-treatment" PA promotion", 
highlighting that PA is unlikely to be the main focus of the contact but acknowledging 
that the contact represents an opportunity for PA behaviour change.22 
To date published reviews in this field have focussed on;  
(i) Programmes commissioned with the primary aim of increasing PA (as opposed to 
integration of PA promotion into existing healthcare infrastructure). Orrow et al 
(2012) concluded that promotion of physical activity to sedentary adults recruited in 
primary care significantly increased self-reported physical activity levels at 12 
months.23  
(ii) Other health care professionals.  A recent global review of PA counselling in 
primary care included studies involving physicians, counsellors, exercise 
professionals, health visitors, nurses, activity coaches; none of the included studies 
involved physiotherapists.24  
(iii) Broader prevention themes of which PA is a subtheme. In a narrative synthesis 
of the literature related to allied health professionals (including Physiotherapy) and 
health promotion, Needles (2011) concluded that interventions were focused on 
individuals with identified "target" pre-existing conditions rather than approaches that 
identify risk factors.25 In 2012, Frerichs et al published a systematic review of the 
literature exploring whether physical therapists can effectively counsel patients for 
lifestyle-related health conditions, the 7 included studies included both the provision 
of additional PA interventions as well as PA promotion integrated into usual 
practice.26 The authors concluded that health counselling delivered by a physical 
therapist has the potential to be effective, at least in the short term.  Finally 
Taukobong et al (2013) performed a systematic review of the literature related to 
health promotion and physiotherapy (of which PA was a component) identifying a 
lack of physical activity promotion in educational literature.27 
To summarise, despite the compelling rationale for promoting PA and the 
opportunities that physiotherapy practice presents, little is known about the extent to 
which PI is addressed in current physiotherapy practice.   
The over-arching aim of the review is to carry out a reconnaissance of the literature 
related to physical activity promotion in Physiotherapy practice. Specific aims were 
to; 
1. Ascertain the extent of the literature that explicitly relates to physical activity 
promotion in physiotherapy practice. 
 5 
 
2. Explore the key characteristics of the body of evidence. 
 
METHODS 
Design 
This review uses the scoping review design described by Peters et al (2015) and is 
further informed by additional relevant guidance.28-31   Scoping reviews are indicated 
when the nature and extent of the available evidence is unknown and they have 
been increasingly used in response to demand for effective and timely summaries of 
primary research.28  
Search Methods 
The search strategy was developed by Principle Investigator (AL) and Information 
Scientist (MG). 
The strategy was deliberately narrow, with the aim of retrieving articles that explicitly 
mention physiotherapy and physical activity (and synonymous terms) in the title or 
abstract. Appropriate search terms were identified from relevant literature known to 
the author and from exploring the National Library of Medicine Medical Subject 
Headings. See Table 1 for the search parameters and appendix 1 for the search 
terms. 
 
Table 1. Search Parameters 
Descriptor 
Where 
Search term 
 
Physiotherapy 
Title 
physiotherap*, "physical therap*" 
 
Exercise/PA 
Title/abstract 
"physical activit*", exercis*, "general health", 
wellbeing, "physical  fitness", sedentar*, inactiv*, 
"exercise therap*",  
 
Intervention 
Title/abstract 
Interven*, program*, promot*, encourag*, advi*, 
counsel* 
Date Limit           2005-2015 
 
Exclusions          NOT comment or editorial or letter as publication type 
 
Language           Abstract available in English 
 
 
 6 
 
The search was carried out in December 2015 and the database date parameters 
were set from 2005 to 2015. Search terms were combined using Boolean logic and 
used to perform searches of key databases (MEDLINE, CINAHL complete, 
PsychINFO, Web of Science, Cochrane Central Register for Controlled Trials, 
Applied Social Sciences Index and Abstracts (ASSIA)).  
A parallel search was carried out, this included using key search terms in Google; 
the top 100 results were scanned for relevance.  The allied health professions (AHP) 
research network CHAIN was used to circulate a request for information and an 
abbreviated message was circulated on Twitter.  The reference lists of included 
articles were checked, publications of particular relevance were hand searched and 
publication lists of key authors were manually checked for relevant articles. 
Screening 
The references from the above search strands were imported into Refworks 
reference management software and duplicates were removed.  AL read all titles 
and excluded overtly irrelevant articles.  All three reviewers then conducted a small 
pilot test of the inclusion/exclusion criteria; this was an iterative process that required 
several amendments before agreement was reached.  All potentially eligible 
abstracts were then reviewed independently by CL and SE who applied the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, AL arbitrated in the event of disagreement.  In line with 
the aim of identifying articles explicitly relating to physiotherapy and physical activity 
screening and data extraction were from the abstracts only. 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
Studies that met the following criteria were included in the review; 
1. Studies focussed on the physiotherapy workforce (physiotherapists, 
assistants, students) or physiotherapy service users.  
2. Interventions were related to physical activity promotion in a physiotherapy 
context. Articles were excluded if they pertained only to specific, targeted or 
"therapeutic" exercise. 
3. Studies were available in English; studies were excluded if the abstract was 
not available in English. 
4. Primary research of any design. Secondary research, including reviews were 
excluded but relevant studies from these reviews were included if they met 
the criteria.  Editorials and commentaries were excluded. 
5. Published 2005 onwards.  This date was chosen because it corresponds with 
increased global interest in PA following the adoption by WHO of the Global 
strategy on diet, physical activity and health.32   It also allowed for mapping of 
a full decade of activity. 
 
Search Outcome 
 7 
 
Articles that met the above criteria were included in the review.  The process of 
identification, screening, eligibility and inclusion has been documented in accordance 
with PRISMA guidance and is represented in Figure 1.33 
Figure 1. Flowchart of the Study Selection Process. 
Quality Appraisal 
In line with current guidance, as this is a preliminary reconnaissance, quality 
appraisal was not considered necessary to achieve the aims of the study.28  
Data Extraction 
A database in Microsoft Excel was created for data entry and management, it was 
developed iteratively, when consensus was reached on data base design CL and SE 
extracted data from all studies independently. Data was extracted from abstracts 
only as this was deemed sufficient to gain required information based on the pilot 
exercise and with reference to other similar reviews.34,35 
Collation and synthesis 
The data extraction spreadsheets were collated by AL.  All studies meeting the 
inclusion criteria were summarised numerically in the first instance.  This included 
the overall number of studies, year of publication, geographical location of study, 
study design, aims and study populations used and can be seen in Table 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 
Table 2. Summary of Included studies (Full details of data extraction can be seen in 
Table 3). 
 
Author 
Year 
Title 
1 
Aweto, HA et 
al22 
 
2013 
Knowledge, attitude and practice of physiotherapists towards 
promotion of physically active lifestyles in patient 
management. 
2 
Bodner, ME et 
al36 
 
2013 
Benchmarking curriculum content in entry-level health 
professional education with special reference to health 
promotion practice in physical therapy: A multi-institutional 
international study 
3 
Christian, A et 
al37 
 
2015 
Designing a Wellness Program for Rural Community Physical 
Therapy Clinics Based Upon a Needs Assessment 
4 
de Vries, NM 
et al38 
 
2013 
Development and Acceptability of an Individually Tailored 
Physical Therapy Strategy to Increase Activity Levels in 
Older Adults With Mobility Problems. 
5 
de Vries, NM 
et al39 
 
2015a 
Personalized physiotherapy in frail older adults with mobility 
problems is (cost)-effective in improving physical activity and 
frailty: a RCT 
6 
de Vries, NM 
et al40 
 
2015b 
Patient-centred physical therapy is (cost-) effective in 
increasing physical activity and reducing frailty in older adults 
with mobility problems: a randomized controlled trial with 
6?months follow-up 
7 
Frantz, JM et 
al41 
2013 
Physical activity and health promotion strategies among 
physiotherapists in Rwanda. 
8 
Healey, WE et 
al42 
2013 
Creating a community-physical therapy partnership to 
increase physical activity in urban African-American adults. 
9 
Holm I, et al43 
 
2015 
Does outpatient physical therapy with the aim of improving 
health-related physical fitness influence the level of physical 
activity in patients with long-term musculoskeletal conditions? 
10 
Langhammer, 
B et al44 
 
2014 
Physiotherapy and physical functioning post-stroke: Exercise 
habits and functioning 4 years later? Long-term follow-up 
after a 1-year long-term intervention period: A randomized 
controlled trial. 
11 
Lau,C et al45 
2015  
Facilitating community-based exercise for people with stroke: 
a cross-sectional e-survey of physical therapy practice and 
perceived needs. 
12 
McPhail, S.46 
 
2015a 
Multi-morbidity, obesity and quality of life among physically 
inactive Australians accessing physiotherapy clinics for 
musculoskeletal disorders 
13 
McPhail, S47 
 
2015b 
Patient-perceived barriers and facilitators to increasing 
physical activity among patients with musculoskeletal 
disorders receiving outpatient physiotherapy: a qualitative 
investigation. 
14 
Messner, T.48 
 
2012 
Change in the activity behavior in the context of outpatient 
physiotherapy treatments Effects of planning and action 
control intervention 
15 
Mulligan, H et 
al.49 
2012 
Promoting physical activity for people with neurological 
disability: perspectives and experiences of physiotherapists. 
16 
O’Donoghue, 
G et al50 
2011 
Physical activity and exercise promotion and prescription in 
undergraduate physiotherapy education: content analysis of 
Irish curricula 
17 
O'Donoghue, 
G et al51 
 
2012 
Contemporary undergraduate physiotherapy education in 
terms of physical activity and exercise prescription: practice 
tutors' knowledge, attitudes and beliefs. 
18 
O'Donoghue, 
G et al52 
 
2014a 
Assessment and management of risk factors for the 
prevention of lifestyle-related disease: a cross-sectional 
survey of current activities, barriers and perceived training 
 9 
 
needs of primary care physiotherapists in the Republic of 
Ireland. 
19 
O'Donoghue, 
G et al53 
 
2014b 
Physical activity and exercise promotion and prescription: 
Recommendations for contemporary professional entry-level 
physiotherapy education 
20 
Radež,P et 
al54 
 
2015 
The physiotherapy and physical activity components within 
the antenatal classes in Slovenia 
21 
Sandström K 
et al55 
2009 
Prerequisites for carrying out physiotherapy and physical 
activity - experiences from adults with cerebral palsy. 
22 
Sheridan,C et 
al56 
 
2008 
Do physiotherapy-led exercise classes change activity levels 
and weight parameters in children attending a weight 
management clinic? 
23 
Shirley,D et 
al57 
 
2010 
Physical activity promotion in the physical therapy setting: 
perspectives from practitioners and students 
24 
Smith CM et 
al58 
 
2013 
Participant perceptions of a novel physiotherapy approach 
("Blue Prescription") for increasing levels of physical activity 
in people with multiple sclerosis: a qualitative study following 
intervention. 
25 
Snodgrass, 
SJ. et al59 
2014 
Weight management including dietary and physical activity 
advice provided by Australian physiotherapists: a pilot cross-
sectional survey. 
26 
Soundy, A. et 
al60 
 
2014a 
Barriers to and facilitators of physical activity among persons 
with schizophrenia: a survey of physical therapists. 
27 
Soundy, A. et 
al61 
 
2014b 
The value of social support to encourage people with 
schizophrenia to engage in physical activity: an international 
insight from specialist mental health physiotherapists. 
28 
Stretton, C. et 
al62 
 
2013 
Activity coaching to improve walking is liked by rehabilitation 
patients but physiotherapists have concerns: a qualitative 
study. 
29 
Tovin, M. et 
al63 
 
2014 
Parent Perspectives on Physical Activity and the Role of 
Physical Therapy in Children With Autism Spectrum Disorder 
30 
Walkeden, S. 
et al64 
2015 
Perceptions of physiotherapists about their role in health 
prootion at an acute hospital: a qualitative study. 
31 
Zalewski K. et 
al65 
 
2014 
Identifying barriers to remaining physically active after 
rehabilitation: differences in perception between physical 
therapists and older adult patients. 
 
 
RESULTS 
A total of 2050 records were identified through the searches.  Following the 
screening process 31 records met the study inclusion criteria, these are summarised 
in Table 1. Reasons for exclusion are listed in Figure 1. 
Year of Publication 
Figure 2 shows the results by year of publication. It demonstrates a steady increase 
from 2008 onwards with more than 50% (n=17) of the studies published in 2014 and 
2015. 
Figure 2. Year of Publication of Records. 
 10 
 
Geographic Location 
Ireland and USA have produced the greatest volume of literature with 5 studies per 
country.  This is followed by Australia which yielded 4 studies; there were also 3 
international studies where data collection occurred in more than one country.  Only 
one study from the UK met the inclusion criteria. 
Populations 
The focus populations in the included studies were physiotherapists, students, 
associate/support works, service users and a number of literature based educational 
studies.  Several of the included studies focussed on more than one population. 
The service users included in the studies were from a variety of clinical groups 
including musculoskeletal, older adults, stroke, general adults, cerebral palsy, 
children with obesity, multiple sclerosis, autistic spectrum disorder and long-term 
neurological conditions. 
Study Design 
The design of the included studies was categorised according to a research design 
framework by Littlewood and May (2013),66  see Figure 3.  All included studies were 
primary research as per inclusion criteria.  The most frequently employed design was 
quantitative, observational studies, followed by mixed methods and qualitative 
studies.  The smallest category was quantitative interventional studies. 
Figure 3. Study Type by Research Design. 
Focus/Theme of the Studies 
The included studies fell broadly into five categories;  
(i) Scoping of barriers, current practice, knowledge and attitudes.  This 
included scoping of physiotherapists and/or service users (n=17). 
(ii) Identifying the need for PA promotion (n=1). 
(iii) Development or evaluation of a specific PA promotion initiative (n=2).  
(iv) Educational studies (n=3). 
(v) PA promotion intervention (n=8).  
 
DISCUSSION 
The key aims of this review were to identify and map the body of literature related to 
physiotherapy and physical activity promotion.  To our knowledge this is the most up 
to date published review of existing literature that explicitly relates to physical activity 
promotion in physiotherapy practice thus providing an important springboard for 
discussion and research.   
 11 
 
This study returned 31 studies globally from the last decade; it is important to 
recognise that this is not a large body of literature.  This could be due to the way in 
which PA promotion is recorded in research literature, it may be "packaged" as part 
of a broader "health promotion" or "Making Every Contact Count" approach for 
example and may therefore not have been returned in the search.  It was the 
intention of this research to identify articles in which there was explicit reference to 
physiotherapy and physical activity in the title or abstract. The vast majority of 
studies were excluded because of a lack of specific reference to Physiotherapy.  It is 
also important to note than some studies were excluded despite having a 
physiotherapy and physical activity component.  Reasons for this include (i) usual 
physiotherapy being compared to a non-physiotherapy PA intervention (ii) physical 
activity approaches were developed with PTs involved but were not explicitly labelled 
as physiotherapy.  The above points raise questions for the physiotherapy profession 
about the terminology used and the visibility of physical activity promotion within 
professional practice. 
The search strategy incorporated novel social media strands; although the additional 
strands didn't yield any included studies they highlighted a number of relevant 
protocols and helped develop international networks.  The impact of this is hard to 
measure but twitter impressions can be used as a guideline for reach within the 
twitter community.  Basic analytics on the original tweet show that it was retweeted 
21 times and had 8,388 "impressions" (i.e. was seen by 8,388 twitter users).  This 
suggests that incorporation of twitter may be a useful, cheap and accessible means 
of increasing the reach of a search. 
The overall trend shows an increase research outputs over time, this is consistent 
with the increased awareness of the impact of physical inactivity globally and the 
corresponding increase in focus on PA in public health policy, and consequently, as 
a research priority.  The overall volume of literature however, remains small and the 
geographical location of the studies shows that large areas of the global 
Physiotherapy community were not represented. 
Fewer than half of the included studies focussed on service users, with most 
focussing on Physiotherapists, this may be indicative of an immature field of 
research or may be a reflection of the fact that accessing healthcare professionals 
for research purposes can be quicker and more straightforward than accessing 
service users.   
In terms of the aims of the included studies, over half of all included studies focussed 
on scoping, which may suggest that there is an appetite for development in this area 
and a rationale for further interventional research. Only 8 interventional studies were 
identified, these included testing the acceptability of PA interventions62 and the 
effectiveness of specific physiotherapy-related PA promotion programmes.38-
40,43,44,48,56  This includes examples of projects that have been developed specifically 
with the purpose of increasing PA in a specific population, (for example a 
 12 
 
physiotherapy-led service for obese children56)  and examples of existing 
physiotherapy services that have evolved to incorporate effective PA promotion 
interventions.43  Both are important and viable future research strands.  
 
One notable study focussed on highlighting the need for PA promotion (and other 
lifestyle interventions) amongst physiotherapy service users by quantifying the 
prevalence of co-morbidities amongst inactive musculoskeletal service users.46   This 
Australian study provides an important rationale for physiotherapy action in this area 
suggesting that; 
"…interventions in ambulatory hospital clinics for people with 
musculoskeletal disorders primarily focus on their presenting 
musculoskeletal complaint with cursory attention given to 
lifestyle risk factors; including physical inactivity. This missed 
opportunity is likely to have both personal costs for patients and 
economic costs from downstream healthcare utilisation." 
Only 2 studies described the development of physiotherapy/PA interventions both 
were community partnerships.37,42 This highlights an important area for future 
research; it is essential that Physiotherapy PA promotion interventions dovetail with 
community services and meet the needs of local populations.  Without this any 
benefit from Physiotherapy interventions is likely to be short lived. 
Three studies focussed on pre-registration physiotherapy education.36,50,53  None of 
the educational literature focuses on post-registration education highlighting a gap 
concerned with the educational needs of the current workforce. 
Despite the small volume of identified research, these studies add to the body of 
literature around barriers to change, and provide examples of both physiotherapy-led 
PA promotion initiatives and examples whereby PA promotion is integrated into 
existing practice.   
Physiotherapists are part of the multiagency workforce required to influence system-
wide PA change.  It is essential that physiotherapists recognise their potential 
contribution, particularly in relation to using PA as a way of reducing and managing 
long-term health conditions.21   Access to this growing and increasingly costly 
population of people with long-term conditions should be viewed as a significant 
health promotion opportunity.  To have impact physiotherapists need to be equipped 
to capitalise on these opportunities at scale.  This requires recognition of PA 
promotion opportunities, knowledge skills and confidence to deliver PA promotion 
that is acceptable and effective in a PT context and robust recording and evaluation 
processes.   
 
 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What this review adds: 
• 
Only a limited amount of research explicitly 
 
related to physiotherapy and physical activity 
 
was identified. 
• 
Research in the area of physiotherapy and 
 
physical activity promotion has increased 
 
significantly in the last few years. 
• 
More interventional studies are needed to 
 
understand the best way for PA promotion to 
 
be effectively integrated into practice in a way 
 
that is acceptable and effective. 
 Educational research in this field focuses on 
pre-registration curricula.  The educational 
needs of the current workforce warrants further 
investigation. 
What is already known on this topic: 
 The positive effects of physical activity on 
physical and mental health, health-related 
quality of life, and healthy ageing have been 
extensively documented.  
 Many of the leading causes of ill health could 
be prevented if more inactive people were to 
become active 
 There are compelling social, economic and 
political drivers for incorporating physical 
activity promotion into routine physiotherapy 
care. 
 
 14 
 
STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS 
This comprehensive and systematic scoping review followed good practice guidance 
and robust, clearly reported methods. 
Novel, social media strands were incorporated into the search strategy to increase 
the reach of the search.   
The aim of identifying and mapping literature that explicitly relates to physical activity 
promotion and physiotherapy meant that the focus of the search was relatively 
narrow and information was extracted from titles and abstracts only.   
CONCLUSION 
This is the most up to date scoping review that identifies, collates and maps literature 
on physiotherapy and physical activity promotion.  The review shows an increasing 
research interest in physiotherapy and physical activity although it remains an 
immature field of research.  This review highlights an appetite for engagement in this 
area; this should be cultivated to increase the impact on PI through individual 
approaches. In addition to individual approaches highlighted in this review there is 
scope for Physiotherapists to be involved in more systems-based approaches 
including promoting healthy environments, healthy workforces and creating 
connections with community assets.   This would enable physiotherapists to promote 
PA on a much larger scale and thus increase their impact on physical inactivity. 
Competing Interests: none 
Contributorship: AL, MG, SE & CL we involved in the process as described in the 
manuscript.  SM & CL oversaw the entire research process & ensure ethical 
governance as doctoral supervisors.   All authors contributed to development of the 
manuscript for publication. 
Acknowledgements: none 
Funding: none 
Ethical Approval: Not required. 
Data Sharing Statement: All data submitted. 
 
Review Team 
Lead: Anna Lowe (AL) 
Reviewer 1: Carolyn Lindsay (CL) 
Reviewer 2: Simon Everett (SE) 
 15 
 
Data Scientist: Melanie Gee (MG) 
Advisors: Dr Sionnadh McLean & Dr Chris Littlewood 
 
REFERENCES 
1.Kruk, J. Physical activity and health. Asian Pac. J. Cancer Prev. 2009, 10, 721–
728. 
2.Reiner, M.; Niermann, C.; Jekauc, D.; Woll, A. Long-term health benefits of 
physical activity—A systematic review of longitudinal studies. BMC Public Health. 
2013, 13. 
3.Bize R, Johnson JA and Plotnikoff RC. Physical activity level and health-related 
quality of life in the general adult population: A systematic review. Prev Med. 
2007;45, 401–415. 
4.Chodzko-Zajko, W.J.; Proctor, D.N.; Fiatarone Singh, M.A.; Minson, C.T.; Nigg, 
C.R.; Salem, G.J.; Skinner, J.S. Exercise and physical activity for older adults. Med. 
Sci. Sports Exerc. 2009, 41, 1510–1530. 
5.World Health Organization  Global recommendations on physical activity for health. 
Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press 2010. 
6.Oldridge NB. (2008) Economic burden of physical inactivity: Healthcare costs 
associated with cardiovascular disease. Eur J Prev Card. 15(2):130-9. 
7.Scarborough P, Bhatnagar P, Wickramasinghe KK, Allender S, Foster C, Rayner 
M. (2011) The economic burden of ill health due to diet, physical inactivity, smoking, 
alcohol and obesity in the UK: An update to 2006-2007 NHS costs. J Public Health. 
33(4):527-535. 
8.Bouchard C and Shephard RJ. Physical activity, fitness, and health: The model 
and key concepts. In: Bouchard C, Shephard RJ, Stephens T, editors. Physical 
activity, fitness and health: International proceedings and consensus statement. 
Champaign, Ill: Human Kinetics 1994: 77-88. 
9.Bull FC, Armstrong TP, Dixon T, Ham S, Neiman A, Pratt M. (2004) Chapter 10 
Physical inactivity. In: Ezzati M, Lopez AD, Rodgers A, Murray CJL, editors. 
Comparative quantification of health risks: Global and regional burden of disease 
attributable to selected major risk factors. Vol 1. Switzerland, WHO Press, 729-881. 
10.Department of health (2011) Start active, stay active: A report on physical activity 
for health from the four home countries’ chief medical officers. [online] 
http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/futurenhs/ (accessed 16th July 2016) 
 16 
 
11.Townsend N, Bhatnagar P, Wickramasinghe K et al (2012) Physical activity 
statistics 2012. London, England: British Heart Foundation and Oxford, England: 
University of Oxford. 
12.Kohl H, Craig C, Lambert E, et al. Physical Activity 5: The pandemic of physical 
inactivity: global action for public health. The Lancet.  2012;380:294-305. 
13.National institute for health and care excellence. Behaviour change: individual 
approaches. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ph49 (accessed 15th July 2016) 
14.Public Health England Making Every Contact Count (MECC):Consensus 
statement. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/51594
9/Making_Every_Contact_Count_Consensus_Statement.pdf (accessed 15th July 
2016) 
15.Speake H, Copeland R, Till S, et al. Embedding Physical Activity in the Heart of 
the NHS: The Need for a Whole-System Approach. Sports Med. 2016;46:939-946.  
16.Lobelo F, de Quevedo IG. The Evidence in Support of Physicians and Health 
Care Providers as Physical Activity Role Models. Am J lifestyle med. 2016;10:36-52. 
17.Rubio-Valera M, Pons-Vigués M, Martínez-Andrés M, et al. Barriers and 
Facilitators for the Implementation of Primary Prevention and Health Promotion 
Activities in Primary Care: A Synthesis through Meta-Ethnography. PLoS One. 
2014;9:e89554. 
18.Hébert E,T., Caughy MO, Shuval K. Primary care providers' perceptions of 
physical activity counselling in a clinical setting: a systematic review. Br J Sports 
Med.  2012;46:625. 
19.Dean E. Physical therapy in the 21st century Part I: Toward practice informed by 
epidemiology and the crisis of lifestyle conditions. Physiotherapy Theory and 
Practice. 2009;25, 330-353. 
20.Dean E. Physical therapy in the 21st century Part II: Evidence-based practice 
within the context of evidence-informed practice. Physiotherapy Theory and Practice. 
2009;25:354; 354-368. 
21.Quality Watch. Focus on allied health professionals 2014 
http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/node/3629 (accessed 15th July 2016) 
22.Aweto HA, Oligbo CN, Fapojuwo OA, et al. Knowledge, attitude and practice of 
physiotherapists towards promotion of physically active lifestyles in patient 
management.  BMC Health Services Research. 2013; 13:21  
 17 
 
23.Orrow G, Kinmonth AL, Sanderson S, Sutton S. Effectiveness of physical activity 
promotion based in primary care: systematic review and meta-analysis of 
randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2012;344:e1389. 
24.Lin J, O'Connor E, Whitlock et al.  Behavioral counseling to promote physical 
activity and a healthful diet to prevent cardiovascular disease in adults: update of the 
evidence for the U.S. preventative services task force. (Evidence Synthesis 
79)AHRQ publication o. 11-05149-EF-1) Rockville, MD. Agency for healthcare 
research and quality; December 2010. 
25.Needles J, Petchey R, Benson J et al The allied health professions and health 
promotion:a systematic literature review and narrative synthesis. Final report. NIHR 
Serive delivery and organisation programme; 2011 
http://www.netscc.ac.uk/hsdr/files/project/SDO_FR_08-1716-205_V01.pdf  
(accessed 15th July 2016) 
26.Frerichs W, Kaltenbacher E, Leur VD, et al. Can physical therapists counsel 
patients with lifestyle-related health conditions effectively? A systematic review and 
implications. Physiotherapy Theory and Practice. 2012;28; Vol.28:571; 571-587; 587. 
27.Taukobong NP, Myezwa H, Pengpid S et al. The degree to which physiotherapy 
literature includes physical activity as a component of health promotion in practice 
and entry level education: scoping systematic review Physiotherapy Theory and 
Practice. 2013,30(1)  
28.Peters MDJ, Godfrey CM, Khalil H, et al. Guidance for conducting systematic 
scoping reviews. Int J ev-based healthcare. 2015;13:141.  
29.Arksey H and O'Malley L. Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework. 
International J Soc Res Meth. 2005;8(1)  
30. Colquhoun HL, Levac D, O&Amp, et al. Scoping reviews: time for clarity in 
definition, methods, and reporting. J Clin Epidemiol. 2014;67:1291-1294. 
31.Daudt HM, van Mossel C, Scott S. Enhancing the scoping study methodology: a 
large, inter-professional team's experience with Arksey and O'Malley's framework. 
BMC Med Res Meth. 2013;13:48.  
32.World Health Organisation 2004 glob strat Global Strategy on Diet, Physical 
Activity and Health 
http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/strategy/eb11344/strategy_english_web.pdf?u
a=1 (accessed 15th July 2016) 
33. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J et al The PRISMA Group (2009). Preferred 
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses: The PRISMA 
Statement. PLoS Med 6(7) 
 18 
 
34. King K, Meader N, Wright K, et al. Characteristics of Interventions Targeting 
Multiple Lifestyle Risk Behaviours in Adult Populations: A Systematic Scoping 
Review. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0117015. 
35. Goertzen L, Halas G, Rothney J, et al. Mapping a Decade of Physical Activity 
Interventions for Primary Prevention: A Protocol for a Scoping Review of Reviews. 
JMIR research protocols.  2015;4:e91. 
36. Bodner ME, Rhodes RE, Miller WC et al. Benchmarking curriculum content in 
entry-level health professional education with special reference to health promotion 
practice in physical therapy: a multi-institutional international study. Adv Health Sci 
Educ Theory Pract. 2013 Oct;18(4):645-57. 
37. Christian A, Bonomo A, Dickover A et al. Designing a Wellness Program for 
Rural Community Physical Therapy Clinics Based Upon a Needs Assessment. Utica 
College, 2015 http://gradworks.umi.com/36/89/3689882.html (accessed 15th July 
2016). 
38. de Vries 2013: The Coach2Move Approach : Development and Acceptability of 
an Individually Tailored Physical Therapy Strategy to Increase Activity Levels in 
Older Adults With Mobility Problems. J Geriatric Phys Ther. 2015;38(4):169-182. 
39.de Vries NM, Staal JB, van DW, et al. Personalized physiotherapy in frail older 
adults with mobility problems is (cost)-effective in improving physical activity and 
frailty: a RCT. Physiotherapy.  2015;101:e1089-e1090. 
40.de Vries NM, Staal JB, van DW, et al. Patient- centred physical therapy is (cost-) 
effective in increasing physical activity and reducing frailty in older adults with 
mobility problems: a randomized controlled trial with 6 months follow-up: Patient 
centred physical therapy in older adults. J Cachexia, Sarcopenia and Muscle. 
2015:n/a-n/a. 
41. Frantz JM, Ngambare JM. Physical activity and health promotion strategies 
among physiotherapists in Rwanda. African Health Sciences.  2013;13:17-23. 
42. Healey WE, Huber G, Reed M. Creating a community- physical therapy 
partnership to increase physical activity in urban African-American adults. Progress 
in Community Health Partnerships: Research, Education, and Action.  2013;7:255-
262. 
43. Holm I, Tveter AT, Moseng T, et al. Does outpatient physical therapy with the 
aim of improving health-related physical fitness influence the level of physical activity 
in patients with long-term musculoskeletal conditions? Physiotherapy.  
2015;101:273-278.  
44. Langhammer B, Lindmark B, Stanghelle JK. Physiotherapy and physical 
functioning post-stroke: exercise habits and functioning 4 years later? Long-term 
 19 
 
follow-up after a 1-year long-term intervention period: a randomized controlled trial. 
Brain injury. 2014;28:1396. 
45. Lau C, Chitussi D, Elliot S, et al. Facilitating Community- Based Exercise for 
People With Stroke: Cross-Sectional e-Survey of Physical Therapist Practice and 
Perceived Needs. Phys Ther . 2016;96:469. 
46. McPhail S. Multi- morbidity, obesity and quality of life among physically inactive 
Australians accessing physiotherapy clinics for musculoskeletal disorders. 
Physiotherapy. 2015;101:e986-e987.  
47.McPhail S, Schippers M, Marshall AL, et al. Patient-perceived barriers and 
facilitators to increasing physical activity among patients with musculoskeletal 
disorders receiving outpatient physiotherapy: a qualitative investigation. 
Physiotherapy. 2015;101:e986. 
48. Messner T. Change in the activity behavior in the context of outpatient 
physiotherapy treatments Effects of planning and action control intervention. 
Zeitschrift fur Physiotherapeuten. 2012; 64(9): 6-17. (12p). 
49. Mulligan H, Fjellman-Wiklund A, Hale L, et al. Promoting physical activity for 
people with neurological disability: Perspectives and experiences of 
physiotherapists. Physiotherapy Theory and Practice. 2011, 2011;27; Vol.27:399; 
399-410; 410. 
50. O’Donoghue G, Doody C, Cusack T. Physical activity and exercise promotion 
and prescription in undergraduate physiotherapy education: content analysis of Irish 
curricula. Physiotherapy.  2011;97:145-153. 
51. O’Donoghue G,  Cusack, T and Doody C (2012) Contemporary undergraduate 
physiotherapy education in terms of physical activity and exercise prescription: 
practice tutors’ knowledge, attitudes and beliefs. Physiotherapy. 98, 2, 167-173. 
52. O’Donoghue G, Cunningham, C, Murphy, F et al (2014) Assessment and 
management of risk factors for the prevention of lifestyle-related disease: a cross-
sectional survey of current activities, barriers and perceived training needs of primary 
care physiotherapists in the Republic of Ireland. Physiotherapy. 100(2):116-22. 
53.O'Donoghue G, Doody C, Cusack T. Physical activity and exercise promotion and 
prescription: Recommendations for contemporary professional entry-level 
physiotherapy education. Physiotherapy Practice and Research. 2014;35:55-63. 
54. Radez, A, Cepanovic D, Jurican AB. The physiotherapy and physical activity 
components within the antenatal classes in Slovenia. Physiotherapy. 2015;101:e100-
e101. 
 20 
 
55. Sandstrom K, Samuelsson K, Oberg B. Prerequisites for carrying out 
physiotherapy and physical activity - experiences from adults with cerebral palsy. 
Disabil Rehabill. 2009;31:161-169. 
56. Sheridan CB, Curley AE, Roche EF. An evaluation of physiotherapy-led exercise 
classes on physical activity levels and weight parameters in paediatric obesity. 
Physiotherapy Ireland. 2009; 30(2): 53-54. (2p). 
57. Shirley D, van der Ploeg H,P., Bauman AE. Physical activity promotion in the 
physical therapy setting: perspectives from practitioners and students. Phys Ther. 
2010;90:1311.  
58.Smith CM, Hale LA, Mulligan HF, et al. Participant perceptions of a novel 
physiotherapy approach ( Blue Prescription) for increasing levels of physical activity 
in people with multiple sclerosis: a qualitative study following intervention. Disability 
and Rehabilitation. 2013;35; Vol.35: 1174-1181  
59.Snodgrass SJ, Carter AE, Guest M, et al. Weight management including dietary 
and physical activity advice provided by Australian physiotherapists: a pilot cross-
sectional survey. Physiotherapy Theory and Practice. 2014;30; Vol.30:409; 409-420; 
420. 
60. Soundy A, Stubbs B, Probst M, PhD. Barriers to and Facilitators of Physical 
Activity Among Persons With Schizophrenia: A Survey of Physical Therapists. 
Psychiatr Serv. 2014. 1;65(5):693-6. 
61.Soundy A, Freeman P, Stubbs B, et al. The value of social support to encourage 
people with schizophrenia to engage in physical activity: an international insight from 
specialist mental health physiotherapists. J Mental Health. 2014;23; Vol.23:256; 256-
260; 260. 
62. Stretton C, Mudge S, Kayes NM, et al. Activity coaching to improve walking is 
liked by rehabilitation patients but physiotherapists have concerns: a qualitative 
study. Physiotherapy. 2013;59:199-206. 
63.Tovin M. Parent Perspectives on Physical Activity and the Role of Physical 
Therapy in Children With Autism Spectrum Disorder. Faculty Proceedings, ,2014 
Paper 362. http://nsuworks.nova.edu/hpd_pt_facpres/362 (accessed 15th July 2016) 
64.Walkeden S, Walker KM. Perceptions of physiotherapists about their role in 
health promotion at an acute hospital: a qualitative study. Physiotherapy. 
2015;101:226-231.  
65.Zalewski 2014: Identifying Barriers to Remaining Physically Active After 
Rehabilitation: Differences in Perception Between Physical Therapists and Older 
Adult Patients. J Ortho Sports Phys Ther. 2014;44(6):415-424.  
 21 
 
66.Littlewood C, May S. Understanding physiotherapy research. Cambridge 
Scholars Publishing 2013. 
67.World confederation for physical therapy http://www.wcpt.org/what-is (accessed 
15th July 2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
