 CASE REPORT
Paintball-related traumatic liver injury
Joshua Luck,1 Daniel Bell,2 Gareth Bashir1
1Department of General
Surgery, North Middlesex
University Hospital, London,
UK
2Department of Radiology,
North Middlesex University
Hospital, London, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Joshua Luck,
joshua.luck1@nhs.net
Accepted 3 March 2016
To cite: Luck J, Bell D,
Bashir G. BMJ Case Rep
Published online: [please
include Day Month Year]
doi:10.1136/bcr-2015-
213780
SUMMARY
Paintball is a popular recreational sport played at both
amateur and professional level. Ocular injuries are well
recognised, although there is a growing body of
literature documenting superficial vascular as well as
deep solid organ injuries. An 18-year-old man presented
with signs and symptoms consistent with acute
appendicitis. Intraoperatively, a grade III liver injury was
identified and packed before a relook at 48 h. No
further active bleeding was identified; however, follow-
up ultrasound at 3 weeks demonstrated non-resolution
of a large subcapsular haematoma. The patient was
readmitted for a short period of observation and
discharged with repeat ultrasound scheduled for
3 months. This represents the first report of paintball-
related blunt traumatic injury to the liver. Solid organ
injuries of this nature have only been reported three
times previously—all in the urological setting. This case
also highlights issues surrounding the use of routine
follow-up imaging in blunt liver trauma and provides a
concise discussion of the relevant literature.
CASE PRESENTATION
An 18-year-old man presented with a 1-day history
of periumbilical pain radiating to the right iliac
fossa, associated with low-grade fever and anorexia.
There were no other symptoms. On examination,
he was tender in the right iliac fossa. Admission
bloods
demonstrated
a
white
cell
count
of
11.6×109/L,
C
reactive
protein
50 mg/L
and
haemoglobin 115 g/L.
The patient was clinically diagnosed with acute
appendicitis and placed on the emergency list. At
this stage, his anaemia was not thought to be clinic-
ally relevant—particularly in the absence of a
history of trauma. It was planned to investigate this
further postoperatively with appropriate referral to
haematology if required.
TREATMENT
At laparoscopy, a large volume of frank and par-
tially clotted blood was found in the peritoneal
cavity. The operation was converted to a midline
laparotomy and four-quadrant packing performed.
Careful removal of the packs revealed that the
spleen, small bowel, stomach, colon and retroperi-
toneal great vessels were all intact. There was no
evidence of iatrogenic injury.
However, inspection of the liver revealed a large
subcapsular haematoma of the right lobe with a
capsular breach in segment VIII posteriorly. The
grade III injured liver was then re-packed and
intraoperative haemoglobin was 119 g/L.
At reinspection, persistent ooze was noted, so a
haemostatic agent (Surgicel) was applied locally
and the liver repacked with a view to re-exploring
at 48 h. This was in close consultation with the
regional hepatobiliary trauma unit. An immediate
postoperative triple phase contrast CT is shown in
figures 1 and 2.
Subsequent questioning of the patient revealed a
recent history of trauma to the right upper quad-
rant, sustained 2 days prior during a paintball game
at a commercial site. Although there was evidence
of neither ‘paintball purpura’1 nor focal ecchym-
oses on the abdomen, the patient described receiv-
ing two ‘hits’ below the costal margin on the
right-hand side.
Re-exploration at 48 h and removal of the packs
demonstrated no ongoing bleeding and no injury to
the biliary tree. The patient returned to the ward
and
was
discharged
after
an
uncomplicated
recovery.
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient was readmitted 3 weeks later after a
privately organised ultrasound scan demonstrated
non-resolution of the haematoma, although the
patient remained asymptomatic. His readmission
haemoglobin was 137 g/L. At CT
, a persistent large
subcapsular haematoma measuring 13.5 cm×10.1
cm×16.5 cm was demonstrated, shown in figure 3.
After further discussion with the hepatobiliary
trauma unit, this was managed conservatively and
the patient discharged after 3 days of uneventful
observation. A repeat ultrasound has been sched-
uled for 3 months.
DISCUSSION
This represents the first report of paintball-related
blunt traumatic injury to the liver.
Solid organ injuries of this nature have only been
reported three times previously. In the first report,
a
subcapsular
haematoma
of
the
kidney
was
Figure 1
Postoperative CT (axial slice): large liver
haematoma visible with areas of clot formation. Mild
streaking artefact secondary to patient’s arm position.
Luck J, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2016. doi:10.1136/bcr-2015-213780
1
New disease
 successfully managed conservatively (with serial CT imaging
demonstrating complete resolution at 9 months), 2 whereas two
urological cases—of penoscrotal lymphoedema3 and testicular
rupture4—required surgical intervention.
Vascular injuries secondary to paintball pellets are well recog-
nised, although these typically involve the superficial scalp
vessels. Traumatic pseudoaneurysm of both the occipital5 and
superficial temporal artery6 has been well described, although
there are no documented cases of internal or deep vascular
injuries.
There appears to be little role for the use of routine follow-up
imaging in blunt liver trauma. In one large trial of 530 patients
managed non-operatively, the authors identified no benefit of
reimaging at <1 week, demonstrating that the majority of cases
remained either unchanged (51%) or improved (34.7%).7
Indeed, only three patients required intervention based on their
repeat scan findings.
Together with a number of other studies, these data have
been incorporated into the most recent Eastern Association for
the Surgery of Trauma practice guidelines for the non-operative
management of blunt hepatic injury.8 The authors state that
‘routine follow-up CT scans are not necessary’ and that
‘repeated imaging should be guided by a patient’s clinical
status’. It is worth highlighting, however, that they are only able
to provide level 3 support for this recommendation (ie, ‘sup-
ported
by
available
data’
but
lacking
‘adequate
scientific
evidence’).
Overall then, it appears that routine follow-up CT imaging is
not indicated in the non-operative setting. Whether this remains
true for patients who undergo surgical intervention remains
unclear.
Likewise, although patients are advised to avoid strenuous
activities for several weeks or longer, there are no evidence-
based recommendations regarding the need for or duration of
reduced physical activity.8 9 Most advice is intuitive with length-
ier restrictions placed on higher grade injuries, although it is not
clear how this influences the risk of reinjury, if at all.
This case report adds to the growing literature on paintball-
related injuries.10 Pellets with muzzle velocities of 100–300 feet/s11
are potentially harmful to ocular structures12 and also to the
intra-abdominal solid organs. Participants and physicians must
both be aware of the possible dangers associated with this recre-
ational sport.
Learning points
▸ This is the first report of paintball-related traumatic liver
injury.
▸ Paintball pellets are known to be harmful to ocular
structures but are increasingly associated with vascular and
solid organ injuries.
▸ Follow-up imaging in blunt hepatic trauma should be guided by
the patient’s clinical status; there is no clear benefit of routine
follow-up CT scans, particularly in the non-operative setting.
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Obtained.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
REFERENCES
1
Ambay AR, Stratman EJ. Paintball: dermatologic injuries. Cutis 2007;80:49–50.
2
Guerrero MA, Zhou W, El Sayed HF, et al. Subcapsular hematoma of the kidney
secondary to paintball pellet injuries. J Emerg Med 2009;36:300–1.
3
Agrawal V, Li C, Minhas S, et al. Paint ball injury resulting in penoscrotal
lymphedema. Urology 2006;67:1288–9.
4
Joudi FN, Lux MM, Sandlow JI. Testicular rupture secondary to paint ball injury.
J Urol 2004;171:797.
5
John N, Leach JL, Rachana T, et al. Traumatic aneurysm of the occipital artery
secondary to paintball injury. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2009;111:105–8.
6
Cohen JE, Itshayek E. Traumatic pseudoaneurysm of the superficial temporal artery
after paintball injury. Isr Med Assoc J 2010;12:123–4.
7
Cox JC, Fabian TC, Maish GO III, et al. Routine follow-up imaging is unnecessary in
the management of blunt hepatic injury. J Trauma 2005;59:1175–8, discussion
1178-80.
8
Stassen NA, Bhullar I, Cheng JD, et al. Nonoperative management of blunt hepatic
injury: an Eastern Association for the surgery of trauma practice management
guideline. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2012;73:S288–93.
9
Richardson JD. Changes in the management of injuries to the liver and spleen.
J Am Coll Surg 2005;200:648.
10
Conn JM, Annest JL, Gilchrist J, et al. Injuries from paintball game related activities
in the United States, 1997–2001. Inj Prev 2004;10:139–43.
11
Laraque D. Injury risk of nonpowder guns. Pediatrics 2004;114:1357–61.
12
Sbicca JA, Hatch RL. Target lesions and other paintball injuries. J Am Board Fam
Med 2012;25:124–7.
Figure 3
Delayed CT (3 weeks postinjury): persistent large
subcapsular haematoma (measuring 13.5 cm×10.1 cm×16.5 cm).
Figure 2
Postoperative CT (coronal slice): infrahepatic radiolucency
represents surgical packs later removed at re-look laparotomy.
2
Luck J, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2016. doi:10.1136/bcr-2015-213780
New disease
 Copyright 2016 BMJ Publishing Group. All rights reserved. For permission to reuse any of this content visit
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
BMJ Case Report Fellows may re-use this article for personal use and teaching without any further permission.
Become a Fellow of BMJ Case Reports today and you can:
▸ Submit as many cases as you like
▸ Enjoy fast sympathetic peer review and rapid publication of accepted articles
▸ Access all the published articles
▸ Re-use any of the published material for personal use and teaching without further permission
For information on Institutional Fellowships contact consortiasales@bmjgroup.com
Visit casereports.bmj.com for more articles like this and to become a Fellow
Luck J, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2016. doi:10.1136/bcr-2015-213780
3
New disease
