 The Carbohydrate-Insulin Model of Obesity
Beyond “Calories In, Calories Out”
David S. Ludwig, MD, PhD; Cara B. Ebbeling, PhD
F
or decades, consideration of “energy balance” has in-
formedeffortstopreventandtreatobesityintheclinicand
public health arena. Indeed, a recent scientific statement
fromtheEndocrineSocietyconcludesthat“theanswertotheques-
tion,‘
Isacalorieacalorie?’
is‘
yes.’
”
1Inotherwords,dietshighinadded
sugar or other processed carbohydrates should have no special ad-
verse effects on metabolism or body composition, after consider-
ing total calorie consumption. However, rates of obesity remain
intractably high despite intensive focus on reducing calorie intake
(eatless)andincreasingcalorieexpenditure(movemore),withma-
jorimplicationstowell-being,life-expectancy,andhealthcarecosts.
Acentralproblemwiththeconventionalmodelofobesity(Figure,
A) is its inability to provide a satisfactory explanation for the obesity
epidemic, beyond the difficulty many people have maintaining self-
controlinthemodernenvironment.Withweightloss,hungerpredict-
ablyincreasesandenergyexpendituredeclines—physiologicaladap-
tations that tend to push body weight back up.2 Why is the average
personintheUnitedStatesandWesternEuropedefending,fromabio-
logical perspective, a body weight 25 to 30 lb greater today than 50
yearsago?Ananswertothisquestionmaypointthewaytomoreef-
fective prevention, with practical implications for clinical treatment.
The Carbohydrate-Insulin Model
Accordingtoanalternativeview,changesindietaryqualitysincethe
1970sproducehormonalresponsesthatshiftthepartitioningofcalo-
ries (metabolic fuels) consumed in a meal toward deposition in fat
tissue.3-5Consequently,fewercaloriesremainavailableintheblood
stream for use by the rest of the body, driving hunger and overeat-
ing. Importantly, this model considers fat cells as central to the eti-
ology of obesity, not passive storage sites of calorie excess.
Although many factors affect fat cells, the hormone insulin
exerts dominant anabolic control. Insulin decreases the circulating
concentrationofallmajormetabolicfuelsbystimulatingglucoseup-
take into tissues, suppressing release of fatty acids from adipose
tissue, inhibiting production of ketones in the liver, and promoting
fat and glycogen deposition. Consistent with these effects, states
of increased insulin action (such as insulin-producing tumors, ini-
tiation of insulin treatment of type 2 diabetes or overtreatment of
type1diabetes)arepredictablyassociatedwithweightgain.Impor-
tantly, a component of insulin-induced weight gain in diabetes re-
latestochangesinmetabolism,notjustreductionincalorielossfrom
glycosuria.6 Conversely, inadequate insulin treatment of type 1 dia-
betes and drugs that inhibit insulin secretion7 cause weight loss.
Among the many influences on insulin secretion, dietary car-
bohydrate has the most potent effects, which vary by amount and
type.Withregardtocarbohydratetype,theglycemicindex(GI)3de-
scribes how fast specific foods raise blood glucose (and therefore
insulin) in the 2 hours after consumption. Most refined grains, po-
tato products, and added sugars digest quickly and have a rela-
tivelyhighGI,whereasnonstarchyvegetables,legumes,wholefruits,
and intact whole grains tend to have a moderate or low GI. A re-
lated measure, the glycemic load (GL, the multiplicative product of
Despite intensive research, the causes of the obesity epidemic remain incompletely
understood and conventional calorie-restricted diets continue to lack long-term efficacy.
According to the carbohydrate-insulin model (CIM) of obesity, recent increases in the
consumption of processed, high–glycemic-load carbohydrates produce hormonal changes
that promote calorie deposition in adipose tissue, exacerbate hunger, and lower energy
expenditure. Basic and genetic research provides mechanistic evidence in support of the CIM.
In animals, dietary composition has been clearly demonstrated to affect metabolism and
body composition, independently of calorie intake, consistent with CIM predictions.
Meta-analyses of behavioral trials report greater weight loss with reduced-glycemic load vs
low-fat diets, though these studies characteristically suffer from poor long-term compliance.
Feeding studies have lacked the rigor and duration to test the CIM, but the longest such
studies tend to show metabolic advantages for low-glycemic load vs low-fat diets. Beyond
the type and amount of carbohydrate consumed, the CIM provides a conceptual framework
for understanding how many dietary and nondietary exposures might alter hormones,
metabolism, and adipocyte biology in ways that could predispose to obesity. Pending
definitive studies, the principles of a low-glycemic load diet offer a practical alternative to
the conventional focus on dietary fat and calorie restriction.
JAMA Intern Med. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.2933
Published online July 2, 2018.
Invited Commentary
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: The New
Balance Foundation Obesity
Prevention Center, Boston Children’
s
Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts.
Corresponding Author: David S.
Ludwig, MD, PhD, Boston Children’
s
Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave,
Boston, MA 02115 (david.ludwig
@childrens.harvard.edu).
Clinical Review & Education
JAMA Internal Medicine | Special Communication
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online July 2, 2018
E1
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 07/02/2018
 carbohydrate amount and GI) is the best single predictor of post-
prandialbloodglucoselevels,explainingupto90%ofthevariance.8
Protein, depending on amino acid composition, stimulates insulin
secretion, but this macronutrient also elicits the secretion of gluca-
gon, a catabolic hormone that antagonizes insulin. Dietary fat has
little direct effect on insulin, providing a theoretical basis for the ef-
ficacy of high-fat diets.
Thus, the carbohydrate-insulin model of obesity (CIM) pro-
posesthatahigh-carbohydratediet—includinglargeamountsofre-
fined starchy foods and sugar, as commonly consumed in the low-
fatdietera9,10—producespostprandialhyperinsulinemia,promotes
depositionofcaloriesinfatcellsinsteadofoxidationinleantissues,
and thereby predisposes to weight gain through increased hunger,
slowingmetabolicrate,orboth.3-5Liketheconventionalmodel,the
CIM obeys the First Law of Thermodynamics specifying conserva-
tion of energy. However, the CIM considers overeating a conse-
quence of increasing adiposity, not the primary cause. That is, the
causal pathway relating energy balance to fat storage flows oppo-
site to the conventional direction (Figure, B). From this perspec-
tive, calorie restriction can be viewed as symptomatic treatment,
destined to fail for most people in the modern food environment.
Low-calorie, low-fat diets may actually exacerbate the underlying
metabolic problem by further restricting energy available in the
blood—triggering the starvation response comprised of rising hun-
ger, falling metabolic rate, and elevated stress hormone levels.3
Animal Research
Insulin injection into the central nervous system produces
anorexia and weight loss. However, peripheral insulin administra-
tion, a more relevant model of insulin’
s whole body actions,
typically11 (but not always12) promotes fat deposition, increases
hunger, and causes weight gain. Even when calorie-restricted to
prevent excessive weight gain, insulin-treated animals still devel-
oped excessive body fat,13 consistent with a prediction of the CIM
regarding fuel partitioning.
Dietsthatintrinsicallyraiseinsulinsecretionhavemetabolicef-
fects similar to insulin injection. Rodents fed high- vs low-GI diets
controlledformacronutrients(carbohydrate,fat,andprotein)mani-
fest progressive abnormalities in this sequence: hyperinsulinemia;
increased adipocyte diameter and other anabolic changes; greater
adiposity; lower energy expenditure; and finally, increased
hunger.14-17 Analogous to the insulin administration studies, calorie
restriction to prevent excessive weight gain in animals on a high-GI
diet did not prevent excessive adiposity or the associated cardio-
metabolic risk factors17—findings for which the conventional
model has no explanation. Moreover, energy expenditure in-
creased and weight decreased among mice consuming a very low-
carbohydrate vs standard diet, despite no difference in food in-
take,suggestingtheexistenceofauniquemetabolicstatecongruous
with weight loss.18
Genetic Models
High insulin levels in blood may arise from primary hypersecretion
(postulated to cause weight gain) or as a compensatory response
to insulin resistance (a mechanism that may protect against weight
gain, especially if present in adipose tissue19). Therefore, simple
observationalstudiesoffastinginsulinandbodyweightdonotpro-
vide a meaningful test of the CIM. Genetic studies offer an ap-
proach to disentangle cause and effect. In a recent report,20 bidi-
rectional Mendelian randomization was used to examine the
relationship between insulin secretion and body mass index ([BMI]
calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters
Figure. Explanatory Models of Obesity
Overeating (ubiquitous tasty foods)
Physical inactivity (TV, computer, etc)
Energy intake
Circulating metabolic fuels
(glucose, lipids)
Fat storage (anabolic adipose)
Energy expenditure
Conventional model
A
Carbohydrate-insulin model
B
Hunger
Resting
energy
expenditure
Fatigue,
physical
inactivity
Muscular
efficiency
Energy intake
Circulating metabolic fuels
(glucose, lipids)
Energy expenditure
Fat storage (anabolic adipose)
Insulin
secretion
Dietary
carbohydrate
Other dietary
and nondietary
exposure
Other dietary
and nondietary
exposure
A, Conventional model.
B, Carbohydrate-insulin model.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
The Carbohydrate-Insulin Model of Obesity
E2
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online July 2, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 07/02/2018
 squared), potentially free from confounding by sociodemographic
and behavioral factors inherent to most conventional associational
analyses. This study found that genetically determined insulin se-
cretionstronglypredictedBMI,whereasgeneticallydeterminedBMI
did not predict insulin secretion. In addition, variants in the insulin
promotorgeneassociatedwithinsulinhypersecretioninhumanspre-
dictweightgainduringadolescence.21Furthermore,transgenicmice
withreducedinsulinsecretionhadincreasedenergyexpenditureand
were protected from diet-induced obesity, leading the investiga-
tors to conclude, in accordance with the CIM, that circulating hy-
perinsulinemiadrivesdiet-inducedobesityanditscomplications.22
Behavioral Trials and Observational Studies
Contrary to prediction of the conventional model, the inherently
lower energy density of low-fat diets does not spontaneously pro-
duce sustained weight loss. In fact, several recent meta-analyses
found that low-fat diets are inferior to all higher-fat (and thus low-
GL)comparisons.23,24However,thesestudiescharacteristicallyrely
ondietarycounseling,amethodwithlimitationsfortestingmecha-
nistichypothesesowingtovaryinglevelsofnoncomplianceoverthe
long term. Of note, 2 major trials that employed special measures
to improve compliance, Diogenes25 and the DIRECT trial,26 found
greater weight loss on low- vs high-GL diets. A third major study,
DIETFITS,27reportednonsignificantlymoreweightlossonahealthy
low-carbohydratedietvshealthylow-fatdiet,butbothgroupswere
counselledtoavoidrefinedgrains,sugar,andotherprocessedfoods.
Consequently,theGLofthehealthylow-fatdietwasnotablylowfor
a higher-carbohydrate diet—similar to that of the lowest-GL diet in
the Diogenes study.
Inlarge,long-termcohortstudies,somehigh-fatfoodswithex-
ceptionally high energy density (eg, nuts, full-fat dairy) have either
nullorinverseassociationswithweightgain.Incontrast,manycom-
monlyconsumedhigh-GLfoods(eg,potatoproducts,refinedgrains,
sweet desserts, sugary beverages, and 100% fruit juice) are di-
rectly associated with weight gain.28,29
Feeding Studies
According to the CIM, a high-GL meal would limit the availability
of metabolic fuels in the late postprandial period (approximately
3 to 5 hours after eating), decrease fat oxidation, lower energy
expenditure,stimulatestresshormonesecretion,andincreasevol-
untary food intake. These effects have been reported in several
studies.3,30,31
Over the long term, increased fat storage may occur with re-
peated postprandial cycles following high-GL meals. Aiming to test
this possibility, a recent meta-analysis reported no meaningful dif-
ferences between low-fat and low-carbohydrate diets and claimed
to have falsified the CIM.32,33 However, this analysis of very short
studies (most �2 weeks) suffers from major methodological flaws
thatprecludeadefinitivefinding.Mostimportantly,theauthorsdid
not account for the physiological processes involved in adaptation
to a low-carbohydrate diet over time, confounding transient with
chronic effects.
On a conventional high-carbohydrate diet, the brain is criti-
cally dependent on glucose, requiring more than 100 g/d. With se-
vere carbohydrate restriction, the body must initially break down
protein from lean tissue for conversion into glucose. However, this
catabolic response is only temporary because, over time, the con-
centration of ketones (produced in the liver from fatty acids) in-
creasesmarkedly,replacingglucoseastheprimaryfuelforthebrain.
For this reason, the hallmark of a very-low-carbohydrate diet (and
prolonged fasting) is development of nutritional ketosis—giving
rise to the term “ketogenic diet.”
Studiesofhumanstarvationprovideinsightsintothetimecourse
of fat adaptation. As reviewed by Owen et al,34 the total ketone
concentration—including β-hydroxybutyric acid, acetoacetic acid,
and acetone—rises progressively for 10 days, reaching steady state
only after about 3 weeks of fasting. Yang et al35 showed that uri-
nary excretion of ketones also rose throughout 10 days on a very-
low-carbohydratediet,butataslowerratethanduringfasting.And
Vazquez et al36 showed that nitrogen balance was more negative
onahypocaloricketogenicdietcomparedwithanonketogenicdiet
forabout3weeks,thenreachedanetneutralbalance(ie,nonetloss
ofleanbodymass).Thus,theprocessoffatadaptionrequiresatleast
2 to 3 weeks, and perhaps longer. Studies of shorter duration have
no bearing on the chronic effects of macronutrients.
Amongthe25uniquestudiesinthemeta-analysisofenergyex-
penditure,only4haddurationsof2.5weeksorlonger.Eachofthese
reported at least a numerical advantage for the low-carbohydrate
diet,asdescribedintheSupplement,averagingabout50kcal/dper
10% decrease in dietary carbohydrate as a proportion of total en-
ergy intake.
Criticisms
As with the metabolic studies, other commonly cited criticisms of
the CIM warrant reexamination.
Overeating Does Cause Obesity
Intentionallyincreasingcalorieconsumptionwillresultinweightgain,
as dictated by the First Law of Thermodynamics. However, over
the long term, the body responds dynamically to overfeeding with
increased energy expenditure and decreased hunger—physiologi-
cal mechanisms (opposite to underfeeding) that resist ongoing
weight gain. In the classic overfeeding studies,37,38 volunteers re-
ported feeling uncomfortable and had difficulty with compliance.
When the protocol ends, body weight spontaneously returns to or
near baseline. Research in animals and humans confirms that bio-
logicalfactorslimitexcessiveweightgain,justastheydowithweight
loss. The CIM argues that a high-GL diet alters these homeostatic
mechanisms, shifting defended body weight upward.
Obesity Is Typically Associated With Normal
or Elevated Circulating Glucose and Fatty Acid Levels1
Unfortunately, cross-sectional studies after development of obe-
sity may also confound understanding of etiology. The CIM pro-
poses that metabolic fuel concentration is reduced with a high-GL
dietinthelatepostprandialperiod(approximately2.5to5hoursaf-
ter eating) owing to excessive adipose anabolic activity during the
dynamicstageofobesitydevelopment.3,31Eventually,fatcellsreach
a limit, beyond which they cannot effectively expand storage
capacity.39Atthisstage,weightgainplateaus(atthecostofincreas-
inginsulinresistanceandchronicinflammation)andcirculatingmeta-
bolic fuel concentrations consequently rise.
Thenaturalhistoryofhypothalamicobesityresultingfromdam-
age to brain areas controlling food intake and energy expenditure
providesanillustrativeexample.Followingventromedialhypothala-
The Carbohydrate-Insulin Model of Obesity
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online July 2, 2018
E3
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 07/02/2018
 mus lesion in rodents, fat cells are initially insulin sensitive, direct-
ingcaloriestofatstorageinthepresenceofhyperinsulinemia.40In-
sulin sensitivity decreases later, with progressive weight gain. This
sequence of events shows how static analyses late into disease de-
velopment can be misleading.
Nevertheless, circulating metabolic fuels provide only an indi-
rect and imperfect measure of cellular metabolism, as demon-
stratedbythecatabolicstatecharacteristicofuncontrolleddiabetes
despiteelevatedbloodglucose.Withnewermethodsfordetermina-
tion of tissue-specific metabolic activity, a key prediction of the CIM
might be directly testable.
Some Populations Consume a High-Carbohydrate Diet
With Low Obesity Prevalence
IntheUS,absoluteintakesofproteinandfathavenotchangedsince
the 1970s, whereas carbohydrate (predominantly high-GL refined
grains, potato products, and added sugars) intake has increased
markedly, resulting in major increases in total calorie consumption
and the proportion of calories from carbohydrates.9 As of 2003 to
2006, the top 3 food sources of energy for US adults were breads
and rolls; cakes, cookies, quick bread, pastry and pie; and sugary
beverages.10
However,internationalepidemiologicaldatadonotalwaysshow
such a clear parallel between GL and obesity prevalence. Histori-
cally,Asianfarmingsocietiesremainedleanonwhiterice-baseddiets,
though these populations typically had high levels of physical ac-
tivity and experienced seasonal limitations in food availability. As
physicalactivitylevelshavedecreasedwithurbanization(eg,China),
rates of obesity and diabetes have been rapidly rising. In Australia,
GL declined moderately since 1995, according to self-reported sur-
vey data, despite ongoing increases in obesity prevalence.41 Per-
haps there is a threshold above which GL remains sufficiently high
to promote ongoing weight gain; or other factors predominant at
this stage of the epidemic in some populations.
Other Considerations
Some heterogeneity in nutrition research is attributable to meth-
odologicallimitationsorotherdesignissues.However,aswithmany
complextraits,biologicalvariabilityinapopulationrelatedtogenes,
perinatal factors, health status, or other exposures may affect how
aspecificindividualrespondstoaspecificdiet.TheCIMpredictsthat
people with an intrinsically high insulin response to carbohydrate
(assessed as insulin concentration 30 minutes into a standard oral
glucose tolerance test) will gain the most weight on a high-GL diet,
whereas those with low response may do relatively well on a low-
fat diet. This possibility receives support from animal research,17
a cohort study,42 and several,43,44 but not all,27 clinical trials.
Ofcourse,no1dietaryfactorcanfullyexplainvariationsinbody
weightamongindividualsandpopulations;furthermore,manyhor-
mones (notably including leptin and ghrelin) and the gut micro-
biomemayaffectbodycompositionrelatedto,orindependentlyof,
GL.TheCIMfocusesonhigh-GLcarbohydratesbecausetheseelicit
a greater insulin response calorie for calorie than any other cat-
egoryoffood.However,asindicatedinFigureBotheraspectsofdiet
(eg,proteinamountandtype,fattyacidprofile,micronutrients)and
nondietary factors (eg, sleep, stress, physical activity, environmen-
tal endocrine-disrupting chemicals) can affect insulin secretion or
adipocyte biology directly. Thus, the CIM offers a comprehensive
paradigmbeyondafocuson1macronutrienttoaddressmajordriv-
ers of fat accumulation and metabolic dysfunction.
Clinical Implications
Withfailureofconventionallow-fat,calorie-restricteddietstostem
theobesityepidemic,theCIMprovidesapracticalalternativeforpub-
lic health and clinical medicine. Primary emphasis should be placed
onthequalityratherthanquantityofcaloriesconsumed,toshiftcalo-
rie partitioning away from storage in adipose tissue and improve
metabolic fuel availability to the rest of the body. This shift would,
accordingtotheCIM,lowertheapparent“bodyweightsetpoint”—
theweightatwhichantagonisticphysiologicaladaptations(includ-
ing rising hunger and slowing metabolic rate) kick in. In this way, a
negativeenergybalanceandweightlossmightbeachievedwithless
difficulty and greater sustainability. The Box provides practical rec-
ommendations to achieve a diet based on the CIM, without severe
carbohydrate restriction. Most of these line items are broadly con-
sistent with key messages from the recent 2015 US Department of
AgricultureDietaryGuidelines,includingabandoningprioradviceto
limit intake of fat.47
Conclusions
A spate of recent reviews claim to refute the CIM,1,32,33,48 or dis-
miss any special metabolic effects of macronutrients,49 but these
attacks are premised on a misunderstanding of physiological
mechanisms, misinterpretation of feeding studies and disregard
for much supportive data. In animals, dietary composition has
Box. Dietary Recommendations Based
on the Carbohydrate-Insulin Model
•Reduce refined grains, potato products, and added
sugars—high-glycemic load (GL) carbohydrates with low
overall nutritional quality
•Emphasize low-GL carbohydrates, including nonstarchy
vegetables, legumes, and nontropical whole fruitsa
•When consuming grain products, choose whole kernel or
traditionally processed alternatives (eg, whole barley, quinoa,
traditionally fermented sourdough made from stone ground
flourb)
•Increase nuts, seeds, avocado, olive oil, and other healthful
high-fat foods
•Maintain an adequate, but not high, intake of protein,
including from plant sourcesc
•For individuals with severe insulin resistance, metabolic
syndrome, or type 2 diabetes, restriction of total carbohydrate
intake, and replacement with dietary fat, may provide greatest
benefit45
a Tropical fruits (eg, banana, papaya) have higher GL than temperate fruits
(eg, berries, apple).
b Because digestion rate is inversely related to particle size, coarsely milled
flour has a lower GI than finely-milled modern industrial flours. Long
fermentation reduces rapidly digestible carbohydrate content and
produces organic acids, thereby lowering GI.
c By eliciting glucagon secretion, protein tends to balance carbohydrate from
a metabolic perspective. However, large amounts of protein can also raise
insulin secretion. Preliminary evidence suggests plant proteins stimulate
less insulin, and may have a lesser anabolic effect, than animal proteins.46
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
The Carbohydrate-Insulin Model of Obesity
E4
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online July 2, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 07/02/2018
 been shown to affect metabolism and body composition, control-
ling for calorie intake, in a manner consistent with the CIM predic-
tions. Admittedly, the evidence for these effects in humans re-
mains inconclusive.
Limitedevidencenotwithstanding,theconventionalmodelhas
an implicit conflict with modern research on the biological control
ofbodyweight.TherisingmeanBMIamonggeneticallystablepopu-
lations suggests that changing environmental factors have altered
the physiological systems defending body weight. After all, inexo-
rableweightgainisnottheinevitableconsequenceofcalorieabun-
dance,asdemonstratedbymanyhistoricalexamples(eg,theUnited
States, Western Europe, and Japan from the end of World War II
until at least the 1970s).
Diets of varying composition, apart from calorie content, have
varying effects on hormones, metabolic pathways, gene expres-
sion, and the gut microbiome in ways that could potentially influ-
ence fat storage. By asserting that all calories are alike to the body,
theconventionalmodelrulesouttheenvironmentalexposurewith
the most plausible link to body weight control. What other factors
could be responsible for such massive changes in obesity preva-
lence? The conventional model offers no compelling alternatives.
High-quality research will be needed to resolve the debate,
which has been ongoing for at least a century.5 In 1941, the re-
nowned obesity expert Julius Bauer described a key component
of the CIM (the reverse direction of causality depicted in Figure B),
writing in this journal: “The current energy theory of obesity, which
considers only an imbalance between intake of food and expendi-
ture of energy, is unsatisfactory…. An increased appetite with a
subsequent imbalance between intake and output of energy is the
consequence of the abnormal anlage [fat tissue] rather than the
cause of obesity.”
50 In view of the massive and rising toll of obesity-
related disease, this research should be given priority.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: May 7, 2018.
Published Online: July 2, 2018.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.2933
Author Contributions: Author Ludwig had full
access to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Concept and design: Ludwig.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: All
authors.
Drafting of the manuscript: Ludwig.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.
Administrative, technical, or material support: All
authors.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Both authors
received grants (to Boston Children’
s Hospital) from
the National Institutes of Health, Nutrition Science
Initiative, the Laura and John Arnold Foundation
and other philanthropic organizations unaffiliated
with the food industry. Both authors have
conducted research studies examining the
carbohydrate-insulin model. Dr Ludwig received
royalties for books on obesity and nutrition that
recommend a low-glycemic load diet. Dr Ludwig is
supported in part by award K24DK082730 from
the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases. No other disclosures are reported.
Disclaimer: The content of this article is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases or the National Institutes of Health.
Additional Contributions: We thank Dariush
Mozaffarian, MD, PhD, Tufts University, for advice
on an earlier version of this manuscript. He received
no financial compensation.
REFERENCES
1. Schwartz MW, Seeley RJ, Zeltser LM, et al.
Obesity pathogenesis: an Endocrine Society
Scientific Statement. Endocr Rev. 2017;38(4):
267-296.
2. Leibel RL, Rosenbaum M, Hirsch J. Changes in
energy expenditure resulting from altered body
weight. N Engl J Med. 1995;332(10):621-628.
3. Ludwig DS. The glycemic index: physiological
mechanisms relating to obesity, diabetes, and
cardiovascular disease. JAMA. 2002;287(18):
2414-2423.
4. Ludwig DS, Friedman MI. Increasing adiposity:
consequence or cause of overeating? JAMA. 2014;
311(21):2167-2168.
5. Taubes G. The science of obesity: what do we
really know about what makes us fat? An essay by
Gary Taubes. BMJ. 2013;346:f1050.
6. Carlson MG, Campbell PJ. Intensive insulin
therapy and weight gain in IDDM. Diabetes. 1993;42
(12):1700-1707.
7. Hansen JB, Arkhammar PO, Bodvarsdottir TB,
Wahl P. Inhibition of insulin secretion as a new drug
target in the treatment of metabolic disorders. Curr
Med Chem. 2004;11(12):1595-1615.
8. Wolever TM, Bolognesi C. Prediction of glucose
and insulin responses of normal subjects after
consuming mixed meals varying in energy, protein,
fat, carbohydrate and glycemic index. J Nutr.
1996;126(11):2807-2812.
9. Ford ES, Dietz WH. Trends in energy intake
among adults in the United States: findings from
NHANES. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;97(4):848-853.
10. O’
Neil CE, Keast DR, Fulgoni VL, Nicklas TA.
Food sources of energy and nutrients among adults
in the US: NHANES 2003–2006. Nutrients. 2012;4
(12):2097-2120.
11. Cusin I, Rohner-Jeanrenaud F, Terrettaz J,
Jeanrenaud B. Hyperinsulinemia and its impact on
obesity and insulin resistance. Int J Obes Relat
Metab Disord. 1992;16(suppl 4):S1-S11.
12. VanderWeele DA, Haraczkiewicz E,
Van Itallie TB. Elevated insulin and satiety in obese
and normal-weight rats. Appetite. 1982;3(2):99-109.
13. Torbay N, Bracco EF, Geliebter A, Stewart IM,
Hashim SA. Insulin increases body fat despite
control of food intake and physical activity. Am J
Physiol. 1985;248(1 Pt 2):R120-R124.
14. Kabir M, Rizkalla SW, Champ M, et al. Dietary
amylose-amylopectin starch content affects
glucose and lipid metabolism in adipocytes of
normal and diabetic rats. J Nutr. 1998;128(1):35-43.
15. Kabir M, Rizkalla SW, Quignard-Boulangé A,
et al. A high glycemic index starch diet affects lipid
storage-related enzymes in normal and to a lesser
extent in diabetic rats. J Nutr. 1998;128(11):1878-1883.
16. Lerer-Metzger M, Rizkalla SW, Luo J, et al.
Effects of long-term low-glycaemic index starchy
food on plasma glucose and lipid concentrations
and adipose tissue cellularity in normal and diabetic
rats. Br J Nutr. 1996;75(5):723-732.
17. Pawlak DB, Kushner JA, Ludwig DS. Effects of
dietary glycaemic index on adiposity, glucose
homoeostasis, and plasma lipids in animals. Lancet.
2004;364(9436):778-785.
18. Kennedy AR, Pissios P, Otu H, et al. A high-fat,
ketogenic diet induces a unique metabolic state in
mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007;292(6):
E1724-E1739.
19. Blüher M, Kahn BB, Kahn CR. Extended
longevity in mice lacking the insulin receptor in
adipose tissue. Science. 2003;299(5606):572-574.
20. Astley CM, Todd JN, Salem RM, et al. Genetic
evidence that carbohydrate-stimulated insulin
secretion leads to obesity. Clin Chem. 2018;64(1):
192-200.
21. Le Stunff C, Fallin D, Schork NJ, Bougnères P.
The insulin gene VNTR is associated with fasting
insulin levels and development of juvenile obesity.
Nat Genet. 2000;26(4):444-446.
22. Mehran AE, Templeman NM, Brigidi GS, et al.
Hyperinsulinemia drives diet-induced obesity
independently of brain insulin production. Cell Metab.
2012;16(6):723-737.
23. Mansoor N, Vinknes KJ, Veierød MB, Retterstøl
K. Effects of low-carbohydrate diets v. low-fat diets
on body weight and cardiovascular risk factors:
a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Br J
Nutr. 2016;115(3):466-479.
24. Tobias DK, Chen M, Manson JE, Ludwig DS,
Willett W, Hu FB. Effect of low-fat diet interventions
versus other diet interventions on long-term weight
change in adults: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015;3
(12):968-979.
25. Larsen TM, Dalskov SM, van Baak M, et al; Diet,
Obesity, and Genes (Diogenes) Project. Diets with
high or low protein content and glycemic index for
weight-loss maintenance. N Engl J Med. 2010;363
(22):2102-2113.
26. Shai I, Schwarzfuchs D, Henkin Y, et al; Dietary
Intervention Randomized Controlled Trial (DIRECT)
The Carbohydrate-Insulin Model of Obesity
Special Communication Clinical Review & Education
jamainternalmedicine.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online July 2, 2018
E5
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 07/02/2018
 Group. Weight loss with a low-carbohydrate,
Mediterranean, or low-fat diet. N Engl J Med. 2008;
359(3):229-241.
27. Gardner CD, Trepanowski JF, Del Gobbo LC,
et al. Effect of low-fat vs low-carbohydrate diet on
12-month weight loss in overweight adults and the
association with genotype pattern or insulin
secretion: the DIETFITS randomized clinical trial.
JAMA. 2018;319(7):667-679.
28. Mozaffarian D, Hao T, Rimm EB, Willett WC,
Hu FB. Changes in diet and lifestyle and long-term
weight gain in women and men. N Engl J Med. 2011;
364(25):2392-2404.
29. de Ruyter JC, Olthof MR, Seidell JC, Katan MB.
A trial of sugar-free or sugar-sweetened beverages
and body weight in children. N Engl J Med. 2012;
367(15):1397-1406.
30. Solomon TP, Haus JM, Cook MA, Flask CA,
Kirwan JP. A low-glycemic diet lifestyle intervention
improves fat utilization during exercise in older
obese humans. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013;21(11):
2272-2278.
31. Walsh CO, Ebbeling CB, Swain JF, Markowitz RL,
Feldman HA, Ludwig DS. Effects of diet
composition on postprandial energy availability
during weight loss maintenance. PLoS One. 2013;8
(3):e58172.
32. Hall KD. A review of the carbohydrate-insulin
model of obesity. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2017;71(3):323-326.
33. Hall KD, Guo J. Obesity energetics: body weight
regulation and the effects of diet composition.
Gastroenterology. 2017;152(7):1718-1727.
34. Owen OE, Caprio S, Reichard GA Jr,
Mozzoli MA, Boden G, Owen RS. Ketosis of
starvation: a revisit and new perspectives. Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 1983;12(2):359-379.
35. Yang MU, Van Itallie TB. Composition of weight
lost during short-term weight reduction. metabolic
responses of obese subjects to starvation and
low-calorie ketogenic and nonketogenic diets. J Clin
Invest. 1976;58(3):722-730.
36. Vazquez JA, Adibi SA. Protein sparing during
treatment of obesity: ketogenic versus
nonketogenic very low calorie diet. Metabolism.
1992;41(4):406-414.
37. Norgan NG, Durnin JV. The effect of 6 weeks
of overfeeding on the body weight, body
composition, and energy metabolism of young
men. Am J Clin Nutr. 1980;33(5):978-988.
38. Sims EA, Goldman RF, Gluck CM, Horton ES,
Kelleher PC, Rowe DW. Experimental obesity in
man. Trans Assoc Am Physicians. 1968;81:153-170.
39. Virtue S, Vidal-Puig A. Adipose tissue
expandability, lipotoxicity and the Metabolic
Syndrome—an allostatic perspective. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2010;1801(3):338-349.
40. Pénicaud L, Kinebanyan MF, Ferré P, et al.
Development of VMH obesity: in vivo insulin
secretion and tissue insulin sensitivity. Am J Physiol.
1989;257(2 Pt 1):E255-E260.
41. Kusnadi DTL, Barclay AW, Brand-Miller JC,
Louie JCY. Changes in dietary glycemic index and
glycemic load in Australian adults from 1995 to
2012. Am J Clin Nutr. 2017;106(1):189-198.
42. Chaput JP, Tremblay A, Rimm EB, Bouchard C,
Ludwig DS. A novel interaction between dietary
composition and insulin secretion: effects on
weight gain in the Quebec Family Study. Am J Clin
Nutr. 2008;87(2):303-309.
43. Ebbeling CB, Leidig MM, Feldman HA,
Lovesky MM, Ludwig DS. Effects of a low-glycemic
load vs low-fat diet in obese young adults:
a randomized trial. JAMA. 2007;297(19):2092-2102.
44. Pittas AG, Das SK, Hajduk CL, et al.
A low-glycemic load diet facilitates greater weight
loss in overweight adults with high insulin secretion
but not in overweight adults with low insulin
secretion in the CALERIE Trial. Diabetes Care. 2005;
28(12):2939-2941.
45. Feinman RD, Pogozelski WK, Astrup A, et al.
Dietary carbohydrate restriction as the first
approach in diabetes management: critical review
and evidence base. Nutrition. 2015;31(1):1-13.
46. Sanchez A, Hubbard RW. Plasma amino acids
and the insulin/glucagon ratio as an explanation for
the dietary protein modulation of atherosclerosis.
Med Hypotheses. 1991;36(1):27-32.
47. Mozaffarian D, Ludwig DS. The 2015 US Dietary
Guidelines: lifting the ban on total dietary fat. JAMA.
2015;313(24):2421-2422.
48. Howell S, Kones R. “
Calories in, calories out”
and macronutrient intake: the hope, hype, and
science of calories. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab.
2017;313(5):E608-E612.
49. Bray GA, Heisel WE, Afshin A, et al. The science
of obesity management: an Endocrine Society
scientific statement. Endocr Rev. 2018;39(2):79-132.
50. Bauer J. Obesity: its pathogenesis, etiology and
treatment. Arch Intern Med (Chic). 1941;67(5):
968-994.
Clinical Review & Education Special Communication
The Carbohydrate-Insulin Model of Obesity
E6
JAMA Internal Medicine
Published online July 2, 2018
(Reprinted)
jamainternalmedicine.com
© 2018 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From:  on 07/02/2018
