 One-week glucose control via zero-order release kinetics from 
an injectable depot of glucagon-like peptide-1 fused to a 
thermosensitive biopolymer
Kelli M. Luginbuhl1, Jeffrey L. Schaal1, Bret Umstead2, Eric M. Mastria1, Xinghai Li1, 
Samagya Banskota1, Susan Arnold2, Mark Feinglos3, David D’Alessio3, and Ashutosh 
Chilkoti1,*
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA
2PhaseBio Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Malvern, Pennsylvania 19355, USA
3Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
North Carolina 27710, USA
Abstract
Stimulation of the glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP1) receptor is a useful treatment strategy for type 
2 diabetes because of pleiotropic effects, including the regulation of islet hormones and the 
induction of satiety. However, the native ligand for the GLP1 receptor has a short half-live owing 
to enzymatic inactivation and rapid clearance. Here, we show that a subcutaneous depot formed 
after a single injection of GLP1 recombinantly fused to a thermosensitive elastin-like polypeptide 
results in zero-order release kinetics and circulation times of up to 10 days in mice and 17 days in 
monkeys. The optimized pharmacokinetics leads to 10 days of glycemic control in three different 
mouse models of diabetes, as well as to the reduction of glycosylated hemoglobin levels and 
weight gain in ob/ob mice treated once weekly for 8 weeks. Our results suggest that the optimized 
GLP1 formulation could enhance therapeutic outcomes by eliminating peak-and-valley 
pharmacokinetics and improving overall safety and tolerability. The design principles that we 
established should be broadly applicable for improving the pharmacological performance of other 
peptide and protein therapeutics.
1. Introduction
Nearly 30 million adults in the United States are diabetic, with over 1.7 million new cases 
diagnosed in 2012. It is estimated that diabetes causes $176 billion annually in direct 
medical costs and there were over 455,000 emergency room visits due to diabetes-related 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Author to whom correspondence should be addressed (chilkoti@duke.edu). 
Author contributions
K.M.L. and A.C. conceived and designed the research. K.M.L, J.L.S., X.L., and B.U. performed the experiments. S.B. provided 
materials for the imaging study. S.A. helped to plan and organize the non-human primate study. M.F. and D.D. provided expertise in 
endocrinology for the design of in vivo studies. E.M.M. assisted in statistical analysis and interpretation of in vivo results. K.M.L. and 
A.C. analyzed the results and wrote the manuscript. J.L.S., E.M.M., and D.D. edited the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Biomed Eng. 2017 ; 1: . doi:10.1038/s41551-017-0078.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glycemic crises in 20111. These statistics highlight the staggering burden of this disease on 
the healthcare system. Of those afflicted, over 90% of adult diabetes cases are type 2. Yet, 
despite the long list of treatment options among a growing number of drug classes, nearly 
half of diagnosed type 2 cases are not properly managed2. These patients routinely fail to 
reach established glycemic targets, due largely to the tapering efficacy of monotherapies 
over time, and inadequate patient adherence to prescribed treatment regimens, which often 
require frequent and complicated, meal-specific dosing. Furthermore, many of the most 
widely prescribed medications are plagued by undesirable side effects, including weight gain 
and a risk of hypoglycemia3.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP1) receptor agonists are a class of recently developed diabetes 
drugs with the therapeutic potential to address all of these challenges of diabetes treatment. 
The parent peptide, GLP1, is a 31-amino acid incretin hormone derived from post-
translational processing of the proglucagon gene4,5. It is secreted from L cells in the lower 
intestine and colon post-prandially6. In addition to stimulating insulin secretion, GLP1 has 
been shown to 1) induce satiety7, 2) mediate weight loss8, and 3) prevent β-cell apoptosis 
and enhance their proliferation9, which can help to slow disease progression.
Diabetes is a chronic disease whose treatment is complicated by constantly changing insulin 
demands based on an intricate balance of diet, metabolism, and activity. Therefore, the 
treatment of diabetes poses a unique drug delivery challenge. GLP1 is an attractive drug for 
treatment for type 2 diabetes due to its glucose-dependent mechanism of action — it only 
stimulates a strong insulin response when glucose levels reach a threshold 
concentration10,11. Thus, maintaining high levels of GLP1 by constant intravenous (IV) 
infusion is very effective for promoting insulin secretion in diabetic subjects when glucose 
levels are elevated12–14, which normalizes both fasting15 and postprandial13 blood glucose 
without incidence of hypoglycemia. Unfortunately, GLP1’s clinical utility is limited by its 
short two minute half-life16, owing to its small size, rapid clearance by renal filtration, and 
inactivation by the ubiquitous, cell surface exopeptidase, DPP-IV17.
There is a large body of literature focused on extending the half-life of GLP1, both to 
enhance its therapeutic potential18 and to enhance patient convenience and compliance. 
Drugs that promote GLP1 receptor signaling have been successfully developed for the 
treatment of diabetes19; they have meaningfully impacted clinical practice and are widely 
used. Albiglutide (Tanzeum®) and dulaglutide (Trulicity®) are once-weekly GLP1 
formulations recently approved for use in patients with type 2 diabetes that achieve long 
half-lives through fusion with protein partners that have slow turnover rates —albumin and 
an engineered Fc fragment, respectively.18 By extending GLP1’s half-life to 3–7 days in 
humans20,21, these drugs are able to reduce the required dose and dosing frequency. Both 
have been FDA approved for once-weekly administration via subcutaneous (SC) injection. 
However, the strategies to continue improving GLP1 pharmacokinetics through recombinant 
engineering and reduced renal clearance are approaching an asymptote. Because 
improvements in circulating half-life have reached a limit, the duration of these treatments 
can only be further modulated by an increase in dose, which is ultimately constrained by the 
therapeutic window, toxicity, and cost.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 2
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To further advance the field if GLP1 therapy, next generation formulations must also 
prioritize mechanisms that control release. Significant improvements to control GLP1 
receptor agonist release have been achieved using injectable synthetic polymer formulations. 
For example, tri-block copolymers mixed with a GLP1 receptor agonist form a gel in situ, 
encapsulating the drug and controlling its release to achieve 7–10 days of glucose control in 
mice22,23. However, synthetic polymer formulations can require multi-component mixtures 
of polymer, drug, and excipients and can raise concerns regarding buildup of the gel’s 
degradation products. Currently, Bydureon® is the only FDA approved controlled release 
formulation on the market, using poly-lactic-co-glycolic acid (PLGA) microsphere 
technology to encapsulate and sustain the release of a GLP1 analogue, exenatide.24,25 This 
formulation is also approved for once-weekly administration, but is not without its own 
limitations including poor shelf-life stability, burst release, and injection discomfort—the 
0.06 mm-diameter microspheres require larger needles for SC injection.26,27 Thus the GLP1 
receptor agonist field still has a need for new sustained release therapies that can achieve 
steady therapeutic levels of a drug in circulation. This drug release profile, termed ’zero 
order kinetics’, is ideal for both reducing dosing frequency and minimizing classic peak and 
valley pharmacokinetics. Such a formulation would likely reduce gastrointestinal side 
effects, improve patient comfort, and further dissociate compliance from therapeutic 
outcome.
Towards this goal, we have coupled half-life extension with a controlled release system by 
fusing GLP1 to a thermally sensitive biopolymer, elastin-like polypeptide (ELP). ELPs are a 
class of recombinant polymer that enhance the pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of 
therapeutic proteins to which they are fused28. They are large, intrinsically disordered, 
random coil polypeptides comprised of a repeated Val-Pro-Gly-Xaa-Gly (VPGXG) 
pentapeptide monomer, a motif derived from human tropoelastin. ELPs are genetically 
encoded and synthesized in E. coli, providing high yields of monodisperse biopolymer that 
are stimuli-responsive, biocompatible, and biodegradable.29 They also exhibit lower critical 
solution temperature (LCST) phase transition behavior30 which enables them to rapidly 
transition from a soluble state to an insoluble coacervate with the addition of heat or salt. 
This phase transition is reversible upon dilution such that, in response to the concentration 
decay at the boundary layer of the depot, the transitioned ELP slowly dissolves from the 
margins into the core, releasing ELP-drug fusions at a steady rate. This feature of ELPs 
distinguishes them from other polypeptides and synthetic polymers and makes them an 
attractive technology for addressing the challenges of peptide drug delivery. The phase 
transition temperature (Tt) can be tuned by adjusting the molecular weight (MW) (number of 
VPGXG repeats), or hydrophobicity (X guest residue composition). The Tt can be precisely 
engineered such that the fusion remains soluble in a syringe at room temperature, but 
transitions to an insoluble, slow releasing coacervate upon injection, when triggered by the 
increase from ambient to body temperature.
We previously reported proof-of-principle of a GLP1-ELP fusion, where a single SC 
injection of first generation GLP1-ELP combined sequence modification of GLP1 for 
degradation resistance (see Methods) and prolonged circulation with sustained release to 
achieve 5 d of glucose control in healthy C57Bl/6J mice31, but only 2–3 d in ob/ob or db/db 
mice32. Herein, we systematically investigate the impact of molecular design features on the 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 3
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 temporal duration of drug release. In this study, we chose to independently optimize the two 
most important and orthogonal molecular parameters: the ELP molecular weight (MW) and 
the fusion Tt, both of which can be tuned at the gene level. By optimizing the MW and Tt of 
the GLP1-ELP fusion, we achieve sustained release of the GLP1-ELP fusion after a single 
SC injection and can control glucose for up to 10 days in three different and challenging 
diabetic mouse models. To our knowledge, this is the longest duration of glucose control 
reported for any recombinant GLP1 fusion system. We also characterized the 
pharmacokinetics of the depot in mouse and monkey models to assess clinical viability in 
humans. The 17 days of sustained release in monkeys achieved with our GLP1-ELP fusion 
is superior to two molecularly engineered formulations of GLP1 —Tanzeum® and 
Trulicity®— in comparable rodent and non-human primate studies. These two GLP1 
receptor agonists are clinically approved for once-weekly administration suggesting that our 
optimized GLP1-ELP fusion may provide the first once-monthly formulation of GLP1 in 
humans.
2. Results
2.1 There is an optimal Tt for controlling GLP1-ELP release
We hypothesized that GLP1-ELP fusions with transition temperatures further below body 
temperature would form a more stable depot capable of slow, sustained release. To test this 
hypothesis, we designed and recombinantly expressed a set of GLP1-ELP fusions with Tt’s 
that span 15°C to 36°C, remaining at or below the SC temperature of wild-type C57Bl/6J 
mice33. A non-depot forming control, transitioning well above body temperature at 49°C, 
was also constructed. The number of VPGXG pentapeptides was kept constant at 120 
repeats for all constructs, while the amino acid composition of the “X” guest residue motif 
was adjusted to modulate the Tt. The Tt is reflective of the degree of hydrophobicity of the 
guest residue composition. We constrained our design by filling the guest residue with only 
three amino acids — Ala, Val, and Leu— in order to minimize differences in molecular 
weight and reduce any intrinsic molecular differences between the ELP aggregates. All 
constructs were synthesized in E. coli and purified to greater than 95% purity, as assessed 
using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (SI Fig 6a). 
Each construct’s composition, phase transition behavior, hydrodynamic radius (Rh), and in 
vitro activity are summarized in Table 1.
As guest residue hydrophobicity was increased, the Tt of the GLP1-ELP fusion was 
depressed (Fig 1a) and its concentration dependence was reduced (Fig 1b). The subscript in 
each fusion’s nomenclature represents its Tt at the injected concentration used for in vivo 
studies, which is indicated by the dotted outline in Fig 1b. Regardless of Tt, all constructs 
retained reversible phase behavior (Fig 1a). Fusion of GLP1 to an ELP reduced its potency 
by approximately 5- to 40-fold compared to native GLP1 peptide (Fig 1c), whose measured 
half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) of 0.7 nM (0.5 to 1.0 nM 95% CI) is in 
agreement with values reported from similar studies34,35. This finding was not surprising, 
given that fusion of GLP1 to albumin results in a 30-fold reduction in bioactivity36. This was 
also better than conjugation of GLP1 to PEG, which reduced receptor affinity by 30- to 500-
fold37. Although there is a trend towards reduced potency for fusions with lower Tt’s, this 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 4
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 trend is not significant and was likely due to their greater propensity to transition and 
aggregate at the assay temperature (37°C); such aggregation could sterically hinder 
interaction with the GLP1 receptor. For example, GLP1-ELP15.5°C and GLP1-ELP21.4°C are 
estimated to undergo a 37°C phase transition at concentrations of 5 pM and 40 nM, 
respectively, and therefore likely exist as an insoluble aggregate at some of the 
concentrations tested in the bioassay.
We next examined the in vivo efficacy of this series of constructs with variable Tt, but a 
near-constant MW of ~50 kDa. All constructs were kept on ice to ensure solubility prior to 
SC injection into the scruff of the neck of 7-week old diet-induced obese (DIO) mice. Mice 
were treated with 700 nmol/kg GLP1-ELP at 500 µM or an equivalent volume of phosphate 
buffered saline (PBS). Blood glucose was measured 24 h before and immediately prior to 
injection. After treatment, it was monitored periodically throughout the first day (SI Fig 8), 
and then every 24 h thereafter (Fig 1d). Body weight response to treatment was similarly 
tracked (Fig 1e). Glucose area under the curve (AUC) for the duration of the experiment 
(144 h) was determined for all treatment groups by integrating blood glucose over time and 
normalizing these values to the PBS control group (Fig 1f). All treatments groups had a 
significantly lower glucose AUC than the PBS control group (p<0.05, ANOVA and 
Dunnett’s Test). The constructs with higher Tt’s (GLP1-ELP35.5°C and GLP1-ELP48.8°C) 
had a bolus-type release, with quick absorption followed by a rapid decline in efficacy. In 
contrast, the more hydrophobic constructs (GLP1-ELP15.5°C and GLP1-ELP21.4°C) released 
less drug and achieve only modest reductions in glucose and weight. Of the designs tested, 
the fusion with a Tt of 30.2°C, just below the SC temperature of mice33, significantly 
outperformed all other GLP1-ELP constructs in both magnitude and duration of effect, 
controlling blood glucose and effecting weight loss out to 6 days.
2.2 There is a MW threshold above which GLP1-ELP fusions perform best
Having identified an optimal Tt for GLP1-ELP depot efficacy, we next asked if molecular 
weight (MW) altered the performance of GLP1-ELP as well. To test the effects of this 
genetically tunable variable, we constructed a second set of GLP1-ELP fusions with 
reversible phase behavior (Fig 2a) that spanned a wide range of MWs, but that all exhibited 
the same optimal Tt of approximately 30°C, indicated by the dotted outline in Fig 2b. This 
was achieved by manipulating the ELP’s “X” guest residue ratio, such that larger fusions 
had a greater proportion of the hydrophilic amino acid, Ala, and smaller fusions had a 
greater percentage of the hydrophobic amino acid, Val. The predictive model developed by 
McDaniel et al38 was used to minimize the iterative design, synthesis, and characterization 
process needed to build the final set of fusions. These fusions were constructed to span a 
specific range of MWs with two parameters in mind: (1) the renal filtration cutoff size for 
globular proteins (50–70 kDa)39,40 and (2) the polymer sizes at which PEGylated proteins 
show an abrupt reduction in renal clearance (30 kDa)41–43.
The purity of these constructs was analyzed using SDS-PAGE (SI Fig 6b). Their sizes were 
measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS) and the reversible phase behavior was 
confirmed (Fig 2a). While the 20.0 kDa fusion has a hydrodynamic radius (Rh) of only 3.5 
nm, the 98.7 kDa construct has an Rh greater than 8 nm. These values correlate well with 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 5
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 data reported for dextrans and linear PEG44 (SI Fig 7), which is reasonable considering ELP 
and PEG share many similarities—both are random, unstructured, and well-hydrated 
polymers. There was no statistically significant correlation between in vitro activity and MW 
(Fig 2c). However, as was seen with the first set of GLP1-ELPs, the overall EC50 of fusions 
is increased by approximately 10–20 fold compared to native GLP1. Full characterization of 
this set of fusions can be found in Table 1.
By increasing the number of VPGXG repeats and, thus, the fusion MW, the concentration 
dependence of Tt decreases and all of these fusions’ Tt’s have a slightly different 
concentration dependence, as indicated by the variable slopes of their Tt versus 
log(concentration) plots (Fig 2b). Importantly, all the plots intersect at a concentration of 
~200 µM, with a Tt of 29.4–32.1 °C. This concentration, at which the Tt is nearly constant 
across constructs, was chosen for in vivo efficacy studies. This set of fusions was used to 
treat 7-week old diet-induced obese (DIO) mice. Mice received a SC depot injection (700 
nmol/kg at 200 µM) and negative control animals were injected with an equivalent volume 
of saline. Glucose and weight were measured prior to injection and glucose was monitored 
periodically throughout the first day (SI Fig 9a) and then every 24 hours until effects were 
no longer observed (Fig 2d and 2e). Glucose area under the curve (AUC) for the duration of 
observed efficacy (144 h) was determined for all treatment groups and normalized to the 
PBS control group (Fig 2f).
The 144 h AUC values for all treated groups were significantly lower than the PBS control 
group (p<0.05, ANOVA and Dunnett’s Test). Additionally, the AUC for the mice treated 
with the 20.0 kDa fusion was significantly different from all other treatment groups 
(p<0.05). Unsurprisingly, this data indicated that the glomerular filtration dependence of 
GLP1-ELP fusions more closely resembles that of linear polymers like PEG rather than 
globular proteins like albumin (SI Fig 7). This data suggests that the 20.0 kDa fusion, whose 
4.4 nm Rh was most similar to human serum albumin’s 3.6 nm45, is below the kidney 
filtration cutoff, while the other constructs with a MW of 35.6 kDa or greater have 
prolonged circulation times due to their larger size and reduced filtration. This hypothesis 
was further confirmed when constructs were injected intravenously (IV) (SI Fig 9b) after 
dilution to 1 µM to prevent the phase transition from occurring; the Tt for all constructs at 
this concentration is above 37 °C. Glucose-lowering effects of the smallest construct (20 
kDa) manifested most quickly, but diminished rapidly and were no longer apparent by 12 h 
post-injection, while all other constructs maintained more steady reductions in blood glucose 
that lasted beyond 12 h. This data is in good agreement with literature where PEG has been 
shown to have a sharp increase in half-life at 30 kDa.43
2.3 Optimized GLP1-ELP fusion is suitable for once-weekly injection in three mouse 
models of diabetes
Having optimized the Tt and MW, we selected GLP1-ELP67.5 kDa — subsequently referred 
to as GLP1-ELPopt — for future efficacy studies. This construct was selected because it had 
an optimal Tt as well as the highest expression in E. coli and the least apparent burst release, 
indicated by a sharper dip in blood glucose and weight loss in the first few days of treatment 
(SI Fig 9a and Fig 2e). Upon completing a dose-response experiment, which verified that 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 6
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 700 nmol/kg was the optimal dose (SI Fig 10a–c), we tested this construct’s efficacy in three 
models of diabetes with varying degrees of severity: C57Bl/6J mice maintained on a high-fat 
diet for 11 weeks (Fig 3a–c), ob/ob mice with a mutant leptin gene (Fig 3d–f), and db/db 
mice with a mutant leptin receptor gene (Fig 3g–i). All mice received a single, SC injection 
of either 700 nmol/kg GLP1-ELPopt or an equivalent volume of saline. Blood glucose and 
body weight were monitored out to 10 days post-treatment and 240 h blood glucose AUC 
was quantified and normalized to the PBS control group.
Treatment with the optimal, depot-forming GLP1-ELP fusion significantly reduced total 
glucose exposure (glucose AUC) by 50% or more in all three models (p<0.05, Student’s t-
test). In both the DIO and ob/ob models, mice treated with GLP1-ELPopt lost weight while 
PBS treated control mice gained weight (Fig 3b and 3e). There was no effect of treatment on 
weight in the most severely diabetic db/db model (Fig 3h). This treatment also regulated 
blood glucose for up to 10 days in all three mouse models (Fig a,d,e). In contrast, the first-
generation GLP1-ELP fusion, showed only 3 days of control in ob/ob mice32. The 
immediately apparent and important consequence of this optimization exercise is the 
substantial increase in the duration of controlled release, which doubled the duration of 
glucose control from 5 days in healthy mice31 to 10 days in three far more challenging 
diabetes models in mice after a single injection.
To further validate the robustness of this delivery system, we performed an intraperitoneal 
glucose tolerance test (IPGTT) at day 3 and day 6 post-injection in the ob/ob strain to 
quantify how treatment alters the ability to respond to a glucose challenge (Fig 3j–l). The 
effect of treatment on IPGTT AUC was significant (p<0.05, two-way ANOVA), however, 
there was neither a significant effect of time post-treatment nor an interaction term between 
treatment and time. The data suggest that the extent of response to a glucose challenge on 
day 3 (Fig 3j) was not statistically different from that on day 6 (Fig 3k), which is an 
indication that our GLP1-ELP system maintained its ability to dynamically regulate 
glycemic control over the course of a week. The difference in AUC between the treatment 
and control group was significant (p<0.05, Bonferroni multiple comparison test) at both time 
points (Fig 3l).
In a separate study, we performed histology at the site of injection in male, ob/ob mice 
treated bilaterally with GLP1-ELPopt, PBS, or PLGA microspheres (n=3). 5 days after 
injection, the injection site was dissected, fixed, paraffin embedded, cut into 5 µm sections, 
and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (SI Fig 14). The slides were imaged and analyzed 
by a pathologist who was blinded to group assignments. No concerning inflammation, 
irritation, or dermal thickening was observed in the GLP1-ELPopt slides. In contrast, mild 
histiocytic inflammation —consistent with the timing of 5 days post-injection of foreign 
material— was seen in all PLGA treated samples, but only in one GLP1-ELPopt treated 
sample. Full histopathology analysis of the sections can be found in SI Section 3.6.
2.4 Fusion of GLP1 to a depot-forming ELP yields favorable zero-order release kinetics and 
improved pharmacokinetic properties in mice
Having seen significant efficacy in three different mouse models of diabetes, we next 
investigated the depot’s release kinetics and pharmacokinetics (PK) in order to better 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 7
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 understand how our results might translate into humans. Using modified free peptide 
(GLP1) and GLP1 fused to a soluble ELP (GLP1-ELPsol) as controls, we performed a 
single, SC injection in ob/ob mice (n=4) with radiolabeled constructs. 125I was selected for 
its long half-life and because it enabled us to simultaneously collect blood for PK analysis 
and image the SC depots with micro-single photon emission computed tomography with x-
ray computed tomography (μSPECT-CT). Anatomically registered μSPECT-CT images were 
used to quantify depot retention with time by analyzing the region of interest (ROI) 
containing the depots, and excluding the pancreas, thyroid, and bladder.
A separate cohort of mice was injected IV with 10 nmol/kg radiolabeled construct to 
determine the elimination half-life (t1/2, elim), clearance (CL), volume of distribution (Vd), 
and bioavailability (F). For IV injection, the constructs were diluted to 1 µM, a concentration 
low enough to prevent the fusions from transitioning in circulation. Counts per minute 
(CPM) in blood samples, measured using a gamma counter, were converted to concentration 
for calculation of PK parameters, which is explained in detail in the Methods section. Table 
2 summarizes these parameters for each of the three constructs —free peptide, GLP1-
ELPsol, and GLP1-ELPopt. Elimination half-life (t1/2, elim) is defined as the time it takes to 
decrease the plasma concentration of a drug by half whereas the apparent, or biological, 
half-life (t1/2, biol) accounts for drugs whose rate of plasma concentration decline is 
dependent on other factors, such as route of administration, rate of absorption, or controlled 
release.
Fusion to an ELP increased the peptide’s elimination half-life from 5 min to approximately 
6 h for both the soluble and depot-forming GLP1-ELP constructs. In contrast, with SC 
injection, fusion to a depot-forming ELP provided a 10-fold improvement in GLP1’s 
biological half-life (t1/2, biol), increasing it to 45.2 h compared to 4.7 h for the GLP1 peptide 
alone. As expected, fusion to an ELP extended the time it took to reach peak concentration 
(tmax) by 8-fold. The depot-forming ELP also prevented burst release, as evidenced by the 
10-fold lower Cmax value, despite the fact that both fusions were administered at the same 
dose. This reduced burst release is advantageous as it prevents wasted drug, better maintains 
plasma drug concentration within the therapeutic window, and minimizes side effects. This 
minimization in burst release is also reflected in drug AUC. GLP1-ELPopt had half the total 
overall exposure compared to GLP1-ELPsol, yet, despite this fact, it was able to regulate 
blood glucose for a week longer.
Clearance (CL), a measure of the plasma volume cleared of drug per unit time, showed a 
much larger value for the peptide, which is freely filtered by the kidneys. The CL values for 
both GLP1-ELPsol and GLP1-ELPopt again highlight the pharmacological benefit of fusion 
to an ELP, which reduced renal filtration and slowed clearance of the drug, extending its 
duration of efficacy. Bioavailability (F), a measure of the amount of drug that is able to reach 
circulation and exert its effect, was nearly 100% for the free GLP1 and about 3-fold lower 
for the fusions. We consider this an acceptable tradeoff given the remarkable improvements 
in pharmacokinetics. Furthermore, image quantification on day 10 proved that 
approximately 18% of the depot remains at the injection site (Fig 4a). Thus, the calculated 
bioavailability of GLP1-ELPopt is likely a low approximation as a result of the study 
terminating before the depot was fully expended.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 8
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Using μSPECT, the radiolabeled depot-forming GLP1-ELPopt is visible in the SC space on 
day 10, whereas the free peptide and soluble controls are absorbed into circulation by 24 h 
(Fig 4a). Depot retention, normalized for each subject to total image intensity at time 0 h, 
quantitatively confirms the controlled release capabilities of GLP1-ELPopt for over a week 
(Fig 4b). When an exponential decay line— yt = (y0−b)e−kt+b —is fit to the percent 
retention data (Fig 4b), the first-order rate constants are 0.14 ± 0.06 h−1 (R2 = 0.99) and 0.01 
± 0.01 h−1 (R2 = 0.87) for GLP1-ELPsol and GLP1-ELPdep, respectively. The depot’s first-
order rate constant is very small, indicative of slower decay that can be approximated as a 
zero-order rate constant. When fit to a linear model, the zero-order rate constant was found 
to be 0.25 ± 0.04 %ret h−1 with an R2 = 0.84, almost equal to the goodness-of-fit value 
obtained from the exponential decay model. To further support our observation of near zero-
order release kinetics, the cumulative AUC of drug in circulation was plotted against time 
(Fig 4c). This plot shows steady, linear release of GLP1-ELPopt compared to GLP1-ELPsol 
and free GLP1, which follow a logarithmic release profile. Biodistribution of mice treated 
with GLP1-ELPopt on day 10 revealed that the highest levels of drug remained at the 
injection site and thyroid (due to radiolabeled iodine uptake) with no remarkable 
accumulation in other organs, including the kidneys and liver (SI Fig 11). 
Pharmacodynamics in the same mouse model indicate that whatever GLP1-ELPopt was still 
releasing beyond this time point was below the theoretical minimum effective concentration 
(Fig 4d) because blood glucose levels were only modestly lower than PBS treated controls 
(SI Fig 12). A full panel of all μSPECT-CT images can be found in SI Fig 13.
2.5 Optimized GLP1-ELP depots have long-term efficacy in mice
To ensure the long-term efficacy of our optimized depots, we subcutaneously injected ob/ob 
mice once weekly with 700 nmol/kg of GLP1-ELPopt. Glucose and weight were monitored 
regularly. Prior to the initial injection and after 4 and 8 weeks of treatment, the percentage of 
glycosylated hemoglobin (%HbA1c) was measured using a Siemens DCA Vantage 
Analyzer, which uses an immunoassay platform. The average %HbA1c level in lean, 
untreated male C57Bl/6J mice is reported to be 4.0%.46 %HbA1c levels are useful in 
diabetes management because they provide an integrated view of glycemia over an extended 
period of time—changing only as red blood cells (RBCs) turn over—and are less sensitive to 
daily fluctuations due to eating and activity. While it is recommended that patients have their 
%HbA1c checked every 3–4 months, we selected an 8-week treatment period because the 
lifespan of RBCs in mice is shorter than in humans (t1/2 ~ 40–60 d in rodents47 versus 120 d 
in humans48).
Prior to starting treatment at day 0, 5-week old, male ob/ob mice in both the GLP1-ELPopt 
and PBS control groups (n=5) had identical %HbA1c levels of about 4.4 (Table 3). By day 
28, the treated group had significantly lower %HbA1c than control mice (p<0.05 with 
Student’s t-test). At day 56, although %HbA1c continued to rise in both the treated and 
control groups, the difference in %HbA1c was equally pronounced (p<0.05 with Student’s t-
test). When each animal’s 28- and 56-day %HbA1c values were plotted against their 
corresponding glucose AUC, there is a correlation (R2 = 0.66, p<0.05) and the linear fit 
predicts a y-intercept of 4.4, the mean %HbA1c at day 0 (SI Fig 15a). The treatment 
regimen with GLP1-ELPopt successfully reduced overall glucose exposure by more than 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 9
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 32% (p<0.05, Student’s t-test). While treatment did not affect weight loss, mice in the 
GLP1-ELPopt group gained an average of 20% less weight than PBS treated controls and 
had a lower mean weight at the conclusion of the study (p<0.05 with Student’s t-test). These 
results are summarized in Table 3. Long-term efficacy in male DIO mice was also 
investigated over a 56-day period, showing significant reduction in %HbA1c between treated 
and control mice (Table 3) with correlation to mean glucose (SI Fig 15b). The 8-week 
treatment significantly reduced total glucose AUC (p<0.05 with Student’s t-test) and was 
more successful in this model at slowing weight gain.
2.6 GLP1-ELP depots persist for two weeks in non-human primates
Because they have a much faster metabolism, mice typically clear a drug more quickly than 
humans and other larger animals. Thus, on the basis of allometry49, we expected our 
optimized fusion to last longer in monkeys than the 10 days of efficacy seen in mice. 
Towards the goal of a bi- or once- monthly injectable treatment option for diabetes patients, 
we next investigated the pharmacokinetics of the optimized fusion in non-human primates. 
Fusion protein-naïve, male cynomolgus macaque monkeys received a single, SC injection at 
a dose of 150 nmol/kg GLP1-ELPopt (n=3). The GLP1-ELPopt sample for in vivo testing in 
monkeys was expressed and purified by PhaseBio Pharmaceuticals (Malvern, PA); details 
can be found in SI Section 1.4.
Pharmacokinetics of the circulating GLP1-ELPopt fusion released from a SC depot was 
quantified using a sandwich ELISA with anti-GLP1 and anti-ELP antibodies (detection limit 
= 2.44 ng/mL). Mean plasma levels of GLP1-ELPopt remained nearly constant out to day 10 
(Fig 5a). The drug was detectable in all three subjects out to 17 d and in subject 2, out to 21 
d (Fig 5b). Blood glucose was monitored at the time of blood draws using a handheld 
glucometer. There were no outliers (ROUT method, Q = 1%) and no severe incidents of 
hypoglycemia in these normal, healthy monkeys (Fig 5c). The lowest detected concentration 
(73 mg/dL for subject 3 at 0.5 h) still falls well within the normal fed blood glucose range 
for cynomolgus macaques50. Assuming a similar bioavailability across species and using 
power laws of allometric scaling, this data suggests that our injectable GLP1-ELPopt depots 
could provide prolonged release for 3 weeks of glycemic control in humans. In fact, using 
equations of allometric scaling, it is possible this construct could even serve as a once 
monthly option for diabetic patients, an exciting prospect given that all currently approved 
formulations require daily or weekly injection18.
Blood samples from these monkeys were also tested for anti-drug antibodies (ADAs), as 
immunogenicity is a common hurdle in biologic drug development51. Antibodies to a 
foreign material typically develop in monkeys by day 14 and can begin as early as day 7 
post-exposure.51 To avoid interference from circulating drug, we compared pre-treatment 
serum to samples from days 24 and 30. Results show an increase in antibody response over 
pre-dose levels (SI Fig 17a–d). Because of this ADA indication, we also performed a 
pharmacokinetics bioassay. If the ADAs are neutralizing, we would expect to see a 
discrepancy between levels of GLP1-ELPopt in serum that was quantified by the sandwich 
ELISA and the levels of functionally active GLP-1 assayed in parallel by measuring cAMP 
generation in GLP1R-expressing cells treated with the serum. The bioassay results were 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 10
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 consistent with immunoassay results (SI Fig 17e–f), indicating that, despite antibody 
generation, the drug is still active and capable of activating its receptor for nearly three 
weeks after a single, SC injection.
3. Discussion
We have shown how GLP1 delivery can be temporally controlled by fusing it to an ELP 
biopolymer and injecting it as a SC depot that has improved half-life and controlled release 
features. Our work has identified a framework for the rational and systematic optimization 
of injectable drug delivery systems at the molecular level—a feature too rarely seen in the 
design of drug delivery systems. First, we showed that there was an optimal Tt, just below 
body temperature, which enabled SC depot formation and optimized the extent and duration 
of release for this application. Second, independent of its impact on the Tt, we found that a 
MW ≥ 35 kDa is needed to prolong circulation and control blood glucose. This is because 
once a fusion is released from the depot, its MW controls its time in systemic circulation. 
For the ELP system investigated here, we found that the diffusive size (Rh) of 20 kDa ELP 
fusions was too small to retard kidney clearance. Moreover, the Tt’s of lower MW ELPs had 
greater dependence on their concentration so that they experienced a greater driving force to 
dissolve and diffuse into systemic circulation compared to higher MW ELPs. This expended 
GLP1-ELP from the depot more quickly, leading to a reduced duration of glycemic control.
Importantly, these results demonstrate that systematic molecular optimization of the 
parameters that control release from an ELP coacervate depot can significantly improve the 
fusion’s in vivo performance. GLP1-ELPopt provided up to 10 d of glucose control from a 
single SC injection in three different mouse models of type 2 diabetes (DIO, ob/ob, and 
db/db) and significantly reduced glucose AUC compared to PBS treated controls. 
Comparing these results with our own data of this delivery system, the first generation 
depot-forming GLP1-ELP fusion was only able to achieve 2–3 d of glucose regulation in 
ob/ob mice at the same dose as used herein.32 Moreover, our results show superior 
preclinical efficacy compared to other molecularly engineered GLP1 formulations currently 
in clinical use. Specifically, db/db mice treated with Trulicity® required twice-weekly 
treatment52, whereas we saw 10 d of glucose control in the same model.
Interestingly, the weight loss effects were different across mouse models, with GLP1-ELPopt 
treatment effecting weight loss in the DIO model, but weight-neutral or weight gain in the 
ob/ob and db/db models, respectively. This can be explained by leptin pathway disregulation 
in the genetic models with homozygous mutation to the leptin protein (ob/ob) or its cognate 
receptor (db/db). Leptin, the satiety hormone produced by adipocytes, helps to inhibit 
hunger and regulate energy balance. Our results suggest that an intact leptin pathway is 
necessary for GLP1 to exert its appetite-suppressing effects in the hypothalamus. This is 
supported by literature showing that leptin enhances the anorectic and weight loss responses 
to post-prandial incretin signals and, in leptin receptor-deficient rats, food intake is not 
suppressed by incretin treatment.53 With GLP1-ELPopt treatment, there is a clear trend of 
decreased weight loss with increasing severity of disease phenotype, from leptin resistant 
DIO mice54, to Lepob/ob and LepRdb/db mice.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 11
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fusion to an ELP, whether soluble or depot forming, reduces GLP1’s activity and 
bioavailability. However, we believe this is an acceptable tradeoff given the improvements 
made to the peptide’s half-life. Pharmacokinetics in mice quantitatively demonstrates that 
fusion to an ELP increases GLP1’s t1/2, elim by over 70-fold and fusion to a depot-forming 
ELP provides a mechanism that controls release so that the drug’s apparent half-life, 
t1/2, biol, can be extended far beyond its t1/2, elim. SPECT imaging confirms that the GLP1-
ELPopt depot was able to sustain release out to 10 d in mice, with approximately 18% of the 
injected dose still present in the SC space on day 10. Because of this remaining drug and its 
long t1/2, biol, this formulation could be a good candidate for dose stacking at the start of 
treatment to even further prolong the duration of glycemic control. We also show that the 
optimized GLP1-ELP depot has close to perfect zero-order release kinetics, whereas 
competing FDA approved formulations, Trulicity® and Tanzeum®, which rely solely on 
their fusion partners to extend circulation times, see more rapid and immediate declines in 
plasma concentration because they do not have a mechanism to sustain release.
Our optimized GLP1-ELP fusion sets itself apart from competing GLP1 molecular delivery 
technologies by its 10 days of glucose control and zero-order release kinetics in mice. In 
comparison to preclinical studies of these FDA approved once-weekly formulations, GLP1-
ELPopt has a better pharmacokinetic profile in non-human primates than Trulicity®, a once-
weekly formulation of GLP1 fused to an Fc domain55. In monkeys, plasma levels of 
Trulicity were only detectable out to 14 d, remaining constant only for the first 2 d and then 
dropping steadily with time55. With the optimized, depot-forming GLP1-ELPopt, we 
achieved constant levels for the first 14 d (seven times as long as Trulicity) in monkeys and 
detectable levels of drug for even longer thereafter. When compared with the GLP1-albumin 
fusion, Tanzeum®56, GLP1-ELPopt (10 mg/kg) was dosed at a five-fold lower level than 
Tanzeum® (50 mg/kg) in monkeys, according to FDA Access Data.
These comparisons emphasize the power of combining prolonged circulation with a 
controlled release mechanism in the same delivery platform. Bydureon®, which is 
comprised of the GLP1 analog, Exendin-4, formulated in PLGA microspheres27, is currently 
the only FDA approved, once-weekly GLP1 receptor agonist that utilizes a controlled 
release formulation. While injection of Bydureon, which requires larger needles (smaller 
gauge) to accommodate the PLGA microspheres57, can cause patient discomfort, our 
formulation is soluble at room temperature and is easily injected with standard 29½ gauge 
insulin syringes. It also demonstrates minimal lag phase or burst release of drug, features 
common to PLGA microspheres58, making it a desirable alternative to Bydureon. Another 
advantage of GLP1-ELPopt is its ease of recombinant production in E. coli with high yield at 
low cost, unlike Trulicity®, which requires more complicated and costly production in 
mammalian cells (HEK293-EBNA)55.
While our GLP1-ELPopt formulation holds much clinical promise, a major concern for 
biologic drugs is the development of antibodies. The drug’s long-term efficacy after 2 
months of weekly dosing, in addition to its consistent pharmacodynamic profile after 
repeated injections in mice (SI Fig 16) indicates an absence of immunoneutralization, and 
suggests that our construct does not generate a deleterious antibody response. Furthermore, 
although ADAs were detected in monkeys, they are non-neutralizing and did not prevent the 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 12
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 drug from activating its receptor in a pharmacokinetics bioassay. It is also worth noting that, 
while the monkeys used in this study were naïve to our GLP1-ELP fusion, they had been 
previously used for testing other unknown compounds. Thus, true determination of antibody 
response warrants testing in fully naïve animals, which will be the focus of future studies.
While we focused on optimizing the sustained release capabilities of ELP fusion depots for 
treating a chronic disease, it is worth noting that this highly tunable approach transcends 
GLP1 and should be valid for ELP fusions with diverse peptide and protein drugs. Although 
they require further study of release kinetics and bioavailability, the more hydrophobic and 
stable ELPs may be suitable for even longer release of biologics that are needed at more 
modest plasma drug concentrations, such as in inducing immune tolerance, or for 
applications such as intratumoral drug delivery where local retention of a drug is desirable.
In summary, we have developed a design framework for a biomolecular delivery system that 
can be systematically optimized at the molecular level. This genetically encoded delivery 
system controls release, exhibiting zero-order kinetics, and a single injection can maintain 
circulating levels of GLP1 for 17–21 days in monkeys, which is, to our knowledge, the 
longest duration reported for a recombinant, injectable delivery system. On the basis of 
allometric scaling using a power function with body weight49,59, mouse and monkey 
pharmacokinetic data suggest that this delivery system may be suitable for once-monthly 
dosing in humans. We estimate that GLP1-ELPopt would have a terminal half-life in humans 
greater than 100 h and a clearance of approximately 17 mL/h. Preclinical data presents 
compelling evidence that this construct would require no more than two injections a month 
for humans, and possibly as few as one per month, especially given the dose-stacking 
potential of this system. Such an improvement could vastly improve patient quality of life by 
reducing the frequency and pain of injections while also providing clinicians with the means 
to further decouple patient compliance from therapeutic outcome.
4. Methods
4.1 Synthesis of GLP1-ELP fusions
For each construct, oligomers were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies as starting 
material and recombinantly engineered into separate pET24 plasmids (EMD Millipore). The 
ELP and GLP1 peptide genes were fused using plasmid reconstruction by recursive 
directional ligation (PRe-RDL)—an iterative gene assembly method that employs type IIs 
restriction endonucleases to seamlessly assemble the synthetic genes that encode repetitive 
polypeptides like ELPs.60
The GLP1 used in all studies reported herein has been sequence-engineered to incorporate 
mutations at the genetic level to improve its stability. An Ala8 to Gly mutation makes GLP1 
DPP-IV resistant61 because the enzyme only recognizes and cleaves N-terminal dipeptides 
where the second residue is either Ala or Pro62. Wild-type GLP1 is comprised of amino 
acids 7–37; by convention, the initial, N-terminal His residue is numbered seven as a result 
of its initial discovery as a longer proglucagon fragment whose initial six residues are 
cleaved during further processing in the gut63. We also added two extra residues at the N-
terminus, an Ala-Ala leader, which is cleaved by endogenous DPP-IV in circulation. This 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 13
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DPP-IV cleavage serves to activate, rather than inactive, the drug by releasing the dipeptide 
and freeing the N-terminus for receptor activation. A Gly22 to Glu mutation stabilizes the 
alpha helical structure of GLP164 and an Arg36 to Ala mutation prevents premature cleavage 
of the peptide from its ELP carrier in the SC space by ubiquitous arginine targeting 
proteases65. The full-length sequence can be found in Supplementary Information.
4.2 Expression and purification of GLP1-ELPs
The gene for each GLP1-ELP fusion, inserted under control of a T7 promoter in a pET24 
plasmid, was transformed into Ultra BL21 (DE3) competent E. coli cells (Edge 
BioSystems). The cells were grown at 37°C in TB Dry (MO Bio) and expressed by 
induction of the T7 RNA polymerase with 0.5 mM isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside 
(IPTG). Cells were lysed using sonication pulsed at 10 s on and 40 s off, for a total 
sonication time of 3 min. DNA was removed by adding 1 mL of 20 w/v% polyethylenimine 
(PEI) per liter culture and centrifuging at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. Fusions were subsequently 
purified through inverse transition cycling (ITC) by exploiting the ELP’s phase transition 
behavior.66 Purity was confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) on 4–20% Tris gradient gels (Bio-Rad) negatively stained with 
0.5 M CuCl2. Protein bands were compared to a standard ladder (Precision Plus Protein 
Kaleidoscope, Bio-Rad) to verify size.
4.3 Phase behavior characterization
The LCST phase behavior of each fusion was characterized using a temperature-controlled 
UV-vis spectrophotometer (Cary 300 Bio, Varian Instruments) to measure the change in 
optical density at 350 nm as the sample was heated at a rate of 1°C/m. A sharp increase in 
absorbance indicates a phase transition of ELP from a soluble state to micron-sized 
aggregates. The Tt was defined as the inflection point of the turbidity versus temperature 
curve, and calculated as the maximum of the first derivative. The 350 nm absorbance was 
also measured as temperature was ramped back down at 1°C/min to confirm reversibility of 
the phase behavior, an attribute critical for facilitating release of drug from the depot into 
circulation.
4.4 Light scattering
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) was performed on a temperature-controlled DynaPro 
Microsampler (Wyatt Technologies) to quantify the hydrodynamic radius (Rh) of each 
GLP1-ELP fusion. Constructs were measured at 1 mg/mL in PBS at 15 °C after filtering 
through a 0.22 µm PVDF filter (Durapore). For three technical replicates, 18 repeat 
measurements of 5 s acquisitions were analyzed by applying a regularization fit to the 
scattering intensity autocorrelation function for Rayleigh spheres.
4.5 In vitro activity assay
The in vitro activity of GLP1-ELP fusions were quantified by measuring the increase in 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels in baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells that 
were stably transfected to constitutively express rat GLP1 receptor (GLP1R) on the cell 
surface35. The transfected cells were a generous gift from Dr. Daniel Drucker (University of 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 14
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Toronto). GLP1R is a G protein-coupled receptor whose downstream signaling is mediated 
by a second messenger cAMP cascade, resulting in insulin secretion. Thus, the cAMP level 
is often used as a measure of receptor activation. Prior to performing the assay, GLP1-ELP 
fusions at 50 µM concentration were incubated overnight with 0.01 µg human DPP-IV 
(Prospec Bio) to cleave the protective Ala-Ala leader and expose an active N-terminus. Cells 
were passaged at least once prior to performing the assay and were cultured in high glucose 
DMEM (Thermo Fisher, 11960-044) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL 
penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin, and 50 µg/mL G418 (Thermo Fisher). Cells were 
seeded without G418 on 24-well plates at 30,000 cells per well in 0.5 mL media and 
incubated at 37 °C for 24–48 h, until reaching approximately 80% confluence. To prevent 
cAMP degradation, 250 µM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) was added to each well 
and incubated for 1 h prior to beginning the assay. Cells were then treated for 15 min with 
10 µL of GLP1-ELP fusion or native GLP1 control over a log-range of concentrations. For 
each construct, three tubes were individually prepared at the maximum concentration and 
then serial dilutions were made for each. Intracellular cAMP level for each treatment and 
concentration was assayed in triplicate using a colorimetric, competitive binding, enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) carried out with the high sensitivity acetylated cAMP 
protocol, according to kit instructions (Enzo Life Sciences). The 650 nm absorbance in each 
well was subtracted from its 405 nm absorbance. After subtracting the mean cAMP level of 
PBS-treated control wells, the dose-response data was fit using a four-parameter logistic, 
nonlinear regression model (GraphPad Prism 6). The calculated EC50 values represent the 
half-maximal effective concentration.
4.6 In vivo studies in mice
All experimental procedures were conducted under protocols approved by the Duke 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Constructs were endotoxin purified 
prior to injection by passing the solution through a sterile 0.22 µm Acrodisc filter comprised 
of a positively charged and hydrophilic Mustang® E membrane (Pall Corporation). Mice 
were group housed in a room with a controlled photoperiod (12 h light/12 h dark cycle) and 
allowed at least 1 week to acclimate to the facilities prior to that start of procedures. Animals 
had ad libitum access to water and food. Mice were fed a standard rodent diet (LabDiet 
5001) unless otherwise indicated and observed daily.
4.6.1 Pharmacodynamics—For evaluating the ELP series with variable Tt or MW, 6-
week old, C57Bl/6J male mice (stock number 000664, Jackson Laboratories) were 
purchased. Mice (n=5 to 6 per treatment group) were immediately placed on a 60 kcal% fat 
diet (Research Diets D12492) and allowed 1 week to acclimate to facilities. Treatment 
groups were randomized. On day 0, initial body weight and blood glucose were measured; 
then mice were injected SC with GLP1-ELP fusions (700 nmol/kg, 200–500 µM) or an 
equivalent volume of PBS kept on ice. A small nick of the tail vein was made with a lancet. 
The first drop of blood was wiped clean and the second drop was measured using an 
AlphaTrak2 handheld glucometer (Abbott), which measures blood glucose using the glucose 
oxidase method. Glucose measurements were taken periodically throughout day 0 and then 
every 24 h post-injection.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 15
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For efficacy and dose response studies in diet-induced obese (DIO) subjects, 6-week old 
male C57Bl/6J mice (n=5) were maintained on the high-fat diet for 11 weeks prior to 
treatment. For the dose response study, GLP1-ELP concentration was kept constant and 
injection volume was adjusted for the various treatment groups. For efficacy studies in 
strains with more progressed diabetes, male mice homozygous for the spontaneous Lepob 
mutation (ob/ob, strain 000632) or the Leprdb mutation (db/db, strain 000697) were used. 
These mice were treated with the same dose and measured as previously described.
4.6.2 Long-term efficacy—6-week old male C57BL/6J mice (n=5, stock number 
000664) placed on a 60 kcal% fat diet were injected with GLP1-ELP every 6 days for 8 
weeks (700 nmol/kg, 200 µM). A1C was measured at the end of the study using a handheld 
A1cNow meter (Bayer), which uses a photometric immunoassay platform. 4-week old ob/ob 
mice (n=4, stock number 000632) were purchased from Jackson Laboratories and injected 
with GLP1-ELP every 7 days (700 nmol/kg, 200 µM). Blood glucose and weight were 
measured periodically and glycosylated hemoglobin (%HbA1c) was measured using a 
monoclonal antibody agglutination reaction automated by a DCA Vantage Analyzer 
(Siemens).
4.6.3 Intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test (IPGTT)—During the first week of the 
long-term study in ob/ob mice (n=4), two IPGTTs were performed. Mice received a single, 
SC injection of GLP1-ELPopt or equivalent volume of PBS on day 0. At 66 h post-injection, 
mice were fasted for 6 h and then challenged with an i.p. injection of 1g/kg, 10 w/v% sterile 
glucose (Sigma-Aldrich). At 72 h post-injection, blood glucose was measured at 0, 10, 20, 
40, 60, 90, 120, and 170 m after glucose administration. This procedure was repeated at 144 
h post-injection for a day 6 IPGTT. The glucose meter is unable to read glucose levels below 
20 or above 750 mg/dL. For measurements where the meter indicated “HI”, maximal values 
of 750 mg/dL were substituted to enable statistical analysis.
4.6.4 Imaging with μSPECT-CT—GLP1-ELPopt and a soluble control, GLP1-ELPsol 
with the same number of VPGXG repeats (310 µM), as well as custom ordered modified 
GLP1 peptide (75 µM, Anaspec), were radiolabeled with Na125I (Perkin Elmer) using the 
Chizzonite indirect method67 for protein iodination to minimize oxidative damage to the 
peptide68. Briefly, in IODOGEN tubes (Thermo Fisher) pre-wetted with 50 µL of PBS, 
Na125I was added to each construct at a molar ratio of 1:250 iodine to GLP1. After 5–10 m 
on ice, the oxidation reaction was quenched with the addition of 10 µL 0.1% trifluoroacetic 
acid (TFA). Free Na125I was removed using overnight dialysis in 500 mL sterile PBS 
(Sigma). The final activities were 1.18 µCi/µL free peptide (37.5 µM), 0.49 µCi/µL GLP1-
ELPsol (200 µM), and 0.72 µCi/µL GLP1-ELPopt (200 µM). An identical procedure was 
performed using non-radioactive NaI, after which concentrations were determined by 
measuring 280 nm absorbance on a NanoDrop 1000 and successful iodination was 
confirmed with matrix-assisted laser desorption and ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-
MS) on trypsin digested samples (SI Fig 1). For the tryptic digest, samples were diluted to 
25 µM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated with 0.2 µg MS grade trypsin 
(ThermoFisher Scientific) for 4 h at 37°C. Samples were diluted 1:10 in 10 mg/mL 4-
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 16
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hydroxycinnamic acid (HCCA) matrix prior to analysis with a DE-Pro MALDI-MS 
(Applied Biosystems).
6-week old, male ob/ob mice (n=4) were treated with a single, SC injection of radiolabeled 
GLP1 (30 nmol/kg), GLP1-ELPsol (700 nmol/kg), or GLP1-ELPopt (700 nmol/kg) and 
imaged with a U-SPECT-II/CT imaging system using a 0.350 collimator (MILabs B.V., 
Utrecht, Netherlands) courtesy of G. Al Johnson at Duke University’s Center for In Vivo 
Microscopy (CIVM). Anesthesia was maintained with a 1.6% isoflurane feed at an O2 flow 
rate of 0.6 L/m. All 20 m SPECT images were reconstructed at 0.2 mm voxel size with 
MILabs proprietary software without decay correction and centered on the 125I photon range 
(15–45 keV). These reconstructed SPECT images were then registered with their 
corresponding CT scans (615 µA, 65 kV) to provide spatial alignment for anatomical 
reference. For each subject, at each time point, the total photon intensity was calculated 
using ImageJ for 1) the entire image and 2) for an ROI selected to contain the depot and 
ensure exclusion of the thyroid, bladder, and pancreas. Depot retention was calculated by 
normalizing the depot ROI intensity to that subject’s 0h full image intensity.
4.6.5 Pharmacokinetics and biodistribution in mice—The same mice from the 
μSPECT-CT study treated with radiolabeled constructs were also used to study depot 
pharmacokinetics in parallel. Following SC treatment, total body activity was measured 
using an AtomLab 400 dose calibrator (Biodex) and 10 µL of blood was collected from a tail 
vein nick into 90 µL of 1000 U/mL heparin. Total body activity measurements and blood 
draws were repeated at 0.75, 2, 4, and 6 h post-injection and every 24 h thereafter out to 144 
h in the GLP1 and GLP1-ELPsol groups and to 240 h in the GLP1-ELPdep group. Upon 
completion of the study, mice in the GLP1-ELPdep group were euthanized and dissected. 
Local SC injection site skin and fat were excised in addition to distal skin, distal fat, flank 
muscle, heart, lungs, thyroid, liver, pancreas, spleen, stomach, and kidneys. A separate 
cohort of mice was used to measure the pharmacokinetics of the same constructs following a 
10 nmol/kg IV bolus injection of radiolabeled drug diluted to 1 µM to prevent phase 
transition. 10 µL of blood was collected into 1000 U/mL heparin solution at 40 s, 10 m, 45 
m, 1.5 h, 3 h, 6 h, 12 h, 18 h, 24 h, 36 h, 48 h, and 54 h post-injection.
Radioactivity of the dissected organs and all blood samples was quantified with a Wallac 
1282 Gamma Counter (Perkin Elmer). To calculate the half-life, raw CPM values of blood 
samples were plotted against time and fit to a one-phase exponential decay function in 
GraphPad Prism 6 using data points in the elimination phase of the PK curve for the IV 
study and after tmax for the SC study. These curves were fit for each subject individually 
because of slightly variable time points. The parameters presented are the average values 
within each treatment group and the standard error of the mean (SEM).
For quantification of circulating drug concentrations, the gamma count for each sample was 
converted to nanomolar concentration using a set of standards and then dividing by the blood 
sample volume (10 µL). For the IV data, t1/2, elim was calculated as ln(2)/ke where ke was 
found by fitting a line of exponential decay to the elimination phase of the PK curve 
generated from raw CPM values (45 m to 48 h range for the fusions and 2 min to 1.5 h range 
for the peptide). For the SC PK data, the same fit was used covering time points after Cmax 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 17
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 had been reached to calculate the biological half-life (t1/2, biol), which accounts for the 
controlled release and slowed absorption from the SC route of administration. In order to 
quantify Cmax and compare the drug AUC for all three constructs, the detected counts per 
minute (CPM) were converted to molar concentration using a standard curve built from 
aliquots of each injected construct, whose activities and concentrations were known. 
Bioavailability (F) was calculated as the ratio of dose-normalized AUCSC to AUCIV, using 
the equation: F = (AUCSC×DoseIV)/ (AUCIV×DoseSC). Clearance (CL) was calculated as 
(Dose×F)/(AUC) where F = 1 for a bolus IV injection. Although there have been few reports 
of a minimum effective concentration of GLP1 in mice, we approximated a value (33 nM) 
based on a study of how GLP1’s insulin stimulating effects are dependent on intravenous 
dose69 in conjunction with a study that involved measuring plasma GLP1 levels after 
intravenous administration70. The calculation of this value is discussed in more detail in 
Supplementary Information. The 40 nM value also correlates with the concentration at 
which a maximum GLP1 receptor response is observed for fusion treatment in vitro.
4.6.6 Histology of the injection site—5-week old, male ob/ob mice were allowed one 
week to acclimate to the facilities. On the day of injection, mice were anesthetized with 
isoflurane and shaved across their backs. Two circles, approximately 12 mm in diameter, 
were marked bilaterally with permanent marker and injected in the center of the circle at 50 
mg/kg or an equal volume of saline. Injections of PBS, GLP1-ELPopt, or PLGA 
microspheres 50 µm in diameter (Sigma) were randomized, but stratified to ensure that no 
mouse received the same injection type bilaterally. After 5 days, the mice were euthanized 
and the skin was dissected. A 12 mm biopsy punch (Electron Microscopy Sciences) was 
used to remove the area indicated by the permanent marker. The skin was cut in half and 
placed in 10% neutral buffered formalin. After paraffin embedding, three 5 µm sections were 
taken from the midline cut, spaced apart by 50 µm. These sections were stained with 
hematoxylin and eosin and imaged using a Zeiss laser microdissection and capture 
microscope equipped with an AxioCam ICc3 color camera. The slides were inspected and 
analyzed by a certified pathologist who was blinded to the groups.
4.7 In vivo pharmacokinetics study in monkeys
For detailed information on production and purification of GLP1-ELPopt for primate testing, 
see Supplementary Information. Briefly, purity was assessed by SDS-PAGE, size exclusion 
high performance liquid chromatography (SEC-HPLC) (SI Fig 2) and reversed-phase (RP) 
HPLC (SI Fig 3). The peptide fusion was verified with electrospray ionization mass 
spectrometry (ESI-MS) (SI Fig 4) and N-terminal sequencing (SI Table 1). Activity was 
assessed using a GLP1 receptor-expressing CHO cell line with a cAMP fluorescent assay kit 
(SI Fig 5).
To evaluate the pharmacokinetic profile of the fusion in primates, GLP1-ELPopt was sent to 
the In-Life Testing Facility at the Sinclair Research Center for testing. Animals were group 
housed and only temporarily caged in single housing for feeding, study procedures, and 
clinical observation. The housing room was maintained between 18°C and 29°C on a 
controlled photoperiod (12 h light/12 h dark cycle). Animals had ad libitum access to water 
and were fed a maintenance diet of Teklad High Fiber Diet with supplemental fresh fruits 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 18
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and vegetables. Animals were observed twice daily and physically examined during the 
period of acclimation. Food consumption was qualitatively monitored daily and weight was 
measured during acclimation, prior to dose administration, and then weekly thereafter. 
Following completion of the study, animals were released to the Sinclair Research Center 
open colony.
After a 5-day acclimation period, 3 male, protein-naive Cynomologus macaques were given 
a single, SC injection of GLP1-ELPopt at a dose of 10 mg/kg (150 nmol/kg), at a 
concentration of 400 µM. These monkeys ranged from 43 to 73 months of age and weighed 
between 3.33 and 4.42 kg. Following administration of this single dose, serial blood 
collections were taken at 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72, 168, 240, 336, 408, 504, 576, 672, and 720 h 
post-injection via direct venipuncture into sterile vacutainers without coagulant. The 
samples were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 m at 4°C and serum was stored at −70°C in a 
cryovial. These samples were analyzed by ELISA at PhaseBio Pharmaceuticals using a 
biotinylated anti-GLP1 capture antibody (Antibody Shop HYB147-12B) mixed at a 60:40 
ratio with biotinylated BSA and an anti-ELP detection antibody labeled with Alexa 647 (in-
house IgY generated in chicken, diluted to 20 nM in Rexxip F). Standards, samples, and 
reagents were loaded onto the Gyrolab immunoassay system utilizing a 3-step method. The 
limit of quantification for this test was 2.44 ng/mL GLP1-ELP.
Anti-drug antibodies were measured semi-quantitatively using two separate assays —one for 
antibodies developed against GLP1-ELPopt and a second for those reactive against native 
GLP1— performed both with and without competition with soluble drug or peptide. For the 
anti-drug assay, GLP1-ELPopt was bound at 1 µg/well in a 96-well, black microtiter plate. 
The plate was washed and blocked in a casein-based blocking buffer. Serum samples from 
pre-dosing as well as days 24 and 30 were diluted 1:50 in either the same buffer, or buffer 
containing the drug, and incubated with shaking. After incubation, all samples were applied 
to the plate and incubated again at room temperature with shaking. Plates were washed with 
Tris- buffered saline with Tween20 (TBST) and then Protein A/G conjugated to HRP was 
added and left for ~60 min. After a final wash step, QuantaBlu (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 
fluorescent substrate was added. Plates were read on a Molecular Devices Spectramax M5 
microplate reader. Surrogate controls for this assay included sheep polyclonal anti-ELP 
antibody (PhaseBio). The second assay for GLP1 specificity involved binding 50 ng/well 
biotinylated GLP1 to a 96-well streptavidin black microtiter plate and then performing a 
wash and blocking step with SuperBlock blocking buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 
same serum samples, diluted 1:50 in buffer alone or buffer with GLP1, were incubated with 
shaking and then applied to the plate and incubated for another 60–65 minutes. The plates 
were washed, bound with QuantaBlue, and detected in the same manner as for the first 
assay. The surrogate control for this assay was a mouse monoclonal anti-GLP1 antibody. 
Both these assay formats were repeated using HRP labeled monkey anti-IgM, IgG, and IgA 
as the detection reagent. Unfortunately, attempts to isotype the sample response was 
unsuccessful due to high levels of cross-reactivity in isotype-specific antibodies. This 
experiment may have been confounded because non-naïve monkeys were used for this study 
and the previously tested compounds in the monkeys are unknown.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 19
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A parallel pharmacokinetics bioassay was conducted using GLP1R expressing Chinese 
Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells and a cAMP assay. Cells were plated on 96-well tissue culture 
treated plates and incubated 24 h at 37 °C. GLP1-ELPopt was diluted to 1000 nM in 100 µL 
of water and incubated with 1 µg DPPIV overnight in order to cleave the Ala-Ala leader and 
allow for receptor binding. A standard curve for cAMP generation was made using this 
activated drug diluted in pre-dose serum from each primate. As per the kit’s recommended 
protocol, cell media was aspirated from the plates and 40µL assay buffer was added to each 
well followed by 5µL of each standard or serum sample from individual days of the PK 
study and for each primate subject. The plates were incubated at 37°C for 30min. Following 
the incubation, 15µL cAMP antibody reagent and 60µL cAMP working detection solution 
were added to each well. Plates were incubated at room temperature for 1hr protected from 
light. Then, 60µL of cAMP solution A was added to each well and the plates were incubated 
for 3 h at room temperature protected from light. After this final incubation, the plates were 
read on a luminescence plate reader at 1 s/well. Using a four-parameter curve fit, the drug 
(diluted in monkey 1M1, 1M2, or 1M3 predose serum) were plotted as signal versus 
concentration. Quantification of active drug in serum samples was determined from sample 
dilutions falling within the linear range generated from the calibration curve.
4.8 Statistical Analysis
Experimental numbers for both in vitro and in vivo studies were selected based on 
knowledge gleaned from previous experiments or other published data. Because of the small 
sample size (n ≤ 6), normality of groups was not tested. Variance across groups was similar 
except in untreated versus treated in vivo groups, which is not unexpected given the lack of 
glucose control in the mouse models tested. All data are presented as mean and standard 
error of the mean (SEM) unless otherwise noted. Blood glucose and percent change in 
weight studies were analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA, followed by lower order 
ANOVAs and Dunnett’s Test for multiple comparisons. Glucose AUC values were 
calculated using the trapezoidal method and then compared using a one-way ANOVA 
followed by either Tukey’s or Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons, as indicated. For 
comparing two groups, two-tailed Student’s t-tests were used. For animal experiments, 
groups were randomized using a list generator on www.random.org. No blinding was 
performed. All analyses and data processing were performed using GraphPad Prism 6 
software.
4.9 Data Availability
The authors declare that all data supporting the findings of this study are available within the 
paper and its supplementary information. Source data for the figures in this study are 
available in figshare with the identifier doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.4903931 (ref.71).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 20
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
A.C acknowledges the support of NIH through grant R01-DK091789. K.L. acknowledges the support of the NSF 
through a Graduate Research Fellowship. We thank Dr. Daniel Drucker for providing BHK cells for assaying in 
vitro activity, Dr. G. Al Johnson and Duke’s Center for In Vivo Microscopy for use of their U-SPECT-II/CT 
imaging equipment, and Dr. Michael R. Zalutsky for allowing us to use his laboratory and equipment to conduct 
radiolabeling experiments. K.L. thanks Caslin Gilroy for productive discussions on in vitro and in vivo experiments. 
Authors sincerely thank Dr. Karen Gerken, who provided pathology expertise and helped to analyze and interpret 
injection site histology, as well as the Duke Research Immunohistology Shared Resource Lab who processed the 
skin samples. Finally, we would like to thank Jamie Jowett, Dave Sendecki, and Chris Woods of PhaseBio 
Pharmaceuticals, who helped to express and purify fusion protein for the non-human primate experiment.
Competing Interests
A. C. is a Scientific Advisor and is on the Board of Directors for PhaseBio Pharmaceuticals, which has licensed the 
ELP technology for drug delivery applications from Duke University.
References
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics Report: Estimates of 
Diabetes and Its Burden in the United States. Atlanta: 2014. 2014
2. Bailey CJ. The current drug treatment landscape for diabetes and perspectives for the future. Clinical 
Pharmacology & Therapeutics. 2015 n/a-n/a. 
3. Inzucchi SE, et al. Management of hyperglycaemia in type 2 diabetes, 2015: a patient-centred 
approach. Update to a Position Statement of the American Diabetes Association and the European 
Association for the Study of Diabetes. Diabetologia. 2015; 58:429–442. [PubMed: 25583541] 
4. Bell GI, Santerre RF, Mullenbach GT. Hamster preproglucagon contains the sequence of glucagon 
and two related peptides. Nature. 1983; 302:716–718. [PubMed: 6835407] 
5. Mojsov S, et al. Preproglucagon gene expression in pancreas and intestine diversifies at the level of 
post-translational processing. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1986; 261:11880–11889. 
[PubMed: 3528148] 
6. Mortensen K, Christensen LL, Holst JJ, Orskov C. GLP-1 and GIP are colocalized in a subset of 
endocrine cells in the small intestine. Regulatory peptides. 2003; 114:189–196. [PubMed: 
12832109] 
7. Flint A, Raben A, Astrup A, Holst JJ. Glucagon-like peptide 1 promotes satiety and suppresses 
energy intake in humans. The Journal of clinical investigation. 1998; 101:515–520. [PubMed: 
9449682] 
8. Meeran K, et al. Repeated intracerebroventricular administration of glucagon-like peptide-1-(7–36) 
amide or exendin-(9–39) alters body weight in the rat. Endocrinology. 1999; 140:244–250. 
[PubMed: 9886831] 
9. Drucker DJ. Glucagon-like peptide-1 and the islet beta-cell: augmentation of cell proliferation and 
inhibition of apoptosis. Endocrinology. 2003; 144:5145–5148. [PubMed: 14645210] 
10. Qualmann C, Nauck MA, Holst JJ, Orskov C, Creutzfeldt W. Insulinotropic actions of intravenous 
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) [7–36 amide] in the fasting state in healthy subjects. Acta 
Diabetol. 1995; 32:13–16. [PubMed: 7612912] 
11. Meloni AR, DeYoung MB, Lowe C, Parkes DG. GLP-1 receptor activated insulin secretion from 
pancreatic beta-cells: mechanism and glucose dependence. Diabetes, obesity & metabolism. 2013; 
15:15–27.
12. Rachman J, et al. Normalization of insulin responses to glucose by overnight infusion of glucagon-
like peptide 1 (7–36) amide in patients with NIDDM. Diabetes. 1996; 45:1524–1530. [PubMed: 
8866556] 
13. Rachman J, Barrow BA, Levy JC, Turner RC. Near-normalisation of diurnal glucose 
concentrations by continuous administration of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) in subjects with 
NIDDM. Diabetologia. 1997; 40:205–211. [PubMed: 9049482] 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 21
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 14. Quddusi S, Vahl TP, Hanson K, Prigeon RL, D'Alessio DA. Differential effects of acute and 
extended infusions of glucagon-like peptide-1 on first- and second-phase insulin secretion in 
diabetic and nondiabetic humans. Diabetes Care. 2003; 26:791–798. [PubMed: 12610039] 
15. Nauck MA, et al. Normalization of fasting hyperglycaemia by exogenous glucagon-like peptide 1 
(7–36 amide) in type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetic patients. Diabetologia. 1993; 36:741–744. 
[PubMed: 8405741] 
16. Vilsboll T, Agerso H, Krarup T, Holst JJ. Similar elimination rates of glucagon-like peptide-1 in 
obese type 2 diabetic patients and healthy subjects. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003; 88:220–224. 
[PubMed: 12519856] 
17. Deacon CF, Johnsen AH, Holst JJ. Degradation of glucagon-like peptide-1 by human plasma in 
vitro yields an N-terminally truncated peptide that is a major endogenous metabolite in vivo. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab. 1995; 80:952–957. [PubMed: 7883856] 
18. Gilroy CA, Luginbuhl KM, Chilkoti A. Controlled release of biologics for the treatment of type 2 
diabetes. Journal of controlled release : official journal of the Controlled Release Society. 2015
19. Drucker DJ, Nauck MA. The incretin system: glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists and 
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors in type 2 diabetes. Lancet. 2006; 368:1696–1705. [PubMed: 
17098089] 
20. Jimenez-Solem E, Rasmussen MH, Christensen M, Knop FK. Dulaglutide, a long-acting GLP-1 
analog fused with an Fc antibody fragment for the potential treatment of type 2 diabetes. Current 
opinion in molecular therapeutics. 2010; 12:790–797. [PubMed: 21154170] 
21. Matthews JE, et al. Pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, safety, and tolerability of albiglutide, a 
long-acting glucagon-like peptide-1 mimetic, in patients with type 2 diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2008; 93:4810–4817. [PubMed: 18812476] 
22. Yu L, et al. In Vitro and In Vivo Evaluation of a Once-weekly Formulation of an Antidiabetic 
Peptide Drug Exenatide in an Injectable Thermogel. J Pharm Sci-Us. 2013; 102:4140–4149.
23. Chen YP, et al. Injectable and Thermosensitive Hydrogel Containing Liraglutide as a Long-Acting 
Antidiabetic System. Acs Appl Mater Inter. 2016; 8:30703–30713.
24. Gedulin BR, et al. Dose-response for glycaemic and metabolic changes 28 days after single 
injection of long-acting release exenatide in diabetic fatty Zucker rats. Diabetologia. 2005; 
48:1380–1385. [PubMed: 15915337] 
25. Kim D, et al. Effects of once-weekly dosing of a long-acting release formulation of exenatide on 
glucose control and body weight in subjects with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2007; 30:1487–
1493. [PubMed: 17353504] 
26. Schwendeman SP, Shah RB, Bailey BA, Schwendeman AS. Injectable controlled release depots for 
large molecules. Journal of controlled release : official journal of the Controlled Release Society. 
2014; 190:240–253. [PubMed: 24929039] 
27. DeYoung MB, MacConell L, Sarin V, Trautmann M, Herbert P. Encapsulation of exenatide in poly-
(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) microspheres produced an investigational long-acting once-weekly 
formulation for type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2011; 13:1145–1154. [PubMed: 
21751887] 
28. MacEwan SR, Chilkoti A. Elastin-like polypeptides: biomedical applications of tunable 
biopolymers. Biopolymers. 2010; 94:60–77. [PubMed: 20091871] 
29. Chilkoti A, Christensen T, MacKay JA. Stimulus responsive elastin biopolymers: applications in 
medicine and biotechnology. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2006; 10:652–657. [PubMed: 17055770] 
30. Chilkoti A, Christensen T, MacKay JA. Stimulus responsive elastin biopolymers: Applications in 
medicine and biotechnology. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2006; 10:652–657. [PubMed: 17055770] 
31. Amiram M, Luginbuhl KM, Li X, Feinglos MN, Chilkoti A. A depot-forming glucagon-like 
peptide-1 fusion protein reduces blood glucose for five days with a single injection. J Control 
Release. 2013; 172:144–151. [PubMed: 23928357] 
32. Amiram, M. PhD thesis. Duke University; 2012. Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Depots for the 
Treatment of Type-2 Diabetes. 
33. Trammell RA, Cox L, Toth LA. Markers for Heightened Monitoring, Imminent Death, and 
Euthanasia in Aged Inbred Mice. Comparative Med. 2012; 62:172–178.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 22
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 34. Runge S, et al. Differential structural properties of GLP-1 and exendin-4 determine their relative 
affinity for the GLP-1 receptor N-terminal extracellular domain. Biochemistry. 2007; 46:5830–
5840. [PubMed: 17444618] 
35. Baggio LL, Huang Q, Brown TJ, Drucker DJ. A recombinant human glucagon-like peptide 
(GLP)-1-albumin protein (albugon) mimics peptidergic activation of GLP-1 receptor-dependent 
pathways coupled with satiety, gastrointestinal motility, and glucose homeostasis. Diabetes. 2004; 
53:2492–2500. [PubMed: 15331566] 
36. Madsbad S, et al. An overview of once-weekly glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists-available 
efficacy and safety data and perspectives for the future. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011; 13:394–407. 
[PubMed: 21208359] 
37. Chae SY, et al. Pharmacokinetic and Pharmacodynamic Evaluation of Site-Specific PEGylated 
Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Analogs as Flexible Postprandial-Glucose Controllers. J Pharm Sci-Us. 
2009; 98:1556–1567.
38. McDaniel JR, Radford DC, Chilkoti A. A unified model for de novo design of elastin-like 
polypeptides with tunable inverse transition temperatures. Biomacromolecules. 2013; 14:2866–
2872. [PubMed: 23808597] 
39. Brenner BM, Hostetter TH, Humes HD. Glomerular permselectivity: barrier function based on 
discrimination of molecular size and charge. Am J Physiol. 1978; 234:F455–460. [PubMed: 
665772] 
40. Waldmann TA, Strober W, Mogielnicki RP. The renal handling of low molecular weight proteins. 
II. Disorders of serum protein catabolism in patients with tubular proteinuria, the nephrotic 
syndrome, or uremia. The Journal of clinical investigation. 1972; 51:2162–2174. [PubMed: 
5054468] 
41. Pisal DS, Kosloski MP, Balu-Iyer SV. Delivery of Therapeutic Proteins. J Pharm Sci-Us. 2010; 
99:2557–2575.
42. Caliceti P, Veronese FM. Pharmacokinetic and biodistribution properties of poly(ethylene glycol)-
protein conjugates. Adv Drug Deliver Rev. 2003; 55:1261–1277.
43. Yamaoka T, Tabata Y, Ikada Y. Distribution and tissue uptake of poly(ethylene glycol) with 
different molecular weights after intravenous administration to mice. J Pharm Sci. 1994; 83:601–
606. [PubMed: 8046623] 
44. Armstrong JK, Wenby RB, Meiselman HJ, Fisher TC. The hydrodynamic radii of macromolecules 
and their effect on red blood cell aggregation. Biophys J. 2004; 87:4259–4270. [PubMed: 
15361408] 
45. Purtell JN, Pesce AJ, Clyne DH, Miller WC, Pollak VE. Isoelectric point of albumin: effect on 
renal handling of albumin. Kidney Int. 1979; 16:366–376. [PubMed: 529683] 
46. Dubuc PU, Scott BK, Peterson CM. Sex-Differences in Glycated Hemoglobin in Diabetic and 
Nondiabetic C57bl/6 Mice. Diabetes Res Clin Pr. 1993; 21:95–101.
47. Vanputten LM. The Life Span of Red Cells in the Rat and the Mouse as Determined by Labeling 
with Dfp32 Invivo. Blood. 1958; 13:789–794. [PubMed: 13560578] 
48. Shemin D, Rittenberg D. The Life Span of the Human Red Blood Cell. Journal of Biological 
Chemistry. 1946; 166:627–636. [PubMed: 20276177] 
49. Mahmood I. Application of allometric principles for the prediction of pharmacokinetics in human 
and veterinary drug development. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2007; 59:1177–1192. [PubMed: 
17826864] 
50. Lapin BA, Gvozdik TE, Klots IN. Blood Glucose Levels in Rhesus Monkeys (Macaca mulatta) and 
Cynomolgus Macaques (Macaca fascicularis) under Moderate Stress and after Recovery. B Exp 
Biol Med+. 2013; 154:497–500.
51. Ponce R, et al. Immunogenicity of biologically-derived therapeutics: Assessment and interpretation 
of nonclinical safety studies. Regul Toxicol Pharm. 2009; 54:164–182.
52. Glaesner W, et al. Engineering and characterization of the long-acting glucagon-like peptide-1 
analogue LY2189265, an Fc fusion protein. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2010; 26:287–296. 
[PubMed: 20503261] 
53. Williams DL, Baskin DG, Schwartz MW. Leptin regulation of the anorexic response to glucagon-
like peptide-1 receptor stimulation. Diabetes. 2006; 55:3387–3393. [PubMed: 17130484] 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 23
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 54. Enriori PJ, et al. Diet-induced obesity causes severe but reversible leptin resistance in arcuate 
melanocortin neurons. Cell Metab. 2007; 5:181–194. [PubMed: 17339026] 
55. Glaesner W, et al. Engineering and characterization of the long-acting glucagon-like peptide-1 
analogue LY2189265, an Fc fusion protein. Diabetes-Metab Res. 2010; 26:287–296.
56. Young MA, et al. Clinical pharmacology of albiglutide, a GLP-1 receptor agonist. Postgrad Med. 
2014; 126:84–97. [PubMed: 25387217] 
57. Painter NA, Morello CM, Singh RF, McBane SE. An evidence-based and practical approach to 
using Bydureon in patients with type 2 diabetes. J Am Board Fam Med. 2013; 26:203–210. 
[PubMed: 23471935] 
58. Wang J, Wang BM, Schwendeman SP. Characterization of the initial burst release of a model 
peptide from poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) microspheres. J Control Release. 2002; 82:289–307. 
[PubMed: 12175744] 
59. Zou P, et al. Applications of human pharmacokinetic prediction in first-in-human dose estimation. 
AAPS J. 2012; 14:262–281. [PubMed: 22407287] 
60. McDaniel JR, MacKay JA, Quiroz FG, Chilkoti A. Recursive Directional Ligation by Plasmid 
Reconstruction Allows Rapid and Seamless Cloning of Oligomeric Genes. Biomacromolecules. 
2010; 11:944–952. [PubMed: 20184309] 
61. Burcelin R, Dolci W, Thorens B. Long-lasting antidiabetic effect of a dipeptidyl peptidase IV-
resistant analog of glucagon-like peptide-1. Metabolism: Clinical and Experimental. 1999; 
48:252–258. [PubMed: 10024091] 
62. de Meester I, Lambeir AM, Proost P, Scharpe S. Dipeptidyl peptidase IV substrates. An update on 
in vitro peptide hydrolysis by human DPPIV. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003; 524:3–17. [PubMed: 
12675218] 
63. Holst JJ. The physiology of glucagon-like peptide 1. Physiol Rev. 2007; 87:1409–1439. [PubMed: 
17928588] 
64. Miranda LP, et al. Design and synthesis of conformationally constrained glucagon-like peptide-1 
derivatives with increased plasma stability and prolonged in vivo activity. J Med Chem. 2008; 
51:2758–2765. [PubMed: 18412318] 
65. Amiram M, Luginbuhl KM, Li X, Feinglos MN, Chilkoti A. Injectable protease-operated depots of 
glucagon-like peptide-1 provide extended and tunable glucose control. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2013; 110:2792–2797. [PubMed: 23359691] 
66. Meyer DE, Chilkoti A. Purification of recombinant proteins by fusion with thermally-responsive 
polypeptides. Nat Biotechnol. 1999; 17:1112–1115. [PubMed: 10545920] 
67. Chizzonite R, et al. IL-12: monoclonal antibodies specific for the 40-kDa subunit block receptor 
binding and biologic activity on activated human lymphoblasts. J Immunol. 1991; 147:1548–1556. 
[PubMed: 1715362] 
68. Chizzonite R, et al. IL-12: monoclonal antibodies specific for the 40-kDa subunit block receptor 
binding and biologic activity on activated human lymphoblasts. J Immunol. 1991; 147:1548–1556. 
[PubMed: 1715362] 
69. Chan HM, Jain R, Ahren B, Pacini G, D'Argenio DZ. Effects of increasing doses of glucagon-like 
peptide-1 on insulin-releasing phases during intravenous glucose administration in mice. Am J 
Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2011; 300:R1126–1133. [PubMed: 21307364] 
70. Ahren B, Holst JJ, Martensson H, Balkan B. Improved glucose tolerance and insulin secretion by 
inhibition of dipeptidyl peptidase IV in mice. Eur J Pharmacol. 2000; 404:239–245. [PubMed: 
10980284] 
71. Luginbuhl, Kelli M., S, JL., Umstead, Bret, Mastria, Eric M., Li, Xinghai, Banskota, Samagya, 
Arnold, Susan, Feinglos, Mark, D’Alessio, David, Chilkoti, Ashutosh. Dataset for: One-week 
glucose control via zero-order release kinetics from an injectable depot of glucagon-like peptide-1 
fused to a thermosensitive biopolymer. figshare. 2017
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 24
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. A set of GLP1-ELP fusions with constant number of repeats, but varied Tt was 
characterized and tested in vivo
Optical density was monitored during heating (solid) and cooling (dashed) to demonstrate 
reversible phase behavior (data shown for constructs at 50 µM, n=1) (a) and to determine the 
Tt’s concentration dependence (b), where the dotted oval indicates the varied Tt’s at the 
injected concentration in vivo. Activity was assayed in vitro by measuring cAMP response 
(n=3) after receptor stimulation with fusions or native GLP1 control (c). Blood glucose (d) 
and percent weight change relative to weight at t=0 (e) were monitored after treating 7-week 
old DIO mice (n=5) with a single, SC injection of GLP1-ELP fusions or PBS control. 144 h 
AUC (f) was quantified for each subject and normalized to the PBS controls in order to 
compare glycemic regulation across treatment groups. Symbols * and # indicate groups that 
are statistically significantly different (p<0.05) from all other groups. Data represent the 
mean and SEM.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 25
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. A set of GLP1-ELP fusions with constant Tt at the injected concentration, but varied 
MW was characterized and tested in vivo
Optical density was monitored during heating (solid) and cooling (dashed) to demonstrate 
reversible phase behavior (data shown for constructs at 100 µM, n=1) (a) and to confirm that 
the Tt for all constructs remains constant at the injected concentration, indicated by the black 
dotted circle (b). Activity was assayed in vitro by measuring cAMP response (n=3) after 
receptor stimulation with fusions or native GLP1 control (c). Blood glucose (d) and 
percentage weight change relative to weight at t=0 (e) were monitored after treating 7-week 
old DIO mice (n=6) with a single, SC injection of GLP1-ELP fusions or PBS control. 144 h 
AUC (f) was quantified for each subject and normalized to the PBS controls in order to 
compare glycemic regulation across treatment groups. Symbols * and # indicate groups that 
are statistically significantly different (p<0.05) from all other groups. Data represent the 
mean and SEM.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 26
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. GLP1-ELP fusions were effective at controlling blood glucose levels for up to 10 days in 
3 murine models of diabetes
Blood glucose and percent weight change were monitored over 10 d after a single injection 
of either GLP1-ELPopt or an equivalent volume of PBS in DIO mice (n=5) (a–b), ob/ob mice 
(n=3) (d–e), and db/db mice (n=4) (g–h). Blood glucose AUC was calculated over 240 h and 
normalized within each experiment (by strain) to the PBS control group (c, f, and i). In the 
male ob/ob model (n=5), after a single injection, treated mice had an improved response to a 
1g/kg glucose challenge compared to PBS controls on day 3 (j) and day 6 (k) post-injection. 
The normalized blood glucose AUC over 180 min is statistically significant at both time 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 27
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 points (l). Symbol * indicated statistical significance of p<0.05. Data represent the mean and 
SEM.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 28
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. GLP1-ELPopt depots persist in the subcutaneous space and enhance the drug’s 
pharmacokinetics
SPECT-CT images illustrate how long each injected construct remains in the SC space (a) 
and were used to calculate local depot retention at the site of SC injection (n=4) (b). 
Circulating GLP1-ELPopt calculated as cumulative AUC versus time can be fit with either 
linear or logarithmic regression (c). Corresponding plasma concentrations after the depot has 
been absorbed into circulation (n=3) (d) show improved pharmacokinetics with GLP1-
ELPopt. The dashed line represents an approximated minimum effective concentration of 
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 29
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GLP1-ELP, calculated with accounting for the reduced activity of the fusions (see SI Section 
1.3). Data represent the mean and SEM.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 30
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Injectable SC depots of GLP1-ELPopt release drug into circulation that can be 
quantified out to 17–21 days in non-human primates
Circulating GLP1-ELPopt with time following a single SC injection of 10 mg/kg shown as 
mean and SEM (a) or individual (b) concentrations in cynomolgus macaque monkeys (n=3). 
Glucose levels remained within a normal range throughout the duration of the experiment 
for all three subjects (c) with no incidents of hypoglycemia.
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 31
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 32
Table 1
Summary of GLP1-ELP fusions and their characterization
Construct Name
Xaa
Composition
(A:V:L)
VPGXG
Repeats (N)
Tt at Injected
Conc. (°C)
Molecular
Weight (kDa)
Rh
(nm)
In Vitro EC50
(nM)
In Vitro EC50
95% CI (nM)
Transition Temperature Series
GLP1-ELP15.5°C
0:6:4
120
15.5
53,446
5.3 ± 0.1
26.0
14.4 to 47.0
GLP1-ELP21.4°C
0:1:0
120
21.4
52,772
6.2 ± 0.1
13.0
7.5 to 22.4
GLP1-ELP30.2°C
5:5:0
120
30.2
51,209
6.0 ± 0.1
7.1
2.9 to 17.3
GLP1-ELP35.5°C
6:5:0
120
35.5
50,873
6.3 ± 0.1
3.8
2.2 to 6.4
GLP1-ELP48.8°C
9:1:0
120
48.8
49,742
5.9 ± 0.1
6.6
4.4 to 9.9
Molecular Weight Series
GLP1-ELP20.0kDa
0:1:0
40
31.5
20,013
4.4 ± 0.1
12.5
6.4 to 24.3
GLP1-ELP35.8kDa
3:7:0
80
29.9
35,840
5.3 ± 0.1
5.7
1.8 to 17.7
GLP1-ELP67.5kDa
4:6:0
160
30.6
67,476
7.4 ± 0.1
11.8
5.1 to 27.2
GLP1-ELP98.7kDa
5:5:0
240
32.3
98,664
8.0 ± 0.3
10.1
6.2 to 16.4
μSPECT-CT Samples
GLP1-ELPopt
4:6:0
160
30.6
67,476
7.4 ± 0.1
11.8
5.1 to 27.2
GLP1-ELPsol
1:0:0
160
54.6
64,783
7.4 ± 0.1
11.0
5.0 to 24.0
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 33
Table 2
Summary of the pharmacokinetic properties of GLP1 and GLP1-ELP fusions
Construct
t1/2,elim#
(h)
t1/2,biol#
(h)
tmax
(h)
Cmax
(nM)
Delivery
Duration
(d)
AUC
(nM×h)
CL
(mL/h)
Bioavailability
(%)
GLP1
0.08 (0.06 to 0.12)
4.7 (3.4 to 7.0)
0.75
484 ± 26%
< 1
4,418 ± 618%
2.88 ± 0.48
98.1 ± 22.8
GLP1-ELPsol
5.7 (3.8 to 11.4)
16.9 (14.5 to 20.3)
6
2,123 ± 49
3
56,451 ± 1,782
0.23 ± 0.01
38.6 ± 0.8
GLP1-ELPopt
6.9 (5.3 to 9.8)
45.2 (33.7 to 68.3)
6
295 ± 13
10
29,872 ± 1,069
0.42 ± 0.10
33.4 ± 21.0
#Values reported are the mean with 95% CI range in parentheses.
%Cmax and AUC for GLP1 are lower than the values for GLP1-ELP because of the lower treatment dose used for free peptide (50 nmol/kg) versus GLP1-ELP fusion (700 nmol/kg).
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Luginbuhl et al.
Page 34
Table 3
Summary of long-term efficacy after 8 weeks of treatment with GLP1-ELPopt
Treatment
Group
Number of
Subjects
Day 0 HbA1c
(%)
Day 28 HbA1c
(%)
Day 56 HbA1c
(%)
Day 0 Weight
(g)
Day 56 Weight
(g)
56-Day Glucose
AUC, Normalized
ob/ob Mouse Model
GLP1-ELPopt
5
4.4 ± 0.2
5.0 ± 0.2
5.8 ± 0.2
32.2 ± 1.0
49.3 ± 1.1
0.67 ± 0.01
PBS Control
5
4.4 ± 0.1
5.7 ± 0.2
6.5 ± 0.2
31.5 ± 0.7
54.1 ± 0.8
1.00 ± 0.04
DIO Mouse Model
GLP1-ELPopt
5
NM
NM
4.4 ± 0.1
23.1 ± 0.5
25.6 ± 0.9
0.74 ± 0.04
PBS Control
5
NM
NM
4.9 ± 0.1
24.0 ± 0.5
32.6 ± 1.4
1.00 ± 0.02
Values reported are the mean and SEM.
Nat Biomed Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 05.
