 BEHAVIORAL THERAPY (J EDINGER, SECTION EDITOR)
Digital Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (dCBT) for Insomnia:
a State-of-the-Science Review
Annemarie I. Luik1,2 & Simon D. Kyle1 & Colin A. Espie1,2
Published online: 8 May 2017
# The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
Abstract
Purpose of Review Over the past decade, digital solutions
have been developed to support the dissemination of
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT). In this paper, we re-
view the evidence for and implications of digital CBT
(dCBT) for insomnia.
Recent Findings We propose three categories of dCBT, which
differ in the amount of clinician time needed, level of autom-
atization, costs, and scalability: dCBT as support, guided
dCBT, and fully automated dCBT. Consistent evidence has
been published on the effectiveness of dCBT to address in-
somnia disorder, in a variety of populations, with effects ex-
tending into well-being. Important gaps in the literature are
identified around moderators and mediators of dCBT, cost-
effectiveness, and the implementation of dCBT.
Summary The evidence base for dCBT is rapidly developing
and already suggests that dCBT for insomnia is effective.
However, further science and digital innovation is required
to realize the full potential of dCBT and address important
clinical questions.
Keywords Insomnia . Cognitive Behavioral Therapy .
Digital CBT
Introduction
The ubiquitous nature of web and smartphone technology has
changed our lives in every way imaginable, including offering
new approaches to the evaluation and treatment of many dis-
orders. Over the past decade, digital solutions, for example via
web and mobile devices, have been developed to support the
dissemination of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT). These
are of particular interest to the insomnia field because CBT
has emerged as the recommended first-line therapy for insom-
nia [1]. Correspondingly, perhaps the 5-year period ending in
December 2016 saw a substantial increase in published pa-
pers, with approximately one paper featuring digital CBT
(dCBT) for insomnia published per month, whereas less than
a handful of articles were published prior to 2012.
Undoubtedly, therefore, the evidence base has substantially
increased. However, CBT for insomnia, in whichever form,
still faces a lot of challenges such as costs and scalability [2,
3]. Similar to the dissemination of conventional CBT, the dis-
semination of dCBT remains limited.
What Is BDigital CBT^ for Insomnia?
CBT has traditionally been a face-to-face talking therapy, de-
livered in a direct one-to-one relationship between patient and
therapist. It also has been demonstrated that CBT can be pro-
vided successfully as a group therapy [4], in large workshops
[5], as a self-help bibliotherapy [6], or by telephone [7]. These
methods reflect attempts at Bscaling^ CBT to meet the popu-
lation need. However, they are by no stretch sufficient if our
ambition is to make CBTas ubiquitous as pharmacotherapy. It
is in fact a perfectly reasonable ambition to provide CBT to
the tens of millions of people who might benefit, considering
that CBT’s evidence base is stronger than that of pharmaco-
therapy—the problem is that providing CBT to a large
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Behavioral Therapy
* Colin A. Espie
colin.espie@ndcn.ox.ac.uk
1
Sleep and Circadian Neuroscience Institute, Nuffield Department of
Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, OMPI G, South Parks
Road, Oxford OX1 3RE, UK
2
Big Health Ltd, London, UK
Curr Sleep Medicine Rep (2017) 3:48–56
DOI 10.1007/s40675-017-0065-4
 population is not even remotely feasible using traditional
methods of dissemination. Potentially, technology can bridge
that feasibility gap, with digital solutions offering the possi-
bility of true scalability.
Although several terms have been used to describe techno-
logical advances, for example internet CBT (iCBT), comput-
erized CBT (cCBT), electronic CBT (eCBT), or online CBT
(oCBT), we have suggested that the field recognizes and
evolves towards the term Bdigital CBT (dCBT)^ to reflect
the contemporary spectrum of digital technology, rather than
one specific, and most likely historical aspect (e.g. computer
or internet) that will soon enough be lost in the mists of time
[3]. There can be little doubt that the pace of change in this
digital age will afford unrelenting opportunity for the dissem-
ination of dCBT. The corollary to this, however, is that all
forms of dCBT will be perpetually out of date unless they
remain at the forefront of digital innovation. Consequently, it
will not be the provenance, content, validation, or outcome
data associated with any particular dCBT program that deter-
mines its longevity but its level of execution. For clinicians
and patients wherever they may be to have ready and
sustained access to high quality, engaging, and effective
CBT, we need both clinical excellence and creative genius,
as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Supportive to Fully Automated dCBT
For convenience, to present a model of how CBT may be
offered using technology, and to summarize progress in the
field to date, we will use the term dCBT for all interventions,
but the reader should note that the literature to date comprises
everything from optimized web sites through to advanced
algorithm-driven systems. Broadly, we suggest that dCBT
provision can be divided into three categories (see Table 1)
which differ in the amount of clinician time needed, level of
automatization, costs, and scalability, each with their own
unique challenges for the dissemination of digital CBT.
(a) Digital CBT as Support
This is the least extensive form of digital involvement in
treating insomnia; it also comprises the field of telemedicine
[7–9]. Here, a therapist or other health professional provides
the therapy, and specific digital elements are used to support
the therapy [10]. Approaches can vary from using digital
tools, such as a communication program to give therapy, to
the development of mobile applications with components
such as sleep diaries, background information, and relaxation
exercises to support the treatment. For example, recently, a
mobile application has been developed to support face-to-
face CBT for insomnia in the VA system [10]. A feasibility
study suggests that the app was well received by participants
and therapists alike. Although received favorably, data so far
have not been published in relation to treatment effectiveness.
The use of dCBT as support is mainly intended to enhance
current conventional therapy. Therefore, it may increase the
feasibility of accessing CBT in remote areas or at times pref-
erable for the patient; however, this category is not likely to
have a large effect on the scalability of CBT for insomnia.
(b) Guided Digital CBT
By far, the largest number of dCBT programs described in the
literature combines an automated program with clinical sup-
port [11–16, 20, 21]. The programs usually provide pre-
assembled course information, available in different modali-
ties, across multiple sessions. This digital content is combined
with therapeutic feedback, most commonly after each session,
and in some cases, the therapist, or health care provider, also
determines the order of the therapeutic content. The therapeu-
tic feedback mostly consists of written feedback via email or
integrated chat functions [11–16, 20, 21]. These programs
have demonstrated effectiveness in improving sleep-onset la-
tency, wake after sleep onset, sleep efficiency, and insomnia
severity. An overview of randomized controlled trials includ-
ing some of these programs can be found in three recently
published meta-analyses [22–24]. As the name suggests, guid-
ed dCBT needs a time investment of a health professional.
Time commitments have been suggested to be in the range
from 40 min [25] to around 2 h [11] per patient per dCBT
course. This is a much lower time investment than needed for
face-to-face CBT, suggesting that guided dCBT could sub-
stantially increase the scalability of CBT for insomnia; how-
ever, a sufficient number of trained professionals will still be
needed.
(c) Fully automated digital CBT
To our knowledge, only three fully automated dCBT pro-
grams have been reported in the scientific literature [17–19].
These programs can function without any form of support of a
human therapist, although some programs might offer thera-
pist support as an additional, but not essential, feature.
Presentation of the fully automated dCBT programs differ
largely, and range from presenting text with interactive com-
ponents, such as videos, to a virtual animated therapist. In
general, sleep diaries and questionnaires support the automatic
tailoring of these programs to the patients’ need, in a similar
fashion as a therapist would. Different additional features that
mimic therapist or group interaction, for example patient tes-
timonies, expert testimonies, live expert sessions, or a forum
for users may also be included in fully automated programs.
The effectiveness of automated dCBT has been demonstrated
in randomized controlled trials [17–19] and the effect sizes
seem to be in a similar range as guided digital interventions
[22–24].
Curr Sleep Medicine Rep (2017) 3:48–56
49
 Evidence in Support of dCBT
In 2013, we suggested that there were 10 key research
questions that needed to be addressed relating to the
emergence of dCBT [3]. Since then, a substantial
number of dCBT applications have been developed,
and there has been a substantial amount of scientific
publications. Therefore, we will consider the extent to
which dCBT evidence base has evolved sufficiently to
address these questions.
Fig. 1 Defining and developing
Digital Medicine: essential
components. Digital Medicine,
including dCBT, is the product of
interaction across four essential
domains (technology, design,
clinical, research). Advanced
knowledge and expertise of the
specific components within each
of the domains is critical to
developing a safe, clinically
effective, scalable, and
sustainable product. dCBT digital
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy,
RCT randomized controlled trial,
SCED single-case experimental
designs
Table 1
dCBT as support, guided dCBT, and fully automated dCBT compared
dCBT as support
Guided dCBT
Fully automated dCBT
Definition
dCBT elements are used to support
conventional therapy
Automated dCBT with guidance of
trained clinicians
Fully automated and tailored dCBT without
clinical support
Automatization
Limited
Partly
Fully
Costs
Clinician time
Development and maintenance dCBT
Clinician time
Development and maintenance dCBT
No clinician time
Development and maintenance dCBT
Scalability
Capped by availability of trained clinicians
Capped by availability of trained
clinicians
Fully extensible
Clinician
involvement
Comparable to conventional CBT
Up to 2 h
None
Example
programs
Bastien et al. [7]
Gehrman et al. [8]
Lichstein et al. [9]
Kuhn et al. [10]
Kaldo et al. [11]
Van Straten et al. [12]
Thiart et al. [13]
Anderson et al. [14]
Feuerstein et al. [15]
Lancee et al. [16]
Ritterband et al. [17]
Vincent et al. [18]
Espie et al. [19]
50
Curr Sleep Medicine Rep (2017) 3:48–56
 1. Is Digital CBT as Clinically and Cost-Effective
as Conventional CBT for Insomnia?
A large number of studies, varying from uncontrolled observa-
tional studies to randomized clinical trials (RCTs) in adults
[11–21, 26–29] and children and adolescents [20, 30, 31], have
supported the idea that dCBT programs can be clinically effec-
tive. Even in the most stringent trial design, a placebo-
controlled randomized trial, dCBT has been demonstrated to
be effective [19]. A recent meta-analysis addressing evidence
from RCTs suggests a large pooled effect for insomnia severity
(Hedges’s g adjusted for publication bias 0.89) and a medium
pooled effect for sleep efficiency (Hedges’s g adjusted for pub-
lication bias 0.49) [22]. A second meta-analysis suggests sim-
ilar effectiveness for dCBT [23]. The volume of evidence is
smaller when it comes to long-term effects, but most studies
support the view that the benefits remain, even after multiple
year follow-up periods [26, 32]. There has been limited evalu-
ation of digital therapy relative to face-to-face therapy, although
meta-analyses [23] suggest effects of dCBT (improvement of
7% in sleep efficiency [95% CI 5 to 9%], increased total sleep
time of 20 min [95% CI 9 to 31], decreased sleep-onset latency
of 11 min [95% CI −16 to −5], decreased wake after sleep onset
of 20 min [95% CI −35 to −6]) are in the range of conventional
therapy (improvement of 9% in sleep efficiency [95% CI 8 to
12%], increased total sleep time of 8 min [95% CI −0.5 to 16],
decreased sleep onset latency of 19 min [95% CI −14 to −24]
minutes, decreased wake after sleep onset of 26 min [95% CI
−15 to −37) [33]. To our knowledge only two direct compari-
sons between dCBTand conventional CBT in adults have been
made. A study comparing face-to-face CBT to guided dCBT
suggested face-to-face CBT outperforms guided dCBT [34],
but a small second study, with limited power, did not find any
differences in effect size when comparing guided dCBT with
group CBT [21].
While the clinical effectiveness of most programs has been
investigated, research into the cost-effectiveness of dCBT is
still evolving, similar to research into the cost-effectiveness of
conventional CBT programs. The available literature suggests
that dCBT might be a cost-effective approach. For example, a
cost saving of US$418 per patient has been described after
giving guided dCBT for insomnia to teachers with insomnia
symptoms [35]. In a comparison of guided dCBT to group
CBT in adolescents, the effects were similar for the two ther-
apies, but the total societal and healthcare costs over 1 year
tended to be lower for dCBT [36], no difference in quality-
adjusted life years was found. Another cost-effectiveness
study on guided dCBT within a healthcare setting is currently
underway [37]. Studies so far have mostly investigated guided
forms of dCBT. It remains unclear whether fully automated
dCBT would achieve similar cost savings or even larger sav-
ings due to the fact that they do not require time from thera-
pists or health care professionals.
2. Is Digital CBT Effective for Insomnia in People with Other
Mental Health Conditions?
dCBT has been suggested to be effective in populations with a
variety of mental health disorders, including patients with de-
pressive disorder and anxiety disorder [38–44]. A recent meta-
analysis found 10 studies assessing the effectiveness of dCBT
in persons with depression and/or anxiety [45]. The effect
sizes of dCBT in this manuscript (improved sleep efficiency
[Cohen’s d 0.75, 95% CI 0.48 to 1.01], increased total sleep
time [Cohen’s d 0.41, 95% CI 0.19 to 0.64], and decreased
sleep-onset latency [Cohen’s d −0.50, 95% CI −0.72 to
−0.28]) were in the range of effect sizes in non-comorbid
insomnia (improved sleep efficiency [Hedges’s g adjusted
for publication bias 0.49, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.71], increased total
sleep time [Hedges’s g adjusted for publication bias 0.24, 95%
CI 0.10 to 0.38], and decreased sleep-onset latency [Hedges’s
g adjusted for publication bias −0.34, 95%: CI −0.20 to
−0.48]) [22]. In addition, feasibility research suggests that
dCBT might be an effective treatment in patients with sub-
stance use disorder [46] and that a supportive app can success-
fully be used in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder
[10]. To our knowledge, no studies assessing dCBT in popu-
lations with severe mental illness have been published.
However, the success of dCBT in these populations does not
appear to be limited to treating insomnia effectively. There is
growing literature indicating that dCBT for insomnia also brings
relief to non-insomnia mental health complaints. In particular,
dCBT reduces symptoms of depression and anxiety [12, 16,
21, 25, 38–44, 47–49], the previously mentioned meta-analyses
[45] suggests low to moderate effects of dCBTon depression (ES
−0.36, 95% CI −0.47 to −0.26) and anxiety (ES −0.35, 95% CI
−0.46 to −0.25). It has also been suggested that dCBT could
prevent the development of depressive symptoms [42], but no
conclusive evidence is available for this yet. Several other ran-
domized controlled trials investigating the dCBT for insomnia
and mental health disorders or symptoms [50, 51] are under way.
In addition, to mental health, the effects of dCBT for insom-
nia also extend to other aspects of well-being, for example im-
provements in cognitive performance [52], work performance
[53], and work behavior [54] have been reported after dCBT.
3. Is Digital CBT Effective for Insomnia in People with Other
Physical Health Conditions?
Digital CBT in physical health conditions has received much
less attention, although comorbidities across mental and phys-
ical diseases are likely. RCTs suggest that dCBT can also be
used effectively to treat insomnia in patients with physical
health conditions, such as cancer [47], elevated blood pressure
[55], and tinnitus [56, 57]. Similar results have been seen for
face-to-face CBT on physical health conditions [58], which
might suggest that there is no basis to view dCBT and CBT
Curr Sleep Medicine Rep (2017) 3:48–56
51
 differently when it comes to effectiveness in comorbid disor-
ders. Possibly, only specific disorder characteristics that affect
receiving in person treatment (for example limited possibility
to attend a clinic due to pain) or digital treatment (for example,
unable to understand digital programs due to cognitive prob-
lems) might affect the effectiveness in different populations.
Digital CBT for insomnia does not consistently improve
symptoms of physical health conditions, for example no effect
on blood pressure was seen after dCBT [55], but dCBT did
improve tinnitus complaints [56, 57]. Protocols of current ac-
tive studies investigating other health complaints such as low
back pain [59] and quality of life [60] have been published.
4. Does Digital CBT Help People Reduce and Withdraw From
Sleep Medications?
The question whether dCBT helps people reduce and withdraw
from sleep medication has been mainly investigated as a second-
ary question. One such study demonstrated that those who
followed a guided dCBT program used significantly less medi-
cation after a 3-year follow-up [26], when medication use was
specifically addressed. This confirmed the findings of a previous
study, using the same dCBT intervention, which found signifi-
cantly lower use of sleep medication in the year after treatment
when comparing a guided dCBT intervention with an active
internet-based control treatment [11]. However, for studies
whereby the dCBT intervention did not address sleep medication
use or tapering specifically, there tended to be an absence of
treatment effects on sleep medication use [12, 17, 19]. Possibly
this is explained by low rates of sleep medication use at baseline
or sample size. More specific investigations on the combination
of dCBT and tapering of medication are needed.
5. Does an Active Social Community Enhance Outcomes?
Fully automated dCBT does not involve any direct human
contact, which is in contrast to face-to-face therapy, group
therapy, or even guided dCBT. Therefore, the use of online
platforms where users can meet has been suggested [3].
Although the idea so far has not been studied systematically
in dCBT for insomnia, two studies do report on the use of
communities. A qualitative study [61] suggests that persons
who use an online community as part of their dCBT experi-
ence several advantages such as a reduced sense of isolation,
being part of a non-judgmental community, obtaining person-
alized advice, achieving positive comparisons with others, and
encouragement to keep going. However, the design, quality,
and privacy of the online community are important concerns
for users. Another study points out that interaction with other
users and professionals may stimulate positive experiences of
online therapy, but that it can be limited by a lack of online
access or poor computer skills [62].
6. What Are the Mediators and Moderators of Digital CBT
Treatment Outcome?
Although the evidence for dCBT has accumulated over the
past 5 years, mediators and moderators of effects remain to be
determined, similar to face-to-face CBT. Studies on both guid-
ed and fully automated dCBTsuggest that beliefs are changed
during dCBT [48, 63]. One study found that dCBT modifies
sleep-related attributions, night-time thought content, and psy-
chopathology, and that this process partly mediated the im-
provement in insomnia associated with dCBT [48]. The sec-
ondary aim of another RCTsuggested that maladaptive beliefs
and safety behaviors might be targeted in particular by dCBT
and that this could be an important mechanism [63].
Adherence (or lack of adherence) may be a predictor of
treatment success or failure and is commonly raised in the
context of digital programs because of inherently limited hu-
man interaction [64]. Qualitative work on patient adherence in
dCBT suggests that instead of digital advantages to improve
adherence, personal willpower was reported as most important
for adherence by patients [64]. It has been suggested that
guidance of treatment improves treatment outcomes [25, 49,
65]. However, there is a gap in knowledge of what drives these
changes; better adherence, improved implementation by the
patient, therapeutic expertise, or the additional support.
Notably, although variation in adherence to digital treatments
is considerable [66], digital solutions also offer new possibil-
ities [67] to increase adherence. Further research is needed to
improve our understanding of optimizing adherence using
digital tools. This said, it is important to bear in mind that
adherence remains a critical problem across all healthcare set-
tings; one meta-analysis reported that the average non-
adherence rate to medical recommendations was up to 25%
[68].
7. What Are the Demographic and Clinical Predictors
of Improvement with Digital CBT?
Only a few studies have investigated predictors for improve-
ment following dCBT. If we focus on the predictive value of
baseline sleep characteristics, it seems that comorbid sleep
disorders [69], higher sleep efficiency [70], lower insomnia
severity, and longer total sleep time predict less successful
treatment or non-completion [71]. In addition, multiple studies
reported psychiatric comorbidities to influence the effects of
dCBT negatively [69, 71]. It has been suggested that people
with high levels of depressive symptoms benefit more from
support, whereas people with low levels of depressive symp-
toms improve regardless of support [40].
Regarding demographic predictors, a younger age and
higher education have been reported as a positive predictor
for improvement with dCBT [69, 70], but a previously pub-
lished conference abstract suggested that only 2.2% of the
52
Curr Sleep Medicine Rep (2017) 3:48–56
 variance in sleep efficiency increase was explained by demo-
graphics [70]. Since dCBT, like CBT given in any other mo-
dality, does not seem to be effective for everyone, the predic-
tion of responders is a particularly important question.
8. What Are the Dose-Response Relationships Associated
with Digital CBT for Insomnia?
There does not appear to be any new data to share on the dose
of dCBT that is needed for a positive outcome, and this may be
at least partly because the issue still requires adequate
Bframing.^ We have argued that the notion that the number of
sessions offered/ attended reflects a purely stochastic unit of
therapeutic dose in psychological therapy [3]. In extremes,
one patient may attend twice and implement everything, while
another may attend endlessly but adhere very little. By way of
contrast, in general practice, when people do not make a further
appointment, or they default or cancel, the common assumption
is that they are fine. Nevertheless, the literature on dCBT, as in
CBT in general, continues to refer to proportions of people
attending all sessions, and trial reporting refers to people who
are lost to follow-up as dropouts. Although attendance and
completion are important concepts, we are also in favor of an
active measurement of implementation as the best proxy for a
CBT dose. This would capture early drop-outs who are early
responders who have already reached a sufficient level of im-
provement. For conventional face-to-face CBT, a small prelim-
inary trial has suggested that 4-session and 1-session CBT for
insomnia might be superior to 8-session treatment, possibly
because in those regimes, people were more likely to prioritize
implementation [72]. Similar work is still required in dCBT.
Moreover, there is enormous potential for dCBT to gather pro-
cess data to inform this question.
9. Does digital CBT Integrated at Various Levels
with Traditional Clinical Care Afford Health Benefits?
The dissemination of dCBT for insomnia in traditional care
has been limited so far, and so, associated health benefits of
such integration are still largely unknown. This situation pre-
vails across all conditions. For example, the large literature
base on dCBT for anxiety and depression has had, for the most
part, a limited impact upon routine service provision. Since it
is difficult to change primary care provider behavior, different
strategies might be needed to ensure that dCBT is integrated in
health care. It has been suggested that a provider-targeted,
more than a consumer-targeted, approach may result in better
dissemination of a dCBT for insomnia [73]. However, in this
specific study, although providers seemed to have positive
attitudes towards dCBT, actual uptake was low. This high-
lights that integrating dCBT into traditional clinical care might
be a slow process in need of innovative approaches and thor-
ough research on integration models, such as the stepped care
model. Indeed, when dCBT was piloted within a UK mental
health service based on the stepped care model, 59% of pa-
tients showed a reliable recovery, with 88% completing four
or more sessions [38].
It is important to consider dCBT as part of the whole spec-
trum of digital medicine, a rapidly developing, new field of
medicine, where technologies will revolutionize how patients
and health professionals interact. Together with access to vast
amounts of personalized health information, digital medicine
offers a highly customized approach, not merely an entry
point on a stepped care pyramid. To realize the full advantages
of digital medicine, a combined effort of academics, clini-
cians, health care commissioners, and digital developers will
be needed.
10. Can a Fully Mobile Version of CBT be Implemented
Effectively?
Only a limited amount of programs have been fully available
as a mobile app. Often these programs have been written for
research studies specifically and are limited in their availabil-
ity to the public. Even if we assess the complete range of
dCBT programs, only a few are available commercially, via
well-being plans, psychological services or sleep clinics. One
published audit [38], outlining the integration of a fully auto-
mated dCBT program into an existing clinical service, sug-
gests that fully automated dCBT can be implemented effec-
tively. In this UK-based psychological service, patients
worked through the program on their own, although they did
receive weekly support calls to enquire about progress/
engagement with the programme, leading to improvements
in insomnia, depression, and anxiety. Published data on
implementations of dCBT in the real world will be scarce by
default; these data will have to come largely from audits of
ongoing services, instead of research studies, and are therefore
much less likely to be published.
Conclusion
The clinical evidence for dCBT has substantially increased
over the last few years, from which it seems reasonable to
conclude that dCBT is effective even in comorbid conditions,
and that there are likely benefits beyond sleep to mental health
and well-being. This is consistent with the general CBT for
insomnia literature, as are ongoing questions around compo-
nent effectiveness, mechanisms of action, and mediators and
moderators of CBT response. Further research, as always, is
required. However, we would like to end by refreshing on
comments made in 2009:
The challenge for CBT is no longer to prove its creden-
tials, but to punch its weight. For at least a decade, CBT
Curr Sleep Medicine Rep (2017) 3:48–56
53
 should have been a contender as the treatment of first
choice for insomnia. In reality, however, it has had very
little impact on the high volume of insomnia patient
care. Indeed, it has amounted to little more than a patchy
cottage industry (Espie, 2009).
This challenge undoubtedly continues. However, we now
know that dCBT quite genuinely has the potential to provide
therapy on a global scale. That is, to make digital medicine as
ubiquitous as pharmacological medicine. We hope that our
taxonomy of Bdigital medicine,^ comprising dCBT as sup-
port, guided dCBT, and fully automated dCBT, will provide
a useful clinical and research framework as we work towards
that goal. We hypothesize that the fully automated approach
will be intrinsically more scalable and cost-effective.
However, we have to be cognizant of the fact that all forms
of dCBT will be perpetually out of date and impoverished in
terms of user experience unless they remain at the forefront of
global digital innovation. World-leading science needs to be
partnered with world-leading creative genius.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest
Annemarie I Luik reports holding a position at
Oxford University funded by Big Health Ltd and serving as their
Research Lead.
Simon D Kyle reports personal fees from Sleepio.
Colin A Espie reports personal fees from Big Health Ltd. and
Warnford Wellness. Dr. Espie reports a licensed patent from
Sleepio and is the co-founder and CMO of Big Health Ltd.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does
not contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any
of the authors.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
1.
Qaseem A, Kansagara D, Forciea MA, Cooke M, Denberg TD.
Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of P.
Management of chronic insomnia disorder in adults: a clinical prac-
tice guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern
Med. 2016;165(2):125–33.
2.
Schmitz MF, The ACP. Guidelines for treatment of chronic insom-
nia: the challenge of implementation. Behav Sleep Med.
2016;14(6):699–700.
3.
Espie CA, Hames P, McKinstry B. Use of the internet and mobile
media for delivery of cognitive behavioral insomnia therapy. Sleep
Medicine Clinics. 2013;8(3):407–19.
4.
Koffel EA, Koffel JB, Gehrman PR. A meta-analysis of group
cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia. Sleep Med Rev.
2015;19:6–16.
5.
Swift N, Stewart R, Andiappan M, Smith A, Espie CA, Brown JS.
The effectiveness of community day-long CBT-I workshops for
participants with insomnia symptoms: a randomised controlled tri-
al. J Sleep Res. 2012;21(3):270–80.
6.
Farrand P, Woodford J. Impact of support on the effectiveness of
written cognitive behavioural self-help: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Clin Psychol Rev.
2013;33(1):182–95.
7.
Bastien CH, Morin CM, Ouellet MC, Blais FC, Bouchard S.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia: comparison of individ-
ual therapy, group therapy, and telephone consultations. J Consult
Clin Psychol. 2004;72(4):653–9.
8.
Gehrman P, Shah MT, Miles A, Kuna S, Godleski L. Feasibility of
group cognitive-behavioral treatment of insomnia delivered by clin-
ical video telehealth. Telemed J E Health. 2016;22(12):1041–6.
9.
Lichstein KL, Scogin F, Thomas SJ, DiNapoli EA, Dillon HR,
McFadden A. Telehealth cognitive behavior therapy for co-
occurring insomnia and depression symptoms in older adults. J
Clin Psychol. 2013;69(10):1056–65.
10.
Kuhn E, Weiss BJ, Taylor KL, Hoffman JE, Ramsey KM, Manber
R, et al. CBT-I coach: a description and clinician perceptions of a
mobile app for cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia. J Clin
Sleep Med. 2016;12(4):597–606.
11.
Kaldo V, Jernelov S, Blom K, Ljotsson B, Brodin M, Jorgensen M,
et al. Guided internet cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia
compared to a control treatment—a randomized trial. Behav Res
Ther. 2015;71:90–100.
12.
van Straten A, Emmelkamp J, de Wit J, Lancee J, Andersson G, van
Someren EJ, et al. Guided internet-delivered cognitive behavioural
treatment for insomnia: a randomized trial. Psychol Med.
2014;44(7):1521–32.
13.
Thiart H, Lehr D, Ebert DD, Sieland B, Berking M, Riper H. Log in
and breathe out: efficacy and cost-effectiveness of an online sleep
training for teachers affected by work-related strain—study proto-
col for a randomized controlled trial. Trials. 2013;14:169.
14.
Anderson KN, Goldsmith P, Gardiner A. A pilot evaluation of an
online cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia disorder—
targeted screening and interactive Web design lead to improved
sleep in a community population. Nat Sci Sleep. 2014;6:43–9.
15.
Feuerstein S, Hodges SE, Keenaghan B, Bessette A, Forselius E,
Morgan PT. Computerized cognitive behavioral therapy for insom-
nia in a community health setting. J Clin Sleep Med. 2016;
16.
Lancee J, van den Bout J, van Straten A, Spoormaker VI. Internet-
delivered or mailed self-help treatment for insomnia?: a randomized
waiting-list controlled trial. Behav Res Ther. 2012;50(1):22–9.
17.
Ritterband LM, Thorndike FP, Gonder-Frederick LA, Magee JC,
Bailey ET, Saylor DK, et al. Efficacy of an Internet-based behav-
ioral intervention for adults with insomnia. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
2009;66(7):692–8.
18.
Vincent N, Lewycky S. Logging on for better sleep: RCT of the
effectiveness of online treatment for insomnia. Sleep. 2009;32(6):
807–15.
19.
Espie CA, Kyle SD, Williams C, Ong JC, Douglas NJ, Hames P,
et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of online cognitive
behavioral therapy for chronic insomnia disorder delivered via an
automated media-rich web application. Sleep. 2012;35(6):769–81.
20.
de Bruin EJ, Bogels SM, Oort FJ, Meijer AM. Efficacy of cognitive
behavioral therapy for insomnia in adolescents: a randomized con-
trolled trial with internet therapy, group therapy and a waiting list
condition. Sleep. 2015;38(12):1913–26.
21.
Blom K, Tarkian Tillgren H, Wiklund T, Danlycke E, Forssen M,
Soderstrom A, et al. Internet- vs. group-delivered cognitive behav-
ior therapy for insomnia: a randomized controlled non-inferiority
trial. Behav Res Ther. 2015;70:47–55.
22.
Zachariae R, Lyby MS, Ritterband LM, O'Toole MS. Efficacy of
internet-delivered cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia—a
54
Curr Sleep Medicine Rep (2017) 3:48–56
 systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled tri-
als. Sleep Med Rev. 2015;30:1–10.
23.
Seyffert M, Lagisetty P, Landgraf J, Chopra V, Pfeiffer PN, Conte
ML, et al. Internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy to treat
insomnia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One.
2016;11(2):e0149139.
24.
Ye YY, Chen NK, Chen J, Liu J, Lin L, Liu YZ, et al. Internet-based
cognitive-behavioural therapy for insomnia (ICBT-i): a meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ Open. 2016;6(11):
e010707.
25.
Lancee J, van den Bout J, Sorbi MJ, van Straten A. Motivational
support provided via email improves the effectiveness of internet-
delivered self-help treatment for insomnia: a randomized trial.
Behav Res Ther. 2013;51(12):797–805.
26.
Blom K, Jernelov S, Ruck C, Lindefors N, Kaldo V. Three-year
follow-up of insomnia and hypnotics after controlled internet treat-
ment for insomnia. Sleep. 2016;39(6):1267–74.
27.
Friethgeirsdottir G, Johannsson G, Ellertsson S, Bjornsdottir E.
Effectiveness of an online cognitive behavioral therapy for insom-
nia. Laeknabladid. 2015;101(4):203–8.
28.
Thiart H, Lehr D, Ebert DD, Berking M, Riper H. Log in and
breathe out: internet-based recovery training for sleepless em-
ployees with work-related strain—results of a randomized con-
trolled trial. Scand J Work Environ Health. 2015;41(2):164–74.
29.
Strom L, Pettersson R, Andersson G. Internet-based treatment for
insomnia: a controlled evaluation. J Consult Clin Psychol.
2004;72(1):113–20.
30.
Schlarb AA, Brandhorst I. Mini-KiSS Online: an Internet-based
intervention program for parents of young children with sleep prob-
lems—influence on parental behavior and children’s sleep. Nat Sci
Sleep. 2012;4:41–52.
31.
de Bruin EJ, Oort FJ, Bogels SM, Meijer AM. Efficacy of internet
and group-administered cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia
in adolescents: a pilot study. Behav Sleep Med. 2014;12(3):235–54.
32.
Ritterband LM, Thorndike FP, Ingersoll KS, Lord HR, Gonder-
Frederick L, Frederick C, et al. Effect of a web-based cognitive
behavior therapy for insomnia intervention with 1-year follow-up:
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016;
33.
Trauer JM, Qian MY, Doyle JS, Rajaratnam SM, Cunnington D.
Cognitive behavioral therapy for chronic insomnia: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2015;163(3):191–204.
34.
Lancee J, van Straten A, Morina N, Kaldo V, Kamphuis JH. Guided
online or face-to-face cognitive behavioral treatment for insomnia:
a randomized wait-list controlled trial. Sleep. 2016;39(1):183–91.
35.
Thiart H, Ebert DD, Lehr D, Nobis S, Buntrock C, Berking M, et al.
Internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia: a health
economic evaluation. Sleep. 2016;39(10):1769–78.
36.
De Bruin EJ, van Steensel FJ, Meijer AM. Cost-effectiveness of
group and internet cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in
adolescents: results from a randomized controlled trial. Sleep.
2016;39(8):1571–81.
37.
van der Zweerde T, Lancee J, Slottje P, Bosmans J, Van Someren E,
Reynolds 3rd C, et al. Cost-effectiveness of i-sleep, a guided online
CBT intervention, for patients with insomnia in general practice:
protocol of a pragmatic randomized controlled trial. BMC
Psychiatry. 2016;16:85.
38.
Luik AI, Bostock S, Chisnall L, Kyle SD, Lidbetter N, Baldwin N,
et al. Treating depression and anxiety with digital cognitive behav-
ioural therapy for insomnia: a real world NHS evaluation using
standardized outcome measures. Behav Cogn Psychother. 2016:
1–6.
39.
Pillai V, Anderson JR, Cheng P, Bazan L, Bostock S, Espie CA,
et al. The anxiolytic effects of cognitive behavior therapy for in-
somnia: preliminary results from a web-delivered protocol. Journal
of Sleep Medicine Disorders. 2015;2(2):1017.
40.
Lancee J, Sorbi MJ, Eisma MC, van Straten A, van den Bout J. The
effect of support on internet-delivered treatment for insomnia: does
baseline depression severity matter? Behav Ther. 2014;45(4):507–
16.
41.
Lancee J, van den Bout J, van Straten A, Spoormaker VI. Baseline
depression levels do not affect efficacy of cognitive-behavioral self-
help treatment for insomnia. Depress Anxiety. 2013;30(2):149–56.
42.
Christensen H, Batterham PJ, Gosling JA, Ritterband LM, Griffiths
KM, Thorndike FP, et al. Effectiveness of an online insomnia pro-
gram (SHUTi) for prevention of depressive episodes (the
GoodNight Study): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
Psychiatry. 2016;3(4):333–41.
43.
Blom K, Jernelov S, Kraepelien M, Bergdahl MO, Jungmarker K,
Ankartjarn L, et al. Internet treatment addressing either insomnia or
depression, for patients with both diagnoses: a randomized trial.
Sleep. 2015;38(2):267–77.
44.
Thorndike FP, Ritterband LM, Gonder-Frederick LA, Lord HR,
Ingersoll KS, Morin CM. A randomized controlled trial of an inter-
net intervention for adults with insomnia: effects on comorbid psy-
chological and fatigue symptoms. J Clin Psychol. 2013;69(10):
1078–93.
45.
Ye YY, Zhang YF, Chen J, Liu J, Li XJ, Liu YZ, et al.
Internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia
(ICBT-i) improves comorbid anxiety and depression—a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS One.
2015;10(11):e0142258.
46.
Hermes ED, Rosenheck RA. Implementing computer-based psy-
chotherapy among veterans in outpatient treatment for substance
use disorders. Psychiatr Serv. 2016;67(2):176–83.
47.
Ritterband LM, Bailey ET, Thorndike FP, Lord HR, Farrell-
Carnahan L, Baum LD. Initial evaluation of an Internet intervention
to improve the sleep of cancer survivors with insomnia.
Psychooncology. 2012;21(7):695–705.
48.
Espie CA, Kyle SD, Miller CB, Ong J, Hames P, Fleming L.
Attribution, cognition and psychopathology in persistent insomnia
disorder: outcome and mediation analysis from a randomized
placebo-controlled trial of online cognitive behavioural therapy.
Sleep Med. 2014;15(8):913–7.
49.
Ho FY, Chung KF, Yeung WF, Ng TH, Cheng SK. Weekly brief
phone support in self-help cognitive behavioral therapy for insom-
nia disorder: relevance to adherence and efficacy. Behav Res Ther.
2014;63:147–56.
50.
Freeman D, Waite F, Startup H, Myers E, Lister R, McInerney J,
et al. Efficacy of cognitive behavioural therapy for sleep improve-
ment in patients with persistent delusions and hallucinations
(BEST): a prospective, assessor-blind, randomised controlled pilot
trial. Lancet Psychiatry. 2015;2(11):975–83.
51.
Cockayne NL, Christensen HM, Griffiths KM, Naismith SL,
Hickie IB, Thorndike FP, et al. The Sleep Or Mood Novel
Adjunctive therapy (SOMNA) trial: a study protocol for a
randomised controlled trial evaluating an internet-delivered cogni-
tive behavioural therapy program for insomnia on outcomes of
standard treatment for depression in men. BMC Psychiatry.
2015;15:16.
52.
de Bruin EJ, Dewald-Kaufmann JF, Oort FJ, Bogels SM,
Meijer AM. Differential effects of online insomnia treatment
on executive functions in adolescents. Sleep Med. 2015;16(4):
510–20.
53.
Bostock S, Luik AI, Espie CA. Sleep and productivity benefits of
digital cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia: a randomized
controlled trial conducted in the workplace environment. J Occup
Environ Med. 2016;58(7):683–9.
54.
Barnes CM, Miller JA, Bostock S. Helping employees sleep well:
effects of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia on work out-
comes. J Appl Psychol. 2016.
Curr Sleep Medicine Rep (2017) 3:48–56
55
 55.
McGrath ER, Espie CA, Power A, Murphy AW, Newell J, Kelly C,
et al. Sleep to lower elevated blood pressure: a randomized con-
trolled trial (SLEPT). American Journal of Hypertension. 2016;30:
Published online January 19.
56.
Jasper K, Weise C, Conrad I, Andersson G, Hiller W, Kleinstauber
M. Internet-based guided self-help versus group cognitive behav-
ioral therapy for chronic tinnitus: a randomized controlled trial.
Psychother Psychosom. 2014;83(4):234–46.
57.
Weise C, Kleinstauber M, Andersson G. Internet-delivered cogni-
tive-behavior therapy for tinnitus: a randomized controlled trial.
Psychosom Med. 2016;78(4):501–10.
58.
Wu JQ, Appleman ER, Salazar RD, Ong JC. Cognitive be-
havioral therapy for insomnia comorbid with psychiatric and
medical conditions: a meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med.
2015;175(9):1461–72.
59.
Pinheiro MB, Ho KK, Ferreira ML, Refshauge KM, Grunstein R,
Hopper JL, et al. Efficacy of a sleep quality intervention in people
with low back pain: protocol for a feasibility randomized co-twin
controlled trial. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2016;19(5):492–501.
60.
Espie CA, Luik AI, Cape J, Drake CL, Siriwardena AN, Ong JC,
et al. Digital cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia versus
sleep hygiene education: the impact of improved sleep on function-
al health, quality of life and psychological well-being. Study proto-
col for a randomised controlled trial. Trials. 2016;17(1):257.
61.
Coulson NS, Smedley R, Bostock S, Kyle SD, Gollancz R, Luik
AI, et al. The pros and cons of getting engaged in an online social
community embedded within digital cognitive behavioral therapy
for insomnia: survey among users. J Med Internet Res. 2016;18(4):
e88.
62.
Middlemass J, Davy Z, Cavanagh K, Linehan C, Morgan K,
Lawson S, et al. Integrating online communities and social net-
works with computerised treatment for insomnia: a qualitative
study. Br J Gen Pract. 2012;62(605):e840–50.
63.
Lancee J, Eisma MC, van Straten A, Kamphuis JH. Sleep-related
safety behaviors and dysfunctional beliefs mediate the efficacy of
online CBT for insomnia: a randomized controlled trial. Cogn
Behav Ther. 2015;44(5):406–22.
64.
Horsch C, Lancee J, Beun RJ, Neerincx MA, Brinkman WP.
Adherence to technology-mediated insomnia treatment: a meta-
analysis, interviews, and focus groups. J Med Internet Res.
2015;17(9):e214.
65.
Holmqvist M, Vincent N, Walsh K. Web- vs. telehealth-based de-
livery of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia: a randomized
controlled trial. Sleep Med. 2014;15(2):187–95.
66.
Donkin L, Christensen H, Naismith SL, Neal B, Hickie IB, Glozier
N. A systematic review of the impact of adherence on the effective-
ness of e-therapies. J Med Internet Res. 2011;13(3):e52.
67.
Brown M, O'Neill N, van Woerden H, Eslambolchilar P, Jones M,
John A. Gamification and adherence to web-based mental health
interventions: a systematic review. JMIR Ment Health. 2016;3(3):
e39.
68.
DiMatteo MR. Variations in patients’ adherence to medical recom-
mendations: a quantitative review of 50 years of research. Med
Care. 2004;42(3):200–9.
69.
Vincent N, Walsh K, Lewycky S. Determinants of success for com-
puterized cognitive behavior therapy: examination of an insomnia
program. Behav Sleep Med. 2013;11(5):328–42.
70.
Espie CA, Bostock S, Kyle SD, Paluzzi B, Hames P. Who benefits
from online CBT for insomnia? Factors associated with change in
sleep efficiency in a large online treatment cohort. Sleep. 2014;37:
A205.
71.
Yeung WF, Chung KF, Ho FY, Ho LM. Predictors of dropout from
internet-based self-help cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia.
Behav Res Ther. 2015;73:19–24.
72.
Edinger JD, Wohlgemuth WK, Radtke RA, Coffman CJ, Carney
CE. Dose-response effects of cognitive-behavioral insomnia thera-
py: a randomized clinical trial. Sleep. 2007;30(2):203–12.
73.
Beaulac J, Vincent N, Walsh K. Dissemination of an Internet-based
treatment for chronic insomnia into primary care. Behav Sleep
Med. 2015;13(2):124–39.
56
Curr Sleep Medicine Rep (2017) 3:48–56
