 Urinary incontinence in women
Yoshitaka Aoki1, Heidi W. Brown2, Linda Brubaker3, Jean Nicolas Cornu4, J. Oliver Daly5, 
and Rufus Cartwright6,7
1Department of Urology, University of Fukui Faculty of Medical Sciences, Fukui, Japan
2Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology & Urology, University of Wisconsin-Madison School 
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
3Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, California, 
USA
4Department of Urology, Charles Nicolle Hospital, University of Rouen Normandy, Rouen, France
5Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Western Health, Victoria, Australia
6Department of Urogynaecology, St Mary’s Hospital, London, UK
7Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, London 
W2 1PG, UK
Abstract
Urinary incontinence symptoms are highly prevalent among women, have a substantial effect on 
health-related quality of life and are associated with considerable personal and societal 
expenditure. Two main types are described: stress urinary incontinence, in which urine leaks in 
association with physical exertion, and urgency urinary incontinence, in which urine leaks in 
association with a sudden compelling desire to void. Women who experience both symptoms are 
considered as having mixed urinary incontinence. Research has revealed overlapping potential 
causes of incontinence, including dysfunction of the detrusor muscle or muscles of the pelvic 
floor, dysfunction of the neural controls of storage and voiding, and perturbation of the local 
environment within the bladder. A full diagnostic evaluation of urinary incontinence requires a 
medical history, physical examination, urinalysis, assessment of quality of life and, when initial 
treatments fail, invasive urodynamics. Interventions can include non-surgical options (such as 
lifestyle modifications, pelvic floor muscle training and drugs) and surgical options to support the 
urethra or increase bladder capacity. Future directions in research may increasingly target primary 
prevention through understanding of environmental and genetic risks for incontinence.
Correspondence to R.C. Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Imperial College London, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, 
UK. r.cartwright@imperial.ac.uk. 
Author contributions
Introduction (R.C.); Epidemiology (H.W.B.); Mechanisms/pathophysiology (J.N.C.); Diagnosis, screening and prevention (J.O.D.); 
Management (L.B.); Quality of life (Y.A. and J.O.D.); Outlook (R.C.); Overview of the Primer (R.C.).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Dis Primers. ; 3: 17042. doi:10.1038/nrdp.2017.42.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Urinary incontinence is the complaint of involuntary loss (leakage) of urine1. The condition 
occurs in both sexes, but is much more frequent in women. Although some overlap in 
pathophysiology is evident between sexes, incontinence in men is often a consequence of 
prostatic enlargement or from damage to continence mechanisms during surgery or 
radiotherapy for prostate cancer. By contrast, incontinence in women is typically related to 
dysfunction of the bladder or pelvic floor muscles, with such dysfunction often arising 
during pregnancy or childbirth, or at the time of menopause. This Primer focuses on female 
urinary incontinence because of its higher prevalence and unique pathophysiology.
There are two main subtypes of urinary incontinence: stress incontinence and urgency 
incontinence. According to the International Urogynecological Association (IUGA) and the 
International Continence Society (ICS) standard definition, stress incontinence is the 
complaint of urine leakage in association with coughing, sneezing or physical exertion, 
whereas urgency incontinence is the complaint of urine leakage associated with a sudden 
compelling desire to void that is difficult to defer1. These two subtypes are so common that 
they often coexist, as a combination of symptoms termed mixed incontinence. Most women 
with urgency incontinence also receive a diagnosis of overactive bladder syndrome (BOX 1), 
of which urgency incontinence forms one possible component.
Rarer subtypes of incontinence in women include postural incontinence, which is the loss of 
urine with a change of body position (often when standing up or bending over); nocturnal 
enuresis, which is the leakage of urine during sleep; continuous incontinence, of which the 
common causes include vesical fistulae; and coital incontinence, the loss of urine during 
sexual intercourse1. The term ‘functional incontinence’ can be used to refer to incontinence 
in the setting of physical or cognitive impairment, such as hip fracture or dementia, that 
limits mobility or the ability to process information about bladder fullness2.
Incontinence symptoms are highly prevalent, have a substantial impact on health-related 
quality of life3 and are associated with huge personal4 and societal5,6 expenditure. All types 
of incontinence are more common with age and obesity7–10, and so the public health burden 
of these conditions is likely to increase with current demographic trends. The burden on 
individuals and populations of these conditions11 is quite disproportionate to the attention 
they receive in the press, or the levels at which incontinence research is funded. Policy 
makers, medical professionals and the general public are largely unaware that urinary 
incontinence is a disease12, despite its International Classification of Diseases (ICD) 
classification13. Part of this lack of awareness is rooted in the widespread misperception that 
incontinence represents a normal part of ageing, or is a natural consequence of childbirth14. 
Furthermore, women often delay or entirely defer presentation to their health care 
practitioners15; even among women who receive a diagnosis, only a minority receive 
effective therapy16,17.
This Primer summarizes the current state of understanding of urinary incontinence in 
women, with a focus, in particular, on stress incontinence and urgency incontinence. Both 
these areas have witnessed considerable innovations in practice over the past decade.
Aoki et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Epidemiology
Urinary incontinence is considered a stigmatizing condition in most populations18, which 
contributes to low rates of presentation for care and creates a high risk for respondent bias in 
observational studies19,20. The best prevalence estimates, therefore, come from general 
health surveys not focused on incontinence among representative samples using validated, 
symptom-based questionnaires21.
Such robust prevalence studies, using validated measures, exist for the United States and 
many developed European and Asian countries; population-level prevalence data for 
developing countries are less readily available. However, most early epidemiological studies 
did not differentiate between stress and urgency urinary incontinence. The range of reported 
prevalence for urinary incontinence of any subtype in adult women is broad (5–72%), with 
studies converging on a prevalence of approximately 30%22–27. This enormous variation 
between studies is observed both within and between countries. If true prevalence rates vary 
between countries, it is obscured by cultural differences in the perception of urinary 
incontinence and willingness to report urinary incontinence, as well as methodological 
differences28, including the wording of questionnaire items, the method of administration of 
questionnaires and — perhaps most importantly — the differences in case definitions 
used25,29. These differences in case definitions relate to the time period over which 
symptoms are ascertained and whether symptom frequency, severity and bother are assessed. 
Indeed, studies specifically measuring severe urinary incontinence, defined as urine leakage 
several times per week, have a more consistent reported prevalence of 6–10% in Europe and 
the United States26,30.
The association of urinary incontinence with age is well characterized. Across all available 
studies, the age-specific incidence is <2 per 1,000 person-years in women <40 years of age, 
but it increases with age31. For example, the EPINCONT study, a longitudinal study of 
women in Norway surveyed in 1995–1997 and again in 2006–2008, showed a 16% increase 
in the prevalence of urinary incontinence between the two time periods, with an incidence 
rate of 18.7% and a remission rate of 34.1%26. For the population as a whole, stress 
incontinence is more common than either urgency or mixed incontinence in most 
studies22–24,26. However, the prevalence of stress incontinence peaks in the fifth decade of 
life, and thereafter the prevalence of mixed and urgency incontinence continues to increase 
(FIG. 1). Studies project that the prevalence of urinary incontinence and other pelvic floor 
disorders, such as pelvic organ prolapse and faecal incontinence, will increase as the global 
population ages32. It is estimated that the number of women in the United States with 
urinary incontinence will rise from 18.3 million in 2010 to 28.4 million in 2050 (REF 32).
Data regarding the association of urinary incontinence with ethnicity are conflicting. Some 
studies have shown a higher prevalence of urinary incontinence in white women, whereas 
others have shown similar prevalence across ethnicities19,25,33–35. In several US studies, 
stress urinary incontinence is more common in white women than in African-American or 
Asian- American women19,34,35. Other factors associated with urinary incontinence in 
multiple, large, population-based studies25,36–38 include parity25,26,36, obesity25,26,36,38, 
Aoki et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 previous hysterectomy or pelvic surgery25,36,38, pulmonary disease36,38, diabetes 
mellitus22,25,26,33,37,38 and nursing home admission or dementia1,3,4.
Mechanisms/pathophysiology
Bladder structure and function
The bladder, urethra and urinary sphincters work in concert to store urine at low pressure 
and to void voluntarily at socially convenient or appropriate times. The detrusor muscle and 
internal urethral sphincter are predominantly smooth muscle, whereas the external urethral 
sphincter and pelvic floor muscles are predominantly striated muscle. The bladder lumen is 
lined with epithelial cells (called urothelium) and the basement membrane (mucosal layer) 
that protect the underlying detrusor muscle from toxins contained in the urine and enable 
communication with neural cells that coordinate storage and voiding phases (FIG. 2).
The sympathetic nervous system predominates during the storage phase and maintains 
continence through the paravertebral ganglia, the hypogastric nerves and hypogastric plexus. 
The parasympathetic system coordinates the voiding phase, through the sacral plexus and 
pelvic nerves (S2–S4)39. Afferent signals from the urothelium and bladder wall are 
transmitted through to the thalamus; the balance between storage and voiding is maintained 
by the central pontine micturition centre (FIG. 3). The neurotransmitters responsible for 
execution of these commands are acetylcholine and noradrenaline.
Voiding up to 7 times per day in the waking hours is considered normal1, with a micturition 
volume of 250–300 ml per void (although the volume is typically higher with the first 
morning void). A healthy adult bladder has a limit of comfortable tolerance of 
approximately 500 ml, and can accommodate this relatively large volume of urine with little, 
if any, increase in intravesical pressure, owing to the viscoelastic compliance of the bladder. 
Although the anatomy of the bladder, urethra and urinary sphincters are well understood, the 
physiology underlying incontinence — particularly urgency incontinence — remains 
surprisingly controversial. Several factors have been implicated in the mechanisms 
underlying stress and urgency incontinence. These include damage to the endopelvic fascia 
and pelvic floor muscles that support the urethra, decreased function of the striated urinary 
sphincter, changes in the compliance and innervation of the detrusor muscle, changes in the 
urothelium, changes in urine composition and changes in the central nervous system.
Stress urinary incontinence
Two common, often overlapping, mechanisms for stress urinary incontinence have been 
described: urethral hypermobility resulting from loss of support of the bladder neck and 
urethra (such that they move during peaks of abdominal pressure), and weakness of the 
urinary sphincter itself. If the urinary sphincter mechanism is damaged, a specific subtype of 
stress urinary incontinence ensues, sometimes referred to as intrinsic sphincter deficiency. 
Weakness of the urinary sphincter can result from trauma, repeated urogynaecological 
surgeries, neurological disease, ageing or diseases leading to systemic muscular atrophy. 
Although all contemporary treatments are used for both subtypes of stress urinary 
Aoki et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 incontinence, in general, treatments are more successful for patients with some degree of 
urethral hypermobility than for isolated weakness of the urinary sphincter40.
The hammock hypothesis is widely accepted as the pathophysiological explanation of stress 
urinary incontinence associated with urethral hypermobility41. The hypothesis states that the 
urethra is supported by the endopelvic fascia, which is the fibromuscular connective tissue 
ofthe vagina (FIG. 4). The endopelvic fascia creates a ‘hammock’ against which the urethra 
is compressed during rest and activity. This compression, combined with ‘intrinsic’ urethral 
sphincter pressure and mucosal coaptation, effectively closes the urethral lumen and 
prevents the involuntary loss of urine even when the intravesical pressure increases. Damage 
to the arcus tendineus fasciae pelvis or paravaginal tissue as a result of excess loading from 
obesity, chronic cough, constipation, parturition or menopause can decrease the anatomical 
support of the bladder neck and the urethra. This loss of support results in hypermobility of 
the urethra, such that rather than being compressed at times of increased intra-abdominal 
pressure, the urethra moves downward without being compressed — resulting in lower 
pressure in the urethra than in the bladder, with consequent urine leakage.
Urgency urinary incontinence
Unlike the physical changes associated with stress urinary incontinence, urgency urinary 
incontinence involves physiological perturbations to bladder function. There are three main 
aetiologies intrinsic to the bladder that lead to urgency incontinence: detrusor overactivity, 
poor detrusor compliance and bladder hypersensitivity.
Detrusor overactivity—Most current drugs for urgency incontinence block muscarinic 
receptors that mediate contraction within the detrusor muscle, or stimulate β3 receptors that 
promote relaxation. Many patients with urgency incontinence have measurable spontaneous 
uninhibited contractions of the detrusor muscle during bladder filling, called detrusor 
overactivity. These contractions can coincide with perceived urinary urgency, and urgency 
incontinence can result if the pressure generated overcomes the resistance of the urinary 
sphincter.
Early hypotheses of the pathophysiology of detrusor overactivity were anatomically centred 
on the spine and parasympathetic motor supply to the bladder — the so-called neurogenic 
hypothesis42. Detrusor overactivity is common after spinal injuries, with substantial spinal 
disease from multiple sclerosis or other lesions of the central nervous system. However, in 
the general population, neurogenic causes of detrusor overactivity are uncommonly 
identified42; that is, detrusor overactivity in most women is labelled as ‘idiopathic’ without 
finding a single pathophysiological cause.
Much research in the early 2000s focused instead on the detrusor muscle as the origin of 
detrusor overactivity — the so-called myogenic hypothesis. This hypothesis is based on the 
recognition that both strips of bladder muscle and individual detrusor cells from patients 
with detrusor overactivity show heightened contractile responses in vitro. Both myogenic 
and neurogenic mechanisms can coexist, so detrusor overactivity can be viewed as a 
multifactorial condition, akin to irritable bowel syndrome43. Although detrusor overactivity 
has been a major focus for research, it is only observed, at the time of urodynamics, in just 
Aoki et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 over half of women presenting with urgency incontinence, but may occur in at least half of 
elderly asymptomatic adults44.
Poor detrusor compliance—In low compliance, the bladder fails to stretch, which 
causes increased pressure, discomfort during filling and a limited capacity. This pattern is 
typical after pelvic radiotherapy, or can result from prolonged periods of catheterization.
Bladder hypersensitivity—Afferent sensory information from the bladder has recently 
been established as a key factor in overactive bladder syndrome and, accordingly, attention 
has focused on the sensory role of the urothelium in this condition (FIG. 5). The urothelium 
is not merely a barrier, but is a responsive structure that is able to detect thermal, mechanical 
and chemical stimuli. Indeed, this is observed in both rodent and porcine models, with the 
mucosal layer of the bladder augmenting detrusor function, either through the release of 
various neurotransmitters or through its own spontaneous electrical activity45,46.
With the recognition of the urothelium as a pivotal mediator of bladder function, much 
attention has been concentrated on the role of urothelial inflammation and infection in the 
aetiology of overactive bladder syndrome. The balance of urinary microbiota47 is now 
believed to substantially alter bladder sensation and, perhaps, function. Historically, the 
bladder and urine have been considered as sterile, and urinary tract infection (UTI) in 
women was thought to result from ascending spread of uropathogenic organisms colonizing 
the vagina. However, the introduction of expanded quantitative urine culture and 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing for bacterial identification has transformed our understanding of the 
microbial ecology of the bladder. Sequencing of urine samples collected using specific 
techniques to avoid vaginal contaminants, from patients and healthy volunteers, has revealed 
a wide range of colonizing organisms that might be implicated in lower urinary tract 
dysfunction48. Evidence of exacerbation of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) in 
association with both planktonic bacteria in the urine and urothelial colonization by bacteria 
has been reported49–51, but it remains unclear which species of bacteria may be responsible.
The vaginal microbiota can be classified into five community-state types, of which four are 
dominated by different Lactobacillus species (L. iners, L. crispatus, L. gasseri and L. 
jensenii), whereas the fifth community is more diverse52. Most urinary bacterial 
communities are also dominated by lactobacilli53. Recent work exploring the urinary 
microbiota have identified bacteria that would be considered as either commensal or 
pathogenic at other body sites54. As our understanding of the urinary microbiota increases, 
we should expect to be able to differentiate common commensal organisms from bacterial 
colonizers that are likely to have a negative effect on urothelial function, and potentially lead 
to bladder hypersensitivity.
Diagnosis, screening and prevention
The presenting symptom of urinary incontinence is, by itself, not necessarily diagnostic of 
the subtype of urinary incontinence or its underlying cause. A comprehensive assessment is 
needed to determine the exacerbating factors, the effect on the woman’s quality of life and 
her desire for treatment55. The typical diagnostic work-up involves medical history, physical 
Aoki et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 examination, urinalysis (see below), assessment of post-void residual volume and exclusion 
of conditions that require specialist referral (FIG. 6). After these assessments, a provisional 
diagnosis of stress, urgency or mixed urinary incontinence can be made in the majority of 
patients56. Most women present with a degree of mixed urinary incontinence, and 
establishing the predominant symptom can assist in directing the appropriate treatment. 
Depending on the severity of the individual components of their overall incontinence, 
patients often benefit from initial treatment that is focused on urgency urinary incontinence.
Symptoms and risk factors
A comprehensive patient history includes the onset, duration and timing of urinary 
incontinence, and associated LUTS and voiding symptoms (BOX 2), recognizing that the 
reported symptoms often relate to the patient’s normal bladder function and expectations. 
Other risk factors or conditions that can exacerbate urinary incontinence should also be 
assessed and include age, obstetric history (parity and mode of delivery), gynaecological 
status (the presence of pelvic organ prolapse, defecatory dysfunction or anal incontinence, 
sexual dysfunction and urogenital syndrome of menopause), medical status (the presence of 
a UTI, dementia, delirium, diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus, cardiorespiratory 
disorders, chronic cough, obesity and obstructive sleep apnoea) and pharmacological status 
(the use of hormonal replacement therapy, α-adrenergic agonists and antagonists, calcium 
channel blockers, diuretics, lithium therapies, opioid analgesics, anticholinergics and 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors; BOX 3)57. Patients with mild cognitive 
impairment are 30% more likely to have urinary incontinence58. In addition, functional and 
lifestyle factors, such as smoking status, mobility and frequency of heavy lifting, should be 
considered during assessment.
Some patients can present with a history that suggests alternative lower urinary tract 
pathologies that also cause urinary incontinence, but require specialist referral. These 
symptoms include recurrent UTI; sterile pyuria (leukocytes in the urine); concurrent pelvic 
organ prolapse, bladder pain, haematuria and continuous leakage suggestive of fistula; 
urinary retention or obstruction; or neurological symptoms. Similarly, a history of 
urogynaecological malignancy, pelvic irradiation, urogenital tract abnormalities or surgery 
should prompt a specialist referral59.
In a patient who is frail, or those >65 years of age, a targeted history of reversible causes of 
urinary incontinence includes an assessment of delirium, infection, pharmaceuticals, 
psychological morbidity, excess fluid intake, restricted mobility and stool impaction (the 
DIPPERS assessment60) (FIG. 6).
Physical examination
Physical examination should include a functional assessment observing the mental status 
and mobility as well as body mass index of the patient. Abdominal examination should 
assess for pelvic masses, a palpable bladder and costovertebral angle tenderness. The 
urogenital examination might reveal vaginal atrophy and incontinence-associated dermatitis 
(that is, damage to the skin with exposure to urine).
Aoki et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A positive cough stress test (whereby observed urethral leakage is provoked by a series of 
forceful coughs in the supine or standing position with a comfortably full (~300 ml) bladder 
volume) has a high sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing stress urinary incontinence61. 
After emptying the bladder, a positive supine empty stress test can be suggestive of intrinsic 
sphincter deficiency62, but invasive urodynamic studies are required to confirm the 
diagnosis63. The findings should be related back to the patient’s predominant reported type 
of urinary incontinence to ensure prioritization of management for the symptom of most 
bother.
Evidence of pelvic organ prolapse should be observed during a Valsalva manoeuvre (that is, 
forced attempted exhalation against a closed airway) over ≥6 seconds64 in whichever 
position maximum protrusion is best demonstrated (supine, left lateral or standing). The 
validated staging of pelvic organ prolapse is described by Pelvic Organ Prolapse 
Quantification (POP-Q)65, but a simplified description (S-POP-Q) has also been validated 
for use in clinical practice66, in which staging is based on assessment after the bladder is 
emptied. This staging system only defines anatomical descent and does not define the 
normal range, with up to 50% of women having stage 2 descent. Only a weak-to-moderate 
correlation between anatomical descent and urinary symptoms has been shown, with 
common prolapse symptoms being a vaginal bulge, sensation of heaviness or difficulty in 
voiding67.
For women with stage 2-4 pelvic organ prolapse, the anatomical distortion may kink the 
urethra, sometimes resulting in a false-negative cough stress test. Thus, reducing the 
prolapse digitally without distorting the bladder neck while performing a cough stress test 
might be of value. However, limited evidence has been reported on how to optimally reduce 
urethral kinking for the test68.
The relationship between urethral mobility and stress urinary incontinence has been assessed 
using a range of techniques, including the POP-Q point Aa descent69, urethral Q-tip70, 
vaginal cotton swab71, visual evaluation72, ultrasonography72 and lateral chain 
urethrocystography73. However, none of these is recommended and there is no consensus 
definition for clinically relevant urethral hypermobility. The advantage of hypermobility 
assessment lies in finding the absence of urethral descent, which is associated with a twofold 
higher rate of surgical failure74.
A digital examination palpating the pelvic floor for muscle tone, contraction technique and 
strength is advised. Standardized terminology has been developed to describe pelvic floor 
function, but no standardized method or normative value for measurement or classification is 
available75. Other abnormalities such as urethral diverticulae (out-pouching of the urethral 
mucosa, which creates a midline anterior wall cystic mass) and pelvic masses can also be 
identified when assessing for pelvic organ prolapse.
Finally, a speculum examination can assist in assessing each vaginal compartment as well as 
assessing for any extra-urethral loss of urine that may suggest a fistula. Any bowel 
dysfunction or neurological symptoms should prompt a rectal examination assessing for tone 
Aoki et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and sphincter squeeze. In addition, bowel dysfunction should prompt a general neurological 
examination, including testing of the S2-S4 nerve distribution63.
Urological tests
Diagnosis might also require objective and semi-objective measures, such as voiding diaries, 
pad tests, urinalysis and urodynamic tests.
Urinalysis—Urinalysis using a colorimetric reagent test strip evaluates urine for a range of 
chemical parameters including pH, protein, glucose, ketones, occult blood, bilirubin, 
urobilinogen, nitrite, leukocyte esterase and specific gravity. Urinalysis is recommended as a 
screening tool for UTIs and other associated conditions in the assessment of urinary 
incontinence76. Indeed, the criteria for diagnosing overactive bladder syndrome and detrusor 
overactivity require the exclusion of UTIs. Urine reagent dipsticks have a low sensitivity and 
high specificity for the exclusion and identification of UTIs77·78, respectively. Formal 
microscopy, culture and antibiotic sensitivity (MCS) analyses of a clean-catch urine 
specimen or catheter urine specimen are recommended79 in women who have symptoms of 
UTI or have a positive dipstick63.
The microbiological criteria for UTI are defined as bacteriuria of >100,000 colony-forming 
units (CFU) per ml on voided specimen or >1,000 CFU per ml on catheterized specimen 
with pyuria (defined as >10 white blood cells per ml). This diagnostic threshold is important 
given the association between low-CFU bacteriuria count (<1,000 CFU per ml), urinary 
incontinence50 and refractory LUTS. In those with a history of recurrent UTIs, requesting 
the results of the previous microscopy, culture and antibiotic sensitivity analyses can assist 
in confirming the diagnosis, determining the correct treatment based on sensitivities and 
determining whether the UTIs are recurrent or persistent1. In addition to screening for 
infection, urine dipsticks detect the presence of blood, glucose and protein, and have a role 
in screening for malignancy, diabetes mellitus and renal impairment.
Elderly patients have a high prevalence of asymptomatic bacteriuria. Thus, care should be 
taken in interpreting urinalysis findings in relation to the symptoms to avoid overuse of 
antibiotics that might be of little benefit or even harm80. The revised McGreer criteria for 
diagnosing UTIs are recommended for use in this population; these criteria require both 
acute localizing genitourinary signs and symptoms and a positive urine culture for the 
diagnosis of symptomatic UTI in individuals without indwelling catheters81.
Post-void residual volume assessment—The post-void residual (PVR) volume is 
determined by measuring the volume remaining in the bladder immediately after voiding; it 
is a measure of the completeness of bladder emptying. Thus, it is recommended when 
evaluating those with voiding symptoms, symptomatic pelvic organ prolapse or palpable 
bladder overdistension82. Measuring the PVR volume can be achieved using 
ultrasonography, with either a bladder scanner or formal renal tract imaging, or an in–out 
catheter. The technique has acceptable sensitivity and specificity and, importantly, greater 
patient acceptability and lower adverse outcomes than the gold standard of 
catheterization76,83. An increased PVR volume when assessed immediately post-void is 
defined as >30 ml, but may be up to 100 ml if assessed 10 minutes post-void and depends on 
Aoki et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the method of measurement1. However, there is wide variation in what clinicians consider to 
be a clinically significant PVR volume. In those with a PVR volume of ≥ 100 ml, there may 
be benefit in repeating the measurement in the event of a false-positive diagnosis of 
increased PVR volume84.
Although large and persistent PVR volumes might be related to UTIs, there is little evidence 
for the effect of increased PVR volume on urinary incontinence and storage symptoms. 
However, evidence of voiding dysfunction is still important to determine because it can alter 
the choice of urinary incontinence treatment options, as some treatments can further impair 
voiding (for example, intradetrusor onabotulinumtoxinA (commonly known as Botox 
(Allergan)) and surgical procedures for stress urinary incontinence).
Voiding diaries—As an objective measure of mean voided volume, frequency and urinary 
incontinence frequency, 3- to 7-day voiding diaries are widely used as a reliable tool that is 
sensitive to small changes83. Three types of urinary diary can be used: a micturition chart to 
record the timing of each void, a frequency–volume diary to record the volume voided with 
the time and a bladder diary to record additional information on urinary incontinence 
episodes, pad usage, fluid intake, fluid type and sensation of urgency1. In addition, the 24-
hour urine production can provide an assessment of daytime and nocturnal polyuria, which 
may be particularly useful in older women with nocturia (BOX 1). Some women might be 
unable to complete the bladder diary for functional reasons, such as cognitive impairment. 
The value of the diary may also be limited in those with either very severe or unconscious 
urinary incontinence, whereby leakage can be difficult to accurately record. Under these 
circumstances, other methods, such as pad tests, are of more value.
Pad testing—Pad testing uses an absorbent perineal pad worn by the patient to detect the 
presence of urinary incontinence and to measure the volume lost, and can be a useful 
correlate with symptoms83. The pad is worn for up to 24 hours while conducting a range of 
normal activities designed to replicate the usual provocations of urinary incontinence, such 
as walking and exercising1. Some increase in pad weight can occur through perspiration; 
accordingly, a positive pad test is defined as a weight increase of >1 g over a 1 -hour test or 
>4 g for a 24-hour test. These thresholds are also recommended as an objective measure of 
treatment outcome76.
Pelvic floor imaging—Ultrasonography and other radiological modalities have been used 
to investigate urinary incontinence by visualizing the morphology, movement and function 
of structures, including the levator ani, pelvic organs, bladder, bladder neck, urethral 
sphincter and urethra85,86. Although abnormalities observed can be associated with urinary 
incontinence, such imaging is not predictive or diagnostic of the cause of the 
incontinence87,88. Ultrasonography might have a role in confirming the findings of the 
patient history and clinical examination, assessing postoperative complications89 or as a 
means of providing biofeedback to help women to identify effective pelvic floor contraction 
during pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT)90.
Urodynamic studies—Urodynamic studies constitute a series of investigations assessing 
lower urinary tract function that include uroflowmetry, voiding cystometry, filling 
Aoki et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cystometry, urethral function and provocative manoeuvres to demonstrate urinary 
incontinence (FIG. 7). Auxiliary tests using fluoroscopy or ambulatory equipment might 
also be of value91. Depending on the clinical or research context, such studies can provide a 
range of information that includes identification of factors that contribute to LUTS and their 
relative importance, assessment of other aspects of lower urinary tract function, prediction of 
the consequences of lower urinary tract dysfunction on the upper tracts (particularly in 
patients with neurogenic causes of incontinence), prediction of the consequences and 
outcomes of treatment, investigation of reasons for treatment failure and investigation of the 
effects of interventions55.
When used in clinical practice, the urodynamic studies should be of suitable technical 
quality92 and the process should replicate the patient’s symptoms to provide results relevant 
to the clinical problem83. To achieve the quality required, the studies should be conducted in 
a standardized manner with parameters reported according to published reference ranges92. 
In the research setting, standardization enables comparison of study cohorts and outcomes. 
In the clinical setting, standardization enables the clinician to provide evidence-based 
recommendations relevant to the patient’s clinical problem.
Conducting a urodynamic study is associated with risks that include procedure-related 
discomfort and post-procedure transient dysuria (painful urination; 47% of patients), 
haematuria (14%), bacteriuria (12%) and symptomatic UTI (28%), with no significant 
reduction in UTI when prophylactic antibiotics are given93. For those classified as having 
overactive bladder syndrome, only around half demonstrate detrusor overactivity, and only 
one-quarter of those with uninhibited detrusor contractions have overactive bladder 
symptoms94. Accordingly, urodynamic studies are not recommended before non-surgical 
management of uncomplicated stress, urgency or mixed urinary incontinence76,82,83. 
Similarly, in patients with symptomatically predominant, demonstrable stress urinary 
incontinence, no pelvic organ prolapse and a PVR volume of <150 ml, treatment outcomes 
are not improved in those undergoing urodynamic studies before primary surgical 
treatment95, even when the urodynamic results are discordant with the symptoms of the 
patient96.
Given these limitations, urodynamic studies are of value if the incontinence diagnosis 
remains uncertain after the initial assessment, when symptoms do not correlate with physical 
findings or after failed previous treatment55,82. Similarly, urodynamic studies should be 
performed in patients who are considered for invasive, morbid or irreversible overactive 
bladder or detrusor overactivity treatments, and in those with neurogenic or obstructive 
voiding conditions. In those with urinary incontinence and an associated neurological 
condition (for example, neurogenic urinary incontinence), the addition of radiological 
imaging at the time of invasive urodynamics for the detection of urinary tract anomalies and 
vesico-ureteric reflux is regarded as the gold-standard investigation97. Other specialist uro-
neurophysiological tests include electromyography to assess muscular responses to bladder 
stimuli, pudendal nerve conduction testing and reflex latency measurements98.
Aoki et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Screening and prevention
Several populations might benefit from proactive screening for symptoms of urinary 
incontinence, including older women who are frail, for whom there is a high prevalence of 
urinary incontinence and related morbidity55, including falls and fractures. Other highrisk 
groups include pregnant patients, for whom urinary incontinence preventive measures such 
as fluid management, PFMT and bladder retraining can be offered. Women presenting with 
other pelvic floor disorders (such as pelvic organ prolapse) might also benefit from 
screening, as the prevalence of urinary incontinence in this population is >60%98.
Management
The management of urinary incontinence in adult women is an iterative process. For some 
affected women, urinary incontinence causes sufficient bother and intrusion to warrant 
consideration of treatment. The options range from lifestyle modification to more-invasive 
surgical interventions99. Otherwise healthy women might prioritize resolution of their 
urinary incontinence by actively engaging in pelvic floor rehabilitation, lifestyle changes 
(including fluid optimization), pharmacological treatment or surgery to resolve persistent 
symptoms. Alternatively, women with other serious health conditions might consider their 
urinary incontinence as a chronic condition, with the emphasis on decreasing symptom 
impact rather than complete resolution. This spectrum of engagement in treatment of urinary 
incontinence changes over a woman’s lifetime and reflects her changing health priorities and 
preferences. Thus, the goals might vary between the ideal of independent continence with 
minimal symptoms and the compromise of dependent continence (in which the patient 
remains dry through regular toileting) or contained incontinence (in which the patient 
remains dry through the use of aids)100. Goals and preferences are likely to change with time 
and should be periodically reconsidered101,102.
Role of the multidisciplinary team
Multidisciplinary care for women with urinary incontinence is regarded as important76. Such 
disciplines include physiotherapy, specialist nursing, occupational therapy, gynaecology, 
urology and geriatrics, with each providing a different service within their scope of practice. 
Although little evidence supports the comparative effectiveness of any discipline in 
particular, the data on outcomes of patients treated with multidisciplinary expertise are 
promising103.
Non-surgical interventions
Women with mixed urinary incontinence often experience symptom reduction as they 
embark on behavioural changes that may include weight loss, timed voiding or bladder 
retraining and fluid optimization104. These interventions can be initiated without exhaustive 
diagnostic work-up, unless signs or symptoms suggest a need for specialist referral. Women 
with urinary incontinence vary in their willingness and ability to engage in these first-line 
interventions; however, for women who are able to work closely with their clinical team, 
significant improvements in symptoms can be achieved105. Patients with mixed urinary 
incontinence benefit from interventions that are designed to optimize fluid intake, 
medication use and pelvic muscle function106.
Aoki et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fluid optimization—Important clues to potential management strategies are often 
detected during evaluation and the initial diagnosis. For example, if a voiding diary reveals a 
fluid intake pattern that exacerbates symptoms — such as excessive total fluid intake, large 
fluid intake before sleep and a pattern of infrequent but large fluid bolus intake — changes 
might be warranted. Similarly, the intake of caffeinated, alcoholic and carbonated drinks can 
be temporarily modified to determine whether incontinence symptoms improve. Some 
medications (BOX 3) are associated with an increase in incontinence symptoms; in such 
cases, mindful adjustments to fluid intake and optimizing medication timing can facilitate 
symptom reduction and decrease withdrawal from social interactions.
Weight loss—Weight reduction in women who are overweight or obese can substantially 
improve symptoms and associated bother107,108. Clinicians and patients alike are aware of 
the challenge this poses for most individuals who are overweight. However, one study 
showed that, for those enrolled in a weight loss programme and losing at least 3–5% of their 
baseline weight, a 47% reduction in stress incontinence episodes109 was achieved, with 
concomitant reduction in urge incontinence episodes. Similarly dramatic improvements have 
been demonstrated with bariatric surgery and other weight loss modalities110.
PFMT—PFMT aims to improve pelvic floor muscle function. The strongest evidence of 
benefit is for supervised PFMT in women with stress incontinence, with less efficacy in 
those with urgency incontinence111. Emerging evidence supports unsupervised delivery of 
PFMT112, which could be cost-effectively delivered through e-training113. Women are 
taught to consciously contract their pelvic floor muscles before and during any increase in 
abdominal pressure, such as coughing, to avert leakage, and simultaneously to build up the 
support of the pelvic floor through regular muscle strength training114. These exercises are 
often supplemented by bladder retraining advice (systematically increasing voiding interval), 
techniques to avert urinary urgency115 and to avoid imminent stress-induced leakage116. In 
those who are unable to contract the pelvic floor, biofeedback techniques might be useful90. 
Although short-term efficacy is good, with no harmful effects, evidence of long-term benefit 
is lacking117–119.
Incontinence pessaries and intravaginal devices—Women seeking further 
treatment for stress urinary incontinence who wish to avoid or defer surgery, and are unable 
to adhere to behavioural therapy, can use vaginal continence pessaries120, which aim to 
compress the urethra. These treatments show the greatest benefit in those with severe stress 
urinary incontinence121. New options are becoming available, including tampon-like devices 
licensed for over-the-counter sale, but the effectiveness of these devices is yet to be 
established.
Continence aids and products—Counselling and guidance about the appropriate use of 
incontinence aids and pads are important for enhancing quality of life and reducing the 
stigma of incontinence. The range of products includes mobility aids, accessible commodes 
and containment products, such as absorbent pads or catheters. When choosing the optimal 
product, many things must be considered. Nurse continence advisers are best placed to 
counsel patients and provide access to these products, although independent web-based 
Aoki et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 resources (such as https://www.continenceproductadvisor.org/) are also available for patients 
and health care providers.
Medical interventions
Should first-line lifestyle, behavioural and physical therapies be ineffective in treating 
urinary incontinence, a range of pharmacological agents are available, depending on the 
specific incontinence symptoms. As for any medication, the woman’s coexisting conditions, 
use of other existing medication and risk of adverse effects should be considered before 
prescribing. For many of these medications, the benefits may not be observed for several 
weeks, so it is important to reliably assess baseline symptoms to enable comparison with the 
treatment effects. Women should also be cautioned about this delay in response.
Vaginal oestrogen—Low-dose vaginal oestrogen should be offered when appropriate to 
women with urogenital atrophic changes, to promote improved blood supply and decrease 
LUTS. A meta-analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in postmenopausal 
women showed that vaginal oestrogen was associated with improved incontinence122. 
Systemic hormone replacement therapy has been associated with worsening incontinence 
outcomes123, particularly for combination oestrogen and progesterone. The reasons for this 
harmful effect remain unclear.
Anticholinergic drugs for urgency incontinence—Anticholinergic drugs (also 
known as antimuscarinics) are often used in primary care alongside behavioural and lifestyle 
modifications as part of first-line therapy. Anticholinergic drugs act directly on the detrusor 
muscle, which leads to reductions in urgency urinary incontinence, with concomitant 
improvements in urinary urgency, voiding frequency and, to a lesser extent, nocturia124,125 
(BOX 2). Improvement in these key bothersome symptoms is associated with moderate 
gains in quality of life126. The different licensed anticholinergics offer a range of dosing 
schedules and, in the case of oxybutynin, are available as either oral or topical formulations, 
with the latter preparation also available over the counter for women in the United States. 
All available drugs cause typical cholinergic adverse effects, including dry mouth, 
constipation, blurred vision, somnolence and confusion127–129 (TABLE 1). Owing to 
adverse effects, costs and inconvenience, adherence to treatment is often poor130–132.
Oxybutynin was the first drug with level 1 evidence of efficacy and is sometimes still 
recommended as a first choice, despite its poor adverse-effect profile76. All newer 
anticholinergic medications for overactive bladder syndrome have been compared in RCTs 
against both placebo and oxybutynin as a condition of licensing. The overall effect of this 
class of drugs is very modest, with few long-term treatment responders133. Very few head-
to-head studies of contemporary anticholinergic medications have been conducted, and when 
direct comparisons have been made, the evidence of differential efficacy is limited134. The 
long-term effects of anticholinergic incontinence medications (cholinergic load) on cognitive 
function and incident dementia are emerging135, particularly in older patients and in those 
already using other medications with anticholinergic effects. In these patients, alternative 
medications are recommended83.
Aoki et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 β3-adrenergic agonists for urgency incontinence—Mirabegron is a β3-adrenergic 
receptor agonist that acts directly on the detrusor muscle. In licensing trials, mirabegron was 
tested against placebo and tolterodine (an antimuscarinic), and subsequent post-marketing 
trials tested it against, and in combination with, several anticholinergics136,137. Meta-
analyses have shown similar efficacy to available anticholinergic drugs, but with a much 
reduced incidence of dry mouth138,139, and lower efficacy than intravesical 
onabotulinumtoxinA140. Mirabegron has the potential to exacerbate hypertension131, but is 
otherwise well tolerated compared with most anticholinergics, with good persistence141. 
However, for most patients, symptom improvement is quite modest. Mirabegron is best used 
in patients for whom there is a contraindication to, or risk of cognitive or other adverse 
effects from, anticholinergics.
Serotonin–noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors for stress incontinence—
Duloxetine is a serotonin–noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) that is widely used in 
depression. SNRIs are proposed to increase the levels of serotonin and noradrenaline at the 
presynaptic neuron in the nucleus of Onuf (FIG. 3) of the sacral spinal cord by inhibiting 
reuptake and increasing striated urethral sphincter activity and urethral pressures142. 
Duloxetine was licensed for the treatment of stress incontinence in the European Union after 
RCTs initially suggested efficacy143, but licensing for the indication of stress incontinence 
failed in the United States owing to concerns of adverse events, including nausea and 
suicidal ideation. Accordingly, the drug is not recommended as first-line therapy59,76, and 
persistence of use for the indication of incontinence is poor144; thus it is not commonly used.
Invasive interventions
Stress incontinence surgery—Although conservative measures should be tried first59, 
surgery to treat stress urinary incontinence is highly effective in reducing symptoms (FIG. 
8). Women with mixed incontinence are candidates for surgery but are likely to need 
adjunctive treatment for their urgency incontinence. Synthetic mid-urethral sling placement 
is currently the first-line surgical procedure, with a cure rate of >80%145 and low morbidity 
rate145. Both the retropubic and transobturator techniques are based on a strip of 
polypropylene mesh146. Complications of vaginal mesh surgery have become a common 
cause of litigation, and although the risk of complications is lower for mid-urethral slings 
than for mesh for prolapse, these procedures need meticulous documentation of the consent 
process. For women and/or clinicians seeking nonmesh-based procedures, a fascial sling or 
retropubic urethropexy are viable options147, with similar overall efficacy148 and similar 
complication rates, but additional risks149. Surgical risks include bleeding, infection, voiding 
dysfunction, visceral injury, pain and anaesthetic concerns. Persistent stress urinary 
incontinence after an initial surgery should prompt an updated diagnostic evaluation; 
subsequent stress incontinence surgery is a possibility for women whose initial surgery was 
not successful and whose diagnosis remains stress urinary incontinence, but are generally 
less successful than the primary procedure150.
A small number of women develop de novo urgency urinary incontinence symptoms 
following stress incontinence surgery145, which can be associated with position, tension or 
the inadvertent introduction of surgical material within the bladder or urethra. Once such 
Aoki et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 complications are excluded, traditional treatment for urgency urinary incontinence can be 
initiated. More commonly, women with mixed urinary incontinence undergo surgery to 
resolve the stress urinary incontinence component of their condition. Although some of 
these women experience resolution of their urgency urinary incontinence, some have 
ongoing, bothersome symptoms151. Treatments aimed at reducing urgency urinary 
incontinence symptoms that were not effective before surgery should be tried again, 
especially if after the surgery the symptoms of stress urinary incontinence are reduced or 
resolved. Clinician encouragement and management of expectations are especially important 
during this post-surgical treatment window, as women might feel dejected that incontinence 
symptoms are present despite complete or near-complete resolution of stress urinary 
incontinence symptoms.
Neuromodulation—Neuromodulation uses direct electrical stimulation to modify bladder 
sensation and contraction. Various forms of neuromodulation are also available and might be 
preferred by women with urgency incontinence who wish to avoid daily oral medication. 
Implantable neurostimulation uses a programmable stimulator placed subcutaneously that 
delivers low-amplitude electrical stimulation to the sacral plexus via a lead through the S3 
foramen. It has high initial costs and high risks of revision surgery152. By contrast, 
percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation is a less-invasive, office-based technique that offers a 
reasonable rate of symptom response153,154. Neither type of neurostimulation is uniformly 
effective, and careful patient selection is mandatory for both. These therapies should be 
considered third line after failure of first-line and second-line therapies.
Intravesical onabotulinumtoxinA injections—Intravesical injection of 
onabotulinumtoxinA is essentially a form of ‘chemical’ neuromodulation that acts at the 
detrusor presynaptic neuromuscular junction. It has an efficacy similar to oral medication for 
urgency urinary incontinence but without the need for a daily medication155,156. The 
administration procedure is usually performed under a general anaesthetic· and is 
accordingly reserved as a third-line treatment. Treatment injections need to be repeated 
when symptoms recur (approximately 9–12 months). The risks include transient urinary 
retention and UTIs, which may require patients to learn to pass a urinary catheter to drain off 
any residual urine. Despite these risks· the procedure is popular with patients and physicians 
and offers a real hope of cure for patients with even the most recalcitrant symptoms.
Quality of life
During a woman’s lifetime· various health conditions can challenge bladder function. 
Urinary incontinence symptoms can worsen or improve· and the desire for management can 
wax and wane. A woman who has experienced prior success with non-invasive treatments 
might initiate self-care or request referral for simple management. A woman who underwent 
successful surgery 15 years ago may now be experiencing a change in bladder symptoms, 
despite efforts at regular pelvic floor muscle exercises. Those who have lived with urinary 
incontinence as a chronic condition might feel nihilistic about management 
recommendations; instead, goals might relate to avoidance of certain threshold events, such 
as avoiding placement in a nursing home because of bladder control concerns.
Aoki et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 All subtypes of urinary incontinence are highly bothersome, and management should begin 
by assessing the patient’s willingness to engage in treatment, determining the level of 
treatment desired and discussing current evidence and recommendations for specific 
treatment, including benefits, alternatives, risks and complications. Furthermore, assessment 
of quality of life has become an integral part of determining the effect of urinary 
incontinence on the individual and assessing the benefit of treatments.
Patient-reported outcomes (PROs) provide an objective assessment of subjective symptoms 
that may assist in identifying the primary symptom to be treated, choosing the type of 
treatment and determining treatment goals and success. In the research setting, PROs 
provide a standardized set of data to be collected and outcome measures. Although these 
tools are widely used and recommended, no evidence suggests that the use of PROs alone 
improves treatment outcomes83. Several PRO tools have been developed (TABLE 2), but no 
single questionnaire has been validated to measure all incontinence-associated outcomes83 
and no single questionnaire has been universally adopted for the assessment of quality 
oflife157. When considering a questionnaire, clinicians and researchers should assess its 
compatibility with their outcome objectives, suitability in the patient group and consider the 
time and effort burden of lengthy surveys on patients.
The severity of urinary incontinence has been reported as a risk factor for poor quality of 
life158 and has a negative effect on many dimensions of quality of life, mental health and 
social activities. Although not life-threatening, urinary incontinence can certainly prove to 
be life-changing159. In one Austrian study, 65.7% of women stated that their quality of life 
was affected by continence status160. In another population-based longitudinal study, urinary 
incontinence predicted the onset of psychological distress among community-dwelling 
adults (≥ 50 years of age), especially when associated with condition-specific functional 
loss, and this distress can prompt the individual to avoid social or religious gatherings, 
travel, physical activities and other everyday activities such as shopping161. Incontinence 
symptoms have also been associated with sexual dysfunction162 and negative effects on 
marital relationships163 or partnerships. Women with urgency urinary incontinence are 
generally more bothered than those with stress urinary incontinence, because the leakage is 
unexpected, sudden and often of large volume. These women show worse scores on quality 
of life and depression scales, poorer quality of sleep, worse sexual function and lower 
productivity than matched controls164.
Urinary incontinence also has negative effects on the psychological burden of family 
caregivers165. The mean total score from the Zarit Burden Interview, one of the most widely 
used tools to measure caregiver burden, was significantly higher among caregivers of 
patients who were incontinent than among those of patients who were continent. Male 
partners of women with urinary incontinence also report lower sexual function and sexual 
satisfaction166. Overall, female urinary incontinence and urgency negatively affect sexual 
function in almost 50% of affected women and in 20% of their partners167.
Finally, understanding the crucial link between urinary incontinence and quality of life is 
pivotal to maximizing the efficacy of routine screening and early intervention168. Given the 
broad extent of the reduction in quality of life from urinary incontinence, measurement of 
Aoki et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 quality of life should also be considered in the design of almost all clinical studies of urinary 
incontinence interventions.
Outlook
Advances in incontinence research suggest that we might be at the cusp of a revolution in 
several research areas, especially in understanding continence physiology and in primary 
prevention. More than 130 years of research into bladder and urethral sphincter 
dysfunction169 have revealed overlapping underlying causes of bladder dysfunction, 
including the myogenic, neurogenic and urotheliogenic hypotheses42. However, the 
development of new drugs has been hampered by a historical focus on detrusor overactivity 
as a supposed unifying ‘cause’ of urinary urgency and urgency incontinence. The 
relationship between urgency and detrusor overactivity is remarkably complex — whether 
detrusor overactivity is a cause or a consequence of urgency incontinence is itself unclear.
Despite a lack of evidence linking detrusor overactivity to urgency incontinence, it has often 
also been used as a surrogate end point in clinical trials of interventions of all modalities. 
Many current treatment options, including anticholinergic medicines and sacral 
neuromodulation, reduce detrusor overactivity measurably. However, the presence of 
detrusor overactivity at baseline has been shown to be a poor predictive factor of treatment 
outcome for a wide variety of incontinence interventions44. There is considerable interest in 
new biochemical and imaging biomarkers that might replace detrusor overactivity as an 
objective clinical end point; however, none has progressed to widespread adoption in clinical 
practice. The most widely tested urinary marker, nerve growth factor, has demonstrated 
problems with specificity and reproducibility170. The most widely investigated imaging 
marker, bladder wall thickness, also failed to demonstrate prognostic value when tested in a 
large trial of implementation171. At the present time, the best clinical end points are 
subjective rather than objective: symptom severity and quality-of-life impact as reported by 
patients on validated instruments.
Recent genome-wide association studies have attempted to shed light on the molecular 
pathogenesis of incontinence. The discovery of new genetic risk variants for 
incontinence172,173 and the interrogation of those variants as known causes of objectively 
measured bladder dysfunction might provide striking insight into the actual variation in 
human bladder physiology associated with incontinence. Accordingly, we might identify 
new subtypes of urgency incontinence at which we can direct targeted care.
In addition to the expanding understanding of bladder physiology, primary prevention of 
incontinence is a growing area of interest. For example, our increasing understanding of the 
microbiota of the urinary tract might lead to effective interventions to correct urinary 
dysbiosis or to modify the resident microbial flora. Topical vaginal oestrogens are already 
used for postmenopausal women with incontinence, and, in part, act to normalize the vaginal 
flora174. Four currently available bladder vaccines (Urovac (Solco Basel) includes heat-
killed uropathogens as an intramuscular injection; OM-89/Uro-Vaxom (Vifor Pharma), an 
oral preparation of bacterial lysates; and Urvakol (Institute of Microbiology, Prague, Czech 
Republic) and Urostim (National Center of Infectious and Parasitic Diseases, Sofia, 
Aoki et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Bulgaria), which are whole-cell inactivated uropathogens in an oral tablet) target Escherichia 
coli and other uropathogens, and are marketed for the prevention of recurrent UTI with 
modest evidence of efficacy175. Novel vaccine approaches are currently emerging. It seems 
plausible that similar targeted interventions to modify the vaginal or bladder microbiota 
might be useful for incontinence.
Successful primary prevention of incontinence will depend on the accurate identification of 
women at high risk. Cohort studies suggest that persistent childhood incontinence strongly 
predicts adult symptoms176,177. Although it is unclear whether this predisposition to 
incontinence is predominantly genetic or environmental, the recognition of predisposition 
offers an opportunity to intervene at appropriate times. In parous women, vaginal delivery is 
a key modifiable risk factor for adult stress urinary incontinence, with traumatic delivery 
unmasking incontinence in predisposed women177.
Ongoing studies, such as UR-CHOICE178, aim to test the acceptability of providing 
pregnant women with tailored risk estimates for incontinence, and will provide valuable 
insights into the efficacy of risk-reducing antenatal and intrapartum interventions that target 
high-risk women. Such data would provide important information for obstetricians, who 
must be selective in the use of pre-labour caesarian section, with vaginal birth being only 
one contributing factor for incontinence179. The risks and benefits of elective caesarian 
should be carefully weighed given the substantial risks as a primary procedure and for future 
deliveries, including maternal mortality, stillbirth, placenta praevia, uterine rupture, neonatal 
respiratory morbidity, hysterectomy, and bladder and bowel injuries. In the absence of 
interventional studies, new research is needed to understand whether genetic information can 
be additionally used to successfully identify women who would benefit from caesarian 
delivery, and whether such a strategy would have any sustained benefit to incontinence and 
any overall impact on health-related quality of life.
Acknowledgments
H.W.B. is a Wisconsin Multidisciplinary K12 Urologic Research Career Development Program Scholar (US NIH 
K12DK100022).
References
1. Haylen BT, et al. An International Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/International Continence 
Society (ICS) joint report on the terminology for female pelvic floor dysfunction. Neurourol 
Urodyn. 2009; 29:4–20. A useful document on the terminology of urinary incontinence that is 
important for clinical practice and research. 
2. Shakespeare K, Barradell V, Orme S. Management of urinary incontinence in frail elderly women. 
Obstet Gynaecol Reprod Med. 2011; 21:281–287.
3. Saarni SI, et al. The impact of 29 chronic conditions on health-related quality of life: a general 
population survey in Finland using 15D and EQ-5D. Qual Life Res. 2006; 15:1403–1414. [PubMed: 
16960751] 
4. Subak LL, et al. High costs of urinary incontinence among women electing surgery to treat stress 
incontinence. Obstet Gynecol. 2008; 111:899–907. [PubMed: 18378749] 
5. Ganz ML, et al. Economic costs of overactive bladder in the United States. Urology. 2010; 75:526–
532.e18. [PubMed: 20035977] 
Aoki et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 6. Irwin DE, et al. The economic impact of overactive bladder syndrome in six Western countries. BJU 
Int. 2009; 103:202–209. [PubMed: 19278532] 
7. Hannestad YS, Rortveit G, Sandvik H, Hunskaar S. A community-based epidemiological survey of 
female urinary incontinence. J Clin Epidemiol. 2000; 53:1150–1157. [PubMed: 11106889] 
8. Vaughan CP, et al. Impact of obesity on urinary storage symptoms: results from the FINNO Study. J 
Urol. 2013; 189:1377–1382. [PubMed: 23103801] 
9. Greer WJ, Richter HE, Bartolucci AA, Burgio KL. Obesity and pelvic floor disorders. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2008; 112:341–349. [PubMed: 18669733] 
10. Mishra GD, Hardy R, Cardozo L, Kuh D. Body weight through adult life and risk of urinary 
incontinence in middle-aged women: results from a British prospective cohort. Int J Obes. 2008; 
32:1415–1422.
11. Agarwal A, et al. What is the most bothersome lower urinary tract symptom? Individual- and 
population-level perspectives for both men and women. Eur Urol. 2014; 65:1211–1217. [PubMed: 
24486308] 
12. Tikkinen KAO, Leinonen JS, Guyatt GH, Ebrahim S, Järvinen TLN. What is a disease? 
Perspectives of the public, health professionals and legislators. BMJ Open. 2012; 2:e001632.
13. World Health Organization. International statistical classification of diseases and related health 
problems. WHO; 2010. 10th revisionhttp://www.who.int/classifications/icd/
ICD10Volume2_en_2010.pdf
14. Mitteness LS. Knowledge and beliefs about urinary incontinence in adulthood and old age. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 1990; 38:374–378. [PubMed: 2179382] 
15. Norton PA, MacDonald LD, Sedgwick PM, Stanton SL. Distress and delay associated with urinary 
incontinence, frequency, and urgency in women. BMJ. 1988; 297:1187–1189. [PubMed: 3144344] 
16. Helfand BT, Evans RM, McVary KT. A comparison of the frequencies of medical therapies for 
overactive bladder in men and women: analysis of more than 7.2 million aging patients. Eur Urol. 
2010; 57:586–591. [PubMed: 20036783] 
17. Wu JM, Matthews CA, Conover MM, Pate V, Jonsson Funk M. Lifetime risk of stress urinary 
incontinence or pelvic organ prolapse surgery. Obstet Gynecol. 2014; 123:1201–1206. [PubMed: 
24807341] 
18. Elstad EA, Taubenberger SP, Botelho EM, Tennstedt SL. Beyond incontinence: the stigma of other 
urinary symptoms. J Adv Nurs. 2010; 66:2460–2470. [PubMed: 20735505] 
19. Thom DH, et al. Differences in prevalence of urinary incontinence by race/ethnicity. J Urol. 2006; 
175:259–264. [PubMed: 16406923] 
20. Klovning A, Sandvik H, Hunskaar S. Web-based survey attracted age-biased sample with more 
severe illness than paper-based survey. J Clin Epidemiol. 2009; 62:1068–1074. [PubMed: 
19246177] 
21. Bedretdinova D, Fritel X, Panjo H, Ringa V. Prevalence of female urinary incontinence in the 
general population according to different definitions and study designs. Eur Urol. 2016; 69:256–
264. [PubMed: 26259998] 
22. Minassian VA, Drutz HP, Al-Badr A. Urinary incontinence as a worldwide problem. Int J Gynecol 
Obstet. 2003; 82:327–338.
23. Cerruto MA, D’Elia C, Aloisi A, Fabrello M, Artibani W. Prevalence, incidence and obstetric 
factors’ impact on female urinary incontinence in Europe: a systematic review. Urol Int. 2013; 
90:1–9. [PubMed: 22868349] 
24. Irwin DE, et al. Population-based survey of urinary incontinence, overactive bladder, and other 
lower urinary tract symptoms in five countries: results of the EPIC Study. Eur Urol. 2006; 
50:1306–1315. [PubMed: 17049716] 
25. Minassian VA, Stewart WF, Wood GC. Urinary incontinence in women. Obstet Gynecol. 2008; 
111:324–331. [PubMed: 18238969] 
26. Ebbesen MH, Hunskaar S, Rortveit G, Hannestad YS. Prevalence, incidence and remission of 
urinary incontinence in women: longitudinal data from the Norwegian HUNT study (EPINCONT). 
BMC Urol. 2013; 13:27. An important epidemiological study of the natural history of incontinence 
in women. [PubMed: 23721491] 
Aoki et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 27. Zhang L, et al. A population-based survey of the prevalence, potential risk factors, and symptom-
specific bother of lower urinary tract symptoms in adult Chinese women. Eur Urol. 2015; 68:97–
112. [PubMed: 25572826] 
28. Botlero R, Urquhart DM, Davis SR, Bell RJ. Prevalence and incidence of urinary incontinence in 
women: review of the literature and investigation of methodological issues. Int J Urol. 2008; 
15:230–234. [PubMed: 18304218] 
29. Thom D. Variation in estimates of urinary incontinence prevalence in the community: effects of 
differences in definition, population characteristics, and study type. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1998; 
46:473–480. [PubMed: 9560071] 
30. Milsom, I., et al. Incontinence. 5th International Consultation on Incontinence. Abrams, P.Cardozo, 
L.Khoury, S., Wein, A., editors. ICUD-EAU; 2013. p. 15-107.
31. Stewart WF, et al. Urinary incontinence incidence: quantitative meta-analysis of factors that 
explain variation. J Urol. 2014; 191:996–1002. [PubMed: 24140547] 
32. Wu JM, Hundley AF, Fulton RG, Myers ER. Forecasting the prevalence of pelvic floor disorders in 
U.S. women: 2010 to 2050. Obstet Gynecol. 2009; 114:1278–1283. [PubMed: 19935030] 
33. Goode PS, et al. Population based study of incidence and predictors of urinary incontinence in 
black and white older adults. J Urol. 2008; 179:1449–1454. [PubMed: 18295279] 
34. Mitchell ES, Woods NF. Correlates of urinary incontinence during the menopausal transition and 
early postmenopause: observations from the Seattle Midlife Women’s Health Study. Climacteric. 
2013; 16:653–662. [PubMed: 23560943] 
35. Fenner DE, et al. Establishing the prevalence of incontinence study: racial differences in women’s 
patterns of urinary incontinence. J Urol. 2008; 179:1455–1460. [PubMed: 18295278] 
36. Zhu L, et al. The epidemiological study of women with urinary incontinence and risk factors for 
stress urinary incontinence in China. Menopause. 2009; 16:831–836. [PubMed: 19240656] 
37. Ebbesen MH, Hannestad YS, Midthjell K, Hunskaar S. Diabetes and urinary incontinence — 
prevalence data from Norway. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2007; 86:1256–1262. [PubMed: 
17851814] 
38. Brown JS, et al. Urinary incontinence in older women: who is at risk? Study of Osteoporotic 
Fractures Research Group. Obstet Gynecol. 1996; 87:715–721. [PubMed: 8677073] 
39. Gomez-Amaya SM, Ruggieri MR, Arias Serrato SA, Massicotte VS, Barbe MF. Gross anatomical 
study of the nerve supply of genitourinary structures in female mongrel hound dogs. Anat Histol 
Embryol. 2014; 44:118–127. [PubMed: 24730986] 
40. Hillary CJ, Osman N, Chapple C. Considerations in the modern management of stress urinary 
incontinence resulting from intrinsic sphincter deficiency. World J Urol. 2015; 33:1251–1256. 
[PubMed: 26060138] 
41. DeLancey JOL. Structural support of the urethra as it relates to stress urinary incontinence: the 
hammock hypothesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1994; 170:1713–1723. An explanation of stress 
urinary incontinence pathology and the hammock hypothesis. [PubMed: 8203431] 
42. Roosen A, et al. A refocus on the bladder as the originator of storage lower urinary tract symptoms: 
a systematic review of the latest literature. Eur Urol. 2009; 56:810–820. [PubMed: 19683859] 
43. Enck P, et al. Irritable bowel syndrome. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016; 2:16014. [PubMed: 27159638] 
44. Cartwright R, Afshan I, Derpapas A, Vijaya G, Khullar V. Novel biomarkers for overactive bladder. 
Nat Rev Urol. 2011; 8:139–145. [PubMed: 21321572] 
45. de Groat, WC., Griffiths, D., Yoshimura, N. Comprehensive Physiology. Wiley-Blackwell; 2014. p. 
327-396.
46. Li M, Sun Y, Simard JM, Chai TC. Increased transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 (TRPV1) 
signaling in idiopathic overactive bladder urothelial cells. Neurourol Urodyn. 2011; 30:606–611. 
[PubMed: 21351130] 
47. Reid G, Burton JP. Urinary incontinence: making sense of the urinary microbiota in clinical 
urology. Nat Rev Urol. 2016; 13:567–568. An overview of a paradigm shift: the urinary tract is not 
sterile and bacteria might have important roles in urinary incontinence. [PubMed: 27644934] 
48. Hilt EE, et al. Urine is not sterile: use of enhanced urine culture techniques to detect resident 
bacterial flora in the adult female bladder. J Clin Microbiol. 2013; 52:871–876. [PubMed: 
24371246] 
Aoki et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 49. Sorrentino F, et al. Associations between individual lower urinary tract symptoms and bacteriuria 
in random urine samples in women. Neurourol Urodyn. 2014; 34:429–433. [PubMed: 24719249] 
50. Walsh CA, Moore KH. Overactive bladder in women: does low-count bacteriuria matter? A review. 
Neurourol Urodyn. 2010; 30:32–37.
51. Khasriya R, et al. Spectrum of bacterial colonization associated with urothelial cells from patients 
with chronic lower urinary tract symptoms. J Clin Microbiol. 2013; 51:2054–2062. [PubMed: 
23596238] 
52. Ravel J, et al. Vaginal microbiome of reproductive-age women. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 
108:4680–4687. [PubMed: 20534435] 
53. Pearce MM, et al. The female urinary microbiome: a comparison of women with and without 
urgency urinary incontinence. mBio. 2014; 5:e01283–14. [PubMed: 25006228] 
54. Brubaker L, Wolfe AJ. Microbiota in 2016: associating infection and incontinence with the female 
urinary microbiota. Nat Rev Urol. 2017; 14:72–74. [PubMed: 28050013] 
55. Abrams, P., et al. Incontinence. 5th International Consultation on Incontinence. Abrams, 
P.Cardozo, L.Khoury, S., Wein, A., editors. ICUD-EAU; 2013. p. 1895-1956.
56. Martin JL, Williams KS, Sutton AJ, Abrams KR, Assassa RP. Systematic review and meta-analysis 
of methods of diagnostic assessment for urinary incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn. 2006; 25:674–
683. [PubMed: 17016795] 
57. Ruby CM, et al. The effect of medication use on urinary incontinence in community-dwelling 
elderly women. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010; 58:1715–1720. [PubMed: 20670377] 
58. Rait G, et al. Prevalence of cognitive impairment: results from the MRC trial of assessment and 
management of older people in the community. Age Ageing. 2005; 34:242–248. [PubMed: 
15863409] 
59. Lucas MG, et al. EAU guidelines on assessment and nonsurgical management of urinary 
incontinence. Eur Urol. 2012; 62:1130–1142. [PubMed: 22985745] 
60. Wagg A, et al. Urinary incontinence in frail elderly persons: report from the 5th International 
Consultation on Incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn. 2014; 34:398–406. [PubMed: 24700771] 
61. Swift SE, Yoon EA. Test-retest reliability of the cough stress test in the evaluation of urinary 
incontinence. Obstet Gynecol. 1999; 94:99–102. [PubMed: 10389726] 
62. Hsu TH, Rackley RR, Appell RA. The supine stress test: a simple method to detect intrinsic 
urethral sphincter dysfunction. J Urol. 1999; 162:460–463. [PubMed: 10411057] 
63. Ghoniem G, et al. Evaluation and outcome measures in the treatment of female urinary stress 
incontinence: International Urogynecological Association (IUGA) guidelines for research and 
clinical practice. Int Urogynecol J. 2007; 19:5–33. An important paper that describes evaluation 
and outcome measures for the treatment of stress urinary incontinence. 
64. Orejuela FJ, Shek KL, Dietz HP. The time factor in the assessment of prolapse and levator 
ballooning. Int Urogynecol J. 2011; 23:175–178. [PubMed: 21887550] 
65. Bump RC, et al. The standardization of terminology of female pelvic organ prolapse and pelvic 
floor dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1996; 175:10–17. [PubMed: 8694033] 
66. Swift S, et al. Validation of a simplified technique for using the POPQ pelvic organ prolapse 
classification system. Int Urogynecol J. 2006; 17:615–620.
67. Jelovsek JE, Maher C, Barber MD. Pelvic organ prolapse. Lancet. 2007; 369:1027–1038. 
[PubMed: 17382829] 
68. Visco AG, et al. The role of preoperative urodynamic testing in stress-continent women undergoing 
sacrocolpopexy: the Colpopexy and Urinary Reduction Efforts (CARE) randomized surgical trial. 
Int Urogynecol J. 2008; 19:607–614.
69. Kim S-O, Chung HS, Hwang EC, Oh KJ, Kwon D. Point Aa of the POP-Q system as a predictive 
value of urethral mobility in women. Int Urogynecol J. 2010; 22:687–691. [PubMed: 21104403] 
70. Swift S, Barnes D, Herron A, Goodnight W. Test–retest reliability of the cotton swab (Q-tip®) test 
in the evaluation of the incontinent female. Int Urogynecol J. 2010; 21:963–967. [PubMed: 
20379698] 
Aoki et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 71. Meyer I, Szychowski JM, Illston JD, Parden AM, Richter HE. Vaginal swab test compared with the 
urethral Q-tip test for urethral mobility measurement. Obstet Gynecol. 2016; 127:348–352. 
[PubMed: 26942364] 
72. Schaer G, Koechli O, Schuessler B, Haller U. Perineal ultrasound for evaluating the bladder neck 
in urinary stress incontinence. Obstet Gynecol. 1995; 85:220–224. [PubMed: 7824234] 
73. Troeger C, Gugger M, Holzgreve W, Wight E. Correlation of perineal ultrasound and lateral chain 
urethrocystography in the anatomical evaluation of the bladder neck. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor 
Dysfunct. 2003; 14:380–384. [PubMed: 14676997] 
74. Richter HE, et al. Demographic and clinical predictors of treatment failure one year after 
midurethral sling surgery. Obstet Gynecol. 2011; 117:913–921. [PubMed: 21422865] 
75. Bo K, et al. An International Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/International Continence 
Society (ICS) joint report on the terminology for the conservative and nonpharmacological 
management of female pelvic floor dysfunction. Int Urogynecol J. 2016; 28:191–213. [PubMed: 
27921161] 
76. Smith A, Bevan D, Douglas HR, James D. Management of urinary incontinence in women: 
summary of updated NICE guidance. BMJ. 2013; 347:f5170. A good summary of the current 
evidence for treatments of urinary incontinence. [PubMed: 24021756] 
77. Buchsbaum GM, Albushies DT, Guzick DS. Utility of urine reagent strip in screening women with 
incontinence for urinary tract infection. Int Urogynecol J. 2004; 15:391–393.
78. Hessdoerfer E, Jundt K, Peschers U. Is a dipstick test sufficient to exclude urinary tract infection in 
women with overactive bladder? Int Urogynecol J. 2010; 22:229–232. [PubMed: 20838986] 
79. Holm A, Aabenhus R. Urine sampling techniques in symptomatic primary-care patients: a 
diagnostic accuracy review. BMC Fam Pract. 2016; 17:72. [PubMed: 27278078] 
80. Cai T, Koves B, Johansen TEB. Asymptomatic bacteriuria, to screen or not to screen — and when 
to treat? Curr Opin Urol. 2017; 27:107–111. [PubMed: 27906777] 
81. Nicolle LE. Urinary tract infections in the older adult. Clin Geriatr Med. 2016; 32:523–538. 
[PubMed: 27394021] 
82. Bettez M, et al. 2012 update: guidelines for adult urinary incontinence collaborative consensus 
document for the Canadian Urological Association. Can Urol Assoc J. 2012; 6:354–363. 
[PubMed: 23093627] 
83. Thüroff JW, et al. EAU guidelines on urinary incontinence. Eur Urol. 2011; 59:387–400. [PubMed: 
21130559] 
84. Saaby M-L, Lose G. Repeatability of post-void residual urine ≥ 100 ml in urogynaecologic 
patients. Int Urogynecol J. 2012; 23:207–209. [PubMed: 22159563] 
85. Ashton-Miller JA, DeLancey JO. Functional anatomy of the female pelvic floor. Ann NY Acad 
Sci. 2007; 1101:266–296. [PubMed: 17416924] 
86. Dietz HP. Pelvic floor ultrasound in prolapse: what’s in it for the surgeon? Int Urogynecol J. 2011; 
22:1221–1232. [PubMed: 21656320] 
87. Dietz HP, Nazemian K, Shek KL, Martin A. Can urodynamic stress incontinence be diagnosed by 
ultrasound? Int Urogynecol J. 2013; 24:1399–1403. [PubMed: 23314227] 
88. Serati M, et al. Ultrasound measurement of bladder wall thickness in different forms of detrusor 
overactivity. Int Urogynecol J. 2010; 21:1405–1411. [PubMed: 20535449] 
89. Bogusiewicz M, et al. Both the middle and distal sections of the urethra may be regarded as 
optimal targets for ‘outside-in’ transobturator tape placement. World J Urol. 2014; 32:1605–1611. 
[PubMed: 24531879] 
90. Herderschee R, Hay-Smith EJC, Herbison GP, Roovers JP, Heineman MJ. Feedback or 
biofeedback to augment pelvic floor muscle training for urinary incontinence in women. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2011; 7:CD009252.
91. Versi E. Videourodynamic diagnosis of occult genuine stress incontinence in patients with anterior 
vaginal wall relaxation. J Soc Gynecol Investig. 1998; 5:327–330.
92. Schäfer W, et al. Good urodynamic practices: uroflowmetry, filling cystometry, and pressure–flow 
studies. Neurourol Urodyn. 2002; 21:261–274. [PubMed: 11948720] 
Aoki et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 93. Clement KD, Lapitan MCM, Omar MI, Glazener CMA. Urodynamic studies for management of 
urinary incontinence in children and adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013; 10:CD003195.
94. Digesu GA, Khullar V, Cardozo L, Salvatore S. Overactive bladder symptoms: do we need 
urodynamics? Neurourol Urodyn. 2003; 22:105–108. [PubMed: 12579626] 
95. Nager CW, et al. A randomized trial of urodynamic testing before stress-incontinence surgery. N 
Engl J Med. 2012; 366:1987–1997. A seminal RCT that demonstrates that, for women with 
uncomplicated, demonstrable stress urinary incontinence, preoperative office evaluation alone is 
not inferior to evaluation with urodynamic testing. [PubMed: 22551104] 
96. van Leijsen SAL, et al. Can preoperative urodynamic investigation be omitted in women with 
stress urinary incontinence? A non-inferiority randomized controlled trial. Neurourol Urodyn. 
2012; 31:1118–1123. [PubMed: 22488817] 
97. Stöhrer M, et al. EAU guidelines on neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction. Eur Urol. 2009; 
56:81–88. [PubMed: 19403235] 
98. Bai SW, et al. Relationship between stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse. Int 
Urogynecol J. 2002; 13:256–260.
99. Burgio KL. Update on behavioral and physical therapies for incontinence and overactive bladder: 
the role of pelvic floor muscle training. Curr Urol Rep. 2013; 14:457–464. [PubMed: 23913199] 
100. Fonda D, Abrams P. Cure sometimes, help always — a ‘continence paradigm’ for all ages and 
conditions. Neurourol Urodyn. 2006; 25:290–292. [PubMed: 16496393] 
101. Elkadry EA, Kenton KS, FitzGerald MP, Shott S, Brubaker L. Patient-selected goals: a new 
perspective on surgical outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003; 189:1551–1557. [PubMed: 
14710061] 
102. Mahajan ST, Elkadry EA, Kenton KS, Shott S, Brubaker L. Patient-centered surgical outcomes: 
the impact of goal achievement and urge incontinence on patient satisfaction one year after 
surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2006; 194:722–728. [PubMed: 16522404] 
103. Vrijens DMJ, Spakman JI, van Koeveringe GA, Berghmans B. Patient-reported outcome after 
treatment of urinary incontinence in a multidisciplinary pelvic care clinic. Int J Urol. 2015; 
22:1051–1057. [PubMed: 26264653] 
104. Myers DL. Female mixed urinary incontinence: a clinical review. JAMA. 2014; 311:2007–2014. 
[PubMed: 24846038] 
105. Borrie MJ, Bawden M, Speechley M, Kloseck M. Interventions led by nurse continence advisers 
in the management of urinary incontinence: a randomized controlled trial. CMAJ. 2002; 
166:1267–1273. [PubMed: 12041843] 
106. Huang AJ. Nonsurgical treatments for urinary incontinence in women. JAMA Intern Med. 2013; 
173:1463–1464. [PubMed: 23817490] 
107. Hunskaar S. A systematic review of overweight and obesity as risk factors and targets for clinical 
intervention for urinary incontinence in women. Neurourol Urodyn. 2008; 27:749–757. 
[PubMed: 18951445] 
108. Subak LL, Richter HE, Hunskaar S. Obesity and urinary incontinence: epidemiology and clinical 
research update. J Urol. 2009; 182:S2–S7. [PubMed: 19846133] 
109. Subak LL, et al. Weight loss to treat urinary incontinence in overweight and obese women. N 
Engl J Med. 2009; 360:481–490. [PubMed: 19179316] 
110. Burgio KL, Richter HE, Clements RH, Redden DT, Goode PS. Changes in urinary and fecal 
incontinence symptoms with weight loss surgery in morbidly obese women. Obstet Gynecol. 
2007; 110:1034–1040. [PubMed: 17978117] 
111. Dumoulin C, Hay-Smith J, Habée-Séguin Mac, G, Mercier J. Pelvic floor muscle training versus 
no treatment, or inactive control treatments, for urinary incontinence in women: a short version 
Cochrane systematic review with meta-analysis. Neurourol Urodyn. 2014; 34:300–308. 
[PubMed: 25408383] 
112. Sjöström M, et al. Internet-based treatment of stress urinary incontinence: 1- and 2-year results of 
a randomized controlled trial with a focus on pelvic floor muscle training. BJU Int. 2015; 
116:955–964. [PubMed: 25683075] 
Aoki et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 113. Sjöström M, Umefjord G, Lindholm L, Samuelsson E. Cost-effectiveness of an Internet-based 
treatment program for stress urinary incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn. 2013; 34:244–250. 
[PubMed: 24347521] 
114. Bø K. Pelvic floor muscle training is effective in treatment of female stress urinary incontinence, 
but how does it work? Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. 2004; 15:76–84. [PubMed: 
15014933] 
115. Wyman JF, Burgio KL, Newman DK. Practical aspects of lifestyle modifications and behavioural 
interventions in the treatment of overactive bladder and urgency urinary incontinence. Int J Clin 
Pract. 2009; 63:1177–1191. [PubMed: 19575724] 
116. Miller JM, Sampselle C, Ashton-Miller J, Hong G-RS, DeLancey JOL. Clarification and 
confirmation of the Knack maneuver: the effect of volitional pelvic floor muscle contraction to 
preempt expected stress incontinence. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. 2008; 19:773–
782. [PubMed: 18204797] 
117. Dumoulin C, Hay-Smith EJC, Mac Habée-Séguin G. Pelvic floor muscle training versus no 
treatment, or inactive control treatments, for urinary incontinence in women. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2014; 5:CD005654.
118. Beyar N, Groutz A. Pelvic floor muscle training for female stress urinary incontinence: five years 
outcomes. Neurourol Urodyn. 2015; 36:132–135. [PubMed: 26397715] 
119. Glazener CMA, et al. Twelve-year follow-up of conservative management of postnatal urinary 
and faecal incontinence and prolapse outcomes: randomised controlled trial. BJOG. 2013; 
121:112–120. [PubMed: 24148807] 
120. Richter HE, et al. Continence pessary compared with behavioral therapy or combined therapy for 
stress incontinence. Obstet Gynecol. 2010; 115:609–617. [PubMed: 20177294] 
121. Morris AR, Moore KH. The Contiform incontinence device? Efficacy and patient acceptability. 
Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. 2003; 14:412–417. [PubMed: 14677003] 
122. Weber MA, et al. Local oestrogen for pelvic floor disorders: a systematic review. PLoS ONE. 
2015; 10:e0136265. [PubMed: 26383760] 
123. Cody JD, Richardson K, Moehrer B, Hextall A, Glazener CMA. Oestrogen therapy for urinary 
incontinence in post-menopausal women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009; 4:CD001405.
124. Novara G, et al. A systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials with 
antimuscarinic drugs for overactive bladder. Eur Urol. 2008; 54:740–764. [PubMed: 18632201] 
125. Chapple CR, et al. The effects of antimuscarinic treatments in overactive bladder: an update of a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Urol. 2008; 54:543–562. [PubMed: 18599186] 
126. Kubota Y, et al. Correlation between improvements in overactive bladder symptom score and 
health-related quality of life questionnaires in overactive bladder patients treated with an 
antimuscarinic drug. Neurourol Urodyn. 2011; 30:1309–1314. [PubMed: 21560155] 
127. Vouri SM, Kebodeaux CD, Stranges PM, Teshome BF. Adverse events and treatment 
discontinuations of antimuscarinics for the treatment of overactive bladder in older adults: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2017; 69:77–96. [PubMed: 
27889591] 
128. Oefelein MG. Safety and tolerability profiles of anticholinergic agents used for the treatment of 
overactive bladder. Drug Saf. 2011; 34:733–754. [PubMed: 21830836] 
129. Kessler TM, et al. Adverse event assessment of antimuscarinics for treating overactive bladder: a 
network meta-analytic approach. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e16718. A useful meta-analysis for 
choosing a drug for the treatment of overactive bladder based on tolerability, covering the 
majority of currently licensed preparations. [PubMed: 21373193] 
130. Kim TH, Lee K-S. Persistence and compliance with medication management in the treatment of 
overactive bladder. Investig Clin Urol. 2016; 57:84–93.
131. Linnér L, Schiöler H, Samuelsson E, Milsom I, Nilsson F. Low persistence of anticholinergic 
drug use in Sweden. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2010; 67:535–536.
132. Yeaw J, Benner JS, Walt JG, Sian S, Smith DB. Comparing adherence and persistence across 6 
chronic medication classes. J Manag Care Pharm. 2009; 15:728–740. [PubMed: 19954264] 
Aoki et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 133. Reynolds WS, et al. Comparative effectiveness of anticholinergic therapy for overactive bladder in 
women: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol. 2015; 125:1423–1432. 
[PubMed: 26000514] 
134. Buser N, Ivic S, Kessler TM, Kessels AGH, Bachmann LM. Efficacy and adverse events of 
antimuscarinics for treating overactive bladder: network meta-analyses. Eur Urol. 2012; 
62:1040–1060. [PubMed: 22999811] 
135. Gray SL, et al. Cumulative use of strong anticholinergics and incident dementia: a prospective 
cohort study. JAMA Intern Med. 2015; 175:401–407. [PubMed: 25621434] 
136. MacDiarmid S, et al. Mirabegron as add-on treatment to solifenacin in patients with incontinent 
overactive bladder and an inadequate response to solifenacin monotherapy. J Urol. 2016; 
196:809–818. [PubMed: 27063854] 
137. Drake MJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of mirabegron add-on therapy to solifenacin in incontinent 
overactive bladder patients with an inadequate response to initial 4-week solifenacin 
monotherapy: a randomised double-blind multicentre phase 3B study (BESIDE). Eur Urol. 2016; 
70:136–145. [PubMed: 26965560] 
138. Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health. Common Drug Review. CADTH; 2015. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK349284/
139. Maman K, et al. Comparative efficacy and safety of medical treatments for the management of 
overactive bladder: a systematic literature review and mixed treatment comparison. Eur Urol. 
2014; 65:755–765. [PubMed: 24275310] 
140. Freemantle N, et al. Comparative assessment of onabotulinumtoxinA and mirabegron for 
overactive bladder: an indirect treatment comparison. BMJ Open. 2016; 6:e009122.
141. Pindoria N, et al. Persistence with mirabegron therapy for overactive bladder: a real life 
experience. Neurourol Urodyn. 2015; 36:404–408. [PubMed: 26669282] 
142. Jost W, Marsalek P. Duloxetine: mechanism of action at the lower urinary tract and Onuf’s 
nucleus. Clin Auton Res. 2004; 14:220–227. [PubMed: 15316838] 
143. Li J, et al. The role of duloxetine in stress urinary incontinence: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int Urol Nephrol. 2013; 45:679–686. [PubMed: 23504618] 
144. Hunskaar S, Welle-Nilsen LK. The market lifecycle of duloxetine for urinary incontinence in 
Norway. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2010; 89:217–222. [PubMed: 20121337] 
145. Ford AA, Rogerson L, Cody JD, Ogah J. Mid-urethral sling operations for stress urinary 
incontinence in women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015; 7:CD006375. The most recent 
Cochrane comparison of mid-urethral slings for stress urinary incontinence. 
146. Latthe PM, Singh P, Foon R, Toozs-Hobson P. Two routes of transobturator tape procedures in 
stress urinary incontinence: a meta-analysis with direct and indirect comparison of randomized 
trials. BJU Int. 2009; 106:68–76. [PubMed: 19912182] 
147. Novara G, et al. Updated systematic review and meta-analysis of the comparative data on 
colposuspensions, pubovaginal slings, and midurethral tapes in the surgical treatment of female 
stress urinary incontinence. Eur Urol. 2010; 58:218–238. [PubMed: 20434257] 
148. Rehman H, Bezerra CC, Bruschini H, Cody JD. Traditional suburethral sling operations for 
urinary incontinence in women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011; 1:CD001754.
149. Lapitan MCM, Cody JD. Open retropubic colposuspension for urinary incontinence in women. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012; 6:CD002912.
150. Parden AM, et al. Incontinence outcomes in women undergoing primary and repeat midurethral 
sling procedures. Obstet Gynecol. 2013; 121:273–278. [PubMed: 23344276] 
151. Abdel-Fattah M, Cao G, Mostafa A. Long-term outcomes for transobturator tension-free vaginal 
tapes in women with urodynamic mixed urinary incontinence. Neurourol Urodyn. 2016; 36:902–
908. [PubMed: 28028822] 
152. Leong RK, de Wachter SGG, Joore MA, van Kerrebroeck PEV. Cost-effectiveness analysis of 
sacral neuromodulation and botulinum toxin A treatment for patients with idiopathic overactive 
bladder. BJU Int. 2010; 108:558–564. [PubMed: 21166750] 
153. MacDiarmid SA, et al. Long-term durability of percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation for the 
treatment of overactive bladder. J Urol. 2010; 183:234–240. [PubMed: 19913821] 
Aoki et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 154. Peters KM, et al. Randomized trial of percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation versus extended-
release tolterodine: results from the Overactive Bladder Innovative Therapy Trial. J Urol. 2009; 
182:1055–1061. [PubMed: 19616802] 
155. Amundsen CL, et al. OnabotulinumtoxinA versus sacral neuromodulation on refractory urgency 
urinary incontinence in women. JAMA. 2016; 316:1366–1374. [PubMed: 27701661] 
156. Visco AG, et al. Anticholinergic therapy versus onabotulinumtoxinA for urgency urinary 
incontinence. N Engl J Med. 2012; 367:1803–1813. An important RCT that demonstrates the 
effectiveness of onabotulinumtoxinA for urgency urinary incontinence. [PubMed: 23036134] 
157. Bartoli S, Aguzzi G, Tarricone R. Impact on quality of life of urinary incontinence and overactive 
bladder: a systematic literature review. Urology. 2010; 75:491–500. [PubMed: 19962738] 
158. Monz B, et al. Patient characteristics associated with quality of life in European women seeking 
treatment for urinary incontinence: results from PURE. Eur Urol. 2007; 51:1073–1082. 
[PubMed: 17081676] 
159. Haslam J. Urinary incontinence: why women do not ask for help. Nurs Times. 2005; 101:47–48.
160. Temml C, Haidinger G, Schmidbauer J, Schatzl G, Madersbacher S. Urinary incontinence in both 
sexes: prevalence rates and impact on quality of life and sexual life. Neurourol Urodyn. 2000; 
19:259–271. [PubMed: 10797583] 
161. de Vries HF, Northington GM, Bogner HR. Urinary incontinence (UI) and new psychological 
distress among community dwelling older adults. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2012; 55:49–54. 
[PubMed: 21601929] 
162. Salonia A, et al. Sexual dysfunction is common in women with lower urinary tract symptoms and 
urinary incontinence: results of a cross-sectional study. Eur Urol. 2004; 45:642–648. [PubMed: 
15082208] 
163. Yip S-K, et al. The impact of urodynamic stress incontinence and detrusor overactivity on marital 
relationship and sexual function. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2003; 188:1244–1248. [PubMed: 
12748492] 
164. Nygaard I. Idiopathic urgency urinary incontinence. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:1156–1162. 
[PubMed: 20843250] 
165. Gotoh M, et al. Impact of urinary incontinence on the psychological burden of family caregivers. 
Neurourol Urodyn. 2009; 28:492–496. [PubMed: 19090589] 
166. Bekker MD, et al. Sexual experiences of men with incontinent partners. J Sex Med. 2010; 
7:1877–1882. [PubMed: 20233280] 
167. Nilsson M, Lalos O, Lindkvist H, Lalos A. Impact of female urinary incontinence and urgency on 
women’s and their partners’ sexual life. Neurourol Urodyn. 2011; 30:1276–1280. [PubMed: 
21351129] 
168. Kang Y, Phillips LR, Kim S-S. Incontinence quality of life among Korean-American women. 
Urol Nurs. 2010; 30:130–136. [PubMed: 20469572] 
169. Perez LM, Webster GD. The history of urodynamics. Neurourol Urodyn. 1992; 11:1–21.
170. Sheng, W., Zhang, H., Ruth, K-H. Could urinary nerve growth factor be a biomarker for 
overactive bladder? A meta-analysis. Neurourol Urodyn. 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nau.
23210
171. Rachaneni S, et al. Bladder ultrasonography for diagnosing detrusor overactivity: test accuracy 
study and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess. 2016; 20:1–150.
172. Richter HE, et al. Genetic contributions to urgency urinary incontinence in women. J Urol. 2015; 
193:2020–2027. [PubMed: 25524241] 
173. Cartwright R, et al. Identification of two novel genomic loci associated with stress and urgency 
urinary incontinence in a genome wide association study. Int Urogynecol J. 2015; 26:S53–S54.
174. Raz R, Stamm WE. A controlled trial of intravaginal estriol in postmenopausal women with 
recurrent urinary tract infections. N Engl J Med. 1993; 329:753–756. [PubMed: 8350884] 
175. Brumbaugh AR, Mobley HLT. Preventing urinary tract infection: progress toward an effective 
Escherichia coli vaccine. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2012; 11:663–676. [PubMed: 22873125] 
Aoki et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 176. von Gontard A, Heron J, Joinson C. Family history of nocturnal enuresis and urinary 
incontinence: results from a large epidemiological study. J Urol. 2011; 185:2303–2307. 
[PubMed: 21511300] 
177. Kuh D, Cardozo L, Hardy R. Urinary incontinence in middle aged women: childhood enuresis 
and other lifetime risk factors in a British prospective cohort. J Epidemiol Community Health. 
1999; 53:453–458. [PubMed: 10562862] 
178. Wilson D, Dornan J, Milsom I, Freeman R. UR-CHOICE: can we provide mothers-to-be with 
information about the risk of future pelvic floor dysfunction? Int Urogynecol J. 2014; 25:1449–
1452. [PubMed: 24740445] 
179. Hallock JL, Handa VL. The epidemiology of pelvic floor disorders and childbirth. Obstet 
Gynecol Clin North Am. 2016; 43:1–13. [PubMed: 26880504] 
180. Hunskaar S, Lose G, Sykes D, Voss S. The prevalence of urinary incontinence in women in four 
European countries. BJU Int. 2004; 93:324–330. [PubMed: 14764130] 
181. Ferroni MC, et al. Role of the brain stem in tibial inhibition of the micturition reflex in cats. Am J 
Physiol Renal Physiol. 2015; 309:F242–F250. [PubMed: 26017973] 
182. Fowler CJ, Griffiths DJ. A decade of functional brain imaging applied to bladder control. 
Neurourol Urodyn. 2009; 29:49–55.
183. Birder L, Andersson K-E. Urothelial signaling. Physiol Rev. 2013; 93:653–680. [PubMed: 
23589830] 
184. Fatton B, de Tayrac R, Costa P. Stress urinary incontinence and LUTS in women — effects on 
sexual function. Nat Rev Urol. 2014; 11:565–578. [PubMed: 25201620] 
185. Lukacz ES, et al. Epidemiology of prolapse and incontinence questionnaire: validation of a new 
epidemiologic survey. Int Urogynecol J. 2005; 16:272–284.
186. Twiss C, et al. Validating the Incontinence Symptom Severity Index: a self-assessment instrument 
for voiding symptom severity in women. J Urol. 2009; 182:2384–2391. [PubMed: 19758631] 
187. Shaw C, et al. Validity and reliability of a questionnaire to measure the impact of lower urinary 
tract symptoms on quality of life: the Leicester Impact Scale. Neurourol Urodyn. 2004; 23:229–
236. [PubMed: 15098218] 
188. Abraham L, et al. Development and validation of a quality-of-life measure for men with nocturia. 
Urology. 2004; 63:481–486. [PubMed: 15028442] 
189. Coyne KS, Thompson CL, Lai J-S, Sexton CC. An overactive bladder symptom and health-
related quality of life short-form: validation of the OAB-q SF. Neurourol Urodyn. 2015; 34:255–
263. [PubMed: 25783168] 
190. Barber MD, Kuchibhatla MN, Pieper CF, Bump RC. Psychometric evaluation of 2 comprehensive 
condition-specific quality of life instruments for women with pelvic floor disorders. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2001; 185:1388–1395. [PubMed: 11744914] 
191. Barber MD, Walters MD, Bump RC. Short forms of two condition-specific quality-of-life 
questionnaires for women with pelvic floor disorders (PFDI-20 and PFIQ-7). Am J Obstet 
Gynecol. 2005; 193:103–113. [PubMed: 16021067] 
192. Brown JS, et al. The sensitivity and specificity of a simple test to distinguish between urge and 
stress urinary incontinence. Ann Intern Med. 2006; 144:715–723. [PubMed: 16702587] 
Aoki et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 1
Overactive bladder syndrome
Overactive bladder syndrome is formally defined as urinary urgency, with or without 
urgency incontinence, usually with urinary frequency and nocturia (the need to wake and 
pass urine at night), in the absence of a urinary tract infection or other obvious pathology. 
Given that urgency incontinence by definition occurs with urgency, having excluded other 
pathology or infection, the presence of urgency incontinence is sufficient, but not 
necessary, for a diagnosis of overactive bladder syndrome. Currently available therapies 
used for urgency incontinence typically receive licences for the broader indication of 
overactive bladder. However, the two terms are not synonymous.
Aoki et al.
Page 29
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 2
Factors assessed during medical history
Fluid intake
•
The amount and types of fluid (particularly caffeinated, alcoholic and 
carbonated)
Urinary frequency
•
Increased frequency is typically >7 micturition episodes during waking hours
Nocturia
•
Interruption of sleep at least once because of the need to micturate; each void 
is preceded and followed by sleep
Urinary urgency
•
Sudden compelling desire to pass urine that is difficult to defer (as opposed to 
urge, which is considered normal)
Bladder sensation during filling
•
Increased, reduced or absent
Urinary stream
•
Delay in initiating micturition (hesitancy), a slower stream than expected, 
intermittent stream that stops and starts on more than one occasion, urinary 
stream that splits or sprays instead of a single discrete stream
Straining
•
The need to abdominally strain, or provide suprapubic pressure to initiate, 
maintain or improve stream
Incomplete emptying
•
Bladder does not feel empty after micturition
Need to immediately re-void
•
Further micturition is necessary soon after passing urine
Position-dependent voiding
•
The need to take specific positions to improve emptying
Urinary retention
•
Inability to pass urine despite persistent effort
Dysuria
•
Lower urinary tract or vulval burning or discomfort with micturition
Lower urinary tract pain
Aoki et al.
Page 30
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Suprapubic or retropubic pain, pressure or discomfort in the bladder that 
increases with filling that persists or is relieved after voiding
•
Pain in the urethra, vulva, vagina, perineum or pelvis
Lower urinary tract infection
•
Microbiological evidence of pathological bacteriuria with bladder storage 
symptoms or pain
Recurrent urinary tract infection
•
At least three symptomatic, medically diagnosed urinary tract infections in 
the previous 12 months with evidence of resolution between episodes
Aoki et al.
Page 31
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 3
Common medications that can cause urinary incontinence
α-Adrenergic agonists
•
Increase smooth muscle tone in the urethra
•
Can precipitate urinary retention and related symptoms
α-Adrenergic antagonists
•
Decrease smooth muscle tone in the urethra
•
Can precipitate stress urinary incontinence
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
•
Cause a cough that can exacerbate stress urinary incontinence
Anticholinergics
•
Can cause impaired emptying, urinary retention and constipation that can 
contribute to urinary incontinence
•
Can cause cognitive impairment and reduce effective toileting ability
Calcium channel blockers
•
Can cause impaired emptying, urinary retention and constipation that can 
contribute to urinary incontinence
•
Can cause dependent oedema that can contribute to nocturnal polyuria
Cholinesterase inhibitors
•
Increase bladder contractility
•
Can precipitate urgency urinary incontinence
Diuretics
•
Cause diuresis and precipitate urinary incontinence
Lithium
•
Causes polyuria via induced diabetes insipidus
Opioid analgesics
•
Can cause urinary retention, constipation, confusion and immobility, all of 
which can contribute to urinary incontinence
Psychotropic drugs, sedatives, hypnotics, antipsychotics and histamine 1 receptor 
antagonists
•
Can cause confusion and impaired mobility, and precipitate urinary 
incontinence
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Aoki et al.
Page 32
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Increased cholinergic transmission can lead to urgency urinary incontinence
Gabapentin, glitazones and NSAIDs
•
Can cause oedema, which can lead to nocturnal polyuria causing nocturia and 
nocturnal enuresis
Aoki et al.
Page 33
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Prevalence of stress, urgency and mixed incontinence stratified by age
The prevalence of stress incontinence peaks in the fifth decade and then declines, whereas 
the prevalence of both mixed and urgency incontinence continues to increase with age. 
Observational data are from France, Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom180. Median 
prevalence data from a review of epidemiological studies from around the world have shown 
similar trends22. Reproduced with permission from REF.180, Wiley.
Aoki et al.
Page 34
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Anatomy and histology of the female bladder
The bladder lies immediately behind the pubic bones. When empty, the bladder has a 
pyramidal shape. As it fills and distends, the bladder balloons up above the pubic bones in 
an ovoid shape. The muscle of the bladder wall (the detrusor) consists of interdigitating 
fibres of smooth muscle, arranged in circular and longitudinal layers. These can stretch up to 
four times their resting length, so there is no increase in linear tension (or pressure) during 
normal bladder filling. The bladder and the ureters are both lined by a transitional 
epithelium, the urothelium. It contains flattened (‘umbrella’) cells and cuboidal cells, which 
also enable stretch as the bladder fills. The base of the bladder is a triagonal area, called the 
trigone. The ureters enter at the two superior corners of this triangle and the bladder neck 
lies at the inferior corner. The bladder neck is in continuity with the urethra, which, in 
women, is 2.5–4 cm long. The internal sphincter is formed of rings of smooth muscle at the 
bladder neck, whereas the external sphincter is formed by the muscles of the pelvic floor. 
Both sphincters help to close off the urethra to maintain continence.
Aoki et al.
Page 35
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Neurological control of the urinary bladder
a | The sympathetic system predominates during the storage phase and maintains continence 
through the paravertebral ganglia and the hypogastric nerves and plexus. b | The 
parasympathetic system coordinates the voiding phase, through the sacral plexus and pelvic 
nerves (S2–S4)39. Afferent signals come from the urothelium and the bladder wall, through 
the pelvic nerves, and then go to the dorsal root ganglia and are projected to the 
periaqueductal grey, then to the posterior cingulate cortex (PCC). c | The main circuits for 
regulating desire to void include the insula and the lateral and medial prefrontal cortices, 
which feed back to the periaqueductal grey18,182. The periaqueductal grey serves as a relay 
station for bladder information and activates the pontine micturition centre, which contracts 
the bladder and relaxes the urethral sphincter mechanism during voiding. d | The 
neurotransmitters responsible for the execution of these commands are acetylcholine and 
noradrenaline.
Aoki et al.
Page 36
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Urethral support
The posterior urethra lies on a supportive tissue layer composed of the anterior vaginal wall 
(part a) and the endopelvic fascia (part b). These structures are suspended from the arcus 
tendineus and in combination with a functional levator ani, create a ‘hammock’ that results 
in compression of the urethra with increased intra-abdominal pressure, preventing urinary 
leakage41.
Aoki et al.
Page 37
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Uroepithelial sensory web
In the urotheliogenic hypothesis of overactive bladder syndrome (BOX 1), urothelial cells 
are targets for neurotransmitters released from nerves, are targets for signals from other cell 
types and can be activated by autocrine or paracrine mechanisms. The signalling cascades 
between bladder nerves, urothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, interstitial cells and blood 
vessels are mediated by noradrenaline and adrenaline (via the β3-adrenergic receptors), 
acetylcholine (via the muscarinic M3 receptors), Ca2+ (via the activity of transient receptor 
potential cation channel subfamily A member 1 (TRPA1) and transient receptor potential 
cation channel subfamily V (TRPV) channels) and ATP (via the purinoceptors P2X and the 
purinergic G protein-coupled receptors P2Y). Ins(1,4,5)P3, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate; 
PKA, protein kinase A; PKC, protein kinase C; PKG, protein kinase G; NO•, nitric oxide; 
NOS, NO synthase. Adapted with permission from REF 183, American Physiological 
Society.
Aoki et al.
Page 38
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Diagnostic work-up of women with urinary incontinence
The initial management of urinary incontinence includes a detailed history and physical 
examination to identify potential reversible causes of symptoms, followed by urinalysis with 
microscopy, voiding diary, assessment of post-void residual volume and cough stress test to 
assist with diagnosis and initial management. In cases of advanced pelvic organ prolapse, 
prior pelvic surgery, haematuria or urinary retention, patients may be referred to a urologist 
or urogynaecologist. UTI, urinary tract infection.
Aoki et al.
Page 39
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Multichannel urodynamic testing
Invasive (catheterized) pressure measurements during urodynamic studies include 
intravesical pressure (using a probe in the bladder) and abdominal pressure (using a probe in 
the rectum as shown or in the vagina (not shown)). In addition, electromyography (EMG) 
can be used to evaluate the activity of the muscles of the pelvic floor. During the test, the 
bladder is filled and then the patient is asked to void, with continuous pressure monitoring 
during filling and emptying. In women with urgency incontinence, findings can include 
uninhibited contraction of the detrusor muscle during filling (detrusor overactivity) or a 
gradual uncomfortable rise in pressure during filling (low compliance). A formal diagnosis 
of stress incontinence is made by observation of leakage with coughing or exertion in the 
absence of detrusor contraction.
Aoki et al.
Page 40
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. Surgical treatment for urinary incontinence
Surgical correction of urethral hypermobility, which results from loss of support of the 
bladder neck and proximal urethra such that they move during peaks of abdominal pressure, 
can involve the use of a synthetic mesh, suture or autologous tissue. A synthetic mesh is 
placed inside the vagina at the level of the mid-urethra and is passed either retropubically 
(part a) or via the transobturator approach (part b). Sutures are not used in either of these 
‘tension-free’ procedures; the body tissues and fibrosis hold the mesh in place. Conversely, 
retropubic urethropexy (part c) involves the placement of permanent sutures in the anterior 
vaginal wall at the level of the bladder neck and proximal urethra. Finally, autologous fascial 
sling placement (part d) involves harvesting a strip of rectus fascia that is placed beneath the 
proximal urethra through a vaginal incision; the two ends of the sling are passed behind the 
pubic bone and are secured with permanent sutures either to each other or to the rectus 
fascia. Part a and part b are reproduced with permission from REF 184, Macmillan 
Publishers Limited.
Aoki et al.
Page 41
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Aoki et al.
Page 42
Table 1
Drugs licensed for urgency urinary incontinence
Class
Medications
Common adverse effects
Non-selective antimuscarinic
•
Fesoterodine fumarate
•
Oxybutynin chloride*
•
Oxybutynin transdermal patch
•
Oxybutynin gel
•
Tolterodine tartrate*
•
Trospium chloride*
•
Dry mouth
•
Blurred vision
•
Constipation
•
Impaired cognition
•
Impaired memory
Selective M3 antimuscarinic
•
Darifenacin
•
Imidafenacin‡
•
Solifenacin succinate
•
Dry mouth
•
Dry eyes
•
Constipation
•
Blurred vision
β3-adrenergic agonist
Mirabegron
•
Headache
•
Dizziness
•
Dry mouth
•
Hypertension
*Immediate and extended release.
‡Currently licensed only in Japan, Thailand, the Philippines and South Korea.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Aoki et al.
Page 43
Table 2
LUTS and urinary incontinence questionnaires for use in women
Questionnaire
Items
Symptom
severity
Quality
of life
Source or refs
EPIQ
49
Yes
Yes
See appendix of REF.185
ICIQ-FLUTS Module
12
Yes
Yes
www.iciq.net/ICIO.FIUTS.html
ICIQ-UI Structure Short Form
4
Yes
Yes
www.iciq.net/ICIO-UIshortform.html
Incontinence Impact 
Questionnaire Long form*
30
Yes
Yes
www.wakehealth.edu/School/OWIMS/NO-and-UDI-Instrument.htm
Urinary Incontinence Quality of 
Life Scale (I-QOL)
22
No
Yes
http://depts.washinnton.edu/seaqol/IOOI
Incontinence Symptom Severity 
Index
8
Yes
Yes
See appendix of REF.186
King’s Health Questionnaire
21
Yes
Yes
https://www.nice.ora.uk/auidance/ca171/resources/the-kinns-health-questionnaire-pdf-191574685
The Leicester Impact Scale
21
No
Yes
See appendix of REF.187
Nocturia Quality of Life 
Questionnaire
13
No
Yes
See appendix of REF.188
OAB-q Short Form
19
Yes
Yes
See appendix of REF.189
ICIQ-OABqol
33
Yes
Yes
www.iciq.net/ICIO-OABqolmodulepane.html
Pelvic Floor Distress Inventory
46‡
No
Yes
Via authors of REF.190
Pelvic Floor Distress Inventory 
Short Form
20§
No
Yes
191
Pelvic Floor Impact 
Questionnaire
93‖
No
Yes
Via authors of REF.190
Pelvic Floor Impact 
Questionnaire Short Form
21¶
No
Yes
191
The 3 incontinence questions#
3
No
No
REF192 and http://www.racap.ora.au/your-practice/auidelines/redbook/appendices/appendix-13a-the-3-incontinence-questions-(3iq)/
EPIQ, Epidemiology of Prolapse and Incontinence Questionnaire; FLUTS, female lower urinary tract symptoms; ICIQ, International Consultation on Incontinence Modular Questionnaire; LUTS, lower 
urinary tract symptoms; OAB, overactive bladder syndrome; qol, quality of life; UI, urinary incontinence.
*Also available in a short form (7 items) that looks at quality of life only.
‡Of which 28 are in the urinary domain.
§Of which 6 are in the urinary domain.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Aoki et al.
Page 44
‖Of which 31 are in the urinary domain.
¶Of which 7 are in the urinary domain.
#Differentiates stress, urgency and mixed incontinence for clinical care.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 01.
