 The choking hazard of grapes: a plea for awareness
Amy J Lumsden, Jamie G Cooper
ABSTRACT
Deaths from choking are a major cause of childhood
mortality, especially in the very young. Whole grapes are
ideally suited to cause paediatric airway obstruction and,
though regularly implicated, knowledge that this popular
fruit, and other similarly shaped foods, is a choking
hazard is not widespread. We present the cases of three
children who presented to our institution after grape
aspiration. Increased dissemination of the learning points
among health professionals working with children may
aid in the prevention of further episodes.
INTRODUCTION
The aspiration of foreign bodies is a major cause of
childhood mortality. In the USA, there were 2103
childhood
deaths
from
foreign
body
airway
obstruction between 1999 and 2013.1 The majority
of choking episodes occur in those under 3 years of
age, the very group most at risk of death.2 3 In add-
ition to having airways with a small cross-sectional
diameter, little children have incomplete dentition
and therefore reduced ability to chew foods into a
smooth bolus; underdeveloped swallowing coord-
ination and a tendency to be easily distracted while
eating.4
The physical features of a foreign body are
important in determining the potential effects of
aspiration. Compared with grapes, small, hard
objects or foods may more easily be dislodged from
the rest of the upper airway with chest or abdom-
inal thrusts. They are also more likely to pass
through the larynx and come to rest in the right
main bronchus, causing respiratory difficulty but
allowing ventilation of the left lung. In contrast,
round foods or objects that are larger than a child’s
airway may cause occlusion at the level of the
laryngeal
inlet,
resulting
in
complete
airway
obstruction that is rapidly fatal if not alleviated
promptly. The threat is bigger still if such an object
has a smooth, easily deformable surface allowing it
to form a tight seal, wedge, and thus becomes very
difficult to dislodge with first aid manoeuvres.5
There is already widespread awareness of the
choking risk posed by small toys, and warnings on
packaging are commonplace but despite the fact
that items of food account for over half the fatal
choking episodes in children up to 5 years of age,6
warnings are routinely absent on packaging and
public knowledge of many of the dangers is not
widespread. Grapes are a popular food with young
children but are ideally suited to cause obstruction
of a paediatric airway and are the third most
common cause of food-related fatal choking epi-
sodes after hotdogs and sweets.4
W
e present three cases of airway obstruction due
to grapes in paediatric patients presenting to the
Paediatric Emergency Department (PED) of The
Royal Aberdeen Children’s Hospital (RACH): two
of which were fatal.
CASE REPORTS
Case 1
A 5-year-old boy developed features of choking
while eating whole grapes at an after school club.
Appropriate first aid measures to dislodge the grape
were attempted by staff and continued by local
technician ambulance staff on their prompt arrival.
Despite back blows and suction, the child pro-
gressed into cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) was instituted. A paramedic
met the crew en route and on direct laryngoscopy
was able to remove a grape from the upper airway
with Magill’s forceps and then intubate the trachea,
allowing effective ventilation. Full CPR was contin-
ued as per Advanced Paediatric Life Support guid-
ance as the patient was transferred to hospital. On
arrival to the PED, despite full resuscitation efforts,
he remained in cardiac arrest and died.
Case 2
A 17-month-old boy was at home eating sand-
wiches and fruits with his family. He was consum-
ing a grape when he developed signs of choking.
Attempts to dislodge the fruit at home were unsuc-
cessful and, after dialling 999, the patient was
rushed to the local community hospital. Further
attempts to alleviate the obstruction failed, chest
compressions were commenced (but ventilation was
ineffectual until the grape was removed under
direct vision at laryngoscopy) and continued during
ambulance transfer to RACH where the child was
later declared dead in the PED.
Case 3
A 2-year-old boy was eating grapes as a snack while
at the park with family. He was noticed to be
choking and the Heimlich manoeuvre was per-
formed but without success. The child quickly
became floppy and unresponsive and was rushed to
a residential home at the end of the park from
where an ambulance was called. Fortunately, an
ambulance was close by and was on the scene within
minutes. Paramedics rapidly identified respiratory
arrest and promptly removed the grape on direct
laryngoscopy. The paramedic promptly performed
direct
laryngoscopy
and
removed
the
grape.
Spontaneous respirations resumed quickly, oxygen
was administered and transfer to hospital was
initiated. En route in the ambulance the child had
two brief seizures and on arrival to the PED there
were
clear
signs
of
cerebral
and
pulmonary
oedema. He was transferred directly to the operat-
ing theatre for tracheal intubation and ventila-
tion. He also underwent flexible bronchoscopy,
which revealed no residual foreign body and was
473
Lumsden AJ, Cooper JG. Arch Dis Child 2017;102:473–474. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2016-311750
Case report
To cite: Lumsden AJ, 
Cooper JG. Arch Dis Child 
2017;102:473–474.
Emergency Department, 
Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, 
Aberdeen, UK
Correspondence to
Dr Jamie G Cooper, Emergency 
Department, Aberdeen Royal 
Infirmary, Aberdeen AB25 2ZN, 
UK;  
jamie. 
cooper2@ 
nhs. 
net
Received 2 August 2016
Revised 25 October 2016
Accepted 13 November 2016
Published Online First 
20 December 2016
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2016-311750 on 20 December 2016. Downloaded from 
 subsequently transferred to the Paediatric Intensive Care Unit in
Edinburgh where he was ventilated for 5 days. An MRI scan of
the brain was normal and he returned to RACH after a further
2 days. He made an excellent recovery and was discharged
home 4 days later alert and playing normally.
DISCUSSION
The above case reports clearly delineate that children can choke
on grapes with tragic results. As demonstrated in Case 3, timely
and successful intervention to dislodge or remove the offending
object can result in excellent clinical outcomes. In all three
instances, adults were present, identified the problem quickly
and promptly instituted appropriate first aid manoeuvres for the
treatment of choking but with no success. In fact, even when
these measures were performed by trained ambulance person-
nel, they were also unsuccessful and all three cases required that
the grape be removed under direct laryngoscopy, clearly some-
thing that requires specialist expertise and equipment.
Though we would wholeheartedly support the wide dissemin-
ation of the knowledge and skills to promptly identify a choking
child and intervene appropriately, prevention is better than cure.
There is a general awareness of the need to supervise young
children when they are eating and to get small solid objects, and
some foods such as nuts, promptly out of the mouths of small
children; but knowledge of the dangers posed by grapes and
other similar foods is not widespread. Intuitively, first aid mea-
sures for the management of choking are more likely to be suc-
cessful for the harder, more solid items, but their effectiveness (as
in the three cases described) may be poor if grapes are the cause.
Others have previously suggested a simple warning label
should be placed on the packaging of grapes and other similarly
shaped enveloped foods (such as cherry tomatoes), highlighting
the potential choking hazard and recommending that they are
divided in half or preferably quartered.7
W
e have contacted The Scottish Government regarding the
provision of information to parents on the risks of choking on
these types of food. There is currently no specific legal require-
ment for such foods such as grapes to include a choking hazard
warning and this may be difficult if such items are being sold
loose. However, NHS Health Scotland has revised its guidance,
given free to all parents in pregnancy, to clearly highlight the
potential choking hazard posed by grapes and cherry tomatoes
and the importance of the need to ‘halve or chop small fruit,
nuts and vegetables like cherry tomatoes and grapes.’8 9 It has
also helpfully reviewed the website to ensure that any pictures
of grapes or tomatoes only show chopped fruit.
While
these
are
positive
moves
from
the
Scottish
Government, grapes are widely consumed throughout the UK
and beyond. By way of this article, we mean to highlight the
need for clear labelling of foods known to be choking hazards,
with succinct advice that such should be chopped in half and
ideally
quartered
before
being
given
to
young
children
(≤5 years), and reiteration of the importance of adult supervi-
sion of small children while they are eating. It is our hope that
dissemination of this information to health professionals with
direct involvement with children through this article will filter
through to the public. Further avenues to explore are the provi-
sion of information and literature directly to those working in
primary care and to those providing food for children on a com-
mercial basis.
Hopefully improving professional and public awareness will
reduce the number of these tragic preventable deaths occurring.
Acknowledgements We would like to acknowledge the help and advice given by
the Reverend James Falconer, Chaplain at RACH, regarding the conduct of this
study.
Contributors AL wrote the manuscript. JGC conceived the idea for the article,
collected the data, obtained consent and edited the manuscript. JGC is the
guarantor of the article.
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Parental/guardian consent obtained.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Eason MK, Norfolk V, Poirier MP. Update on Choking Emergencies: Foreign Bodies
of the Respiratory Tract, 2015. http://www.virginiapediatrics.org/wp-content/
uploads/2011/09/Foreign-Bodies-of-the-Respiratory-Tract-2015-2.pdf (accessed
02/08/2016).
2
National Safety Council. Accident facts. Itasca, IL: National Safety Council, 2014.
http://www.nsc.org/SafeCommunitiesDocuments/Conference-2014/
Injury-Facts-Statistical-Analysis-Kolosh.pdf (accessed 02/08/2016).
3
Tan HK, Brown K, McGill T, et al. Airway foreign bodies (FB): a 10-year review. Int
J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 2000;56:91–9.
4
Altkorn R, Chen X, Milkovich S, et al. Fatal and non-fatal food injuries among
children (aged 0–14 years). Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 2008;72:1041–6.
5
Reilly JS, Walter MA, Beste D, et al. Size/shape analysis of aerodigestive foreign
bodies in children: a multi-institutional study. Am J Otolaryngol 1995;16:190–3.
6
Harris CS, Baker SP, Smith GA, et al. Childhood asphyxiation by food: a national
analysis and overview. JAMA 1984;251:2231–5.
7
Feltblower S, McCormack J, Theilen U. Fatal and near-fatal grape aspiration in
children. Pediatr Emerg Care 2015;31:422–4.
8
“Weaning your baby”, Ready Steady Baby, NHS Health Scotland. http://www.
readysteadybaby.org.uk/growing-together/looking-after-your-growing-baby/
weaning-your-baby/index.aspx (accessed 02/08/2016).
9
Fun First Foods, NHS Health Scotland. http://www.healthscotland.com/documents/
303.aspx (accessed 02/08/2016).
474 
Lumsden AJ, Cooper JG. Arch Dis Child 2017;102:473–474. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2016-311750
Case report
Case report
Case report
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://adc.bmj.com/
Arch Dis Child: first published as 10.1136/archdischild-2016-311750 on 20 December 2016. Downloaded from 
