 Review
Health consequences of electric lighting practices in the modern world: A
report on the National Toxicology Program's workshop on shift work at
night, artificial light at night, and circadian disruption
Ruth M. Lunn a, David E. Blask b, Andrew N. Coogan c, Mariana G. Figueiro d, Michael R. Gorman e, Janet E. Hall f,
Johnni Hansen g, Randy J. Nelson h, Satchidananda Panda i, Michael H. Smolensky j,k, Richard G. Stevens l,
Fred W. Turek m, Roel Vermeulen n, Tania Carreón o, Claire C. Caruso o, Christina C. Lawson o, Kristina A. Thayer p,
Michael J. Twery q, Andrew D. Ewens r, Sanford C. Garner r, Pamela J. Schwingl r, Windy A. Boyd p,⁎
a Office of the Report on Carcinogens, Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Research Triangle Park, NC, United States
b Department of Structural and Cellular Biology, Laboratory of Chrono-Neuroendocrine Oncology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, United States
c Maynooth University Department of Psychology, National University of Ireland, Maynooth, County Kildare, Ireland
d Light and Health Program, Lighting Research Center, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY, United States
e Department of Psychology and Center for Circadian Biology, University of California, San Diego, CA, United States
f Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, United States
g Danish Cancer Society Research Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark
h Department of Neuroscience, Neuroscience Research Institute, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH, United States
i Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, United States
j Department of Biomedical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, United States
k Sleep Medicine, The University of Texas-Houston McGovern School of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States
l School of Medicine, University of Connecticut, Farmington, CT, United States
m Center for Sleep & Circadian Biology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, United States
n Division of Environmental Epidemiology, Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences (IRAS), Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
o National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Cincinnati, OH, United States
p Office of Health Assessment and Translation, Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Research Triangle Park, NC, United States
q National Center on Sleep Disorders Research, Division of Lung Diseases, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), Bethesda, MD, United States
r Contractor in support of the NIEHS Report on Carcinogens, Integrated Laboratory Systems (ILS), Durham, NC, United States
H I G H L I G H T S
• Patterns of light exposure during day
and night have direct effects on circadi-
an biology and health.
• Modern electric lighting practices also
enable 24/7 activities and may lead to
circadian disruption.
• Work at night is a complex exposure
scenario, including, but not limited to,
light at night.
• Some light and work at night are essen-
tial to society, making identification of
interventions challenging.
• Better measures of exposure and early
disease may help identify interventions
to protect public health.
G R A P H I C A L
A B S T R A C T
Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
⁎ Corresponding author at: PO Box 12233, MD K2-04, RTP, NC 27709, United States.
E-mail address: boydw@niehs.nih.gov (W.A. Boyd).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.07.056
0048-9697/Published by Elsevier B.V.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Science of the Total Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv
 a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 8 May 2017
Received in revised form 7 July 2017
Accepted 7 July 2017
Available online 27 July 2017
Editor: Jay Gan
The invention of electric light has facilitated a society in which people work, sleep, eat, and play at all hours of the
24-hour day. Although electric light clearly has benefited humankind, exposures to electric light, especially light
at night (LAN), may disrupt sleep and biological processes controlled by endogenous circadian clocks, potentially
resulting in adverse health outcomes. Many of the studies evaluating adverse health effects have been conducted
among night- and rotating-shift workers, because this scenario gives rise to significant exposure to LAN. Because
of the complexity of this topic, the National Toxicology Program convened an expert panel at a public workshop
entitled “Shift Work at Night, Artificial Light at Night, and Circadian Disruption” to obtain input on conducting lit-
erature-based health hazard assessments and to identify data gaps and research needs. The Panel suggested de-
scribing light both as a direct effector of endogenous circadian clocks and rhythms and as an enabler of additional
activities or behaviors that may lead to circadian disruption, such as night-shift work and atypical and inconsis-
tent sleep-wake patterns that can lead to social jet lag. Future studies should more comprehensively characterize
and measure the relevant light-related exposures and link these exposures to both time-independent biomarkers
of circadian disruption and biomarkers of adverse health outcomes. This information should lead to improve-
ments in human epidemiological and animal or in vitro models, more rigorous health hazard assessments, and
intervention strategies to minimize the occurrence of adverse health outcomes due to these exposures.
Published by Elsevier B.V.
Keywords:
Artificial light at night (ALAN)
Light at night (LAN)
Shift work
Circadian disruption
Contents
1.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1074
2.
Methods: workshop format
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1075
3.
Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1075
3.1.
Light as effector and enabler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1075
3.2.
Light as an effector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1075
3.3.
Light as an enabler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1075
3.4.
Shift work: light as both effector and enabler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1076
3.5.
Circadian disruption and adverse health effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1077
3.5.1.
Advancing the science for understanding potential health outcomes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1078
3.6.
Characterization of light in human studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1078
3.7.
Characterization of exposures in studies of shift workers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1078
3.8.
Animal models of LAN and shift work. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1079
3.9.
Biomarkers of circadian disruption and adverse outcomes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1081
3.9.1.
Protecting public health. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1081
4.
Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1082
Funding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1083
Disclaimer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1083
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1083
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1083
1. Introduction
The widespread adoption of electric light, only about 130 years ago,
has facilitated a 24-hour/7-day society in which people work, sleep, eat,
play, and expect goods and services at any time during the day or night.
In this situation, people are exposed to electric light through lifestyle
choices (e.g., use of electronic devices at night), the locations of their
residences (e.g., urban light pollution), and employment during the
night shift or as a shift worker (i.e., a worker whose schedule switches
among morning, day, evening, and night). The United Nations
proclaimed 2015 the International Year of Light and Light-Based Tech-
nologies in recognition of how light “has revolutionized medicine,
opened up international communication via the Internet, and continues
to be central to linking cultural, economic, and political aspects of the
global economy” (http://www.light2015.org/Home/About.html). Al-
though electric light has clearly benefited humankind, exposures to
ill-timed, unnatural electric light, such as light at night (LAN) or differ-
ences in the quantity and spectrum of electric light from that provided
by daylight exposures, may disrupt sleep and biological processes con-
trolled by endogenous circadian clocks, potentially resulting in adverse
health outcomes.
Because of these potential health concerns, LAN was nominated to
the National Toxicology Program (NTP) to be the subject of literature-
based health-hazard assessments on cancer and non-cancer outcomes.
The NTP's Office of the Report on Carcinogens (ORoC) is assessing can-
cer outcomes for potential listing in the RoC, a U.S. congressionally man-
dated, science-based document that identifies cancer hazards. The
Office of Health Assessment and Translation (OHAT) was asked to con-
sider evaluating non-cancer (e.g., cardiovascular, metabolic, reproduc-
tive, gastrointestinal, immunological, neurological, and psychiatric)
outcomes. Both ORoC and OHAT evaluations typically integrate evi-
dence from human, experimental animal, and mechanistic studies.
One of the rationales for nominating LAN to the RoC was the Interna-
tional Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) working group 2007 con-
clusion that “shift work involving circadian disruption is probably
carcinogenic to humans” (IARC, 2010). Therefore, the NTP defined the
nomination to include circadian disruption and shift work at night, in
addition to LAN. Those nominating this topic emphasized that they
were interested in a broader scope than shift work, because of concerns
about effects from exposure to LAN in the sleeping area (from indoor
and outdoor lights) and outfitting of institutions with light sources
rich in short-wavelength content, such as some types of light-emitting
diodes, and based on the opinion that carcinogenic effects observed
among shift workers were potentially due to LAN.
Because of the complexity and breadth of the topic, the NTP con-
vened a public workshop and webcast entitled “Shift Work at Night,
1074
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 Artificial Light at Night, and Circadian Disruption” on March 10–11,
2016, to help obtain input on the approach for the NTP literature-anal-
ysis activities and to identify data gaps and research needs in the field.
(The Panel suggested changing the terminology used by the NTP to de-
scribe the exposure to light from “artificial light at night” [ALAN] to
“electric lighting practices.”)
This workshop report captures the major discussion points of the
Panel. The first part introduces the concepts of electric light as effector
and enabler and of shift work as a complex exposure scenario, and it
provides background information on circadian disruption and links to
potential adverse health effects. The second part discusses key issues re-
lated to advancing the science, which will help inform NTP literature-
based evaluations and identify data gaps and research needs. This sec-
tion is followed by a brief discussion of interventions to protect public
health. Finally, post-workshop activities and meeting outcomes are
discussed. It is important to note that the workshop did not require ex-
pert consensus and is not intended to provide formal recommendations
or guidelines.
2. Methods: workshop format
To meet the workshop goals, a cross-disciplinary workshop panel
was selected by the NTP with experts in (1) the key exposures, such
as light, shift work, and sleep, (2) health outcomes, such as cancer and
reproductive, neurological, and behavioral outcomes, and (3) other per-
tinent disciplines, such as circadian biology, exposure assessment, epi-
demiology, clinical research, toxicology, and mechanisms of disease.
The workshop was organized into six sessions, which reflected a
progression of knowledge within each session informing subsequent
sessions. The workshop began with a description of circadian disrup-
tion, followed by cross-disciplinary dialogues on exposure scenarios of
LAN, shift work, and additional overlapping exposures related to circa-
dian disruption, such as sleep and timing of meals. It concluded with
sessions on strategies to synthesize information across the various ex-
posure scenarios and identify data gaps and research needs. The first
three sessions included brief presentations by the experts on the state
of the science that defined the topic and provided an overview of the re-
search in humans or experimental animals. All sessions included a mod-
erator-led period with specific questions related to interpretation of the
science that had been developed by the NTP prior to the workshop. In
addition to discussion questions, to provide a brief introduction to the
topics and facilitate workshop discussions, the NTP prepared abstracts
and appendices, including tables and key references for each session, or-
ganized by health outcomes within the broad categories of cancer and
non-cancer outcomes. The workshop was webcast and provided oppor-
tunity for public comment by those attending the meeting in person.
More information and links to videos of the webcast are available on
the workshop website at http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/go/workshop_ALAN.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Light as effector and enabler
One of the key suggestions from the Panel was to describe light both
as a direct effector on circadian rhythms and as an enabler of additional
activities that may lead to circadian disruption, including night-shift
work and other atypical and inconsistent sleep-wake patterns that can
lead to social jet lag. It is important to note that the NTP workshop fo-
cused on effects of light and shift work on the circadian domain of the
biological time structure. Circadian disruption was defined by the
panel as internally or externally induced disorganization, including,
but not limited to, misalignment of time structure in living systems, po-
tentially leading to adverse health outcomes (for more discussion, see
Smolensky et al. (2016)). In addition to circadian rhythms, biological
processes are organized as (1) ultradian rhythms, with periods shorter
than a day, typically in the 90-minute to 6-hour range (e.g., the duration
of different sleep stages), (2) infradian rhythms, with cycles longer than
28 h (e.g., the menstrual cycle), and (3) seasonal rhythms (e.g., annual
variation in endocrine parameters, metabolism, and appetite that are
entrained by variation in day length) (Blask et al., 2009). The different
biological rhythm domains are likely interconnected so as to contribute
to the overall functional and adaptive capacity of life.
3.2. Light as an effector
Light is essential to life and critical for the regulation of circadian
rhythms. These 24-hour rhythms of daily physiological processes are
coordinated by internal biological clocks that are regulated at the mo-
lecular level by specific “clock genes.” These genes and their protein
products oscillate on a self-sustained, near-24-hour basis, but are syn-
chronized to a 24-hour period by input from external and internal
time cues, and they influence a suite of circadian rhythms, such as
sleep-wake cycles and cycles of body temperature, blood pressure,
and metabolism. For most of human existence, light came in the form
of direct and diffuse sunlight during the day and nearly complete dark-
ness at night, with the exception of light from the moon, stars, and fire-
light. In modern society, unnatural exposures to light, including
irregular light-dark patterns characterized by insufficient light exposure
during the day, too much LAN, or a combination of both, are ubiquitous.
The suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus sit at the top
of a hierarchy of endogenous biological clocks that regulate circadian
rhythms in physiology and behavior. The so-called master circadian
clock is synchronized to the 24-hour “day” by exposure to the ambient
light-dark cycle, primarily by light transmitted via retinal photorecep-
tors (both image-forming and non-image-forming photoreceptors in
the outer and inner retina) to the SCN. Signals are then relayed from
the master clock to a multitude of peripheral clocks located in almost
every cell of the body, including the melatonin-secreting pineal gland.
This orchestration of organismal rhythmicity by the SCN occurs through
diverse mechanisms that include neural, hormonal, metabolic, and ther-
mal networks to synchronize (or “entrain”) all circadian rhythms and
ensure appropriate alignment between internal and external time
(Fig. 1). One important biochemical signal is the hormone melatonin.
In response to signals from the SCN conveyed via the sympathetic
chain, melatonin is primarily produced in the pineal gland of the brain
and secreted into the general circulation, where it is made available to
peripheral tissues. Melatonin is influenced by the SCN and is also a
chronobiotic feedback moderator of the oscillatory activity of the SCN,
whose neurons express melatonin receptors and are neurophysiologi-
cally responsive to melatonin (Fig. 1) (Kandalepas et al., 2016). Noctur-
nal light exposures directly suppress pineal production of melatonin, a
robust marker of circadian rhythmicity. In the absence of LAN, levels
of melatonin in blood, cerebral spinal fluid, and saliva are normally
low during the day and high during the darkness of night. The timing,
duration, quantity, and spectrum of light exposures throughout the
day and evening influence the duration, amplitude, and total quantity
of melatonin production during the night. In seasonal animals, duration
of the melatonin signal is a physiological proxy for day length (short sig-
nal for long summer days and long signal for short winter days). Light,
especially of certain wavelength characteristics, will acutely curtail noc-
turnal production.
3.3. Light as an enabler
Electricity has allowed for major advances in modern-day society
and can be considered an enabler of circadian disruption. This is princi-
pally because electric LAN allows people to work, eat, and enjoy leisure
time during the night, with concomitant indirect effects on sleep timing
(e.g., night-shift workers who sleep during the day). As a result, signifi-
cant and rapid alterations have occurred in the night-time environment,
both outdoors and inside the home and workplace. Satellite images of
Earth at night have revealed how ubiquitous exposures to LAN have
1075
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 become over the past several decades in major cities and surrounding
areas, as LAN now covers 80% of the world (Falchi et al., 2016) (Fig. 2).
Perhaps not surprisingly, self-reported sleep duration among adults in
those areas with the greatest levels of LAN also show a lower prevalence
of healthy sleep duration, defined as 7 or more hours of sleep within a
24-hour period. A study in the United States among non-institutional-
ized people aged 18 years or older found that living in areas with greater
outdoor nighttime light was significantly associated with delayed bed-
time and wake up time, shorter sleep duration, increased daytime sleep-
iness, and greater dissatisfaction with sleep quantity and quality
(Ohayon and Milesi, 2016). Meanwhile, increasing numbers of people,
including children and adolescents, who may be developmentally vul-
nerable to sleep deprivation, circadian disruption, and downstream ef-
fects of such disruption, are using electronic devices, such as
televisions, computers, tablets, and smartphones, in the evenings and
nights, often shortly before commencing sleep. Some studies have
found that adolescents are more sensitive than adults to circadian
disruption by evening light, as measured by acute melatonin suppres-
sion (Crowley and Carskadon, 2010; Figueiro and Overington, 2015).
3.4. Shift work: light as both effector and enabler
In addition to traditional jobs necessarily carried out both day and
night, such as health care, security, and emergency response, economic
globalization has increased the need for work environments that allow
businesses and organizations to operate longer than the hours of an in-
dividual worker and thus produce goods and services on a 24/7 basis.
Shift work typically involves working outside the standard daytime
hours (~7 a.m. to 6 p.m.) — such as at night, during evenings, or starting
before 6 a.m. — and shifts can be permanent, slowly alternating, rapidly
switching from day to night (forward rotating) or night to day (back-
ward rotating), or without any particular pattern. Night-shift work is a
common occupational exposure; approximately 15% to 18% of all
Fig. 1. Regulation of circadian rhythms by internal and external cues. Light is the primary regulator of the master circadian clock found in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the brain. The
SCN sends endocrine and neural signals to a variety of peripheral tissues to temporally coordinate their physiology and metabolism. The SCN also sends a signal to the pineal gland to
produce the hormone melatonin during darkness at night. Melatonin can then convey signals back to the SCN, other parts of the brain, and peripheral tissues to help coordinate
physiological functions and behaviors to approximate 24-hour days.
Fig. 2. World map of artificial brightness as a ratio to the natural sky brightness (Falchi et al., 2016).
1076
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 workers in Europe and the United States work a variety of night-shift
schedules (Straif et al., 2007).
In a typical night-shift work scenario, exposure to LAN that is effec-
tive at suppressing melatonin or disrupting the circadian system can
occur (often for the entire nighttime period over decades of employ-
ment), which may result in periodic or chronic circadian disruption.
Field studies reporting on actual LAN exposure are not widely available,
but a recent review suggests that it can range from 50 to 100 photopic
lux at the eye, with some exposures exceeding 200 lx at the eye
(Hunter and Figueiro, 2017). Studies of shift workers were originally
conducted to test the hypothesis that increasing exposure to LAN is re-
sponsible, in part, for the increasing incidence of breast cancer in high-
income countries (see “Circadian Disruption and Adverse Health Ef-
fects,” below). IARC concluded in 2007 that shift work involving circadi-
an disruption is probably carcinogenic to humans (Group 2A), based on
limited evidence of carcinogenicity for breast cancer from eight human
studies, in addition to sufficient evidence from studies in experimental
animals. Other studies of shift workers have evaluated risk for other
types of cancer outcomes (most notably prostate and colorectal cancer
and to a lesser degree other hormonal cancers, including ovarian and
endometrial cancers) and non-cancer outcomes (especially cardiovas-
cular disease, diabetes, obesity, mental health and other neurological
disorders, and disorders of the endocrine and reproductive systems)
(see webinar meeting materials available at http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/
go/workshop_ALAN).
Although shift work may represent an extreme type of LAN expo-
sure, it is not an exact surrogate for LAN, because it is a complex expo-
sure scenario. In addition to direct effects due to LAN and altered
exposure to daylight, shift work also includes activities that are related
to electricity as an enabler, such as changes in the timing of daily activ-
ities, eating, sleeping, and social patterns. Other lifestyle activities may
also differ in shift workers, such as physical activity and stress coping
mechanisms, such as tobacco smoking and alcohol consumption; how-
ever, the directions of these confounding behaviors may be in opposite
directions in different populations. Chronotype, the behavioral manifes-
tation of underlying physiological phase in sleep-wake behavior
(resulting in individual characteristics described as being a “morning
lark” or “night owl”), which is partly a heritable trait, as well as other ge-
netic traits, may also modify potential risks of adverse health outcomes
in shift workers (Hansen and Lassen, 2012; Juda et al., 2013; Vetter et al.,
2015). Furthermore, the role of the different exposures in shift workers
may vary with the specific health outcome (e.g., eating patterns may be
more important for obesity and metabolic disorders than for other
health outcomes; co-exposures to carcinogens may affect cancer out-
comes). The nature of the shift work itself may also be important in de-
termining long-term health outcomes; for example, sedentary work
may be associated with worse cardiovascular and metabolic outcomes
than work involving significant levels of physical activity (De Rezende
et al., 2014; Jermendy et al., 2012).
3.5. Circadian disruption and adverse health effects
Potential adverse health effects from light-induced circadian disrup-
tion are mediated in part by melatonin suppression. Light at night of suf-
ficient level and duration, appropriate wavelength, and appropriate
timing can shift the timing and/or reduce the amplitude of the night-
time melatonin signal, as may happen in night-shift workers (Dumont
and Paquet, 2014). This may contribute to sleep changes and circadian
disruption, which in turn affect a host of cellular mechanisms (such as
metabolism and cell cycling) and neurobehavioral processes (such as
mood regulation and cognitive outcomes). These disturbances may po-
tentially lead to adverse health outcomes, as discussed below. Expo-
sures to dim, warm-colored light during the day (e.g., b50 lx at the
eye of a 2700 K light source) may make matters worse. Studies have
shown that higher levels of light during the daytime, including exposure
to daylight, are associated with better sleep and mood in office workers
(Boubekri et al., 2014; Figueiro et al., 2017).
The nighttime circadian melatonin signal in both rats and humans is
known to exert an oncostatic role in a variety of cancers (Haus and
Smolensky, 2013), most particularly in models of human breast cancer
tumor growth (Blask et al., 2005; Blask et al., 2011). The nighttime mel-
atonin signal modulates circadian rhythms in human breast cancer cell
proliferation and metabolism and effects signal-transduction activity
that restricts tumor growth. Exposure to dim LAN in rats and bright
LAN in humans attenuates the melatonin signal and leads to the disrup-
tion of these circadian dynamics, resulting in tumor growth (Blask et al.,
2005; Blask et al., 2014). In fact, the nighttime melatonin signal repre-
sents the only circadian-driven anticancer signal identified thus far in
humans or in rats (Blask et al., 2005). Furthermore, suppression of the
nocturnal circadian melatonin signal by LAN may lead not only to in-
creased breast cancer risk but even to resistance of human breast cancer
tissue to hormonal intervention and chemotherapy, as observed in pre-
clinical human breast cancer studies (Dauchy et al., 2014; Xiang et al.,
2015). The suppression of melatonin by LAN led to the hypothesis that
LAN may play a role in the elevated incidence of breast cancer in some
high-income countries; as increases in incidence of breast cancer have
paralleled the expansion of LAN (Haus and Smolensky, 2013; Stevens,
1987; Stevens et al., 2014).
Aside from the direct effects of light on physiology, light also indi-
rectly impacts daily rhythms by affecting hunger cues, acute behavior,
and cognitive arousal levels (Chellappa et al., 2011). Thus, LAN may
alter timing of food intake and the downstream effects of hormones
and molecular signaling pathways (Fig. 1). Unnatural exposures to
light, as either LAN or dim indoor lighting during the day, lead to chang-
es in the expression of clock genes and proteins in the SCN, as well as
melatonin and other hormones, which in turn lead to effects on sleep
duration and quality and to disruption of central and peripheral circadi-
an clocks. In addition, other activities, such as night-shift work, the
timing of meals, and the composition of the foods eaten, act as entrain-
ment or synchronizing cues for peripheral clocks, which also modify cir-
cadian rhythmicity.
Misalignment of sleep and circadian disruption have been linked to
numerous adverse effects on performance, mental well-being, and
physical health in animals or humans (e.g., Filipski et al., 2003;
Grimaldi et al., 2016; Leproult et al., 2014). In the short term, these ef-
fects may include increased incidence of accidents and injuries, in-
creased sick leave, mood disorders (including depression), weight
gain, and social and family problems. As a consequence of chronic
sleep disturbance and circadian disruption, adverse health outcomes
may develop, including metabolic disorders and the related diseases of
obesity and type 2 diabetes; cardiovascular-related diseases, including
hypertension and ischemic stroke; neurological disorders; gastrointes-
tinal ulcers; adverse reproductive outcomes; and various types of can-
cer. Moreover, circadian disruption may play a role in other
unrecognized pathological mechanisms of human disease (Smolensky
et al., 2016).
Irregular sleep-wake cycles may both result from and contribute to
circadian disruption. The acute and transient symptoms, such as fatigue,
sleepiness, indigestion, and irritability, of so-called “jet lag” that accom-
panies transmeridian travel are classic examples of this desynchronosis,
or uncoupling of circadian rhythms. When travelers rapidly cross sever-
al time zones in one day, their 24-hour rhythms are suddenly
desynchronized from the day-night cycle at their destination. Thus, bio-
logical rhythms such as sleeping and eating are wrongly timed, resulting
in further misalignment of the master and peripheral clocks from the
temporal features of the external environment and also from each
other internally. Traveling eastward is more difficult than traveling
westward and requires a longer period of adaptation for most people.
Eastward travel requires a phase advance of the circadian pacemaker
(i.e., an acute shortening of the 24-hour “day”). Following phase-ad-
vancing stimuli, some elements of the circadian system may adapt
1077
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 quickly but require several transient cycles in which remaining clock el-
ements catch up (Illnerova et al., 1989; Reddy et al., 2002). Following a
single advancing light pulse, shifts in behavior may not be completed for
several cycles, whereas delaying shifts are fully manifest the following
day. It is worth noting that for most travelers, the occurrence of jet lag
is a transitory experience. Although acute transient circadian disruption
typically is well tolerated, it can lead to negative health outcomes, such
as exacerbating mood disorder in certain individuals, and chronic circa-
dian disruption may potentially aggravate existing medical conditions
whose etiopathology is circadian misalignment. One does not have to
board a plane to experience the effects of circadian disruption. The
vast majority of non-shift-working Americans wakes to the alarm
clock during the work week and sleep in on the weekends, a phenome-
non termed social jet lag. A large population study found the mean level
of social jet lag is on the order of 90 min (Roenneberg et al., 2012). Social
jet lag is associated with a set of symptoms that overlap with those of
travel-associated jet lag, including increased sleepiness during waking
times, decreased performance, and adverse effects on mood. When ex-
perienced chronically, social jetlag may lead to a suite of metabolic dis-
orders known as “metabolic syndrome,” which includes obesity,
cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes. In contrast to travel jet
lag, social jet lag, whether associated with shift work or with “normal”
life, is chronic in nature, and it may be the chronicity of circadian mis-
alignment, rather than its absolute magnitude, that is important in
shaping long-term health outcomes.
3.5.1. Advancing the science for understanding potential health outcomes
The Panel discussed scientific issues important for informing study
designs and for advancing the understanding of health effects due to in-
appropriate exposures to light, including characterization of various ex-
posures and end points (biomarkers and health outcomes). These issues
are useful for evaluating and interpreting studies in the peer-reviewed
literature, as well as for conducting new research.
3.6. Characterization of light in human studies
The Panel discussed several issues related to improving measure-
ment of circadian-effective light (i.e., light that stimulates the circadian
system) in human epidemiological and experimental studies. To date,
characterization of indoor light exposures has been estimated from
self-reports or retrospective questionnaires (e.g., bedroom brightness)
in epidemiological studies of the relationship between exposure to elec-
tric light and cancer risks. Ecological studies of LAN in various geograph-
ical areas correlate light level, measured by satellite as a surrogate for
exposure to LAN, with specific health outcomes. These studies, like all
ecological studies, do not account for individual level exposures and
co-exposures, and are therefore susceptible to confounding and mis-
classification bias.
A clear need exists for implementation of improved technologies to
classify measures of actual circadian-effective light exposures experi-
enced by individuals both indoors and outdoors during the daytime
and at night. It is also important that researchers start reporting the
light stimulus used in their studies in a more uniform manner, as pro-
posed by Lucas et al. (2014). However, as noted by some Panel mem-
bers, perfect exposure characterization may not be feasible in
observational studies; therefore, exposure surrogates are needed to ad-
vance the understanding of causes of disease. In general, non-differen-
tial misclassification of exposure decreases the likelihood of detecting
a true association in epidemiological studies (Blair et al., 2007).
Some members of the Panel presented data showing the limitations
of using satellite images as surrogates for measuring circadian-effective
light for individuals in ecological studies. Satellite data are filtered to
more closely match the spectral sensitivity of two of the three cone pho-
toreceptors (long- and medium-wavelength cones) that are responsible
for visual acuity, which peaks close to 555 nm, not the spectral sensitiv-
ity of the circadian system (as measured by melatonin suppression),
which peaks close to 460 nm (Brainard et al., 2001; Thapan et al.,
2001). Although these measures are imprecise, they may be able to sep-
arate individuals living in communities of high outdoor LAN exposure
from those living in low LAN exposure (Stevens, 2011). However, it is
unclear whether these ecological studies are able to separate the direct
effects of light per se from the effects of light as an enabler of other be-
haviors potentially associated with poor health.
To advance exposure assessment used in epidemiology studies, the
Panel suggested that field studies assess light exposure using calibrated
devices, which can be used to validate detailed questionnaire data. Once
validated, the questionnaires could be scaled up for use in large epide-
miology studies and be designed to collect information on the type, du-
ration, frequency, and timing of electric-light exposure and the timing
of daylight exposure. These data could also be supplemented with
data from new technologies, such as socially acceptable wearable mon-
itoring devices that collect real-time data, and with data collection ap-
plications (apps) that allow users to enter information on eating and
other behaviors.
More precise measurements of light exposure are required for ex-
perimental studies in humans to inform interventions to prevent
acute melatonin suppression and circadian disruption. The Panel em-
phasized that it is important to improve the characterization of light
that can lead to circadian disruption, including dose, light level, spectral
composition (i.e., wavelength), distribution, timing, and duration to
which an individual is exposed.
The action spectrum for melatonin suppression has been carefully
measured for monochromatic light. Using these data, two spectral sen-
sitivity functions and one mathematical model have been proposed and
published in peer-reviewed journals, as described by Lucas et al. (2014).
However, no spectral sensitivity function for characterizing light for the
circadian system has been sanctioned by national or international stan-
dard-setting bodies. Nevertheless, using the Rea et al. (2005) mathe-
matical model, one of the panel members generated and presented
Fig. 3, which allows one to compare the relative effectiveness of light
sources of various spectral power distributions and light levels for sup-
pressing melatonin.
As shown in Fig. 3, for the same photopic light levels (lux) at the cor-
nea, daylight is more effective at suppressing melatonin than is incandes-
cent light, because daylight emits more energy in the short wavelength
region (Rea et al., 2005; Rea et al., 2010). Night-time sensitivity to light
(usually measured by melatonin suppression) is influenced by light ex-
posure during the day, inter-individual sensitivity, chronotype, age, and
photic history (Chang et al., 2011; Glickman et al., 2012; Hébert et al.,
2002; Smith et al., 2004). It is also important to note in the discussion
about health effects of LAN that occupational light exposures, such as
those experienced by shift workers, are significantly higher than outdoor
light exposures at night, and that most of the epidemiological work to
date relating LAN to health risks has been limited to shift work.
Finally, the Panel suggested evaluating the interaction between ex-
perimentally induced diseases (e.g., using known toxicants) under dif-
ferent light conditions to determine how electric light may change
susceptibility to environmental exposures. Evaluations in experimental
animals could explore circadian chronotoxicities (differences in sensi-
tivity to toxicants according to circadian time of exposure) under differ-
ent light conditions. Observational epidemiological studies evaluating
potential interactions between exposure to toxicants and LAN or
among shift workers would also be informative.
3.7. Characterization of exposures in studies of shift workers
In most studies of shift workers, information on working arrange-
ments is typically assessed from self-reported retrospective question-
naires or interviews, employment records, or job exposure matrices
(e.g., individual occupational histories with survey data linking occupa-
tions to night work). Fully detailed classifications of shift work are rarely
available, which include information about regular or irregular shift
1078
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 schedules, time schedules of each shift, light level, permanent or rotat-
ing night shifts, direction and speed of rotation (e.g., intensity of shift
work, consecutive night shifts, forward or backward rotations, perma-
nent versus rotating shift work), and exposure window (e.g., age at
first shift work or timing before or after full-term pregnancy). Rather,
many studies have reported only years of working night shifts, without
information on intensity (e.g., number and/or duration of night shifts
per week and changes in shift schedule). Moreover, significant hetero-
geneity exists in definitions of “shift or night work” across the studies,
which limits the utility of conducting a meta-analysis, as risk estimates
from these studies cannot necessarily be combined. Furthermore, the
nature of the light exposure of such employees during off-work hours
is rarely assessed (Stevens et al., 2011).
In addition, co-exposures with shift work (e.g., known or presumed
chemical risk factors for cancer and other health outcomes) may con-
found or modify the studied association. It has been suggested that
shift workers and day workers may differ significantly in susceptibility
to adverse effects from chemical exposures (Ward et al., 2010). Further-
more, risk factors for chronic diseases, such as poor diet, lack of physical
activity, excess alcohol consumption and smoking, and being over-
weight, have frequently been reported among shift workers (Nea et
al., 2015; Van Amelsvoort et al., 2006). Studies assessing the association
between shift work and chronic health outcomes should obtain infor-
mation on social patterns, lifestyle aspects (such as tobacco and alcohol
use), and eating patterns (or body mass index), and evaluate their role
as confounders, effect modifiers, or mediators of the association.
To date, only a few biomarkers, such as melatonin, cortisol, sex hor-
mones, and epigenetic variables, have been studied in humans that
could provide information on circadian disruption among shift workers.
To be of maximal utility, most of these variables would require monitor-
ing throughout an entire circadian cycle, and interpretation of the re-
sults for circadian disruption would require detailed understanding of
how each may be acutely affected by environmental conditions. De-
tailed exposure assessment is needed to reduce measurement error
and to suggest rational, empirically informed strategies for intervention.
In addition, studies of shift workers are complicated because the expo-
sure metrics that are related to adverse health effects have not been
fully elucidated. In addition to collecting detailed information about
the temporal patterning of the shifts worked, it is important to collect
information on the different exposure components of shift work, includ-
ing social patterns, lifestyle aspects (such as tobacco and alcohol use),
eating patterns, light exposure (both at work and off work), sleeping
patterns, and vigilance and cognition, all of which tend to be related
(Fig. 4). New technologies, such as those mentioned above for light
and the use of mobile phone apps and wearable activity trackers,
could help facilitate exposure assessment of shift workers. In addition,
it is important to collect information on potential confounders and ef-
fect modifiers, such as chronotype and other genetic traits.
The Nightingale study (Pijpe et al., 2014), a prospective cohort study
on shift work and breast cancer among nurses in the Netherlands, is an ex-
ample of a study currently in progress that has collected detailed informa-
tion across all domains of the shift-work exposure scenario, including the
shift-work system, cumulative exposure to shift work, and shift intensity.
In addition to shift work, the questionnaire collects information on socio-
demographics, reproductive history, education, other occupational expo-
sure, mobile phone use, residential history, current sleeping habits (in-
cluding disruption of sleep not related to occupational shift work), and
medical and family history of diseases. To more fully characterize the com-
plex exposure scenario of shift work, a substudy of the Nightingale study
called “Klokwerk” is collecting information on various exposures through
questionnaire data, 24-hour recall logs, employer data, light sensors, and
biomarkers in the blood, urine, and feces. Another example of a nation-
wide prospective cohort is the Danish Working Hours Database, which,
on an individual level, covers exact daily working time from payrolls for
all employees in all hospitals (Garde et al., 2016). The unique personal
number applied to all residents in Denmark makes it possible to link this
information with information from health registries, such as the national
cancer registry or the national hospital register, for research purposes.
3.8. Animal models of LAN and shift work
The Panel noted that although animal models of shift work and ex-
posures to LAN (primarily rats and mice) do not fully replicate complex,
overlapping exposure scenarios in humans, they do play a key role in
Fig. 3. Nocturnal melatonin suppression for different light spectra plotted as a function of light level, where the spectral power distributions of various light sources used in previous
published studies are weighted according to the CLA (x-axis). CLA is irradiance at the cornea weighted to reflect the spectral sensitivity of the human circadian system as measured by
acute melatonin suppression, and is measured in units of spectrally weighted flux per unit area. The right ordinate (y-axis), labeled “circadian stimulus” (CS), is scaled to be
proportional to the left ordinate, representing the relative amount of melatonin suppressed after exposure of the retina for 1 h, ranging from 0.0 (no suppression) to a maximum of 0.7
(70% suppression).
1079
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 Fig. 4. Design considerations for epidemiological studies of shift workers. Shift work is a complex multi-dimensional exposure with a range of associated effects or exposures. The ideal
study of shift work would capture, in addition to lifetime patterns of shiftwork, measurements of disturbed social, sleep, and dietary patterns; lifestyle aspects; and changes in light-at-
night and sun exposure, which are potentially modified by chronotype. Potentially relevant exposures are measured by self-report (e.g., interviews or questionnaires), employer data,
actigraphy, 24-hour recall logs, light sensors, urinary, blood, or fecal biomarkers, anthropometry, psychomotor vigilance tasks, and memory tests. Gray boxes represent methods to
measure these complex exposures and intermediate outcomes; numbers in the related-exposures or intermediate-effects boxes relate to the corresponding type of “measurement
methods” to assess the factors; (Δ = change, arrows indicate direction of change).
Fig. 5. Schematic depicting animal models of shift work showing several exposure components acting via a number of putative pathophysiological mechanisms and resulting in a series of
adverse chronic health outcomes. These models may help disentangle the relationships among exposure components in a systematic manner, and may help in assessing the impact of
relevant variables on shift-work exposure outcomes and their underlying mechanisms. Modifying factors may include age, sex, the nature of the shift-work exposure (e.g., fast vs.
slow, forward vs. backward rotating), circadian phenotypes (e.g., morning types vs. evening types), and the nature of the background photic exposure onto which the shift-work-
related light-dark cycle is imposed (e.g., long, summer-like photoperiods vs. short, winter-like photoperiods).
1080
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 understanding specific exposures and mechanisms, and provide evi-
dence for interventions. These animal studies have either evaluated
the direct effects of light or have tried to model shift work by exposing
animals to repeated phase shifts in the light-dark cycle, and have inves-
tigated a variety of end points and health outcomes, including cancer;
cardiovascular disease; mood and behavior disorders; effects on the im-
mune, neurological, or reproductive systems; energy metabolism and
obesity; and changes in the structure of gut microbial communities
(Summa and Turek, 2014; Voigt et al., 2014) (Fig. 5). Animal studies
will also be crucial in testing hypotheses related to interventions, such
as the effect of meal timing or meal composition on potentially alleviat-
ing some of the adverse effects due to circadian disruption. Animal
models may offer the advantage of allowing relatively easy assessment
of the importance of chronicity of exposure on health-related bio-
markers of circadian disruption, including the development of time-
of-day-independent biomarkers that may be used in human studies,
such as a set of liver-transcriptome-based biomarkers recently reported
by Van Dycke et al. (2015).
Studies to evaluate effects of light as a direct effector have primarily
altered the light timing or level and have usually exposed animals to
continuous bright light, constant dim light in the dark phase, or inter-
mittent light exposure in the dark phase (e.g., 1-minute exposure to
light every few hours) or shortened or lengthened the photoperiods of
light and dark, with 12-hour light-dark days for the control groups.
The Panel suggested that animal facilities should be constructed with
light-tight rooms for housing animals in the dark phase and that room
lighting specifications should be standardized across all animal studies.
They also noted that while animal studies are informative, nocturnal an-
imals are more sensitive to light than humans, and it is therefore impor-
tant to translate metrics from animals to humans appropriately. Dim
light in animal studies reported in the peer-reviewed literature typically
ranged from 0.21 to 5 lx, with the latter corresponding to light intensity
between a full moon (b1 lx) and twilight (~10 lx).
The Panel suggested studies on dim LAN at lower light levels than
commonly reported in the literature and the use of diurnal models
with both male and female animals to more closely replicate human ex-
posures and effects. As a short-term goal, the Panel suggested
conducting studies in experimental animals using study designs similar
to those used by Nelson and colleagues, which used lower, more biolog-
ically relevant doses of light to better characterize the dose-response re-
lationship. These studies compared health-related outcomes in animals
(mice, rats, or hamsters) exposed to 16 h of bright broad-spectrum
(white) light (150 lx) and 8 h of dim light (5 lx) with outcomes in con-
trol animals exposed to 16 h of bright light (150 lx) and 8 h of complete
darkness (e.g., Aubrecht et al., 2014; Aubrecht et al., 2015; Bedrosian et
al., 2011; Bedrosian et al., 2013a; Fonken et al., 2012).
The Panel also noted that some strains of laboratory mice either (1) do
not produce melatonin even though they have melatonin receptors or (2)
have abnormal patterns of melatonin production (e.g., a nocturnal spike
or production during the light phase). These species differences between
humans and animals should be considered in both the interpretation of
studies in the peer-reviewed literature and in the design of new studies
in mice. The recent discovery that melatonin can adversely affect glu-
cose-induced insulin release from the pancreas raises a mechanistic link
between melatonin and metabolism (Tuomi et al., 2016). In light of this
finding, controlled animal experiments using strains that have intact mel-
atonin production and receptors combined with controlled lighting and
diet will be important for future research. The Panel also noted a need
for the use of a wider range of animal models in the study of LAN and
shift work, in order to address the nature of species-specific differences
that may be informative for human studies.
3.9. Biomarkers of circadian disruption and adverse outcomes
The classic biomarkers of circadian disruption in humans are core
body temperature, the sleep-wake cycle, and circulating melatonin
and its main metabolite 6-sulfatoxymelatonin, measured most fre-
quently in urine, but also in saliva and blood (Mirick and Davis, 2008).
Less frequently, other circulating hormones, such as cortisol and sex
hormones, have also been measured. Studies using animal models of
shift work or animals exposed to various light regimes most often use
the rhythm of locomotor activity and melatonin (in the light studies)
as biomarkers of circadian disruption. Other measures of circadian dis-
ruption in animal models include body temperature, corticosterone
concentration, and expression of circadian-related and clock-related
genes.
Because the levels of such circadian biomarkers fluctuate with time
of day, sampling at multiple time points is likely to be necessary, espe-
cially among shift workers and others who may or may not be circadi-
an-synchronized. In the past, sampling of melatonin has varied across
studies, with some collecting 24-hour specimens and others collecting
the first morning void. The latter may fairly represent the nightly pro-
duction of night-sleeping people, but may not be a fair measure for
night-working people. The identification of biomarkers that are inde-
pendent of circadian time per se would be useful for large population-
based epidemiological studies. To this end, the Panel referred the NTP
to recent work reporting universal biomarkers of circadian disruption
that are independent of time sampling, which identified 15 genes with
increased expression in mouse liver after simulated chronic jet lag
(Van Dycke et al., 2015). An increased level of the protein encoded by
one of these genes, CD36, was also observed in the serum of jet-lagged
animals, indicating the potential utility of this marker as a non-invasive
biomarker of circadian disruption in human studies.
Other emerging measures of circadian disruption that require more
investigation include measurement of elevated cytokine expression and
other markers of inflammation using commercially available kits; epi-
genetic effects, such as promoter methylation; effects on the
microbiome and resultant health outcomes; genomic characterization
of chronotype or diurnal preference; and genetic polymorphisms that
affect individual differences in the sensitivity to circadian effects and
health risks. An important observation made by the Panel was that
few to no studies have adequately characterized the degree of circadian
disruption in conjunction with the measurement of specific health out-
comes in humans (Roenneberg and Merrow, 2016). The Panel also
noted the need to use multiple biomarkers for circadian disruption in
order to appreciate the desynchronization of individual circadian
rhythms (e.g., desynchronization of the hepatic clock from the SCN
clock or of melatonin rhythm from sleep timing). The Panel noted the
need for specific biomarkers of circadian disruption that are relevant
for understanding the mechanisms and risk for developing specific neg-
ative outcomes.
3.9.1. Protecting public health
The impact on public health from either direct or indirect effects of
electric lighting is of utmost concern. Unnatural light exposures (LAN
and/or dim light during the day) and shift work are very common and
in some cases unavoidable components of our society. In addition, the
potential adverse health outcomes — such as cancers, cardiovascular
disease, obesity, adverse pregnancy outcomes, and metabolic diseases
— are common. Since the March 2016 workshop, the French Agency
for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health & Safety released its
assessment of the health risks associated with night work (ANSES,
2016). It concluded that working at night was associated with “proven”
effects for sleep disturbances (sleep quality, sleep time, and sleepiness
and alertness) and metabolic syndrome, and “probable” effects for cog-
nitive performances, cardiovascular diseases, metabolic-related disor-
ders (obesity or overweight and type 2 diabetes), and breast cancer
and other types of cancer (prostate, ovary, pancreas, and colorectal).
As people will likely continue to work alternative shift schedules, and
society will need to use electric lighting, the key question to ask is,
what reasonable changes can people make to decrease their risk of po-
tential adverse health effects?
1081
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 Although night-shift work presents a complex exposure scenario,
where electric light can be both an effector and an enabler, interven-
tions that minimize the effects of light and shift work on circadian dis-
ruption
may
help
prevent
adverse
health
outcomes.
Ideally,
interventions could be implemented now, rather than after waiting
until studies evaluating the mechanisms of disease and intervention
are completed. To date, several experimental studies of sleep in humans
have evaluated the effects of lighting characteristics — such as level, du-
ration, wavelength, and biological timing — on biomarkers of circadian
disruption, such as melatonin, cortisol, and body temperature. For addi-
tional information, see workshop background materials available at
http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/go/workshop_ALAN. Some studies have also
evaluated whether interventions such as using blue-light-blocking gog-
gles affect circadian biology. Other studies suggest that using light
sources with low emission at short wavelengths minimizes melatonin
suppression without greatly affecting performance and alertness at
night (Kayumov et al., 2005; Rahman et al., 2017; Van de Werken et
al., 2013).
The American Medical Association recently advised minimizing and
controlling short-wavelength (blue) and light-emitting-diode lighting
because of health and safety concerns (http://www.ama-assn.org/
ama/ama-wire/post/physicians-timely-public-health-issues). It should
be noted, however, that levels of outdoor LAN exposures at night are
much lower (recommended average horizontal illuminance is 18 phot-
opic lux (Illuminating Engineering Society, 2014), which is approxi-
mately 6 photopic lux at eye level) than light levels experienced by
shift workers working at night (between 50 and 100 photopic lux at
the eye, with some exposures exceeding 200 lx (Hunter and Figueiro,
2017)).
The Panel noted that industry is becoming aware of the potential ad-
verse effects of short-wavelength light at night, as it provides electronic-
device users the opportunity to reduce short-wavelength light emis-
sions from the screen. Nonetheless, recommendations focused only on
reducing exposure to short-wavelength light may not prevent adverse
health outcomes, because other lighting characteristics, such as the
amount and duration of exposure, play a role in how LAN affects noctur-
nal melatonin production and broader circadian function. One potential
future strategy for mitigating against cancer risk or treatment failures
may be the use of “near”-physiological melatonin supplementation or
replacement, especially in high-risk groups for which the type of circa-
dian disruption involved is restricted to nighttime melatonin suppres-
sion. Other potential interventions may focus on meal timing and diet.
Studies in experimental animals have also investigated interven-
tions in models of depression and stroke damage after exposure to
LAN, such as using red light instead of blue light, to minimize adverse
health outcomes. For example, a Panel member presented data from a
study that found less depression-like behavior and fewer alterations in
neuronal structure in hamsters exposed to dim red light during the
dark phase than in hamsters exposed to dim white or dim blue light
during the dark phase (Bedrosian et al., 2013b). The Panel's advice on
improving exposure and outcome assessments and studying mecha-
nisms will help inform intervention strategies.
4. Conclusions
An important outcome of the workshop was to increase the visibility
of these pervasive and often unavoidable exposures and their associa-
tions with potential adverse health effects. Same-day attendees, either
in person or via the webinar, exceeded 150 people from diverse organi-
zations, including government, industry, academia, and non-profits,
along with other concerned citizens. Videos of the workshop and sum-
mary materials remain available on the NTP website (http://ntp.niehs.
nih.gov/go/workshop_ALAN).
The workshop deliberations provided input on approaches for
conducting health hazard evaluations, such as guidance on problem for-
mulation, protocol development (e.g., types of studies to include and
exclude), interpretation of data from various animal models, and factors
to consider when trying to synthesize across different bodies of evi-
dence (see Boxes 1 and 2 for key issues). NTP will use this input in its
Box 1
Key issues for evaluating health effects associated with electric light.
• Many characteristics of electric light exposure are related to
circadian disruption, including level, spectrum, distribution,
timing, duration, and photic history. In addition, light expo-
sure during the day influences nighttime light sensitivity, so
attention to the daily pattern of light exposure is important
for maintaining health.
• In addition to direct effects of unnatural light at night (LAN),
LAN enables activities that allow individuals to eat, sleep,
and conduct other activities 24/7, which is associated with
circadian disruption and adverse health effects.
• Shift work is a complex exposure scenario, involving both ex-
posure to light and activities enabled by light.
• LAN may have a significant public health impact due to the
pervasive exposure and its potential to increase the risk of
common diseases, such as cancer, obesity, and heart dis-
ease.
• Understanding potential mechanisms and characteristics of
light or shift work that are related to circadian disruption or
biomarkers of disease may help identify interventions to pro-
tect public health.
Box 2
Research needs for the field.
• Conduct field studies on light exposures using calibrated de-
vices, mobile applications, and detailed questionnaire data
that can be scaled up for use in large epidemiology studies.
• Collect information (e.g., questionnaires, biomarkers) that
provides comprehensive characterization of shift work (e.g.,
scheduling and nature) and other “exposures,” such as light
exposure and sleep and eating patterns.
• Develop and test interventions for shift workers that minimize
the effects of light and shift work on circadian disruption and
thereby help prevent adverse safety and health outcomes.
• Develop non-circadian markers of circadian disruption that
could be employed in epidemiological and intervention stud-
ies.
• Measure biomarkers at multiple time points, to determine op-
timal times for larger-scale studies.
• Conduct studies in animals to model relevant components of
shift-work exposure on biomarkers of circadian function and
health outcomes.
• Conduct studies in animals that involve both acute and chron-
ic repeated phase shifts in the light-dark cycle, exposure to
constant light, feeding at the “wrong” time of day, and acute-
ly or chronically shortened sleep. Such studies have the po-
tential to elucidate mechanisms by which disrupted sleep or
circadian rhythms lead to adverse health outcomes, and for
the exploitation of these models for testing therapeutic inter-
ventions (Fig. 5).
• Conduct studies in animals with dim LAN at lower light levels,
and use diurnal models to more closely replicate human expo-
sures and effects.
• Evaluate interactions between chemical and light exposures
in humans and animals.
1082
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 cancer hazard evaluation for review of night shift work and electric-
light exposures for the RoC.
Delineating research gaps and study-design considerations will help
ensure that future studies more comprehensively characterize and mea-
sure the relevant light-related exposures and link these exposures to
additional and time-independent biomarkers of circadian disruption
and to biomarkers of adverse health outcomes (see Box 2). In this
way, existing information on interventions can be supplemented with
additional information, leading to realistic, implementable, and effec-
tive intervention strategies to minimize the occurrence of adverse
health outcomes due to these exposures.
Funding
This research did not receive any specific grants from funding agen-
cies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Disclaimer
The findings and conclusions in this manuscript are those of the au-
thor(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the National Tox-
icology Program or the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Gloria Jahnke, Dr. Katie
Pelch, Dr. Kyla Taylor, Ms. Whitney Mitchell, and Ms. Courtney Skuce
for their support at the workshop or for preparation of background ma-
terials for the workshop.
References
ANSES, 2016. French agency for food, environmental and occupational health & safety.
Available. https://www.anses.fr/en.
Aubrecht, T.G., Weil, Z.M., Nelson, R.J., 2014. Dim light at night interferes with the devel-
opment of the short-day phenotype and impairs cell-mediated immunity in Siberian
hamsters (Phodopus sungorus). J. Exp. Zool. A Ecol. Genet. Physiol. 321, 450–456.
Aubrecht, T.G., Jenkins, R., Nelson, R.J., 2015. Dim light at night increases body mass of fe-
male mice. Chronobiol. Int. 32, 557–560.
Bedrosian, T.A., Fonken, L.K., Walton, J.C., Nelson, R.J., 2011. Chronic exposure to dim light
at night suppresses immune responses in Siberian hamsters. Biol. Lett. 7, 468–471.
Bedrosian, T.A., Aubrecht, T.G., Kaugars, K.E., Weil, Z.M., Nelson, R.J., 2013a. Artificial light
at night alters delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction in response to acute stress in Si-
berian hamsters. Brain Behav. Immun. 34, 39–42.
Bedrosian, T.A., Vaughn, C.A., Galan, A., Daye, G., Weil, Z.M., Nelson, R.J., 2013b. Nocturnal
light exposure impairs affective responses in a wavelength-dependent manner.
J. Neurosci. 33, 13081–13087.
Blair, A., Stewart, P., Lubin, J.H., Forastiere, F., 2007. Methodological issues regarding con-
founding and exposure misclassification in epidemiological studies of occupational
exposures. Am. J. Ind. Med. 50, 199–207.
Blask, D.E., Brainard, G.C., Dauchy, R.T., Hanifin, J.P., Davidson, L.K., Krause, J.A., et al., 2005.
Melatonin-depleted blood from premenopausal women exposed to light at night
stimulates growth of human breast cancer xenografts in nude rats. Cancer Res. 65,
11174–11184.
Blask, D.E., Dauchy, R.T., Brainard, G.C., Hanifin, J.P., 2009. Circadian stage-dependent inhi-
bition of human breast cancer metabolism and growth by the nocturnal melatonin
signal: consequences of its disruption by light at night in rats and women. Integr.
Cancer Ther. 8, 347–353.
Blask, D.E., Hill, S.M., Dauchy, R.T., Xiang, S., Yuan, L., Duplessis, T., et al., 2011. Circadian
regulation of molecular, dietary, and metabolic signaling mechanisms of human
breast cancer growth by the nocturnal melatonin signal and the consequences of
its disruption by light at night. J. Pineal Res. 51, 259–269.
Blask, D.E., Dauchy, R.T., Dauchy, E.M., Mao, L., Hill, S.M., Greene, M.W., et al., 2014. Light
exposure at night disrupts host/cancer circadian regulatory dynamics: impact on the
Warburg effect, lipid signaling and tumor growth prevention. PLoS One 9, e102776.
Boubekri, M., Cheung, I.N., Reid, K.J., Wang, C.H., Zee, P.C., 2014. Impact of windows and
daylight exposure on overall health and sleep quality of office workers: a case-control
pilot study. J. Clin. Sleep Med. 10, 603–611.
Brainard, G.C., Hanifin, J.P., Greeson, J.M., Byrne, B., Glickman, G., Gerner, E., et al., 2001.
Action spectrum for melatonin regulation in humans: evidence for a novel circadian
photoreceptor. J. Neurosci. 21, 6405–6412.
Chang, A.M., Scheer, F.A., Czeisler, C.A., 2011. The human circadian system adapts to prior
photic history. J. Physiol. 589, 1095–1102.
Chellappa, S.L., Gordijn, M.C., Cajochen, C., 2011. Can light make us bright? Effects of light
on cognition and sleep. Prog. Brain Res. 190, 119–133.
Crowley, S.J., Carskadon, M.A., 2010. Modifications to weekend recovery sleep delay circa-
dian phase in older adolescents. Chronobiol. Int. 27, 1469–1492.
Dauchy, R.T., Xiang, S., Mao, L., Brimer, S., Wren, M.A., Yuan, L., et al., 2014. Circadian and
melatonin disruption by exposure to light at night drives intrinsic resistance to ta-
moxifen therapy in breast cancer. Cancer Res. 74, 4099–4110.
De Rezende, L.F., Rodrigues Lopes, M., Rey-Lopez, J.P., Matsudo, V.K., Luiz, Odo C., 2014.
Sedentary behavior and health outcomes: an overview of systematic reviews. PLoS
One 9, e105620.
Dumont, M., Paquet, J., 2014. Progressive decrease of melatonin production over consec-
utive days of simulated night work. Chronobiol. Int. 31, 1231–1238.
Falchi, F., Cinzano, P., Duriscoe, D., Kyba, C.C., Elvidge, C.D., Baugh, K., et al., 2016. The new
world atlas of artificial night sky brightness. Sci. Adv. 2, e1600377.
Figueiro, M., Overington, D., 2015. Self-luminous devices and melatonin suppression in
adolescents. Light. Res. Technol. 48, 966–975.
Figueiro, M.G., Steverson, B., Heerwagen, J., Kampschroer, K., Hunter, C.M., Gonzales, K., et
al., 2017. The impact of daytime light exposures on sleep and mood in office workers.
Sleep Health 3, 204–215.
Filipski, E., King, V.M., Li, X., Granda, T.G., Mormont, M.C., Claustrat, B., et al., 2003. Disruption of
circadian coordination accelerates malignant growth in mice. Pathol. Biol. 51, 216–219.
Fonken, L.K., Kitsmiller, E., Smale, L., Nelson, R.J., 2012. Dim nighttime light impairs cogni-
tion and provokes depressive-like responses in a diurnal rodent. J. Biol. Rhythm. 27,
319–327.
Garde, A.H., Hansen, J., Kolstad, H.A., Larsen, A.D., Hansen, A.M., 2016. How do different
definitions of night shift affect the exposure assessment of night work? Chronobiol.
Int. 33, 595–598.
Glickman, G., Webb, I.C., Elliott, J.A., Baltazar, R.M., Reale, M.E., Lehman, M.N., et al., 2012.
Photic sensitivity for circadian response to light varies with photoperiod. J. Biol.
Rhythm. 27, 308–318.
Grimaldi, D., Carter, J.R., Van Cauter, E., Leproult, R., 2016. Adverse impact of sleep restric-
tion and circadian misalignment on autonomic function in healthy young adults. Hy-
pertension 68, 243–250.
Hansen, J., Lassen, C.F., 2012. Nested case-control study of night shift work and breast can-
cer risk among women in the Danish military. Occup. Environ. Med. 69, 551–556.
Haus, E.L., Smolensky, M.H., 2013. Shift work and cancer risk: potential mechanistic roles
of circadian disruption, light at night, and sleep deprivation. Sleep Med. Rev. 17,
273–284.
Hébert, M., Martin, S.K., Lee, C., Eastman, C.I., 2002. The effects of prior light history on the
suppression of melatonin by light in humans. J. Pineal Res. 33, 198–203.
Hunter, C.M., Figueiro, M.G., 2017. Measuring light at night and melatonin levels in shift
workers: a review of the literature. Biol. Res. Nurs. 19, 365–374.
IARC, 2010. Shift work. Painting, Firefighting, and Shiftwork. vol. 98. International Agency
for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, pp. 563–764.
Illnerova, H., Vanecek, J., Hoffmann, K., 1989. Different mechanisms of phase delays and
phase advances of the circadian rhythm in rat pineal N-acetyltransferase activity.
J. Biol. Rhythm. 4, 187–200.
Jermendy, G., Nadas, J., Hegyi, I., Vasas, I., Hidvegi, T., 2012. Assessment of cardiometabolic
risk among shift workers in Hungary. Health Qual. Life Outcomes 10, 18.
Juda, M., Vetter, C., Roenneberg, T., 2013. Chronotype modulates sleep duration, sleep
quality, and social jet lag in shift-workers. J. Biol. Rhythm. 28, 141–151.
Kandalepas, P.C., Mitchell, J.W., Gillette, M.U., 2016. Melatonin signal transduction path-
ways require E-box-mediated transcription of Per1 and er2 to reset the SCN clock
at dusk. PLoS One 11, e0157824.
Kayumov, L., Casper, R.F., Hawa, R.J., Perelman, B., Chung, S.A., Sokalsky, S., et al., 2005.
Blocking low-wavelength light prevents nocturnal melatonin suppression with no
adverse effect on performance during simulated shift work. J. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 90, 2755–2761.
Leproult, R., Holmback, U., Van Cauter, E., 2014. Circadian misalignment augments
markers of insulin resistance and inflammation, independently of sleep loss. Diabetes
63, 1860–1869.
Lucas, R.J., Peirson, S.N., Berson, D.M., Brown, T.M., Cooper, H.M., Czeisler, C.A., et al., 2014.
Measuring and using light in the melanopsin age. Trends Neurosci. 37, 1–9.
Mirick, D.K., Davis, S., 2008. Melatonin as a biomarker of circadian dysregulation. Cancer
Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 17, 3306–3313.
Nea, F.M., Kearney, J., Livingstone, M.B., Pourshahidi, L.K., Corish, C.A., 2015. Dietary and
lifestyle habits and the associated health risks in shift workers. Nutr. Res. Rev. 28,
143–166.
Ohayon, M.M., Milesi, C., 2016. Artificial outdoor nighttime lights associate with altered
sleep behavior in the american general population. Sleep 39, 1311–1320.
Pijpe, A., Slottje, P., van Pelt, C., Stehmann, F., Kromhout, H., van Leeuwen, F.E., et al., 2014.
The nightingale study: rationale, study design and baseline characteristics of a pro-
spective cohort study on shift work and breast cancer risk among nurses. BMC Cancer
14, 47.
Rahman, S.A., St Hilaire, M.A., Lockley, S.W., 2017. The effects of spectral tuning of evening
ambient light on melatonin suppression, alertness and sleep. Physiol. Behav. 177,
221–229.
Rea, M.S., Figueiro, M.G., Bullough, J.D., Bierman, A., 2005. A model of phototransduction
by the human circadian system. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 50, 213–228.
Rea, M.S., Figueiro, M.G., Bierman, A., Bullough, J.D., 2010. Circadian light. J. Circadian
Rhythms 8, 2.
Reddy,
A.B.,
Field,
M.D.,
Maywood,
E.S.,
Hastings,
M.H.,
2002.
Differential
resynchronisation of circadian clock gene expression within the suprachiasmatic nu-
clei of mice subjected to experimental jet lag. J. Neurosci. 22, 7326–7330.
Roenneberg, T., Merrow, M., 2016. The circadian clock and human health. Curr. Biol. 26,
R432–R443.
Roenneberg, T., Allebrandt, K.V., Merrow, M., Vetter, C., 2012. Social jetlag and obesity.
Curr. Biol. 22, 939–943.
1083
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
 Smith, K.A., Schoen, M.W., Czeisler, C.A., 2004. Adaptation of human pineal melatonin
suppression by recent photic history. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 89, 3610–3614.
Smolensky, M.H., Hermida, R.C., Reinberg, A., Sackett-Lundeen, L., Portaluppi, F., 2016. Cir-
cadian disruption: new clinical perspective of disease pathology and basis for
chronotherapeutic intervention. Chronobiol. Int. 1–19.
Society, Illuminating Engineering, 2014. Roadway Lighting. ANSI/IES RP-8-14. Illuminat-
ing Engineering Society, New York, NY.
Stevens, R.G., 1987. Electric power use and breast cancer: a hypothesis. Am. J. Epidemiol.
125, 556–561.
Stevens, R.G., 2011. Testing the light-at-night (LAN) theory for breast cancer causation.
Chronobiol. Int. 28, 653–656.
Stevens, R.G., Hansen, J., Costa, G., Haus, E., Kauppinen, T., Aronson, K.J., et al., 2011. Con-
siderations of circadian impact for defining “shift work” in cancer studies: IARC work-
ing group report. Occup. Environ. Med. 68, 154–162.
Stevens, R.G., Brainard, G.C., Blask, D.E., Lockley, S.W., Motta, M.E., 2014. Breast cancer and
circadian disruption from electric lighting in the modern world. CA Cancer J. Clin. 64,
207–218.
Straif, K., Baan, R., Grosse, Y., Secretan, B., El Ghissassi, F., Bouvard, V., et al., 2007. Carcino-
genicity of shift-work, painting, and fire-fighting. Lancet Oncol. 8, 1065–1066.
Summa, K.C., Turek, F.W., 2014. Chapter 4. Biomedical effects of circadian rhythm distur-
bances. In: Redline, S., Berger, N.A. (Eds.), Impact of Sleep and Sleep Disturbances on
Obesity and Cancer. Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 77–99.
Thapan, K., Arendt, J., Skene, D.J., 2001. An action spectrum for melatonin suppression: ev-
idence for a novel non-rod, non-cone photoreceptor system in humans. J. Physiol.
535, 261–267.
Tuomi, T., Nagorny, C.L., Singh, P., Bennet, H., Yu, Q., Alenkvist, I., et al., 2016. Increased
melatonin signaling is a risk factor for type 2 diabetes. Cell Metab. 23, 1067–1077.
Van Amelsvoort, L.G., Jansen, N.W., Kant, I., 2006. Smoking among shift workers: more
than a confounding factor. Chronobiol. Int. 23, 1105–1113.
Van de Werken, M., Gimenez, M.C., de Vries, B., Beersma, D.G., Gordijn, M.C., 2013. Short-
wavelength attenuated polychromatic white light during work at night: limited mel-
atonin suppression without substantial decline of alertness. Chronobiol. Int. 30,
843–854.
Van Dycke, K.C., Pennings, J.L., van Oostrom, C.T., van Kerkhof, L.W., van Steeg, H., van der
Horst, G.T., et al., 2015. Biomarkers for circadian rhythm disruption independent of
time of day. PLoS One 10, e0127075.
Vetter, C., Fischer, D., Matera, J.L., Roenneberg, T., 2015. Aligning work and circadian time
in shift workers improves sleep and reduces circadian disruption. Curr. Biol. 25,
907–911.
Voigt, R.M., Forsyth, C.B., Green, S.J., Mutlu, E., Engen, P., Vitaterna, M.H., et al., 2014. Cir-
cadian disorganization alters intestinal microbiota. PLoS One 9, e97500.
Ward, E.M., Schulte, P.A., Straif, K., Hopf, N.B., Caldwell, J.C., Carreon, T., et al., 2010. Re-
search recommendations for selected iarc-classified agents. Environ. Health Perspect.
118, 1355–1362.
Xiang, S., Dauchy, R.T., Hauch, A., Mao, L., Yuan, L., Wren, M.A., et al., 2015. Doxorubicin
resistance in breast cancer is driven by light at night-induced disruption of the circa-
dian melatonin signal. J. Pineal Res. 59, 60–69.
1084
R.M. Lunn et al. / Science of the Total Environment 607–608 (2017) 1073–1084
