 1
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports
In Vivo Quantification of Placental 
Insufficiency by BOLD MRI: A 
Human Study
Jie Luo1,2, Esra Abaci Turk1,2, Carolina Bibbo3, Borjan Gagoski1, Drucilla J. Roberts4, Mark 
Vangel5, Clare M. Tempany-Afdhal6, Carol Barnewolt7, Judy Estroff7, Arvind Palanisamy 
 
8, William H. Barth  
9, Chloe Zera3, Norberto Malpica2,10, Polina Golland11,12, Elfar 
Adalsteinsson2,11,13, Julian N. Robinson3 & Patricia Ellen Grant1
Fetal health is critically dependent on placental function, especially placental transport of oxygen from 
mother to fetus. When fetal growth is compromised, placental insufficiency must be distinguished from 
modest genetic growth potential. If placental insufficiency is present, the physician must trade off the 
risk of prolonged fetal exposure to placental insufficiency against the risks of preterm delivery. Current 
ultrasound methods to evaluate the placenta are indirect and insensitive. We propose to use Blood-
Oxygenation-Level-Dependent (BOLD) MRI with maternal hyperoxia to quantitatively assess mismatch 
in placental function in seven monozygotic twin pairs naturally matched for genetic growth potential. 
In-utero BOLD MRI time series were acquired at 29 to 34 weeks gestational age. Maps of oxygen Time-
To-Plateau (TTP) were obtained in the placentas by voxel-wise fitting of the time series. Fetal brain 
and liver volumes were measured based on structural MR images. After delivery, birth weights were 
obtained and placental pathological evaluations were performed. Mean placental TTP negatively 
correlated with fetal liver and brain volumes at the time of MRI as well as with birth weights. Mean 
placental TTP positively correlated with placental pathology. This study demonstrates the potential of 
BOLD MRI with maternal hyperoxia to quantify regional placental function in vivo.
Monitoring placental function in vivo and in real time is crucial for optimizing fetal and maternal outcomes as 
placental dysfunction has been linked to numerous fetal and maternal disorders from intrauterine demise to 
maternal cardiovascular disease1. Current clinical management of suspected placental dysfunction often relies 
on ultrasound assessment of fetal size and amniotic fluid volume as well as Doppler assessments of blood flow in 
the umbilical arteries and other fetal vessels to indirectly assess placental function. None of these measurements 
offers direct information about gas or nutrient exchange in the placenta2. The ability of these tests to distin-
guish the fetus with low genetic growth potential from the one compromised by placental dysfunction is limited. 
Since early delivery is often recommended for placental dysfunction, determining who should be delivered and 
when remains a challenge, as preterm birth is also associated with unfavorable outcomes3, 4. It is plausible that 
direct evaluation of regional placental function in vivo could improve diagnostic accuracy and risk stratification 
when there is a suspicion of placental dysfunction. In monochorionic (therefore monozygotic) twins, the genetic 
growth potential, gestational age, as well as maternal environmental factors are naturally controlled within each 
1Fetal-Neonatal Neuroimaging and Developmental Science Center, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, 02115, USA. 
2Madrid-MIT M+Vision Consortium, RLE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 02139, USA. 3Maternal 
Fetal Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 02115, USA. 4Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, 02114, USA. 5Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 02114, USA. 6Radiology, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, Boston, 02115, USA. 7Radiology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, 02115, USA. 8Anaesthesia, 
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 02115, USA. 9Obstetrics and Gynecology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, 02114, USA. 10Medical Image Analysis and Biometry Laboratory, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, 28933, 
Spain. 11Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 02139, USA. 
12Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 02139, 
USA. 13Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 02139, USA. 
Jie Luo, Esra Abaci Turk, Julian N. Robinson and Patricia Ellen Grant contributed equally to this work. Correspondence 
and requests for materials should be addressed to P.E.G. (email: Ellen.Grant@childrens.harvard.edu)
Received: 8 February 2017
Accepted: 4 May 2017
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
twin pair. This provides an ideal opportunity to investigate the potential of new placental biomarkers, since dis-
cordance in fetal growth can be more clearly attributed to twin differences in placental function.
The placenta serves as a critical interface between mother and fetus enabling gas and nutrient exchange. The 
human placenta is enclosed by the chorionic plate on the fetal side and the basal plate on the maternal side 
(Fig. 1). Fetal arteries pass through the umbilical cord and branch into the chorionic plate, then enter small 
structures called villi, which are bathed in maternal blood. Maternal blood perfuses these villi by entering the 
intervillous spaces via spiral arteries and returning via venous openings that lead back to the uterine veins. Villous 
veins return the oxygenated blood to the fetus via the umbilical vein. The placenta is divided into cotyledons 
with varying numbers of villi and a varying vascular supply5. Flow in both fetal capillaries and the intervillous 
space enables exchange of nutrients and waste products between the mother and the fetus6. In monochorionic 
diamniotic twin placentas, each twin is enclosed in its own amniotic sac. The placentas share one chorionic plate, 
with two umbilical cord insertions, one in each amnionic sac, and one basal plate, thus one maternal blood pool 
(Fig. 1A). Although fetal vessels of the twins might form anastomoses, in the absence of the twin-to-twin transfu-
sion syndrome5, each twin can be considered to have its own placental unit.
Previously, gadolinium based contrast agents have been used to assess placental function in primates, provid-
ing identification of maternal perfusion domains and associated regional maternal blood flow7. In human single-
ton placentas associated with severely growth restricted fetuses, dynamic contrast enhancement (DCE) revealed 
slow, patchy placental perfusion compared to controls8. However, given concerns that fetal exposure to gadolin-
ium maybe associated with a higher risk of adverse outcomes9, alternate methods to assess placental perfusion are 
desired. Blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) MRI with hyperoxia is a promising alternative to gadolinium 
based approaches as it has been used in prior human studies to measure cerebral perfusion and blood volume10.
BOLD signal change in the placenta is affected by maternal blood in the intervillous space (volume fraction 
40%) and fetal blood in the fetal capillaries (volume fraction 10%)11. Since neither compartment is saturated by 
oxygen under ambient conditions (80% and 60% respectively)12, when oxygenation level increases, deoxygenated 
hemoglobin [dHb] content drops, causing a BOLD signal increase due to a lower blood R2*. BOLD MRI has been 
suggested as a potential tool for visualizing placental oxygenation and BOLD MRI signal increases in the pla-
centa and fetal organs due to maternal hyperoxia have been previously reported13–15. However, prior BOLD MRI 
hyperoxia studies of pregnant women focused on the average organ signal change and did not capture important 
spatiotemporal variations. Moreover, no quantitative biomarkers, such as perfusion associated with placental 
function have been investigated in previous BOLD studies.
In this paper we perform detailed spatiotemporal analysis of the BOLD MRI contrast generated by tran-
sient elevation of blood oxygen saturation, derive an image-based biomarker and test its performance in mon-
ochorionic diamniotic twin placentas against important clinical indicators such as fetal brain and liver volume 
as well as birth weight. The naturally matched genetic growth potential, maternal environment and gestational 
age of co-twins remove these confounding factors and facilitate interpretations of the findings. The proposed 
non-invasive method for characterizing maternal placental perfusion on a regional basis with a parameter more 
directly related to regional placental vascularity and gas exchange represents an important step towards quanti-
fying the relationship between in vivo placental perfusion, in vivo nutrient transport and fetal growth in humans.
Results
Regional placental signal change with maternal hyperoxgenation. 
The first step in the placental 
image processing pipeline is a non-rigid body motion correction to provide good alignment of the deformable 
placental structure and improved contrast for our spatiotemporal analysis16 (Fig. S1). Figure 2 shows a BOLD 
MRI (gradient recalled echo planar imaging (GRE-EPI), with T2* = 1/R2* weighting) of one placenta at baseline, 
hyperoxia, and normoxia respectively. In these images, the maternal side of the placenta is on the left and the fetal 
side on the right. The observed intensity gradient from left to right is seen most dramatically in Fig. 2A. The coty-
ledon structures characterized by the consistent bright-dark-bright pattern on the fetal side, is best appreciated in 
Fig. 2D–F, which are views of the placenta perpendicular to those in Fig. 2A–C respectively. BOLD images show 
Figure 1. Schematic diagrams depicting (A) the main components of a monochorionic diamniotic twin 
gestation. The magnified views in (B) represent the maternal placental circulation (left) and the fetal placental 
circulation (right) with an inset cartoon (C) representing oxygen transport from mother to the fetuses. 
Oxygen exchange between maternal hemoglobin and fetal hemoglobin by free diffusion across the interhemal 
membrane, and is modulated by the oxygen gradient, membrane permeability, and blood flow in both 
circulations.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
dramatic signal intensity changes with maternal hyperoxia as oxygen moves from the maternal to the fetal side of 
the placenta. This is better appreciated when viewed dynamically (SI Movie).
Regional placental oxygen delivery timing and placental Pathology. 
Regional placental oxygen 
delivery is modulated by the blood flow in both maternal and fetal circulations, membrane permeability, and 
oxygen pressure gradient. While there is currently no way to directly quantify oxygen content in the placenta 
during hyperoxia non-invasively, we utilize the spatiotemporal feature of BOLD MRI time series to quantify the 
oxygen delivery timing. The dynamic of oxygenation in the placenta was modeled as a step function representing 
the oxygen exposure paradigm convoluted with a gamma function representing the hemodynamic response. 
Time-to-plateau (TTP) maps of placentas (i.e. the time that the signal change due to the regional oxygenation 
reaches to the plateau) were obtained after fitting the signal to the model. For this study, the histopathology was 
reviewed by an experienced placental pathologist blinded to the MRI findings, as histology is the current gold 
standard for documenting placental dysfunction. We observed that regional oxygen TTP had a different distribu-
tion in placentas confirmed to have moderate to severe placental pathology when compared to healthy placentas. 
In healthy placentas, the TTP values were near zero and relatively homogeneous across the placenta, with a pat-
tern following that of the cotyledon structure (Fig. 3). In pathological placentas, the TTP values were delayed and 
inhomogeneous. For example, the placenta shown in Fig. 3 had extensive fetal vascular malperfusion (avascular 
villi) in the entire placenta as well as chorangiosis in the placental component supplying twin B. The TTP map 
shows diffusely delayed TTP compared to the TTP distribution in the normal placenta, with the lower lobe (cor-
responding to twin B) more severely affected. This finding suggests that the vascular proliferation associated with 
chorioangiosis is inefficient at compensating for poor placental perfusion.
The correlation between the average TTP and our overall pathology severity score was significant across all 
subjects. Regional TTPs for individual twins with normal or mild placental pathology were significantly shorter 
than those with moderate to severe pathology (p < 0.01). Even after including gestational age as a confounding 
factor, the association remained significant (p = 0.03).
Regional placental oxygen time-to-plateau compared to fetal brain and liver volumes and birth 
weight. 
We investigated the relationship between placental TTP and measures of fetal growth. The placenta 
region for each twin was delineated based on umbilical cord insertion, as illustrated in Fig. 4A. The brains and 
the livers of twin fetuses were segmented on the HASTE images acquired at the time of placental assessment 
(Fig. 4B) to explore correlations in organ volume and regional placental oxygen delivery. In all twin pairs, cover-
ing a spectrum of birth weight discordance from 3.7% to 30.3%, including those born appropriate-for-gestational 
age (AGA) and those born small-for-gestational age (SGA), the larger placental TTP values were associated with 
a smaller brain (p = 0.06), smaller liver (p = 0.06) and smaller body weight (p = 0.008), using the Friedman rank 
sum test. The case illustrated in Fig. 4A,B corresponds to the red points in Fig. 4C–E. In this case, the average TTP 
for the selected regions was 1.4 min for twin A and 3.0 min for twin B. Twin A had larger brain volume (168 cm3 
vs. 124 cm3) and liver volume (72 cm3 vs. 50 cm3) compared to twin B. In these twins, the birth weight discordance 
exceeded 20%17, and the placental pathological score was worse (higher) in the smaller twin.
Figure 2. Example cross-sections of a placenta (gestational age 31.4 weeks) during different stages of maternal 
hyperoxia. (A–C) BOLD images of the same cross-section view, at baseline (Fraction of inspired oxygen, FiO2 
= 0.21), during hyperoxia (FiO2 = 1.0), and post hyperoxia. Dashed line in B defines the plane of section for 
images (D–F). (D–F) cross-sectional views orthogonal to (A–C) respectively. Note multiple hyperintense 
regions in a cotyledon-like distribution. The temporal pattern of signal instensity from baseline to hyperoxia 
and back is further investigated in the cotyledon circled in B and E in Supplementary Materials.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
Across subjects, average TTP is significantly correlated with brain volume (r = −
0.86, p = 0.02), and liver 
volume (r = −
0.79, p = 0.05), using Spearman correlation adjusted for twin pairs (Fig. 4C,D). The correlations 
Figure 3. From left to right: BOLD images, TTP maps, histogram of TTP distribution and histology (10X). 
One control (top) is compared to one case with abnormal placental pathology (bottom). Yellow dashes in A 
and E outline the placenta. For healthy subjects, TTP values were short and placental histology was normal. For 
pathological cases, TTP values were longer and less uniform (blue regions in (F) and blue box in (G)). Arrows in 
H point to avascular villi and the star identifies chorangiosis.
Figure 4. Illustrations of segmentation volumes and of mean time-to-plateau (TTP). (A) placenta for the 
discordant twin pair with indication of ROI segmentation used for the average TTP calculation. (B) 3D view of 
segmented fetal brains and livers in the corresponding discordant twin pair (red points in (C–E) below). (C–E) 
Brain volume, liver volume and birth weight respectively as a function of the average TTP. The brain and liver 
volume were measured at the time of the scan. Twin pairs are connected by solid line, and are assigned same 
color. Hollow circles denotes fetuses that proved to be SGA at birth.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
remained after applying mixed model regression including gestational age as a co-variate and twin pairs as a 
random effect (p = 0.002 for brain volume vs. TTP and p = 0.001 for liver volume vs. TTP). Twin birth weights 
were recorded at delivery, with time from the fetal MRI scan to birth ranging from 0.2 to 5.5 weeks. Significant 
correlation (Spearman, adjusted for twin pairs) was found between the average TTP and birth weight (r = −
0.75, 
p = 0.07) (Fig. 4E). The significance of this correlation improved when mixed model regression was applied 
including gestational age covariates (gestational age at date of MR scan and time from scan until birth) and twin 
pairs as a random effect (p = 0.0003).
Comparisons to ultrasound measurements. 
Routine clinical screening for placental insufficiency 
focuses on estimated fetal weight (EFW) from ultrasound and Doppler velocimetry of the umbilical arteries 
(UmA). In this study, when we include both EFW and TTP in the mixed model to predict birth weight, while 
keeping gestational age as a covariate and twin pairs as a random effect, the TTP showed significance (p = 0.02) 
whereas EFW did not (p = 0.9). Similarly when we include both UmA Doppler grade and TTP in the mixed 
model to predict placenta pathological score, both Doppler and TTP were significant covariates (p = 0.01 vs. 
p = 0.03). Therefore TTP predicted birth weight when EFW did not and TTP significantly contributed to deter-
mination of pathological score when combined with UmA.
Fetal response to maternal hyperoxia. 
The placentas that are associated with SGA fetuses exhibit slower 
rates of Δ
R2* rise from baseline (lower slope) at the beginning of hyperoxia compared to those who prove to be 
AGA at delivery (Δ
R2* per minute: 0.88 s−
1 vs. 1.89 s−
1, p = 0.04, measured at 10 min) as shown in Fig. 5A. This 
is consistent with the finding that average TTP was longer in placentas associated with SGA neonates (p = 0.03). 
However, there was no significant difference in the magnitude of signal change (Δ
R2*) between the two groups 
throughout the oxygen paradigm, suggesting that absolute signal differences are insensitive measures.
Figure 5. Time activity curves of placentas and fetal organs presented as signal intensity change relative to 
baseline (Δ
R2*). Green: mean and standard deviation of Δ
R2* for the organs of AGA fetuses; Red: mean and 
standard deviation of Δ
R2* for the organs of SGA fetuses as defined retrospectively using birth weight. (A) 
placentas, (B) fetal livers, (C) fetal brain.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
In corresponding fetal livers, there were no differences in rates of ΔR2* rise at the onset of hyperoxia but 
significant differences in rate of Δ
R2* decrease after termination of hyperoxia were observed (Fig. 5B). After 
hyperoxia, Δ
R2* fell significantly faster in SGA livers (Δ
R2* per minute: −
0.91 s−
1 for SGA vs. −
0.16 s−
1 for 
AGA, p = 0.002, measured at 23 min), resulting in a significant difference in R2* at 28 min relative to the baseline 
(p = 0.048). Fetal brains also exhibit a similar behavior, although neither the rates of ΔR2* rise nor fall was sig-
nificant. However, the Δ
R2* became significantly lower in SGA brains by approximately 27 min. Placentas asso-
ciated with SGA fetuses tended to reach maximum oxygen level before AGA placentas, with the same tendency 
observed for fetal livers and brains (although these differences were not significant). Interestingly, SGA fetal livers 
and brains had significantly lower R2* values at the end of the post-hyperoxia phase than at baseline.
Discussion
This study demonstrates a novel application of BOLD MRI for assessment of placental insufficiency. We investi-
gated the utility of time-to-plateau (TTP) of the BOLD MRI time series under maternal hyperoxia as a surrogate 
marker for placental oxygen transport. We demonstrated that 1) placental TTP maps depict a regional perfusion 
pattern consistent with the known cotyledon structure; 2) placental TTP was significantly longer in placentas 
with moderate to severe pathology compared to normal to mild pathology; 3) placental TTP within each twin 
pair has a consistent tendency to be longer in the smaller twin; 4) placental TTP is significantly correlated with 
liver and brain volume and birth weight across all subjects, with TTP of fetuses destined to be SGA at birth sig-
nificantly longer than those destined to be AGA. These findings suggest that TTP with maternal hyperoxia is a 
promising in vivo biomarker of placental function.
Regional and temporal variations in TTP (Fig. 3) agree with known regional placental anatomy. For exam-
ple, TTP exhibits a significant negative correlation with gestational age (p = 0.002) that suggests an increase in 
placental perfusion with increasing gestational age. This is consistent with the increased dilation of the spiral 
arteries as gestation transitions from first to the second trimester18. As a result, uterine blood flow19 continues 
to increase linearly from 20 to 38 weeks, with an associated exponential increase in umbilical venous blood flow 
from 20 weeks to term20, 21. Given the small range of gestational ages in this study (29–34 wks), linear mixed 
model is applied when accounting for gestational age as a co-variate. A more detailed exploration of placental 
TTP across gestation in healthy twin and singleton pregnancies is needed to fully characterize TTP dependence 
on gestational age.
In pathological placentas, TTP maps clearly show localized regions with severely delayed TTP and a larger 
range of TTP values compared to normal (Fig. 3). These findings are consistent with a prior gadolinium based 
study of growth restricted singletons8. In addition, placental average TTP values obtained in vivo were in agree-
ment with postnatal pathological assessment, the current gold standard for documenting placental dysfunction. 
Although there was a time lapse between imaging and placental examination (Table S1), we cannot exclude exten-
sion of the pathologies over time. The findings reported herein are those of chronic insult and likely occurred 
long before the delivery. We did not find any acute pathologies, e.g., acute villous edema, meconium pigment, or 
acute chorioamnionitis. Such spatiotemporal information of placental pathophysiology is impossible to obtain 
with current ultrasound systems. Thus TTP provides regional information that may allow physicians to monitor 
placental function longitudinally with more sensitivity. More detailed correlation of regional placental TTP and 
histopathology is required to fully characterize the sensitivity and specificity of TTP for different types of placen-
tal pathology.
In monozygotic twins, the twin pairs are most optimally matched for genetic growth potential, gestational 
age and maternal environment. As a result, discordant twin growth can be attributed primarily to differences in 
regional uterine and placental function. This is an example of environmental influences impacting fetal growth. 
Using the average TTP of each placenta as an indicator of placental oxygen transport, the smaller of the discord-
ant twins (>20% different in estimated weight by fetal US) was associated with a significantly longer average TTP. 
In addition, all seven smaller twins were associated with a longer placental average TTP. In addition we observed 
a significant association between TTP and gestational age. Thus TTP appears to detect a spectrum of placental 
function that correlates with fetal size as well as gestational age. Therefore, TTP is a promising new technique for 
assessing placental health as a function of gestational age.
Quantitative analysis of oxygen concentration changes is challenging because BOLD signal is dependent on 
many biophysical and physiological parameters. The magnitude of placental ΔR2* during hyperoxia reported 
previously in studies performed at 1.5 T differs between studies, for example, ΔR2* = 4.30 ± 1.82 s−
1 in one 
study22 and 2.83 ± 0.63 s−
1 in another study of healthy controls13 (calculated based on reported % signal change). 
In our study Δ
R2* = 9.83 ± 4.49 s−
1 measured during the last 2 min of hyperoxia for healthy subjects, is much 
larger than literature values primarily because we image at the higher field strength of 3 T instead of 1.5 T. The 
increased field strength increases R2* relaxivity and therefore when oxygen binds with deoxyHb, there is a more 
dramatic decrease in R2*. Regional placental physiology can also influence Δ
R2* with hyperoxia. For exam-
ple, in our study pathological placentas had smaller Δ
R2* change during hyperoxia (6.55 ± 3.30 s−
1) compared 
to healthy placentas (although not significant). This is in agreement with observations in intrauterine growth 
restricted mice models vs. control23, 24 and a few cases reported in a human study15. In addition, multiple physio-
logical factors such as hematocrit levels of the blood, binding affinity of fetal hemoglobin and baseline oxygena-
tion levels could affect the capacity for Δ
R2* change during hyperoxia. MR oximetry based on T2 mapping could 
quantify oxygenation level in blood vessels12, however regional placental data are lacking. Quantitative measure-
ments of R2* show promise in normal primate studies25 and may improve our ability to detect consistent changes 
in Δ
R2* with placental pathology. However, due to the challenges of quantitative R2* imaging in humans we 
focused on TTP.
Oxygen delivered from the placenta to the fetus diffuses freely into fetal organs, therefore monitoring fetal 
organ Δ
R2* with maternal hyperoxia provides information on oxygen transport across placenta to the fetus. 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
To understand the observed differences in Δ
R2* of the placenta and fetal organs (Fig. 5), differences in regional 
blood volume fraction and potential blood volume changes during hyperoxia must be considered. The markedly 
different magnitudes of Δ
R2* observed in the placenta, fetal liver and fetal brain are likely due to the markedly 
different blood volume fraction of these organs. As expected, the brain shows the smallest |Δ
R2*|max change, 
(1.65 ± 0.97 s−
1) as it has a much smaller blood volume fraction. The ratio of |Δ
R2*|max for placenta, fetal liver 
and fetal brain are roughly 6:3:1 respectively, which is consistent with the relative blood volume fraction of the 
placenta being much larger than the fetal liver and even larger still than the brain.
Changes in human fetal brain R2* with maternal hyperoxia have not been previously reported. While in fetal 
sheep and mice brain R2* signal changes have been observed during maternal hyperoxia at 1.5 T and 4.7 T23, 
24, R2* signal change was not observed in human fetal brains at 1.5 T14, 26. It is unclear if the magnitude of R2* 
change is minimized by vasoconstriction during hyperoxia. Human fetal Doppler studies of middle cerebral 
arteries during maternal hyperoxia report measureable but inconsistent changes that support both vasodiliatation 
and vasoconstriction27–29. Here, significant increases, albeit small, were detected in fetal brains likely due to the 
increased field strength (3 T) and more sophisticated motion mitigation strategies. How these signal changes are 
modified by changes in fetal cerebral vasoreactivity with gestational age remains unclear.
The decreases in R2* below baseline in the livers and brains of fetuses destined to be SGA, but not their cor-
responding placenta, is intriguing. This is particularly interesting, given that the placenta consumes a significant 
amount of oxygen with normal term placenta, more than 40% of the overall oxygen delivered to uterus30, 31. One 
possibility is that in pathological placentas, the rate of oxygen consumption may not remain constant. Similar 
to high altitude pregnancies, where there is chronic low ambient pO2, the placental metabolism may adjust to 
reduce its own oxygen consumption by switching from oxidative metabolism of carbohydrates to anaerobic glyc-
olysis32. In this chronic case, the fetus is provided with lower O2 and glucose supply, slowing fetal growth32–34. We 
hypothesize a similar physiology occurs in this study, with the insufficient placenta maintaining a lower baseline 
oxygen consumption due to chronic hypoxia. With maternal hyperoxia, placental oxygen extraction may increase 
and continue at a higher rate before the oxygen returns to baseline, resulting in the observed R2* drop in fetal 
organs below baseline. The lack of undershoot in the organs of fetuses destined to be AGA is consistent with the 
observation that in healthy pregnancies, oxidative metabolism in the placental-fetal unit remains constant dur-
ing acute fluctuations of oxygenation35. If our hypothesis is true, a transient hyperoxia episode may prove useful 
in probing the baseline metabolic state of the placenta. This hypothesis, although preliminary, deserves further 
study. Recent advances in 13C imaging of placenta36 may provide additional complimentary information on pla-
cental metabolic shifts with oxygenation.
Accurate determination of placental volume for each twin was not possible, as identification and validation 
of the equator location is not feasible in this study. The patient population is small, as discordant monochorionic 
twins are not common, and recruitment was challenging. Nonetheless, we believe the information gained by 
having fetuses matched for genetics, gestational age and maternal environment enabled us to isolate the effects of 
placental dysfunction.
In summary, in our BOLD imaging study with maternal hyperoxia, average placental TTP correlated posi-
tively with placental histopathological score at birth, negatively with fetal brain and liver volume at time of MRI 
and negatively with birth weight. In monozygotic twin pairs, where the genetic growth potential, gestational age 
and maternal environment are optimally controlled, we show that placental oxygen TTP is consistently longer in 
the smaller of the discordant twin pairs. These results expand existing knowledge of BOLD MRI with maternal 
hyperoxia to demonstrate not only global but also regional placental signal changes with introduction of TTP 
as a quantitative parameter. In this study group, we also show that TTP is better than US biometry and umbil-
ical artery Doppler grade at predicting birth weight, and when combined with umbilical artery Doppler grade 
improves prediction of placental pathology scores. Thus BOLD MRI measures of TTP with maternal hyperoxia is 
a promising in vivo measure of regional placental function.
Materials and Methods
Statement. 
All experimental protocols were approved by a named institutional/licencing committee. 
Specifically, MRI scan on pregnant mothers, ultrasound data collection from obstetric clinical record, follow up 
birth record collection and pathological reports collection were approved by the Instutional Review Board (IRB) 
at the Boston Children’s Hospital. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects, and all methods were carried 
out in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations of IRB, Protocol #00012586.
Subjects. 
This study enrolled seven pairs of monochorionic diamniotic twins, whose gestational age ranged 
from 29 to 34 weeks. Exclusion criteria: Twin-to-Twin Transfusion Syndrome, fetal anomalies, maternal hyper-
tension and any diabetes. Of the 7 study subjects, 6 were Caucasian and one was Asian. The median age was 34 
with a range of 28 to 42 and the median height was 163 cm with a range of 157 to 170 cm. The median BMI was 
23.3 with a range of 21.2 to 27.6, with only two of the patients being overweight and none being obese. Table S1 
reports demographics of the population, prenatal and postnatal data.
Image acquisition. 
MRIs were acquired on a 3 T Skyra scanner (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) 
using a combined 18-channel body and 12-channel spine-receive arrays, while mother remained in left lateral 
position. HASTE images (2 ×
 2 ×
 5 mm3) of the whole uterus was acquired for anatomical reference. BOLD imag-
ing of the whole uterus was collected using single-shot gradient echo EPI sequence with field-of-view (FOV) and 
matrix size adjusted to achieve in plane resolution of 3 ×
 3 mm2, slice thickness of 3 mm, interleaved; TR = 5–8 sec, 
TE = 32–38 ms, FA = 90 deg, BW = 2.3 kHz/px. The number of time frames was adjusted so that the total acquisi-
tion time was 30 min. SAR did not exceed 2 W/kg at any time. Oxygen supply to the mother was alternated from 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
room air with fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 21%, to oxygen (flow rate 15 L/min, FiO2 100%), and back to 
room air via non-rebreathing facial mask during MRI acquisition. Each epoch was 10 min long.
Image processing. 
The acquired images were first corrected for signal non-uniformity and then registered 
to mitigate motion with a non-rigid transformation approach designed for BOLD time series which outperforms 
traditional rigid body motion correction approaches16 (Fig. S1). The bias field accounting for B1 inhomogeneities 
was estimated from averaged selected volumes collected in first 10 minutes by using N4ITK algorithm37, and 
subsequently applied to correct for signal non-uniformity of each volume. For intravolume motion correction, 
each volume was separated into two sub-volumes: even and odd slices, then registered to each other using the 
group-wise approach38. For intervolume motion correction, a reference volume with a least sum of mean square 
error (MSE) difference compared to the rest of the volumes in the series was selected. Then pairwise registration 
was employed between the reference volume and the other volumes. As an initialization, a six degrees of free-
dom rigid transformation as a mapping from the reference volume to the rest of the volumes was estimated. To 
compensate for motion of the deformable fetal body and placenta in the time series, a non-rigid body transfor-
mation was performed following the initial rigid body alignment. To compensate for motion of the brain, which 
is more rigid, a second rigid body transformation was estimated following the initial rigid body alignment. All 
registration steps were carried out in Elastix39, an open source software. ROIs of the placenta and fetal organs 
in the reference frame were manually delineated using ITK-SNAP40, and propagated to all time frames. Outlier 
volume detection was performed based on 1) over-deformation during intravolume motion correction; and 2) 
unexpected average signal intensity change of nearby time frames. The median fraction of outliers discarded for 
placenta was 3.3% (0.9–53.4%), for fetal brain was 22.1% (1.6–85%) and for fetal liver was 15.6% (1.4–34.8%). The 
registered 4D placenta image was subsequently smoothed in the spatial domain by a Gaussian kernel with width 
of 5 pixels, sigma 1.5, and interpolated in the temporal domain followed by a smoothing window of around 1 min 
(8–12 TRs). The indicator of oxygen saturation level change, Δ
R2*, was calculated for placenta and fetal organs, 
as follows:
Δ
= −
−
=
= −
⋅
⋅ Δ
+
⋅ Δ
⁎
⁎
⁎
⁎
R
t
R
R
S t S
TE
r
V
dHb t
V
dHb
t
2 ( )
( 2
2
)
log( ( )/
)/
2
(
[
( )]
[
( )])
(1)
baseline
baseline
F
F
M
M
where r2* is the relaxivity of deoxygenated hemoglobin, VF and VM are the volume fractions of fetal and maternal 
blood, [dHbM], [dHbF] stands for the maternal and fetal deoxygenated hemoglobin concentration repectively. 
When oxygenation level increases, [dHb] drops, which decreases R2* and increases BOLD signal S(t), therefore 
we define Δ
R2* in the way that it increases with the oxygenation level increase.
Using ITK-SNAP, placenta regions corresponding to each twin were determined by tracing umbilical cord that 
connects each fetus to its placenta. The placental tissue corresponding to each twin was manually delineated by 
first identifying the cord insertion for each twin and confirming with an expert radiologist. Second, as the bound-
ary dividing portions of the placenta supplying each twin is not visible, a 5 cm boundary zone half-way between 
the two cords was excluded from analysis. ROIs from each cord to the respective boundary were extended cir-
cumferentially around each cord to define placental regions corresponding to each twin. The fetal brain and liver 
was manually delineated with boundaries supervised and confirmed by expert radiologists.
Similarly to the fMRI studies in the brain41, 42, we employ the Gamma function to capture the shape of the 
hemodynamic response of the placenta. Gamma function fitting was implemented both in the regions-of-interest 
(ROIs) and on voxel-by-voxel basis. The R2* time series in placental tissue are fit to a gamma function convolved 
with the oxygen paradigm using Least-Squares:
α β Δ
=
+
⋅
−Δ
⋅
⊗
Δ
Δ
=
≥Δ
< Δ
α
β
−
− −
Δ
⁎
{
}
R
t
C C
C
C
t
e
P
t
P
t
t
t
2 (
,
,
,
1, 2)
1
2
(
)
( ,
)
( ,
)
1 for
0 for
(2)
t
oxy
oxy
1
(
)/
τ
α
β
=
⋅
−
(
1)
(3)
τ
= Δ +
TTP
(4)
where x is the frame number after onset of signal change of the R2* time series, α
 and β
 are gamma function 
parameters, C1 describes baseline T2* weighted signal, and C2 describes the amplitude of R2* change; Poxy is 
a step function that describes administration of oxygen. With Δ
 we describe the delay time of oxygen arrival; 
together with the mode τ
 of the Gamma function (derived from α
 and β
), we obtain Time-to-Plateau (TTP). 
Variations in fitting and TTPs are demonstrated in Table. S3.
Outcome Metrics. 
Ultrasound antenatal measurements included estimated fetal weight and Doppler veloci-
metry of the umbilical artery. MRI measurements included fetal brain and fetal liver volumes were measured 
based on delineation of HASTE images. Birth record: Apgar scores at 0 and 5 minutes were collected. All babies’ 
Apgar scores were in the normal range (7–10), indicating normal respiratory and cardiac function. Birth weights 
were collected for all subjects. Appropriate for gestational age (AGA) was defined as larger than 10th percentile, 
and SGA was defined as equal to or smaller than 10th percentile. Birth weight discordance was defined as the 
fraction of difference between co-twin birth weights divided by the weight of the larger twin.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
Placental gross inspection was performed as part of clinical care by experienced pathologists and technicians 
without knowledge of the MRI findings. The placenta lobes (A or B) corresponding to each twin fetus were noted 
according to clamps on the attached umbilical cords. Tissue specimens were then sampled and send for routine 
hematoxylin and eosin stained slides. For this study, the histology was reviewed by a single experienced placental 
pathologist also blinded to the MRI findings. Global histopathological scores were assigned based on a 4-point 
scale from 1 = normal placental histology to 4 = severely abnormal placental histology. The numerical score was 
based on both the extent and severity of the pathology. Minor findings included chorangiosis in a normal weight 
placenta, placental weights <10th or >90th percentiles for gestational age, or low grade fetal vascular malper-
fusion. 1 minor finding received a score of 1. Two minor findings received a score of 2. Moderate pathological 
findings included high grade fetal vascular malperfusion, diffuse chorangiosis, fetal normoblastemia, extensive 
increase in perivillous fibrin, or placental infarct(s) of more than 5% of the placental mass. Moderate pathologic 
findings received a score of 2. Three minor or one minor and one moderate finding received a score of 3. Severe 
pathologic findings included 3 minor or two moderate findings and received a score of 4. There were no cases of 
inflammatory placental pathology (e.g. chorioamnionitis or villitis)43.
Statistical Analysis. 
Statistical analyses were performed in Matlab®9.1, (MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA 
2016). The Friedman ranksum test was used for testing the relationship between the difference in fetal growth 
and their corresponding placental TTP within each twin pair. For each twin pair, for each of the two quantities 
to be correlated, one of the two values was selected at random, and a Spearman correlation was calculated. This 
was repeated 1000 times, and the median correlation and its associated p-value was reported. Mixed models 
were used for across subjects regression analyses, with mother’s ID included as a random effect to account for 
correlation between fetuses from the same mother. Because of long-range temporal correlations, we modeled the 
temporal data using functional data analysis methods as implemented in the FDA toolbox in Matlab44. We used a 
cubic B-spline basis with knots at two-minute intervals, then calculated mean and standard deviation as functions 
of time for AGA and SGA groups, and t-statistic and p-value functions comparing the group means.
References
 1. Gagnon, R. Placental insufficiency and its consequences. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 110(Suppl 1), S99–107 (2003).
 2. Resnik, R. Fetal growth restriction: Evaluation and management. UpToDate, Waltham, MA (Accessed on Oct. 20, 2016).
 3. Baschat, A. A. & Odibo, A. O. Timing of delivery in fetal growth restriction and childhood development: some uncertainties remain. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 204, 2–3 (2011).
 4. Walker, D. M. et al. The growth restriction intervention trial: long-term outcomes in a randomized trial of timing of delivery in fetal 
growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(34), e1–9, doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2010.09.019 (2011).
 5. Benirschke, K., Burton, G. J. & Baergen, R. N. Pathology of the Human Placenta, 6th edition (Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 
2012).
 6. Serov, A. S., Salafia, C., Grebenkov, D. S. & Filoche, M. The role of morphology in mathematical models of placental gas exchange. J 
Appl Physiol 120, 17–28 (2016).
 7. Frias, A. E. et al. Using dynamic contrast-enhanced mri to quantitatively characterize maternal vascular organization in the primate 
placenta. Magn Reson Med 73, 1570–1578 (2015).
 8. Brunelli, R. et al. Intervillous circulation in intra-uterine growth restriction. correlation to fetal well being. Placenta 31, 1051–1056 
(2010).
 9. Ray, J. G., Vermeulen, M. J., Bharatha, A., Montanera, W. J. & Park, A. L. Association between mri exposure during pregnancy and 
fetal and childhood outcomes. JAMA 316, 952–961 (2016).
 
10. Zaharchuk, G., Martin, A. J. & Dillon, W. P. Noninvasive imaging of quantitative cerebral blood flow changes during 100 imaging. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 29, 663–667 (2008).
 
11. Egbor, M., Ansari, T., Morris, N., Green, C. J. & Sibbons, P. D. Morphometric placental villous and vascular abnormalities in early- 
and late-onset pre-eclampsia with and without fetal growth restriction. BJOG 113, 580–589 (2006).
 
12. Sun, L. et al. Reduced fetal cerebral oxygen consumption is associated with smaller brain size in fetuses with congenital heart disease. 
Circulation 131, 1313–1323 (2015).
 
13. Sorensen, A. et al. Changes in human placental oxygenation during maternal hyperoxia estimated by blood oxygen level-dependent 
magnetic resonance imaging (bold mri). Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42, 310–314 (2013).
 
14. Sorensen, A. et al. Changes in human fetal oxygenation during maternal hyperoxia as estimated by bold mri. Prenat Diagn 33, 
141–145 (2013).
 
15. Sorensen, A. et al. Placental oxygen transport estimated by the hyperoxic placental bold mri response. Physiol Rep 3, e12582, 
doi:10.14814/phy2.12582 (2015).
 
16. Turk, E. A. et al. Spatiotemporal alignment of in utero bold-mri series. J Magn Reson Imaging, doi:10.1002/jmri.25585 (2017).
 
17. Chasen, S. & Chervenak, F. A. Twin pregnancy: Prenatal issues. UpToDate, Waltham, MA (Accessed on Aug. 18, 2016).
 
18. Burton, G. J., Woods, A. W., Jauniaux, E. & Kingdom, J. C. Rheological and physiological consequences of conversion of the maternal 
spiral arteries for uteroplacental blood flow during human pregnancy. Placenta 30, 473–482 (2009).
 
19. Konje, J. C., Kaufmann, P., Bell, S. C. & Taylor, D. J. A longitudinal study of quantitative uterine blood flow with the use of color 
power angiography in appropriate for gestational age pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185, 608–613 (2001).
 
20. Sutton, M. S. et al. Changes in placental blood flow in the normal human fetus with gestational age. Pediatr Res 28, 383–387 (1990).
 
21. Barbera, A. et al. Relationship of umbilical vein blood flow to growth parameters in the human fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181, 
174–179 (1999).
 
22. Huen, I. et al. R1 and r2* changes in the human placenta in response to maternal oxygen challenge. Magn Reson Med 70, 1427–1433 
(2013).
 
23. Aimot-Macron, S. et al. In vivo mri assessment of placental and foetal oxygenation changes in a rat model of growth restriction using 
blood oxygen level-dependent (bold) magnetic resonance imaging. Eur Radiol 23, 1335–1342 (2013).
 
24. Chalouhi, G. E. et al. Fetoplacental oxygenation in an intrauterine growth restriction rat model by using blood oxygen level-
dependent mr imaging at 4.7 t. Radiology 269, 122–129 (2013).
 
25. Schabel, M. C. et al. Functional imaging of the nonhuman primate placenta with endogenous blood oxygen level-dependent 
contrast. Magn Reson Med 76, 1551–1562 (2016).
 
26. Huen, I. et al. Absence of po2 change in fetal brain despite po2 increase in placenta in response to maternal oxygen challenge. BJOG 
121, 1588–1594 (2014).
 
27. Simchen, M. J. et al. Effects of maternal hyperoxia with and without normocapnia in uteroplacental and fetal doppler studies. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 26, 495–499 (2005).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3713  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
 
28. Brantberg, A. & Sonesson, S. E. Central arterial hemodynamics in small-for-gestational-age fetuses before and during maternal 
hyperoxygenation: a doppler velocimetric study with particular attention to the aortic isthmus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 14, 
237–243 (1999).
 
29. Arduini, D., Rizzo, G., Mancuso, S. & Romanini, C. Short-term effects of maternal oxygen administration on blood flow velocity 
waveforms in healthy and growth-retarded fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 159, 1077–1080 (1988).
 
30. Carter, A. M. Placental gas exchange and the oxygen supply to the fetus. Compr Physiol 5, 1381–1403 (2015).
 
31. Carter, A. M. Placental oxygen consumption. part i: in vivo studies–a review. Placenta 21(Suppl A), S31–37 (2000).
 
32. Moore, L. G., Charles, S. M. & Julian, C. G. Humans at high altitude: hypoxia and fetal growth. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 178, 181–190 
(2011).
 
33. Illsley, N. P., Caniggia, I. & Zamudio, S. Placental metabolic reprogramming: do changes in the mix of energy-generating substrates 
modulate fetal growth? Int J Dev Biol 54, 409–419 (2010).
 
34. Zamudio, S. et al. Hypoglycemia and the origin of hypoxia-induced reduction in human fetal growth. PLoS One 5, e8551, 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0008551 (2010).
 
35. Longo, L. D., Dale, P. S. & Gilbert, R. D. Uteroplacental o2 uptake: continuous measurements during uterine quiescence and 
contractions. Am J Physiol 250, R1099–1107 (1986).
 
36. Friesen-Waldner, L. J. et al. Hyperpolarized [1-(13) c]pyruvate mri for noninvasive examination of placental metabolism and 
nutrient transport: A feasibility study in pregnant guinea pigs. J Magn Reson Imaging 43, 750–755 (2016).
 
37. Tustison, N. J. et al. N4itk: improved n3 bias correction. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 29, 1310–1320 (2010).
 
38. Guyader, J. M. et al. Influence of image registration on apparent diffusion coefficient images computed from free-breathing diffusion 
mr images of the abdomen. J Magn Reson Imaging 42, 315–330 (2015).
 
39. Klein, S., Staring, M., Murphy, K., Viergever, M. A. & Pluim, J. P. elastix: a toolbox for intensity-based medical image registration. 
IEEE Trans Med Imaging 29, 196–205 (2010).
 
40. Yushkevich, P. A. et al. User-guided 3d active contour segmentation of anatomical structures: significantly improved efficiency and 
reliability. Neuroimage 31, 1116–1128 (2006).
 
41. Friston, K., Ashburner, J., Kiebel, S., Nichols, T. & Penny, W. Statistical Parametric Mapping: The Analysis of Functional Brain Images 
(Academic Press, 2007).
 
42. Frackowiak, R. S. et al. Human Brain Function (Academic Press, 1997).
 
43. Khong, T. Y. et al. Sampling and definitions of placental lesions: Amsterdam placental workshop group consensus statement. Arch 
Pathol Lab Med 140, 698–713 (2016).
 
44. Ramsay, J. Functional data analysis matlab toolbox; http://www.psych.mcgill.ca/misc/fda/software.html (2014).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Theonia Boyd for assistance on pathological reports, Dr. Philip Zhe Sun for 
useful discussions, and Dr. Zongxi Li for helping with creation of Figure 1. Funding: NIH U01 HD087211, NIH 
R01 EB017337 Consejeria de Educacion, Juventud y Deporte de la Comunidad de Madrid through the Madrid-
MIT M+ Vision Consortium.
Author Contributions
J.L., E.A.T., E.A., A.P., J.N.R. and P.E.G., conceived and designed the research. C.B., J.N.R. recruited subjects, and 
followed subjects to get clinical results. W.H.B. and C.Z. provided insight on utero-placental-fetal physiology. 
J.L., E.A.T., B.G., and P.E.G. performed the in vivo MRI experiments. E.A.T., J.L., N.M. and P.G. developed and 
performed the motion mitigation, image processing and image analysis; E.A.T., J.L., C.M.T., J.A.E., C.E.B. and 
P.E.G. performed image segmentations; D.J.R. performed pathological assessments. M.V. and J.L. performed 
statistical analysis. J.L., E.A.T., and P.E.G. wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at doi:10.1038/s41598-017-03450-0
Competing Interests: J. Luo, E. Abaci Turk, P.E. Grant, N. Malpica, and E. Adalsteinsson are co-inventors on a 
patent applications describing the MRI based method for measuring placental transport.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2017
