   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MMWR Weeks
 
Definition: 
The MMWR week is the week of the epidemiologic year for which the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance 
System (NNDSS) disease report is assigned by the reporting local or state health department for the purposes of 
MMWR disease incidence reporting and publishing. Values for MMWR week range from 1 to 53, although most 
years consist of 52 weeks. 
•  
MMWR week supports reporting of notifiable infectious disease incidence data at the national level. 
Some states may assign MMWR week for data management or reporting purposes more so than for 
monitoring ‘true’ disease incidence. Since MMWR week may be based on any of several dates relevant 
to calculating disease incidence and that assignment may vary by state or condition, analyses defining 
temporal notifiable disease incidence patterns should determine whether analysis by MMWR week or 
another epidemiologically-relevant date type is more appropriate for their needs. 
Purpose: 
MMWR week is used to support public health reporting in the MMWR weekly morbidity tables and the annual 
Summary of Notifiable Diseases, United States. Historically, MMWR week has supported aggregated reporting of 
notifiable disease incidence (e.g., during the transition from hard-copy reporting to NETSS). 
Assumptions: 
•  
State health departments assign MMWR week based on a hierarchy of dates supported by the NNDSS 
(below). 
•  
State health departments use the same rules over time to assign MMWR week; therefore reporting 
patterns are assumed to be similar from year-to-year. 
•  
States may choose to assign MMWR week differently by notifiable condition (e.g., a state’s immunization 
program may assign MMWR week using different ‘rules’ compared to the state’s STD or TB program). 
Background: 
Traditionally, state health departments collect a number of types of dates that are relevant to the incident case 
and its management. For NNDSS reporting, these dates have been assigned to a hierarchy as follows: 
•  
Date of disease onset 
•  
Date of diagnosis 
•  
Date of laboratory result 
•  
Date of first report to public (community) health system 
•  
State or MMWR report date 
The NNDSS NETSS message structure supports the reporting of only one of the above dates [EVENTDATE] and 
date type [DATETYPE] as specified in a separate data element. 
The NEDSS message structure supports the reporting of each of the following dates: 
•  
Date of illness onset. Reported date of the onset of symptoms of the condition being reported to the 
public health system 
•  
Date of diagnosis of condition being reported to public health system. 
•  
Date of specimen collection. Date specimen was collected for testing to define clinical presentation or to 
diagnose illness being reported to public health system 
Page 1 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  
Date laboratory result 
•  
Date of first report to public health system (earliest of date of report to local/district/regional/state public 
health system) 
•  
Date of first report to CDC (from local/state public health system or other surveillance partner) 
Business rules for assigning MMWR week: 
The first day of any MMWR week is Sunday. MMWR week numbering is sequential beginning with 1 and 
incrementing with each week to a maximum of 52 or 53. MMWR week #1 of an MMWR year is the first week of 
the year that has at least four days in the calendar year. For example, if January 1 occurs on a Sunday, Monday, 
Tuesday or Wednesday, the calendar week that includes January 1 would be MMWR week #1. If January 1 
occurs on a Thursday, Friday, or Saturday, the calendar week that includes January 1 would be the last MMWR 
week of the previous year (#52 or #53). Because of this rule, December 29, 30, and 31 could potentially fall into 
MMWR week #1 of the following MMWR year. 
State health departments may choose to assign MMWR week based on any of the dates listed above. Since 
MMWR week may change or need to reassigned based on changing information, surveillance information 
systems should allow the person entering the data to reassign MMWR week. 
If a number of case reports have not been entered into the surveillance information system for several months, 
the local or state health department should assign MMWR weeks corresponding to the appropriate date of onset 
or week when the local or state health department would have reported the case information (according to the 
local or state rules for assigning MMWR week). Assigning MMWR week appropriately reduces the likelihood of 
sporadic changes in disease occurrence resulting from batched reporting. 
Page 2 
