 Children of the Affluent:
Challenges to Well-Being
Suniya S. Luthar and Shawn J. Latendresse
Teachers College, Columbia University
Abstract
Growing up in the culture of affluence can connote various psychosocial risks. Studies have
shown that upper-class children can manifest elevated disturbance in several areas—such as
substance use, anxiety, and depression—and that two sets of factors seem to be implicated, that is,
excessive pressures to achieve and isolation from parents (both literal and emotional). Whereas
stereotypically, affluent youth and poor youth are respectively thought of as being at “low risk”
and “high risk,” comparative studies have revealed more similarities than differences in their
adjustment patterns and socialization processes. In the years ahead, psychologists must correct the
long-standing neglect of a group of youngsters treated, thus far, as not needing their attention.
Family wealth does not automatically confer either wisdom in parenting or equanimity of spirit;
whereas children rendered atypical by virtue of their parents' wealth are undoubtedly privileged in
many respects, there is also, clearly, the potential for some nontrivial threats to their psychological
well-being.
Keywords
affluence; risk; contextual influences; socioeconomic status
Children of upper-class, highly educated parents are generally assumed to beat “low risk,”
but recent evidence suggests that they can face several unacknowledged pressures. In this
article, we describe programmatic research relevant to this issue. We begin by characterizing
the samples of youth we have studied across suburban communities in the Northeast. We
then provide an overview of findings of problems in various spheres of adjustment and
discuss associated implications for research, practice, and policy.
RESEARCH INVOLVING UPPER-CLASS SAMPLES
Since the late 1990s, our group has accumulated data on three cohorts of youth from high-
income communities; characteristics of these cohorts are summarized in Table 1. The first,
which we refer to as Cohort I, consisted of 264 tenth graders attending a suburban high
school serving three contiguous towns.1 These students were followed annually through
their senior year, and as sophomores, we contrasted them with 224 tenth graders in an inner-
city school.
Cohort II encompassed 302 middle school students from another high-income town, whom
we studied when they were in the sixth and seventh grades (Luthar & Becker, 2002). Cohort
III, subsequently recruited from the same community as Cohort II, incorporated all children
Address correspondence to Suniya S. Luthar, Teachers College, Columbia University, 525 West 120th St., Box 133, New York, NY
10027-6696..
1We are currently examining effects of varying affluence across neighborhoods subsumed in wealthy townships.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Curr Dir Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 August 14.
Published in final edited form as:
Curr Dir Psychol Sci. 2005 February ; 14(1): 49–53. doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2005.00333.x.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 attending the sixth grade during the 1998–1999 academic year, and these students were then
followed annually (11th-grade assessments had been completed at the time of writing this
report). In parallel, we obtained annual assessments of an inner-city middle school sample,
enabling further comparisons of youngsters from widely disparate sociodemographic
settings.
EVIDENCE OF ADJUSTMENT DISTURBANCES
The first set of questions addressed with Cohort I was focused on substance use and related
problems (Luthar & D'Avanzo, 1999), and descriptive analyses showed many signs of
trouble among the suburban students. These youngsters reported significantly higher use of
cigarettes, alcohol, marijuana, and hard drugs than did their inner-city counterparts, and also
showed elevations in comparison with national norms. Suburban teens also reported
significantly higher anxiety and somewhat higher depression than did inner-city youth. In
comparison with normative samples, girls in the suburbs were three times more likely to
report clinically significant levels of depression.
Also disturbing were findings on correlates of substance use. Among affluent (but not inner-
city) youth, substance use was linked with depression and anxiety, suggesting efforts to self-
medicate; this “negative affect” type of substance use tends to be sustained over time, rather
than remitting soon after the teen years. In addition, among suburban boys (but not other
subgroups in the study), popularity with classmates was linked with high substance use,
suggesting that the peer group may endorse and even encourage substance use among
affluent teenage boys.
In Cohort II, we saw no evidence of disturbance among the sixth graders, but among the
seventh graders, some problems were beginning to emerge (Luthar & Becker, 2002). Among
the older girls, for example, rates of clinically significant depressive symptoms were twice
as high as those in normative samples. Whereas no boys in the sixth grade had used alcohol
or marijuana, 7% of seventh-grade boys reported having drunk alcohol until intoxicated or
using marijuana about once a month. Finally, results supported the earlier findings on
correlates of substance use, which had significant links with depression and anxiety in this
middle school sample, and with peer popularity among the seventh-grade boys.
In Cohort III, as well, preliminary data showed that suburban sixth graders scored below
national norms on depression and anxiety, and also had lower scores than inner-city
comparison youth. Once again, however, some signs of trouble began to emerge by the
seventh grade, with popular students, for example, reporting significantly higher levels of
substance use than others (Luthar & Sexton, 2004). We are currently examining different
developmental pathways to problems and to well-being from pre- through midadolescence.
WHY MIGHT “PRIVILEGED” YOUTH BE TROUBLED?
In exploring pathways to maladjustment in affluent suburbia, we considered two sets of
potential antecedents in our study of Cohort II. The first encompassed achievement
pressures. Statistical analyses showed, in fact, that children with very high perfectionist
strivings—those who saw achievement failures as personal failures—had relatively high
depression, anxiety, and substance use, as did those who indicated that their parents
overemphasized their accomplishments, valuing them disproportionately more than their
personal character (Luthar & Becker, 2002).
The second potential antecedent was isolation from adults, both literal and emotional.
Among upper-middle-class families, secondary school students are often left home alone for
several hours each week, with many parents believing that this promotes self-sufficiency.
Luthar and Latendresse
Page 2
Curr Dir Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 August 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 Similarly, suburban children's needs for emotional closeness may often suffer as the
demands of professional parents' careers erode relaxed “family time” and youngsters are
shuttled between various after-school activities. Again, results showed that both literal and
emotional isolation were linked to distress as well as substance use.
We next sought to explore family functioning in greater depth among sixth graders in
Cohort III and, simultaneously, their inner-city counterparts. A common assumption is that
parents are more accessible to high- than to low-income youth, but our data showed
otherwise (Luthar & Latendresse, in press). We considered children's perceptions of seven
aspects of parenting, and average ratings on four of these dimensions were similar for the
two sets of students: felt closeness to mothers, felt closeness to fathers, parental values
emphasizing integrity, and regularity of eating dinner with parents. Inner-city students did
fare more poorly than suburban students on two of the remaining three dimensions—
parental criticism and lack of after-school supervision—but at the same time, they did
significantly better than suburban students on the last dimension, parental expectations.
Results also revealed the surprising unique significance of children's eating dinner with at
least one parent on most nights. Even after the other six parenting dimensions (including
emotional closeness both to mothers and to fathers) were taken into account, this simple
family routine was linked not only to children's self-reported adjustment, but also to their
performance at school. Striking, too, were the similarities of links involving family dining
among families ostensibly easily able to arrange for shared leisure time and those who had
to cope with the sundry exigencies of everyday life in poverty.
Subsequent analyses with Cohort III students and their inner-city counterparts when they
were in the seventh grade revealed similarities in peer-group influences as well (Luthar &
Sexton, 2004). Early adolescents at both socioeconomic extremes showed admiration for
classmates who openly flouted authority. In the suburban context, high peer status was
linked with overt displays of low academic effort, disobedience at school, aggressiveness
among girls, and substance use among boys, and in the urban context, high peer status was
associated with aggression and substance use among both boys and girls. Also noteworthy
were startlingly strong links between physical attractiveness and peer popularity among
affluent girls. This variable alone explained more than half the variation in their popularity
scores, suggesting particularly high emphasis on physical appearance among this subgroup
of girls (the links between attractiveness and popularity were substantially weaker among
inner-city girls and among both groups of boys). All in all, the substantive message was that
affluent adolescents, just like their inner-city counterparts, valued some peer attributes that
could potentially compromise overall competence or well-being.
DOES REBELLION AMONG AFFLUENT TEENS REALLY “MATTER”?
All adolescents might be drawn to overt forms of rebellion, but it is quite plausible that
wealthy youth, unlike their poor counterparts, can dabble in drug use or delinquency without
any substantive damage to their life prospects, given various safety nets (i.e., concerned
adults and access to high-quality treatment services). To examine this possibility, we
returned to our high school Cohort I data, as older teens reflect more variability on such
forms of behavioral deviance than middle school students do. Once again, our findings
showed that youth at the socioeconomic extremes were more similar than different (Luthar
& Ansary, in press). In both settings, we found a distinct subgroup of teens who manifested
multiple behavior problems—substance use, delinquency, poor interest in academics—and
had school grades that were significantly lower than the average. Although the findings on
urban adolescents were unsurprising in light of prior empirical evidence, the results on
affluent youth were noteworthy in indicating that, despite the resources ostensibly available
Luthar and Latendresse
Page 3
Curr Dir Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 August 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 to them, nearly 1 of every 10 teenagers in this cohort exhibited high levels of behavior
disturbances across multiple domains, and concurrently experienced significant risk for poor
grades during the sophomore year of high school.
We also examined substance use among this subgroup of suburban sophomores annually
through the remainder of high school (McMahon & Luthar, 2004). Twenty percent of these
students showed persistently high substance use across time. Furthermore, across all three
assessments, this group also showed relatively high levels of depression and physiologically
manifest anxiety (e.g., nausea, difficulty breathing), as well as poor grades and negative
teacher ratings. For as many as one in five of these affluent youth, therefore, high substance
use, coexisting with depression, anxiety, and both behavioral and academic problems, was
sustained up to the age of 18 years.
IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERVENTIONS
All is not necessarily well among children of the affluent. Across three suburban cohorts, a
nontrivial proportion of youth reported diverse adjustment problems, and disconnectedness
in families and pressured lifestyles constituted discernible challenges (for parallel evidence
among adult samples, see Csikszentmihalyi, 1999; Kasser, 2002; Myers, 2000).
Why do affluent youth have these problems—despite all the mental health services
ostensibly available? One possibility is that although high-income parents are generally
willing to place overtly troubled youth in psychotherapy or on medication, they are less
eager to delve into the less “conspicuous” problems in their children, in themselves, or in
family processes more generally. Research has shown, for example, that parents in general
tend to be aware when their children are depressed, but tend not to seek professional help
unless symptoms include those that inconvenience adults, such as disobedience or asthma
(Puura et al., 1998).
Upper-class parents can be particularly reluctant to seek help for the less visible problems
because of privacy concerns, as well as embarrassment. Affluent adults are often very
concerned about keeping family troubles private; this is not surprising, as misfortunes of the
wealthy tend to evoke a malicious pleasure in people who are less well-off (a phenomenon
called schadenfreude; see Feather & Sherman, 2002). Upper-class parents also can feel more
compelled than most to maintain a veneer of well-being, feeling that “those at the top are
supposed to be better able to handle their problems than those further down the scale”
(Wolfe & Fodor, 1996, p. 80).
Then there are realities of everyday lives that impede change. In the subculture of affluent
suburbia, overscheduled days are often the norm for young people, with high school students
participating in numerous activities, which can then be logged on college applications. The
careers of many parents, similarly, do in fact demand long work hours: Job sharing and
flexible hours are not an option for chief executive officers or university presidents. At the
same time, these careers do bring many personal rewards, including the gratification of
mastering substantial professional challenges, and of providing well for stellar educations
and leisure activities for the next generation. Few people would blithely repudiate such
rewards.
Also relevant is practitioners' perseverance—or lack thereof—in pursuing nascent signs of
trouble. School psychologists, for example, often hesitate to express concerns to high-
income parents, anticipating resistance and sometimes even threats of lawsuits.
Consequently (and paradoxically), wealthy youth can end up having less access to school-
based counseling services than do students who are less well-off (Pollak & Schaffer, 1985).
Clinicians may also minimize problems they see among the wealthy. The same symptoms
Luthar and Latendresse
Page 4
Curr Dir Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 August 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 are more often viewed as signs of mental illness among the poor than among the affluent; by
corollary, the rich are more often dismissed as “not needing help” even when they report
distress commensurate with that of others typically judged to be needing assistance (Luthar
& Sexton, 2004).
Even if affluent youth do, in fact, receive high-quality psychiatric care, it should be
emphasized that this is no substitute for strong attachments with parents. Decades of work
on children's mental health policies have established that psychotherapy to address
crystallized maladjustment is largely unproductive as long as the child's everyday life
continues to present major challenges to adjustment (Knitzer, 2000).
In the future, an expedient first step toward addressing these issues would be to raise
awareness of the potential costs of overscheduled, competitive lifestyles (Luthar & Sexton,
2004). This can be done effectively via books comprehensible to the lay public, such as
those by Kasser (2002) and Myers (2000). Although obviously not panaceas, such
dissemination efforts could begin to sensitize caregivers to risks in the context of affluence
—risks that they (like developmental scientists) may have been only faintly aware of in the
past.
Consideration of these issues is important not only for the families themselves, but also for
society in general. Many children of highly educated, affluent parents will likely come to
assume positions of influence in society, and their own equanimity of spirit may have far-
reaching ramifications. Depression vastly impairs productivity. And people who are
unhappy, with a fragile, meager sense of self, can be more acquisitive than philanthropic,
focused more on gaining more for themselves than on improving the lot of others (Diener &
Biswas-Diener, 2002).
CONCLUSIONS
Until the 1970s, developmental scientists had largely ignored children in poverty, and it is
critical to correct the neglect of another group of youngsters heretofore invisible in
psychological science: those in high-income families. Systematic research is needed on the
generalizability of research results obtained thus far. Scientists need to establish, for
instance, whether elevated distress or pressured lifestyles occur in wealthy metropolitan
locations, and not just in suburban communities. It will also be important to determine
whether these problems are discernible in nationally representative samples (assuming, of
course, that high-income families are appropriately represented in them). Also critical are
prospective studies that can indicate (a) whether problems such as depression or drug use
generally represent temporary blips of adolescent angst among the wealthy or are early signs
of continuing problems and, conversely, (b) if factors such as prolonged isolation and
pressure within families do, in fact, set apart those teens who carry adolescent adjustment
disturbances into adulthood. Finally, practitioners and parents must be alert to the risks
potentially attached to wealth and status. The American dream spawns widespread beliefs
that Ivy League educations and subsequently lucrative careers are critical for children's long-
term happiness. In the sometimes single-minded pursuit of these goals, let us not lose sight
of the possible costs to mental health and well-being of all concerned.
Acknowledgments
Preparation of this manuscript was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (RO1-DA10726,
RO1-DA11498, RO1-DA14385), the William T. Grant Foundation, and the Spencer Foundation.
Luthar and Latendresse
Page 5
Curr Dir Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 August 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 Recommended Reading
Csikszentmihalyi M. 1999 (See References)
Kasser T. 2002 (See References)
Luthar SS. The culture of affluence: Psychological costs of material wealth. Child Development. 2003;
74:1581–1593. [PubMed: 14669883]
Luthar SS, Sexton C. 2004 (See References)
Myers DG. 2000 (See References)
REFERENCES
Csikszentmihalyi M. If we are so rich, why aren't we happy? American Psychologist. 1999; 54:821–
827.
Diener E, Biswas-Diener R. Will money increase subjective well-being? Social Indicators Research.
2002; 57:119–169.
Feather NT, Sherman R. Envy, resentment, Schadenfreude, and sympathy: Reactions to deserved and
undeserved achievement and subsequent failure. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 2002;
28:953–961.
Kasser, T. The high price of materialism. MIT Press; Cambridge, MA: 2002.
Knitzer, J. Early childhood mental health services: A policy and systems development perspective. In:
Shonkoff, JP.; Meisels, SJ., editors. Handbook of early childhood intervention. 2nd ed..
Cambridge University Press; New York: 2000. p. 416-438.
Luthar SS, Ansary NS. Dimensions of adolescent rebellion: Risks for academic failure among high-
and low-income youth. Development and Psychopathology. in press.
Luthar SS, Becker BE. Privileged but pressured: A study of affluent youth. Child Development. 2002;
73:1593–1610. [PubMed: 12361321]
Luthar SS, D'Avanzo K. Contextual factors in substance use: A study of suburban and inner-city
adolescents. Development and Psychopathology. 1999; 11:845–867. [PubMed: 10624729]
Luthar SS, Latendresse SJ. Comparable “risks” at the SES extremes: Pre-adolescents' perceptions of
parenting. Development and Psychopathology. in press.
Luthar, SS.; Sexton, C. The high price of affluence. In: Kail, RV., editor. Advances in child
development. Vol. 32. Academic Press; San Diego, CA: 2004. p. 126-162.
McMahon TJ, Luthar SS. Substance use, psychopathology, and social competence: A longitudinal
study of affluent, suburban, high school students. 2004 Manuscript submitted for publication.
Myers, DG. The American paradox: Spiritual hunger in an age of plenty. Yale University Press; New
Haven, CT: 2000.
Pollak JM, Schaffer S. The mental health clinician in the affluent public school setting. Clinical Social
Work Journal. 1985; 13:341–355.
Puura K, Almqvist F, Tamminen T, Piha J, Kumpulainen K, Raesaenen E, Moilanen I, Koivisto AM.
Children with symptoms of depression: What do adults see? Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines. 1998; 39:577–585.
Wolfe JL, Fodor IG. The poverty of privilege: Therapy with women of the “upper classes.”. Women &
Therapy. 1996; 18:73–89.
Luthar and Latendresse
Page 6
Curr Dir Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 August 14.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
 NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Luthar and Latendresse
Page 7
TABLE 1
Characteristics of the Samples
Source and sample
N
Minority ethnicity
in sample (%)
Eligible for free
or reduced lunch
in school (%)
Median annual
family income in
region (census)
Adults with graduate
or professional
degrees in region
(%; census)
Luthar & D'Avanzo (1999)
Suburban Cohort I: 10th graders followed through high school
264
18
 1
$80,000–$102,000
24–37
Comparison sample: inner-city 10th graders
224
87
86
$35,000
5
Luthar & Becker (2002)
Suburban Cohort II: 6th and 7th graders
302
 8
 3
$120,000
33
Luthar & Latendresse (in press)
Suburban Cohort III: 6th graders followed annually through high school (ongoing)
314
 7
 3
$125,000
33
Comparison sample: inner-city 6th graders followed through 8th grade
300
80
79
$27,000
6
Curr Dir Psychol Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2007 August 14.
