                           
Lyndon, A., Audrey, S., Wells, C., Burnell, E., Ingle, S., Hill, R., ...
Henderson, G. (2017). Risk to heroin users of poly-drug use of pregabalin or
gabapentin. Addiction, 112(9), 1580-1589. https://doi.org/10.1111/add.13843
Peer reviewed version
License (if available):
CC BY-NC
Link to published version (if available):
10.1111/add.13843
Link to publication record in Explore Bristol Research
PDF-document
This is the author accepted manuscript (AAM). The final published version (version of record) is available online
via Wiley at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/add.13843/abstract. Please refer to any applicable terms
of use of the publisher.
University of Bristol - Explore Bristol Research
General rights
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite only the published
version using the reference above. Full terms of use are available:
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/pure/about/ebr-terms
  
This article has been accepted for publication and undergone full peer review but has not 
been through the copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process which may 
lead to differences between this version and the Version of Record. Please cite this article as 
doi: 10.1111/add.13843 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Risk to heroin users of poly-drug use of pregabalin or gabapentin 
 
Authors:  
Abigail Lyndon1, Suzanne Audrey2, Claudia Wells3, Erica S Burnell1, Suzanne Ingle2, Rob 
Hill1, Matthew Hickman2 and Graeme Henderson1 
 
Author affiliations: 
1School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 
1TD, UK 
2 School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 2PS, UK 
3 Mortality Analysis, Office for National Statistics, Newport NP10 8XG, UK 
 
Corresponding Authors:  
Graeme Henderson, School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of 
Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK  
Email: Graeme.henderson@bris.ac.uk 
Tel: 44-117-9287629  
 
Matthew Hickman, School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol 
BS8 2BN, UK 
Email: Matthew.Hickman@bristol.ac.uk 
Tel: 44-117-3310016 
 
 
 
Running head: 
Risks in combining gabapentoids with heroin  
 
 
Word count  
Abstract 3000 
Text (excluding title page, abstract, acknowledgements, funding, references, figures, figure 
legends and tables): 3972 
 
 
Declaration of competing interests: 
The authors declare no competing interests 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
ABSTRACT  
AIM 
To examine the risk to heroin users of also using gabapentin or pregabalin (gabapentoids). 
DESIGN 
Multidisciplinary study:- we (a) examined trends in drug related deaths and gabapentoid 
prescription data in England and Wales to test for evidence that any increase in deaths 
mentioning gabapentin or pregabalin is associated with trends in gabapentoid prescribing and 
is concomitant with opioid use; (b) interviewed people with a history of heroin use about their 
polydrug use involving gabapentin and pregabalin; (c) studied the respiratory depressant 
effects of pregabalin in the absence and presence of morphine in mice to determine whether 
concomitant exposure increased the degree of respiratory depression observed. 
SETTING 
England and Wales. 
PARTICIPANTS 
Interviews were conducted with 30 participants (19 males, 11 female). 
MEASUREMENTS 
(a) Office of National Statistics drug-related deaths from 1 January 2004 and 31 December 
2015 that mention both an opioid and pregabalin or gabapentin; (b) subjective views on the 
availability, use, interactions, and effects of polydrug use involving pregabalin and gabapentin; 
(c) rate and depth of respiration. 
RESULTS 
Pregabalin and gabapentin prescriptions increased about 24% per year from 1 million in 2004 
to 10.5 million in 2015.  The number of deaths involving gabapentoids increased from less 
than one per year prior to 2009 to 137 in 2015; 79% of these deaths also involved opioids.  The 
increase in deaths was highly correlated with the increase in prescribing (correlation 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
coefficient 0.965; 5% increase in deaths per 100,000 increase in prescriptions).  Heroin users 
described pregabalin as easy to obtain. They suggested that the combination of heroin and 
pregabalin reinforced the effects of heroin but were concerned it induced ‘black outs’ and 
increased the risk of overdose. In mice, a low dose of S-pregabalin (20 mg/kg) that did not 
itself depress respiration reversed tolerance to morphine depression of respiration (resulting in 
35% depression of respiration, P<0.05) whereas a high dose of S-pregabalin (200 mg/kg) alone 
depressed respiration and this effect summated with that of morphine (producing over 50% 
depression of respiration, P<0.05). 
CONCLUSIONS  
For heroin users the combination of opioids with gabapentin or pregabalin potentially 
increases the risk of acute overdose death through either reversal of tolerance or an additive 
effect of the drugs to depress respiration. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The gabapentoids, gabapentin and pregabalin, are first-line treatments for various forms of 
neuropathic pain and are licensed for the treatment of some forms of epilepsy. They are also 
widely used off-label for other disorders including anxiety (pregabalin), insomnia, migraine, 
mania, bipolar disorder and alcohol withdrawal (gabapentin).  These drugs were originally 
classified as having low abuse potential. However there have been reports of gabapentin and 
pregabalin being misused with subsequent development of dependence [1-4] and recent 
reports of gabapentin and pregabalin misuse in subjects with a history of opioid use [5-9]. 
Behavioural effects of these drugs related to their misuse include relaxation, enhanced 
sociability, euphoria and at higher doses dissociation and sedation.    
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Concerns about over prescribing of gabapentin and pregabalin led Public Health England and 
NHS England to issue prescribing advice for these drugs in 2014 [10]. Clinical guidelines on 
the management of neuropathic pain in both general and special settings (such as prisons) 
have emphasised caution in the use of gabapentoids because of their potential for misuse and 
diversion, however the specific issue of increased overdose death has not been emphasised in 
this context [11,12].  A study of toxicology reports of drug-related deaths in Finland in 2010-
2011 [13] suggested there had been a substantial increase in drug related deaths involving 
pregabalin and opioids. In two opioid treatment programmes in Ireland and Germany 10% of 
patients tested positive for pregabalin by urine analysis; the majority without being prescribed 
the drug for any medical purpose [5,6].   
 
We conducted a multi-disciplinary study to examine the risk of polydrug use involving 
opioids and pregabalin or gabapentin. We examined trends in the number of drug poisoning 
deaths in England and Wales to assess whether there has been an increase in the number of 
pregabalin or gabapentin fatal poisonings and whether the increase is associated with 
concomitant opioid use.  People with a history of heroin use were interviewed about their use 
of pregabalin and gabapentin, and their perception of the dangers of co-use with opioids. We 
also determined in mice the respiratory depressant effects of pregabalin in the absence and 
presence of morphine to see if concomitant use increased the likelihood of overdose death 
from respiratory depression. 
 
 
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
METHODS 
Drug Related Poisoning Deaths 
The Office for National Statistics (ONS) has developed a database of drug related deaths in 
England and Wales (based on International Classification of Disease codes) that identifies the 
specific substances involved [14,15]. The information is obtained from death certificates 
issued by coroners after investigation of the death, supported by forensic toxicology. ONS 
only has access to information specified on the death certificate and does not have access to 
the full toxicology report. Guidance on the limitations of the data held by ONS are given in 
reference 15. Data on the number of drug related deaths where pregabalin or gabapentin were 
mentioned, and whether or not the record also mentioned an opioid, were extracted for deaths 
registered between 1st January 2004 and 31st of December 2015. The number of community 
prescriptions per annum for pregabalin and gabapentin in England and Wales were obtained 
from the Health and Social Care Information Centre (HSCIC). We used correlation 
coefficient and linear regression to test whether there was a positive association between 
trends in gabapentoid prescription and drug related deaths mentioning pregabalin or 
gabapentin. Drug related deaths data had 1 added to each year record (because no deaths 
observed in 2005, 2007 and 2008) and were then log-transformed so that residuals from the 
linear regression model were normally distributed [16]. As a sensitivity analysis around the 
addition of 1 as a constant to the death data, we re-ran the regression model after dropping the 
year records with no deaths.   
 
Interviews with heroin users 
Bristol Drugs Project (BDP), the selected location for this study into polydrug abuse amongst 
heroin users, is located close to the city centre and offers a range of facilities for service users 
who are on varying drug treatments and at different stages of treatment. The study was 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
approved by the Faculty of Medical and Dentistry Committee for Research Ethics, University 
of Bristol. A purposive sample (based on gender, drug treatment and duration of heroin use) 
were given information about the study and asked if they would be willing to take part in an 
interview.  
 
A purposive sample (based on gender and duration of heroin use) were given information 
about the study and asked if they would be willing to take part in an interview. The staff of 
BDP had good background knowledge of how long people had been using heroin and assisted 
in identifying eligible participants. No-one who was approached actively rejected 
participating in the study, although three individuals who had verbally agreed to take part did 
not attend for interview at their allocated time. No-one withdrew from the study once written 
consent was given.  
 
Interviews were conducted with 30 participants. The sample size was partly pragmatic in 
terms of the study timetable, but was designed to include a range of heroin users. Data 
saturation was reached in that no new issues were emerging towards the end of the interview 
process. The final sample comprised 19 males and 11 females of whom: 20 were long-term 
drug users who had used heroin for over 10 years; four had used heroin between 5-10 years, 
and; six were shorter-term drug users who had used heroin for under five years. Each 
participant was interviewed once by AL between October 2014 and February 2015, and was 
given £10 to compensate them for their time. Interviews were conducted in a private 
consultation room and digitally recorded with the written consent of the participant. 
Interviews lasted between eight and 52 minutes, with the mean length of interview being 25 
minutes (excluding the initial introduction and consent procedures). All interviews were 
conducted by the same researcher (AL) using a topic guide designed to identify patterns and 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
types of polydrug use, and participants’ perceptions of any benefits and disadvantages to 
polydrug use. 
 
 
Recordings were transcribed verbatim, anonymised and transferred into Nvivo10 software 
(QSRinternational, UK) to aid analysis. Thematic analysis was undertaken using Framework 
and Nvivo software [17]. Sections of text were coded by AL according to specific drugs used, 
and participants’ perceptions of their interactions and effects. SA checked coding and 
interpretation, with any discrepancies resolved through discussion between AL and SA. Data 
presented here relate to the key themes identified in relation to polydrug use involving 
gabapentoids. 
 
Respiration studies 
Male CD-1 mice (Harlan Laboratories, UK) weighing approximately 30g were maintained at 
22°C on a reversed 12 hour dark:light cycle with food and water available ad libitum. All 
experiments were performed in the dark (active) phase. Animals were randomly ascribed to 
treatment groups (N = 6 or 7) with the experimenter blinded to the drug treatment. 
Respiration was measured in freely moving animals using plethysmography chambers 
(EMKA Technologies, France) supplied with a 5% CO2 in air mixture (BOC Gas Supplies, 
UK) as described previously [18].  Rate and depth of respiration were recorded and converted 
to minute volume (MV). Only animals whose initial pre-drug MV was between 120 and 185 
ml/min were included in this study. Data were analysed using an unpaired Student’s t-test and 
a statistically significant difference assumed when P<0.05. All procedures were performed in 
accordance with the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986, the European 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Communities Council Directive 1986 (86/609/EEC) and the University of Bristol ethical 
review document.   
 
Drugs used were morphine hydrochloride (Macfarlan Smith, UK), naloxone hydrochloride 
(Sigma Aldrich, UK), S/R-pregabalin and S-pregabalin (synthesized and purified at the 
University of Bristol). S/R-pregabalin was used in our initial experiments but we switched to 
S-pregabalin (the active isomer) when sufficient stocks became available. To induce 
tolerance to morphine mice were either implanted subcutaneously with a morphine pellet 
(75mg morphine base, National Institute on Drug Abuse, USA) or an osmotic minipump 
(Alzet) that released morphine 45mg/kg/day for six days [18]. 
 
RESULTS 
Deaths involving pregabalin and gabapentin 
Figure 1A shows trends in the number of prescriptions for gabapentoids (pregabalin and 
gabapentin) in 100,000s with the number of drug related deaths mentioning gabapentoids in 
total and those mentioning gabapentoids and opioids. There has been an annual 24% increase 
in the number of gabapentoid prescriptions in England and Wales from approximately 1 
million in 2004 to over 10 million in 2015.   Deaths in which pregabalin or gabapentin was 
mentioned on the death certificate increased from less than 1 per year before 2009 to 137 
deaths in 2015. In 79% of these deaths (216/275) opioids (heroin, methadone, other or non-
specific) were also mentioned. The increase in deaths was highly correlated with prescribing 
data (correlation coefficient 0.94; Figure 1B). For each 100,000 increase in gabapentoid 
prescription, the number of deaths increased by approximately 5% (risk ratio (RR) 1.05 
95%CI 1.03-1.06 p< 0.001) which is equivalent to a RR of 1.64 for an increase of 1 million 
prescriptions and an RR of 88.4 for an increase of 8 million prescriptions. After transforming 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
the deaths data there was no evidence of non-normality (Shapiro-Wilk W test for normal data 
p = 0.75; Cameron & Trivedi's test against heteroskedasticity p=0.11. Excluding years 
without any deaths did not alter the findings (correlation coefficient 0.965; RR 1.047).   
 
Heroin users’ perceptions of combining heroin and pregabalin or gabapentin 
All interview participants were, or had been, active heroin users and some were on an opioid 
substitution treatment. Participants reported ease of access to gabapentoids. Of the 30 
participants interviewed, 21 had experience of pregabalin or gabapentin. Two participants 
used gabapentin, stating they used it daily and sourced it from friends who were prescribed it. 
Of the 19 pregabalin users: one was a daily user; three used it weekly; five used it rarely, and 
10 stated it was just a one-off occasion.  Pregabalin was taken orally in tablet form, and doses 
ranged from 300mg to 1500mg.  Some participants said they were prescribed pregabalin by a 
doctor, usually as they had some kind of nerve damage from previous accidents, but others 
suggested pregabalin could be purchased on the street for approximately £2 per 300mg tablet. 
 
Pregabalin enhances the effect of heroin  
Participants highlighted growing recognition that the combination of heroin and pregabalin 
could enhance the effect of the heroin. Ian, aged 51, a long-term heroin user who took 
pregabalin on a daily basis, indicated: “I’m prescribed it for a reason, for nerve damage but I 
didn’t know what was going on until later on, later on like in my using, that it was enhancing, 
enhancing the feeling of the heroin whereas I thought it was just better heroin [laughs] at the 
time.  So I was naive to the fact of that but now I’m well, well, well versed in like knowing 
what that is all about.” Similarly Edward, aged 34 and a short-term heroin user who took 
pregabalin rarely, suggested: “If anything the heroin’s helped the pregabalin work quicker 
and maybe stronger … so they both sort of work same sort of way.” 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Pregabalin might reduce heroin use 
Because of the belief that the drugs had similar effect, it was asserted that pregabalin might 
decrease heroin use for some people. James, aged 58 and a long-term heroin user, said he had 
used pregabalin three times and added: You don’t really want to use heroin, you want more 
pregabs, I don’t know why.” Kate, aged 35, a long-term heroin user who said she had rarely 
taken pregabalin, suggested it might assist with heroin withdrawal: “Last time I used I took 
two, two of 250 pregabalins and I went home.  And I’ve got two of each [heroin and crack 
cocaine] in my pocket for instance, yeah. Put it down on the coffee table and normally I 
would be desperate – open it up, you know, doing it. I just, I was just so like chilled out 
watching TV and the next thing I know I woke up the next morning and the two things, four 
things [heroin and crack cocaine] were still on the table and I felt really good about myself, I 
hadn’t used because, for some reason. And loads of other addicts have said the same to me as 
well. It [pregabalin] would be a brilliant drug to bring out in a detox unit, just to be used for 
like one or two days, just when you’re feeling the shittiest, because it really, it really does, it 
just chills you out.”  
 
Pregabalin causes blackouts/loss of control 
The combination of heroin and pregabalin was thought to be the cause of blackouts and loss 
of control. Cleo, aged 23 and a short-term heroin user, said she had rarely used pregabalin: 
“The effect on me it’s like I had blackouts because the next day I wakes up and I can’t 
remember nothing what happened.”  Edward, aged 34 and a short-term heroin user, also said 
he rarely used pregabalin: “Most people that I know who’s took pregabalin around me, cos 
I’ve not took many myself but I’ve known people who takes them to get wrecked, is um they’re 
like zombies, they don’t know what they’re doing.”  
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Concerns were raised that these blackouts could have serious implications for the user. Jacob, 
aged 44 and long-term heroin user who used pregabalin on a weekly basis, suggested: “By the 
time it hits the pregabs you’re already out of your head so, you know what I mean, you could 
end up doing a hit that you wouldn’t usually do because you’re not really with it.”  
 
Pregabalin and overdose 
Of the participants who took pregabalin, most believed it increased the risk of overdose. Ian, 
aged 51 and long-term heroin user, used pregabalin daily: “That’s one of my last overdoses. I 
knew the heroin was strong and I didn’t know, I was naive to the fact, that pregabalin is an 
enhan- is an enhancer as well as what it’s used for medically like on my body.” Helen, aged 
36 and another long-term heroin user who took pregabalin every day, suggested pregabalin 
had a delayed effect which could increase the risk of overdose for an impatient user: 
“Pregabalin takes like two, three hours to kick in so, like, and then we think “Argh it hasn’t 
kicked in, I’ll have a dig”.  So we have a dig and then that kicks in and then there’s more 
chance of you going over ...  overdosing, that’s the danger.”  
 
Effect of pregabalin on respiration 
Pregabalin depression of respiration 
The heroin users we interviewed indicated a preference for pregabalin and therefore we 
examined the effects of pregabalin rather than gabapentin on respiration in mice. In the early 
stages of the study we only had S/R-pregabalin available to us. We observed that S/R-
pregabalin (40–400 mg/kg i.p.) produced dose-dependent depression of respiration. When S-
pregabalin, the active pregabalin isomer in Lyrica [19], became available we demonstrated 
that a 200mg/kg dose of this isomer produced similar respiratory depression to 400 mg/kg of 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
the racemate (compare the depression of respiration by pregabalin in Figures 2B and 3B). S-
pregabalin produced profound depression of respiration that developed rapidly, within five 
minutes of drug injection, and was maintained for the remainder (30 minutes) of the 
observation period (Figure 2A & B). When respiration was depressed by pregabalin it 
became regular, there was no evidence of apnoea or gasping, and resulted from a decrease in 
both rate and depth of respiration (Figure 2C).  Pregabalin did not induce ribcage muscle 
stiffness which would reduce tidal volume. The depression of respiration by 200mg/kg S-
pregabalin was similar to that induced by 10mg/kg morphine (Figure 2B).  The depression of 
respiration by pregabalin was not however due to release in the brain of endogenous opioids 
or to direct activation of opioid receptors as, unlike the depression which occurs to morphine, 
it was not prevented by prior administration of naloxone (Figure 3A). 
 
When administered to the same animal the respiratory depressant effects of S/R-pregabalin 
and morphine appeared to summate rather than show synergism (Figure 3B). The depression 
of respiration by morphine after S/R-pregabalin was similar in extent to that seen in animals 
not pretreated with S/R-pregabalin (Figure 3C). In mice that had been rendered tolerant to 
morphine by continuous exposure to the drug over six days, S/R-pregabalin produced the 
same degree of respiratory depression as seen in morphine-naïve mice (Figure 3D). 
 
Pregabalin reversal of morphine tolerance 
Following six days treatment with morphine an acute challenge with morphine (10mg/kg) 
failed to depress respiration demonstrating that the mice were tolerant (compare Figure 2B 
and Figure 4B). To investigate the effect of pregabalin on morphine tolerance we gave mice 
that had been treated with morphine for six days an acute injection of S-pregabalin (20mg/kg 
i.p.) at the same time as the challenge dose of morphine. This dose of S-pregabalin alone 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
produced very little depression of respiration in both naïve mice and mice pretreated with 
morphine (Figure 4A). In morphine-pretreated mice that were injected with S-pregabalin at 
the same time as the acute morphine challenge respiration was significantly depressed (Figure 
4B). This is consistent with pregabalin reversal of morphine tolerance. 
 
DISCUSSION 
Main Findings 
Concomitant use of heroin and gabapentoids (pregabalin and gabapentin) is an emerging 
public health problem. Fatal poisonings, the majority involving opioids, have increased 
substantially and are strongly correlated with the increase in prescriptions. Heroin users 
reported ease of access and increasing use of gabapentoids which, if taken with heroin, can 
induce blackouts and may increase overdose risk. In laboratory animal experiments a low 
dose of pregabalin was observed to reverse morphine tolerance and reveal respiratory 
depression to a dose of morphine that did not depress respiration in tolerant animals; whereas 
a high dose of pregabalin itself depressed respiration in opioid naïve animals and this was 
additive with morphine. Taken together our data corroborate the hypothesis of an increase in 
overdose risk when gabapentoids are used along with opioids.  
 
Strengths and limitations 
We are unaware of any other studies that combine epidemiological, qualitative and 
pharmacological laboratory experimental insights on overdose risk, and believe our study 
demonstrates the benefits of combining different research methods in the study of risk.  
However, there are limitations that need to be taken into account. Information on drug related 
poisonings is based on drugs specified by the coroner on the death certificate. About 10% of 
poisoning deaths have no specific information, and not every drug detected in forensic tests 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
will be reported on the death certificate [20]. Approximately one in three fatal poisonings 
mention more than one substance and 30% mention alcohol and it is not always clear which 
substance or substances is responsible for the fatality [15]. We are not aware, however, of any 
alteration in practice by coroners that would increase the likelihood of reporting pregabalin or 
gabapentin on death certificates. We show a strong ecological association between trends in 
gabapentoid prescriptions and overdose deaths but from the data available to ONS we are 
unable to say how many acute poisoning deaths in which both opioids and gabapentoids were 
reported are illicit opioid users or how many are patients prescribed both opioids and 
gabapentoids for pain. The majority of people dying from opioid poisoning, however, are 
problem drug users. Moreover, given the ready availability of gabapentoids to illicit opioid 
users (as reported in our interviews with heroin users) and the perceived higher incidence of 
overdose (non-fatal and fatal) amongst illicit opioid users it is likely that they are the larger 
cohort.  
 
Our interviews with heroin users were by necessity undertaken on a relatively small sample 
of participants and cannot be generalized to a wider population.  However, we were able to 
interview a range of heroin users of both genders whose accounts are authentic and give 
insight into the views and experiences of polydrug use involving heroin and gabapentoids. 
Finally, in the study of the effect of pregabalin on respiration we did not attempt to determine 
the mechanism by which the observed depression occurred save that it was produced by S-
pregabalin, the active isomer of pregabalin used clinically in the treatment of pain, and that it 
did not involve either the release of endogenous opioids or direct activation of opioid 
receptors. 
 
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
How our evidence fits with other studies 
An association between the presence at post mortem of opioids and gabapentoids has 
previously been observed in a Finnish study of drug-related deaths [13]. They observed that 
opioids were present in around 90% of the deaths where there was evidence of pregabalin or 
gabapentin misuse.  They also reported that the incidence of pregabalin misuse in drug 
related deaths was over 7-fold greater than that of gabapentin. This may be because 
pregabalin is more rapidly absorbed and has higher bioavailability than gabapentin following 
oral administration [21]. 
 
Potentially the presence of pregabalin or gabapentin in opioid overdose fatalities could have 
been benign and not a factor in overdose, their presence simply being due to recent misuse of 
these drugs by heroin users. However, there is evidence now from multiple sources that 
gabapentoids potentiate the effects of opioids. A survey of opioid users suggested pregabalin 
and gabapentin potentiated the high obtained with methadone [22]. Also, the heroin users we 
interviewed reported that gabapentoids enhanced both the high and the likelihood of 
overdose.   
 
In animal experiments pregabalin has been reported to enhance the sedation induced by 
oxycodone and morphine [23] while gabapentin can inhibit both the development and 
maintenance of tolerance to the antinociceptive effects of morphine [24].  We observed that 
morphine and pregabalin were additive in depressing respiration and a low dose of pregabalin 
could reverse tolerance to the respiratory depressant effects of morphine. Both of these 
effects would result in enhanced respiratory depression and further supports the view that 
gabapentoids can contribute to heroin fatalities.   
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Implications 
Heroin users are notorious polydrug users frequently using alcohol, benzodiazepines and 
crack cocaine as well as heroin [25].  To this list we can now add the gabapentoids which are 
now widely prescribed for a range of disorders. The substantial rise in prescriptions 
illustrated in Figure 1 seems unlikely to be due simply to an increase in cases of neuropathic 
pain [26]. Their uncontrolled status may lead to over-prescribing particularly to those with a 
history of substance/opioid misuse [4]. Also, the absence of objective parameters for the 
severity of the conditions for which pregabalin and gabapentin are prescribed may make it 
easy to obtain high doses of these drugs, simply by reporting poor effectiveness, or by 
reporting symptoms that do not exist [8]. This may also facilitate diversion. Though 
guidelines for pain management recommend caution in the use of gabapentoids because of 
the risk of misuse and diversion, these issues are not highlighted in current guidance on the 
management of opioid dependence.  Similarly, the specific problem of increased overdose 
risk associated with gabapentoids is not emphasised in current overdose prevention 
guidelines for problem opioid users. In contrast the increase in methadone prescription after 
the introduction of supervised consumption was not associated with an increase in methadone 
related overdose deaths [27].  In the broader context these issues reflect the challenge of the 
management of chronic non-cancer pain in the community. Pain is a symptom and is not 
amenable to objective measurement. Chronic pain, including “neuropathic” pain, is extremely 
common and is mainly managed by clinical generalists working in Primary Care [28]. Faced 
with an apparently distressed and demanding patient who reports that their pain has not been 
controlled by other treatments, GPs may feel pressure to prescribe an alternative, particularly 
when there is some evidence that this alternative is effective [29]. 
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Gabapentin or pregabalin are currently being prescribed to heroin users, or can be purchased 
on the street. It is important that doctors and their patients are aware that the combination of 
opioids with gabapentin or pregabalin potentially increases the risk of acute overdose death 
through either reversing tolerance or by an additive effect of the drugs to depress respiration.  
Alternatives to gabapentoids need to be recommended for clinicians managing opioid 
dependent patients with neuropathic pain or generalised anxiety, and greater attention given 
to restricting diversion of gabepentoid prescriptions.    
 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Pete Ellis of the Bristol Drugs Project who first raised with us 
questions about heroin users also using gabapentoids. The project would not have been 
possible without the involvement of the staff and service users of Bristol Drugs Project.  Prof 
John MacLeod provided helpful comments on the manuscript. 
 
Funding 
Research reported in this publication was supported by the Medical Research Council, the 
National Institute on Drug Abuse under award number RO1036975-01 and by The Centre for 
the Development and Evaluation of Complex Interventions for Public Health Improvement 
(DECIPHer), a UKCRC Public Health Research Centre of Excellence. The funders of the 
study had no role in the study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, 
writing of the report. 
 
REFERENCES 
1. Mersfelder T.L., Nichols W.H. Gabapentin: abuse, dependence, and withdrawal. Ann 
Pharmacother 2016 50:229-233.   
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
2. Papazisis G., Tzachanis D. Pregabalin's abuse potential: a mini review focusing on the 
pharmacological profile. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 2014 52:709-716.   
 
3. Schjerning O., Rosenzweig M., Pottegård A., et al. Abuse Potential of Pregabalin: A 
Systematic Review. CNS Drugs 2016 30:9-25. 
 
4. Smith R.V., Havens J.R., Walsh S.L. Gabapentin misuse, abuse and diversion: a 
systematic review.  Addiction 2016 111:1160-1174.   
 
5. Grosshans M., Lemenager T., Vollmert C., et al.  Pregabalin abuse among opiate 
addicted patients. Eur J Clin Pharmacol  2013 69:2021-2025.   
 
6. McNamara S., Stokes S., Kilduff R. et al. Pregabalin abuse amongst opioid 
substitution treatment patients. Ir Med J  2015 108:309-310. 
 
7. Smith R.V., Lofwall M.R., Havens J.R. Abuse and diversion of gabapentin among 
nonmedical prescription opioid users in Appalachian Kentucky. Am J Psychiatry 2015 
172:487-488. 
 
8. Bastiaens L., Galus J., Mazur C. Abuse of gabapentin is associated with opioid 
addiction.  Psychiatr Q 2016 
. 
 
9. Evoy K.E., Morrison M.D., Saklad S.R. Abuse and misuse of pregabalin and 
gabapentin. Drugs. 2017 [Epub ahead of print] 
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
10. PHE/NHS guidelines 2014 Advice for prescribers on the risk of the misuse of 
pregabalin and gabapentin.  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/385791
/PHE-NHS_England_pregabalin_and_gabapentin_advice_Dec_2014.pdf. 
 
11. NICE Guidance; Neuropathic Pain in adults: pharmacological management in non-
specialist settings. 2014 https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg173. 
 
12. Royal College of General Practitioners. Safer prescribing in prisons. 2011 
http://www.rcgp.org.uk/Clinical-and-research/Clinical-
resources/~/media/106D28C849364D4CB2CB5A75A4E0849F.ashx. 
 
13. Häkkinen M., Vuori E., Kalso E. et al. Profiles of pregabalin and gabapentin abuse by 
postmortem toxicology. Forensic Sci Int 2014 241:1-6. 
 
14. Morgan O., Griffiths C., Toson B. et al. Trends in deaths related to drug misuse in 
England and Wales, 1993-2004. Health Stat Q 2006: 23-27. 
 
15. Office for National Statistics. Deaths Related to Drug Poisoning in England and 
Wales: 2015 registrations. 2016 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/de
aths/bulletins/deathsrelatedtodrugpoisoninginenglandandwales/2015registrations 
 
16. Kirkwood B., Sterne J. Essential Medical Statistics (2nd Edition), Blackwell Oxford 
2003. 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
17. Richie J., Lewis J., Nicholls C.M.N. et al. Qualitative research practice: A guide for 
social science students and researchers (2nd Edition), Sage London 2014. 
 
18. Hill R., Lyndon A., Withey S. et al. Ethanol reversal of tolerance to the respiratory 
depressant effects of morphine. Neuropsychopharmacology 2016 41:762-773. 
 
19. Ben-Menachem E. Pregabalin pharmacology and its relevance to clinical 
practice. Epilepsia 2004 45: Suppl 6:13-18. 
 
20. Hickman M., Carrivick S., Paterson S., Hunt N., Zador D., Cusick L., Henry J. 
London audit of drug-related overdose deaths: characteristics and typology, and 
implications for prevention and monitoring. Addiction 2007 102:317-323. 
 
21. Bockbrader H.N., Wesche D., Miller R., et al. A comparison of the pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics of pregabalin and gabapentin. Clin Pharmacokinet 2010 
49:661-669.   
 
22. Baird C.R., Fox P., Colvin L.A. Gabapentoid abuse in order to potentiate the effect of 
methadone: a survey among substance abusers. Eur Addict Res 2014 20: 115-118. 
 
23. Jokinen V., Lilius T.O., Laitila J. et al. Pregabalin enhances the antinociceptive effect 
of oxycodone and morphine in thermal models of nociception in the rat without any 
pharmacokinetic interaction. Eur J Pain 2016 20:297–306.   
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
24. Gilron I., Biederman J., Jhamandas K., et al. Gabapentin blocks and reverses 
antinociceptive morphine tolerance in the rat paw-pressure and tail-flick tests. 
Anesthesiology. 2003 98:1288-1292. 
 
25. Brecht M., Huang D., Evans E., et al.  Polydrug use and implications for longitudinal 
research: Ten-year trajectories for heroin, cocaine, and methamphetamine users. Drug 
and Alcohol Dependence 2008 96: 193–201. 
 
26. Smith B.H., Higgins C., Baldacchino A., et al. Substance misuse of gabapentin. Br J 
Gen Prac 2012 62, 406-407. 
 
27. Strang J., Hall W., Hickman M., et al. Impact of supervision of methadone 
consumption on deaths related to methadone overdose (1993-2008): analyses using 
OD4 index in England and Scotland. BMJ 2010 16;341:c4851. 
 
28. Smith B.H., Torrance N. “Neuropathic Pain”, in Croft P (ed): Chronic Pain 
Epidemiology: from Aetiology to Public Health. Oxford: Oxford University Press 
2011 pp209 – 233.  
 
29. Finnerup N.B., Attal N., Haroutounian S., et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain 
in adults: systematic review, meta-analysis and NeuPSIG recommendations. Lancet 
Neurology 2015 162–173. 
 
 
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
FIGURE LEGENDS 
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
Figure 1.  Number of pregabalin and gabapentin prescriptions and number of deaths 
per annum in which pregabalin and gabapentin were mentioned on the death certificate 
from 2004 - 2015. A. The number of community care prescriptions per annum for pregabalin 
and gabapentin in the England and Wales are shown in red.  Data were obtained from the 
Health and Social Care Information Centre (HSCIC, UK).  The number of registered deaths 
per annum in England and Wales in which pregabalin or gabapentin were mentioned on the 
death certificate is shown in green.  The number of deaths in which pregabalin and 
gabapentin as well as an opioid drug were mentioned are shown in purple.  Data obtained 
from the Office for National Statistics (ONS, UK). B. Scatter plot of gabapentoid 
prescriptions (per 100,000) in England and Wales (2004 to 2015) versus overdose deaths (on 
a logarithmic scale) in which gabapentoids were mentioned in the coroner’s report. Data are 
replotted from that used in A. The blue line shows line of best fit (correlation coefficient 
0.965): 5% increase in overdose deaths per 100,000 increase in prescriptions. 
 
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Figure 2.  Depression of respiration by pregabalin and morphine in the mouse.  A.  
Inhibition of respiration by S-pregabalin (200 mg/kg ip).  Data are shown as minute volume 
before and following drug injection.  N = 6. In some instances error bars are smaller than the 
symbol.  B.  Comparison of inhibition of respiration by S-pregabalin (200 mg/kg ip) and 
morphine (10mg/kg ip).  For each drug treatment then for each animal data are normalised to 
minute volume before drug injection.  Data for S-pregabalin were derived from that 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
illustrated in part A.  N = 6 for both drug treatments.  C.  Raw respiration traces from an 
untreated mouse and one injected with S/R-pregabalin (400 mg/kg ip) recorded at the height 
of drug action.  The horizontal blue line indicates the point of pressure inflection.  In the 
respiration traces expiration is upwards.   
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Figure 3.  Interactions between S/R-pregabalin and morphine on mouse respiration.  A.  
Pretreatment with naloxone (1 mg/kg ip; nal) for 10 min abolished the depression of 
respiration induced by morphine (10 mg/kg ip; mor) but not that induced by S/R-pregabalin 
(400 mg/kg ip, pregab).  The area under the curve (AUC) for the percentage change in minute 
volume induced by each drug treatment has been calculated [see ref 18] and then the mean 
value determined.  N = 6 in each case; * indicates P<0.05, unpaired, two tailed Student’s t 
test comparing morphine and morphine + naloxone.  There was no statistical difference 
between pregabalin and pregabalin + naloxone.  B.  Depression of respiration induced by 
morphine (10 mg/kg ip, filled squares) or saline (filled circles) in mice that had been 
pretreated with S/R-pregabalin (400 mg/kg ip).  C.  Comparison of the depression of 
respiration induced by morphine in naïve animals and in animals pretreated with S/R 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
pregabalin (400 mg/kg).  N = 6 in each case, there was no statistical difference (unpaired, two 
tailed Student’s t test) between the treatments.  D.  Depression of respiration induced by S/R-
pregabalin (400 mg/kg ip) in naïve mice and in mice that had been pretreated with morphine 
for 6 days.  N = 7 in each case.  Statistical analysis (unpaired, two tailed Student’s t test) of 
the AUC for both treatments demonstrated that there was no statistical difference between the 
degree of respiratory depression induced by pregabalin in the naïve and morphine-treated 
mice.   
 
 
  
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. 
 
Figure 4. Reversal of morphine tolerance by S-pregabalin. A. The low dose of S-
pregabalin (20 mg/kg ip) in naïve mice and mice that had been pretreated with morphine for 6 
days produced little depression of respiration. N = 6. B. In mice that had been pretreated with 
morphine for 6 days acute injection of morphine (10 mg/kg ip) did not depress respiration i.e. 
the mice were tolerant. Whereas, with a simultaneous injection of pregabalin (20 mg/kg ip) 
injection of morphine (10 mg/kg ip) did depress respiration in mice that had been pretreated 
with morphine for 6 days. C. AUC analysis of the data in A & B [see ref 18] indicated that in 
morphine pretreated mice pregabalin + morphine induced significantly greater depression of 
respiration than morphine alone (P<0.05). N = 6 in each case. 
 
