 www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018 
1027
Articles
Safety and feasibility of ultrasound-triggered targeted drug 
delivery of doxorubicin from thermosensitive liposomes in 
liver tumours (TARDOX): a single-centre, open-label, 
phase 1 trial
Paul C Lyon, Michael D Gray, Christophoros Mannaris, Lisa K Folkes, Michael Stratford, Leticia Campo, Daniel Y F Chung, Shaun Scott, 
Mark Anderson, Robert Goldin, Robert Carlisle, Feng Wu, Mark R Middleton, Fergus V Gleeson, Constantin C Coussios
Summary
Background Previous preclinical research has shown that extracorporeal devices can be used to enhance the delivery 
and distribution of systemically administered anticancer drugs, resulting in increased intratumoural concentrations. 
We aimed to assess the safety and feasibility of targeted release and enhanced delivery of doxorubicin to solid tumours 
from thermosensitive liposomes triggered by mild hyperthermia, induced non-invasively by focused ultrasound.
Methods We did an open-label, single-centre, phase 1 trial in a single UK hospital. Adult patients (aged ≥18 years) 
with unresectable and non-ablatable primary or secondary liver tumours of any histological subtype were considered 
for the study. Patients received a single intravenous infusion (50 mg/m²) of lyso-thermosensitive liposomal 
doxorubicin (LTLD), followed by extracorporeal focused ultrasound exposure of a single target liver tumour. The 
trial had two parts: in part I, patients had a real-time thermometry device implanted intratumourally, whereas 
patients in part II proceeded without thermometry and we used a patient-specific model to predict optimal exposure 
parameters. We assessed tumour biopsies obtained before and after focused ultrasound exposure for doxorubicin 
concentration and distribution. The primary endpoint was at least a doubling of total intratumoural doxorubicin 
concentration in at least half of the patients treated, on an intention-to-treat basis. This study is registered with 
ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT02181075, and is now closed to recruitment.
Findings Between March 13, 2015, and March 27, 2017, ten patients were enrolled in the study (six patients in part I 
and four in part II), and received a dose of LTLD followed by focused ultrasound exposure. The treatment resulted in 
an average increase of 3·7 times in intratumoural biopsy doxorubicin concentrations, from an estimate of 2·34 μg/g 
(SD 0·93) immediately after drug infusion to 8·56 µg/g (5·69) after focused ultrasound. Increases of two to ten times 
were observed in seven (70%) of ten patients, satisfying the primary endpoint. Serious adverse events registered were 
expected grade 4 transient neutropenia in five patients and prolonged hospital stay due to unexpected grade 1 confusion 
in one patient. Grade 3–4 adverse events recorded were neutropenia (grade 3 in one patient and grade 4 in five patients), 
and grade 3 anaemia in one patient. No treatment-related deaths occurred.
Interpretation The combined treatment of LTLD and non-invasive focused ultrasound hyperthermia in this study 
seemed to be clinically feasible, safe, and able to enhance intratumoural drug delivery, providing targeted chemo-
ablative response in human liver tumours that were refractory to standard chemotherapy.
Funding Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, National Institute for Health Research.
Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY 4·0 license.
Introduction
A major challenge of systemic anticancer therapy is 
achieving the delivery of a therapeutic dose to the tumour 
without exceeding the maximum tolerated dose and 
causing toxicity in healthy tissues.1 Several device-based 
approaches are under investigation to address this 
challenge, including the use of focused ultrasound,2 
magnetic field, laser, radio-frequency, and microwave 
techniques for activation of stimuli-responsive drug 
delivery systems.3
Liposomes are biocompatible phospholipid nano-
particles that can enhance the pharmacokinetics of 
chemotherapeutic drugs and therefore are attractive drug 
delivery systems.4 A considerable body of preclinical 
research has shown that hyperthermia-triggered release 
of a therapeutic drug encapsulated in thermosensitive 
liposomal carriers can greatly enhance the intratumoural 
concentration, distribution, and ultimate therapeutic 
efficacy of a given systemic dose.5–8 However, these effects 
have not yet been proven clinically. Focused ultrasound is 
the only non-invasive approach capable of generating 
highly targeted mild hyperthermia at depth within the 
body and is thus an attractive method for triggered drug 
release.
Lancet Oncol 2018; 19: 1027–39
Published Online 
July 9, 2018 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
S1470-2045(18)30332-2
See Comment page 1000
Nuffield Department of 
Surgical Sciences 
(P C Lyon DPhil, Prof F Wu PhD) 
and Nuffield Department of 
Anaesthetics (S Scott FRCA), 
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford 
University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK; 
Department of Radiology 
(P C Lyon, D Y F Chung FRCR, 
M Anderson FRCR, 
Prof F V Gleeson FRCR) and 
Department of Oncology 
(Prof M R Middleton FRCP), 
Churchill Hospital, Oxford 
University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK; 
Institute of Biomedical 
Engineering (P C Lyon, 
M D Gray PhD, C Mannaris PhD, 
R Carlisle PhD, 
Prof C C Coussios PhD) and 
CRUK/MRC Oxford Institute for 
Radiation Oncology, 
Department of Oncology 
(L K Folkes DPhil, 
M Stratford PhD, L Campo Dip), 
University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK; and Centre for Pathology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial 
College London, London, UK 
(R Goldin FRCPath)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Constantin C Coussios, 
Institute of Biomedical 
Engineering, University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK 
constantin.coussios@eng.ox.
ac.uk
 Articles
1028 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018
Unlike non-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin 
(NTLD), lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin 
(LTLD; Celsion Corporation, Lawrenceville, NJ, USA) 
releases its drug payload at temperatures above 39·5°C.6 
Liposomal formulations enhance plasma pharma-
cokinetics of doxorubicin, resulting in a plasma half-life 
in humans of about 10 h for NTLD9 and 1 h for LTLD,10—
much longer than that of free doxorubicin, which has a 
half-life of only minutes.10
The thermosensitive property of LTLD has been used 
clinically, mainly in conjunction with minimally invasive 
radiofrequency ablation, which is used to thermally ablate 
the core of the tumour while LTLD is circulating 
systemically, with the intention of improving therapy at the 
tumour margins.11 LTLD was evaluated as part of the HEAT 
trial,12 a pivotal phase 3 study of the use of radiofrequency 
ablation for the treatment of hepato 
cellular carcinoma. 
The primary endpoint of the HEAT trial was not met; in 
the intention-to-treat analysis, the progression-free survival 
hazard ratio (HR) of radio 
frequency ablation plus LTLD 
versus radiofrequency ablation alone was 0·96 (95% CI 
0·79–1·18; p=0·71) and the overall survival HR was 
0·95 (0·76–1·20; p=0·67). However, in a subgroup of 
285 patients with a solitary hepatocellular carcinoma lesion 
who received a radiofrequency ablation dwell time of at 
least 45 min, the overall survival HR was 0·63 (0·41–0·96; 
p<0·05) in favour of combination therapy. The positive 
findings in this subgroup of the HEAT study led to the 
ongoing OPTIMA study (NCT02112656), which is a 
randomised, double-blind, dummy-controlled, phase 3 
clinical study of LTLD used in combination with 
standardised radiofrequency ablation for 45 min or longer 
for solitary hepatocellular carcinoma. These radiofrequency 
ablation studies have shown an acceptable safety profile, 
but targeted LTLD release using extracorporeal focused 
ultrasound, to our knowledge, has never been assessed in 
humans. Therefore, we did a phase 1 trial to assess the 
safety and feasibility of targeted release and enhanced 
delivery of doxorubicin from thermosensitive liposomes 
triggered by mild hyperthermia, induced non-invasively by 
focused ultrasound.
Methods
Study design and participants
The TARDOX study was a phase 1, single-centre, 
open-label study, done at Churchill Hospital (Oxford, 
UK). The Health Research Authority National Research 
Ethics Service, the Oxford University Hospitals Research 
Research in context
Evidence before this study
Achievement of targeted and efficacious drug delivery while 
avoiding off-target toxicity represents a universal challenge in 
oncology, especially for the treatment of metastatic cancer. 
Nanotechnology vehicles that passively accumulate or 
selectively release anticancer agents in solid tumours have 
shown substantial promise in preclinical studies but have not 
yet gained widespread adoption because of the absence of 
demonstrable clinical benefit. Lyso-thermosensitive liposomal 
doxorubicin (LTLD) is a thermally active liposomal drug delivery 
system capable of selectively releasing its cargo (doxorubicin) 
under conditions of mild hyperthermia. Previous clinical studies 
with LTLD have used it solely in combination with minimally 
invasive radiofrequency ablation to improve treatment of 
tumour margins. However, preclinical studies showed that, by 
using focused ultrasound to induce mild hyperthermia 
non-invasively after systemic administration of LTLD, the 
intratumoural delivery and distribution for a given systemic 
dose of doxorubicin can be greatly enhanced, potentially 
increasing therapeutic efficacy. The feasibility and applicability 
of these effects have not yet been demonstrated clinically. 
Because of the small number and heterogeneous nature of 
preclinical studies and the absence of clinical studies, we did not 
do a formal meta-analysis of existing literature in 
ultrasound-mediated targeted drug delivery.
Added value of this study
To our knowledge, this clinical study is the first to investigate 
the safety and feasibility of extracorporeally triggered drug 
release in oncology and to quantify the potential benefits of 
this approach in terms of the drug dose, distribution, and 
cellular delivery, in addition to radiologically assessing the 
observed therapeutic response induced by a single systemically 
administered course of chemotherapy. Our study showed the 
safety and feasibility of selectively maintaining non-ablative 
hyperthermia in tumours with volume up to 100 cm3 in the 
liver, by use of a clinically approved extracorporeal focused 
ultrasound device. Additionally, our study showed quantitative 
measures of the pharmacokinetics and intratumoural drug 
accumulation derived from the use of liposomal carriers in 
several tumour subtypes, both before and after ultrasound 
exposure, providing much needed clinical data about the value 
of passive versus active methods of accumulating therapeutic 
agents in tumours.
Implications of all the available evidence
Our study showed the potential to attain a chemo-ablative 
response in otherwise refractory tumours when using a 
thermosensitive liposomal drug carrier in combination with 
non-invasive focused ultrasound. Building on decades of 
promising preclinical research, in both therapeutic ultrasound 
and drug delivery systems, our study highlights the clinical 
potential of device-based drug delivery approaches in general, 
and ultrasound in particular, to achieve several-fold 
enhancements in the delivery and distribution of existing and 
future therapeutic agents to solid tumours, with potentially 
transformative implications for their therapeutic effectiveness 
at a given systemic dose.
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018 
1029
and Development Department, and the UK’s Medicines 
and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency granted 
ethics and regulatory approvals. The full study protocol is 
available in the appendix and a detailed account of the 
protocol design is available elsewhere.13
Patients who were considered for this study were aged 
18 years or older and had pathologically confirmed 
incurable solid primary or secondary (metastatic) liver 
tumours, of any histological subtype, who had progressed 
or were stable on conventional chemotherapy. For 
inclusion, patients were required to have at least one liver 
tumour (≥1 cm in size) amenable to ultrasound-guided 
intervention, a life expectancy of 3 months or longer, a 
left ventricular ejection fraction of 50% or greater, a 
WHO performance status of 1 or lower, and adequate 
haema 
tological and biochemical indices. Patients who 
had received radiotherapy to the target region in the 
preceding 12 months or a lifetime dose of doxorubicin 
greater than 450 mg/m² were excluded, as were patients 
who were pregnant or had HIV-positive status, haemo-
chromatosis, uncontrolled diabetes, ongoing infection, 
advanced liver disease, or serious illness—including 
congestive heart failure, myocardial infarction, or 
stroke—within the previous 6 months. Detailed inclusion 
and exclusion criteria are provided in the full study 
protocol (appendix p 28) and the protocol design.13 
Patients were recruited from the early phase trials clinic 
at the Churchill Hospital. All patients gave written 
consent for study participation.
Procedures
Participants were assigned to one of two parts of the 
study, delineated by the presence (part I) or absence 
(part II) of a clinically approved thermometry device 
temporarily implanted percutaneously in the target 
tumour during the intervention (appendix p 4). In part I, 
real-time thermometry data were acquired during 
focused ultrasound exposure by the implanted thermo-
metry device (thermistor or thermocouple). Intra-
tumoural drug concentration was estimated by use of 
tumour biopsies taken before drug infusion (pre-LTLD), 
after infusion (post-LTLD), and after ultrasound exposure 
(post-LTLD plus focused ultrasound), through the same 
co-axial needle used to implant the thermometry device. 
In addition to assessing safety, feasibility, and efficacy of 
ultrasound-triggered targeted drug delivery, part I was 
also designed to capture thermometry data to help 
predict ultrasound parameters for part II of the study.
Part II of the study was opened subsequently and was 
designed to assess the feasibility and efficacy of drug 
delivery without invasive thermometry, to better reflect 
how this treatment might be ultimately implemented 
non-invasively in routine clinical practice. Focused 
ultrasound treatment parameters were defined by a 
predictive model to scale the ultrasound power and duty 
cycle as a function of the treatment depth, to yield a 
temperature in the range of 39·5–43°C on the intended 
treatment volume. In part II of the study, after drug 
delivery, only the post-LTLD plus focused ultrasound 
biopsy was taken. Clinical data from both parts of the 
study were used in endpoint analysis, which included 
quantification of the delivered intratumoural dose of 
doxorubicin from tumour biopsies.
For all study participants, before full study consent, 
ultrasound planning sessions were done to assess the 
feasibility of targeting liver lesions with ultrasound, 
resulting in the selection of a single target tumour for 
each patient for intervention. On the day before treatment, 
baseline scans (perfusion CT and dynamic contrast-
enhanced MRI of the liver, and ¹⁸F-fluorodeoxyglucose 
PET-CT scans were done and the required pre-medications 
(steroids) were given. Treatment consisted of one cycle of 
LTLD administered during a single inter 
ventional 
procedure. The treatment was received under a general 
anaesthetic (with the use of high-frequency jet ventilation 
to reduce respiratory motion of the liver) and involved a 
single 30-min intravenous infusion of LTLD (50 mg/m²) 
followed by targeted hyperthermia of the selected liver 
tumour by focused ultrasound. In the focused ultrasound 
treatment, a CE-marked extracorporeal high-intensity 
focused ultrasound device, certified for oncological 
treatment (model JC200 Focused Ultrasound Tumor 
Therapeutic System, Chongqing Haifu, Chongqing, 
China), operating at a frequency of 0·96 MHz, was used 
to induce highly targeted mild hyperthermia (≥39·5°C) 
within the selected liver tumours. For all part I and part II 
interventions, the integrated diagnostic B-mode ultra-
sound probe of the device was used for image guidance 
through intercostal or subcostal windows. Extensive 
preclinical validation of the clinical device for its 
application in volumetric hyper 
thermia, using the same 
thermometry devices that were used in this study, was 
done before patient inter 
vention (Lyon PC, unpublished). 
Patients were discharged from hospital the following 
morning, after a clinical review and MRI scan. The 
intervention is further detailed in the appendix and 
protocol design.13
Clinical reviews and routine blood tests were done at 
2 weeks and 4 weeks post-intervention, coinciding with 
repeat radiological imaging (CT and MRI scans of the 
liver and ¹⁸F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET-CT scan). During 
the 30-day follow-up period, adverse events were recorded 
using Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, 
version 4.0 (CTCAE v4.0). After the trial period, patients 
either resumed standard of care (typically supportive 
treatments without further systemic chemotherapy) or 
were recruited for further early-phase trials. Patients 
could be removed from the study according to their 
wishes or clinician decision, if toxic effects or adverse 
events were deemed unacceptable, if there were sub-
stantial protocol deviations or non-compliance, or if there 
were new exclusion criteria, such as pregnancy.
Detailed sample analysis methods are outlined in the 
appendix (pp 5, 6). In both parts of the study, peripheral 
See Online for appendix
 Articles
1030 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018
blood samples were obtained pre-LTLD, post-LTLD, and 
post-LTLD plus focused ultra 
sound for pharmacokinetic 
analysis, corresponding with part I biopsy timepoints. 
Plasma aliquots and weighed biopsy samples were stored 
at –80°C until sub 
sequent analysis by high-performance 
liquid chrom 
atography (HPLC), with fluorescence 
detection at 480 nm excitation and 560 nm emission, to 
assess the total doxorubicin concentration within each 
biopsy and plasma sample, whether liposomal or free. We 
used daunorubicin as an internal standard to improve 
accuracy. Because of the solvent drug-extraction technique 
used, it was not possible to independently measure 
liposomal and free (bioavailable) concentrations of 
doxorubicin in tissue. Therefore, only total tissue concen-
trations are reported. Plasma aliquots obtained at the 
same timepoints were also analysed on the same day by a 
dequenching assay, in an attempt to estimate the degree 
of encapsulation of doxorubicin in plasma using direct 
fluorometry (appendix p 12). In part II of the study, 
biopsies were only done after LTLD plus focused ultra-
sound treatment. Therefore, for part II of the study, the 
mean drug concentration of the part I post-LTLD treat-
ment biopsies was used as a comparator to evaluate the 
number of patients with at least a two-times increase in 
intra 
tumoural biopsy drug concentration.
The focused ultrasound-targeted tumours were analysed 
for response by PCL or other members of the radiology 
team with Choi criteria, Response Evaluation Criteria in 
Solid Tumors (RECIST), and PET Response Criteria in 
Solid Tumors (PERCIST), each modified for a single target, 
by CT, MRI, and PET-CT imaging.14,15,16 Additionally, target 
tumours were also analysed for total lesion glycolysis by 
PET-CT scan17 (appendix p 6). Non-target liver tumours that 
had received a drug dose but no focused ultrasound 
exposure were also assessed in isolation in the same 
manner, with the same scan sequences, to provide time-
matched radio 
logical controls.
Outcomes
The primary objective of this study was to assess the 
feasibility of targeted release of doxorubicin from LTLD 
by use of mild hyperthermia generated non-invasively 
by focused ultrasound. The primary endpoint was 
defined as at least a doubling of the intratumoural biopsy 
doxorubicin concentrations, or final concentrations 
greater than 10 µg/g, after focused ultrasound-mediated 
hyperthermia, in at least half of patients treated.
Secondary objectives were related to assessment of the 
safety and optimisation of the ultrasound exposure 
parameters for targeted liver hyperthermia and drug 
release. Therefore, secondary endpoints were defined as 
the achievement of mild hyperthermia as monitored by 
the implanted thermometry device for patients in part I; 
persistence of cell viability staining after focused 
ultrasound exposure, to indicate absence of instantaneous 
thermal ablation; and adverse events occurring in the 
30 days after the intervention relating to either LTLD or 
focused ultrasound procedure, including clinically 
significant bone marrow suppression and liver toxicity.
Prespecified exploratory (tertiary) objectives investi-
gated alternative methods of quantifying doxorubicin 
release (as opposed to estimating intratumoural concen-
trations) and the therapeutic effect of the intervention on 
the target tumours. Therefore, tertiary endpoints included 
positive fluorescence in tumour biopsies (which would be 
indicative of bioavailable doxorubicin), and radiological 
evidence of response in target tumour volumes up to 
30 days after the intervention, according to RECIST and 
Choi response evaluation criteria based on MRI and CT 
scans, and SUVmax using PET-CT, with each criteria 
modified for a single target.
Statistical analysis
This study tested the hypothesis that higher intratumoural 
drug concentrations could be achieved when combining 
LTLD with focused ultrasound-induced hyperthermia for 
targeted tumour delivery, compared with passive accu-
mulation alone. We chose the sample size of up to 
28 patients on the basis of ethical considerations and 
available funding. We did not do a formal sample size 
power calculation. All outcome measures were assessed 
on an intention-to-treat basis, regardless of whether or 
not satisfactory hyperthermia was achieved. All evaluable 
patients from parts I and II of the trial were included in 
the endpoint analyses. Patients were excluded from the 
primary outcome measure if validated HPLC analysis of 
tumour tissue was not available. This study did not 
require statistical analysis; a doubling of total intra-
tumoural doxorubicin concentrations (post-LTLD vs post-
LTLD plus focused ultrasound) in at least half of the 
evaluable participants was required to meet the primary 
endpoint. After treatment of the first four patients in part 
I of the study, the trial management group did an interim 
analysis of the secondary endpoint relating to optimal 
focused ultrasound exposure parameters, in addition to 
the remaining secondary endpoints pertaining to safety. 
Because hyperthermia higher than the drug release 
threshold had been reliably attained in each target liver 
tumour, and no safety concerns were raised, part II of the 
trial was opened in parallel to part I. From this point on, 
allocation to either part was determined on the basis of 
feasibility (anatomical location of the potential target 
tumours) and study team and patient preference, as 
detailed in the full study protocol. All other analyses were 
done at the end of the study.
This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number 
NCT02181075, and Eudra-CT, number 2014–000514–61.
Role of the funding source
The funders and sponsor of the study had no role in study 
design, data collection, data analysis, data inter 
pretation, 
or writing of the report. PCL, RC, MRM, FVG, and CCC 
had access to all the raw data. LKF and MS had access to 
HPLC data. MDG, CM, DYFC, SS, MA, and FW had 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018 
1031
access to thermometry and radiology data. LC and RG 
had access to microscopy data. The corresponding author 
had full access to all the data in the study and had final 
responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.
Results
Of 46 patients who were screened and assessed for 
eligibility, ten patients satisfied the inclusion criteria and 
were enrolled between March 13, 2015, and March 27, 2017
. 
The remaining 36 patients did not proceed with the study: 
33 were ultimately ineligible and the remaining three 
patients declined to participate (figure 1). Of the excluded 
patients, the majority  (19 [53%] of 36) were excluded on 
the basis of anatomical location of the tumour, before part 
II was open to recruitment, which offered much more 
flexibility in tumour location. All ten enrolled patients 
received the intervention, with a median follow-up 
duration of 29·5 days (IQR 29–30 days, table 1). Various 
liver malignancies were targeted for therapy, including 
colorectal, breast, and lung metastases and primary 
hepatocellular carcinoma (table 1). Six patients were 
recruited to part I and four patients to part II of the study. 
Patients are identified in this report by study part (I or II) 
and index—for example, II.03 indicates the third patient 
treated with the part II protocol. There were no treatment-
related deaths during the study.
Part I interventions were of long duration (mean 
anaesthetic time 369·2 min [SD 38·4]) because of time 
spent simultaneously localising the target tumour 
with diagnostic ultrasound by two different intercostal 
approaches and optimising the focused ultrasound 
parameters with thermometry feedback before drug 
infusion.13 The procedurally simpler part II interventions, 
which did not require the insertion of an intratumoural 
thermometry device and real-time optimisation of 
focused ultrasound parameters, were expectedly of 
shorter duration (mean anaesthetic time 213·8 min 
[SD 21·0]) (appendix p 3). For focused ultrasound, we 
used ultrasound powers in the range of 50–140 watts 
(corresponding to estimated in-situ peak rarefactional 
pressures in the range of 5·0–8·2 MPa) and duty cycles 
between 30% and 100%, depending on tumour location 
(appendix p 2).
In part I of the study (n=6 patients), the mean 
intratumoural biopsy doxorubicin concentration post-
LTLD plus focused ultrasound was 7·74 µg/g (SD 4·09), 
representing an increase of 3·3 times compared with the 
mean post-LTLD concentration of 2·34 µg/g (0·93; table 2, 
appendix pp 7, 8). In all cases, doxorubicin was not 
detected in tumour samples taken before drug infusion, 
while higher doxorubicin concentrations were detected 
in samples taken post-LTLD plus focused ultrasound, 
compared with those of post-LTLD samples (table 2).
Overall, the mean doxorubicin concentrations in post-
LTLD plus focused ultrasound intratumoural biopsy 
samples from all ten study participants was 8·56 µg/g 
(SD 5·69)—an increase of 3·7 times compared with the 
mean intratumoural biopsy concentrations in part I 
post-LTLD samples (table 2, figure 2). The highest intra-
tumoural drug delivery was detected in a colorectal 
metastatic target tumour, in a patient treated in part II 
without thermometry monitoring, in which the intra-
tumoural doxorubicin concentration, based on biopsy 
estimate, reached 21·8 μg/g, suggesting an increase of 
nearly 10 times.
Of part I patients, at least a doubling in intratumoural 
doxorubicin concentration was seen post-LTLD plus 
focused ultrasound compared with post-LTLD alone in 
all patients apart from patients I.03 and I.04 (figure 2), 
with patient I.03 also being the only one in whom 
sustained hyperthermia of 39·5°C or higher was not 
recorded (table 3). Of the part II patients, patient II.03 
was the only patient under the two-times increase limit 
required to satisfy the primary endpoint (figure 2). Given 
that seven (70%) of ten patients showed at least a 
doubling increase in intratumoural biopsy doxorubicin 
concentrations after focused ultrasound exposure, with 
concentrations from biopsies obtained in part II com-
pared with the mean concentration post-LTLD alone 
from biopsies obtained in part I, our study met its 
primary endpoint (table 2). This analysis included three 
estimated datapoints, all of which made the primary 
endpoint harder to attain. The post-LTLD intratumoural 
doxorubicin concentrations for patients I.02 and I.06 
were upper-bound estimates that were required because 
of low quantification concentrations (further detailed in 
table 2). The post-LTLD plus focused ultrasound intra-
tumoural doxorubicin concentration estimate for patient 
I.06 was required because of the inadvertent omission of 
the internal standard during processing. HPLC data 
were recalculated for samples from patients I.01 and 
I.02 with standard curves created without the use of 
internal standard area for biopsy and plasma samples. 
This alternative quantification method yielded accuracy 
and precision of quality controls within 15% for both 
Figure 1: Trial profile
46 patients assessed for eligibility
36 patients excluded 
 
19 unsuitable tumour location
 
10 progressive disease 
 
3 recent radiotherapy to liver 
 
3 declined to participate 
 
1 tumour size too small
10 patients allocated and received intervention
1 patient lost to follow-up 
 1 patient too fatigued to attend final follow-up visit (week 4)
10 patients included in intention-to-treat analysis
 Articles
1032 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018
Patient I.01
Patient I.02
Patient I.03
Patient I.04
Patient I.05
Patient I.06
Patient II.01
Patient II.02
Patient II.03
Patient II.04
Age
50
68
66
64
49
65
53
63
53
65
Sex
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Male
BMI, kg/m²
22·6
22·9
25·0
25·7
26·3
25·9
37·3
25·2
27·0
27·0
WHO 
performance 
status
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
ASA grade
2
2
2
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
Enrolment 
date
March 13, 2015
May 5, 2015
Sept 18, 2015
Oct 28, 2015
March 4, 2016
March 27, 2017
June 15, 2016
July 18, 2016
Nov 7, 2016
Jan 9, 2017
Treatment 
date
March 24, 2015
May 6, 2015
Sept 23, 2015
Nov 4, 2015
March 9, 2016
March 29, 2017
June 22, 2016
July 20, 2016
Nov 9, 2016
Jan 11, 2017
Last follow-up 
date
April 22, 2015
June 8, 2015
Oct 22, 2015
Dec 4, 2015
April 8, 2016
April 27, 2017
July 25, 2016
Aug 19, 2016
Nov 30, 2016
Feb 9, 2017
Diagnosis
Diffuse 
multi-lobular 
hepatocellular 
carcinoma
Metastatic ductal 
breast carcinoma 
(ER+, PR+)
Metastatic colorectal 
adenocarcinoma 
(KRAS+)
Metastatic 
colorectal 
adenocarcinoma 
(RAS mutant)
Metastatic 
colorectal 
adenocarcinoma 
(KRAS+)
Metastatic 
colorectal 
adenocarcinoma 
(KRAS+)
Metastatic squamous 
cell lung cancer
Metastatic colorectal 
carcinoma (Dukes C1, 
G2 T4 N2 Mx) (KRAS+, 
NRAS+, BRAF wildtype)
Metastatic 
colorectal 
adenocarcinoma 
(KRAS+)
Metastatic 
colorectal 
adenocarcinoma 
(KRAS+)
Previous 
treatments 
(chronological 
order)
Nemorubicin + 
cisplatin, 
pemetrexed + 
cisplatin + PARP 
inhibitor 
(A4991014 
early-phase 
study)
Breast resection, 
radiotherapy, 
arimidex, 
exemestane, 
tamoxifen, 
faslodex, 
capecitabine, SIRT, 
denosumab, 
megace, vinorelbine
Bowel resection, 
irinotecan, modified de 
Gramont chemotherapy 
and bevacizumab, liver 
resection and RFA, 
CAPOX, AZD0424 
(early-phase study), 
BAY17437 (early-phase 
study)
Bevacizumab + 
5-FU, irinotecan + 
5-FU, BAY1238097 
– BETI-CID-7 
(early-phase study), 
surgery for bowel 
obstruction
FOLFOX and 
FOLFIRI 
chemotherapy
FOLFOX 
chemotherapy + 
cetuximab, bowel 
resection, FOLFIRI 
chemotherapy, 
trifluridine-tipiracil
Radiotherapy + 
cisplatin + etoposide, 
paclitaxel + AZD2014 
(TAX-TORC early-
phase study)
Bowel resection, 
oxaliplatin + 
capecitabine, FOLFIRI 
chemotherapy + 
cetuximab, mytomycin 
C + capecitabine, 
further palliative 
laparotomy for 
Krukenburg tumour
Oxaliplatin + 
5-FU, liver 
resection, 
irinotecan + 
capectiabine, 
oxaliplatin
Bowel resection, 
oxaliplatin + 
capecitabine 
(SCOT trial), 
irinotecan + 5-FU, 
oxaliplatin + 5-FU
Comorbidities
Tetralogy of 
Fallot surgery 
as child, 
well controlled 
asthma
··
Hypertension, 
pulmonary embolism, 
atrial fibrillation, GORD, 
hypercholesterolaemia
Oophrectomy 
(cyst), osteoporosis, 
cataract, GORD, 
abdominal wall 
hernia
Hypertension
Coeliac disease, 
deep vein 
thrombosis
NIDD, gout, 
hypertension, 
hypercholesterolaemia
Ablated 
Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome, 
hypertension, NIDD, 
endometrial polyps, 
deep vein thrombosis
Pulmonary 
embolus, deep 
vein 
thrombosis, 
superior vena 
cava filter
Depression, 
hypertension, 
transient 
ischaemic attack
Both partial and complete previous chemotherapy treatment programmes are included. BMI=body-mass index. ASA=American Society of Anesthesiologists. ER+=oestrogen receptor positive. PR+=progesterone receptor positive. KRAS+=KRAS 
mutation positive. NRAS+=NRAS mutation positive. PARP=poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase. RFA=radiofrequency ablation. CAPOX=oxaliplatin and capecitabine chemotherapy. 5-FU=fluorouracil. FOLFOX=leucovorin, fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin. 
FOLFIRI=leucovorin, fluorouracil, and irinotecan. GORD=gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. NIDD=non-insulin-dependent diabetes. 
Table 1: Patient characteristics
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018 
1033
methods of analysis. Plasma concentrations calculated 
with this method were similar for both methods of 
quantification; however, the calculated biopsy concen-
trations were lower when the internal standard was 
excluded in calculations compared with when it was 
included. This difference was mainly because of lower 
recovery of the anthracyclines in tissue samples when 
compared with plasma samples. Therefore, the esti-
mated post-LTLD plus focused ultrasound value for 
intra 
tumoural doxorubicin in patient I.02 is likely to 
represent an under 
estimate of the true concentration.
Six patients from part I, with prescribed tumour 
volume range of 10·5–73·4 cm³ (mean 49·6 cm³ 
[SD 26·3]), and four from part II, with prescribed tumour 
volume range of 30·7–53·9 cm³ (43·8 cm³ [10·3]), were 
exposed to focused ultrasound (overall mean tumour 
volume 47·3 cm³ [20·7]; appendix p 2). Sustained and 
controlled hyperthermia (>39·5°C) was achieved in five 
(83%) of six part I patients for a mean of 40·8 min 
(SD 15·7). In these six patients, mean intratumoural 
temperatures of 38·9–41·5°C (overall mean 40·1°C, 
SD 0·9) were recorded between 33 min and 79 min 
(mean 65·3 min, 16·7; table 3, figure 3, appendix pp 9–11). 
In the one patient (I.03), in whom hyperthermia of 
39·5°C or higher was achieved momentarily but not 
sustained (appendix p 10), gas introduced around the 
tip of the co-axial needle on intro 
duction of the thermo-
metry device (as visualised on the ultrasound-guidance 
B-mode imaging system) might have resulted in under-
representation of the temperature in the target tumour 
volume. In one patient (I.06), spikes of intratumoural 
hyperthermia higher than 47°C for 2 min cumulatively 
were recorded (appendix p 11). These spikes were 
probably due to the thermocouple artifact caused by the 
incidental coincidence of the focused ultrasound beam 
with the thermocouple shaft, because these temperatures 
did not translate into bulk heating.18 For the remaining 
patients in part I (patients I.01 to I.05), real-time 
temperature measures did not exceed 46°C at any stage. 
Cumulative equivalent minutes at 43°C thermal dose 
analysis (table 3) is discussed in the appendix p 11.
Changes 
consistent 
with 
instantaneous 
tumour 
ablation, as is typically seen in high-intensity focused 
ultrasound thermal ablation,19 were absent on the 
diagnostic ultra 
sound guidance system (B-mode imaging) 
for all inter 
ventions. This absence of thermal ablation 
was further supported by the day 1 MRI findings, cell 
viability studies, and the predictive model (Gray MD, 
unpublished data). Some patients had an absence of MRI 
changes on day 1, followed by subsequent reductions in 
perfusion and PET-CT scans showing new photopenia at 
2 weeks (patients I.04, I.06, and II.02), whereas others 
(patients I.01, I.05, and II.04) had reduced perfusion 
shown on day 1 MRI (appendix pp 20–27).
 Specific cytokeratin-8 staining of viable tumour cells 
after drug and ultrasound exposure was seen in 
eight (89%) of nine patients whose biopsies yielded tissue 
analysable by microscopy, further supporting the absence 
of instantaneous thermal ablation due to direct effects of 
focused ultrasound (appendix pp 16–18).20 Specific tumour 
cell staining was not seen in the remaining analysed 
sample (of patient II.01), which was thought to be because 
of a non-cytokeratin-8 expressing non-small (squamous) 
cell lung metastasis, rather than ablative damage.
Biopsy mass, mg (minutes after end of infusion)
Total intratumoural biopsy doxorubicin 
concentration (μg/g), normalised for mass
Times by which 
doxorubicin concentration 
increased post-LTLD + FUS 
vs post-LTLD alone
Pre-LTLD
Post-LTLD
Post-LTLD + FUS
Pre-LTLD
Post-LTLD
Post-LTLD+FUS
I.01
2·78
2·57 (2)
6·64 (56)
0·0
2·56
5·32
2·1
I.02
2·19
2·81 (0)
4·85 (81)
0·0
1·78*
13·20†
7·4
I.03
3·11
2·10 (5)
3·94 (93)
0·0
4·09
7·89
1·9
I.04
1·59
2·31 (3)
2·77 (74)
0·0
1·59
2·09
1·3
I.05
0·84
2·73 (1)
1·30 (90)
0·0
2·23
11·50
5·2
I.06
1·76
1·40 (4)
3·97 (87)
0·0
1·79*
6·41
3·6
II.01
··
··
2·45 (96)
··
··
6·65
2·8
II.02
··
··
2·42 (114)
··
··
6·84
2·9
II.03
··
··
2·49 (89)
··
··
3·89
1·7
II.04
··
··
2·91 (90)
··
··
21·80
9·3
Mean
2·05
2·32 (2·5)
3·37 (87·0)
0·0
2·34
8·56
3·7
SD
0·83
0·52 (1·9)
1·53 (15·0)
0·0
0·93
5·69
2·7
Mean total concentration of intratumoural biopsy doxorubicin after lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin (LTLD) treatment in six patients in part I was used as a comparator 
for part II. *Responses (ratio of doxorubicin to internal standard) were significantly lower than the response seen for the plasma lower limit of quantification (LLOQ; 0·1 µg/mL for 
I.02 and 0·05 µg/mL for I.06); the values shown are upper-bound estimates; assuming that the response for these samples would be the same as that for the LLOQ, the amounts 
are calculated for the mass of each specific biopsy analysed. Because the values are upper-bound estimates of the possible concentration, the part I post-LTLD mean comparator is 
probably an overestimate of the true concentration. †Estimate only, because the internal standard was inadvertently omitted from this sample during processing.
Table 2: High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) biopsy results after analysis of chromatograms
 Articles
1034 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018
All patients were discharged the day after the inter-
vention except patient II.04, who had a prolonged 
hospital stay because of fluctuating grade 1 confusion, 
which was classified as a serious adverse event, but 
deemed probably not related to the drug or intervention. 
Serious adverse events were otherwise restricted to self-
resolving grade 4 neutropenia in five (50%) of ten patients, 
an expected adverse event of LTLD (table 4).11 Worsening 
of pre-existing liver function derangements (grade 3 or 
lower) was seen in all patients, except patient I.01, within 
the 30-day follow-up period (appendix p 3), in keeping 
with the known adverse event profile of LTLD.21 However, 
it was not possible to distinguish a drug-related cause of 
liver dysfunction from progressive liver malignancy with 
certainty in this patient cohort.
Non-invasive ultrasound-mediated hyperthermia was 
found to be safe, causing no skin burns, off-target tissue 
damage, or other clinically significant adverse events, 
either with or without real-time thermometry (table 4).
At the 2-week and 4-week follow-up visits, CT, MRI, and 
PET-CT scans were done. Patient I.02 was excluded from 
radiological analysis because of failed venous access, 
rendering post-treatment scans effectively non-contrast. 
For the remaining nine patients, targeted tumour 
volumes (exposed to both LTLD and focused ultrasound) 
were assessed with RECIST, Choi, and PERCIST criteria 
modified for a single target tumour and compared with 
control liver tumours (exposed to LTLD alone). A partial 
response according to Choi criteria was seen in the target 
tumour alone at 2 weeks and 4 weeks in patients I.01, I.04, 
I.06, and II.04, with patient II.04 also showing a partial 
response according to PERCIST criteria. In patients I.05 
and II.02, a partial response according to Choi criteria 
was seen in both the target tumour and at least one control 
tumour, at 2 weeks and 4 weeks. All other target tumours 
(four [40%] of ten) and control tumours (13 [81%] of 16) 
assessed showed either stable or progressive disease 
according to RECIST, Choi, or PERCIST criteria at 
2 weeks or 4 weeks (appendix pp 20–25). This targeted 
effect is well demonstrated in several patients:  patient 
I.01, where the PET-CT showed new photopenia in the 
target tumour, whereas a similarly sized control tumour, 
incidentally captured in the same axial slice as the treated 
tumour, showed little or no response (appendix p 20); 
similarly, patients I.04, I.06, and II.04 only showed new 
photopenia in the region of the target tumour treated 
with ultrasound. Total lesion glycolysis of the target 
tumours was calculated at baseline and at 2 weeks 
(appendix p 6). The four patients with a partial response 
according to Choi criteria showed 36·4%, 22·6%, 18·2%, 
and 46·3% reductions in total lesion glycolysis, despite 
only having partial tumour coverage with focused 
ultrasound (appendix p 26).
After counterstaining of cell nuclei with 4',6-diamidino-
2-phenylindole (DAPI), tumour biopsies were examined 
microscopically for evidence of intratumoural LTLD release 
within 2 months of sampling (appendix p 6). Tumour 
samples from patient I.01 were too auto-fluorescent for the 
doxorubicin signal to be distinguished from background 
noise in the paraffin-embedded samples, while the post-
LTLD plus focused ultrasound tissue sample from patient 
I.02 was contaminated with blood. Confocal fluorescence 
microscopy showed colocalisation of doxo 
rubicin with the 
DAPI nuclear stain in seven (88%) of the remaining eight 
post-LTLD plus focused ultrasound tumour samples 
(patients I.04–06 and II.01–04; appendix pp 14–17). The 
presence of nuclear doxorubicin showed bioavailability of 
intratumoural doxorubicin and thus liposomal release, 
because doxorubicin must be in its free form to diffuse into 
the tumour cells.22 In the post-LTLD controls, minimal 
nuclear or extravascular doxorubicin was seen.
Plasma samples from each patient were assayed for 
total doxorubicin concentration by HPLC. The results 
for the first patient (I.01) were above the higher end of 
Figure 2: Total doxorubicin concentration in plasma and tumour samples analysed by high-performance 
liquid chromatography (HPLC)
(A) Lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin (LTLD) plasma pharmacokinetic data by HPLC. Data for patient I.01 
are omitted from the plot, because concentrations were much greater than the top standard, resulting in a ten-fold 
dilution step for plasma analysis subsequently being introduced to the assay. (B) Intratumoural pharmacokinetic 
data by HPLC. The post-LTLD values for patient I.02 and I.06, and the post-LTLD plus focused ultrasound (FUS) 
values for patient I.06 are worst-case estimates.
0
Total plasma sample doxorubicin concentration (μg/mL)
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
A
0
1
2
3
4
0
Total intratumoural biopsy doxorubicin concentration (μg/g)
Time since LTLD infusion start (h)
5
10
15
20
25
B
Key
I.01
I.02
I.03
I.04
I.05
I.06
II.01
II.02
II.03
II.04
Post-LTLD
Post-LTLD+FUS
Mean =
2·34 µg/g
5-fold
2-fold
10-fold
LTLD
infusion
Post-LTLD
(part I)
Post-LTLD+FUS
(part I+II)
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018 
1035
the standard curve; therefore, subsequent plasma 
samples of the remaining nine patients  were diluted 
before analysis. For these patients, mean total plasma 
doxorubicin concentrations decreased from 26·3 μg/mL 
(SD 4·0) post-LTLD to 12·9 μg/mL (6·0) post-LTLD plus 
focused ultrasound. Results of the quenched and 
dequenched fluorometric plasma analysis are available 
in the appendix (pp 12, 13).
Discussion
To our knowledge, our study was the first to attempt non-
invasive ultrasound-mediated targeted hyperthermia for 
Real-time trace 
duration (min:s)
Analysis of unprocessed real-time thermometry 
data
Thermometry analysis of polynomial fitted real-time 
thermometry data
Temperature 
39·5–47°C (min:s)
Temperature 
>47°C (min:s)
Mean temperature, 
°C (SD)
Maximum 
temperature, °C
Minimum 
temperature, °C
Mean temperature, 
°C (SD)
CEM43 
(min:s)
I.01
33:13
23:19
00:00
39·8 (0·77)
40·4
37·1
39·7 (0·81)
00:28
I.02
74:34
27:52
00:00
39·4 (1·66)
41·4
35·9
39·3 (1·30)
01:42
I.03
73:54
00:06
00:00
38·9 (0·37)
39·2
38·0
38·9 (0·36)
00:16
I.04
65:59
63:14
00:00
41·5 (0·95)
42·6
37·4
41·5 (1·07)
13:05
I.05
79:52
55:49
00:00
40·1 (1·25)
41·1
37·4
40·0 (0·82)
02:07
I.06
64:11
35:57
02:00
40·7 (2·58)
41·4
39·1
40·6 (0·47)
02:52
Cumulative equivalent in minutes at 43°C (CEM43) has been calculated on the fitted data to better represent the average bulk temperature of the heated tumour volume and 
reduce thermistor artifact effects, which were especially prominent in patient I.06. Thermometry captured before or after focused ultrasound exposure has been excluded 
from the analysis. Polynomial fit was done with least squares fit of fourth order in MatLab.
Table 3: Summary of statistics for the post-drug thermometry analysis for all part I patients, for both raw and polynomial fitted data
Figure 3: Illustrative controlled hyperthermia by focused ultrasound
Real-time thermometry data (trace) captured after infusion of lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin (LTLD) and during focused ultrasound exposure in moving 
beam (linear) mode for patient I.05. This trace was acquired at a 10 ms resolution by use of a calibrated Medtronic thermocouple, with custom LabView data-acquisition 
setup. Shaded regions represent the period when focused ultrasound was being applied. From approximately 30 s to 33 min, a 90·9 cm³ prescribed target tumour 
volume was exposed to focused ultrasound at 115 W (8·7 MPa peak rarefactional in situ pressure) at 70% duty cycle in linear mode. Although the release threshold was 
reached within 5 min of focused ultrasound exposure, heating in the first 30 min was deemed slightly suboptimal because of prolonged cooling periods between 
treatment cycles. Subsequently, by removing the outermost slices from the prescribed treatment volume, resulting in a smaller 68·3 cm³ tumour volume, and increasing 
power to 125 W (9·0 MPa derated) and duty cycle to 77%, optimal hyperthermia was achieved for 35–80 min. Once focused ultrasound stopped, the tumour was allowed 
to cool before the thermocouple was removed from the patient at 85 min, and a tumour biopsy sample was subsequently taken. The dotted curve is a fourth order 
polynomial fit, which is probably more representative of the bulk temperature in the prescribed tumour volume than the rapidly fluctuating point temperature recorded 
by the sensitive region of the intratumoural thermometry device (trace).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
36
Temperature (ºC)
Time (min)
115 W, 70% duty cycle
Prescribed volume 90·9 cm3
LTLD release threshold [39·5ºC]
1.05 real-time thermometry (post-LTLD)
Polynomial fit (order=4)
JC200 treatment parameters: scanning mode = linear mode at 6 mm/s; power = 115–125 W; duty cycle = 70–77%
125 W, 77% duty cycle
Prescribed volume 63·8 cm3
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
45
44
46
 Articles
1036 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018
triggered drug release and enhanced drug delivery in a 
clinical setting. Apart from the existing risks associated 
with general anaesthesia, the overall intervention posed 
no additional safety concerns to the patient other than 
those typically associated with chemotherapy alone. 
Mean temperatures needed for drug release were safely 
maintained in clinically relevant tumour volumes by 
extracorporeal focused ultrasound, for about 1 h, without 
subsequent radiological or histological evidence of 
thermal ablation. This approach resulted in a substantial 
increase in the total intratumoural biopsy concentration 
of doxorubicin, compared with that achieved by passive 
accumulation alone, with seven of ten patients having at 
least a doubling and an increase of up to ten times in 
intratumoural doxorubicin concentrations. This increase 
occurred concurrently with the presence of nuclear 
doxorubicin, showing liposomal release after focused 
ultrasound exposure, and localised radiological responses 
in the target tumour regions exposed to focused ultra-
sound in several patients. Overall, these findings suggest 
that target drug delivery to solid tumours triggered non-
invasively by therapeutic ultrasound is clinically safe, 
feasible, and potentially effective.
The non-thermosensitive liposomal formulation of 
doxorubicin, NTLD, is hypothesised to exert its thera-
peutic effect predominantly by the enhanced permeability 
and retention effect.23 By contrast, the LTLD formulation 
that we used in this trial is understood to act by rapid 
diffusion of doxorubicin into the tumour interstitium 
under conditions of mild hyperthermia, with only a small 
pro 
portion of doxorubicin entering the tumour by 
enhanced permeability and retention. These intended 
delivery mechanisms are reflected in the circulation 
profiles of the two formulations, with NTLD having a 
half-life of more than 10 h while LTLD has a shorter half-
life of about 1 h.9,10,24,25
Mild hyperthermia has been shown to enhance the 
perfusion and increase the permeability of tumour 
vasculature.26 Because focused ultrasound exposure 
begins while blood concentrations of LTLD are at their 
peak11,13 (figure 2) and at a timepoint before any sub-
stantial enhanced permeability and retention-assisted 
accumulation could have occurred, it is our understanding 
that the majority of the intratumoural doxorubicin is 
released from circulating LTLD in the tumour micro-
vasculature, when the tumour reaches the liposomal 
transition temperature (39·5°C). Free (bio-available) 
circulating doxorubicin might then rapidly diffuse into the 
adjacent or downstream perivascular space, and on to 
tumour cells at therapeutic concentrations and penetration 
depths due to a steep concentration gradient, surpassing 
what could be achieved through passive circulation alone.
The post-LTLD intratumoural biopsy concentrations of 
doxorubicin (after infusion) were similar to those seen in 
preclinical tumour models of LTLD.5 Differences in the 
measured total doxorubicin concentrations before 
focused ultrasound exposure were very small across 
patients. In keeping with preclinical studies,5,7 this result 
strongly suggests that there is little opportunity for 
passive accumulation of LTLD in the first 2 h after 
administration, but there could still be differences in the 
leakiness of tumour vascular pores across the different 
tumour subtypes treated.27 The much greater differences 
in total doxorubicin concentration observed after focused 
ultrasound exposure are probably due to a combination of 
factors, including the differences in tumour leakiness 
across subtypes, tumour heterogeneity, the percentage of 
Grade 1-2
Grade 3
Grade 4
Definitely or probably related to LTLD: haematological toxic effects
Neutropenia or neutrophils 
decreased
0
1 (10%)
5 (50%)*
Anaemia
0
1 (10%)
0
Urinary tract infection
1 (10%)
0
0
Definitely or probably related to LTLD: non-haematological toxic 
effects
Alopecia
8 (80%)
0
0
Candida infection
1 (10%)
0
0
Fatigue or lethargy
4 (40%)
0
0
Nausea
2 (20%)
0
0
Vomiting
2 (20%)
0
0
Definitely or probably related to the procedure
Abdominal pain
2 (20%)
0
0
Back pain
1 (10%)
0
0
Decreased appetite
1 (10%)
0
0
Dysphonia
1 (10%)
0
0
Erythema
1 (10%)
0
0
Fatigue
1 (10%)
0
0
Hepatic pain
1 (10%)
0
0
Musculoskeletal chest pain
2 (20%)
0
0
Musculoskeletal pain or 
discomfort
6 (60%)
0
0
Nausea
1 (10%)
0
0
Pain in extremity
2 (20%)
0
0
Skin discolouration
1 (10%)
0
0
Definitely or probably unrelated or possibly related to LTLD or 
procedure (indeterminate cause)
Abdominal pain
1 (10%)
0
0
Confusion state
1 (10%)*
0
0
Constipation
1 (10%)
0
0
Decreased appetite
2 (20%)
0
0
Fatigue
2 (20%)
0
0
Joint swelling
1 (10%)
0
0
Malaise
1 (10%)
0
0
Nausea
2 (20%)
0
0
Peripheral swelling
1 (10%)
0
0
Respiratory tract infection
1 (10%)
0
0
Vomiting
1 (10%)
0
0
No grade 5 adverse events occurred. Liver function tests pre-treatment and 
post-treatment are detailed in appendix p 3. LTLD=lyso-thermosensitive liposomal 
doxorubicin. *Serious adverse events. 
Table 4: All adverse events stratified by definite or probable causality
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018 
1037
the ultrasonically treated volume that was adequately 
vascularised, and the total duration of focused ultrasound-
mediated hyperthermia relative to the patient-specific 
pharmacokinetics of LTLD. Despite the use of a different 
analytical technique, pharmacokinetic profiles for total 
doxorubicin were similar to previously published clinical 
data,11 in which the same dose of LTLD was combined 
with radiofrequency ablation of liver tumours.
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy, particularly chemical 
exchange saturation transfer, was explored as a method 
of quantifying free doxorubicin preclinically, using 
phantom and small animal studies (unpublished). We 
had initially intended to do similar analyses clinically 
during the day 1 MRI sequences of our trial. However, 
the signal-to-noise ratio of this approach was ultimately 
deemed too poor for clinical translation, and this research 
avenue was not pursued.
The absence of MRI changes on day 1, followed by 
subsequent reductions in perfusion and PET-CT scans 
showing new photopenia at 2 weeks in some patients 
(I.04, I.06, and II.02), suggests a delayed chemo-ablative 
response rather than direct instantaneous thermal 
ablation (appendix pp 19–27). Reduced perfusion shown 
on day 1 MRI in other patients (patients I.01, I.05, and 
II.04) might be due to temporary vasoconstriction, 
tumour thrombosis, or a possible early tumour response.
The direct cytotoxic effects of doxorubicin have long 
been thought to be enhanced under hyperthermic 
conditions, a hypothesis based on increased cellular uptake 
and mechanisms relating to inhibition of nucleic acid 
synthesis and DNA repair.28 However, extensive preclinical 
work before this study showed that addition of ultrasound-
mediated hyperthermia to free doxorubicin, at modest 
thermal doses used in our study, appears to have little 
effect on intratumoural accumulation and therapeutic 
response.5,7 This finding suggests that the enhancement in 
delivery observed in this study is probably related to the 
sudden increase in concentration triggered by the release 
of doxorubicin from thermosensitive liposomes in the 
tumour microvasculature, rather than to any hyperthermia-
mediated chemosensitisation alone. 
In this early study, it remains unclear whether ultrasound-
mediated cavitation is involved in the mechanism of 
delivery, but preclinical data strongly suggest that the 
microstreaming and shockwaves created by cavitation 
can be a benefit to the delivery of cancer drugs.29,30
Although our phase 1 study was, to the best of our 
knowledge, the first to translate focused ultrasound-
triggered targeted drug delivery to a clinical oncology 
setting, the study design had inherent limitations. First, 
the prescribed tumour treatment volumes were con-
strained by the presence of ribs in the acoustic field 
(which restricted the real-time B-mode treatment 
monitoring and guidance and reduced the focused 
ultrasound beam intensity) and by the focused ultrasound 
system itself (with restricted scanning capabilities and a 
nominally small, fixed ultrasonic focus), such that, 
typically, only partial sonication of larger tumours could 
be achieved, usually including tumour borders closest to 
the ultrasound source. Custom focused ultrasound 
devices designed for volumetric hyperthermia—for 
example, devices using less tightly focused transducers or 
multi-element systems with beam steering8—might allow 
rapid induction of large volume hyperthermia, facilitating 
the treatment of larger tumour volumes with this strategy.
Second, tumours are highly heterogeneous and show 
great microregional variations, not least in the amount of 
vascularity and necrosis.31 In this study design, tumour 
biopsies were intended to provide an estimate of the 
mean intratumoural drug concentration in the focused 
ultrasound-exposed tumour volume. However, the total 
intratumoural drug concentration reported served as a 
point measurement that was not necessarily reflective of 
the mean concentration throughout the tumour. This 
design limitation is mitigated, to some extent, by 
subsequent radiological analysis of the targeted tumours, 
most crucially by PET-CT scan, a technique that can 
discriminate metabolically active from necrotic or chemo-
ablated tumours.
Third, the study design did not include time-matched 
control biopsies from liver tumours receiving LTLD 
alone, because doing more than three sequential tissue 
biopsies in more than one location in any one patient was 
neither ethical nor practical.13 Preclinical studies of LTLD 
showed that, in great part because of its short half-life 
(1 h compared with more than 10 h for NTLD), the 
additional intratumoural accumulation beyond 30 min 
after administration is not substantial, and falls well short 
of the doubling increase in intratumoural concentration 
that constituted the primary endpoint of our study.6,8 
Radiological follow-up enabled indirect assessment of 
negligible longer-term passive accumulation of LTLD.
Fourth, although the HPLC tumour results were 
generated by a validated method, worst-case estimations 
were done in three cases. However, since these estimates 
were worst-case estimates, we are confident that the 
primary endpoint is not compromised.
A fifth limitation was that the introduction of any 
instrumentation into the target tumour risked conta-
mination of tumour samples with blood products. 
Haemotoxylin and eosin staining was done on a section 
of the same cores used for HPLC assessment. The post-
LTLD sample for patient I.04 and the post-LTLD plus 
focused ultrasound sample for patient I.02 were both 
shown to contain blood contamination on haemotoxylin 
and eosin staining. Therefore, although we do not know 
the exact tissue constituents that were homogenised for 
HPLC, these individual pharmacokinetic tumour results 
should be interpreted with caution. Nevertheless, 
exclusion of these two results from the overall analysis 
does not alter the outcome of the study, because seven of 
eight patients still had an increase greater than doubling 
in drug concentrations and the study still met its primary 
endpoint.
 Articles
1038 
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018
Lastly, a magnetic resonance spectroscopy-guided 
focused ultrasound system would have provided valuable 
spatial thermography and coregistration with the 
follow-up MRI, facilitating both treatment and response 
assessment. However, the ultrasound-guided focused 
ultrasound device used made practical issues surrounding 
the use of high-frequency jet ventilation anaesthesia and 
the biopsy procedure less challenging because of the 
absence of a magnetic field.
By design, part II of the study proceeded without 
invasive thermometry, and this was shown to not 
adversely affect the efficacy of the intervention; indeed, 
the mean post-LTLD plus focused ultrasound intra-
tumoural concen 
tration of doxorubin in part II was 
9·80 ug/g, compared with 7·74 ug/g in part I.
Whether delivering small molecules, antibodies, or 
viruses, maximising the dose delivered to a tumour while 
minimising off-target toxicity represents a universal 
challenge in oncology.32 A major limitation of systemically 
administered liposomal agents is their low therapeutic 
index: the dose required to produce a successful anti-
tumour effect is toxic to normal tissues. The antitumour 
activity of traditional liposomal agents is hindered by a 
failure to effectively release their cargo and an inability to 
penetrate beyond the perivascular space. Device-targeted 
drug delivery has undergone decades of preclinical 
development but could be nearing clinical adoption as a 
generic tool for overcoming the challenges of delivering 
existing and emerging therapeutics to solid tumours. 
MRI-based or ultrasound-based treatment monitoring 
strategies—or detailed predictive treatment planning, as 
was used in this study—are likely to facilitate clinical 
adoption for non-invasive targeting. Preclinical MRI 
studies33,34 have combined three-dimensional thermo-
graphy with sophisticated closed-loop feedback algorithms 
at high temporal resolutions to reduce microregional 
temperature fluctuations, and a clinical study involving 
the use of magnetic resonance-guided high intensity 
focused ultrasound with LTLD is underway for treatment 
of paediatric solid tumours (NCT02536183). By using an 
ultrasound-guided focused ultrasound device without 
thermography, our study explored the economically 
attractive and more easily scalable alternative than MR-
guided techniques for attaining large-volume bulk hyper-
thermia with predictive models, with less emphasis on 
maintaining tight and homogeneous temperature control.
Overall, this prospective study shows for the first time 
in a clinical setting the safety, feasibility, and potential for 
therapeutic benefit of ultrasound-triggered release of 
LTLD in otherwise chemorefractory tumours. The small 
sample size of ten patients reflects that this trial was a 
proof-of-concept study, for which participation was 
predominately altruistic, involving only a single cycle of 
chemotherapy and targeting of a single tumour. The 
tumours targeted on this study were typically large, of 
diverse histological type, and were refractory to systemic 
chemotherapy. A demonstrable radiological response in 
the targeted tumour volume alone is encouraging, given 
that doxorubicin has been previously shown to have 
reduced therapeutic value in many of these tumour 
subtypes.21,35 Despite its limitations, our study shows for 
the first time in a clinical setting that it is feasible to 
safely trigger and enhance intratumoural delivery of a 
chemotherapeutic agent to a precise anatomical location 
at depth, by using focused ultrasound applied non-
invasively. Further preclinical and clinical research in 
focused ultrasound-mediated drug delivery might be 
warranted, with the intention of reducing toxicity and 
improving therapeutic outcomes in a broad range of 
solid tumours, potentially across multiple drug classes.
Contributors
CCC, PCL, RC, MRM, and FVG designed the study and wrote the 
protocol. PCL and MRM led the trial and recruited patients. FW, PCL, 
FVG, SS, DYFC, and MA contributed to the interventions. PCL, MDG, 
CM, LKF, MS, and LC collected data, analysed data, or both. CCC, PCL, 
MDG, RG, RC, FVG, and MRM interpreted the data. PCL and CCC 
wrote the manuscript, and all authors reviewed, commented on, and 
approved the paper.
Declaration of interests
No author has direct or indirect financial interest in either the clinical 
device used for the study (JC200, Chongqing Haifu, Chongqing, China) or 
the drug (ThermoDox, Celsion Corporation, Lawrenceville, NJ, USA) used 
in the study. FW was part of the original team that developed the high-
intensity focused ultrasound device used in this study. The patents for the 
device are held by the Chongqing Medical University (Chongqing, China), 
by whom FW was employed. The high-intensity focused ultrasound 
device (model JC200) is manufactured by a company owned by the 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Haifu. FW does not receive 
royalties for the manufacture, sale, upkeep, or maintenance of the device 
used for treatment despite being involved in the original team that filed 
patents related to the device. CCC and RC are founders, shareholders, 
and consultants for a spinout company from the University of Oxford 
(Oxford, UK), OxSonics, specialising in ultrasound-enhanced drug 
delivery to tumours. However, the OxSonics technology exploits purely 
mechanical ultrasound mechanisms for enhanced drug delivery, while 
this study describes the use of thermal ultrasound mechanisms for drug 
release. RC reports personal fees and other from OrthoSon outside the 
submitted work. CCC reports personal fees and other from OrthoSon and 
OrganOx, outside the submitted work. MRM reports personal fees from 
Amgen, Valo Therapeutics, and Bioline; grants and personal fees from 
Roche and GSK; grants from AstraZeneca; personal fees and trial-related 
payments to institutions from Novartis, Eisai, Rigontec, Array Biopharma, 
and BMS; trial-related payments to institutions from Astellas, 
Millennium, Vertex, Regeneron, TCBiopharma, Replimune, and Pfizer; 
non-financial support and trial-related payments to institutions from 
Immunocore; and personal fees, non-financial support, and trial-related 
payments to institutions from Merck, outside the submitted work. All 
other authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
The trial was funded by the UK’s National Institute for Health Research, 
Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, and the research was supported by 
the Oxford Centre for Drug Delivery Devices under a programme grant 
(EP/L024012/1) from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research 
Council. LTLD was provided by Celsion Corporation, at no cost to the 
trial. The University of Oxford sponsored the study. We thank 
Lucy Griffiths, Linda Collins, Chrissie Butcher, Meena Patil, 
Sarah Pearson, Marian Taylor, Aimi Hewitt, Sylwia Kopijasz (Oncology 
Clinical Trials Office, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK); Simon Lord, Sarah Blagden, Rachel Kerr, Nicholas Coupe, 
Karin Herbschleb, Victoria Woodcock, Ricardo Fernandes, Astrid Lipplaa, 
Finn Tysoe, Samantha Suter, Hayley Hitchcock, Lainey Hellings, and 
Richard Cousins (Department of Oncology, Oxford University Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, UK); Gavin Brown (Research Services, 
University of Oxford); Freddie Hamdy, David Cranston, 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com/oncology   Vol 19   August 2018 
1039
Prasanna Sooriakumaran (Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, 
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust); Amy Swinson, 
John Griffiths (Department of Anesthesia, Oxford University Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust); Daniel McGowan (Department of Radiation 
Physics and Protection, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust); Nita Fisher, Daniela Tramonti, Gemma Jordan (Good Clinical 
Practice Laboratories, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK); Kevin Bradley, Aarti Shah, Mark Little, Jenni Lee, 
Samantha Messenger, Diane Pratley (Department of Radiology, Oxford 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust); Alfonso Gonzalez Blas 
(Pharmacy Department, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust); Brian Burns, Kevin Ray (Oxford Institute for Radiology Oncology, 
University of Oxford); Michael Chappell, Jamie Collin, 
Eleonora Mylonopoulou (Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University 
of Oxford); Zhibiao Wang (Chongqing Haifu Medical Technology Co. Ltd, 
China); and Nicholas Borys (Celsion Corporation, NJ, USA). The views 
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, 
the NIHR, or the Department of Health.
References
1 
Trédan O, Galmarini CM, Patel K, Tannock IF. Drug resistance 
and the solid tumor microenvironment. J Natl Cancer Inst 2007; 
99: 1441–54.
2 
Diederich CJ, Hynynen K. Ultrasound technology for 
hyperthermia. Ultrasound Med Biol 1999; 25: 871–87
.
3 
Mura S, Nicolas J, Couvreur P. Stimuli-responsive nanocarriers for 
drug delivery. Nat Mater 2013; 12: 991–1003.
4 
Gregoriadis G, Ryman BE. Liposomes as carriers of enzymes or 
drugs: a new approach to the treatment of storage diseases. 
Biochem J 1971; 124: 58P.
5 
Dromi S, Frenkel V, Luk A, et al. Pulsed-high intensity focused 
ultrasound and low temperature–sensitive liposomes for enhanced 
targeted drug delivery and antitumor effect. Clin Cancer Res 2007; 
13: 2722–27
.
6 
Needham D, Anyarambhatla G, Kong G, Dewhirst MW. 
A new temperature-sensitive liposome for use with mild 
hyperthermia: characterization and testing in a human tumor 
xenograft model. Cancer Res 2000; 60: 1197–201.
7 
Staruch RM, Ganguly M, Tannock IF, Hynynen K, Chopra R. 
Enhanced drug delivery in rabbit VX2 tumours using 
thermosensitive liposomes and MRI-controlled focused ultrasound 
hyperthermia. Int J Hyperth 2012; 28: 776–87
.
8 
Staruch RM, Hynynen K, Chopra R. Hyperthermia-mediated 
doxorubicin release from thermosensitive liposomes using 
MR-HIFU: therapeutic effect in rabbit Vx2 tumours. 
Int J Hyperth 2015; 31: 118–33.
9 
Gabizon A, Shmeeda H, Barenholz Y. Pharmacokinetics of 
pegylated liposomal doxorubicin: review of animal and human 
studies. Clin Pharmacokinet 2003; 42: 419–36.
10 
Wood BJ, Poon RT, Locklin JK, et al. Phase I study of heat-deployed 
liposomal doxorubicin during radiofrequency ablation for hepatic 
malignancies. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2012; 23: 248–55.
11 
Poon RT, Borys N. Lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin: 
an adjuvant to increase the cure rate of radiofrequency ablation in 
liver cancer. Futur Oncol 2011; 7: 937–45.
12 
Tak WY, Lin S-M, Wang Y, et al. Phase III HEAT study adding 
lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin to radiofrequency 
ablation in patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma 
lesions. Clin Cancer Res 2017; 24: 73–83.
13 
Lyon PC, Griffiths LF, Lee J, et al. Clinical trial protocol for 
TARDOX: a phase I study to investigate the feasibility of targeted 
release of lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin 
(ThermoDox®) using focused ultrasound in patients with liver 
tumours. J Ther Ultrasound 2017; 5: 28.
14 
Choi H, Charnsangavej C, Faria SC, et al. Correlation of computed 
tomography and positron emission tomography in patients with 
metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor treated at a single 
institution with imatinib mesylate: proposal of new computed 
tomography response criteria. J Clin Oncol 2007; 25: 1753–59.
15 
Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, et al. New response evaluation 
criteria in solid tumours: revised RECIST guideline (version 1.1). 
Eur J Cancer 2009; 45: 228–47
.
16 
Wahl RL, Jacene H, Kasamon Y, Lodge MA. From RECIST to 
PERCIST: evolving considerations for PET response criteria in solid 
tumors. J Nucl Med 2009; 50 (suppl 1): 122S–50S.
17 
Larson SM, Erdi Y, Akhurst T, et al. Tumor treatment response based 
on visual and quantitative changes in global tumor glycolysis using 
PET-FDG imaging. The visual response score and the change in total 
lesion glycolysis. Clin Positron Imaging 1999; 2: 159–71.
18 
Hynynen K, Martin CJ, Watmough DJ, Mallard JR. Errors in 
temperature measurement by thermocouple probes during 
ultrasound induced hyperthermia. Br J Radiol 1983; 56: 969–70.
19 
Vaezy S, Shi X, Martin RW, et al. Real-time visualization of 
high-intensity focused ultrasound treatment using ultrasound 
imaging. Ultrasound Med Biol 2001; 27: 33–42.
20 Kreb DL, Bosscha K, Ernst MF, et al. Use of cytokeratin 
8 immunohistochemistry for assessing cell death after radiofrequency 
ablation of breast cancers. Biotech Histochem 2011; 86: 404–12.
21 
Poon RT, Borys N. Lyso-thermosensitive liposomal doxorubicin: 
a novel approach to enhance efficacy of thermal ablation of liver 
cancer. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2009; 10: 333–43.
22 Laginha KM, Verwoert S, Charrois GJ, Allen TM. Determination of 
doxorubicin levels in whole tumor and tumor nuclei in murine breast 
cancer tumors. Clin Cancer Res 2005; 11: 6944–49.
23 Maeda H. The enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect in 
tumor vasculature: the key role of tumor-selective macromolecular 
drug targeting. Adv Enzym Regul 2001; 41: 189–207
.
24 
Landon CD, Park J-Y, Needham D, Dewhirst MW. Nanoscale drug 
delivery and hyperthermia: the materials design and preclinical and 
clinical testing of low temperature-sensitive liposomes used in 
combination with mild hyperthermia in the treatment of local cancer. 
Open Nanomed J 2011; 3: 38.
25 Dawidczyk CM, Russell LM, Hultz M, Searson PC. 
Tumor accumulation of liposomal doxorubicin in three murine 
models: optimizing delivery efficiency. Nanomedicine 2017; 
13: 1637–44.
26 Kong G, Braun RD, Dewhirst MW. Hyperthermia enables 
tumor-specific nanoparticle delivery: effect of particle size. 
Cancer Res 2000; 60: 4440–45.
27 
Hobbs SK, Monsky WL, Yuan F, et al. Regulation of transport 
pathways in tumor vessels: Role of tumor type and 
microenvironment. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95: 4607–12.
28 Hahn GM, Braun J, Har-Kedar I. Thermochemotherapy: synergism 
between hyperthermia (42–43 degrees) and adriamycin (of bleomycin) 
in mammalian cell inactivation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1975; 
72: 937–40.
29 Myers R, Coviello C, Erbs P, et al. Polymeric cups for 
cavitation-mediated delivery of oncolytic vaccinia virus. Mol Ther 2016; 
24: 1627–33.
30 Nwokeoha S, Carlisle R, Cleveland RO. The application of clinical 
lithotripter shock waves to RNA nucleotide delivery to cells. 
Ultrasound Med Biol 2016; 42: 2478–92.
31 
Welch DR. Tumor heterogeneity—a ‘contemporary concept’ founded 
on historical insights and predictions. Cancer Res 2016; 76: 4–6.
32 Carlisle R, Coussios CC. Mechanical approaches to oncological drug 
delivery. Ther Deliv 2013; 4: 1213–15.
33 Staruch R, Chopra R, Hynynen K. Localised drug release using 
MRI-controlled focused ultrasound hyperthermia. Int J Hyperth 2011; 
27: 156–71.
34 
Hijnen N, Langereis S, Grüll H. Magnetic resonance guided 
high-intensity focused ultrasound for image-guided 
temperature-induced drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2014; 
72: 65–81.
35 Weinländer G, Kornek G, Raderer M, Hejna M, Tetzner C, 
Scheithauer W. Treatment of advanced colorectal cancer with 
doxorubicin combined with two potential 
multidrug-resistance-reversing agents: high-dose oral tamoxifen 
and dexverapamil. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 1997; 123: 452–55.
