 Towards a neurophysiological signature for fibromyalgia
Marina López-Solà, PhD1,2,*, Choong-Wan Woo, MSc1,2, Jesus Pujol, MD, PhD3, Joan Deus, 
PhD3,4, Ben J. Harrison, PhD5, Jordi Monfort, MD, PhD6, and Tor D. Wager, PhD1,2
1Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, Colorado
2Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado Boulder, Colorado, U.S.A
3MRI Research Unit, Department of Radiology, Hospital del Mar, CIBERSAM G21, Barcelona, 
Spain
4Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain
5Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, Department of Psychiatry, The University of Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia
6Rheumatology Department, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain
Abstract
Fibromyalgia (FM) patients show characteristically enhanced unpleasantness to painful and non-
painful sensations accompanied by altered neural responses. The diagnostic potential of such 
neural alterations, including their sensitivity and specificity to FM (vs. healthy controls) is 
unknown. We identify a brain signature that characterizes FM central pathophysiology at the 
neural systems level. We included 37 FM patients and 35 matched healthy controls, and analyzed 
fMRI responses to (i) painful pressure and (ii) non-painful multisensory (visual-auditory-tactile) 
stimulation. We used machine-learning techniques to identify a brain-based FM signature. When 
exposed to the same painful stimuli, FM patients showed greater Neurologic Pain Signature (NPS, 
Wager 2013) responses. In addition, a new pain-related classifier (‘FM-pain’) revealed augmented 
responses in sensory integration (insula/operculum) and self-referential (e.g., medial prefrontal) 
regions in FM, and reduced responses in the lateral frontal cortex. A ‘Multisensory’ classifier 
trained on non-painful sensory stimulation revealed augmented responses in insula/operculum, 
posterior cingulate, and medial prefrontal regions, and reduced responses in primary/secondary 
sensory cortices, basal ganglia and cerebellum. Combined activity in the NPS, FM-pain, and 
Multisensory patterns classified patients vs. controls with 92% sensitivity and 94% specificity in 
out-of-sample individuals. Enhanced NPS responses partly mediated mechanical hypersensitivity, 
and correlated with depression and disability(puncorrected<0.05); FM-pain and Multisensory 
responses correlated with clinical pain(puncorrected<0.05). The study provides initial 
characterization of individual FM-patients based on pathophysiological, symptom-related brain 
features. If replicated, these brain features may constitute objective neural targets for therapeutic 
*Correspondence should be addressed to: Marina López-Solà, Ph.D. marina.lopezsola@colorado.edu, Telephone (Lab): (303) 
492-4299. Fax: (303) 492-2967. Mailing Address: Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of Colorado Boulder, 345 
UCB, Boulder, CO 80305. 
The authors declare no conflict of interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Pain. 2017 January ; 158(1): 34–47. doi:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000707.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 interventions. The results establish a framework for assessing therapeutic mechanisms and 
predicting treatment response at the individual level.
INTRODUCTION
Fibromyalgia (FM) is characterized by the presence of widespread musculoskeletal pain and 
tenderness accompanied by fatigue, cognitive/emotional and sleep-related symptoms, 
occurring without any other medical explanation[77]. Besides its high prevalence and 
clinical relevance[79], there is an inherent problem associated with the diagnosis of FM in 
that there is an absence of laboratory findings or well-characterized pathology that is 
sensitive and specific for the disorder. The existence of FM as a clinical diagnosis has been 
therefore historically questioned[79]. The last two decades of research, however, have 
provided consistent evidence to suggest abnormal nervous system findings in FM 
patients[14]. Of note, neuroimaging studies have shown augmented responses to a variety of 
painful stimuli in FM[15; 25; 56], and altered brain structure, metabolic activity and resting 
state functional connectivity in regions that are consistently involved in processing pain, e.g.
[23; 28; 34; 36; 38; 44; 50; 57; 58; 60; 61].
In addition to pain-related changes, FM patients show reduced tolerance (augmented 
unpleasantness) to non-painful sensory stimulation (visual, auditory, olfactory and tactile), 
along with abnormal brain processing of non-painful sensory stimuli, e.g.[11; 21; 30; 42; 
74]. Our group[42; 58] and others[31; 46; 53] have reported evidence suggesting that the 
brain systems involved in the primary cortical processing of non-painful sensory signals and 
their integration may play an important role in FM pain. These studies suggest that pain in 
FM may be associated with (i) hyper-excitability of the nociceptive system, i.e., increased 
transmission (e.g.[52; 64; 69]), central amplification[15; 25; 56], and/or reduced inhibitory 
control mechanisms[35; 37] and (ii) reduced opponent non-nociceptive sensory 
processing[31; 42; 46; 53; 58]. In spite of these brain and behavioral findings, there remains 
a critical gap between characterizing abnormalities in FM at a group level and identifying 
neurophysiological markers diagnostic of FM at an individual patient level.
Here we use a multisensory approach to identify a brain signature sensitive to FM status (vs. 
healthy) at the individual-person level. Notably, we do not imply that the signature should 
differentiate FM from other chronic pain conditions with a sensitization component. We 
include tests of both mechanical pain and non-painful sensory brain responses to (i) 
characterize the sensory processing alterations that are distinctive of FM at the central level, 
and (ii) address how such characteristic pathophysiological features relate to patients’ core 
symptoms. As a first approach to assess alterations in central pain processing, we applied the 
Neurologic Pain Signature (NPS), a multivariate brain activation pattern that was previously 
validated to be sensitive and specific to predict experimental pain perception at the 
individual-person level[70]. The NPS accurately predicts experimental pain perception, but 
does not respond to other unpleasant, highly arousing emotional experiences[70]. 
Augmented expression of the NPS in FM would indicate enhanced pain-specific cerebral 
processing in patients. In addition, we applied cross-validated machine learning algorithms 
to differentiate FM patients from healthy participants based on their brain responses to (i) 
López-Solà et al.
Page 2
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pressure pain and (ii) combined non-painful visual, auditory, and tactile-motor stimulation. 
Finally, we combined pain and multisensory brain measures to obtain a cross-validated 
signature for FM status.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement
This study was conducted according to the principles expressed in the Declaration of 
Helsinki and was approved by the Ethics and Institutional Review Board of the Autonomous 
University of Barcelona (reference number SAF2010-19434). All patients and healthy 
participants provided written informed consent to participate in the study.
Subjects
Seventy-two subjects participated, including 37 female FM patients (1990 American College 
of Rheumatology criteria for FM)[78] and 35 female matched healthy controls (see Table 1). 
Patients and healthy subjects were matched for age, education status and handedness (all 
right-handed, Table 1). The patients were consecutively recruited during clinical follow-up 
in the rheumatology service (CIMA, Barcelona) to provide a homogeneous sample with 
severe and persistent FM symptoms. Vision and hearing were normal upon neurological 
examination for all patients and healthy participants.
We administered the following scales in a visit prior to the MRI appointment: Fibromyalgia 
Impact Questionnaire (FIQ); the 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey, General Perception of 
Health; the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS).
Patients were allowed to continue with their stable medical treatment, as listed in Table 1, 
but were asked to refrain from taking occasional rescue analgesic drugs (i.e., non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, paracetamol, and tramadol) 72 hours prior to scanning session.
Control subjects with relevant medical and neurological disorders, any form of chronic or 
acute pain, substance abuse, or history of psychiatric illness were not considered for 
inclusion. Contraindication to MRI including pregnancy was a general exclusion criterion 
for both groups.
Clinical pain in deep tissue was assessed using a 101-point verbal scale. A score of 0 
expressed no pain and a score of 100 the most intense pain imaginable, perceived in the 
body as a whole, or in most of its extension, rather than referring to any focal tenderness. 
Patients were asked to report spontaneous pain approximately 1 hour before the scanning 
session (Table 1). All healthy participants rated “0” for this measure.
Description of fMRI tasks and stimuli used
1. Multisensory task—A block-design fMRI paradigm was used, with alternating 30-
second periods of rest (no stimulation) and activation (concurrent visual, auditory and 
tactile-motor stimulation), completing a total of 4 rest-stimulation cycles[42]. A subset of 
these data (from 25 controls and 35 patients) was used in a previous publication by our 
group[42]. The multisensory stimuli consisted of the simultaneous presentation of visual 
López-Solà et al.
Page 3
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (3Hz, equivalent to 6 color reversals per second) full-field flashing checkerboard composed 
of a grid of black and white alternating squares (80 ± 10 lux) and auditory stimulation 
(series of 15 tones of frequencies comprised in the range of 233.1 to 1318.5 Hz, presented at 
a temporal frequency of 3 Hz, with an intensity of 75 ± 5 dB) and a finger-opposition task 
during which subjects were instructed to touch the tip of their right thumb with the other 
fingers (from index to little finger)[42]. In our multisensory assessment, we were interested 
in a more naturalistic presentation of sensory stimuli (and motor response) that are usually 
combined in daily life, rather than in modality specific alterations. As a first approach, this 
approach allowed us to maximize signal power and challenge both sensory and motor 
systems efficiently.
2. Low and high (healthy participants only) pressure stimulation tasks—
Pressure stimulation tasks involved a block design fMRI paradigm consisting of three 
conditions per stimulation cycle repeated 5 times. Each cycle began with a rest condition 
with pseudorandom duration (range: 20 to 32 s), followed by a brief auditory stimulus (600-
ms tone), followed by a 6-second anticipatory period, and then a 10-second pressure pain 
period. Each subject was asked to rate pain intensity and unpleasantness immediately after 
the end of the fMRI scanning sequence (run) using a numerical rating scale (NRS) ranging 
from 0 (not at all painful/unpleasant) to 100 (worst pain imaginable/most unpleasant 
imaginable). All participants completed a low-pressure pain task first, with pressure set at 
4.5 kg/cm2. Approximately 10 minutes later, 28 healthy participants (out of 35) completed a 
second, high-pressure pain task, with stimulus intensity individualized based on the 
calibration session to reliably provoke severe but tolerable pain (5.90 ± 0.62 kg/cm2), 
comparable to the experience of FM patients at 4.5 kg/cm2.
As in previous studies[25; 41; 56] pressure pain stimuli were delivered using a hydraulic 
device capable of transmitting controlled pressure to 1 cm2 surface placed on the subjects’ 
right thumbnail. In a calibration session, each subject was trained to report pain intensity and 
unpleasantness to different pressure stimuli ranging from 2 to 9 kg/cm2 (or up to tolerance 
threshold) using the NRS described above. A stimulus of 4.5kg/cm2 was selected to reliably 
provoke intense pain (above 60 in the NRS, but tolerable) in the patient group. This stimulus 
is only slightly more intense than what was used to determine tender points during clinical 
assessment in patients (4 kg/cm2). The ten-second 4.5kg/cm2 was able to evoke, during the 
calibration assessment, a mean pain intensity of 73.15 ± 19.76 points in the patient group 
and a 36.47 ± 20.38 points in the healthy control group (between-group effect: t=7.75, 
p<0.0005). For healthy participants, we also determined the minimum pressure intensity that 
was required during the calibration session to provoke severe (above 60 in the NRS) but 
tolerable pain (5.90 ± 0.62 kg/cm2).
Statistical analyses
Behavioral analyses—Two-sample t-tests (for post-scan pain intensity and 
unpleasantness) were computed in SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics for Macintosh, Version 20.0).
MRI acquisition and preprocessing—We scanned participants on a Philips Achieva 
3.0 TX system (Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands), with an eight-channel phased-
López-Solà et al.
Page 4
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 array head coil and single-shot echoplanar imaging (EPI). Each functional sequence 
consisted of gradient recalled acquisition in the steady state (repetition time [TR]= 2.000 ms; 
echo time [TE]= 35 ms; flip angle= 90°; dummy volumes= 4) within a field of view of 23 
cm, a 96×69-pixel matrix, and slice thickness of 4 mm (inter-slice gap, 1 mm). Twenty-two 
slices parallel to the anterior-posterior commissure provided whole-brain coverage.
Imaging data were processed using MATLAB (v2011b; The MathWorks Inc, Natick, Mass) 
and Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM8; The Wellcome Department of Imaging 
Neuroscience, London). Preprocessing involved motion correction, spatial normalization and 
smoothing using a Gaussian filter (full-width half-maximum, 8 mm). Data were normalized 
to the standard SPM-EPI template provided by SPM8 and resliced to 2 mm isotropic 
resolution in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Regarding motion correction, 
translation and rotation estimates (x, y, z) were less than 2 mm or 2°, respectively, for all the 
participants, and no subjects were excluded because of artifacts or head displacement/
rotations.
To address the potential effects of head motion on the FM-status prediction results, we 
computed a single motion index per subject for each fMRI task (see full description of the 
method in [57]; see also[55]). Briefly, we computed a measure for mean inter-frame motion 
due to translation (x,y,z), mIMtr, and a measure for mean inter-frame motion due to rotation 
(pitch, yaw, roll), mIMrot. Whereas mIMtr is a distance, mIMrot is an angle. The combined 
measurement was based on an average of both, 
, where r is the 
approximate average distance of all brain voxels to the rotation principal axis. The 
multiplicative factor r is necessary to transform the angle mIMrot to its corresponding 
distance arc. Following previous authors, we set r = 50mm.[55] Specific details about the 
computation of mIMtr and mIMrot are provided in[57], Supplementary Information file. We 
did not observe between-group differences in motion during the multisensory paradigm (t=
−0.28, p=0.78). However, for the pressure pain task, significant differences were observed in 
TR-by-TR head motion between FM patients and healthy participants (patients > controls, 
t=2.49, p=0.02) (also between healthy subjects at the low and high-pressure intensities, 
t=2.38, p=0.02), whereas no differences emerged between patients and healthy participants 
when pain was matched (t=0.27, p=0.79). Importantly, the magnitude of the between-group 
difference in head motion was minimal (95% confidence interval for the head motion 
difference between patients and healthy participants: 0.01–0.16mm). To account for the 
potential influence of head motion in the prediction model of FM status (see below, logistic 
multiple regression), we added the single subject measures of head motion for each task 
(pain and multisensory, for the sake of completeness) as independent variables in the model, 
and verified that neither contributed significant variance to explaining FM status 
(multisensory task: t=−0.84, p=0.40; pain task: t=0.20, p=0.84).
To test whether motion parameters (during the pain task) were sufficiently informative to 
correctly classify patients from healthy participants, we used support vector machines 
(SVM) with the 6 motion regressors per subject as the classification features and the 
subjects’ category (patient vs. healthy participant) as the outcome. The results were not 
significant (cross-validated accuracy: 60%± 5.7% (SE), p=0.10). We also checked and 
López-Solà et al.
Page 5
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 confirmed that the time course of the ‘nociception-positive NPS’ response (see below) on a 
TR-by-TR basis was not correlated with motion parameter estimates, for any regressor for 
any subject (all p-values>0.1).
First level single-subject models for fMRI data—We used a conventional general 
lineal model approach (GLM) as implemented in SPM8 software to estimate brain responses 
to (a) multisensory stimulation and (b) pressure stimulation, for each subject.
For the multisensory task, a primary task regressor was created by convolving the sensory 
stimulation blocks with a canonical hemodynamic response function. The “off” (rest) 
condition served as an implicit task baseline. Parameter estimates were calculated at each 
voxel using the general linear model. A high-pass filter was used to remove low-frequency 
signal fluctuations (1/128 Hz). [Multisensory Stimulation – Baseline] contrast images for 
each participant were calculated.
For the pressure stimulation task, signal response was modeled using separate regressors for 
the anticipatory and the pain periods, with a hemodynamic delay of 4 seconds. In three 
previous studies using similar procedures[22; 41; 56], we systematically observed that the 
duration of brain responses to 10-second pressure stimuli of similar intensities extends to 16 
seconds (average response duration across pain processing regions)[41], which is consistent 
with observations by different research groups [13; 47; 70]. To account for this, pain-related 
activation was modeled using a pain condition of 16-sec duration. A high-pass filter was 
used to remove low-frequency signal fluctuations (1/128 Hz). In agreement with our 
previous work[42; 56; 58; 70], we did not model autocorrelations. Modeling 
autocorrelations has the potential disadvantage of producing biased parameter estimates 
when the AR model assumptions are violated, which can result in reduced efficiency[20; 
80]. Of note, models that do not consider autocorrelation have shown to generate unbiased 
parameter estimates (beta values, which we use here for classification purposes), even if the 
data are autocorrelated[51; 80] (see also Supplementary Figure 1). [Pressure Stimulation – 
Baseline] contrast images for each participant were calculated.
We studied brain response alterations during pain processing in FM patients using two 
complementary approaches: (1) As a first test of pain-related brain responses, we applied the 
NPS brain signature[70], a multivariate fMRI-based brain pattern that was validated to 
specifically predict experimental pain (and not other unpleasant/arousing emotional 
experiences) in humans. The goal of this approach was to use a defined marker or process 
that has been well characterized in healthy individuals to test for abnormalities in the patient 
population. An advantage is that the NPS was trained to track pain intensity in a fine-grained 
way across multiple levels of stimulus intensity, and tested for specificity to pain and 
generalizability across a number of independent studies. (2) Because the NPS may not be 
sufficient to capture all pain-related differences between patients and controls, a second 
approach was to train a classifier optimized to discriminate FM patients from controls. This 
pattern identifies pain-related signals that may be missed by the NPS. This second approach 
was also applied to the multisensory task (see below).
López-Solà et al.
Page 6
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Computing Neurologic Pain Signature (NPS) responses—We computed for each 
subject (FM patient or healthy participant) a single scalar value representing their expression 
of the NPS pattern in response to pressure pain (using the contrast [Pressure Stimulation 
minus Baseline] images as detailed below).
For this analysis, we separated NPS regions likely to be related to nociceptive pain 
(associated with pain-evoked activation in the NPS) from those that play other modulatory 
roles (associated with pain-evoked deactivation in the NPS). In most of the regions in the 
NPS, pain is associated with increased overall activity. Such regions include the major 
targets of ascending nociceptive afferents, including the thalamus, secondary somatosensory 
regions (SI/SII), posterior, mid and anterior insula and adjacent opercula, midbrain, dorsal 
anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), inferior frontal gyrus and amygdala (Supplementary Table 
1 and Figure 1). We refer to pattern responses in this set of regions as the “Nociception-
positive NPS” (NPSp). In a subset of other medial regions, including the perigenual ACC 
(pgACC) and the PCC (posterior cingulate)/precuneus/paracentral lobule, pain was 
associated with deactivation in the original NPS pattern. These regions are not strongly 
linked to nociception and are not direct targets of nociceptive afferents, rather they have 
been associated with a variety of affective, autonomic, social, self-referential, and decision-
making functions[62]. We refer to responses in this set of regions as the “Nociception-
negative NPS” (NPSn), and analyze this pattern separately from the NPSp due to its 
differential functional characteristics and considering the particular role of these regions, 
mostly the pgACC, in chronic pain. Of note, the local pattern of voxel weights is exactly the 
same as in the original NPS within the two NPS components (NPSp and NPSn). 
Supplementary Text 1 provides a detailed description of the rational for computing NPSp 
and NPSn and the procedure used to characterize them.
Mediation analysis—We tested two separate mediation models to assess whether the 
relationship between FM status (FM vs. healthy) and pain ratings during the fMRI pain task 
(intensity -model 1- and unpleasantness –model 2-) were significantly mediated by NPS 
brain responses. The mediation analysis tested several joint hypotheses: Path a tested 
whether FM status (FM vs. healthy) predicts NPSp responses. Path b tested whether NPSp 
responses predict subjective ratings of intensity (or unpleasantness), controlling for FM 
status. Finally, the Path a×b tested the mediation effect, i.e., whether NPSp responses during 
pressure pain explain a significant proportion of the co-variation between FM status and 
subjective pain ratings. The analyses were conducted using the mediation toolbox (http://
wagerlab.colorado.edu/tools) that has been used and described extensively in previous work 
(e.g.[71]) with bias-corrected, accelerated bootstrap tests.
Multivariate pattern-based classification of FM patients vs. healthy controls—
We performed two analyses using linear support vector machines (SVMs) to discriminate 
FM patients and controls based on whole-brain activation patterns. The first analysis used 
activation patterns during painful pressure at 4.5kg/cm2 pressure stimulation (FM-pain), and 
the second analysis used activations during non-painful multisensory stimulation 
(Multisensory). The SVM was implemented in the Spider Toolbox (http://
people.kyb.tuebingen.mpg.de/spider). It identifies a hyperplane (direction in 
López-Solà et al.
Page 7
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 multidimensional voxel space) that separates the two groups. Distances from the hyperplane 
are related to the likelihood a participant belongs to the patient vs. control class, and were 
used in the logistic regression analysis below.
The FM-pain classifier was based on the [Pressure stimulation minus Baseline] contrast, and 
the Multisensory classifier was based on the [Multisensory stimulation minus Baseline] 
contrast. In each analysis, we used leave-two-subject-out cross-validation, which ensured 
that the patterns we identified were always tested on new, out-of-sample individuals (see 
Supplementary Information). Accuracy (sensitivity and specificity) was based on the cross-
validation, and the final weight map was based on the full sample, and was thresholded 
using a bootstrap test (q < .05 FDR-corrected; see Supplementary Text 2 for a detailed 
description of the SVM analysis and the bootstrap test).
Logistic multiple regression to develop a combined classifier for FM status—
We used logistic regression to combine results from the three fMRI-based classifiers (NPS, 
FM-pain and Multisensory) into a single signature of FM status. The predictors in the 
regression were: (1) the NPSp response; (2) the NPSn response; (3) the cross-validated FM-
pain signature response (distance from the hyperplane); and (4) the cross-validated 
Multisensory signature response.
Logistic regression results were used to calculate sensitivity, specificity, and the area under 
the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC). We assessed these values for 
each fMRI-based classifier (NPSp, FM-pain and Multisensory) independently, and for the 
combined model.
Multivariate brain pattern responses and medication status—In order to examine 
the relationship between medication status and brain pattern responses, we performed a 
series of two-sample t-tests to compare between-group differences in pattern response 
between medicated and non-medicated patients.
Multivariate brain pattern responses and clinical severity—We also tested whether 
the multivariate fMRI patterns used to classify FM status were correlated with clinical 
symptom severity. We performed linear regression (stepwise procedure in SPSS), including 
the 4 brain-derived (cross-validated) pattern response values as predictors (NPSp, NPSn, 
FM-pain and multisensory) and each of the clinical measures as the dependent variable in 
one of three regression models (clinical pain, FIQ, and HADS depression scores). We 
included a fourth predictor representing the presence or absence of anxiolytic or 
antidepressant medication in each model, considering the significant correlation between 
NPS responses and antidepressant and anxiolytic medication status (further described in the 
results section). For completeness, we also assessed zero-order Pearson correlations between 
brain measures and clinical symptom severity in FM patients.
López-Solà et al.
Page 8
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RESULTS
Enhanced pressure pain sensitivity in FM patients
In response to the low-pressure intensity fMRI task (4.5 kg/cm2), FM patients (vs. healthy 
participants) reported increased pain intensity (mean ± SD, 71.71 ± 14.47 for FM patients, 
48.48 ± 18.31 for healthy participants; between-group effect: t=5.95; p<0.0005) and 
unpleasantness (68.24 ± 18.84 for FM patients, 44.11± 19.98 for healthy subjects; between-
group effect: t=5.24, p<0.0005). In the high-pressure intensity task (~6 kg/cm2 ± 0.62) 
healthy subjects reported equivalent pain levels as FM patients stimulated at low pressure 
(t=0.61, p=0.54 for intensity and t=0.54, p=0.59 for unpleasantness).
Neurologic Pain Signature (NPS) responses in FM patients vs. healthy controls
Figure 1A shows the NPSp pattern. FM patients and healthy subjects (at both stimulation 
intensities) showed significant NPSp responses, shown in Figure 1B. Responses to the low-
pressure fixed intensity (4.5kg/cm2) were greater for FM patients than healthy participants 
(t=3.24; p=0.002), consistent with hypersensitivity to mechanical pain in FM. When 
subjective pain was matched between groups by comparing healthy participants 
experiencing high pressure (6 kg/cm2 ± 0.62) to FM patients experiencing low pressure 
(4.5kg/cm2), NPSp responses for both groups were virtually identical (t=0.07, p=0.94), 
suggesting that subjective reports of pain were proportional to pain-specific NPSp responses.
We also examined local signature responses in each contiguous region of the NPSp (Figure 
1C and Supplementary Table 1). Comparisons between FM patients and healthy participants 
showed significantly greater NPSp responses to low-pressure intensity in FM patients in all 
regions tested, with one exception (the inferior frontal gyrus). When subjective pain was 
matched (high pressure in healthy participants vs. low pressure in FM patients), local pattern 
responses were virtually identical for all regions.
Mediation analyses supported the conclusion that the FM vs. healthy participant difference 
in pain intensity and unpleasantness was significantly partly mediated by NPSp brain 
responses (Figure 1D–E).
We also studied pattern responses in the heteromodal regions of the NPSn component, which 
may have pain modulatory functions but which are not considered nociceptive targets (fully 
described in Supplementary Figure 2, Supplementary Table 1). In the original NPS map, 
increased pain was associated with deactivation in these regions (negative weights, blue-
colored regions in Supplementary Figure 2). However, NPSn regions in this study showed 
pain-evoked activation (not deactivation). Patients showed significant pain-evoked activation 
in both pgACC and PCC/precuneus/paracentral lobule regions of the NPSn, whereas healthy 
subjects showed significant pain-evoked activation only in the PCC/precuneus/paracentral 
lobule cluster. For simplicity, pattern response magnitudes are always signed such that 
increases in pattern response indicate increases in pain activation in these regions. Both FM 
patients at low pressure and healthy participants at high pressure showed significant NPSn 
pattern response (FM: 1.56 ± 1.96 (mean ± SD); t=4.82, p<0.00005; healthy participants, 
low pressure: 0.30 ± 1.18; t=1.49, p=0.15; healthy participants, high pressure: 1.04 ± 1.61; 
t=3.40, p=0.0021). FM patients showed significantly greater pattern response in NPSn 
López-Solà et al.
Page 9
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regions than healthy controls (all receiving 4.5kg/cm2, t=3.27, p=0.002; i.e., greater 
activation in such regions; Supplementary Figure 2). Equating pain perception between 
groups again eliminated the FM vs. healthy participant difference (t=1.14, p=0.258). 
Additionally, in healthy participants, NPSn responses were stronger (i.e., greater activation) 
in the high pressure than in the low-pressure condition (t=2.09, p=0.04). Analyses of 
individual regions within the NPSn are summarized in Supplementary Figure 2 and 
Supplementary Table 1. Interestingly, the pgACC showed pain-evoked activation only for 
patients (and not for healthy participants at high pressure). Both NPSn regions (pgACC and 
PCC/precuneus) exhibited stronger response for patients than healthy participants at 
matched pressure. Matching pain intensity across groups resulted in statistically equivalent 
activation in PCC/precuneus, but a trend (p=0.10, Supplementary Table 1) towards greater 
activation in the pgACC in patients. Furthermore, there were no between-group differences 
in pgACC activity between healthy participants at low and high pressure (p=0.48, 
Supplementary Table 1), suggesting that this region does not contribute to pain intensity 
encoding in healthy participants.
We finally assessed whether the NPSp response to low-pressure intensity performed 
significantly better than chance in classifying FM status (present vs. absent) and found that it 
classified 68%± 5.5 (SE) of the cases correctly (p=0.0029). Also, NPSn responses to low 
pressure classified FM status with 71%± 5.3 (SE) accuracy (p=0.0004) suggesting that 
greater pain-evoked activation in NPSn regions at low pressure is an identifying feature of 
FM. Note that the two classification accuracy values are not statistically different from each 
other.
A new pain-related classifier map (FM-pain) discriminates FM patients from controls
The FM-pain classification brain pattern (Figure 2, Supplementary Table 2) was 
characterized by augmented activity in FM patients in regions associated with sensory 
integration (SII/parietal operculum extending into mid-insula) and self-referential/‘default 
mode’ network regions (including dorsomedial prefrontal cortex [PFC, all q<0.05 FDR-
corrected]). At a lower level of significance (p<0.001), a larger extended network was 
observed that included augmented pain-related responses in ventromedial PFC/subgenual 
ACC and PCC. Reduced activity in FM patients was found in a region considered important 
for pain and emotion regulation, the dorsolateral PFC (q<0.05 FDR-corrected). This pattern, 
when applied to new test participants, classified FM patients vs. controls with 70% ± 5.4% 
accuracy, P=0.0009. Sensitivity was 74% (CI: 62%–86%) and specificity was 66% (CI: 
53%–79%).
A new non-painful multisensory classifier map discriminates FM patients from controls
The Multisensory classification pattern (Figure 3, Supplementary Table 3) showed enhanced 
activity in FM patients in heteromodal regions associated with multisensory integration 
(posterior-mid insula/operculum), self-referential/’default mode’ network regions (including 
the PCC/precuneus and dorsomedial PFC), and an anterior lingual region proximal to the 
parahippocampal gyrus. Reduced activity in FM patients was found in primary/secondary 
sensory areas (occipital and superior temporal regions) associated with visual and auditory 
processing, respectively; lateral cerebellum; basal ganglia (dorsal and ventral putamen and 
López-Solà et al.
Page 10
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pallidum); diencephalon (consistent with subthalamic and hypothalamic regions); 
dorsolateral PFC; and midbrain. This pattern of activity, when applied prospectively to new 
test participants, classified FM patients and healthy participants with a cross-validated 
accuracy of 89% ± 3.7% (SE), p<0.0000005; sensitivity: 84% (CI: 73%–93%) and 
specificity: 94% (CI: 87%–100%).
In order to check for a more global brain functional reorganization in fibromyalgia patients, 
we also tested whether the FM_pain pattern described above could accurately classify 
patients vs. controls using images from the multisensory task and vice versa. Indeed, 
FM_pain pattern responses computed using individual person-level multi-sensory contrast 
images accurately classified fibromyalgia status (classification accuracy: 86% ± 4.1%; 
p<0.0001 sensitivity: 95% (88–100%), specificity: 77% (64–88%)). Conversely, 
Multisensory pattern responses computed using individual pressure pain contrast images 
also classified fibromyalgia status (classification accuracy: 76% ± 5.0%; p<0.0001 
sensitivity: 65% (CI: 51–78%), specificity: 89% (CI: 79–97%)). Thus, the two brain 
classifiers may in part reflect a more general (task-nonspecific) brain reorganization in 
fibromyalgia that is not specific to any one sensory modality.
Combined neural classifier using pain and multisensory brain measures
This analysis aimed to predict FM status by combining pattern response values for the 
NPSp, NPSn, FM-pain and Multisensory patterns using logistic regression. Three of the four 
pattern responses significantly contributed to the prediction of FM status while controlling 
for the others (NPSp_t = 2.16 [p= 0.03], FM-pain_t=2.03 [p=0.04] and Multisensory_t= 
4.22 [p<0.0005]), whereas the NPSn was not significant (t=0.09, p=0.924). Figure 4 shows 
the group means in the joint space of NPSp/FM-pain and Multisensory patterns. The 
combined classifier was able to discriminate patients from healthy participants with a cross-
validated accuracy of 93% ± 3.0% (SE), p<0.0000005; sensitivity: 92% (CI: 84%–98%) and 
specificity: 94% (CI: 87%–100%).
Associations between brain pattern responses and medication status in FM patients
No significant effect of analgesics (either opioid-dependent [tramadol], or non-opioid 
dependent [ibuprofen and paracetamol]), hypnotics, or gabapentin was found on pattern 
response values for any of the four brain patterns, i.e, NPSp, NPSn, FM-pain map and 
multisensory response (all p > 0.10). A significant association was found between 
anxiolytic/antidepressant medication and NPS measures. Anxiolytic medication (present in 
18 out of 37 patients) was significantly associated with NPSn pattern response values 
(t=2.29, p=0.03), indicating that medicated patients showed greater pain-evoked activation in 
pgACC and PCC/precuneus regions than patients who were not receiving anxiolytic 
medication. In addition, antidepressant medication, which is currently prescribed as a 
standard treatment for FM and was used in 76% of patients in this sample, was associated 
with greater NPSp (t=3.74, p=0.001) and NPSn responses (i.e., increased activation; t=2.51, 
p=0.016). These results indicate that FM patients receiving stable treatment with 
antidepressants showed significantly greater NPS responses than untreated individuals.
López-Solà et al.
Page 11
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We also found a significant association between antidepressant/anxiolytic medication and 
clinical severity. Specifically, a variable representing presence of antidepressant/anxiolytic 
medications (0: no antidepressant neither anxiolytic medication; 1: presence of either 
antidepressant or anxiolytic medication; 2: presence of both antidepressant and anxiolytic 
medication) was positively correlated with HADS-depression (r=0.325, p=0.049) and FIQ 
scores (r=0.341, p=0.039).
Importantly, after controlling for clinical severity (including clinical pain, HADS and FIQ 
scores as covariates), the relationship between anxiolytic and antidepressant use and both 
NPSp and NPSn responses became non-significant (all p>0.1). These findings suggest that 
the observed relationship between medication use and brain measures may reflect common 
influences of symptom severity on both measures. That is, greater symptom severity is 
associated with both increased medication use and larger NPS responses.
Associations between brain pattern responses and clinical symptoms in FM patients
Multiple regression analyses using brain pattern responses (NPSp, NPSn, FM-pain and 
Multisensory) to predict symptom severity in FM patients showed that several brain 
measures correlated with FM symptoms, as illustrated in Figure 5. In each multiple 
regression model we included a predictor representing the presence or absence of anxiolytic/
antidepressant medication, to control for medication effects on symptom severity. Greater 
levels of clinical pain were predicted by a combination of greater FM-pain pattern responses 
(t=2.14, p=0.039) and greater Multisensory pattern responses (t=2.88, p= 0.007). NPSp and 
NPSn values were not predictive, either individually or in stepwise multiple regression (all 
p>0.10). Higher Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire scores (FIQ, assessing functional 
impairment associated with the disease) were predicted by a trend towards stronger NPSn 
responses (t=1.92, p=0.06), indicating that greater pain-evoked activation in NPSn regions 
was associated with marginally greater FIQ scores. Other measures were not predictive, 
either alone or in stepwise regression (all p>0.10). Greater depressive symptomatology 
(HADS depression) was also predicted by stronger NPSn responses (t=2.09, p=0.04), but not 
other measures (all p>0.10). Our correlation findings are preliminary and need further 
replication in larger samples (see Supplementary Table 4).
Brain pattern responses and time since diagnosis
There was no significant association between time since diagnosis (surrogate measure for 
time exposed to the disorder) and brain pattern responses (NPS, FM-pain and multisensory: 
p>0.1).
DISCUSSION
Diagnosing FM based on objective brain measures is important for several reasons. The 
status of FM as a disorder with objective physiological dysfunction has been questioned, in 
part because it is unclear that central[23–25; 28; 32–34; 36; 39; 42; 49; 50; 56; 58] and 
peripheral changes[52; 64; 69] are sufficient to diagnose FM and explain symptoms. 
Objective brain-based signatures can reveal patterns of neurophysiological alterations 
López-Solà et al.
Page 12
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 characteristic of FM (vs. healthy), potentially establishing a specific neurological component 
to the disorder.
Here, we identify a set of three brain patterns based on fMRI responses to pressure pain and 
non-painful multisensory stimulation. These patterns, taken together, discriminate FM from 
matched healthy controls with 92% sensitivity and 94% specificity. Though we take this as a 
provisional ‘signature’ for FM, we do not imply that these patterns are unique to FM or that 
they differentiate it from other conditions. Multifocal pain and widespread mechanical 
hypersensitivity are common features of multiple chronic pain conditions[54; 75]. Given the 
overlap in symptoms and comorbidities across disorders[54; 75; 76], which clinical 
categories are respected at the neurophysiological level and which clinical features are most 
likely represented in a continuum, still remain open, empirical questions. Exploratory 
analyses suggested that the three component patterns are correlated with clinical symptoms. 
Individual FM patients may vary in the expression of the different brain patterns we 
identified, which may lead to the characterization of new FM subtypes.
These results show that fMRI may serve as a useful component of multi-modal FM 
assessments. Previously, heart rate variability[40] and performance in specific fitness tests[3] 
have shown moderate-to-strong separation of patients and healthy participants. While these 
measures are useful and are easy to deploy, they are not suitable for addressing the 
neurophysiological mechanisms of FM. Previous attempts have established 
neurophysiological differences in pain-related processing in FM patients[15; 24; 25; 56] but 
have not yet successfully discriminated patients from healthy participants at the individual-
person level (cf.[67]). A recently published study based on brain anatomy findings shows 
ability to discriminate FM patients with from 53% to 76% accuracy in different datasets[61]. 
Our ability to classify with 93% accuracy in the present study relies strongly on the joint 
consideration of responses to nociceptive and non-painful multi-sensory stimuli, following 
previous work[42; 56; 58].
Brain features diagnostic of FM
Combined pain-multisensory neural classifier—Our study provides three distinct 
neural targets for objective patient characterization. A model combining: (i) enhanced 
responses in the NPSp, a pain-specific brain network, (ii) a pattern of brain responses to 
painful pressure (FM-pain pattern) and (ii) a pattern of extra-nociceptive multisensory 
responses, differentiated FM patients vs. healthy participants with 93% cross-validated 
accuracy. The three effects are theoretically significant. Stronger NPSp responses mediated 
mechanical hyperalgesia in FM and were associated with a trend to greater depression; 
stronger FM-pain and multisensory responses were associated with greater clinical pain. 
Thus, the combined model is most likely to be useful for clinical and translational purposes, 
though either feature might also be used alone. Though the NPSn was not significant in the 
final model, NPSn responses may nonetheless be important for assessing and understanding 
functional aspects of FM.
Pain-related patterns—The NPSp pattern showed an augmented response in FM when 
the stimulus intensity was matched, but not when subjective pain was matched. It was a 
López-Solà et al.
Page 13
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 significant mediator of mechanical hypersensitivity in patients. Thus, NPSp responses are 
enhanced in patients in proportion to their augmented subjective experience of pressure-
induced pain, and are consistent with previous evidence supporting peripheral (e.g.,[52; 64; 
69]) and central (e.g.,[10; 45; 58; 66]) sensitization in FM. The current study cannot 
determine whether this enhancement reflects a change in the gain of the NPSp per unit 
stimulus intensity or simply reflects enhanced afferent input. Future studies could begin to 
disentangle these alternatives by testing multiple stimulus intensities in both patients and 
controls.
Rather than being limited to regions associated most strongly with emotional or evaluative 
aspects of pain (e.g., anterior insula, ACC, lateral PFC), our findings showed a distributed 
enhancement of nociceptive processing affecting all major NPSp regions. In agreement with 
previous observations[25; 56] and considering the validation properties of the NPS, the 
results provide evidence of augmented pain-specific responses in FM, consistent with 
peripheral/central sensitization.
NPSp responses were predictive of experimental pain but not ongoing clinical pain intensity, 
consistent with work showing that medial prefrontal-striatal systems rather than classic 
nociceptive systems are correlated with chronic low back pain[6].
The NPSn pattern includes patterns within medial regions in which greater deactivation was 
previously associated with increased pain[70]. In this study, however, increased pain was 
associated with greater activations in healthy participants (specifically for the PCC/
precuneus cluster) and FM patients (for both the PCC/precuneus and the pgACC clusters). 
The pgACC showed increased activation specifically for FM patients, in agreement with 
previous findings showing that chronic pain patients do not deactivate pgACC/medial PFC 
and/or surrounding regions of the ‘default mode’ network as strongly as controls do (and 
sometimes show activation)[2; 5; 6; 12; 27; 63; 72]. Conversely, the PCC/precuneus may 
activate in response to pressure-evoked pain in both healthy[4; 16; 43; 65] and patient 
populations[27; 48; 59; 65]. The value of ‘default mode’ network regions as predictors of 
pain may therefore vary across pain modalities and pain patient groups. We discuss the issue 
in detail in Supplementary Text 3.
The FM-pain pattern complements the NPS results by showing that FM was best 
characterized by concurrently augmented pain-evoked activation in regions that show an 
important role in sensory integration (anterior SII extending to middle insula) and ‘default 
mode’ regions and reduced activation of the dorsolateral PFC, a region commonly found to 
play a role in pain and emotion regulation[71; 73]. This pattern, which was (together with 
the Multisensory) predictive of clinical pain in patients, also emphasizes the importance of 
some key regions that are not part of the NPS (and are important for self-related, 
motivational and emotional regulation) as targets for future study in FM.
Supplementary analyses of medication use indicated that it was not sufficient to explain the 
relationship between FM patient status and alterations in brain activity (Supplementary Text 
4).
López-Solà et al.
Page 14
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The Multisensory pattern—The Multisensory pattern is the feature that most strongly 
discriminates FM patients from healthy participants, with and without controlling for NPS 
and FM-pain responses, and contributes to predict clinical pain. Central processing of non-
painful sensory signals may be of particular importance in maintaining clinical pain in FM, 
in agreement with previous work [29; 42; 58]. Consistently, Harte and colleagues very 
recently showed that fMRI data during a visual task could discriminate FM patients vs. 
healthy controls with 82% accuracy[29]. The Multisensory pattern shows early sensory 
cortical processing attenuation, which is consistent with reduced processing of fine sensory/
discriminative properties of stimulus[1; 18; 46; 53], accompanied by amplification of 
sensory integration (in agreement with [29]) and self-referential aspects of the response, 
including potential threat of harm[17].
The FM_pain pattern could accurately classify patients vs. controls using multisensory brain 
responses and vice versa, which may reflect a more global brain reorganization in FM that 
may be detected across a range of experimental conditions. Our study and others show 
overlapping brain functional alterations during rest and task performance in FM and other 
chronic pain conditions involving sensory integration (e.g.,[19; 36; 42; 58]), salience ([33; 
42; 50; 58; 68]) and default-mode network regions (e.g., [6–8; 49; 50; 58]).
Overall, we have found an augmented NPSp response that is consistent with enhanced 
nociceptive processing, and partly mediates augmented mechanical pain, and, more broadly, 
evidence for central nervous system alteration in brain processing of sensory stimuli that go 
beyond nociception, consistent with a central nervous system pathophysiological component 
in FM.
Several limitations and future directions remain to be addressed in future studies. First, 
replication of these results with fully independent validation samples is a next step towards 
translational utility. The validation process is a long, multi-study and multi-publication 
effort[9; 26]. Second, false positive cases, i.e., patients that are erroneously classified as 
healthy controls using these brain measures, are always a possibility. Importantly, these 
brain patterns may not capture other sensory/affective/cognitive processes that may also be 
altered in FM patients. Third, the brain pattern-symptom severity correlations that we 
present are preliminary and need replication in multiple samples. Fourth, further studies are 
needed to test whether our findings generalize to other chronic pain populations or are 
specific to FM. Lastly, all participants included in the study were females and therefore the 
findings cannot be generalized to the population of men with fibromyalgia, for which future 
generalization and validation studies are warranted.
Overall, an important open question concerns the extent to which FM and other chronic pain 
disorders are pathophysiologically distinct or may share certain brain features independent 
of primary etiology. Testing the generalizability of the brain patterns we identify here may 
advance our understanding regarding the common and independent central pathophysiology 
of distinct chronic pain conditions across domains of sensory processing. Thus, the current 
approach may help in identifying pain endophenotypes across a spectrum of chronic pain 
conditions and in providing objective guidance for therapeutic interventions on an 
individualized basis.
López-Solà et al.
Page 15
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by grant R01DA035484 (T.D.W.) and by grant SAF2010-19434 (Ministry of 
Science and Innovation of Spain, J.D.). Dr. López-Solà’s work was supported by a Beatriu de Pinos-A Postdoctoral 
Fellowship (2010_BP_A_00136) from the Government of Catalunya.
The Agency of University and Research Funding Management of the Catalonia Government participated in the 
context of Research Groups SGR 2009/718, 1435 and 1450. Matlab code implementing the analyses presented here 
is available at wagerlab.colorado.edu.
References
1. Alanoglu E, Ulas UH, Ozdag F, Odabasi Z, Cakci A, Vural O. Auditory event-related brain 
potentials in fibromyalgia syndrome. Rheumatol Int. 2005; 25(5):345–349. [PubMed: 14986061] 
2. Albuquerque RJ, de Leeuw R, Carlson CR, Okeson JP, Miller CS, Andersen AH. Cerebral activation 
during thermal stimulation of patients who have burning mouth disorder: an fMRI study. Pain. 2006; 
122(3):223–234. [PubMed: 16632202] 
3. Aparicio VA, Segura-Jimenez V, Alvarez-Gallardo IC, Soriano-Maldonado A, Castro-Pinero J, 
Delgado-Fernandez M, Carbonell-Baeza A. Fitness Testing in the Fibromyalgia Diagnosis: the al-
Andalus Project. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014
4. Baciu MV, Bonaz BL, Papillon E, Bost RA, Le Bas JF, Fournet J, Segebarth CM. Central processing 
of rectal pain: a functional MR imaging study. AJNR American journal of neuroradiology. 1999; 
20(10):1920–1924. [PubMed: 10588119] 
5. Baliki MN, Baria AT, Apkarian AV. The cortical rhythms of chronic back pain. The Journal of 
neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2011; 31(39):13981–13990. 
[PubMed: 21957259] 
6. Baliki MN, Chialvo DR, Geha PY, Levy RM, Harden RN, Parrish TB, Apkarian AV. Chronic pain 
and the emotional brain: specific brain activity associated with spontaneous fluctuations of intensity 
of chronic back pain. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience. 2006; 26(47):12165–12173. [PubMed: 17122041] 
7. Baliki MN, Geha PY, Apkarian AV, Chialvo DR. Beyond feeling: chronic pain hurts the brain, 
disrupting the default-mode network dynamics. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of 
the Society for Neuroscience. 2008; 28(6):1398–1403. [PubMed: 18256259] 
8. Baliki MN, Petre B, Torbey S, Herrmann KM, Huang L, Schnitzer TJ, Fields HL, Apkarian AV. 
Corticostriatal functional connectivity predicts transition to chronic back pain. Nature neuroscience. 
2012; 15(8):1117–1119. [PubMed: 22751038] 
9. Borsook D, Becerra L, Hargreaves R. Biomarkers for chronic pain and analgesia. Part 1: the need, 
reality, challenges, and solutions. Discovery Medicine. 2011; 11(58):197–207. [PubMed: 21447279] 
10. Cagnie B, Coppieters I, Denecker S, Six J, Danneels L, Meeus M. Central sensitization in 
fibromyalgia? A systematic review on structural and functional brain MRI. Seminars in arthritis 
and rheumatism. 2014; 44(1):68–75. [PubMed: 24508406] 
11. Carrillo-de-la-Pena MT, Vallet M, Perez MI, Gomez-Perretta C. Intensity dependence of auditory-
evoked cortical potentials in fibromyalgia patients: a test of the generalized hypervigilance 
hypothesis. J Pain. 2006; 7(7):480–487. [PubMed: 16814687] 
12. Ceko M, Gracely JL, Fitzcharles MA, Seminowicz DA, Schweinhardt P, Bushnell MC. Is a 
Responsive Default Mode Network Required for Successful Working Memory Task Performance? 
The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2015; 35(33):
11595–11605. [PubMed: 26290236] 
13. Chen JI, Ha B, Bushnell MC, Pike B, Duncan GH. Differentiating noxious- and innocuous-related 
activation of human somatosensory cortices using temporal analysis of fMRI. J Neurophysiol. 
2002; 88(1):464–474. [PubMed: 12091568] 
López-Solà et al.
Page 16
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 14. Clauw DJ, Arnold LM, McCarberg BH. The science of fibromyalgia. Mayo Clin Proc. 2011; 86(9):
907–911. [PubMed: 21878603] 
15. Cook DB, Lange G, Ciccone DS, Liu WC, Steffener J, Natelson BH. Functional imaging of pain in 
patients with primary fibromyalgia. J Rheumatol. 2004; 31(2):364–378. [PubMed: 14760810] 
16. Creac’h C, Henry P, Caille JM, Allard M. Functional MR imaging analysis of pain-related brain 
activation after acute mechanical stimulation. AJNR American journal of neuroradiology. 2000; 
21(8):1402–1406. [PubMed: 11003271] 
17. Denny BT, Kober H, Wager TD, Ochsner KN. A meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies 
of self- and other judgments reveals a spatial gradient for mentalizing in medial prefrontal cortex. 
Journal of cognitive neuroscience. 2012; 24(8):1742–1752. [PubMed: 22452556] 
18. Dohrenbusch R, Sodhi H, Lamprecht J, Genth E. Fibromyalgia as a disorder of perceptual 
organization? An analysis of acoustic stimulus processing in patients with widespread pain. 
Zeitschrift fur Rheumatologie. 1997; 56(6):334–341. [PubMed: 9487649] 
19. Flodin P, Martinsen S, Lofgren M, Bileviciute-Ljungar I, Kosek E, Fransson P. Fibromyalgia is 
associated with decreased connectivity between pain- and sensorimotor brain areas. Brain 
connectivity. 2014; 4(8):587–594. [PubMed: 24998297] 
20. Friston, KAJ.; Kiebel, S.; Nichols, T.; Penny, W. The Analysis of Functional Brain Images. 
Elsevier; 2007. Statistical Parametric Mapping. 
21. Geisser ME, Glass JM, Rajcevska LD, Clauw DJ, Williams DA, Kileny PR, Gracely RH. A 
psychophysical study of auditory and pressure sensitivity in patients with fibromyalgia and healthy 
controls. J Pain. 2008; 9(5):417–422. [PubMed: 18280211] 
22. Gimenez M, Pujol J, Ali Z, Lopez-Sola M, Contreras-Rodriguez O, Deus J, Ortiz H, Soriano-Mas 
C, Llorente-Onaindia J, Monfort J. Naproxen Effects on Brain Response to Painful Pressure 
Stimulation in Patients with Knee Osteoarthritis: A Double-blind, Randomized, Placebo-
controlled, Single-dose Study. The Journal of rheumatology. 2014; 41(11):2240–2248. [PubMed: 
25274897] 
23. Gracely RH, Ambrose KR. Neuroimaging of fibromyalgia. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2011; 
25(2):271–284. [PubMed: 22094201] 
24. Gracely RH, Geisser ME, Giesecke T, Grant MA, Petzke F, Williams DA, Clauw DJ. Pain 
catastrophizing and neural responses to pain among persons with fibromyalgia. Brain: a journal of 
neurology. 2004; 127(Pt 4):835–843. [PubMed: 14960499] 
25. Gracely RH, Petzke F, Wolf JM, Clauw DJ. Functional magnetic resonance imaging evidence of 
augmented pain processing in fibromyalgia. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2002; 46(5):1333–1343. 
[PubMed: 12115241] 
26. Group BDW. Biomarkers and surrogate endpoints: preferred definitions and conceptual framework. 
2001 0009-9236 (Print). 
27. Hampson JP, Reed BD, Clauw DJ, Bhavsar R, Gracely RH, Haefner HK, Harris RE. Augmented 
central pain processing in vulvodynia. The journal of pain: official journal of the American Pain 
Society. 2013; 14(6):579–589. [PubMed: 23578957] 
28. Harris RE, Sundgren PC, Craig AD, Kirshenbaum E, Sen A, Napadow V, Clauw DJ. Elevated 
insular glutamate in fibromyalgia is associated with experimental pain. Arthritis Rheum. 2009; 
60(10):3146–3152. [PubMed: 19790053] 
29. Harte SE, Ichesco E, Hampson JP, Peltier SJ, Schmidt-Wilcke T, Clauw DJ, Harris RE. 
Pharmacologic attenuation of cross-modal sensory augmentation within the chronic pain insula. 
1872-6623 (Electronic). 
30. Hollins M, Harper D, Gallagher S, Owings EW, Lim PF, Miller V, Siddiqi MQ, Maixner W. 
Perceived intensity and unpleasantness of cutaneous and auditory stimuli: an evaluation of the 
generalized hypervigilance hypothesis. Pain. 2009; 141(3):215–221. [PubMed: 19121558] 
31. Ichesco, E.; Kairys, A.; Chang, E.; Ramirez, G.; Clauw, DJ.; Harris, RE.; Harte, SE. Proceedings 
of the Neuroscience Meeting Planner Vol. Program No. 268.06. Society for Neuroscience; 2013. 
Further evidence for sensory hypersensitivity in fibromyalgia: Sensitivity to visual stimuli and 
response to pregabalin. Online
López-Solà et al.
Page 17
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 32. Ichesco E, Quintero A, Clauw DJ, Peltier S, Sundgren PM, Gerstner GE, Schmidt-Wilcke T. 
Altered functional connectivity between the insula and the cingulate cortex in patients with 
temporomandibular disorder: a pilot study. Headache. 2012; 52(3):441–454. [PubMed: 21929661] 
33. Ichesco E, Schmidt-Wilcke T, Bhavsar R, Clauw DJ, Peltier SJ, Kim J, Napadow V, Hampson JP, 
Kairys AE, Williams DA, Harris RE. Altered resting state connectivity of the insular cortex in 
individuals with fibromyalgia. The journal of pain: official journal of the American Pain Society. 
2014; 15(8):815–826 e811. [PubMed: 24815079] 
34. Jensen KB, Srinivasan P, Spaeth R, Tan Y, Kosek E, Petzke F, Carville S, Fransson P, Marcus H, 
Williams SC, Choy E, Vitton O, Gracely R, Ingvar M, Kong J. Overlapping structural and 
functional brain changes in patients with long-term exposure to fibromyalgia pain. Arthritis and 
rheumatism. 2013; 65(12):3293–3303. [PubMed: 23982850] 
35. Julien N, Goffaux P, Arsenault P, Marchand S. Widespread pain in fibromyalgia is related to a 
deficit of endogenous pain inhibition. Pain. 2005; 114(1–2):295–302. [PubMed: 15733656] 
36. Kim H, Kim J, Loggia ML, Cahalan C, Garcia RG, Vangel MG, Wasan AD, Edwards RR, 
Napadow V. Fibromyalgia is characterized by altered frontal and cerebellar structural covariance 
brain networks. NeuroImage Clinical. 2015; 7:667–677. [PubMed: 25844321] 
37. Kosek E, Hansson P. Modulatory influence on somatosensory perception from vibration and 
heterotopic noxious conditioning stimulation (HNCS) in fibromyalgia patients and healthy 
subjects. Pain. 1997; 70(1):41–51. [PubMed: 9106808] 
38. Kuchinad A, Schweinhardt P, Seminowicz DA, Wood PB, Chizh BA, Bushnell MC. Accelerated 
brain gray matter loss in fibromyalgia patients: premature aging of the brain? The Journal of 
neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2007; 27(15):4004–4007. 
[PubMed: 17428976] 
39. Kucyi A, Moayedi M, Weissman-Fogel I, Goldberg MB, Freeman BV, Tenenbaum HC, Davis KD. 
Enhanced medial prefrontal-default mode network functional connectivity in chronic pain and its 
association with pain rumination. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society 
for Neuroscience. 2014; 34(11):3969–3975. [PubMed: 24623774] 
40. Lerma C, Martinez A, Ruiz N, Vargas A, Infante O, Martinez-Lavin M. Nocturnal heart rate 
variability parameters as potential fibromyalgia biomarker: correlation with symptoms severity. 
Arthritis research & therapy. 2011; 13(6):R185. [PubMed: 22087605] 
41. Lopez-Sola M, Pujol J, Hernandez-Ribas R, Harrison BJ, Ortiz H, Soriano-Mas C, Deus J, 
Menchon JM, Vallejo J, Cardoner N. Dynamic assessment of the right lateral frontal cortex 
response to painful stimulation. Neuroimage. 2010; 50(3):1177–1187. [PubMed: 20080188] 
42. López-Solà MPJ, Wager TD, Garcia-Fontanals A, Blanco-Hinojo L, Garcia-Blanco S, Poca-Dias 
V, Harrison BJ, Contreras-Rodríguez O, Monfort J, Garcia-Fructuoso F, Deus J. Altered fMRI 
responses to non-painful sensory stimulation in fibromyalgia patients. Arthritis & Rheumatology. 
2014
43. Maeda L, Ono M, Koyama T, Oshiro Y, Sumitani M, Mashimo T, Shibata M. Human brain activity 
associated with painful mechanical stimulation to muscle and bone. Journal of anesthesia. 2011; 
25(4):523–530. [PubMed: 21633873] 
44. McCrae CS, O’Shea AM, Boissoneault J, Vatthauer KE, Robinson ME, Staud R, Perlstein WM, 
Craggs JG. Fibromyalgia patients have reduced hippocampal volume compared with healthy 
controls. Journal of pain research. 2015; 8:47–52. [PubMed: 25674013] 
45. Meeus M, Nijs J. Central sensitization: a biopsychosocial explanation for chronic widespread pain 
in patients with fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome. Clinical rheumatology. 2007; 26(4):
465–473. [PubMed: 17115100] 
46. Montoya P, Sitges C, Garcia-Herrera M, Rodriguez-Cotes A, Izquierdo R, Truyols M, Collado D. 
Reduced brain habituation to somatosensory stimulation in patients with fibromyalgia. Arthritis 
and rheumatism. 2006; 54(6):1995–2003. [PubMed: 16732548] 
47. Moulton EA, Keaser ML, Gullapalli RP, Greenspan JD. Regional intensive and temporal patterns 
of functional MRI activation distinguishing noxious and innocuous contact heat. J Neurophysiol. 
2005; 93(4):2183–2193. [PubMed: 15601733] 
López-Solà et al.
Page 18
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 48. Naliboff BD, Derbyshire SW, Munakata J, Berman S, Mandelkern M, Chang L, Mayer EA. 
Cerebral activation in patients with irritable bowel syndrome and control subjects during 
rectosigmoid stimulation. Psychosomatic medicine. 2001; 63(3):365–375. [PubMed: 11382264] 
49. Napadow V, Kim J, Clauw DJ, Harris RE. Decreased intrinsic brain connectivity is associated with 
reduced clinical pain in fibromyalgia. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2012; 64(7):2398–2403. 
[PubMed: 22294427] 
50. Napadow V, LaCount L, Park K, As-Sanie S, Clauw DJ, Harris RE. Intrinsic brain connectivity in 
fibromyalgia is associated with chronic pain intensity. Arthritis Rheum. 2010; 62(8):2545–2555. 
[PubMed: 20506181] 
51. Neter, JNCJ.; Li, W. Applied linear statistical models. McGraw-Hill; Irwin: 2005. 
52. Oaklander AL, Herzog ZD, Downs HM, Klein MM. Objective evidence that small-fiber 
polyneuropathy underlies some illnesses currently labeled as fibromyalgia. Pain. 2013; 154(11):
2310–2316. [PubMed: 23748113] 
53. Ozgocmen S, Yoldas T, Kamanli A, Yildizhan H, Yigiter R, Ardicoglu O. Auditory P300 event 
related potentials and serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment in patients with fibromyalgia. Ann 
Rheum Dis. 2003; 62(6):551–555. [PubMed: 12759293] 
54. Phillips K, Clauw DJ. Central pain mechanisms in the rheumatic diseases: future directions. 
Arthritis and rheumatism. 2013; 65(2):291–302. [PubMed: 23045168] 
55. Power JD, Barnes KA, Snyder AZ, Schlaggar BL, Petersen SE. Spurious but systematic 
correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion. Neuroimage. 
2012; 59(3):2142–2154. [PubMed: 22019881] 
56. Pujol J, Lopez-Sola M, Ortiz H, Vilanova JC, Harrison BJ, Yucel M, Soriano-Mas C, Cardoner N, 
Deus J. Mapping brain response to pain in fibromyalgia patients using temporal analysis of FMRI. 
PLoS One. 2009; 4(4):e5224. [PubMed: 19381292] 
57. Pujol J, Macia D, Blanco-Hinojo L, Martinez-Vilavella G, Sunyer J, de la Torre R, Caixas A, 
Martin-Santos R, Deus J, Harrison BJ. Does motion-related brain functional connectivity reflect 
both artifacts and genuine neural activity? Neuroimage. 2014; 101:87–95. [PubMed: 24999036] 
58. Pujol J, Macia D, Garcia-Fontanals A, Blanco-Hinojo L, Lopez-Sola M, Garcia-Blanco S, Poca-
Dias V, Harrison BJ, Contreras-Rodriguez O, Monfort J, Garcia-Fructuoso F, Deus J. The 
contribution of sensory system functional connectivity reduction to clinical pain in fibromyalgia. 
Pain. 2014; 155(8):1492–1503. [PubMed: 24792477] 
59. Ringel Y, Drossman DA, Leserman JL, Suyenobu BY, Wilber K, Lin W, Whitehead WE, Naliboff 
BD, Berman S, Mayer EA. Effect of abuse history on pain reports and brain responses to aversive 
visceral stimulation: an FMRI study. Gastroenterology. 2008; 134(2):396–404. [PubMed: 
18242208] 
60. Robinson ME, Craggs JG, Price DD, Perlstein WM, Staud R. Gray matter volumes of pain-related 
brain areas are decreased in fibromyalgia syndrome. The journal of pain: official journal of the 
American Pain Society. 2011; 12(4):436–443. [PubMed: 21146463] 
61. Robinson ME, O’Shea AM, Craggs JG, Price DD, Letzen JE, Staud R. Comparison of machine 
classification algorithms for fibromyalgia: neuroimages versus self-report. 2015 1528-8447 
(Electronic). 
62. Roy M, Shohamy D, Wager TD. Ventromedial prefrontal-subcortical systems and the generation of 
affective meaning. Trends in cognitive sciences. 2012; 16(3):147–156. [PubMed: 22310704] 
63. Seminowicz DA, Wideman TH, Naso L, Hatami-Khoroushahi Z, Fallatah S, Ware MA, Jarzem P, 
Bushnell MC, Shir Y, Ouellet JA, Stone LS. Effective treatment of chronic low back pain in 
humans reverses abnormal brain anatomy and function. The Journal of neuroscience: the official 
journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2011; 31(20):7540–7550. [PubMed: 21593339] 
64. Serra J, Collado A, Sola R, Antonelli F, Torres X, Salgueiro M, Quiles C, Bostock H. 
Hyperexcitable C nociceptors in fibromyalgia. Annals of neurology. 2014; 75(2):196–208. 
[PubMed: 24243538] 
65. Smith JK, Humes DJ, Head KE, Bush D, White TP, Stevenson CM, Brookes MJ, Marciani L, 
Spiller RC, Gowland PA, Francis ST. fMRI and MEG analysis of visceral pain in healthy 
volunteers. Neurogastroenterology and motility: the official journal of the European 
Gastrointestinal Motility Society. 2011; 23(7):648–e260. [PubMed: 21507149] 
López-Solà et al.
Page 19
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 66. Staud R, Vierck CJ, Cannon RL, Mauderli AP, Price DD. Abnormal sensitization and temporal 
summation of second pain (wind-up) in patients with fibromyalgia syndrome. Pain. 2001; 91(1–2):
165–175. [PubMed: 11240089] 
67. Sundermann B, Burgmer M, Pogatzki-Zahn E, Gaubitz M, Stuber C, Wessolleck E, Heuft G, 
Pfleiderer B. Diagnostic classification based on functional connectivity in chronic pain: model 
optimization in fibromyalgia and rheumatoid arthritis. Acad Radiol. 2014; 21(3):369–377. 
[PubMed: 24507423] 
68. Truini A, Tinelli E, Gerardi MC, Calistri V, Iannuccelli C, La Cesa S, Tarsitani L, Mainero C, 
Sarzi-Puttini P, Cruccu G, Caramia F, Di Franco M. Abnormal resting state functional connectivity 
of the periaqueductal grey in patients with fibromyalgia. Clinical and experimental rheumatology. 
2016; 34(2 Suppl 96):129–133.
69. Uceyler N, Zeller D, Kahn AK, Kewenig S, Kittel-Schneider S, Schmid A, Casanova-Molla J, 
Reiners K, Sommer C. Small fibre pathology in patients with fibromyalgia syndrome. Brain: a 
journal of neurology. 2013; 136(Pt 6):1857–1867. [PubMed: 23474848] 
70. Wager TD, Atlas LY, Lindquist MA, Roy M, Woo CW, Kross E. An fMRI-based neurologic 
signature of physical pain. N Engl J Med. 2013; 368(15):1388–1397. [PubMed: 23574118] 
71. Wager TD, Davidson ML, Hughes BL, Lindquist MA, Ochsner KN. Prefrontal-subcortical 
pathways mediating successful emotion regulation. Neuron. 2008; 59(6):1037–1050. [PubMed: 
18817740] 
72. Weissman-Fogel I, Moayedi M, Tenenbaum HC, Goldberg MB, Freeman BV, Davis KD. 
Abnormal cortical activity in patients with temporomandibular disorder evoked by cognitive and 
emotional tasks. Pain. 2011; 152(2):384–396. [PubMed: 21167644] 
73. Wiech K, Ploner M, Tracey I. Neurocognitive aspects of pain perception. Trends in cognitive 
sciences. 2008; 12(8):306–313. [PubMed: 18606561] 
74. Wilbarger JL, Cook DB. Multisensory hypersensitivity in women with fibromyalgia: implications 
for well being and intervention. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2011; 92(4):653–656. [PubMed: 
21440712] 
75. Wolfe F. Fibromyalgianess. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2009; 61(6):715–716. [PubMed: 19479689] 
76. Wolfe F, Michaud K. Outcome and predictor relationships in fibromyalgia and rheumatoid arthritis: 
evidence concerning the continuum versus discrete disorder hypothesis. The Journal of 
rheumatology. 2009; 36(4):831–836. [PubMed: 19228653] 
77. Wolfe F, Ross K, Anderson J, Russell IJ, Hebert L. The prevalence and characteristics of 
fibromyalgia in the general population. Arthritis and rheumatism. 1995; 38(1):19–28. [PubMed: 
7818567] 
78. Wolfe F, Smythe HA, Yunus MB, Bennett RM, Bombardier C, Goldenberg DL, Tugwell P, 
Campbell SM, Abeles M, Clark P, et al. The American College of Rheumatology 1990 Criteria for 
the Classification of Fibromyalgia. Report of the Multicenter Criteria Committee Arthritis and 
rheumatism. 1990; 33(2):160–172. [PubMed: 2306288] 
79. Wolfe F, Walitt B. Culture, science and the changing nature of fibromyalgia. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 
2013; 9(12):751–755. [PubMed: 23820862] 
80. Wooldridge, J. Introductory econometrics: A modern approach. Cengage Learning; 2012. 
López-Solà et al.
Page 20
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Nociception-positive NPS (NPSp) map of voxel weights (A); pattern response per group (B); 
and contiguous regions (C). Ins/Op, insula and operculum; BG, basal ganglia; Thal, 
thalamus. dACC/SMA, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and supplementary motor area. L, 
left, R, right. Midbr, midbrain. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean. ***, 
p<0.0001. Responses to low intensity stimulation in Figure 1B were 21.87 ± 14.00 (t=9.5, 
p<0.0001) in FM patients and 13.21± 8.02 in healthy participants (t=9.74, p<0.0001). 
Responses to high intensity stimulation were 21.62 ± 13.31 in healthy participants (t=9.74, 
p<0.0001). NPSp pattern response significantly mediates (partial mediation) the relationship 
between clinical category (FM diagnosis present vs. absent) and Pain Intensity (D), and Pain 
Unpleasantness (E) ratings in response to 4.5kg/cm2 painful pressure. All coefficients in the 
mediation models have been tested for significance using 10,000 bootstrap tests. One-tail p-
values are reported as we had directional a priori hypotheses (FM patients will show greater 
NPS responses; and, the greater the NPS response the higher the pain ratings).
López-Solà et al.
Page 21
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Multivariate brain pattern that predicts fibromyalgia status on the basis of brain activation 
during painful (pressure) stimulation. Positive weight values reflect higher pain-evoked 
activation in FM patients relative to healthy participants, whereas negative weight values 
reflect reduced pain-evoked activation in FM patients. A. SVM pattern of whole-brain voxel 
weights that optimizes classification of FM patients and healthy participants. We provide the 
voxel-by-voxel weights for three representative regions (anterior SII, right dorsolateral and 
dorsomedial PFC) to illustrate the concept of weighted pattern. B. Regions whose voxel 
weights contributed most reliably to the prediction of FM status (q<0.05 FDR-corrected for 
the first two rows; p-uncorrected<0.001 to further illustrate the findings).
López-Solà et al.
Page 22
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Multivariate brain pattern that predicts fibromyalgia status on the basis of brain activation 
during multisensory stimulation. Positive weight values reflect higher multisensory-evoked 
activation in FM patients relative to healthy participants, whereas negative weight values 
reflect reduced multisensory-evoked activation in FM patients. A. SVM pattern of whole-
brain voxel weights that optimizes classification of FM patients and healthy participants. We 
provide the voxel-by-voxel weights for four representative regions (visual cortex, auditory 
cortex, basal ganglia and PCC) to illustrate the concept of weighted pattern. B. Regions 
whose voxel weights contributed most reliably to the prediction of FM status (FDR-
corrected). The top row matches the view of Figure 3A, showing that the most reliably 
predicting voxels correspond to those showing the highest and lowest weights. The last three 
rows represent sagittal, coronal and axial views showing all predictive voxel clusters.
López-Solà et al.
Page 23
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Sensitivity and specificity of the combined neural classifier including NPSp, FM-pain and 
Multisensory responses (cross-validated) for each subject. Figure 4A shows the receiver-
operating characteristic (ROC) plot displaying sensitivity and specificity properties for the 
combined classifier. Figure 4B (left panels) shows the individual subjects’ data in the join 
space of NPSp and Multisensory or FM-pain and Multisensory pattern responses. The 
shadowed areas represent 95% confidence regions for each group. The coefficients of 
correlation between pattern expression scores for healthy participants are: Multisensory and 
NPSp, r = 0.17 (p = 0.92), Multisensory and FM-pain, r = −0.26 (p=0.12), NPSp and FM-
pain, r = 0.015 (p=0.93). And, for FM patients: Multisensory and NPSp, r = −0.24 (p=0.14), 
Multisensory and FM-pain, r = −0.09 (p=0.59), NPSp and FM-pain, r = 0.39 (p=0.017). 
Figure 4B (right panels) represent the group means (and SE) in the same spaces. Outlier 
tests were performed (≥ 3.5 SDs from the mean of the subject’s group). Only one control 
showed a value more similar to the Fibromyalgia group than to the Healthy Control group 
(z=3.93), for the FM-pain pattern.
López-Solà et al.
Page 24
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Prediction of symptom severity using brain patterns (NPSp, NPSn, FM-pain and 
Multisensory) in multiple regression models. The blue arrows indicate statistically 
significant predictors for each multiple regression analysis model described in the main text. 
The straight lines in the plots are the standard linear fit lines for each regression model, and 
the two additional lines in each plot correspond to the confidence intervals for the mean. Of 
note, the correlation findings reported here are preliminary and need further replication in 
multiple samples. The right top panel illustrates the correlation between NPSn pattern 
responses and HADS depression scores in patients (r=0.333, p=0.044); the next panel 
illustrates the correlation between NPSn pattern responses and functional impairment scores 
(r=0.309, p=0.063, two-tailed); lastly, FM-pain and Multisensory responses jointly and 
significantly contributed to the prediction of clinical pain (main text). Here we present the 
raw correlations between clinical pain and FM-pain pattern responses (r=0.279, p=0.094) 
and clinical pain and Multisensory pattern responses (r=0.393, p=0.015). To minimize the 
influence of potential extreme values while retaining the full sample (which is important for 
evaluating person-level ‘signatures’), we also conducted Spearman rank-correlation tests, 
which revealed the same pattern of results.
López-Solà et al.
Page 25
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
López-Solà et al.
Page 26
Table 1
Demographics, Illness Severity and Medication regime.
FM Patients
(N = 37)*
Healthy Participants
(N = 35)*
Statistics
Age
(mean ± SD)
46.27 ± 7.72
43.86 ± 6.05
t=1.47, p=0.15
Education (years)
14.19 ± 4.47
15.09 ± 4.90
t=0.81, p=0.42
Illness duration (months)
80.41 ± 52.05
Tender points (number)
15.92 ± 1.96
FIQ (Total Score)
66.86 ± 15.79
FIQ (Functional Capacity)
4.81 ± 1.84
SF-36 (Perception of Health)
30.33 ± 17.63
HADS (Depression)
8.89 ± 4.72
HADS (Anxiety)
11.54 ± 4.15
Clinical Pain (0–100 NRS)
72.03 ± 14.82
Number of FM patients (N = 37)
Antidepressants**
SSRI
15
NS-SSRI
3
SNRI
6
NaSSAs
1
TCA and SSRI
3
Anxiolytics
Benzodiazepines
18
Hypnotics
Benzodiazepinics, long half-life
1
Benzodiazepinics, medium half-life
1
Benzodiazepinics, short half-life
3
Gabapentin
10
Analgesic drugs*
33 occasionally (11 stably)
Non-opiod (Ibuprofen and Paracetamol)
(11)
Opiod (Tramadol)
(6)
*All subjects were right handed.
**The total number of patients receiving antidepressant medication was 28. FM, Fibromyalgia Patients; SSRI, Selective Serotonin Reuptake 
Inhibitor; NS-SSRI, Non-selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor; SNRI, Serotonin-Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitor; NaSSAs, Noradrenergic and 
Specific Serotonergic Antidepressants; TCA, Tricyclic Antidepressant;
*Analgesic drugs include ibuprofen, paracetamol and tramadol. Patients were asked to refrain from taking non-stable (rescue) NSAID/analgesic 
drugs (i.e., ibuprofen, paracetamol and tramadol) 72 hours before the MRI assessment. The number in parenthesis corresponds to subjects taking 
the analgesic medications under a stable regime.
Pain. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 01.
