 RESEARCH ARTICLE
Regeneration of functional alveoli by adult
human SOX9+ airway basal cell transplantation
Qiwang Ma1, Yu Ma1,5, Xiaotian Dai2, Tao Ren3, Yingjie Fu4, Wenbin Liu1, Yufei Han1, Yingchuan Wu1,
Yu Cheng4, Ting Zhang5, Wei Zuo1,5,6&
1 Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai 200433, China
2 Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University of PLA, Chongqing 400038, China
3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital, Shanghai 200233, China
4 The Institute for Biomedical Engineering and Nano Science, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai 200029, China
5 Kiangnan Stem Cell Institute, Zhejiang 311300, China
6 Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou 510120, China
& Correspondence: zuow@tongji.edu.cn (W. Zuo)
Received December 8, 2017
Accepted December 24, 2017
ABSTRACT
Irreversible destruction of bronchi and alveoli can lead
to multiple incurable lung diseases. Identifying lung
stem/progenitor cells with regenerative capacity and
utilizing them to reconstruct functional tissue is one of
the biggest hopes to reverse the damage and cure such
diseases. Here we showed that a rare population of
SOX9+ basal cells (BCs) located at airway epithelium
rugae can regenerate adult human lung. Human SOX9+
BCs can be readily isolated by bronchoscopic brushing
and
indefinitely
expanded
in
feeder-free
condition.
Expanded human SOX9+ BCs can give rise to alveolar
and bronchiolar epithelium after being transplanted into
injured mouse lung, with air-blood exchange system
reconstructed and recipient’s lung function improved.
Manipulation of lung microenvironment with Pirfenidone
to suppress TGF-β signaling could further boost the
transplantation efficiency. Moreover, we conducted the
first autologous SOX9+ BCs transplantation clinical trial
in two bronchiectasis patients. Lung tissue repair and
pulmonary function enhancement was observed in
patients 3–12 months after cell transplantation. Alto-
gether our current work indicated that functional adult
human lung structure can be reconstituted by orthotopic
transplantation of tissue-specific stem/progenitor cells,
which could be translated into a mature regenerative
therapeutic strategy in near future.
KEYWORDS
lung, regeneration, transplantation, stem
cell, bronchiectasis, alveoli
INTRODUCTION
Regeneration of human skin (Gallico et al., 1984), corneal
epithelium (Rama et al., 2001; Rama et al., 2010) and
hematopoietic
system
(Copelan,
2006)
by
autologous
transplantation of tissue-specific stem/progenitor cell has
been achieved decades ago and now has become a routine
therapeutic approach. However, regeneration of large inner
organs, such as lung, remains one of the biggest challenges
to modern medicine. Lung-related diseases are the third-
leading cause of human death globally. Most of the lethal
lung diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease (COPD) (Mannino, 2002), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
(Selman et al., 2004) and bronchiectasis (Moulton and Bar-
ker, 2012) are characterized by irreversible, progressive
damage of lung tissues (alveoli and/or bronchi). Besides the
mitigating treatments available, lung transplant surgery is the
only solution for the exacerbated patients but its application
is largely limited due to the extreme lack of donor lung as
well as severe side effects resulted from immune-rejection.
As a potential substitute, the transplantable artificial lung
technique is promising but still in its infancy (Ott et al., 2010).
Electronic supplementary material
The online version of this
article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s13238-018-0506-y) contains sup-
plementary material, which is available to authorized users.
Qiwang Ma, Yu Ma, Xiaotian Dai, and Tao Ren have contributed
equally to this work.
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Protein Cell 2018, 9(3):267–282
DOI 10.1007/s13238-018-0506-y
Protein&Cell
Protein & Cell
 Therefore, millions of patients are in urgent need of a new
strategy to cure such diseases and stem/progenitor cell-
based regenerative therapy is likely to be the biggest hope
for them. Among all cells with clinical potential, mesenchy-
mal stem cells (MSCs) or other stroma-derived cells are
easy to obtain and handle. However, it is widely recognized
that transplanted MSCs function mainly through paracrine or
immunomodulatory mechanism (Meirelles Lda et al., 2009),
with no evidence showing that they can reconstitute lung
structure for regeneration purpose. Induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) could be another source of “self” stem cells for
autologous transplantation and indeed, iPSCs have been
successfully coaxed to alveolar and airway lineage in vitro
(Huang et al., 2014). However the capability of iPSC-derived
cells to generate real lung structure and their tumorigenic
risk remains to be evaluated in vivo (Kotton and Morrisey,
2014). To this end, tissue-resident progenitor cells from an
adult’s own lung—if can be identified, isolated and expanded
—can be a new option for transplantation therapy.
In adult rodent, different populations of lung stem/pro-
genitor cells have been identified in last decade with capa-
bility to reconstruct lung epithelium. Most of the mouse lung
stem/progenitor cells are facultative and can be induced to
proliferate in response to injury as well as differentiate into
one or more lung cell types (Kotton and Morrisey, 2014; Kim
et al., 2005; Barkauskas et al., 2013; Hogan et al., 2014;
Desai et al., 2014). More recently, we and others found a
rare population of p63+/Krt5+ distal airway stem cells
(DASCs), which play essential role in murine lung repair after
influenza-induced acute injury (Zuo et al., 2015; Vaughan
et al., 2015). However in adult human, whether there are
lung cells with regenerative capacity in vivo need to be
explored. Given the huge differences between human vs.
mouse of their respiratory systems in terms of develop-
mental process, lung lobulation, branching pattern and cell
composition, the identity of human lung progenitor cells need
to be rigorously evaluated.
In the current work, we discovered the putative adult
human lung progenitor cells located at the bottom of “rugaes”
in airway epithelium, with a SOX9 marker to distinguish them
from other SOX9−/P63+/KRT5+ airway basal cells (BCs).
From a trace amount of bronchoscopic brush-off lung tis-
sues, we isolated SOX9+ BCs and expanded them in vitro
indefinitely. SOX9+ BCs transplanted into injured immune-
deficient
mouse
lung
can
regenerate
functional
lung
epithelium
with
both
human
bronchiolar
and
alveolar
epithelium reconstituted. Most importantly, for the first time
we explored the clinical feasibility of autologous SOX9+ BC
transplantation to treat two patients with chronic lung dis-
eases. The clinical trial result is highly consistent with our
observation on mouse model, and making it a solid basis for
future large-scale clinical study.
RESULTS
Bronchoscopic isolation of clonogenic airway basal
cells
In current study, we worked on the P63+/KRT5+ BCs in the
airway epithelium of human lung which could possibly be the
counterpart of mouse DASC. The workflow of BC isolation
and expansion is summarized in Fig. 1A. Approximately
20,000–30,000 cells were brushed off from the luminal sur-
face of donor’s 3rd–4th order bronchus using a 2-mm
bronchoscopic brush (Wimberley et al., 1982) (Fig. 1B). The
brushed-off cells were seeded onto embryo-derived feeder
cells with the culture medium favoring BC growth (Zuo et al.,
2015; Wang et al., 2015). After seeding 5,000 live cells onto
6-well plate, 9 (±2) cells grew up into visible tight colonies 3–
5 days later with expression of human nucleus specific
antigens, lung progenitor marker NKX2.1 and proliferation
marker KI67 (Figs. 1C and S1A). All of the P0 colonies were
confirmed epithelium origin (E-cadherin+, Fig. S1A) and
stained double positive for airway basal cell markers KRT5
and P63 (Fig. 1C and 1D). We did not observe any P63
single positive colonies (Vaughan et al., 2015). Considering
that BCs take for about 20% of total cell number in brushed
samples of 3rd–4th order bronchus, it appeared that
approximately 1% of the BCs in human airway could be
clonogenic lung epithelium progenitors.
We seeded one single BC onto feeder cells and grew them
into one single colony which was then picked up by cloning
cylinders and passaged continually. The latest passage of
BC clones had gone through 50 doublings (=1015 fold
expansion) in our lab. The single cell-derived BC clones and
their original brush-off tissue samples were analyzed by high-
throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq). On average, we
detected 16,230 genes and 25,223 transcripts. Thus, more
than 60% of known human genes and transcripts were
expressed in clonogenic BCs. Gene expression value cor-
relation analysis showed that the clone transcriptome profiles
are distinct from their original brush-off tissues, but the two
clones from two independent persons share very similar
transcriptome (Fig. 1E, Pearson correlation coefficient =
0.95).
Single
nucleotide
polymorphism
(SNP)
analysis
showed that BC clones have around 70% less polymorphism
comparing to the brush-off tissues, which is in consistency
with their single cell origination. High expression of BC
markers (KRT5, P63, NGFR and S100A) and another puta-
tive mouse stem cell marker integrin α6β4 (Chapman et al.,
2011) were observed in clones. In contrast, clonogenic BCs
do not express other bronchial or alveolar lineage markers as
shown by RNA-Seq and confirmed by immunostaining
(Figs. 1F and S1B). Protein-protein interaction analysis of
overexpressed genes indicated three major signal molecule
networks including Notch1/2/3, FGF10/7 and Wnt7 ligand
and their downstream components. All three signaling
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Qiwang Ma et al.
268
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Protein & Cell
 networks are previously known to play essential roles in
embryonic lung development (Bellusci et al., 1997; Rajagopal
et al., 2008; Tsao et al., 2008) (Fig. 1G). Gene ontology (GO)
term analysis demonstrated critical biological processes
enriched in BCs (Fig. 1H).
Clonal analysis of SOX9+ BCs
Importantly, RNA-Seq data also showed that clonogenic BCs
highly express SOX9 (Sex Determing Region Y- Box 9), a
transcriptional factor known to be enriched in branching tips
of developmental lung. In embryonic development, SOX9
activity is required to maintain the undifferentiated status of
distal lung progenitor and disruption of SOX9 function pre-
vents adult alveoli formation (Perl et al., 2005; Rockich et al.,
2013). Here we confirmed SOX9 expression in P63+/KRT5+
BC clones by immunostaining (Fig. 2A). Accordingly, by
histological examination of human 2nd order (Fig. S2) and
3rd–4th order airway (Fig. 2B), we observed 1.3% ± 0.3%
and 1.7% ± 0.5% SOX9-expressing P63+ BCs, respectively.
The proportion of SOX9+ cells in total BCs is very close to
our estimation in clonogenic assay as mentioned above
(∼1%), suggesting SOX9 as a marker to distinguish clono-
genic BCs vs. other non-clonogenic BCs. Interestingly, we
noticed that there are a few invaginations (rugaes) in 2–4
order human airway epithelium and the SOX9+ BCs are
exclusively located near the base of the rugaes. There are
averagely 3 (±1) SOX9+ BCs in each individual rugae. Fur-
ther immunofluorescent examination showed a very small
portion of them (<1%) are proliferative (KI67+) (Fig. 2C). Of
KRT5  P63
KRT5  P63 CC10
GO  term enrichment
level (clone vs. brush)
A
Br
Bronchoscopic
brushing-off cells
Basal cell clones on
feeder cells
Pedigree clone
from a single
cells
Feeder-free expansion
C
E
F
G
H
D
B
Pearson correlation
of transcriptome
Brush-1
ITGB4
Laminin complex
Basement membrane
Epithelium development
Wnt receptor signaling pathway
Organ morphogenesis
Cell proliferation
Secretion
Cilium
JAG2
FGFBP1
FGFR3
FGFR4
FGF1
FGF10
FZD1
FZD8
LRP6
LRP5
WNT7A WNT7B
CTNNB1
HSPG2
FGF7
JAG1NOTCH1
NOTCH2
NOTCH3
DLL1
MAML1
HES5 HES1 BACE1
ITGA6
TP63
NGFR
MKI67
KRT5
S100A2
TUBA1A
SCGB1A1
SCGB3A1
FOXJ1
MUC5AC
Clone-1
Clone-2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Brush-2
Brush-1
Clone-1
Clone-2
Brush-2
Brush-1
Clone-2
Clone-1
Brush-2
Brush
Brush
Br
-4 -
2
0
2
4
6
8
Br
Br
Figure 1. Isolation and characterization of BCs from SOX9+ human airway. (A) Diagram showing the process of clonogenic BCs
isolation and expansion. (B) Bronchoscopic image showing brushing of cells from human airway. (C) Left, BC colonies grown on
feeder cells; right, anti-KRT5 and anti-P63 immunostaining of BC colonies with nuclei counterstain. Human sample number n = 10.
Scale bar, 100 μm. (D) Left, BCs in human airway by anti-KRT5 and anti-P63 immunostaining. Inset, high magnification with club cell
(CC10+, cyan color) costaining; right, hematoxylin & eosin staining of the same section. Br, bronchus. Scale bar, 100 μm.
(E) Heatmap showing transcriptome profile correlation value of BC clones and brush-off tissues. (F) Expression heatmap of selected,
differentially expressed genes (P < 0.05) comparing BC clones and brush-off tissues. (G) Protein-protein interaction network of
selected genes with high expression level in BC clones. (H) Enriched gene ontology classes of BC clones versus brush-off tissues.
Regeneration of human lung
RESEARCH ARTICLE
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
269
Protein & Cell
 note, SOX9+ BCs can also be isolated and expanded from
those small airway (∼1 mm diameter) samples, which is
accessible by open-chest surgery or autopsy but not by
bronchoscopy (data not shown).
The whole brushing sampling and SOX9+ BCs cloning
procedure was carried out on 15 individuals with a recovery
rate of 100%. Donors are from 4 different disease categories
including 5 normal healthy volunteers, 2 bronchiectasis
patients, 3 chronic COPD patients, and 5 interstitial lung
disease (ILD) patients with pulmonary fibrosis. The SOX9+
BCs from different categories of diseases showed no
apparent difference in colony morphology (Fig. S3A) or
marker expression (Fig. S3B). Their clonogenic efficiency
seemed similar—but still need future investigation in much
larger cohort to get statistically meaningful conclusion.
We further analyzed SOX9+ BCs at single cell resolution.
5 single cells from one person in normal group were selected
at Passage 0 and expanded to Passage 1 and Passage 2.
Great variation of their clonogenic capacity was observed at
Passage 1 (coefficient variation = 59.9%) and Passage 2
(coefficient variation = 75.7%). Similar clonogenicity varia-
tion was observed in individuals from other disease cate-
gories and the average coefficient variation of all clones is
52.2% (Fig. S3C).
SOX9+ BCs grown on feeder cells can be transferred onto
petri dish pre-coated with collagen fibers for feeder-free
culture. The feeder-free cultured SOX9+ BC can also form
colonies though their cell-cell contact within one colony is
less tight comparing to those on feeders (Fig. 2D). The
feeder-free cultured BCs are able to be passaged for at least
30
doublings
with
no
obvious
morphology
change.
A
D
E
G
1
F
H
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.1
P63
P63
P63
P63
KRT5
Feeder-free
Human lung
Early passages
AQP5
HOPX
SPC
SPB
LAMP3
MUC1
SCGB1A1
KRT5
SOX9
TP63
Late passasges
Human lung
Early passages
Late passasges
Relative expression
Relative expression
SOX9
SOX9
Ki-67
SOX9
Br
Br
Br
CC-10
B
C
Human lung
Early passages
Late passasges
P63
SOX9
KRT5
MUC1
Acet-a-Tub
CC-10
SPB
SPC
LAMP3
HOPX
AQP5
GAPDH
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
18
0
5
10
50
100
150
200
17
16
15
14
13
19
X
Y
20
21 22
2
3
4
5
Figure 2. Feeder-free expansion of SOX9+ BCs. (A) Immunostaining of SOX9+ BCs with anti-P63, anti-KRT5 and anti-SOX9
antibodies. (B) SOX9+ BCs in rugae of 3rd order human airway by anti-SOX9, anti-P63 and anti-CC10 immunostaining. Scale bar,
100 μm. (C) SOX9+ BCs in rugae of 3rd order human airway by anti-KI67 immunostaining. (D) BC colony cultured on feeder-free
condition. (E) Karyotyping of cultured BCs. (F) qPCR showing alveolar and bronchial epithelium marker gene expression of human
lung sample and SOX9+ BCs in early (P2) and late (P8) passages. n = 3, biological replicates. Error bars, S.E.M. (G) qPCR showing
progenitor cell marker (Krt5, P63 and SOX9) gene expression of human lung sample and SOX9+ BCs in early (P2) and late (P8)
passages. n = 3, biological replicates. Error bars, S.E.M. (H) Western blotting showing marker gene expression of human lung sample
and SOX9+ BCs in early (P2) and late (P8) passages.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Qiwang Ma et al.
270
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Protein & Cell
 Karyotyping indicated their stable genetic characteristics
along with passaging (Fig. 2E). Quantitative analysis of
progenitor markers (KRT5, P63 and SOX9) and lung
epithelium lineage markers at both RNA and protein level
indicated that there is no spontaneous differentiation of BCs
in the culture process (Fig. 2F–H).
Xeno-transplanted SOX9+ BCs give rise to human lung
in vivo
Next we examined whether the SOX9+ BC could differentiate
and regenerate lung tissue by transplanting such cells into
mouse lung parenchyma. Firstly, immunodeficient NOD-
SCID mice were subjected to bleomycin intratracheal instil-
lation, which lead to rapid onset (8 days after bleomycin)
damage of centrilobular and surrounding regions as shown
by microCT-scan and immunostaining. Masson trichrome
staining for collagen and α-SMA immunostaining indicated
severe tissue fibrosis of mouse lung at later time points
(Zhang et al., 1996) (Fig. S5A–C). Scarce endogenous
mouse p63+/Krt5+ distal airway stem cell expansion was
observed in damaged lung parenchyma as reported previ-
ously (Vaughan et al., 2015) (Fig. S5D). Then we intratra-
cheally delivered (Zuo et al., 2015) 1 × 106 GFP-labeled
SOX9+ BCs into the injured mouse lung and analyzed the
lung 3 weeks after transplantation. As shown in Fig. 3A, we
observed large-scale incorporation of GFP+ human SOX9+
progenitors and their progeny into mouse lung. Direct fluo-
rescence after tissue sectioning showed distribution of GFP+
human cells in mouse distal lung, some of them are mor-
phologically indistinguishable from neighboring GFP− mouse
lung structures (Fig. 3A). The chimerism of human-mouse
lung was further confirmed by human-specific nucleus anti-
gen Lamin A+C co-staining with GFP (Fig. 3B) and qPCR
with human specific GAPDH primers (Fig. S6A). A few fully
differentiated human cells have lost SOX9 marker expres-
sion and form air-sacs of similar size to mouse alveoli with
AEC1 marker (AQP5 and HOPX) expression (Fig. 3C–E).
Some transplanted GFP+ human cells could also incorporate
into bronchiolar region of lung, where some of them gave
rise to Club cell with CC10 marker expression while a few
others became ciliated cells (acetylated-tubulin+, FOXJ1+),
respectively (Fig. S6B–D). However, we hardly observed
human SPC+ AEC2 in transplanted mouse lung. The differ-
entiation potential of SOX9+ BCs was further confirmed by
qPCR analysis of multiple marker genes with human specific
primers. Both AEC1 and bronchiolar cell marker genes were
strongly expressed in the chimera. For AEC2 marker genes,
though SPB and LAMP3 were highly expressed, we did not
detect SPC expression in the chimera, which was consistent
with the immunostaining result (Fig. 3F).
In control experiment, we found that the transplanted
SOX9+ progenitors cannot incorporate into non-injured
healthy mouse lung or porcine pancreatic elastase-injured
mouse lung (data not shown). Also, human lung-derived
fibroblast cells (data not shown) or human cervix-derived
P63+/KRT5+/SOX9+ progenitor cells (Figs. 3G and S6E) can
barely incorporate into injured mouse lung either. This data
indicated the tissue specificity of different adult stem/pro-
genitor cells.
Regenerated lung by SOX9+ BC transplantation
contributed to mouse pulmonary function
Functional alveolar unit requires close epithelium-capillary
interaction for exchange of gas, energy and other sub-
stances. In the optically cleared mouse lung, we observed
branching major blood vessels in transplanted mouse lung
(Fig. S7A). We also found that the thin, long-shape human
AEC1 aligned together with microvascular vessels which are
positive for capillary endothelial markers CD34 and PECAM/
CD31, with approximately 1 μm-thick integrinβ-1+ basement
membrane between epithelium and capillary endothelium
(Fig. 4A–C). And engrafted GFP+ human cells form adhe-
rens junctions and tight junctions with neighboring alveolar
epithelial cells as shown by E-cadherin and ZO-1 staining on
the border (Fig. 4D and 4E), which makes a closed space to
maintain air pressure. In order to examine whether such
blood-gas exchanging units are functionally connected with
circulation, we developed a gold nanoparticle (AuNP)
(Cheng et al., 2008)-based approach to mimic gas exchange
and transport in vivo. The nanoparticles can be transported
in blood and diffuse across cells (like O2 and CO2) due to its
small size (∼5 nm), water solubility and lipophilicity, and
meanwhile can be detected by histology. One hour after
injection of AuNPs into mouse tail vein, we detected signif-
icant gold signal in healthy mouse alveoli (Fig. S7B) as well
as in GFP+ human alveoli (Fig. 4F), indicating the regener-
ated human tissues are functionally linked with circulation
system. On the other side, after intratracheally aspiration of
AuNPs, some GFP+ part of mouse lung showed significant
gold signal, indicating the regenerated human tissues are
anatomically linked with atmospheric air (Figs. 4G and S7C).
As control, no or very little AuNPs signal was observed in
damaged alveolar area by either way of particle delivery
(Fig. S7B and S7C). These evidences implicated that the
regenerated lung tissue has vascularized gas-exchange
capacity, probably through recruitment of self-organizing
capillary endothelial cells by SOX9+ BCs.
We also found that SOX9+ BC transplantation effectively
blocked the progression of mouse pulmonary fibrosis mani-
fested as fibronectin accumulation and α-SMA positive
myofibroblast expansion (Phan, 2012) in the human cell-
enriched area (Fig. 5A and 5B), suggesting that regenerated
human lung can replace damaged tissue in mouse model.
Accordingly, alveoli regeneration by SOX9+ BC transplan-
tation also improved the recipient mouse pulmonary function
as shown by the decrease of CO2 partial pressure, increase
of O2 partial pressure and O2 saturation in artery blood
(Fig. 5C–E).
Regeneration of human lung
RESEARCH ARTICLE
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
271
Protein & Cell
 TGF-β signaling modulates SOX9+ BC proliferation
To further improve the transplantation efficiency of SOX9+
BCs, we screened multiple drugs and found Pirfenidone, an
FDA approved anti-pulmonary fibrosis drug (King et al.,
2014) could facilitate the SOX9+ BC transplantation effi-
ciency significantly. Interestingly, transforming growth factor-
β (TGF-β) had the opposite effect (Figs. 6A and S8A). This
discovery prompted us to study the underlying molecular and
cellular mechanism. We found that Pirfenidone treatment
can abolish TGF-β-induced phosphorylation of SMAD2/
SMAD3 (Fig. 6B). In turn, TGF-β treatment significantly
suppressed the clonogenicity and cell viability of SOX9+
BCs, which can be rescued by the SMAD2/SMAD3 inhibitor
SB-431542 (Fig. 6C–E). Simutaneously, the expression of
p15(INK4B), a G1 cell cycle inhibitor, was strongly induced
by TGF-β treatment together with mild change of some other
cell cycle-related genes (Fig. 6F). TGF-β had little effect on
the apoptosis of SOX9+ BCs (Fig. S8B). Collectively these
experiments showed that the TGF-β/SMAD/P15 signaling
axis could effectively modulate SOX9+ BC proliferation.
Similar proliferation inhibitory effect of TGF-β/SMAD was
recently reported on TBC as well (Mou et al., 2016).
Autologous SOX9+ BCs transplantation clinical trial
in bronchiectasis patients
Bronchiectasis is a chronic lung disease radiographically
characterized by permanent pathologic dilation of the small
and medium-sized bronchi, which may lead to respiratory
failure and eventually to death. Patients with bronchiectasis,
A
B
HuLamin GFP
GFP SOX9
HuLamin AQP5 SPC
C
F
G
D
E
- SOX9+ BCs
+ SOX9+ BCs
SOX9+ BC
AQP5
HOPX
SPB
LAMP3
SCGB1A1
MUC1
Human gene expression
Chimera
AIv
AIv
AQP5
HOPX
SOX9+ BC
from lung
BC from
cervix
0
20
40
60
200
400
600
800
**
**
**
**
**
*
Figure 3. Transplantated SOX9+ BCs regenerate functional human lung in vivo. (A) Left, direct fluorescence image under
stereomicroscope showing NOD-SCID mouse lung without (upper panel) or with (lower panel) GFP-labeled SOX9+ BC
transplantation. Right, cryo-section and direct fluorescence imaging of transplanted GFP-labeled SOX9+ BCs in lung parenchyma.
Scale bar, 100 μm. (B) Immunofluorescence imaging of transplanted GFP-labeled SOX9+ BCs in lung parenchyma with human
specific Lamin A+C marker costaining. (C) Fully differentiated GFP+ cells lost SOX9 marker expression (arrowhead indicated). Scale
bar, 10 μm. (D) Confocal image with human specific Lamin A+C immunostaining (HuLamin) showing regenerated type I (AQP5+)
alveolar cells. No type II (SPC+) cells were observed. (E) Confocal image showing regenerated AEC1 (AQP5+ and HOPX+). AQP5 as
a membrane-bound protein distributes on surface of GFP+ cells. Arrowheads indicated the overlay of HOPX with GFP signal in
nucleus. Scale bar, 20 μm. (F) qPCR with human specific primers showing alveolar and bronchiolar epithelium marker gene
expression in SOX9+ BC transplanted chimeric lung (AEC1: AQP5 and HOPX; AEC2: SPB and LAMP3; bronchiolar cells: SCGB1A1
and MUC1). Biological replicates, n = 3. Error bars, S.E.M. (G) Left, clonogenic BCs isolated from human cervix epithelium obtained
by biopsy. Right, transplantation of equal numbers of BCs from lung and cervix indicated different incorporation efficiency.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Qiwang Ma et al.
272
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Protein & Cell
 if left untreated, will have a continual decrease of their pul-
monary function. Current pharmacological strategies to treat
bronchiectasis such as antibiotics, mucolytics and anti-in-
flammatory agents could only control the disease exacer-
bation but not improve the pulmonary function nor repair the
damaged lung tissue (ten Hacken et al., 2007). To explore
the clinical feasibility of autologous SOX9+ BC transplanta-
tion, we conducted a pilot trial aiming to treat bronchiectasis
by regenerating functional human lung. The general trial
protocol and the cell manufacturer (Regend Therapeutics
Co.Ltd) were archived by China Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (CFDA) and National Health and Family Planning
Commission of China, and the trial was performed in national
approved stem cell clinical research institute (Southwest
Hospital) after strict ethic commission review of preclinical
data (A part of but not all preclinical data was released in the
current manuscript).
Two patients diagnosed as non-CF bronchiectasis were
firstly enrolled for autologous SOX9+ BC transplantation on
April, 2016. Both patients are men in 50s, non-smokers.
Patient 1 was diagnosed as bronchiectasis 8 years ago with
productive cough and dyspnea on exertion symptom, which
worsens continually under regular pharmacological treat-
ment. CT scan shows multiple bronchial cylinder dilation and
patchy consolidation in his lung. Patient 2 was diagnosed as
bronchiectasis and COPD decades ago, with productive
cough and dyspnea on exertion symptom, which worsens
continually under regular pharmacological treatment. CT
scan shows multiple bronchial cystic dilation, thicken bron-
chial wall and patchy consolidation in his lung.
For both patients, tissues were bronchoscopically col-
lected from random region of left upper lobe and right upper
lobe and transported to GMP (Good Manufacture Practices)
level tissue culture facility for SOX9+ BC isolation and
A
GFP CD34
F
GFP
Au NP
G GFP
Au NP
C
GFP CD31 ITGB1
AIv
AIv
Bv
AIv
Bv
AIv
AIv
AIv
Bv
B GFP CD34
D
E
GFP   CD31   E-Cad
GFP  ZO-1
Figure 4. Regenerated alveoli with functional epithelium-capillary system. (A) Transplanted SOX9+ BCs (anti-GFP) and
capillary endothelium marker (anti-CD34). Scale bar, 100 μm. (B) Confocal image of SOX9+ BCs regenerated alveoli (Alv) and the
neighboring capillary blood vessel (Bv). Left, immunofluorescence; right, bright field. Scale bar, 20 μm. (C) Confocal image showing
the basement membrane (ITGB1+, white color, arrowhead indicated) between regenerated alveoli epithelium and capillary
endothelium (CD31+). Scale bar, 10 μm. (D) Confocal image showing the cell adherens junction (E-cadherin+, white color) between
regenerated alveoli epithelial cells. Scale bar, 20 μm. (E) Confocal image showing the cell tight junction (ZO-1+) between regenerated
alveoli epithelial cells. Scale bar, 20 μm. (F) Direct fluorescence image of the transplanted GFP-labeled SOX9+ BCs (green) and
bright-field image of tail vein delivered gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) of the same region (brown). Scale bar, 100 μm. (G) Direct
fluorescence image of the transplanted GFP-labeled SOX9+ BCs (green) and bright-field image of intratracheally delivered gold
nanoparticles (AuNPs) of the same region (brown). Scale bar, 100 μm.
Regeneration of human lung
RESEARCH ARTICLE
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
273
Protein & Cell
 expansion (Fig. 7A). Isolated SOX9+ BCs were cultured on
clinical-level feeder cells and then shifted to feeder-free
culture condition. Totally 1 × 106/kg body weight of SOX9+
BCs were infused into distinct lobes of patients through
bronchoscopy (Tzouvelekis et al., 2013) (Fig. 7B). Clinical
status of patients was evaluated 1 day before and 1, 3 and
12 months after cell transplantation. Although it is almost
impossible to directly track unlabelled transplanted cells in
human, we did observe regional repair of cystic dilation after
cell transplantation by high-resolution computed tomography
(HRCT) scan for Patient 2 (Fig. 7C). The thickened bronchial
wall also became thinner after cell therapy for Patient 2.
Spirometry results indicated remarkable recovery of pul-
monary function in both patients after transplantation as
measured by FEV1, FVC and DLCO/VA (Fig. 7D). Impor-
tantly, no aberrant cell growth or other related adverse
events were observed during the whole follow-up time. In the
last follow-up (20 months after transplantation), Patient 1
described improvement of dyspnea, improvement of exer-
cise capacity, less productive cough and less times of
exacerbation after cell therapy; Patient 2 described less
productive cough and less times of exacerbation after cell
therapy. As it is well documented that bronchiectasis is a
permanent,
irreversible
disease
that
cannot
resolve
spontaneously or with regular medicine, the recovery of
patients suggested high probability that transplanted SOX9+
BCs were able to regenerate functional lung in human, which
is consistent with our observation in animal models. And we
will continue life-long observation on the two patients.
DISCUSSION
In the current study, we revealed that a small population of
SOX9+ BCs in adult airway can regenerate human lung
epithelium. A few SOX9+ BCs brushed off from human air-
ways can be expanded to sufficient number in feeder-free
condition and transplanted into injured mouse lung to
regenerate human air exchanging units. In unperturbed lung,
the SOX9+ BCs are located in the base of airway epithelium
invagination, which is reminiscent of intestinal stem cells
residing in gut crypt compartments. However unlike the
intestinal stem cells which are constantly in active cell cycle
to replenish gut epithelium in a fast turn-over mode (Clevers,
2013), the SOX9+ BCs in airway are quiescent most of the
time, and could only be activated once a particular injury
signal from more distal lung was received. Like its counter-
part p63+/Krt5+ BCs in mouse, endogenous SOX9+ BCs
might migrate towards inflamed parenchymal region and
A
C
D
E
B
- SOX9+ BCs
+ SOX9+ BCs
FN1
GFP
α-SMA
+ SOX9+ BCs
pCO2
kPa
0
5
10
15
Bleo + SOX9+ BCs
Bleo + PBS
Normal
pO2
kPa
0
5
10
20
15
Bleo + SOX9+ BCs
Bleo + PBS
Normal
sO2
Fraction (%)
60
80
100
Bleo + SOX9+ BCs
Bleo + PBS
Normal
*
*
Figure 5. BC transplantation rescued mouse pulmonary function. (A) Injured mouse lung without or with GFP-labeled SOX9+
BCs transplantation by anti-GFP and anti-Fibronectin co-staining. Scale bar, 200 μm. (B) Left, immunofluorescence image of injured
mouse lung transplanted with GFP-labeled SOX9+ BCs; right, immunostaining on the same section showing exclusion of α-SMA+
myofibroblasts from GFP+ area. Scale bar, 200 μm. (C) CO2 partial pressure of mouse arterial blood before and 1 month after
bleomycin-induced injury with or without SOX9+ BCs transplantation. Each dot indicates an individual mouse. (D) O2 partial pressure
of mouse arterial blood 1 month after bleomycin-induced injury with or without SOX9+ BCs transplantation. Each dot indicates an
individual mouse. (E) O2 saturation of mouse arterial blood before and 1 month after bleomycin-induced injury with or without SOX9+
BCs transplantation. Each dot indicates an individual mouse.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Qiwang Ma et al.
274
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Protein & Cell
 rebuild the respiratory tree by proliferation and differentiation.
We and previous studies found that there are P63+ and/or
KRT5+ cells enriched in the damaged alveolar region of
many lung disease patients (including those with COPD,
pulmonary fibrosis and bronchiectasis) (Chilosi et al., 2002;
Asano et al., 2011; Smirnova et al., 2016), which could be
the progeny of endogenous SOX9+ BCs in the middle of
differentiation process. Interestingly there was almost no
SPC+ AEC2 generated in our xeno-transplantation model,
which suggested the limitation of the SOX9+ progenitor
potency and also the possibility that the traditional concept of
human AEC2 as the progenitor of AEC1 may not be correct
in this circumstance.
The pattern that SOX9+ BCs adopt to regenerate the
respiratory tree resembles the natural development process
of lung in gestation, which raises an open question as
whether SOX9+ BCs are the remains of previously docu-
mented SOX9+ progenitors in embryonic lung. In embryonic
lung, SOX9+ embryonic progenitors are enriched in distal
bud tips of respiratory tree at canalicular stage (Perl et al.,
2005).
Interestingly,
previous
report
demonstrated
that
intravenous
transplantation
of
human
canalicular-stage
embryonic lung cell mixture into NOD-SCID mice can give
rise to chimeric lung (Rosen et al., 2015). Similarly, a more
recent report showed mouse SOX9+ progenitors in embry-
onic lung can be grown in vitro as organoid and transplanted
to generate mouse alveoli (Nichane et al., 2017). Altogether
these work supported the concept that SOX9+ cells are lung
progenitors in both embryonic and adult lung.
One important technical advance we bring out in this work
is the system to selectively expand SOX9+ BCs in a feeder-
free condition. Previously through bronchoscopic brushing
0.69 ± 0.042
-
-
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
-
-
0.00 ± 0.00
0.49 ± 0.024
TGF-β
Pirfenidone
TGF-β
SB-431542
Smad2/3
DMSO
0
1
2
3
5
10
Clonony formation units
15
20
25
30
TGF-β
0 h
12 h
24 h
Relative expression
48 h
P15
P21
Cyclin A1
Cyclin E2
CDK4
PCNA
P-Smad2/3
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Absorbance of OD450
0
-
5
5
10
20
30
40
50
**
**
**
+ TGF-β
 - TGF-β
Cell viability assay
A
C
E
F
B
D
**
**
**
**
**
**
**
***
**
* *
* *
*
*
Figure 6. TGF-β signaling modulates SOX9+ BC proliferation. (A) Direct fluorescence image of mouse lung transplanted with
1 × 106 GFP-labeled SOX9+ BCs under dissection microscope. Each lung was from mouse with indicated treatment and harvested 7
days after transplantation. The left lobes were analyzed and the GFP+ cell numbers (×106) were counted by flow cytometry analysis.
Biological replicates, n = 3. PFD, Pirfenidone. (B) SOX9+ BCs were stimulated with 10 ng/mL TGF-β for 2 h, with or without 1 mg/mL
Pirfenidone treatment overnight. Western blotting of cell lysates with anti-phosphated-Smad2/3 and anti-total Smad2/3 antibodies
was performed to examine the activation of TGF-β pathway. (C) Direct fluorescence imaging of GFP-labeled SOX9+ BCs cultured in a
6-well plate in the absence or presence of 10 ng/mL TGF-β. Scale bar, 200 μm. (D) Quantification of clonogenicity of SOX9+ BCs in
the presence of 10 ng/mL TGF-β or 10 mmol SB. SB, TGF-β type I receptor inhibitor SB-431542. Technical replicates n = 3. (E) WST
viability assay of SOX9+ BCs treated by 10 ng/mL TGF-β or 5 mmol TGF-β inhibitor SB-431542, or their combination. Technical
replicates n = 3. (F) qPCR showing cell cycle-related gene expression level of SOX9+ BCs with 10 ng/mL TGF-β treatment for
indicated h. Biological replicates, n = 3.
Regeneration of human lung
RESEARCH ARTICLE
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
275
Protein & Cell
 followed by routine basal cell culture, Crystal et al., obtained
P63+/KRT5+/SOX7/15/4+ basal cells but not the rare SOX9+
subpopulation (Hackett et al., 2011) . Here from as few as
one single SOX9+ BC, we can expand it to 5 × 107 purely
undifferentiated cells within 3–4 weeks. Therefore we can
acquire a homogeneous population of regenerative cells with
uniform characteristics, which is crucial for cell quality control
in further clinical application.
Most importantly, we showed that SOX9+ BCs cultured
under GMP guidelines can be applied clinically in order to
reconstitute human lung for devastating chronic lung disease
treatment. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
successful attempt to regenerate human large inner organ
based on cell replacement strategy. As demonstrated in
hematopoietic, skin and corneal regeneration field, autolo-
gous stem/progenitor cell transplantation strategy has been
successfully applied to treat multiple devastating diseases.
Before
After
Months post
transplantation
Patient 1
Patient 2
Months post
transplantation
Patient 1
Patient 2
0
1
3
FEV1 (L)
DLCO/VA (mmol/min/kPa/L)
FVC (L)
12
0
1
3
12
1.07 (36.6%)
0.94
1.40
1.29
2.56 (69.4%)
2.15
2.93
2.73
0.51 (20.8%)
0.85
0.81
0.71
1.77 (128.2%)
1.88
1.66
1.60
0.21 (14.9%)
1.47
1.36
1.49
0.73 (24.3%)
1.85
1.88
1.65
0
1
3
12
A
C
Patient 1
Patient 2
B
2.0/1.1
1.6/0.67
1.6/0.67
3.2/
1.6
-
/0.67
D
Figure 7. Autologous SOX9+ BC transplantation: a pilot clinical study. (A) Cultured SOX9+ BCs from two patients of
bronchiectasis. (B) Diagram showing the number of SOX9+ BCs (×107) transplanted into each lobe of Patient 1/Patient 2. Five lobes
are labeled with different colors. Note the Patient 1 undertook left lower lobectomy a decade ago. (C) Representative images of
consecutive CT scan show the regional recovery of bronchiectasis (yellow square) 1 year after autologous SOX9+ BC transplantation
in Patient 2. (D) Measurement of pulmonary function and exercise capacity in both patients: FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1
second), FVC (forced vital capacity), DLCO/VA (diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide adjusted by the alveoli volume)
were shown as absolute value and percentage to predicted level. For each parameter, percentage >80% was regarded as clinically
normal.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Qiwang Ma et al.
276
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Protein & Cell
 We show here that supplement of expandable SOX9+ BCs
by autologous transplantation could repair the damaged lung
in two bronchiectasis patients in both pulmonary structure
and function. Generally the bronchiectasis patients without
medical intervention will deteriorate over time, thus the
recovery of lung function and structure after cell therapy
suggested the efficacy of this strategy, and established a
basis for future trials. As the SOX9+ BCs are derived from
patients’ own airway, it is a recapitulation and augmentation
of naturally occurring lung repair process. However after all,
our pilot clinical trial is a very preliminary exploratory study
so the safety and efficacy of the current strategy still need
additional verification in a much larger cohort. Although we
have never observed aberrant growth of SOX9+ BCs in
NOD-SCID mouse model, longer time follow-up on the
patients is still necessary to fully eliminate the tumorigeneic
possibility. We have demonstrated the differentiation poten-
tial of SOX9+ BCs in mouse model, but the exact fate of
transplanted SOX9+ BCs in human lung remains to be pro-
ven with future development of non-invasive cell tracking
techniques. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that SOX9+
BCs derived from normal or diseased people can both give
rise to multiple lineages of lung epithelial cells, but detailed
quantitative
comparisons
of
the
regenerative
capacity
between normal and diseased persons would require a lar-
ger sample size investigation in future.
In conclusion, our study clearly shows the capability of
SOX9+ BCs to regenerate human lung, proves the concept
of chronic lung disease treatment by SOX9+ BC transplan-
tation and provides exciting translational opportunities in
near future.
METHODS
Human tissue collection
Patients without or with chronic lung diseases (COPD, bronchiec-
tasis and ILD) were diagnosed by ATS/ERS criteria. All individuals
went through thorough medical examination before sampling. The
bronchoscopic procedure for sampling was performed by board-
certified respiratory physicians using a flexible fiber-optic broncho-
scope (Olympus, Japan). Before the bronchoscopy, oropharyngeal
and laryngeal anesthesia was obtained by administration of 2 mL of
nebulized 4% lidocaine, followed by 1 mL of 2% topical lidocaine
sprayed into the patient’s oral and nasal cavities. After the bron-
choscope was advanced through the vocal cords, 2 mL of 2%
lidocaine solution was instilled into the trachea and both main
bronchi through the working channel of the bronchoscope. Then a
disposable 2-mm brush was advanced through the working channel
of the fiberoptic bronchoscope and used to collect airway epithelial
cells by gently gliding the brush back and forth 1 or 2 time in random
regions of trachea or 3–4 order bronchi in the right or left lobe. No
obvious differences were observed between the BC clones isolated
from 3rd vs. 4th order bronchi, or from different lung lobes. For bulk
lung sampling, normal human lung bulk samples were collected from
unaffected lung area of lung cancer patients with open chest sur-
gery. All the human tissues were obtained following clinical SOP
under patient’s consent and approved by Southwest Hospital Ethics
Committee (Chongqing, China) and Shanghai East Hospital Ethics
Committee (Shanghai, China).
Isolation and culture of human SOX9+ BCs
To isolate the SOX9+ BCs, 2 mm brush with samples were cut with
scissors into 1 cm pieces. After removing sputum, the brush pieces
were directly digested with dissociation buffer including DMEM/F12
(Gibco, USA), 2 mg/mL protease XIV (Sigma, USA), 0.01% trypsin
(Gibco, USA) and 10 ng/mL DNase I (Sigma, USA). Specimens
were incubated at 37°C for an hour with gentle rocking. Alternatively,
human small airway were dissected from a bulk of lung tissue and
digested in the same dissociation buffer at 37°C overnight. Disso-
ciated cells were passed through 70-μm Nylon mesh (Falcon, USA)
to remove aggregates and then washed twice with cold F12 medium.
Cell viability was assessed by exclusion of trypan blue dye. Cell
pellets were collected by centrifuge of 200 ×g and plated onto mit-
omycin-inactivated 3T3 feeder cells in BC culture medium for lung
(BCM-L) including DMEM/F12 (Gibco, USA), 10% FBS (Hyclone,
Australia), antibiotics, amphotericin and growth factor cocktail as
previously described (Zuo et al., 2015). Under 7.5% CO2 culture
condition, the SOX9+ BC colonies emerged 3–5 days after plating,
and were digested by 0.25% trypsin-EDTA (Gibco, USA) for 3–5 min
for passaging. Typically, SOX9+ BCs are passaged every 5 to 7 days
and split at 1:7 ratio. To obtain single cell-derived clone, cells are
digested into single cells, loaded through 40-μm Nylon mesh and
seeded with extremely low density, then a single colony grown up
from a single cell was picked up by clone cylinder (Sigma, USA) and
high vacuum grease after its neighboring colonies were cleared by
scraper to ensure the pedigree purity. For feeder-free culture of
SOX9+ BCs, feeder cells were removed by differential trypsinization
with 0.05% trypsin (Gibco, USA) and SOX9+ BCs were plated with
high density onto dishes pre-coated with 15% cold collagen type I
(Corning, USA) and 20% Matrigel (Corning, USA) for further
expansion.
For labeling of cells by GFP, pLenti-CMV-EGFP plasmid was
transfected into 293T cells together with lentivral packaging mix (Life
Technologies, USA). Lentivirus supernatant produced by 293T was
collected, filtered and cryo-preserved before use. To infect SOX9+
BCs, 0.5 mL lentivirus containing medium was directly added to
2 mL cell culture medium with 10 μg/mL polybrene and incubated for
12 h. The overall labeling efficiency of cells is above 95%. To confirm
that GFP containing virus will not spread between cells after label-
ing, we co-cultured GFP-labeled SOX9+ BCs with mCherry-labeled
(pLenti-CMV-mCherry) SOX9+ BCs for 5 days and did not observe
any yellow color cells.
Immunofluorescence staining
For
immunofluorescence
staining,
cells
were
fixed
by
3.7%
formaldehyde, and then incubated with 0.3% Triton X-100 to
improving the cell permeability for 10 min. Paraffin- or cryo-embed-
ded tissues were sectioned and subjected to antigen retrieval in
citrate buffer (pH 6.0, Sigma, USA) in microwave oven for 20 min
before staining. 10% normal donkey serum (Jackson ImmunoRe-
search) was used to block the non-specific antigen. Primary anti-
bodies used in this work include BC markers:KRT5 (1:200,
Regeneration of human lung
RESEARCH ARTICLE
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
277
Protein & Cell
 EP1601Y, Thermo), P63 (deltaN, 1:200, 4A4, Abcam), E-cadherin
(1:200, H-108, Santa cruz), SOX9 (1:200, ERP14335-78, Abcam),
SOX9 (1:200, AF3075, R&D); AEC markers: AQP5 (1:1000,
EPR3747, Abcam), HOPX (1:500, E-1, Santa Cruz), PDPN (1:500,
FL-162, Santa Cruz), SPC (1:200, M-20, Santa Cruz), SPC (1:200,
FL-197, Santa Cruz), LAMP3 (1:200, 12632-1-AP, Proteintech);
bronchiolar cell markers: CC10 (1:200, T-18, Santa Cruz), acety-
lated-α-Tubulin (1:1000, 6-11B-1, Abcam), MUC5AC (1:500, 45M1,
Thermo), FOXJ1 (1:200, 2A5, eBioscience); vasculature markers:
CD31 (1:100, M-20, Santa Cruz), CD34 (1:1000, EP373Y, Abcam);
myofibroblast marker: α-SMA (1:500, 1A4, DAKO), Fibronectin
(1:500, F14, Abcam), others: KI67 (1:200, RM-9106, Thermo), GFP
(1:200, B-2, Santa Cruz), GFP (1:200, FL, Santa Cruz), GFP (1:200,
T-19, Santa Cruz), ITGB1 (1:500, ERP16895, Abcam), Human
specific Lamin A+C (1:200, EPR4100, Abcam). Alexa Fluor-conju-
gated Donkey 488/594/647 (1:200, Life Technologies, USA) were
used as secondary antibodies. For antibodies of low reactivity, Bio-
tin-Streptavidin signal amplification system (Life Technologies, USA)
was used. After counterstaining with DAPI (Roche, USA), samples
were treated with 0.1% Sudan Black (Sigma, USA) for 1 min to
remove autofluorescence and then mounted with VECTASHIELD®
Mounting medium (Vector labs, USA). Images were visualized under
fluorescence microscope (Nikon 80i and Eclipse Ti, Nikon, Japan) or
fluorescence stereomicroscope (MVX10, Olympus, Japan). Confo-
cal images were taken under Nikon A1R microscope (Nikon, Japan).
RNA-sequencing and bioinformatics
SOX9+ BCs isolated from two donors and their corresponding brush-
off specimens were subjected to RNA-Seq analysis. The total RNA
concentration and RIN were measured by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer
(Agilent). For human SOX9+ BCs, 200 ng total RNA sample was
purified, and the first-strand cDNA was synthesized using first strand
master mix and super script II (Life Technologies). Second strand
master mix (Life Technologies) was then used to synthesize the
second-strand cDNA. After cDNA purification and adapter ligation,
PCR amplification was performed to enrich the cDNA fragments. For
brush-off samples, after RNA extraction and quality control, cDNA
was prepared using the SMARTer Ultra Low RNA Kit (Clontech) for
Illumina sequencing. Low Input Library Prep Kit (Clontech) was then
used for library construction. The library quantity and quality was
verified by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer and real-time quantitative PCR.
Then the library is sequenced using Illumina HiSeq 4000. Clean data
were acquired from raw data (fastq format) using the NGSQC Toolkit
by removing low-quality reads. Clean RNA-seq reads were mapped
to the reference genome (Ensembl, GRCh37) using Tophat v2.0.049
using default settings.
With genome mapping result, gene expression level was calcu-
lated with RSEM software (v1.2.12). Transcript levels were quanti-
fied as fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads
(FPKM). Pearson correlation coefficient between samples was cal-
culated by R scripts (3.2.3). Heatmap was generated using R scripts.
The protein-protein interactions were retrieved from Human Protein
Reference Database (HPRD, release 9) and visualized with Cytos-
cape (v3.3.0). SNPs were called by GATK (v3.4-0).
Karyotyping
To arrest SOX9+ BCs in mitosis metaphase, cells of 75% confluence
were treated with 1 μg/mL colchicines for 7 h and digested into
single cells by 0.25% trypsin. Then the cells were incubated by 0.4%
KCl at 37°C for 40 min and fixed by 10 mL fixation solution including
methanol and glacial acetic acid (3:1) at room temperature for
30 min. Suspension with chromosomes was dropped and spread on
slides. Samples on slides were treated by 0.0005% trypsin for 5 min
and stained with 15% Giemsa (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Banding pat-
terns on chromosome spreads were checked for more than 15
mitotic phases and all of them are normal human cells. All cells used
for clinical purpose were subjected to karyotyping in prior to
transplantation.
Quantitative reverse transcription PCR
Total RNA from tissues or cells were isolated using the RNeasy mini
kit with DNase digestion according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Qiagen). RNA quality was determined by SimpliNano (GE Health-
care). 1 μg total RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA with Pri-
meScript™1st Strand cDNA synthesis Kit (TaKaRa). The real-time
PCR assays were performed on an ABI 7500 real-time PCR system
(Applied Biosystems) according to the instructions of SYBR® Premix
Ex Taq™II (Tli RNaseH Plus, Takara). qPCR reactions were set as
following: 95°C for 2 min, then 40 cycles of 95°C for 10 s, and 60°C
for 40 s. Melt curve stage was added after PCR amplification stage.
The threshold crossing value (Ct) of each transcript was normalized
to reference genes (β-Actin or GAPDH). The relative expression
level of each genes was calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method.
Sequence of primer pairs for qPCR was listed in Supplementary
Table.
Animal tissue histology
All animal experiments were conducted according to guidelines
approved by University Association for Laboratory Animal Science.
NOD-SCID mice (female or male, 6–10 weeks, The Jackson Lab-
oratory, USA) were euthanized at proper time points and the dia-
phragm was carefully cut open without touching the lung. In situ
fixation by injecting 3.7% formaldehyde (Sigma, USA) through tra-
chea was performed using 29 G needle. Then the lung was dis-
sected and fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde at 4°C overnight. For
cryosection, the fixed lung was settled by 30% sucrose before
embedding into the Tissue-Tek O.C.T compound (Sakura, Japan),
the 5–10 μm sections were cut using a cryotome (Leica microsys-
tem, Germany). For paraffin section, the lung was dehydrated by
gradient ethanol and processed in an automatic tissue processor,
then embedded into the paraffin blocks. All the samples were sliced
into 5–7 μm thickness using microtome (Leica microsystem, Ger-
many). Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed fol-
lowing standard protocol. Masson trichrome staining was performed
following the manual of Trichrome Staining Kit manual.
Small animal micro-CT
Micro-CT was used to monitor mouse lung damage before trans-
plantation. Mice were anesthetized through intraperitoneal injection
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Qiwang Ma et al.
278
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Protein & Cell
 with chloral hydrate and fixed with tap. Lung image was obtained
using a volumetric micro-CT scanner without respiratory gating
(TriumphTM, Gamma medica-ideas, Northridge, USA). Scanning
was performed at 70 kV, 350 μA. The number of projections were
512 slices and total acquire time was around 4.27 min. All data were
converted into digital imaging by TRIUMPH ‘X-O’ CT system
software.
SOX9+ BC transplantation in mouse
Adult NOD-SCID mice (female or male, 6–10 weeks, The Jackson
Laboratory, USA) maintained in SPF animal facilities were used for
xeno-transplantation experiments. Mouse lung was injured by
intratracheally instilling with 3 U/kg body weight bleomycin (Sel-
leckchem, USA) eight days prior to transplantation. Mouse lung was
monitored by small animal micro-CT before transplantation to verify
lung damage. Then mice were anesthetized by I.P injection of 3%
chloral hydrate and rested on a stand gesture. One million GFP-
labeled cells were suspended in 50 μL PBS and used for trans-
plantation of each mouse. Intratracheal aspiration was performed by
injecting the cells into trachea via mouth. Three weeks after trans-
plantation, the lung samples were collected for analysis.
Fluorescence compatible optical clearing of lung sample
Optical clearing of SOX9+ BC transplanted lung was performed
following the SeeDB protocol of Meng-Tsen Ke et al., (2013) with
minor modification. Briefly, a whole lobe of lung was fixed by 3.7%
formaldehyde, and then transferred into 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% and
100% (w/v) fructose solution containing 0.5% α-thioglycerol. In each
gradient solution lung was incubated for 12 h at RT. In the end, lung
was transferred into SeeDB solution (80.2% w/w fructose) for 48 h to
72 h. The GFP fluorescence and blood vessels were directly visu-
alized by fluorescence stereomicroscope.
Tracing intravascular transport by nanoparticles
Water soluble 5 nm gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were synthesized as
described previously (Cheng et al., 2008) with minor modifications:
0.25 mmol tetra-n-octylammonium bromide (TOAB) and 0.6 mmol
dodecylamine (DDA) dissolving in 5 mL of toluene was mixed with
0.53 mmol HAuCl4 solution (30% in HCl solution). A 2 mmol cold
NaBH4 aqueous solution was added into the organic phase and
stirred vigorously for 2 h. The DDA-AuNPs were collected by pre-
cipitation in 40 mL of ethanol and then redispersed in 3 mL of
chloroform. Next, MeO-PEG-SH (MW = 5000) and the DDA-stabi-
lized Au nanoparticles were mixed in chloroform and stirred over-
night. The organic phase was washed twice by water and then
evaporated under vacuum. The residues were washed three times
by water and purified by centrifugation.
To trace the intravascular transport route into lung, 10 mmol/L
AuNPs were dissolved in 50 μL PBS and injected intravenously into
mouse tail. To trace the aspiration route into lung, 10 mmol/L AuNPs
were dissolved in 50 μL PBS and instilled intratracheally into mouse
lung. One hour later, the lung was collected and then briefly fixed in
3.7% formaldehyde for 30 min on ice, and then embedded into the
Tissue-Tek O.C.T compound followed by cryosections. GFP signal
on tissue slide was captured by direct immunofluorescence and then
the same slide was stained with LI Silver Enhancement Kit following
manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo, USA). Brown color indicates the
precipitation of AuNPs after reaction with silver
Western Blotting
Cells were washed in cold PBS and harvested by plastic scraper.
Collected lung tissues were washed in cold PBS, ground and lysed
by electric tissue grinder in RIPA buffer (150 mmol/L sodium chlo-
ride, 0.5% Triton-X100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 5 mmol/L EDTA,
0.1% SDS, 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) with protease inhibitors
cocktail (Roche, USA). Approximately 30 μg total protein from each
sample was loaded. Samples were separated on a 10% SDS poly-
acrylamide gel and transferred to PVDF membranes (Roche, USA)
with electrophoresis blotting transfer apparatus. The membranes
were blocked with 5% dehydrated milk for 1.5 h and then incubated
with primary antibodies overnight. The next day, the membranes
were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary
antibody. The specific signals were detected by ECL plus western
blotting detection reagents and X-ray film system.
Flow cytometry analysis
For immunostaining, cells were fixed by 3.7% formaldehyde for
30 min and permealized by 0.2% Triton X-100 for 5 min. 0.5%
donkey serum was used to block the non-specific signals at room
temperature
for
30
min.
Then
the
samples
were
incubated
sequentially with primary antibody and FITC/APC-Cy7-conjugated
secondary antibody (1:400, Life technologies, USA) at room tem-
perature for 1–2 h. BD FACS Verse (BD, USA) equipped with
488 and 647 lasers was used to detect the fluorescence signals for
samples. Single cell suspensions went through 40 μm strainer
before test. FSC-A and SSC-A parameters were used to exclude the
debris and FSC-H, FSC-W, SSC-W parameters were used to
exclude the clusters in the cell suspension. IgG control sample was
used to set the bottom-line of the positive signals.
SOX9+ BC transplantation clinical trial
A prospective, single-center, non-randomized clinical study was
conducted to evaluate the feasibility, safety and efficacy of SOX9+
BC transplantation in patients with bronchiectasis. The trial was
approved by Southwest Hospital Ethics Committee (Chongqing,
China, 2016-Research-#19,ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02722642), con-
ducted in compliance with Good Clinical Practice (GCP) standard
and the most recent version of the Declaration of Helsinki. Two
patients who had signed informed consent form were admitted to
hospital twice for SOX9+ BC isolation and transplantation, respec-
tively. Diagnosis was established based on ATS/ERS guidelines.
Patient medical history, vital signs, routine laboratory tests (regular
blood counts, biochemical measurements, coagulation test, liver/
renal function tests, myocardiozymogram measurements), electro-
cardiogram, arterial blood gas, pulmonary function tests and HRCT
scan were conducted based on standardized clinical SOP of hospital
1 day before and different times after SOX9+ BC transplantation.
More detailed information for the clinical trial was described in
Supplementary Materials.
Regeneration of human lung
RESEARCH ARTICLE
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
279
Protein & Cell
 Statistics
Block randomization was used to randomize samples/mice into
groups of similar sample size. No samples, animals or patients were
excluded from all analysis. Statistical analysis was performed by
Student’s t-tests (two-tail comparisons) or Wilcox test and significant
difference was defined as P < 0.05. Values in text were presented as
means with S.E.M. Microsoft Excel 2011 (Microsoft, USA) or R
programming was used for data management, statistical analysis
and graph generation. Statistical power analysis was used to ensure
adequate sample size for detecting significant difference between
samples. The variance is similar between groups that are being
statistically compared. All experiments (except the clinical trial) were
replicated for at least three times with consistent results in the lab-
oratory. All experimental including the clinical trial outcomes were
assessed by at least one blinded participating investigator.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded by The National Key Research and Develop-
ment Program of China (2017YFA0104600), Youth 1000 Talent Plan
of China to W. Zuo, Tongji University (Basic Scientific Research-In-
terdisciplinary Fund and 985 Grant to W. Zuo), Shanghai Pulmonary
Hospital (Annual Grant to W. Zuo), National Science Fund Committee
of China (81570091 and 81770073 to W. Zuo), Academic Leadership
Fund of Shanghai (16XD1403100 to T. Ren), Postdoc Grant of China
(2016M601651 to Y. Ma and 2016M591716 to Q. Ma) and Kiangnan
Stem Cell Institute. We thank Prof. Zhongwei Li for comment on the
manuscript, and thank Profs. Frank McKeon, Wa Xian and Nanshan
Zhong for helpful discussion of this work, and thank Profs. Xiaoqing
Zhang, Long Zhang and Huiping Li for reagents help.
COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICS GUIDELINES
Qiwang Ma, Yu Ma, Xiaotian Dai, Tao Ren, Yingjie Fu, Wenbin Liu,
Yufei Han, Yingchuan Wu, Yu Cheng, Ting Zhang and Wei Zuo
declare that they have no conflict of interest. All institutional and
national guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals were
followed. All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical
standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation
(institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975,
as revised in 2000 (Mannino 2002). Informed consent was obtained
from all patients for being included in the study.
OPEN ACCESS
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to
the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
REFERENCES
Asano S, Takemura T, Katoh K, Taneda M, Kitagawa M (2011)
Epithelial regeneration after diffuse alveolar damage in relation to
underlying disease and DAD stage: an autopsy study. Journal of
medical and dental sciences 58:113–121
Barkauskas CE, Cronce MJ, Rackley CR, Bowie EJ, Keene DR,
Stripp BR, Randell SH, Noble PW, Hogan BL (2013) Type 2
alveolar cells are stem cells in adult lung. The Journal of clinical
investigation 123:3025–3036. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI68782
Bellusci S, Grindley J, Emoto H, Itoh N, Hogan BL (1997) Fibroblast
growth factor 10 (FGF10) and branching morphogenesis in the
embryonic mouse lung. Development 124:4867–4878
Chapman HA, Li X, Alexander JP, Brumwell A, Lorizio W, Tan K,
Sonnenberg A, Wei Y, Vu TH (2011) Integrin alpha6beta4
identifies an adult distal lung epithelial population with regener-
ative potential in mice. The Journal of clinical investigation
121:2855–2862. https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI57673
Cheng Y, Samia CA, Meyers JD, Panagopoulos I, Fei B, Burda C
(2008) Highly efficient drug delivery with gold nanoparticle
vectors for in vivo photodynamic therapy of cancer. Journal of
the American Chemical Society 130:10643–10647. https://doi.
org/10.1021/ja801631c
Chilosi M, Poletti V, Murer B, Lestani M, Cancellieri A, Montagna L,
Piccoli P, Cangi G, Semenzato G, Doglioni C (2002) Abnormal re-
epithelialization and lung remodeling in idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis: the role of deltaN-p63. Laboratory investigation; a journal
of technical methods and pathology 82:1335–1345
Clevers H (2013) The intestinal crypt, a prototype stem cell
compartment. Cell 154:274–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2013.07.004
Copelan EA (2006) Hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation. The
New England journal of medicine 354:1813–1826. https://doi.org/
10.1056/NEJMra052638
Desai TJ, Brownfield DG, Krasnow MA (2014) Alveolar progenitor
and stem cells in lung development, renewal and cancer. Nature
507:190–194. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12930
Gallico GG 3rd, O’Connor NE, Compton CC, Kehinde O, Green H
(1984) Permanent coverage of large burn wounds with autolo-
gous cultured human epithelium. The New England journal of
medicine 311:448–451. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM198408163
110706
Hackett NR, Shaykhiev R, Walters MS, Wang R, Zwick RK, Ferris B,
Witover B, Salit J, Crystal RG (2011) The human airway epithelial
basal cell transcriptome. PloS one 6:e18378. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0018378
Hogan BL, Barkauskas CE, Chapman HA, Epstein JA, Jain R, Hsia
CC, Niklason L, Calle E, Le A, Randell SH, Rock J, Snitow M,
Krummel M, Stripp BR, Vu T, White ES, Whitsett JA, Morrisey EE
(2014) Repair and regeneration of the respiratory system:
complexity, plasticity, and mechanisms of lung stem cell function.
Cell stem cell 15:123–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2014.
07.012
Huang SX, Islam MN, O’Neill J, Hu Z, Yang YG, Chen YW, Mumau
M, Green MD, Vunjak-Novakovic G, Bhattacharya J, Snoeck HW
(2014) Efficient generation of lung and airway epithelial cells from
human pluripotent stem cells. Nature biotechnology 32:84–91.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2754
Ke MT, Fujimoto S, Imai T (2013) SeeDB: a simple and morphology-
preserving
optical
clearing
agent
for
neuronal
circuit
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Qiwang Ma et al.
280
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Protein & Cell
 reconstruction. Nature neuroscience 16:1154–1161. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nn.3447
Kim CF, Jackson EL, Woolfenden AE, Lawrence S, Babar I, Vogel S,
Crowley D, Bronson RT, Jacks T (2005) Identification of
bronchioalveolar stem cells in normal lung and lung cancer. Cell
121:823–835. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.03.032
King TE, Bradford WZ, Castro-Bernardini S, Fagan EA, Glaspole I,
Glassberg MK, Gorina E, Hopkins PM, Kardatzke D, Lancaster L,
Lederer DJ, Nathan SD, Pereira CA, Sahn SA, Sussman R,
Swigris JJ, Noble PW, Group AS (2014) A phase 3 trial of
pirfenidone in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The
New England journal of medicine 370:2083–2092. https://doi.org/
10.1056/nejmoa1402582
Kotton DN, Morrisey EE (2014) Lung regeneration: mechanisms,
applications and emerging stem cell populations. Nature medi-
cine 20:822–832. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3642
Mannino DM (2002) COPD: epidemiology, prevalence, morbidity
and mortality, and disease heterogeneity. Chest 121:121S–126S
Meirelles Lda S, Fontes AM, Covas DT, Caplan AI (2009) Mecha-
nisms involved in the therapeutic properties of mesenchymal
stem cells. Cytokine & growth factor reviews 20:419–427. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cytogfr.2009
Mou H, Vinarsky V, Tata PR, Brazauskas K, Choi SH, Crooke AK,
Zhang B, Solomon GM, Turner B, Bihler H, Harrington J, Lapey
A, Channick C, Keyes C, Freund A, Artandi S, Mense M, Rowe S,
Engelhardt JF, Hsu YC, Rajagopal J (2016) Dual SMAD Signaling
Inhibition Enables Long-Term Expansion of Diverse Epithelial
Basal Cells. Cell stem cell 19:217–231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
stem.2016.05.012
Moulton BC, Barker AF (2012) Pathogenesis of bronchiectasis.
Clinics in chest medicine 33:211–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ccm.2012.02.004
Nichane M, Javed A, Sivakamasundari V, Ganesan M, Ang LT,
Kraus P, Lufkin T, Loh KM, Lim B (2017) Isolation and 3D
expansion of multipotent Sox9(+) mouse lung progenitors. Nature
methods 14:1205–1212. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4498
Ott HC, Clippinger B, Conrad C, Schuetz C, Pomerantseva I,
Ikonomou L, Kotton D, Vacanti JP (2010) Regeneration and
orthotopic transplantation of a bioartificial lung. Nature medicine
16:927–933. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2193
Perl AK, Kist R, Shan Z, Scherer G, Whitsett JA (2005) Normal lung
development and function after Sox9 inactivation in the respira-
tory epithelium. Genesis 41:23–32. https://doi.org/10.1002/gene.
20093
Phan SH (2012) Genesis of the myofibroblast in lung injury and
fibrosis. Proceedings of the American Thoracic Society 9:148–
152. https://doi.org/10.1513/pats.201201-011AW
Rajagopal J, Carroll TJ, Guseh JS, Bores SA, Blank LJ, Anderson
WJ, Yu J, Zhou Q, McMahon AP, Melton DA (2008) Wnt7b
stimulates embryonic lung growth by coordinately increasing the
replication
of
epithelium
and
mesenchyme.
Development
135:1625–1634. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.015495
Rama P, Bonini S, Lambiase A, Golisano O, Paterna P, De Luca M,
Pellegrini G (2001) Autologous fibrin-cultured limbal stem cells
permanently restore the corneal surface of patients with total
limbal stem cell deficiency. Transplantation 72:1478–1485
Rama P, Matuska S, Paganoni G, Spinelli A, De Luca M, Pellegrini G
(2010) Limbal stem-cell therapy and long-term corneal regener-
ation. The New England journal of medicine 363:147–155. https://
doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa0905955
Rockich BE, Hrycaj SM, Shih HP, Nagy MS, Ferguson MA, Kopp JL,
Sander M, Wellik DM, Spence JR (2013) Sox9 plays multiple
roles in the lung epithelium during branching morphogenesis.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States
of
America
110:E4456–4464.
https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1311847110
Rosen C, Shezen E, Aronovich A, Klionsky YZ, Yaakov Y, Assayag
M, Biton IE, Tal O, Shakhar G, Ben-Hur H, Shneider D, Vaknin Z,
Sadan O, Evron S, Freud E, Shoseyov D, Wilschanski M,
Berkman N, Fibbe WE, Hagin D, Hillel-Karniel C, Krentsis IM,
Bachar-Lustig
E,
Reisner Y
(2015) Preconditioning
allows
engraftment of mouse and human embryonic lung cells, enabling
lung repair in mice. Nature medicine 21:869–879. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nm.3889
Selman M, Thannickal VJ, Pardo A, Zisman DA, Martinez FJ, Lynch
JP 3rd (2004) Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: pathogenesis and
therapeutic approaches. Drugs 64:405–430
Smirnova NF, Schamberger AC, Nayakanti S, Hatz R, Behr J,
Eickelberg O (2016) Detection and quantification of epithelial
progenitor cell populations in human healthy and IPF lungs.
Respiratory research 17:83. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-016-
0404-x
ten Hacken NH, Wijkstra PJ, Kerstjens HA (2007) Treatment of
bronchiectasis in adults. Bmj 335:1089–1093. https://doi.org/10.
1136/bmj.39384.657118.80
Tsao PN, Chen F, Izvolsky KI, Walker J, Kukuruzinska MA, Lu J,
Cardoso WV (2008) Gamma-secretase activation of notch
signaling regulates the balance of proximal and distal fates in
progenitor cells of the developing lung. The Journal of biological
chemistry
283:29532–29544.
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.
M801565200
Tzouvelekis A, Paspaliaris V, Koliakos G, Ntolios P, Bouros E,
Oikonomou A, Zissimopoulos A, Boussios N, Dardzinski B,
Gritzalis D, Antoniadis A, Froudarakis M, Kolios G, Bouros D
(2013) A prospective, non-randomized, no placebo-controlled,
phase Ib clinical trial to study the safety of the adipose derived
stromal cells-stromal vascular fraction in idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis. Journal of translational medicine 11:171. https://doi.org/
10.1186/1479-5876-11-171
Vaughan AE, Brumwell AN, Xi Y, Gotts JE, Brownfield DG, Treutlein
B, Tan K, Tan V, Liu FC, Looney MR, Matthay MA, Rock JR,
Chapman HA (2015) Lineage-negative progenitors mobilize to
regenerate lung epithelium after major injury. Nature 517:621–
625. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14112
Wang X, Yamamoto Y, Wilson LH, Zhang T, Howitt BE, Farrow MA,
Kern F, Ning G, Hong Y, Khor CC, Chevalier B, Bertrand D, Wu L,
Nagarajan N, Sylvester FA, Hyams JS, Devers T, Bronson R,
Lacy DB, Ho KY, Crum CP, McKeon F, Xian W (2015) Cloning
and variation of ground state intestinal stem cells. Nature
522:173–178. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14484
Wimberley NW, Bass JB Jr, Boyd BW, Kirkpatrick MB, Serio RA,
Pollock HM (1982) Use of a bronchoscopic protected catheter
Regeneration of human lung
RESEARCH ARTICLE
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
281
Protein & Cell
 brush for the diagnosis of pulmonary infections. Chest 81:556–
562
Zhang HY, Gharaee-Kermani M, Zhang K, Karmiol S, Phan SH
(1996) Lung fibroblast alpha-smooth muscle actin expression and
contractile phenotype in bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis.
The American journal of pathology 148:527–537
Zuo W, Zhang T, Wu DZ, Guan SP, Liew AA, Yamamoto Y, Wang X,
Lim SJ, Vincent M, Lessard M, Crum CP, Xian W, McKeon F
(2015) p63(+)Krt5(+) distal airway stem cells are essential for
lung regeneration. Nature 517:616–620. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature13903
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Qiwang Ma et al.
282
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Protein & Cell
