 Review
Endurance exercise and gut microbiota: A review
Núria Mach a,b,*, Dolors Fuster-Botella a
a Health Science Department, International Graduate Institute of the Open University of Catalonia (UOC), Barcelona 08035, Spain
b Animal Genetics and Integrative Biology unit (GABI), INRA, AgroParis Tech, University of Paris-Saclay, Jouy-en-Josas 78350, France
Received 27 October 2015; revised 25 January 2016; accepted 14 March 2016
Available online 10 May 2016
Abstract
Background: The physiological and biochemical demands of intense exercise elicit both muscle-based and systemic responses. The main
adaptations to endurance exercise include the correction of electrolyte imbalance, a decrease in glycogen storage and the increase of oxidative
stress, intestinal permeability, muscle damage, and systemic inflammatory response. Adaptations to exercise might be influenced by the gut
microbiota, which plays an important role in the production, storage, and expenditure of energy obtained from the diet as well as in inflammation,
redox reactions, and hydration status.
Methods: A systematic and comprehensive search of electronic databases, including MEDLINE, Scopus, ClinicalTrials.gov, ScienceDirect,
Springer Link, and EMBASE was done. The search process was completed using the keywords: “endurance”, “exercise”, “immune response”,
“microbiota”, “nutrition”, and “probiotics”.
Results: Reviewed literature supports the hypothesis that intestinal microbiota might be able to provide a measureable, effective marker of an
athlete’s immune function and that microbial composition analysis might also be sensitive enough to detect exercise-induced stress and metabolic
disorders. The review also supports the hypothesis that modifying the microbiota through the use of probiotics could be an important therapeutic
tool to improve athletes’ overall general health, performance, and energy availability while controlling inflammation and redox levels.
Conclusion: The present review provides a comprehensive overview of how gut microbiota may have a key role in controlling the oxidative stress
and inflammatory responses as well as improving metabolism and energy expenditure during intense exercise.
© 2017 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V
. on behalf of Shanghai University of Sport. This is an open access article under the CC BY
-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords: Endurance; Exercise; Immune response; Microbiota; Nutrition; Probiotics
1. Introduction
Endurance exercise can be defined as cardiovascular exercise—
such as running, cross-country skiing, cycling, aerobic exercise, or
swimming—that is performed for an extended period of time.1The
physiological and biochemical demands of endurance exercise
elicit both muscle-based and systemic responses. Endurance ath-
letes expose their bodies to extreme physiological circumstances
that disrupt inner body’s homeostasis, overwhelming organs and
the system’s normal function. Physical exertion at a very high level
for a prolonged time means that the whole body initiates a defense
response through the synthesis of acute phase proteins, hormone
release, and shifts in fluid and metabolic balance. The main
adaptations to endurance exercise include an improvement of
mechanical, metabolic, neuromuscular, and contractile functions
in muscle,2 a rebalance of electrolytes,3 a decrease in glycogen
storage,4 and an increase in mitochondrial biogenesis in muscle
tissue.5 Furthermore, endurance exercise has a profound impact on
oxidative stress,5 intestinal permeability, muscle damage, systemic
inflammation, and immune responses.5 An increase in body tem-
perature changes blood flow and increases dehydration, which
causes the release of adrenaline and glucocorticoids as a way to
reestablish homeostatic equilibrium.6
The human gut harbors a vast array of microorganisms that
significantly affect host nutrition, metabolic function, gut devel-
opment, and maturation of the immune system and epithelial
cells.7 Overall, the gut microbiota comprises 5 phyla and approxi-
mately 160 species in the large intestine.8 Although very few of
these species are shared between unrelated individuals, the func-
tions carried out by these species appear to be similar in every-
body’s gastrointestinal tract.9 The gut microbiota promotes
digestion and food absorption for host energy production,10
whereas in the colon, complex carbohydrates are digested and
subsequently fermented into short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such
Peer review under responsibility of Shanghai University of Sport.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nuria.mach@inra.fr (N. Mach).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jshs.2016.05.001
2095-2546/© 2017 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V
. on behalf of Shanghai University of Sport. This is an open access article under the CC BY
-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Journal of Sport and Health Science 6 (2017) 179–197
www.jshs.org.cn
HOSTED BY
ScienceDirect
 as n-butyrate, acetate, and propionate. Propionate and acetate are
carried in the bloodstream to a variety of different organs where
they are used as substrates for energy metabolism, particularly by
the hepatocyte cells, which use propionate for gluconeogenesis.11
The gut microbiota also plays a fundamental role in the induction
and function of the host immune system,12 protection from patho-
gens, and stimulation and maturation of epithelial cell.13 Endur-
ance athletes present a high prevalence of upper respiratory tract
infections and gastrointestinal troubles, including increased per-
meability of the gastrointestinal epithelial wall, also called “leaky
gut”, disruption of mucous thickness and higher rates of bacterial
translocation.14 Understanding the effect of exercise on gut
microbiota composition and structure is still in its infancy and the
function of microbiota on exercise adaptation remains unknown,
but a few studies have shown the impact exercise has on the gut
microbiota composition.
A recent observational study comparing the fecal bacterial
profile of male elite rugby players with non-athlete healthy
subjects15 showed that athletes had lower levels of bacteroidetes
and greater amounts of firmicutes than controls. After analyzing
the gut microbiota composition of the participants of theAmerican
Gut Project,16 it was concluded that increasing moderate exercise
frequency from never to daily causes greater diversity among
the firmicutes phylum (including Faecalibacterium prausnitzii,
and species from the genus Oscillospira, Lachnospira, and
Coprococcus) which contribute to a healthier gut environment. In
the limited studies available in animal models, exercise in rats was
associated with higher bacteroidetes and lower firmicutes in fecal
matter,17,18 whereas the cecal microbiota following 6 weeks of
exercise activity presented a greater abundance of selected
firmicutes species and lower Bacteroides/Prevotella genera.19
Similarly, at the phyla level, exercise reduced bacteroidetes, while
it increased firmicutes, proteobacteria, and actinobacteria in
mice.20,21 Additionally, gut microbiota can improve some of the
other exercise-induced disturbances in the gastrointestinal tract
like oxidative stress19,22 and hydration levels.23
Given the gut microbiota’s fundamental role in the regulation
of energy metabolism, hydration, inflammatory response and
oxidative stress, the aim of this systematic review is to review
papers published from 2007 that allow greater understanding of
how the gut microbiota may exert beneficial effects on elite
athletes. With a specific focus on endurance, the proposed sys-
tematic review will first answer whether the microbiota–host
relationships specifically could influence the energy metabolism,
hydration, oxidative stress, and inflammation in the gastrointes-
tinal tract. Second, it will identify probiotics, prebiotics, or other
functional foods that could modify the microbiota composition
and improve both overall health (i.e., improving the conditions of
the intestinal epithelium and the immune system response) and
performance (i.e., improving energy availability from diet and
controlling the inflammation levels in athletes).
2. Methods
This study was executed according to the requirements
established in the preferred reporting items for systematic
review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA).24
The articles selected were divided into the following catego-
ries: (i) generic articles about gut microbiota and exercise;
(ii) articles about the relationship between probiotics consump-
tion and exercise response. With regard to the generic articles
about gut microbiota and exercise, publications of any type
were included if they reported data that linked intestinal
microbiota and exercise in humans and animal models. The
search was not restricted to the type of exercise, exercise inten-
sity, gender, clinical condition, sample size, specie, year of
publication, publication status, or length of follow-up. No study
design limit was imposed on the search, although only studies
published in English were included. We included randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) that compared athletes’ gut microbiota
from sedentary individuals, case–control studies, and prospec-
tive cohort studies. Given that the studies in humans and
animals analyzing the gut microbiota’s involvement in various
responses to exercise are still in its infancy, we did not restrict
the criteria papers selected for this review. The search process
was completed using the keywords “exercise”, “endurance”,
and “microbiota”. For each study, the following information
was retrieved: species, number of individuals, individual char-
acteristics, level and frequency of exercise, experimental
design, and duration of follow-up. The primary outcome was
the gut microbiota profile, the indicators of immune response,
oxidative stress, dehydration, or other clinical outcome.
To understand the relationship between probiotics consump-
tion, gut microbiota, and exercise response, we selected observa-
tional studies in humans, including case–control, prospective
cohort studies, randomized, blinded and counterbalanced cross-
over designs, and pre–post controlled trial with control (but no
placebo treatment). The search process was completed using the
keywords “athletes”, “exercise”, “endurance”, “microbiota”,
“nutrition”, “probiotics”, and “prebiotics”. For each study, the
following information was retrieved: number of individuals, indi-
vidual characteristics, the experimental intervention, the type of
control used, dosage, frequency, and duration of treatment,
patient characteristics, duration of follow-up, and the primary
outcomes.
This review was not registered a priori and nor was a pro-
tocol published prior to the start of the study. An addendum of
the original article by Clarke et al.15 has been recently published
under the title of Exercise and the Microbiota.25 Based on data
from the Irish international rugby football team, they discuss
the relationship between exercise, associated dietary habits, and
gut microbiota composition.25 They also describe the potential
mechanisms by which exercise may exert a direct or indirect
effect on gut microbiota, but they do not explain how the gut
microbiota may contribute to the individual’s exercise perfor-
mance and health. Similarly, the recently published review
entitled Exercise, Fitness, and the Gut26 explains the benefits of
regular exercise in the treatment and prevention of gastrointes-
tinal conditions, but it does not explain how the gut microbiota
may contribute to individual’s exercise performance.
Due to the nature of our review, no request was performed
for the ethics committee’s approval. We searched MEDLINE,
Scopus, ClinicalTrials.gov, ScienceDirect, Springer Link, and
EMBASE for publications in English documenting the role of
180
N. Mach and D. Fuster-Botella
 microbiota in exercise. Bibliographies of the identified reviews
and original research publications were hand-selected for addi-
tional studies that may have been missed by the database
searches. We also searched Web of Science for conference
proceedings and abstracts that may not have been indexed in the
databases mentioned before.
Records were imported into a bibliographic database. The 2
authors independently assessed titles and abstracts for eligible
publications. If eligibility could not be determined, the full
article was retrieved.
A search conducted in October 2015 yielded the following
list of key term combinations (microbiota and exercise = 46;
probiotic and athlete = 30). Clearly the focus on the research
community
investigating
how
exercise
and
healthy
gut
microbiota help maintain good health and sport performance
is in its early states. Finally, a total of 33 experimental studies
met the inclusion criteria and were included in the review. All
reports were journal articles, except for 1 PhD thesis. Most of
the studies were randomized controlled trials. Periods of data
collection spanned from 2007 to 2015, including data from
human and animal models (i.e., mice and rats).
3. Results and discussion
Endurance exercise has a profound impact on metabolism in
tissues other than skeletal muscle, including the heart, brain,
adipose tissue, and liver (Fig. 1).27 By reviewing the respective
role microbiota has on exercise regulation, we were able to iden-
tify a large number of biological functions that fit neatly into the
well-characterized context of adaptive regulation in response to
endurance exercise, including energy metabolism, inflammatory
response, stress resistance, and oxidative stress. These changes
may help supply the working muscles with energy or control
excessive inflammatory reactions. They might be involved
Fig. 1. The physiological and biochemical demands of endurance exercise elicit both muscle-based and systemic responses. The main adaptations to endurance
exercise include an improvement of mechanical, metabolic, neuromuscular and contractile functions in muscle, a rebalance of electrolytes, a decrease in glycogen
storage and an increase in mitochondrial biogenesis in muscle tissue. Moreover, endurance exercise has a profound impact on oxidative stress, intestinal permeability,
muscle damage, systemic inflammation and immune responses. Additionally, there is increased ventilation and pumping function of the heart associated with
substantially decreased peripheral vascular resistance in the muscles. This facilitates the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to working muscles, which consume high
amounts of oxygen and nutrients, especially when exercise intensity increases. ↑: increases; ↔: no change in response; ↓: decreases; ↕: may increase or decrease.
Adapted with permission.109
181
Intestinal microbiota and exercise
 in “staleness” and the transient immunosuppression that can
occur during and/or after endurance exercise. Additionally, we
discovered to what extent probiotics, in conjunction with diet
composition and type of exercise and intensity, affect health and
exercise performance in athletes.
3.1. The link between exercise and alterations in the gut
microbiota
The impact gastrointestinal tract microbiota has on health and
performance, including metabolism of nutrients, growth and matu-
ration of the immune response, protection from pathogens, and
stimulation of epithelial cell proliferation, is becoming increas-
ingly apparent.28,29 In humans, there is growing evidence that per-
turbations of the gut microbiota composition and functions may
play an important role in the development of the host metabolism
and diseases.28 The current perception is that microbiota composi-
tion and structure are regulated by the metabolic niche (mainly
diet, antimicrobials, and lifestyle behaviors), host genetics,
microbe–microbe interactions, inflammation status, and host–
microorganism crosstalk.30–32 Generally, the gut microbiota com-
position is estimated by analyzing fresh fecal samples because they
are relatively easy to obtain. The strength of the associations
between fecal samples and species richness, enterotypes, which are
classifications of bacteriological ecosystems, and the bacterial
community composition in gut emphasizes the importance of fecal
sample assessment in gut metagenome-wide association studies.33
Although little is known about how the gut microbiome may
contribute to an individual’s exercise performance, accumulat-
ing literature shows that exercise alone induces modifications in
the gut microbiota composition (Table 1). After analyzing a
total of 1493 human fecal samples from the participants of the
American Gut Project, McFadzean16 concluded that exercise
leads to an increase in α-diversity, which is the number and
distribution of kinds of taxa or lineages in 1 sample within an
individual, especially in certain members of the firmicutes
phylum. Similarly, a recent study in elite rugby players sug-
gested that athletes have a greater gut microbial diversity com-
pared to sedentary individuals.15 They found significantly
higher proportions of the genus Akkermansia in the rugby
players as well as in low body mass index control group,15
which is generally associated with a healthier metabolic
profile.34 Although the authors were careful in their interpreta-
tion and did not associate correlation into causation, they sug-
gested that increased microbial diversity is one of the beneficial
effects of exercise.25 Similar positive effects on the gut
microbiota have also been observed in laboratory animals. Mat-
sumoto et al.35 showed that rats that participated in voluntary
running exercise had increased colonic butyrate concentrations
compared to sedentary rats due to higher levels of butyrate-
producing bacterium from the firmicutes phylum (SM7/11 and
T2-87) in their cecum. Most of the published works on murine
models examine the combined effects of exercise, dietary inter-
ventions, and diseases. For example, according to Evans et al.,17
exercise increases the bacteroidetes phylum while it decreases
firmicutes in a manner that is proportional to the distance ran by
mice who were fed a high-fat diet. In a case–control study,
Queipo-Ortuno et al.18 described that moderate exercise in rats
may affect the α-diversity of the gut microbiota by increasing
Lactobacillus,
Bifidobacterium,
and
Blautia
coccoides–
Eubacterium rectale species while decreasing Clostridium and
Enterococcus genera compared to sedentary male rats. Simi-
larly, Lambert et al.19 showed that 6 weeks of exercise activity in
diabetic and control mice resulted in a greater abundance of
some firmicutes species and lower Bacteroides/Prevotella
genera compared to sedentary counterparts. Accordingly, it has
been reported20 that exercise alone causes modifications in mice
gut microbiota at nearly the same magnitude as high-fat diet.
Exercise reduced the Streptococcus genus and bacteroidetes
and tenericutes phyla, while increasing the firmicutes phylum.
The results from Petriz et al.36 in obese, non-obese, and hyper-
tensive male rats showed that moderate exercise altered the
composition and a-diversity of gut microbiota. A recent human
study elucidated how intense exercise (4-day cross-country ski-
march) modifies gut microbiota composition. Compared with
controls, individuals following an intense training showed an
increased level of microbial diversity, an increased abundance
of members of the commensal microbiota that may become
pathogenic under certain circumstances and a decreased abun-
dance of the dominant beneficial species, such as members of
the Bacteroidaceae, and Lachnospiraceae families.37 Exercise
also enhanced the relative abundance of Lactobacillus, while
Streptococcus, Aggregatibacter, and Sutterella were shown to
be more abundant before exercise training. They also made a
significant
correlation
between
the
bacterial
families
clostridiaceae and bacteroidaceae and the Oscillospira and
Ruminococcus genera and blood lactate accumulation. Results
from Choi et al.21 showed that oral exposure to polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCB, 150 μmol/kg) significantly changed the mice
gut
microbiota
mainly
by
reducing
the
amount
of
proteobacteria. They also discovered that exercise decreased
the PBC-induced alterations in the gut ecology, which may
protect them against dangerous xenobiotic effects.
Only 1 study in mice has evaluated how the gut microbiota
affects exercise performance. While most of the reviewed lit-
erature focuses on the effect that exercise produces in gut
microbiota, Hsu et al.10 investigated the influence that intestinal
microbiota has on endurance swimming time in specific
pathogen-free (SPF), germ-free (GF), and Bacteroides fragilis
(BF) gnotobiotic mice. Additionally, they found that the serum
levels of glutathione peroxidase (GPx) and catalase (CAT) were
greater in SPF than GF mice, while serum superoxide
dismutase (SOD) activity was lower in BF than SPF and GF
mice. In addition, hepatic GPx level was higher in SPF than GF
and BF mice. The authors found that endurance swimming time
was longer for SPF and BF than GF mice, suggesting that gut
microbiota composition is crucial for exercise performance and
could also potentially be linked to antioxidant enzyme systems
in athletes (see Section 3.4 for further details).
Additionally, it must be taken into consideration that all the
published articles to date are very bacteria-centric when
looking at the gut microbiota after exercise; there are no papers
that have looked at the viral component (or virome) and other
eukaryotes such as protozoa and fungi. Despite this, there is
no evidence to date that the depletion or enrichment of a
182
N. Mach and D. Fuster-Botella
 Table 1
Relationship between gut microbiota and exercise performance.
Author
Y
ear
Species
Number of
individuals
Level and frequency of exercise
Experimental
design
Duration of
experiment
Results/conclusions
Choi et al.21
2013
Mice
12
(n = 6/group)
Mice were randomly distributed into 2 groups:
(i) exercised and (ii) sedentary. For the exercised mice,
activity on a running wheel was monitored 24 h/day, 7
day/week. Wheels were locked in the cages of sedentary
mice. A total PCB dose of 150 μmol/kg was administered
to mice, resulting in a PCB plasma level of 5 μmol/L.
Randomized
controlled
trial
5 weeks,
1 sampling
point
Exercise attenuates changes in microbiota induced by oral
exposure to PCBs. Exercise increased phylum firmicutes,
class bacilli, and most of these were in the order
lactobacillales. The taxa that were decreased in the
exercised group belonged to phyla tenericutes and
bacteroidetes. Exercised mice had a decrease in
Erysipelotrichaceae bacterium C11_K211 from phylum
tenericutes compared to sedentary mice.
Clarke et al.15
2014
Human
86
Male professional rugby players (n = 40) and healthy male
controls (n = 46) were included in the study. Controls were
divided into 2 groups based on their physical size (BMI)
relative to the athletes, gender, and age. Each participant
completed a detailed food frequency questionnaire.
Case–control
study
1 sampling
point
Athletes had a higher diversity of gut microorganisms,
representing 22 distinct phyla. Bacteroidetes was
significantly less abundant in athletes. The top changes in
relative abundance were in the firmicutes,
Ruminococcaceae, S24-7, Succinivibrionaceae, RC9 gut,
and Succinivibrio groups. Notably, there were significantly
higher proportions of Akkermansiaceae and Akkermansia
in elite athletes compared to the high BMI controls.
Evans et al.17
2014
Mice
48
(n = 12/group)
Male littermates (5 weeks old) were randomly distributed
into 4 groups: (i) LF/Sed, (ii) LF/Ex, (iii) HF/Sed, and
(iv) HF/Ex. Mice were individually housed and LF/Ex and
HF/Ex cages were equipped with a wheel and odometer to
record exercise.
Randomized
controlled
trial
12 weeks,
3 sampling
points:
baseline,
6 weeks, and
12 weeks
Exercise induces a unique shift in the gut microbiota that
was different from dietary effects. The bacteroidetes
phylum increased while it decreased firmicutes in a
manner that was proportional to the distance run in mice
fed with HFD.
Hsu et al.10
2015
Mice
24
(n = 8/group)
Male (12 weeks old) were (i) SPF, (ii) GF, or (iii) BF
gnotobiotic. Swimming was performed in plastic
containers. Mice were considered exhausted when they
failed to rise to the surface of the water to breathe after
7 s.
Prospective
cohort study
1 sampling
point
Endurance swimming time was longer for SPF and BF
than GF mice, and the weight of liver, muscle, brown
adipose, and epididymal fat pads was higher for SPF and
BF than GF mice. The serum levels of GPx and catalase
were greater in SPF than GF mice. SOD activity was
lower in BF than SPF and GF mice. In addition, hepatic
GPx level was higher in SPF than GF and BF mice. Gut
microbial status could be crucial for exercise performance
and its potential action linked with the antioxidant enzyme
system in athletes.
Kang et al.20
2014
Mice
40
(n = 10/group)
Male (8 weeks old) were randomly distributed into 4
groups: (i) ND, (ii) ND + exercise, (iii) HFD, and (iv)
HFD + exercise. Exercised groups were placed in running
wheels for 1 h at 7 m/min every morning for 5 day/week.
Control “sedentary” groups were placed in adjacent
running wheels that rotated at a speed that just prevented
them from sleeping (~1 m/min) to control for
environmental enrichment and handling.
Randomized
controlled
trial
1 sample
point
Exercise alone caused massive shifts in the gut
microbiome at nearly the same magnitude as diet but
shifts were unrelated (orthogonal). At the phyla level,
exercise reduced bacteroidetes, while increased firmicutes,
proteobacteria and actinobacteria. Additionally, exercise
reduced the abundance of Porphyromonadaceae,
Streptococcaceae, Peptococcaceae_2 family, while
increased the peptostreptococcacea, the cryomorphaceae,
the rhizobiaceae, and the Incertae Sedis IV.
(continued on next page)
183
Intestinal microbiota and exercise
 Table 1 (continued)
Author
Y
ear
Species
Number of
individuals
Level and frequency of exercise
Experimental
design
Duration of
experiment
Results/conclusions
Lambert et al.19
2015
Mice
38
(n = 9–10/group)
Male (6 weeks old) with (i) type 2 diabetic db/db and
(ii) db/+ (heterozygote; control) were randomly distributed
into 2 groups: sedentary or exercise group for 6 weeks.
Exercise consisted of low-intensity treadmill running for 5
day/week. db/+ mice exercised for 60 min/session at
4.79 m/min (287 m/session) and db/db mice for
66 min/session at 2.87 m/min (189 m/session).
Randomized
controlled
trial
6 weeks,
1 sampling
point
The interaction between diabetic state and exercise
training affected the cecal abundance of total bacteria;
enterobacteriaceae and Bifidobacterium spp. Specifically,
total bacteria and enterobacteriaceae were similar in
db/+ mice regardless of exercise, but lower with exercise
in db/db mice. Bifidobacterium spp. was greater in
exercised non-diabetic mice. Exercise was independently
associated with lower abundance of Bacteroides/Prevotella
spp. and Methanobrevibacter spp., and greater
Lactobacillus spp. and Clostridium leptum.
Matsumoto
et al.35
2008
Rats
14
(n = 7/group)
Male (6 weeks old) were randomly distributed by matched
weight into 2 groups: (i) sedentary (control) group or (ii) a
voluntary wheel-running exercise group. The rats in the
exercise group were moved to cages equipped with
running wheels.
Randomized
block design
5 weeks,
1 sampling
point
Exercised rats presented increased colonic butyrate
concentrations compared with sedentary rats. The
temperature gradient gel electrophoresis analysis suggested
that the appearance of the butyrate-producing bacteria
associated with the alteration in the cecal microbiota was
the reason for the n-butyrate increase in the cecum.
McFadzean16
2014
Human
1493
Each participant was categorized according to his or her
exercise frequency into: (i) never, (ii) rarely,
(iii) occasionally, (iv) regularly, and (v) daily.
Prospective
cohort study
1 sampling
point
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii was the only species to be
significantly different among exercise. They showed an
increase in Faecalibacterium prausnitzii as exercise
increases. There was a significant increase in α-diversity
among individuals who exercised more frequently.
Petriz et al.36
2014
Rats
15
(n = 5/group)
Three different strains from 2 different genotypes were
included in the study: (i) an obese genotype, homozygous
(fa/fa) obese (Obese rats), (ii) hypertensive genotype
(Hypertensive rats), and (iii) a strain obtained by the
selective breeding of Wistar-Kyoto rats with high blood
pressure. Duration and speed on treadmill were increased
progressively (up to 12.5 m/min for obese rats; 20 m/min
for hypertensive and Wistar rats). All animals were trained
for 30 min/day, 5 day/week for 4 weeks.
Prospective
cohort study
4 weeks
Exercise altered the composition and diversity of gut
bacteria at genus level in all rat lineages. In obese rats,
Pseudomonas and Lactobacillus were both significantly
altered after exercise training. Minimal variation in
Pseudomonas relative abundance was observed between
samples, while Lactobacillus presented the higher relative
abundance after exercise from all identified genera.
Another 3 genera were shown to be more abundant before
exercise training (Streptococcus, Aggregatibacter, and
Sutterella). A significant correlation was seen in the
clostridiaceae and bacteroidaceae families and
Oscillospira and Ruminococcus genera with blood lactate
accumulation.
Queipo-Ortuno
et al.18
2013
Rats
40
(n = 10/group)
Weight-matched rats (5 weeks old) were randomly
assigned to 1 of 4 experimental groups: (i) ABA group;
(ii) control ABA group: rats submitted to the same food
restriction schedule as ABA with no wheel access
exercise, (iii) exercise group: rats feed ad libitum with free
access to the activity wheel, and (iv) ad libitum group:
rats feed ad libitum but without access to the activity
wheel.
Case–control
study
6 days
Nutritional status and exercise affected the diversity and
similarity of the gut microbiota. The number of
Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Blautia
coccoides–Eubacterium rectale group was greater in the
exercise group with respect to the ABA, control ABA, and
ad libitum groups. Both Bifidobacteria and Lactobacillus
had the capacity to produce the organic acid lactate, which
is converted into butyrate by butyrate-producing bacteria
in the gut. Clostridium and Enterococcus appeared
decreased in the exercise group.
Abbreviations: ABA = activity based anorexia; BF = bacteroides fragilis; BMI = body mass index; Ex = exercise; GF = germ free; GPx = glutathione peroxidase; HFD = high fat diet; HF/Ex = high fat exercise;
HF/Sed = high fat sedentary; LF/Ex = low fat exercise; LF/Sed = low fat sedentary; ND = normal diet; PCB = polychlorinated biphenyl; Sed = sedentary; SOD = superoxide dismutase; SPF = specific pathogen-free.
184
N. Mach and D. Fuster-Botella
 single species (bacterial, fungal, viral, or other eukaryotes) is
associated with better performance or health in athletes. As
pinpointed by Marchesi et al.,9 we know that the gut microbiota
is essential for the proper function and development of the host
(e.g., energy metabolism, the inflammatory response, stress
resistance, and oxidative stress), but we are unsure which are
the key species and whether the microbiota’s function as a
whole is more important than any individual member of the
ecological community for regulating the exercise response.
3.2. The role of gut microbiota in energy metabolism during
endurance exercise
As previously mentioned, energy availability is an important
limiting factor in the final performance during endurance exer-
cise. After several minutes of muscle contractions, the concen-
tration of phosphocreatine (PCr) declines, resulting in a need to
use other fuels. This stimulus is rapidly sensed and transduced
through signaling pathways into a coordinated transcriptional,
post-transcriptional and allosteric response leading to the syn-
thesis of specific molecules needed to restore the cellular
energy homeostasis. First, the transcription of genes involved in
glycogenolysis is induced to ensure the production of ATP
meets the demand of the cross-bridge cycle (increased myosin
ATPase activity) and muscle ion pumps. Unfortunately, mito-
chondria are unable to oxidize all the pyruvate produced during
intense exercise, which leads to its conversion into lactate in the
myoplasm.38 Intracellular acidosis may cause fatigue such as
inhibiting energy metabolism.39 At the same time, lipolysis of
adipose tissue provides an increase in fatty acids as well as
increased plasma free fatty acid uptake and fatty acid oxidation.
Given the energy requirements during endurance exercise40
and the recently described complex and reciprocal relationship
between the gut microbiota and whole body energy metabolism,19
it is not surprising that efforts to identify the mechanisms via
which gut microbiota exerts positive performance effects in elite
athletes are increasing. Carbohydrate fermentation is a core activ-
ity of the human gut microbiota, driving the energy and carbon
metabolism of the colon, although the range of end products gen-
erated by protein digestion is broader than that of carbohydrates.41
In the colon, complex plant-derived polysaccharides (such as cel-
lulose, β-glucan, xylan, mannan, and pectin) are digested and
subsequently fermented by gut microorganisms into short-chain
fatty acids (SCFAs) and gases (Fig. 2), which are also used as
carbon and energy sources by other more specialized bacteria
such as reductive acetogens, sulfate-reducing bacteria, and
methanogens.9 The SCFAs affect a range of host processes includ-
ing energy utilization, host–microbe signaling and control of
colonic pH, with consequent effects on microbiota composition,
intestinal gut motility, gut permeability, and epithelial cell
proliferation.42 Gut motility, a gross measure of forces (resistive
and propulsive) in the small intestine transit flow,43 is increasingly
gaining interest since it is highly correlated with transit time and
stool consistency. In turn, it has been recently published that stool
consistency is a good biomarker for species richness and commu-
nity composition.33
In addition to being a local nutrient source for colonocytes11
and a minor nutrient source for microorganisms such as
Desulfotomaculum genus in the gut,44 n-butyrate has also been
shown in cell-culture models and mice to regulate energy homeo-
stasis by stimulating leptin production in adipocytes as well as
provoking intestinal enteroendocrine L cells to secrete glucagon-
like peptide-1 (GLP-1).11 The main genera that produce n-butyrate
are Clostridia, Eubacteria, and Roseburia.Additionally, n-butyrate
produced by gut bacteria regulates neutrophil function and migra-
tion, inhibits inflammatory cytokine-induced expression of vascu-
lar cell adhesion molecule-1, increases expression of tight junction
proteins in colon epithelia and exhibits anti-inflammatory effects.29
Other SCFAs such as propionate and acetate are substrates for
gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis in the liver and peripheral organs
(e.g., muscle and adipose tissue11,45). The types and amount of
SCFAs produced by gut microorganisms are determined by the
composition of the gut microbiota and the metabolic interactions
between microbial species,46 but also by the amount, type, and
balance of the main dietary macro- and micronutrients.41,47,48 The
dietary regime of endurance athletes is based on high protein and
carbohydrateconsumptionandverylowfatintaketogetherwiththe
consumption of certain key micronutrients such as iron, calcium,
and essential fatty acids.49 Overall, the dietary protein intake nec-
essary for endurance athletes ranges from 1.2 to 1.6 g/kg/day in the
top sport elite athletes50,51 so that amino acids are spared for protein
synthesis and are not oxidized to assist in meeting energy needs.51
Carbohydrate intake ranges from 7 to 12 g/kg/day and fat < 1 g/kg/
day(<20%oftotalcaloriesconsumed).49Althoughthefermentation
of amino acids can produce beneficial by-products such as SCFAs,
Fig. 2. Complex polysaccharides are metabolized by the colonic microbiota to
oligosaccharides and monosaccharides and then fermented to short-chain fatty
acid (SCFA) end products, mainly acetate, propionate, and butyrate. The SCFAs
are absorbed in the colon, where butyrate provides energy for colonic epithelial
cells, and acetate and propionate reach the liver and peripheral organs, where
they are substrates for gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis. The types and amount
of SCFAs produced by gut microorganisms are determined by the composition
of the gut microbiota and the metabolic interactions between specie.45 In
addition to being energy sources, SCFAs control colonic gene expression
involved in the immune response. It must be borne in mind that endurance diets
are rich in protein (1.2–1.6 g/kg/day), which besides liberating beneficial
SCFAs, produces a range of potentially harmful compounds in the intestine.
Adapted with permission.9,110
185
Intestinal microbiota and exercise
 a range of potentially harmful compounds can also be produced.9
Studies in animal models and in vitro show that compounds like
ammonia, phenols, p-cresol, certain amines and hydrogen sulfide
play important roles in the initiation or progression of increased
intestinal permeability or “leaky gut” and inflammation.52With this
in mind, the modulation of the microbiota and its fermentation
capacity may provide the scientific basis for designing diets aimed
atimprovingperformancebyenhancingcarbohydratefermentation
during exercise and limiting those that produce toxic metabolites
from protein degradation. Modifying athletes’ diets in a way in
which they positively impact the activities of their gut microbiota
through newly recognized inter-kingdom axes of communication
such as the gut–liver axis9 may also benefit sport performance.
It is clear then that the interaction between diet and exercise
needs to be further studied to better assess the contributions of
diet and microbial activities in athletic performance. In fact, an
important confounding effect of the study of Clarke et al.15 that
documented that gut microbial diversity increases with exercise
is that the professional rugby players’ diet differed from that of
the controls. The athletes ate more calories, fat, carbohydrates,
sugars, protein, protein supplements, and saturated fat per day
than the controls. Therefore it is difficult to draw conclusions
from the study of Clarke et al.15 and assess the impact diet has on
gut microbial diversity and exercise performance.53 As such,
further prospective studies are now planned to determine
whether dietary changes or exercise affect elite athletes’ gut
microbiota profile.54 In the same line, Liu et al.55 have published
a protocol to study the effect of exercise and dietary intervention
on the microbiota profile during 6 months in 200 postmeno-
pausal women and middle-age pre-diabetic men along with
follow-ups 6 and 12 months later. If their program proves to be
effective in reducing serum glucose levels and fatty liver content
while improving gut microbiota composition in the participants,
it will open new strategies to combat chronic diseases through
exercise and modifications of gut microbiota composition.
3.3. Effects of gut microbiota on immune response during
intense exercise
Immune response activation appears to play a key role in
endurance performance. More specifically, there is evidence that
several immune responses are suppressed during prolonged
periods of intense exercise training. These include total leuko-
cyte count, granulocyte, monocyte, lymphocyte and natural
killer cell counts, total T cell counts, cell proliferation in
response to mitogens, and serum immunoglobulin levels among
others.56 As intense exercise continues, plasma cortisol levels
rise, inducing an influx of neutrophils from bone marrow and an
efflux of other leukocyte subsets.57,58 In addition to cellular
immune alterations, several studies have reported that intense
exercise causes an acute-phase inflammatory response, which
has some similarities to those seen in sepsis and trauma.59,60 In
contrast to habitual light exercise and fitness,15 strenuous exer-
cise causes an increase in the number of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, such as Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α),
Interleukin 1(IL-1), IL-6, IL-1 receptor antagonist, TNF recep-
tors, as well as anti-inflammatory modulators like IL-10, IL-8,
and macrophage inflammatory protein-1,61 indicating a dose–
response effect between biological responses to exercise and
host immunity25 (Fig. 3). It has been reported that strenuous
aerobic exercise in mice leads to an increase in TNF-α62 and
IL-1063 in intestinal lymphocytes. In addition, it has also been
demonstrated that intense exercise increases immunoglobulin A
(IgA) expression, which coats the bacteria helping maintain a
tolerant, non-inflammatory host–microbial relationship64 and
may thus strengthen the resistance of exercised mice to infec-
tions by intestinal pathogens and the colonization of commensal
microbiota in mice.65 Conversely, when studying 38 eliteAmeri-
ca’s Cup yacht racing athletes over 50 weeks of training, a clear
correlation was found between increased training and competi-
tion load and decreased levels of salivary IgA.66 These findings
have led to a theory that an “open window” of impaired immu-
nity exists in which viruses and bacteria are more likely to take
over and increase the risk of subclinical and clinical infections in
endurance athletes.67 In fact, it is known that strenuous exercise
Fig. 3. Endurance: crosstalk between intestinal microbiota, immune responses
and redox status. Endurance exercise may cause an increase in the number of
pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, IL-1 receptor
antagonist, TNF receptors, but also anti-inflammatory modulators (e.g., IL-10,
IL-8), sIgA and intestinal lymphocytes. In turn, this inflammatory response may
induce disbiosis and modifications of intestinal microbiome composition and
their secreted products. Additionally there is an increase of tissue hyperthermia,
gastrointestinal permeability and destruction of gut mucous thickness.
Moreover, the activity of antioxidant enzymes may become weaker, which
modify the mesenteric redox environment. In parallel, the epithelial barrier
disruption enhances the TLRs-mediated recognition of gut commensal bacteria
by effector cell types, which potentiate the immune response. IgA =
immunoglobulin A; IL = interleukin; RONS = reactive oxygen and nitrogen
species; ROS = reactive oxygen species; sIgA = secretory IgA; TLRs = toll-like
receptors; TNF = tumor necrosis factor. Adapted with permission.111
186
N. Mach and D. Fuster-Botella
 increases the prevalence of upper respiratory tract infections
(URTI) and digestive troubles in athletes.68 For instance, 2311
runners had a higher incidence of URTI during the week after
they had taken part in the 1988 Olympic marathon competition
compared to a control group.69 Athletes are more prone to URTI
because of the physical and psychological stress of exercise
combinedwithimbalanced diet, foreign travel across time zones,
disturbed sleep and exposure to environmental extremes.70Their
exposure to pathogens may also be increased because of elevated
lung ventilation during exercise, skin abrasions, and exposure to
large crowds.70 As mentioned previously, some athletes are also
susceptible to the development of gastrointestinal symptoms
such as abdominal discomfort and diarrhea which often occur
during long-distance runs or competitions.71
Another way endurance training can cause changes in
immune response is by reducing the gastrointestinal blood flow,
oxygen, and nutrients while increasing tissue hyperthermia,
permeability of the gastrointestinal epithelial wall and the
destruction of gut mucous thickness,53 which stimulates an
inflammatory immune response. This so-called “leaky gut”
might lead to endotoxemia14 in which pathogens or endotoxins
are able to cross the intestinal barrier into the bloodstream,
causing a disruption of the immune system–microbiota homeo-
stasis. Thus, in stressful situations, loosening of the tight junc-
tions and adherens junction which strictly control paracellular
trafficking of solutes and fluids between gut epithelial cells may
occur, causing larger substances to escape the intestines pro-
voking an immune response.14,29 The loosening of the tight
junctions as a result of exercise occurs through a dynamic
interaction with specific toll-like receptors (TLRs) which are
able to recognize motifs expressed by bacterial cells. On the one
hand, the activation of the TLRs starts signaling cascades that
involve the activation of proteins and transcription factors,
inducing the secretion of proinflammatory and cytokines in the
gastrointestinal tract.72 In fact, it has recently been shown that in
healthy individuals, commensal bacteria cannot access the liver
through the portal vein and reach the spleen because of the
existence of a gut–vascular barrier which controls the type of
antigens that are translocated across blood endothelial cells to
the portal vein.73 Whether the gut–vascular barrier is compro-
mised under intense exercise is not known yet.
Other studies have shown how increased intestinal permeabil-
ity caused by exercise can increase serum endotoxicity as well as
stimulate an immune response. Jeukendrup et al.74 analyzed
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) levels, which are endotoxins found in
the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, in blood samples
from 29 athletes before, immediately after, and 1 h, 2 h, and 16 h
after a long-distance triathlon. There was an increase in LPS
immediately after exercise and was even higher 1 h after the race
(meaning there was an increase in intestinal permeability after
intense exercise). The highest measured value was 15.0 pg/mL.
If it is assumed that endotoxemia is present when LPS concen-
trations are >5.0 pg/mL, then at 1 h after the race, 68% of the
athletes had endotoxemia. Marycz et al.75 have documented that
prolonged strenuous exercise expands the population of devel-
opmentally early stem cells in bone marrow and transports them
into peripheral blood which may be in part mediated by the
derived bacterial LPS. Therefore, Marycz et al.75 proposed to
measure the levels of serum endotoxin in future studies investi-
gating the effect of exercise on gut microbiota.
To counteract these inflammatory responses brought on by
intense exercise, the gut microbiota and their resulting SCFA
metabolites may reduce colonic mucosa permeability and inhibit
inflammatory cytokines. These anti-inflammatory effects of gut
microbiota may help delay the fatigue symptoms in endurance
performances. In line with this, the study with elite rugby players
suggested that the observed microbial modifications were
accompanied by lower inflammatory status compared to controls
(higher IL-10 and IL-8; lower IL-6,TNF-α, and IL-1B).15Whole
metagenome sequencing for functional genomic analysis along
with blood immune parameters profiling is needed to ascertain
which, if any, immune response functional pathways are altered
during exercise training. Additionally, it is also plausible to
imagine that the gut microbiota composition and structure could
be measured in fecal samples from patients partaking in endur-
ance exercise and serve as useful biomarkers to trace metabolic
and systemic stress during and after exercise. Since the altera-
tions of the microbial diversity have been linked to changes in the
prevalence of gastrointestinal and respiratory tract alterations
among professional athletes, it is important to address this
important issue and find, for example, dietary habits that help
ameliorate immune responses via the modulation of gut
microbiota (see probiotics section below).
3.4. The role of gut microbiota in oxidative stress during
endurance exercise
One of the main physiological adaptations to endurance exer-
cise is the modulation of oxidative and nitrosative stress as a way
to avoid tissue damage, intestinal permeability, and bacterial
translocation.14,76 The gastrointestinal tract is a key source of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitrogen oxide species
(RONS) substances, which are by-products of normal cellular
metabolism. The homeostatic control of the intestinal epithelia
redox environment, which is the balance between antioxidant
defense and/or oxidative stress, is central to the functions of the
gut in nutrient digestion and absorption, stem cell proliferation,
apical enterocyte apoptosis, and immune response.77 The control
and removal of ROS and RONS substances are accomplished by
(i) an enzymatic system (e.g., SOD, CAT, and GPx) and (ii) a
non-enzymatic system (e.g., urate, glutathione, ubiquinone,
thioredoxin, ferritin, and lactoferri).78 During exercise, the activ-
ity of antioxidant enzymes such as SOD, CAT, and GPx becomes
weaker during chronic fatigue and intense exercise. Additionally,
there is an increased production of catecholamines that subse-
quently undergo autoxidation which may increase the oxidative
stress79 and thus limit the final performance.
Investigation of the effect microbiota has in controlling the
gastrointestinal redox environment is still in its infancy.
However, some initial datasets have opened the way toward
identifying microbiota–redox status relationships that are spe-
cifically regulated in the gastrointestinal tract. Xu et al.22 have
demonstrated that the host redox status is related to a balanced
gut microbiota composition. They observed that oxidative
status was negatively correlated with Lactobacillus and
187
Intestinal microbiota and exercise
 Bifidobacterium and positively correlated with gut Escherichia
coli. In mice, data reveal that the colonic microbiota where
there are higher levels of bacteroidetes play a critical role in
protecting
against
intestinal
infection
by
inducing
pro-
inflammatory and pro-oxidant responses that control pathogen
load as well as ion transporter gene expression which may
prevent fatal dehydration.80 In mice, it has also been reported
that gut microbiota affects the host’s amino acid metabolism
which thus regulates glutathione metabolism.81 Given the
modulatory effects of gut microbiota on antioxidant enzyme
activity and the ability of antioxidant enzymes to augment
recovery following extreme exercise, Hsu et al.10 examined the
antioxidant enzyme activity and endurance exercise time in
SPF, GF, and BF gnotobiotic mice following an exhaustive
exercise challenge. As mentioned above, the absence of
microbiota decreased antioxidant enzyme activities and the
overall exercise performance. Therefore, the authors concluded
that different microbiota composition and structure might affect
exercise performance by modifying the activity of the antioxi-
dant enzymes, such as CAT and GPx. The higher levels of CAT
in SPF than GF and BF gnotobiotic mice led them to conclude
that gut microbiota may promote increased CAT activity and
thus reduce exercise-induced fatigue. It was also observed that
GF animals presented lower serum and hepatic GPx activity as
well as lower epididymal fat pad weight, which may limit the
exercise performance. No effects were observed when analyz-
ing the SOD activity which is responsible for the breakdown of
superoxide into hydrogen peroxide and oxygen.82 While the role
the microbiota has on controlling the redox homeostasis during
exercise is not well-defined,77 we believe that understanding the
signaling events initiated by free radicals as well as the role of
microbiota in such processes is key to furthering our under-
standing of ROS and RONS-mediated response in the gastro-
intestinal tract during exercise.
3.5. The role of gut microbiota on dehydration status during
endurance exercise
Endurance athletes are at particular risk for dehydration,
primarily because of increased fluid losses from sweating as a
result of prolonged and intensive periods of exercise.49 Exer-
cise performance is impaired when an individual is dehydrated
and loses as little as 2% of one’s body weight. An excess loss
of 5% body weight can decrease athletic performance by about
30%.83 Therefore, an adequate hydration status is essential for
endurance performance. A primary physiologic function of
mucosal epithelial cells is electrolyte transport.84 Water trans-
port and mucosal hydration function are thought to be necessary
components of a normal functioning and protective intestinal
barrier.84 The study by Musch et al.85 reported that activation
of electrogenic Cl− secretion in the intestinal mucosa altered
the composition of mucus and intestinal microbiota by increas-
ing the abundance of Lactobacillus (firmicutes phylum) and
Alistipes genera. In addition, another study has reported that
active electrogenic Cl− secretion functions as a primitive innate
defense mechanism, substantially shifting the colonic microbiota
with notable changes (increasing the number of bacteria of the
firmicutes and bacteroidetes phyla).86 Very recently the gut
microbiota has been related to the maintenance of proper hy-
dration during exercise and the prevention of an inflammatory
response. Redondo et al.23 demonstrated that the bacteroidetes
phylum reduced plasma sodium levels, whereas the Clos-
tridium genus reduced the plasma osmolality levels in 23 healthy
young individuals. In plasma, the sodium substance concentra-
tion, together with potassium, bicarbonate, urea, and glucose,
constitutes 95% of total osmolarity.87 These results suggested
that microbiota influence the cellular transport of solutes through
the gut mucosa and contribute to the hydration state, while
reducing the plasma osmolality. In the same experiment, an
abundance of Bifidobacterium influenced T lymphocyte levels,
reflecting an interaction with the immune response of the host.
Because a good hydration state and a well-functioning protec-
tive intestinal barrier are essential for sports performance, and
since ultra-endurance athletes typically do not meet their fluid
needs during exercise, it is important to understand the role
that microbiota has on water transport and the associated changes
to the mucus intestinal layer.
3.6. Diet modulation of gut microbiota profiles and its
fermentation capacity to improve endurance performance
The overall aim of the studies of the gut microbiota in health
and disease is to find associations between lifestyle changes,
primarily diet, and functional consequences of alterations in the
gut microbiota. Currently, it is known that the ingestion of
probiotics, prebiotics, polyphenols, and antibiotics modify the
gut microbiota,9 but their effects in athletes are in the early
stages of investigation.
There is now a reasonable body of evidence that shows
consuming probiotics regularly may positively modify the
gut microbiota’s population and structure and may influence
immune function as well as intestinal epithelium cell prolifera-
tion, function, and protection in individuals who follow exercise
programs (Table 2). Probiotics are food supplements that contain
live microorganisms, especially lactic acid bacteria, which when
administered in adequate amounts confer a health benefit for the
host.88 They are available commercially in tablets, capsule form,
as a powder (added to drinks), probiotic-enriched chews or in
selected dairy products such as fermented milk or yogurt.40 For
further details on probiotic supplementation in athletes, see the
recently published review by Pyne et al.40
Most recently, interest in the use of probiotics has focused
on preventing respiratory illness or persistent common cold
and flu-like symptoms in athletes. For example, Salarkia et al.89
studied the effects of probiotic yogurt in 46 female endurance
swimmers. The intervention group consumed 400 mL of probiotic
yogurt containing Lactobacillus acidophilus spp., Lactobacil-
lus delbrueckii bulgaricus, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and
Streptococcus salivarus thermophilus, while the control group
received the same amount of ordinary yogurt (produced using
a culture of L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus and S. thermophilus).
They observed that consuming probiotic yogurt resulted in a
reduction in the number of episodes of respiratory infections
after endurance swimming competition and the duration of
some of the symptoms. Ingesting probiotic yogurt also resulted
in a significant improvement in maximum oxygen uptake
188
N. Mach and D. Fuster-Botella
 Table 2
Effect of probiotics and prebiotics in trained individuals. Studies were selected from 2006 to 2016. Updated from Ref. 40.
Author
Y
ear
Number of
individuals
Functional food treatment
Experimental
design
Duration of
experiment
Results/conclusions
Clancy et al.91
2006
27
A total of 18 healthy athletes and 9 fatigued athletes
were included in the study. Fatigued athletes were
self-referred to a medical sports clinic complaining of
fatigue, recurrent sore throats, and impaired
performance. All individuals were supplemented with
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 2 × 1010 cell/day.
Prospective single
group intervention
4 weeks,
1 sampling
point
Athletes complaining of fatigue had significantly less
secretion of IFN γ from blood CD4+ T cells than
healthy control athletes. After treatment with
L. acidophilus there was a significant increase in
secretion of whole-blood IFN γ to levels similar to
those found in the control athlete group. No effect on
whole blood culture secretion of IL-4, IL-12 or S-IgA
concentration was observed.
Cox et al.90
2010
20
(n = 10/group)
Distance runners were randomly distributed into 1 of
the 2 groups: (i) supplementation with Lactobacillus
fermentum daily at the dose of 1.26 × 1010 cells or (ii)
placebo capsules contained an inert excipient.
Randomized,
blinded,
placebo-controlled,
cross-over trial
4 weeks of
winter training
L. fermentum VRI-003 treatment elicited greater
change in the whole-blood culture of IFN γ compared
to placebo, and significantly reduced (50%) the
number of days of respiratory illness and its severity.
No substantial changes in running performance
measures were seen over the study. There were no
significant differences in the mean change in S-IgA
and IgA1 levels, or in IL-4 and IL-12 levels between
treatments.
Gill et al.102
2016
8
Endurance trained males were randomly assigned to 1
of the 2 groups: (i) supplementation with Lactobacillus
casei (1 × 1011 cell/day) or (ii) placebo. After
treatment, individuals were exposed to EHS, which
comprised of 2 h running exercise at 60%VO2max in hot
ambient conditions (34.0°C and 32%RH).
Randomized,
blinded, and
counterbalanced
cross-over trial
1 week,
7 sampling
points:
baseline,
pre-EHS,
post-EHS
(1 h, 2 h, 4 h,
and 24 h).
L. casei supplementation did not show significant
changes in resting circulatory endotoxin concentration
or plasma cytokine profile compared to placebo. A
main effect of time was observed for IL-6, TNF-α,
IL-10, and IL-8; whereby levels increased in response
to EHS. Relative to pre-EHS concentrations, higher
plasma concentrations of endotoxin, and plasma
TNF-α concentration was observed after probiotic
supplementation compared to placebo group.
Gill et al.103
2016
8
Endurance trained males were randomly assigned to 1
of 2 groups: (i) supplementation of Lactobacillus casei
(1 × 1011 cell/day) or (ii) placebo. After treatment,
individuals were exposed to EHS, which comprised of
2 h running exercise at 60%VO2max in hot ambient
conditions (34.0°C and 32%RH).
Randomized,
blinded, and
counterbalanced
cross-over trial
1 week
7 sampling
points:
baseline,
pre-EHS,
post-EHS
(1 h, 2 h, 4 h,
and 24 h).
Probiotic supplementation did not induce significant
changes in resting S-AMP responses compared with
placebo. Increases in S-IgA, S-α-amylase, and
S-cortisol responses, but not S-lysozyme responses,
were observed after EHS. No main effects of trial or
time × trial interaction were observed for S-AMP and
S-cortisol responses.
(continued on next page)
189
Intestinal microbiota and exercise
 Table 2 (continued)
Author
Y
ear
Number of
individuals
Functional food treatment
Experimental
design
Duration of
experiment
Results/conclusions
Gleeson et al.104
2012
66
(n = 33/group)
Highly active individuals were randomly distributed
into 1 of the 2 groups: (i) probiotic supplementation
(Lactobacillus salivarius; 2.0 × 1010 live cell/day) or
(ii) placebo.
Randomized,
blinded,
placebo-controlled
trial
16 weeks,
3 sampling
points:
baseline,
8 and 16
weeks
The proportion of subjects on placebo group who
experienced 1 or more weeks with URTI symptoms
was not different from individuals supplemented with
probiotics. The number of URTI episodes was similar
between groups. Severity and duration of symptoms
were not significantly different between treatments.
Blood leukocyte, neutrophil, monocyte, and
lymphocyte counts; S-IgA; and lysozyme
concentrations did not change over the course of the
study and were not different between groups.
Gleeson et al.88
2011
84
(n = 42/group)
Endurance runners were randomly distributed into 1 of
the 2 groups: (i) probiotic supplementation with
Lactobacillus casei Shirota (6.5 × 109 live cell/day) or
(ii) placebo.
Randomized,
blinded,
placebo-controlled
trial
16 weeks,
3 sampling
points:
baseline, 8
and 16 weeks
The proportion of subjects on placebo group who
experienced 1 or more weeks with URTI symptoms
was 36% higher than those on probiotic
supplementation. The number of URTI episodes was
significantly higher in the placebo group than in the
probiotic group. Severity and duration of symptoms
were not significantly different between treatments.
S-IgA concentration was higher on probiotic group
than placebo.
Haywood
et al.96
2014
30
Rugby union players were randomly distributed into
1 of the 2 groups: (i) probiotics multi-species
(Lactobacillus gasseri: 2.6 × 1012 cell/day,
Bifidobacterium bifidum: 0.2 × 1012 cell/day, and
Bifidobacterium longum: 0.2 × 1012 cell/day) or
(ii) placebo.
Randomized
controlled, single
cross-over design
with 28-day
washout period
4 weeks
During the probiotic treatment 14/30 participants
never experienced a single URTI or gastrointestinal
episode, compared to 6/30 on the placebo
supplementation. The number of days of illness
tended to be higher for the placebo than probiotic.
There was no significant difference in the severity of
the symptoms between the 2 treatment groups.
Kekkonen
et al.67
2007
141
Marathon runners were randomly assigned to 1 of
the 2 groups: (i) Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG
(4.0 × 1010 cell/day) or (ii) placebo.
Randomized,
double-blinded
intervention study
12 weeks
The number of healthy days was 79.0 in the probiotic
group and 73.4 in the placebo group. There were no
differences in the number of respiratory infections or
gastrointestinal-symptom episodes. The duration of
gastrointestinal-symptom episodes in the probiotic
group was 2.9 days vs. 4.3 days in the placebo group
during the training. Hematological parameters within
reference range for both groups throughout study.
Lamprecht
et al.79
2012
23
Trained men were randomly distributed into 1 of the 2
groups: (i) multi-species probiotic group (1 × 1010
cell/day, Ecologic®Performance or
OMNi-BiOTiC®POWER, n = 11) or (ii) placebo group
(n = 12). Individuals were submitted to a triple-step
test cycle ergometry.
Randomized,
double-blinded,
placebo-controlled
trial
14 weeks,
2 sampling
points:
baseline and
16 weeks
Zonulin, a marker indicating improved intestinal
barrier integrity, decreased in feces (~25%) after
probiotic supplementation. Probiotic supplementation
reduced TNF concentration by ~25% at rest and
post-exercise, and exercise-induced protein oxidation
by ~8% and IL-6 production.
(continued on next page)
190
N. Mach and D. Fuster-Botella
 Table 2 (continued)
Author
Y
ear
Number of
individuals
Functional food treatment
Experimental
design
Duration of
experiment
Results/conclusions
Martarelli
et al.98
2011
24
(n = 12/group)
Active individuals were randomly distributed in 1 of
the 2 groups: (i) mixture of the 2 probiotic strains (1:1
Lactobacillus rhamnosus IMC 501 and Lactobacillus
paracasei IMC 502; ~10 × 109 cell/day) or (ii) control
group. They did not consume any supplements during
the 4 weeks.
Pre–post
controlled trial
with control (but
no placebo
treatment) group
4 weeks
Probiotic supplementation increased plasma
antioxidant levels (~9%), thus neutralizing reactive
oxygen species. The 2 strains, L. rhamnosus and
L. paracasei exerted strong antioxidant activity.
Nieman et al.105
2014
19
Cyclists were engaged in two 75 km time trials after 2
weeks pistachio or no pistachio supplementation
(480 kcal per 3 of serving) with a 2-week washout
period. Pistachios were used because they are
nutrient-dense nuts that contain a unique nutrient
profile of proteins and carbohydrates (∼30% of
energy), fats (∼70% of energy), minerals (in particular,
copper, iron, magnesium), potassium, vitamins B6 and
thiamin, carotenoids, phytosterols, and phenolic acids.
Randomized,
cross-over design
Sampling at
5 min
pre-exercise,
and
immediately
post-, 1.5 h
post-, and
21 h
post-exercise
Two weeks pistachio nut supplementation was
associated with reduced 75 km cycling time trial
performance and increased post-exercise plasma
levels of raffinose, sucrose, and metabolites related to
leukotoxic effects and oxidative stress.
O’Brien et al.106
2015
67
Active individuals were randomly assigned to 1 of the
4 groups: (i) endurance training + control beverage,
(ii) endurance training + kefir beverage, (iii) active
control + control beverage, or (iv) active control + kefir
beverage. The exercise groups completed 15 weeks of
structured endurance training while the active control
groups maintained their usual exercise routine.
Additionally, each group was assigned to either a kefir
or a calorie/macronutrient matched placebo beverage
that was consumed twice per week.
Prospective group
intervention
15 weeks
The endurance training was effective in improving 1.5
mile (2.41 km) times and kefir supplementation may
have been a factor in attenuating the increase in CRP
that was observed over the course of the intervention
period.
Salarkia et al.89
2013
46
(n = 23/group)
Endurance swimmers girls were randomly assigned
into 1 of the 2 groups: (i) consumption 400 mL of
probiotic yogurt or (ii) ordinary yogurt daily.
Randomized
controlled design
8 weeks,
2 sampling
points:
beginning and
at the end of
the study
Consumption of probiotic yogurt resulted in a
reduction in the number of episodes of respiratory
infections and in duration of some of their symptoms.
Intake of probiotic yogurt also resulted in a
significant improved in VO2max possibly due to the
reduction of upper respiratory tract infections.
Salehzadeh107
2015
30
(n = 15/group)
Male students were randomized to (i) probiotic yogurt
drink (1 × 105 cell/g) along with physical activities or
(ii) ordinary yogurt drink and physical activities. Both
groups had 200 mL of yogurt drink daily.
Randomized,
double-blinded,
placebo-controlled
trial
10 weeks,
2 sampling
points: 24 h
before the first
training
session and at
the end of the
study
Both types of yogurt drink significantly increase HDL
and decrease CRP; yet, the decreasing effects of CRP
on athletes’ records were significantly higher in
probiotic group compared to the ordinary drink
group.
(continued on next page)
191
Intestinal microbiota and exercise
 Table 2 (continued)
Author
Y
ear
Number of
individuals
Functional food treatment
Experimental
design
Duration of
experiment
Results/conclusions
Shing et al.99
2014
10
(n = 5/group)
Male runners were randomly distributed into 1 of the 2
groups: (i) supplementation with a probiotics capsule
(45 billion cell/day of Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium
and Streptococcus strains) or (ii) placebo, separated by
a washout period. After each treatment, the runners
exercised to fatigue at 80% of their ventilatory
threshold at 35°C and 40% humidity.
Randomized,
double-blinded,
cross-over design
4 weeks
Four weeks of supplementation with a multi-strain
probiotic increased running time to fatigue in high
temperatures. There was a small-to-moderate
reduction in urine lactulose: rhamnose and a small
reduction in symptoms of gastrointestinal discomfort
following probiotics supplementation.
Valimaki
et al.108
2012
127
Runners were randomly assigned to 1 of the 2 groups:
(i) Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (probiotic group;
3 × 1010 cell/day) or (ii) placebo drink group.
Randomized,
double-blinded
intervention
3 months prior
to marathon
Probiotics did not have any effect on oxidized LDL
lipids, antioxidants, and serum antioxidant potential
during the study. Oxidized LDL lipids increased by
28% and 33% during the preparation period and
decreased by 16% and 19% during the marathon run
in the placebo and probiotic groups, respectively. No
changes were seen in serum antioxidant potential
before marathon, but during run serum antioxidant
potential raised by 16% in both groups.
West et al.95
2014
465
(241 males,
224 females)
Individuals were randomly distributed to 1 of the 3
groups: (i) Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis
Bl-04 (Bl-04), 2.0 × 109 cell/day; (ii) Lactobacillus
acidophilus NCFM and Bifidobacterium animalis
subsp. lactis Bi-07 (NCFM & Bi-07) 5 × 109 cell/day;
and (iii) placebo mixed in a drink.
Randomized,
double-blinded
placebo-controlled
trial
150 days,
sampling time
at baseline,
before 6-day
preparation,
before and
immediately
after the
marathon
The risk of an upper respiratory illness episode was
significantly lower in the Bl-04 group compared to
placebo.
West et al.97
2011
99
Cyclists (64 males, 35 females) were randomized
distributed into 1 of the 2 groups: (i) probiotic
supplementation (1 × 109 cell/day Lactobacillus
fermentum or (ii) placebo treatment.
Double-blinded,
randomized,
controlled trial
11 weeks
Lactobacillus numbers increased 7.7-fold more in
males on the probiotic, while there was an unclear
2.2-fold increase in females taking the probiotic. The
number and duration of mild gastrointestinal
symptoms were ~2-fold greater in the probiotic
group. The load (duration × severity) of lower
respiratory illness symptoms was less by a factor of
0.31 in males taking the probiotic compared with
placebo but increased by a factor of 2.2 in females.
Differences in use of cold and flu medication
mirrored these symptoms. There were clear
reductions in the magnitude of acute exercise-induced
changes in some cytokines.
Abbreviations: CRP = C-reactive protein; EHS = exertional-heat stress; HDL = high density lipoprotein; IFN γ = interferon gamma; IgA = immunoglobulin A; IL = Interleukin; LDL = low density lipoprotein;
RH = relative humidity; S-AMP = salivary antimicrobial protein; S-IgA = salivary immunoglobulin A; TNF = tumor necrosis factor; URTI = upper respiratory tract infections; VO2max = maximum oxygen uptake.
192
N. Mach and D. Fuster-Botella
 possibly due to the reduction of URTI. Meanwhile, Cox et al.90
evaluated the ability of the probiotic Lactobacillus fermentum
VRI-003 (PCC) to enhance the mucosal immune system in a
cohort of 20 highly-trained distance runners. Athletes who were
administered the probiotic for 1 month reported less than half the
number of days of respiratory symptoms during the 30 days of
PCC treatment compared to the control-placebo group. Illness
severity was also milder for episodes occurring during the PCC
treatment. There were no significant differences in salivary IgA
levels or interleukin (IL-4 and IL-12) levels. However, prophy-
lactic probiotic administration treatment elicited a 2-fold greater
change in whole-blood culture interferon gamma (IFN γ) com-
pared to the placebo group, suggesting that the maintenance of
IFN γ levels may be one of the underlying mechanisms for
positive clinical outcomes. A study in endurance athletes
(n = 42) who took Lactobacillus casei supplements for 4 months
showed a reduced prevalence of upper respiratory illness com-
pared to the control group. The subjects presented improved
levels of salivary IgA during a winter period of training and
competition.88 Clancy et al.91 also found that fatigued athletes
(n = 9) had clinical characteristics similar to those seen in
patients who experienced reactivated Epstein–Barr virus infec-
tions, including a significantly less secretion of IFN γ from blood
CD4+ T cells compared to healthy control athletes (n = 18).
After 4 weeks of treatment with capsules containing 2.0 × 1010
cells or colony forming units (CFU) of Lactobacillus acidophi-
lus, the fatigued athletes increased the quantity of IFN γ secre-
tion to levels similar to those of the healthy subjects. The
administration of Lactobacillus acidophilus in healthy athletes
also resulted in increased concentrations of mucosal IFN γ,
suggesting that probiotic therapy may reverse a T cell defect,
Treg cells in particular, in fatigued athletes while enhancing
mucosal IFN γ concentrations in healthy athletes. A number of
research groups continue to explore the role of Tregs in main-
taining inflammatory control in various athlete cohorts.92–94
Other studies have documented beneficial effects of probiotic
interventions on improvements in cytokines and immune-marker
panels, reductions in oxidative stress as well as respiratory and
gastrointestinal symptoms. For example,West et al.95 observed that
probiotic supplementation (Bifidobacterium animals subsp. lactis;
2 × 109 CFU/day) for 28 days reduced the risk of respiratory and
gastrointestinal illness in a cohort of 465 healthy active men and
women compared to a placebo group. In a smaller randomized
controlled trial of elite rugby players, the administration of a multi-
species probiotic for 4 weeks also reported a reduction in the
frequency of upper respiratory tract disorders and gastrointestinal
symptoms.96 To address the question if females and males respond
differently to probiotics, West et al.97 investigated 99 physically
active healthy men and women through a randomized controlled
trial. They observed a substantial reduction in respiratory and gas-
trointestinal symptoms in males, but not females after 88 days of
Lactobacillus fermentum supplementation.The extent to which the
observed differences between the 2 sexes were biological and/or
environmental in nature is unclear. Conversely, a randomized
double-blinded intervention study in 141 runners taking either a
placebo or probiotic supplement of Lactobacillus rhamnosus for 3
months showed no significant differences in the number of epi-
sodes of respiratory or gastrointestinal tract disorders in 2 weeks
after the marathon.67 Furthermore, probiotics may counteract
exercise-induced oxidative stress. In a randomized double-blinded,
placebo-controlled trial, Lamprecht et al.79 reported that trained
male athletes who consumed a multispecies probiotic supplement
for a 14-week period had normalized fecal zonulin concentrations,
which is a marker for intestinal permeability, compared to the
placebo group, in which exercise showed no effect on TNF-α
serum concentrations. The authors also reported that probiotic
supplementation does not enhance antioxidant enzyme level,
which subsequently neutralized excessive oxidative stress during
intense exercise. However, the oxidative stress in athletes who took
Lactobacillus paracasei and Lactobacillus rhamnosus supple-
ments during a 4-week period of intense physical activity was
reduced.98 The results demonstrated that intense physical activity
induced oxidative stress and that probiotic supplementation with
Lactobacillus rhamnosus or Lactobacillus paracasei increased
plasma antioxidant levels, thus exerting strong antioxidant activity
in athletes. Of particular interest is a small cross-over study of 10
runners who were exercised until they were fatigued at 80% of
their ventilatory threshold in 35°C and 40% humidity and supple-
mented with probiotic capsules containing 45 billion CFU of Lac-
tobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Streptococcus strains in runners.99
The dominant Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains were
selected because they have been shown to increase the expression
of tight junction proteins and thus maintain the integrity of the
intestinal barrier in response to various physiological stressors.
Following probiotic supplementation, serum levels of LPS were
reduced, resulting in an improvement in gut mucosa permeability
and an increase in the time it took to reach fatigue while exercising
in hot temperatures.
Most of the articles reviewed do not specifically identify an
ergogenic role of probiotic therapy but suggest that immune
function is enhanced, the effects of reactive oxygen species are
neutralized and gut mucosa permeability is normalized, which
might improve performance in athletes undergoing intense
physical training. Thus, probiotic supplementation could act as
an indirect ergogenic aid. However, these studies in athletes’
performances who take probiotic supplements have design
flaws. Dose–response experimental studies of probiotic supple-
mentation should investigate parallel changes in exercise
outcome, clinical outcome, immune function as well as dietary
and exercise regime over a period of several weeks to a few
months. As suggested by Pyne et al.,40 more well-designed
studies of probiotic supplementation in various athlete groups
are warranted to understand the complex relationship between
diet, activity levels, clinical outcome, and gut microbiota modi-
fications caused by probiotic supplementation is essential.
Future studies that examine the relationship between probiotic
supplementation and exercise-induced disorders should also
discuss the most appropriate bacterial strains, the best encap-
sulation form in which probiotics are manufactured and the
concentrations/dosage that could increase its benefits on ath-
letic performance and oxidative stress and immunity.14
Given the small number of studies that have examined the
effects of probiotic supplementation in athletes and other highly
active individuals, it is somewhat premature to issue definitive
193
Intestinal microbiota and exercise
 clinical and practical guidelines.40 However, it appears that
probiotic supplementation in combination with a well-formulated
dietary plan could assist athletes with a history of respiratory and
gastrointestinal disorders during intense periods of training and
competition.40
Unlike probiotics, the effects of prebiotics have not been tested
in athletes. Prebiotics represent a specific type of dietary fiber
that when fermented mediate measurable changes within the
gut microbiota composition such as increasing the levels of
bifidobacteria or certain butyrate products. Similarly, no reports
exist on the effect polyphenols have on the gut microbiota compo-
sition and athletic performance. However, recent studies show that
the consumption of polyphenol extracts, such as wine, cocoa, and
blueberry, modulates the human gut microbiota toward a more
“health-promoting profile” by increasing the relative abundance of
bifidobacteria and lactobacilli.100 It is now evident that gut
microbiota can play a critical role in transforming dietary polyphe-
nols into bioactive polyphenol-derived metabolites which thus
benefit the microbiota composition and host health.100 At the same
time, polyphenols may control microbiota sub-populations by
changing the intestinal redox state; therefore, the link between
microbiota and polyphenol consumption represents an additional
marker of oxidative-stress-mediated processes.101 These data again
raise the possibility that certain functional foods may tap into the
underlying ecological processes that regulate gut microbiome
community structure and function, contributing to the athlete’s
health and performance.9,100
As we enter the post-metagenomic era and gain a better under-
standing of the microbiota’s role in health and metabolism, we
could aim to effectively integrate an athlete’s microbiota into
some form of personalized training and diet plan. With a more
complete understanding of the physiological processes that the
microbiota regulate, nutritionists will be able to determine
whether or not the gut microbiota is a potential target that we can
modulate in order to enhance the performance and health of elite
athletes.
4. Conclusion
During endurance exercise, transient immunosuppression
and inflammatory alterations are observed as well as the regu-
lation of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, mitochondrial bio-
genesis, oxidative stress, and dehydration. In the past decade,
interest in human microbiome has increased considerably. Gut
microbiota ferment complex dietary polysaccharides into SCFs,
which may be used as sources of energy in liver and muscle cells
and improve endurance performance by maintaining glycemia
over time. In addition, the resulting SCFs seem to regulate
neutrophil function and migration, reduce colonic mucosal per-
meability, inhibit inflammatory cytokines and control the redox
environment in the cell, which might help delay fatigue symp-
toms in endurance athlete. However, the fermentation of amino
acids produces a range of potentially harmful compounds.
Given that many endurance dietary plans are based on high
protein and carbohydrate levels, a key challenge is to design
diets that limit the microbial profiles that produce toxic metabo-
lites from protein degradation while increasing the number
of microorganisms that improve energy metabolism, reduce
oxidative stress and regulate systemic inflammation. Currently,
the main dietary strategy to modulate gut microbiota includes
probiotics. In athletes, the administration of different Lactoba-
cillus and Bifidobacterium strains might help maintain a state of
general health, enhance immune function, improve gut mucosal
permeability, reduce oxidative stress and obtain energy from
plant-carbohydrate sources. By better understanding the mecha-
nisms by which microbiota respond to exercise, we hope to
develop novel therapeutic and nutritional strategies to modulate
the microbiota and enhance the athlete’s overall performance
and health. It is therefore important for future research to tease
apart the respective influences that high intensity exercise and
the intestinal microbiota have on the immune, redox system, and
energy metabolism and to track the impact that ongoing func-
tional foods have on the intestinal microbiota. In the future, it
may be possible to use the gut microbiota profile as a tool to
predict performance and detect potential disorders before con-
ventional diagnostic tools can.
Acknowledgment
We thank Allison Clark from Open University of Catalonia
for the English editing.
Authors’ contributions
NM is the guarantor; DFB wrote the main manuscript text
and prepared all tables; NM wrote the main manuscript text,
designed, coordinated, and provided critical revision of the
article. Both authors have read and approved the final version of
the manuscript, and agree with the order of presentation of the
authors.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
References
1. Joyner MJ, Coyle EF. Endurance exercise performance: the physiology of
champions. J Physiol 2008;586:35–44.
2. Russell AP, Lamon S, Boon H, Wada S, Güller I, Brown EL, et al.
Regulation of miRNAs in human skeletal muscle following acute
endurance exercise and short-term endurance training. J Physiol 2013;
591:4637–53.
3. Munoz A, Riber C, Trigo P, Castejon-Riber C, Castejon FM.
Dehydration, electrolyte imbalances and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-
vasopressin axis in successful and unsuccessful endurance horses. Equine
Vet J 2010;42:83–90.
4. Snow DH, Baxter P, Rose RJ. Muscle fibre composition and glycogen
depletion
in
horses
competing
in
an
endurance
ride.
Vet
Rec
1981;108:374–8.
5. Davies
KJ,
Packer
L,
Brooks
GA.
Biochemical
adaptation
of
mitochondria, muscle, and whole-animal respiration to endurance
training. Arch Biochem Biophys 1981;209:539–54.
6. Devenport L, Doughty D, Heiberger B, Burton D, Brown R, Stith R.
Exercise endurance in rats: roles of type I and II corticosteroid receptors.
Physiol Behav 1993;53:1171–5.
7. Hooper LV, Gordon JI. Commensal host–bacterial relationships in the
gut. Science 2001;292:1115–8.
8. Rajilic-Stojanovic M, de Vos WM. The first 1000 cultured species of the
human gastrointestinal microbiota. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2014;38:
996–1047.
194
N. Mach and D. Fuster-Botella
 9. Marchesi JR, Adams DH, Fava F, Hermes GD, Hirschfield GM, Hold G,
et al. The gut microbiota and host health: a new clinical frontier. Gut
2016;65:330–9.
10. Hsu YJ, Chiu CC, Li YP, Huang WC, Huang YT, Huang CC, et al. Effect
of intestinal microbiota on exercise performance in mice. J Strength Cond
Res 2015;29:552–8.
11. Samuel BS, Shaito A, Motoike T, Rey FE, Backhed F, Manchester JK,
et al. Effects of the gut microbiota on host adiposity are modulated by the
short-chain fatty-acid binding G protein-coupled receptor, Gpr41. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:16767–72.
12. Belkaid Y, Hand TW. Role of the microbiota in immunity and
inflammation. Cell 2014;157:121–41.
13. Neish AS. Mucosal immunity and the microbiome. Ann Am Thorac Soc
2014;11(Suppl. 1):S28–32.
14. Lamprecht M, Frauwallner A. Exercise, intestinal barrier dysfunction and
probiotic supplementation. Med Sport Sci 2012;59:47–56.
15. Clarke SF, Murphy EF, O’Sullivan O, Lucey AJ, Humphreys M, Hogan
A, et al. Exercise and associated dietary extremes impact on gut microbial
diversity. Gut 2014;63:1913–20.
16. McFadzean R. Exercise can help modulate human gut microbiota.
Boulder, Co: University of Colorado; 2014. [Dissertation].
17. Evans CC, LePard KJ, Kwak JW, Stancukas MC, Laskowski S,
Dougherty J, et al. Exercise prevents weight gain and alters the gut
microbiota in a mouse model of high fat diet-induced obesity. PLoS One
2014;9:e92193. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0092193
18. Queipo-Ortuno MI, Seoane LM, Murri M, Pardo M, Gomez-Zumaquero
JM, Cardona F, et al. Gut microbiota composition in male rat models
under different nutritional status and physical activity and its association
with serum leptin and ghrelin levels. PLoS One 2013;8:e65465.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0065465
19. Lambert JE, Myslicki JP, Bomhof MR, Belke DD, Shearer J, Reimer RA.
Exercise training modifies gut microbiota in normal and diabetic mice.
Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2015;40:749–52.
20. Kang SS, Jeraldo PR, Kurti A, Miller ME, Cook MD, Whitlock K, et al.
Diet and exercise orthogonally alter the gut microbiome and reveal
independent associations with anxiety and cognition. Mol Neurodegener
2014;9:36. doi:10.1186/1750-1326-9-36
21. Choi JJ, Eum SY, Rampersaud E, Daunert S, Abreu MT, Toborek M,
et al. Exercise attenuates PCB-induced changes in the mouse gut
microbiome. Environ Health Perspect 2013;121:725–30.
22. Xu J, Xu C, Chen X, Cai X, Yang S, Sheng Y, et al. Regulation of an
antioxidant blend on intestinal redox status and major microbiota in early
weaned piglets. Nutrition 2014;30:584–9.
23. Redondo N, Gheorghe A, Serrano R, Nova E, Marcos A. HYDRAGUT
study: influence of HYDRAtion status on the GUT microbiota and their
impact on the immune system. The FASEB J 2015;29(Suppl. 1):593.
24. Shamseer L, Moher D, Clarke M, Ghersi D, Liberati A, Petticrew M, et al.
Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis
protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015: elaboration and explanation. BMJ 2015;
349:g7647. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g7647
25. O’Sullivan O, Cronin O, Clarke SF, Murphy EF, Molloy MG,
Shanahan F, et al. Exercise and the microbiota. Gut Microbes 2015;
6:131–6.
26. Cronin O, Molloy MG, Shanahan F. Exercise, fitness, and the gut. Curr
Opin Gastroenterol 2016;32:67–73.
27. Boveris A, Navarro A. Systemic and mitochondrial adaptive responses to
moderate exercise in rodents. Free Radic Biol Med 2008;44:224–9.
28. Clavel T, Desmarchelier C, Haller D, Gérard P, Rohn S, Lepage P, et al.
Intestinal microbiota in metabolic diseases: from bacterial community
structure and functions to species of pathophysiological relevance. Gut
Microbes 2014;5:544–51.
29. Nicholson JK, Holmes E, Kinross J, Burcelin R, Gibson G, Jia W, et al.
Host–gut microbiota metabolic interactions. Science 2012;336:1262–7.
30. Schloss PD, Schubert AM, Zackular JP, Iverson KD, Y
oung VB,
Petrosino JF. Stabilization of the murine gut microbiome following
weaning. Gut Microbes 2012;3:383–93.
31. Spor A, Koren O, Ley R. Unravelling the effects of the environment and
host genotype on the gut microbiome. Nat Rev Microbiol 2011;9:279–90.
32. Bearson SM, Allen HK, Bearson BL, Looft T, Brunelle BW, Kich JD,
et al. Profiling the gastrointestinal microbiota in response to Salmonella:
low versus high Salmonella shedding in the natural porcine host. Infect
Genet Evol 2013;16:330–40.
33. Vandeputte D, Falony G, Vieira-Silva S, Tito RY, Joossens M, Raes J.
Stool consistency is strongly associated with gut microbiota richness and
composition, enterotypes and bacterial growth rates. Gut 2016;65:57–
62.
34. Le Chatelier E, Nielsen T, Qin J, Prifti E, Hildebrand F, Falony G, et al.
Richness of human gut microbiome correlates with metabolic markers.
Nature 2013;500:541–6.
35. Matsumoto M, Inoue R, Tsukahara T, Ushida K, Chiji H, Matsubara N,
et al. Voluntary running exercise alters microbiota composition and
increases n-butyrate concentration in the rat cecum. Biosci Biotechnol
Biochem 2008;72:572–6.
36. Petriz BA, Castro AP, Almeida JA, Gomes CP, Fernandes GR, Kruger
RH, et al. Exercise induction of gut microbiota modifications in obese,
non-obese and hypertensive rats. BMC Genomics 2014;15:511. doi:
10.1186/1471-2164-15-511
37. Karl JP, Margolis LM, Madslien EH, Murphy NE, Castellani JW,
Gundersen Y, et al. Changes in intestinal microbiota composition and
metabolism coincide with increased intestinal permeability in young
adults under prolonged physiological stress. Am J Physiol Gastrointest
Liver Physiol 2017;312:G559–71.
38. Cairns SP. Lactic acid and exercise performance: culprit or friend? Sports
Med 2006;36:279–91.
39. Opitz D, Lenzen E, Opiolka A, Redmann M, Hellmich M, Bloch W, et al.
Endurance training alters basal erythrocyte MCT-1 contents and affects
the lactate distribution between plasma and red blood cells in T2DM men
following maximal exercise. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 2015;93:413–9.
40. Pyne DB, West NP, Cox AJ, Cripps AW. Probiotics supplementation for
athletes—clinical and physiological effects. Eur J Sport Sci 2015;15:
63–72.
41. Hold GL. The gut microbiota, dietary extremes and exercise. Gut
2014;63:1838–9.
42. Musso G, Gambino R, Cassader M. Interactions between gut microbiota
and host metabolism predisposing to obesity and diabetes. Annu Rev Med
2011;62:361–80.
43. Pimentel M, Lin HC, Enayati P, van den Burg B, Lee HR, Chen JH, et al.
Methane, a gas produced by enteric bacteria, slows intestinal transit and
augments small intestinal contractile activity. Am J Physiol Gastrointest
Liver Physiol 2006;290:G1089–95.
44. Gibson GR, Cummings JH, Macfarlane GT. Competition for hydrogen
between sulphate-reducing bacteria and methanogenic bacteria from the
human large intestine. J Appl Bacteriol 1988;65:241–7.
45. Wong JM, de Souza R, Kendall CW, Emam A, Jenkins DJ. Colonic
health: fermentation and short chain fatty acids. J Clin Gastroenterol
2006;40:235–43.
46. Jumpertz R, Le DS, Turnbaugh PJ, Trinidad C, Bogardus C, Gordon JI,
et al. Energy-balance studies reveal associations between gut microbes,
caloric load, and nutrient absorption in humans. Am J Clin Nutr
2011;94:58–65.
47. De Filippo C, Cavalieri D, Di Paola M, Ramazzotti M, Poullet JB, Massart
S, et al. Impact of diet in shaping gut microbiota revealed by a
comparative study in children from Europe and rural Africa. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2010;107:14691–6.
48. Mach N, Berri M, Estellé J, Levenez F, Lemonnier G, Denis C, et al.
Early-life establishment of the swine gut microbiome and impact on host
phenotypes. Environ Microbiol Rep 2015;7:554–69.
49. Antonio J, Kalman D, Stout JR, Greenwood M, Willoughby DS, Haff GG,
editors. Essentials of sports nutrition and supplements. Totowa, NJ:
Humana Press; 2008.
50. Tipton KD, Witard OC. Protein requirements and recommendations
for
athletes:
relevance
of
ivory
tower
arguments
for
practical
recommendations. Clin Sports Med 2007;26:17–36.
51. Rodriguez NR, Vislocky LM, Gaine PC. Dietary protein, endurance
exercise, and human skeletal-muscle protein turnover. Curr Opin Clin
Nutr Metab Care 2007;10:40–5.
195
Intestinal microbiota and exercise
 52. Windey K, De Preter V, Verbeke K. Relevance of protein fermentation to
gut health. Mol Nutr Food Res 2012;56:184–96.
53. Marlicz W, Loniewski I. The effect of exercise and diet on gut microbial
diversity. Gut 2015;64:519–20.
54. Ray K. Gut microbiota. Tackling the effects of diet and exercise on the gut
microbiota. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;11:456. doi:10.1038/
nrgastro.2014.109
55. Liu WY, da Lu J, Du XM, Sun JQ, Ge J, Wang RW, et al. Effect of
aerobic exercise and low carbohydrate diet on pre-diabetic non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease in postmenopausal women and middle aged men—the
role of gut microbiota composition: study protocol for the AELC
randomized controlled trial. BMC Public Health 2014;14:48. doi: 10.1186/
1471-2458-14-48
56. Shephard RJ, Shek PN. Potential impact of physical activity and sport
on the immune system—a brief review. Br J Sports Med 1994;28:247–
55.
57. Brenner I, Shek PN, Zamecnik J, Shephard RJ. Stress hormones and the
immunological responses to heat and exercise. Int J Sports Med
1998;19:130–43.
58. Gleeson M. Immune function in sport and exercise. J Appl Physiol
2007;103:693–9.
59. Cannon JG, Evans WJ, Hughes VA, Meredith CN, Dinarello CA.
Physiological
mechanisms
contributing
to
increased
interleukin-1
secretion. J Appl Physiol 1986;61:1869–74.
60. Evans WJ, Meredith CN, Cannon JG, Dinarello CA, Frontera WR,
Hughes VA, et al. Metabolic changes following eccentric exercise in
trained and untrained men. J Appl Physiol 1986;61:1864–8.
61. Pedersen BK, Toft AD. Effects of exercise on lymphocytes and cytokines.
Br J Sports Med 2000;34:246–51.
62. Pervaiz N, Hoffman-Goetz L. Immune cell inflammatory cytokine
responses differ between central and systemic compartments in response
to acute exercise in mice. Exerc Immunol Rev 2012;18:142–57.
63. Hoffman-Goetz L, Spagnuolo PA, Guan J. Repeated exercise in mice
alters expression of IL-10 and TNF-α in intestinal lymphocytes. Brain
Behav Immun 2008;22:195–9.
64. Palm NW, de Zoete MR, Cullen TW, Barry NA, Stefanowski J, Hao L,
et al. Immunoglobulin A coating identifies colitogenic bacteria in
inflammatory bowel disease. Cell 2014;158:1000–10.
65. Viloria M, Lara-Padilla E, Campos-Rodríguez R, Jarillo-Luna A,
Reyna-Garfias H, López-Sánchez P, et al. Effect of moderate exercise on
IgA levels and lymphocyte count in mouse intestine. Immunol Invest
2011;40:640–56.
66. Neville V, Gleeson M, Follan JP. Salivary IgA as a risk factor for upper
respiratory infections in elite professional athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc
2008;40:1228–36.
67. Kekkonen RA, Vasankari TJ, Vuorimaa T, Haahtela T, Julkunen I,
Korpela R. The effect of probiotics on respiratory infections and
gastrointestinal symptoms during training in marathon runners. Int J
Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2007;17:352–63.
68. Gleeson M. Immune function in sport and exercise. Appl Physiol
2007;103:693–9.
69. Nieman DC, Johanssen LM, Lee JW, Arabatzis K. Infectious episodes in
runners before and after the Los-Angeles marathon. J Sports Med Phys
Fitness 1990;30:316–28.
70. Thomas LV, Ockhuizen T. New insights into the impact of the intestinal
microbiota on health and disease: a symposium report. Br J Nutr
2012;107(Suppl. 1):S1–13.
71. Simons SM, Kennedy RG. Gastrointestinal problems in runners. Curr
Sports Med Rep 2004;3:112–6.
72. Trevisi P, De Filippi S, Minieri L, Mazzoni M, Modesto M, Biavati B,
et
al.
Effect
of
fructo-oligosaccharides
and
different
doses
of
Bifidobacterium animalis in a weaning diet on bacterial translocation and
Toll-like receptor gene expression in pigs. Nutrition 2008;24:1023–9.
73. Spadoni I, Zagato E, Bertocchi A, Paolinelli R, Hot E, Di Sabatino A,
et al. A gut–vascular barrier controls the systemic dissemination of
bacteria. Science 2015;350:830–4.
74. Jeukendrup AE, Vet-Joop K, Sturk A, Stegen JH, Senden J, Saris WH,
et al. Relationship between gastro-intestinal complaints and endotoxaemia,
cytokine release and the acute-phase reaction during and after a long-
distance triathlon in highly trained men. Clin Sci 2000;98:47–55.
75. Marycz K, Mierzejewska K, S
´mieszek A, Suszynska E, Malicka I, Kucia
M, et al. Endurance exercise mobilizes developmentally early stem cells
into peripheral blood and increases their number in bone marrow:
implications for tissue regeneration. Stem Cells Int 2016;2016:5756901.
doi: 10.1155/2016/5756901
76. Bessa A, Oliveira VN, Agostini G, Oliveira RJ, Oliveira AC, White GE,
et al. Exercise intensity and recovery: biomarkers of injury, inflammation
and oxidative stress. J Strength Cond Res 2016;30:311–9.
77. Circu ML, Aw TY. Intestinal redox biology and oxidative stress. Semin
Cell Dev Biol 2012;23:729–37.
78. Bhattacharyya A, Chattopadhyay R, Mitra S, Crowe SE. Oxidative stress:
an essential factor in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal mucosal
diseases. Physiol Rev 2014;94:329–54.
79. Lamprecht M, Bogner S, Schippinger G, Steinbauer K, Fankhauser F,
Hallstroem S, et al. Probiotic supplementation affects markers of
intestinal barrier, oxidation, and inflammation in trained men; a
randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. J Int Soc Sports
Nutr 2012;9:45. doi: 10.1186/1550-2783-9-45
80. Ghosh S, Dai C, Brown K, Rajendiran E, Makarenko S, Baker J, et al.
Colonic microbiota alters host susceptibility to infectious colitis by
modulating inflammation, redox status, and ion transporter gene
expression. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2011;301:G39–49.
81. Mardinoglu A, Shoaie S, Bergentall M, Ghaffari P, Zhang C, Larsson E,
et al. The gut microbiota modulates host amino acid and glutathione
metabolism in mice. Mol Syst Biol 2015;11:834. doi: 10.15252/msb.
20156487
82. Dobashi Y, Y
oshimura H, Atarashi E, Takahashi K, Tohei A, Amao H.
Upregulation of superoxide dismutase activity in the intestinal tract
mucosa of germ-free mice. J Vet Med Sci 2013;75:49–54.
83. Armstrong LE, Costill DL, Fink WJ. Influence of diuretic-induced
dehydration on competitive running performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc
1985;17:456–61.
84. Colgan SP. Swimming through the gut: implications of fluid transport on
the microbiome. Dig Dis Sci 2013;58:602–3.
85. Musch MW, Wang Y, Claud EC, Chang EB. Lubiprostone decreases
mouse colonic inner mucus layer thickness and alters intestinal
microbiota. Dig Dis Sci 2013;58:668–77.
86. Keely S, Kelly CJ, Weissmueller T, Burgess A, Wagner BD, Robertson
CE, et al. Activated fluid transport regulates bacterial–epithelial
interactions and significantly shifts the murine colonic microbiome. Gut
Microbes 2012;3:250–60.
87. Sollanek KJ, Kenefick RW, Cheuvront SN, Axtell RS. Potential impact of
a 500-mL water bolus and body mass on plasma osmolality dilution. Eur
J Appl Physiol 2011;111:1999–2004.
88. Gleeson M, Bishop NC, Oliveira M, Tauler P. Daily probiotic’s
(Lactobacillus casei Shirota) reduction of infection incidence in athletes.
Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2011;21:55–64.
89. Salarkia N, Ghadamli L, Zaeri F, Sabaghian Rad L. Effects of probiotic
yogurt on performance, respiratory and digestive systems of young adult
female endurance swimmers: a randomized controlled trial. Med J Islam
Repub Iran 2013;27:141–6.
90. Cox AJ, Pyne DB, Saunders PU, Fricker PA. Oral administration of the
probiotic Lactobacillus fermentum VRI-003 and mucosal immunity in
endurance athletes. Br J Sports Med 2010;44:222–6.
91. Clancy RL, Gleeson M, Cox A, Callister R, Dorrington M, D’Este C,
et al. Reversal in fatigued athletes of a defect in interferon gamma
secretion after administration of Lactobacillus acidophilus. Br J Sports
Med 2006;40:351–4.
92. Handzlik MK, Shaw AJ, Dungey M, Bishop NC, Gleeson M. The
influence of exercise training status on antigen-stimulated IL-10
production in whole blood culture and numbers of circulating regulatory
T cells. Eur J Appl Physiol 2013;113:1839–48.
93. Cosgrove C, Galloway SD, Neal C, Hunter AM, McFarlin BK, Spielmann
G, et al. The impact of 6-month training preparation for an Ironman
triathlon on the proportions of naive, memory and senescent T cells in
resting blood. Eur J Appl Physiol 2012;112:2989–98.
196
N. Mach and D. Fuster-Botella
 94. Perry C, Pick M, Bdolach N, Hazan-Halevi I, Kay S, Berr I, et al.
Endurance exercise diverts the balance between Th17 cells and regulatory
T cells. PLoS One 2013;8:e74722. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0074722
95. West NP, Horn PL, Pyne DB, Gebski VJ, Lahtinen SJ, Fricker PA, et al.
Probiotic supplementation for respiratory and gastrointestinal illness
symptoms in healthy physically active individuals. Clin Nutr 2014;
33:581–7.
96. Haywood BA, Black KE, Baker D, McGarvey J, Healey P, Brown RC.
Probiotic supplementation reduces the duration and incidence of
infections but not severity in elite rugby union players. J Sci Med Sport
2014;17:356–60.
97. West NP, Pyne DB, Cripps AW, Hopkins WG, Eskesen DC, Jairath A,
et al. Lactobacillus fermentum (PCC®) supplementation and gastrointes-
tinal and respiratory-tract illness symptoms: a randomised control trial in
athletes. Nutr J 2011;10:30. doi: 10.1186/1475-2891-10-30
98. Martarelli D, Verdenelli MC, Scuri S, Cocchioni M, Silvi S, Cecchini C,
et al. Effect of a probiotic intake on oxidant and antioxidant parameters in
plasma of athletes during intense exercise training. Curr Microbiol
2011;62:1689–96.
99. Shing CM, Peake JM, Lim CL, Briskey D, Walsh NP, Fortes MB, et al.
Effects of probiotics supplementation on gastrointestinal permeability,
inflammation and exercise performance in the heat. Eur J Appl Physiol
2014;114:93–103.
100. Queipo-Ortuno MI, Boto-Ordóñez M, Murri M, Gomez-Zumaquero JM,
Clemente-Postigo M, Estruch R, et al. Influence of red wine polyphenols
and ethanol on the gut microbiota ecology and biochemical biomarkers.
Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95:1323–34.
101. Bolca S, Van de Wiele T, Possemiers S. Gut metabotypes govern health
effects of dietary polyphenols. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2013;24:220–5.
102. Gill SK, Allerton DM, Ansley-Robson P, Hemmings K, Cox M, Costa RJ.
Does
short-term
high
dose
probiotic
supplementation
containing
lactobacillus casei attenuate exertional-heat stress induced endotoxaemia
and cytokinaemia? Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2016;26:268–
75.
103. Gill SK, Teixeira AM, Rosado F, Cox M, da Costa RJ. High dose
probiotic supplementation containing lactobacillus casei for seven days
does not enhance salivary antimicrobial protein responses to exertional-
heat stress compared with placebo. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab
2016;26:150–60.
104. Gleeson M, Bishop NC, Oliveira M, McCauley T, Tauler P, Lawrence C,
et al. Effects of a Lactobacillus salivarius probiotic intervention on
infection, cold symptom duration and severity, and mucosal immunity in
endurance athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2012;22:235–42.
105. Nieman DC, Scherr J, Luo B, Meaney MP, Dréau D, Sha W, et al.
Influence
of
pistachios
on
performance
and
exercise-induced
inflammation, oxidative stress, immune dysfunction, and metabolite shifts
in cyclists: a randomized, crossover trial. PLoS One 2014;9:e113725.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0113725
106. O’Brien KV, Stewart LK, Forney LA, Aryana KJ, Prinyawiwatkul W,
Boeneke CA. The effects of postexercise consumption of a kefir beverage
on performance and recovery during intensive endurance training. J Dairy
Sci 2015;98:7446–9.
107. Salehzadeh S. The effects of probiotic yogurt drink on lipid profile, CRP
and record changes in aerobic athletes. Life Sci 2015;4:32–7.
108. Valimaki IA, Vuorimaa T, Ahotupa M, Kekkonen R, Korpela R,
Vasankari T, et al. Decreased training volume and increased carbohydrate
intake increases oxidized LDL levels. Int J Sports Med 2012;33:291–6.
109. Heinonen I, Kalliokoski KK, Hannukainen JC, Duncker DJ, Nuutila P,
Knuuti J, et al. Organ-specific physiological responses to acute physical
exercise and long-term training in humans. Physiology 2014;29:421–36.
110. Tremaroli V, Backhed F. Functional interactions between the gut
microbiota and host metabolism. Nature 2012;489:242–9.
111. Goldszmid RS, Trinchieri G. The price of immunity. Nat Immunol
2012;13:932–8.
197
Intestinal microbiota and exercise
