   
  BMJ Quality Improvement Reports 2016; u210506.w4243 doi: 10.1136/bmjquality.u210506.w4243 
Increasing Healthy Start food and vitamin voucher uptake for low income
pregnant women (Early Years Collaborative Leith Pioneer Site)
Graham Mackenzie, Angela Dougall
NHS Lothian
Abstract
Poverty has a detrimental impact on health and wellbeing. Healthy Start food and vitamin vouchers provide support for low income families
across the UK, but at least 25% of eligible women and children miss out. We set out to increase uptake, with an aim of 90% of eligible women
and children (n~540 eligible, varying over time) receiving vouchers in the initial team's catchment area by December 2015.
Starting with one midwife and one pregnant woman in March 2014 we used the model for improvement to identify ways to improve
documentation, sign up, and referral. Weekly data on process measures and monthly data on voucher receipt were plotted on run charts.
Comparing medians for January-June 2014 and March-August 2015 there was a 13.3% rise in voucher receipt in Lothian (increase from 313
to 355 women), versus an 8.4% decline for the rest of Scotland (fall from 1688 to 1546 women). Figures varied by team, influenced by staff,
family, and area factors. The initial aim proved unrealistic, as signing up a woman for vouchers increases both the numerator and
denominator. Accordingly, the percentage uptake has not increased at a regional level (remains at 75%), though the figure for the initiating
team ("team 3" in graphs) has increased from 73.0% (January 2014) to 79.0% (November 2015). We have continued testing, achieving recent
increases in the number of women referred for welfare rights advice on benefits, tax credits, employment rights, childcare, and debt, securing
on average £4,500 per client during 2015/16 (£404k for 89 clients by mid September 2015).
This improvement project, part of the Early Years Collaborative in Scotland, has had a measureable impact on pregnant women across
Lothian. Success has relied on testing, an electronic maternity record, rapid dissemination of findings through direct engagement with clinical
teams, and persistence. Our findings have relevance across the UK, particularly at a time of worsening finances for many families.
Problem
Healthy Start is a UK wide food and vitamin voucher scheme for low
income pregnant women and families, and pregnant women under
18 years of age regardless of financial circumstances. Across the
UK around 1/4 eligible pregnant women and families with children
miss out on vouchers. Healthy Start is one of the simplest parts of
the UK benefit system. A pregnant woman or family with child(ren)
under four years old completes an application form that is
countersigned by a midwife, health visitor, general practitioner, or
practice nurse. Preliminary information in our area (Edinburgh,
Lothian, Scotland, United Kingdom), showed that practice varied.
Monthly data on Healthy Start voucher receipt and eligibility are
available from Department of Health, at postcode sector level.
There is considerable variation in voucher receipt, even in areas of
highest entitlement where word of mouth sharing between families
and wider acceptance of vouchers in local shops may be expected
to maximise uptake. Understanding the support required to boost
voucher receipt will help us improve support for low income
families.
Background
Across the UK around 28% of children live in poverty.[1] Food
poverty is increasing.[2] Poverty has immediate and long term
negative consequences for health and wellbeing. Healthy Start
vouchers are an important source of support for pregnant women
and children, with vouchers worth up to £899 if eligible from week
10 of pregnancy up until the child's 4th birthday.[3] Work in other
areas has highlighted the importance of welfare rights advice in
supporting low income families to access their entitlements and
other support (e.g. NHS Glasgow and Clyde's Healthier Wealthier
Children).[4] However, across the UK at least 25% eligible women
and children do not receive Healthy Start vouchers, and that figure
has remained static for many years.
Baseline measurement
The improvement work started in March 2014. In February 2014,
294 women were in receipt of vouchers in Lothian (source:
Department of Health data on voucher receipt).
Process measures were also available from the NHS Lothian
maternity electronic patient record (Trak) for the first 12 weeks of
2014, during which period 2,767 women booked for antenatal care:
- 72.3% of women had documentation of Healthy Start eligibility
- 13.9% women considered themselves eligible for Healthy Start
- 56.6% had documentation of questions about debt and money
  Page 1 of 5
© 2016, Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopenquality.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Improv Report: first published as 10.1136/bmjquality.u210506.w4243 on 11 April 2016. Downloaded from 
 worries
- 0.9% had documentation of referral for welfare rights advice.
Design
We used the Model for Improvement, taught to the Early Years
Collaborative by the Institute for Healthcare Improvement, to test
small changes with an individual midwife and pregnant woman.
Identifying areas for improvement we retested. On establishing a
streamlined process we surveyed other midwives to assess existing
practice. We shared the redesigned process with other teams. We
used a Pareto chart to document reasons for not receiving vouchers
at return appointment at 16 weeks of pregnancy.
Strategy
PDSA cycle 1. Our initial focus was on the steps required for a
pregnant woman to receive vouchers by 10 weeks of pregnancy. By
starting at the level of individual woman/midwife, we found that the
midwife had built in unnecessary steps in an attempt to avoid
signing up women with non-viable pregnancy, or to reduce fraud,
that had been delaying sign up into the second or third trimester.
We established that the midwife did not need to assess the
woman's financial circumstances (i.e. eligibility): she simply needed
to confirm that the woman had consulted the midwife about her
pregnancy. The midwife did not need the woman to complete the
form before countersigning the form: she just needed to confirm that
the details about any children were correct. These extra steps
delayed and reduced sign up.
PDSA cycle 2. Retesting with the next woman who considered
herself eligible for Healthy Start, the midwife was able to complete
her section of the form without complication. However, on checking
at the 16 week appointment, the pregnant woman had not
completed her section of the form. Collecting information from
women at the 16 week appointment we were able to confirm
problems in completing the woman's section of the form (e.g. low
literacy, application form not posted, wrong colour ink used,
application rejected, partner did not want to complete their section
of form). We used a Pareto chart to document and assess these
reasons. In order to support women with completing the form we
worked with a local adult literacy programme in the area.
PDSA cycle 3. Having established that half the midwives in the
initiating team had also built these unnecessary steps into the sign
up process, we conducted a survey of community midwives in the
neighbouring team, and then across the whole region (n=61
responses in total), which showed that half of midwives had built in
similar unnecessary steps. The results of the survey were shared
with all ten teams, along with information about the simplified sign
up process, by email. The information explained how to record
eligibility on the electronic patient record, how to complete the
application form and gain additional support if required, and
provided a flowchart. Process measures (documentation and level
of sign up) from the electronic patient record did not improve in the
weeks following the survey and email.
PDSA cycle 4. Over subsequent weeks the process and team level
data and advice were shared in community midwife team meetings.
Data on voucher receipt were shared regularly, and in increasing
detail, including postcode sector level data. Process measures and
then voucher receipt increased in teams following the team visit, but
that improvement was not always sustained.
Exploring the primary and secondary drivers with midwives and
other community organisations, it was clear that there was some
demoralisation within teams about the continuing challenges of
supporting women to complete their section of the application form.
Accordingly, following a successful application to the Scottish Legal
Aid Board for funding, we introduced welfare rights adviser posts to
support 3/10 community midwife teams.
PDSA cycle 5. Women were initially slow to uptake offer of referral
for welfare rights advice. Collocation with antenatal services and
other local organisations supporting families, and a move to email
referral (with honorary contract and NHS.net email to ensure
confidentiality) led to an increase in referrals. Text reminders
appeared to boost attendance, while a letter reminder did not.
Results
Process measures improved (figure 1), for the initiating team (team
3) and for Lothian overall. For the 12 weeks with most recent data
(17 August - 6 November 2015), during which period 2,646 women
booked for antenatal care, for Lothian overall:
- 95.8% of women had documentation of Healthy Start eligibility
- 19.3% women considered themselves eligible for Healthy Start
- 72.5% had documentation of questions about debt and money
worries
- 6.3% had documentation of referral for welfare rights advice.
Having weekly process data, extracted routinely from maternity
records, allowed teams to see the impact of their earliest testing
very rapidly. These questions were already included on the national
handheld record (Scottish Woman Held Maternity Record) and the
local electronic maternity record (Trak) includes the same
questions. Asking all women about eligibility for Healthy Start, and
documenting the answer, identified more women as being
potentially eligible for vouchers. For team 3 the percentage of
women eligible for Healthy Start at antenatal booking (based on self
report) increased from a median of 8.7% to 19.7% by April 2014. By
August 2014, however, midwives in team 3 reported that many
women had not received vouchers, and started to question whether
they were signing up women who were not eligible. The percentage
of women recorded as eligible for Healthy Start stablilised at 13.9%
at that point, and has remained at that level ever since. Asking
about Healthy Start, and documenting the response, has become a
routine part of antenatal care in team 3. Similar patterns have been
seen in teams across Lothian and, as illustrated in figure 1, at whole
area level. The welfare rights advice data, also shown in figure 1,
are explored further below.
  Page 2 of 5
© 2016, Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopenquality.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Improv Report: first published as 10.1136/bmjquality.u210506.w4243 on 11 April 2016. Downloaded from 
 The number of women in receipt of vouchers in Lothian increased,
peaking at 368 during July 2015, with a corresponding upward shift
on the run chart from March 2015 onwards (figure 2). Using run
chart rules, shifts are shown by a change in median (red central
line), trends with red ovals. In comparison, the figures for the rest of
Scotland have fallen, with a downward shift on the run chart from
January 2015 onwards. Comparing medians for January-June 2014
and March-August 2015 there was a 13.3% rise in voucher receipt
in Lothian (increase from 313 to 355 women), versus an 8.4%
decline for the rest of Scotland (fall from 1688 to 1546 women). The
number of pregnant women in Lothian has not changed
substantially over the period studied.
The results have varied by team (figure 2). Teams 3 and 5 have
shown recent upward trends in voucher receipt, coinciding with the
appointment of welfare rights advisers in the area. Team 2, whose
team lead was also involved in the Early Years Collaborative, saw
an increase in voucher receipt during the first months of 2014, but
not meeting run chart rules for an upward trend; the median was
recalculated after 12 data points, with a modest upward shift that
has been maintained. Team 4 also saw an upward shift after 12
data points, coinciding with direct input from the welfare rights
advice team in December 2014. While most areas of Lothian are
quite mixed in terms of socioeconomic status, teams 7 and 8 cover
more affluent areas, with smaller pockets of deprivation. These
areas had a lower level of uptake initially (percentage of eligible
families in receipt of vouchers) but saw rapid increases in voucher
receipt for pregnant women on establishing new processes at the
antenatal booking appointment. Reasons for potential decline in
voucher receipt in these two areas subsequently are explored
below. Teams 1 and 6 have seen considerable change, with
demolition/new housing and demographic changes making further
interpretation challenging (area and family factors). Further testing
is being undertaken in both areas. Teams 9 and 10 cover a single
local authority area, but with differences in access to services and
changes in demographics (area and family factors).
Despite the overall improvement in Lothian (upward shift), there has
more recently been a downward trend in voucher receipt, with the
number of women in receipt falling from 368 in July 2015 to 336 by
November 2015 (figure 2). This is thought to be due to a change in
the application process at a UK level, with applications received
before ten weeks now rejected by the national Healthy Start office
(previously applications received at eight or nine weeks of
pregnancy were held and processed at ten weeks). We are,
accordingly, in the process of changing our application process
locally. The rest of Scotland has seen a corresponding downward
shift. This more recent decline in voucher receipt at a Lothian level
has not been observed in all teams. Teams 3 and 5 have sustained
their increase, while other teams have shown a rapid decline. This
has led to a further round of testing. Teams 7 and 8, for example,
which had had great success in signing up women in the first 18
months by focusing on sign up at the antenatal booking
appointment (typically before ten weeks), have predictably seen
their voucher receipt decline rapidly as a result of the recent change
in rules prior to ten weeks.
Results can also vary within a team’s catchment area. Figure 3
shows number of women in receipt of vouchers for the originating
team (team 3), in descending order from the postcode sector area
with greatest entitlement (PCA) as assessed by number of women
and children eligible, to the area with lowest entitlement (PCG).
Areas with fewer than 30 women and children eligible have not
been included in this figure. The postcode area with highest
entitlement (PCA), where the midwife conducting the first tests was
based, saw early gains followed by a rapid fall as midwives became
demoralised about the number of rejected applications; the
introduction of local welfare rights advice for pregnant women and
families has increased confidence and successful applications. The
neighbouring area (PCB) also saw an early increase followed by a
fall that has not recovered. Having a framework to discuss reasons
for a change in results (improvement or fall) at team or locality level
is important, and we have simplified the driver diagram to make this
possible, based on experiences with different teams, as described
above (figure 4). This will form the basis of planning and then
testing in postcode sector B (PCB) in figure 3, which sits in two
midwife teams’ catchment area.
The overall aim of this work was that 90% eligible women and
children in team 3’s area would be in receipt of vouchers by
December 2015 ("uptake"). Department of Health does not report
percentage uptake for pregnant women and children separately,
presumably because of the limitations in data described below.
Uptake for Lothian overall has remained static over the period of
study at between 74 and 75%. While we are not currently meeting
the aim in the initiating team (team 3), we have seen an increase
from 73.0% (452/619) in Jan 2014 to 79.0% (392/496) in November
2015 with an associated upward shift (figure 5). We identified during
the course of this work that Department of Health data (sourced
from Department for Work and Pensions and Her Majesty's
Revenue and Customs), on which the aim is based, have important
limitations. They will not typically know that a woman is pregnant
until the Healthy Start application is made, in contrast to children
where eligibility is documented through other entitlements such as
Child Benefit, which have almost universal coverage soon after
birth. Signing a pregnant woman up for Healthy Start therefore
increases both the numerator and denominator for this measure, so
the percentage uptake increases much more slowly than expected.
The number of children also greatly exceeds the number of children
in receipt. Refocusing the aim for this maternity work, we are now
aiming for 400 women to be in receipt of Healthy Start vouchers in
Lothian by June 2016.
Figure 6 shows the Pareto chart for data collected at the 16 week
appointment, for apparently eligible women who were not in receipt
of vouchers. Having signed the women up at the antenatal booking
appointment (typically before ten weeks), the midwives found that
women struggled to complete the application and/or post the form,
experienced delays in hearing back, or had their application
rejected. Others had not thought they were eligible at booking.
These findings were used to support the case for more welfare
rights advice in the area, working with NHS, education colleagues,
and the voluntary sector, with a successful application to the
Scottish Legal Aid Board. Welfare rights advisers took up post in
the team 3 area February 2015, extending to team 5 more recently.
This welfare rights advice service has reported on outcomes to mid
  Page 3 of 5
© 2016, Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopenquality.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Improv Report: first published as 10.1136/bmjquality.u210506.w4243 on 11 April 2016. Downloaded from 
 September 2015. In total 89 women and families had been referred
up to this point, with projected financial gain of £404,000, an
average of £4,500 per client for 2015/16. Main gains were through
unclaimed entitlements, housing, childcare, and debt advice, so
projected sums are likely to be close to the actual sums secured;
some women and families were also supported to apply for
hardship funds, which are approved on a discretionary basis.
Documentation and referrals for welfare rights advice for team 3
and Lothian overall, as recorded on the maternity electronic record,
are shown in figure 1. In common with the Healthy Start work, we
observed an improvement in documentation and an increase in
referrals in team 3. We have not yet seen an equivalent increase in
referrals in other teams, though referral details for existing welfare
rights advice have been shared in each area. This has become an
important focus for testing in each team, boosted by the initial
results on financial gain from team 3.
See supplementary file: ds7216.pdf - “Healthy Start figures 1-6”
Lessons and limitations
This work has demonstrated that low income pregnant women need
support to apply for entitlements during pregnancy. Healthy Start is
one of the simplest parts of the welfare system, but sign up was
poorly understood and completed. Even when midwives had
mastered their part of the sign up process, women frequently
needed more support to complete the application.
We rapidly identified areas for improvement (March - April 2014),
but sharing improvement with other teams relied on face to face
discussions rather than email, and sharing team and postcode
sector level data on a monthly basis. Sharing learning with other
teams meant that there was less time to test new ideas and
continue to produce team level reports, so increases in voucher
receipt were not sustained in some teams. This observation led to a
greater focus on keeping data up to date, sharing local results with
all teams, and providing tools to plan next steps (see figure 4 for an
adapted version of the driver diagram, which acts as a prompt for
discussion within the team). We are now working on automating
data sharing and learning skills in improvement science within
teams. A more complex project would require dedicated project
management, analyst and administration time.
These observations apply equally to sharing the approach with
other parts of Scotland. While the findings and analytic approaches
have been shared widely across Scotland, from May 2014 onwards,
the increase in voucher receipt has not been repeated for the rest of
Scotland. Sharing learning at a conference or committee or
cascading materials by email should not be expected to drive
improvement. Department of Health data are available by postcode
sector across the whole of Scotland and the rest of the UK, so the
outcome data presented here could potentially be automated more
widely, but would require details about team breakdown by
postcode sector.
The downward trend in voucher receipt observed in our area from
July – November 2015 appears to be due to a change in the way
applications are processed centrally. This illustrates the need for
ongoing monitoring and testing, and the fragile nature of
improvement work. It also illustrates the power of up to date local
data. We were able to work through the different options using
figure 4. With no apparent changes in staff, family, or area factors
we could narrow our focus onto process factors (in this case the
processing of applications in the UK central office). Information from
midwives and women helped identify potential causes. Phoning up
the central office confirmed the change in the processing of
applications centrally, and we fed this information to government
colleagues who had not known of the change either.
Starting again, we would have chosen a different aim focusing on a
count (number of women in receipt of vouchers) rather than
percentage uptake. Refocusing the aim is a legitimate part of
improvement work.[5] Ultimately, of course, the intention is that no
eligible women and children miss out on Healthy Start vouchers.
This work has relevance to staff working with pregnant women and
families across the UK. Healthy Start, and the other benefits and
entitlements mentioned here, are available to low income women
and families across the UK. The work described here could be
repeated in other areas, though not all areas will have electronic
maternity data used to report on process measures. Furthermore,
the monthly outcome data, available across the UK, potentially
provide an insight into important aspects of maternal and child
poverty. As demonstrated in this work, low income women and
families struggle to apply for Healthy Start without coordinated
support, and are vulnerable to even small rule changes in the
welfare system.
Wider lessons, for colleagues starting an improvement project,
include: the need to start small (single midwife, single patient); meet
and work with teams rather than simply email them or discuss with
team leads; keep testing and thinking ahead; share up to date team
level data with teams and partner organisations; break down the
barriers between organisations. These are consistent with the
Institute for Healthcare Improvement "high impact" leadership
behaviours of Person-centredness; Front Line Engagement;
Relentless Focus; Transparency; Boundarilessness.[6]
Conclusion
We have achieved an increase in the number of women receiving
Healthy Start food and vitamin vouchers for Lothian overall (13.3%
increase), at a time when voucher receipt has fallen for the rest of
the country (8.4% decrease). Success relied on understanding the
process, testing improvements, sharing team and small area data,
and employing welfare rights advisers. The benefits have extended
beyond the Healthy Start programme, to boost family budgets
attending a welfare rights adviser by an average of £4,500. These
successes are achievable across the UK, as the benefits, tax
credits, and other supports are available UK-wide, and there are
lessons here for early years workers and families interacting with
welfare systems across the world.
References
  Page 4 of 5
© 2016, Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopenquality.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Improv Report: first published as 10.1136/bmjquality.u210506.w4243 on 11 April 2016. Downloaded from 
 1 Child Poverty Action Group website. Child Poverty facts and
figures. Accessed 12 December 2015. http://www.cpag.org.uk/child-
poverty-facts-and-figures
2 Taylor-Robinson D, Rougeaux E, Harrison D, Whitehead M, Barr
B, Pearce, A. The rise of food poverty in the UK. BMJ
2013;347:f7157
3 Healthy Start Website. Accessed 12 December 2015. 
https://www.healthystart.nhs.uk/
4 Healthier Wealthier Children in Glasgow website. NHS Glasgow
and Clyde. Accessed 12 December. http://www.nhsggc.org.uk/your-
health/campaigns/healthier-wealthier-children/
5 Aims tool. QI Hub website. Accessed 12 December 2015. 
http://www.qihub.scot.nhs.uk/knowledge-centre/quality-
improvement-tools/aims-tool.aspx
6 Swensen S, Pugh M, McMullan C, Kabcenell A. High-Impact
Leadership: Improve Care, Improve the Health of Populations, and
Reduce Costs. IHI White Paper. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Institute for Healthcare Improvement; 2013. (Available at ihi.org)
Declaration of interests
None to declare
Acknowledgements
Lyndsey Good and community midwives in the Leith community
midwife team, NHS Lothian; Roddy Samson, Rosie Mears and
Patrycja Bukowiecka at Granton Information Centre; Marilyn Keilloh
and colleagues at Stepping Stones North Edinburgh; Jacqui Bain in
City of Edinburgh Council; Amanda Cronin, Ros Gray, Jason Leitch
and Carolyn Wilson at Scottish Government; Dr Margaret Douglas,
Prof Alex McMahon, Prof Alison McCallum, Sarah Archibald,
Melissa Clements, Rhonda Archibald, Andrew Massie, Simita
Kumar and Niall Blackie in NHS Lothian; Scottish Legal Aid Board
for funding; Bob Lloyd at Institute for Healthcare Improvement for
teaching on improvement science.
Ethical approval
According to the policy activities that constitute research in NHS
Lothian this work met criteria for operational improvement activities
exempt from ethics review. We used the following criteria for
determining if improvement activities require ethics review. Policy
criterion: The work is primarily intended to improve local care and
supporting activities, not provide generalisable knowledge in a field
of inquiry. Explanation: The work reported here meets this criterion
because documentation of money worries, application for Healthy
Start and referral for welfare rights advice is already included in the
national antenatal care pathway. We sought to improve the offer
and uptake among pregnant women, as part of routine antenatal
care.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
  Page 5 of 5
© 2016, Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not already granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopenquality.bmj.com/
BMJ Qual Improv Report: first published as 10.1136/bmjquality.u210506.w4243 on 11 April 2016. Downloaded from 
