 Original research n Special RepoRt
228 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017
1 From the Department of Radiology, University of Chicago, 
5841 S Maryland Ave, MC 2026, Chicago, IL 60637 (H.M.); 
Department of Radiology, New York University Langone 
Medical Center, New York, NY (D.P.N.); Department of 
Radiology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea (J.M.G.); Department of Radiology, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea (K.S.L.); Department of 
Radiology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, 
Calif (A.N.C.L.); Department of Radiology, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada (J.R.M.); Department of Medicine, 
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio (A.C.M.); Department of 
Radiology, Advanced Biomedical Imaging Research Center, 
Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo, 
Japan (Y.O.); Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, ICAHN 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY (C.A.P.); 
Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Radboud 
University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Neth-
erlands (M.P.); Department of Radiology, Duke University 
School of Medicine, Durham, NC (G.D.R.); Department of 
Radiology, Meander Medical Center, Amersfoort, the Neth-
erlands (C.M.S.); Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY (W.D.T.); Department 
of Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Antwerp University 
Hospital, Edegem, Belgium (P.E.V.S.); and Department of 
Radiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, 
Mass (A.A.B). Received August 4, 2016; revision requested 
September 21; revision received November 9; accepted 
November 21; final version accepted December 16. 
Address correspondence to H.M. (e-mail: hmacmahon@
radiology.bsd.uchicago.edu).
q RSNA, 2017
The Fleischner Society Guidelines for management of solid 
nodules were published in 2005, and separate guidelines 
for subsolid nodules were issued in 2013. Since then, new 
information has become available; therefore, the guide-
lines have been revised to reflect current thinking on nod-
ule management. The revised guidelines incorporate sev-
eral substantive changes that reflect current thinking on 
the management of small nodules. The minimum thresh-
old size for routine follow-up has been increased, and rec-
ommended follow-up intervals are now given as a range 
rather than as a precise time period to give radiologists, 
clinicians, and patients greater discretion to accommodate 
individual risk factors and preferences. The guidelines for 
solid and subsolid nodules have been combined in one 
simplified table, and specific recommendations have been 
included for multiple nodules. These guidelines represent 
the consensus of the Fleischner Society, and as such, they 
incorporate the opinions of a multidisciplinary interna-
tional group of thoracic radiologists, pulmonologists, sur-
geons, pathologists, and other specialists. Changes from 
the previous guidelines issued by the Fleischner Society 
are based on new data and accumulated experience.
q 
RSNA, 2017
Online supplemental material is available for this article.
Heber MacMahon, MB, BCh
David P. Naidich, MD
Jin Mo Goo, MD, PhD
Kyung Soo Lee, MD, PhD
Ann N. C. Leung, MD
John R. Mayo, MD
Atul C. Mehta, MB, BS
Yoshiharu Ohno, MD, PhD
Charles A. Powell, MD
Mathias Prokop, MD, PhD
Geoffrey D. Rubin, MD
Cornelia M. Schaefer-Prokop, MD, PhD
William D. Travis, MD
Paul E. Van Schil, MD, PhD
Alexander A. Bankier, MD, PhD
guidelines for Management of 
incidental Pulmonary nodules 
Detected on cT images: From the 
Fleischner Society 20171
An earlier incorrect version of this 
article appeared online. This article was 
corrected on March 13, 2017.
This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org
 Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017 n radiology.rsna.org 
229
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
Our recommendations are summa-
rized in the Table. These are followed 
by graded ratings of each recommen-
dation using the American College of 
Chest 
Physicians 
recommendations 
for evidence grading in clinical guide-
lines (9). Additional explanations are 
provided regarding the rationale for 
each recommendation, which is based 
on the consensus of a multidisciplin-
ary team and a systematic review of 
the literature, further details of which 
are included in Appendix E1 [online]. 
The minimum threshold size for recom-
mending follow-up is based on an esti-
mated cancer risk in a nodule on the 
order of 1% or greater. This criterion is 
necessarily arbitrary, and we recognize 
that a higher threshold may be consid-
ered appropriate in some environments 
and that this threshold will ultimately 
depend on social and economic factors. 
Several general considerations regard-
ing technical aspects of using these 
recommendations are also presented. 
Finally, in Appendix E1 (online), addi-
tional information regarding methods 
and risk factors is given.
detected at CT in adult patients who are 
at least 35 years old. Separate guide-
lines have been issued for lung can-
cer screening, such as those from the 
American College of Radiology (ACR), 
and we support the use of those guide-
lines when interpreting the results of 
CT screening (8). Specific recommen-
dations are provided for patients with 
multiple solid and subsolid nodules, and 
several other commonly encountered 
clinical situations are addressed.
These guidelines are not intended 
for use in patients with known primary 
cancers who are at risk for metasta-
ses, nor are they intended for use in 
immunocompromised 
patients 
who 
are at risk for infection; in these pa-
tients, treatment should be based on 
the specific clinical situation. Also, be-
cause lung cancer is rare in children 
and adults younger than 35 years, these 
guidelines are not appropriate for such 
patients. When incidental nodules are 
encountered in young patients, man-
agement decisions should be made on 
a case-by-case basis, and the physician 
should recognize that infectious causes 
are more likely than cancer and that 
use of serial CT should be minimized. 
Most nodules smaller than 1 cm will not 
be visible on chest radiographs; how-
ever, for larger solid nodules that are 
clearly visualized and are considered 
low risk, follow-up with radiography 
rather than CT may be appropriate to 
take advantage of the lower cost and 
lower radiation exposure.
https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2017161659
Content code: 
Radiology 2017; 284:228–243
Abbreviations:
ACR = American College of Radiology
ACCP = American College of Chest Physicians
BCCA = British Columbia Cancer Agency
iELCAP = International Early Lung Cancer Action Program
NELSON = Nederlans-Leuvens Longkanker Screenings 
Onderzoek 
NLST = National Lung Screening Trial
PanCan = Pan-Canadian Early Detection of Lung Cancer 
Study
Author contributions:
Guarantors of integrity of entire study, H.M., D.P.N., Y.O., 
A.A.B.; study concepts/study design or data acquisition 
or data analysis/interpretation, all authors; manuscript 
drafting or manuscript revision for important intellectual 
content, all authors; approval of final version of submitted 
manuscript, all authors; agrees to ensure any questions 
related to the work are appropriately resolved, all authors; 
literature research, H.M., D.P.N., J.M.G., K.S.L., A.N.C.L., 
J.R.M., A.C.M., Y.O., C.A.P., G.D.R., C.M.S., W.D.T., P.E.V.S., 
A.A.B.; clinical studies, D.P.N., K.S.L., A.C.M., G.D.R., 
P.E.V.S.; statistical analysis, K.S.L., A.C.M.; and manuscript 
editing, all authors
Conflicts of interest are listed at the end of this article.
Advances in Knowledge
 
n For solid nodules, the minimum 
threshold size for routine fol-
low-up has been increased, and 
fewer follow-up examinations are 
recommended for stable nodules.
 
n For subsolid nodules, a longer 
period is recommended before 
initial follow-up, and the total 
length of follow-up has been ex-
tended to 5 years.
Implications for Patient Care
 
n These guidelines apply to inci-
dental nodules, which can be 
managed according to the spe-
cific recommendations.
 
n These guidelines do not apply to 
patients younger than 35 years, 
immunocompromised patients, 
or patients with cancer.
 
n For lung cancer screening, adher-
ence to the existing American 
College of Radiology Lung CT 
Screening Reporting and Data 
System (Lung-RADS) guidelines 
is recommended.
T
hese revised recommendations for 
incidentally discovered lung nod-
ules incorporate several changes 
from the original Fleischner Society 
guidelines for management of solid or 
subsolid nodules (1,2). The purpose of 
these recommendations is to reduce the 
number of unnecessary follow-up exam-
inations while providing greater discre-
tion to the radiologist, clinician, and 
patient to make management decisions. 
Thus, a range of times rather than a 
specific interval for follow-up computed 
tomography (CT) is given for many sce-
narios. This change has been made in 
recognition of the multiple factors that 
determine risk and that cannot be eas-
ily incorporated into a summary table, 
as well as the important role of patient 
preference for either more aggressive 
or more conservative management. Al-
though we have taken into account new 
data from the National Lung Screening 
Trial (NLST), Nederlans-Leuvens Long-
kanker Screenings Onderzoek (NEL-
SON), International Early Lung Cancer 
Action Program (iELCAP), Pan-Cana-
dian Early Detection of Lung Cancer 
Study (PanCan), and British Columbia 
Cancer Agency (BCCA) cancer screen-
ing trials, all of which support the use 
of less aggressive management of small 
nodules, we recognize that screening 
programs have defined protocols to ed-
ucate candidates about potential risks 
and the need for consistent monitoring, 
whereas incidentally identified nodules 
represent a separate population that re-
quires a more varied approach to clini-
cal management (3–7).
These recommendations refer to 
incidentally encountered lung nodules 
 230 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
Fleischner Society 2017 Guidelines for Management of Incidentally Detected Pulmonary Nodules in Adults
A: Solid Nodules*
Nodule Type
Size
Comments
,6 mm (,100 mm3)
6–8 mm (100–250 mm3)
.8 mm (.250 mm3)
Single
 Low risk†
No routine follow-up
CT at 6–12 months, then 
consider CT at 
18–24 months  
Consider CT at 3 months, PET/CT, 
or tissue sampling
Nodules ,6 mm do not require routine follow-up in 
low-risk patients (recommendation 1A).
 High risk†
Optional CT at 12 months
CT at 6–12 months, then CT 
at 18–24 months  
Consider CT at 3 months, PET/CT, 
or tissue sampling
Certain patients at high risk with suspicious nodule 
morphology, upper lobe location, or both may 
warrant 12-month follow-up (recommendation 
1A).
Multiple
 Low risk†
No routine follow-up
CT at 3–6 months, then 
consider CT at 18–24 
months 
CT at 3–6 months, then  
consider CT at 18–24 months
Use most suspicious nodule as guide to 
management. Follow-up intervals may vary 
according to size and risk (recommendation 2A).
 High risk†
Optional CT at 12 months
CT at 3–6 months, then at 
18–24 months
CT at 3–6 months, then at 18–24 
months
Use most suspicious nodule as guide to 
management. Follow-up intervals may vary 
according to size and risk (recommendation 2A).
B: Subsolid Nodules*
Nodule Type
Size
Comments
,6 mm (,100 mm3)
6 mm (.100 mm3)
Single
 Ground glass
No routine follow-up
CT at 6–12 months to confirm persistence, then CT  
every 2 years until 5 years
In certain suspicious nodules , 6 mm, consider 
follow-up at 2 and 4 years. If solid component(s) 
or growth develops, consider resection. 
(Recommendations 3A and 4A).
 Part solid
No routine follow-up
CT at 3–6 months to confirm persistence. If unchanged and solid 
component remains ,6 mm, annual CT  
should be performed for 5 years.
In practice, part-solid nodules cannot be defined 
as such until 6 mm, and nodules ,6 mm 
do not usually require follow-up. Persistent 
part-solid nodules with solid components 6 
mm should be considered highly suspicious 
(recommendations 4A-4C)
Multiple
CT at 3–6 months. If stable, 
consider CT at 2 and 4 
years.
CT at 3–6 months. Subsequent management based  
on the most suspicious nodule(s).
Multiple ,6 mm pure ground-glass nodules 
are usually benign, but consider follow-up in 
selected patients at high risk at 2 and 4 years 
(recommendation 5A).
Note.—These recommendations do not apply to lung cancer screening, patients with immunosuppression, or patients with known primary cancer.
* Dimensions are average of long and short axes, rounded to the nearest millimeter.
† Consider all relevant risk factors (see Risk Factors).
Recommendations for Managing 
Incidentally Discovered Pulmonary 
Nodules
General Recommendations
All CT scans of the thorax in adults 
should be reconstructed and archived 
with contiguous thin sections (1.5 
mm, typically 1.0 mm) to enable accu-
rate characterization and measurement 
of small pulmonary nodules, and rou-
tine acquisition and archiving of off-ax-
is (coronal and sagittal) reconstructed 
series is strongly recommended (grade 
1A; strong recommendation, high-qual-
ity evidence).
Use of thick sections increases 
volume averaging, which effectively 
precludes accurate nodule charac-
terization of small nodules, with re-
spect to part-solid morphology and 
fat or calcium content, which can af-
fect management (Figs 1–3) (10–12). 
Coronal and sagittal series facilitate 
 Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017 n radiology.rsna.org 
231
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
recommend adjusting exposure factors 
according to body habitus, with a goal 
of achieving a volumetric CT dose index 
(or CTDIvol) of no more than 3 mGy in 
a standard-size patient (height, 170 cm; 
weight, 70 kg), as per ACR recommen-
dations for screening CT (8).
A number of dose reduction tech-
niques, including dose modulation and 
iterative reconstruction, may be used 
(13). It is important that a similar tech-
nique be used to perform the follow-up 
examination to minimize interscan var-
iability, with section thickness and re-
construction filter being the most im-
portant parameters in this respect.
For these guidelines, manual nod-
ule measurements should be based on 
the average of long- and short-axis di-
ameters, both of which should be ob-
tained on the same transverse, coro-
nal, or sagittal reconstructed images. 
Whichever image reveals the greatest 
be considered as a baseline for future 
comparison.
CT examinations of the thorax per-
formed to follow lung nodules should 
use a low-radiation technique (grade 1A: 
strong recommendation, high quality ev-
idence). Techniques to reduce radiation 
dose are of particular importance, given 
the frequency with which follow-up 
CT examinations are performed. We 
distinction between nodules and scars 
(Fig 4). This recommendation is not 
restricted to examinations performed 
specifically for nodule assessment or 
lung cancer screening, as lung nodules 
may be encountered incidentally in any 
adult patient. If the initial examination 
was performed with thick sections, 
a short-term follow-up examination 
with contiguous thin sections should 
Figure 1
Figure 1: (a) Lung window and (b) soft-tissue window 1-mm transverse CT sections show a smoothly 
marginated solid nodule (arrow) with internal fat and calcification, consistent with a hamartoma. No further 
CT follow-up is recommended for such findings.
Figure 2
Figure 2: (a) CT image shows a smoothly marginated solid nodule with central calcification, typical of 
a healed granuloma. No further CT follow-up is recommended for such nodules. (b) CT image shows a 
smoothly marginated solid nodule with laminar calcification, typical of a healed granuloma. No further CT 
follow-up is recommended for such findings.
Figure 3
Figure 3: (a) Transverse 5-mm CT section shows 
an apparently pure ground-glass nodule in the 
left lower lobe (arrow). (b) Transverse 1-mm CT 
section at the same level as a reveals that this is a 
suspicious part-solid nodule with cystic components 
(arrow).
 232 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
should include the earliest available 
study and more recent studies. Note 
that differences in scanning technique, 
such as use of thick sections for pre-
vious imaging, may make comparison 
less accurate, especially for small nod-
ules; therefore, routine use of contig-
uous thin-section reconstruction and 
archiving is important (20).
Recommendations for Solid Lung Nodules
Recommendation 1: single solid noncal-
cified nodules.—Solid nodules smaller 
than 6 mm (those 5 mm or smaller) 
do not require routine follow-up in pa-
tients at low risk (grade 1C; strong rec-
ommendation, low- or very-low-quality 
evidence). There is a paucity of direct 
evidence regarding cancer probability 
in small nodules in low-clinical-risk sit-
uations. However, there is abundant evi-
dence for cancer risk in current smokers 
or those who recently quit smoking and 
who have been studied in the context 
of lung cancer screening programs. 
The risk of cancer in patients who have 
never smoked and in younger patients 
is known to be significantly lower, with 
a relative risk on the order of 0.15 in 
the United States when compared with 
risk in heavy smokers in the case of solid 
nodules (21). Given that the average risk 
of cancer in solid nodules smaller than 6 
mm in patients at high risk is less than 
1%, it is reasonable to assume an even 
lower risk in a patient with low clinical 
risk (7,22). This recommendation is 
consistent with our policy of excluding 
nodules with a less than 1% risk of can-
cer from routine CT follow-up.
Solid nodules smaller than 6 mm do 
not require routine follow-up in all pa-
tients with high clinical risk; however, 
some nodules smaller than 6 mm with 
suspicious morphology, upper lobe loca-
tion, or both may warrant follow-up at 
12 months (grade 2A; weak recommen-
dation, high-quality evidence.). These 
revised guidelines increase the size 
threshold for routine follow-up of solid 
nodules to 6 mm. This change is based 
on supporting data from several screen-
ing trials that indicate the risk of cancer 
in nodules smaller than 6 mm is consid-
erably less than 1%, even in patients 
at high risk (6,7). On the other hand, 
are not recommended, as their use im-
plies a greater degree of accuracy than 
that which can be achieved in practice. 
Thus, the size threshold (,6 mm) cor-
responds to a rounded measurement of 
5 mm or less in these guidelines. As an 
alternative to manual linear measure-
ments, automated or semiautomated 
volumetric measurements can be used, 
and they have the advantage of being 
more reproducible than manual tech-
niques (17). Volume thresholds of 100 
and 250 mm3 are used for volumetry 
instead of the 6- and 8-mm thresholds 
used for linear measurements. How-
ever, volumetry is substantially de-
pendent on the specific software used 
(18,19). For this reason, volumetric 
measurements to assess nodule growth 
should be performed with identical 
software versions. More comprehen-
sive recommendations on nodule mea-
surements, including a full discussion of 
technical and observer-related factors, 
will be provided in a separate White 
Paper from the Fleischner Society that 
is currently in preparation.
Prior imaging studies should always 
be reviewed whenever they are available 
to determine possible growth or stabil-
ity (grade 1A; strong recommendation, 
high-quality evidence). Comparisons 
dimensions is the image that should be 
used. Measurements should be made 
with electronic calipers or semiauto-
mated methods and should be recorded 
to the nearest whole millimeter (grade 
1C; strong recommendation, low- or 
very-low-quality evidence).
Although several screening trials 
have used the maximum diameter of 
nodules on transverse sections to esti-
mate size, others (iELCAP) have used 
the average of long- and short-axis di-
ameters measured by using lung win-
dows (4,5,7,14,15). Prediction models 
used to estimate malignancy yield bet-
ter results with the average diameter 
than with the maximum transverse 
diameter (16). The Fleischner Society 
has recommended use of the average 
diameter since 2005, as the average of 
long and short axes more accurately re-
flects three-dimensional tumor volume 
(1). For larger nodules and for masses 
larger than 10 mm, it is generally ap-
propriate to record both long- and 
short-axis dimensions, with the long-
axis dimension being used to determine 
the T factor in lung cancer staging and 
being a criterion for tumor response 
to treatment. Measurements should 
be rounded to the nearest millimeter. 
Fractional millimeter measurements 
Figure 4
Figure 4: (a) Transverse 1-mm CT section shows a nodular opacity adjacent to the minor fissure (arrow). 
(b) Coronal reconstructed CT image shows that the opacity is a benign linear scar or lymphoid tissue (arrow).
 Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017 n radiology.rsna.org 
233
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
discontinuing follow-up of well-defined 
solid nodules with benign morphology 
at 12–18 months if the nodule is ac-
curately measurable and unequivocally 
stable. For subsolid nodules, longer-
term follow-up is recommended (2).
For solitary solid noncalcified nod-
ules measuring 6–8 mm in patients at 
high risk, an initial follow-up examina-
tion is recommended at 6–12 months 
and again at 18–24 months (grade 1B: 
strong recommendation, moderate qual-
ity evidence). This recommendation is 
based on an estimated average risk of 
malignancy of approximately 0.5%–
2.0% for nodules in this size range and 
is derived from screening studies, most 
notably the PanCan, BCCA, and NEL-
SON trials (6,7) Again, the precise in-
tervals can be modified according to in-
dividual risk factors and preferences. In 
some patients in whom nodule stability 
remains uncertain, further surveillance 
may be required; however, two follow-up 
examinations should be sufficient to ex-
clude growth in most subjects.
For solitary solid noncalcified nod-
ules larger than 8 mm in diameter, con-
sider 3-month follow-up, work-up with 
combined positron emission tomog-
raphy (PET) and CT (PET/CT), tissue 
sampling, or a combination thereof; 
any one of these options may be appro-
priate depending on size, morphology, 
comorbidity, and other factors. (grade 
1A; strong recommendation, high-qual-
ity evidence). Although the average risk 
of cancer in an 8-mm solitary nodule 
is only approximately 3% depending 
on morphology and location, a consid-
erably higher risk can be inferred in 
certain patients (25,26). As nodules be-
come larger, their morphology becomes 
more distinct, and management should 
be strongly influenced by the appear-
ance of the nodule rather than by size 
alone (Figs 5–7). Thus, both invasive 
and noninvasive management options 
are included in this article.
Measurement of attenuation (in 
Hounsfield units) in solid nodules can 
be helpful to determine the presence 
of calcification or fat, either of which 
can have major diagnostic implica-
tions. It is critical that such measure-
ments be made on images without an 
suspicious morphology, upper lobe lo-
cation, or both can increase cancer 
risk into the 1%–5% range; therefore, 
follow-up at 12 months may be consid-
ered, depending on comorbidity and 
patient preferences. Earlier follow-up is 
not recommended in such instances, as 
experience has shown that such small 
nodules, if malignant, rarely advance in 
stage over 12 months, whereas a short-
term follow-up examination showing no 
apparent change may provide false re-
assurance. An exception may be made 
in some patients with technically sub-
optimal initial scanning results to ob-
tain a high-quality baseline study for fu-
ture comparison or in nervous patients 
who may be reassured by evidence of 
short-term stability.
Solitary noncalcified solid nodules 
measuring 6–8 mm in patients with low 
clinical risk are recommended to un-
dergo initial follow-up at 6–12 months 
depending on size, morphology, and pa-
tient preference (grade 1C: strong rec-
ommendation, low- or very-low-quality 
evidence). One follow-up examination 
should suffice in many instances. If 
morphology is suspicious or if stability 
is uncertain, an additional study may be 
obtained after a further 6–12 months. 
The risk of malignancy is very low in 
this category, and not all solid nodules 
require traditional 2-year follow-up. The 
 
recommendation for 2-year follow-up 
was based on earlier studies with thick 
CT sections or chest radiographs and 
was made before the important differ-
ences between solid and subsolid nod-
ules were recognized (6,7).
Although some solid cancers have 
been reported to grow very slowly, 
with doubling times of more than 700 
days and failure to clearly demonstrate 
growth for up to 2 years, these reports 
were also based on analysis of thicker-
section CT images and evaluation on 
hard-copy images (23). More recent 
studies have confirmed the reliability of 
2-year stability in the assessment of be-
nignancy in solid nodules, and shorter 
or longer periods of follow-up may be 
appropriate in selected subjects, de-
pending on risk factors, nodule mor-
phology, and accuracy of measurements 
(24). Thus, we recommend optionally 
Figure 5
Figure 5: CT image shows a solid triangular 
subpleural nodule (arrow) with a linear extension 
to the pleural surface, typical of an intrapulmonary 
lymph node. No CT follow-up is recommended for 
such findings.
Figure 6
Figure 6: Transverse 1-mm CT section through 
the left upper lobe shows a suspicious solid 
spiculated nodule (arrow). Surgery revealed invasive 
adenocarcinoma.
edge-enhancing filter, such as the type 
that is generally used on lung and bone 
images. Measurements on a sharpened 
image may give erroneously high atten-
uation values, and other factors, such 
as beam hardening, can affect the ac-
curacy of the measurements. All atten-
uation measurements should be made 
on the thinnest available nonsharpened 
(typically soft-tissue window) image 
series; the radiologist should use a 
small region of interest (not a point 
 234 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
Note that this recommendation as-
sumes no known or suspected primary 
neoplasm that might be a source of 
metastases. In patients with clinical evi-
dence of infection and in those who are 
immunocompromised, active infection 
should be considered, and short-term 
follow-up may be appropriate.
For multiple solid noncalcified nod-
ules with at least one nodule 6 mm or 
larger in diameter, follow-up is recom-
mended at approximately 3–6 months, 
followed by an optional second scan 
at 18–24 months that will depend on 
estimated risk. (grade 1B; strong rec-
ommendation, moderate-quality evi-
dence). If a larger or more suspicious 
nodule is present, it should be used as 
a guide to management according to 
the guidelines for solitary nodules, as 
stated previously. In such situations, 
metastases remain a leading consider-
ation, particularly when the distribution 
of nodules has peripheral and/or lower 
zone predominance and when the size 
of the nodules has a wide range (Fig 8) 
 
(28). In most instances, metastases will 
grow perceptibly within 3 months. An 
analysis of subjects with multiple nod-
ules in the NELSON trial showed an 
increase in risk for primary cancer, as 
the total nodule count increased from 
1 to 4, but a decrease in risk for those 
with five or more nodules, most of 
which likely resulted from prior granu-
lomatous infection (29).
The dominant nodule should be 
used as a guide to management; how-
ever, additional nodules should also be 
monitored on follow-up images. In this 
context, the term dominant refers to 
the most suspicious nodule, which may 
not be the largest.
Solitary Subsolid Lung Nodules
Recommendation 
3: 
solitary 
pure 
ground-glass 
nodules.—For 
pure 
ground-glass nodules smaller than 6 
mm (ie, 5 mm and smaller) in diame-
ter, no routine follow-up is recommend-
ed (grade 1B; strong recommendation, 
moderate-quality evidence). Because 
of the high prevalence of ground-glass 
nodules smaller than 6 mm, we do not 
recommend follow-up scanning in every 
patient with such findings. However, 
evidence). Small nodules in this size 
range are frequently encountered in 
routine clinical practice and are usually 
benign in origin. They most often repre-
sent either healed granulomata from a 
previous infection (especially in regions 
with endemic fungal infections) or in-
trapulmonary lymph nodes. In patients 
at high risk, a 12-month follow-up ex-
amination may be considered.
value) and realize that substantial vari-
ations occur among different scanners, 
filters, and body locations, even with 
regular calibration (27).
Recommendation 2: multiple solid 
noncalcified 
nodules.—For 
multiple 
solid noncalcified nodules smaller than 
6 mm in diameter, no routine follow-up 
is recommended (grade 2B; weak 
recommendation, 
moderate-quality 
Figure 7
Figure 7: Transverse 1-mm CT sections obtained 10 months apart show a highly suspicious pat-
tern of progressive thickening in the wall of a right lower lobe cyst (arrow). Resection revealed invasive 
adenocarcinoma.
Figure 8
Figure 8: CT image shows multiple solid nodules of varying size with lower 
zone predominance (arrows) secondary to metastatic thyroid carcinoma.
 Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017 n radiology.rsna.org 
235
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
Figure 9
Figure 9: Transverse 1-mm CT sections through the right lower lobe. (a) A well-defined 6-mm ground-
glass nodule (arrow) can be seen. (b) Image obtained more than 2 years after a shows a subtle increase in 
the size of the nodule (arrow). This finding was confirmed by noting the slightly altered relationship to adja-
cent vascular structures. Such subtle progression can be detected only by using 1-mm contiguous sections. 
Findings are consistent with adenocarcinoma in situ or minimally invasive adenocarcinoma, and continued 
yearly follow-up is recommended.
Figure 10
Figure 10: (a) A 1-mm transverse CT image through the right midlung shows a 10-mm pure ground-glass nodule (arrow). (b) CT image in the same location as a 
at 15-month follow-up shows only a very subtle increase in opacity. (c) CT image in the same location as a and b a further 10 months after b shows the nodule has 
evolved into a larger part-solid nodule. Surgical resection revealed stage 1A invasive lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma.
of 2- and 4-year follow-up in selected 
subjects at high risk. This reflects data 
from Asian populations, indicating that 
up to 10% of such nodules may grow 
and that nearly 1% may progress to ad-
enocarcinoma over many years. How-
ever, the finding of malignant transfor-
mation in less than 1% of all patients 
is strong evidence for a conservative 
approach to the vast majority of these 
typically noninvasive lesions (30).
For pure ground-glass nodules 6 mm 
or larger, follow-up scanning is recom-
mended at 6–12 months and then every 2 
years thereafter until 5 years (grade 1B; 
strong recommendation, moderate-qual-
ity evidence). The previous recommen-
dation of initial follow-up at 3 months 
(2) has been changed to follow-up at 
6–12 months because earlier follow-up is 
unlikely to affect the outcome of these 
characteristically indolent lesions.
To date, numerous reports have 
shown that pure ground-glass nodules 
that are 6 mm or larger may be fol-
lowed safely for 5 years, with an av-
erage of 3–4 years typically required 
to establish growth or, less commonly, 
to diagnose a developing invasive car-
cinoma (Figs 9, 10) (30–34).
this does not preclude follow-up in se-
lected patients with subsolid nodules 
(including those with pure ground-glass 
or part-solid types) close to 6 mm in 
size with suspicious morphology or 
other risk factors. This item has been 
modified slightly from the previous 
recommendation, providing an option 
 236 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
a median time of 25 months. These all 
proved to be stage 1 lesions, with an 
overall survival rate of 100%.
Although these reports represent 
strong evidence for a conservative ap-
proach to pure ground-glass lesions, 
initial follow-up at 6 months is still 
recommended, particularly in those 
nodules with features reported to be 
risk factors for progression. These in-
clude larger lesion size, especially di-
ameter greater than 10 mm (7,35–38), 
and the presence of bubbly lucencies 
(35,37,39,40).
Of particular concern are patients 
who are uncomfortable with the pros-
pect of waiting 12 months for follow-up 
examinations. In this setting, sooner 
follow-up may be warranted, as many 
of these lesions will either resolve or 
show no change, thereby reassuring the 
patient (Fig 11) (3,36,41,42). Again, we 
would emphasize that these guidelines 
are not intended to preclude either 
shorter or longer term follow-up in in-
dividual subjects, when deemed clini-
cally appropriate (43).
Recommendation 4: solitary part-
solid lung nodules.—For solitary part-
solid nodules smaller than 6 mm, no rou-
tine follow-up is recommended (grade 
1C; strong recommendation, low- or 
very-low-quality evidence). In practice, 
discrete solid components cannot be 
reliably defined in such small nodules, 
and they should be treated similar to the 
way in which pure ground-glass lesions 
of equivalent size are treated (see Rec-
ommendation 3, which was described 
previously).
For solitary part-solid nodules 6 
mm or larger with a solid component 
less than 6 mm in diameter, follow-up is 
recommended at 3–6 months and then 
annually for a minimum of 5 years. Al-
though part-solid nodules have a high 
likelihood of malignancy, nodules with a 
solid component smaller than 6 mm typ-
ically represent either adenocarcinoma 
in situ or minimally invasive adenocar-
cinoma rather than invasive adenocar-
cinoma (42,43). Additionally, part-solid 
nodules may be due to transient infec-
tions and may resolve after short-term 
follow-up (Fig 12) (44). Thus, at least 
one follow-up scan (3–6 months) is 
identified among 57 
496 baseline studies. 
From these, a total of 73 lesions subse-
quently proved to be adenocarcinomas. 
Overall median time to treatment was 19 
months, with solid components develop-
ing in 19 (26%) malignant nodules within 
Figure 11
Figure 11: (a) Transverse 1-mm CT section through the left upper lobe shows an indeterminate 10-mm 
ground-glass nodule (arrow). (b) Follow-up CT image after 4 months shows interval resolution without treat-
ment, consistent with a benign cause, such as focal infection.
Further evidence in support of con-
servative monitoring of these lesions has 
been provided recently by Yankelevitz et al 
(34), who described a large-scale screen-
ing study in which 2392 (4.2%) pure 
ground-glass (nonsolid) nodules were 
Figure 12
Figure 12: (a) Transverse 1-mm CT section through the right upper lobe shows a 6-mm part-solid nodule 
with a solid component (arrow) smaller than 4 mm. (b) Follow-up CT section at 6-month follow-up shows 
complete resolution, consistent with a benign cause.
 Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017 n radiology.rsna.org 
237
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
decisions should be based on the most 
suspicious nodule. In such instances, 
consider infectious causes. If persis-
tent after 3–6 months, consider mul-
tiple primary adenocarcinomas (grade 
1C; strong recommendation, low- or 
very-low-quality evidence). In patients 
with multiple subsolid lesions 6 mm 
or larger, the most suspicious nodule 
(which may not be the largest) should 
guide management (Fig 14). However, 
decisions regarding intervention and 
surgery for a dominant lesion must be 
constrained by the potential for other 
existing nodules to grow and require 
treatment. Also, more than one sus-
picious nodule increases the overall 
likelihood of cancer when compared 
with the likelihood associated with a 
solitary nodule.
Risk Factors for Malignancy: General 
Considerations
Nodule Size and Morphology
Nodule size has a clear relationship with 
risk of malignancy, as discussed previ-
ously, and it is a dominant factor in man-
agement. In these guidelines, nodules are 
further divided into solid, ground-glass, 
and part-solid categories. However, the 
criteria for making these distinctions 
have not been completely agreed upon 
and remain controversial. Van Riel et al 
(59) examined the agreement between 
experienced thoracic radiologists using 
traditional subjective criteria to assign 
nodules to solid, pure ground-glass, and 
part-solid categories. Both inter- and in-
traobserver agreement was found to be 
highly variable in these nodules. Correct 
classification of nodules as solid or sub-
solid by all radiologists was achieved in 
only 58% of cases (59). Nonetheless, it 
is generally agreed that nodules that are 
rendered partially invisible when viewed 
on thin sections with mediastinal (soft-
tissue) window settings and a sharp fil-
ter can be regarded as subsolid and that 
any nodule components other than nor-
mal vascular or bronchial structures that 
remain visible on such images are solid. 
Small solid or semisolid components 
that represent early signs of invasive ad-
enocarcinoma may be rendered invisible 
Figure 13
Figure 13: (a) Transverse 1-mm CT section through the superior segment of the right lower lobe shows a 
highly suspicious (large size, ground-glass appearance, and solid morphology) part-solid nodule (arrow). (b) 
Follow-up image obtained 3 months after a shows progressive increase in the size of the solid component. 
Surgery revealed invasive adenocarcinoma.
recommended to determine persistence 
or resolution. For persistent lesions, 
yearly follow-up for 5 years is recom-
mended to assess stability of the solid 
component. The recommended end 
point of 5 years is necessarily somewhat 
arbitrary, but it is considered reasonable 
for patients in whom the dimensions 
and attenuation of a part-solid nodule 
have remained unequivocally stable over 
that time period (42).
For solitary part-solid nodules with 
a solid component 6 mm or larger, a 
short-term follow-up CT scan at 3–6 
months should be considered to eval-
uate for persistence of the nodule. For 
nodules with particularly suspicious 
morphology (ie, lobulated margins or 
cystic components), a growing solid 
component, or a solid component 
larger than 8 mm, PET/CT, biopsy, or 
resection are recommended (grade 1B; 
strong 
recommendation, 
moderate-
quality evidence.) Abundant evidence 
enables us to confirm that the larger 
the solid component, the greater the 
risk of invasiveness and metastases. 
A solid component larger than 5 mm 
correlates with a substantial likelihood 
of local invasion (7,43,45–54), and this 
is a threshold criterion in the newly 
revised T factor staging for adenocar-
cinoma (Fig 13) (55–57). However, a 
large solid component can also be seen 
in transient part-solid nodules (44,58).
Recommendation 5: multiple sub-
solid lung nodules.—In patients with 
multiple subsolid nodules smaller than 
6 mm, one must consider infectious 
causes. If lesions remain persistent 
 
after an initial follow-up scan at 3–6 
months, consider follow-up at approx-
imately 2 and 4 years to confirm sta-
bility, depending on the clinical setting 
(grade 1C; strong recommendation, 
low- or very-low-quality evidence). For 
multiple subsolid nodules, including 
pure ground-glass and part-solid mor-
phologies smaller than 6 mm, short-term 
(3–6-month) follow-up may be appro-
priate when the diagnosis is uncertain 
and the differential diagnosis includes 
nonneoplastic causes. If stability is es-
tablished in this time frame, follow-up 
examinations at 2 and 4 years are 
recommended to confirm absence of 
growth, given the likelihood of atypical 
adenomatous hyperplasia or adenocar-
cinoma in situ in such instances (34).
In patients with multiple subsol-
id nodules with at least one nodule 
that is 6 mm or larger, management 
 238 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
make a recommendation for follow-up. 
Although linear measurement with 
electronic calipers remains the current 
standard of practice, experience with 
semiautomated nodule volumetry sug-
gests that this approach has superior 
sensitivity in the detection of nodule 
growth (22,64,65). While robust and 
validated software for volumetric nod-
ule measurement is not widely used at 
present, we anticipate that it will have 
an increased role in the future.
Volume doubling times for solid 
cancers are well established (one vol-
ume doubling corresponds to a 26% 
increase in diameter), with a large ma-
jority of times being in the 100–400-day 
range. For subsolid cancerous nodules, 
which represent primary adenocar-
cinomas, more indolent growth is the 
rule, with average doubling times on 
the order of 3–5 years (34,66). For this 
reason, longer initial follow-up inter-
vals and longer total follow-up periods 
are recommended for subsolid nodules 
than for solid nodules.
Emphysema and Fibrosis
The presence of emphysema on a CT 
image is an independent risk factor for 
lung cancer (67). An analysis of lung 
near the hila (62). Small solid nodules 
in a perifissural or subpleural location 
often represent intrapulmonary lymph 
nodes (discussed later in this article).
Nodule Multiplicity
An analysis of patients with multiple 
nodules in the NELSON trial showed 
increased risk of primary cancer as the 
total nodule count increased from 1 to 
4 but decreased risk in patients with 5 
or more nodules, most of which likely 
resulted from prior granulomatous in-
fection (29). In the PanCan trial, multi-
plicity of nodules was associated with a 
reduced risk of cancer when compared 
with risk associated with one nodule 
(7).
Nodule Growth Rate
Cancers have a wide range of growth 
rates that depend on morphology and 
histologic findings. Recommended fol-
low-up intervals are intended to mini-
mize the number of examinations and 
the chance of a growing cancer advanc-
ing in stage during the period of CT 
follow-up prior to diagnosis. Thus, we 
must consider the potential growth rate 
of a detected nodule and our ability to 
detect small changes in size when we 
with these settings, and the current 
consensus is that such nodules are best 
evaluated subjectively by using a lung 
window setting and an edge-enhancing 
(sharp) filter to judge the presence and 
extent of solid components (52,60).
Marginal 
spiculation 
has 
been 
known for many years to be associated 
with malignancy, and more recent stud-
ies have confirmed spiculation as a risk 
factor for cancer (7,61). Unfortunately, 
spiculation has generally been classified 
in a binary manner as present or ab-
sent, and the threshold for determin-
ing the presence of spiculation has not 
been defined. Nonetheless, it has been 
consistently identified as a risk factor 
for malignancy, with an odds ratio in 
the range of 2.2–2.5 in screen-detected 
nodules (7).
Nodule Location
Lung cancers occur more frequently in 
the upper lobes, with a predilection for 
the right lung (62,63). In the PanCan 
trial, upper lobe nodule location was 
confirmed as a risk factor, with an odds 
ratio of approximately 2.0 (7). Adeno-
carcinomas and metastases tend to be 
located in the periphery, while squa-
mous cancers are more often found 
Figure 14
Figure 14: (a) Transverse 1-mm CT section through the upper lobes shows multiple variable-sized subsolid nodules bilaterally, including at least one highly 
suspicious (large size, ground-glass appearance, and solid morphology) part-solid lesion in the left upper lobe (arrow). Initial follow-up would be appropriate in 3–6 
months. (b) A more inferior section from the same examination shows another highly suspicious lobulated 10-mm ground-glass nodule in the right upper lobe 
(arrow), which would also warrant follow up. The findings are most consistent with multifocal primary adenocarcinoma.
 Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017 n radiology.rsna.org 
239
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
location, family history of lung cancer, 
age, and sex. Because these factors are 
numerous and have differing effects 
on the likelihood of cancer, several 
sophisticated risk prediction models 
have been developed (Appendix E1 
[online]). However, for the purposes 
of these guidelines, we recommend 
that risk be assigned according to the 
categories proposed by the American 
College of Chest Physicians (ACCP). 
Low risk, which corresponds to an es-
timated risk of cancer of less than 5%, 
is associated with young age, less smok-
ing, smaller nodule size, regular mar-
gins, and location in an area other than 
the upper lobe. To estimate high risk, 
we recommend combining the ACCP 
intermediate-risk (5%–65% risk) and 
high-risk (.65% risk) categories. High-
risk factors include older age, heavy 
smoking, larger nodule size, irregular 
or spiculated margins, and upper lobe 
location. Subjects with intermediate 
risk share both high- and low-risk char-
acteristics (83).
Invasive Diagnostic and Therapeutic 
Procedures
These guidelines are limited to the non-
invasive management of incidentally 
detected nodules. The appropriate use 
of invasive diagnostic and therapeu-
tic procedures is vitally important but 
depends greatly on available resources 
and expertise. As a general rule, trans-
thoracic needle biopsy is an effective 
approach in experienced hands, but it 
has important limitations for very small 
nodules and ground-glass lesions due 
to potential problems with inadequate 
sampling and false-negative results 
(84–86).
Newer guided transbronchial tissue 
sampling techniques that use electro-
magnetic navigation and endobronchial 
ultrasonography-guided nodal sampling 
have greatly extended the role and ac-
curacy of bronchoscopy for diagnosis 
and staging (87,88), while minimally 
invasive surgery with lung-sparing tech-
nique enables diagnosis and definitive 
treatment in selected patients (89–92).
Decisions regarding choice of pro-
cedure in any given case are best made 
in the context of a multidisciplinary 
1.8 in patients with an affected sibling. 
Race is also a factor, with a significantly 
higher incidence of lung cancer in black 
men and native Hawaiian men at low 
levels of smoking when compared with 
that in white men (74).
Tobacco and Other Inhaled Carcinogens
Cigarette smoking has been established 
as the major risk factor for lung cancer 
since the 1960s, with a 10- to 35-fold 
increased risk when compared with that 
in nonsmokers, and exposure to second-
hand smoke is a proven, albeit lesser, 
risk factor (75–77). The association be-
tween adenocarcinoma, which accounts 
for virtually all subsolid lung cancers, and 
smoking is weaker than the association 
between small cell or squamous cell car-
cinomas and smoking, and the incidence 
of adenocarcinoma in nonsmokers is in-
creasing, with female nonsmokers being 
affected significantly more often than 
male nonsmokers (75,77). However, the 
degree to which smoking affects the risk 
for lung adenocarcinoma has not been 
clearly defined; thus, our recommenda-
tions for management of subsolid nod-
ules are independent of customary risk 
categories (78).
A smoking history of 30 pack-years 
or more and quitting smoking within 
the past 15 years have been used as the 
qualifying tobacco exposure threshold 
for the NLST screening program, and 
they should be considered indicative of 
high-risk status in patients with solid 
nodules. Other inhaled carcinogens that 
are known risk factors for lung cancer 
include exposure to asbestos, uranium, 
or radon (79–81).
Smokeless 
electronic 
cigarettes 
have been introduced, but possible 
risks associated with these products 
are as yet unproven (82).
Risk Estimation and Risk Models
These guidelines for nodule manage-
ment are based on estimations of the 
individual risk of malignancy. Although 
nodule size and morphology remain the 
dominant factors that we use to predict 
risk, it is important to consider addi-
tional clinical risk factors, including 
smoking, exposure to other carcino-
gens, emphysema, fibrosis, upper lobe 
cancer and emphysema in the NLST 
trial revealed an incidence of 25 in-
stances of cancer per 1000 screened 
patients with emphysema, compared 
with 7.5 instances of cancer per 1000 
screened patients for those without 
(68). Chiles et al (69) investigated the 
relationship between chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease phenotypes and 
risk of cancer in indeterminate nodules 
detected in the NLST trial and found 
that emphysema-predominant chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease pheno-
type and increasing severity of centri-
lobular emphysema were associated 
with increased risk of malignancy. Pul-
monary fibrosis, particularly idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis, is also an indepen-
dent risk factor, with a hazard ratio of 
approximately 4.2 compared with em-
physema alone (70).
Age, Sex, Race, and Family History
The relationship between age and lung 
cancer risk has been clearly established, 
with an accelerating increase in risk as-
sociated with advancing age. Lung can-
cer is still relatively rare in individuals 
younger than 35 years and is unusual 
before the age of 40 years. For each ad-
ditional decade of life, lung cancer in-
cidence increases steadily (71,72). The 
possible role of sex as a risk factor for 
lung cancer has been explored in several 
recent studies. Chiles et al (69) identi-
fied certain individual characteristics of 
female subjects in the NLST trial, such 
as lower educational level and lower 
body mass index, that were associated 
with an increased risk of cancer; how-
ever, the overall 6-year risk of cancer 
was not significantly different from that 
in male subjects. Boiselle (73) exam-
ined the relative risk for women and 
men in the same trial with solid, non-
solid, or part-solid nodules and found a 
significantly higher risk in women with 
ground-glass (nonsolid) nodules. Female 
sex was also found to be a risk factor in 
the PanCan trial, with an overall odds 
ratio of 1.8; however, the relationship to 
nodule type was not reported (7). A fam-
ily history of lung cancer is a risk factor 
for both smokers and those who never 
smoked, with an overall relative risk in 
the range of 1.5 that can extend up to 
 240 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
well-defined component of standard 
clinical care is well documented. In a 
recent survey of thoracic CT studies 
obtained in adults between 2006 and 
2012, more than 4.8 million people 
underwent at least one thoracic CT 
examination, with more than 1.5 mil-
lion nodules identified, and a new lung 
cancer diagnosis was made in approx-
imately 63 
000 patients within 2 years 
(97). Thus, the importance of a sys-
tematic and evidence-based approach 
to the management of these nodules 
is apparent.
It is anticipated that these guide-
lines will remain clinically relevant for 
many years; however, continued pro-
gress in image processing and evolving 
understanding of the natural history 
of incidentally identified nodules will 
likely mandate further revisions in the 
future.
Disclosures of Conflicts of Interest: H.M. 
Activities related to the present article: dis-
closed no relevant relationships. Activities not 
related to the present article: received a con-
sulting fee from and is on the advisory board 
of Riverian Technologies, holds stock options in 
Hologic, received a grant from Philips Health-
care, holds patents and receives liscensing fees 
from UCTech. Other relationships: disclosed 
no relevant relationships. D.P.N. Activities re-
lated to the present article: disclosed no rele-
vant relationships. Activities not related to the 
present article: is a consultant for Vida Diag-
nostics. Other relationships: disclosed no rel-
evant relationships. J.M.G. disclosed no rele-
vant relationships. K.S.L. disclosed no relevant 
relationships. A.N.C.L. disclosed no relevant 
relationships. J.R.M. Activities related to the 
present article: disclosed no relevant relation-
ships. Activities not related to the present arti-
cle: led a symposium sponsored by GE Health-
care. Other relationships: disclosed no relevant 
relationships. A.C.M. disclosed no relevant 
relationships. Y.O. Activities related to the pre-
sent article: disclosed no relevant relationships. 
Activities not related to the present article: 
received research grants from Toshiba Medical 
Systems, grants from Philips Electronics Ja-
pan, Bayer Pharma, Daiichi-Sankyo, Guerbet, 
Fuji RI Pharma, Fuji Pharma, and Eizai. Other 
relationships: disclosed no relevant relation-
ships. C.A.P. Activities related to the present 
article: disclosed no relevant relationships. Ac-
tivities not related to the present article: is a 
consultant for and was reimbursed for travel 
by Siemens. Other relationships: disclosed no 
relevant relationships. M.P. Activities related to 
the present article: disclosed no relevant rela-
tionships. Activities not related to the present 
article: is on the speakers bureaus of Bracco, 
Bayer, and Toshiba; has a financial interest in 
Thirona; department has a license agreement 
malignancy, and a follow-up examina-
tion in 6–12 months should be consid-
ered in these patients.
Incidentally Detected Lung Nodules on 
Incomplete Thoracic CT Scans
Lung nodules are commonly encoun-
tered in the portions of the lungs that 
are included on CT scans of the neck, 
heart, and abdomen, and the question 
often arises as to whether a complete 
thoracic CT examination should be per-
formed in such instances.
For most small nodules (,6 mm), 
we do not recommend any further in-
vestigation on the basis of the estimated 
low risk of malignancy (6,7). For inter-
mediate-size (6–8-mm) nodules, we rec-
ommend follow-up CT of the complete 
chest after an appropriate interval (3–12 
months depending on clinical risk) to 
confirm stability and to evaluate addi-
tional findings. If nodule stability can be 
demonstrated on the basis of retrospec-
tive comparison with a previous study, 
that may suffice. In the case of a large or 
very suspicious nodule, we recommend 
proceeding with a complete thoracic CT 
examination for further evaluation.
Partial Thoracic CT Scans for Nodule 
Follow-up
We do not recommend use of partial 
thoracic scans for practical reasons, in-
cluding the need for a technologist or 
radiologist to determine the appropri-
ate range of the scan from a scout im-
age and the possible detection of unan-
ticipated abnormal findings that would 
require complete examination of the 
thorax to properly evaluate.
Conclusions
These guidelines represent the consen-
sus of the Fleischner Society, and as 
such, they incorporate the opinions of 
a multidisciplinary international group 
of thoracic radiologists, pulmonolo-
gists, surgeons, pathologists, and other 
specialists. Changes from the previous 
guidelines issued by this society are 
based on new data and accumulated 
experience.
The need to consider inciden-
tally detected nodules as a separate 
conference, where the merits and lim-
itations of each approach can be dis-
cussed (93).
Additional Considerations
Apical Scarring
Some degree of pleural and subpleural 
apical scarring is extremely common, 
and these scars may have a nodular 
appearance, especially when viewed on 
transverse images. Certain features are 
suggestive of a scar, including a pleu-
ral-based configuration, an elongated 
shape, straight or concave margins, 
and the presence of similar adjacent 
opacities. Review on coronal or sagit-
tal reconstructed images can be helpful 
in the characterization of such findings. 
Similar considerations apply to sub-
pleural opacities in other locations, in-
cluding the costophrenic angles, where 
focal scarring is also common.
Perifissural Nodules
Perifissural nodule is a term used to de-
scribe small solid nodules that are com-
monly seen on CT images adjacent to 
pleural fissures and that are thought to 
represent intrapulmonary lymph nodes. 
Similar nodules can occur in other lo-
cations, usually adjacent to a pleural 
surface. Typically, these are triangular 
or oval on transverse images, and they 
have a flat or lentiform configuration 
in sagittal or coronal reconstructions 
and a fine linear septal extension to the 
pleura. When small nodules have a per-
ifissural or other juxtapleural location 
and a morphology consistent with an 
intrapulmonary lymph node, follow-up 
CT is not recommended, even if the av-
erage dimension exceeds 6 mm. In one 
study of patients in the NELSON Lung 
Cancer Screening Trial, 20% of nodules 
were classified as perifissural, and 16% 
of these grew during the study; how-
ever, none were malignant (94). How-
ever, perifissural or juxtapleural loca-
tion does not in itself reliably indicate 
benignancy, and the specific nodule 
morphology must be considered (95, 
96). A spiculated border, displacement 
of the adjacent fissure, or a history 
of cancer increase the possibility of 
 Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017 n radiology.rsna.org 
241
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
mography screening for lung cancer: three 
rounds of the NELSON trial. Eur Respir J 
2013;42(6):1659–1667.
 
23. Zhao B, James LP, Moskowitz CS, et al. 
Evaluating variability in tumor measure-
ments from same-day repeat CT scans of 
patients with non-small cell lung cancer. Ra-
diology 2009;252(1):263–272.
 
24. Shin KE, Lee KS, Yi CA, Chung MJ, Shin 
MH, Choi YH. Subcentimeter lung nod-
ules stable for 2 years at LDCT: long-term 
follow-up 
using 
volumetry. 
Respirology 
2014;19(6):921–928.
 
25. Gould MK, Fletcher J, Iannettoni MD, et al. 
Evaluation of patients with pulmonary nod-
ules: when is it lung cancer? ACCP evidence-
based clinical practice guidelines (2nd edi-
tion). Chest 2007;132(3 Suppl):108S–130S.
 
26. Soardi GA, Perandini S, Motton M, Monte-
mezzi S. Assessing probability of malignancy 
in solid solitary pulmonary nodules with a 
new Bayesian calculator: improving diagnos-
tic accuracy by means of expanded and up-
dated features. Eur Radiol 2015;25(1):155–
162.
 
27. Goodsitt MM, Chan HP, Way TW, Schipper 
MJ, Larson SC, Christodoulou EG. Quan-
titative CT of lung nodules: dependence of 
calibration on patient body size, anatomic 
region, and calibration nodule size for sin-
gle- and dual-energy techniques. Med Phys 
2009;36(7):3107–3121.
 
28. Herold CJ, Bankier AA, Fleischmann D. 
Lung metastases. Eur Radiol 1996;6(5):596–
606.
 
29. Peters R, Heuvelmans MA, Vliegenthart R, 
Van Ooijen PM, De Bock GH, Oudkerk M. 
Prevalence of pulmonary multi-nodularity in 
CT lung cancer screening and lung cancer 
probability [abstr]. In: Radiological Society of 
North America Scientific Assembly and An-
nual Meeting Program. Oak Brook, Ill: Radio-
logical Society of North America, 2015; 111.
 
30. Kakinuma R, Muramatsu Y, Kusumoto M, 
et al. Solitary pure ground-glass nodules 5 
mm or smaller: frequency of growth. Radi-
ology 2015;276(3):873–882.
 
31. Aoki T. Growth of pure ground-glass lung 
nodule detected at computed tomography. J 
Thorac Dis 2015;7(9):E326–E328.
 
32. Kobayashi Y, Fukui T, Ito S, et al. How 
long should small lung lesions of ground-
glass opacity be followed? J Thorac Oncol 
2013;8(3):309–314.
 
33. Lim HJ, Ahn S, Lee KS, et al. Persistent 
pure ground-glass opacity lung nodules  10 
mm in diameter at CT scan: histopathologic 
comparisons and prognostic implications. 
Chest 2013;144(4):1291–1299.
 
10. Webb WR. Radiologic evaluation of the 
solitary pulmonary nodule. AJR Am J 
Roentgenol 1990;154(4):701–708.
 
11. Erasmus JJ, Connolly JE, McAdams HP, 
Roggli VL. Solitary pulmonary nodules. I. 
Morphologic evaluation for differentiation 
of benign and malignant lesions. Radio-
Graphics 2000;20(1):43–58.
 
12. Gaerte SC, Meyer CA, Winer-Muram HT, 
Tarver RD, Conces DJ Jr. Fat-contain-
ing lesions of the chest. RadioGraphics 
2002;22(Spec No):S61–S78.
 
13. Bankier AA, Tack D. Dose reduction strat-
egies for thoracic multidetector computed 
tomography: background, current issues, 
and recommendations. J Thorac Imaging 
2010;25(4):278–288.
 
14. Gelbman BD, Cham MD, Kim W, et al. Ra-
diographic and clinical characterization of 
false negative results from CT-guided needle 
biopsies of lung nodules. J Thorac Oncol 
2012;7(5):815–820.
 
15. Zhang L, Yankelevitz DF, Carter D, Henschke 
CI, Yip R, Reeves AP. Internal growth of 
nonsolid lung nodules: radiologic-pathologic 
correlation. Radiology 2012;263(1):279–286.
 
16. Kovalchik SA, Tammemagi M, Berg CD, et 
al. Targeting of low-dose CT screening ac-
cording to the risk of lung-cancer death. N 
Engl J Med 2013;369(3):245–254.
 
17. Hein PA, Romano VC, Rogalla P, et al. Lin-
ear and volume measurements of pulmo-
nary nodules at different CT dose levels: 
intrascan and interscan analysis. Rofo 
2009;181(1):24–31.
 
18. Ashraf H, de Hoop B, Shaker SB, et al. 
Lung nodule volumetry: segmentation algo-
rithms within the same software package 
cannot be used interchangeably. Eur Radiol 
2010;20(8):1878–1885.
 
19. de Hoop B, Gietema H, van Ginneken B, 
Zanen P, Groenewegen G, Prokop M. A 
comparison of six software packages for 
evaluation of solid lung nodules using semi-
automated volumetry: what is the mini-
mum increase in size to detect growth in 
repeated CT examinations. Eur Radiol 
2009;19(4):800–808.
 
20. Park CM, Goo JM, Lee HJ, Lee CH, Chun 
EJ, Im JG. Nodular ground-glass opacity at 
thin-section CT: histologic correlation and 
evaluation of change at follow-up. Radio-
Graphics 2007;27(2):391–408.
 
21. Samet JM, Avila-Tang E, Boffetta P, et al. 
Lung cancer in never smokers: clinical ep-
idemiology and environmental risk factors. 
Clin Cancer Res 2009;15(18):5626–5645.
 
22. Horeweg N, van der Aalst CM, Vliegen-
thart R, et al. Volumetric computed to-
with Mevis Medical Solutions. Other rela-
tionships: disclosed no relevant relationships. 
G.D.R. disclosed no relevant relationships. 
C.M.S. disclosed no relevant relationships. 
W.D.T. disclosed no relevant relationships. 
P.E.V.S. disclosed no relevant relationships. 
A.A.B. Activities related to the present article: 
disclosed no relevant relationships. Activities 
not related to the present article: is a consul-
tant for Spiration and Olympus, has served as 
a speaker for the American Thoracic Society, 
receives royalties from Elsevier. Other relation-
ships: disclosed no relevant relationships.
References
 1. MacMahon H, Austin JH, Gamsu G, et al. 
Guidelines for management of small pulmo-
nary nodules detected on CT scans: a state-
ment from the Fleischner Society. Radiology 
2005;237(2):395–400.
 2. Naidich DP, Bankier AA, MacMahon H, et 
al. Recommendations for the management 
of subsolid pulmonary nodules detected at 
CT: a statement from the Fleischner Society. 
Radiology 2013;266(1):304–317.
 3. Wiener RS, Gould MK, Woloshin S, 
Schwartz LM, Clark JA. What do you 
mean, a spot? a qualitative analysis of pa-
tients’ reactions to discussions with their 
physicians about pulmonary nodules. Chest 
2013;143(3):672–677.
 4. National Lung Screening Trial Research 
Team, Aberle DR, Adams AM, et al. Re-
duced lung-cancer mortality with low-dose 
computed tomographic screening. N Engl J 
Med 2011;365(5):395–409.
 5. Farooqi AO, Cham M, Zhang L, et al. Lung 
cancer associated with cystic airspaces. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol 2012;199(4):781–786.
 6. Horeweg N, van Rosmalen J, Heuvelmans 
MA, et al. Lung cancer probability in pa-
tients with CT-detected pulmonary nodules: 
a prespecified analysis of data from the 
NELSON trial of low-dose CT screening. 
Lancet Oncol 2014;15(12):1332–1341.
 7. McWilliams A, Tammemagi MC, Mayo JR, 
et al. Probability of cancer in pulmonary 
nodules detected on first screening CT. N 
Engl J Med 2013;369(10):910–919.
 8. Kazerooni EA, Armstrong MR, Amorosa 
JK, et al. ACR CT Accreditation Program 
and the Lung Cancer Screening Program 
Designation. J Am Coll Radiol 2016;13(2 
Suppl):R30–R34.
 9. Guyatt G, Gutterman D, Baumann MH, 
et al. Grading strength of recommenda-
tions and quality of evidence in clinical 
guidelines: report from an American Col-
lege of Chest Physicians task force. Chest 
2006;129(1):174–181.
 242 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
Pleura, Thymus and Heart. 4th ed. Lyon, 
France: International Agency for Research 
on Cancer, 2015.
 
56. Ujiie H, Kadota K, Chaft JE, et al. Solid pre-
dominant histologic subtype in resected stage 
I lung adenocarcinoma is an independent 
predictor of early, extrathoracic, multisite 
recurrence and of poor postrecurrence sur-
vival. J Clin Oncol 2015;33(26):2877–2884.
 
57. Travis WD, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, et 
al. International Association for the Study 
of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Soci-
ety/European Respiratory Society inter-
national 
multidisciplinary 
classification 
of lung adenocarcinoma. J Thorac Oncol 
2011;6(2):244–285.
 
58. Travis WD, Asamura H, Bankier AA, et al. 
The IASLC Lung Cancer Staging Project: 
proposals for coding T categories for subsol-
id nodules and assessment of tumor size in 
part-solid tumors in the forthcoming eighth 
edition of the TNM Classification of Lung 
Cancer. J Thorac Oncol 2016;11(8):244–285.
 
59. van Riel SJ, Sánchez CI, Bankier AA, et al. 
Observer variability for classification of pul-
monary nodules on low-dose CT images and 
its effect on nodule management. Radiology 
2015;277(3):863–871.
 
60. Matsuguma H, Oki I, Nakahara R, et al. 
Comparison of three measurements on 
computed tomography for the prediction 
of less invasiveness in patients with clinical 
stage I non-small cell lung cancer. Ann Tho-
rac Surg 2013;95(6):1878–1884.
 
61. Xu DM, van der Zaag-Loonen HJ, Oudkerk 
M, et al. Smooth or attached solid inde-
terminate nodules detected at aaseline CT 
screening in the NELSON study: cancer 
risk during 1 year of follow-up. I. Radiology, 
2009;250(1):264–272.
 
62. Lindell RM, Hartman TE, Swensen SJ, et al. 
Five-year lung cancer screening experience: 
CT appearance, growth rate, location, and 
histologic features of 61 lung cancers. Radi-
ology 2007;242(2):555–562.
 
63. Horeweg N, van der Aalst CM, Thunnissen 
E, et al. Characteristics of lung cancers de-
tected by computer tomography screening in 
the randomized NELSON trial. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2013;187(8):848–854.
 
64. Heuvelmans MA, Oudkerk M, de Bock GH, 
et al. Optimisation of volume-doubling time 
cutoff for fast-growing lung nodules in CT 
lung cancer screening reduces false-positive 
referrals. Eur Radiol 2013;23(7):1836–1845.
 
65. Mehta HJ, Ravenel JG, Shaftman SR, et al. 
The utility of nodule volume in the context 
of malignancy prediction for small pulmo-
nary nodules. Chest 2014;145(3):464–472.
 
45. Kim 
HY, 
Shim 
YM, 
Lee 
KS, 
Han 
J, 
Yi 
CA, 
Kim 
YK. Persistent pulmonary nodular ground-
glass opacity at thin-section CT: histopath-
ologic comparisons. Radiology 2007;245(1): 
267–275.
 
46. Saito H, Yamada K, Hamanaka N, et al. Initial 
findings and progression of lung adenocarci-
noma on serial computed tomography scans. 
J Comput Assist Tomogr 2009;33(1):42–48.
 
47. Suzuki K, Kusumoto M, Watanabe S, Tsuchi-
ya R, Asamura H. Radiologic classification of 
small adenocarcinoma of the lung: radiologic-
pathologic correlation and its prognostic im-
pact. Ann Thorac Surg 2006;81(2):413–419.
 
48. Hwang EJ, Park CM, Ryu Y, et al. Pulmo-
nary adenocarcinomas appearing as part-
solid ground-glass nodules: is measuring 
solid component size a better prognostic 
indicator? Eur Radiol 2015;25(2):558–567.
 
49. Liao JH, Amin VB, Kadoch MA, Beasley 
MB, Jacobi AH. Subsolid pulmonary nod-
ules: CT-pathologic correlation using the 
2011 IASLC/ATS/ERS classification. Clin Im-
aging 2015;39(3):344–351.
 
50. Matsuguma H, Mori K, Nakahara R, et al. 
Characteristics of subsolid pulmonary nod-
ules showing growth during follow-up with 
CT scanning. Chest 2013;143(2):436–443.
 
51. Tamura M, Shimizu Y, Yamamoto T, Yo-
shikawa J, Hashizume Y. Predictive value 
of one-dimensional mean computed tomog-
raphy value of ground-glass opacity on high-
resolution images for the possibility of future 
change. J Thorac Oncol 2014;9(4):469–472.
 
52. Lee KH, Goo JM, Park SJ, et al. Correlation 
between the size of the solid component on 
thin-section CT and the invasive component 
on pathology in small lung adenocarcinomas 
manifesting as ground-glass nodules. J Tho-
rac Oncol 2014;9(1):74–82.
 
53. International Early Lung Cancer Action Pro-
gram Investigators, Henschke CI, Yankelev-
itz DF, et al. Survival of patients with stage 
I lung cancer detected on CT screening. 
N Engl J Med 2006;355(17):1763–1771. 
[Published corrections appear in N Engl J 
Med 2008;358(17):1875 and N Engl J Med 
2008;359(8):877.]
 
54. Saji H, Matsubayashi J, Akata S, et al. Cor-
relation between whole tumor size and solid 
component size on high-resolution com-
puted tomography in the prediction of the 
degree of pathologic malignancy and the 
prognostic outcome in primary lung adeno-
carcinoma. Acta Radiol 2015;56(10):1187–
1195.
 
55. International Agency for Research on Can-
cer. Minimally invasive adenocarcinoma in 
WHO Classification of Tumors of the Lung, 
 
34. Yankelevitz DF, Yip R, Smith JP, et al. CT 
screening for lung cancer: nonsolid nodules 
in baseline and annual repeat rounds. Radi-
ology 2015;277(2):555–564.
 
35. Hwang IP, Park CM, Park SJ, et al. Persis-
tent pure ground-glass nodules larger than 
5 mm: differentiation of invasive pulmo-
nary adenocarcinomas from preinvasive 
lesions or minimally invasive adenocarci-
nomas using texture analysis. Invest Radiol 
2015;50(11):798–804.
 
36. Lee HY, Choi YL, Lee KS, et al. Pure ground-
glass opacity neoplastic lung nodules: histo-
pathology, imaging, and management. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol 2014;202(3):W224–W233.
 
37. Lee SM, Park CM, Goo JM, Lee HJ, Wi 
JY, Kang CH. Invasive pulmonary adeno-
carcinomas versus preinvasive lesions ap-
pearing as ground-glass nodules: differ-
entiation by using CT features. Radiology 
2013;268(1):265–273.
 
38. Silva M, Bankier AA, Centra F, et al. Lon-
gitudinal evolution of incidentally detected 
solitary pure ground-glass nodules on CT: 
relation to clinical metrics. Diagn Interv Ra-
diol 2015;21(5):385–390.
 
39. Jin X, Zhao SH, Gao J, et al. CT charac-
teristics and pathological implications of 
early stage (T1N0M0) lung adenocarcinoma 
with pure ground-glass opacity. Eur Radiol 
2015;25(9):2532–2540.
 
40. Xiang W, Xing Y, Jiang S, et al. Morpho-
logical factors differentiating between early 
lung adenocarcinomas appearing as pure 
ground-glass nodules measuring 10 mm on 
thin-section computed tomography. Cancer 
Imaging 2014;14(1):33.
 
41. Choi WS, Park CM, Song YS, Lee SM, Wi 
JY, Goo JM. Transient subsolid nodules in 
patients with extrapulmonary malignancies: 
their frequency and differential features. 
Acta Radiol 2015;56(4):428–437.
 
42. Lee JH, Park CM, Lee SM, Kim H, Mc-
Adams HP, Goo JM. Persistent pulmonary 
subsolid nodules with solid portions of 
5 mm or smaller: their natural course and 
predictors of interval growth. Eur Radiol 
2016;26(6):1529–1537.
 
43. Cohen JG, Reymond E, Lederlin M, et al. 
Differentiating pre- and minimally invasive 
from invasive adenocarcinoma using CT-
features in persistent pulmonary part-solid 
nodules in Caucasian patients. Eur J Radiol 
2015;84(4):738–744.
 
44. Lee SM, Park CM, Goo JM, et al. Transient 
part-solid nodules detected at screening 
thin-section CT for lung cancer: comparison 
with persistent part-solid nodules. Radiol-
ogy 2010;255(1):242–251.
 Radiology: Volume 284: Number 1—July 2017 n radiology.rsna.org 
243
SPECIAL REPORT: Guidelines for Management of Incidental Pulmonary Nodules 
MacMahon et al
tomography 
in 
relation 
to 
Noguchi’s 
classification for diagnosis of peripheral 
non-small-cell lung cancer 2 cm or less in 
size. World J Surg 2007;31(2):314–317.
87. Chu ZG, Yang ZG, Shao H, et al. Small 
peripheral 
lung 
adenocarcinoma: 
CT 
and histopathologic characteristics and 
prognostic implications. Cancer Imaging 
2011;11(11):237–246.
 
88. Rivera MP, Mehta AC, Wahidi MM. Estab-
lishing the diagnosis of lung cancer: diag-
nosis and management of lung cancer, 3rd 
ed: American College of Chest Physicians 
evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. 
Chest 143(5 Suppl):e142S–e165S.
 
89. Kohno T, Fujimori S, Kishi K, Fujii T. Safe 
and effective minimally invasive approaches 
for small ground glass opacity. Ann Thorac 
Surg 2010;89(6):S2114–S2117.
 
90. Lynch JE, Zwischenberger JB. Is a small-
er resection a smaller operation? Chest 
2011;139(3):481–482.
 
91. Mun M, Kohno T. Efficacy of thoracoscopic 
resection for multifocal bronchioloalveolar 
carcinoma showing pure ground-glass opac-
ities of 20 mm or less in diameter. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg 2007;134(4):877–882.
 
92. Van Schil PE, Asamura H, Rusch VW, et 
al. Surgical implications of the new IASLC/
ATS/ERS 
adenocarcinoma 
classification. 
Eur Respir J 2012;39(2):478–486.
 
93. Ost DE, Gould MK. Decision making in pa-
tients with pulmonary nodules. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2012;185(4):363–372.
 
94. de Hoop B, van Ginneken B, Gietema H, Pro-
kop M. Pulmonary perifissural nodules on CT 
scans: rapid growth is not a predictor of ma-
lignancy. Radiology 2012;265(2):611–616.
 
95. Ahn MI, Gleeson TG, Chan IH, et al. Perifis-
sural nodules seen at CT screening for lung 
cancer. Radiology 2010;254:949–956.
 
96. Bankoff MS, McEniff NJ, Bhadelia RA, 
Garcia-Moliner M, Daly BD. Prevalence of 
pathologically proven intrapulmonary lymph 
nodes and their appearance on CT. AJR Am 
J Roentgenol 1996;167:629–630.
 
97. Gould MK, Tang T, Liu IL, et al. Recent 
trends in the identification of incidental 
pulmonary nodules. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 2015;192(10):1208–1214. 
 
76. Oberg M, Jaakkola MS, Woodward A, Pe-
ruga A, Prüss-Ustün A. Worldwide burden of 
disease from exposure to second-hand smoke: 
a retrospective analysis of data from 192 
countries. Lancet 2011;377(9760):139–146.
 
77. Tamura M, Shimizu Y, Yamamoto T, Yo-
shikawa J, Hashizume Y. Predictive value of 
one-dimensional mean computed tomogra-
phy value of ground-glass opacity on high-
resolution images for the possibility of future 
change. J Thorac Oncol 2014;9(4):469–472.
 
78. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. 
Comprehensive molecular profiling of lung 
adenocarcinoma. Nature 2014;511(7511): 
543–550.
 
79. Field RW, Steck DJ, Smith BJ, et al. Resi-
dential radon gas exposure and lung cancer: 
the Iowa Radon Lung Cancer Study. Am J 
Epidemiol 2000;151(11):1091–1102.
 
80. Gottlieb LS, Husen LA. Lung cancer among 
Navajo 
uranium 
miners. 
Chest 
1982; 
81(4):449–452.
 
81. Lee PN. Relation between exposure to as-
bestos and smoking jointly and the risk 
of lung cancer. Occup Environ Med 2001; 
58(3):145–153.
 
82. Lauterstein D, Hoshino R, Gordon T, 
Watkins BX, Weitzman M, Zelikoff J. The 
changing face of tobacco use among Unit-
ed States youth. Curr Drug Abuse Rev 
2014;7(1):29–43.
 
83. Gould MK, Donnington J, Lynch WR, et al. 
Evaluation of individuals with pulmonary 
nodules: when is it lung cancer? diagno-
sis and management of lung cancer, 3rd 
ed: American College of Chest Physicians 
evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. 
Chest 2013;143(5 Suppl):e93S–e120S.
 
84. Kim HK, Shin BK, Cho SJ, et al. Transtho-
racic fine needle aspiration and core biopsy 
of pulmonary lesions. a study of 296 pa-
tients. Acta Cytol 2002;46(6):1061–1068.
 
85. Kothary N, Lock L, Sze DY, Hofmann LV. 
Computed tomography-guided percutane-
ous needle biopsy of pulmonary nodules: 
impact of nodule size on diagnostic accu-
racy. Clin Lung Cancer 2009;10(5):360–363.
 
86. Tsunezuka Y, Shimizu Y, Tanaka N, Takay-
anagi T, Kawano M. Positron emission 
 
66. Hasegawa M, Sone S, Takashima S, et 
al. Growth rate of small lung cancers de-
tected on mass CT screening. Br J Radiol 
2000;73(876):1252–1259.
 
67. Wilson DO, Weissfeld JL, Balkan A, et al. 
Association of radiographic emphysema and 
airflow obstruction with lung cancer. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 2008;178(7):738–
744.
 
68. de Torres JP, Bastarrika G, Wisnivesky 
JP, et al. Assessing the relationship be-
tween lung cancer risk and emphysema de-
tected on low-dose CT of the chest. Chest 
2007;132(6):1932–1938.
 
69. Chiles C, Duan F, Amorosa JK, et al. Sex- 
and gender-linked differences in baseline 
characteristics of the National Lung Screen-
ing Trial [abstr]. In: Radiological Society of 
North America Scientific Assembly and An-
nual Meeting Program. Oak Brook, Ill: Ra-
diological Society of North America, 2015; 
111.
 
70. Kwak N, Park CM, Lee J, et al. Lung cancer 
risk among patients with combined pulmo-
nary fibrosis and emphysema. Respir Med 
2014;108(3):524–530.
 
71. Gadgeel SM, Ramalingam S, Cummings G, 
et al. Lung cancer in patients , 50 years of 
age: the experience of an academic multidis-
ciplinary program. Chest 1999;115(5):1232–
1236.
 
72. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Can-
cer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J Clin 
2015;65(1):5–29.
 
73. Boiselle PM. Lung nodule consistency and 
relative risk of future lung cancer diagnosis: 
does sex matter? [abstr]. In: Radiological 
Society of North America Scientific As-
sembly and Annual Meeting Program. Oak 
Brook, Ill: Radiological Society of North 
America, 2015; 111.
 
74. Haiman CA, Stram DO, Wilkens LR, et al. 
Ethnic and racial differences in the smok-
ing-related risk of lung cancer. N Engl J Med 
2006;354(4):333–342.
 
75. Kobayashi Y, Sakao Y, Deshpande GA, et al. 
The association between baseline clinical-
radiological characteristics and growth of 
pulmonary nodules with ground-glass opac-
ity. Lung Cancer 2014;83(1):61–66.
