 The Impact of Working in a Green Certified Building on Cognitive 
Function and Health
Piers MacNaughton1, Usha Satish2, Jose Guillermo Cedeno Laurent1, Skye Flanigan1, Jose 
Vallarino1, Brent Coull3, John D. Spengler1, and Joseph G. Allen1
1Department of Environmental Health, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, 
USA
2Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, SUNY-Upstate Medical School, Syracuse, NY, USA
3Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA
Abstract
Thirty years of public health research have demonstrated that improved indoor environmental 
quality is associated with better health outcomes. Recent research has demonstrated an impact of 
the indoor environment on cognitive function. We recruited 109 participants from 10 high-
performing buildings (i.e. buildings surpassing the ASHRAE Standard 62.1-2010 ventilation 
requirement and with low total volatile organic compound concentrations) in five U.S. cities. In 
each city, buildings were matched by week of assessment, tenant, type of worker and work 
functions. A key distinction between the matched buildings was whether they had achieved green 
certification. Workers were administered a cognitive function test of higher order decision-making 
performance twice during the same week while indoor environmental quality parameters were 
monitored. Workers in green certified buildings scored 26.4% (95% CI: [12.8%, 39.7%]) higher on 
cognitive function tests, controlling for annual earnings, job category and level of schooling, and 
had 30% fewer sick building symptoms than those in non-certified buildings. These outcomes may 
be partially explained by IEQ factors, including thermal conditions and lighting, but the findings 
suggest that the benefits of green certification standards go beyond measureable IEQ factors. We 
describe a holistic “buildingomics” approach for examining the complexity of factors in a building 
that influence human health.
Keywords
Green Certification; Office Buildings; Cognitive Function; Indoor Environmental Quality; 
Buildingomics
Corresponding Author: Joseph G. Allen, DSc, MPH, Assistant Professor, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 401 Park Drive, 
Landmark Center, 404-L, Boston, MA 02215, JGAllen@hsph.harvard.edu, o: 617-384-8475. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Build Environ. 2017 March ; 114: 178–186. doi:10.1016/j.buildenv.2016.11.041.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1.0 Introduction
Thirty years of public health science and building science have demonstrated that buildings 
play a key role in shaping our health [1–5]. Buildings have the capacity to create conditions 
that are harmful to health or conducive to health: they determine our exposure to outdoor 
pollutants, by either facilitating entry of particles of outdoor origin indoors, or acting as a 
barrier and removing them through enhanced filtration [6]; they govern exposure to 
chemicals of concern, such as volatile organic compounds (VOCs), flame retardants and 
polyfluorinated compounds, which can be ubiquitous or nonexistent, depending on the 
decisions we make regarding building materials and products [7, 8]; buildings either protect 
us from noise or contribute to the problem through the introduction of indoor sources, poor 
noise insulation, or poor acoustical design [9, 10]; they can induce eye strain or improve 
alertness through impacts on circadian rhythm, depending on the lighting system [11, 12]; 
buildings can protect us during heat events, or create environments that magnify the problem 
through solar heat gain [13, 14]; and buildings can either wall us off from nature or connect 
us to it [15, 16].
The scientific literature around buildings and health has identified the foundations of a 
healthy building including factors such as ventilation, air quality, thermal comfort, noise and 
lighting, and this body of research has served as the basis for green certification standards to 
define their indoor environmental quality (IEQ) guidelines. A review of leading, global 
green-building standards - LEED New Construction 2009, Green Star Office v3, BREEAM 
New Construction 2012, BCA Green mark for new non-residential buildings v4.1 2013, and 
DGNB New Office v2012 - demonstrates the approach of these certification standards 
toward IEQ. All of the rating systems offer credits for thermal comfort, indoor air quality 
(IAQ) and lighting; all but LEED NC 2009 have credits for acoustics; and Green STAR v3 
and LEED NC 2009 have credits specifically for ventilation. However, building owners and 
developers can opt for certain credits, and IEQ represents only 4–20% of the total score a 
building can obtain. Of the reviewed rating systems, only LEED NC 2009 has mandatory 
IEQ credits, for minimum IAQ performance and environmental tobacco smoke control [17].
The adoption rates of the optional IEQ credits in LEED NC 2009 give an indication of how 
building owners are prioritizing certain aspects of IEQ [17]. We extracted the data and found 
that the vast majority of projects obtain credits for low-emitting adhesives, paints and 
flooring systems (Table 1). Increased ventilation is much less widely adopted, despite strong 
evidence for health and performance benefits of higher ventilation rates [18, 19]. While 
some credits are preferentially adopted and others not, buildings that seek LEED NC 2009 
obtain on average 9 of the 15 possible IEQ credits, not including the required fundamental 
commissioning credit under the energy and atmosphere credit category.
The literature suggests that these credits translate into improved IEQ. Our previous review of 
green buildings and health identified 17 studies and found that, overall, occupants report 
better IEQ and fewer health problems in these buildings compared to non-certified buildings. 
These studies found lower levels of VOCs, formaldehyde, allergens, nitrogen dioxide, and 
particulate matter in green buildings, which have been separately shown to impact health. 
Six of the reviewed studies tracked the health of occupants in addition to IEQ, and all six 
MacNaughton et al.
Page 2
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 found improvements in the green buildings [20]. These include reduced asthma and allergy 
symptoms in offices [21]; reduced respiratory symptoms, fewer sick building symptoms, and 
better self-reported well-being in public housing [22–24]; and fewer medical errors and 
decreased mortality in hospitals [25]. Of these studies, Newsham et al. used an approach 
similar to this study by recruiting green and conventional office building pairs and 
measuring IEQ. They found an improvement in IEQ, a reduction in symptoms, and better 
reported sleep quality in the green buildings [26]. A follow up paper by Colton et al. 
published since the time of our review found that in addition to fewer asthma symptoms, 
hospital visits and school absences were reduced in the green certified public housing 
development [27]. Comparisons of buildings in poor condition to green buildings provide an 
opportunity to see the biggest potential effect, but may falsely attribute benefits to 
certification.
As part of our efforts to determine the factors that drive better human health in buildings, we 
previously conducted a study in a controlled setting to investigate several IEQ factors – 
ventilation, CO2, and VOCs – and their impact on cognitive function scores. We found 
significant impacts on human decision-making performance related to all three of these 
factors (Allen et al., 2015). Others have also found independent effects of ventilation, CO2 
and VOCs on cognitive function and other physiological responses at levels commonly 
found in indoor environments [19, 28–31]. In this current study, we looked at buildings that 
are high-performing across these indicators of IEQ and investigated the potential for 
additional benefits of green certification on cognitive function, environmental perceptions, 
and health.
2.0 Methods
Study Design - Overview
Workers from 10 office buildings in five U.S. cities (two buildings per city) were recruited to 
participate in a week-long assessment. 12 participants were initially recruited from each 
building. Participants completed surveys about their health and environmental perceptions 
and took a cognitive test on the Tuesday and Thursday of the assessment. All buildings are 
high-performing buildings, defined as buildings surpassing the ASHRAE Standard 62.1–
2010 minimum acceptable per person ventilation requirement and with low (<250 μg/m3) 
TVOC concentrations; however, six of the buildings were renovated to green via the LEED 
certification framework while the remaining four did not seek green certification during 
renovation [32].
Participant and Building Recruitment
The building assessments took place in urban areas of the following cities: Boston, 
Massachusetts (9/29/2015–10/2/2015); Washington DC (10/26/2015–10/30/2015); Denver, 
Colorado (11/9/2015–11/13/2015); San Jose, California (11/30/2015–12/4/2015); and Los 
Angeles, California (12/14/2015–12/18/2015 and 2/1/2016–2/5/2016). In each city, the 
buildings were matched strictly by tenant and loosely by age and size (Table 3). In the first 
four cities, the buildings were also matched by the dates of assessment, and the buildings 
were recruited such that one building was LEED-certified and the other not. The goal of 
MacNaughton et al.
Page 3
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 matching was to select two high-performing buildings in each city that were as similar to 
each other as possible with the key distinction being that one pursued LEED certification. In 
the last city, Los Angeles, two green certified buildings were recruited and the assessments 
occurred on different dates due to an earlier enrolled building dropping out of the study prior 
to the assessment; a second building was subsequently recruited. The study team visited 
each building prior to the assessment to: 1) perform a an initial assessment of the heating, 
ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems, 2) ensure that the building classification as 
high-performing was valid, and 3) recruit participants.
After obtaining permission from the building owner, building management and tenant, 12 
participants were recruited to participate in a five day health assessment in each building. 
Final participant numbers by building are presented in Table 3. As mentioned previously, the 
same tenant was used in each city to ensure similar work functions, and all of the companies 
employ primarily knowledge workers (i.e. administrative, professional, technical and 
managerial positions). Asthmatics were excluded during recruitment. We did not restrict 
recruitment to select areas of each building to limit potential selection bias, but we are 
unable to demonstrate that our participants are representative of the building population. The 
study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public 
Health Institutional Review Board. All participants signed informed consent documents and 
were compensated $100.
Building Assessment
The building assessment consisted of three parts. First, the study team conducted an 
inspection of the building systems along with the building engineers from each facility. The 
study team recorded the type and condition of the systems, how they are typically operated, 
and the frequency of building commissioning tasks such as changing the filters. Second, the 
study team characterized each test space. The test spaces were defined by the unique 
ventilation zones in which the participants were located. The baseline assessment of the test 
spaces characterized the building, office and cleaning materials in the space; the air supply 
and exhaust strategies; and the environmental controls such as operable windows and 
thermostat set points. On each cognitive testing day, a separate assessment was conducted of 
the ventilation rates, noises, odors and occupancy in each test space. Lastly, the building 
manager was provided a survey asking about general building information, building policies, 
and utility costs. All elements of the building assessment were adapted from the EPA BASE 
study [33]. These elements were designed to assess the building as a whole rather than just 
the IEQ of the participant’s workstations. The building assessments did not intend to 
validate the certification of building; therefore, we cannot say whether the green certified 
buildings still meet the criteria for certification nor whether the non-certified buildings 
would classify as a green certified building had they gone through the certification process at 
the time of the study. We anticipate that the organizations responsible for the non-certified 
buildings would seek certification if it was possible since the same organizations did obtain 
certification for the green certified buildings in our study.
MacNaughton et al.
Page 4
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Environmental Assessment
A complete characterization of the IEQ in each test space was conducted on each cognitive 
testing day. Each participant was outfitted with a Netatmo Weather Station (Netatmo, 
Boulogne-Bellancourt) in their cubicle to measure temperature, humidity, carbon dioxide 
concentrations in parts per million (ppm), and sound levels (in decibels) every 5 minutes for 
each participant. The units were tested with 400 and 1000 ppm CO2 calibration gas before 
and after the field campaign. If the sensor had drifted, the CO2 data was adjusted first by the 
offset from the 400 ppm reading and second by a scaling factor to match the 1000 ppm 
reading of the instrument to 1000 ppm. This process corrected both the intercept and slope 
of the collected data to match experimentally derived values. The CO2 data was then used to 
produce ventilation (cfm of outdoor air per person) and air exchange rates (ACH) for each 
participant-day of the study. For ventilation rate, the 90th percentile CO2 concentration 
during occupied hours was taken as the steady-state concentration of CO2 using the method 
described by Ludwig et al., and for air exchange rate, the decays curves of CO2 were 
analyzed using the tracer gas method described in ASTM Standard E741-11 [34, 35]. 
Briefly, when test spaces changed from fully occupied to unoccupied, the rate of decay of 
occupant generated CO2 can be used to estimate air exchange rates using the validated 
methodology set forth by ASTM. These approaches have some limitations; for example, air 
from other zones with elevated CO2 levels can bias air exchange rate calculations and 
assumptions about occupant CO2 generation rates may be inaccurate.
Air sampling was performed for 62 common VOCs and 14 common aldehydes in each 
building in the test space with the most participants present during each cognitive testing 
day. VOCs were collected using summa canisters according to EPA method TO-15. 
Aldehydes were collected on an 8-hour integrated active air sample (0.4 L/min flow rate) 
according to EPA method TO-11. ALS Analytical Laboratories conducted the analyses of 
these samples (Cincinnati, OH). 25 VOCs and four aldehydes were not detected in any of the 
samples. Each test space was also equipped with at least one commercial sensor package 
(FengSensor, Tsinghua University, Beijing) to measure the same parameters as the Netatmo 
as well as light levels in lux and particulate matter less than 2.5 μm in diameter (PM2.5) in 
μg/m3. These sensors were installed on the first day of the assessment (Monday) and 
collected on the final day of the assessment (Friday).
Health Assessment
Participants were provided a Basis Peak Watch (Basis an Intel Company, San Francisco) for 
the duration of the assessment, which tracked the participants’ heart rate, skin temperature, 
galvanic skin response, physical activity (i.e. steps and calorie expenditure) and sleep 
patterns (i.e. sleep duration, tossing and turning, number of interruptions). The participants 
also completed a series of questionnaires over the course of the study. The first was a 
baseline survey about their perceptions of their work environment and health. The second 
survey was completed each study day at the end of the workday, a total of five times for each 
participant, which asked about their environment and whether they experienced any of 19 
sick building syndrome (SBS) symptoms on that day. A follow-up survey was completed on 
the final day of the study asking questions about the previous week, such as satisfaction with 
MacNaughton et al.
Page 5
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 noise, lighting, thermal comfort and odors in their cubicle. These surveys were adapted from 
the EPA BASE study as well and used in our previous research on green buildings [30, 33].
Cognitive function was assessed using the Strategic Management Simulation (SMS) 
software on Tuesday and Thursday at approximately 15:00. The participants completed two 
different scenarios to avoid potential learning effects, and the frequency of each scenario 
was balanced between green certified and non-certified buildings. The SMS tool is a 
validated, computer-based test that measures higher-order decision making ability across 
nine domains of cognitive function, ranging from basic activity levels to strategy. The SMS 
tool, and how to interpret scores in each cognitive domain, has been extensively described in 
the literature [36–38]. Briefly, the SMS tool immerses the participant in a 1.5 hour long real-
life scenario, where they have to respond to several plot lines that emerge over the course of 
the simulation. These plot lines are validated for content and designed to capture cognitive 
functions representative of productivity in the real world. As a result, validations of the SMS 
testing have found a high degree of correlation between performance on the SMS test and 
other indicators of productivity such as salary at age and number of employees supervised at 
age [36]. Participants are given the flexibility to approach the simulation in their own 
thinking style, with no stated demands and a wide breadth of available responses. The types 
of decisions and plans the participant makes and the events to which they link these actions 
are processed by the software through a series of algorithms that compute scores for each 
domain. The SMS study team is blinded to the building status (green certified vs. non-
certified). Participants’ cognitive function scores on Tuesday and Thursday were, on 
average, highly consistent. More detailed methodology about the cognitive testing is 
described elsewhere [19, 29, 39].
Statistical Methods
The IEQ data collected in this study experienced building-level clustering, which was 
accounted for with hierarchical statistical tests. Two-sample t-tests with clustered data were 
used to test for significant differences in IEQ between green certified and non-certified 
buildings. For analyses of participant outcomes, such as cognitive function and sleep, the 
data was additionally clustered by the repeated measurements on each participant. 
Generalized linear mixed effect models were used to model the associations between 
building classification and these outcomes, treating participant ID and building ID as a 
random effect:
(1)
where Cog.Scorei,i,k is the average cognitive score for subject i on day j in building k, 
normalized to the non-certified, high-performing buildings; β1 is the fixed intercept; β2 is 
the fixed effect of high-performing, certified buildings compared to high-performing, non-
certified buildings; b1i is the random effect of intercept for subject i; and b2i,k is the random 
effect of intercept for building k. Additional models were run with the following variables: 
job category, annual earnings, level of schooling and thermal comfort as indicator variables 
and previous night’s sleep as a continuous variable. The residuals were normally distributed 
MacNaughton et al.
Page 6
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and homoscedastic for all models. We used penalized splines to graphically assess linearity 
in the associations between continuous variables and outcome measures.
The SMS tool provides raw scores for nine domains of cognitive function. To allow 
comparisons between domains, the cognitive function scores were normalized to scores in 
the non-certified building by dividing each score by the average score in the non-certified 
buildings in that domain, as has been done in previous studies using the SMS test [39]. The 
average cognitive score is an average score across the nine domains. Thermal comfort is a 
binary variable that reflects whether or not a participant was within the thermal comfort zone 
specified by ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 on any particular day of the assessment [40] 
(Figure S1). Relative humidity and temperature from the Netatmo were entered in the 
Fanger thermal comfort equations to estimate whether the percent of people dissatisfied with 
the thermal conditions would exceed 10% [41]. We assume constant radiant temperatures 
(same as dry bulb temperature), air velocities (0.15 m/s), metabolic rates (1 met), and 
clothing (1 clo) between participants.
To assess sleep, we developed an index to characterize each night of sleep across three well-
known indicators of sleep quality: sleep duration, tossing and turning, and number of 
interruptions. It was calculated using data from the Basis Watch for each night of sleep the 
participants had during the assessment according to equation (2):
(2)
where Sleep.Duration is the number of minutes the participant spent sleeping between 9PM 
and 9AM the following day, Toss.Turn is the number of minutes during which the watch 
registered motion via the accelerometer (the maximum Toss.Turn in this study was 85), and 
Num.Int is the number of times during a night of sleep that the sleep activity changed from 
asleep to awake and then back to asleep (the maximum Num.Int in this study was 4). If the 
participant slept for longer than 420 minutes, or 7 hours, the first term was capped at 100%. 
Nights when the watch was not worn or worn improperly were removed from the analysis, 
resulting in a total sample size of 260 nights, 100 of which preceded a cognitive testing day. 
The average Sleep Score was 83.1% with a standard deviation of 19.7%. Sleep Scores and 
thermal comfort were added to the model in Equation 1 to test their effect on cognitive 
function. Analyses were performed using the open-source statistical package R version 3.2.0 
(R Project for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).
3.0 Results
The non-certified buildings and green certified buildings had similar air quality; the low 
CO2, low TVOC and high ventilation rates indicate that the buildings were high-performing 
at the time of the assessment (Figure 1). The ventilation rates exceeded the ASHRAE 
62.1-2010 standard for 84% of participants, which could mitigate the buildup of airborne 
contaminants. The green certified buildings were on average brighter (374 lux vs. 163 lux), 
louder (51.8 dB vs. 48.9 dB), and drier (38.4% vs. 45.9%) than the non-certified buildings; 
however, only the difference in relative humidity was statistically significant (Figure 1). 
MacNaughton et al.
Page 7
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Differences in humidity may be driven by the ventilation strategies in the green certified 
buildings, which more frequently had variable air volume ventilation systems and energy 
recovery ventilators (ERVs). In the cases when outdoor humidity was high, buildings with 
ERVs had lower indoor humidity levels.
Between-subject analyses were necessary to compare participants in different building 
classifications. Table 2 shows the demographic information for the participants in each 
building classification: the matching criteria resulted in the two groups having similar job 
classifications, gender and ages. The green certified buildings had a slightly larger 
percentage of white/Caucasian participants and participants with a college or graduate 
degree. These buildings also had more participants at both the lower and higher end of the 
range of annual earnings. We added these variables as predictors to the cognitive function 
models to test if they influenced baseline cognitive abilities. While some of these variables 
had non-significant associations with cognitive test scores, the effect estimate of building 
classification did not change when these parameters were added to the model, indicating that 
the findings are not a result of residual confounding.
The impact of building classification on each domain of cognitive function is summarized in 
Figure 2. On average, participants in the high-performing, green certified buildings scored 
26.4% (95% CI: [12.8%, 39.7%]) higher on the SMS cognitive test than those in the high-
performing, non-certified buildings (p-value < 0.001). Cognitive scores were statistically 
significantly higher for 7 of the 9 domains with the largest impacts on crisis response, 
applied and focused activity level and strategy. No differences in scores were seen for basic 
activity level or information seeking. For the average scores, the model’s R2 was 0.28, 
indicating that 28% of the variability in cognitive function scores is explained by the 
building classification alone.
Of the IEQ parameters assessed in the buildings, the largest differences were seen for 
relative humidity. The non-certified buildings were more frequently outside the ASHRAE 
Standard 55 thermal comfort zone than the green certified buildings due to their higher 
humidities (Figure S1). Both building classifications had participant-days where the building 
was too cold to comply with ASHRAE Standard 55. After controlling for building 
classification, participants scored 5.4% higher on the cognitive tests, averaged across the 
nine domains of cognitive function, on days when they took the SMS test within the thermal 
comfort zone than when they took it without (Figure 3). This finding is not statistically 
significant at the 95% confidence level.
Previous night’s sleep was also associated with cognitive function scores. A 25% increase in 
Sleep Scores was associated with a 2.8% increase in cognitive function scores. Sleep quality 
was influenced by day-time exposures in the office: participants in the green certified 
buildings had 6.4% higher Sleep Scores than those in the non-certified buildings. This may 
be in part a result of higher light levels in the green buildings; a 300 lux increase in 
illuminance during the day was associated with a 2.9% increase in Sleep Scores that night. 
However, these findings are not statistically significant (Figure 3).
MacNaughton et al.
Page 8
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In addition to improved cognitive function scores, participants in green certified buildings 
reported better environmental perceptions and fewer symptoms than those in non-certified 
buildings. Participants in green certified buildings were generally more satisfied with 
daylighting and electrical lighting in their workspace, and less frequently reported the 
temperature being too hot or too cold, the air movement being too much or too little, the air 
being too dry or too humid, and the presence of chemical, tobacco and other odors (Figure 
S2). These perceptions are linked to varying degrees to the monitored IEQ in the spaces. For 
example, relative humidities were 15.9% higher when participants reported the air was too 
humid and 9.3% lower when they reported the air was too dry. Importantly, for the same 
change in monitored IEQ conditions, participants in the green certified buildings report a 
larger improvement based on environmental perceptions. Lastly, participants in the non-
certified buildings reported 0.5 (30%) more symptoms each day than those in the green 
certified buildings. Symptom counts are higher when participants report an issue with 
environmental conditions. Environmental perceptions and total symptom counts were not 
associated with cognitive function scores when introduced into the mixed effect models.
4.0 Discussion
Previous research by our team, and others, has identified IAQ as a key driver of cognitive 
function. In particular, CO2, TVOCs, and ventilation all have independent impacts on 
cognitive function, even at levels deemed to be acceptable by the relevant codes and 
standards [19, 28, 29, 39]. Many office buildings on the market now fit the classification as 
high-performing by surpassing the ASHRAE Standard 62.1 ventilation requirement and 
having low TVOC concentrations (<250 μg/m3). The findings of this study indicate that even 
among high-performing buildings that meet these IEQ criteria, additional benefits to 
cognitive function and health may be achieved by seeking green building certification. 
Participants in high-performing, green certified buildings had better environmental 
perceptions, 30% fewer sick building symptoms, 26.4% higher cognitive function scores and 
6.4% higher Sleep Scores than participants in the high-performing, non-certified buildings 
even after controlling for annual earnings, job categories, and level of schooling. The 
reduction in self-reported symptoms and improvements in environmental perceptions 
support previous research in green buildings [23, 24, 27, 30, 42]. Participant’s environmental 
perceptions do track actual IEQ conditions, but participants in green certified buildings are 
more likely to have a positive response even when IEQ conditions are the same. This 
observation, along with participants reporting more symptoms when they report problems 
with environmental conditions, highlights the limitations of using subjective metrics when 
assessing building performance or occupant wellbeing. For the cognitive function results, 
some of the domains that had the largest differences in scores (crisis response, information 
usage, and strategy) are the most highly correlated with other measures of productivity such 
as salary at age [36]. This aligns with Allen et al. that found these same domains to be the 
most impacted by CO2, TVOCs and ventilation. By comparison, lowering TVOC 
concentrations from ~580 μg/m3 to ~40 μg/m3 caused a 61% increase in cognitive function 
scores in that study compared to 26.4% increase from working in a green certified building 
in this study.
MacNaughton et al.
Page 9
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 While much of the effect of green certification on cognitive test scores is unexplained, the 
effect may be partly attributed to several IEQ parameters. The green certified buildings were 
generally less humid than the non-certified buildings, and as a result a larger proportion of 
participants in these buildings were in the thermal comfort zone defined by ASHRAE 55 
(Figure S1). Participants outside this thermal comfort zone scored 5.4% lower on the 
cognitive simulations, but the finding was not statistically significant. The detriments to 
cognitive function align with previous research on thermal conditions and performance. In a 
review of 24 papers, Seppänen et al. found that work performance was optimized at 
temperatures within the ASHRAE Standard 55 zone, and that the benefits were seen using 
various different indicators of cognitive function ranging from simple cognitive tests to 
objectively reported work performance [43]. The impacts on the SMS tool indicate that high 
order decision-making may also be affected by these exposures.
Not surprisingly, our study suggests that previous night’s sleep is a driver of cognitive 
function scores. More interesting is that better Sleep Scores were associated with better 
lighting conditions in the building. This is biologically plausible, considering previous 
research linking exposure to daylighting or blue-enriched lighting before sleep to sleep 
repression. Warmer light colors, such as those at dusk, trigger the body to release melatonin, 
which has a fatiguing effect, and late-night screen use can delay or suppress the release of 
melatonin [44]. Similarly, a larger contrast between daytime light exposures and nighttime 
light exposures leads to a larger amplitude in daily melatonin secretion cycles [45]. 
Daylighting and blue-enriched lighting during the day helps align the body’s circadian 
rhythm and improve sleep quality at night [12]. This effect was observed in our study: 
brighter lighting in the office during the day was associated with higher Sleep Scores at 
night, and participants in the green certified buildings, which were generally brighter, had 
6.4% higher Sleep Scores than those in the non-certified buildings. This finding supports 
previous research by Newsham et al. on sleep quality in green buildings [26].
Investigating real-world office buildings, as opposed to a simulated environment, posed 
several limitations on the study. First, the case-control study design required between-subject 
comparisons. To minimize baseline differences in cognitive function, we matched the 
buildings by tenant and job categories. Adding annual earnings, level of education, and job 
category to our models did not influence the effect size of building classification on 
cognitive function scores, nor were these factors statistically significantly associated with 
cognitive scores. Second, the environmental conditions were variable between buildings and 
could not be modified by the study team. The variability in exposures also limits the ability 
for the factors we did measure to produce a quantifiable effect. Third, missing data for some 
outcomes, such as sleep, reduced the power of those analyses. Fourth, while the sample size 
of participants was sufficiently powered, factors that vary on building level, such as 
ventilation system type, have a sample size of 10 and were underpowered. With this sample 
size we were not able to identify which individual green credits were drivers of better 
performance, nor were we able to obtain the same level of building-related design data from 
the non-certified buildings (precisely because they did not go through the certification 
process). As such, it is possible that green certification in our study may simply be a proxy 
for more relevant indicators of building performance. Fifth, we assessed the IEQ of the 
workstations of our participants, which may not be representative of the building as a whole. 
MacNaughton et al.
Page 10
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 During our building assessment, we did not observe major differences in building systems, 
operation or maintenance for areas of the building in which we did not have participants. As 
the buildings were all high-performing, the results of the study may not be representative of 
conventional or problem buildings. In addition, the study population is representative of the 
general population of knowledge workers and may not be generalizable to other worker 
populations.
The findings in this study hint at the complexity of understanding all of the building related 
factors that can influence human health and performance. The measured IEQ variables only 
accounted for part of the impact of green certification on productivity and health. Other 
aspects of the green certification process – such as commissioning of building systems, 3rd 
party reviews of IEQ performance, and the commitment to sustainability and health of 
owners and building managers – may play a role in how occupants perceive and perform in a 
building. Here, we advocate for a holistic, “buildingomics” approach. Omics research 
describes efforts to understand the totality of a given research field, currently best 
exemplified by genomics research and the ambitious undertaking of the Human Genome 
Project. This has spurred a set of related –omics research areas: transcriptomics, proteomics, 
metabolomics, epigenomics. And, in the field of exposure science, the relatively new and 
equally challenging efforts to characterize human exposures over the course of a person’s 
lifetime – the exposome [46]. We now propose “buildingomics” to capture the complexity of 
the research of health in buildings. “Buildingomics” is the totality of factors in indoor 
environments that influence human health, well-being and productivity of people who work 
in those spaces. The primary challenge is that buildings serve a variety of purposes and the 
potential exposures span several fields of study; thus multi-disciplinary teams that include 
building scientists, exposure scientists, epidemiologists, toxicologists, materials scientists, 
architects, designers, and social/behavioral scientists are necessary to characterize all the 
building-related factors that influence health in buildings.
5.0 Conclusions
Our findings show that in high-performing buildings additional benefits to health and 
productivity may be obtained through green certification. In a sample of 10 high-performing 
buildings, participants in green certified buildings had 26.4% higher cognitive function 
scores, better environmental perceptions and fewer symptoms than those in high-performing, 
non-certified buildings. This outcome may be partially explained by IEQ factors, including 
thermal conditions and lighting, but the findings suggest that the benefits of green 
certification standards go beyond measureable IEQ factors. Building-level factors may play 
an important role in occupant health and cognitive function yet have been largely 
overlooked. We describe the need for a holistic, “buildingomics” approach to studying the 
drivers of human health and performance in buildings.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
MacNaughton et al.
Page 11
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge our partners who allowed our team to investigate the impact of buildings on their 
employees and tenants. We thank both the study participants and field staff for volunteering their time. We also 
thank the reviewers of this manuscript for their thoughtful comments that have strengthened the paper. This research 
was supported by a gift from United Technologies to the Center for Health and the Global Environment at the 
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. United Technologies was not involved in the recruitment of buildings 
or participants, data collection, data analysis, data presentation, or drafting of the manuscript. Dr. MacNaughton’s 
time was supported by NIEHS environmental epidemiology training grant 5T32ES007069-35.
References
1. Wargocki P, Wyon D, Sundell J, Clausen G, Fanger PO. The effects of outdoor air supply rate in an 
office on perceived air quality, Sick Building Syndrome (SBS) symptoms and productivity. Indoor 
Air-International Journal Of Indoor Air Quality And Climate. 2000; 10(4):222–236.
2. Spengler JD, Sexton K. Indoor Air Pollution: A Public Health Perspective. Science. 1983; 
221(4605):9–17. [PubMed: 6857273] 
3. Weschler CJ. Changes in indoor pollutants since the 1950s. Atmospheric Environment. 2009; 43(1):
153–169.
4. Mendell MJ, Fisk WJ, Kreiss K, Levin H, Alexander D, Cain WS, Girman JR, Hines CJ, Jensen PA, 
Milton DK, Rexroat LP, Wallingford KM. Improving the Health of Workers in Indoor 
Environments: Priority Research Needs for a National Occupational Research Agenda. American 
Journal of Public Health. 2002; 92(9):1430–1440. [PubMed: 12197969] 
5. Spengler, J. Indoor air quality handbook. McCarthy, JF.Samet, JM., Spengler, JD., editors. New 
York: McGraw-Hill; 2001. 
6. Rudd, A. Ventilation system effectiveness and tested indoor air quality impacts. Bergey, D., et al., 
editors. U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy, Building Technologies 
Office; 2014. 
7. Allen JG, McClean MD, Stapleton HM, Webster TF. Linking PBDEs in House Dust to Consumer 
Products using X-ray Fluorescence. Environmental Science & Technology. 2008; 42(11):4222–
4228. [PubMed: 18589991] 
8. Dodson RE, Perovich LJ, Covaci A, Van Den Eede N, Ionas AC, Dirtu AC, Brody JG, Rudel RA. 
After the PBDE phase-out: a broad suite of flame retardants in repeat house dust samples from 
California. Environmental science & technology. 2012; 46(24):13056. [PubMed: 23185960] 
9. Heakyung CY. Differences in performance with different background sound and ambient noise in 
three open office plans. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 2000; 108:2632.
10. Jahncke H. Open-plan office noise: the susceptibility and suitability of different cognitive tasks for 
work in the presence of irrelevant speech. Noise &Amp. 2012; 14(61):315–320.
11. Stone PT. A model for the explanation of discomfort and pain in the eye caused by light. Lighting 
Research & Technology. 2009; 41(2):109–121.
12. Viola AU, James LJM, Schlangen D-J, Dijk DJ. Blue-enriched white light in the workplace 
improves self-reported alertness, performance and sleep quality. 2008 (0355-3140 (Print)). 
13. Hatvani-Kovacs G, Belusko M, Skinner N, Pockett J, Boland J. Drivers and barriers to heat stress 
resilience. Science of the Total Environment. 2016
14. Park, J. H. University. JOB MARKET PAPER - Unpublished Manuscript. Harvard University 
Economics Department; 2016. Heat Stress and Human Capital Production (Job Market Paper). 
15. Ulrich RS. View through a Window May Influence Recovery from Surgery. Science. 1984; 
224(4647):420–421. [PubMed: 6143402] 
16. Wilson, EO. President and Fellows of Harvard College. 1986. Biophilia. 
17. Da Silva, NAF., Wargocki, P., Tham, KW. Building certification schemes and the quality of indoor 
environment. Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering; 2015. DTU 
Civil Engineering Report R335
18. MacNaughton P, Pegues J, Satish U, Santanam S, Spengler JD, Allen J. Economic, Environmental 
and Health Implications of Enhanced Ventilation in Office Buildings. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health. 2015:12.
MacNaughton et al.
Page 12
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 19. Maddalena R, Mendell MJ, Eliseeva K, Chan WR, Sullivan DP, Russell M, Satish U, Fisk WJ. 
Effects of ventilation rate per person and per floor area on perceived air quality, sick building 
syndrome symptoms, and decision-making. Indoor Air. 2015; 25(4):362–370. [PubMed: 
25142723] 
20. Allen JG, MacNaughton P, Laurent JGC, Flanigan SS, Eitland ES, Spengler JD. Green Buildings 
and Health. Current Environmental Health Reports. 2015; 2(3):250–258. [PubMed: 26231502] 
21. Singh A, Syal M, Grady SC, Korkmaz S. Effects of green buildings on employee health and 
productivity. American journal of public health. 2010; 100(9):1665. [PubMed: 20634460] 
22. Colton M, MacNaughton P, Vallarino J, Kane J, Bennett-Fripp M, Spengler J, Adamkiewicz G. 
Indoor Air Quality in Green Vs Conventional Multifamily Low-Income Housing. Environmental 
Science & Technology. 2014; 48(14):7833–7833. [PubMed: 24941256] 
23. Breysse J, Jacobs DE, Weber W, Dixon S, Kawecki C, Aceti S, Lopez J. Health Outcomes and 
Green Renovation of Affordable Housing. Public Health Reports. 2011; 126(Suppl 1):64–75. 
[PubMed: 21563714] 
24. Jacobs DE, Ahonen E, Dixon SL, Dorevitch S, Breysse J, Smith J, Evens A, Dobrez D, Isaacson 
M, Murphy C, Conroy L, Levavi P. Moving Into Green Healthy Housing. Journal of Public Health 
Management and Practice. 2014:1. [PubMed: 24322675] 
25. Thiel CL, Needy KL, Ries R, Hupp D, Bilec MM. Building design and performance: A 
comparative longitudinal assessment of a Children’s hospital. Building and Environment. 2014; 
78:130–136.
26. Newsham, G., Birt, B., Arsenault, C., Thompson, L., Veitch, J., Mancini, S., Galasiu, A., Gover, B., 
Macdonald, I., Burns, G. National Research Council Canada. Research Report; no. RR-329. 
National Research Council Canada; 2012. Do green buildings outperform conventional buildings? 
Indoor environment and energy performance in North American offices. 
27. Colton, M., Laurent, JG., MacNaughton, P., Kane, J., Bennett-Fripp, M., Spengler, J., 
Adamkiewicz, G. Health Benefits of Green Public Housing: Associations With Asthma Morbidity 
and Building-Related Symptoms. 2015. (1541-0048 (Electronic))
28. Satish U, Cleckner L, Vasselli J. Impact of VOCs on decision making and productivity. Intelligent 
Buildings International. 2013; 5(4):213–220.
29. Satish U, Mendell MJ, Shekhar K, Hotchi T, Sullivan DP, Streufert S, Fisk WJ. Is CO2 an indoor 
pollutant? Direct effects of Low-to-moderate CO2 concentrations on human decision-making 
performance. Environmental Health Perspectives. 2012; 120(12):1671. [PubMed: 23008272] 
30. MacNaughton P, Spengler J, Vallarino J, Santanam S, Satish U, Allen J. Environmental perceptions 
and health before and after relocation to a green building. Building and Environment. 2016; 
104:138–144. [PubMed: 27713594] 
31. Vehvilainen T, Lindholm H, Rintamaki R, Paakkonen A, Hirvonen O, Niemi J, Vinha J. High 
indoor CO concentrations in an Office Environment Increases the Transcutaneous CO Level and 
Sleepiness during Cognitive Work. 2015 (1545-9632 (Electronic)). 
32. ASHRAE. Standard 62.1-2016 -- Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality. American Society 
for Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc; 2016. 
33. EPA. Building Assessment Survey and Evaluation. 1998. [cited 2015 1/22]; Available from: http://
www.epa.gov/iaq/base/study_overview.html
34. Ludwig, J., McCarthy, J., Baker, B., Caron, R., Hanson, D. A Review of Selected Methodologies to 
Determine Outdoor Air Ventilation Rates in BASE Study Buildings. Air and Waste Management 
Assoc Conference; 2000. 
35. ASTM. Standard Test Method for Determining Air Change in a Single Zone by Means of a Tracer 
Gas Dilution. ASTM International; 2011. 
36. Streufert S, Pogash R, Piasecki M. Simulation-based assessment of managerial competence: 
Reliability and validity. Personnel Psychology. 1988; 41(3):537–557.
37. Satish U, Streufert S, Dewan M, Voort S. Improvements in Simulated Real-world Relevant 
Performance for Patients with Seasonal Allergic Rhinitis: Impact of Desloratadine. Allergy. 2004; 
59(4):415–420. [PubMed: 15005765] 
38. Breuer, K., Satish, U. N.A. Press. Emergency Management Simulations: An Approach to the 
Assessment of Decision-making Processes in Complex Dynamic Crisis Environments. In: JJG, 
MacNaughton et al.
Page 13
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 editor. From Modeling to Managing Security: A Systems Dynamics Approach. Norway: 2003. p. 
145-156.
39. Allen JG, MacNaughton P, Santanam S, Satish U, Spengler J. Associations of Cognitive Function 
Scores with Carbon Dioxide, Ventilation, and Volatile Organic Compound Exposures in Office 
Workers: A Controlled Exposure Study of Green and Conventional Office Environments. 
Environmental Health Perspectives. 2015; 123(10)
40. ASHRAE. Standard 55-2010 -- Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy. 
American Society for Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc; 2010. 
41. Fanger, PO. Analysis and Applications in Environmental Engineering. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Company; 1970. 
42. Garland E, Steenburgh SH, Sanchez A, Geevarughese L, Bluestone L, Rothenberg A, Rialdi M, 
Foley M. Impact of LEED-certified affordable housing on asthma in the South Bronx. Prog 
Community Health Partnership. 2013; 7(1):29–37.
43. Seppänen, O., William, JF., Quanhong, L-G. Effect of temperature on task performance in office 
environment. 5th International Conference on Cold Climate Heating, Ventilating and Air 
Conditioning; 2006; Moscow, Russia. 
44. Lockley SW, Brainard CA, Czeisler CA. High sensitivity of the human circadian melatonin rhythm 
to resetting by short wavelength light. 2003 (0021-972X (Print)). 
45. Takasu NN, Hashimoto S, Yamanaka Y, Tanahashi Y, Yamazaki A, Honma S, Honma K-i. 
Repeated exposures to daytime bright light increase nocturnal melatonin rise and maintain 
circadian phase in young subjects under fixed sleep schedule. American Journal of Physiology - 
Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology. 2006; 291(6):R1799–R1807.
46. Rappaport, SM. Implications of the exposome for exposure science. 2010. (1559-064X 
(Electronic))
MacNaughton et al.
Page 14
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Highlights
1.
26.4% higher cognitive test scores in high-performing, green certified 
buildings
2.
6.4% higher Sleep Quality scores in high-performing, green certified 
buildings
3.
30% fewer symptoms in high-performing, green certified buildings
4.
Thermal comfort and sleep quality associated with higher cognitive scores
5.
“Buildingomics”: the totality of factors in buildings that influence health
MacNaughton et al.
Page 15
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Boxplots of indoor environmental quality (IEQ) parameters in high-performing, non-
certified buildings and high-performing, green certified buildings. Vent, AER, CO2, Temp, 
RH and Noise are measured by the Netatmo in every workstation each day, TVOCs are 
measured with summa canisters in every test space each cognitive testing day, and PM2.5 
and Light are measured by the Feng Sensor in every test space each day. An asterisk (*) 
denotes that the building classifications are statistically significantly different from each 
other for that IEQ parameter after adjusting for clustering by building.
MacNaughton et al.
Page 16
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Cognitive scores and 95% confidence intervals for each domain of the SMS tool after 
controlling for participant, normalized to high-performing buildings, for participants in high-
performing and high-performing, green certified buildings
MacNaughton et al.
Page 17
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Effect of a) thermal comfort on cognitive function scores, b) yesterday’s sleep on cognitive 
function scores, c) building classification on Sleep Scores, and d) light levels on Sleep 
Scores, using generalized linear mixed effect models with 95% confidence intervals, treating 
building and participant as random effects. The effect size for thermal comfort is comparing 
cognitive scores from tests taken by participants within the ASHRAE Standard 55-2013 
comfort zone to those without. The effect sizes for yesterday’s sleep and light correspond to 
a 25% change in Sleep Score and 300 lux change in illuminance respectively.
MacNaughton et al.
Page 18
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
MacNaughton et al.
Page 19
Table 1
Credit adoption rates for select optional IEQ credits in 5,490 LEED New Construction 2009 certified buildings 
(USGBC, 2016).
Credit
% Adoption
EQc2: Increased ventilation
40.9%
EQc4.1: Low-emitting materials - adhesives and sealants
86.5%
EQc4.2: Low-emitting materials - paints and coatings
94.4%
EQc4.3: Low-emitting materials - flooring systems
79.1%
EQc4.4: Low-emitting materials - composite wood and agrifiber products
58.6%
EQc5: Indoor chemical and pollutant source control
40.7%
EQc6.1: Controllability of systems – lighting
66.4%
EQc6.2: Controllability of systems - thermal comfort
39.1%
EQc7.1: Thermal comfort – design
79.4%
EQc7.2: Thermal comfort – verification
59.2%
EQc8.1: Daylight and views – daylight
19.5%
EQc8.2: Daylight and views – views
38.3%
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
MacNaughton et al.
Page 20
Table 2
Demographic breakdown of participants in each building classification
High-Performing Green Certified
High-Performing Non-Certified
Number of Participants1
69
40
Gender
 Male
55%
54%
 Female
45%
46%
Age
 20–30
39%
28%
 31–40
21%
33%
 41–50
21%
15%
 51–60
18%
15%
 61–70
1%
8%
Ethnicity
 White/Caucasian
70%
56%
 Black or African American
6%
10%
 Asian
7%
8%
 Latino
7%
13%
 Other
9%
13%
Highest level of Schooling
 High School Graduate
0%
10%
 Some College
12%
26%
 College Degree
63%
49%
 Graduate Degree
25%
15%
Job Category
 Managerial
22%
10%
 Professional
45%
54%
 Technical
6%
18%
 Secretarial or Clerical
18%
15%
 Other
9%
3%
Total Annual Earnings
 <$50,000
34%
13%
 $50,000–$75,000
21%
41%
 $75,000–$100,000
10%
21%
 $100,000–$150,000
27%
18%
 >$150,000
7%
8%
1Includes 2 participants in green certified buildings and 1 in non-certified buildings who did not complete the baseline survey
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
MacNaughton et al.
Page 21
Table 3
Building characteristics of the 10 high-performing buildings included in the study
City
Type
Size (sq. ft)
Year of Construction
Type/Year of Certification1
Ventilation Strategy2
Number of Participants
Boston
Non-Certified
<50,000
1929
NA
CV, RC
12
Boston
Certified
<50,000
1929
LEED EB v3
Platinum in 2012
VAV, SP
12
DC
Non-Certified
>500,000
1935
NA
VAV, RC
11
DC
Certified
>500,000
1917
Pending
CV, SP
12
Denver
Non-Certified
50,000–100,000
1938
NA
CV, RC
8
Denver
Certified
50,000–100,000
1938
LEED CI v3
Silver in 2011
CV, RC
12
San Jose
Non-Certified
50,000–100,000
1971
NA
CV, RC
9
San Jose
Certified
>500,000
1934
LEED EB v3
Gold in 2015
VAV, RC
12
Los Angeles
Certified
<50,000
1953
LEED EB v3
Platinum in 2013
VAV, RC
11
Los Angeles
Certified
<50,000
1929
Pending
VAV, RC
10
1EB = Existing Buildings, CI = Commercial Interiors
2CV = Constant Volume, VAV = Variable Air Volume, SP = Single pass with energy recovery ventilator, RC = Partial recirculation with reheat
Build Environ. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
