 PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH
VOLUME 5 ISSUE 3 JANUARY 2017
ISSN 2050-4322
DOI 10.3310/pgfar05030
Acupuncture for chronic pain and depression  
in primary care: a programme of research
Hugh MacPherson, Andrew Vickers, Martin Bland, David Torgerson,  
Mark Corbett, Eldon Spackman, Pedro Saramago, Beth Woods,  
Helen Weatherly, Mark Sculpher, Andrea Manca, Stewart Richmond,  
Ann Hopton, Janet Eldred and Ian Watt
  Acupuncture for chronic pain and
depression in primary care: a programme
of research
Hugh MacPherson,1* Andrew Vickers,2 Martin Bland,1
David Torgerson,1 Mark Corbett,3 Eldon Spackman,4
Pedro Saramago,4 Beth Woods,4 Helen Weatherly,4
Mark Sculpher,4 Andrea Manca,4 Stewart Richmond,1
Ann Hopton,1 Janet Eldred1 and Ian Watt5
1Department of Health Sciences, University of York, York, UK
2Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA
3Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York, York, UK
4Centre for Health Economics, University of York, York, UK
5Department of Health Sciences/Hull York Medical School, University of York,
York, UK
*Corresponding author
Declared competing interests of authors: Mark Sculpher reports grants from the National Institute for
Health Research (NIHR) during the conduct of the study and personal fees from various pharmaceutical and
other life science companies outside the submitted work. Andrea Manca reports grants from NIHR during
the conduct of the study. Beth Woods reports grants from the NIHR during the conduct of the study.
Published January 2017
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
This report should be referenced as follows:
MacPherson H, Vickers A, Bland M, Torgerson D, Corbett M, Spackman E, et al. Acupuncture for
chronic pain and depression in primary care: a programme of research. Programme Grants Appl
Res 2017;5(3).
  Programme Grants for Applied Research
ISSN 2050-4322 (Print)
ISSN 2050-4330 (Online)
This journal is a member of and subscribes to the principles of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) (www.publicationethics.org/).
Editorial contact: nihredit@southampton.ac.uk
The full PGfAR archive is freely available to view online at www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk/pgfar. Print-on-demand copies can be purchased
from the report pages of the NIHR Journals Library website: www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
Criteria for inclusion in the Programme Grants for Applied Research journal
Reports are published in Programme Grants for Applied Research (PGfAR) if (1) they have resulted from work for the PGfAR programme,
and (2) they are of a sufficiently high scientific quality as assessed by the reviewers and editors.
Programme Grants for Applied Research programme
The Programme Grants for Applied Research (PGfAR) programme, part of the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), was set up in 2006
to produce independent research findings that will have practical application for the benefit of patients and the NHS in the relatively near
future. The Programme is managed by the NIHR Central Commissioning Facility (CCF) with strategic input from the Programme Director.
The programme is a national response mode funding scheme that aims to provide evidence to improve health outcomes in England through
promotion of health, prevention of ill health, and optimal disease management (including safety and quality), with particular emphasis on
conditions causing significant disease burden.
For more information about the PGfAR programme please visit the website: http://www.nihr.ac.uk/funding/programme-grants-for-
applied-research.htm
This report
The research reported in this issue of the journal was funded by PGfAR as project number RP-PG-0707-10186. The contractual start date was
in April 2009. The final report began editorial review in February 2015 and was accepted for publication in January 2016. As the funder,
the PGfAR programme agreed the research questions and study designs in advance with the investigators. The authors have been wholly
responsible for all data collection, analysis and interpretation, and for writing up their work. The PGfAR editors and production house have
tried to ensure the accuracy of the authors’ report and would like to thank the reviewers for their constructive comments on the final report
document. However, they do not accept liability for damages or losses arising from material published in this report.
This report presents independent research funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). The views and opinions expressed by
authors in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the NHS, the NIHR, CCF, NETSCC, PGfAR or the
Department of Health. If there are verbatim quotations included in this publication the views and opinions expressed by the interviewees are
those of the interviewees and do not necessarily reflect those of the authors, those of the NHS, the NIHR, NETSCC, the PGfAR programme or
the Department of Health.
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a
commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of
private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals provided that
suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for
commercial reproduction should be addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials
and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
Published by the NIHR Journals Library (www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk), produced by Prepress Projects Ltd, Perth, Scotland
(www.prepress-projects.co.uk).
 Programme Grants for Applied Research Editor-in-Chief
Professor Paul Little Professor of Primary Care Research, University of Southampton, UK
NIHR Journals Library Editor-in-Chief
Professor Tom Walley Director, NIHR Evaluation, Trials and Studies and Director of the EME Programme, UK
NIHR Journals Library Editors
Professor Ken Stein Chair of HTA Editorial Board and Professor of Public Health, University of Exeter Medical 
School, UK
Professor Andree Le May Chair of NIHR Journals Library Editorial Group (EME, HS&DR, PGfAR, PHR journals)
Dr Martin Ashton-Key Consultant in Public Health Medicine/Consultant Advisor, NETSCC, UK
Professor Matthias Beck Chair in Public Sector Management and Subject Leader (Management Group),  
Queen’s University Management School, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
Professor Aileen Clarke Professor of Public Health and Health Services Research, Warwick Medical School,  
University of Warwick, UK
Dr Tessa Crilly Director, Crystal Blue Consulting Ltd, UK
Ms Tara Lamont Scientific Advisor, NETSCC, UK
Professor William McGuire Professor of Child Health, Hull York Medical School, University of York, UK
Professor John Norrie Chair in Medical Statistics, University of Edinburgh, UK
Professor John Powell Consultant Clinical Adviser, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), UK
Professor James Raftery Professor of Health Technology Assessment, Wessex Institute, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Southampton, UK
Dr Rob Riemsma Reviews Manager, Kleijnen Systematic Reviews Ltd, UK
Professor Helen Roberts Professor of Child Health Research, UCL Institute of Child Health, UK
Professor Helen Snooks Professor of Health Services Research, Institute of Life Science, College of Medicine, 
Swansea University, UK
Professor Jim Thornton Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,  
University of Nottingham, UK
Please visit the website for a list of members of the NIHR Journals Library Board: 
www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk/about/editors
Editorial contact: nihredit@southampton.ac.uk
Professor Geoffrey Meads  Professor of Health Sciences Research, Health and Wellbeing Research Group, 
University of Winchester, UK
Professor Jonathan Ross Professor of Sexual Health and HIV, University Hospital Birmingham, UK
Dr Eugenia Cronin Senior Scientific Advisor, Wessex Institute, UK
Professor Martin Underwood Director, Warwick Clinical Trials Unit, Warwick Medical School,
University of Warwick, UK
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
 Abstract
Acupuncture for chronic pain and depression in primary
care: a programme of research
Hugh MacPherson,1* Andrew Vickers,2 Martin Bland,1
David Torgerson,1 Mark Corbett,3 Eldon Spackman,4
Pedro Saramago,4 Beth Woods,4 Helen Weatherly,4 Mark Sculpher,4
Andrea Manca,4 Stewart Richmond,1 Ann Hopton,1 Janet Eldred1
and Ian Watt5
1Department of Health Sciences, University of York, York, UK
2Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY, USA
3Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York, York, UK
4Centre for Health Economics, University of York, York, UK
5Department of Health Sciences/Hull York Medical School, University of York, York, UK
*Corresponding author hugh.macpherson@york.ac.uk
Background: There has been an increase in the utilisation of acupuncture in recent years, yet the evidence
base is insufficiently well established to be certain about its clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness.
Addressing the questions related to the evidence base will reduce uncertainty and help policy- and
decision-makers with regard to whether or not wider access is appropriate and provides value for money.
Aim: Our aim was to establish the most reliable evidence on the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of acupuncture for chronic pain by drawing on relevant evidence, including recent high-quality trials, and to
develop fresh evidence on acupuncture for depression. To extend the evidence base we synthesised the
results of published trials using robust systematic review methodology and conducted a randomised
controlled trial (RCT) of acupuncture for depression.
Methods and results: We synthesised the evidence from high-quality trials of acupuncture for chronic
pain, consisting of musculoskeletal pain related to the neck and low back, osteoarthritis of the knee,
and headache and migraine, involving nearly 18,000 patients. In an individual patient data (IPD) pairwise
meta-analysis, acupuncture was significantly better than both sham acupuncture (p < 0.001) and usual
care (p < 0.001) for all conditions. Using network meta-analyses, we compared acupuncture with other
physical therapies for osteoarthritis of the knee. In both an analysis of all available evidence and an analysis
of a subset of better-quality trials, using aggregate-level data, we found acupuncture to be one of the
more effective therapies. We developed new Bayesian methods for analysing multiple individual patient-
level data sets to evaluate heterogeneous continuous outcomes. An accompanying cost-effectiveness
analysis found transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) to be cost-effective for osteoarthritis at a
threshold of £20,000 per quality-adjusted life-year when all trials were synthesised. When the analysis was
restricted to trials of higher quality with adequate allocation concealment, acupuncture was cost-effective.
In a RCT of acupuncture or counselling compared with usual care for depression, in which half the patients
were also experiencing comorbid pain, we found acupuncture and counselling to be clinically effective and
acupuncture to be cost-effective. For patients in whom acupuncture is inappropriate or unavailable,
counselling is cost-effective.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
v
 Conclusion: We have provided the most robust evidence from high-quality trials on acupuncture for
chronic pain. The synthesis of high-quality IPD found that acupuncture was more effective than both usual
care and sham acupuncture. Acupuncture is one of the more clinically effective physical therapies for
osteoarthritis and is also cost-effective if only high-quality trials are analysed. When all trials are analysed,
TENS is cost-effective. Promising clinical and economic evidence on acupuncture for depression needs
to be extended to other contexts and settings. For the conditions we have investigated, the drawing
together of evidence on acupuncture from this programme of research has substantially reduced levels of
uncertainty. We have identified directions for further research. Our research also provides a valuable basis
for considering the potential role of acupuncture as a referral option in health care and enabling providers
and policy-makers to make decisions based on robust sources of evidence.
Trial registration: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN63787732.
Funding: The National Institute for Health Research Programme Grants for Applied Research programme.
ABSTRACT
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
vi
 Contents
List of tables
xi
List of figures
xiii
List of abbreviations
xv
Plain English summary
xvii
Scientific summary
xix
Chapter 1 Introduction
1
Chapter 2 Acupuncture for chronic pain: an individual patient data meta-analysis
9
Background
9
Methods
10
Phase I: systematic review to identify eligible trials
11
Phase II: collection, checking and harmonisation of data
13
Phase III: statistical methods
14
Methods for substudy 1: influence of control group on effect size
15
Methods for substudy 2: characteristics of acupuncture
16
Results
17
Results from the main study
17
Results for substudy 1: influence of the control group on effect size
25
Results for substudy 2: characteristics of acupuncture
29
Discussion
34
Discussion for substudy 1: influence of control group on effect size
35
Discussion for substudy 2: characteristics of acupuncture
36
Recommendations for future research
37
Conclusion
37
Chapter 3 Comparison of acupuncture with other physical treatments for pain
caused by osteoarthritis of the knee: a network meta-analysis
39
Background
39
Methods
40
Literature search
40
Study selection and definitions of interventions and outcome
40
Data extraction
41
Assessment of trial quality
41
Outcomes and data transformations
42
Evidence synthesis
42
Results
44
Study characteristics
44
Network meta-analysis
45
Discussion
55
Principal findings
55
Strengths and limitations
55
Comparison with the wider literature
56
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
vii
 Implications for clinical practice
57
Recommendations for future research
57
Conclusion
58
Chapter 4 Towards a cost-effectiveness analysis of acupuncture for chronic pain:
developing methods in a case study
59
Background
59
Evidence synthesis in health technology assessment
59
Network meta-analysis and the use of individual patient data
59
Objectives and structure
59
Motivating case study: the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for chronic pain in primary care
60
Background to acupuncture and acupuncture guidance
60
Data description and network of evidence
60
Methods
61
Overview of the analysis
61
Generating homogeneous health-related quality-of-life scores and pain outcomes
65
Statistical methods
66
Individual patient data network meta-analysis considering pain type as a treatment
effect modifier
67
Model 1: analysis of covariance variation – change score modelling, adjusted for baseline
67
Modelling extensions
67
Analysis in the presence of restricted evidence
68
Model selection and implementation
68
Modelling resource use
69
Estimation of cost-effectiveness outcomes
70
Application
70
Results of generating homogeneous health-related quality-of-life scores and
pain outcomes
70
Analysis of covariance (model 1)
71
Controlling for patient-level characteristics
73
Analysis with restricted evidence (models 3 and 4)
74
Results of analysing resource use
75
Results of the illustrative cost-effectiveness analysis
75
Discussion
75
Principal findings
75
Limitations
78
Recommendations for future research
79
Conclusions
79
Chapter 5 Cost-effectiveness of non-pharmacological adjunct treatments for
patients with osteoarthritis of the knee
81
Introduction
81
The evidence base and economic decision problem associated with osteoarthritis of the knee
82
The decision problem
82
The evidence base
83
The evidence base in the context of the economic decision problem
84
Methods
87
Health-related quality of life for cost-effectiveness analysis
87
Methods for estimating the total cost
95
Cost-effectiveness analysis
98
Results
102
Mapping and synthesis
102
Cost-effectiveness analysis
107
CONTENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
viii
 Sensitivity analyses
108
Value of further information
113
Discussion
113
Principal findings
113
Strengths and limitations
116
Recommendations for future research
118
Conclusion
118
Chapter 6 Acupuncture, Counselling or Usual Care for Depression (ACUDep):
a randomised controlled trial
119
Introduction
119
Methods
119
Design
119
Population
120
Interventions
120
Outcome measures
120
Sample size
120
Analysis
121
Patient and public involvement
121
Methods for substudy 1: experience of treatment from the patient perspective
122
Methods for substudy 2: impact of comorbid pain on depression outcomes
123
Methods for substudy 3: approaches that practitioners used to enhance
longer-term benefits
124
Methods for substudy 4: cost-effectiveness analysis
124
Results
125
Participants
125
Interventions
125
Clinical outcomes
130
Prescribed medication
132
Adverse events
133
Results for substudy 1: experience of treatment from the patient perspective
133
Results for substudy 2: impact of comorbid pain on depression outcomes
134
Results for substudy 3: approaches that practitioners used to enhance
longer-term benefits
136
Results for substudy 4: cost-effectiveness analysis
137
Discussion
142
Principal findings
142
Strengths and limitations
142
Relationship to the literature
142
Implications for clinical practice
143
Discussion for substudy 1: experience of treatment from the patient perspective
143
Discussion for substudy 2: impact of comorbid pain on depression outcomes
144
Discussion for substudy 3: approaches that practitioners used to enhance
longer-term benefits
145
Discussion for substudy 4: cost-effectiveness analysis
145
Recommendations for future research
146
Conclusion
147
Chapter 7 Conclusions
149
Acknowledgements
153
References
157
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
ix
 Appendix 1 Review data related to Chapter 1
189
Appendix 2 Acupuncture characteristics related to trials in Chapter 2
203
Appendix 3 Review data related to Chapter 3
219
Appendix 4 Review data related to Chapter 4
273
Appendix 5 Review data related to Chapter 5
279
Appendix 6 Trial data related to Chapter 6
303
CONTENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
x
 List of tables
TABLE 1 Summary of characteristics of included studies
19
TABLE 2 Primary analyses of effect sizes
23
TABLE 3 Sensitivity analyses
24
TABLE 4 Types of sham acupuncture control
25
TABLE 5 Trial-level characteristics for trials with sham control groups
26
TABLE 6 Effect size for acupuncture compared with sham control by type
26
TABLE 7 Differences in effect size between types of sham control
27
TABLE 8 Types of non-sham control group by trial
27
TABLE 9 Trial-level characteristics for trials with non-sham controls
28
TABLE 10 Trial-level acupuncture characteristics (n = 29)
29
TABLE 11 Patient-level acupuncture characteristics (n = 18,434)
30
TABLE 12 Results of characteristics with univariate metaregression analyses
32
TABLE 13 Results of the metaregression for acupuncture trials with sham
controls, excluding the outlying trials
33
TABLE 14 Results of the patient-level analysis of acupuncture characteristics
33
TABLE 15 Summary of characteristics of eligible trials included in the review
46
TABLE 16 Results of network meta-analyses for comparisons with standard care:
studies of any quality
49
TABLE 17 Results of network meta-analyses for comparisons with acupuncture:
studies of any quality
49
TABLE 18 Results of network meta-analyses for comparisons with standard care:
studies of better quality
52
TABLE 19 Results of network meta-analyses for comparisons with acupuncture:
studies of better quality
53
TABLE 20 Ranking of interventions (using only better-quality studies)
54
TABLE 21 Data set main characteristics and study outcomes used for analysis
62
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
xi
 TABLE 22 Parameter estimates from fitting the novel network meta-analysis
ANCOVA synthesis model (model 1) to the EQ-5D preference score and
standardised pain end points
71
TABLE 23 Parameter estimates from fitting the synthesis model including age as
a covariate
73
TABLE 24 Parameter estimates from fitting three different network
meta-analysis models to the EQ-5D end point
74
TABLE 25 Resource use regression results
75
TABLE 26 Cost-effectiveness results (probabilistic analysis) for each pain condition
76
TABLE 27 Adjunct non-pharmacological interventions for knee osteoarthritis
83
TABLE 28 Interventions for the management of chronic pain in NHS patients
with osteoarthritis of the knee in primary care
97
TABLE 29 Unit costs of interventions (UK £, 2012–13)
98
TABLE 30 Model diagnostics
107
TABLE 31 Cost-effectiveness results
108
TABLE 32 Probability intervention is cost-effective at cost-effectiveness
thresholds of £20,000 and £30,000 per QALY
110
TABLE 33 Results of sensitivity analyses that altered the optimal choice
of intervention
111
TABLE 34 Demographics and variables of interest at baseline
125
TABLE 35 Unadjusted depression outcomes
130
TABLE 36 Effect of trial arm on PHQ-9 depression
131
TABLE 37 Effect of trial arm on BDI-II depression
132
TABLE 38 Numbers of patients taking prescribed medication in the preceding
3 months
132
TABLE 39 EuroQol-5 Dimensions data: the proportional odds of being at level 2 or
3 compared with level 1 – comparing acupuncture or counselling with usual care
138
TABLE 40 Complete case and imputed resource use over 12 months
139
TABLE 41 Complete case and imputed costs over 12 months
140
TABLE 42 Incremental cost-effectiveness of usual care, acupuncture and counselling
141
TABLE 43 Incremental cost-effectiveness scenario analyses
141
LIST OF TABLES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
xii
 List of figures
FIGURE 1 Systematic review Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews
and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram
18
FIGURE 2 Forest plots comparing acupuncture with no acupuncture controls
(see Table 2 for references): (a) osteoarthritis; (b) chronic headache; and
(c) musculoskeletal pain
20
FIGURE 3 Forest plots comparing acupuncture with sham acupuncture (see Table 2
for references): (a) osteoarthritis; (b) chronic headache; (c) musculoskeletal pain;
and (d) shoulder pain
21
FIGURE 4 Study flow chart
45
FIGURE 5 Network diagram for the end-of-treatment analysis of any-quality
studies (with interventions categorised without adjuncts)
48
FIGURE 6 Standardised mean differences of each treatment compared with
standard care for the analysis including studies of any quality
50
FIGURE 7 Standardised mean differences of each treatment compared with
acupuncture for the analysis including studies of any quality
51
FIGURE 8 Network diagram for the end-of-treatment analysis of better-quality
studies (with interventions categorised without adjuncts)
52
FIGURE 9 Standardised mean differences of each treatment compared with
standard care for the analysis including better-quality studies
53
FIGURE 10 Standardised mean differences of each treatment compared with
acupuncture for the analysis including better-quality studies
54
FIGURE 11 Network of RCTs
65
FIGURE 12 Illustrative diagram of the treatment benefits over the period
of assessment
70
FIGURE 13 Forest plot showing the network meta-analysis results for the
standardised pain and EQ-5D outcomes: (a) acupuncture vs. usual care;
(b) acupuncture vs. sham acupuncture; and (c) sham acupuncture vs. usual care
72
FIGURE 14 Cost-effectiveness acceptability curves for each pain condition
76
FIGURE 15 Network of evidence for interventions in osteoarthritis of the knee
85
FIGURE 16 Network of evidence: trials with a low risk of bias for allocation
concealment
86
FIGURE 17 Network of evidence: trials with a low risk of bias for allocation
concealment and reporting at 3–13 weeks
86
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
xiii
 FIGURE 18 Best available quality-of-life data by comparison
88
FIGURE 19 Visual map of the model integrating synthesis, mapping and
economic analysis
89
FIGURE 20 Health-related quality-of-life profiles compatible with base-case
assumptions
99
FIGURE 21 Methods for treatment appointment duration sensitivity analysis
101
FIGURE 22 Results of the network meta-analysis with 95% CrIs (results presented
as values corresponding to 2.5%, 50% and 97.5% of the posterior distribution):
(a) all trials; (b) trials with adequate allocation concealment; and (c) trials with
adequate allocation concealment and reporting in the range 3–13 weeks
103
FIGURE 23 Results of the network meta-analysis (results presented as the
probability that each treatment is ranked first, second, third etc.): (a) acupuncture;
(b) balneotherapy; (c) braces; (d) insoles; (e) NMES; (f) placebo; (g) TENS; (h) usual
care; (i) sham acupuncture; (j) muscle-strengthening exercise; (k) aerobic exercise;
(l) heat treatment; (m) ice/cooling treatment; (n) inferential therapy; (o) laser/light
therapy; (p) manual therapy; (q) PES; (r) PEMF; (s) static magnets; and (t) t’ai chi
105
FIGURE 24 Cost-effectiveness acceptability frontiers: (a) all trials; (b) trials with
adequate allocation concealment; and (c) trials with adequate allocation
concealment and reporting in the range 3–13 weeks
109
FIGURE 25 Cumulative health generated under the adoption, AWR and OIR
policies: (a) all trials; (b) trials with adequate allocation concealment; and
(c) trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting at 3–13 weeks
114
FIGURE 26 Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) flow diagram
129
FIGURE 27 Unadjusted PHQ-9 mean scores from baseline to 12 months
130
FIGURE 28 Mean PHQ-9 scores by treatment, comparing the pain and no-pain
groups: (a) patients with moderate to extreme pain at baseline (n = 384); and
(b) patients pain free at baseline (n = 371)
135
FIGURE 29 Mean SF-36 bodily pain scores by treatment over the course of the
trial, comparing the pain and no-pain groups: (a) patients with moderate to
extreme pain at baseline (n = 384); and (b) patients pain free at baseline (n = 371)
136
FIGURE 30 Health-related quality-of-life scores over time and by treatment
138
FIGURE 31 Sampling frame of the patients interviewed in nested substudy 1
(experience of treatment from the patient perspective)
312
LIST OF FIGURES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
xiv
 List of abbreviations
AACP
Acupuncture Association of
Chartered Physiotherapists
AAOS
American Academy of Orthopaedic
Surgeons
ACR
American College of Rheumatology
ACUDep
Acupuncture, Counselling or Usual
Care for Depression
AIMS
Arthritis Impact Measurement Scale
ANCOVA
analysis of covariance
ANOVA
analysis of variance
ATC
Acupuncture Triallists’
Collaboration
AUC
area under the curve
AWR
adopt with research
BAcC
British Acupuncture Council
BAWMA
British Academy of Western
Medical Acupuncture
BDI-II
Beck Depression Inventory-II
BEAM
Back pain Exercise And
Manipulation
BMAS
British Medical Acupuncture
Society
BMI
body mass index
CAM
complementary and alternative
medicine
CARE
Consultational and Relational
Empathy
CI
confidence interval
CLAD
censored least absolute deviations
CMS
Constant–Murley Score
CRD
Centre for Reviews and
Dissemination
CrI
credible interval
DIC
deviance information criterion
EQ-5D
EuroQol-5 Dimensions
EULAR
European League Against
Rheumatism
EVPI
expected value of perfect
information
GP
general practitioner
HAQ
Health Assessment Questionnaire
HERC
Health Economics Research Centre
HRQoL
health-related quality of life
ICER
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
IPD
individual patient data
MCII
minimal clinically important
improvement
MCMC
Markov chain Monte Carlo
MCS
mental component summary
MPCI
minimal perceptible clinical
improvement
NICE
National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence
NMES
neuromuscular electrical
stimulation
NRS
numerical rating scale
NSAID
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug
OARSI
Osteoarthritis Research Society
International
OIR
only in research
OLS
ordinary least squares
PCS
physical component summary
PEMF
pulsed electromagnetic field
PES
pulsed electrical stimulation
PHQ-9
Patient Health Questionnaire-9
items
QALY
quality-adjusted life-year
RCT
randomised controlled trial
SD
standard deviation
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
xv
 SE
standard error
SF-12
Short Form questionnaire-12 items
SF-36
Short Form questionnaire-36 items
SMD
standardised mean difference
TENS
transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation
TOIB
Topical or Oral IBuprofen
TTH
tension-type headache
VAS
visual analogue scale
WOMAC
Western Ontario and McMaster
Universities Osteoarthritis Index
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
xvi
 Plain English summary
I
ncreasing numbers of people are seeking acupuncture treatment for various conditions. However, we
do not yet know how effective acupuncture is or if it provides value for money. By studying all of the
available research, we should be able to reduce uncertainty about these issues and provide clear evidence
for decision-makers. We aimed to provide high-quality evidence about the use of acupuncture for chronic
pain from existing data and to develop fresh evidence on the use of acupuncture for depression.
We used systematic processes to combine and interpret data from high-quality clinical trials of acupuncture
involving approximately 18,000 patients. The types of pain investigated in these trials were neck and lower
back pain, osteoarthritis of the knee, headache and migraine. We found acupuncture to be more than
simply a placebo as it was more effective than sham acupuncture, with sham acupuncture consisting of
needling that did not penetrate the skin or needling at the wrong points. Acupuncture was also found to
be better than standard medical care for all of these chronic pain conditions. In another analysis, we
compared acupuncture with other physical therapies for osteoarthritis of the knee and found acupuncture
to be one of the more clinically effective therapies and, when based on high-quality trial evidence, also
cost-effective. When all trials were analysed, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation was cost-effective.
We also conducted a large-scale clinical trial of acupuncture or counselling for depression in which we
found both interventions to be clinically effective and acupuncture to be cost-effective. Counselling was
also cost-effective where acupuncture was contraindicated or unavailable.
Drawing together this evidence provides high-quality information on the effect of acupuncture for patients
with chronic pain or depression, offers directions for further research and gives health-care providers and
policy-makers an opportunity to consider if wider access to acupuncture is appropriate and cost-effective.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
xvii
  Scientific summary
Background
Acupuncture is widely practised in the UK, with an estimated 4 million treatments provided a year,
primarily for chronic pain conditions such as musculoskeletal pain and headache or migraine. In addition to
chronic pain conditions, psychological distress, including depression, has been a common reason that
people have consulted acupuncturists. The evidence base on acupuncture has been patchy, with some
controversy regarding the clinical benefits and specifically the extent that acupuncture is more than simply
a placebo. Clinical questions remain as to the effect of acupuncture in everyday practice and there are
unanswered questions regarding whether or not acupuncture is cost-effective. One of the challenges in
the field has been the quality of the available evidence. For most conditions, systematic reviews of
acupuncture have had a limited ability to draw any definitive conclusions regarding effectiveness. As with
research into many other physical therapies for chronic pain, there have been too many underpowered
trials conducted and the methodological standards have been insufficiently robust. In this climate of
uncertainty, however, there has been a recent and dramatic increase in the quality and quantity of trials of
acupuncture, especially for chronic pain conditions, which has provided this programme of research a
unique opportunity to substantially reduce the uncertainty. In this context, our primary aim was to use
high-quality methods and the best evidence available to determine the clinical and economic impact of
acupuncture for chronic pain and depression.
Acupuncture for chronic pain
Although acupuncture is widely used for chronic pain, there is limited understanding of how it works,
which in turn fuels some of the uncertainty as to its potential role as a treatment modality. The uncertainty is
associated with a concern that acupuncture might simply be a theatrical placebo and the suggestion that
when issues of bias are taken into account, the size of any effect might vanish. To address the uncertainty, in
our first study we set out to determine the effect size of acupuncture for chronic pain, whether acupuncture
is compared with sham acupuncture or with a non-acupuncture control, based on direct trial data on these
comparisons. On building a collaboration of key triallists, the Acupuncture Triallists’ Collaboration (ATC),
we were able to conduct an individual patient data (IPD) meta-analysis. To establish eligible studies we
identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of acupuncture for the four chronic pain conditions in which
allocation concealment was determined unambiguously to be adequate. Data from 29 of 31 eligible RCTs,
with a total of 17,922 patients, were analysed. Our primary result, when including all eligible RCTs, was that
acupuncture was statistically significantly more effective than both sham controls and non-acupuncture
controls for all four pain conditions (p < 0.001). When an outlying set of RCTs that strongly favoured
acupuncture was excluded, the effect size across each pain condition was similar. Patients receiving
acupuncture had less pain than those receiving sham controls, with effect sizes based on standardised mean
differences (SMDs) of 0.23 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.13 to 0.33], 0.16 (95% CI 0.07 to 0.25) and 0.15
(95% CI 0.07 to 0.24) for back and neck pain, osteoarthritis and chronic headache, respectively. In the
comparison between acupuncture and non-acupuncture controls, effect sizes were 0.55 (95% CI 0.51 to
0.58), 0.57 (95% CI 0.50 to 0.64) and 0.42 (95% CI 0.37 to 0.46), respectively. A variety of sensitivity
analyses was conducted, including those related to publication bias, with little impact on the main findings of
the study. To conclude, in these high-quality studies, a clinically relevant and statistically significant difference
was found between acupuncture and non-acupuncture controls, suggesting that acupuncture is a suitable
referral option for chronic pain. Statistically significant differences between true and sham acupuncture
indicate that acupuncture is more than a placebo.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
xix
 Physical therapies for osteoarthritis
Many systematic reviews have evaluated individual types of physical treatments for osteoarthritis of the knee,
but no study has compared these different physical treatments against each other in the same analysis. In a
second study we used a network meta-analysis to address the question of how effective physical treatments
for osteoarthritis of the knee are, when compared with each other, for relieving pain. We reviewed the
literature up to January 2013, which involved searching 17 electronic databases. We identified RCTs of
physical treatments in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee in which pain was reported as an outcome. In a
network meta-analysis, both direct and indirect evidence was synthesised to compare the effectiveness of
acupuncture with that of other relevant physical treatments for alleviating pain. In total, 114 trials (covering
22 treatments and 9709 patients) were included in the analysis. Many trials were classed as being of poor
quality with a high risk of bias in several domains. Eight interventions statistically significantly outperformed
standard (usual) care, producing an improvement in pain compared with standard care: interferential therapy,
acupuncture, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), pulsed electrical stimulation, balneotherapy,
aerobic exercise, sham acupuncture and muscle-strengthening exercise. The better-quality studies, most
commonly of acupuncture (11 trials), muscle-strengthening exercise (nine trials) and sham acupuncture (eight
trials), were included in a sensitivity analysis. Acupuncture was statistically significantly more effective than
muscle-strengthening exercise and sham acupuncture (SMD 0.49, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.98; and 0.34, 95% CI
0.03 to 0.66, respectively). Acupuncture was also statistically significantly better than standard care (SMD
1.01, 95% CI 0.61 to 1.43). To conclude, in a network meta-analysis, acupuncture was found to be one of
the more effective physical treatments for alleviating osteoarthritis knee pain in the short term. However,
given that much of the evidence was of poor quality, there is uncertainty about the effectiveness of many
physical treatments.
Towards evaluating the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for
osteoarthritis
To address the question of the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for chronic pain, we have benefited
from the availability of the data from the ATC repository. In this third study we conducted a network
meta-analysis of the individual patient-level data from the ATC repository. By synthesising all of the data,
including indirect data, we derived treatment effect estimates, a key parameter for cost-effectiveness
analyses to be used for resource allocation decisions. In this primarily methodological study, new Bayesian
methods for analysing multiple individual patient-level data sets reporting heterogeneous continuous
outcomes were developed. An essential step towards a cost-effectiveness analysis is a preference-based
measure of health-related quality of life, such as the EuroQol-5 Dimensions (EQ-5D). To synthesise
heterogeneous outcomes, we used mapping to convert and compare heterogeneous outcomes on to
the EQ-5D summary index scale. The models developed entailed a Bayesian random-effects network
meta-analysis specification, including exchangeable pain type interaction effects. The implications for
cost-effectiveness analysis were also demonstrated. The methods were illustrated using a case study of
acupuncture for chronic pain in primary care, including headache/migraine, musculoskeletal pain and
osteoarthritis of the knee. By using the same evidence base as in the first study, our analysis included
approximately 17,500 patients from 28 trials (we were unable to use IPD from one trial), in which we
compared acupuncture, sham acupuncture and usual care with each other. The synthesis of mapped EQ-5D
estimates found that acupuncture was effective compared with usual care, with median treatment effects
estimated as 0.056 [95% credible interval (CrI) 0.021 to 0.092] for headache/migraine, 0.082 (95% CrI
0.047 to 0.116) for musculoskeletal pain and 0.079 (95% CrI 0.042 to 0.114) for osteoarthritis of the knee.
The EQ-5D benefit of acupuncture over sham acupuncture was smaller and more uncertain (headache:
0.004, 95% CrI –0.035 to 0.042; musculoskeletal pain: 0.023, 95% CrI –0.007 to 0.053; osteoarthritis of
the knee: 0.022, 95% CrI –0.014 to 0.060). Although not all relevant interventions were compared for
decision-making purposes, cost-effectiveness results suggest that when acupuncture is compared with usual
care alone it is cost-effective, with incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) ranging from £7000 to
£14,000 per quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) across the pain types of headache/migraine, musculoskeletal
SCIENTIFIC SUMMARY
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
xx
 pain and osteoarthritis of the knee. In this methodologically oriented case study we showed that the
mapping of heterogeneous outcomes on to the EQ-5D summary index provides a useful step towards
conducting a cost-effectiveness analysis.
Cost-effectiveness of non-pharmacological treatments
for osteoarthritis
In a fourth study within this programme of research, we conducted an economic evaluation to evaluate
the cost-effectiveness of non-pharmacological treatments used to reduce chronic pain in osteoarthritis of
the knee. We used novel network meta-analysis methods to synthesise RCT evidence for 17 active
interventions and three control interventions. Data were obtained from the systematic review carried out in
the second study, which were available for 88 RCTs including 7507 patients. IPD from the first study were
available for five of the RCTs, including 1329 patients. A wide range of health-related quality-of-life
outcomes were reported in the trials. As the ultimate objective of the analysis was to inform resource
allocation decisions in the UK, data from these instruments were mapped to EQ-5D preference weights
prior to synthesis, extending methods developed in the third study. Sensitivity analyses were conducted to
address potential bias associated with poor study conduct and to explore the importance of the time point
of reporting for the study results. Resource use associated with the interventions was estimated from trial
data, expert opinion, the literature and information obtained from NHS trust websites. Non-intervention
resource use related to changes in EQ-5D was obtained from another UK trial. Outcomes and costs were
synthesised using an area-under-the-curve cost-effectiveness model with a time horizon of 8 weeks.
When all trials were included in the synthesis, TENS was cost-effective with an ICER of £2690 per
QALY compared with usual care. When the analysis was restricted to trials with adequate allocation
concealment, acupuncture was cost-effective with an ICER of £13,502 per QALY compared with TENS.
There were limited data regarding the long-term effects of many non-pharmacological interventions used
to treat osteoarthritis of the knee. The active and control interventions in the trials informing this analysis
were subject to heterogeneity in the method, duration and intensity with which they were administered.
These results are subject to some decision uncertainty and the expected value of perfect information is
relatively high, suggesting that additional research may be cost-effective.
Acupuncture or counselling for depression
Depression is a significant cause of morbidity. Many patients have communicated an interest in
non-pharmacological therapies to their general practitioners. Systematic reviews of acupuncture and
counselling for depression in primary care have identified limited evidence. The aim of the fifth study was
to evaluate acupuncture compared with usual care and counselling compared with usual care for patients
who continue to experience depression in primary care. Moreover, a cost-effectiveness analysis is needed to
understand whether or not such therapies should be considered a good use of limited health resources. In
total, 755 patients with depression (Beck Depression Inventory-II score of ≥ 20) were recruited to a RCT carried
out in 27 primary care practices in the north of England. Allocation was to one of three arms using a ratio of
2 : 2 : 1 to acupuncture (n = 302), counselling (n = 302) and usual care alone (n = 151). The difference in
mean Patient Health Questionnaire-9 items (PHQ-9) score at 3 months was the primary outcome. Patients
were followed up over 12 months and analysis was by intention to treat. Additional quantitative and
qualitative substudies were conducted. Data on PHQ-9 scores were available for 614 patients at 3 months
and 572 patients at 12 months. A mean of 10 sessions was attended for acupuncture and a mean of nine
sessions was attended for counselling. There was a statistically significant reduction in mean PHQ-9 depression
score at 3 months for acupuncture compared with usual care (–2.46, 95% CI –3.72 to –1.21) and counselling
compared with usual care (–1.73, 95% CI –3.00 to –0.45), and at 12 months for acupuncture (–1.55, 95% CI
–2.41 to –0.70) and counselling (–1.50, 95% CI –2.43 to –0.58) compared with usual care. When controlling
for time and attention, no significant differences in clinical outcome were found between acupuncture and
counselling. No serious treatment-related adverse events were reported. The trial was not designed to separate
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
xxi
 out specific from non-specific effects. Acupuncture and counselling were found to have higher mean QALYs
and costs than usual care. In the base-case analysis, acupuncture had an ICER of £4560 per additional
QALY and was cost-effective with a probability of 0.62 at a cost-effectiveness threshold of £20,000 per QALY.
A scenario analysis of counselling compared with usual care, excluding acupuncture as a comparator when
inappropriate or unavailable, resulted in an ICER of £7935 and a probability of being cost-effective of 0.91.
To summarise, patients with ongoing depression in primary care who received a short course of either
acupuncture or counselling experienced statistically significant reductions in depression compared with usual
care alone.
Conclusion
In conclusion, this programme of research has provided the most substantive evidence to date on
acupuncture and its potential impact. Drawing on the existing data from RCTs, we used an IPD
meta-analysis and found acupuncture to be clinically effective across the chronic pain conditions of
headache and migraine, back and neck pain, and osteoarthritis of the knee. Our evidence from this data
set suggests that acupuncture is a statistically significantly more effective intervention than placebo. In a
network meta-analysis, our evidence across a range of physical therapies for osteoarthritis of the knee
suggested that acupuncture is associated with more high-quality trials than any of the other therapies and
is also one of the most effective therapies. Acupuncture was also cost-effective if only high-quality trials
were analysed. When all trials were included in the synthesis, including both low- and high-quality trials,
we found TENS to be cost-effective. In the trial that we conducted on depression, we found that
acupuncture and counselling were statistically significantly better than usual care and that acupuncture
was also cost-effective.
There remains some uncertainty regarding our results. For example, with regard to the cost-effectiveness
analyses of acupuncture for musculoskeletal pain and headache and migraine, not all competing therapies
relevant to decision-making were included in the analysis. There are few data regarding the long-term
effects of many non-pharmacological interventions used to treat osteoarthritis of the knee, and sensitivity
analyses suggested that the cost-effectiveness model results may be sensitive to the magnitude of these
effects. When comparing acupuncture with usual care for depression, there was no control for non-specific
effects, although we did control for time and attention when comparing acupuncture with counselling.
Nevertheless, our programme of research has used high-quality methods to provide the best possible data
on the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for chronic pain and depression. Robust
evidence is in the interests of all stakeholders and our results will be used to inform patients, practitioners,
policy-makers and commissioners of services.
Trial registration
The trial of acupuncture and counselling for depression is registered as ISRCTN63787732.
Funding
Funding for this study was provided by the Programme Grants for Applied Research programme of the
National Institute for Health Research.
SCIENTIFIC SUMMARY
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
xxii
 Chapter 1 Introduction
A
round 4 million acupuncture treatments are provided each year in the UK according to a national survey
conducted in 2012.1 Approximately one-third of the 4 million treatments were reported as being provided
within the NHS and the remainder in the independent or not-for-profit sectors.1 Reasons for consultation were
dominated by musculoskeletal complaints (59%) and neurological conditions (9%), primarily headaches
and migraine. Younger people predominantly consulted for back pain and headaches, whereas older people
were proportionately more likely to consult for knee pain. These data reflect a steady increase over time in
the utilisation of acupuncture: in 2001, a survey reported an estimate of the total number of acupuncture
treatments in the UK per year of 3 million, with a similar proportion, namely one-third, provided within the
NHS.2 The provision of acupuncture within the NHS appears to be patchy, with limited access for patients with
an interest in receiving acupuncture. Despite general practitioners (GPs) being, in general, supportive of the
idea of wider acupuncture provision,3 the funding of acupuncture clinics in primary care has been difficult.4
This situation has led to many patients turning to the independent sector for acupuncture treatment.5,6 The
common conditions treated by independent acupuncturists showed a marked correspondence with the
conditions that GPs in primary care have acknowledged that they are not fully effective in treating, especially
musculoskeletal conditions, depression and chronic pain.7 Across Europe, a similar pattern has been reported
whereby patients are most commonly seeking help for painful conditions.8
The provision of acupuncture in the UK involves practitioners who are primarily members of the four main
professional organisations that regulate acupuncture in the UK: the Acupuncture Association of Chartered
Physiotherapists (AACP), British Acupuncture Council (BAcC), British Academy of Western Medical
Acupuncture (BAWMA) and British Medical Acupuncture Society (BMAS). The AACP is a clinical interest
group of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy with membership (n = 5600) requiring a minimum of
80 hours of training. The BAcC is the leading self-regulatory body for independent acupuncturists in the
UK, with membership (n = 2600) open to graduates of acupuncture courses based on 3 years of full-time
study or equivalent, with most courses awarding a university degree. Most members (n = 300) of BAWMA
are nurses or other health-care professionals, and they have received approximately 100 hours of training
delivered over eight weekends, leading to an Academy Licentiate Certificate. Practising members
(n = 2400) of the BMAS are primarily doctors with minimum training taking place over two weekends,
which may be extended, with accreditation based on completion of 100 hours of training along with
provision of a series of case histories.
Unlike the pharmaceutical agents within conventional medicine, acupuncture has had no regulatory gatekeeper
controlling its therapeutic activity before being made available on the open market. Treatments have therefore
been used widely before researchers have evaluated their effect, whether in terms of safety, efficacy, clinical
effectiveness or cost-effectiveness. It has been argued that all of these issues are important in the context of the
‘uncontrolled’ provision of acupuncture, especially when widely used outside the national health-care system,
and therefore it is the question of patient safety that needs to be most urgently addressed.9 This concern about
the risks of acupuncture was highlighted some time ago by a systematic review that documented case reports of
six deaths that may have been caused by acupuncture.10 However, case reports are a limited source of evidence
on risk, as there is no sense of the frequency or rate with which such events occur. More robust research led to
data on adverse event rates involving two prospective surveys of practitioners in the UK, with data involving
members of three professional associations: one study involving practitioners of the BAcC11 and the other
involving practitioners from both the BMAS and AACP.12 These studies covered > 30,000 treatments each and
reported no serious adverse events, leading to the conclusion that acupuncture is safe in qualified hands.13
A subsequent prospective UK survey14 of patient reports of adverse events over a 3-month period found results
that were largely consistent with the aforementioned practitioner surveys. For most patients it has been found
that their experience of benefit following acupuncture appears to outweigh the perceived adverse reactions to
treatment.15 These data on safety have been reinforced by two independent prospective surveys in Germany.
One covered adverse events associated with 760,000 acupuncture treatments, leading to reports of two cases of
pneumothorax, one case of exacerbation of depression, one acute hypertensive crisis, one vasovagal reaction,
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
1
 and one asthma attack with hypertension and angina.16 Another covered 2.2 million consecutive acupuncture
treatments provided for 229,230 patients, with two patients found to have had a pneumothorax (life-
threatening for neither patient) and one to have had a lower limb nerve injury that persisted for 180 days.17
Taken together, these prospective surveys provide evidence that serious adverse events associated with
acupuncture are extremely rare.
Although questions of safety have been largely addressed over the last decade or so, questions of the
physiological mechanisms of acupuncture have been more widely debated. A feature of acupuncture
research has been the concentrated effort to understand how acupuncture works. For example, numerous
acupuncture-related biomarkers have been identified, including antinociceptive endogenous opioids,18,19
immune system markers,20,21 cardiovascular activity,22 gastrointestinal function23 and functional magnetic
resonance imaging-detected brain activity.24 Biomarker outcomes, however, are more revealing of
correlations (i.e. when needling occurs, changes can be detected) than mechanisms or causal pathways.
Reviews of acupuncture from China25 and the West26 continue to use the overarching term ‘mechanism’
but focus almost entirely on ‘correlates’.
Beyond correlations between acupuncture and biomarkers, research has focused on the search for
acupuncture-related biochemical, physiological and anatomical mechanisms. These research efforts include
a focus on elucidating the nature of acupuncture points and meridian pathways, and the neurological
‘signals’ that they may carry. For example, some researchers are exploring to what extent the stimulation
of the underlying neural pathways accounts for the physiological effects of and clinical responses to
acupuncture in patients.27 The experimental recording of neural activity associated with needle insertion,
along with correlations between acupuncture-induced pain and endogenous opioids, led to models that
proposed a set of pathways of acupuncture analgesia involving both the peripheral and the central
nervous systems.18,19 These models showed how the effects of acupuncture could be mapped onto the
nervous system,27,28 an understanding that has received some support from neuroimaging research.24,29
The neural hypothesis has been used to explain the existence of meridians, given the observations that
many acupuncture points and sections of meridians overlie the major peripheral nerves.27
There is also an emerging view that loose connective tissue (fascia) provides an alternative biomedical
explanation for the role of acupuncture points and meridians.30 For example, a study has shown that a
large proportion of traditional acupuncture points are located at sites where the underlying nerve–vessel
bundles are wrapped in a loose sheath of connective tissue that penetrates the fascia to reach the
outer dermal layers.31 A subsequent study demonstrated a high correspondence between the sites of
acupuncture points and the location of loose connective tissue planes.30 Indications are that the superficial
fascia provides an initial ‘response element’ to needle stimulation, which may explain the ‘needle grasp’
phenomenon of acupuncture practice.32 These studies provide a viable alternative to the prevailing
neurobiological models based on the emerging evidence on loose connective tissue anatomy and its
relationship with the acupuncture system.
Another line of physiological research has explored electrodermal activity at acupuncture points.
For example, in an early study, acupuncture points were found to be at the summits of individually
contoured conductivity fields.33 The experimental and physiological confounders to such measurements
have been highlighted in recent reviews.34 In a recent narrative review, the relation of acupuncture point
electrodermal activity to pathology has been described.35 In this review one blinded study found that
electrodermal activity at auricular acupuncture points could be used to distinguish which patients had
recent or prior cardiopathology and which were healthy control subjects.36 The observation that traditional
pathways of acupuncture meridians correspond to ultrasound images of connective tissue planes30 has
been followed by the insight that these meridian-oriented collagenous structures are associated with lower
electrical impedance.37 Lower electrodermal activity along acupuncture meridians was also reported in
seven of nine studies at both subcutaneous and intermuscular depths.38
INTRODUCTION
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
2
 Our understanding of how acupuncture might have a pain-relieving effect has been informed by basic
science research. One mechanism to explain acupuncture is called the ‘gate theory’.39 This suggests that the
pathway associated with acupuncture involves the A delta fibres entering the dorsal horn of the spinal cord,
which inhibit pain impulses that are carried in the slower, unmyelinated C fibres. Descending inhibition of
C fibre pain impulses is also enhanced through neural connections in the midbrain.40 Additional mechanisms
have been proposed for acupuncture’s effect on pain, which are not necessarily in contradiction to the gate
theory; for example, acupuncture stimulates release of endogenous opioids and other neurotransmitters.
Interest in acupuncture and endogenous opioids was sparked in the 1970s by research into acupuncture’s
analgesic effects, for example research showing that acupuncture could induce analgesia in mice, which was
blocked by naloxone.18 After receiving acupuncture, levels of endogenous opioids in the cerebrospinal fluid
have been directly observed to increase in humans.41 Neuroimaging research has also provided insights into
neurological changes associated with acupuncture when used to treat for pain. The research using functional
magnetic resonance imaging has demonstrated that acupuncture elicits changes in the brain that appear to
correlate with the presumed clinical effects of the points used. For example, a study of acupuncture for
carpal tunnel syndrome has shown how acupuncture elicits neural plasticity in the somatosensory area of the
brain that correlates with clinical benefits.42
These physiological studies are important in the context of efficacy research and the need to design a
sham acupuncture needle to be used as a control in clinical trials. The lack of a clear understanding of the
physiological events that are initiated by acupuncture needling is problematic. This is compounded by
confusion surrounding the concept and definition of a ‘placebo’, and the difficulty in interpreting ‘placebo
effects’ in a clinical context. This arises because placebo effects vary with different treatments, different
settings, different coloured pills, varying patient and/or practitioner expectations, whether a drug or a
device is used as a placebo, how placebo effects are explained at the outset of a trial, the extent that
placebo effects might interact with concurrent treatment and whether or not placebo effects can be
satisfactorily separated out from within a complex intervention.43 Separating out placebo effects from
other effects, such as the natural history of the condition or regression to the mean, is not straightforward.
In a Cochrane review, larger effects of placebo interventions were associated with physical placebo
interventions, such as sham acupuncture, and with patient-reported outcomes, for example as commonly
used to monitor pain-related conditions.44 Moreover, sham needling is implemented in a number of ways,
each with its associated physiological effects. Two approaches to sham needling are commonly used:
either needles are used at ‘incorrect’ locations but to penetrate the skin or non-penetrating (stage dagger
type) needles are used at the ‘correct’ locations.45 Some argue that a placebo should be physiologically
inert, whereas others suggest that a placebo intervention is acceptable as long as it looks and feels the
same as the active intervention that it is controlling for but does not trigger any of the physiological activity
elicited by the active intervention. One aspect of this debate has clearly emerged, namely that there is no
agreement that the physiological activity of sham acupuncture has been fully characterised.
Beyond the uncertainty of what a sham needle actually triggers at a physiological level, there is
considerable agreement that it is useful in principle to determine if an active intervention has a ‘specific’
effect over and above what are commonly called ‘non-specific effects’, a term often used synonymously
with ‘placebo effects’. The use of the term ‘non-specific effect’ is preferred as it bypasses the confusion
associated with the concept of the placebo that has been discussed above. In this programme of research,
we have reviewed many trials that have designated ‘sham’ acupuncture arms and which have made the
assumption that any difference in effect that we might observe between true and sham acupuncture in
these trials provides the best available assessment of whether or not acupuncture outperforms a placebo.
A major focus in this programme was on questions regarding the efficacy and clinical effectiveness of
acupuncture’s putative benefits. Understandably, these are essential questions for the field, whether for
patients, practitioners or commissioners. First, the widespread utilisation of acupuncture, as discussed
above, raises public health issues related to patient safety. In addition, concerns about safety are often
linked to questions regarding the risk/benefit ratio; for example, it can be argued that ‘if there is no
benefit, any risk is too much’.46 Given that an overview of systematic reviews in 2010 concluded that
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
3
 ‘numerous reviews have produced little convincing evidence that acupuncture is effective in reducing
pain’,47 this is an understandable concern. Another concern is over questions of bias, given the tendency of
trials with a greater risk of bias to deliver more positive results. In this context, a 2009 review of trials of
acupuncture for pain stated that ‘the effects of acupuncture cannot be clearly distinguished from bias and
that it is unclear whether needling at acupuncture points relieves pain independently of the psychological
impact of the treatment ritual’.48 The question of interest here is whether or not true acupuncture, when
adequately assessed, has an effect above and beyond that of a placebo or whether or not the effect
becomes negligible as bias is reduced, potentially leading to all effect finally vanishing in the sands of
placebodom.49 As with many emerging fields, and especially those fields that are outside the many
regulatory structures of modern medicine, the need for rigorous and unbiased research is an essential
requirement so that fair judgements can be made regarding a role in our national health-care system. An
unbiased assessment of the evidence base on acupuncture is necessary to inform decisions made by
patients, practitioners and policy-makers.
It is useful to distinguish between randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of efficacy and RCTs of effectiveness.
The term ‘effectiveness’ is used to measure the overall impact of an intervention on outcome, as would
be expected to occur in usual care, with an emphasis on generalisability. The term ‘efficacy’ is used to
measure the impact of an intervention on outcome in as ideal conditions as possible, with an emphasis on
controlling for placebo effects. In both cases there is a need to limit bias as much as possible, although the
challenges of doing so vary somewhat between the two types of trials. When evaluating effectiveness, a
comparative or pragmatic design is commonly used in which acupuncture is compared with another active
treatment, usual care or no treatment. It should be noted that many acupuncture trials have three-arm
designs that include both a sham and another comparator treatment, because the researchers are
attempting to address the questions of efficacy and effectiveness in the same trial. The effectiveness/
efficacy dichotomy is a useful perspective as it provides a framework for understanding the different types
of acupuncture trials in the field, the different questions that they seek to answer and the different ways
that the results of these trials need to be interpreted. In reality, many trials are hybrids that contain
features of both effectiveness and efficacy trials.50
With regard to questions of the efficacy of acupuncture for a number of pain-related conditions, there has
been considerable uncertainty, especially prior to the mid- to late 2000s. The state of the evidence to that
time had been drawn together in a number of systematic reviews of acupuncture trials that included at
least one sham-controlled arm, thereby enabling assessment of the difference between true and sham
acupuncture. These reviews raised as many questions as answers, with authors identifying a range of
mixed outcomes, some positive and some negative. These included data on chronic pain,51 osteoarthritis of
the knee,52–54 headache and migraine,55,56 and lower back pain.57,58 A common feature identified in these
reviews was a concern about the relatively small numbers of patients in many of the included trials. As an
example, a review of acupuncture for chronic pain, published in 2000,51 included 51 RCTs of acupuncture
for a variety of conditions. Typical of these early reviews, there was a low sample size, with a median of
18 patients per trial arm, and weak methodology, with 68% of the trials defined as being of poor quality
and only three of the 51 studies receiving a maximum quality score; in addition, there was a typical final
conclusion of ‘inconclusive evidence’ on whether or not acupuncture is more effective than a placebo.51
The state of the evidence when considering the question of the effectiveness (rather than efficacy) of
acupuncture, and specifically the evidence on acupuncture compared with usual care, has appeared more
clear-cut. The aforementioned reviews published during the 2000s were generally more positive, with
effect sizes considerably larger than when acupuncture was compared with sham acupuncture and with
the differences between acupuncture and usual care more commonly being statistically significant.
Nevertheless, these trials were also subjected to criticism because of the absence of a sham control, the
argument being that there might be bias introduced because of unblinded practitioners, increasing the
relative effect of the acupuncture, or bias because of resentful demoralisation in participants in the usual
care arm who enrolled into a trial because they wanted to receive acupuncture.59 Two pragmatic trials of
INTRODUCTION
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
4
 acupuncture for chronic pain conducted in the UK were of particular relevance to discussions of
effectiveness.60,61 Both trials were pragmatic in nature, recruiting everyday patients from within primary
care and providing the approach to acupuncture that was as near as possible to normal practice, with one
evaluating acupuncture for headache and migraine60 and one evaluating acupuncture for lower back
pain.61 The cost-effectiveness analyses of these two trials62,63 turned out to be of importance in terms of
subsequent decisions on clinical guidance related to policy and practice. In reviewing these and other
trials evaluating acupuncture against usual care for chronic pain in the mid- to late 2000s, authors of
meta-analyses typically found that acupuncture was more effective than non-acupuncture controls
(comprising waiting list, usual care or no treatment) for the conditions of lower back pain,58 migraine/
headache64,65 and osteoarthritis of the knee.52 Nevertheless, there remained some uncertainty about the
clinical relevance of the effect size. As with the efficacy comparison between acupuncture and sham
acupuncture, the studies that included an evaluation of effectiveness at this time were dominated by small
trials of questionable methodological quality.
Towards the end of the 2000s it was becoming clear that the landscape of research into the efficacy and
effectiveness of acupuncture was undertaking a remarkable shift in terms of the number of completed trials,
the number of participants in the trials and the methodological quality of the trials. Of particular note was the
funding by insurance companies of a series of trials in Germany, some of which had patient numbers in the
thousands. These included the cluster of German Acupuncture Randomized Trials published in 2005 and
early 2006,66–69 which recruited around 300 patients in each of four separate trials on osteoarthritis,69 chronic
lower back pain,66 migraine68 and chronic tension headache.67 Conducted at the same time were the
GERman ACupuncture (GERAC) trials, including around 1000 patients with osteoarthritis,70 chronic lower
back pain71 and migraine,72 and 400 patients with chronic tension headache.73 The third group of trials, the
Acupuncture in Routine Care (ARC) trials, had even larger sample sizes, with ≥ 3000 patients in each of three
separate pragmatic trials of back pain,74 neck pain75 and chronic headache,76 and 700 patients in a trial of
osteoarthritis arthritis.77 The combination of this remarkable set of trials along with various other larger and
higher-quality trials provided an extraordinary opportunity towards the end of the 2000s to provide a robust
meta-analysis to provide the necessary clarity to supersede the prevailing uncertainty of the times.
Our programme of research consisted of a series of studies, some of which utilised this unusually large
and recently completed set of acupuncture trial data related to chronic pain. The first of these was an
individual patient data (IPD) meta-analysis, funded primarily by the US National Institutes of Health, which
we report in Chapter 2. In this study we examined the clinical effectiveness of acupuncture for managing
chronic pain in conditions including back and neck pain, osteoarthritis of the knee, and chronic headache
and migraine. IPD meta-analysis is the most powerful method to synthesise research data. One of the
founders of the Cochrane Collaboration, Ian Chalmers, has been quoted as saying that IPD meta-analysis is
the ‘yardstick’ by which meta-analyses should be compared.78 There are a number of advantages of using
IPD compared with the summary methods of traditional meta-analyses, which analyse only the published
summary data.79 IPD meta-analysis allows for standardisation within the analysis of different types of
outcome measures, for example allowing for the combination of continuous change scores with those
reporting only percentage response rates. There is greater power to address subgroups within the
population and explore if patient characteristics such as age, sex or baseline severity might impact on
outcome. Prior to combining data sets, reanalysis of all trials should be carried out, which will ensure that
the data are of a high quality. Finally, an IPD meta-analysis has greater statistical power and consequently
more precision in estimating clinical effects. In Chapter 2 we use this method for the first time in
acupuncture research to evaluate outcomes from the large number of high-quality trials of acupuncture for
chronic pain.
Acupuncture has been recommended by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) for the
treatment of chronic headache and migraine,80 and lower back pain,81 but not chronic pain associated with
osteoarthritis of the knee.82 This last decision in part reflected concerns regarding the available evidence.83
In Chapter 3 we address the question of how competing physical therapies compare for osteoarthritis
of the knee, a condition for which there is some uncertainty with regard to the effectiveness of
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
5
 acupuncture.84 A powerful method to compare the outcomes from a range of interventions for the same
condition is a network meta-analysis, which has several advantages over comparing interventions using only
pairwise meta-analysis. A network meta-analysis, which is also referred to as a multiple treatment comparison
meta-analysis, can be used to compare interventions that may or may not have been evaluated directly
against each other. Although direct evidence can come from head-to-head trials, a network meta-analysis
can incorporate indirect evidence, which adds strength to the analysis as it allows the effects to be compared
between interventions that have not been investigated head to head in RCTs and uses both direct and
indirect evidence to inform estimates of effect.85 For many comparisons, the network meta-analysis may yield
more reliable and definitive results than a pairwise meta-analysis would.86 Clinical practice guidelines that
inform the decisions about optimal care need to rely on evidence-based evaluation of often many treatment
options. As it provides comparisons across multiple interventions, a network meta-analysis is an approach
that can inform a cost-effectiveness analysis, which in turn can inform clinical decision-making. As a step
towards providing evidence on competing physical therapies, including acupuncture, for osteoarthritis of the
knee, we report a network meta-analysis in Chapter 3.
Given that the current study has been designed to improve evidence around the costs and effects of
acupuncture, in Chapter 4 we report a synthesis of the IPD from the RCTs that provided the data set in
Chapter 2, which evaluated acupuncture for headache/migraine and musculoskeletal and osteoarthritis
pain. We used a network meta-analysis to leverage all available evidence to inform estimates of relative
treatment effects when acupuncture was compared with usual care or sham acupuncture, or when both
control interventions were compared with each other. The availability of IPD for all studies expanded the
set of feasible analyses and allowed development of de novo methods to fully exploit the benefits of
access to these data. Although evidence of effectiveness is important, policy-makers faced with difficult
resource allocation decisions require estimates of the costs and effects of alternative treatment options.
These estimates should reflect all relevant data and treatments should be compared using a metric that
can be used across clinical areas – in the UK the quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) is typically used.
Synthesising all relevant evidence to produce comparable estimates of costs and effects generates a series
of challenges as the available evidence base rarely captures all costs and effects of treatment (because of
the nature of data collection or the duration of follow-up), and often requires evidence to be generalised
from different populations. The available trial evidence may compare different sets of treatments and in
many instances the health-related quality-of-life (HRQoL) data required to estimate QALYs directly are not
available. The mapping to convert heterogeneous outcome data on to the EuroQol-5 Dimensions (EQ-5D)
summary index scale forms a key component of Chapter 4. In turn, this enabled us to estimate the
cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for chronic pain conditions, with the caveat that not all other possible
interventions have informed this analysis.
In Chapter 5 we report a cost-effectiveness analysis that was conducted by systematically identifying and
synthesising outcome data on a wide range of adjunct non-pharmacological interventions for osteoarthritis
of the knee. This allowed an assessment of value for money to be made for all available alternatives at this
point in the treatment pathway. We mapped the available HRQoL data to EQ-5D preference weights,
producing a common statistic for synthesis. Network meta-analysis was used to synthesise data reported at
both the individual-patient and aggregate level. Estimates of effect from a network meta-analysis of EQ-5D
outcomes were used to estimate QALYs within a decision-analytic model, which also incorporated cost
data from a range of sources. As well as allowing us to estimate the expected costs and effects associated
with a wide range of treatments, the decision-analytic methods used allowed us to quantify both the
nature and extent of uncertainty, and the value of further research. The synthesis in Chapter 5 therefore
combines the use of the IPD related to osteoarthritis of the knee presented in Chapter 2, the data and
network meta-analysis methods used to compare competing treatments in Chapter 3 and the mapping
methods as set out in Chapter 4.
The focus on acupuncture for chronic pain conditions is central to this programme of research for two
related reasons. First, much of the basic research into acupuncture is related to its pain-relieving effects.
For example, acupuncture-induced analgesia caught the public imagination in the 1970s and led to
INTRODUCTION
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
6
 research findings showing how acupuncture analgesia is mediated in part by endogenous opioids.87 More
recently, acupuncture neuroimaging research on pain has not only led to a better understanding of how
acupuncture might work,88 but also has informed biomedical understanding of neuroplasticity.89 Second,
there has been a remarkable growth in the utilisation of acupuncture for chronic pain after its transmission
from East Asia to the West. In part because of media attention and insurance-related reimbursement,
the leading indication for acupuncture utilisation is for pain, whether provided in Europe,8 the USA90 or
Australia.91 Moreover, increased acceptance of acupuncture by physicians and allied health-care specialists
is paralleled by proportionately more provision for chronic pain within biomedical settings, as is the case
for the one-third of the 4 million annual acupuncture sessions that the UK provided within the NHS by
doctors and physiotherapists.1
The final study in this programme of research moved on from chronic pain and focused on acupuncture
as a potential treatment for depression. In a previous study exploring the clinical areas in which GPs
experience themselves to be not fully effective, described as ‘effectiveness gaps’, GPs reported that
depression was the second most common effectiveness gap after musculoskeletal problems.7 Moreover,
patients with psychological problems, including depression, make up the second most common group
treated by acupuncture practitioners after those with chronic pain, with much of the provision resulting
from patients seeking help from independent acupuncturists.1 Acupuncture is rarely available as a referral
option within NHS mental health services or primary care.2 Pain and depression often appear to be
experienced concurrently, with around 50% of individuals who are diagnosed with and treated for
depression also presenting with painful symptoms.92 Although these data formed a basis for further
investigation, the evidence base from systematic reviews in the mid-2000s suggested that there was
insufficient evidence to draw conclusions.93,94 The evidence for pharmacological antidepressant treatment
also raised some concern at the time, with pharmacological antidepressant treatment being associated
with up to 33% of patients not showing an adequate response.95 Moreover, 30% of patients have
been found to not adhere to their medication regime.96 An over-reliance on prescribed antidepressant
medications has also been identified by patients, who also report that they are interested in being offered
more of a range of possible treatment choices.97
The focus of the work in Chapter 6 was the evaluation of the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
of acupuncture or counselling for depression when offered in primary care as an adjunct to usual GP care.
It is accepted that the question of whether or not acupuncture is more than simply a placebo is important;
however, we were reluctant to use a form of sham acupuncture as a control for reasons addressed above
regarding the lack of an adequate understanding of the mechanism of acupuncture, leading to a difficulty
in interpretation. Moreover, the feasibility of implementing a sham acupuncture arm would be challenging,
given the lack of institutional support if acupuncture was to be delivered in the field. For these reasons we
opted for a pragmatic design that built on our pilot RCT98 and used non-directive counselling as an active
control. Our rationale for this was based on the following: (1) counselling is a credible and widely used
intervention for patients with depression; (2) there is structural equivalence between acupuncture
and non-directive counselling in terms of contact time (1-hour sessions) with empathetic practitioners and
therefore if acupuncture performs better than counselling the difference is unlikely to be because of the
effects of time or quality of attention; (3) this trial design would help inform patients, decision-makers
and providers of the relative merits of counselling compared with acupuncture; and (4) the most recent
Cochrane systematic review at the time proposed the wider use of non-placebo comparative designs when
evaluating acupuncture for depression – future studies may need to consider the use of comparative
designs using medication or structured psychotherapies (cognitive–behavioural therapy, psychotherapy,
counselling) or standard care, due to the ethics of administering this intervention to this study
population’.94 It is this design that formed the basis for the RCT described in Chapter 6.
The overarching aim of this programme of research was to use high-quality methods, and innovative ones
if necessary, to develop the evidence base on acupuncture. The widespread utilisation of acupuncture
combined with insufficient confidence regarding outcomes and decision-making provides a research
imperative that is in the public interest. An important question has been asked regarding the extent that
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
7
 acupuncture is simply a remarkably effective placebo as opposed to a physiologically active and scientifically
proven intervention. This programme of research provides the latest evidence from high-quality trials that
have been carefully designed to answer this question. Innovative research has been conducted, in particular
the IPD meta-analysis (see Chapters 2, 4 and 5) and the network-meta-analysis (see Chapters 3–5). As for
any research endeavour, not all of the concerns and questions are answered within this report. For example,
we do not directly address the placebo question with regard to acupuncture for depression (see Chapter 6);
however, we do address this question rigorously, and in some depth, when conducting reviews of the
literature on the evaluation of acupuncture for chronic pain in IPD meta-analyses (see Chapter 2) and for
osteoarthritis of the knee in a network meta-analysis (see Chapter 3). We did not take into account all
competing therapies for the cost-effectiveness analyses of acupuncture for musculoskeletal pain and for
headache and migraine (see Chapter 3), although we do so for osteoarthritis of the knee (see Chapter 5).
Overall, our focus has been on delivering results that inform patients, providers and decision-makers, which
required us to assess whether or not acupuncture outperforms a placebo, if there is a clinically relevant
change in clinical status and whether or not there is a sufficiently robust economic case, ideally based on
comparisons with all other competing therapies.
INTRODUCTION
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
8
 Chapter 2 Acupuncture for chronic pain:
an individual patient data meta-analysis
Background
An estimated 4 million acupuncture treatments are provided each year in the UK and the most common
reasons for consulting are related to chronic pain.1 Despite this widespread use, there remains uncertainty
regarding the clinical effectiveness of acupuncture, and particularly the effectiveness of acupuncture over
and above that of sham acupuncture. Many RCTs of acupuncture for chronic pain have been conducted.
Most of these trials are methodologically poor in quality, which in turn leads to difficulty in interpreting
their results in meta-analyses. Moreover, there has been some controversy regarding the role of sham
acupuncture and concerns have been raised that the differences found in these trials between acupuncture
and sham acupuncture have been either negligible or sufficiently small to be of little value. Indeed, some
commentators have suggested that acupuncture is entirely a theatrical placebo,99 whereas others claim
that any putative differences between acupuncture and sham acupuncture are vanishingly small, tending
to zero when issues of bias are fully addressed.49 It is in this climate of uncertainty that the opportunity has
arisen to resolve important questions regarding the true effect of acupuncture.
The recent growth in the number100 of RCTs of acupuncture, and improvement in quality, have provided a
further rationale regarding the timing of this project to establish more robust evidence. Much of the
clinical trial-based research has evaluated the effectiveness of acupuncture for typical chronic pain
conditions that commonly occur in primary care.101 Our method of choice to synthesise these data was an
IPD meta-analysis, which is a superior method to conventional meta-analysis using summary data. In the
words of Iain Chalmers, one of the founders of the Cochrane Collaboration, using IPD in a meta-analysis is
the ‘yardstick’ by which all meta-analyses should be measured.78 Compared with traditional reviews, which
analyse summary data that have already been published, the advantages of using IPD are as follows:102
1. Standardisation is possible between different analytical approaches. Some trials of acupuncture have
reported mean change in pain whereas others have reported ‘response rates’ relating to the proportion
of patients who experienced a threshold reduction in pain (e.g. 33%). These results cannot be
combined without access to the raw data, which allows conversion from one type of analysis
to another.
2. Greater power is available in the application of statistical methods. In a typical meta-analysis, the
investigator records the means and standard deviations (SDs) for the acupuncture and control groups
separately. This does not allow the application of techniques such as analysis of covariance (ANCOVA),
which have greater statistical power than unadjusted analysis.103,104
3. When analysing associations between patient-level characteristics and outcomes, IPD analyses have far
greater power to investigate questions such as whether age or baseline symptom severity influence
outcome. As an example, if there were four trials with 250 patients in each, analysis of published data
would attempt to correlate four values of a predictor (e.g. mean age in each trial) with four values of an
outcome (e.g. difference between mean pain scores). Analysis of IPD would be able to create a model
with 1000 data points.
4. With regard to data quality, the process of combining data from different sources requires careful data
scrutiny by an independent investigator, which provides an opportunity to identify and correct errors in
the data set.
The updating of results is an issue of particular importance for trials with longer-term outcomes as data
continue to accrue on a daily basis after publication. It is possible that acupuncture triallists have data from
long-term follow-up that have yet to be published. Because this method of meta-analysis uses superior
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
9
 statistical methods, it leads to greater precision in the results. In summary, we have optimised the synthesis
of existing acupuncture trials by conducting an IPD meta-analysis, including only the highest-quality trials
to enhance the quality of the resulting evidence.
To this end, the Acupuncture Triallists’ Collaboration (ATC) was established to manage this project.
Collaborators included a group of triallists, statisticians and other researchers with the goal of sharing raw
data and developing, in partnership, a set of research questions and associated analytical strategies. The
group was motivated to work together to help break down the oppositional culture of competing triallists,
to share data in a robust scientific collaboration and to help translate clinical trial findings into patient
benefit. Lead investigators from each of the eligible trials contributed raw data, which then were combined
into a single data set. This data set was then analysed to address questions concerning the management
of chronic pain conditions. The full protocol of the meta-analysis has been published.105 The study was
conducted in three phases: (1) identification of eligible RCTs; (2) collection, checking and harmonisation of
raw data; and (3) the IPD meta-analysis.
Our primary objectives, which are addressed in this chapter, were identified as follows:
1. To conduct a systematic review to identify high-quality trials of acupuncture for common chronic pain
conditions and then establish a single individual patient-level database of raw data from these trials.
This database provided the opportunity to address several key questions in acupuncture research. Our
plan is to then publish the database for the benefit of the acupuncture research community.
2. To determine whether or not real acupuncture is superior to sham acupuncture for the treatment of
common chronic pain conditions and, if so, to determine the effect size. ‘Real acupuncture’ was
defined as the acupuncture intervention that is designed to have activity against pain. ‘Sham
acupuncture’ was defined as a comparator intervention that is designed to mimic real acupuncture,
with the patient not knowing whether he or she has received real acupuncture, and which ideally has
no acupuncture-specific effects.
3. To determine whether or not real acupuncture is superior to non-acupuncture controls for the
treatment of common chronic pain conditions and, if so, to determine the effect size. ‘Non-acupuncture
controls’ were defined to include care, such as medication ‘as needed’, that is also received by the
acupuncture group. Non-acupuncture controls were sometimes described as waiting-list controls, usual
or standard care controls or controls receiving no additional treatment. Attention control, in which
patients receive general education and advice, was also included in this category.
Within this chapter we also address two secondary objectives in two substudies. In the first substudy we
determined the influence of the control group on the effect size of acupuncture. We first identified the
variations in types of sham and non-sham controls used and then analysed their impact on effect size.
This substudy will inform the design of trials that evaluate acupuncture, as the choice of control will help
inform aspects of the design such as sample size. In the second substudy we analysed the data set to
determine whether there are characteristics of acupuncture or acupuncturists that act as effect modifiers
for treatment outcome.
By meeting both primary and secondary objectives, it is hoped that the evidence generated by this
collaboration will have important implications for both clinical practice and research. IPD meta-analysis of
high-quality trials provides the most reliable basis for treatment decisions. Analyses of the impact of
different sham techniques, styles of acupuncture or frequency and duration of treatment sessions can be
expected to guide future clinical trials of acupuncture.
Methods
The methods related to the primary objectives for this study are described in three phases below, after
which the methods for the two substudies that address the secondary objectives are described.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
10
 Phase I: systematic review to identify eligible trials
Trial quality criteria for trial eligibility
In terms of methodological quality, unconcealed allocation is the most important source of bias in
RCTs.106,107 To be included in the study, a key criterion therefore was the requirement that RCTs of
acupuncture for chronic pain conditions had to have unambiguously concealed allocation of the
randomisation sequence. When this was not clear from the published paper, we contacted the trial
authors for further information concerning the exact logistics of the randomisation process. We considered
allocation to be adequately concealed if both of the following two conditions held: (1) the researchers
were unable to predict the group to which a patient would be randomised until the patient was explicitly
registered on study and (2) the researchers were unable to change a patient’s allocation after a patient
was randomised. Allocation concealment was considered inadequate if participants or investigators
enrolling participants could possibly foresee or modify assignments and, thus, introduce selection bias.
Researchers had to have established clear procedures to ensure that these two conditions were met. For
example, there should have been procedures to prevent investigators resealing and reusing an envelope
after it was opened (e.g. envelopes were held by an independent party).
Patient criteria for trial eligibility
Trials were eligible if the patient population was recruited on the basis of pain conditions related to
osteoarthritis, chronic or recurrent headaches (e.g. tension or migraine headaches), specific and non-specific
shoulder pain, and non-specific back or neck pain. Trials were excluded when the back or neck pain was
associated with specific pathologies (e.g. osteoporotic fracture). Trials of shoulder pain were included when
the pain was associated with specific pathologies (e.g. rotator cuff tendonitis, frozen shoulder or bursitis).
As the main analyses were conducted separately by indication, we did not expect to identify more than one
or two eligible trials for other pain conditions. For osteoarthritis and headache pain we did not require a
specific pain duration, as both are chronic in nature. Back, neck and shoulder pain are commonly episodic
conditions and we used the frequently employed criterion for chronicity that the current episode must be of
at least 4 weeks’ duration.
Intervention criteria for trial eligibility
Trials were included provided patients in at least one trial arm received acupuncture in the form of
penetrating needles at either acupuncture points or trigger points. Trials were classed as ineligible if
patients in the acupuncture group, but not the control group, were protocolled to receive medication
(conventional or otherwise), surgery or physical therapy. With regard to control groups, eligible trials
needed to have included at least one group receiving sham acupuncture or a non-acupuncture control
intervention. Sham acupuncture was defined as any intervention designed to prevent the patient from
knowing whether he or she received real acupuncture but which was thought by researchers to have
minimal activity against pain. Variations of sham acupuncture included variations of superficial needle
insertion; needle insertion at non-acupuncture points or at points not indicated for the condition under
study; ‘placebo’ needles such as the Streitberger needle,108 which act like stage daggers, appearing to
penetrate the skin but which do not do so; techniques such as tapping on a guide tube, designed to feel
like needle penetration; and non-needle methods, such as detuned lasers or deactivated transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) devices. It is worth noting that we did not consider these controls to be
equivalent a priori; possible differences between sham procedures were analysed as one of our objectives.
Trials with non-acupuncture control groups were included provided the care received in the control group
was defined as any of the following: trials with a waiting-list control; trials in which patients received usual
clinical care in both arms of the trial, for example a study in which the effects of a course of physiotherapy
plus acupuncture were compared with the effects of physiotherapy alone; trials in which the intervention
in the control group involved general advice, education and support (sometimes described as ‘attention
control’); and trials in which the control group, but not the acupuncture group, received recommendations
for guideline care, although no specific treatment plan was mandated and no treatment was provided by
the trial. As with sham acupuncture, we did not expect these different types of non-acupuncture controls
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
11
 to have equivalent effects, but we included these different types of control in our analyses and we also
investigated differences between them. Trials were excluded if the control groups received a specific
programme of treatment such as medication, massage or physical therapy in addition to sham
acupuncture or treatments also available in the true acupuncture group.
Outcome criteria for trial eligibility
For eligibility, trials were required to have a measure of pain. The primary end point must have been
measured > 4 weeks after the end of the initial acupuncture treatment. There was no restriction on
eligibility because of the type of end point.
Trial size and language for trial eligibility
For inclusion, there was no restriction on the size of the trial. We also had no language exclusions. All
papers in languages other than English were translated into English and the English text made available to
all collaborators.
Search strategy for identification of trials
We searched MEDLINE, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and the citation lists of systematic
reviews. The search strategy used (detailed in Appendix 1) was the same as for the previous reviews of
headache,109 back pain57 and osteoarthritis110 (each of which was coauthored by one or more members of
the ATC) with the addition of the following terms: ‘neck’, ‘shoulder’, ‘cervical’ and ‘musculoskeletal’.
Searching established databases for trials conducted in China or published in the Chinese language was
expected to have involved very poor precision as few of these studies are of sufficient quality to merit
inclusion.111–114 Accordingly, Chinese trials were identified by a separate process: Jianping Liu of the
Chinese Cochrane Centre in Beijing used that institution’s resources to identify trials of acupuncture for
chronic pain that involved full allocation concealment.
Inclusion of trials
All retrieved references were scanned by one of two investigators to remove any clearly inappropriate
titles. Hard copies of all remaining papers were then obtained and read by both investigators to remove
any for which there was no possibility of eligibility. Inclusion criteria for the remaining papers were applied
by two reviewers separately (no reviewer assessed a trial on which he or she was listed as a coauthor).
Disagreements about study inclusion were resolved by consensus. Authors of trials were contacted, if
necessary, to clarify details such as allocation concealment if this was not clear. All retrieved trials that were
excluded from the review were given a reason for exclusion as follows: not a randomised trial; allocation
unclear or inadequate; not acupuncture; inappropriate control; not pain; only short-term measurement of
pain; or not an osteoarthritis, headache, back, neck or shoulder pain trial.
Quality assessment
With regard to potential bias, the most important quality criteria for a RCT concerned the quality of
randomisation, blinding and exclusions and dropouts.106,107 The quality of randomisation was an inclusion
criterion for this study: only trials with full allocation concealment were included in the analysis. Exclusions
and dropouts were dealt with by multiple imputation in the statistical analysis. Hence, our quality
assessment focused on blinding. For all studies involving sham acupuncture, assessment of blinding
followed that in previous Cochrane reviews, with grading as A, B or C. In this categorisation, A
represented a low likelihood of bias: either the adequacy of blinding was checked by direct questioning of
patients, for example with a credibility questionnaire, and no important differences were found between
groups or a blinding method was used that had previously been validated as being able to maintain
blinding (e.g. the Streitberger sham device108). A categorisation of C represented a high likelihood of bias:
there were clear reasons to believe that blinding was broken, for example differential responses to a
credibility questionnaire or an obviously non-credible sham technique was used. Between these two
categorisations, category B represented an intermediate likelihood of bias: a trial that did not meet the
criteria for a grade of either A or C. Quality assessment was conducted by two reviewers separately with
disagreements resolved by consensus.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
12
 Phase II: collection, checking and harmonisation of data
Development of the database
We sought IPD for all of the included trials, which we entered into a single database. Data were obtained
for all randomised patients, regardless of whether they received treatment or provided post-randomisation
data. Trial-level data were then added to the individual patient records. For example, a data set for a trial
might have an indicator variable for acupuncture compared with control. This was replaced by several
variables indicating the type of acupuncture and control as described in the trial report. When raw data
were not available for a trial, we conducted sensitivity analyses to determine if inclusion of the trial might
alter the results.
Initial data manipulation
The raw data were saved in their original format and then converted to a Stata format (version 11; StataCorp
LP, College Station, TX, USA). Three blank statistical programs were then saved: one to undertake preliminary
checks on the data, one to rename and label the variables and one to replicate statistics reported in the trial
publication. All files were saved using a standard notation: ‘raw data [descriptor]’, ‘initial import [descriptor]’,
‘initial set up [descriptor]’, ‘initial data checks [descriptor]’ and ‘replication [descriptor]’, where ‘[descriptor]’
is a unique label for each data set (e.g. ‘Linde 2005 migraine’).
Annotation checks
Statistical code was written for the ‘initial set up’ program. Each variable in the raw data set was renamed
to a standard notation (e.g. ‘age_at_randomisation’ became ‘age’) and given a standard label (a label
is a text description of the variable, such as ‘combined headache score at 60 days’, that is stored by
the statistical software). Variables unique to a particular data set, for example a Western Ontario and
McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) score115 in an arthritis trial, were then identified and
labelled. Any variables that could not be identified, or which were ambiguous, were documented and
appropriate clarification was sought from the original investigator.
Checking for erroneous or missing data
Statistical code was written for the ‘initial data checks’ program. First, the number of missing observations
for each variable was calculated and checked against data available in the original publication. Any
inconsistencies, or variables for which information on rates of missing data were not available in the trial
publication, were brought to the attention of the original investigator for clarification. Second, ‘range’
checks were conducted on all variables to determine whether or not all values were reasonable. As a trivial
example, a visual analogue scale (VAS) of 123, or an age of 567 years, immediately suggested an error.
Third, we checked categorical variables by tabulation. For instance, if 200 patients were categorised as
having stage I disease, 220 categorised as having stage II disease and one as having stage IIa disease,
the investigator would be queried as to the accuracy of the IIa categorisation.
Replication
The third program ‘replication [descriptor]’ was then written. This replicated as far as possible every
number reported in the trial publication. Replications included baseline characteristics such as age, sex
and duration of disease within each group; outcome data such as pain scores within each group at
each follow-up time; and comparisons, such as the difference in pain scores between groups at the
post-treatment follow-up. In each case, we used the statistical methods reported by the authors and
derived the statistics given in the publication. For example, if a mean and SD for baseline pain score were
given in the trial publication, we similarly calculated the mean and SD and, if the difference between
groups was calculated by linear regression with baseline score and duration of disease as covariates, we
used exactly this method to see if we could obtain the same difference between groups, 95% confidence
interval (CI) and p-value. Any discrepancies between our results and those reported in the published papers
were brought to the attention of the investigators for clarification. We considered that any data set that
had gone through these checks – independent labelling of every variable, assessment of prima facie errors
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
13
 and replication of all reported statistics – could be considered valid for inclusion in an independent patient
data meta-analysis. Across all trials, the variable names were harmonised.
Phase III: statistical methods
Principal end point
For each trial we identified the primary outcome defined by the study authors in terms of both the scale
(e.g. WOMAC) and time point (e.g. 6 months after randomisation). We kept end points on a continuous
scale. For example, in some studies the primary end point was defined in terms of the proportion of
patients who had at least a 35% reduction in the number of days with headache pain at 6 months’
follow-up. In this case, the primary end point was specified as the number of days with pain at 6 months.
If multiple criteria were considered in the primary outcome, or if the primary outcome was inherently
categorical, we used a continuous measure of pain measured at the same time point as the original
primary end point. For example, if a trial’s primary outcome was a response to treatment defined as a
given degree of improvement on a pain scale or a function scale, we selected the pain scale for inclusion
in our primary analysis. If there were multiple pain measurements we selected one according to the
outcome measures preference list (see Appendix 1). For analyses that included trials with different primary
end points, we created a standardised primary end point by dividing by the SD.
Primary analysis: analysis of the effect size of acupuncture
Each trial was reanalysed by ANCOVA with the standardised principal end point as the dependent variable
and the baseline principal end point and variables used to stratify randomisation as covariates. This
approach has been shown to have the greatest statistical power for trials in general with baseline and
follow-up measures,104 and also when specifically applied to acupuncture research.103 For trials in which
randomisation was stratified by centre or practitioner, this stratification was included in the analysis only if
there were ≤ 20 sites and there was a mean of at least 20 patients per site, with at least one patient in
each arm at each site. In trials in which there was more than one acupuncture group, for example trials
in which patients were randomised to local points, distal points or sham points, results from all real
acupuncture groups were combined (local points and distal points in this case). The standardised mean
between-group difference (effect size) for acupuncture from each trial [i.e. the coefficient and standard
error (SE)] was then entered into a meta-analysis; the meta-analytic statistics were created by weighting
each coefficient by the reciprocal of the variance, summing and dividing by the sum of the weights.
Meta-analysis was accomplished using the metan command in Stata 11.
Our primary analysis was a fixed-effects model. Our rationale for a fixed-effects analysis was that it
constituted a valid test of the null hypothesis of no treatment effect. Moreover, we have taken the view
that the use of a fixed-effects model does not imply an assumption that all trials are estimating the same
effect, but that the robustness of the fixed-effects approach is likely to lead to a more accurate estimate.
Nonetheless, we also report the results of the random-effects analysis. In addition, we report heterogeneity
statistics.116 We computed effect sizes separately for comparisons of acupuncture with sham and
non-acupuncture controls. Comparisons between acupuncture and sham controls omitted trials graded
as category C (high likelihood of bias) because of concerns regarding blinding. These analyses were
conducted separately for each pain condition (specific shoulder conditions, musculoskeletal pain,
osteoarthritis, headache) and then within each pain condition (neck pain and back pain or chronic tension
headache and migraine).
Secondary analyses
We repeated the analyses of effect size for the secondary end points of pain intensity, pain frequency,
functional impairment, combined measures of pain and functional impairment, mental well-being [e.g.
Short Form questionnaire-36 items (SF-36) mental health], physical well-being (e.g. SF-36 physical health),
overall quality of life (e.g. global assessment), range of motion or stiffness, health change, satisfaction with
care and medication use. If a trial reported more than one end point that could be placed in a particular
category, the outcome measures preference list (see Appendix 1) was consulted to select the most
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
14
 appropriate measure. On occasion, this could have involved taking a mean score of two end points. For
example, if a trial reported both a daytime and a night-time VAS score, we calculated the average for each
patient and the combined score was then entered into the analysis. Note that this demonstrates a key
advantage of IPD meta-analysis: such a data manipulation would not be possible with summary-level data.
As different measurement scales were used in the different trials, we used the standardised mean
difference (SMD) as the meta-analytic statistic. Time was always measured from randomisation. For our
data, we used end points of 1, 2, 3, 6 and 9 months and 1 year. For outcomes with these exact time
points (or the equivalent in another unit of time: 13 weeks = 3 months), no time point standardisation was
required. Otherwise, the time point closest to the selected scheme was adopted. For example, if for a trial
there was no measurement at 6 months but there was for 24 weeks, this time point was selected and
relabelled appropriately. Numerical rating scale (NRS) scores were converted to a 0–100 point scale by
appropriate multiplication.
Sensitivity analyses
The first sensitivity analysis involved multiple imputation for missing data, following the approach used
in the analysis of the NHS trial of acupuncture for headache.60 The second sensitivity analysis was for
publication bias. Although we did not believe that there were many unpublished adequately concealed
acupuncture trials large enough to have an important weight in the meta-analysis, we included scenarios
that could change the study results. For example, if we found a statistically significant difference between
acupuncture and sham, we estimated the parameters for the following scenarios that, if added to the
meta-analysis, would change the p-value to 0.05: (1) the number of trials with 50 patients per group and
no differences between groups; and (2) the number of trials with 50 patients per group and an effect size
of 0.25 in favour of the control. The third sensitivity analysis omitted subsets of trials based on trial quality.
We omitted trials graded as category B for blinding from the comparison of acupuncture with sham.
Our final sensitivity analysis involved adding the results of studies for which we did not receive individual
patient-level data. We calculated an estimate of the difference between groups and the resulting SE from
published summary data.
Methods for substudy 1: influence of control group on effect size
Types of sham acupuncture control
In the included trials with a sham acupuncture control group we assessed whether or not a sham needle
was used, whether or not a sham needle that penetrated the skin was used, whether sham needling was
performed on true acupuncture points or non-acupuncture points, and whether a sham needle insertion
was deep or superficial. Information on acupuncture characteristics was obtained from the trial manuscript
supplemented by a questionnaire sent to triallists.
When trial authors reported using either a penetrating or a non-penetrating needle for sham acupuncture,
the trial was classified as using a ‘needle sham’. Trials using non-needle methods of sham acupuncture, such
as an inactivated laser or a TENS device, were classified as ‘non-needle sham’. Needle sham trials were
further classified as using penetrating needles, which were almost always inserted at locations away from
true acupuncture points (thereby investigating point location), or using non-penetrating sham needles, which
were applied either at the same points as in the true acupuncture group (testing exclusively skin penetration
and not location) or at non-acupuncture points (investigating penetration and location simultaneously).
We had hoped to include two other features of sham controls: whether the depth of insertion for
penetration was categorised by triallists as superficial or deep and whether sham acupuncture was applied
at or away from true acupuncture points; however, only one trial reported using deep insertion in sham
acupuncture.117 For point location, there was strong collinearity with sham technique, with only techniques
avoiding skin penetration using true acupuncture points. As a sensitivity analysis, we reanalysed the data
excluding four trials that were determined by consensus among external reviewers to have an ‘intermediate
likelihood of unblinding’.72,117–119 However, after excluding these trials, only one remaining trial used
non-needle sham acupuncture, limiting our ability to use metaregression.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
15
 Types of non-sham control
We categorised trials that included controls without sham acupuncture into two types: ‘routine care’ and
‘protocolled care’. In ‘routine care’ trials, both treatment and control groups had access to non-specified
care as needed, such as rescue medications or other conventional care, but the use of such treatment was
at the discretion of patients and doctors, with no specification in the protocol as to what treatments
patients could receive. If protocols prescribed some treatments such as surgery but did not make specific
recommendations as to allowable treatments, trials were defined as ‘routine care’. Control groups in which
treatment consisted of information or education given to a patient (‘attention control’) were also
considered to be routine care control groups.
In ‘protocolled care’ trials, the care in the control group was specified in the study protocol. This was
typically when the acupuncture group and the usual care control group both received an additional
non-acupuncture treatment that was specifically indicated as part of the trial protocol. For example, trials
that studied the effect of acupuncture and physical therapy compared with physical therapy alone were
categorised as protocolled care.
Statistical methods related to effect of control group
To test the effect of each characteristic of sham acupuncture on the main effect estimate, we used
random-effects metaregression with the Stata command metareg. This command was also used to run
a random-effects metaregression to test the effect of routine compared with protocolled care on the main
effect estimate for usual care control groups. The main effect estimate of each trial was determined using
linear regression, and the coefficient and SE for each trial were entered as the dependent variable in the
random-effects metaregression.
All analyses were conducted using Stata 12. We excluded three trials by Vas et al.120–122 in a sensitivity
analysis. As described in Meta-analysis, these trials had very much larger effect sizes than average and their
exclusion resulted in heterogeneity becoming non-significant in the comparisons between acupuncture and
sham acupuncture. More detail on this substudy’s methods is reported separately.45
Methods for substudy 2: characteristics of acupuncture
Data included at the trial and patient level
Data on the trial and patient-level characteristics of the acupuncture interventions were obtained directly
from responding triallists by use of a questionnaire and are presented in Appendix 2. Characteristics
investigated included the style of acupuncture, which was defined as based on traditional Chinese theory or
contemporary Western acupuncture or a mixture of both approaches. Point prescriptions were defined as
fixed, flexible or individualised. Trials were categorised as using a flexible needle formula if triallists indicated
that acupuncture was semistandardised, a flexible formula with fixed points or both fixed and flexible
formulas. Triallists reported whether or not their trial allowed electrical stimulation to be added to the
needles during acupuncture sessions and whether or not moxibustion was allowed. Trial-level information
was reported on whether or not acupuncturists attempted to elicit deqi and whether it was felt by the
acupuncturist or the patient. Triallists reported on whether or not acupuncture-specific interactions between
the patient and the acupuncturist were allowed, for example through explanations of treatment, advice,
support and suggestions about helpful lifestyle changes. These interactions, when driven by acupuncture
theory, are considered ‘specific’ to the acupuncture treatment. Triallists reported the minimum number
of years of practice as an acupuncturist required to participate in their trial. The maximum number of
acupuncture treatment sessions allowed during the trial period was reported by each triallist and these
data were analysed per five-session increments. The frequency of sessions was recorded and analysed
continuously as a weekly average (i.e. typical number of sessions per week). The duration of sessions was
reported as the average length of a session in minutes among the patients receiving acupuncture.
Patient-level data were used when available by taking the mean duration of patients’ sessions. Trials were
not included in this analysis if treatment was individualised and no individual-level data were available.
The duration of sessions was included as a continuous variable in the analyses and the results reported per
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
16
 5-minute increments. Triallists were asked to report the average number of needles used per treatment
session. Trials were excluded from this analysis if the number of needles used was unknown. If patient-level
data were available an average was included. The average number of needles used was analysed as a
continuous variable, with the coefficient reported per five-needle increments. The placement of acupuncture
needles was categorised as local (at or near the location of pain), distal to the location of pain or both.
Statistical methods for analysis of characteristics
We identified the primary outcome as defined by the study authors in terms of both the scale and the time
point. We kept end points on the continuous scale. For analyses that included trials with different primary
end points, we created a standardised primary end point by dividing by the SD. We conducted analyses
separately for sham and non-acupuncture controls using Stata 12.
We used random-effects metaregression for trial-level analyses to test the effect of each characteristic on
the main effect estimate using the Stata command metareg. We first calculated the effect size and SE for
each trial as described in Statistical methods related to effect of control group. For each documented
treatment characteristic, we entered the effect size and SE for each trial into a metaregression along with
the trial-level average for that characteristic. The coefficients obtained from these analyses are estimates,
in SDs, of the effect of each acupuncture characteristic on the main treatment effect.
In the patient-level analyses we were able to use the number of sessions, the number of needles and the
age and sex of the acupuncturist for a subset of the trials. For each trial we created a linear regression
using random effects as for the main analysis of effect size, but included the characteristic and an
interaction term between the characteristic and treatment allocation. The coefficient and SE for the
interaction term represents the change in the outcome score in SDs associated with the acupuncture
characteristic in the acupuncture treatment group. This was then entered into a meta-analysis using the
Stata command metan.
We excluded a set of outlying trials, all by the same team120–122 and which had very much larger effect sizes
than other trials, as a pre-planned sensitivity analysis. Further details of the methods are reported separately.123
Results
Results from the main study
Eligible studies
In our initial search we identified and assessed 83 RCTs for eligibility (Figure 1), of which 31 were eligible
(for further details of the 29 studies included in the patient-level meta-analysis, see Appendix 2). Eleven
studies were sham controlled, 10 had non-acupuncture controls and 10 were three-armed studies with
both sham and no-acupuncture control arms. A second search for studies was requested by the Archives
of Internal Medicine prior to publication and therefore subsequent to conducting the meta-analysis;
we identified an additional four eligible studies, which were used in a sensitivity analysis.124–127
Data extraction and quality assessment
From the 31 eligible RCTs, usable raw data were obtained from 29 trials including a total of 17,922
patients from the USA, UK, Germany, Spain and Sweden (Table 1). For two studies the raw data were
unavailable: the study database had become corrupted in one trial128 and in another, despite approval
for data sharing being obtained from the principal investigator, the trial statisticians failed to respond to
repeated enquiries.129
In terms of design, the 29 RCTs included 18 comparisons of acupuncture with non-acupuncture controls
(14,597 patients) and 20 comparisons of acupuncture with sham acupuncture controls (5230 patients).
Patients in all RCTs had access to analgesics and other standard treatments for pain. Four sham-controlled
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
17
 RCTs were determined to have an intermediate likelihood of bias from unblinding;72,117–119 the 16 remaining
sham RCTs were graded as having a low risk of bias from unblinding. Dropout rates were low on average
(weighted mean of 10%), with rates being > 25% for only four RCTs. For the trials by Molsberger et al.127,129
(dropout rates 27%129 and 33%129), the raw data were not received and neither RCT was included in the
main analysis; the other two trials with a dropout rate of > 25% were those by Carlsson and Sjölund119
(46%, RCT excluded in a sensitivity analysis for blinding) and Berman et al.134 (31%). This RCT had a high
dropout rate among non-acupuncture control subjects (43%); dropout rates were close to 25% in the
acupuncture and sham groups. The RCT by Kerr et al.117 had a large difference in dropout rates between
groups (acupuncture 13%, control 33%) but was excluded in the sensitivity analysis for blinding.
Clinical heterogeneity between studies was identified as being related to the control groups. For sham
RCTs, the type of sham control varied, including acupuncture needles inserted superficially,72 sham
acupuncture devices with needles that retract into the handle rather than penetrate the skin,137
and non-needle approaches such as deactivated electrical stimulation132 or a detuned laser.118 The
cointerventions also varied, with no additional treatment other than analgesics in some RCTs66 and both
acupuncture and sham groups receiving a course of additional treatment, such as exercise led by physical
therapists, in other RCTs.135 For the trials with non-acupuncture control groups, there was variation in
usual care, for example control group patients being merely advised to ‘avoid acupuncture’;62 an attention
control, such as group education sessions;134 and guidelined care, in which, for example, patients were
given advice on specific drugs and doses.72
Records identified through
searching ClinicalTrials.gov
(n = 12)
Records screened
(n = 955)
Records excluded
(n = 872)
Data request sent
(n = 31)
Records after duplicates removed
(n = 955)
Full-text articles assessed
for eligibility
(n = 83)
Studies included in
patient-level meta-analysis
(n = 29)
Full-text articles excluded
(n = 52)
• Pain type, n = 2
• Pain duration, n = 4
• Control type, n = 7
• Length of follow-up, n = 8
• Randomisation, n = 29
• Inadequate, n = 9
• Unclear, n = 20
• Intervention not acupuncture, n = 2
Data not included in 
meta-analysis
(n = 2)
• Database was corrupted, n = 1
• Never received data, n = 1
Records identified through
searching Cochrane reviews
(n = 34)
Records identified through
searching MEDLINE
(n = 909)
FIGURE 1 Systematic review Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)
flow diagram.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
18
 TABLE 1 Summary of characteristics of included studies
Indication (n = 35)
Pain type
Control group
Primary outcome measure
Time point
Chronic headache (n = 7)
Migraine (n = 268,72); tension-type
headache (n = 367,73,128); both
(n = 260,76)
Sham (n = 467,68,72,73); no acupuncture control
(n = 6) – ancillary carea (n = 1128), usual careb
(n = 460,67,68,76), guidelined carec (n = 168)
Severity score (n = 260,128); days with
headache (n = 173); migraine days
(n = 367,72,76); days with moderate to
severe pain (n = 168)
1 month (n = 1128);
3 months (n = 367,68,76);
6 months (n = 272,73);
12 months (n = 160)
Non-specific
musculoskeletal pain (back
and neck) (n = 15)
Back
(n = 1061,66,71,74,117,119,124,129–131);
neck (n = 575,118,121,132,133)
Sham (n = 1066,71,117–119,121,124,129,130,132); no
acupuncture control (n = 9) – ancillary carea
(n = 1129), usual careb (n = 661,66,74,75,124,133),
non-specific adviced (n = 1131), guidelined
carec (n = 171)
VAS (n = 766,117–119,121,129,132); Roland
Morris Disability Questionnaire
(n = 3124,130,131); neck pain and disability
(n = 175); Hannover Functional
Questionnaire (n = 174); Northwick Park
Neck Pain Questionnaire (n = 1133); von
Korff pain score (n = 171); SF-36 bodily
pain (n = 161)
1 month (n = 4117,121,131,132);
2 months (n = 366,124,131);
3 months (n = 574,75,129,130,133);
6 months (n = 271,119);
24 months (n = 161)
Osteoarthritis (n = 9)
Sham (n = 669,70,120,125,134,135); no acupuncture
control (n = 8) – ancillary carea (n = 370,125,135),
usual careb (n = 369,77,126), non-specific adviced
(n = 2134,136)
Oxford Knee Score questionnaire
(n = 1136); WOMAC (n = 269,77); WOMAC
pain subscore (n = 670,120,125,126,134,135)
2 months (n = 269,136);
3 months (n = 477,120,125,126);
6 months (n = 370,134,135)
Shoulder pain (n = 4)
Sham (n = 4122,127,137,138); no acupuncture
control (n = 1) – usual careb (n = 1127)
Constant–Murley score (n = 2122,137); VAS
(n = 2127,138)
1 month (n = 2122,137);
6 months (n = 2127,138)
a Ancillary care: programme of care received by both acupuncture and no acupuncture control groups (e.g. trial comparing physiotherapy plus acupuncture with physiotherapy alone).
b Usual care: protocol did not specify treatments received in control group (e.g. trials with ‘waiting list control’).
c Guidelined care: patients in the control group received care according to national guidelines.
d Non-specific advice: patients in the control group receive general advice and support (‘attention control’).
Note
More information on the included trials is provided in Appendix 2.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
19
 Meta-analysis
The comparisons of acupuncture against no acupuncture controls and against sham acupuncture are
shown separately for each of the four pain conditions in forest plots (Figures 2 and 3, respectively).
Meta-analytic statistics are shown in Table 2. Acupuncture was found to be statistically superior to all types
of control intervention for all analyses (p < 0.001). Effect sizes were larger for the comparison between
acupuncture and non-acupuncture controls than for the comparison between acupuncture and sham
controls (0.37, 0.26 and 0.15 for comparison with sham controls vs. 0.55, 0.57 and 0.42 for comparison
with non-acupuncture controls for musculoskeletal pain, osteoarthritis and chronic headache, respectively).
(a)
Trial
Year
Coefficient (95% CI)
Weight
n
Berman
Witt
Scharf
Witt
Foster
Williamson
Overall (fixed-effects estimate)
Overall (random-effects estimate)
–0.50 –0.25
2004134
200569
200670
200677
2007135
2007136
0.51 (0.31 to 0.72)
1.36 (1.08 to 1.64)
0.51 (0.37 to 0.65)
0.72 (0.60 to 0.84)
–0.01 (–0.23 to 0.20)
0.37 (0.12 to 0.62)
0.57 (0.50 to 0.64)
0.57 (0.29 to 0.85)
12
6
26
37
11
8
100
250
212
624
561
213
108
0.25
0.00
0.50
1.00
Acupuncture better
Acupuncture worse
0.27 (0.13 to 0.42)
0.46 (0.41 to 0.52)
0.55 (0.30 to 0.81)
0.09 (–0.06 to 0.24)
0.58 (0.38 to 0.78)
0.42 (0.37 to 0.46)
0.38 (0.22 to 0.55)
10
72
3
9
5
100
(b)
Trial
Year
Coefficient (95% CI)
Weight
n
Vickers
Jena
Linde
Diener
Melchart
Overall (fixed-effects estimate)
Overall (random-effects estimate)
–0.25
200460
200876
200568
200672
200567
Indication
Both
Both
Migraine
Migraine
TTH
301
2776
197
507
181
0.25
Acupuncture better
Acupuncture worse
0.00
0.50
1.00
FIGURE 2 Forest plots comparing acupuncture with no acupuncture controls (see Table 2 for references):
(a) osteoarthritis; (b) chronic headache; and (c) musculoskeletal pain. No forest plot is available for shoulder pain as there
were fewer than three trials and therefore no meta-analysis was performed. TTH, tension-type headache. (continued)
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
20
 Coefficient (95% CI)
Weight
0.24 (0.00 to 0.48)
0.92 (0.62 to 1.22)
0.34 (0.03 to 0.65)
0.43 (0.38 to 0.49)
0.56 (0.43 to 0.70)
0.11 (–0.57 to 0.78)
0.68 (0.63 to 0.74)
0.55 (0.51 to 0.58)
0.51 (0.36 to 0.67)
2
1
1
46
7
0
42
100
Acupuncture better
Acupuncture worse
(c)
Trial
Year
n
Cherkin
Brinkhaus
Thomas
Witt
Haake
Salter
Witt
Overall (fixed-effects estimate)
Overall (random-effects estimate)
–0.50 –0.25
2001131
200666
200661
200674
200771
2006133
200675
Indication
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Neck
Neck
171
214
182
2565
732
21
3118
0.25
0.00
0.50
1.00
FIGURE 2 Forest plots comparing acupuncture with no acupuncture controls (see Table 2 for references):
(a) osteoarthritis; (b) chronic headache; and (c) musculoskeletal pain. No forest plot is available for shoulder pain as there
were fewer than three trials and therefore no meta-analysis was performed. TTH, tension-type headache.
(a)
Trial
Year
Coefficient (95% CI)
Weight
n
Berman
Vas
Witt
Scharf
Foster
Overall (fixed-effects estimate)
Overall (random-effects estimate)
–0.25
2004134
2004120
200569
200670
2007135
0.27 (0.07 to 0.47)
1.21 (0.92 to 1.49)
0.41 (0.18 to 0.63)
0.11 (–0.02 to 0.25)
–0.07 (–0.28 to 0.14)
0.26 (0.17 to 0.34)
0.37 (0.03 to 0.72)
18
9
14
41
17
100
283
88
218
678
220
0.25
0.00
0.50
1.00
Acupuncture better
Acupuncture worse
FIGURE 3 Forest plots comparing acupuncture with sham acupuncture (see Table 2 for references): (a) osteoarthritis;
(b) chronic headache; (c) musculoskeletal pain; and (d) shoulder pain. TTH, tension-type headache. (continued)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
21
 (b)
Trial
Indication
Coefficient (95% CI)
Weight
n
Linde
Diener
Melchart
Endres
Overall (fixed-effects estimate)
Overall (random-effects estimate)
–0.50
–0.25
Migraine
Migraine
TTH
TTH
Year
200568
200672
200567
200773
0.05 (–0.19 to 0.29)
0.17 (0.03 to 0.31)
0.03 (–0.16 to 0.23)
0.24 (0.09 to 0.40)
0.15 (0.07 to 0.24)
0.15 (0.05 to 0.24)
13
38
19
30
100
208
633
175
398
0.25
0.00
0.50
Acupuncture better
Acupuncture worse
(c)
Trial
Year
Coefficient (95% CI)
Weight
Indication
Carlsson
Kerr
Brinkhaus
Haake
Kennedy
Irnich
White
Vas
Overall (fixed-effects estimate)
Overall (random-effects estimate)
–0.25
2001119
2003117
200666
200771
2008130
2001118
2004132
2006121
0.55 (0.06 to 1.05)
0.39 (–0.09 to 0.87)
0.27 (–0.01 to 0.55)
0.13 (–0.00 to 0.27)
0.34 (–0.17 to 0.85)
0.34 (0.01 to 0.66)
0.36 (0.03 to 0.68)
1.77 (1.45 to 2.09)
0.37 (0.27 to 0.46)
0.52 (0.14 to 0.90)
4
4
12
51
4
9
9
9
100
Back
Back
Back
Back
Back
Neck
Neck
Neck
n
27
46
210
745
40
108
126
115
0.25
0.00
0.50
1.00
Acupuncture better
Acupuncture worse
(d)
Trial
Year
Coefficient (95% CI)
Weight
n
Kleinhenz
Guerra de Hoyos
Vas
Overall (fixed-effects estimate)
Overall (random-effects estimate)
–0.50
–0.25
1999137
2004138
2008122
0.79 (0.30 to 1.28)
0.74 (0.43 to 1.05)
0.54 (0.35 to 0.74)
0.62 (0.46 to 0.77)
0.62 (0.46 to 0.77)
10
26
64
100
45
110
409
0.25
0.00
0.50
1.00
Acupuncture better
Acupuncture worse
FIGURE 3 Forest plots comparing acupuncture with sham acupuncture (see Table 2 for references): (a) osteoarthritis;
(b) chronic headache; (c) musculoskeletal pain; and (d) shoulder pain. TTH, tension-type headache.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
22
 The test for heterogeneity was statistically significant for five of the seven analyses. In the case of
comparisons with sham acupuncture, the RCTs by Vas et al.120–122 are clear outliers. For example, the effect
size in the RCTs by Vas et al. for neck pain is about five times greater than the meta-analytic estimate.
One effect of excluding these RCTs in a sensitivity analysis (Table 3) was that there was no significant
heterogeneity in the comparisons between acupuncture and sham acupuncture.
Moreover, the effect size for acupuncture became relatively similar for the different pain conditions: 0.23,
0.16 and 0.15 against sham control and 0.55, 0.57 and 0.42 against non-acupuncture control for back
and neck pain, osteoarthritis and chronic headache, respectively (fixed effects; results similar for the
random-effects analysis).
To understand what these effect sizes mean in real terms, a baseline pain score on a 0–100 scale for
a typical RCT might be 60, for example. Given a SD of 25, follow-up scores would average 43 in a
no-acupuncture group, 35 in a sham-acupuncture group and 30 in patients receiving true acupuncture.
If average responses were defined in terms of a pain reduction of ≥ 50%, response rates would be
approximately 30%, 42.5% and 50%, respectively.
There is evidence of heterogeneity in the comparisons with non-acupuncture controls, which can be
explained by the differences in the types of control groups used. In the case of osteoarthritis, the largest
effect size was in the study by Witt et al.,69 in which patients in the waiting-list control group received only
rescue pain medication, and the smallest was in the study by Foster et al.,135 which involved a programme
of exercise and advice led by physical therapists. For the musculoskeletal analyses, heterogeneity was
driven by two very large RCTs74,75 (n = 256574 and n = 311875) for back and neck pain. If only back pain is
considered, heterogeneity is dramatically reduced and is again driven by one RCT, that by Brinkhaus et al.66
with a waiting-list control. In the headache meta-analysis, the study by Diener et al.72 reported much
smaller differences between groups. This RCT involved providing drug therapy according to national
guidelines in the non-acupuncture control group, including initiation of beta-blockers as migraine
TABLE 2 Primary analyses of effect sizes
Indication
n
Fixed effects (95% CI)
Random effects
(95% CI)
p-value for
overall effect
Acupuncture vs. sham acupuncture
Non-specific musculoskeletal pain
(back and neck)66,71,117–119,121,130,132
8
0.37 (0.27 to 0.46);
heterogeneity: p < 0.001
0.52 (0.14 to 0.90)
0.001
Osteoarthritis69,70,120,134,135
5
0.26 (0.17 to 0.34);
heterogeneity p < 0.001
0.37 (0.03 to 0.72)
0.001
Chronic headache67,68,72,73
4
0.15 (0.07 to 0.24);
heterogeneity: p = 0.3
0.15 (0.05 to 0.24)
0.001
Shoulder pain122,137,138
3
0.62 (0.46 to 0.77);
heterogeneity: p = 0.4
0.62 (0.46 to 0.77)
0.001
Acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control
Non-specific musculoskeletal pain
(back and neck)61,66,71,74,75,131,133
7
0.55 (0.51 to 0.58);
heterogeneity: p < 0.001
0.51 (0.36 to 0.67)
0.001
Osteoarthritis69,70,77,134–136
6
0.57 (0.50 to 0.64);
heterogeneity: p < 0.001
0.57 (0.29 to 0.85)
0.001
Chronic headache60,67,68,72,76
5
0.42 (0.37 to 0.46);
heterogeneity: p < 0.001
0.38 (0.22 to 0.55)
0.001
Shoulder pain
0
No trials
Note
Effect sizes are standardised differences.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
23
 prophylaxis. There was disagreement within the collaboration about whether or not this constituted an
active control. Excluding this RCT reduced evidence of heterogeneity (p = 0.04) but had little effect on the
effect size (0.42–0.45).
Pre-specified sensitivity analyses found no substantive effect on our main estimates of either restricting
the sham RCTs to those with a low likelihood of unblinding or adjusting for missing data. There was also
little impact of including summary data from RCTs for which raw data were not obtained (two RCTs)128,129
or which were published recently (four RCTs),124–127 either for the primary analysis or the analysis with the
outlying RCTs by Vas et al.120–122 excluded (data not shown).
To address whether or not publication bias might be involved, we entered all RCTs into a single analysis
and compared the effect sizes from small and large studies.139 We found some evidence that small studies
had larger effect sizes overall for the comparison with sham acupuncture (p = 0.02) but not for the
comparison with non-acupuncture controls (p = 0.72). However, these analyses were influenced by
the outlying RCTs by Vas et al.,120–122 which were smaller than average, and by indication, because the
shoulder pain RCTs were small and had large effect sizes. Tests for asymmetry were non-significant when
we excluded the RCTs by Vas et al.120–122 and shoulder pain studies (n = 15; p = 0.07), and when small
studies were also excluded (n < 100 and n = 12; p = 0 30). Nonetheless, we repeated our meta-analyses
excluding the RCTs with a sample size of n < 100. This had essentially no effect on our results. We also
considered the possible effect on our analysis if we had failed to include high-quality unpublished studies
in terms of publication bias. There would need to be 47 unpublished RCTs with n = 100 patients showing
an advantage of acupuncture over sham acupuncture of 0.25 SDs before the difference between
acupuncture and sham acupuncture would lose its significance.
The effect of pooling different end points measured at different periods of follow-up was the focus of
a further sensitivity analysis. We repeated our analyses including only pain end points measured at
2–3 months after randomisation. We found no material effect on the results: effect sizes increased by
0.05–0.09 SDs for musculoskeletal and osteoarthritis RCTs, and were otherwise stable.
We compared sham control with no-acupuncture control in an exploratory analysis. In a meta-analysis of nine
RCTs,66–72,134,135 the effect size for sham control was 0.33 (95% CI 0.27 to 0.40) and 0.38 (95% CI 0.20 to 0.56)
for fixed- and random-effects models, respectively (for tests of both effect and heterogeneity, p < 0.001).
TABLE 3 Sensitivity analyses
Sensitivity analysis
Indication
n
Fixed effects (95% CI)
Random effects
(95% CI)
p-value for
overall effect
Acupuncture vs. sham acupuncture
Exclusion of Vas
et al.120–122 trials
Non-specific
musculoskeletal pain
7
0.23 (0.13 to 0.33);
heterogeneity: p = 0.51
0.23 (0.13 to 0.33)
0.001
Osteoarthritis
4
0.16 (0.07 0.25);
heterogeneity: p = 0.15
0.17 (0.00 to 0.35)
0.001
Shoulder pain
Fewer than three trials
Separate pain types
Back pain
5
0.20 (0.09 to 0.31);
heterogeneity: p = 0.4
0.20 (0.09 to 0.32)
0.001
Neck pain
3
0.83 (0.64 to 1.01)
heterogeneity: p < 0.001
0.82 (–0.11 to 1.75)
0.001
Acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control
Separate pain types
Back pain
5
0.46 (0.40 to 0.51);
heterogeneity: p = 0.004
0.49 (0.33 to 0.64)
0.001
Neck pain
0
No trials
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
24
 Results for substudy 1: influence of the control group on effect size
Sham acupuncture controls
Twenty trials with 5230 patients included a control arm in the form of sham acupuncture (Table 4) and the
trial-level characteristics for these trials are described in Table 5. The majority of sham-controlled trials
(80%) used needle-based sham acupuncture. The number of trials using penetrating or non-penetrating
needles was similar: seven trials used non-penetrating needles and nine trials used penetrating needles.
All trials using penetrating needles placed these outside the true acupuncture points, whereas only one of
seven trials using non-penetrating needles did so.
The effect sizes for sham-controlled acupuncture trials, as categorised by the type of sham, are shown in
Table 6. Acupuncture was significantly superior to sham irrespective of the type of sham control, both
in the main analysis and in a sensitivity analysis excluding outlying studies. This table also includes the
results of the primary sensitivity analysis that excluded the Vas et al.120–122 trials as outliers. Overall, we
found that larger effect sizes were associated with acupuncture compared with non-penetrating sham
needles (0.43, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.85) than with penetrating sham needles (0.17, 95% CI 0.11 to 0.23),
although the difference between groups did not reach conventional levels of statistical significance.
Comparisons between types of sham control are provided in Table 7, which shows the results of the
random-effects metaregression for sham-controlled trials. Although trials that used needles did not differ
significantly from trials that used a non-needle sham control (p ≥ 0.2 for all comparisons), there was clear
evidence of a greater effect size when acupuncture was compared against non-penetrating sham than
when compared against penetrating sham. Trials using a penetrating needle had an effect size that was
–0.21 (95% CI –0.41 to –0.01) SDs lower than trials that did not use a needle sham (p = 0.036). Trials that
used penetrating needles for sham control had smaller effect sizes than those with a non-penetrating sham
control or sham control without needles. The difference in effect size was –0.45 (95% CI –0.78 to –0.12;
p = 0.007). For the sensitivity analysis that excluded the Vas et al.120–122 trials, this effect size reduced to
–0.19 (95% CI –0.39 to 0.01; p = 0.058). There were no significant differences between non-penetrating
needles and sham techniques that did not involve needling. Details of further sensitivity analyses are
reported separately.45
TABLE 4 Types of sham acupuncture control
Needle used?
Penetrating?
True acupuncture
points?
Depth of
insertion?
Trials
Yes
Yes
No
Superficial
Linde et al.,68 Melchart et al.,67 Diener et al.,72
Scharf et al.,70 Haake et al.,71 Endres et al.,73
Witt et al.69 and Brinkhaus et al.66
Yes
Yes
No
Deep
aBerman et al.134
Yes
No
No
N/A
Vas et al.122
Yes
No
Yes
N/A
Foster et al.,135 Guerra de Hoyos et al.,138
Kennedy et al.,130 Kleinhenz et al.,137
Vas et al.120 and Vas et al.121
No
No
No
N/A
Carlsson and Sjölund119 and Kerr et al.117
No
No
Yes
N/A
Irnich et al.118 and White et al.132
N/A, not applicable.
a In the Berman et al.134 trial, penetrating needles were used on non-acupuncture points and non-penetrating needles
were used on true acupuncture points. For the main analysis, we considered this trial as penetrating-needle sham
acupuncture used on non-acupuncture points.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
25
 Non-sham acupuncture controls
Eighteen trials including 14,597 patients used a non-sham control, with trial-level characteristics for these
trials described in Table 8. The majority of these control groups (72%) were classified as ‘routine care’,
with the rest classified as ‘protocolled care’. Table 9 provides details of the non-sham control groups by
pain type. The effect size for acupuncture in trials with routine care control arms (0.55, 95% CI 0.40 to
0.70) was larger than when acupuncture was compared with protocolled care (0.29, 95% CI 0.01 to
0.58). Although the difference in effect size was large, it was not significant (difference in effect size 0.26,
95% CI –0.05 to 0.57; p = 0.1). Details of further sensitivity analysis are reported separately.45
TABLE 5 Trial-level characteristics for trials with sham control groups
Characteristic
n (%)
Needle used
Yes
16 (80)
No
4 (20)
Penetrating needle used
Yes
9 (45)
No
7 (35)
Non-needle
4 (20)
True acupuncture points used
Yes
8 (40)
No
12 (60)
Superficial or deep sham
Superficial
8 (40)
Deep
1 (5)
Non-penetrating sham
11 (55)
Pain type
Lower back pain
5 (25)
Migraine
2 (10)
Neck
3 (15)
Osteoarthritis
5 (25)
Shoulder
3 (15)
Tension-type headache
2 (10)
TABLE 6 Effect size for acupuncture compared with sham control by type
Type of sham control
Main analysis
Excluding Vas et al.120–122 trials
Number of trials
Effect size (95% CI)
Number of trials
Effect size (95% CI)
Needle sham
16
0.42 (0.19 to 0.66)
13
0.22 (0.11 to 0.33)
Non-needle sham
4
0.38 (0.19 to 0.57)
4
0.38 (0.19 to 0.57)
Non-penetrating needle
7
0.76 (0.31 to 1.21)
4
0.43 (0.01 to 0.85)
Penetrating needle
9
0.17 (0.11 to 0.23)
9
0.17 (0.11 to 0.23)
Non-needle and non-penetrating
needle
11
0.63 (0.33 to 0.94)
8
0.40 (0.18 to 0.62)
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
26
 TABLE 7 Differences in effect size between types of sham control
Sham control
Main analysis
Excluding Vas et al.120–122 trials
Number
of trialsa
Change in effect size
(95% CI)
p-value
Number
of trialsa
Change in effect size
(95% CI)
p-value
Needle vs. non-needle
sham
16
0.02 (–0.49 to 0.53)
0.9
13
–0.17 (–0.43 to 0.09)
0.2
4
4
Non-penetrating needle
vs. non-needle sham
7
0.35 (–0.28 to 0.99)
0.3
4
0.01 (–0.45 to 0.47)
1
4
4
Penetrating needle vs.
non-penetrating needle
9
–0.57 (–0.96 to –0.18)
0.004
9
–0.19 (–0.47 to 0.08)
0.2
7
4
Penetrating needle vs.
non-needle sham
9
–0.21 (–0.41 to –0.01)
0.036
9
–0.21 (–0.41 to –0.01)
0.036
4
4
Penetrating needle vs.
non-needle or non-
penetrating needle
9
–0.45 (–0.78 to –0.12)
0.007
9
–0.19 (–0.39 to 0.01)
0.058
11
8
a The number listed in the top row is the number of trials in the first comparison group. The number of trials listed in the
bottom row is the number of trials in the second comparison group. For example, there were 16 needle sham-controlled
trials and four non-needle sham-controlled trials in the main analysis.
TABLE 8 Types of non-sham control group by trial
Trial
Control group
Type of control
group
Foster et al. (2007)135
Advice and exercise: all three arms of the trial received advice and exercise.
Patients received a leaflet with information on knee osteoarthritis. Patients
on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were allowed to continue with a
stable dose. Individualised exercises of progressive intensity for lower limb
stretching, strengthening and balance (up to six 30-minute sessions over
6 weeks). Patients in the control arm did not receive verum or sham
acupuncture
Protocolled
Linde et al. (2005),68
Melchart et al. (2005)67
Waiting list control: control patients were not permitted to undergo
prophylactic treatment for 12 weeks. All patients were allowed to treat
acute headache as necessary (following current guidelines)
Routine
Thomas et al. (2006),61
Salter et al. (2006),133
Vickers et al. (2004)60
GP care: all patients received NHS treatment according to GPs’ assessment
and recommendations. Control patients did not receive acupuncture or any
other specified interventions
Routine
Berman et al. (2004)134
Education/attention control: patients in this arm attended six 2-hour
group sessions based on arthritis self-management and received
periodic educational materials by mail. Patients in the acupuncture and
sham-acupuncture arms did not participate in this intervention
Routine
Cherkin et al. (2001)131
Self-care education: patients in this group received a book with information
about back pain, treatment, improving quality of life and coping with
emotional and interpersonal issues surrounding back pain. Patients
also received two professionally produced videos that addressed
self-management of back pain and demonstrated exercises. Patients in the
acupuncture and massage groups did not receive this educational material
Routine
continued
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
27
 TABLE 8 Types of non-sham control group by trial (continued)
Trial
Control group
Type of control
group
Scharf et al. (2006)70
Conservative therapy: patients in the conservative therapy group had
10 visits with a physician and received prescriptions for either diclofenac
(up to 150 mg/day) or rofecoxib (25 mg/day) up to week 23. Patients in this
group who had ‘partially successful’ results were given the option of
attending an additional five visits. Patients in the verum acupuncture
and sham acupuncture groups were permitted to take up to 150 mg/day
of diclofenac for the first 2 weeks and a total of 1 g of diclofenac during
the rest of the study. Patients in both acupuncture groups and in
the conservative management group received up to six sessions of
physiotherapy. All patients were prohibited from taking any analgesics
other than diclofenac and rofecoxib and any corticosteroids
Protocolled
Diener et al. (2006)72
Standard migraine treatment: control group patients were treated
according to the guidelines of the German Migraine and Headache Society.
Patients had six to seven visits in which standard treatment was established.
First choice of treatment was beta-blockers, followed by flunarizine and
then valproic acid. Acute medication use was permitted in all groups
Protocolled
Haake et al. (2007)71
Conventional therapy: patients in the conventional therapy group were
treated according to German guidelines. Conventional therapy patients
had 10 visits with a physician or physiotherapist at which physiotherapy,
exercise and/or similar treatments were offered. Patients in all three arms
were permitted to take non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs up to the
maximum daily dose
Protocolled
Williamson et al.
(2007)136
Education and exercise: patients in the control group were told that they
were in the ‘home exercise’ group and received an exercise and advice
leaflet
Routine
Witt et al. (2005),69
Brinkhaus et al.
(2006)66
Waiting list control: patients in the waiting list control group received no
acupuncture treatment for 8 weeks after randomisation. All patients were
allowed oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for pain as rescue
medication. All patients were prohibited from taking corticosteroids or pain
medication that acted on the central nervous system
Routine
Witt et al. (2006)77
(osteoarthritis),
Witt et al. (2006)74
(lower back pain)
Conventional treatment: patients in the control group were not allowed to
use any kind of acupuncture during the first 3 months. All patients were
allowed to use additional conventional treatments as needed
Routine
Jena et al. (2008),76
Witt et al. (2006)75
(neck pain)
Conventional treatment: patients in the control group were not allowed to
use any kind of acupuncture during the first 3 months. All patients were
allowed to use additional conventional treatments as needed
Routine
TABLE 9 Trial-level characteristics for trials with non-sham controls
Pain type
Routine care
Protocolled care
Total
Headache
2
0
2
Migraine
1
1
2
Tension-type headache
1
0
1
Osteoarthritis
4
2
6
Lower back pain
3
2
5
Neck pain
2
0
2
Total
13 (72%)
5 (28%)
18 (100%)
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
28
 Results for substudy 2: characteristics of acupuncture
Table 10 provides a summary of the trial-level acupuncture characteristics and Table 11 provides a
summary of the patient-level acupuncture characteristics. Fuller details of the characteristics of each
individual trial are presented in Appendix 2. The acupuncture in the majority of trials was based on
traditional Chinese acupuncture (59%) and had a flexible point prescription (55%). In all 29 trials manual
needle stimulation was used in the acupuncture group, whereas only about one-quarter of trials allowed
the addition of electrical stimulation (n = 7) and 14% allowed moxibustion (n = 4). Attempts to elicit deqi
in the acupuncture group were made in all 25 trials that provided this information. The mean session
frequency ranged from one session every 8 days to two sessions per week. The maximum number of
sessions varied widely, from three to 30, as did the mean number of needles used (range 1–18) and the
mean session duration (range 15–32 minutes).
None of the acupuncture characteristics evaluated in the trial-level analysis, including style of acupuncture,
number or placement of needles, number, frequency or duration of sessions, patient–practitioner
interactions or experience of the acupuncturist significantly modified the effect of acupuncture on pain
(all p > 0.05) in sham-controlled trials (Table 12). Compared with non-sham controls, there was little
evidence that these characteristics modified the effect of acupuncture (see Table 12). The exception was
that acupuncture effects increased in comparison to non-sham controls when more needles were used.
TABLE 10 Trial-level acupuncture characteristics (n = 29)
Characteristics
n (%)
Style of acupuncture
Traditional Chinese techniques
17 (59)
‘Western’
4 (14)
Combination of traditional Chinese techniques and Western
8 (28)
Point prescription
Fixed needle formula
4 (14)
Flexible formula
16 (55)
Individualised
9 (31)
Location of needles
Local points only
0 (0)
Distal points only
1 (3)
Both local and distal points
28 (97)
Electrical stimulation allowed
7 (24)
Moxibustion allowed
4 (14)
Deqi attempted (n = 25)
25 (100)
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner interactions
12 (41)
Minimum years of experience required
No requirement specified (0 years)
12 (41)
6 months to 2 years
5 (17)
3 years
9 (31)
5 years
2 (7)
10 years
1 (3)
continued
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
29
 TABLE 10 Trial-level acupuncture characteristics (n = 29) (continued)
Characteristics
n (%)
Maximum number of sessions
3–5
3 (10)
6–10
14 (48)
11–15
7 (24)
16–20
3 (10)
21–30
2 (7)
Frequency of sessions (mean number of sessions per week)
0.88
1 (3)
1
14 (48)
1.5
7 (24)
1.67
1 (3)
2
6 (21)
Mean duration of sessions (minutes), rounded to whole numbers
15–19
1 (4)
20–24
4 (16)
25–29
6 (24)
30+
14 (56)
Mean number of needles used, rounded to whole numbers
1–4
1 (4)
5–9
6 (25)
10–14
9 (38)
15–20
8 (33)
TABLE 11 Patient-level acupuncture characteristics (n = 18,434)
Characteristics
n (%)
Number of sessions
0
383 (2)
1–5
402 (2)
6–10
7161 (39)
11–15
1998 (11)
16–20
45 (< 1)
21–30
16 (< 1)
Missing
1806 (10)
Not reported
6623 (36)
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
30
 TABLE 11 Patient-level acupuncture characteristics (n = 18,434) (continued)
Characteristics
n (%)
Average session duration (minutes)
2–15
166 (1)
16–30
2552 (14)
31–45
406 (2)
46–60
60 (< 1)
60+
3 (< 1)
Missing
1257 (7)
Not reported
13,990 (76)
Average number of needles
2–5
20 (< 1)
6–10
610 (3)
11–15
717 (4)
16–20
627 (3)
21–25
177 (1)
26+
27 (< 1)
Missing
2529 (14)
Not reported
13,727 (74)
Age of physician/acupuncturist (years)
30–35
298 (2)
36–40
2119 (11)
41–45
2630 (14)
46–50
2407 (13)
51–55
1701 (9)
56–60
872 (5)
60+
303 (2)
Missing
368 (2)
Not reported
7736 (42)
Physician/acupuncturist sex
Male
7002 (38)
Female
3626 (20)
Missing
0 (0)
Not reported
7806 (42)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
31
 The results of the sensitivity analysis that excluded the three outlying trials,120–122 all sham controlled and
by the same team and with very much larger effect sizes than the other trials, are presented in Table 13.
This showed that trials allowing electrical stimulation showed a significantly stronger effect of acupuncture
than of sham controls and those with a longer average treatment session duration had a smaller effect
than sham controls.
In the patient-level analysis, we found that the direction of the effect of the acupuncture characteristics
was unchanged (Table 14). As expected, the CIs were much tighter around the patient-level estimates
despite the fact that fewer trials could be included in each analysis. There were no more than six trials with
patient-level data available for each of the specific predictors being analysed. The patient-level analysis
suggested that a higher number of acupuncture treatment sessions improves the effect of acupuncture.
Further details of the results are reported separately.123
TABLE 12 Results of characteristics with univariate metaregression analyses
Characteristic
Acupuncture vs. sham control
(n = 20)
Acupuncture vs. non-acupuncture
control (n = 18)
βa
95% CI
p-value
βa
95% CI
p-value
Style of acupuncture
Some traditional Chinese medicine
vs. Western only
0.05
–0.52 to 0.63
0.9
0.13
–0.51 to 0.77
0.7
Traditional Chinese medicine only
vs. some Western
0.20
–0.20 to 0.61
0.3
–0.10
–0.38 to 0.19
0.5
Point prescription
Fixed needle formula
Reference
Reference
Flexible formula
–0.08
–0.58 to 0.43
0.8
0.02
–0.64 to 0.68
> 0.9
Individualised
–0.15
–1.16 to 0.86
0.8
–0.08
–0.74 to 0.59
0.8
Electrical stimulation allowed
0.34
–0.13 to 0.80
0.15
–0.19
–0.56 to 0.17
0.3
Manual stimulation allowed
All allowed
All allowed
Moxibustion allowed
All did not allow
–0.28
–0.63 to 0.06
0.11
Deqi attempted
All allowed
All allowed
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions allowed
–0.22
–0.70 to 0.26
0.4
0.06
–0.23 to 0.35
0.7
Minimum experience required (years)
0.01
–0.08 to 0.10
0.8
0.05
–0.05 to 0.16
0.3
Maximum number of sessions
(per five sessions)
–0.14
–0.37 to 0.08
0.2
0.02
–0.07 to 0.12
0.6
Frequency of sessions (per week)
–0.19
–0.66 to 0.27
0.4
0.09
–0.31 to 0.49
0.7
Duration of sessions (per 5 minutes)b
–0.10
–0.30 to 0.11
0.4
–0.01
–0.26 to 0.24
0.9
Number of needles used (per five needles)c
–0.17
–0.37 to 0.03
0.095
0.33
0.08 to 0.58
0.01
a β is an estimate of the change in effect of acupuncture in terms of the standardised difference compared with the
control for each characteristic; a positive β indicates a larger effect of acupuncture than of the control for trials with the
given characteristic vs. the reference level of the characteristic.
b Four trials excluded missing data.
c Five trials excluded missing data.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
32
 TABLE 13 Results of the metaregression for acupuncture trials with sham controls, excluding the
outlying trials120–122
Characteristic
Acupuncture vs. sham control (n = 17)
n
βa
95% CI
p-value
Style of acupuncture
17
‘Western’ only
Reference
Traditional Chinese medicine
–0.14
–0.46 to 0.17
0.4
Point prescription
17
Fixed needle formula
Reference
Flexible formula
–0.25
–0.50 to 0.00
0.054
Individualised
–0.11
–0.58 to 0.36
0.6
Electrical stimulation allowed
17
0.27
0.03 to 0.51
0.027
Manual stimulation allowed
17
All allowed
Moxibustion allowed
17
All did not allow
Deqi elicited (n = 26)
17
All allowed
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner interactions allowed
17
–0.04
–0.28 to 0.20
0.8
Minimum experience required (years)
17
0.00
–0.05 to 0.05
> 0.9
Maximum number of sessions (per five sessions)
17
–0.05
–0.18 to 0.08
0.4
Frequency of sessions (per week)
17
–0.04
–0.29 to 0.21
0.8
Duration of sessions (per 5 minutes)
17
–0.14
–0.22 to –0.06
0.001
Number of needles used (per five needles)
17
–0.08
–0.22 to 0.05
0.2
a β is an estimate of the change in effect of acupuncture in terms of the standardised difference compared with the
control for each characteristic; a positive β indicates a larger effect of acupuncture than of the control for trials with the
given characteristic vs. the reference level of the characteristic.
TABLE 14 Results of the patient-level analysis of acupuncture characteristics
Characteristic
Sham control
Non-acupuncture control
na
βb
95% CI
p-value
na
βb
95% CI
p-value
Number of sessions
(per five sessions)
3 (646/648)
–0.76
–1.75 to 0.22
0.13
5 (8292/9321)
0.11
0.01 to 0.21
0.0007
Duration of sessions
(per 5 minutes)
5 (2444/2482)
–0.03
–0.08 to 0.03
0.3
Fewer than three trials
Number of needles
used (per five needles)
5 (1769/2484)
–0.11
–0.35 to 0.14
0.4
Fewer than three trials
Age of acupuncturist
(per 5 years)
Fewer than three trials
6 (9127/9446)
–0.01
–0.04 to 0.02
0.5
Male acupuncturist
Fewer than three trials
6 (9384/9446)
–0.07
–0.16 to 0.02
0.084
a Number of trials included in analysis (number of patients included in analysis/total number of patients in included trials).
b β is an estimate of the change in effect of acupuncture in terms of the standardised difference compared with the
control for each characteristic; a positive β indicates a larger effect of acupuncture than of the control for trials with the
given characteristic vs. the reference level of the characteristic.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
33
 Discussion
Our principal finding is that there are statistically significant differences between acupuncture and sham
acupuncture, and between acupuncture and non-acupuncture controls for all of the pain types studied.
The meta-analytic effect sizes were similar across pain conditions for both of these comparisons after
excluding an outlying set of studies. The difference between acupuncture and sham acupuncture was of
a lesser magnitude, ranging from 0.15 to 0.23 SDs depending on condition. For acupuncture compared
with non-acupuncture control, there was a larger effect size of around 0.5 SDs, although there was
some variation in the effect size for individual RCTs, a variation that could be partly explained in terms of
the type of control used. For example, acupuncture had a smaller benefit in patients who received a
programme of ancillary care involving physiotherapist-led exercise135 than in patients who continued to be
treated with usual care. Nevertheless, the average effect, as expressed in the meta-analytic estimate of
approximately 0.5 SDs, was of clear clinical relevance either considered as a standardised difference or
when converted back to a pain scale.
This meta-analysis has not been compromised by study quality or sample size, on the basis that only
high-quality studies were included and the total sample size was large. In addition, we saw no evidence that
publication bias, or failure to identify published eligible studies, might affect our conclusions. With regard to
limitations, the comparisons between acupuncture and non-acupuncture controls cannot be blinded and
therefore both performance and response bias are possible. Although we considered the risk of bias from
unblinding to be low in most studies comparing acupuncture and sham acupuncture, health-care providers
could not but be aware of the treatment that they provided and therefore a certain degree of bias of our
effect estimate for specific effects is possible. However, it should be kept in mind that this problem applies
to almost all studies on non-pharmacological interventions. We would argue that the risk of bias in the
comparison between acupuncture and sham acupuncture was low compared with the risk of bias for other
non-drug treatments for chronic pain, such as cognitive therapies, exercise or manipulation, which are rarely
subject to placebo control. The meta-analyses combined different end points, such as pain and function,
measured at different times. However, when we restricted the analysis to pain end points measured at a
specific follow-up time, 2–3 months after randomisation, our results did not change.
Many previous systematic reviews of acupuncture for chronic pain have included RCTs of low
methodological quality because of liberal eligibility criteria. As a result, the authors have come to the
circular conclusion that weaknesses in the data did not allow conclusions to be drawn.57,140 Because of
variation in the study end points, other reviews have not included meta-analyses.110,141 Both limitations
have been avoided by including only high-quality RCTs and obtaining raw data for IPD meta-analysis.
Some more recent systematic reviews have published meta-analyses48,64,65,142 and reported findings that are
broadly comparable with ours, with clear differences between acupuncture and non-acupuncture controls
and smaller differences between true and sham acupuncture. Our findings have greater precision: all
previous reviews have analysed summary data, an approach of reduced statistical precision compared with
IPD meta-analysis.105,143 In particular, we have demonstrated a robust difference between acupuncture and
sham acupuncture that can be distinguished from bias. This is a novel finding that moves the evidence
base beyond the existing literature.
These findings are important both clinically and scientifically. The total effects of acupuncture, as
experienced by the patient in routine clinical practice, are clinically relevant as a result of our determination
of an effect size of around 0.5. Our finding that acupuncture also has statistically significant effects over
and above those of sham acupuncture, with an effect size of around 0.2, is therefore of major importance
for clinical practice. We have found the effect size of sham acupuncture compared with non-acupuncture
controls to be around 0.3. Accordingly, there appears to be no evidence to support the claim that it makes
little difference whether one receives real or sham acupuncture. The size of this effect may be associated
with sham acupuncture’s potentially potent placebo or context effects,144–146 or with the additional
physiological effects associated with needle penetration even when at the wrong acupuncture points.147
If one accepts that, on average, the differences in effect sizes between acupuncture and sham
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
34
 acupuncture are small, the clinical decision made by physicians and patients is not between true and
sham acupuncture but between a referral to an acupuncturist or avoiding such a referral. The total effects
of acupuncture, as experienced by the patient in routine practice, include the specific effects associated
with correct needle insertion according to acupuncture theory, non-specific physiological effects of needling
and non-specific psychological (placebo) effects related to the patient’s belief that treatment will be effective.
Further research will include the ongoing addition of new trials to the database subject to eligibility.
This will require further literature searches and then updating of the main meta-analysis. Although six
substudies were planned as part of the original programme of work, we report in detail on only
two here.45,123
Discussion for substudy 1: influence of control group on effect size
This substudy has extended the primary findings of the main study, confirming that acupuncture is
significantly superior to either sham acupuncture or non-sham controls by also showing that this result
holds irrespective of which type of sham or non-sham control is used. This substudy has produced robust
data on the differences in effect sizes between trials with different control conditions. We found that the
acupuncture in trials with sham controls involving penetrating needles had smaller effect sizes than the
acupuncture in trials that did not use a needle control or in which the needles in the control group did not
penetrate the skin. An important implication is that the central estimates from our primary meta-analysis
may have underestimated the effects of acupuncture compared with sham acupuncture. Although
differences did not reach statistical significance, we have also found evidence that the effect size of
acupuncture when compared with protocolled care is smaller than when compared with the less intensive
routine care.
With regard to the impact of placebo controls for non-pharmacological therapies, one approach has been
to investigate trials that included both a placebo arm and a no-treatment arm and then compare outcomes
between these two, and in this way explore variations in the impact of the different types of placebo.
An example of this is a Cochrane review of placebo controls covering a wide range of trials for different
conditions, including some acupuncture trials.44 In a subgroup analysis the authors found that trials using
‘physical placebos’ (including sham acupuncture) were associated with greater placebo effects than trials
using pharmacological placebos. This finding is consistent with the results of a trial that was specifically
designed to compare a sham device (sham acupuncture) with an inert pill, the sham device being
associated with a greater reduction in self-reported pain.144 Our finding that different types of sham
control led to different estimates of treatment effects is consistent with these findings.
By combining patient data from 29 high-quality trials in a single database, we have had, for the first time,
sufficient power to explore the role of controls in trials of acupuncture for chronic pain. This is because the
power of metaregression is strongly influenced by the number of trials and their variation. However, even
with this large data set we are not able to obtain a full understanding of the different physiological and
psychological effects of sham acupuncture. One limitation within the field generally is that the mechanisms
for a persistent effect of acupuncture on chronic pain are incompletely understood and therefore we have
no clear idea of whether or not a sham control inadvertently activates these mechanisms. This lack of
understanding about the physiological mechanisms of acupuncture limits any firm conclusions that we can
draw regarding the extent that any of the sham controls discussed above can be considered as a true
‘placebo’. Moreover, when implementing sham acupuncture trials the outcome may also be influenced by
factors not included in our analysis. These include practical implementation issues such as how carefully
the ring that comes with the Streitberger needle108 is taped in place, the believability of the control,
patients’ prior knowledge of acupuncture, whether or not the true acupuncture group is treated identically
and the extent to which the acupuncturists are able to maintain equipoise.
Although sham acupuncture involving penetrating needles may well have a place when addressing questions
of point specificity in explanatory trials, our results provide support to the contention that needle penetration
should be avoided as a sham technique when controlling for non-specific effects associated with
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
35
 acupuncture for chronic pain. We are more cautious with regard to recommending the use of
non-penetrating needles. Many forms of Japanese acupuncture use shallow insertion or non-insertion
(the toya hari method).148 Using non-penetrating needles in controlled trials is not without its challenges:
although apparently less active than other types of sham control, we cannot assume that non-penetrating
needles have complete physiological inactivity. Furthermore, there are practical and generic questions
regarding the use of sham acupuncture, for example whether or not to enrol only acupuncture-naive patients
and whether or not practitioners can maintain equipoise in large trials over reasonable periods of time.
The choice of control needs to be driven by the research question. For instance, in the UK NHS trial of
acupuncture for chronic headache, the study question of Vickers et al.60 was related to the effects of
making acupuncture more widely available in primary care, a pragmatic comparison of ‘use acupuncture’
and ‘avoid acupuncture’. On the other hand, Foster et al.135 were interested in the impact of acupuncture
when added to an existing rehabilitation programme. Our findings have clear implications for sample size
calculations, with larger sample sizes needed in trials in which care in the control arm is carefully specified.
Further discussion has been reported separately.45
Discussion for substudy 2: characteristics of acupuncture
Our results from high-quality trials of acupuncture for chronic pain provide robust data on treatment effect
modifiers related to treatment characteristics. Across the many characteristics that might have been
commonly expected to modify outcomes, such as style of acupuncture, use of electrical stimulation,
addition of moxibustion, experience of the acupuncturist and the frequency and duration of sessions,
we found no evidence of a modifying effect on pain outcomes in trial-level analyses. We also found in
patient-level analyses, involving a subset of only five trials, that more treatment sessions were associated
with better pain outcomes in acupuncture treatment groups compared with non-acupuncture controls
(p < 0.001). It appears that the ‘dose’ of acupuncture has an impact on treatment outcomes. We need to
be careful when interpreting these results in the context of testing multiple hypotheses, which increases
the risk of falsely rejecting at least one null hypothesis. We did not feel that formal statistical correction to
account for multiple testing was justified given the largely null results.
Our observations on the minimal impact of style of acupuncture practice on outcomes contrasts with
findings from qualitative studies asserting the importance of the theoretical affiliation and institutional
context of the acupuncturists.149,150 For example, theoretical affiliation has been linked to impact on ‘almost
all aspects of treatment’, with ‘demonstrable implications for the practice and research of acupuncture’.149
Similarly, others have argued that without a theoretical approach to acupuncture that is ‘holistic’, with an
emphasis that includes the process of care, there are likely to be reduced or absent outcomes.150
In a study that pooled data from four German-based trials of acupuncture for chronic pain,151 all of which
are included in our study, we see some concordance with our results, as might be expected. The only
physician characteristic that the authors found had a significant influence on outcome in these four trials
was that internists performed slightly better than an average physician and ‘orthopaedists’ slightly worse.
Given the results of the primary analyses in this study, which showed small differences between real and
sham acupuncture, it is perhaps unsurprising that this substudy showed little evidence of substantial
differences between alternative approaches to, or characteristics of, acupuncture. It is likely that we had
insufficient power to determine the extent, if any, of the contribution of each individual component of
acupuncture to outcome, even with the large data set at our disposal.
As for any meta-analysis, the main limitation was data availability. The total number of trials was relatively
modest and analyses with IPD included no more than five trials. Consequently, many of our analyses had
relatively low power, with wide CIs around central estimates. Furthermore, heterogeneity of treatment
characteristics was relatively limited. For example, nearly 75% of trials involved between six and
15 treatments, and in no trial was acupuncture administered more than twice a week. It is not unusual in
China for acupuncture to be given four or five times a week. A feature that characterises acupuncture
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
36
 when practised according to the principles of traditional Chinese medicine involves syndrome
differentiation, but we had no data on which to assess the resulting impact on outcome.
The quality of the current evidence supports the case that contemporary acupuncture trials do not
systematically underestimate treatment effects. Although acupuncturists have long been concerned about
what constitutes ‘correct’ practice,152,153 it can be argued that the consensus methods that are often used
to determine acupuncture characteristics – number of treatment sessions, duration of sessions, needle
prescriptions and training and experience of acupuncturists – are appropriate. This is because the variations
in outcome associated with these factors are likely to be small. This study would suggest that the most
useful characteristics to test would be the number of needles and number of treatment sessions.
Few characteristics of acupuncturists were reported sufficiently consistently by triallists, namely age, sex
and minimum experience as an acupuncture practitioner, and consequently our results on related effects
on outcome were compromised. We know that some practitioners have better results than others, yet we
do not have the data from this substudy to understand why, a concern also raised in relation to other
therapist-led interventions.154,155 It is likely that more sophisticated measures are needed, such as a measure
of the patients’ perception of a practitioner’s empathy, which has been shown to correlate with
enablement and in turn with outcome.156
Recommendations for future research
Four additional substudies are planned by the ATC, as well as an update to the database by adding in a set
of more recently published trials. The first additional substudy will explore the time course of acupuncture,
establishing for how long the effects of acupuncture last beyond the end of treatment. Another will explore
the relationship between characteristics of the patients and variations in outcome, for example whether or
not there any baseline characteristics of patients, such as age, psychological distress or baseline severity, that
might influence the effects of acupuncture. In the third substudy we will determine if there is a certain type
of patient who could be classed as a super-responder. Finally, a substudy will explore whether or not the
effects of acupuncture are significantly influenced by the acupuncture practitioner.
An important recommendation for future research is that trials need to be designed with sufficient power
to detect the small differences in outcome that might be associated with differences between acupuncture
and sham acupuncture. Given our analyses involving acupuncture trials for chronic pain, an effect size of
0.2 requires a sample size in a two-arm trial of > 1000 patients, a number rarely reached in almost all
sham-controlled trials. To determine differences between two different styles of acupuncture, for example
when one might hypothesise that the difference in outcome between two individual acupuncture
characteristics of treatment is associated with a smaller effect size of say 0.10 or 0.05, would require
> 2000 or > 8000 patients, respectively, assuming 90% power and a 0.05 significance level.
To explore contextual factors, further research into empathy and enablement as well as other measures
such as the therapeutic alliance or success of patient–practitioner interactions may be useful lines of
enquiry. Interestingly, a widely accepted principle underlying traditional Chinese medicine is that it is not
the techniques and methods used but the cultivation of the practitioner that is the key to effective
practice.157 A qualitative study might provide a useful way of exploring the key factors which explain the
observation that some practitioners consistently have better patient outcomes than others.
Conclusion
Acupuncture is superior to both non-acupuncture controls and sham acupuncture for the treatment of
chronic pain and is therefore a reasonable referral option for patients with chronic pain. The data indicate
that acupuncture is more than a placebo; however, the differences between true and sham acupuncture
are relatively modest. Other factors, in addition to the specific effects of needling, are important
contributors to therapeutic effects. Given that the results are from IPD meta-analyses of nearly 18,000
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
37
 randomised patients in high-quality RCTs, it can be concluded that they provide the most robust evidence
to date on acupuncture for chronic pain.
Moreover, acupuncture is significantly superior to control, irrespective of the subtype of control. With
regard to sham acupuncture, non-penetrating needles appear to be a more effective sham control. In
addition, the effect size of acupuncture is greater when compared with routine care than when compared
with protocol-guided care. Our findings can help inform study design in acupuncture, particularly with
respect to sample size, in the context that the choice of control should be driven by the research question.
We found little evidence that different characteristics of acupuncture or acupuncturists were effect
modifiers. There was modest evidence that more needles and more sessions were associated with better
outcomes when comparing acupuncture with non-sham controls, suggesting that the dose of acupuncture
is important. Trials designed to evaluate the potentially small differences in outcome associated with
different acupuncture or acupuncturist characteristics are likely to require large sample sizes.
ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN: AN INDIVIDUAL PATIENT DATA META-ANALYSIS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
38
 Chapter 3 Comparison of acupuncture with other
physical treatments for pain caused by osteoarthritis
of the knee: a network meta-analysis
Background
Osteoarthritis is a degenerative condition involving the progressive wearing down of (joint) bone and
cartilage, normally resulting in pain, stiffness and functional disability. These symptoms usually worsen
according to how much the affected joint is used. In adults aged ≥ 45 years, the knee represents the most
common site of peripheral joint pain and the prevalence of painful, disabling knee osteoarthritis in people
aged > 55 years is 10%.158 Risk factors for knee osteoarthritis include age, sex, obesity, bone density,
genetic factors and injury.
Diagnosis is usually made using clinical features of knee osteoarthritis, by radiological assessment of the
knee or by a combination of the two. Radiographic features – the severity of which are commonly
summarised using the Kellgren and Lawrence score159 – have been significantly associated with
knee pain.160
The WOMAC index is a self-administered disability status measure for knee (or hip) osteoarthritis.115 Its
individual components assess pain, stiffness and function, with the summed scores producing an overall
measure of disability (WOMAC index). As a standardised and comprehensive assessment of disability and
its components, the WOMAC index increases transparency and comparability within clinical research.
The treatment of knee osteoarthritis should be tailored according to knee risk factors (obesity, adverse
mechanical factors, physical activity), general risk factors (age, comorbidity, polypharmacy), level of pain
intensity and disability, sign of inflammation, and location and degree of structural damage.161 The main
objective of a GP treating a patient with knee osteoarthritis is normally alleviation of pain; failure to control
pain may result in reduced mobility and daily activities, leading to a reduction in quality of life.161 The more
sedentary lifestyle that might follow may, in turn, exacerbate the symptoms of knee osteoarthritis through
lack of exercise and joint movement, and weight gain.
In clinical practice, treatment often begins with analgesia [paracetamol and/or topical non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)] and, when these are ineffective, a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor is
recommended. GP advice about exercise and weight loss, which NICE guidelines82 recommend as part
of core therapy, is often given in addition to (rather than instead of) analgesic drugs. The regular and
long-term use of pharmacological agents such as NSAIDs for pain may be associated with side effects,
such as gastrointestinal bleeding, without necessarily resulting in worthwhile pain reduction.162 A UK
review of qualitative studies of medicine taking163 revealed considerable reluctance to take drugs and a
preference to take as little as possible; many knee osteoarthritis patients want non-pharmacological
treatments for pain relief.164 The use of physical (i.e. non-pharmacological) treatments such as acupuncture
is therefore likely to be attractive for patients seeking alternatives, particularly for a condition such as
osteoarthritis of the knee for which there is currently no cure.
In patients for whom insufficient pain relief has been provided by the core interventions mentioned
above (as recommended by NICE), coupled with paracetamol and/or topical NSAIDs, GPs may consider
a range of physical treatments as the next step in the treatment pathway. The NICE guidelines82 list
muscle-strengthening and aerobic exercise, manual therapy, TENS, braces and insoles, weight loss, and
heat and cooling treatments as being among such alternatives, but acupuncture was not recommended.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
39
 Other non-pharmacological interventions used for osteoarthritis of the knee, but which would not be
considered as alternatives to acupuncture, include surgery, an intervention that would be considered at a
later stage in the treatment pathway. Similarly, structured psychosocial/educational interventions are
generally considered for a different group of patients, that is, when pain-reducing therapies have failed
and the emphasis is on a need for pain-coping skills, rather than pain reduction.165
Many reviews have been undertaken of the varying types of physical therapies for osteoarthritis of the
knee, but evaluation of a single therapy for a single condition provides only a limited basis for decision-
making. Few randomised trials have directly compared physical therapies and no review has attempted to
address the question of how effective such treatments are relative to each other using statistical methods.
The focus of interest within our study was on acupuncture, as this review was funded as part of this
programme of projects on acupuncture and chronic pain, and because of the uncertainty within the NICE
decision-making process with regard to the level of evidence on acupuncture for osteoarthritis relative to
other physical treatments.84 The purpose of this systematic review, therefore, was to comprehensively
synthesise both the direct and the indirect evidence – using mixed-treatment comparison methods in a
network meta-analysis – to compare the effectiveness of different physical therapies used for the
alleviation of knee pain caused by osteoarthritis.
In a separate substudy within this project we summarise the reporting methods of the WOMAC pain
subscale and the WOMAC index from the trials identified for the main study, and make recommendations
to improve reporting in future studies.
Methods
Using the methods recommended by the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (CRD)166 and the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement,167 the systematic review
and network meta-analysis was first conducted in 2010. A report based on this study is available on the
CRD website.168 This chapter reports an update of this systematic review and network meta-analysis
conducted in 2013 and published in Osteoarthritis and Cartilage.169
Literature search
We searched 17 electronic databases from inception to June 2013. A combination of relevant free-text
terms, synonyms and subject headings relating to osteoarthritis of the knee and named physical treatments
were included in the strategy. A search filter was used to limit retrieval of studies to RCTs. No language or
date restrictions were applied.
The base search strategy developed in MEDLINE was translated to run on the databases listed in Appendix 3.
Adaptations to the search strategy were necessary for certain databases: Manual, Alternative and Natural
Therapy Index System (MANTIS), PASCAL (database of the Institut de l’Information Scientifique et Téchnique),
Inside Conferences, Physiotherapy Evidence Database (PEDro), CAMbase (Complementary and Alternative
Medicine), Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature (LILACS) and ClinicalTrials.gov.
Supplementary internet searches of websites relating to osteoarthritis were undertaken to locate any
additional studies not found from the database searches. The bibliographies of all relevant reviews and
guidelines were checked for further potentially relevant studies. The base MEDLINE search strategy can be
found in Appendix 3.
Study selection and definitions of interventions and outcome
All abstracts were screened by two reviewers independently, followed by all relevant full papers.
Disagreements were resolved by discussion or, when necessary, by a third reviewer. We included RCTs in
adults with osteoarthritis of the knee (in which the mean age of the population was ≥ 55 years) that
assessed pain as an outcome. Studies with mixed populations (e.g. including both patients with
osteoarthritis of the knee and those with osteoarthritis of the hip) that presented results by site of
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
40
 osteoarthritis were eligible for inclusion. Trials of acute knee pain or trials in which the mean age of the
population was < 55 years were excluded.
We included treatment with the following: acupuncture, balneotherapy, braces, aerobic exercise,
muscle-strengthening exercise, heat treatment, ice/cooling treatment, insoles, interferential therapy,
laser/light therapy, manual therapy, neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES), pulsed electrical
stimulation (PES), pulsed electromagnetic fields (PEMFs), static magnets, t’ai chi, TENS and weight loss.
We aimed not to be restrictive with regard to selecting the types of intervention within these categories.
However, exercise interventions that were predominantly home based and unsupervised were excluded as
being too similar to standard care. Trials evaluating surgery or medication were also excluded, as were
studies evaluating the combination of two or more physical treatments and studies comparing only
different regimens/durations/modalities of the same type of intervention.
When considering the electrotherapy interventions, we classed studies using ‘pulsed short-wave’
interventions as being PES. Although interferential therapy works in a similar way to TENS, we classed it as
a distinct intervention. Similarly, NMES was considered separately from TENS as it is commonly used to
elicit muscle contraction, as opposed to TENS, which stimulates nerves with the aim of blocking pain
inputs to the brain. PEMFs (in which an electric current is generated in the treated area by means of a
magnetic field) was also classed separately.
We classified adjunctive components to the main intervention into five categories, based on what was
reported in the trials: (1) treatment as usual, (2) treatment as usual plus specified home exercise or
education, (3) treatment as usual plus specified (trial-specific) analgesics, (4) no medication and (5) no
medication plus specified home exercise or education. Using this coding we explored the impact of
different adjunctive components on the main interventions and on variations in standard care.
Eligible comparators included any form of standard or usual care, including waiting-list control (which
could incorporate one or more of analgesics, education and exercise advice), all of which we classed as
being ‘standard care’. Placebo interventions, no intervention and sham acupuncture were also eligible.
Because of evidence suggesting that sham acupuncture is more active than an inert ‘placebo’, it was
treated as a separate comparator.145 Commonly, sufficient details about standard care or usual treatment
were not reported.
Data extraction
Using a standardised data extraction form created using EPPI-Reviewer software (version 4.0; Evidence for
Policy and Practice Information and Co-ordinating Centre, University of London, London, UK), data were
extracted on population characteristics [population type, method of diagnosis, age, sex, weight, body mass
index (BMI) and Kellgren and Lawrence score], intervention parameters and study quality. Data on pain
assessment at baseline, at the end of treatment and at all subsequent time points were extracted onto a
Microsoft Excel® 2010 spreadsheet (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA). Data extraction was
performed by one reviewer and independently checked by a second reviewer. Any disagreements were
resolved by discussion or by a third reviewer when necessary. Data from non-English-language papers
were extracted by one reviewer together with a native speaker. Multiple publications of the same
study were extracted as one study, using all of the information available.
Assessment of trial quality
Trial quality was assessed using 14 questions adapted from a checklist used in a previous review by
researchers at the CRD.170 Based on the number of criteria satisfied, studies were then graded as excellent,
good, satisfactory or poor. To be of satisfactory quality studies had to report the number of randomised
participants; have groups with comparable baseline characteristics for important variables, such as pain;
adequately report eligibility criteria; clearly report on losses to follow-up; report data for the intention-to-
treat population; and use an appropriate placebo (if relevant). Poor-quality trials were those that failed to
satisfy one or more of the criteria required for satisfactory study quality. Beyond questions relating to the
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
41
 above grading, other questions in the assessment covered methods of randomisation and allocation
concealment, level of blinding, use of a power calculation and level of losses to follow-up. A further quality
assessment was conducted using the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool.171 Quality assessments were performed
by one reviewer and independently checked by a second reviewer. Any disagreements were resolved by
discussion or by a third reviewer when necessary.
Outcomes and data transformations
It was anticipated that pain – our primary outcome – would be measured using a variety of measures,
for example a VAS, Likert scale, WOMAC pain subscale and Arthritis Impact Measurement Scale (AIMS),
with all scales accepted.
The WOMAC is a widely used, self-administered health status measure that assesses the dimensions of
pain, stiffness and physical function in patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. It is available in
five-point Likert, 11-point numerical rating and 100-mm VAS formats. Under each dimension there are a
number of questions designed to assess the clinical severity of the disease (five questions for pain, two
questions for stiffness and 17 questions for physical function). The patient’s response to each question
produces a score, with the scores summed to derive an aggregate score for each dimension. There are
three subscale scores (pain, stiffness and physical function) and a total score (WOMAC index), which
reflects disability overall.
The WOMAC pain score range has been reported in various ways: a VAS 0–10 scale (commonly reported
across a 0–50 range), a VAS 0–100 scale (commonly reported as a 0–500 range) or a Likert scale
(commonly reported as a 0–20 range). The overall WOMAC score (index) is determined by summing the
scores across the three dimensions and the score range includes the following: a VAS 0–10 scale
(commonly reported as a 0–240 range), a VAS 0–100 scale (commonly reported as a 0–2400 range) and a
0–4 Likert scale (commonly reported as a 0–96 range). A number of transformations and modifications are
reported in the literature.
The preferred measure of pain was the WOMAC pain scale (using either a VAS or a Likert scale).
Another pain scale was included in the analysis when a trial did not measure the WOMAC pain scale,
with prioritisation of pain scales made on a clinical, or prevalence, basis. The secondary outcome was the
WOMAC index. Studies that did not report a pain outcome were excluded from the review. Outcome data
were extracted for different time points: baseline, end of treatment and any follow-up time point.
As a variety of pain scales were used, Hedges’ g SMDs between treatment groups were calculated for the
meta-analyses (studies reporting medians could not be analysed). Different doses/regimens of the same
type of treatment within a study were pooled. Final values were used in the analysis to maximise the
evidence available and to avoid the need to make assumptions about within-patient correlation between
baseline and final values, which the use of change from baseline data would have necessitated. For trials
reporting change from baseline but not final values, we calculated final values provided baseline data were
reported along with variance estimates (e.g. SDs). When the number of patients included in a trial’s
analysis was not reported, but the number of patients randomised was, we estimated the number of
analysed patients by multiplying the number of patients randomised by the average proportion of patients
included in an analysis across trials. SEs or 95% CIs were used to derive SDs when they were not reported.
When this was not possible, trials that used the same or a similar scale as that used in the trial with
missing SDs were identified and their SDs pooled, with this imputed estimate being used. We present
results as SMDs, as well as SMDs converted to the WOMAC VAS 0–100 pain scale, to provide more
clinically meaningful results.
Evidence synthesis
A network meta-analysis draws on both direct (treatments compared in the same trial) and indirect
evidence (different treatments studied in separate trials, but compared when they share the use of a
common comparator treatment). The summary treatment effect from each study is utilised, so the benefit
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
42
 of randomisation in each study is retained. To conduct a meta-analysis of trials, study characteristics must
be similar within a comparison. For indirect and direct evidence to be consistent, study characteristics
must be similar across comparisons.85,86,172–175
We planned analyses for three different time points to assess both the immediacy and the durability of
effects: (1) end of treatment, which was our primary time point, as defined in the individual studies;
(2) 3 months from the start of treatment, which was the time point closest to 3 months from the start of
treatment (excluding outcomes recorded at < 4 weeks from the start of treatment); and (3) 3 months
after the end of treatment, which was the time point closest to 3 months, but between 8 and 16 weeks,
from the end of treatment. However, there was a paucity of long- and medium-term data across the
trials, and for the 3 months after the end-of-treatment time point no connected network incorporating
acupuncture existed and this time point was evaluated by only 21 trials. Data for the 3 months from the
start of treatment analysis were very similar to data for the end-of-treatment analysis because for around
two-thirds of trials the two time points were the same. Furthermore, in most studies, the primary time
point specified by investigators was the end of treatment and this time point produced the largest
network, incorporating more interventions, and studies, than the other time points. We therefore report
the results for the end-of-treatment time point.
To evaluate the impact of study quality on the results, two sets of analyses were performed: one included
all studies regardless of quality (labelled ‘any quality’) and one was a primary sensitivity analysis including
only studies of satisfactory, or better, quality (labelled ‘better quality’). Studies with atypical populations,
interventions or results were excluded in a second sensitivity analysis. These studies were identified from
pairwise meta-analyses conducted (in RevMan 5.0; The Cochrane Collaboration, The Nordic Cochrane Centre,
Copenhagen, Denmark) using outcomes recorded at the end of treatment only. These studies were not
intended as a comprehensive stand-alone synthesis, but as a means of informing and complementing the
network meta-analysis. In particular, they were used to investigate the within-intervention clinical and
statistical heterogeneity. We assessed for possible publication bias using a funnel plot when enough studies
within individual treatments were available. This was deemed to be appropriate only for muscle-strengthening
exercise and the funnel plot provided no evidence to suggest publication bias.168
Analyses were conducted using WinBUGS software (version 1.4; MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge, UK),
which uses Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation to estimate model parameters and follows a
Bayesian approach in which prior probabilities are specified for parameters (these were specified to be
vague throughout the analysis). The treatment difference was assumed to be normally distributed and a
random-effects network meta-analysis model was selected as clinical and methodological heterogeneity
within the treatment definitions appeared likely.176 A common between-study variance was modelled to
allow a between-study variance to apply for comparisons with few data points.
Convergence of the MCMC chains was assessed by observing the history of the traces of the starting
values for selected priors, the Brooks–Gelman–Rubin statistic and posterior distributions.177 The first 10,000
iterations were discarded and then a further 50,000 iterations were conducted on which parameter
estimates were based. The model fit was evaluated using the residual deviance, with this being
approximately equal to the number of data points if the fit was good.174,178–180
Inconsistency in the treatment effect estimates derived separately from direct and indirect evidence was
assessed for many of the comparisons distributed across the networks using the node-splitting method
where a p-value is 2 × min(prob, 1 – prob), where ‘prob’ is the probability that the direct estimate is higher
than the indirect estimate.172,179
Uncertainty in all estimates is presented using the upper and lower limits of the 95% credible intervals
(CrIs) of these estimates. These credible limits describe the boundaries within which it is believed that there
is a 95% chance that the true value lies. The median rank of each intervention and the 95% CrIs of the
rank are presented to summarise the uncertainty across all of the treatment effect estimates.181
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
43
 To present more clinically meaningful network meta-analysis results, we present both SMDs and the SMDs
converted to the WOMAC VAS 0–100 pain scale (although it is acknowledged that back-transformation
can be of limited value in heterogeneous populations).182 A pooled SD for the WOMAC VAS 0–100 pain
scale was calculated from all of the arms of the six trials in the analysis that utilised this scale. The SMDs
were then multiplied by this pooled SD (16.49) to produce a difference in WOMAC VAS 0–100 score.
In the substudy within this study that explored reporting of the WOMAC pain subscale and WOMAC
index, further details were extracted for those trials that utilised the WOMAC: scale used (Likert/VAS 0–10,
VAS 0–100/NRS); whether the WOMAC pain subscale or the WOMAC index was used; and whether any
modifications were reported. In the light of inconsistencies and lack of clarity identified during the review,
the WOMAC outcome details were re-examined by a third reviewer (NFW) and further information was
extracted as necessary to address the following four questions:
1. Was it clear that all assessments had been conducted?
2. Was the score range clear?
3. Were details reported on how the final score had been calculated (sum, average or transformation to
0–100 scale)?
4. Were baseline scores reported (and approximate baseline score)?
In addition, the scale used and the score range that could be deduced from the information provided in
each paper was recorded and the ease of identification of these was categorised as clearly stated in the
paper (stated), required assumptions to be made (assumed) or unclear. All information that could support
any assumptions, including baseline score (or, when not reported, follow-up scores), was also recorded.
Further details of this substudy’s methods are reported elsewhere.183
Results
In total, 3820 references were retrieved from searches, of which 156 trials (detailed in Appendix 3)
including 18 distinct interventions and four comparators met the inclusion criteria. Four of 10 foreign-
language papers that appeared eligible based on their English abstracts could not be translated and so had
to be excluded. Thirty-eight trials reported data in ways that meant they could not be incorporated in the
network meta-analyses. One study was found to have been retracted and was subsequently removed from
all analyses. A study flow diagram is presented in Figure 4.
Study characteristics
An overview of all eligible studies is presented in Table 15, regardless of whether or not they reported data
suitable for network meta-analysis. The mean treatment duration (and timing of the end-of-treatment
assessment) varied widely, from just a single session (TENS) to 69 weeks (weight-loss interventions),
although the majority of interventions were administered over a 2- to 6-week period. Most studies
were classified as having recruited a general knee osteoarthritis population, although weight-loss trials
(as expected) recruited only overweight or obese participants. The mean BMI in some studies recruiting
a general population fell into the overweight or obese classification, although most studies did not
report BMI.
Around three-quarters of the studies (110/152) were classed as ‘poor-quality’ studies. Of the remainder,
33 studies were classed as ‘satisfactory’ and nine studies were classed as ‘good’, which together were
classed as ‘better quality’. Only 12 trials were considered to be at low risk of bias in the network meta-
analysis. Trial quality was commonly compromised by a lack of adequate blinding and small sample sizes,
which limited the effectiveness of randomisation, resulting in baseline imbalances. Quality assessment
data are presented in Appendix 3. Study quality did vary by intervention, making the evidence base more
robust in some areas than in others. No evidence was found for publication bias (only assessable for
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
44
 muscle-strengthening exercise). Individual study characteristics of all studies included in the systematic
review can be found in Appendix 3.
Network meta-analysis
Suitable data for the end-of-treatment analyses were reported in 114 trials (9709 patients) (detailed in
Appendix 3). This includes data from the 22 new studies identified from the search update conducted in
2013 and nine studies that had been excluded from the original review analyses but which were now
included by calculating final values from the change from baseline data. In our original analyses (based on
searches up to 2010) there was no indication that the majority of the adjunctive components of the
experimental interventions were associated with a treatment effect difference.169 The one exception was
that standard care incorporating active analgesia was more effective than standard care with ‘treatment as
References retrieved from
searches up to June 2010
(n = 3820)
Excluded on title or abstract
(n = 3267)
Linked publications
(n = 67)
Appeared eligible from abstract, 
but translation not possible
(n = 4)
Trials reported data in ways which could not be 
incorporated into the network meta-analyses
(n = 38)
Potentially relevant papers
(n = 553)
Articles assessed
(n = 603)
Eligible articles
(n = 223)
Trials included in 
systematic review
(n = 156)
Trials with data suitable for network meta-analysis
(at the ‘end of treatment’ time point)
(n = 114)
Unobtainable
(n = 44)
2013 update: potentially
relevant papers
(n = 96)
Unobtainable
(n = 2)
• Study design, n = 105
• Treatment, n = 153
• Population, n = 48
• Outcomes, n = 65
• Protocol or ongoing study, n = 9
Excluded
(n = 380)
FIGURE 4 Study flow chart.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
45
 TABLE 15 Summary of characteristics of eligible trialsa included in the review
Intervention
Number of trials eligible
for the review (number
of patientsb)
Type of population recruitedc
(number of studies)
Mean age
(years), range
Female
(%), range
Comparators (number of treatment armsd)
Acupuncture
25 (2794)
General (23), both knees affected
(1), awaiting surgery (1)
58–85
50–96
Sham acupuncture (15), standard care (13), TENS (3),
muscle-strengthening exercise (1), ice/cooling (1)
Balneotherapy
14 (1008)
General (12), both knees affected (2)
54–70e
47–100
Placebo (8), standard care (6), heat treatment (1)
Braces
1 (24)
General (1)
59.5
63
Insoles (1)
Aerobic exercise
13 (1136)
General (9), both knees affected
(2), overweight or obese (2)
54–75e
50–100
Standard care (13), muscle-strengthening exercise
(2), weight loss (1)
Muscle-strengthening
exercise
34 (3013)
General (26), both knees affected
(5), awaiting surgery (2)
53–77e
31–100
Standard care (22), placebo (4), no treatment (2),
aerobic exercise (2), heat treatment (1), TENS (1),
acupuncture (1), PES (1), manual therapy (1),
NMES (2)
Heat treatment
7 (412)
General (7)
61–74
63–100
Placebo (4), standard care (1), TENS (1),
muscle-strengthening exercise (1), balneotherapy
(1), ice/cooling (1)
Ice/cooling treatment
4 (211)
General (4)
56–61
48–91
TENS (2), acupuncture (1), standard care (1), heat
treatment (1), placebo (1), no treatment (1)
Insoles
6 (893)
General (6)
58–68
54–100
Placebo (5), braces (1)
Interferential therapy
5 (240)
General (5)
59–67
67–80
Placebo (3), TENS (1), no treatment (1)
Laser/light therapy
9 (379)
General (6), both knees affected (3)
58–74
68–90
Placebo (8), standard care (1)
Manual therapy
6 (486)
General (6)
56–68
63–78
Standard care (4), placebo (2), muscle-strengthening
exercise (1)
NMES
3 (78)
General (3)
60–71
42–79
Standard care (2), muscle-strengthening exercise (2)
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
46
 Intervention
Number of trials eligible
for the review (number
of patientsb)
Type of population recruitedc
(number of studies)
Mean age
(years), range
Female
(%), range
Comparators (number of treatment armsd)
PES
8 (392)
General (8)
55–70
46–100
Placebo (7), standard care (1), muscle-strengthening
exercise (1), no treatment (1)
PEMF
6 (521)
General (6)
60–69
28–80
Placebo (6)
Static magnets
3 (131)
General (3)
63–65
60–79
Placebo (3)
T’ai chi
4 (307)
General (4)
65–70
75–93
Standard care (4)
TENS
18 (805)
General (17), awaiting surgery (1)
56–85
48–97
Placebo (12), standard care (3), acupuncture (3),
ice/cooling (2), heat treatment (1), interferential (1),
no treatment, muscle-strengthening exercise (1)
Weight loss (dieting)
5 (870)
Overweight or obese (5)
61–70
26–89
Standard care (5), aerobic exercise (1)
a Some studies compared two or more different interventions.
b Number of patients analysed by the primary studies for end-of-treatment pain not always clearly stated.
c ‘General’ is used as a broad term for studies that did not recruit very specific population types.
d Different doses of the same treatment in a trial were pooled, counting as one arm.
e Trial reported mean age by treatment group, and contained a group with a mean age of ≥ 55.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
47
 usual’ (with or without home exercise/education). However, as analgesic adjuncts were used in only eight
trials, and most studies were classified as using the ‘treatment as usual’ adjunct, with little adjunct detail
defined, the focus of this study was on comparing the interventions categorised without adjuncts. The
resulting network for any-quality studies, with analysis at the end of treatment and interventions
categorised without adjuncts, is illustrated in Figure 5.
The interventions drawn from the any-quality trials were compared with standard care and acupuncture
(Tables 16 and 17, respectively), with caterpillar plots shown in Figures 6 and 7, respectively, and
interventions ordered by treatment effect. Across all comparisons, inconsistency at a p-value of < 0.05 was
identified only for the two comparisons involving PES. Eight physical treatments had a statistically significant
mean beneficial effect compared with standard care, namely interferential therapy, acupuncture, TENS, PES,
balneotherapy, aerobic exercise, sham acupuncture and muscle-strengthening exercise (see Table 16 and
Figure 6). When acting as a comparator, acupuncture was statistically significantly better at reducing pain
than sham acupuncture, muscle-strengthening exercise, weight loss, PEMF, placebo, insoles, NMES and no
intervention (see Table 17 and Figure 7).
Effect sizes for each intervention are presented in terms of both SMDs and the WOMAC VAS 0–100 pain
scale. To help evaluate these conversions, one study reported the minimal clinically important change as
–15 mm (on a VAS 0–100 scale and derived from a prior Delphi exercise)184 and the minimal perceptible
clinical improvement (MPCI, the smallest change detectable by the patient) as –9.7 mm (on a WOMAC
0.96
0.83
0.48
0.17
0.50
0.33
0.88
0.4
0.42
0.46
0.67
Sham acupuncture
Acupuncture
Weight loss
Manual therapy
Static magnets
Ice/cooling 
treatment
Heat treatment
Muscle exercise
Aerobic exercise
T’ai chi
Placebo
Braces
No treatment
Balneotherapy
Standard
care
TENS
PEMF
PES
Insoles
NMES
Laser/
light therapy
Interferential
treatment
0.88
FIGURE 5 Network diagram for the end-of-treatment analysis of any-quality studies (with interventions categorised
without adjuncts). In this figure, each solid arrow indicates that there is a data point for that comparison entered
into the analysis. The thickness of the arrow reflects the number of trials. The dotted line reflects an extra
comparison in a multiarm trial. The numbers are a measure of inconsistency: 0 is no inconsistency; 1 is complete
inconsistency.
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
48
 TABLE 16 Results of network meta-analyses for comparisons with standard care: studies of any quality
Intervention
Number
of trials
(patientsa)
SMD (95% CrI)
Difference expressed on
a WOMAC VAS 0–100
pain scale (95% CrI)
Standard care (comparator)
– (–)
– (–)
Interferential therapy
3 (98)
–1.63 (–2.39 to –0.87)
–26.90 (–39.39 to –14.40)
Acupuncture
24 (1219)
–0.89 (–1.18 to –0.59)
–14.69 (–19.52 to –9.80)
TENS
12 (285)
–0.65 (–1.06 to –0.25)
–10.77 (–17.50 to –4.05)
PES
6 (180)
–0.65 (–1.19 to –0.10)
–10.65 (–19.59 to –1.66)
Balneotherapy
9 (275)
–0.60 (–1.04 to –0.15)
–9.87 (–17.15 to –2.48)
Aerobic exercise
11 (428)
–0.55 (–0.89 to –0.21)
–9.02 (–14.68 to –3.51)
T’ai chi
4 (159)
–0.51 (–1.03 to 0.01)
–8.39 (–16.98 to 0.13)
Static magnets
2 (41)
–0.50 (–1.34 to 0.33)
–8.27 (–22.08 to 5.43)
Sham acupuncture
14 (892)
–0.47 (–0.84 to –0.09)
–7.76 (–13.89 to –1.52)
Manual therapy
4 (166)
–0.44 (–0.96 to 0.09)
–7.21 (–15.90 to 1.49)
Muscle-strengthening exercise
28 (1254)
–0.40 (–0.61 to –0.19)
–6.54 (–9.99 to –3.11)
Ice/cooling treatment
3 (51)
–0.35 (–1.03 to 0.33)
–5.81 (–16.94 to 5.44)
Heat treatment
5 (123)
–0.31 (–0.86 to 0.24)
–5.14 (–14.20 to 3.98)
Laser therapy
5 (155)
–0.27 (–0.86 to 0.32)
–4.53 (–14.19 to 5.20)
Weight loss
5 (436)
–0.26 (–0.67 to 0.15)
–4.25 (–10.97 to 2.43)
PEMF
5 (238)
–0.15 (–0.71 to 0.42)
–2.43 (–11.76 to 6.90)
Placebo
42 (1077)
–0.07 (–0.42 to 0.29)
–1.15 (–6.98 to 4.70)
Braces
1 (12)
0.00 (–1.39 to 1.39)
0.07 (–22.84 to 22.94)
Insoles
3 (197)
0.10 (–0.65 to 0.85)
1.64 (–10.71 to 13.97)
NMES
2 (28)
0.22 (–0.62 to 1.05)
3.58 (–10.26 to 17.33)
No intervention
5 (87)
0.44 (–0.15 to 1.04)
7.25 (–2.51 to 17.12)
a Number of patients analysed by the primary studies for end-of-treatment pain not always clearly stated.
Data points: 131; residual deviance: 152.
Between-study SD 0.45 (95% CI 0.36 to 0.55).
TABLE 17 Results of network meta-analyses for comparisons with acupuncture: studies of any quality
Intervention
Number
of trials
(patientsa)
SMD (95% CrI)
Difference expressed on
a WOMAC VAS 0–100
pain scale (95% CrI)
Acupuncture (comparator)
– (–)
– (–)
Interferential therapy
3 (98)
–0.74 (–1.54 to 0.05)
–12.21 (–25.33 to 0.84)
TENS
12 (285)
0.24 (–0.22 to 0.70)
3.92 (–3.70 to 11.50)
PES
6 (180)
0.25 (–0.35 to 0.84)
4.04 (–5.78 to 13.87)
Balneotherapy
9 (275)
0.29 (–0.22 to 0.81)
4.82 (–3.60 to 13.28)
Aerobic exercise
11 (428)
0.34 (–0.11 to 0.79)
5.67 (–1.84 to 13.00)
continued
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
49
 TABLE 17 Results of network meta-analyses for comparisons with acupuncture: studies of any quality (continued)
Intervention
Number
of trials
(patientsa)
SMD (95% CrI)
Difference expressed on
a WOMAC VAS 0–100
pain scale (95% CrI)
T’ai chi
4 (159)
0.38 (–0.22 to 0.98)
6.30 (–3.58 to 16.12)
Static magnets
2 (41)
0.39 (–0.48 to 1.25)
6.41 (–7.86 to 20.61)
Sham acupuncture
14 (892)
0.42 (0.15 to 0.70)
6.93 (2.50 to 11.46)
Manual therapy
4 (166)
0.45 (–0.14 to 1.05)
7.47 (–2.30 to 17.23)
Muscle-strengthening exercise
28 (1254)
0.49 (0.15 to 0.84)
8.14 (2.41 to 13.83)
Ice/cooling treatment
3 (51)
0.54 (–0.16 to 1.25)
8.88 (–2.70 to 20.61)
Heat treatment
5 (123)
0.58 (–0.02 to 1.18)
9.55 (–0.30 to 19.44)
Laser therapy
5 (155)
0.62 (–0.02 to 1.25)
10.16 (–0.28 to 20.61)
Weight loss
5 (436)
0.63 (0.13 to 1.14)
10.44 (2.13 to 18.72)
PEMF
5 (238)
0.74 (0.13 to 1.36)
12.26 (2.22 to 22.36)
Placebo
42 (1077)
0.82 (0.40 to 1.25)
13.53 (6.58 to 20.53)
Standard care
53 (2308)
0.89 (0.59 to 1.18)
14.69 (9.80 to 19.52)
Braces
1 (12)
0.89 (–0.51 to 2.31)
14.76 (–8.49 to 38.01)
Insoles
3 (197)
0.99 (0.21 to 1.78)
16.33 (3.41 to 29.30)
NMES
2 (28)
1.11 (0.22 to 1.98)
18.27 (3.57 to 32.72)
No intervention
5 (87)
1.33 (0.69 to 1.97)
21.95 (11.30 to 32.52)
a Number of patients analysed by the primary studies for end-of-treatment pain not always clearly stated.
Data points: 131; residual deviance: 152.
Between-study SD 0.45 (95% CI 0.36 to 0.55).
INT (3)
ACU (24)
TENS (12)
PES (6)
BAL (9)
AE EX (11)
TAI (4)
MAG (2)
SH ACU (14)
MAN (4)
MU EX (28)
ICE (3)
HEA (5)
LAS  (5)
WEI (5)
PEMF (5)
PLA (42)
BRA (1)
INS (3)
NMES (2)
NO INT (5)
SMD
Favours intervention
Favours standard care
–3.0
–2.0
–1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
FIGURE 6 Standardised mean differences of each treatment compared with standard care for the analysis including
studies of any quality. Numbers in parentheses indicate the numbers of studies. ACU, acupuncture; AE EX, aerobic
exercise; BAL, balneotherapy; BRA, braces; HEA, heat treatment; ICE, ice/cooling treatment; INS, insoles; INT,
inferential therapy; LAS, laser therapy; MAG, static magnets; MAN, manual therapy; MU EX, muscle-strengthening
exercise; NO INT, no intervention; PLA, placebo; SH ACU, sham acupuncture; TAI, t’ai chi; WEI, weight loss.
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
50
 VAS 0–100 scale).185 Another study estimated the minimal clinically important improvement (MCII),
although only for pain on movement, as –19.9 mm on a VAS 0–100 scale; this figure varied by baseline
pain score, with patients with less pain having a smaller MCII (10.8 mm) and patients with severe pain
having a larger MCII (36.6 mm).186
When analysing only the better-quality studies (see Appendix 3) in the primary sensitivity analysis, 35 trials
were included, with nine types of intervention and 3499 patients. One study was identified as causing
inconsistency in the main analysis (a small study of muscle-strengthening exercise vs. PES) and was
therefore excluded.187 The network is illustrated in Figure 8, in which the analysis is at the end of treatment
and interventions are categorised without adjuncts. Uncertainty around the true between-study variance
increased because of the reduction in the number of studies per comparison, as well as loops in the
network. Most studies were of acupuncture (n = 11) or muscle-strengthening exercise (n = 9), with some
interventions represented by few studies.
When compared with standard care, there was a statistically significant reduction in pain for acupuncture,
balneotherapy, sham acupuncture and muscle-strengthening exercise (Table 18 and Figure 9). When
acupuncture was the comparator, it was statistically significantly better at a 95% level of credibility than
sham acupuncture, muscle-strengthening exercise, weight loss, aerobic exercise and no intervention
(Table 19 and Figure 10).
In terms of ranking, a probability statistic calculated from the treatment effect distributions showed that
acupuncture and balneotherapy were the two interventions with the highest rank (Table 20). Because
of overlapping CrIs for sham acupuncture, muscle-strengthening exercise and t’ai chi, there is some
uncertainty around these rankings.
In a secondary sensitivity analysis several trials were excluded based on population or intervention
differences, or on extreme data;136,188–193 the results were not sensitive to these changes, although the model
fit improved, as reported elsewhere.169 No network link could be made with the placebo-controlled studies
INT (3)
TENS (12)
PES (6)
BAL (9)
AE EX (11)
TAI (4)
MAG (2)
SH ACU (14)
MAN (4)
MU EX (28)
ICE (3)
HEA (5)
LAS  (5)
WEI (5)
PEMF (5)
PLA (42)
ST CARE (53)
BRA (1)
INS (3)
NMES (2)
NO MED (5)
Favours intervention
Favours acupuncture
–2.0
–1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
SMD
FIGURE 7 Standardised mean differences of each treatment compared with acupuncture for the analysis including
studies of any quality. Numbers in parentheses indicate the numbers of studies. AE EX, aerobic exercise;
BAL, balneotherapy; BRA, braces; HEA, heat treatment; ICE, ice/cooling treatment; INS, insoles; INT, inferential
therapy; LAS, laser therapy; MAG, static magnets; MAN, manual therapy; MU EX, muscle-strengthening exercise;
NO MED, no intervention; PLA, placebo; SH ACU, sham acupuncture; ST CARE, standard care; TAI, t’ai chi;
WEI, weight loss.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
51
 Sham acupuncture
Acupuncture
Weight loss
Muscle exercise
Aerobic exercise
T’ai chi
No treatment
Balneotherapy
Standard
care
0.02
0.07
FIGURE 8 Network diagram for the end-of-treatment analysis of better-quality studies (with interventions
categorised without adjuncts).
TABLE 18 Results of network meta-analyses for comparisons with standard care: studies of better quality
Intervention
Number
of trials
(patientsa)
SMD (95% CrI)
Difference expressed on
a WOMAC VAS 0–100
pain scale (95% CrI)
Standard care (comparator)
– (–)
– (–)
Acupuncture
11 (878)
–1.01 (–1.43 to –0.61)
–16.70 (–23.61 to –10.07)
Balneotherapy
1 (40)
–1.01 (–1.92 to –0.11)
–16.65 (–31.73 to –1.74)
Sham acupuncture
8 (685)
–0.68 (–1.17 to –0.19)
–11.14 (–19.29 to –3.16)
Muscle-strengthening exercise
9 (450)
–0.52 (–0.84 to –0.22)
–8.62 (–13.92 to –3.58)
T’ai chi
2 (51)
–0.26 (–0.96 to 0.44)
–4.29 (–15.87 to 7.23)
Weight loss
3 (357)
–0.08 (–0.55 to 0.39)
–1.34 (–9.10 to 6.41)
Aerobic exercise
1 (80)
0.07 (–0.69 to 0.84)
1.23 (–11.30 to 13.78)
No intervention
1 (30)
0.19 (–0.77 to 1.14)
3.11 (–12.72 to 18.77)
a Number of patients analysed by the primary studies for end-of-treatment pain not always clearly stated.
Data points: 31; residual deviance: 31.4.
Between-study SD 0.39 (95% CI 0.24 to 0.58).
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
52
 BAL (1)
AE EX (1)
TAI (2)
ACU (11)
SH ACU (8)
MU EX (9)
WEI (3)
NO TREAT (1)
Favours intervention
Favours standard care
–2.0
–1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
SMD
FIGURE 9 Standardised mean differences of each treatment compared with standard care for the analysis including
better-quality studies. Numbers in parentheses indicate the numbers of studies. ACU, acupuncture; AE EX, aerobic
exercise; BAL, balneotherapy; MU EX, muscle-strengthening exercise; NO TREAT, no intervention; SH ACU, sham
acupuncture; TAI, t’ai chi; WEI, weight loss.
TABLE 19 Results of network meta-analyses for comparisons with acupuncture: studies of better quality
Intervention
Number of trials
(patientsa)
SMD (95% CrI)
Difference expressed on
a WOMAC VAS 0–100
pain scale (95% CrI)
Acupuncture (comparator)
– (–)
– (–)
Balneotherapy
1 (40)
0.00 (–0.99 to 1.01)
0.05 (–16.36 to 16.62)
Sham acupuncture
8 (685)
0.34 (0.03 to 0.66)
5.57 (0.42 to 10.86)
Muscle-strengthening exercise
9 (450)
0.49 (0.00 to 0.98)
8.08 (0.02 to 16.21)
T’ai chi
2 (51)
0.75 (–0.05 to 1.57)
12.42 (–0.81 to 25.84)
Weight loss
3 (357)
0.93 (0.31 to 1.57)
15.36 (5.18 to 25.81)
Standard care
17 (928)
1.01 (0.61 to 1.43)
16.70 (10.07 to 23.61)
Aerobic exercise
1 (80)
1.09 (0.23 to 1.96)
17.94 (3.82 to 32.27)
No intervention
1 (30)
1.20 (0.18 to 2.23)
19.80 (2.94 to 36.81)
a Number of patients analysed by the primary studies for end-of-treatment pain not always clearly stated.
Data points: 31; residual deviance: 31.4.
Between-study SD 0.39 (95% CI 0.24 to 0.58).
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
53
 in the analysis of better-quality studies. We therefore conducted a separate network meta-analysis for these
studies. Both interferential therapy and heat treatment were statistically significantly more effective than
placebo, but laser therapy, PES and insoles were not; these data are also reported elsewhere.169
In the substudy on the reporting of the WOMAC pain subscale and WOMAC index, the former was
reported in 60 (45%) trials and the latter in 31 (23%) trials. Reporting of the exact method used in
administering the WOMAC pain subscale scoring was poor in many cases. Overall, only 15 (25%) trials
reported unambiguously both the scale and the score range for their use of the WOMAC pain subscale.
Only four (13%) trials reported unambiguously both the scale and the score range for their use of the
WOMAC index. Further details of the results of this substudy are reported elsewhere.183
TABLE 20 Ranking of interventions (using only better-quality studies)
Intervention
Number of trials
Median rank
95% CrI
Acupuncture
11
2
1 to 3
Balneotherapy
1
2
1 to 6
Sham acupuncture
8
3
2 to 6
Muscle-strengthening exercise
9
4
2 to 6
T’ai chi
2
5
2 to 9
Weight loss
3
6
4 to 9
Standard care
17
7
6 to 9
Aerobic exercise
1
8
3 to 9
No intervention
1
8
3 to 9
BAL (1)
AE EX (1)
TAI (2)
ST CARE (17)
SH ACU (8)
MU EX (9)
WEI (3)
NO TREAT (1)
SMD
Favours intervention
Favours acupuncture
–1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
FIGURE 10 Standardised mean differences of each treatment compared with acupuncture for the analysis
including better-quality studies. Numbers in parentheses indicate the numbers of studies. AE EX, aerobic exercise;
BAL, balneotherapy; MU EX, muscle-strengthening exercise; NO TREAT, no intervention; SH ACU, sham acupuncture;
ST CARE, standard care; TAI, t’ai chi; WEI, weight loss.
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
54
 Discussion
Principal findings
In the comprehensive network meta-analysis that we report here we compared all physical treatments for
osteoarthritis of the knee with each other within a coherent framework. This analysis provides the first
estimate of the relative effect of these treatments, which can be viewed as essential for decision-makers
when comparing treatment effects. By providing a basis for synthesising all of the available evidence in a
consistent framework, a network meta-analysis obviates the need to make decisions based on subjective
inferences from disconnected data.
Compared with standard care, eight of the 22 interventions that we evaluated produced a statistically
significant reduction in pain: interferential therapy, acupuncture, TENS, PES, balneotherapy, aerobic
exercise, sham acupuncture and muscle-strengthening exercise. Of these eight, only two interventions
were represented by more than three trials in the sensitivity analysis of better-quality studies: acupuncture
(11 trials) and muscle-strengthening exercise (nine trials), with acupuncture having statistically significantly
better outcomes. Acupuncture and balneotherapy (only one trial) were the two interventions with the
highest rank, although there is some uncertainty around this. For the better-quality placebo-controlled
studies, interferential therapy (one trial) showed a strong effect compared with placebo.
Strengths and limitations
Numerous systematic reviews, some summarised in a review of reviews,194 have evaluated the interventions
(or classes of interventions) included in this review. However, our analysis represents the use of the most
practical methods currently available to compare a large number of different types of treatment, enabling
a fair comparison to be made of competing physical treatments (including acupuncture) with each other.
A network meta-analysis requires an assumption of exchangeability between the trials in the same way
as is required for a standard meta-analysis. With regard to concerns that might arise from within- or
between-intervention heterogeneity, we sought to minimise these by using an age restriction as part of
our inclusion criteria and by excluding interventions consisting of more than one physical treatment.
We found that patient characteristics appeared to be broadly comparable across interventions. Inevitably,
there will be some clinical heterogeneity in a wide-ranging study such as this, but as far as it was possible
to tell, given the wide variation of scales used, baseline pain did not appear to vary systematically
between interventions.
We used a random-effects model to incorporate heterogeneity and we evaluated levels of inconsistency
and model fit. We also conducted sensitivity analyses excluding trials causing heterogeneity. Although
heterogeneity is accounted for in our results with the CrIs, it is possible that unknown confounding factors
may be affecting the results of indirect comparisons. With regard to trials of placebo interventions, the
majority used electrical or electromagnetic interventions and so it is not unreasonable to assume that the
placebo effects were similar (as the interventions were similar). In our review the trials, covering a diverse
range of interventions, were all assessed using the same quality assessment tools, which enabled
equivalence in the comparisons and better interpretation of the evidence base for each intervention.
Our sensitivity analysis of the better-quality studies resulted in fewer trials per comparison and fewer
network loops. This led to greater uncertainty about the true heterogeneity and about the differences
between the direct and the indirect evidence. The uncertainty associated with inconsistency may not be
fully captured in the results because fewer loops in relation to the size of the network meant that there
were fewer data to quantify inconsistency.
We were not able to include all of the studies in our analyses because of the variable reporting of pain
results. Moreover, our analyses focused only on the end-of-treatment data and these were available mostly
for short-term time periods. Of the trials that investigated effectiveness over medium- or long-term time
periods, only a few provided the data required for our analyses. However, a comparison of the maximum
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
55
 effect of interventions is not without merit, given that the treatments under consideration are not intended
as being cures and that any treatment effect might be expected to attenuate over time.
It is important that our results are evaluated in context. Most of the studies in our review were rated as
being of poor quality. Many of the better-quality studies were pragmatic trials in which blinding of patients
was not possible, that is, most studies are likely to have been subject to some form of bias. For this reason
there can be methodological limitations in clinical trials of physical treatments that are often inherent and
unavoidable. For the trials in which patients were not blinded and treatments were compared with
standard care, the overall treatment effect is likely to incorporate non-specific (placebo) effects. We
assumed that such non-specific effects were similar across all interventions, but variation may in fact be
present. However, there were also limitations that could have been avoided by triallists using better
methodology and reporting practices. For example, in our substudy on WOMAC reporting,183 we found
poor reporting of both the WOMAC pain subscale and the WOMAC index, which in turn resulted in
significant uncertainty in the interpretation of the results of individual trials and limited their contribution
to our evidence synthesis.
Comparison with the wider literature
In light of our results, it is worth considering what might be the true (or specific) effect of acupuncture.
In a Cochrane review,142 a statistically significant, clinically relevant, short-term improvement in pain was
reported (acupuncture vs. waiting list control: SMD –0.96, 95% CI –1.19 to –0.72), a similar finding to
what we have reported. A similar effect to ours was also observed in the comparison of acupuncture with
sham acupuncture (SMD –0.35, 95% CI –0.55 to –0.15). It is worth noting that the largest study70 in this
Cochrane analysis, which showed no statistically significant difference between acupuncture and sham
acupuncture, was one of two trials that used an intensive sham needling technique, which may have had
physiological effects. Also, our analysis included a recent large trial125 that used what appeared to be a very
active sham. Therefore, the inclusion of trials with sham controls that might be more active than an inert
placebo control could lead to pooled results that underestimate the short-term effect of acupuncture. It is
of interest to note that the effect size of acupuncture compared with sham acupuncture is of the same
order as that seen for NSAIDs compared with placebo (SMD 0.32, 95% CI 0.24 to 0.39), a difference that
has also been described as being too small to be clinically significant.195
An IPD meta-analysis that included an evaluation of acupuncture for patients with knee osteoarthritis was
recently reported196 (see Chapter 2). All included studies were deemed be of high quality because the
allocation concealment methods were assessed to be unambiguously adequate. This study also found
acupuncture to be more effective than sham acupuncture and with a smaller effect size than when
acupuncture was compared with no-acupuncture (usual care) controls. These findings indicate that
non-specific effects provide a partial contribution to the pain-alleviating effects of acupuncture.
Non-specific effects will also be contributing to the effectiveness of other (non-acupuncture) interventions
in our network meta-analysis. When interventions were not controlled by a placebo or a relevant sham,
commonly when blinding was not possible, the contribution of non-specific effects to the overall effect
cannot be estimated. However, given that there are inherent problems with identifying non-specific effects
in interventions involving physical treatments, it is reasonable to assume that fair comparisons between
treatments have been made.
There is some evidence to suggest that larger treatment effects are associated with sham acupuncture
than with pharmacological or other physical placebos.145,197 However, one of two contrasting factors may
impact on the effect of sham acupuncture in a given trial: either there is inadequate patient blinding
because of using unsuitable shams or there is the use of physiologically active shams. The former may lead
to an overestimation of the true effect of acupuncture, whereas the latter may lead to an underestimation
of the true effect. In the trials that we have reviewed in this study we found that important details about
sham acupuncture (e.g. depth of insertion) were sometimes poorly reported or were not reported at all. As
with the variations in styles of acupuncture, so too were there variations in the types of sham acupuncture,
both contributing to the possibility of clinical heterogeneity.
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
56
 Implications for clinical practice
Five guidelines82,161,198–200 have evaluated treatment effects on key outcomes of knee osteoarthritis
(including pain, function and disability). Only the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI)
guideline200 is unequivocal in its recommendation to offer acupuncture for knee osteoarthritis. The
American College of Rheumatology (ACR)198 conditionally recommended acupuncture but only for patients
with moderate to severe pain who are unable or unwilling to undergo total knee arthroplasty. The
American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS)199 found the acupuncture evidence to be inconclusive
and the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR)161 and NICE82 did not recommend the use of
acupuncture. Our analyses of the better-quality studies suggest that acupuncture should be considered as
one of the short-term physical treatment options for relieving pain caused by osteoarthritis of the knee.
Guidance from all organisations recommended treatment with muscle-strengthening and aerobic exercise,
education, weight loss (if required) and, when necessary, paracetamol and/or topical NSAIDs; when these are
ineffective, a choice of one or more options from a range of pharmacological and non-pharmacological
treatments is sometimes recommended, including TENS, thermal (heat/cooling) treatments, insoles and braces.
Some of our results on effectiveness do not concur with existing guidance on the (non-acupuncture) physical
treatments: our evidence differs from the EULAR guidelines161 with regard to insoles, braces and weight loss;
from the NICE guidelines82 with regard to TENS, insoles, braces, weight loss, manual therapy and heat or
cooling treatment; from the ACR guidelines198 with regard to weight loss, insoles, thermal agents and t’ai chi;
from the AAOS guidelines199 with regard to weight loss; and from the OARSI guidelines200 with regard to
insoles, braces, heat or cooling treatment, TENS and weight loss. Our analyses found little evidence (of
significant differences from standard care, let alone clinically relevant differences) to support such guidance
with respect to treating pain, other than for TENS, for which the evidence was of poor quality and likely to be
unreliable. It should be remembered, however, that our review was focused on pain outcomes rather than on
function, disability or cost-effectiveness.
The clinical relevance of improvements in knee pain scores has been quantified in several ways. In this
context, our better-quality trial results appear to indicate that acupuncture produces both a MPCI185 and
quite possibly a minimum clinically important change,184,185 but may yield a MCII only for patients with low
levels of pain.186 A MPCI remains a possibility for muscle-strengthening exercise (with evidence from nine
trials). Our better-quality results suggest that few physical treatments are likely to have a clinically relevant
pain-relieving effect. The exceptions were balneotherapy, interferential therapy and heat treatment for
which we found evidence of effectiveness compared with standard care. However, the results for these
three interventions were informed by single small studies and so a cautious interpretation is warranted.
When interpreting effectiveness results, other factors to consider beyond effectiveness are acceptability,
safety, rapidity and durability of benefit, convenience, cost and likelihood of patient adherence to
treatment.201 Given the diverse range of interventions that we studied, these factors will clearly differ
between interventions, as well as in relation to pharmacological and other treatments.
Recommendations for future research
To comprehensively assess the value of many of these interventions, larger RCTs, with risk of bias
reduced and with longer treatment periods, are needed. Given the stronger evidence on acupuncture
and muscle-strengthening exercise in the better-quality trials, there is a need in future studies to determine
the optimum timing and parameters of treatment. Ideally, trials should examine the effectiveness of
retreatment following treatment cessation (to evaluate durability and attenuation effects), which would
match the way that these physical treatments are often delivered in practice.
In the substudy on standards of reporting of WOMAC scales,183 we found that in general the reporting of
methods and results in RCTs using the WOMAC assessment tool lacked clarity. Poor reporting of WOMAC
scales limits the interpretation of trial results and their useability for evidence synthesis. Given that the
various versions of WOMAC available are clearly defined and have all been validated, full descriptions by
researchers are needed. Adherence to the standard WOMAC scoring system should be encouraged.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
57
 As an absolute minimum, the type of WOMAC used and the score range must be reported. Clear
reporting is important and should not be sacrificed to reduce word count.
Conclusion
The evidence available for our network meta-analyses, in which physical interventions for osteoarthritis of
the knee were compared equally with each other within a coherent framework, suggests that the evidence
of effectiveness for most interventions is weak. However, when comparing all interventions, whether based
on the any-quality or the better-quality trials, acupuncture can be considered as one of the more effective
physical treatments for alleviating pain in the short term. Despite the large evidence base found, the
methodological limitations associated with many of the trials indicate that high-quality trials of many of
the physical treatments are still required.
COMPARISON OF ACUPUNCTURE WITH OTHER PHYSICAL TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
58
 Chapter 4 Towards a cost-effectiveness analysis of
acupuncture for chronic pain: developing methods in
a case study
Background
Evidence synthesis in health technology assessment
Cost-effectiveness analyses of health technologies have a number of key requirements.202 These analyses
should entail (1) a clear definition of the decision problem, which should include all relevant comparators;
(2) an appropriate time horizon for the analysis; (3) the systematic identification and consideration of all
relevant evidence;203 (4) an appropriate characterisation of all sources of uncertainty; and (5) an assessment
of the value of acquiring additional research. It is extremely rare for the evidence base informing a cost-
effectiveness analysis to come from a single study.204 Data (typically summary study level) are derived from
multiple sources and are often available in multiple formats, for example using different instruments for
measurement and using different measures of effect reported at different time points. Evidence synthesis
and decision modelling are used extensively in health technology appraisal to meet the challenge of
reflecting these disparate sources of evidence within a coherent framework.
Synthesis tools are increasingly used to obtain pooled estimates of the parameters of interest to inform
economic decision models. This is particularly the case for treatment effect estimates when multiple
relevant RCTs may be available. In many circumstances the synthesis of treatment effect evidence considers
only pairwise comparisons through the use of standard meta-analysis. However, frequently there are
more than two treatment choices. Network meta-analysis (also known as mixed-treatment comparisons) is
a tool that extends standard pairwise meta-analysis, allowing the estimation of the relative effectiveness
of multiple treatments by simultaneously synthesising all relevant evidence. This statistical method is a
well-established technique and its methods have been described extensively in the literature.85,86,178,205–208
As is the case for standard meta-analysis, most published work using network meta-analysis focuses on the
synthesis of aggregate data. These data are usually obtained from published literature and consist of
an estimate of treatment effectiveness (e.g. mean difference in the case of continuous outcomes) and an
appropriate measure of uncertainty (e.g. the variance or SE).
Network meta-analysis and the use of individual patient data
With the increasing availability of IPD for economic evaluation, together with considerable support for utilising
this type of evidence,209,210 meta-analytic methods have emerged to address the challenges of IPD study
synthesis.211,212 Most progress has been made in the area of the statistical synthesis of clinical effectiveness,
whereas little work has been undertaken to address the challenges of synthesising information on other
important decision model parameter types.213 Techniques for pairwise meta-analysis of individual-level
evidence exist for most outcome types including binary,214 continuous210,215 and time-to-event data.216,217
Use of IPD to inform decisions creates added value by offering the potential to reduce network heterogeneity,
tackle existing evidence inconsistencies172 and examine subgroup effects in patients in whom interventions
might have an effectiveness and cost-effectiveness profile which differs from that of the wider population.218
Few methodological studies on the synthesis of IPD in network meta-analysis are available in the published
literature and even fewer examples of its use within cost-effectiveness analysis exist.213
Objectives and structure
Given the potential benefits of IPD network meta-analysis as a basis for informing cost-effectiveness
modelling and the paucity of examples of this approach in the literature, we present a case study of
using IPD network meta-analysis to inform a cost-effectiveness analysis of acupuncture for chronic pain.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
59
 The objectives of this research were to both develop novel methods for IPD network meta-analysis and
demonstrate the application of IPD network meta-analysis for use in economic evaluation.
To our knowledge the current synthesis methods literature does not offer modelling tools for continuous data
within an IPD network meta-analysis framework. Using a pairwise meta-analysis framework, Riley et al.219
discuss different approaches to the synthesis of continuous outcome data when IPD are available. Riley et al.219
highlight that modelling the follow-up result, adjusted for the baseline value, commonly called ANCOVA,219,220
is the preferred approach. The availability of IPD is crucial for such models. If IPD are not available, the use of
ANCOVA would require all original study authors to have reported appropriate treatment effect estimates,
ideally at the same follow-up time. These requirements, in most circumstances, make this option unfeasible.
Flexibility is introduced with the availability of IPD as the analyst can apply the same modelling approach across
trials and derive consistent outputs. This report describes a novel, methodological framework for IPD network
meta-analysis of continuous data within the Bayesian framework, which builds on the work described in
Riley et al.219
Two approaches to synthesising data on heterogeneous continuous outcomes are explored. The first
involves standardising outcomes by dividing primary outcome scores by study-specific SDs. This creates a
dimensionless measure of treatment effect usually termed the SMD.221–223 Although commonly used,
this approach does not produce results that can directly feed into cost-effectiveness analysis models, as
absolute treatment effect estimates are required. Furthermore, health-care policy-makers require a
common health outcome measure to be able to make decisions across different conditions and clinical
areas. In many jurisdictions, including England and Wales,224 this measure is the QALY.225 The QALY is a
composite measure and provides an estimate of an individual’s remaining life expectancy weighted by
a preference-based measure of HRQoL. The most popular HRQoL measure for generating quality-of-life
weights is the EQ-5D.226 These considerations motivate the second synthesis approach used, which involves
translating (or ‘mapping’) the available HRQoL data from the trials to EQ-5D values and synthesising the
resulting data.
After describing the motivating data set in Motivating case study: the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for
chronic pain in primary care, the core of Methods outlines the novel statistical models for the IPD network
meta-analysis. A variety of modelling approaches are described and discussed. This section also describes
how comparable end points suitable for synthesis were obtained, the estimation of costs and the
cost-effectiveness modelling methods. The section Application provides the results of the IPD network
meta-analysis and cost-effectiveness analysis. The discussion section offers concluding remarks and
discusses relevant issues, including extensions to the current work.
Motivating case study: the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for
chronic pain in primary care
Background to acupuncture and acupuncture guidance
There is currently a lack of agreement about the effectiveness of acupuncture as a treatment for chronic
pain, as reflected in debates about recent UK guidance surrounding its value.83,84,227 Acupuncture received
a positive recommendation from NICE for its use in back pain81 and headache/migraine,80 whereas a
negative recommendation was given for its use in osteoarthritis in 2008228 and 2014.82 The methods in this
chapter were developed as part of a project to improve evidence regarding the clinical effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for chronic non-specific pain to inform decision-making in the UK NHS.
Data description and network of evidence
Data for the current study were made available by the ATC. To address the lack of good-quality evidence
in acupuncture, the ATC undertook a systematic review in which relevant high-quality trials were identified
and, for a large proportion, IPD were obtained.196 From 31 eligible RCTs from the ATC database, IPD were
obtained from 29. However, data from Cherkin et al.131 were not available to us because of sharing
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
60
 restrictions. The data set analysed here included 28 high-quality RCTs60,61,66–77,117–122,130,132–138 that assessed
the effectiveness of acupuncture for three pain conditions: osteoarthritis of the knee (seven trials),
headache [including tension-type headache (TTH)] and migraine (six trials), and musculoskeletal pain,
encompassing lower back, shoulder and neck pain (15 trials), totalling approximately 17,500 patients from
the USA, UK, Germany, Spain and Sweden. These studies are summarised in Table 21.
Nine of these studies were three-arm trials, assessing the three treatments simultaneously, 11 evaluated
acupuncture and sham acupuncture only, and eight considered acupuncture and usual care only. Thus, the
comparison of acupuncture with usual care is informed by 17 studies, acupuncture with sham acupuncture
by 20 studies and sham acupuncture with usual care by nine studies. The resulting evidence network is
presented in Figure 11.
Resource use information in the data set was limited to five60,61,66,69,71 of the 28 studies. Of these, three are
specific to the German health-care system66,69,71 and, given the jurisdiction-specific nature of health-care
resource use data, non-UK studies are of limited value to inform decision-making in the UK.229 The
remaining two studies that provided resource use evidence60,61 were carried out in the UK, although only
one of these60 collected resource use for time points that matched the 3-month time frame of the
effectiveness assessment. The study by Thomas et al.61 recorded resource use at 12 and 24 months only.
The study by Vickers et al.60 focused on one of the three clinical areas of interest (headache/migraine).
It was decided to seek additional external data sets outside the ATC data set instead of assuming that
health-care resource use data from headache/migraine trials could be generalised to musculoskeletal
conditions and osteoarthritis of the knee. Therefore, IPD were obtained from the UK Back pain Exercise
And Manipulation (BEAM) study230 for musculoskeletal pain and the UK Topical or Oral IBuprofen (TOIB)
study231 for knee osteoarthritis pain.
Methods
This section describes how individual-level comparable values for the two end points of interest were
generated, that is, EQ-5D index values and standardised pain scores. The section then goes on to describe
the Bayesian IPD network meta-analysis synthesis modelling framework for both end points. Extensions to
the modelling approach are then considered. Following this, methods used to analyse resource use and
costs, and to generate cost-effectiveness results, are described.
Overview of the analysis
The ATC data set includes trials comparing acupuncture with sham acupuncture or usual care or comparing
all three comparators. All trials were included in the synthesis to maximise use of the available data. In the
context of clinical or other health-care decision-making, a sham comparator is not a clinically meaningful
intervention as it would not be prescribed; the focus of the cost-effectiveness analysis was therefore on
acupuncture compared with usual care. The range of possible treatment options for chronic non-specific
pain in primary care is much wider than those considered here. The cost-effectiveness results presented
in this report should not therefore be interpreted as providing a definitive answer to the question of
whether or not acupuncture is cost-effective for the treatment of chronic non-specific pain. Instead, the
cost-effectiveness analysis provides an illustration of how IPD network meta-analysis can be used.
Two outcome measures were used to value benefit in the present analysis: pain and EQ-5D index values.
Given the spectrum of pain conditions considered, the availability of multiple instruments with which to
measure pain, the lack of agreement about the preferred outcomes with which to measure pain and
variable quality in reporting, pain measurement was highly heterogeneous across trials. SMDs were used to
synthesise the pain outcomes. The HRQoL data were also obtained using a variety of instruments – some
generic [e.g. Short Form questionnaire-12 items (SF-12) and SF-36] and others disease specific (e.g. the
WOMAC index). These data were therefore mapped to EQ-5D values using a series of statistical mapping
algorithms, which are described below.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
61
 TABLE 21 Data set main characteristics and study outcomes used for analysis
ID
Study
Location
Pain group (type)
Age (years),
mean (SD)
Follow-up/time
point used
(months)
Treatment
Observations
HRQoL outcome
mapped
Pain outcome
standardised
1
Diener 200672
Germany
Headache (migraine)
37.62 (10.4)
6/3
Usual care
328
SF-12
Migraine days
Sham acupuncture
202
Acupuncture
305
2
Endres 200773
Germany
Headache (TTH)
38.44 (11.77)
6/3
Sham acupuncture
200
SF-12
TTH days
Acupuncture
209
3
Jena 200876
Germany
Headache (headache)
43.66 (12.69)
6/3
Usual care
1613
SF-36
Headache days
Acupuncture
1569
4
Linde 200568
Germany
Headache (migraine)
42.55 (11.35)
6/3
Usual care
76
SF-36
Days of moderate
to severe pain
Sham acupuncture
81
Acupuncture
145
5
Melchart 200567
Germany
Headache (TTH)
42.68 (13.18)
6/3
Usual care
75
SF-36
Headache days
Sham acupuncture
62
Acupuncture
132
6
Vickers 200460
UK
Headache (headache)
46.34 (10.39)
12/3
Usual care
161
SF-36
Severity score
Acupuncture
140
7
Brinkhaus 200666
Germany
Musculoskeletal
(lower back)
58.81 (9.13)
12/2
Usual care
79
SF-36
VAS pain score
Sham acupuncture
73
Acupuncture
146
8
Carlsson 2001119
Sweden
Musculoskeletal
(lower back)
49.84 (15.4)
6/3
Sham acupuncture
16
VAS pain
VAS pain score
Acupuncture
34
9
Guerra de Hoyas
2004138
Spain
Musculoskeletal
(shoulder)
59.19 (11.37)
6/3
Sham acupuncture
65
VAS pain
VAS pain score
Acupuncture
65
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
62
 ID
Study
Location
Pain group (type)
Age (years),
mean (SD)
Follow-up/time
point used
(months)
Treatment
Observations
HRQoL outcome
mapped
Pain outcome
standardised
10
Haake 200771
Germany
Musculoskeletal
(lower back)
50.15 (14.68)
6/3
Usual care
388
SF-12
von Korff pain
intensity score
Sham acupuncture
387
Acupuncture
387
11
Irnich 2001118
Germany
Musculoskeletal
(neck)
N/A
3/3
Sham acupuncture
61
VAS pain
VAS pain score
Acupuncture
56
12
Kennedy 2008130
Northern
Ireland
Musculoskeletal
(lower back)
45.58 (11.1)
3/3
Sham acupuncture
24
VAS pain
Roland Morris
disability score
Acupuncture
24
13
Kerr 2003117
Northern
Ireland
Musculoskeletal
(lower back)
N/A
6/1
Sham acupuncture
20
VAS pain
VAS pain score
Acupuncture
26
14
Kleinhenz 1999137
Germany
Musculoskeletal
(shoulder)
N/A
3/1
Sham acupuncture
27
CMS and
predicted VAS
pain
CMS
Acupuncture
25
15
Salter 2006133
UK
Musculoskeletal
(neck)
47.71 (16.51)
3/3
Usual care
14
No mapping –
EQ-5D available
Northwick Park
pain score
Acupuncture
10
16
Thomas 200661
UK
Musculoskeletal
(neck)
42.62 (10.71)
24/3
Usual care
80
No mapping –
EQ-5D available
SF-36 bodily pain
score
Acupuncture
159
17
Vas 2006121
Spain
Musculoskeletal
(neck)
46.73 (13.2)
6/1
Sham acupuncture
62
SF-36
VAS pain score
Acupuncture
61
18
Vas 2008122
Spain
Musculoskeletal
(shoulder)
55.68 (11.37)
12/3
Sham acupuncture
220
VAS pain
CMS
Acupuncture
205
19
White 2004132
UK
Musculoskeletal
(neck)
53.36 (15.61)
12/3
Sham acupuncture
65
VAS pain
VAS pain score
Acupuncture
70
20
Witt 200675
Germany
Musculoskeletal
(neck)
50.57 (12.93)
6/3
Usual care
1698
SF-36
Neck pain and
disability score
Acupuncture
1753
continued
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
63
 TABLE 21 Data set main characteristics and study outcomes used for analysis (continued)
ID
Study
Location
Pain group (type)
Age (years),
mean (SD)
Follow-up/time
point used
(months)
Treatment
Observations
HRQoL outcome
mapped
Pain outcome
standardised
21
Witt 200674
Germany
Musculoskeletal
(lower back)
52.83 (13.33)
6/3
Usual care
1390
SF-36
Hanover
functional ability
score
Acupuncture
1451
22
Foster 2007135
UK
Osteoarthritis of the
knee
63.23 (8.81)
12/1
Usual care
116
VAS pain
WOMAC pain
score
Sham acupuncture
119
Acupuncture
117
23
Berman 2004134
USA
Osteoarthritis of the
knee
65.46 (8.62)
6/2
Usual care
189
No mapping –
EQ-5D available
WOMAC pain
score
Sham acupuncture
191
Acupuncture
190
24
Scharf 200670
Germany
Osteoarthritis of the
knee
62.81 (10.07)
6/3
Usual care
316
SF-12
WOMAC total
score
Sham acupuncture
365
Acupuncture
326
25
Vas 2004120
Spain
Osteoarthritis of the
knee
67.04 (10.09)
3/3
Sham acupuncture
49
WOMAC total
WOMAC total
score
Acupuncture
48
26
Williamson
2007136
UK
Osteoarthritis of the
knee
70.67 (8.94)
3/3
Usual care
61
WOMAC total
Oxford Knee Score
Acupuncture
60
27
Witt 200569
Germany
Osteoarthritis of the
knee
64.01 (6.49)
12/2
Usual care
70
SF-36
WOMAC total
score
Sham acupuncture
75
Acupuncture
149
28
Witt 200677
Germany
Osteoarthritis of the
knee
61.2 (10.39)
6/3
Usual care
310
SF-36
WOMAC total
score
Acupuncture
322
CMS, Constant–Murley Score; N/A, not applicable; SF-12, Short Form questionnaire-12 items.
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
64
 End points were measured at a variety of follow-up times across trials. To consistently assess the effect of
the treatments of interest across trials, the analysis focused on the time point closest to 3 months from the
start of treatment. The 3-month time point was used as this was typically the measurement taken after
the end of an acupuncture treatment course in the trials forming the evidence base and was reported
for the majority (21/28) of the trials (see Appendix 1).
Generating homogeneous health-related quality-of-life scores and
pain outcomes
The EQ-5D index score was the preferred end point for our analysis because of its importance for
cost-effectiveness analysis. The conventional three-level version of the EQ-5D questionnaire includes five
domains (mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression), each of which can be
at one of three severity levels (no problems, some or moderate problems, or extreme problems), to generate
a health status descriptor of one of 243 (35) health states (245 states in total when also considering the
‘unconscious’ and ‘dead’ states). The descriptor is quality adjusted using a score derived from analysing the
preferences of approximately 3400 members of the UK public.232 Bounded by full health and by the worst
imaginable health state, the score ranges from 1 to –0.594. The distribution of EQ-5D health-state utility
data is commonly non-normal. This, among other features, makes statistical modelling of the EQ-5D
particularly challenging.233 Only a small number of trials in the data set (see Table 21) provided EQ-5D data.
When EQ-5D data were not available they were predicted using other generic and disease-specific measures
(see Table 21) through published mapping algorithms. Mapping algorithms were identified using the
University of Oxford’s Health Economics Research Centre (HERC) database of studies mapping from HRQoL
or clinical measures to the EQ-5D.234,235 When using this tool and when multiple mapping algorithms were
available for a given instrument, the preferred algorithm was selected on the basis of the sample size,
adequacy of statistical modelling and relevance of study population. The selection of the outcome to
be mapped was not at random. Preference was given to generic health status-based instruments
(i.e. SF-12 and SF-36) and, in their absence, to condition-specific instruments [i.e. WOMAC, VAS pain and
Constant–Murley Score (CMS)], conditional on the existence of a valid and published algorithm. The
WOMAC was used in preference to VAS pain and CMS as it covers a broader definition of HRQoL. In 50%
of the trials (n = 14) (see Appendix 4 for trial details), well-established published algorithms were used to
map from SF-36 dimensions and SF-12 summary scores to the EQ-5D61,236,237 [a random-effects generalised
least-squares algorithm considering dimensions, dimensions squared and interactions from Rowen et al.236
was used (model R2 = 0.71); a multinomial logit using physical component summary (PCS) and mental
component summary (MCS) scores, summary scores squared and interaction terms (mean square
error = 0.021) from Gray et al.237 was used to map the SF-12 to the EQ-5D. In 10 of the 28 trials, published
algorithms that map VAS pain scores [an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression including VAS pain and
VAS pain squared as covariates from Maund et al.238 was used (R2 = 0.101)] and WOMAC scores [an OLS
regression including total WOMAC score, total WOMAC score squared, age and sex as covariates from
Barton et al.239 (R2 = 0.313) was used] to the EQ-5D were used. For one trial,137 a double mapping was
20 IPD trials:
4 H; 11 MSK; 5 OAK
17 IPD trials:
5 H; 6 MSK; 6 OAK
9 IPD trials:
3 H; 2 MSK; 4 OAK
(1) Usual care
(2) Sham 
acupuncture
(3) Acupuncture
FIGURE 11 Network of RCTs. In the network, a unique treatment category is indicated by a box. Arrows between
boxes indicate that these treatments had been compared in a trial. Pain groups: H, headache/migraine;
MSK, musculoskeletal; OAK, osteoarthritis of the knee (as set out in Table 21).
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
65
 necessary as, to our knowledge, no direct mapping algorithm exists to obtain EQ-5D values from the CMS.
Thus, an in-house unpublished mapping algorithm240 was used to derive VAS pain estimates from the CMS,
which were used to obtain individual-level EQ-5D predictions using the algorithm mentioned above
(available on request from Kamran Khan – K.A.Khan@warwick.ac.uk). For further details on mapping to the
EQ-5D, see Chapter 5 (Health-related quality of life for cost-effectiveness analysis).
A high level of unexplained variation was found in the majority of the mapping algorithms used, that is,
the proportion of total variation of the outcome(s) explained in these models (quantified by the coefficient
of determination, R2, in most cases) was low. To account for this source of uncertainty in the mapping
process, an additional variance component was included in the EQ-5D predictions.241 A mapping process
involves additional sources of uncertainty – the uncertainty in the mapping function regression coefficients
and the structure of the mapping model. These additional sources of uncertainty are not accounted for in
this analysis. This was achieved by drawing from a normal distribution with a mean of zero and variance
equal to the study-specific residual variance. The residual variance was calculated as the difference
between the total variance (calculated by dividing the variance of the mapped data by the R2 for the
mapping algorithm) and the mapped outcome variance. Each random draw was then added to each
individual-level EQ-5D prediction.
The second outcome measure assessed was standardised pain. Across the 28 trials, the primary outcome
of each study was used to generate patient-level standardised pain estimates. Pain measures varied from
days with headache in the headache/migraine pain condition to VAS pain in the musculoskeletal group or
WOMAC pain in the osteoarthritis of the knee group, as reported in Table 21. Individual-level standardised
pain estimates were obtained for each trial by dividing the primary outcome scores by the study-specific
SD. Note that, although these estimates were used as inputs in the synthesis models, the outputs of the
synthesis are in the SMD format, as differences between treatments were estimated within the modelling
[considering st
tx as the standardised value of the pain measurement p made at the time point t in patients
under treatment tx, it can be demonstrated that (st1
tx1 − st0
tx1) − (st1
tx0 − st0
tx0) = (st1
tx1 − st1
tx0) − (st0
tx1 − st0
tx0) = ΔSMD�.
Health-related quality of life and standardised pain estimates were obtained at baseline and at the
follow-up point closest to 3 months following the start of treatment. Changes from baseline were
obtained by calculating the difference between values for these two time points.
Statistical methods
This section describes the IPD network meta-analysis models. All analyses were conducted from a Bayesian
perspective. Bayesian methods can be considered an alternative to the classical (frequentist) approach to
statistical modelling and have been frequently used in the data synthesis and the economic evaluation of
heath-care technologies.202,207 They provide a more appealing, intuitive and flexible modelling framework
as both the data and the model parameters are considered as random quantities. The key feature in this
framework is the likelihood function, which defines how reasonable the data are given values of those
model parameters. A key feature of this approach is that it allows the model to incorporate external
information alongside available data in the format of prior distributions. When very little or no information
is accessible, or when wanting the data to dominate, the posterior, subjective or ‘vague’ beliefs are set as
priors.242 This framework also allows the uncertainty in the relative effect estimates to be translated into
probabilities of decision uncertainty, that is, the probability of which treatment is best (most efficacious)
out of all treatments being compared. This explicit consideration of decision uncertainty leads naturally into
a decision theory framework, which usually also considers costs and utilities, typically used in health-care
decision-making.202
A one-step IPD network meta-analysis modelling approach was preferred as, together with relative
treatment effect estimates, the estimation of treatment–covariate interactions for patient-level covariates
were of interest.210,212 In the following model descriptions a random-effects approach was taken because
of the expected between-study heterogeneity. Nonetheless, a fixed-effect framework could be attained
with straightforward simplifications.86,243 The models described apply both to the EQ-5D and to the
standardised pain outcome.
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
66
 The main modelling approach considered (model 1) is a variation of the ANCOVA approach, modelling the
change score but also adjusting for baseline outcome values.219,220,243,244 Model 1 was used as changes from
baseline more closely approximated a normal distribution than absolute outcomes at 3 months. The model
included interaction effects for pain type as it was expected that the impact of acupuncture (and sham
acupuncture) may differ across pain types. Interaction effects for each pain type were modelled as
exchangeable and related245 as it was expected that the impact of each pain type on the treatment effect
of acupuncture may be related to the impact of each pain type on sham acupuncture effects.
Individual patient data network meta-analysis considering pain type as a treatment
effect modifier
The model considers a set of J studies for which IPD were available. These studies included patients with
a specific pain condition, with the pain conditions being headache/migraine, musculoskeletal pain and
osteoarthritis of the knee. The set of treatments included in these trials are labelled [A,B,C], where A is the
reference treatment, and there are K (= 3) treatments in total. At baseline, patient i in study j allocated to
treatment k provides a baseline measurement Yijk0, where 0 indicates time t at baseline). Each patient
provides a follow-up measurement (the assessment closest to 3 months) Yijk3. The change from baseline
(Yijk3 – Yijk0) is denoted ΔYijk.
Model 1: analysis of covariance variation – change score modelling, adjusted for
baseline
This model can be written as:
ΔY i jk ∼ N(θi jk, V j)
θi jk =
(
µjb + β0jY i jk0
if k = 0; b, k ∈ fA, B, Cg
µjb + β0jY i jk0 + δjbk + βbkpX jp
if k > b
δjbk ∼ N dbk, σ2
�
�
∼ N dAk − dAb, σ2
�
�
βbkp = βAkp − βAbp
βAkp ∼ N Bp, σ2
Bp
�
�
dAA, βAAp = 0,
(1)
where Vj represents the study-level variance, the quantity µjb represents the outcome for the treatment b in
study j for a patient with a baseline utility of 0, the parameter β0j represents the impact of the (outcome)
baseline on the change outcome for each study j, the term δjbk represents the study-specific treatment
effect for treatment k relative to treatment b and Xjp are p – 1 dummy variables representing pain type p in
the jth study. Pain × treatment interaction effects βAkp were considered different for each treatment but
exchangeable and were assumed to be drawn from a random distribution with a common mean (Bp) and
between-treatment variance (σ2
Bp).
Independent prior distributions were defined as follows: 1/Vj ∼ Gamma(0.001,0.001); µjb ∼ N(0,106);
β0j ∼ N(0,106); dAk ∼ N(0,106); σ ∼ Unif(0,2); Bp ∼ N(0,106); σBp ∼ Unif(0,2). Correlations in the random effects
from trials with three or more arms were accounted for following published methodology.86,222 In this
report, k > b indicates that k is after b in the alphabet.
Modelling extensions
Model 1 can be extended to consider covariates. Age and BMI were identified as potential treatment effect
modifiers, with the clinical expectation being that older age or higher BMI may make patients more
difficult to treat (i.e. reduce the effect of treatment). BMI data were, however, rarely reported and were
available in only 10 of the 28 studies. This covariate was not therefore adjusted for in the modelling.
Age was assumed to modify outcomes by the same amount across pain types and to modify treatment
effects by the same margin for acupuncture and sham acupuncture (i.e. a single interaction term is
assumed to apply to all comparisons with usual care). Squared terms were included for main effects and
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
67
 treatment interaction effects as a non-linear impact of age on outcomes and treatment effects was
expected a priori. Age was centred prior to inclusion in the model.
The following model (model 2) extends model 1 by considering the effects of the covariate Z:
ΔY i jk ∼ N(θi jk, V j)
θi jk =
(
µjb + β0jY i jk0 + ϕ0Zi jk + φ0Z2
i jk
if k = 0; b, k ∈ fA, B, Cg
µjb + β0jY i jk0 + ϕ0Zi jk + φ0Z2
i jk + δjbk + βbkpX jp
if k > b and b ≠ A
µjb + β0jY i jk0 + ϕ0Zi jk + φ0Z2
i jk + ϕZi jk + φZ2
i jk + δjbk + βbkpX jp
if k > b and b = A
δ jbk ∼ N dbk, σ2
�
�
∼ N dAk − dAb, σ2
�
�
βbkp = βAkp − βAbp
βAkp ∼ N Bp, σ2
Bp
�
�
Zi jk ∼ N(m, prec)
dAA, βAA = 0.
(2)
Coefficients on the main covariate effect and the effect squared are represented by ϕ0 and φ0, respectively.
Coefficients on the treatment–covariate interaction term and the interaction between treatment and the
squared covariable term are represented by ϕ and φ, respectively. No interaction term for comparisons of
k and b was included when b ≠ A because the common regression coefficient cancels out.
Because of the possibility of missing covariate information for some individuals, Zijk was represented as a
normally distributed random variable with mean m and precision prec, common across all IPD studies.
This represents a multiple imputation technique and assumes that the covariable data were missing at
random. Additional priors were required for this model: ϕ0, ϕ, φ0, φ, ∼ N(0,106); m ∼ Unif(–50,50),
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
1=prec ∼ Unif(0, 30)
p
.
Analysis in the presence of restricted evidence
Although model 1 is the preferred choice, this model would not be feasible in the absence of information
at the individual level at the baseline and follow-up time points. Models that do not rely on the availability
of IPD were therefore run for comparison purposes. Two options219 are typically available to the analyst
when only aggregate data are available: modelling the change score (model 3) or modelling the final
outcome score (model 4), both without baseline adjustment. These models represent simplifications of
model 1 in which the baseline outcome variable is omitted.
Model selection and implementation
Data management was performed in the freely available software package, R version 3.0.0 (The R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). The network meta-analysis was undertaken in
WinBUGS version 1.4.3,246 linked to the R software through the packages R2WinBUGS246 and CodaPkg.247
Code for the network meta-analysis is provided in Appendix 4.
In all models the MCMC Gibbs sampler was initially run for 10,000 iterations and these were discarded
as ‘burn-in’. Models were run for a further 5000 iterations, on which inferences were based. Chain
convergence was checked using autocorrelation and Gelman and Rubin248 diagnostics. Within the network
meta-analysis, goodness of fit was assessed using the deviance information criterion (DIC) and residual
deviance.180 The DIC is a measure that balances fit and complexity, allowing parsimony to be considered in
model choice. The DIC is often used for model comparison when smaller DIC models should be preferred.
The residual deviance of each data point may be viewed as a measure of the data point’s contribution to
the total residual deviance (or lack of fit) of the model. A posterior mean for the total residual deviance
similar to the number of data points will imply that model predictions fit well to the observed data.
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
68
 Results are presented as EQ-5D index scores and SMD treatment effect estimates (and associated
95% CrIs), and also the probability of treatment being the ‘best’ treatment in terms of being the most
clinically effective.207
Modelling resource use
Acupuncture was assumed to be administered during 10 sessions with a physiotherapist. Ten sessions
of acupuncture have been recommended by NICE in the context of lower back pain81 and headache/
migraine,80 and it was assumed that this duration of therapy could be generalised to other musculoskeletal
conditions and osteoarthritis of the knee. The first session was assumed to last for 40 minutes and
subsequent sessions for 30 minutes. All sessions were costed using a unit cost for a physiotherapist
(£36 per hour; Schema 9.1, with qualifications249).
The NICE recommendations, alongside the above assumptions regarding appointment durations, equate to
a total of 5.2 hours of therapist time. A sensitivity analysis using a weighted average of the therapist time
observed in the trials was conducted. Data were obtained from the data extractions conducted by Vickers
et al.105 Therapist time was calculated as the duration of sessions multiplied by the number of sessions
and included only sessions that occurred within the 3-month time horizon considered for efficacy. The
sensitivity analysis used total therapist interaction times of 5.6 hours for headache/migraine, 3.9 hours for
musculoskeletal and 4.7 hours for osteoarthritis of the knee chronic pain.
The potential impact of improved health outcomes on resource use was explored using the three data sets
described in Data description and network of evidence.60,230,231 EQ-5D predictions (mapped from the available
SF-36 physical and mental summary scores) together with the number of primary care (i.e. GP) and secondary
care (i.e. specialist) visits from Vickers et al.60 were used to estimate the relationship between change in
HRQoL and change in health resource utilisation for the headache pain group. The relationship estimated
from Vickers et al.60 was assumed to apply for the entire headache group of patients (which includes patients
with TTH and migraine pain). A simple OLS analysis was used to regress the change in resource use from
0–3 months to 3–12 months on the change in EQ-5D scores between month 3 and month 12. Primary and
secondary care visits were analysed separately. Although not aimed at evaluating acupuncture, the UK BEAM
study230 (with approximately 1300 patients) and the TOIB study231 (with approximately 280 patients) were used
to estimate this relationship for lower back pain and osteoarthritis of the knee patients, respectively, using the
same approach. Data from the UK BEAM study were assumed to be applicable to the other patients within
the musculoskeletal pain category (i.e. those with neck and shoulder pain).
Resource utilisation at baseline was not collected in these studies (and is generally not collected in clinical
trials). Changes in resource use were preferred to absolute resource use estimates as their relationship with
EQ-5D changes is less likely to be confounded. To estimate the change in resource use it was therefore
necessary to use the change from 0–3 months to 3–12 months. Use of the change from 0–3 months to
3–12 months to infer change in resource use over the 0- to 3-month time horizon of the economic model,
however, assumes that a given utility change would drive a given change in resource use regardless of the
time frame. Given that this is a strong assumption a secondary analysis was conducted using the absolute
resource use in the period 0–3 months and regressing this on the change in EQ-5D score over this period.
The statistical software Stata 13 was used to model resource use for each pain condition.
The average cost of non-intervention resources used for each pain condition was calculated as the product
of the EQ-5D estimates derived from the synthesis models, the coefficients on the EQ-5D estimates from
the resource use regressions and the relevant unit costs [primary care visits were costed at £46.8 – this
represents a weighted average of GP (£45 per consultation) and nurse (£49 per hour) visits with weights
taken from the UK BEAM study and unit costs taken from the Curtis249 – and secondary care visits at
£135 – this is the weighted average NHS reference cost for all outpatient procedures taken from Curtis249).
Costs are reported in UK pounds for the financial year 2012–13. Other treatments and health-care
interactions that may form a package of ‘usual care’ were assumed to have been provided equally to all
patients regardless of comparator. These costs were therefore omitted from the analysis.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
69
 Estimation of cost-effectiveness outcomes
Quality-adjusted life-years were estimated assuming that the benefit of acupuncture over usual care
estimated from the network meta-analysis of EQ-5D index scores was achieved instantaneously, with
benefit maintained from 0 to 3 months, and was then lost instantaneously, illustrated in Figure 12 by the
accrued benefit 2. This is equivalent to assuming that the full benefit was gradually achieved over a
specified period and then lost linearly over the same period, which may be viewed as a more realistic
scenario (see Figure 12, accrued benefit 1). For example, the benefit could be linearly achieved from the
start of treatment until 12 weeks and gradually lost over the 12 weeks following treatment completion.
Costs and effects beyond the 3-month time horizon were not considered in the current model and given
the short time horizon no discounting was applied.
Incremental QALY estimates were compared with incremental cost estimates (intervention costs and
non-intervention costs) to calculate incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs). These can be compared
with a threshold value of £20,000–30,000 per QALY as conventionally applied in England and Wales.203
Uncertainty in the estimates was quantified through the use of probabilistic analysis. The 5000 posterior
samples from the synthesis of effectiveness (extracted from the Convergence Diagnostic and Output
Analysis WinBUGS output) were used together with 5000 samples of the cost parameters, generated
through Monte Carlo simulation. Uncertainty surrounding the decision to accept/reject acupuncture on
the basis of cost-effectiveness was illustrated through cost-effectiveness acceptability curves. The
cost-effectiveness modelling was also implemented in R.
Application
Results of generating homogeneous health-related quality-of-life scores and
pain outcomes
Appendix 4 presents the (mapped) EQ-5D data and standardised pain outcomes. In general, patients’
HRQoL increased from baseline to 3 months. Similarly, standardised pain estimates decreased from
baseline to 3 months. For both time points, it appears that osteoarthritis of the knee patients had, on
average, lower HRQoL (and higher mean values of standardised pain) than patients suffering from
headache/migraine or musculoskeletal pain.
For both end points, baseline imbalances between trial arms were observed within trials. For the EQ-5D
end point, the biggest within-trial differences at baseline were found in the studies by Carlsson et al.119
and Salter et al.133 For the SMD end point, the largest differences were found in the same two trials and
Treatment
benefit
0
Time
Benefit accrued 1
Benefit accrued 2
FIGURE 12 Illustrative diagram of the treatment benefits over the period of assessment.
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
70
 also in the studies by Kleinhenz et al.137 and White et al.132 These large imbalances are not surprising as
most of these trials included only a small number of patients (around 50 or fewer). These observations
supported the use of a modelling framework that allows for baseline adjustment,219 involving the use of
either model 1 or 2 as the appropriate tool to synthesise this evidence.
Analysis of covariance (model 1)
Table 22 shows the parameter estimates obtained from model 1 applied to the EQ-5D and the
standardised pain outcome data. For each parameter estimate the median of the MCMC posterior sample
and 95% CrI are shown. Relative treatment effect estimates are shown, adjusted for baseline and
treatment–pain interaction effects, together with measures of model fit (total residual deviance and DIC).
The osteoarthritis of the knee pain group is the reference category for the pain interaction effects.
For both end points, model 1 indicates that acupuncture treatment increases the HRQoL of patients and/or
reduces pain more than usual care and sham acupuncture treatments, irrespective of the pain group they
belong to. For the EQ-5D end point, the median treatment effect of acupuncture compared with usual
care in the osteoarthritis of the knee population is 0.079 (95% CrI 0.042 to 0.114); for headache/migraine
and musculoskeletal pain patients the comparable median treatment effects are 0.056 (95% CrI 0.021 to
0.092) and 0.082 (95% CrI 0.047 to 0.116), respectively. The results also favour acupuncture over sham
acupuncture, although with a greater degree of uncertainty, as reflected by the fact that the CrIs include
zero for all pain types (osteoarthritis of the knee 0.022, 95% CrI –0.014 to 0.060; headache/migraine
0.004, 95% CrI –0.035 to 0.042; musculoskeletal pain 0.023, 95% CrI –0.007 to 0.053). The probability
that acupuncture is the best treatment at improving HRQoL is 0.89 for osteoarthritis of the knee, 0.64 for
headache/migraine and 0.95 for musculoskeletal pain.
TABLE 22 Parameter estimates from fitting the novel network meta-analysis ANCOVA synthesis model (model 1) to
the EQ-5D preference score and standardised pain end points
IPD NMA results
Comparison
Model 1 (ANCOVA extension, change in outcome
score, adjusted for baseline), median MCMC posterior
sample (95% CrI)
Change EQ-5D
Change standardised pain
Relative treatment
effects for OAK
SHAM vs. UC
0.057 (0.013 to 0.095)
0.271 (–0.007 to 0.537)
ACU vs. UC
0.079 (0.042 to 0.114)
0.703 (0.399 to 0.984)
ACU vs. SHAM
0.022 (–0.014 to 0.060)
0.438 (0.121 to 0.715)
Pain exchangeable
interactions (vs. OAKa)
Headacheb,c
SHAM (vs. UC)
–0.005 (–0.060 to 0.054)
0.057 (–0.351 to 0.485)
ACU (vs. UC)
–0.023 (–0.071 to 0.029)
–0.121 (–0.467 to 0.254)
Musculoskeletalb,c
SHAM (vs. UC)
0.002 (–0.052 to 0.062)
–0.199 (–0.595 to 0.218)
ACU (vs. UC)
0.003 (–0.046 to 0.054)
–0.108 (–0.465 to 0.307)
Between-study variance
0.001 (0 to 0.003)
0.090 (0.049 to 0.170)
Total residual devianced
15,850 (15,480 to 16,230)
17,060 (16,660 to 17,450)
DICe
–6420.4
37,394.2
ACU, acupuncture; NMA, network meta-analysis; OAK, osteoarthritis of the knee; SHAM, sham acupuncture; UC, usual care.
a The reference pain group for the interaction terms is the OAK group.
b The reference treatment is usual care.
c Headache group = headache, migraine and TTH; musculoskeletal group = neck, shoulder and lower back pain.
d For the EQ-5D end point, models used approximately 14,800 observations; for the SMD end point, models used
approximately 15,900 observations. Models should be preferred when the total residual deviance mean posterior is close
to the actual number of data points.
e The DIC is a statistical measure of model fit and model comparison. Models with a smaller DIC should be preferred.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
71
 For the SMD end point the median treatment effect of acupuncture compared with usual care in the
osteoarthritis of the knee population is 0.703 (95% CrI 0.399 to 0.984); for headache/migraine and
musculoskeletal pain patients the comparable median treatment effects are 0.588 (95% CrI 0.311 to
0.869) and 0.588 (95% CrI 0.334 to 0.863), respectively. The results also favour acupuncture over sham
acupuncture. In contrast to the EQ-5D analysis, the CrIs do not include zero in the standardised pain
analysis for osteoarthritis of the knee (0.438, 95% CrI 0.121 to 0.715) and musculoskeletal pain (0.527,
95% CrI 0.323 to 0.735), although the CrI for headache/migraine does (0.256, 95% CrI –0.073 to 0.560).
The probability that acupuncture is the best treatment at improving standardised pain is 0.96–1.00,
depending on pain type. These results are presented as a forest plot in Figure 13.
EQ-5D (median, 95% CrI)
SMD (median, 95% CrI)
OAK
(a)
0.703 
(0.399 to 0.984)
Musculoskeletal
0.588 
(0.334 to 0.863)
Headache/
migraine
0.588 
(0.311 to 0.869)
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
OAK
0.079 
(0.042 to 0.114)
Musculoskeletal
0.082 
(0.047 to 0.116)
Headache/
migraine
0.056 
(0.021 to 0.092)
–0.05
–0.10
0.00
0.05
0.10
EQ-5D (median, 95% CrI)
SMD (median, 95% CrI)
(b)
0.438 
(0.121 to 0.715)
Musculoskeletal
0.527 
(0.323 to 0.735)
Headache/
migraine
0.256 
(–0.073 to 0.56)
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
OAK
OAK
0.022 
(–0.014 to 0.06)
Musculoskeletal
0.023 
(–0.007 to 0.053)
Headache/
migraine
0.004 
(–0.035 to 0.042)
–0.05
–0.10
0.00
0.05
0.10
(c)
0.271 
(–0.007 to 0.537)
Musculoskeletal
0.063 
(–0.241 to 0.378)
Headache/
migraine
0.332 
(0.022 to 0.669)
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
OAK
OAK
0.057 
(0.013 to 0.095)
Musculoskeletal
0.059 
(0.017 to 0.101)
Headache/
migraine
0.052 
(0.01 to 0.095)
–0.05
–0.10
0.00
EQ-5D (median, 95% CrI)
SMD (median, 95% CrI)
0.05
0.10
FIGURE 13 Forest plot showing the network meta-analysis results for the standardised pain and EQ-5D outcomes:
(a) acupuncture vs. usual care; (b) acupuncture vs. sham acupuncture; and (c) sham acupuncture vs. usual care.
OAK, osteoarthritis of the knee.
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
72
 The expectations were that some level of heterogeneity existed between trials. Possibly as a consequence
of the mapping work performed, this expectation was not fulfilled for the EQ-5D end point (the between-
study variance estimate is 0.001). For the standardised pain end point, the between-study variance was
also small relative to the magnitude of the treatment effects (the between-study variance estimate is 0.09).
The total residual deviance suggests that the models provide an adequate fit to the data (see Table 22).
Controlling for patient-level characteristics
Table 21 provides information on age of participants for each of the trials included in the data set.
On average, age was lower in the headache/migraine pain group than in the musculoskeletal and
osteoarthritis of the knee groups.
Using the change in EQ-5D as the outcome for synthesis, Table 23 presents the results of applying model 2
(an extension of model 1) to include patient-level information on age, age being a potential treatment
effect modifier. The model fit statistics show that this adjusted by age model is marginally better than
model 1, providing lower DIC statistics and reduced posterior residual deviance. The results of this model
are very similar to those of model 1 and do not suggest that age is a strong effect modifier or that
non-linear effects of age on the effect of treatments exist.
TABLE 23 Parameter estimates from fitting the synthesis model including age as a covariate
IPD NMA results
Comparison
Model 2 (with adjustment for baseline age
and treatment by age interactions), median
MCMC posterior sample (95% CrI)
Relative treatment effects
SHAM vs. UC
0.040 (–0.006 to 0.084)
ACU vs. UC
0.066 (0.025 to 0.105)
ACU vs. SHAM
0.026 (–0.012 to 0.066)
Main effects
Age
–0.002 (–0.002 to –0.001)
Age2
0.000 (0.000 to 0.000)
Pain exchangeable
interactions (vs. OAKa)
Headacheb,c
SHAM (vs. UC)
0.016 (–0.044 to 0.079)
ACU (vs. UC)
–0.006 (–0.059 to 0.047)
Musculoskeletalb,c
SHAM (vs. UC)
0.006 (–0.057 to 0.070)
ACU (vs. UC)
0.008 (–0.045 to 0.062)
Age common interactions
Age
0.000 (0.000 to 0.001)
Age2
0.000 (0.000 to 0.000)
Between-study variance
0.001 (0.000 to 0.003)
Total residual devianced
15,590 (15,210 to 15,970)
DICe
–6462.0
ACU, acupuncture; NMA, network meta-analysis; OAK, osteoarthritis of the knee; SHAM, sham acupuncture; UC, usual care.
a The reference pain group for the interaction terms is the OAK group.
b The reference treatment is usual care.
c Headache group = headache, migraine and TTH; musculoskeletal group = neck, shoulder and lower back pain.
d Compared with approximately 14,800 observations.
e The DIC is a statistical measure of model fit and model comparison. Models with a smaller DIC should be preferred.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
73
 Analysis with restricted evidence (models 3 and 4)
Results for models 3 and 4 are presented in Table 24, together with the model 1 results for comparison.
Generally, all three models convey the same message in relation to which treatment provides higher
increases in patients’ HRQoL, that is, acupuncture is found to be better than sham acupuncture and usual
care treatments. Nevertheless, given the presence of baseline imbalance, models 3 and 4 (but model 3
in particular) provide very different and potentially inappropriate summary results of treatment effects
when compared with model 1. These two models show also a fit to the data that is worse than model 1
(higher DIC of –6420 in model 1 compared with –69 and –3824 in models 3 and 4, respectively). In the
absence of baseline outcome data, if the choice was between modelling change (model 3) or modelling
follow-up scores (model 4), results from the latter model indicate that this would be a better option as the
relative treatment effect estimates and pain interaction effects are closer to those in model 1.
TABLE 24 Parameter estimates from fitting three different network meta-analysis models to the EQ-5D end point
IPD NMA
results
Comparison
Model
1 (ANCOVA
extension, change in
EQ-5D scores,
adjusted for
baseline), median
MCMC posterior
sample (95% CrI)
3 (change in
EQ-5D scores
without baseline
adjustment),
median MCMC
posterior sample
(95% CrI)
4 (follow-up EQ-5D
scores without
baseline
adjustment),
median MCMC
posterior sample
(95% CrI)
Relative
treatment
effects
SHAM vs. UC
0.057
(0.013 to 0.095)
0.077
(0.033 to 0.118)
0.051
(0.008 to 0.094)
ACU vs. UC
0.079
(0.042 to 0.114)
0.093
(0.054 to 0.129)
0.074
(0.035 to 0.113)
ACU vs. SHAM
0.022
(–0.014 to 0.060)
0.016
(–0.022 to 0.054)
0.023
(–0.014 to 0.065)
Pain
exchangeable
interactions
(vs. OAKa)
Headacheb,c
SHAM
(vs. UC)
–0.005
(–0.060 to 0.054)
–0.032
(–0.089 to 0.029)
0.001
(–0.059 to 0.064)
ACU
(vs. UC)
–0.023
(–0.071 to 0.029)
–0.035
(–0.082 to 0.014)
–0.021
(–0.074 to 0.032)
Musculoskeletalb,c
SHAM
(vs. UC)
0.002
(–0.052 to 0.062)
–0.016
(–0.074 to 0.045)
0.003
(–0.056 to 0.064)
ACU
(vs. UC)
0.003
(–0.046 to 0.054)
–0.009
(–0.059 to 0.042)
0.005
(–0.048 to 0.058)
Between-study variance
0.001 (0 to 0.003)
0.001 (0 to 0.003)
0.001 (0 to 0.003)
Total residual devianced
15,850
(15,480 to 16,230)
16,990
(16,570 to 17,420)
15,370
(15,010 to 15,730)
DICe
–6420.4
–69.9
–3823.7
ACU, acupuncture; NMA, network meta-analysis; OAK, osteoarthritis of the knee; SHAM, sham acupuncture; UC, usual care.
a The reference pain group for the interaction terms is the OAK group.
b The reference treatment is usual care.
c Headache group = headache, migraine and TTH; musculoskeletal group = neck, shoulder and lower back pain.
d Compared with approximately 14,800 observations.
e The DIC is a statistical measure of model fit and model comparison. Models with a smaller DIC should be preferred.
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
74
 Results of analysing resource use
Table 25 shows the results from regressing change in primary and secondary care health resources on
change in EQ-5D index score for each study. Generally, an increase in EQ-5D score over time implies a
reduction in health-care resource use. The analysis of secondary care resource use for osteoarthritis of the
knee was an exception, with improvements in EQ-5D score being associated with increased secondary care
attendances; however, this result was not statistically significant.
Results of the illustrative cost-effectiveness analysis
Illustrative cost-effectiveness results are presented in Table 26. The ICERs in each indication are well below
the threshold of £20,000–30,000 per QALY generally considered acceptable in the UK. Results using the
0- to 3-month data for the resource use regressions were very similar to the results in the base case and
are therefore not shown here. Acupuncture has close to a 100% probability of being cost-effective in
patients with osteoarthritis of the knee and musculoskeletal pain types, and an 86% probability of being
cost-effective for the headache/migraine indication, assuming a threshold of £20,000 per QALY. The
sensitivity analysis using trial data with a weighted average of the therapist time observed in the trials
provided fairly similar results, with musculoskeletal pain now obtaining the lowest estimated ICER
compared with the other two pain groups, as shown in Table 26. The results of the probabilistic sensitivity
analysis are presented as cost-effectiveness acceptability curves in Figure 14.
Discussion
Principal findings
Policy-makers faced with difficult resource allocation decisions require estimates of the costs and effects of
alternative treatment options. These estimates should reflect all relevant data and compare treatments
using a metric that can be used across clinical areas – in the UK the QALY is typically used. Synthesising all
relevant evidence to produce comparable estimates of costs and effects generates a series of challenges as
the available evidence base rarely captures all costs and effects of treatment (because of the nature of data
collection or the duration of follow-up), and often requires evidence to be generalised from different
populations. The available trial evidence may compare different sets of treatments and in many instances
the HRQoL data required to estimate QALYs directly are not available.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence has recommended acupuncture for the treatment
of chronic headache and musculoskeletal pain but not in the context of chronic pain associated with
osteoarthritis of the knee and headache/migraine.80–82 This decision in part reflected concerns regarding the
available evidence. The current study was commissioned as part of a programme intended to improve
TABLE 25 Resource use regression results
Study
Pain group
(type)
Analysis
Main 3–12 months of EQ-5D on type
of resource use, mean (95% CI)
Secondary 0–3 months of EQ-5D on
resource use, mean (95% CI)
Primary carea
Secondary careb
Primary carea
Secondary careb
Vickers 200460
Headache
(headache)
–1.247
(–2.409 to –0.085)
–0.17
(–0.63 to 0.289)
–0.719
(–1.849 to 0.412)
–0.057
(–0.503 to 0.390)
UK BEAM Trial
Team230
Musculoskeletal
(lower back)
–0.296
(–0.988 to 0.393)
–0.193
(–0.58 to 0.193)
–0.414
(–0.925 to 0.098)
–0.19
(–0.863 to 0.483)
Underwood
2008 (TOIB)231
Osteoarthritis of
the knee
–0.885
(–1.93 to 0.16)
0.47
(–0.638 to 1.579)
–0.294
(–0.966 to 0.378)
0.069
(–0.421 to 0.559)
a Primary care resources include GP and practice nurse visits.
b Secondary care resources include NHS hospital outpatient visits.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
75
 1.0
0.8
0.6
Probability cost-effective
0.4
0.2
0.0
0
10
20
30
Value of ceiling ratio (£000)
40
50
OAK
Headache
Musculoskeletal
FIGURE 14 Cost-effectiveness acceptability curves for each pain condition. The curves indicate the probability that
acupuncture is cost-effective at different values of the ceiling ratio. Separate curves are shown for osteoarthritis of
the knee (OAK), headache/migraine and musculoskeletal chronic pain types.
TABLE 26 Cost-effectiveness results (probabilistic analysis) for each pain condition
Analysis
Pain group
Treatment
Incremental
QALYs, mean
(95% CrI)a
Incremental
costs, mean
(95% CrI) (£)a
ICER
(£ per
QALY)
Probability
cost-effective
at £20,000
per QALY
Main analysis
(NICE guidance
treatment regimen)
Osteoarthritis of
the knee
Usual care
–
–
–
0.02
Acupuncture
0.0196 (0.0101
to 0.0287)
189
(176 to 202)
9673
0.98
Headache/
migraine
Usual care
–
–
–
0.14
Acupuncture
0.0140 (0.0053
to 0.0231)
183
(176 to 188)
13,076
0.86
Musculoskeletal
Usual care
–
–
–
0.01
Acupuncture
0.0205 (0.0118
to 0.0291)
184
(179 to 189)
8997
0.99
Sensitivity analysis
(trial-based
treatment regimen)
Osteoarthritis of
the knee
Usual care
–
–
–
0.01
Acupuncture
0.0196 (0.0101
to 0.0287)
169
(156 to 182)
8651
0.99
Headache/
migraine
Usual care
–
–
–
0.18
Acupuncture
0.0140 (0.0053
to 0.0231)
197
(191 to 202)
14,110
0.82
Musculoskeletal
Usual care
–
–
–
0.00
Acupuncture
0.0205 (0.0118
to 0.0291)
138
(132 to 143)
6745
1.00
a Data are incremental QALYs (95% CrIs) and incremental costs (95% CrIs).
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
76
 evidence around the costs and effects of acupuncture. This study synthesised IPD from RCTs of
acupuncture in headache/migraine, musculoskeletal and osteoarthritis of the knee chronic pain. Trials
compared acupuncture with usual care, sham acupuncture or both control interventions. Bayesian network
meta-analysis synthesis modelling was therefore used in this study to leverage all available evidence to
inform estimates of relative treatment effects. The studies reported heterogeneous and distinct outcome
sets. Methods to homogenise outcomes for synthesis were therefore used. The availability of IPD for all
studies expanded the set of feasible analyses and allowed development of de novo methods to fully exploit
the benefits of access to these data.
Novel methods for network meta-analysis of IPD on continuous outcomes were developed, building on
previous work on ANCOVA models for pairwise meta-analysis.219 Analysis of the pain outcome required
development of methods for conducting SMD analysis with IPD. Analysis of the EQ-5D data required an
extensive mapping exercise whereby separate mapping functions were applied to each study, with choice of
mapping dependent on the available outcome data. Access to IPD allowed ANCOVA models to be applied,
thus improving precision and adjusting for baseline imbalance. Access to IPD also avoided the use of any
assumptions regarding the distribution of HRQoL instrument scores, thus allowing the observed distributions
to be adequately reflected in the mapped utilities. Finally, access to IPD provided the opportunity to adjust for
covariates based on within- and across-trial information. Given the demonstrable benefits of access to IPD,
more effort should be made to share and develop repositories for data. A recent survey indicated a high level
of support from reviewers affiliated with Cochrane Collaboration’s IPD Meta-analysis Methods Group for the
development of a central repository for storing IPD.250
Analyses were conducted to explore the importance of modelling change scores in the presence of
non-normally distributed outcome data and to explore the implications of using non-ANCOVA models, as
would be necessary in the absence of IPD. The results showed that modelling final scores or change scores
without baseline adjustment produced estimates of treatment effect that differed by up to 26% compared
with the baseline adjusted model, emphasising the importance of baseline adjustment and therefore of
having access to IPD.
The results of the network meta-analysis show acupuncture to be more effective than usual care with
respect to reducing pain and improving HRQoL. There remains uncertainty regarding whether or not the
benefit of acupuncture varies across the pain types analysed. The analysis of EQ-5D preference scores
suggests that patients with the headache/migraine pain type may benefit from acupuncture, but less so
than patients with osteoarthritis of the knee or musculoskeletal pain, although interaction effects are
relatively uncertain. A reduced benefit in patients with headache/migraine-related chronic pain could be
caused by ceiling effects as individuals with chronic headache/migraine pain had higher baseline EQ-5D
index values. Results for the standardised pain analysis were more consistent across indications.
Differences between acupuncture and sham acupuncture were relatively small. The large effect of the
sham acupuncture intervention compared with usual care may reflect the potency of the sham
comparators in the higher-quality trials included in the ATC systematic review. In contrast to the NICE
guidelines, our results suggest that if anything the evidence base for acupuncture is stronger in the
osteoarthritis of the knee and musculoskeletal conditions (for which acupuncture is recommended only
for lower back pain) than in the headache/migraine pain group (for which acupuncture is recommended).
The recommendations in the NICE osteoarthritis guidelines were heavily driven by comparisons with
sham acupuncture. The network meta-analysis found strong evidence of an effect of acupuncture when
compared with sham acupuncture in osteoarthritis of the knee for the standardised pain outcome but not
the EQ-5D outcome (for which the CrI contained zero).
Considerable commonalities exist between the methodologies and the results presented in Chapter 2 and
this chapter; however, there are some differences. Across pain types, the two chapters report minor
differences in effect between acupuncture and usual care, and acupuncture and sham acupuncture.
Nevertheless, the results were broadly consistent across the two chapters. The exact magnitude of the
treatment effects and their precision inevitably varied given that there are differences in the data and
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
77
 methods being used. The current analysis used 28 trials (rather than 29) and consistently used the 3-month
end point rather than the primary end point as in Chapter 2. For example, in Chapter 2 the two headache
trials used the primary end point, which was at 6 months. Additionally, a different methodology was used.
Chapter 2 used IPD pairwise meta-analysis based on a frequentist approach. In contrast, in this chapter,
IPD network meta-analysis was implemented using a Bayesian random-effects framework. The synthesis
model implemented in the current analysis considered all evidence and all available treatments of interest
in a single analysis, simultaneously deriving relative treatment effects for all comparisons. Finally, Chapter 2
focused on the standardised pain outcome whereas this chapter analysed standardised pain and HRQoL
(EQ-5D) estimates.
The cost-effectiveness results suggest that, compared with usual care alone, acupuncture is cost-effective
with ICERs ranging from £9000 to £13,000 per QALY. These values fall within both the NICE plausible
threshold range (i.e. between £20,000 and £30,000 per QALY gained) and a more recent empirical
threshold estimate of £13,000 per additional QALY obtained.251 These values are comparable to those in
other studies in the UK comparing acupuncture with usual care for the same pain indications, which have
estimated ICERs of £4000–17,000.62,63,227 These ICERs were derived from individual studies, whereas the
ICERs presented here reflect the synthesis of a large number of studies.
Limitations
The study has a series of limitations. First, synthesis of heterogeneous outcomes relied on imperfect
standardisation processes (which assume that any differences in within-trial outcome variability result from
the use of different instruments) and mappings, which are typically able to explain only a minority of
variation in EQ-5D scores. Clearly, the use of any mapping tool is considered a second best approach to
directly eliciting relevant preference-based measures from study participants. The magnitude of bias
introduced by using standardisation processes and mapping functions (and different mapping functions
across trials) is unknowable. The availability of key outcomes across trials would have reduced these
concerns, as would the collection of generic preference-based measures of HRQoL in all trials. A ‘core
outcome set’ for osteoarthritis is available, along with the recommendation that future Phase III trials of
knee, hip and hand osteoarthritis should evaluate the following domains: pain, physical function, patient
global assessment and, for studies of ≥ 1 year, joint imaging.252 Other recommendations have tended to
focus on domains rather than specific instruments. Recommendations that go beyond Phase III regulatory
trials, and which define the instruments that should be used to measure outcomes in these domains,
are warranted.
Second, outcome data closest to 3 months were selected for synthesis. The synthesis therefore requires
the assumption that, in the minority of trials not reporting at 3 months, the available data are reflective
of the 3-month time point. Some trials reported outcomes at months 1 and 2. If the effect of acupuncture
is gradual, these effects may underestimate 3-month outcomes. For the cost-effectiveness analysis,
the HRQoL effects observed at 3 months were applied from 0 to 3 months to generate QALYs. Other
quality-of-life trajectories may, however, be more plausible. For example, quality of life may increase
gradually during treatment and reduce gradually following treatment completion. Moreover, there is some
evidence of benefits increasing for some time after the first 3 months when treatment was provided, for
example at 12 months for headache/migraine60 and at 24 months for lower back pain.61 Depending on the
nature and magnitude of these effects, the incremental benefit of sham acupuncture and acupuncture
could be larger or smaller than presented here. Further work analysing repeated outcome measurements in
a network meta-analysis could be used to evaluate the importance of these effects.
All sham interventions were assumed to be equivalent in the analysis, as were the usual care controls.
Evidence from work recently conducted by the ATC suggests that the effect of sham acupuncture may
vary depending whether penetrating or non-penetrating needles are used and that the effect of usual care
may depend on whether or not a treatment protocol for usual care is specified.45 Exploration of a network
including more refined comparator definitions may, therefore, be of value.
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
78
 The impact of each pain condition on treatment effects was assumed to be exchangeable;173 this
assumption could be explored further by comparing the fit of models assuming a common pain–treatment
effect interaction and models assuming completely separate pain–treatment effect interactions.
The studies analysed here are from a range of countries, which may differ in terms of the method and
intensity with which acupuncture is administered. For instance, following NICE recommendations for lower
back pain, we assumed that acupuncture treatments are fixed at 10 sessions, irrespective of the pain
condition. This assumption might be questionable as the optimum number of treatment sessions may vary
according to setting and pain type. Also, acupuncture sessions were costed using a unit cost for a
physiotherapist of £36 per hour. This is also an assumption of the current work as unit costs will depend
on how the NHS will provide the service. In addition, differences in the nature of health care for chronic
pain more generally could have impacted on outcomes.
The analysis of non-intervention resource use assumed that only primary care and specialist visits are
impacted on by changes in outcomes following acupuncture, and that the impact of treatment on
resource use can be captured through changes in the EQ-5D. It is possible, however, that this did not
capture the full impact of treatment on resource use.
Our analysis of standardised pain included the primary end point for each study and, therefore, the
outcomes on which we would expect the trials to have been powered. The outcomes included in the
analysis ranged from pure pain measures to wider measures of HRQoL (e.g. total WOMAC score). Both pain
and functioning outcomes have been highlighted in previous NICE Guidance Development Groups to be of
critical importance to decision-making.80–82 Our analysis suggests that, based on the standardised pain
outcome, acupuncture is better than usual care and sham acupuncture for all indications, although CrIs
include zero for the headache group when acupuncture is compared with sham acupuncture.
Recommendations for future research
First, a key limitation of this work is the use of imperfect standardisation processes to adequately combine
available heterogeneous evidence. Thus, we consider it a research priority to identify key outcomes for the
conditions considered here and improve reporting so that consistency exists across the body of evidence.
Second, in the impossibility of achieving complete homogeneity of outcomes across the relevant evidence
resulting in mapping tools being required, a worthwhile methodological extension of the current work
would be to develop a model that would map the existing evidence to the desired outcome and
simultaneously synthesise it together with other relevant evidence. Finally, it was highlighted in this work
how important it is to have access to, and analyse, evidence at the individual level. It showed that IPD
has clear value over summary data for both synthesis and decision modelling aspects of the analysis.
Thus, continuing efforts to share this data type across the research community is highly commended.
Although results from this analysis provide robust estimates of the incremental costs and effects of
acupuncture compared with usual care, they are unlikely to provide a suitable basis for decision-making.
There is a wide range of alternative treatments for chronic pain and the relative value of these alternatives
should be appraised alongside the costs and effects of acupuncture and usual care to reliably inform
decision-making. In the context of osteoarthritis of the knee, an evaluation of a broader set of treatment
options has been conducted and is presented in the following chapter.
Conclusions
This study presents methods for conducting IPD network meta-analysis of continuous outcomes when the
instruments used to measure outcomes differ between trials. Using the example of acupuncture for the
treatment of chronic pain, our novel methods show how heterogeneous outcomes can be analysed using
standardisation and mapping approaches, and how the resulting outcomes can be translated into
cost-effectiveness results to inform resource allocation decisions.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
79
 The methods developed allowed all available trials to inform the synthesis. Availability of IPD allowed the
true distribution of outcome measures to be reflected in the mapping to EQ-5D and avoided the use of
non-baseline-adjusted models, which produced quite different results. Use of baseline-adjusted change
score models produced better results than non-adjusted models, suggesting the superiority of the
ANCOVA framework in the context of treatment effect estimation.
The analysis found acupuncture to be more effective than usual care with respect to reducing pain
and improving EQ-5D preference scores in patients with chronic pain of osteoarthritis of the knee,
musculoskeletal and headache/migraine origin. The benefits of acupuncture over sham acupuncture are
smaller than when compared with usual care. The probability that acupuncture is associated with better
pain outcomes than sham acupuncture and usual care is high (> 0.96) across indications. The probability
that acupuncture is associated with higher EQ-5D preference scores than sham acupuncture and usual care
is high in osteoarthritis of the knee (0.89) and musculoskeletal chronic pain (0.95). For headache/migraine
this probability is 0.64, reflecting the smaller benefit of acupuncture compared with sham acupuncture
for this indication. The methods used provide outputs in a format that can be used to directly inform
cost-effectiveness considerations once the full set of relevant comparators is considered.
TOWARDS A COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS OF ACUPUNCTURE FOR CHRONIC PAIN
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
80
 Chapter 5 Cost-effectiveness of
non-pharmacological adjunct treatments for
patients with osteoarthritis of the knee
Introduction
Health policy-makers worldwide are under increasing pressure to provide the best and most affordable
care to their fellow citizens to maximise population health given existing constraints (e.g. budgetary,
ethical, structural). Cost-effectiveness analysis is now being used in many jurisdictions to support ‘value for
money’ appraisals as part of the health technology assessment of competing interventions.253 Examples of
national agencies that use cost-effectiveness analysis for health technology assessment to inform their
deliberation process include NICE in England and Wales, the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee
in Australia and the Common Drugs Review in Canada.
Many other similar agencies exist around the world253 and, although the methods they use may vary
slightly across jurisdictions, there are a number of essential information requirements, common to all, that
must be met for these decision-makers to be able to formulate their funding recommendations. These
requirements include the systematic consideration and quantification of the clinical effectiveness, quality of
life and health-care cost implications associated with each competing treatment strategy relevant to the
decision problem in the jurisdiction of interest.
Unfortunately, the above information is often either not available at all or not available in the format
required by the decision-maker. For instance, the evidence base may (1) lack (or be informed by a limited
set of) studies comparing head to head all of the relevant treatment strategies, (2) present a fragmented
picture with different studies reporting different sets of outcomes and summary statistics, (3) include
clinical studies with too short a follow-up duration to directly inform questions about the long-term (cost)
effectiveness of the technologies, (4) reflect large variations in clinical practice (between and within
jurisdictions) and (5) provide little or no health-care resource utilisation data relevant to the jurisdiction
of interest.204,254
In all of these cases, to use the existing evidence base to inform health policy inevitably requires the
application of statistical evidence synthesis and decision-analytic (cost-effectiveness) models. These types
of models facilitate the organisation and synthesis of the available information within a coherent
mathematical framework developed to evaluate the outcomes of interest (e.g. long-term costs and effects),
identify and quantify their key drivers, and appropriately reflect all sources of uncertainty surrounding the
decision problem.255
In many clinical areas and for many interventions, particularly those not subject to strict regulation, the
evidence base may include a significant proportion of poor-quality studies, making decision-making
challenging. For example, not all interventions that come under the category of complementary and
alternative medicine (CAM) therapies256 are subject to rigorously conducted RCTs. However, there is
growing public interest in (and demand for) the use of these therapies, with patients often making direct
contact with practitioners, with or without their primary care physician’s referral.257,258 Health policy-makers
are therefore responsible for assessing the role and position of CAM therapies within the management of
patients with certain conditions and health-care staff need to be familiar with the various treatment options,
their possible benefits and risks, and potential interactions with more conventional medical therapies.259
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
81
 The limitations of the evidence base mean that there is considerable uncertainty surrounding the (cost)
effectiveness of some of the CAM therapies, so much so that, in a recent review of UK clinical guidelines
that discussed CAM, 62% did not reach a conclusive recommendation for or against treatment.260
In its guideline on the care and management of osteoarthritis, NICE228 acknowledges the limitations in the
published evidence base and advises people with osteoarthritis of the knee to use a range of core treatments
(access to appropriate information, exercise and weight loss for people who are overweight or obese) and a
range of pharmacological and non-pharmacological (e.g. manipulation and stretching, electrotherapy)
adjunct treatments. The guideline stated that acupuncture should not be offered for the management of
osteoarthritis. This recommendation spurred reactions from patient groups and practitioners,84 particularly
because it is in contrast to the fact that, of the various forms of CAM, acupuncture is one of the most
popular referrals (based on a review of three different surveys) and approximately 4 million sessions are
provided annually in the UK each year.1,261,262
In this chapter we address some of the concerns about the limitations in the published evidence base on
CAM, particularly with regard to the role of acupuncture for osteoarthritis of the knee. The study featured
in this chapter builds on the IPD meta-analysis of Chapter 2 in which we found that acupuncture was
superior to both usual care and sham acupuncture for the treatment of back and neck pain, osteoarthritis
of the knee, and chronic headaches and migraine. In Chapter 3 we conducted a comprehensive evidence
synthesis (i.e. systematic literature review and network meta-analysis) of physical therapies for patients with
pain related to osteoarthritis of the knee in which we found acupuncture to be one of the more effective
therapies for alleviating knee pain. However, the study did not attempt to quantify the wider quality-of-life
benefits of the included interventions or their value for money. In Chapter 4, we reanalysed the IPD of
Chapter 2 in which pain outcome measures and measures of HRQoL mapped to EQ-5D preference weights
were analysed and a number of methodological challenges were addressed.
This chapter tackles the methods issues identified in Chapter 4 and builds on the work of Chapter 3 with its
focus on osteoarthritis of the knee. We report on novel methods and results of a network meta-analysis of
multiple sources of aggregate data and IPD, and a cost-effectiveness (or ‘value for money’) assessment of
non-pharmacological adjunct interventions in patients with knee pain caused by osteoarthritis in the UK
NHS primary care setting. The study compares the costs and effects of 13 therapies that could be (and in
some cases already are being) used within the UK NHS as adjunct treatments for knee osteoarthritis.
The evidence base and economic decision problem associated with osteoarthritis of the knee describes the
decision problem and the evidence base. The methods section describes the network meta-analysis models
developed for the simultaneous synthesis of continuous aggregate data and IPD, and the cost-effectiveness
model methods. The results section presents the results of the application of the methods to the decision
problem and data at hand. The discussion section discusses the study findings, its strengths and limitations,
and recommendations for future applied and methodological research. This is followed by the final
conclusions.
The evidence base and economic decision problem associated with
osteoarthritis of the knee
The decision problem
Osteoarthritis is most commonly located in the knee and is a major cause of pain, activity limitation and
health-care utilisation, especially among older people.228 There appears to be an unmet need for treatment
for this condition.263,264 Although acupuncture has been advocated as a potentially effective therapy to
manage osteoarthritis-related pain,265 NICE does not recommend its use because of questions over its (cost)
effectiveness.228 Other international guidelines have varied in their recommendations. EULAR161 and AAOS266
do not recommend the use of acupuncture, the ACR198 recommends acupuncture for those with moderate
to severe pain who are unwilling, unable or ineligible to undergo total knee arthroplasty and OARSI267
makes an ‘uncertain’ recommendation regarding acupuncture. The Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
82
 Network268 recommendations regarding the management of chronic pain recommend acupuncture for
short-term pain relief in osteoarthritis and guidance on the management of pain in older people has
deemed acupuncture worthy of further investigation.269 In addition, a range of other adjunct treatments
have been recommended and/or are available that could be used to manage osteoarthritis-related pain.
This evaluation aimed to assess the cost-effectiveness of alternative non-pharmacological adjunct
interventions in patients experiencing pain attributable to osteoarthritis of the knee. The setting of the
study was UK primary care and the costing perspective was that of the NHS and Personal Social Services.
The outcome measure used was the QALY. The comparators included in the economic evaluation are
documented in Table 27. The exact delivery of comparators reflects the delivery (and heterogeneity in
delivery) of the underlying trials (see Appendix 3).
The evidence base
To inform estimates of the effectiveness of the alternative interventions, we conducted an extensive
systematic literature review, presented in Chapter 3, synthesising the network of available RCT data using
network meta-analysis methods, to assess the effectiveness of acupuncture and other relevant physical
treatments for alleviating osteoarthritis-related knee pain. Of the 22 main interventions in the studies
forming this evidence base, we found that muscle-strengthening exercise, acupuncture, TENS and
balneotherapy were the interventions most commonly investigated. Studies typically recruited from general
populations with osteoarthritis of the knee, although weight-loss trials (as expected) recruited only
overweight or obese participants. Mean ages in the studies ranged from 53 to 85 years and the proportion
of female patients ranged from 26% to 100%. Usual care and placebo were the most frequently studied
comparators, with ‘no intervention’ being used rarely. There was considerable variation in the average
treatment duration across the interventions, although a majority of interventions were administered over a
2- to 6-week period. For five of the studies included in this review, IPD were available from the repository
prepared by the ATC for the IPD meta-analysis study presented in Chapter 2.
TABLE 27 Adjunct non-pharmacological interventions for knee osteoarthritis
Intervention
Intervention subtype
Acupuncture
Appliances
Braces
Insoles
Electrotherapy
Interferential therapy
Laser/light therapy
NMES
PES
PEMFs
TENS
Manual therapy
Static magnets
Heat treatment
Usual care
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
83
 The evidence base in the context of the economic decision problem
The NICE clinical pathway for the management of osteoarthritis distinguishes between core treatments
(i.e. information, exercise and weight loss) and a number of non-core treatments that may be given to patients
as needed, depending on preferences, needs and risk factors.228 These additional treatments are classified by
NICE as pharmacological adjunct, non-pharmacological adjunct and possible joint surgery following referral.
The 22 interventions included in the systematic literature review and network meta-analysis presented in
Chapter 3 included core and non-pharmacological adjunct treatments. Furthermore, NICE will undertake
a full review of evidence on the pharmacological management of osteoarthritis, which will be carried out
after a review of the safety of over-the-counter analgesics is completed by the Medicines and Healthcare
products Regulatory Agency. Therefore, the decision problem addressed in this chapter is, ‘which is the most
cost-effective non-pharmacological adjunct treatment for individuals in England and Wales with pain of the
knee caused by osteoarthritis’? It follows that information provision, activity and exercise and interventions to
achieve weight loss are excluded from the cost-effectiveness comparisons on the grounds that they are core
treatments and the decision about which to use is expected to be independent of the choice of adjuvant
therapy. Activity and exercise interventions were retained in the network meta-analysis as they provide indirect
evidence regarding the relative efficacy of the interventions of interest in the cost-effectiveness analysis. Trials
of weight-loss interventions were excluded from the network meta-analysis as these interventions were trialled
only in overweight osteoarthritis of the knee patients and inclusion of these data was expected to increase
heterogeneity in the network.
Usual care and no intervention were pooled in the current analysis as information available from the trials
did not allow these comparators to be clearly distinguished. Furthermore, balneotherapy was included
in the network meta-analysis but not the cost-effectiveness analysis as it seemed unlikely that the NHS in
England and Wales would invest in provisions for mineral bathing. Ice/cooling treatment was included
in the network meta-analysis but not the cost-effectiveness analysis as use of local cold application (packs,
massage) is widely used as part of self-management at no (or minimal) cost and no known risk.228
Comparator interventions were classified as in Chapter 3. This included classifying sham acupuncture
separately from other placebo interventions but otherwise considering all sham interventions in a single
placebo category. The potential for this to increase heterogeneity in the network is addressed in the discussion.
Data included in the synthesis model
All studies from the systematic review in Chapter 3 that provided data suitable for the network meta-analysis
were initially considered for inclusion in the synthesis (see Appendix 5 for a description of the data required
for the network meta-analysis). The characteristics of the studies included in this study have been reported in
detail in Appendix 3 as well as in a previous report168 and are briefly summarised in Appendix 5. The network
meta-analysis included 88 studies (out of a possible 152) and 7507 patients. The remaining 64 studies were
not included because of limitations in the collection and reporting of data. IPD were available for five of the
88 trials,69,77,120,134,136 including 1329 patients. As IPD were made available by the ATC, IPD were available only
for acupuncture trials. The systematic review in Chapter 3 identified 25 trials including acupuncture as a
comparator; of these, 16 provided data suitable for inclusion in the current analysis and five were included by
the ATC and therefore contributed IPD.
The studies were generally small, with only 15 of the 88 studies including > 50 patients per trial arm.
It was felt that, because of the heterogeneity in follow-up assessment and duration of treatment, the
analysis should focus only on data reported while patients were on treatment (or within 2 weeks of
treatment discontinuation). Based on feedback from clinical experts (a GP and a physiotherapist), patients
in the NHS are typically offered 6–10 weeks of treatment to alleviate pain related to osteoarthritis of the
knee. The analysis therefore included data reported closest to the 8-week time point. This time point was
also used in the review of acupuncture conducted as part of the development of the NICE osteoarthritis
guideline.228 The time points available for analysis ranged from < 1 day to 1 year, as determined by the
nature of the intervention, treatment duration, trial-specific design and planned follow-up assessment.
Figure 15 provides a visual representation of the network of all included trial data.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
84
 Here, points represent competing treatment strategies and solid lines describe treatment comparisons for
which direct trial evidence exists. Each line’s thickness is proportional to the number of studies informing a
comparison between two strategies, thus, the thicker the line the larger the number of trials available for
that comparison. The largest numbers of trials were available for the comparisons between muscle
strengthening exercise and usual care (n = 14), acupuncture and sham acupuncture (n = 8), aerobic
exercise and usual care (n = 7), and acupuncture and usual care (n = 7).
Given the variable and often poor quality of the underlying evidence base, the appropriate data set to
inform decision-making is uncertain. Three different networks of evidence were therefore used in the
primary analysis: first, a network meta-analysis in which all trials were included as described above; second,
a subset of trials that restricted the network meta-analysis to studies with a low risk of bias for allocation
concealment (39 trials); and, third, a network meta-analysis that used this criterion as well as further
restricting the data set to those studies that reported outcomes between 3 and 13 weeks (31 trials).
Figures 16 and 17 show the network of evidence available for the second and third scenarios, respectively.
Appendix 5 documents which studies were included within each network.
Health-related quality of life
Instruments designed to measure patient HRQoL can be classified according to whether they are generic
or condition specific and whether they are preference based or not preference based (depending on
whether or not the values used to score them have been derived using methods consistent with
economic theory).270,271 Examples of generic preference-based HRQoL instruments include the EQ-5D,272
Health Utilities Index-3273 and Short Form questionnaire-6 Dimensions,274 whereas examples of generic
non-preference-based instruments include the SF-36275 and the SF-12.276 Similarly, the WOMAC115 and
the Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ)277 are examples of condition-specific non-preference-based
HRQoL instruments in osteoarthritis, whereas an example of a condition-specific preference-based HRQoL
instrument is the HAQ preference-based measure.278
Exercise – aerobic
Exercise – muscle strengthening
Manual therapy
Insoles
Braces
PES
Laser/light therapy
Placebo
Static magnets
PEMFs
Interferential therapy
Heat treatment
TENS
Balneotherapy
Usual care
T’ai chi
Sham acupunture
Acupuncture
Ice/cooling treatment
NMES
FIGURE 15 Network of evidence for interventions in osteoarthritis of the knee.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
85
 Exercise – aerobic
Exercise – muscle strengthening
Manual therapy
Insoles
PES
Laser/light therapy
Placebo
Static magnets
Interferential therapy
Heat treatment
TENS
Balneotherapy
Usual care
Sham acupunture
Acupuncture
PEMFs
T’ai chi
FIGURE 17 Network of evidence: trials with a low risk of bias for allocation concealment and reporting at
3–13 weeks.
Exercise – aerobic
Exercise – muscle strengthening
Manual therapy
Insoles
PES
Laser/light therapy
Placebo
Static magnets
Interferential therapy
Heat treatment
TENS
Balneotherapy
Usual care
Sham acupunture
Acupuncture
Ice/cooling treatment
PEMFs
T’ai chi
FIGURE 16 Network of evidence: trials with a low risk of bias for allocation concealment.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
86
 The HRQoL instrument(s) reported in each study varied considerably across the 88 trials and many trials
reported more than one instrument. The EQ-5D was our preferred end point for the economic assessment
given the preferences of UK decision-makers, such as NICE, for this HRQoL measure.224 We therefore
focused on HRQoL instruments for which a mapping algorithm to the EQ-5D was available. The
instruments for which a mapping algorithm to the EQ-5D was available, and the mapping algorithms
themselves, were identified using the University of Oxford’s HERC database of studies mapping from
HRQoL or clinical measures to EQ-5D as reported by Dakin.235 When multiple mapping algorithms were
available for a given instrument, the preferred algorithm was selected on the basis of the sample size,
adequacy of statistical modelling and relevance of the study population.
In a number of studies data for multiple HRQoL instruments for which mappings were available were
reported. The preferred instrument was selected from these studies based on the extent to which the
instrument was expected to reflect all dimensions of the EQ-5D. This resulted in the following hierarchy:
EQ-5D preference values; SF-36 dimension scores; SF-36 MCS and PCS scores; SF-12 MCS and PCS scores;
WOMAC total score; VAS measures of pain; and NRS measures of pain.
The HRQoL instrument used for each study is presented in Appendix 5. Generic HRQoL instruments were
available for 19 studies (EQ-5D, n = 3; SF-36 dimensions, n = 6; SF-36 MCS and PCS, n = 9; SF-12 MCS
and PCS, n = 1). The remaining 69 studies provided WOMAC (n = 33); pain VAS (n = 33) or pain NRS
(n = 3) data. The distribution of instruments used according to treatment comparison and study size is
shown in Figure 18. Those studies that included generic HRQoL data tended to be larger and of higher
quality. Generic HRQoL instruments were used in studies including muscle-strengthening or aerobic
exercise, acupuncture, PES, t’ai chi and NMES comparators.
Health-care resource use
Only one study in the IPD data set provided resource use data.69 This study was conducted in Germany and
the only resource use item provided was the number of acupuncture sessions. It was, thus, deemed
appropriate to bring in external study data to inform resource use. Resource use associated with
administering each intervention was obtained using information from the clinical trials regarding the
intensity of treatment and information from clinical experts (a GP and a physiotherapist) regarding the
typical method of administering the treatment and equipment required.
It was anticipated that the frequency of primary care and outpatient specialist visits might be impacted on
by interventions that reduce individuals’ chronic pain. Resource use data from the TOIB RCT231 was
therefore used to relate changes in health outcomes (measured by the EQ-5D) to changes in these
resource use items.
Methods
This section describes the methods developed to carry out the synthesis of IPD and aggregate data, the
rationale and methods for mapping generic and condition-specific HRQoL into EQ-5D scores, the approach
used to derive health-care resource use and cost estimates for each treatment strategy being compared
and the methods used to carry out the cost-effectiveness analysis. Given the complexity of the evidence
base at hand and the range of methods used to address the challenges described in the previous section,
Figure 19 provides a visual representation of the relationships between data, models and outputs to
facilitate exposition in this section.
Health-related quality of life for cost-effectiveness analysis
As mentioned in the previous section, the 88 studies included in the base-case analysis used a range of
different HRQoL instruments, which were also reported in a fragmented way (see Appendix 5 for more
details). To overcome this problem, in Chapter 3 we synthesised study-level standardised mean (pain)
differences as a measure of effectiveness. This is one of the possible solutions when combining treatment
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
87
 Exercise – muscle strengthening vs. usual care
Acupuncture vs. usual care
Acupuncture vs. sham acupuncture
Exercise – aerobic vs. usual care
TENS vs. placebo
Balneotherapy vs. placebo
PEMFs vs. placebo
PES vs. placebo
T’ai chi vs. usual care
Manual therapy vs. usual care
Laser/light therapy vs. placebo
Usual care vs. sham acupunture
TENS vs. usual care
Placebo vs. usual care
Interferential therapy vs. placebo
Insoles vs. usual care
Insoles vs. placebo
Heat treatment vs. placebo
Exercise – muscle strengthening vs. placebo
Balneotherapy vs. usual care
TENS vs. interferential therapy
TENS vs. heat treatment
TENS vs. acupuncture
Static magnets vs. placebo
PES vs. usual care
PES vs. exercise – muscle strengthening
Placebo vs. PES
NMES vs. usual care
Manual therapy vs. placebo
Insoles vs. braces
Ice/cooling treatment vs. usual care
Ice/cooling treatment vs. TENS
Exercise – muscle strengthening vs. NMES
Exercise – muscle strengthening vs. manual therapy
Exercise – aerobic vs. exercise – muscle strengthening
Acupuncture vs. TENS
Acupuncture vs. placebo
Acupuncture vs. exercise – muscle strengthening
QoL instrument
EQ-5D
SF-36 dimensions
SF-36 MCS and PCS
SF-12 MCS and PCS
WOMAC
Pain VAS
Pain NRS
FIGURE 18 Best available quality-of-life data by comparison. Note: shape size is proportional to study size. Shapes are used to represent different HRQoL instruments.
Studies informing multiple comparisons (because of the presence of three or more trial arms) appear for each comparison.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
88
 Pain
SF-36
MCS/PCS
MCS/PCS
VAS
NRS
Mapping
Probabilistic cost-effectiveness model
NMA for synthesis of AD and IPD
8 dimensions
WOMAC
EQ-5D
QALYs
HCRU
External trial data and clinical experts
SF-12
Area under the curve
Mapping HRQoL into EQ-5D
Mapping ∆EQ-5D into ∆HCRU
Costs
FIGURE 19 Visual map of the model integrating synthesis, mapping and economic analysis. AD, aggregate data; HCRU, health-care resource use; NMA, network meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
89
 effect estimates from studies that measured the same outcome using a variety of different instruments.279,280
However, the method has limitations and these are important when the SMD outcome is to be used to
inform cost-effectiveness considerations. This is because health-care policy-makers require a common health
outcome measure to use as a yardstick to be able to make decisions across different conditions and clinical
areas. In many jurisdictions, including England and Wales,224 this yardstick is the QALY.225 The QALY is a
composite measure that combines mortality and morbidity into a single numeraire, thus providing an
estimate of an individual’s remaining life expectancy weighted by some measure of HRQoL. In England and
Wales, HRQoL is typically measured using a preference-based instrument such as the EQ-5D.272
The EQ-5D has been developed by the EuroQol Group [see www.euroqol.org (accessed 20 July 2016)] as a
standardised instrument for describing and valuing HRQoL. It describes an individual’s health state on five
domains – mobility, self-care, usual activity, pain/discomfort, anxiety and depression – each of which has
three levels of severity (no problem, some problems, extreme problems), giving rise to 243 possible health
states. Studies in the general population have been used to derive societal preference values for each of
the EQ-5D health states in several countries, including the UK.232 The UK survey estimated the EQ-5D index
score using the time trade-off method to elicit preference values for 42 of the 243 health states in the
EQ-5D using a representative sample (n = 3395) of the UK population, and regression methods to predict
the values of the remaining health states. The EQ-5D index value (also referred to as ‘tariff’ or ‘social tariff’)
for the UK ranges from –0.594 (health state 33333, i.e. the worst possible state) to 1 (health state 11111,
i.e. full health).
As the metric of interest for quantifying health benefits in cost-effectiveness analysis is the (absolute)
difference in mean QALYs between treatment groups, a series of network meta-analysis models were
developed to synthesise the EQ-5D data. These models were designed to include data available at both the
study and the patient level. Unfortunately, most studies had not reported EQ-5D data. Therefore, the
synthesis was preceded by a series of ‘mapping’ exercises used to predict EQ-5D scores from observed
generic or condition-specific HRQoL data. Details of the mapping are provided in the next section.
Synthesis of multiple heterogeneous outcomes
As described in the previous section, a range of mapping algorithms was used to predict EQ-5D estimates
from the available HRQoL data. This generated a series of challenges. First, the mapping algorithms used
were all non-linear and frequently used multiple correlated input dimensions. When IPD are available,
these non-linearities and correlations between dimensions are appropriately reflected simply by applying
the algorithm to the data reported for each patient. However, when only summary statistics for the HRQoL
dimension scores are available, methods were required to appropriately reflect the non-linear nature of the
mapping algorithms and the correlation between the dimension scores. This was addressed by generating
simulated data sets for each aggregate data study’s HRQoL instrument dimension scores, applying the
relevant mapping algorithm and then estimating the statistics required for the synthesis from the resulting
simulated EQ-5D data set. The statistics required for synthesis were baseline EQ-5D score and follow-up
EQ-5D score as well as their variances. As the distribution of HRQoL dimensions was unknown, individual
dimensions from the HRQoL instrument were assumed to follow a multivariate normal distribution. This
required an estimate of the variance–covariance matrix for the HRQoL instrument dimensions at baseline
and follow-up. Variances were obtained directly from the aggregate data studies. Covariances were
estimated using these variances combined with correlations estimated from the IPD studies using standard
formulae for the variance–covariance matrix. Correlations between EQ-5D index values at baseline and
follow-up were estimated from one study.134 Correlations between SF-36 dimension scores (and SF-36 PCS
and MCS scores) at baseline and follow-up were estimated from three studies.69,77,134 Correlations between
SF-12 PCS and MCS scores were obtained from a study not included in the systematic review reported in
Chapter 3, but made available by the ATC.70 Correlations between baseline and follow-up WOMAC scores
were obtained from four studies.69,77,120,136 Correlations between baseline and follow-up VAS scores were
estimated from four studies120,134,136 and an additional trial obtained from the ATC.135 No IPD were available
for the pain NRS end point; correlations between baseline and follow-up NRS data were therefore
assumed to be the same as for the VAS data. Samples of HRQoL measures that fell outside of the feasible
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
90
 range were truncated to the minimum or maximum possible values for each HRQoL instrument. Mapped
utilities generated by both the IPD and the aggregate data were truncated using the minimum and
maximum EQ-5D tariff values.
A second challenge faced in all analyses of mapped HRQoL data was that simply applying a mapping algorithm
does not adequately reflect the uncertainty in the mapping process. This is because of both the presence of
unmeasured predictors (reflected in the residual error of the mapping algorithm) and the fact that the
coefficients of the mapping algorithm are also random variables. Recent methodological developments241 were
therefore applied to capture residual error in the mapping algorithms. As recommended in Chan et al.,241
variances for the mapped aggregate data were inflated by the inverse of the R2 statistic from the corresponding
mapping algorithm. For the IPD studies the observed variances were inflated in the same way. As data entered
the model at the individual patient level, the additional variance was incorporated by adding a random deviate
to the observed outcomes. This deviate was drawn from a normal distribution with a mean of zero and variance
equal to the difference between the original and the inflated variances. Uncertainty in the regression coefficients
from the mapping algorithm and in the valuation of the EQ-5D preference scores was not captured.
As reported in Appendix 5, the HRQoL measures reported in the evidence base of knee pain related to
osteoarthritis included several different instruments, including the SF-36 (sometimes reported in terms of its
eight dimensions and sometimes reported in terms of its PCS and MCS scores), SF-12 (MCS and PCS
scores), WOMAC and pain (pain VAS or pain NRS). The following published mapping algorithms were
applied to data collected using these instruments to derive EQ-5D estimates.
SF-36 to EQ-5D
Those studies that used the SF-36 questionnaire reported the results either in terms of the score for the
eight dimensions of the instrument or in terms of its PCS and MCS scores. The model used the mapping
algorithm published by Rowen et al.236 for those studies that reported results for the eight dimensions of
the SF-36 questionnaire and the mapping algorithm published by Maund et al.238 for those studies that
reported the SF-36 PCS and MCS scores. Rowen et al.236 mapping coefficients were obtained from a
generalised least-squares regression of individual patient-level EQ-5D scores against the values of the eight
dimensions of the SF-36, their squares and their interactions, as this was identified as the preferred model
by the authors. Rowen et al.236 analysed data from a wide range of inpatients and outpatients at Cardiff
and Vale NHS Hospitals Trust. Maund et al.238 mapping coefficients were obtained from an OLS regression
of individual patient-level EQ-5D scores against the values of the SF-36 PCS and MCS scores, using data
from patients with rotator cuff disease in primary care recruited in the SAPPHIRE (Stenting and Angioplasty
With Protection In Patients at High Risk for Endarterectomy) trial.281 The authors estimated five models:
three OLS regressions (one with main effects for PCS and MCS scores only, another adding squared terms
and a third adding both squared and interaction terms), one Tobit regression and one censored least
absolute deviations (CLAD) model (both the Tobit and CLAD models included main effects, squared terms
and interaction terms). All models performed similarly (with mean absolute errors of 0.18–0.19). Given this,
for simplicity OLS models were preferred and the model including the main effects, their squares and their
interaction was used on the basis of marginal improvements in explanatory power and model fit. The
analysis of 1-, 3- and 12-month data was used as these analyses had slightly improved explanatory power
and model fit compared with the 3-month analysis.
SF-12 to EQ-5D
Those studies that used the SF-12 questionnaire reported its results in terms of its PCS and MCS scores.
The model used the mapping algorithm published by Gray et al.,237 which was obtained from a
multinomial logistic regression model of individual patient-level EQ-5D scores against the values of
the two summary scores of the SF-12, their squares and interaction terms. This model is based on an
analysis of data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey [see https://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/
(accessed 13 October 2016)], which reflects the HRQoL outcomes of non-institutionalised US civilians.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
91
 WOMAC to EQ-5D
Barton et al.239 developed a series of algorithms to map the WOMAC instrument on to EQ-5D scores.
Using IPD from patients who participated in the Lifestyle Interventions for Knee Pain study,282 the authors
conducted a series of OLS regressions, relating the EQ-5D index value to various possible ways in which
the WOMAC questionnaire may be reported. Five models were estimated in total: the first included total
WOMAC score as the only explanatory variable; the second used the WOMAC pain, stiffness and
functioning subscales; the third used the total WOMAC score and total WOMAC score squared; the fourth
included pain, stiffness and functioning, their interactions and their squares; and the final model was the
best fitting of the previous four plus age and sex. Access to the five different models proved useful as the
WOMAC had been reported in different ways in the literature forming the evidence base. The model
preferred by Barton et al.239 included total WOMAC score, total WOMAC score squared, age, age squared
and sex. This model was therefore applied to the IPD. Because of variable reporting of age and sex across
studies, for aggregate data studies the model including only total WOMAC score and total WOMAC score
squared was used.
Pain to EQ-5D
A final set of studies included in the analysis reported pain, measured using either a NRS or a VAS. The
report by Maund et al.238 that provided the mapping algorithm for the SF-36 MCS and PCS scores also
provided an algorithm to map pain VAS to EQ-5D scores. The authors estimated four models: two OLS
regressions (one with the pain VAS and another with the pain VAS and its squared term), one Tobit
regression and one CLAD model, using the pain VAS and its squared term as explanatory variables. All
models performed similarly (with mean absolute errors of 0.18–0.20). Given this, for simplicity OLS models
were preferred and the model including the main effects and their squares was used as there were no
observed differences in model fit or explanatory power between the model with and without the squared
term, and it seemed plausible that the relationship between pain VAS and EQ-5D scores was non-linear.
The analysis of 1-, 3- and 12-month data was used as these analyses had slightly improved explanatory
power and model fit compared with the 3-month analysis.
A mapping algorithm from the 11-point Pain Intensity Numerical Rating Scale (PI-NRS-11), ranging from
0 (‘no pain’) to 10 (‘pain as bad as you can imagine’), to the EQ-5D was available from Gu et al.283 To
estimate two mapping algorithms, the authors used survey data from a US sample of patients who had
at least 3 months of neuropathic pain, either painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy or post-herpetic
neuralgia, and were receiving medications treating neuropathic pain. The first related the EQ-5D index
score to a set of pain NRS dummy variables using OLS and the second used an ordered logistic regression
model to predict the response levels (i.e. 1, 2, 3) for each of the EQ-5D dimensions using the same
explanatory variables. Models were run with and without patient age, sex and pain duration as
independent variables. The reduced models, which excluded age, sex and disease duration, were used
given variable reporting of these variables across studies. The OLS model was used in the current analysis
as it had a better fit than the ordered logistic model.
Synthesis of individual-level and aggregate reporting of continuous outcomes
The second challenge that the analysis reported here had to address is common to the synthesis of all
continuous end points when only summary statistics are available. ANCOVA is the preferred method for
analysing continuous outcome data from RCTs.219 In an ANCOVA analysis the post-baseline outcome of
interest is regressed on both a treatment indicator and the baseline value of the outcome of interest.
ANCOVA is preferred as it offers improved precision and lower bias than other available methods when
there is imbalance in baseline outcomes. However, ANCOVA analyses are rarely reported in clinical
publications, particularly for secondary end points such as HRQoL. Meta-analyses therefore typically analyse
either post-baseline (or ‘final’) values or change from baseline values. An analysis of final scores would be
expected to be biased in favour of the treatment with a higher baseline value. In the current data set,
patients with higher EQ-5D values experienced lower changes in values; a change score analysis would
therefore be expected to bias against the treatment with higher baseline values. Existing proposals to handle
this have significant limitations. Fu et al.284 recommend sensitivity analyses using final scores and change
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
92
 scores. It is not clear how the results of this analysis would be interpreted, as there is no guarantee that,
at the (network) meta-analysis level, the true treatment effects will be bounded by the results of these
scenarios. Riley et al.219 propose dropping studies with significant imbalance; however, this results in a loss of
information and requires a demarcation of what constitutes ‘significant imbalance’. Methods were therefore
developed to address this concern, given the significant imbalances observed in this data set.
Differences in study designs, study populations and the implementation of individual interventions seemed
likely to generate heterogeneity in the underlying true effects. We therefore developed random-effects
models as in Chapter 3. This model extends the IPD model presented in Chapter 4 to the more commonly
faced situation in which IPD are available for only a subset of studies, with only aggregate data reporting
available for the remainder.
The outcome variable, absolute EQ-5D score at follow-up, was assumed to be normally distributed.
Although this assumption is unlikely to characterise EQ-5D scores,233 simulation results have shown
treatment effect estimates from ANCOVA to be very close to the true treatment effects for a range of
non-normal outcome distributions.285
Individual patient data were included in the model using an ANCOVA network meta-analysis model:
Yik jt ∼ N θik j, σ2
j
�
�
θik j =
�
αbj + βj0Yik j0
if k = b
αbj + βj0Yik j0 + δkbj
if k > b,
(3)
where Yijkt and Yijk0 are the values of the (continuous) outcome at time point t and baseline (t = 0),
respectively, for participant i in treatment arm k of study j; σ2
j represents the study-level variance; the
quantity αbj represents the outcome for the baseline treatment k = b in study j for a patient with an EQ-5D
score Yijk0 of zero at time 0 (this is study specific to respect within-study randomisation); the parameter βj0
represents a study-specific estimate of the impact of baseline EQ-5D score on the final outcome; and δkbj
represents the treatment effect for treatment k relative to treatment b in trial j.
The aggregate data are included in a final outcomes model that has been modified to adjust for the
potential bias caused by differences in outcomes between treatments at baseline (Ykbj0 = Ykb0 – Ybj0):
Yk jt ∼ N θk j, σ2
k j
�
�
θjk =
�
αbj
if k = b
αbj + βpredYkbj0 + δkbj
if k > b,
(4)
where Ykjt and σ2
k j are the mean and variance for the final outcome for treatment arm k of study j at time
t, respectively.
This model adjusts the treatment effects to emulate the ANCOVA model results. This is achieved by
considering the reported unadjusted results as being subject to omitted variable bias, where the omitted
variable is baseline EQ-5D score. Omitted variable bias can be estimated as the product of the coefficient
on the baseline EQ-5D score from the ‘correctly’ specified model (the ANCOVA model) multiplied by the
coefficient from a regression of the omitted variable (baseline EQ-5D score) on the included variable
(treatment).286 The coefficient on the baseline EQ-5D score from the ANCOVA model (βj0) is obviously
unknown for the aggregate data studies. This coefficient is assumed to be exchangeable with the
coefficients obtained from the studies for which IPD were available and can therefore be estimated as:
βpred ∼ N(β0, σβ0).
(5)
β0 and σβ0 are estimated by assuming that the coefficient on the baseline outcome measure for each IPD
trial (βj0) is drawn from a normal distribution with mean β0 and variance σβ0.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
93
 The covariate from the regression of baseline EQ-5D score on treatment is simply the difference in baseline
EQ-5D score between the treatment and the control for the comparison of interest (i.e. Ykbj0).
The estimated study-specific treatment effects (δkbj) from the IPD and aggregate data inform a common
random-effects consistency model:
δkbj ∼ N(dkb, σ2)
dkb = dk1 − d1b,
(6)
where dkb represents the treatment effects for the comparison of treatment k with treatment b; these are
assumed to be derived from a set of basic parameters (dk1), which estimate the treatment effect of
treatment k relative to the reference treatment (k = 1), where d11 = 0.
Priors were defined to be vague and were specified as follows: αbj ∼ N(0,104); dk1 ∼ N(0,103); σk ∼ Unif(0,2);
β0 ∼ N(0,106); σβ0∼Unif(0, 2); σ∼Unif(0, 2).
If outcome data were missing for patients within the IPD, these cases were dropped from the analysis
(this occurred in 21% of all cases). If baseline data were missing for the aggregate data studies, the
difference at baseline (Ykbj0) was assumed to be zero.
Correlation in the random effects from trials with three or more arms were accounted for using previously
published methods.222 When SEs were not reported and could not be derived from the reported data,
they were imputed using the methods described by Dakin et al.,234 which allow for the uncertainty in the
imputation process.
Model fit was assessed using the posterior residual deviance and the DIC. In the IPD each patient
(data point) should contribute approximately 1 to the residual deviance, whereas for the aggregate data
each study arm (data point) should contribute approximately 1 to the residual deviance. Residual deviance
contributions from each patient in each IPD study arm were therefore summed and divided by the total
number of patients in the study arm to allow an aggregate measure of mean posterior residual deviance to
be estimated and to allow deviance contributions to be compared across studies.
Inconsistency was assessed using the methods set out in Dias et al.,287 whereby the fit of the consistency
model is compared with the fit of an inconsistency model. As recommended in Dias et al.,287 changes in
the model fit associated with using the inconsistency model were assessed using ‘omnibus’ diagnostics
(DIC; posterior mean residual deviance). Residual deviance contributions for each data point were also
reviewed for both consistency and inconsistency models.180
Convergence was assessed by inspecting trace plots, density plots and Brooks–Gelman–Rubin plots as well
as autocorrelation plots.177 Efficiency was assessed by comparing the Monte Carlo error to the posterior
SD. All models were run for 100,000 ‘burn-in’ iterations and a further 100,000 samples.
Data manipulation and analysis was carried out using the software packages R version 3.0.2 and WinBUGS246
version 1.4.3. The network meta-analyses were undertaken in WinBUGS, linked to the R software through the
package R2WinBUGS.247,288 The statistical software Stata 12.0 was used to analyse the relationship between
changes in resource use and changes in EQ-5D score. The annotated WinBUGS code is provided as Appendix 5.
Study heterogeneity
Three sources of heterogeneity were anticipated to be potential treatment effect modifiers based on a
review of the trial data and clinical opinion: bias associated with trial quality, variable reporting times
across trials and differences in patients across trials.
Study quality has been found to be a study-level treatment effect modifier in the context of osteoarthritis
trials.289 A meta-epidemiological study by Nüesch et al.289 of 16 meta-analyses comparing active with
control interventions (or placebo) in patients with hip or knee osteoarthritis found effect sizes to be less
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
94
 beneficial in trials with adequate allocation concealment than in those with inadequate or unclear
allocation concealment according to the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool.171 The Cochrane risk-of-bias tool
assesses allocation concealment based on whether or not the method used to conceal the allocation
sequence is sufficient to avoid intervention allocations being foreseen before or during enrolment.
The risk-of-bias score (low, unclear or high) is assigned based on the risk of selection bias because of
inadequate concealment of allocations prior to assignment.
The difference in effect size was most pronounced when the trial data set was restricted to trials of
complementary medicine interventions, which included acupuncture, chondroitin, glucosamine, PEMFs
and static magnets. The impact of patient blinding was also explored; however, observed differences in
treatment effects were less consistent and disappeared after accounting for allocation concealment.
We therefore ran analyses restricting the study set to those with adequate allocation concealment
according to the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool.171
It was expected that trials reporting at very short or very long time points may have both different
characteristics (e.g. very short trials may be of a more experimental nature) and reflect different points on a
patients’ HRQoL change trajectory. An additional analysis was therefore conducted further restricting the
analysis of trials with adequate allocation concealment to only those trials reporting within the 3- to 13-week
period (note that originally an analysis restricted to trials reporting in the 4- to 12-week range was planned;
however, this resulted in the network becoming disconnected).
Increased age and BMI were potentially expected to reduce the efficacy of the interventions considered in
this synthesis. Given the low number of studies available for many of the contrasts we used the common
interaction effect model outlined in the study by Dias et al.245 A common interaction term βxk1 was
assumed to apply to all treatment effects relative to treatment 1 (usual care). This required modifications to
Equations 3 and 4 as shown in Equations 7 and 8, where Xikj represents the centred age (BMI) of patient i
in treatment arm k of study j in the IPD studies, and Xj represents the centred mean age (BMI) of study j in
the aggregate data studies. The coefficient βxj represents the study-specific impact of centred age (BMI) on
the outcome measure. The logical operator I(u) takes the value 1 if the condition u is met and 0 otherwise.
Yik jt ∼ N θik j, σ2
j
�
�
θi jk =
�
αbj + βj0Yik j0 + βx jXik j
if k = b
αbj + βj0Yik j0 + δkbj + βxk1Xik jI(b = 1)
if k > b.
(7)
Yk jt ∼ N θk j, σ2
k j
�
�
θjk =
�
αbj
if k = b
αbj + βpredYkbj0 + δkbj + βxk1XjI(b = 1)
if k > b.
(8)
The following additional priors were required for the covariate modelling: βxj ∼ N(0,104); βxk1 ∼ N(0,104).
Missing covariate values were imputed assuming an ignorable missing covariate mechanism using the
methods described in Lunn.290 Missing data for BMI and age were assumed to be drawn from independent
normal distributions, and separate models were assumed for missing IPD and aggregate data covariates.
Methods for estimating the total cost
The total cost included the costs of providing the interventions, primary care visits and outpatient hospital
visits. The cost year was 2012–13.
Intervention costs
The main purpose of the cost-effectiveness analysis was to estimate the costs and QALYs associated with
each treatment and identify which strategy provided ‘value for money’ in the NHS for England and Wales.
Unfortunately, most of the studies in the data set either did not collect health-care resource use data to
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
95
 inform a costing exercise relevant to the NHS for England and Wales or did not collect resource use data at
all. Health-care resource use information is typically considered not transferable from country to country as
it is a function of country-specific health-care system factors (e.g. the incentive structure faced by providers
and patients, relative prices of available health-care resource use, the treatment strategies available in the
country), which are difficult to control for even when the analyst has access to IPD.
To estimate the resource use associated with delivering each intervention, clinical experts were consulted,
as well as the published literature (including the published trial data) and UK NHS data, such as NHS
foundation trust information available on the internet. The resulting intervention resource use and cost
data are summarised in Table 28.
For interventions assumed to be administered via regular physiotherapy attendance (acupuncture,
electrotherapy excluding TENS, thermotherapy and manual therapy), weekly attendance durations were
estimated from the clinical trial data. Acupuncture is administered in the UK by a range of practitioners.
Recent survey data suggest that, of acupuncture administered within the NHS, 59% is administered by
physiotherapists with the remainder administered by medical doctors (29%), nurses (4%), other health-care
professionals (5%) or independent practitioners (4%).1 For the purpose of estimating costs, we therefore
assume that acupuncture is carried out by a physiotherapist. Unless a marked difference in outcomes was
expected between delivery by a physiotherapist and delivery by a medical doctor, it seems unlikely that
provision by medical doctors would be cost-effective given the large difference in hourly costs.249
Weekly attendance was estimated for each trial as the total number of sessions multiplied by the number
of minutes per session divided by the number of weeks of treatment. A weighted average for weekly
attendance was then estimated from the trials included in the network meta-analysis. This was carried out
separately for the analysis of all trials and the analysis restricted to trials with adequate allocation
concealment to ensure that in each cost-effectiveness analysis scenario the resource use was aligned with
the efficacy data. Equipment administered by physiotherapists was not included in the costing, as the
associated per-patient costs were expected to be small given the high throughput of individuals
experiencing osteoarthritis of the knee and chronic pain of other aetiologies.
Insoles, braces and static magnets would be typically used for longer durations, beyond the 8-week
cost-effectiveness model time horizon. Therefore, it was assumed that for these therapies, the (upfront)
costs could be spread across their useable lifetimes and that the effects observed within the network
meta-analysis would be maintained throughout their useable lifetimes. For TENS we assumed that the
patient used the TENS machine at home for 8 weeks and then returned it to the physiotherapy unit for
use by other patients.
Unit costs were obtained from published national sources when possible and are reported in Table 29.
The financial year 2012–13 was used to value resource use relevant to each intervention. Costs reported
for previous financial years were inflated using the Hospital and Community Health Services prices index.249
Total costs were calculated by multiplying resource use by the unit cost. Other treatments and health-care
interactions that may form a package of ‘usual care’ were assumed to have been provided equally to all
patients regardless of comparator. These costs were therefore omitted from the analysis.
Other health-care costs
Non-treatment-specific health-care resource utilisation was assumed to be a function of any change in
EQ-5D over the 8 weeks of the treatment period and was derived from the TOIB trial.231,292 Briefly, the TOIB
trial collected EQ-5D and health-care resource utilisation data at baseline and follow-up; having gained
access to the TOIB trial IPD, it provided an opportunity to estimate a series of simple models that regressed
changes in health-care resource utilisation (i.e. GP visits, nurse practitioner visits, outpatient hospital
specialist visits) against changes in EQ-5D score. A simple OLS analysis was used to regress the change in
resource use from 0–3 months to 3–12 months on the change in EQ-5D score between month 3 and
month 12. Primary and secondary care visits were analysed separately. The estimated regression
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
96
 TABLE 28 Interventions for the management of chronic pain in NHS patients with osteoarthritis of the knee in
primary care
Interventions
Resource use
Trials (weekly attendance in
minutes), mean (range)
All
With
adequate
allocation
concealmenta
Acupuncture
Administered weekly by a physiotherapist
over 8 weeks
37 (18–80)
40 (20–50)
Biomedical
appliances
Braces
Initial 40-minute visit to a physiotherapist
to prescribe brace and a subsequent
30-minute visit to fit brace. Assume brace
lasts for 6 months
N/A
N/A
Insoles
Initial 40-minute visit to a podiatrist to
prescribe insole and a 30-minute follow-up
visit. Assume use of a ready-made insole,
which lasts for 1 year
N/A
N/A
Electrotherapy
Interferential therapy
Administered weekly by a physiotherapist
over 8 weeks
159 (40–245)
245 (N/Ab)
Laser/light therapy
105 (25–210)
60 (N/Ab)
NMES
100 (N/Ab)
N/Ac
PES
82 (57–114)
85 (57–114)
PEMFs
303 (80–600)
120 (N/Ab)
TENS
Initial 40-minute visit to a physiotherapist
to provide intervention, which is
subsequently self-administered. Assume
TENS machine lasts for 1 year
N/A
N/A
Thermotherapy
Heat treatment
Short-wave diathermy administered weekly
by a physiotherapist over 8 weeks. In
one trial, heat treatment consisted of a
heat-retaining knee sleeve. This is assumed
to be prescribed by a physiotherapist
(40-minute consultation) and then used
as required for 6 months. Total cost for
heat treatment is a weighted average of
diathermy and heat-retaining sleeve costs,
with weights of 73%/27% in line with the
number of patients enrolled in the heat
treatment trial arms
84 (60–143)
60 (N/Ab)
Manual therapy
Administered weekly by a physiotherapist
over 8 weeks
63 (30–90)
57 (30–90)
Static magnets
Initial 40-minute visit to a physiotherapist to
prescribe static magnet. Assume static
magnets last for 2 years and 50% of
patients require one replacement wrist strap
N/A
N/A
N/A, not applicable.
a Data were identical for the analysis restricted to 3–13 weeks.
b Ranges not available as they are not meaningful when only one trial informed an analysis.
c Intervention does not provide data to inform network.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
97
 coefficients were then used (in combination with the unit costs from Table 29) to derive changes in cost
components and, following aggregation, change in total costs as a function of changes in EQ-5D score
over the 8-week time period of the base-case analysis. The regression coefficients estimated that a 1-unit
increase in the EQ-5D resulted in a 0.89 (SE 0.53) decrease in primary care visits and a 0.47 (SE 0.56)
increase in specialist visits.
Cost-effectiveness analysis
Linking predicted changes in EQ-5D score from the network meta-analysis for each of the competing
strategies, and changes in total costs (treatment and non-treatment related) based on the analysis described
in the previous section, facilitated the value for money assessment of competing adjunct non-pharmacological
interventions for pain of the knee in individuals with osteoarthritis in the NHS. Direct HRQoL benefits were the
focus of the evaluation as the interventions under appraisal are expected to impact on pain and functioning
but not on disease progression. QALYs were therefore estimated from the EQ-5D estimates using an
area-under-the-curve (AUC) approach.
The time horizon for the analysis was 8 weeks, in line with the preferred time point for the synthesis.
There is limited evidence regarding whether or not the effects of the therapies appraised continue beyond
the treatment period. For example, an earlier report by Corbett et al.168 found that only 23% of studies
reporting data suitable for synthesis reported data 8–16 weeks from the end of treatment. The possibility
that interventions may offer longer-term benefits was explored in scenario analyses. Some studies did,
however, report results for multiple on-treatment time points. This could have provided information on
interim on-treatment outcomes. However, it was not expected that there would have been sufficient data
to provide robust treatment-specific estimates of the HRQoL profile from baseline to 8 weeks.
TABLE 29 Unit costs of interventions (UK £, 2012–13)
Health-care
professional/appliance
Unit
costa (£)
Unit
Source
Hospital physiotherapistb
36
Per hour
Schema 13.1291
Community podiatrist
30
Per hour
Schema 9.4291
GP visit
45
Per 11.7-minute
consultation
Schema 10.8b291
Secondary care specialist
visit
135
Per consultation
Schema 7.1291
Brace
88
Brace
Bauerfeind GenuTrain Knee Support [www.
healthandcare.co.uk (accessed 9 May 2014)]
Insole
50
Insole
Ready-made lateral wedge foot insole [www.rcht.nhs.
uk/DocumentsLibrary/PeninsulaCommunityHealth/
OperationsAndServices/Podiatry/PodiatryDischargeLetter.
pdf (accessed 9 June 2014)]
Heat-retaining sleeve
11
Sleeve
www.amazon.co.uk/TITANIUM-ADJUSTABLE-KNEE-
HEATING-STRAP/dp/B007EBTXDS/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&
qid=1401871047&sr=8–3&keywords=heat+knee
(accessed 9 June 2014)
Static magnets
35
Per static magnet
www.magnetsforall.com/category/40397320 (accessed
8 July 2014)
15
Per additional strap
TENS
35
Per TENS machine
www.boots.com/en/Boots-TENS-Digital-Pain-Relief-Unit_
1405593/ (accessed 22 May 2014)
a Labour costs inclusive of qualifications; equipment costs exclusive of value-added tax.
b Note that the cost of a community physiotherapist is very similar (£34 per hour including qualifications).
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
98
 Quality-adjusted life-years were therefore estimated assuming that the benefit of treatment was achieved
instantaneously, was maintained for 8 weeks and was then lost instantaneously. This is equivalent to
assuming that the full benefit was gradually achieved over a specified period and then lost linearly over
the same period, which may be viewed as a more realistic scenario for some interventions. For example,
the benefit could be linearly achieved from the start of treatment until 8 weeks and gradually lost over the
8 weeks following treatment completion. The model is therefore expected to reasonably approximate a
range of alternative HRQoL profiles (Figure 20). For example, expert opinion suggested that electrotherapy,
static magnets and heat treatment may be more likely to follow an instant gain/instant loss-type profile,
whereas acupuncture, manual therapy and the appliances may be associated with a gradual gain/gradual
loss-type profile. These issues are explored further in the sensitivity analyses.
Placebo and sham acupuncture were not included as comparators in the cost-effectiveness analysis as it is
not expected that the NHS would be willing to prescribe these as treatments. The analysis therefore
controls for regression to the mean effects (as all improvements are relative to usual care) but not patient
expectation effects.293 The underlying assumption made here is therefore that the patient expectation
effects observed in the trials would also be observed in clinical practice.
The model was run probabilistically by assigning the posterior distribution from the network meta-analysis
to the effect sizes and reflecting the uncertainty in the relationship between the EQ-5D and primary
care/outpatient resource use using a normal distribution (parameterised using data described in Other
health-care costs).
After obtaining changes in expected costs and QALYs for each strategy, these were ranked by mean
change in costs, starting from the least costly. ICERs were then calculated by dividing incremental (change
in) costs by incremental (change in) QALYs. Treatment strategies that were dominated and those subject to
extended dominance were subsequently excluded and ICERs recalculated if necessary. A treatment is
dominated if it generates worse health outcomes and has equal or higher costs when compared with an
alternative treatment. Extended dominance occurs when a treatment is less effective and has a higher ICER
than an alternative treatment.
Derived posterior distributions for the incremental costs and incremental QALYs were used to calculate the
probability that each strategy is cost-effective at the conventional cost-effectiveness threshold levels used
by NICE (i.e. between £20,000 and £30,000 per QALY gained224). Given the large number of treatment
strategies, it was considered more appropriate to plot the study results as a cost-effectiveness acceptability
frontier,294 which provides a direct indication of both the optimal strategy and the probability of that
strategy being cost-effective for a given threshold value. Given that the time horizon was < 1 year, costs
and QALYs were not discounted.
Treatment benefit
0
2
8
10
16
Time (weeks)
Instant gain–instant loss
Gradual gain–gradual loss
Hybrid
FIGURE 20 Health-related quality-of-life profiles compatible with base-case assumptions.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
99
 The cost-effectiveness model was analysed using outputs of the synthesis of all trials; of trials that had a
low risk of bias for adequate allocation concealment according to the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool;171 and of
trials with a low risk of bias for allocation concealment and reporting end-point data between weeks 3
and 13 post baseline.
For each scenario a series of sensitivity analyses were run. For treatments delivered via regular physiotherapy
attendance, sensitivity analyses were run assuming that each session lasted as long as the shortest and the
longest duration observed in the trial data for each intervention (as shown in Table 28). In the case of
therapies for which the cost was driven by both labour and equipment costs (braces, insoles, static magnets
and TENS), the costs were varied by ±50%. We also explored the impact of assuming that acupuncture
was delivered by a private practitioner at the higher cost of £47.50 for the first session and £37.50 for
subsequent sessions (for data sources see Chapter 6, Methods for substudy 4: cost-effectiveness analysis).
The intensity of therapy (hours per week) varied considerably across trials, with many therapies being
administered much more intensively than would typically be expected in the context of a UK musculoskeletal
outpatient physiotherapy service. Given the small number of studies for many of the interventions it was not
possible to explore the impact of treatment intensity on treatment efficacy within the synthesis. We therefore
conducted sensitivity analyses using appointment times more typical in the NHS for the purposes of costing
[based on clinical opinion: 40-minute consultation followed by 20-minute treatment sessions (or 30 minutes
for acupuncture and manual therapy)] and exploring different assumptions with respect to how the efficacy
of treatment might vary when the session duration was reduced. Four assumptions with respect to the
dose–response relationship of session duration and EQ-5D outcome were explored: (1) outcomes increase
linearly to achieve a maximum benefit with the mean session duration, as listed in Table 28; (2) outcomes
increase linearly up to the maximum value for 1 hour of session time per week, beyond which no further
benefit is observed; (3) 75% of outcomes are achieved using 30-minute sessions with the remaining 25% of
benefit achieved by moving from 30- to 60-minute sessions; and (4) the full benefit of treatment observed is
obtained with 20-minute sessions (or 30 minutes for acupuncture), that is, no adjustment to outcomes.
Moving from scenario (1) through to scenario (4), the benefits of increased session duration are assumed to
be reduced. Scenarios (1) and (4) probably represent quite extreme scenarios. As an example, Figure 21
shows the method for estimating outcomes under each scenario assuming that the weighted average session
duration for the treatment is 80 minutes, which we wish to extrapolate to a 20-minute session duration.
Sensitivity analyses using the upper and lower values of the 95% CrIs from the network meta-analysis
were also conducted. The threshold value treatment effect at which the decision would change, as well as
the probability of observing a value at least this extreme, were calculated. These estimates provide an
indication of the likelihood of observing an outcome sufficiently extreme for the conclusions of the analysis
to alter. However, they are univariate analyses and do not account for other sources of uncertainty or the
correlation between treatment effects estimated from the network meta-analysis.
In the base case the benefit of treatment is assumed to be instantaneous at time zero and to disappear
immediately at the end of week 8. Two sensitivity analyses were conducted: the first was a threshold
analysis estimating the duration of benefit beyond the 8-week period of treatment that would be required
to alter the decision, assuming that all interventions delivered benefit over this period; the second
extended the benefit of each intervention individually by 50% (equivalent to 4 weeks at full benefit or
8 weeks linear decline).
Given the large number of scenarios and comparators, the results are summarised by stating the intervention
that is cost-effective at a cost-effectiveness threshold of £20,000 per QALY under each scenario.
The expected value of perfect information (EVPI) was also calculated for the decision problem. The EVPI
provides the upper bound on the value of reducing uncertainties in the decision problem. The EVPI
associated with each instance of a decision was calculated using established methods.202 It is important
that the EVPI is calculated for the total population eligible to benefit from additional information.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
100
 This requires an assessment of the period over which information will be useful and the estimated
incidence of the decision during this period.
Studies of new GP referrals for knee pain and of incident radiographic osteoarthritis suggest that among
older patients (typically aged > 45 years or > 50 years) incidence is 2–4% per year.158,295 The most recent
data suggest that the incidence of consultations for knee pain in those aged > 50 years is 4% per year.295
We estimate that 56% of consultations for knee pain are given a diagnosis of osteoarthritis.296 Applying
these data to UK population data on the number of people aged ≥ 50 years in the UK (22.773 million297)
yields an estimate of 490,721 new consultations per year. Some data are available in the literature
regarding the proportion of individuals with osteoarthritis of the knee (or with knee pain) who receive
non-pharmacological treatments. Estimates of the proportion of patients receiving physiotherapy range
from 13% to 41%.296,298 One study reported the use of complementary therapy (21%)296 and another
reported the use of TENS (13%), acupuncture (8%), wedged insoles (6%) and appliances (5%).298 Based
on this information we estimate that approximately 50% of patients will be considered for adjunct
non-pharmacological interventions. We assume that patients are considered for non-pharmacological
interventions only once during their entire treatment for osteoarthritis of the knee; this may therefore
underestimate the number of instances in which the decision of interest is faced.
We used the value of information analysis to compare three possible policy options that are available for
cost-effective interventions:299
1. adopt the cost-effective intervention (adopt)
2. adopt the cost-effective intervention and commission research or ‘adopt with research’ (AWR)
3. delay adoption until new research is available or ‘only in research’ (OIR).
Given the nature of the uncertainties in the model we anticipate that any further research would take the
form of a clinical study, which would take approximately 5 years to be planned, conducted and reported.
We also assume that current practice is usual care. In reality there is likely to be some use of the appraised
interventions in current practice. This assumption will not impact on the difference between the adopt and
the AWR policies but will increase (reduce) the benefit of OIR relative to these policies if the net health
benefit of current usage is positive (negative) relative to usual care.
20
30
(NHS practice)
(Trial data)
Weekly appointment duration (minutes)
60
80
EQ-5D(1)
EQ-5D(2)
EQ-5D(3)
EQ-5Dobs
= EQ-5D(4)
Benefit (EQ-5D vs. usual care)
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Scenario 4
FIGURE 21 Methods for treatment appointment duration sensitivity analysis.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
101
 We therefore consider the net health benefits associated with adoption (the population net health benefits
generated by the cost-effective technology, which we assume would be used for 10 years by which point
new interventions may be available and the management pathway for osteoarthritis of the knee may have
changed dramatically), the health benefits associated with AWR (the health benefits generated by adoption
for 5 years followed by a revised decision based on perfect information from year 6 to year 10) and the
health benefits associated with OIR (the health benefits generated by no adoption from year 1 to year 5 and
a decision based on perfect information from year 5 to year 10). The AWR and OIR estimates should be
considered upper bounds as they are based on an assumption that research will resolve all uncertainties,
which will not be the case for real research designs that reduce but do not remove uncertainty.
Adopt with research will always offer the highest health benefits if net health benefits are constant over
time. There are two reasons why AWR may not, however, be the preferred policy choice. First, it may not
be feasible, for instance if adoption removes incentives for health-care professionals to conduct research or
patients to participate in research. Second, if there are high upfront costs OIR may offer higher health
benefits as under this policy such upfront (or ‘sunk’) costs are incurred only if the intervention turns out to
be cost-effective.
The main source of sunk costs is likely to be the cost of training physiotherapists to deliver acupuncture.
Our estimates suggest that 245,360 patients would be eligible for treatment each year. Assuming that
these patients receive eight sessions of treatment and that physiotherapists who deliver acupuncture
typically deliver 208 sessions per year,1 then 9437 physiotherapists would require training. We assume
that training consists of an 80-hour course (40 hours taught) costing £495.300 The opportunity cost of
this course is unclear as many accredited courses run during weekends and require out-of-hours study.
We therefore conservatively assume an opportunity cost of 40 hours of time (at £36 per hour) or £1440.
The total cost of training would therefore be £18.3M, which we assume would be incurred in the first year
of adoption. Spreading this across all treated patients over 10 years (or more if training provides benefits
over a career) would have a minimal impact on the cost-effectiveness results. However, if this cost is
incurred in the first year, this may increase the benefit of OIR over adoption or AWR, and is therefore
included in our comparison of the three policies.
Results
Mapping and synthesis
Appendix 5 presents the results of the mapping from individual HRQoL measures to the EQ-5D. Figure 22
displays the results of the network meta-analysis of (1) all trials, (2) trials that were assessed to be at low
risk of bias with respect to the adequacy of allocation concealment and (3) trials that were assessed to be
at low risk of bias with respect to the adequacy of allocation concealment and which reported in the
restricted 3- to 13-week range.
In the all-trials analysis, interferential therapy followed by acupuncture, TENS, PES and t’ai chi offered the
largest benefit in terms of the EQ-5D, based on point estimates of the effect size alone. However, the CrI
crossed zero for t’ai chi. The least uncertainty, as reflected by the narrowest CrIs, was associated with
acupuncture and muscle-strengthening exercises. In the analysis of trials with a low risk of bias for
allocation concealment, t’ai chi followed by acupuncture, interferential therapy, manual therapy and sham
acupuncture offered the largest benefits, again based on point estimates of effect. However, the CrIs
touched or crossed zero for t’ai chi, interferential therapy and manual therapy. When this analysis was
restricted to trials reporting between week 3 and week 13, t’ai chi followed by manual therapy,
acupuncture, interferential therapy and sham acupuncture offered the largest benefit. In this case the CrIs
touched or crossed zero for t’ai chi, manual therapy and interferential therapy. The magnitude of the
effect sizes differed between analyses. The effects of interferential therapy and TENS diminished when the
analysis was restricted to trials with a low risk of bias with respect to allocation concealment. The effects of
t’ai chi and sham acupuncture were stronger in the analyses restricted to trials with a low risk of bias with
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
102
 (a)
Insoles
Braces
Placebo
Balneotherapy
Exercise – aerobic
NMES
Heat treatment
PEMFs
Sham acupuncture
Laser/light therapy
Ice/cooling treatment
Exercise – muscle strengthening
Manual therapy
T’ai chi
PES
TENS
Acupuncture
Interferential therapy
0.01 (–0.18 to 0.19)
0.01 (–0.04 to 0.06)
0.01 (–0.09 to 0.11)
0.02 (–0.01 to 0.06)
0.03 (–0.02 to 0.08)
0.03 (–0.01 to 0.07)
0.03 (–0.39 to 0.45)
0.03 (–0.05 to 0.11)
0.04 (–0.02 to 0.11)
0.04 (0.00 to 0.08)
0.05 (–0.02 to 0.11)
0.05 (–0.07 to 0.16)
0.05 (0.02 to 0.08)
0.05 (0.00 to 0.11)
0.06 (–0.02 to 0.13)
0.07 (0.02 to 0.12)
0.07 (0.03 to 0.12)
0.09 (0.06 to 0.13)
0.22 (0.14 to 0.29)
Static magnets
–0.4
–0.2
EQ-5D at 8 weeks vs. usual care
0.0
0.2
(b)
Insoles
Braces
Placebo
Balneotherapy
Exercise – aerobic
NMES
Heat treatment
PEMFs
Sham acupuncture
Laser/light therapy
Ice/cooling treatment
Exercise – muscle strengthening
Manual therapy
T’ai chi
PES
TENS
Acupuncture
Interferential therapy
0.00 (–0.18 to 0.18)
0.01 (–0.05 to 0.07)
0.02 (–0.04 to 0.07)
–0.03 (–0.09 to 0.05)
0.03 (–0.02 to 0.08)
0.02 (–0.07 to 0.11)
0.05 (–0.06 to 0.15)
0.08 (0.03 to 0.12)
0.02 (–0.06 to 0.11)
0.02 (–0.09 to 0.13)
0.05 (0.01 to 0.09)
0.08 (0.00 to 0.17)
0.12 (–0.02 to 0.26)
0.07 (0.00 to 0.14)
0.03 (–0.04 to 0.10)
0.11 (0.07 to 0.15)
0.11 (–0.01 to 0.23)
Static magnets
–0.4
–0.2
EQ-5D at 8 weeks vs. usual care
0.0
0.2
FIGURE 22 Results of the network meta-analysis with 95% CrIs (results presented as values corresponding to 2.5%,
50% and 97.5% of the posterior distribution): (a) all trials; (b) trials with adequate allocation concealment; and
(c) trials with adequate allocation concealment and reporting in the range 3–13 weeks. (continued)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
103
 respect to allocation concealment, as was the effect of manual therapy, particularly when the analysis was
restricted to trials reporting in between 3 and 13 weeks.
The results are associated with a high degree of uncertainty for most but not all of the interventions as
indicated by the wide CrIs around many of the treatment effect estimates. Muscle-strengthening exercise
and acupuncture are associated with the least uncertainty, as they have the narrowest CrIs across analyses,
and static magnets and NMES are associated with the most uncertainty. The treatment effects associated
with TENS and interferential therapy are considerably more uncertain when the evidence is restricted to
trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting in between 3 and 13 weeks.
Forest plots are unable to represent the full set of information regarding treatment effect uncertainty as
they do not reflect the correlation in treatment effects. Figure 23 therefore presents a ‘rankogram’181
showing the probability that each treatment ranks as the first, second, third etc. best of the treatments
considered in each analysis. The majority of the rankograms are fairly flat, indicating high uncertainty with
respect to where the treatment would rank. Exceptions to this are acupuncture, for which there is a peak
at ranks 2–3 (depending on analysis) with the majority of the density covering ranks 1–5, and interferential
therapy, which peaks at rank 1 in all analyses but which is subject to considerable uncertainty in the
analyses restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment. Static magnets is likely to be one of
the worst treatments across analyses, with balneotherapy likely to be one of the worst treatments in the
analyses restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment. T’ai chi peaks at rank 1 in the analyses
restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment. For NMES, the rankogram displays a ‘bucket’
shape as the posterior density is spread over a very wide range and at the lowest and highest extremes it
competes with few treatments to be the ‘best’ and ‘worst’ of those considered.
(c)
Insoles
Braces
Placebo
Balneotherapy
Exercise – aerobic
NMES
Heat treatment
PEMFs
Sham acupuncture
Laser/light therapy
Ice/cooling treatment
Exercise – muscle strengthening
Manual therapy
T’ai chi
PES
TENS
Acupuncture
Interferential therapy
–0.01 (–0.22 to 0.21)
0.02 (–0.11 to 0.16)
0.01 (–0.09 to 0.12)
–0.05 (–0.16 to 0.08)
0.06 (–0.02 to 0.13)
0.02 (–0.11 to 0.14)
0.05 (–0.09 to 0.19)
0.08 (0.02 to 0.12)
0.02 (–0.11 to 0.14)
0.06 (0.02 to 0.10)
0.12 (0.00 to 0.23)
0.12 (–0.02 to 0.26)
0.07 (–0.03 to 0.16)
0.04 (–0.14 to 0.22)
0.11 (0.07 to 0.15)
0.11 (–0.09 to 0.31)
Static magnets
–0.4
–0.2
EQ-5D at 8 weeks vs. usual care
0.0
0.2
FIGURE 22 Results of the network meta-analysis with 95% CrIs (results presented as values corresponding to 2.5%,
50% and 97.5% of the posterior distribution): (a) all trials; (b) trials with adequate allocation concealment; and
(c) trials with adequate allocation concealment and reporting in the range 3–13 weeks.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
104
 0.5
(a)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(b)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(c)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(d)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(e)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(f)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(g)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(h)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(i)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(j)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(k)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(l)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
FIGURE 23 Results of the network meta-analysis (results presented as the probability that each treatment is ranked
first, second, third etc.): (a) acupuncture; (b) balneotherapy; (c) braces; (d) insoles; (e) NMES; (f) placebo; (g) TENS;
(h) usual care; (i) sham acupuncture; (j) muscle-strengthening exercise; (k) aerobic exercise; (l) heat treatment;
(m) ice/cooling treatment; (n) inferential therapy; (o) laser/light therapy; (p) manual therapy; (q) PES; (r) PEMF;
(s) static magnets; and (t) t’ai chi. The solid line represents the all-trials analysis; the small dots the analysis of trials
with adequate allocation concealment and the long dashes the analysis of trials with adequate allocation
concealment reporting at 3–13 weeks. (continued)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
105
 The level of uncertainty regarding the effect of some comparators was very high, particularly for NMES and
static magnets. The 95% CrIs cross zero for many interventions, with the exception of muscle-strengthening
exercise and acupuncture in all three analyses; interferential therapy, PES and TENS in the all-trials analysis
only; and sham acupuncture in both analyses involving a low risk of bias for allocation concealment.
Inclusion of age as a potential treatment effect modifier did not improve the model fit according to the
residual deviance or DIC measures and had a very minimal impact on results. The results of this analysis are
therefore not shown here. The model analysing the role of BMI as a treatment effect modifier did not
converge, which was likely because of the high volume of missing data for BMI. This was not addressed
through more advanced imputation approaches as the available data were unlikely to provide a useful
basis for imputation (weight was rarely reported in the studies that did not report BMI).
0.5
(m)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(n)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(o)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(p)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(q)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(r)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(s)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
0.5
(t)
0.0
1
5
10
Rank
15
20
Probability
FIGURE 23 Results of the network meta-analysis (results presented as the probability that each treatment is ranked
first, second, third etc.): (a) acupuncture; (b) balneotherapy; (c) braces; (d) insoles; (e) NMES; (f) placebo; (g) TENS;
(h) usual care; (i) sham acupuncture; (j) muscle-strengthening exercise; (k) aerobic exercise; (l) heat treatment;
(m) ice/cooling treatment; (n) inferential therapy; (o) laser/light therapy; (p) manual therapy; (q) PES; (r) PEMF;
(s) static magnets; and (t) t’ai chi. The solid line represents the all-trials analysis; the small dots the analysis of trials
with adequate allocation concealment and the long dashes the analysis of trials with adequate allocation
concealment reporting at 3–13 weeks.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
106
 Model fit statistics are provided in Table 30. The mean residual deviance suggests an adequate fit of each
model to the data. Comparison of mean residual deviance and DIC statistics between the inconsistency
and the consistency models for each analysis suggests no global evidence of inconsistency. However,
inspection of individual data points’ posterior mean deviance contributions suggests that the model is a
poor fit for some data points. In the all-trials analysis, four data points had very high deviance contributions
(3.4–6.9) in both the consistency and the inconsistency models. Two of the points were from trials
comparing interferential therapy with placebo.301,302 These studies are clearly inconsistent with each other.
The difference in EQ-5D scores for interferential therapy compared with placebo is 0.07 (no variance
measure reported) in the study by Adedoyin et al.301 and 0.30–0.33 (95% CrI 0.19 to 0.42), depending on
interferential therapy arm, in the study by Gundog et al.302 These effects are also quite different from the
indirect data on interferential therapy from Burch et al.303 (interferential therapy vs. TENS 0.07, 95% CrI
–0.01 to 0.16); thus, although all studies suggest that interferential therapy offers benefit, the magnitude
of this benefit is inconsistent across studies and therefore more uncertain than the analysis of all trials
suggests. No clear source of the uncertainty was identified, although all studies were assigned a high or
unclear risk-of-bias score. One potential source of heterogeneity is the treatment intensity: patients in the
Adedoyin et al.301 study were delivered the equivalent of a 40-minute weekly dose, whereas patients in the
Gundog et al.302 study were delivered 100 minutes of treatment and patients in the Burch et al.303 study
were delivered 245 minutes of treatment (some of this period involved patterned muscle stimulation rather
than interferential therapy). The two other points contributing high residual deviances were from a study
comparing aerobic exercise with usual care.189 This study is considered to be at high risk of bias and has
been identified as an outlier in previous analyses.168 The benefit from treatment estimated in this study may
also be viewed as implausibly large (the difference in EQ-5D scores for aerobic exercise vs. usual care is
0.37, 95% CI 0.20 to 0.54). As aerobic exercise does not form part of a closed loop, any impact of this
study will be limited to the aerobic exercise–usual care contrast. Residual deviance contributions for all
other data points in the all-trials consistency model were < 2.3. For the other models, residual deviance
contributions for all data points were < 2.5.
Cost-effectiveness analysis
The results of the cost-effectiveness analysis are presented in Table 31. Intervention costs represented the
vast majority of costs. Expected outcomes calculated using the posterior distributions of costs and effects
are presented; uncertainty around these results is discussed in the remainder of the results section. In the
analysis including all trials, TENS is the cost-effective intervention assuming a willingness-to-pay threshold
in the range £20,000–30,000 per QALY gained, with an ICER of £2690 per QALY compared with
usual care. In the analysis restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment, acupuncture is the
TABLE 30 Model diagnostics
Statistic
Trials
All
With adequate allocation
concealment
With adequate allocation
concealment, end point
reporting 3–13 weeks
Consistency
model
Inconsistency
model
Consistency
model
Inconsistency
model
Consistency
model
Inconsistency
model
Mean residual
deviance (data
points)
206 (210)
214 (210)
84 (92)
87 (92)
69 (73)
68 (73)
pD
173
182
87
92
77
77
DICa
12,872
12,891
12,814
12,821
12,787
12,787
Random effect
SD (95% CrI)
0.03
(0.02 to 0.05)
0.03
(0.01 to 0.05)
0.02
(0.00 to 0.04)
0.02
(0.00 to 0.04)
0.02
(0.00 to 0.05)
0.01
(0.00 to 0.04)
pD, number of effective parameters.
a Lower values indicate improved model fit.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
107
 cost-effective intervention, with an ICER of £13,502 per QALY compared with TENS. When the analysis is
restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment and which reported in between 3 and 13 weeks,
acupuncture is the cost-effective intervention, with an ICER of £14,275 per QALY compared with TENS.
Cost-effectiveness acceptability frontiers for the three primary analyses are presented in Figure 24. The
probability that each intervention would be cost-effective at decision thresholds of £20,000 and £30,000
per QALY gained is presented in Table 32. These summaries provide the probability that each intervention
is cost-effective in the context of a fully incremental analysis comparing all interventions. The probability is
calculated as the proportion of simulations in which the intervention has the highest ICER (under a given
threshold) or, equivalently, the highest incremental net benefit. At a cost-effectiveness threshold of
£20,000 per QALY, the probability that TENS is cost-effective in the all-trials analysis is 49%. In the analysis
of trials with adequate allocation concealment the probability that acupuncture is cost-effective is 47%.
In the analysis of trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting between 3 and 13 weeks the
probability that acupuncture is cost-effective is 25%.
Sensitivity analyses
A summary of all sensitivity analyses that altered the optimal choice of intervention at a cost-effectiveness
threshold of £20,000 per QALY is provided as Table 33. Detailed results of the sensitivity analyses are
provided in Appendix 5.
TABLE 31 Cost-effectiveness results
Intervention
Trials
All
With adequate allocation
concealment
With adequate allocation
concealment, end point
reporting 3–13 weeks
Cost
(£)
QALYs
ICER
(£ per
QALY)
Cost
(£)
QALYs
ICER
(£ per
QALY)
Cost
(£)
QALYs
ICER
(£ per
QALY)
Usual care
0
0.000
Referent
0
0.000
Referent
0
0.000
Referent
Static
magnets
5
0.001
ED
5
0.000
Dominated
5
–0.001
Dominated
Insoles
13
0.001
ED
13
0.002
ED
14
0.004
3540
TENS
31
0.011
2690
30
0.005
6142
30
0.006
9750
Braces
40
0.001
Dominated
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
Acupuncture
179
0.014
ED
192
0.017
13,502
192
0.017
14,275
Heat
treatment
297
0.005
Dominated
214
0.003
Dominated
213
0.002
Dominated
Manual
therapy
304
0.008
Dominated
276
0.013
Dominated
277
0.018
86,964
PES
396
0.011
Dominated
410
0.010
Dominated
410
0.010
Dominated
NMES
481
0.005
Dominated
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
Laser light
therapy
503
0.007
Dominated
288
0.003
Dominated
288
0.003
Dominated
Interferential
therapy
770
0.033
33,866
1179
0.016
Dominated
1179
0.017
Dominated
PEMF
1453
0.007
Dominated
577
0.008
Dominated
577
0.007
Dominated
ED, extendedly dominated; NA, not available because of intervention not providing information to network.
Note
Shading differentiates the three groups of trials.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
108
 1.00
(a)
0.75
0.50
Probability best
0.25
0.00
0
10
20
30
Threshold £000/QALY
40
50
Interferential therapy
TENS
Usual care
1.00
(b)
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0
10
20
30
Threshold £000/QALY
40
50
Acupuncture
TENS
Usual care
Probability best
FIGURE 24 Cost-effectiveness acceptability frontiers: (a) all trials; (b) trials with adequate allocation concealment;
and (c) trials with adequate allocation concealment and reporting in the range 3–13 weeks. (continued)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
109
 1.00
(c)
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0
10
20
30
Threshold £000/QALY
40
50
Acupuncture
Insoles
TENS
Usual care
Probability best
FIGURE 24 Cost-effectiveness acceptability frontiers: (a) all trials; (b) trials with adequate allocation concealment;
and (c) trials with adequate allocation concealment and reporting in the range 3–13 weeks.
TABLE 32 Probability intervention is cost-effective at cost-effectiveness thresholds of £20,000 and £30,000
per QALY
Intervention
Trials
All
With adequate allocation
concealment
With adequate allocation
concealment 3–13 weeks
£20,000
£30,000
£20,000
£30,000
£20,000
£30,000
Usual care
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Static magnets
0.22
0.18
0.26
0.20
0.17
0.13
Insoles
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.02
0.13
0.09
TENS
0.49
0.28
0.15
0.08
0.25
0.20
Braces
0.06
0.05
NA
NA
NA
NA
Acupuncture
0.06
0.12
0.47
0.57
0.25
0.28
Heat treatment
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
Manual therapy
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.12
0.20
0.28
PES
0.00
0.00
0. 00
0.00
0.00
0.00
NMES
0.16
0.21
NA
NA
NA
NA
Laser light therapy
0.00
0.00
0. 00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Interferential therapy
0.00
0.15
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
PEMF
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
NA, not available because of intervention not providing information to network.
Note
Shading differentiates the three groups of trials.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
110
 TABLE 33 Results of sensitivity analyses that altered the optimal choice of intervention
Data set
Scenario
Cost-effective
intervention at
threshold of
£20,000 per QALYa
All trials
Base case
TENS
Shortest session duration used for acupuncture costing
Acupuncture
Shortest session duration used for interferential therapy costing
Interferential therapy
Shortened sessions – 75% of benefit in first 30 minutes, remainder
by 1 hour
Interferential therapy
Shortened sessions – all benefit achieved within 20–30 minutes
Interferential therapy
Increase in duration of benefit for all interventions by 6 weeks
Interferential therapy
Increase in duration of benefit of acupuncture by 31%
Acupuncture
Increase in duration of benefit of interferential therapy by 45%
Interferential therapy
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for acupuncture
Acupuncture (0.05)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for braces
Braces (0.08)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for NMES
NMES (0.18)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for static magnets
Static magnets (0.25)
Lower 95% CrI from NMA for TENS
Acupuncture (0.15)
Trials with low risk of bias
for allocation concealment
Base case
Acupuncture
Use of private cost for acupuncture sessions
TENS
Shortened sessions – all benefit achieved within 20–30 minutes
Interferential therapy
Lower 95% CrI from NMA for acupuncture
TENS (0.05)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for insoles
Insoles (0.09)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for manual therapy
Manual therapy (0.10)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for static magnets
Static magnets (0.29)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for TENS
TENS (0.21)
Trials with low risk of bias
for allocation concealment,
end point reporting
3–13 weeks
Base case
Acupuncture
Use of private cost for acupuncture sessions
Manual therapy
Shortest session duration used for manual therapy costing
Manual therapy
Shortened sessions – all benefit achieved within 20–30 minutes
Interferential therapy
Increase in duration of benefit for all interventions of 27 weeks
Manual therapy
Increase in duration of benefit of manual therapy by 18%
Manual therapy
Lower 95% CrI from NMA for acupuncture
TENS (0.14)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for heat treatment
Heat treatment (0.35)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for insoles
Insoles (0.35)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for manual therapy
Manual therapy (0.35)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for static magnets
Static magnets (0.30)
Upper 95% CrI from NMA for TENS
TENS (0.40)
NMA, network meta-analysis.
a Values in parentheses represent the probability that the intervention is cost-effective at a cost-effectiveness threshold of
£20,000 per QALY.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
111
 Costs
Varying the costs of treatment as specified in Cost-effectiveness analysis altered the optimal decision at a decision
threshold of £20,000 per QALY gained in only three of the analyses (out of the 70 conducted; see Appendix 5
for full results). In the analysis of all trials, using the shortest duration of session time for acupuncture resulted in
this intervention becoming cost-effective (ICER £19,033 per QALY gained) and using the shortest duration for
interferential therapy resulted in this intervention becoming cost-effective (ICER £7626 per QALY gained). In the
remainder of the all-trials analyses, TENS remained the cost-effective treatment, with all ICERs < £4000 per
QALY gained. In the analysis restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment, acupuncture remained
cost-effective across all analyses, with ICERs ranging from £6000 to £18,000 per QALY gained. In the analysis
restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment and reporting within 3–13 weeks, using the shortest
duration for manual therapy resulted in this intervention becoming cost-effective (ICER £9500 per QALY gained).
In the other analyses acupuncture was cost-effective, with ICERs ranging from £7000 to £19,000 per
QALY gained.
Assuming that acupuncture was delivered by private practitioners resulted in acupuncture no longer being
cost-effective in the analysis restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment and the analysis
restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting within 3–13 weeks. In these analyses
TENS and manual therapy became cost-effective, respectively.
As described in Cost-effectiveness analysis a series of scenarios explored shorter treatment sessions and
a range of assumptions about the response of intervention effects to session duration. In the all-trials
analysis, interferential therapy became cost-effective if we assumed that 75% of the benefit of treatment
occurs in the first 30 minutes and the remainder of the benefit occurs between 30 minutes and 1 hour.
In both analyses restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment, the preferred treatment choice
switched only under the extreme scenario whereby all of the benefit observed within the trials is achieved
within the first 20 minutes (or 30 minutes in the case of acupuncture or manual therapy).
Effectiveness
The optimal choice of intervention at a cost-effectiveness threshold of £20,000 per QALY gained using
95% CrI values was altered in our sensitivity analyses for the following interventions: acupuncture, braces,
heat treatment, insoles, manual therapy, NMES, static magnets and TENS. The values required to alter
decisions were generally at the extremes of the posterior distributions (see Table 33), although there were
exceptions to this.
In the analysis of all trials the probability that the treatment effect for TENS would be sufficiently small
for acupuncture to become cost-effective was 0.15. In the analyses of trials with adequate allocation
concealment, the probabilities that the treatment effect for TENS would be sufficiently large for TENS to
become cost-effective were 0.21 and 0.40 (analysis restricted to trials reporting between 3 and 13 weeks).
Conversely, in the analysis of trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting in the 3- to 13-week
period the probability that the treatment effect for acupuncture would be sufficiently small for TENS to
become cost-effective was 0.14. In the analyses of trials with adequate allocation concealment, the
probabilities that the treatment effect for manual therapy would be sufficiently large for manual therapy to
become cost-effective were 0.10 and 0.35 (analysis restricted to trials reporting between 3 and 13 weeks).
In the analysis of trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting in the 3- to 13-week period, insoles
and heat treatment had a probability of 0.35 of being sufficiently effective to become the cost-effective
treatment. Across analyses, the probability of observing a treatment effect for static magnets sufficiently
large for it to become cost-effective was 0.25–0.30, whereas for NMES this probability was 0.18. In both
cases this reflected the high levels of uncertainty around the efficacy of these comparators.
In the analysis of all trials the extension of benefit would have to be 6 weeks for interferential therapy to
become cost-effective. In the analysis restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment no
extension of the duration of benefit impacted on the decision. In the analysis restricted to trials with
adequate allocation concealment and which reported between 3 and 13 weeks, the extension of benefit
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
112
 would have to be 27 weeks for manual therapy to become cost-effective. Extending the duration of
benefit of each intervention individually (by up to 50%) altered the decision in only three cases. In the
all-trials analysis, increasing the benefit of acupuncture and interferential therapy by 50% resulted in these
interventions becoming cost-effective. In the analysis of trials with adequate allocation concealment
reporting in the 3- to 13-week period, increasing the benefit of manual therapy resulted in this
intervention becoming cost-effective. Further threshold analyses indicated that the extension of benefit
required to alter these decisions was 31%, 45% and 18%, respectively.
Value of further information
Assuming a decision threshold of £20,000 per QALY, the per-decision EVPI for the all-trials scenario is
£113, for the analysis of trials with adequate allocation concealment is £74 and for the trials with
adequate allocation concealment reporting in the 3- to 13-week period is £164. The EVPI for the total
population eligible to benefit from improved decision-making is estimated as £239M, £156M and £346M,
respectively, over a 10-year period.
Figure 25 shows the cumulative net health benefits (in QALYs) generated under the policies of adoption,
AWR and OIR. This shows that AWR is always the preferred policy. If AWR was not available, adoption is the
preferred option in the all-trials analysis and the analysis of trials with adequate allocation concealment.
In the analysis restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting between 3 and 13 weeks,
there is higher uncertainty and the adoption and OIR policies deliver very similar health benefits. Given that
this analysis reflects the maximum value of further research and that the real value will be lower (as research
will not deliver perfect information and is associated with research costs), adoption is the preferred policy.
Discussion
Principal findings
Health-care decision-makers, aiming to maximise population health, require evidence of the costs and
effects of competing treatment strategies. In many cases the available information is not in a format that
readily facilitates comparisons of costs and effects. RCTs rarely compare all of the treatments of interest
and rarely provide sufficiently long or detailed follow-up for all costs and outcomes of treatment to be
observed. In addition, evidence may need to be generalised across different settings (e.g. countries, disease
subpopulations). In the case of complementary therapies and other non-pharmaceutical interventions for
which there are more limited regulatory processes, there is an increased potential for heterogeneous
conduct of trials and data availability, especially when combined with a focus on subjective outcome
measures. However, regardless of the limitations and uncertainties in the evidence base, policy-makers
must make decisions.
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence has recommended acupuncture for the treatment of
chronic headache and migraine,80 and for musculoskeletal pain,81 but not in the context of chronic pain
associated with osteoarthritis of the knee.82 This decision in part reflected concerns regarding the available
evidence. The current study was commissioned as part of a programme intended to improve evidence
around the costs and effects of acupuncture. The work presented in this chapter builds on work presented
in Chapter 3 to systematically identify and synthesise outcome data on a wide range of interventions for
osteoarthritis of the knee. The work extends the synthesis in Chapter 3 to the EQ-5D end point, allowing
calculation of QALYs and a cost-effectiveness analysis. The available trials were of varying quality, reporting
distinct outcomes at different time points. IPD were available for a minority of studies with the rest
providing only summary statistics. Novel Bayesian network meta-analysis models were developed to
synthesise continuous outcome data reported at both the individual patient level and the aggregate level.
Mapping of the available HRQoL data to EQ-5D preference weights was conducted to produce a common
statistic for synthesis and one that could inform the cost-effectiveness analysis. The simulation outputs
from the network meta-analysis informed a decision-analytic cost-effectiveness model that compared the
costs and QALYs of the competing interventions, and was used to reflect the degree of uncertainty
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
113
 0
5000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
(a)
Cumulative QALYs generated
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Time (years)
Adopt
AWR
OIR
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000
20,000
Adopt
AWR
OIR
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Time (years)
Cumulative QALYs generated
0
5000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
(c)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Time (years)
Cumulative QALYs generated
Adopt
AWR
OIR
FIGURE 25 Cumulative health generated under the adoption, AWR and OIR policies: (a) all trials; (b) trials with
adequate allocation concealment; and (c) trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting at 3–13 weeks.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
114
 surrounding the optimal treatment decision under different assumptions concerning quality of the
evidence, treatment effectiveness, duration of treatment effectiveness and costs.
Network meta-analyses were conducted for three data sets: (1) all trials, (2) trials with a low risk of bias for
allocation concealment and (3) trials with a low risk of bias for allocation concealment and reporting
within the 3- to 13-week window. In the analysis of all trials, interferential therapy was the most effective
treatment based on the point estimate of effect, followed by acupuncture, TENS, PES and t’ai chi. These
results are broadly consistent with the work conducted in Chapter 3 on the standardised pain outcome,
which found that the least uncertainty, as reflected by the narrowest CrIs, is associated with acupuncture
and muscle-strengthening exercises. Although this analysis of all trials suggested a high probability that
interferential therapy was the most effective treatment, analyses of model fit suggested that the model
estimates were inconsistent with the observed trial-level treatment effect estimates because of large
differences in the effects observed in different studies. No obvious sources of heterogeneity were
observed, although differences in treatment intensity may have played a role. Results from this analysis
should therefore be interpreted with caution.
The analysis including trials with a low risk of bias for allocation concealment found that t’ai chi was the most
effective treatment based on the point estimate of effect, followed by acupuncture, interferential therapy,
manual therapy and sham acupuncture. The analysis including trials with a low risk of bias for allocation
concealment and reporting within the 3- to 13-week window found that t’ai chi was the most effective
treatment based on the point estimate of effect, followed by manual therapy, acupuncture, inferential therapy
and sham acupuncture. The analyses suggested an incremental effect of acupuncture over usual care that
ranged from 0.09 (95% CrI 0.06 to 0.13) to 0.11 (95% CrI 0.07 to 0.15), depending on the analysis. These
results for acupuncture are similar to those reported for osteoarthritis of the knee in Chapter 4 (0.08, 95% CrI
0.05 to 0.12). The level of uncertainty regarding the treatment effect of some comparators was very high. By
contrast, in both the analyses of higher-quality trials, acupuncture and muscle-strengthening exercises stand
out as being associated with the narrowest CrIs and therefore the least uncertainty. The 95% CrIs cross zero
for all interventions with the exception of muscle-strengthening exercise and acupuncture in all three analyses;
for interferential therapy, PES and TENS in the all-trials analysis only; and for sham acupuncture in the two
analyses involving trials with a low risk of bias for allocation concealment.
The cost-effectiveness results varied according to the data set considered relevant for decision-making.
The analysis of all trials found that TENS was cost-effective (ICER £2690 per QALY vs. usual care) whereas
analyses (2) and (3) found that acupuncture was cost-effective (ICER £13,502–14,275 per QALY vs. TENS)
as an adjunct treatment for knee osteoarthritis in the UK NHS. The difference between these results is
attributable to the reduced effect of TENS in analyses (2) and (3), in which trials with a high risk of bias
were excluded.
The sensitivity analyses conducted suggested that the optimal intervention with respect to cost-effectiveness
was uncertain. In analysis (1), plausible reductions in the cost of acupuncture, reductions in the efficacy of TENS
and increases in the duration of benefit of acupuncture resulted in acupuncture becoming the cost-effective
treatment. Using the shortest duration of interferential therapy sessions observed in the studies included in the
synthesis resulted in this intervention becoming cost-effective, as was the case in analyses assuming that the
duration of interferential therapy sessions could be reduced without proportionate reductions in efficacy. In
analyses (2) and (3) plausible increases in the efficacy of TENS resulted in TENS becoming the cost-effective
treatment and plausible increases in the efficacy of manual therapy resulted in this comparator becoming
cost-effective. In analysis (3) using the shortest duration of manual therapy sessions observed in the studies
included in the synthesis resulted in this comparator becoming cost-effective, as did carrying out plausible
increases to the duration of benefit of manual therapy. Analysis (3) was particularly uncertain and use of the
upper and lower CrIs from the network meta-analysis altered the cost-effective intervention in six instances.
There is considerable uncertainty in terms of both the effects of many of the interventions and the
probability that each intervention is cost-effective. The latter reflects both uncertainty in the effect of
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
115
 treatment and the large number of interventions appraised. Despite these uncertainties the value of
information analysis suggested that adoption (of TENS or acupuncture, depending on the analysis) will
generate more health to the NHS than delaying adoption until further research is conducted. There may be
value to conducting further research alongside adoption if this is feasible and possible avenues for this
research are discussed later in this section.
The conclusions of the current work are based on a cost-effectiveness threshold of £20,000–30,000 per
QALY as this has been used historically by NICE. A cost-effectiveness threshold is used to assess if the
health benefits offered by an intervention are greater than the health likely to be lost because the
additional resources required are not available to fund other effective treatments in the NHS. Research
conducted during the course of this study suggests that cost-effectiveness thresholds of £20,000–30,000
per QALY may be too high as it was estimated that £13,000 of NHS resources adds 1 QALY to NHS
patients.251 In the context of this study, using this lower estimate of the cost-effectiveness threshold would
result in TENS being the cost-effective choice in the base-case analyses.
Strengths and limitations
This study has a number of strengths and limitations. The study methods and the presentation of the
results are consistent with the requirements of funding agencies, which need to ensure efficient allocation
of resources across a wide range of programmes and diseases. The analysis was based on evidence
identified by the previous systematic literature review presented in Chapter 3, all decisions with respect to
inclusion/exclusion of studies and evidence are made transparent and the assumptions required to make
comparisons across therapies are made explicit. The analysis was able to include a large number of studies
and interventions despite a lack of head-to-head trial data, access to IPD and many studies not collecting
(or reporting) the outcome of interest (EQ-5D preference weights).
The synthesis of heterogeneous outcomes relied on imperfect mappings, which are typically able to explain
only a minority of variation in EQ-5D scores. The magnitude of bias introduced by using mapping functions
(and different mapping functions across trials) is unknowable. The availability of key outcomes across trials
would have reduced these concerns, as would the collection of generic preference-based measures of
HRQoL in all trials. Mapping is always a second-best approach compared with directly collecting data on
preference-based measures, such as the EQ-5D, as it leads to increased uncertainty and error around
HRQoL estimates.304 A ‘core outcome set’ for osteoarthritis is available. This recommended that future
Phase III trials of knee, hip and hand osteoarthritis should evaluate the following domains: pain, physical
function, patient global assessment and, for studies of ≥ 1 year, joint imaging.252 Recommendations that
go beyond Phase III regulatory trials and which define the instruments that should be used to measure
outcomes in these domains are warranted to foster consistency.
Our analysis accounted for the limited explanatory power of the mapping algorithms; however, it did not
explicitly account for measurement error around the HRQoL measures or the EQ-5D. None of the mapping
algorithms used reflected measurement error and methods to reflect measurement error in this context
have only recently been piloted.305 Future research should explore how measurement error can be
adequately reflected in mapping algorithms and synthesis of multiple outcomes (some work on this has
begun – see, for example, Lu et al.306).
Individual patient data were available only for a minority of studies. Means and variances for the EQ-5D
data mapped from aggregate data on HRQoL were required for the synthesis. The HRQoL instrument
dimension scores were therefore assumed to be distributed according to a multivariate normal distribution.
This may not have been a good approximation in some cases, thus increasing uncertainty regarding the
resulting mean or variance estimates. In addition, samples from the HRQoL instruments that were outside
the feasible range for each instrument were truncated at the minimum or maximum value. This will have
altered the means and variances from those reported in the publications. Checks were performed to
identify any trials for which the direction of treatment effect on utility was not as would have been
expected using the mean values of the HRQoL instrument. This found discrepancies for five of the 88 trials.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
116
 The relationship between baseline and final outcomes observed in the IPD studies was assumed to
generalise to the aggregate data studies. This allowed potential baseline imbalances in studies for which
only summary data were available to be adjusted for. This assumption may not have been appropriate in
all cases, particularly when follow-up time points in the aggregate data studies were particularly short or
long. Missing data from the IPD studies were excluded from the analysis, which may have biased the
results. Development of methods to account for missing data in the context of IPD and aggregate data
network meta-analysis is warranted.
Outcome data closest to 8 weeks’ follow-up were selected for synthesis. The synthesis therefore required
the assumption that, in the many trials not reporting outcomes at 8 weeks, the available data are reflective
of the 8-week time point. Sensitivity analyses around this assumption suggested that the results were not
particularly sensitive to the inclusion of studies with very short or very long follow-up periods, with the
exception of manual therapy. For the cost-effectiveness analysis, the HRQoL effects observed at 8 weeks
were applied from 0 to 8 weeks to generate QALY estimates. Sensitivity analyses were conducted to assess
the impact of extending the duration of benefit of the interventions. These analyses found that the model
was sensitive to the duration of benefit of acupuncture, interferential therapy and manual therapy. Further
work to understand the long-term effects of therapies would be of value.
All usual care interventions were assumed to be equivalent in the analysis, as were all sham acupuncture
interventions and all other placebo interventions. Evidence from work recently conducted by the ATC
suggests that the effect of sham acupuncture may depend on whether it involves the use of penetrating or
non-penetrating needles and that the effect of usual care may depend on whether or not usual care is
delivered according to a pre-specified protocol.45 It seems plausible that other non-acupuncture sham
procedures may also vary in their effects. Exploration of a network including more refined comparator
definitions may therefore be of value.
There was substantial variation in the duration of therapy course, frequency of sessions and duration of
sessions administered. Further research should explore the impact of these attributes of intervention
delivery on outcomes and cost-effectiveness.
The studies analysed here are from a range of countries, which may differ in terms of the method by
which and intensity with which interventions are administered. In addition, differences in the nature of
health care for chronic pain more generally could have impacted on outcomes.
The analysis of non-intervention resource use assumed that only primary care and specialist visits are
impacted on by changes in outcomes following interventions and that the impact of treatment on resource
use can be captured through changes in EQ-5D scores. It is possible that this did not capture the full impact
of treatment on resource use. Intervention costs were derived using a combination of expert opinion on
required resource use and trial data on the intensity with which interventions were administered. Empirical
resource use data for each intervention would have increased the robustness of the intervention costs. In
addition, the costing involved a number of strong assumptions. Insoles, braces and static magnets were
assumed to deliver the benefits estimated from the network meta-analysis for their usable lifespan. Costs of
equipment used by physiotherapists were not included in the analysis as per-use costs were expected to be
small. Inclusion of these costs is unlikely to change the conclusions of the analysis as equipment costs for
acupuncture and manual therapy are likely to be small and many musculoskeletal outpatient physiotherapy
departments are likely to already have interferential therapy devices.307 We assumed that acupuncture would
be administered by physiotherapists. Survey data suggest that a non-negligible proportion of acupuncture
sessions administered within the NHS are administered by medical doctors. We did not evaluate this as,
unless a marked difference in outcomes was expected between delivery by a physiotherapist and delivery by
a medical doctor, it seemed unlikely that provision by medical doctors would be cost-effective given the large
difference in hourly costs. Survey data also suggest that independent acupuncturists currently deliver the
majority of acupuncture sessions per annum in the UK, primarily for musculoskeletal pain.1 However, a large
majority of this is delivered outside of the NHS.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
117
 The analysis presented here evaluated adjunct treatments assuming that their benefit was independent of
any concomitant core treatments. Further work could explore interactions between core and adjunct
therapies. The analysis also assumes that health-care professionals are faced with a single opportunity to
select treatment for an individual, whereas in reality individuals with chronic pain are likely to be treated
with a series of interventions. Further work could explore the costs and effects of different sequences
of interventions.
Recommendations for future research
The EVPI in this area is relatively high, suggesting that additional research may be cost-effective. Further
analysis is required to identify the most cost-effective and clinically appropriate specifications for further
research. Such analyses could explore the cost-effectiveness of research to address the following key areas
of uncertainty:
l
The impact of the exact attributes of the treatment approach on HRQoL outcomes. This could include
exploring variation in attributes such as the treatment protocol, overall duration of the course of
therapy and frequency and duration of sessions.
l
The time profile of HRQoL benefits of interventions both within the treatment period and beyond the
treatment period.
The value of new clinical research to inform these areas of uncertainty should ideally be assessed by
extending the existing model to include data (and when necessary expert opinion) that quantify our
current understanding of these uncertain quantities. This would allow the uncertainties that are most
important in determining cost-effectiveness to be identified. Clinical research to reduce these key
uncertainties could take a number of forms including prospective trials or observational studies.
More generally, there would be value in developing a set of recommendations defining which HRQoL
instruments should be used when evaluating therapies aimed at improving the HRQoL of knee
osteoarthritis patients. Development of these recommendations would help to ensure that appropriate
instruments are used in future trials and foster consistency in outcomes collected across trials. This in turn
would improve the reliability of future meta-analyses and network meta-analyses.
Conclusion
When all trials are included in the network meta-analysis irrespective of quality, TENS is the cost-effective
non-pharmacological adjunct treatment for patients with chronic pain related to osteoarthritis of the knee.
However, the effect of TENS may be exaggerated because of biases associated with poor trial conduct.
When the network meta-analysis is restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment, an attribute
known to be associated with treatment effect magnitude in osteoarthritis, the effect of TENS diminishes
and is associated with wide CRIs that include zero. In this analysis acupuncture becomes cost-effective.
COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL ADJUNCT TREATMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
118
 Chapter 6 Acupuncture, Counselling or Usual Care
for Depression (ACUDep): a randomised controlled
trial
Introduction
A substantial proportion of the global disease burden involves depression,308 which is a major cause of
suicide. Depression involves more than just everyday mood fluctuations; it also involves feelings of severe
sadness, anxiety, hopelessness and worthlessness. Those affected individuals lose interest in the activities
that they used to enjoy and often have physical symptoms such as chronic pain, fatigue and insomnia.
The front-line treatment for depression in primary care usually involves antidepressants; however, they do
not work well for more than half of patients.95 Moreover, the effectiveness of newer antidepressants has
recently come into question for patients with mild to moderate depression.309 Non-pharmacological
treatment options for depression are of interest to many patients, in part because of concerns about
dependency on antidepressants.97
Among non-pharmacological treatments, acupuncture and counselling show some promise in the
treatment of depression, yet further evidence is needed. A Cochrane review of acupuncture for depression
was inconclusive on whether or not acupuncture is an effective intervention for depression, in part because
of the high risk of bias in the majority of studies.310 Counselling is a widely used intervention for patients
with depression and is provided in approximately half of the 9000 primary care practices in England.311
A Cochrane review of counselling for mental health and psychosocial problems in primary care found
short-term but not long-term benefits from counselling.312 Both Cochrane reviews recommended extending
the evidence base to include comparisons not just with usual care but also with other interventions, as this
would have the potential to increase patient choice.
The aims of this study were to determine the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of short courses
of either acupuncture or counselling compared with usual care for patients with depression. We also
planned to compare acupuncture and counselling on the basis that there would be structural equivalence
regarding time and attention. Additional exploratory studies nested within the trial focused on (1) the
experience of treatment from the patient perspective; (2) the impact of comorbid pain on depression
outcomes; (3) the approaches that practitioners use to enhance longer-term benefits; and (4) a health-
economic analysis to investigate HRQoL and the costs of these treatments, and understand whether or not
they should be considered a good use of limited health resources.
Methods
Design
Patients were randomised by the York Trials Unit to one of three arms in a pragmatic RCT (registration number
ISRCTN63787732), as detailed in a published protocol.313 An allocation ratio of 2 : 2 : 1 was used for the
randomised groups: acupuncture plus usual care, counselling plus usual care and usual care alone, respectively.
The York Trials Unit ensured that the allocation was securely concealed from the researchers who subsequently
informed patients of their allocation. The unit recorded patient details prior to using Structured Query Language
software for computer-generated block randomisation, with block sizes of five and 10. Randomisation was
conducted by an investigator with no clinical involvement in the trial. The York NHS Research Ethics Committee
(reference number 09/H1311/75) provided ethical approval on 21 September 2009.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
119
 Population
Patients were recruited from a primary care population who had consulted with depression within the past
5 years, who were continuing to experience depression and who were aged ≥ 18 years. We identified
potential participants from general medical practice databases. Signed consent forms and baseline
questionnaires were returned by patients. Patients were not eligible if they were receiving acupuncture
or counselling at the time, had a terminal illness, significant learning disabilities, haemophilia, hepatitis or
human immunodeficiency virus infection, were pregnant or had confounding psychiatric conditions
(bipolar disorder, post-partum depression, adjustment disorder, psychosis, dementia or personality
disorder). Patients who had suffered a close personal bereavement or given birth during the previous
12 months were also excluded. Spoken English was a requirement. Patients were eligible if they scored
≥ 20 on the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-11),314 which is classified within this scale as ‘moderate’ or
‘severe’ depression.
Interventions
Up to 12 sessions were offered, usually on a weekly basis, to patients allocated to the acupuncture or
counselling groups. Practitioners providing acupuncture were registered with the BAcC, with at least
3 years of post-qualification experience. In consultation with participating acupuncturists, an acupuncture
treatment protocol was developed, which allowed for customised treatments within a standardised
theory-driven framework.315 Practitioners providing counselling were members of the British Association for
Counselling and Psychotherapy with accreditation or who were eligible for accreditation having completed
400 supervised hours post qualification. Counselling competences using a humanistic approach drawn
from those independently developed for Skills for Health316 were incorporated into a manualised protocol.
All practitioners recorded in logbooks the number and length of sessions, treatment provided and adverse
events. Further details of the two interventions are presented in Appendix 6. In all three patient groups,
usual care, both NHS and private, was available according to need and was monitored for all for the
purposes of comparison.
Outcome measures
The Patient Health Questionnaire-9 items (PHQ-9)317 at 3 months was the primary outcome measure.
We also evaluated the overall impact over the 12-month period. PHQ-9 scores range from 0 to 27, with
depression considered mild (5–9), moderate (10–14), moderately severe (15–19) or severe (≥ 20). As a
preference-based measure of health outcome, we used the EQ-5D.226 Medication use was ascertained by
asking patients if they had taken any prescribed medication for depression or any prescribed analgesics/
painkillers. Patients reported health service use, including the number of times that they had consulted
a health professional because of their depression. Patients also reported out-of-pocket spending on
acupuncture, counselling or psychotherapy, including cognitive–behavioural therapy. Data were collected at
baseline and by postal questionnaire at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months. Because these data were self-reported by
patients independently of the research team, we minimised potential bias associated with unblinded
researchers or clinicians measuring outcomes. We also collected demographic data and patients’ prior
preferences and expectations of the interventions at baseline and BDI-II data at baseline and 12 months.
We measured patients’ perceptions of their practitioners’ empathy at 3 months using the Consultational
and Relational Empathy (CARE) measure14 in both the acupuncture group and the counselling group. A
payment of £5 as reimbursement was enclosed with the final questionnaire to enhance the response rate.15
Sample size
We sought an effect size of 0.39 on the PHQ-9 when comparing either acupuncture with usual care alone
or counselling with usual care alone, an effect size that was taken to be both moderate and realistic.
We used the allocation ratio of 2 : 2 : 1 to increase the power to detect statistically significant differences
between acupuncture and counselling. A smaller effect size of 0.32 was sought when comparing
acupuncture and counselling, although the anticipated difference between these two treatments was
expected to be small and not clinically meaningful. With a two-sided significance level of 5% and 90%
power the required group sizes were 204, 204 and 102 in the acupuncture, counselling and usual care
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
120
 alone arms, respectively. The total sample size required was 640 (i.e. groups of 256, 256 and 128
respectively) when allowing for 20% attrition.
Analysis
Primary comparisons were between acupuncture plus usual care and usual care alone, and between
counselling plus usual care and usual care alone. A secondary comparison was between acupuncture plus
usual care and counselling plus usual care. The PHQ-9 was the primary outcome measure and 3 months
was the primary end point, and we used ANCOVA, with baseline PHQ-9 score as covariate. For missing
data we used multiple imputation by chained regression using treatment group, baseline measures (PHQ-9,
BDI-II, SF-36, EQ-5D anxiety/depression) and demographics (age and sex). We used imputed rather than
raw data for the primary analysis to take account of the profile of non-responders.
In a secondary analysis we assessed the overall clinical impact over 12 months, using the AUC method for
the PHQ-9 by linear regression, predicting the average AUC while controlling for baseline PHQ-9. We also
explored in more detail the PHQ-9 outcomes across all time points using random intercept linear mixed
models with fixed effects for treatment arm, time and arm–time interaction for each treatment
comparison. The models nested time points within patients and controlled for baseline PHQ-9 score and
potential mediators including patients’ prior expectations and preferences regarding the treatments.
Potential mediators were identified by univariate regressions (p < 0.1) of the PHQ-9 at 3 months for the
whole patient sample, controlling for baseline PHQ-9 score. We controlled for treatment time (combined
length of sessions) and quality of attention (CARE score) when comparing acupuncture and counselling.
We used ANCOVA to evaluate treatment differences between BDI-II depression scores at 12 months, while
controlling for BDI-II baseline scores and covariates for depression as identified above. We used multiple
imputation for missing data as for the PHQ-9.
Using an intention-to-treat basis, all analyses were carried out in Stata 12.1. Statistical tests were at a
two-sided 0.05 significance level. To assess model assumptions, analysis of residuals was undertaken for
all regression models.
Patient and public involvement
In preparation for conducting this research into acupuncture for depression, we conducted a feasibility
study that included a prospective case series of 10 patients who received acupuncture treatment for their
depression and a focus group with six patients with experience of depression. We used a focus group
because as a research team we wanted to learn from patients about their depression and experiences of
treatment. We also needed guidance on how best to address the question of whether or not acupuncture
is a suitable treatment option for people with depression.
A local patient-centred mental health group, York & District Mind, agreed to work with us on this research
and became a long-term partner in its support of research into acupuncture for depression. As a first step
we drew on this support in forming a focus group, which met once for 2 hours. Participants in the group
were two researchers and six volunteers, identified through York & District Mind, who had experienced
depression and were either staff or users of mental health services. A topic guide provided structure for
the meeting, covering personal experiences of depression, experiences of both conventional and alternative
treatments for depression, and feedback on our research plans. It is the last of these that is most relevant
to the patient and public impact on our research.
With regard to feedback on our research plans, participants were concerned about recruitment through
GPs on the basis that people who do not consult their GP could not be part of the study. It was agreed
that reaching out to those not consulting their GP was a good idea; however, the methods of recruitment
would be challenging as there was no way of identifying this hard-to-reach group in sufficient numbers for
a RCT.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
121
 Another issue raised was to do with the definition of depression amid concerns that there might be some
cut-off in severity, for example having a cut-off point so that only people with mild to moderate depression
could be recruited. There was a strong feeling among participants that people with severe depression,
particularly those who had exhausted all other treatment options, would want to be included in the offer
to participate in a trial. The feelings regarding discrimination against mental health users were clearly
resonating in this discussion; nobody wanted to be excluded.
This point about not including more severely depressed patients in the trial had a major impact on our trial
design when finalising the eligibility criteria. The resulting design included a cut-off to exclude mild
depression; however, there was no cut-off for the more severely depressed. This was operationalised with
the BDI-II, which we used to recruit patients with both moderate (score of 20–28) and severe (score 29–63)
depression. This eligibility requirement led to 62% of patients recruited being categorised as having severe
depression and the remaining 38% of patients being categorised as having moderate depression.
York & District Mind continued to be involved with our research into acupuncture for depression. Two
lay members and their chief executive joined our independent steering group, which met roughly every
6 months throughout the duration of the trial. Beyond the steering group, their contributions also involved
editing the wording in documentation related to the questionnaires that were to be filled in by patients.
The chief executive took responsibility for consulting members of his organisation, including users of
mental health services, and then aggregated the feedback, which led to improvements in the wording of
the questionnaires. Once we had agreed the documentation, and received ethics approval, there was less
scope for the York & District Mind participants to contribute, as the trial became primarily a logistic task
for the next 3 years. In 2011 York & District Mind merged with another charity called Our Celebration to
become York Mind. This change also brought a new chief executive, a transition that took some time
to be completed. The new chief executive attended one independent steering committee meeting in
June 2011. The combination of this change of personnel and the associated participation gap led to a
reduced involvement by patients and the public in the trial from this point on.
Methods for substudy 1: experience of treatment from the patient perspective
The aim of this substudy was to explore patients’ experiences of depression, both with and without
comorbid pain, and the perceived changes as a result of receiving the treatments of acupuncture or
counselling and usual care. A secondary aim was to report the aspects of treatment that patients reported
might have had a positive influence on any long-term change.
In terms of methods, this was a nested qualitative substudy within the Acupuncture, Counselling or Usual
Care for Depression (ACUDep) trial. To recruit patients for interview, we selected only from those who
had already consented to interview. We used a purposive sampling frame and recruited in the same
2 : 2 : 1 proportions as in the main trial from the treatment groups of acupuncture, counselling and usual
care, respectively. We balanced the proportions of men and women and whether or not in pain at
baseline. On receipt of their final 12-month postal questionnaire, and based on a sampling frame, a
sample of participants who had previously consented to be contacted for an interview was invited to
engage in a telephone interview of approximately 30 minutes’ duration. Altogether, 52 people consented
to a one-to-one, audio-recorded, semistructured telephone interview for this study.
A researcher (AH) interviewed all participants and all interviews were conducted between February and
May 2012. The researcher was unknown to the participants prior to the interview and therefore the
interview opened with an introduction designed to set the participant at ease, reveal the context for their
depression and draw out their account of treatment received as part of the trial. Prompts from a prepared
topic guide were used to elicit the participants’ experiences of depression and treatment. On average, the
interviews lasted approximately 25 minutes (range 11–46 minutes). To encourage participants to relax,
participants were asked to introduce themselves by speaking about things they like to do or hoped to do
and then how depression had entered their lives, before moving on to the research-related questions within
the topic guide. Interviews were audio taped, transcribed verbatim and checked for accuracy. All recordings
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
122
 were of sufficient clarity and content that no repeat interviews were necessary. Each transcription was
checked to remove any names and was then assigned a participant identification number.
Across the data set of 52 transcribed interviews we used an inductive thematic analysis.318 With a
constructivist approach to grounded theory,319 data were analysed initially by AH. Coding was performed
sequentially on each transcript by working systematically through the entire data set. Coding and
extractions were checked by JE to verify that the participants’ experiences were reflected and summarised
accurately. Coding was conducted within each interview and across interviews resulting in themes
associated with the experience of depression and further themes associated with the experience of the
treatment. Further details of the methods are provided in a separate publication.320
Methods for substudy 2: impact of comorbid pain on depression outcomes
The aim of this substudy was to find out whether people with depression who were also in pain had
better or worse depression outcomes than those without pain. We documented the prevalence of pain in
this trial population, the demographic profile of patients in pain and the relationship between pain and
depression. We determined depression and pain outcomes following treatment with acupuncture or
counselling compared with usual care alone. A full report has been published elsewhere.321
In terms of methods, the participants were first divided into two groups according to their response to the
EQ-5D pain statements at baseline. People who reported either ‘moderate’ or ‘extreme pain’ were
considered together as the ‘pain group’; the remainder were assigned to a ‘no-pain comparator group’.
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the mean baseline PHQ-9 scores between the pain
group and the no-pain comparator group. For the pain group alone, a Kendall’s tau correlation was used
to test the association between the baseline scores of the PHQ-9 and SF-36 bodily pain score. A series of
regression models was applied to determine the influence of baseline pain and other demographic
variables on the PHQ-9 depression outcome at 3 months, the primary end point of the trial. To take into
account the additional impact of other demographic predictors of PHQ-9 depression at 3 months, a
systematic univariate analysis of demographic variables was conducted on the BDI-II depression items and
the five EQ-5D items while controlling for PHQ-9 scores at baseline. For this scoping exercise, the level of
significance was set at p < 0.1 to maintain consistency with the analysis within the main ACUDep trial.
The variables identified by univariate analysis were then included in a linear regression model (p < 0.05);
the odds ratios and 95% CIs of the variables identified by the regression models are presented within the
results section.
Using any remaining significant predictors and controlling for baseline PHQ-9 depression scores, ANCOVA
was used to test if baseline pain affected treatment outcomes measured by the PHQ-9 at 3 months. An
interaction term between treatment and pain group in this model was used to establish whether or not
patients in pain responded differently to the treatments with regard to their depression from patients
reporting no pain. Also, using any remaining significant predictors and controlling for baseline PHQ-9
depression scores, ANCOVA was used to test whether or not baseline pain affected treatment outcome
measured by the number of depression-free days at 3 months; an approximate summary measure was
derived from PHQ-9 cut-off scores averaged over the period between measurements.322
An ANCOVA model controlling for baseline depression and baseline SF-36 bodily pain was used to assess
the impact of treatment for depression on the bodily pain scores at 3 months. Descriptive analysis of the
depression and pain scores was conducted over the 12-month follow-up period. Finally, a comparison of
the adverse events reported between baseline and 12 months’ follow-up was conducted using proportions
and odds ratios.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
123
 Methods for substudy 3: approaches that practitioners used to enhance
longer-term benefits
The aim of this qualitative substudy was to explore practitioners’ experiences of providing treatment within
the trial and to specifically identify the strategies that practitioners reported using to promote longer-term
benefits for their patients.
Nested within the trial, this substudy involved in-depth interviews and focus groups with acupuncturists
and counsellors who provided treatments to at least two patients within the trial. Our aim was to recruit
up to 30 counsellors and acupuncturists (approximately 15 in each group). All participants provided written
consent. The interviews and focus groups were informed by topic guides, which were developed by the
research team to address the substudy aims. Along with questions, the topic guides also included prompts.
The interviews and focus group were conducted by two experienced health services researchers from the
research team who were not involved in the conduct of the trial itself (Liz Newbronner and Ruth Chamberlain).
The interviews commonly lasted around 45 minutes (range 40–90 minutes) and the focus group 90 minutes.
They were all audio-recorded (with participants’ permission) and transcribed verbatim.
The transcripts were analysed thematically.318 A framework approach facilitated the thematic content
analysis, which involved analysing the data across the two groups of practitioners contributing to the
study.323 An inductive process was used to identify themes, drawing on shared experiences or points of
difference identified from the data. A full report of the methods has been published separately.324
Methods for substudy 4: cost-effectiveness analysis
The main outcome of the cost-effectiveness analysis was the cost per QALY, which takes into account the
treatment differences in HRQoL and mortality. HRQoL was measured using the EQ-5D325 at baseline and at
months 3, 6, 9 and 12. The cost perspective of the NHS was used, although out-of-pocket expenses were
also identified. Using patient questionnaires in the trial, resource use data were collected at 3, 6, 9 and
12 months. The sum of the resource use collected during each 3-month period was used to determine the
total annual resource use. The total annual cost was calculated by multiplying the total annual resource
use by the unit costs using publicly available 2012 national unit costs (see Appendix 6). We used the costs
of acupuncture as estimated previously326 and the average of the ranges reported by NHS Choices:327
£47.50 for an initial session and £37.50 for subsequent sessions. The costs of counselling were those
currently used in the NHS: £65 per hour of client contact.291
Multiple imputation methods were used to manage the uncertainty caused by the missing data. Chained
imputation using predictive mean matching was undertaken using resource use data, PHQ-9 and BDI scores,
QALYs and patient characteristics such as age, sex and education. EQ-5D data were analysed using ordered
logit models on each of the five dimensions of the instrument. Analysis at 3 months controlled for the
baseline response and analysis over 12 months used random-effects models and controlled for the baseline
response and the timing of each response (i.e. the day from randomisation). HRQoL weights on the 0
(equivalent to death) to 1 (full health) scale, including negative values (health states worse than death), were
calculated using an independent pre-defined algorithm obtained by the elicitation of societal preferences for
the health dimensions in a random population sample through a time trade-off technique.328 QALYs were
calculated by applying an individual’s HRQoL weights and the time between EQ-5D measures using the AUC
approach.329 For all cost-effectiveness analyses, seemingly unrelated regressions were used to account for the
correlation between costs and QALYs.330 QALYs were regressed on baseline HRQoL and treatment arm, and
costs were regressed on the treatment arm only. We estimated ICERs using fully incremental analysis.
Using total costs we calculated base-case results taking into account the uncertainty from the multiple
imputation and the seemingly unrelated regression. Probabilistic sensitivity analysis was used to reflect
uncertainty in mean total costs and QALYs, and we estimated the probability of cost-effectiveness
conditional on alternative cost-effectiveness thresholds. Further exploratory scenario analyses were
undertaken to understand the influence on cost-effectiveness of (1) the differential cost of the acupuncture
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
124
 and counselling interventions, (2) depression-related resource use, (3) the complete case and (4) a population
for whom acupuncture is not appropriate or unavailable. All analyses considered the published NICE
cost-effectiveness thresholds of £20,000 and £30,000 per QALY gained.224
Results
Participants
We exceed our recruitment target of 640, recruiting 755 patients in total. Patients registered with
27 general medical practices were recruited between December 2009 and April 2011 in Yorkshire and
north-east England. These practices recruited an average of 28 patients (range 0–122 patients). The
baseline characteristics of patients were balanced between the trial arms and are presented in Table 34.
Notably, baseline expectations of treatment effectiveness were lowest for acupuncture yet, by contrast, a
majority (58%) expressed a baseline preference to be allocated to acupuncture. These baseline variations
were taken into account in the linear mixed-model analysis. Comparison of baseline data between patients
with and without missing data at 3 months is presented in Appendix 6. Figure 26 presents the patient flow
in the trial.
Interventions
Of the patients allocated to acupuncture, 266 (88.1%) received one or more treatment sessions (mean 10.3,
SD 3.14 treatment sessions) with one of 23 acupuncturists. The average number of sessions received at
3 months was 8.7 (SD 3.34), with 133 patients (50.0%) having completed all of their sessions. Of the patients
allocated to counselling, 231 (76.5%) received one or more treatment sessions (mean 9.0, SD 3.74 treatment
sessions) with one of 37 therapists. The average number of sessions received at 3 months was 7.5 (SD 3.60),
with 114 patients (49.4%) having completed all of their sessions. The mean time from randomisation to last
treatment was 117 days in both treatment arms (SD 47.0 and 51.2 days, respectively), a period that included
time to first appointment. An average of 13 patients were allocated to each acupuncturist (range 2–45
patients) and an average of eight patients were allocated to each counsellor (range 1–27 patients).
We collected data on acupuncturists’ and counsellors’ self-reports of intervention protocol violations in
logbooks. There were reports of four cases of violation of the acupuncture protocol (which incidentally did
not involve counselling), one of which was deemed to be a true case involving prescription of a herbal
lotion application to reduce swelling and pain. There were seven reports of violation of the counselling
TABLE 34 Demographics and variables of interest at baseline
Characteristic
Intervention
Total
(N = 755)
Acupuncture + usual
care (N = 302)
Counselling + usual
care (N = 302)
Usual care
(N = 151)
Age (years)
Mean (SD)
43.4 (13.24)
43.5 (13.26)
43.5 (13.93)
43.5 (13.37)
Median (min., max.)
43 (18, 86)
43 (18, 93)
42 (18, 89)
43 (18, 93)
Interquartile range
34–52
33–52
32–54
33–53
Missing, n (%)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Sex, n (%)
Male
88 (29.1)
69 (22.8)
44 (29.1)
201 (26.6)
Female
214 (70.9)
233 (77.2)
107 (70.9)
554 (73.4)
Missing
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
continued
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
125
 TABLE 34 Demographics and variables of interest at baseline (continued)
Characteristic
Intervention
Total
(N = 755)
Acupuncture + usual
care (N = 302)
Counselling + usual
care (N = 302)
Usual care
(N = 151)
Age left education (years)
Mean (SD)
18.0 (4.69)
18.0 (3.92)
18.1 (4.62)
18.0 (4.37)
Median (min., max.)
16 (13, 54)
16 (14, 48)
16 (14, 54)
16 (13, 54)
Interquartile range
16–18
16–19
16–19
16–19
Missing, n (%)
17 (5.6)
7 (2.3)
7 (4.6)
31 (4.1)
Employment, n (%)
Full-time education
13 (4.4)
5 (1.7)
5 (3.3)
23 (3.1)
Working full-time
112 (38.0)
107 (36.4)
62 (41.3)
281 (38.0)
Working part-time
57 (19.3)
59 (20.1)
28 (18.7)
144 (19.5)
Unable to work
38 (12.9)
42 (14.3)
15 (10.0)
95 (12.9)
Looking after home
37 (12.5)
32 (10.9)
14 (9.3)
83 (11.2)
Retired
23 (7.8)
30 (10.2)
12 (8.0)
65 (8.8)
Other
15 (5.1)
19 (6.5)
14 (9.3)
48 (6.5)
Missing
7 (2.3)
8 (2.6)
1 (0.7)
16 (2.1)
Depression, n (%)
In last 2 weeks
224 (75.7)
235 (78.6)
115 (77.7)
574 (77.3)
Missing
6 (2.0)
3 (1.0)
3 (2.0)
12 (1.6)
Not first major episode
196 (89.5)
217 (93.5)
100 (87.7)
513 (90.8)
Missing
5 (2.2)
3 (1.3)
1 (0.7)
9 (1.6)
Four or more previous episodes
143 (73.0)
165 (76.7)
81 (82.7)
389 (76.4)
Missing
0 (0.0)
2 (0.9)
2 (2.0)
4 (0.8)
Age at first major depressive episode (years)
Mean (SD)
25.8 (12.69)
24.9 (11.73)
24.4 (12.55)
25.2 (12.28)
Median (min., max.)
23 (3, 79)
22 (6, 71)
20 (0, 78)
22 (0, 79)
Interquartile range
16–33
16–31
16–30
16–31
Missing, n (%)
9 (3.0)
3 (1.0)
4 (2.6)
16 (2.1)
Medication, n (%)
Depression medication in last
3 months
189 (62.6)
220 (72.8)
110 (72.8)
519 (68.7)
Missing
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Analgesic medication in last
3 months
147 (48.8)
126 (42.3)
86 (57.3)
359 (47.9)
Missing
1 (0.3)
4 (1.3)
1 (0.7)
6 (0.8)
EQ-5D anxiety/depression, n (%)
Not anxious/depressed
8 (2.7)
8 (2.6)
5 (3.3)
21 (2.8)
Moderately anxious/depressed
219 (73.0)
221 (73.2)
114 (75.5)
554 (73.6)
Extremely anxious/depressed
73 (24.3)
73 (24.2)
32 (21.2)
178 (23.6)
Missing
2 (0.7)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
2 (0.3)
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
126
 TABLE 34 Demographics and variables of interest at baseline (continued)
Characteristic
Intervention
Total
(N = 755)
Acupuncture + usual
care (N = 302)
Counselling + usual
care (N = 302)
Usual care
(N = 151)
PHQ-9 score
Mean (SD)
15.3 (5.33)
16.6 (5.27)
16.2 (5.09)
16.0 (5.29)
Median (min., max.)
15 (3, 27)
17 (4, 27)
16 (5, 27)
16 (3, 27)
Interquartile range
11–19
13–21
13–20
12–20
Missing, n (%)
1 (0.33)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
1 (0.1)
PHQ-9 group, n (%)
None (0–4)
4 (1.3)
2 (0.7)
0 (0.0)
6 (0.8)
Mild (5–9)
44 (14.6)
29 (9.6)
14 (9.3)
87 (11.5)
Moderate (10–14)
97 (32.2)
74 (24.5)
46 (30.5)
217 (28.7)
Moderately severe (15–19)
88 (29.2)
96 (31.8)
47 (31.1)
231 (30.6)
Severe (20–27)
68 (22.6)
101 (33.4)
44 (29.1)
213 (28.2)
Missing
1 (0.3)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
1 (0.1)
BDI-II score
Mean (SD)
32.0 (8.54)
33.3 (9.11)
31.8 (8.17)
32.5 (8.72)
Median (min., max.)
31 (20, 57)
32 (20, 60)
30 (20, 56)
31 (20, 60)
Interquartile range
25–37
26–39
25–37
26–38
Missing, n (%)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
BDI-II group, n (%)
Moderate (20–28)
124 (41.1)
104 (34.4)
56 (37.1)
284 (37.6)
Severe (29–63)
178 (58.9)
198 (65.6)
95 (62.9)
471 (62.4)
SF-36 bodily pain
Mean (SD)
58.8 (27.99)
58.0 (29.17)
54.4 (27.83)
57.6 (28.44)
Median (min., max.)
62 (0, 100)
62 (0, 100)
51 (0, 100)
52 (0, 100)
Interquartile range
41–84
31–84
31–74
32–84
Missing, n (%)
1 (0.3)
3 (1.0)
0 (0.0)
4 (0.5)
Expectation acupuncture, n (%)
Very ineffective
10 (3.3)
6 (2.0)
1 (0.7)
17 (2.3)
Fairly ineffective
9 (3.0)
11 (3.7)
6 (4.0)
26 (3.5)
Can’t decide
187 (61.9)
204 (68.0)
103 (68.2)
494 (65.6)
Fairly effective
66 (21.9)
44 (14.7)
29 (19.2)
139 (18.5)
Very effective
30 (9.9)
35 (11.7)
12 (7.9)
77 (10.2)
Missing
0 (0.0)
2 (0.7)
0 (0.0)
2 (0.3)
Expectation counselling, n (%)
Very ineffective
23 (7.7)
18 (6.0)
15 (9.9)
56 (7.5)
Fairly ineffective
50 (16.7)
43 (14.3)
21 (13.9)
114 (15.2)
Can’t decide
101 (33.8)
100 (33.2)
39 (25.8)
240 (32.0)
continued
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
127
 protocol, of which two were deemed to be true cases; one case involved goal setting and in another the
counsellor reported being analytical and interpretative beyond the scope of humanistic counselling.
Details of all three interventions are provided in Appendix 6, with usual care documented in the following
categories: patients seeing health professionals; patients attending hospital accident and emergency
departments; patients admitted to hospital; patients paying for private health care. Medication use is
detailed later in this chapter. A more complete report on acupuncture provision has been published331 as
well as a report reflecting on experiences of providing the counselling.332
TABLE 34 Demographics and variables of interest at baseline (continued)
Characteristic
Intervention
Total
(N = 755)
Acupuncture + usual
care (N = 302)
Counselling + usual
care (N = 302)
Usual care
(N = 151)
Fairly effective
95 (31.8)
97 (32.2)
65 (43.0)
257 (34.2)
Very effective
30 (10.0)
43 (14.3)
11 (7.3)
84 (11.2)
Missing
3 (1.0)
1 (0.3)
0 (0.0)
4 (0.5)
Expectation of usual care, n (%)
Very ineffective
29 (9.6)
34 (11.3)
6 (4.1)
69 (9.2)
Fairly ineffective
60 (19.9)
62 (20.7)
44 (29.7)
166 (22.1)
Can’t decide
108 (35.8)
92 (30.7)
50 (33.8)
250 (33.3)
Fairly effective
95 (31.5)
97 (32.3)
46 (31.1)
238 (31.7)
Very effective
10 (3.3)
15 (5.0)
2 (1.4)
27 (3.6)
Missing
0 (0.0)
2 (0.7)
3 (2.0)
5 (0.7)
Expectation of actual treatment randomised to, n (%)
Very ineffective
10 (3.3)
18 (6.0)
6 (4.1)
34 (4.5)
Fairly ineffective
9 (3.0)
43 (14.3)
44 (29.7)
96 (12.8)
Can’t decide
187 (61.9)
100 (33.2)
50 (33.8)
337 (44.9)
Fairly effective
66 (21.9)
97 (32.2)
46 (31.1)
209 (27.8)
Very effective
30 (9.9)
43 (14.3)
2 (1.4)
75 (10.0)
Missing
0 (0.0)
1 (0.3)
3 (2.0)
4 (0.5)
Treatment preference, n (%)
Acupuncture
177 (58.8)
171 (57.6)
82 (54.7)
430 (57.5)
Counselling
55 (18.3)
75 (25.3)
34 (22.7)
164 (21.9)
Usual care
2 (0.7)
7 (2.4)
1 (0.7)
10 (1.3)
No preference
67 (22.3)
44 (14.8)
33 (22.0)
144 (19.3)
Missing
1 (0.3)
5 (1.7)
1 (0.7)
7 (0.9)
Treatment concordance, n (%)
Randomised to preferred treatment
177 (58.8)
75 (25.3)
1 (0.7)
253 (33.8)
Randomised to non-preferred
treatment
57 (18.9)
178 (59.9)
116 (77.3)
351 (46.9)
No preference
67 (22.3)
44 (14.8)
33 (22.0)
144 (19.3)
Missing
1 (0.3)
5 (1.7)
1 (0.7)
7 (0.9)
Max., maximum; min., minimum.
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
128
 Participants identified
(n = 9053)
Responded and consented
(n = 1416)
Not randomised
(n = 661)
Withdrawn
(n = 168)
• Ineligible (more than one reason 
   possible), n = 493
• Did not speak sufficient English, n = 2
• Currently receiving acupuncture 
   or counselling, n = 15
• Current diagnosis of haemophilia, n = 8
• Current diagnosis of hepatitis, n = 10
• Current diagnosis of HIV infection, n = 4
• Pregnant, n = 7
• Given birth in the last 12 months, n = 12
• Bereaved in the last 12 months, n = 193
• Taking part in other research study, n = 18
• BDI-II score of < 20, n = 311
Allocated to acupuncture 
and usual care
(n = 302)
Received intervention
(n = 266)
(Sessions received: 
mean 10.3, SD 3.14)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 7)
Withdrawn
(n = 6)
Died
(n = 1)
3-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 249)
Missing
(n = 46)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 3)
Withdrawn
(n = 1)
Unable to contact
(n = 1)
Died
(n = 1)
6-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 235)
Missing
(n = 57)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 1)
Died
(n = 1)
9-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 234)
Missing
(n = 57)
12-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 233)
Missing
(n = 58)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 0)
Allocated to counselling
and usual care
(n = 302)
Received intervention
(n = 231)
(Sessions received: 
mean 9.0, SD 3.74)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 24)
Withdrawn
(n = 21)
Withdrawn by 
nurse/doctor
(n = 1)
Unable to contact
(n = 1)
Randomised 
in error
(n = 1)
3-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 237)
Missing
(n = 41)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 2)
Withdrawn
(n = 2)
6-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 229)
Missing
(n = 47)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 4)
Withdrawn
(n = 3)
Unable to contact
(n = 1)
9-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 215)
Missing
(n = 57)
12-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 222)
Missing
(n = 50)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 0)
Allocated to usual care
(n = 151)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 3)
Withdrawn
(n = 3)
3-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 130)
Missing
(n = 18)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 0)
6-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 121)
Missing
(n = 27)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 1)
Withdrawn
(n = 1)
9-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 120)
Missing
(n = 27)
12-month follow-up
Available for analysis
(n = 119)
Missing
(n = 26)
Lost to follow-up
(n = 2)
Withdrawn
(n = 2)
Randomised
(n = 755)
FIGURE 26 Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) flow diagram. HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
129
 Clinical outcomes
For the PHQ-9, unadjusted mean scores at all time points are presented in Table 35 and Figure 27. Table 36
provides the primary outcome results for between-group differences in PHQ-9 depression at 3 months
using ANCOVA. With regard to missing data at 3 months, patients for whom no data were available tended
to be younger with higher levels of baseline depression. Imputed data were used to take their profile into
account. Compared with usual care, patients in the acupuncture arm experienced an average additional
reduction in depression of –2.46 points on the PHQ-9 (95% CI –3.72 to –1.21 points; p < 0.001), an
observed effect size equivalent to a Cohen’s d of –0.39 (95% CI –0.58 to –0.19). Compared with usual care,
patients allocated to the counselling arm experienced an average additional reduction in depression of –1.73
points (95% CI –3.00 to –0.45 points; p = 0.008), equivalent to a Cohen’s d of –0.27 (95% CI –0.47 to
–0.07). There was no statistically significant difference between acupuncture and counselling (–0.76 points
on the PHQ-9, 95% CI –1.77 to 0.25 points; p = 0.41). These data are conservative as non-imputed data
showed slightly larger treatment effects (see Appendix 6).
TABLE 35 Unadjusted depression outcomes
Outcome measure
Intervention
Total
Acupuncture + usual
care
Counselling + usual
care
Usual care
n
Mean (SD)
n
Mean (SD)
n
Mean (SD)
n
Mean (SD)
PHQ-9
Baseline
301
15.3 (5.33)
302
16.6 (5.27)
151
16.2 (5.09)
754
16.0 (5.29)
3 months
249
9.4 (6.33)
237
10.9 (6.45)
128
12.7 (6.47)
614
10.7 (6.51)
6 months
235
9.1 (6.51)
228
10.1 (6.87)
120
12.0 (6.85)
583
10.1 (6.80)
9 months
234
9.7 (6.90)
215
10.1 (7.03)
120
11.9 (7.04)
569
10.3 (7.02)
12 months
233
9.3 (6.68)
220
10.1 (6.86)
119
11.5 (6.98)
572
10.1 (6.85)
BDI-II
Baseline
302
32.0 (8.54)
302
33.3 (9.11)
151
31.8 (8.17)
755
32.5 (8.72)
12 months
226
20.4 (13.19)
211
21.4 (13.64)
151
23.8 (12.63)
588
21.4 (13.29)
19
17
15
13
Mean PHQ-9 score
11
9
7
5
Baseline
3 months
6 months
Time point
9 months
12 months
Acupuncture
Counselling
Standard care
FIGURE 27 Unadjusted PHQ-9 mean scores from baseline to 12 months.
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
130
 In the AUC analysis over the 12-month period, the statistically significant benefit of acupuncture and
counselling over usual care alone in terms of PHQ-9 score reduction seen at 3 months remained:
acupuncture reduced the PHQ-9 score by –1.55 (95% CI –2.41 to –0.70) and counselling by –1.50
(95% CI –2.43 to –0.58) (see Table 36).
In a secondary analysis exploring potential mediators, PHQ-9 scores at 3 months were found to be
associated with two factors: expectations of counselling (p = 0.064) and expectations about the treatment
that patients were allocated to (p = 0.015). These factors were included as potential mediators of the
effect of trial arm in further analyses. Related to the comparison of the acupuncture and counselling arms,
additional significant factors were total session time at 3 months (p < 0.001) and perceived empathy of
practitioners (p < 0.001), which were added as further covariates.
From the linear mixed modelling, PHQ-9 depression scores in the acupuncture and counselling groups were
reduced compared with usual care at 3 and 6 months (see Table 36). The scores in the usual care group
continued to reduce over time, such that differences were no longer statistically significant at 9 and 12 months.
There was no evidence of significant differences between acupuncture and counselling throughout.
TABLE 36 Effect of trial arm on PHQ-9 depression
Analysis
Month
n
Group
Group difference
1
2
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
95% CI
p-value
Acupuncture
Usual care
ANCOVAa
3
452
9.8
0.41
12.3
0.58
–2.46
0.636
–3.72 to –1.21
< 0.001
Mixedb
3
372
9.8
0.27
12.1
0.38
–2.29
0.475
–3.22 to –1.36
–
6
350
9.6
0.33
11.5
0.46
–1.90
0.569
–3.02 to –0.79
–
9
348
10.2
0.39
11.1
0.54
–0.83
0.671
–2.15 to 0.49
–
12
347
9.7
0.45
10.7
0.64
–0.99
0.785
–2.53 to 0.55
–
AUCc
3–12
407
10.9
0.25
12.5
0.35
–1.55
0.435
–2.41 to –0.70
–
Counselling
Usual care
ANCOVAa
3
453
11.1
0.40
12.8
0.58
–1.73
0.648
–3.00 to –0.45
0.008
Mixedb
3
362
10.9
0.28
12.8
0.38
–1.83
0.477
–2.76 to –0.90
–
6
345
10.4
0.33
12.2
0.47
–1.78
0.576
–2.91 to –0.65
–
9
332
10.5
0.40
11.8
0.55
–1.26
0.688
–2.61 to 0.08
–
12
336
10.4
0.47
11.4
0.65
–1.00
0.805
–2.58 to 0.57
–
AUCc
3–12
402
11.6
0.28
13.1
0.38
–1.50
0.470
–2.43 to –0.58
–
Acupuncture
Counselling
ANCOVAa
3
603
10.0
0.41
10.8
0.40
–0.76
0.514
–1.77 to 0.25
0.140
Mixedb
3
402
9.5
0.29
9.4
0.32
0.11
0.439
–0.75 to 0.97
–
6
371
9.6
0.35
9.1
0.38
0.45
0.527
–0.58 to 1.49
–
9
360
10.0
0.41
9.0
0.45
0.97
0.621
–0.25 to 2.19
–
12
361
9.6
0.48
9.0
0.53
0.59
0.721
–0.82 to 2.01
–
AUCc
3–12
531
11.1
0.27
11.2
0.27
–0.06
0.378
–0.81 to 0.68
–
a ANCOVA: effect of trial arm on imputed PHQ-9 scores at 3 months (adjusting for baseline PHQ-9 score).
b Mixed: effect of trial arm on PHQ-9 scores over 12 months (mixed-effects model, including time, trial arm–time
interaction, baseline PHQ-9 score, baseline expectation of counselling and baseline expectation of allocated treatment;
for the comparison between acupuncture and counselling, treatment time completed within 3 months and practitioner’s
empathy were additionally included).
c AUC: effect of trial arm on average PHQ-9 depression over 12 months (adjusting for baseline PHQ-9 score).
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
131
 Using ANCOVA, depression scores on the BDI-II were found to be reduced in the acupuncture arm (–2.88,
95% CI –5.68 to –0.08) and the counselling arm (–2.74, 95% CI –5.50 to 0.02) to a greater extent than
by usual care alone at 12 months, but with no statistically significant difference between acupuncture and
counselling (Table 37).
Prescribed medication
Among all patients, the majority (68.7%) were taking antidepressants at baseline (Table 38) and prescribed
antidepressant utilisation decreased steadily by an average of 12% over the 12-month study period, a rate
TABLE 37 Effect of trial arm on BDI-II depression
Analysis
Month
n
Group
Group difference
1
2
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
95% CI
Acupuncture
Usual care
ANCOVAa
12
445
22.8
1.34
25.7
1.82
–2.88
1.419
–5.68 to –0.08
Counselling
Usual care
ANCOVAa
12
449
22.7
1.47
25.4
1.74
–2.74
1.399
–5.50 to 0.02
Acupuncture
Counselling
ANCOVAa
12
401
22.5
0.92
21.9
1.02
0.59
1.281
–1.93 to 3.11
a ANCOVA: effect of trial arm on imputed BDI-II scores at 12 months (adjusting for baseline BDI-II score, baseline
expectation of counselling and baseline expectation of allocated treatment; for the comparison between acupuncture
and counselling, treatment time*3 months and practitioner’s empathy were additionally included).
TABLE 38 Numbers of patients taking prescribed medication in the preceding 3 months
Prescribed
medication
Intervention
Total
Acupuncture + usual
care
Counselling + usual
care
Usual care
n
%a
Change
from
baseline
(%)
n
%a
Change
from
baseline
(%)
n
%a
Change
from
baseline
(%)
n
%a
Change
from
baseline
(%)
Antidepressants
Baseline
189
62.6
–
220
72.9
–
110
72.9
–
519
68.7
–
3 months
147
60.7
–0.9
155
69.2
–3.7
80
66.7
–6.2
382
65.2
–3.5
6 months
126
54.6
–8.0
145
65.3
–7.6
75
63.6
–9.3
346
60.6
–8.1
9 months
123
54.0
–8.6
124
60.8
–12.1
74
66.1
–6.8
321
59.0
–9.7
12 months
121
52.4
–10.2
124
58.2
–14.7
69
61.6
–11.3
314
56.5
–12.2
Analgesics
Baseline
147
48.8
–
126
42.3
–
86
57.3
–
359
47.9
–
3 months
73
30.8
–18.0
93
42.5
0.2
57
48.3
–9.0
223
38.9
–9.0
6 months
99
43.4
–5.4
84
38.5
–3.8
52
46.4
–10.9
235
42.1
–5.8
9 months
82
36.8
–12.0
71
34.8
–7.5
55
50.0
–7.3
208
38.7
–9.2
12 months
84
36.8
–12.0
87
41.0
–1.3
54
49.5
–7.8
225
41.0
–6.9
a All percentages given out of total number of patients with valid responses.
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
132
 comparable between trial arms. Around half of patients (47.9%) were taking analgesics at baseline, which
decreased on average to 41.0% over 12 months. Patients in the acupuncture arm showed a marked
decrease in the use of analgesics in the first 3 months.
Adverse events
Over the 12 months, the number of patients experiencing a serious adverse event, as judged by a clinician (IW),
was 16 out of 302 (5.3%) in the acupuncture group, 26 out of 302 (8.6%) in the counselling group and nine
out of 151 (6.0%) in the usual care group, of whom nine had more than one serious adverse event (range
2–4). None of the serious adverse events, including three deaths, was known to be related to treatment. Over
the 12 months, the number of patients experiencing a non-serious adverse event was 56 (18.5%), 47 (15.6%)
and 40 (26.5%), respectively, of whom 17 had more than one non-serious adverse event (range 2–4).
Results for substudy 1: experience of treatment from the patient perspective
Of the 61 participants invited, four declined participation and three did not respond; in addition, two recordings
failed for technical reasons. In total, 52 participants, 24 men and 28 women, with an age range of 22–89 years
(mean 46 years, SD 13.8 years), were interviewed. At baseline, 26 of these participants had reported having
moderate or extreme pain or discomfort on the EQ-5D questionnaire; these people formed the pain group,
with the remainder forming the no-pain comparator group. As part of the ACUDep trial, 22 of the 52 had
been randomised to receive acupuncture, 20 had been randomised to receive counselling and 10 had been
randomised to receive usual care alone. A summary is presented in the sampling frame in Appendix 6. On
average, those allocated to acupuncture attended 11 sessions (range 4–12 sessions) and those allocated to
counselling attended 10 sessions (range 6–12 sessions).
Participants’ experiences of depression varied considerably between those with comorbid pain and those
with depression alone. Those participants with depression and comorbid pain commonly experienced a
number of other physical symptoms concurrently such as fatigue, low energy and sleep problems. For
some this meant withdrawing from social and day-to-day activities. This reduced ability to engage in social
activity was one of the factors that led to this group having less in the way of internal and external
resources available to manage their depression effectively. The majority in the no-pain comparator group
were in full- or part-time employment, or were relatively affluent retired professional people. For many,
their experience of depression concerned feelings of low self-esteem brought about by high expectations
of themselves within their working life or hectic social schedules.
Those with physical symptoms who were receiving acupuncture commonly reported that these broader
symptoms were usually addressed as part of the treatment. As treatment progressed, many participants
reported that their acupuncturist began guiding them to make changes to their lifestyle to engender beneficial
long-term outcomes. For most people with pain, fear of pain and potential injury posed a barrier to engaging
in physical activity. Nevertheless, the majority of the pain group reported being encouraged to take up gentle
exercise for their overall health. The advice given to the no-pain comparator group more often focused on
dietary change and a reduction in caffeine and alcohol intake, as well as encouragement of some form of
relaxation. Overall, longer-term improvement in depression was developed through the participants’ active
engagement in health-promoting behaviours, supported by a positive therapeutic relationship.
For those receiving counselling there was less emphasis on physical symptoms and more on help with gaining
an understanding of themselves and their situation. Despite many having low expectations of counselling
based on their previous experiences, the majority of participants engaged with the counselling process.
Most reported feeling relieved to have someone to talk to in confidence. For both the pain and the no-pain
groups, the process of change followed a common pathway, beginning with the participants’ disclosure of
personal information and being listened to and leading to an exploration of their past, which helped to clarify
their understanding of themselves and their situation. The final stage in the process of change for many was
directed towards enabling them to maintain their progress and recovery independently.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
133
 In summary, longer-term change was encouraged by most practitioners over the course of treatment.
This was facilitated by strong support to cope with depression and pain independently of treatment, with
a focus on relevant lifestyle and behaviour changes. Participants identified as important components of
treatment the therapeutic relationship with their practitioner and their active engagement in the treatment
process, whether they were receiving acupuncture or counselling, A full report on the experiences of
treatment has been published separately.320
Results for substudy 2: impact of comorbid pain on depression outcomes
Patients reporting moderate and extreme pain or discomfort on the EQ-5D questionnaire were merged
together to form a single pain group (n = 384, 51%) with the remainder forming the no-pain comparator
group (n = 371, 49%). A summary of the demographic variables in the subgroups allocated to the pain
and no-pain groups at baseline is presented in Appendix 6. The variables were comparable for most items
with the following notable exceptions: (1) the pain group members tended to be older than the no-pain
comparator group members (mean 47 years vs. 40 years); and (2) in terms of health and employment,
56% of the pain group (vs. 9% of the no-pain group) reported a painful health condition or illness that
predated the onset of depression, for which 64% (vs. 31%) used analgesic medication regularly, and 32%
(vs. 9%) were unable to work or were retired.
The baseline PHQ-9 depression scores indicate that the pain group reported higher levels of depression at
baseline (mean 17.0, SD 5.2) than the no-pain comparator group (mean 14.9, SD 5.2). Results of the
ANOVA confirmed the difference to be highly significant (mean difference 2.02, 95% CI 1.28 to 2.76).
For the pain group alone, the correlation between the PHQ-9 scores and SF-36 bodily pain scores was
weak but highly significant (Kendall’s tau –0.172; p < 0.001).
Using the average across all treatment groups, participants in the pain group showed a smaller reduction in
depression score at 3 months compared with baseline (mean reduction from 16.70 to 12.06 at 3 months)
than the no-pain comparator group (mean reduction from 14.06 to 9.10 at 3 months). A linear regression
model found that the presence of moderate or extreme pain at baseline predicted a poorer outcome of
depression treatment at 3 months (mean difference –1.72, 95% CI –2.64 to –0.80; p < 0.001) when
controlling for baseline depression scores. An ANCOVA model controlling for significant predictors and
baseline PHQ-9 score revealed that the effect of pain group remained significant, with patients with baseline
pain having poorer depression outcomes (mean difference –1.16, 95% CI –2.2 to –0.12; p = 0.028).
Regarding PHQ-9 depression scores by pain group and by trial arm at baseline and all follow-up time points,
relevant data are shown in Figure 28. Controlling for baseline depression and covariates, an ANCOVA model
including a pain group–treatment interaction term showed that, in the pain group, participants showed a
larger reduction in depression with acupuncture at 3 months (mean reduction in PHQ-9 score from baseline
6.0, 95% CI 5.07 to 7.11), with smaller reductions associated with counselling (mean reduction 4.3, 95% CI
3.3 to 5.4) and usual care (mean reduction 2.7, 95% CI 1.50 to 4.06). In comparison, no notable differences
were seen between treatment arms within the no-pain comparator group.
Using the SF-36 bodily pain score at 3 months’ follow-up as the end point, and controlling for baseline
SF-36 bodily pain and baseline PHQ-9 depression scores, the results of the ANCOVA show that the pain
group continued to experience significantly worse pain after treatment for depression compared with the
no-pain comparator group (mean difference 14.57, 95% CI 9.73 to 19.40). There was also a significant
interaction between pain group and treatment arm (F2,1 = 3.3; p = 0.036), with pain group patients who
received acupuncture for depression experiencing a greater reduction in SF-36 bodily pain (represented by
an increase in scores) between baseline and 3 months’ follow-up (mean reduction 11.2, 95% CI 7.1 to
15.2) than those who received counselling (mean reduction 7.6, 95% CI 3.6 to 11.6) or usual care (mean
reduction 7.2, 95% CI 2.3 to 12.1). The reduction in pain at 3 months persisted through to the 12-month
follow-up point (Figure 29); however, the median score in the pain group after 12 months (median 41,
interquartile range 1 = 31, interquartile range 3 = 62) remained below the trial baseline median score of
52 on the SF-36 bodily pain scale. Further details of the results have been published separately.321
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
134
 Acupuncture
Counselling
Usual care
14
Mean PHQ-9 score
12
10
8
6
Baseline
3 months
6 months
Time point
9 months
12 months
16
18
(a)
20
Acupuncture
Counselling
Usual care
14
Mean PHQ-9 score
12
10
8
6
Baseline
3 months
6 months
Time point
9 months
12 months
16
18
20
(b)
FIGURE 28 Mean PHQ-9 scores by treatment, comparing the pain and no-pain groups: (a) patients with moderate
to extreme pain at baseline (n = 384); and (b) patients pain free at baseline (n = 371).
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
135
 Results for substudy 3: approaches that practitioners used to enhance
longer-term benefits
Forty-one therapists consented to be involved in the study but five therapists later withdrew or did not
respond when the fieldwork was being set up. The substudy included individual telephone interviews with
15 counsellors and 13 acupuncturists (n = 28), and one focus group with four counsellors and four
acupuncturists (n = 8) (see Appendix 6). The sample for the qualitative substudy included over half (56%)
of the total number of therapists involved in the main trial. The 17 acupuncturists were predominantly
30
40
50
60
Mean SF-36 bodily pain score (100 = no pain)
70
80
90
(a)
Baseline
3 months
6 months
Time point
9 months
12 months
100
Acupuncture
Counselling
Usual care
Mean SF-36 bodily pain score (100 = no pain)
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
(b)
Baseline
3 months
6 months
Time point
9 months
12 months
Acupuncture
Counselling
Usual care
FIGURE 29 Mean SF-36 bodily pain scores by treatment over the course of the trial, comparing the pain and no-pain
groups: (a) patients with moderate to extreme pain at baseline (n = 384); and (b) patients pain free at baseline (n = 371).
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
136
 male (39% were female), with an average duration of practice of 12 years. In the trial they treated on
average nine patients, who attended on average for 10 sessions. The 19 counsellors were predominantly
female practitioners (79%), with an average duration of practice of 7 years. In the trial they treated on
average seven patients, who attended on average for nine sessions.
A cluster of eight themes emerged from the framework analysis. Almost all of the acupuncturists and
counsellors stressed the importance that they attached to promoting longer-term benefits.
1. Importance of a long-term focus. Almost all of the practitioners mentioned the long-term perspective as
inherent to the way they worked. For longer-term impact, both acupuncturists and counsellors
encouraged insight into root causes of depression on an individual basis and saw small incremental
changes as precursors to sustained benefit.
2. Identifying root causes. The commitment to identifying and addressing the root causes of depression
within the treatment process was a commonly expressed factor among both acupuncturists and
counsellors. Acupuncturists commonly used the theoretical concept of ‘root’ (ben) and ‘branch’ (biao).
The counsellors were more interested in ‘going deeper’ and ‘further back (in time)’ with their clients as
a way of getting to the root causes.
3. Individualisation. When practised within the theoretical framework of traditional Chinese medicine,
acupuncture treatment has been customised to the individual, such that treatment varies not only
between patients but also, for the same patient, over time. Likewise for the counsellors in the trial, all
of whom were committed to working within the humanistic tradition, a person-centred approach
was provided.
4. Valuing incremental change. Practitioners reported that they did not expect change to happen all at
once. Rather than seeking cathartic experiences, ideally improvement in symptoms would develop
slowly with small incremental changes.
5. Addressing concurrent physical symptoms. Acupuncturists generally stressed the importance of
addressing concurrent physical symptoms, for example helping patients relax or sleep better to be more
receptive to change. Counsellors were less focused on the physical symptoms and worked more on the
assumption that by treating the underlying causes of depression there should be a knock-on effect in
terms of reducing physical symptoms.
6. Lifestyle changes. Acupuncturists tended to highlight the importance of giving advice about lifestyle
change that was relevant to the Chinese medicine perspective. By contrast, the counsellors had a more
non-directive style, consistent with the humanistic tradition.
7. Therapeutic relationship. More often than the acupuncturists, the counsellors stressed the importance
of the therapeutic relationship as a facilitator of change.
8. Careful ‘pacing’ based on ‘readiness to change’. Many of the counsellors also emphasised the need for
careful ‘pacing’ such that the processes and tools that they employed were tailored and timed for each
individual, depending on the ‘readiness’ to change. A number of acupuncturists reflected on the best
way of sustaining benefit over the longer term, suggesting that ideally appointments should be spread
out towards the end of the course of treatment and beyond.
The above themes capture both similarities and differences in approaches between acupuncture and
counselling, with most practitioners of both interventions having a shared sense of the prerequisites for
sustained long-term benefit. The impression formed from the interviews is that the various approaches do
not operate in isolation. The themes appear to be integrated into a coherent combination that uniquely
informs the practice of each practitioner, although the emphasis may vary. A full report of the results has
been published separately.324
Results for substudy 4: cost-effectiveness analysis
At 3 months patients treated with acupuncture or counselling were less likely than patients treated with
usual care to report that they were moderately or extremely anxious or depressed rather than not anxious
or depressed (Table 39). The 3-month improvement in anxiety and depression was sustained over the trial
period to 12 months. Combining the EQ-5D dimension results with the UK population health state
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
137
 preferences resulted in the HRQoL scores over time and by treatment presented in Figure 30. For all
treatment arms HRQoL increased between baseline and 3 months, with the acupuncture and counselling
arms having a higher HRQoL than usual care and remaining higher at 12 months. QALYs were estimated
to be 0.604, 0.663 and 0.666 for the usual care, acupuncture and counselling arms, respectively, using
imputed data and seemingly unrelated regression and controlling for baseline HRQoL.
Mean NHS resource use is reported in Table 40. Total costs and depression-related costs are reported in
Table 41. Patients reported the amount spent on out-of-pocket acupuncture, counselling or usual care.
Patients in the acupuncture arm reported spending a mean of £32 (SD £93) on acupuncture, whereas those
in the counselling and usual care arms reported spending £7 (SD £41) and £6 (SD £57), respectively. Patients
in the counselling arm reported spending a mean of £42 (SD £173) on counselling, whereas those in the
acupuncture and usual care arms reported spending £6 (SD £42) and £5 (SD £32), respectively. Patients
spent on average £2 (SD £33), £15 (SD £87) and £3 (SD £23) on psychotherapy in the acupuncture,
counselling and usual care arms, respectively. The mean number of days off work over 12 months was
TABLE 39 EuroQoL-5 Dimensions data: the proportional odds of being at level 2 or 3 compared with level 1a –
comparing acupuncture or counselling with usual care
EQ-5D dimension
At 3 monthsb
Over 12 monthsb
Acupuncture OR
(95% CI)
Counselling OR
(95% CI)
Acupuncture OR
(95% CI)
Counselling OR
(95% CI)
Anxiety and depression
0.63 (0.40 to 0.98)
0.66 (0.42 to 1.02)
0.40 (0.23 to 0.70)
0.40 (0.23 to 0.70)
Pain
0.77 (0.48 to 1.23)
0.96 (0.60 to 1.53)
0.87 (0.49 to 1.54)
0.88 (0.5 to 1.55)
Usual activities
1.14 (0.48 to 2.71)
1.05 (0.44 to 2.54)
0.57 (0.34 to 0.95)
0.72 (0.43 to 1.21)
Self-care
0.81 (0.52 to 1.27)
0.85 (0.54 to 1.33)
0.40 (0.15 to 1.09)
0.58 (0.22 to 1.53)
Mobility
1.29 (0.64 to 2.61)
1.19 (0.59 to 2.41)
0.89 (0.41 to 1.94)
0.74 (0.35 to 1.59)
OR, odds ratio.
a Levels 1–3 represent low, moderate and high disability, respectively.
b ORs of < 1 indicate that the treatment was correlated with fewer patients reporting being in the more severe health
states compared with patients in the usual care arm (i.e. the odds ratio of 0.63 in column 2 suggests that patients in the
acupuncture arm were less likely to report being moderately or extremely anxious or depressed than patients in the usual
care arm at 3 months). ORs of > 1 suggest that the treatment is correlated with more patients reporting being in the
more severe health states compared with patients in the usual care arm.
0.75
0.70
0.65
HRQoL score
0.60
0.55
0.50
Baseline
3 months
6 months
9 months
12 months
Usual care
Acupuncture
Counselling
FIGURE 30 Health-related quality-of-life scores over time and by treatment.
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
138
 TABLE 40 Complete case and imputed resource use over 12 months
Resource
Intervention
Usual care
Acupuncture
Counselling
n
Complete case
mean (95% CI)
Imputed mean
(95% CI)
n
Complete case
mean (95% CI)
Imputed mean
(95% CI)
n
Complete case
mean (95% CI)
Imputed mean
(95% CI)
GP
69
6.48 (5.16 to 7.80)
6.56 (5.37 to 7.75)
145
5.57 (4.78 to 6.37)
5.66 (4.88 to 6.43)
127
4.94 (4.19 to 5.7)
5.06 (4.38 to 5.73)
Practice nurse
60
1.40 (0.86 to 1.94)
1.53 (1.05 to 2.02)
140
1.16 (0.84 to 1.48)
1.25 (0.95 to 1.54)
127
1.25 (0.95 to 1.55)
1.36 (1.05 to 1.66)
Other health
professional
54
1.39 (0.74 to 2.04)
1.76 (0.93 to 2.6)
133
1.24 (0.7 to 1.79)
1.37 (0.85 to 1.89)
116
1.4 (0.78 to 2.01)
1.54 (1 to 2.07)
NHS hospital
outpatient clinic
82
1.55 (0.99 to 2.1)
2.01 (1.19 to 2.83)
175
1.4 (0.95 to 1.85)
1.52 (1.05 to 1.98)
151
1.69 (1.17 to 2.21)
1.87 (1.35 to 2.39)
Hospital ward
79
0.29 (–0.01 to 0.60)
0.32 (0.04 to 0.6)
166
0.15 (0.02 to 0.28)
0.21 (0.05 to 0.38)
138
0.27 (0.06 to 0.47)
0.35 (0.12 to 0.59)
Hospital ICU
76
–
0 (0 to 0)
160
0.04 (–0.04 to 0.11)
0.03 (–0.03 to 0.1)
136
–
0 (0 to 0)
Hospital mental health
unit
76
0.53 (–0.48 to 1.53)
0.48 (–0.34 to 1.3)
160
0.04 (–0.04 to 0.13)
0.12 (–0.18 to 0.43)
134
–
0.42 (–0.13 to 0.97)
Other hospital unit
75
0.01 (–0.01 to 0.04)
0.02 (–0.02 to 0.07)
152
0.05 (–0.04 to 0.14)
0.04 (–0.02 to 0.09)
132
0.05 (0 to 0.11)
0.04 (0 to 0.08)
Accident and
emergency
84
0.37 (0.17 to 0.57)
0.4 (0.15 to 0.64)
191
0.21 (0.13 to 0.29)
0.25 (0.13 to 0.37)
157
0.35 (0.11 to 0.59)
0.35 (0.16 to 0.53)
Community mental
health nurse
74
0.43 (–0.04 to 0.91)
0.42 (0.04 to 0.79)
164
0.15 (0.02 to 0.29)
0.2 (0.04 to 0.37)
145
0.1 (–0.02 to 0.23)
0.18 (0.01 to 0.35)
Psychologist or
psychiatrist
72
0.75 (0.04 to 1.46)
0.73 (0.16 to 1.3)
164
0.21 (0.08 to 0.34)
0.31 (0.09 to 0.54)
135
0.35 (0.09 to 0.61)
0.55 (0.22 to 0.88)
NHS counsellor not
involved in the study
68
0.34 (0.07 to 0.60)
0.38 (0.07 to 0.68)
161
0.29 (0.08 to 0.49)
0.28 (0.11 to 0.45)
142
0.17 (0.02 to 0.32)
0.23 (0.06 to 0.4)
ICU, intensive care unit.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
139
 TABLE 41 Complete case and imputed costs over 12 months
Resource
Intervention
Usual care
Acupuncture
Counselling
n
Complete case
mean (95% CI)
Imputed mean
(95% CI)
n
Complete case
mean (95% CI)
Imputed mean
(95% CI)
n
Complete case
mean (95% CI)
Imputed mean
(95% CI)
Total costs (£)
22
621 (365 to 877)
958 (739 to 1180)
69
1110 (930 to 1291)
1227 (1103 to 1350)
59
1355 (1082 to 1627)
1450 (1305 to 1592)
Depression-related
costs (£)
18
226 (92 to 360)
496 (288 to 704)
54
769 (644 to 894)
913 (764 to 1061)
48
962 (759 to 1166)
1006 (761 to 1251)
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
140
 similar across arms: 238 (SD 115), 240 (SD 112) and 231 (SD 113) for the acupuncture, counselling and
usual care arms, respectively.
When comparing acupuncture, counselling and usual care, acupuncture was found to be the cost-effective
alternative with an ICER of £4560 per additional QALY compared with usual care alone, with probabilities
of being cost-effective of 0.68, 0.62 and 0.56 at thresholds of £13,000, £20,000 and £30,000 per QALY,
respectively (Table 42). Counselling resulted in higher costs and benefits than acupuncture, with an ICER of
£71,757 per additional QALY compared with acupuncture.
In a scenario analysis which assumed that each session of acupuncture was the same price as each session of
counselling (£65), counselling had higher QALYs and lower costs than acupuncture, that is, acupuncture was
dominated (Table 43). Restricting the analysis to the complete case data resulted in an ICER for acupuncture
of £10,979 per QALY and counselling having higher costs and lower QALYs than acupuncture. For patients
in whom acupuncture is inappropriate or unavailable, the incremental cost-effectiveness of counselling
compared with usual care was £7935 per additional QALY.
TABLE 42 Incremental cost-effectiveness of usual care, acupuncture and counselling
Treatment
QALYs
Total
costs (£)
ICER
(£ per QALY)
Probability of cost-effectiveness
Threshold
£13,000 per QALY
Threshold
£20,000 per QALY
Threshold
£30,000 per QALY
Usual care
0.604
958
–
0.07
0.03
0.02
Acupuncture
0.663
1227
4560
0.68
0.62
0.56
Counselling
0.666
1450
71,757
0.26
0.36
0.42
TABLE 43 Incremental cost-effectiveness scenario analyses
Scenario
analysis
QALYsa
Total
costs (£)
ICER
(£ per QALY)
Probability of cost-effectiveness
Threshold
£13,000 per QALY
Threshold
£20,000 per QALY
Threshold
£30,000 per QALY
1. Assuming acupuncture has the same cost as counselling (£65)
Usual care
0.558
524
–
0.15
0.06
0.03
Counselling
0.620
1050
8497
0.50
0.55
0.56
Acupuncture
0.617
1073
Dominated
0.35
0.39
0.42
2. Using depression-related costs
Usual care
0.601
513
–
0.08
0.03
0.02
Acupuncture
0.659
853
5819
0.61
0.58
0.54
Counselling
0.663
1025
50,612
0.32
0.39
0.44
3. Complete case analysis
Usual care
0.638
648
–
0.43
0.29
0.20
Acupuncture
0.682
1121
10,979
0.57
0.70
0.79
Counselling
0.643
1378
Dominated
0.01
0.01
0.01
4. Population for whom acupuncture is not appropriate
Usual care
0.604
958
–
0.21
0.09
0.05
Counselling
0.666
1450
7935
0.79
0.91
0.95
a Some of the differences between these results and the base-case results (see Table 42) are because of the probabilistic
nature of the calculations.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
141
 Discussion
Principal findings
For patients continuing to experience depression in primary care, we found statistically significant benefits
at 3 months associated with both acupuncture and counselling interventions when provided as adjuncts
to usual care. Prior to recruitment to the trial, these patients experienced recurring bouts of depression
(76% having had four or more episodes), with the first episode on average occurring at age 25 years,
some 19 years previously, and 69% were on antidepressant medication. We also found statistically
significant benefits for patients over the 12-month period as a whole in an AUC analysis. At 12 months
the benefits of acupuncture and counselling were no longer significantly better than those of usual care
for our primary outcome measure, the PHQ-9, but statistically significant differences remained when
depression was measured by the BDI-II. No serious adverse events related to treatment were reported.
Strengths and limitations
This study design of a pragmatic RCT had a clear and practical research question with an appropriate trial
design to model closely what would happen if patient referrals to acupuncturists and counsellors were
routine. With an emphasis on external validity, our pragmatic trial was designed to have findings that are
generalisable to typical patients and settings. We recruited patients in primary care from among those who
had consulted with depression and who continued to be depressed, thereby excluding patients whose
symptoms had been alleviated sufficiently by other treatment.
The attrition of patient-reported data between randomisation at baseline and the follow-up time-points was
typical of trials that recruit through primary care databases. We used multiple imputation to compensate in
part for the limitations related to the loss of follow-up data. Our design controlled for temporal effects,
such as the natural history of depression, and other factors across all patients that might have influenced
outcomes beyond the treatment itself through the randomisation into groups. The standardised treatment
protocols for the acupuncturists and counsellors were designed to reflect routine practice, allowing
individualisation to match patient variability while ensuring that all practitioners met appropriate standards
of qualification and experience. No attempt was made to standardise usual care; however, we were careful
to document the usual care that was provided to patients in all arms of the trial. The majority of patients
continued with antidepressants and differences between groups in usual care at all time points were
minimal (see Appendix 6). For this reason we can assume that the differences in outcomes between arms
can largely be ascribed to the treatments provided by the acupuncturists and the counsellors.
Our study was not designed to determine which aspects of the interventions might be most or least
beneficial. In contrast to pragmatic trials, explanatory trials are designed to separate out the relative
contributions of specific or non-specific components of treatment. Nevertheless, we took into account in
our regression model the expectations and preferences reported by all patients in the trial, components
that are often considered non-specific effects. Moreover, for two treatment-related components in the
acupuncture and counselling groups of our trial that are often considered ‘non-specific’, namely session
time and quality of therapist attention, we found that specific treatment effects remained when these
were accounted for. Despite the limitation that a pragmatic approach has in ascribing outcomes to
different treatment components, a pragmatic trial design provides a useful estimate of the overall effect,
an estimate of most interest to patients, practitioners and providers.
Relationship to the literature
In a recent Cochrane review of acupuncture for depression,310 no studies focused on the BDI-II-related
categories of moderate to severe depression, unlike patients in our trial who, for eligibility, had to have a score
of ≥ 20 on the BDI-II. Moreover, only two trials in the Cochrane review, by the same research team, used a
usual care comparator, which was based on a wait list.333,334 A meta-analysis of these two trials involving 94
patients showed a reduction in the SMD of –0.73 (95% CI –1.18 to –0.29).310 This is a larger effect size than
we found (we found a point estimate of –0.39); however, we need to be cautious in the interpretation of the
result, as the patients in these studies were less depressed and the patient numbers were small.
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
142
 From a Cochrane review of counselling for mental health and psychosocial problems in primary care,312
there is evidence from six trials of counselling for mild to moderate depression including 772 patients that
counselling is more effective than usual care in terms of mental health outcomes over 1–6 months (SMD
–0.28, 95% CI –0.43 to –0.13). These advantages were not shown to endure over the longer term from
7 to 12 months (SMD –0.09, 95% CI –0.27 to 0.10). Their number needed to treat for short-term benefit
was six, somewhat less than the 10 we found for moderate to severely depressed patients. We found
no counselling trial equivalent to the one that we report here, namely one based in primary care that
evaluated counselling for moderate to severe depression. In a review of psychological interventions for
depression, four cognitive–behavioural therapy studies based in primary care covering 259 patients found
a similar short-term effect (SMD –0.33, 95% CI –0.60 to –0.06).335
In this report we present the first evidence on acupuncture and counselling for patients in primary care
who are representative of those continuing to experience symptoms of moderate to severe depression.
At 3 months, which is approximately at the end of the course of 12 treatment sessions, both acupuncture
and counselling were shown to be effective treatments compared with usual care alone. There was also
evidence that there are benefits over the 12-month period in terms of clinical symptoms.
Implications for clinical practice
To interpret the results for clinical practice, we found that 33% of acupuncture patients, 29% of counselling
patients and 18% of usual care patients achieved a successful treatment outcome when this is defined as
improvement from a depressed PHQ-9 score (≥ 10) to a non-depressed score (≤ 9), with an improvement
of at least 50%.336 These percentages apply to the total number of patients with a baseline PHQ-9 score of
≥ 10 and for whom data were available at 3 months. The number needed to treat is also a useful way to
interpret results. We found that for one additional treatment success, as defined above, the number needed
to treat was 7 for acupuncture (95% CI 4.3 to 17.4) and 10 for counselling (95% CI 5.3 to 47.3). A further
illustration of the impact on patient experience can be provided in terms of ‘depression-free days’,322 which is
a summary measure derived from PHQ-9 cut-off scores averaged over the period between measurements.
The mean number of depression-free days over 3 months was 34 (95% CI 31 to 38) for the acupuncture
group, 27 (95% CI 24 to 30) for the counselling group and 23 (95% CI 19 to 27) for the usual care group.
We used the BDI-II as a screening tool, with patients having to score ≥ 20 for eligibility, a score that is
classified by this measure as moderate or severe depression. Other classification systems, such as the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [see www.psychiatry.org/psychiatrists/practice/dsm
(accessed 13 October 2016)], have different categories of severity. Our trial did not determine whether
acupuncture or counselling performed better or worse for the more mild forms of depression. Our trial also
did not determine whether or not patients not receiving antidepressant medication (one-third of our
sample) do better or whether fewer sessions would be sufficient for mild to moderate depression or more
sessions would improve outcomes for those with severe depression (approximately 60% of our sample).
It is not clear from our trial whether or not there was any impact on outcomes because, for those allocated
to acupuncture, it was usually their first experience of this intervention, whereas for many randomised to
counselling, it was an intervention they had received before.
Discussion for substudy 1: experience of treatment from the patient perspective
Patients commonly reported that their acupuncturists appeared to have a more physical perspective on
treatment, with a focus on directly relieving the symptoms of depression as well as concurrent physical
symptoms. This was particularly welcomed by patients who reported comorbid pain at baseline, who
appreciated having their physical symptoms treated alongside their depression. In conjunction with the
acupuncture sessions, the acupuncturists often helped patients engage in health behaviours that had a
positive influence on long-term change. In contrast, patients typically reported that their counsellors helped
them identify and confront underlying causes of depression and then helped them find their own way
forward. For both treatment modalities, most participants reported that the establishment of a therapeutic
relationship and their active engagement as patients helped them develop coping strategies, which in turn
helped them be more effective in reducing their depression in the longer term.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
143
 These qualitative findings are concordant with, and supplement, the quantitative data on depression and
comorbid pain within the trial.321 Notably, the patients with moderate or extreme pain at baseline (as
reported on the EQ-5D) had worse outcomes at 3 months for depression than the no-pain comparator
group in all three treatment arms. Our findings extend the findings of the trial’s quantitative data in two
ways. First, there are identifiable differences in the experiences of depression when comorbid pain is
present. Second, acupuncture appears to involve an approach that more directly addresses physical
symptoms, including the comorbid pain, whereas counselling more directly addresses the underlying
psychological causes of depression, which may or may not be linked to comorbid pain.
Our study has some limitations. Participants may have attributed changes directly to treatment rather than
concurrent, coincidental contextual changes. We accept that there is a possibility of recall bias as it has long
been known that there is a significant, stable association between depression and memory impairment,337
which may have altered what was recalled and how it was recalled. The lack of face-to-face contact during
the telephone interviews prevented the interviewer gathering non-verbal contextual information, such as
social cues, body language, appearance and setting, to supplement the verbal answers of the interviewees.
A full report of the discussion related to this substudy has been published separately.320
Discussion for substudy 2: impact of comorbid pain on depression outcomes
Participants with moderate to extreme pain at baseline had worse outcomes for depression than the
no-pain comparator group in all three treatment arms after controlling for baseline depression. Participants
in the pain group had greater reductions in depression symptoms with acupuncture from baseline to
12 months than those who received counselling or usual care, whereas those who were pain free did
relatively well whichever group they were assigned to. Participants in the pain group receiving acupuncture
found that their pain reduced markedly in the first 3–6 months compared with those in the other two
groups, but by the end of the 12-month trial these differences disappeared. It should be noted that this
study, as a substudy of a larger trial, was not powered to detect differences between the subgroups with
moderate to extreme pain and no pain.
The estimated prevalence of moderate to extreme pain within our study population of depressed patients
was 51%, which is comparable to the 50% identified in previous literature.92 Evidence from an English
longitudinal study of ageing identified pain and mobility disability at baseline as predictors of comorbid pain
and depression.338 In a large European study, a higher number of pain locations, pain of the joints and longer
duration of pain (for ≥ 90 days), daily use of pain medication and more severe pain at baseline were found
to be associated with a significantly increased risk of still having a depressive or anxiety disorder after
2 years.338 Together, these factors are known to adversely affect the outcomes of treatment for depression.338
Consistent with previous research, the majority of painful complaints within the study sample were of
musculoskeletal origin and accompanied by poor mobility and a loss of energy. Pain from osteoarthritis is
known to determine subsequent depressed mood through its effect on fatigue and disability.339
That patients reported reduced pain following acupuncture is not surprising given that 32% of patients
had chronic musculoskeletal pain and acupuncturists within the trial were encouraged to work how they
normally would, incorporating treatment for pain alongside treatment for the symptoms of depression.
Moreover, there is a growing body of evidence supporting the efficacy of acupuncture for chronic pain.196
Patients who received counselling reported a more gradual reduction in pain over the 12-month follow-up
period. This finding is consistent with a Cochrane review340 which reports that psychological therapies,
primarily cognitive–behavioural therapy, can help people with chronic pain reduce negative mood
(depression and anxiety), disability and, to a lesser degree, pain over a 6-month period.
Frequently patients with comorbid pain and depression will attribute their condition to one or other of these
two symptoms and seek help accordingly.341 For treatment success, our trial provides some evidence that both
pain and depression should be both recognised and treated from the outset. Overall, the evidence emerging
in the current study is that both acupuncture and counselling appear to have the potential to reduce
symptoms associated with pain and depression when treated concurrently, with the potential to relieve
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
144
 symptoms of depression and reduce the intensity of pain in both the short and the longer term. Further
discussion related to this substudy can found elsewhere.321
Discussion for substudy 3: approaches that practitioners used to enhance
longer-term benefits
Encouraging longer-term change was integral to the work of both acupuncturists and counsellors.
Although both types of practitioners reported on the need to address the root causes, the approach
differed. For the acupuncturists there was a focus drawn from Chinese medicine theory on treating the
root cause as well as the manifesting symptoms, with the precise details of the intervention customised to
their patients at an individual level. By contrast, the approach of the counsellors was to get below the
surface of the clients’ problems and to ‘go deeper’ and ‘further back (in time)’ as a way of getting a
handle on the root cause. For both types of practitioners, this required an individualised approach.
Further differences in approach to facilitating more sustained benefits were noted, in that acupuncturists
were more focused on physical symptoms, on whether or not these could be resolved by acupuncture to
speed up the improvements in the symptoms of depression and on providing lifestyle advice linked to the
Chinese medicine diagnosis. Meanwhile, counsellors were more explicit about the importance of a strong
therapeutic relationship accompanied by a careful consideration of what might be a manageable pace
of change.
The methods used in this substudy, involving interviews and focus groups with verbatim transcripts and
thematic analysis, were consistent with many of the markers of quality in qualitative research.342 By
involving an independent research team, we have helped establish the credibility and dependability of the
results. With regard to the transferability of the results, we have provided details of the practitioners as
well as the patients who were the focus of this substudy, such that readers can draw conclusions
regarding relevance for other areas. In terms of limitations, our data are limited to patients receiving
acupuncture as practised by those using the theories of traditional Chinese medicine and to clients
receiving counselling as provided in the humanistic and non-directive and person-centred style.
Within the wider literature there is a dearth of evidence on the acupuncture treatment factors that might
be associated with longer-term change in the symptoms of depression. The findings from a small study
involving interviews with six practitioners in a trial of acupuncture for back pain found that these
acupuncturists had a goal of a positive long-term outcome and developed a therapeutic partnership to
support the active engagement of patients in their own recovery.343 Consistent with some of the findings
we report here, the authors reported that the key elements were establishing a rapport, using an interactive
diagnostic process, matching treatment to the patient and using explanatory models from Chinese medicine
to aid a shared understanding and motivate lifestyle changes to reinforce the potential recovery.343
There is also limited evidence in the counselling literature from qualitative studies on the factors that
improve the long-term effects of counselling. One report contains client interview data drawn from
15 clients who had received counselling from between 1 and 3 years previously.344 The authors’
interpretation of the interview data led them to describe a model of the change process and mechanisms
that were perceived as essential to produce a lasting benefit. They identified as key elements of the
counselling process the active engagement of the client during and between sessions, and the acquisition
of a ‘box of skills’ to be built on further after the counselling was finished.344 A full report of the discussion
related to this substudy has been published separately.324
Discussion for substudy 4: cost-effectiveness analysis
This economic analysis demonstrated that the HRQoL results are consistent with the clinical results. The
cost-effectiveness results, taking into account the uncertainty in the estimates, suggest that acupuncture is
the cost-effective option. In the base-case analysis, acupuncture had an ICER of £4560 per additional QALY
and was cost-effective with a probability of 0.62 at a cost-effectiveness threshold of £20,000 per QALY.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
145
 Currently, acupuncture for depression is not provided by the NHS. To understand the cost-effectiveness of
counselling in a population for whom acupuncture is not appropriate (e.g. those who are needle phobic),
a scenario analysis of counselling compared with usual care, excluding acupuncture as a comparator, was
undertaken. In this population counselling had an estimated ICER of £7935 and a 0.91 probability of being
cost-effective.
It is possible that the regulation of acupuncture may increase the per-session costs. A sensitivity analysis
was undertaken assuming that each acupuncture session costs £65, the same as the cost of counselling. In
this scenario counselling was preferred to acupuncture because not only were the expected benefits higher
but the expected costs were lower. This demonstrates that the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture in this
study is reliant on it having a lower cost than that of counselling.
Recommendations for future research
Further research could usefully identify the optimal populations for acupuncture and counselling. It would
also be useful to explore the impact of different recruitment methods on the characteristics of those
recruited. For example, patients recruited at the point of consultation will be different from those recruited
through databases, as we did in this trial, and different again from those with depression who do not
consult their GP at all. What was important in the trial that we report here was that all patients had
consulted in primary care, all continued to be depressed and all were seeking other interventions that
might reduce their depression. Other recruitment methods could be used, for example to assess whether
the interventions would be more effective for patients at the time of consulting their GP or for patients
who were experiencing their first episode of depression, rather than after many episodes, as was the case
in the present study, in which 76% of participants had four or more previous episodes, or for patients who
have given up consulting in primary care yet continue to be depressed.
Further research into optimal treatment regimens would also be useful. With regard to acupuncture
provision, there is some evidence from the literature that a uniform combination of points can work for
depressed patients.345,346 However, a large-scale head-to-head trial or extensive synthesis in an IPD
meta-analysis would be required to determine if a uniform approach for all acupuncture provision might
be more beneficial than a style of acupuncture in which treatment is individualised for each patient and
with changes over time, as was the case with the trial that we report here.
Although our findings are that both acupuncture and counselling for depression appear to be associated
with longer-term benefits, it would be useful to explore the different ways that the interventions work.
For example, we found that acupuncturists include in their treatment of patients with depression a focus on
physical symptoms, yet it is not clear how important this is for outcomes related to depression. Further
research is needed into the patient perspective on the treatment of depression with comorbidities and
specifically the value that patients place on their comorbid symptoms being addressed concurrently. Further
research is also needed from the perspective of patients on their experiences of treatment from these two
modalities. To assist referral, a clearer understanding is needed of which type of person with depression
would benefit from acupuncture and which from counselling. When taking into account patient preference,
such a typology would provide referring clinicians with valuable guidance on suitability for referral.
Further analyses are needed to explore variations in the time horizon and the related impact on the
cost-effectiveness of acupuncture and counselling. In this trial patients were followed up for 12 months
and our analysis considered only this 12-month time frame, which assumed no differences between
treatment arms beyond 12 months. This is a conservative assumption as there would be no further
intervention costs, but our trial results suggest that a continued difference in treatment outcomes after
12 months is plausible, even though these treatment differences seem to be converging (see Figure 30).
Extrapolating these differences beyond 12 months would result in a lower ICER for acupuncture. Further
evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture and counselling when compared with other physical
and psychological interventions as well as with different levels of usual care will provide a better
understand of how to best allocate scarce health-care resources.
ACUPUNCTURE, COUNSELLING OR USUAL CARE FOR DEPRESSION (ACUDEP): A RANDOMISED CONTROLLED TRIAL
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
146
 Conclusion
In this report we present what is to our knowledge the first study to rigorously evaluate the clinical and
economic impacts of acupuncture and counselling for patients who are representative of those who
continue to experience depression in primary care. Our evidence on acupuncture compared with usual care
and counselling compared with usual care shows that both treatments are associated with a statistically
significant reduction in symptoms of depression in the short to medium term, with no reported serious
adverse events related to treatment. Acupuncture is cost-effective compared with counselling or usual care
alone, although the ranking of counselling and acupuncture depends on the relative costs of delivering
these interventions. For patients in whom acupuncture is unavailable or perhaps inappropriate, counselling
has an ICER that is less than most cost-effectiveness thresholds.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
147
  Chapter 7 Conclusions
I
n this programme of research we have addressed several key questions regarding the evidence base on
acupuncture for chronic pain and depression. Our focus has been on assessing the clinical effectiveness of
acupuncture compared with usual care as well as the efficacy of acupuncture for chronic pain beyond a
placebo. Moreover, we have evaluated acupuncture in terms of cost-effectiveness and value for money. Our
questions have led to a range of different methods, some innovative and some not, all of which have been
appropriate for the questions being considered. For example, among the more innovative methods, for the
first time in acupuncture research we have used an IPD meta-analysis, which has provided more power to
explore treatment effects and to explore subgroup variations. We have used network meta-analyses to
compare acupuncture with other physical therapies for the first time, leading to new evidence on both
clinical impact and cost-effectiveness. We have also used more standard methods, for example in a RCT, in
which acupuncture or counselling were compared with usual care for depression. These studies within the
programme have provided a comprehensive evidence synthesis on acupuncture for a number of chronic
pain conditions (lower back pain and neck pain, osteoarthritis of the knee and headache and migraine), as
well as a substantive trial of acupuncture and counselling for depression in primary care.
In the IPD meta-analysis, we determined the effect size of acupuncture for chronic pain based on direct
evidence, both when acupuncture is compared with sham acupuncture and when it is compared with a
non-acupuncture control. Based on data from 29 of 31 high-quality trials, including a total of 17,922
patients, we found that patients receiving acupuncture had less pain than those receiving sham control
treatment, with effect sizes for the different pain conditions being in the order of 0.2 (p < 0.001). When
comparing acupuncture with non-acupuncture controls, effect sizes were larger for all conditions, with
effect sizes in the order of 0.5 (p < 0.001). The difference between these two comparisons, which is of the
order of 0.3, can be ascribed to ‘placebo’ effects, sham needle-related effects and other context effects.
Given the highly statistically significant effect sizes, these data are relevant to the debate regarding the
proportion that ‘placebo’ effects contribute to the overall effect of acupuncture for chronic pain.
In a network meta-analysis, we addressed the question of how effective physical treatments for osteoarthritis
of the knee are, when compared with each other on an equal basis, for relieving pain. When synthesising
the data from 114 trials involving 22 treatments and 9709 patients, we found that eight interventions
statistically significantly outperformed standard (usual) care, including acupuncture and sham acupuncture.
The intervention with the most higher-quality studies was acupuncture, which was also one of the more
effective physical treatments for alleviating osteoarthritis knee pain in the short term. The caveat for this
study was that much of the evidence on physical therapies was of poor quality, which made it difficult to
draw conclusions on the effectiveness of many of them.
In another network meta-analysis, we used innovative methods to analyse IPD, drawn from the study
discussed above. HRQoL data are required for a cost-effectiveness analysis. To synthesise heterogeneous
outcomes we have made use of standardisation of pain measurements and of published mapping algorithms
to convert and compare HRQoL evidence on to the EQ-5D summary index scale. This enabled us to analyse
HRQoL data across trials in which these data were not collected. Our analysis used the same evidence base
as the IPD pairwise meta-analysis. This included approximately 17,500 patients from 28 trials in which we
compared acupuncture, sham acupuncture and usual care with each other. Standardised pain pooled results
were broadly similar to the ones obtained from the above-mentioned pairwise meta-analysis. The synthesis
of mapped EQ-5D estimates found that acupuncture was effective compared with usual care. However, the
EQ-5D benefit of acupuncture over sham acupuncture was found to be smaller and less certain. When
combined with resource use and cost estimates, these EQ-5D data can be used to generate estimates of
cost-effectiveness. Cost-effectiveness results suggested that acupuncture was cost-effective when compared
with usual care alone, with ICERs ranging from £7000 to £14,000 per QALY across pain types. Because this
was primarily a methods exercise, not all relevant comparators were included and aggregate data beyond
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
149
 the IPD from the 28 trials evaluated were not included. These are, therefore, not robust estimates of
cost-effectiveness and are not an adequate basis for resource allocation decision-making.
To address the question of the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for osteoarthritis of the knee, we
conducted an economic evaluation of non-pharmacological adjunct interventions. We again used network
meta-analysis methods, and IPD when available, this time to synthesise RCT evidence on 17 active
interventions and three control interventions for osteoarthritis of the knee. The network meta-analysis
included 88 eligible studies and 7507 patients. IPD were available for five of the studies including 1329
patients. Data from HRQoL instruments were mapped to EQ-5D preference weights prior to synthesis using
network meta-analysis. We estimated resource use associated with the interventions from trial data, expert
opinion, the literature and information obtained from NHS trust websites. When all trials were included in
the synthesis, TENS was cost-effective at conventional cost-effectiveness threshold values with an ICER of
£2690 per QALY compared with usual care. The effectiveness of TENS may be exaggerated because of
biases associated with poor-quality trials. When the analysis was restricted to trials with adequate
allocation concealment, acupuncture was cost-effective with an ICER of £13,502 per QALY compared with
TENS. The EVPI in this area is relatively high, suggesting that additional research may be cost-effective.
Further analysis is required to identify the most cost-effective and clinically appropriate specification of
further research. Given the likely ‘up-front’ training costs associated with expansion of acupuncture
services in the NHS, investment in further research may need to precede the widespread availability of
acupuncture services.
In a RCT of acupuncture or counselling for patients with depression in primary care, we recruited 755
patients from 27 primary care practices in the north-east of England. This was the largest trial to date
evaluating acupuncture for depression. Allocation was to acupuncture (n = 302), counselling (n = 302) or
usual care alone (n = 151). A mean of 10 sessions was attended for acupuncture and nine sessions for
counselling. We found a statistically significant reduction in mean PHQ-9 depression score at 3 months for
both acupuncture and counselling compared with usual care, which was largely sustained at 12 months.
When controlling for time and attention, we found no significant differences in clinical outcome between
acupuncture and counselling. No serious adverse events were reported that were both unexpected and
related to treatment. Acupuncture and counselling were found to have higher mean QALYs and costs than
usual care. Acupuncture had an ICER of £4560 per additional QALY in the base-case analysis and was
cost-effective with a probability of 0.62 at a cost-effectiveness threshold of £20,000 per QALY.
There are limitations to what we report here for two major reasons. First, in our systematic reviews we
were limited by the available literature. The history of acupuncture research, as with much of the literature
for physical therapies, has been littered with small trials of generally low quality. The higher the risk of
bias, the less certainty we have in drawing conclusions. This programme of research has been possible only
because of the number of high-quality acupuncture trials with large sample sizes conducted in the 2000s.
Moreover, for all physical therapies, including acupuncture, the difficulty in having available a scientifically
acceptable control for non-specific effects means that attempts to delineate the proportion of any effect
that is non-specific are inevitably limited. At least in acupuncture trials for chronic pain, in which the
research question has been related to efficacy rather than effectiveness, the sham needle has been widely
used as a control for ‘placebo’ effects. Remarkably, across all physical therapies for osteoarthritis, there are
more high-quality trials of acupuncture with a sham comparator than of any other physical therapy.
Therefore, the limitations in the existing literature on physical therapies for chronic pain are less in
acupuncture trials, allowing us to draw conclusions with more certainty than for other physical therapies.
The second broad limitation of the programme is that we have not addressed all of the aspects of the
evidence base that continue to be associated with uncertainty. In part, this is because we have yet to
complete a number of substudies that were planned as integral to individual projects. For example, the IPD
meta-analysis had six substudies planned as part of the original mission, yet we have only managed to
report on two at this stage; a further four will be completed and published soon. These are a study of the
time course of acupuncture, a study exploring the relationship between patient characteristics and
CONCLUSIONS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
150
 variations in outcome, a study of practitioner effects and a study to identify whether or not there are
‘super-responders’. We have recently published two substudies related to the acceptability, feasibility and
validity of using text messaging scores of depression,347,348 and there remains a further substudy exploring
the variation in practitioner outcomes that has yet to be published. In part, this is because some of the
much-needed associated research fell outside the scope of the programme at the outset. A case in point
here is the absence of relevant comparators when we evaluated the cost-effectiveness of acupuncture for
musculoskeletal pain and headache and migraine. There are limited data regarding the long-term effects
of many non-pharmacological interventions used to treat osteoarthritis of the knee and sensitivity analyses
suggested that the cost-effectiveness model results may be sensitive to the magnitude of these effects.
The active and control interventions in the trials informing the cost-effectiveness analysis were subject
to heterogeneity in the methods, duration and intensity with which they were administered. Another
example is that, because of our trial design, we did not control for context effects in our depression trial
when comparing acupuncture with usual care, although we did control for time and attention when
comparing acupuncture with counselling. In part, further trials of acupuncture would usefully expand the
generalisability of data on effectiveness, for example with different populations, such as only patients
with mild to moderate depression or only patients on antidepressants. Similarly, different outcomes
could be addressed, for example finding out whether or not acupuncture reduces the relapse rate and
sustains remission. Further research is merited in these areas related to acupuncture for chronic pain
and depression.
The results of this programme of research are important on several counts. First, the data on acupuncture
for chronic pain are particularly relevant as pain is the condition for which acupuncture is most commonly
used. Moreover, chronic pain and depression are known to be areas in which patients and GPs consider
conventional medical treatments have their limitations, whether because of perceived limitations of
routinely prescribed medication or because of concerns regarding side effects and dependency. Second,
we have used robust and rigorous methods throughout the studies to provide a high level of evidence.
Indeed, in the systematic reviews we have purposely sought to identify and synthesise the higher-quality
studies as they are known to be affected less by bias than data drawn from trials with a high risk of bias.
Third, we have asked questions and used methods that have led to the synthesis of trials that between
them have large numbers of participants and, when analysed, these large data sets have provided results
with more precision than would be otherwise possible. Fourth, our results are relevant to important
questions about resource use in a climate of limited funding within the NHS. By comparing acupuncture in
an unbiased way with other ‘competing’ physical or psychological therapies, we are providing the very
evidence on clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness that is of most value to policy-makers and
commissioners. Finally, it is in the interests of patients to have available well-informed results based on
high-quality evidence to make decisions about their health care.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
151
  Acknowledgements
W
e wish to acknowledge Mike Bennett, Richard Blackwell, Peter Bower, Matthew Bowes,
Sally Brabyn, Stephen Brealey, Ann Burton, Ruth Chamberlain, Ben Cross, Ben Elliot, David Geddes,
Christina Giannopoulou, Simon Gilbody, Peter Hall, Pauline Holloway, Victoria Hurtado-Menses,
Kamran Khan, Harriet Lansdown, Hillary Marshall, Peter Morley, Liz Newbronner, Joanne O’Conner,
Karen Overend, Sara Perren, Lucy Revell, Steve Rice, Mark Roman, Micah Rose, Trevor Sheldon,
Eleftherios Sideris, David Smith, Lesley Stewart, Alex Sutton, Val Wadsworth, Kerry Wheeler and
Nerys Woolacott.
Acknowledgement of related funding
The ATC is funded by a R21 (AT004189I) from the National Center for Complementary and Alternative
Medicine at the National Institutes of Health to Andrew Vickers and by a grant from the Samueli Institute.
Andrea Manca’s contribution was made under the terms of a career development research training
fellowship issued by the NIHR (grant CDF-2009–02–21).
Contributions of authors
All authors made a substantial contribution to at least one area within the programme of research.
Hugh MacPherson (Professor of Acupuncture Research) was lead applicant and principal investigator. He
designed the programme of research and was involved in all projects and their presentation in the chapters
of this report.
Andrew Vickers (Statistician) conducted the IPD meta-analysis in Chapter 2 and contributed to the
interpretation of the results in Chapters 4 and 5.
Martin Bland (Professor of Health Statistics) was involved in the conduct of the depression trial in
Chapter 6.
David Torgerson (Professor, Director of the York Trials Unit) had oversight on the conduct of the
depression trial in Chapter 6.
Mark Corbett (Research Fellow, Systematic Reviewer) wrote the first draft of Chapter 3 and contributed to
writing Chapters 1, 5 and 7.
Eldon Spackman (Research Fellow, Health Economist) took the lead in the health economic analysis of
the depression trial presented in Chapter 6.
Pedro Saramago (Research Fellow, Statistician) was the lead analyst for and author of Chapter 4. He
contributed to all aspects of development of the health economic methods, the analysis and the write-up
for Chapters 4 and 5.
Beth Woods (Research Fellow, Health Economist) was the lead analyst and author of Chapter 5. She
contributed to all aspects of development of the health economic methods, the analysis and the write-up
for Chapters 4 and 5.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
153
 Helen Weatherly (Senior Research Fellow) supported and co-ordinated the research for Chapters 4 and 5.
She contributed to all aspects of development of the health economic methods, the analysis and the
write-up for Chapters 4 and 5.
Mark Sculpher (Professor, Health Economist) advised on all aspects of development of the health
economic methods and analysis for Chapters 4 and 5. He was co-investigator of the overall research and
he participated in the design of the study, the methods development and the write-up for Chapters 4
and 5.
Andrea Manca (Professor, Health Economist) advised on all aspects of development of the health
economic methods and analysis for Chapters 4 and 5. He participated in the design of the study,
the methods development and the write-up for Chapters 4 and 5.
Stewart Richmond (Research Fellow) was the trial manager for the depression trial in Chapter 6.
Ann Hopton (Research Fellow) had a management role across the programme of research and was
directly involved in the conduct of the depression trial in Chapter 6.
Janet Eldred (Research Administrator across the programme of research) was directly involved in the
conduct of the depression trial in Chapter 6.
Ian Watt (Professor of Primary Care) was involved in the conduct of the depression trial in Chapter 6,
including the monitoring of adverse events.
Publications
Vickers AJ, Cronin AM, Maschino AC, Lewith G, MacPherson H, Victor N, et al. Individual patient data
meta-analysis of acupuncture for chronic pain: protocol of the Acupuncture Triallists’ Collaboration.
Trials 2010;11:90.
Corbett M, Rice S, Slack R, Harden M, Madurasinghe V, Sutton A, et al. Acupuncture and Other Physical
Treatments for the Relief of Chronic Pain due to Osteoarthritis of the Knee: A Systematic Review and
Network Meta-Analysis. CRD Report 40. York: CRD, University of York; 2011.
MacPherson H, Richmond S, Bland MJ, Lansdown H, Hopton A, Kang’ombe A, et al. Acupuncture,
Counseling, and Usual care for Depression (ACUDep): study protocol for a randomised controlled trial.
Trials 2012;13:209.
Vickers AJ, Cronin AM, Maschino AC, Lewith G, MacPherson H, Foster NE, et al. Acupuncture for chronic
pain: individual patient data meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med 2012;172:1444–53.
Woolacott NF, Corbett MS, Rice SJ. The use and reporting of WOMAC in the assessment of the benefit of
physical therapies for the pain of osteoarthritis of the knee: findings from a systematic review of clinical
trials. Rheumatology 2012;51:1440–6.
Corbett MS, Rice SJC, Madurasinghe V, Slack R, Fayter DA, Harden M, et al. Acupuncture and other
physical treatments for the relief of pain due to osteoarthritis of the knee: network meta-analysis.
Osteoarthr Cartil 2013;2:1290–8.
MacPherson H, Elliot B, Hopton A, Lansdown H, Richmond S. Acupuncture for depression: patterns of
diagnosis and treatment within a randomised controlled trial. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med
2013;2013:286048.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
154
 MacPherson H, Maschino AC, Lewith G, Foster NE, Witt C, Vickers AJ, et al. Characteristics of acupuncture
treatment associated with outcome: an individual patient meta-analysis of 17,922 patients with chronic
pain in randomised controlled trials. PLOS ONE 2013;8:e77438.
MacPherson H, Richmond S, Bland, Brealey S, Gabe R, Hopton A, et al. Acupuncture and counselling for
depression in primary care: a randomised controlled trial. PLOS Med 2013;10:e1001518.
Vickers AJ, Maschino AC, Lewith G, MacPherson H, Sherman KJ, Witt CM; Acupuncture Triallists’
Collaboration. Responses to the Acupuncture Triallists’ Collaboration individual patient data meta-analysis.
Acupunct Med 2013;31:98–100.
Hopton A, Eldred J, MacPherson H. Patients’ experiences of acupuncture and counselling for depression
and comorbid pain: a qualitative study nested within a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open
2014;4:e005144.
Hopton A, MacPherson H, Keding A, Morley S. Acupuncture, counselling or usual care for depression and
comorbid pain: secondary analysis of a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open 2014;4:e004964.
MacPherson H, Newbronner L, Chamberlain R, Richmond SJ, Lansdown H, Perren S, et al. Practitioner
perspectives on strategies to promote longer-term benefits of acupuncture or counselling for depression:
a qualitative study. PLOS ONE 2014;9:e104077.
MacPherson H, Vertosick E, Lewith G, Linde K, Sherman KJ, Witt CM, et al. Acupuncture Triallists’
Collaboration. Influence of control group on effect size in trials of acupuncture for chronic pain:
a secondary analysis of an individual patient data meta-analysis. PLOS ONE 2014;9:e93739.
Spackman E, Richmond S, Sculpher M, Bland M, Brealey S, Gabe R, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis
of acupuncture, counselling and usual care in treating patients with depression: the results of the ACUDep
trial. PLOS ONE 2014;9:e113726.
Keding A, Böhnke JR, Croudace TJ, Richmond SJ, MacPherson H. Validity of single item responses to short
message service texts to monitor depression: an mHealth sub-study of the UK ACUDep trial. BMC Med Res
Methodol 2015;15:56.
Perren S, Richmond S, MacPherson H. The human face of an RCT: reflections on providing counselling for
clients with moderate to severe depression in a randomised controlled trial. Healthcare Couns Psychother J
January 2015, pp. 8–13.
Richmond SJ, Keding A, Hover M, Gabe R, Cross B, Torgerson D, et al. Feasibility, acceptability and validity
of SMS text messaging for measuring change in depression during a randomised controlled trial.
BMC Psychiatry 2015;15:68.
Data sharing statement
All available data can be obtained on request from the corresponding author.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
155
  References
1. Hopton AK, Curnoe S, Kanaan M, Macpherson H. Acupuncture in practice: mapping the
providers, the patients and the settings in a national cross-sectional survey. BMJ Open
2012;2:e000456. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000456
2. Thomas KJ, Nicholl JP, Coleman P. Use and expenditure on complementary medicine in England:
a population based survey. Complement Ther Med 2001;9:2–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1054/
ctim.2000.0407
3. Lipman L, Dale J, MacPherson H. Attitudes of GPs towards the provision of acupuncture on the
NHS. Complement Ther Med 2003;11:110–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0965-2299(03)00042-6
4. Lim JH. Provision of medical acupuncture service in general practice under practice-based
commissioning. Acupunct Med 2010;28:103–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/aim.2010.002287
5. Dale J. Acupuncture practice in the UK. Part 1: report of a survey. Complement Ther Med
1997;5:215–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0965-2299(97)80032-5
6. MacPherson H, Sinclair-Lian N, Thomas K. Patients seeking care from acupuncture practitioners in
the UK: a national survey. Complement Ther Med 2006;14:20–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.ctim.2005.07.006
7. Fisher P, van Haselen R, Hardy K, Berkovitz S, McCarney R. Effectiveness gaps: a new concept for
evaluating health service and research needs applied to complementary and alternative medicine.
J Altern Complement Med 2004;10:627–32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.2004.10.627
8. Robinson N, Lorenc A, Ding W, Jia J, Bovey M, Wang XM. Exploring practice characteristics and
research priorities of practitioners of traditional acupuncture in China and the EU-A survey.
J Ethnopharmacol 2012;140:604–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2012.01.052
9. Fønnebø V, Grimsgaard S, Walach H, Ritenbaugh C, Norheim AJ, MacPherson H, et al.
Researching complementary and alternative treatments – the gatekeepers are not at home.
BMC Med Res Methodol 2007;7:7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-7-7
10. Ernst E, White A. Life-threatening adverse reactions after acupuncture? A systematic review.
Pain 1997;71:123–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(97)03368-X
11. MacPherson H, Thomas K, Walters S, Fitter M. The York acupuncture safety study: prospective
survey of 34 000 treatments by traditional acupuncturists. BMJ 2001;323:486–7. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bmj.323.7311.486
12. White A, Hayhoe S, Hart A, Ernst E. Adverse events following acupuncture: prospective survey of
32 000 consultations with doctors and physiotherapists. BMJ 2001;323:485–6. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bmj.323.7311.485
13. Vincent C. The safety of acupuncture. BMJ 2001;323:467–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.323.7311.467
14. Macpherson H, Scullion A, Thomas KJ, Walters S. Patient reports of adverse events associated with
acupuncture treatment: a prospective national survey. Qual Saf Health Care 2004;13:349–55.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/qshc.2003.009134
15. Hopton AK, Thomas KJ, MacPherson H. Willingness to try acupuncture again: reports from
patients on their treatment reactions in a low back pain trial. Acupunct Med 2010;28:185–8.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/aim.2010.002279
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
157
 16. Melchart D, Weidenhammer W, Streng A, Reitmayr S, Hoppe A, Ernst E, et al. Prospective
investigation of adverse effects of acupuncture in 97 733 patients. Arch Intern Med
2004;164:104–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.164.1.104
17. Witt CM, Pach D, Brinkhaus B, Wruck K, Tag B, Mank S, et al. Safety of acupuncture: results of a
prospective observational study with 229,230 patients and introduction of a medical information
and consent form. Forsch Komplementmed 2009;16:91–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000209315
18. Pomeranz B. Scientific research into acupuncture for the relief of pain. J Altern Complement Med
1996;2:53–60. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.1996.2.53
19. Han JS. Acupuncture: neuropeptide release produced by electrical stimulation of different
frequencies. Trends Neurosci 2003;26:17–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0166-2236(02)00006-1
20. Kim SK, Bae H. Acupuncture and immune modulation. Auton Neurosci 2010;157:38–41.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2010.03.010
21. Cabiog
˘ lu MT, Cetin BE. Acupuncture and immunomodulation. Am J Chin Med 2008;36:25–36.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S0192415X08005552
22. Zhou W, Fu L-W, Tjen-A-Looi SC, Li P, Longhurst JC. Afferent mechanisms underlying stimulation
modality-related modulation of acupuncture-related cardiovascular responses. J Appl Physiol
2005;98:872–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.01079.2004
23. Noguchi E. Acupuncture regulates gut motility and secretion via nerve reflexes. Auton Neurosci
2010;156:15–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2010.06.010
24. Dhond RP, Kettner N, Napadow V. Neuroimaging acupuncture effects in the human brain.
J Altern Complement Med 2007;13:603–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.2007.7040
25. Zhao ZQ. Neural mechanism underlying acupuncture analgesia. Prog Neurobiol 2008;85:355–75.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2008.05.004
26. Li P, Longhurst JC. Neural mechanism of electroacupuncture’s hypotensive effects. Auton
Neurosci 2010;157:24–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2010.03.015
27. Longhurst JC. Defining meridians: a modern basis of understanding. J Acupunct Meridian Stud
2010;3:67–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2005-2901(10)60014-3
28. Kagitani F, Uchida S, Hotta H. Afferent nerve fibers and acupuncture. Auton Neurosci
2010;157:2–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2010.03.004
29. Lewith GT, White PJ, Pariente J. Investigating acupuncture using brain imaging techniques: the
current state of play. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2005;2:315–19. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/ecam/neh110
30. Langevin HM, Yandow JA. Relationship of acupuncture points and meridians to connective tissue
planes. Anat Rec 2002;269:257–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ar.10185
31. Heine H. The morphological basis of the acupuncture points. Acupunct Sci Int J 1990;1:1–6.
32. Langevin HM, Churchill DL, Wu J, Badger GJ, Yandow JA, Fox JR, et al. Evidence of connective
tissue involvement in acupuncture. FASEB J 2002;16:872–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1096/fj.01-0925fje
33. Becker RO, Reichmanis M, Marino AA. Electrophysiological correlates of acupuncture points and
meridians. Psychoenerg Syst 1976;1:105–12.
34. Ahn AC, Martinsen OG. Electrical characterization of acupuncture points: technical issues and
challenges. J Altern Complement Med 2007;13:817–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.2007.7193
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
158
 35. Colbert AP, Spaulding KP, Ahn AC, Cutro JA. Clinical utility of electrodermal activity at
acupuncture points: a narrative review. Acupunct Med 2011;29:270–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
acupmed-2011-010021
36. Saku K, Mukaino Y, Ying H, Arakawa K. Characteristics of reactive electropermeable points on
the auricles of coronary heart disease patients. Clin Cardiol 1993;16:415–19. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/clc.4960160509
37. Ahn AC, Park M, Shaw JR, McManus CA, Kaptchuk TJ, Langevin HM. Electrical impedance of
acupuncture meridians: the relevance of subcutaneous collagenous bands. PLOS ONE
2010;5:e11907. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0011907
38. Ahn AC, Colbert AP, Anderson BJ, Martinsen OG, Hammerschlag R, Cina S, et al. Electrical
properties of acupuncture points and meridians: a systematic review. Bioelectromagnetics
2008;29:245–56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bem.20403
39. Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain mechanisms: a new theory. Science 1965;150:971–9. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1126/science.150.3699.971
40. Carlsson C. Acupuncture mechanisms for clinically relevant long-term effects – reconsideration
and a hypothesis. Acupunct Med 2002;20:82–99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/aim.20.2-3.82
41. Clement-Jones V, McLoughlin L, Tomlin S, Besser GM, Rees LH, Wen HL. Increased beta-endorphin
but not met-enkephalin levels in human cerebrospinal fluid after acupuncture for recurrent pain.
Lancet 1980;2:946–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(80)92106-6
42. Napadow V, Liu J, Li M, Kettner N, Ryan A, Kwong KK, et al. Somatosensory cortical plasticity
in carpal tunnel syndrome treated by acupuncture. Hum Brain Mapp 2007;28:159–71.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20261
43. Birch S. A review and analysis of placebo treatments, placebo effects, and placebo controls in
trials of medical procedures when sham is not inert. J Altern Complement Med 2006;12:303–10.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.2006.12.303
44. Hróbjartsson A, Gøtzsche PC. Placebo interventions for all clinical conditions. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2010;1:CD003974. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.cd003974.pub3
45. MacPherson H, Vertosick E, Lewith G, Linde K, Sherman KJ, Witt CM, et al. Influence of control
group on effect size in trials of acupuncture for chronic pain: a secondary analysis of an individual
patient data meta-analysis. PLOS ONE 2014;9:e93739. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0093739
46. Hall H. Acupuncture’s claims punctured: not proven effective for pain, not harmless. Pain
2011;152:711–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2011.01.039
47. Ernst E. Acupuncture – a treatment to die for? J R Soc Med 2010;103:384–5. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1258/jrsm.2010.100181
48. Madsen MV, Gøtzsche PC, Hróbjartsson A. Acupuncture treatment for pain: systematic review of
randomised clinical trials with acupuncture, placebo acupuncture, and no acupuncture groups.
BMJ 2009;338:a3115. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a3115
49. Ernst E, Lee MS, Choi TY. Acupuncture: does it alleviate pain and are there serious risks? A review
of reviews. Pain 2011;152:755–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2010.11.004
50. Thorpe KE, Zwarenstein M, Oxman AD, Treweek S, Furberg CD, Altman DG, et al. A pragmatic-
explanatory continuum indicator summary (PRECIS): a tool to help trial designers. J Clin Epidemiol
2009;62:464–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2008.12.011
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
159
 51. Ezzo J, Berman B, Hadhazy VA, Jadad AR, Lao L, Singh BB. Is acupuncture effective for the
treatment of chronic pain? A systematic review. Pain 2000;86:217–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0304-3959(99)00304-8
52. Manheimer E, Linde K, Lao L, Bouter LM, Berman BM. Meta-analysis: acupuncture for
osteoarthritis of the knee. Ann Intern Med 2007;146:868–77. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-
4819-146-12-200706190-00008
53. Kwon YD, Pittler MH, Ernst E. Acupuncture for peripheral joint osteoarthritis: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Rheumatology 2006;45:1331–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
rheumatology/kel207
54. White A, Foster NE, Cummings M, Barlas P. Acupuncture treatment for chronic knee pain:
a systematic review. Rheumatology 2007;46:384–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
rheumatology/kel413
55. Davis MA, Kononowech RW, Rolin SA, Spierings EL. Acupuncture for tension-type headache: a
meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. J Pain 2008;9:667–77. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jpain.2008.03.011
56. Sun Y, Gan TJ. Acupuncture for the management of chronic headache: a systematic review.
Anesth Analg 2008;107:2038–47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1213/ane.0b013e318187c76a
57. Furlan AD, van Tulder M, Cherkin D, Tsukayama H, Lao L, Koes B, et al. Acupuncture and dry-needling
for low back pain: an updated systematic review within the framework of the Cochrane Collaboration.
Spine 2005;30:944–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.brs.0000158941.21571.01
58. Manheimer E, White A, Berman B, Forys K, Ernst E. Meta-analysis: acupuncture for low back pain. Ann
Intern Med 2005;142:651–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-142-8-200504190-00014
59. Ernst E, Lee MS. A trial design that generates only ‘positive’ results. J Postgrad Med
2008;54:214–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.4103/0022-3859.41806
60. Vickers AJ, Rees RW, Zollman CE, McCarney R, Smith CM, Ellis N, et al. Acupuncture for
chronic headache in primary care: large, pragmatic, randomised trial. BMJ 2004;328:744.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.38029.421863.EB
61. Thomas KJ, MacPherson H, Thorpe L, Brazier J, Fitter M, Campbell MJ, et al. Randomised
controlled trial of a short course of traditional acupuncture compared with usual care for
persistent non-specific low back pain. BMJ 2006;333:623–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.38878.907361.7C
62. Wonderling D, Vickers AJ, Grieve R, McCarney R. Cost effectiveness analysis of a randomised trial
of acupuncture for chronic headache in primary care. BMJ 2004;328:747. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bmj.38033.896505.EB
63. Ratcliffe J, Thomas KJ, MacPherson H, Brazier J. A randomised controlled trial of acupuncture care
for persistent low back pain: cost effectiveness analysis. BMJ 2006;333:626. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bmj.38932.806134.7C
64. Linde K, Allais G, Brinkhaus B, Manheimer E, Vickers A, White AR. Acupuncture for tension-type
headache. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009;1:CD007587. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
14651858.cd007587
65. Linde K, Allais G, Brinkhaus B, Manheimer E, Vickers A, White AR. Acupuncture for migraine
prophylaxis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2009;1:CD001218. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
14651858.cd001218.pub2
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
160
 66. Brinkhaus B, Witt CM, Jena S, Linde K, Streng A, Wagenpfeil S, et al. Acupuncture in patients
with chronic low back pain: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:450–7.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.166.4.450
67. Melchart D, Streng A, Hoppe A, Brinkhaus B, Witt C, Wagenpfeil S, et al. Acupuncture in patients
with tension-type headache: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2005;331:376–82. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/bmj.38512.405440.8F
68. Linde K, Streng A, Jürgens S, Hoppe A, Brinkhaus B, Witt C, et al. Acupuncture for patients with
migraine: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2005;293:2118–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jama.293.17.2118
69. Witt C, Brinkhaus B, Jena S, Linde K, Streng A, Wagenpfeil S, et al. Acupuncture in patients with
osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomised trial. Lancet 2005;366:136–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(05)66871-7
70. Scharf HP, Mansmann U, Streitberger K, Witte S, Krämer J, Maier C, et al. Acupuncture and knee
osteoarthritis: a three-armed randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2006;145:12–20. http://dx.doi.org/
10.7326/0003-4819-145-1-200607040-00005
71. Haake M, Müller HH, Schade-Brittinger C, Basler HD, Schäfer H, Maier C, et al. German
Acupuncture Trials (GERAC) for chronic low back pain: randomized, multicenter, blinded,
parallel-group trial with 3 groups. Arch Intern Med 2007;167:1892–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
Archinte.167.17.1892
72. Diener HC, Kronfeld K, Boewing G, Lungenhausen M, Maier C, Molsberger A, et al. Efficacy of
acupuncture for the prophylaxis of migraine: a multicentre randomised controlled clinical trial.
Lancet Neurol 2006;5:310–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70382-9
73. Endres HG, Böwing G, Diener HC, Lange S, Maier C, Molsberger A, et al. Acupuncture for
tension-type headache: a multicentre, sham-controlled, patient-and observer-blinded, randomised
trial. J Headache Pain 2007;8:306–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10194-007-0416-5
74. Witt CM, Jena S, Selim D, Brinkhaus B, Reinhold T, Wruck K, et al. Pragmatic randomized trial
evaluating the clinical and economic effectiveness of acupuncture for chronic low back pain.
Am J Epidemiol 2006;164:487–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwj224
75. Witt CM, Jena S, Brinkhaus B, Liecker B, Wegscheider K, Willich SN. Acupuncture for patients
with chronic neck pain. Pain 2006;125:98–106. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2006.05.013
76. Jena S, Witt CM, Brinkhaus B, Wegscheider K, Willich SN. Acupuncture in patients with
headache. Cephalalgia 2008;28:969–79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2982.2008.01640.x
77. Witt CM, Jena S, Brinkhaus B, Liecker B, Wegscheider K, Willich SN. Acupuncture in patients with
osteoarthritis of the knee or hip: a randomized, controlled trial with an additional nonrandomized
arm. Arthritis Rheum 2006;54:3485–93. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.22154
78. Chalmers I. The Cochrane Collaboration: preparing, maintaining, and disseminating systematic
reviews of the effects of health care. Ann NY Acad Sci 1993;703:156–63. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1993.tb26345.x
79. Stewart LA, Tierney JF. To IPD or not to IPD? Advantages and disadvantages of systematic reviews
using individual patient data. Eval Health Prof 2002;25:76–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0163278702025001006
80. NICE. Headaches: Diagnosis and Management of Headaches in Young People and Adults. NICE
clinical guideline150. London: NICE; 2012. URL: http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG150 (accessed
20 November 2014).
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
161
 81. NICE. Low Back Pain: Early Management of Persistent Non-Specific Low Back Pain. London:
NICE; 2009. pp. 4–25. URL: www.nice.org.uk/cg88 (accessed 20 November 2014).
82. NICE. Osteoarthritis: Care and Management in Adults. NICE clinical guideline 177. London: NICE;
2014. URL: www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/14383/66527/66527.pdf (accessed 9 March 2014).
83. Latimer N. NICE guideline on osteoarthritis: is it fair to acupuncture? Yes. Acupunct Med
2009;27:72–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/aim.2009.000802
84. Cummings M. Why recommend acupuncture for low back pain but not for osteoarthritis?
A commentary on recent NICE guidelines. Acupunct Med 2009;27:128–9. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/aim.2009.001214
85. Caldwell DM, Ades AE, Higgins JP. Simultaneous comparison of multiple treatments: combining
direct and indirect evidence. BMJ 2005;331:897–900. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.331.7521.897
86. Lu G, Ades AE. Combination of direct and indirect evidence in mixed treatment comparisons.
Stat Med 2004;23:3105–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.1875
87. Han JS. Acupuncture and endorphins. Neurosci Lett 2004;361:258–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neulet.2003.12.019
88. Napadow V, Webb JM, Pearson N, Hammerschlag R. Neurobiological correlates of acupuncture:
November 17–18, 2005. J Altern Complement Med 2006;12:931–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
acm.2006.12.931
89. Napadow V, Maeda Y, Audette J, Kettner N. Neuroplasticity in Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. In
Knotkova H, Cruciani RA, Merrick J. Neural Plasticity in Chronic Pain. New York, NY: Nova
Publishers; 2011. pp. 153–84.
90. Barnes PM, Bloom B, Nahin RL. Complementary and alternative medicine use among adults and
children: United States, 2007. Natl Health Stat Report 2008;12:1–23.
91. Xue CC, Zhang AL, Lin V, Myers R, Polus B, Story DF. Acupuncture, chiropractic and osteopathy
use in Australia: a national population survey. BMC Public Health 2008;8:105. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1186/1471-2458-8-105
92. Katona C, Peveler R, Dowrick C, Wessely S, Feinmann C, Gask L, et al. Pain symptoms in
depression: definition and clinical significance. Clin Med 2005;5:390–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.7861/
clinmedicine.5-4-390
93. Mukaino Y, Park J, White A, Ernst E. The effectiveness of acupuncture for depression – a
systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Acupunct Med 2005;23:70–6. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/aim.23.2.70
94. Smith CA, Hay PP. Acupuncture for depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005;2:CD004046.
95. Fava M. Diagnosis and definition of treatment-resistant depression. Biol Psychiatry
2003;53:649–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3223(03)00231-2
96. Gilbody S, Whitty P. Improving the Recognition and Management of Depression in Primary Care.
York: NHS Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York; 2002. URL: www.york.ac.uk/
media/crd/ehc75.pdf (accessed 7 October 2016).
97. Mind. My Choice: A Survey. 2002. URL: www.mind.org.uk/News+policy+and+campaigns/
Press+archive/Mind+launches+campaign+for+more+choice+of+mental+health+services+at+GP
+level.htm (accessed 13 January 2008).
98. Schroer S, Macpherson H. Acupuncture, or non-directive counselling versus usual care for the
treatment of depression: a pilot study. Trials 2009;10:3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1745-6215-10-3
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
162
 99. Colquhoun D, Novella SP. Acupuncture is theatrical placebo. Anesth Analg 2013;116:1360–3.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0b013e31828f2d5e
100. Han JS, Ho YS. Global trends and performances of acupuncture research. Neurosci Biobehav Rev
2011;35:680–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.08.006
101. Breivik H, Collett B, Ventafridda V, Cohen R, Gallacher D. Survey of chronic pain in Europe:
prevalence, impact on daily life, and treatment. Eur J Pain 2006;10:287–333. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.ejpain.2005.06.009
102. Stewart LA, Parmar MK. Meta-analysis of the literature or of individual patient data: is there a
difference? Lancet 1993;341:418–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(93)93004-K
103. Vickers AJ. Statistical reanalysis of four recent randomized trials of acupuncture for pain
using analysis of covariance. Clin J Pain 2004;20:319–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
00002508-200409000-00006
104. Frison L, Pocock SJ. Repeated measures in clinical trials: analysis using mean summary statistics
and its implications for design. Stat Med 1992;11:1685–704. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
sim.4780111304
105. Vickers AJ, Cronin AM, Maschino AC, Lewith G, Macpherson H, Victor N, et al. Individual patient
data meta-analysis of acupuncture for chronic pain: protocol of the Acupuncture Trialists’
Collaboration. Trials 2010;11:90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1745-6215-11-90
106. Moher D, Pham B, Jones A, Cook DJ, Jadad AR, Moher M, et al. Does quality of reports of
randomised trials affect estimates of intervention efficacy reported in meta-analyses? Lancet
1998;352:609–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(98)01085-X
107. Schulz KF, Chalmers I, Hayes RJ, Altman DG. Empirical evidence of bias. Dimensions of
methodological quality associated with estimates of treatment effects in controlled trials. JAMA
1995;273:408–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1995.03520290060030
108. Streitberger K, Kleinhenz J. Introducing a placebo needle into acupuncture research. Lancet
1998;352:364–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(97)10471-8
109. Melchart D, Linde K, Fischer P, Berman B, White A, Vickers A, et al. Acupuncture for idiopathic
headache. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2001;1:CD001218. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
14651858.cd001218
110. Ezzo J, Hadhazy V, Birch S, Lao L, Kaplan G, Hochberg M, et al. Acupuncture for osteoarthritis of
the knee: a systematic review. Arthritis Rheum 2001;44:819–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
1529-0131(200104)44:4<819::AID-ANR138>3.0.CO;2-P
111. Vickers A, Goyal N, Harland R, Rees R. Do certain countries produce only positive results? A
systematic review of controlled trials. Control Clin Trials 1998;19:159–66. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0197-2456(97)00150-5
112. Tang JL, Zhan SY, Ernst E. Review of randomised controlled trials of traditional Chinese medicine.
BMJ 1999;319:160–1. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.319.7203.160
113. Wang G, Mao B, Xiong ZY, Fan T, Chen XD, Wang L, et al. The quality of reporting of randomized
controlled trials of traditional Chinese medicine: a survey of 13 randomly selected journals from
mainland China. Clin Ther 2007;29:1456–67. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clinthera.2007.07.023
114. Wu T, Li Y, Bian Z, Liu G, Moher D. Randomized trials published in some Chinese journals: how
many are randomized? Trials 2009;10:46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1745-6215-10-46
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
163
 115. Bellamy N, Buchanan WW, Goldsmith CH, Campbell J, Stitt LW. Validation study of WOMAC:
a health status instrument for measuring clinically important patient relevant outcomes to
antirheumatic drug therapy in patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. J Rheumatol
1988;15:1833–40.
116. Higgins JP, Thompson SG. Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-analysis. Stat Med
2002;21:1539–58. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.1186
117. Kerr DP, Walsh DM, Baxter D. Acupuncture in the management of chronic low back pain:
a blinded randomized controlled trial. Clin J Pain 2003;19:364–70. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
00002508-200311000-00004
118. Irnich D, Behrens N, Molzen H, König A, Gleditsch J, Krauss M, et al. Randomised trial of
acupuncture compared with conventional massage and ‘sham’ laser acupuncture for treatment of
chronic neck pain. BMJ 2001;322:1574–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.322.7302.1574
119. Carlsson CP, Sjölund BH. Acupuncture for chronic low back pain: a randomized placebo-controlled
study with long-term follow-up. Clin J Pain 2001;17:296–305. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
00002508-200112000-00003
120. Vas J, Méndez C, Perea-Milla E, Vega E, Panadero MD, León JM, et al. Acupuncture as a
complementary therapy to the pharmacological treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee:
randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2004;329:1216. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.38238.601447.3A
121. Vas J, Perea-Milla E, Méndez C, Sánchez Navarro C, León Rubio JM, Brioso M, et al. Efficacy and
safety of acupuncture for chronic uncomplicated neck pain: a randomised controlled study. Pain
2006;126:245–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2006.07.002
122. Vas J, Ortega C, Olmo V, Perez-Fernandez F, Hernandez L, Medina I, et al. Single-point
acupuncture and physiotherapy for the treatment of painful shoulder: a multicentre randomized
controlled trial. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2008;47:887–93. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
rheumatology/ken040
123. MacPherson H, Maschino AC, Lewith G, Foster NE, Witt CM, Witt C, et al. Characteristics
of acupuncture treatment associated with outcome: an individual patient meta-analysis of
17,922 patients with chronic pain in randomised controlled trials. PLOS ONE 2013;8:e77438.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0077438
124. Cherkin DC, Sherman KJ, Avins AL, Erro JH, Ichikawa L, Barlow WE, et al. A randomized trial
comparing acupuncture, simulated acupuncture, and usual care for chronic low back pain.
Arch Intern Med 2009;169:858–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2009.65
125. Suarez-Almazor ME, Looney C, Liu Y, Cox V, Pietz K, Marcus DM, et al. A randomized controlled
trial of acupuncture for osteoarthritis of the knee: effects of patient-provider communication.
Arthritis Care Res 2010;62:1229–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/acr.20225
126. Lansdown H, Howard K, Brealey S, MacPherson H. Acupuncture for pain and osteoarthritis of the
knee: a pilot study for an open parallel-arm randomised controlled trial. BMC Musculoskelet
Disord 2009;10:130. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-10-130
127. Molsberger AF, Schneider T, Gotthardt H, Drabik A. German Randomized Acupuncture Trial
for chronic shoulder pain (GRASP) – a pragmatic, controlled, patient-blinded, multi-centre
trial in an outpatient care environment. Pain 2010;151:146–54. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.pain.2010.06.036
128. Coeytaux RR, Kaufman JS, Kaptchuk TJ, Chen W, Miller WC, Callahan LF, et al. A randomized,
controlled trial of acupuncture for chronic daily headache. Headache 2005;45:1113–23.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1526-4610.2005.00235.x
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
164
 129. Molsberger AF, Mau J, Pawelec DB, Winkler J. Does acupuncture improve the orthopedic
management of chronic low back pain: a randomized, blinded, controlled trial with 3 months
follow up. Pain 2002;99:579–87. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(02)00269-5
130. Kennedy S, Baxter GD, Kerr DP, Bradbury I, Park J, McDonough SM. Acupuncture for acute
non-specific low back pain: a pilot randomised non-penetrating sham controlled trial.
Complement Ther Med 2008;16:139–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ctim.2007.03.001
131. Cherkin DC, Eisenberg D, Sherman KJ, Barlow W, Kaptchuk TJ, Street J, et al. Randomized trial
comparing traditional Chinese medical acupuncture, therapeutic massage, and self-care education
for chronic low back pain. Arch Intern Med 2001;161:1081–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archinte.161.8.1081
132. White P, Lewith G, Prescott P, Conway J. Acupuncture versus placebo for the treatment of
chronic mechanical neck pain: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 2004;141:911–19.
http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-141-12-200412210-00007
133. Salter GC, Roman M, Bland MJ, MacPherson H. Acupuncture for chronic neck pain: a pilot for a
randomised controlled trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2006;7:99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2474-7-99
134. Berman BM, Lao L, Langenberg P, Lee WL, Gilpin AM, Hochberg MC. Effectiveness of acupuncture
as adjunctive therapy in osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med
2004;141:901–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-141-12-200412210-00006
135. Foster NE, Thomas E, Barlas P, Hill JC, Young J, Mason E, et al. Acupuncture as an adjunct to
exercise based physiotherapy for osteoarthritis of the knee: randomised controlled trial. BMJ
2007;335:436. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.39280.509803.BE
136. Williamson L, Wyatt MR, Yein K, Melton JT. Severe knee osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled
trial of acupuncture, physiotherapy (supervised exercise) and standard management for patients
awaiting knee replacement. Rheumatology (Oxford) 2007;46:1445–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
rheumatology/kem119
137. Kleinhenz J, Streitberger K, Windeler J, Güssbacher A, Mavridis G, Martin E. Randomised clinical
trial comparing the effects of acupuncture and a newly designed placebo needle in rotator cuff
tendinitis. Pain 1999;83:235–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(99)00107-4
138. Guerra de Hoyos JA, Andrés Martín Mdel C, Bassas y Baena de Leon E, Vigára Lopez M,
Molina López T, Verdugo Morilla FA, et al. Randomised trial of long term effect of acupuncture
for shoulder pain. Pain 2004;112:289–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2004.08.030
139. Egger M, Davey Smith G, Schneider M, Minder C. Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple,
graphical test. BMJ 1997;315:629–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.315.7109.629
140. Green S, Buchbinder R, Hetrick S. Acupuncture for shoulder pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2005;2:CD005319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.cd005319
141. White AR, Ernst E. A systematic review of randomized controlled trials of acupuncture for neck
pain. Rheumatology 1999;38:143–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/38.2.143
142. Manheimer E, Cheng K, Linde K, Lao L, Yoo J, Wieland S, et al. Acupuncture for peripheral joint
osteoarthritis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;1:CD001977. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
14651858.cd001977.pub2
143. Riley RD, Lambert PC, Abo-Zaid G. Meta-analysis of individual participant data: rationale, conduct,
and reporting. BMJ 2010;340:c221. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.c221
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
165
 144. Kaptchuk TJ, Stason WB, Davis RB, Legedza AR, Schnyer RN, Kerr CE, et al. Sham device v
inert pill: randomised controlled trial of two placebo treatments. BMJ 2006;332:391–7.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.38726.603310.55
145. Linde K, Niemann K, Meissner K. Are sham acupuncture interventions more effective than (other)
placebos? A re-analysis of data from the Cochrane review on placebo effects. Forsch
Komplementrmed 2010;17:259–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000320374
146. Kaptchuk TJ. The placebo effect in alternative medicine: can the performance of a healing
ritual have clinical significance? Ann Intern Med 2002;136:817–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/
0003-4819-136-11-200206040-00011
147. Lundeberg T, Lund I, Sing A, Näslund J. Is placebo acupuncture what it is intended to be? Evid
Based Complement Alternat Med 2011;2011:932407.
148. Birch S, Felt R. Understanding Acupuncture. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1999.
149. Hughes JG, Goldbart J, Fairhurst E, Knowles K. Exploring acupuncturists’ perceptions of treating
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Complement Ther Med 2007;15:101–8. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.ctim.2006.09.008
150. Paterson C, Britten N. Acupuncture as a complex intervention: a holistic model. J Altern
Complement Med 2004;10:791–801. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.2004.10.791
151. Witt CM, Lüdtke R, Wegscheider K, Willich SN. Physician characteristics and variation in treatment
outcomes: are better qualified and experienced physicians more successful in treating patients
with chronic pain with acupuncture? J Pain 2010;11:431–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jpain.2009.08.010
152. Birch S. Reflections on the German acupuncture studies. J Chinese Med 2007;83:12–17.
153. Hanfileti L. What Licensed Acupuncturists Need to Know about the Training and Qualifications of
Physicians Providing Medical Acupuncture. Insights For Acupuncturists; 2013. URL: www.insights-
for-acupuncturists.com/medical-acupuncture.html (accessed 16 September 2013).
154. Wampold BE, Brown GS. Estimating variability in outcomes attributable to therapists: a naturalistic
study of outcomes in managed care. J Consult Clin Psychol 2005;73:914–23. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/0022-006X.73.5.914
155. Lewis M, Morley S, van der Windt DA, Hay E, Jellema P, Dziedzic K, et al. Measuring practitioner/
therapist effects in randomised trials of low back pain and neck pain interventions in primary care
settings. Eur J Pain 2010;14:1033–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpain.2010.04.002
156. Price S, Mercer SW, MacPherson H. Practitioner empathy, patient enablement and health
outcomes: a prospective study of acupuncture patients. Patient Educ Couns 2006;63:239–45.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2005.11.006
157. Scheid V. Defining Best Practice or Cultivating the Best Practitioner. In Scheid V, MacPherson H,
editors. Integrating East Asian Medicine into Contemporary Healthcare. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone; 2012. pp. 13–38.
158. Peat G, McCarney R, Croft P. Knee pain and osteoarthritis in older adults: a review of community
burden and current use of primary health care. Ann Rheum Dis 2001;60:91–7. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/ard.60.2.91
159. Kellgren JH, Lawrence JS. Radiological assessment of osteo-arthrosis. Ann Rheum Dis
1957;16:494–502. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ard.16.4.494
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
166
 160. Lethbridge-Cejku M, Scott WW, Reichle R, Ettinger WH, Zonderman A, Costa P, et al. Association
of radiographic features of osteoarthritis of the knee with knee pain: data from the Baltimore
Longitudinal Study of Aging. Arthritis Care Res 1995;8:182–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
art.1790080311
161. Jordan KM, Arden NK, Doherty M, Bannwarth B, Bijlsma JW, Dieppe P, et al. EULAR
Recommendations 2003: an evidence based approach to the management of knee osteoarthritis:
report of a Task Force of the Standing Committee for International Clinical Studies Including
Therapeutic Trials (ESCISIT). Ann Rheum Dis 2003;62:1145–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
ard.2003.011742
162. Tramèr MR, Moore RA, Reynolds DJ, McQuay HJ. Quantitative estimation of rare adverse events
which follow a biological progression: a new model applied to chronic NSAID use. Pain
2000;85:169–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3959(99)00267-5
163. Pound P, Britten N, Morgan M, Yardley L, Pope C, Daker-White G, et al. Resisting medicines: a
synthesis of qualitative studies of medicine taking. Soc Sci Med 2005;61:133–55. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.socscimed.2004.11.063
164. Arthritis Care. Osteoarthritis Nation: The Most Comprehensive UK Report of People with
Osteoarthritis. London: Arthritis Care; 2004. URL: www.arthritiscare.org.uk/Publications
andResources/Forhealthprofessionals/OANation (accessed 30 November 2012).
165. Devos-Comby L, Cronan T, Roesch SC. Do exercise and self-management interventions benefit
patients with osteoarthritis of the knee? A metaanalytic review. J Rheumatol 2006;33:744–56.
166. CRD. Systematic Reviews: CRD’s Guidance for Undertaking Reviews in Health Care. York: CRD,
University of York; 2009.
167. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, PRISMA Group. Preferred reporting items for
systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. BMJ 2009;339:b2535.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b2535
168. Corbett M, Rice S, Slack R, Harden M, Madurasinghe V, Sutton A, et al. Acupuncture and Other
Physical Treatments for the Relief of Chronic Pain due to Osteoarthritis of the Knee: A Systematic
Review and Network Meta-Analysis. CRD Report 40. York: CRD, University of York; 2011.
URL: www.york.ac.uk/media/crd/crdreport40.pdf (accessed 21 December 2016).
169. Corbett MS, Rice SJ, Madurasinghe V, Slack R, Fayter DA, Harden M, et al. Acupuncture and other
physical treatments for the relief of pain due to osteoarthritis of the knee: network meta-analysis.
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2013;21:1290–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2013.05.007
170. Rodgers M, McKenna C, Palmer S, Chambers D, Van Hout S, Golder S, et al. Curative catheter
ablation in atrial fibrillation and typical atrial flutter: systematic review and economic evaluation.
Health Technol Assess 2008;12(34). http://dx.doi.org/10.3310/hta12340
171. Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gøtzsche PC, Jüni P, Moher D, Oxman AD, et al. The Cochrane
Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ 2011;343:d5928.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d5928
172. Dias S, Welton NJ, Caldwell DM, Ades AE. Checking consistency in mixed treatment comparison
meta-analysis. Stat Med 2010;29:932–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.3767
173. Cooper NJ, Sutton AJ, Morris D, Ades AE, Welton NJ. Addressing between-study heterogeneity
and inconsistency in mixed treatment comparisons: application to stroke prevention treatments in
individuals with non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation. Stat Med 2009;28:1861–81. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sim.3594
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
167
 174. Welton NJ, Caldwell DM, Adamopoulos E, Vedhara K. Mixed treatment comparison meta-analysis
of complex interventions: psychological interventions in coronary heart disease. Am J Epidemiol
2009;169:1158–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwp014
175. Salanti G, Higgins JP, Ades AE, Ioannidis JP. Evaluation of networks of randomized trials.
Stat Methods Med Res 2008;17:279–301. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0962280207080643
176. Ades AE, Welton N, Lu G. Introduction to Mixed Treatment Comparisons. Bristol: Bristol
University; 2007. URL: www.bris.ac.uk/social-community-medicine/media/mpes/intro-to-mtc.pdf
(accessed 19 March 2014).
177. Brooks SP, Gelman AJ. General methods for monitoring convergence of iterative simulations.
J Comput Graph Stat 1998;7:434–55.
178. Lu G, Ades AE, Sutton AJ, Cooper NJ, Briggs AH, Caldwell DM. Meta-analysis of mixed treatment
comparisons at multiple follow-up times. Stat Med 2007;26:3681–99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
sim.2831
179. Lu G, Ades AE. Assessing evidence inconsistency in mixed treatment comparisons. J Am Stat
Assoc 2006;101:447–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1198/016214505000001302
180. Spiegelhalter DJ, Best NG, Carlin BP, Van der Linden A. Bayesian measures of model complexity
and fit. J R Stat Soc Ser B 2002;64:583–639. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-9868.00353
181. Salanti G, Ades AE, Ioannidis JP. Graphical methods and numerical summaries for presenting
results from multiple-treatment meta-analysis: an overview and tutorial. J Clin Epidemiol
2011;64:163–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2010.03.016
182. Scholten RJ, de Beurs E, Bouter LM. From effect size into number needed to treat. Lancet
1999;354:598. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(05)77952-6
183. Woolacott NF, Corbett MS, Rice SJ. The use and reporting of WOMAC in the assessment of
the benefit of physical therapies for the pain of osteoarthritis of the knee: findings from a
systematic review of clinical trials. Rheumatology 2012;51:1440–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
rheumatology/kes043
184. Bellamy N, Carette S, Ford PM, Kean WF, le Riche NG, Lussier A, et al. Osteoarthritis
antirheumatic drug trials. III. Setting the delta for clinical trials – results of a consensus
development (Delphi) exercise. J Rheumatol 1992;19:451–7.
185. Ehrich EW, Davies GM, Watson DJ, Bolognese JA, Seidenberg BC, Bellamy N. Minimal perceptible
clinical improvement with the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities osteoarthritis
index questionnaire and global assessments in patients with osteoarthritis. J Rheumatol
2000;27:2635–41.
186. Tubach F, Ravaud P, Baron G, Falissard B, Logeart I, Bellamy N, et al. Evaluation of clinically relevant
changes in patient reported outcomes in knee and hip osteoarthritis: the minimal clinically important
improvement. Ann Rheum Dis 2005;64:29–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ard.2004.022905
187. Dias RC, Dias JM, Ramos LR. Impact of an exercise and walking protocol on quality of life for
elderly people with OA of the knee. Physiother Res Int 2003;8:121–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
pri.280
188. Weiner DK, Rudy TE, Morone N, Glick R, Kwoh CK. Efficacy of periosteal stimulation therapy for
the treatment of osteoarthritis-associated chronic knee pain: an initial controlled clinical trial. J Am
Geriatr Soc 2007;55:1541–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01314.x
189. Aglamis
¸ B, Toraman NF, Yaman H. Change of quality of life due to exercise training in knee
osteoarthritis: SF-36 and WOMAC. J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil 2009;22:43–8. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3233/BMR-2009-0219
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
168
 190. Börjesson M, Robertson E, Weidenhielm L, Mattsson E, Olsson E. Physiotherapy in knee
osteoarthrosis: effect on pain and walking. Physiother Res Int 1996;1:89–97. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/pri.6120010205
191. Cheing GL, Tsui AY, Lo SK, Hui-Chan CW. Optimal stimulation duration of TENS in the
management of osteoarthritic knee pain. J Rehabil Med 2003;35:62–8. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/16501970306116
192. Lu TW, Wei IP, Liu YH, Hsu WC, Wang TM, Chang CF, et al. Immediate effects of acupuncture on
gait patterns in patients with knee osteoarthritis. Chin Med J 2010;123:165–72.
193. Yip YB, Sit JW, Fung KK, Wong DY, Chong SY, Chung LH, et al. Impact of an arthritis
self-management programme with an added exercise component for osteoarthritic knee sufferers
on improving pain, functional outcomes, and use of health care services: an experimental study.
Patient Educ Couns 2007;65:113–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2006.06.019
194. Jamtvedt G, Dahm KT, Christie A, Moe RH, Haavardsholm E, Holm I, et al. Physical therapy
interventions for patients with osteoarthritis of the knee: an overview of systematic reviews.
Phys Ther 2008;88:123–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20070043
195. Bjordal JM, Ljunggren AE, Klovning A, Slørdal L. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, including
cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors, in osteoarthritic knee pain: meta-analysis of randomised placebo
controlled trials. BMJ 2004;329:1317. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.38273.626655.63
196. Vickers AJ, Cronin AM, Maschino AC, Lewith G, MacPherson H, Foster NE, et al. Acupuncture
for chronic pain: individual patient data meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med 2012;172:1444–53.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2012.3654
197. Lund I, Näslund J, Lundeberg T. Minimal acupuncture is not a valid placebo control in randomised
controlled trials of acupuncture: a physiologist’s perspective. Chin Med 2009;4:1. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1186/1749-8546-4-1
198. Hochberg MC, Altman RD, April KT, Benkhalti M, Guyatt G, McGowan J, et al. American College
of Rheumatology 2012 recommendations for the use of nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic
therapies in osteoarthritis of the hand, hip, and knee. Arthritis Care Res 2012;64:465–74.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/acr.21596
199. AAOS. Treatment of Osteoarthritis of the Knee (Non-Arthroplasty). Rosemont, IL: AAOS; 2008.
URL: www.aaos.org/research/guidelines/OAKguideline.pdf (accessed 30 November 2012).
200. Zhang W, Moskowitz RW, Nuki G, Abramson S, Altman RD, Arden N, et al. OARSI recommendations
for the management of hip and knee osteoarthritis, part II: OARSI evidence-based, expert consensus
guidelines. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2008;16:137–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2007.12.013
201. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, McDermott MP, Peirce-Sandner S, Burke LB, Cowan P, et al. Interpreting
the clinical importance of group differences in chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT
recommendations. Pain 2009;146:238–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2009.08.019
202. Briggs A, Claxton K, Sculpher M. Decision Modelling for Health Economic Evaluation. Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 2006.
203. NICE. Guide to the Methods of Technology Appraisal. 3rd edn. London: NICE; 2012.
204. Sculpher MJ, Claxton K, Drummond M, McCabe C. Whither trial-based economic evaluation for
health care decision making? Health Econ 2006;15:677–87. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hec.1093
205. Bucher HC, Guyatt GH, Griffith LE, Walter SD. The results of direct and indirect treatment
comparisons in meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Clin Epidemiol 1997;50:683–91.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0895-4356(97)00049-8
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
169
 206. Lumley T. Network meta-analysis for indirect treatment comparisons. Stat Med 2002;21:2313–24.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.1201
207. Ades AE, Sculpher M, Sutton A, Abrams K, Cooper N, Welton N, et al. Bayesian methods
for evidence synthesis in cost-effectiveness analysis. Pharmacoeconomics 2006;24:1–19.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2165/00019053-200624010-00001
208. Sutton A, Ades AE, Cooper N, Abrams K. Use of indirect and mixed treatment comparisons for
technology assessment. Pharmacoeconomics 2008;26:753–67. http://dx.doi.org/10.2165/
00019053-200826090-00006
209. Stewart LA, Clarke MJ. Practical methodology of meta-analyses (overviews) using updated
individual patient data. Cochrane Working Group. Stat Med 1995;14:2057–79. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sim.4780141902
210. Higgins JP, Whitehead A, Turner RM, Omar RZ, Thompson SG. Meta-analysis of continuous
outcome data from individual patients. Stat Med 2001;20:2219–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
sim.918
211. Riley RD, Dodd SR, Craig JV, Thompson JR, Williamson PR. Meta-analysis of diagnostic test studies
using individual patient data and aggregate data. Stat Med 2008;27:6111–36. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/sim.3441
212. Riley RD, Lambert PC, Staessen JA, Wang J, Gueyffier F, Thijs L, et al. Meta-analysis of continuous
outcomes combining individual patient data and aggregate data. Stat Med 2008;27:1870–93.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.3165
213. Saramago P, Manca A, Sutton AJ. Deriving input parameters for cost-effectiveness modeling:
taxonomy of data types and approaches to their statistical synthesis. Value Health
2012;15:639–49. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2012.02.009
214. Turner RM, Omar RZ, Yang M, Goldstein H, Thompson SG. A multilevel model framework for
meta-analysis of clinical trials with binary outcomes. Stat Med 2000;19:3417–32. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/1097-0258(20001230)19:24<3417::AID-SIM614>3.0.CO;2-L
215. Goldstein H, Yang M, Omar R, Turner R, Thompson S. Meta-analysis using multilevel models
with an application to the study of class size effects. J R Stat Soc Series C (Applied Stat)
2000;49:399–412. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-9876.00200
216. Smith CT, Williamson PR, Marson AG. An overview of methods and empirical comparison of
aggregate data and individual patient data results for investigating heterogeneity in meta-analysis
of time-to-event outcomes. J Eval Clin Pract 2005;11:468–78. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1365-2753.2005.00559.x
217. Welton NJ, Willis SR, Ades AE. Synthesis of survival and disease progression outcomes for health
technology assessment of cancer therapies. Res Synth Methods 2010;1:239–57. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/jrsm.21
218. Saramago P, Sutton AJ, Cooper NJ, Manca A. Mixed treatment comparisons using aggregate-
and individual-participant level data: an efficient use of evidence for cost-effectiveness modelling.
Value Health 2011;14:A237–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2011.08.024
219. Riley RD, Kauser I, Bland M, Thijs L, Staessen JA, Wang J, et al. Meta-analysis of randomised trials
with a continuous outcome according to baseline imbalance and availability of individual
participant data. Stat Med 2013;32:2747–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.5726
220. Vickers AJ, Altman DG. Statistics notes: analysing controlled trials with baseline and follow up
measurements. BMJ 2001;323:1123–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.323.7321.1123
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
170
 221. Dias S, Welton N, Sutton A, Ades A. NICE DSU Technical Support Document 2: A Generalised
Linear Modelling Framework for Pairwise and Network Meta-Analysis of Randomised Controlled
Trials. Sheffield: Decision Support Unit, School of Health and Related Research, University of
Sheffield; April 2011. URL: www.nicedsu.org.uk/TSD2%20General%20meta%20analysis%
20corrected%2015April2014.pdf (accessed 16 July 2016).
222. Dias S, Sutton AJ, Ades AE, Welton NJ. Evidence synthesis for decision making 2: a generalized
linear modeling framework for pairwise and network meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Med Decis Making 2013;33:607–17. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0272989X12458724
223. Higgins J, Green S. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. Version 5.1.0.
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell; 2011.
224. NICE. Guide to the Methods of Technology Appraisal 2013. London: NICE; 2013. URL: www.nice.
org.uk/article/pmg9/resources/non-guidance-guide-to-the-methods-of-technology-appraisal-2013-
pdf (accessed 16 July 2016).
225. Drummond MF, Sculpher MJ, Torrance GW, O’Brien BJ, Stoddart GL. Methods for the Economic
Evaluation of Health Care Programmes. 3rd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2012.
226. Williams A. EuroQol – a new facility for the measurement of health-related quality-of-life. Health
Policy 1990;16:199–208. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0168-8510(90)90421-9
227. Latimer NR, Bhanu AC, Whitehurst DG. Inconsistencies in NICE guidance for acupuncture:
reanalysis and discussion. Acupunct Med 2012;30:182–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
acupmed-2012-010152
228. NICE. Osteoarthritis: the Care and Management of Osteoarthritis in Adults. London: National
Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions; 2008. URL: www.nice.org.uk/CG059
(accessed 30 November 2012).
229. Sculpher MJ, Pang FS, Manca A, Drummond MF, Golder S, Urdahl H, et al. Generalisability in
economic evaluation studies in healthcare: a review and case studies. Health Technol Assess
2004;8(49). http://dx.doi.org/10.3310/hta8490
230. UK BEAM Trial Team. United Kingdom back pain exercise and manipulation (UK BEAM)
randomised trial: effectiveness of physical treatments for back pain in primary care. BMJ
2004;329:1377. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.38282.669225.AE
231. Underwood M, Ashby D, Cross P, Hennessy E, Letley L, Martin J, et al. Advice to use topical or
oral ibuprofen for chronic knee pain in older people: randomised controlled trial and patient
preference study. BMJ 2008;336:138–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.39399.656331.25
232. Dolan P. Modeling valuations for EuroQol health states. Med Care 1997;35:1095–108.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005650-199711000-00002
233. Hernández Alava M, Wailoo AJ, Ara R. Tails from the peak district: adjusted limited dependent
variable mixture models of EQ-5D questionnaire health state utility values. Value Health
2012;15:550–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2011.12.014
234. Dakin HA, Welton NJ, Ades AE, Collins S, Orme M, Kelly S. Mixed treatment comparison of
repeated measurements of a continuous endpoint: an example using topical treatments for
primary open-angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension. Stat Med 2011;30:2511–35.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.4284
235. Dakin H. Review of studies mapping from quality of life or clinical measures to EQ-5D: an online
database. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2013;11:151. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1477-7525-11-151
236. Rowen D, Brazier J, Roberts J. Mapping SF-36 onto the EQ-5D index: how reliable is the
relationship? Health Qual Life Outcomes 2009;7:27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1477-7525-7-27
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
171
 237. Gray AM, Rivero-Arias O, Clarke PM. Estimating the association between SF-12 responses and
EQ-5D utility values by response mapping. Med Decis Making 2006;26:18–29. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/0272989X05284108
238. Maund E, Craig D, Suekarran S, Neilson A, Wright K, Brealey S, et al. Management of frozen
shoulder: a systematic review and cost-effectiveness analysis. Health Technol Assess 2012;16(11).
http://dx.doi.org/10.3310/hta16110
239. Barton GR, Sach TH, Jenkinson C, Avery AJ, Doherty M, Muir KR. Do estimates of cost–utility
based on the EQ-5D differ from those based on the mapping of utility scores? Health Qual Life
Outcomes 2008;6:51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1477-7525-6-51
240. Khan K. Mapping Outcomes Data to Estimate Health State Utilities: An Analysis of Individual
Patient Level Data from 15 Acupuncture Trials. York: University of York; 2011.
241. Chan KKW, Willan AR, Gupta M, Pullenayegum E. Underestimation of uncertainties in health
utilities derived from mapping algorithms involving health-related quality-of-life measures:
statistical explanations and potential remedies. Med Decis Making 2014;34:863–72.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0272989x13517750
242. O’Hagan A, Luce B. A Primer on Bayesian Statistics in Health Economics and Outcomes Research.
Sheffield: Centre for Bayesian Statistics in Health Economics; 2003.
243. Senn S. Change from baseline and analysis of covariance revisited. Stat Med 2006;25:4334–44.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.2682
244. Van Breukelen GJ. ANCOVA versus change from baseline: more power in randomized studies,
more bias in nonrandomized studies. J Clin Epidemiol 2006;59:920–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclinepi.2006.02.007
245. Dias S, Sutton AJ, Welton NJ, Ades AE. Evidence synthesis for decision making 3: heterogeneity –
subgroups, meta-regression, bias, and bias-adjustment. Med Decis Making 2013;33:618–40.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0272989X13485157
246. Lunn D, Thomas A, Best N, Spiegelhalter D. WinBUGS – a Bayesian modelling framework:
concepts, structure, and extensibility. Stat Computing 2000;10:325–37. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1023/A:1008929526011
247. Plummer M, Best N, Cowles K, Vines K. CODA: convergence diagnosis and output analysis for
MCMC. R News 2006;6:7–11.
248. Gelman A, Rubin DB. Inference from iterative simulation using multiple sequences. Stat Sci
1992;7:457–72. http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/ss/1177011136
249. Curtis L. Unit Costs of Health and Social Care 2013. Canterbury: Personal Social Services Research
Unit, University of Kent; 2013. URL: www.pssru.ac.uk/archive/pdf/uc/uc2013/full-with-covers.pdf
(accessed 16 July 2016).
250. Tudur Smith C, Dwan K, Altman DG, Clarke M, Riley R, Williamson PR. Sharing individual
participant data from clinical trials: an opinion survey regarding the establishment of a central
repository. PLOS ONE 2014;9:e97886. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0097886
251. Claxton K, Martin S, Soares M, Rice N, Spackman E, Hinde S, et al. Methods for the estimation of
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence cost-effectiveness threshold. Health Technol
Assess 2015;19(14). http://dx.doi.org/10.3310/hta19140
252. Bellamy N, Kirwan J, Boers M, Brooks P, Strand V, Tugwell P, et al. Recommendations for a core
set of outcome measures for future phase III clinical trials in knee, hip, and hand osteoarthritis.
Consensus development at OMERACT III. J Rheumatol 1997;24:799–802.
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
172
 253. Drummond M. Twenty years of using economic evaluations for drug reimbursement decisions:
what has been achieved? J Health Polit Policy Law 2013;38:1081–102. http://dx.doi.org/10.1215/
03616878-2373148
254. Urdahl H, Manca A, Sculpher MJ. Assessing generalisability in model-based economic evaluation
studies: a structured review in osteoporosis. Pharmacoeconomics 2006;24:1181–97.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2165/00019053-200624120-00004
255. Caro JJ, Briggs AH, Siebert U, Kuntz KM, ISPOR-SMDM Modeling Good Research Practices Task
Force. Modeling good research practices – overview: a report of the ISPOR-SMDM Modeling
Good Research Practices Task Force-1. Value Health 2012;15:796–803. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jval.2012.06.012
256. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine. Complementary, Alternative, or
Integrative Health: What’s In a Name? Bethesda, MD: National Center for Complementary and
Alternative Medicine; 2013. URL: http://nccam.nih.gov/health/whatiscam (accessed 16 July 2016).
257. Eisenberg DM, Davis RB, Ettner SL, Appel S, Wilkey S, Van Rompay M, et al. Trends in alternative
medicine use in the United States, 1990–1997: results of a follow-up national survey. JAMA
1998;280:1569–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.280.18.1569
258. Fairfield KM, Eisenberg DM, Davis RB, Libman H, Phillips RS. Patterns of use, expenditures, and
perceived efficacy of complementary and alternative therapies in HIV-infected patients. Arch
Intern Med 1998;158:2257–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.158.20.2257
259. House of Lords. Report of the Select Committee on Science and Technology: Complementary and
Alternative Medicine. London: The Stationery Office; 2000.
260. Lorenc A, Leach J, Robinson N. Clinical guidelines in the UK: do they mention complementary and
alternative medicine (CAM) – are CAM professional bodies aware? Eur J Integrative Med
2014;6:164–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eujim.2013.11.003
261. CRD. Acupuncture. York: CRD, University of York; 2001. Effective Health Care, vol. 7, no. 2.
URL: www.york.ac.uk/inst/crd/EHC/ehc72.pdf (accessed 19 August 2016).
262. Posadzki P, Alotaibi A, Ernst E. Prevalence of use of complementary and alternative medicine
(CAM) by physicians in the UK: a systematic review of surveys. Clin Med 2012;12:505–12.
http://dx.doi.org/10.7861/clinmedicine.12-6-505
263. Laufer S. Osteoarthritis therapy – are there still unmet needs? Rheumatology 2004;43(Suppl. 1):i9–15.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keh103
264. Chang J, Kauf TL, Reed SD, Friedman JY, Omar M, Kahler KH, et al. Productivity loss as an
indicator of unmet needs for osteoarthritis patients. Arthritis Rheum 2003;48:S292–3.
265. Selfe TK, Taylor AG. Acupuncture and osteoarthritis of the knee: a review of randomized,
controlled trials. Fam Community Health 2008;31:247–54. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
01.FCH.0000324482.78577.0f
266. AAOS. Treatment of Osteoarthritis of the Knee: Evidence-Based Guideline. 2nd edn. Rosemont,
IL: AAOS; 2013. URL: www.aaos.org/research/guidelines/TreatmentofOsteoarthritisofthe
KneeGuideline.pdf (accessed 16 July 2016).
267. McAlindon TE, Bannuru RR, Sullivan MC, Arden NK, Berenbaum F, Bierma-Zeinstra SM, et al.
OARSI guidelines for the non-surgical management of knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthr Cartil
2014;22:363–88. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2014.01.003
268. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. SIGN 136: Management of Chronic Pain. A National
Clinical Guideline. Edinburgh: Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network; 2013. URL: www.sign.
ac.uk/pdf/SIGN136.pdf (accessed 20 December 2015).
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
173
 269. Abdulla A, Adams N, Bone M, Elliott AM, Gaffin J, Jones D, et al. Guidance on the management of
pain in older people. Age Ageing 2013;42(Suppl. 1):i1–57. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ageing/afs199
270. Brazier JE, Harper R, Munro J, Walters SJ, Snaith ML. Generic and condition-specific outcome
measures for people with osteoarthritis of the knee. Rheumatology 1999;38:870–7.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/38.9.870
271. Brazier J, Deverill M, Green C, Harper R, Booth A. A review of the use of health status measures
in economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess 1999;3(9).
272. Brooks R. EuroQol: the current state of play. Health Policy 1996;37:53–72. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/0168-8510(96)00822-6
273. Horsman J, Furlong W, Feeny D, Torrance G. The Health Utilities Index (HUI): concepts,
measurement properties and applications. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2003;1:54. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1186/1477-7525-1-54
274. Brazier J, Roberts J, Deverill M. The estimation of a preference-based measure of health from the
SF-36. J Health Econ 2002;21:271–92. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-6296(01)00130-8
275. Ware JE, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36). I. Conceptual
framework and item selection. Med Care 1992;30:473–83. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
00005650-199206000-00002
276. Ware J, Kosinski M, Keller SD. A 12-Item Short-Form Health Survey: construction of scales and
preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Med Care 1996;34:220–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
00005650-199603000-00003
277. Kirwan JR, Reeback JS. Stanford Health Assessment Questionnaire modified to assess disability
in British patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Br J Rheumatol 1986;25:206–9. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/rheumatology/25.2.206
278. Versteegh MM, Leunis A, Uyl-de Groot CA, Stolk EA. Condition-specific preference-based
measures: benefit or burden? Value Health 2012;15:504–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jval.2011.12.003
279. Thorlund K, Walter SD, Johnston BC, Furukawa TA, Guyatt GH. Pooling health-related quality of
life outcomes in meta-analysis – a tutorial and review of methods for enhancing interpretability:
enhancing interpretability in continuous meta-analysis. Res Synthesis Methods 2011;2:188–203.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.46
280. Cummings P. Arguments for and against standardized mean differences (effect sizes). Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med 2011;165:592–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpediatrics.2011.97
281. McKenna C, Bojke L, Manca A, Adebajo A, Dickson J, Helliwell P, et al. Shoulder acute pain in
primary health care: is retraining GPs effective? The SAPPHIRE randomized trial: a cost-effectiveness
analysis. Rheumatology 2009;48:558–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kep008
282. Barton GR, Sach TH, Jenkinson C, Doherty M, Avery AJ, Muir KR. Lifestyle interventions for knee
pain in overweight and obese adults aged > or = 45: economic evaluation of randomised
controlled trial. BMJ 2009;339:b2273. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b2273
283. Gu NY, Bell C, Botteman MF, Ji X, Carter JA, van Hout B. Estimating preference-based EQ-5D
health state utilities or item responses from neuropathic pain scores. Patient 2012;5:185–97.
284. Fu R, Vandermeer BW, Shamliyan TA, O’Neil ME, Yazdi F, Fox SH, et al. Handling Continuous
Outcomes in Quantitative Synthesis. In Methods Guide for Effectiveness and Comparative
Effectiveness Reviews. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2008.
URL: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK154408/ (accessed 11 August 2014).
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
174
 285. Vickers AJ. Parametric versus non-parametric statistics in the analysis of randomized trials with
non-normally distributed data. BMC Med Res Methodol 2005;5:35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2288-5-35
286. Wooldridge JM. Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach. 2nd edn. Cincinnati, OH:
South-Western College Publishing; 2003. pp. 863.
287. Dias S, Welton NJ, Sutton AJ, Caldwell DM, Lu G, Ades AE. Evidence synthesis for decision
making 4: inconsistency in networks of evidence based on randomized controlled trials. Med
Decis Making 2013;33:641–56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0272989X12455847
288. Sturtz S, Ligges U, Gelman A. R2WinBUGS: a package for running WinBUGS from R. J Stat
Software 2005;12:1–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.18637/jss.v012.i03
289. Nüesch E, Reichenbach S, Trelle S, Rutjes AW, Liewald K, Sterchi R, et al. The importance of
allocation concealment and patient blinding in osteoarthritis trials: a meta-epidemiologic study.
Arthritis Rheum 2009;61:1633–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.24894
290. Lunn D. The BUGS Book: A Practical Introduction to Bayesian Analysis. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press;
2013. pp. 381.
291. Curtis L. Unit Costs of Health and Social Care 2012. Canterbury: Personal Social Services Research
Unit, University of Kent; 2012. URL: www.pssru.ac.uk/archive/pdf/uc/uc2012/full-with-covers.pdf
(accessed 16 July 2016).
292. Castelnuovo E, Cross P, Mt-Isa S, Spencer A, Underwood M. Cost-effectiveness of advising the
use of topical or oral ibuprofen for knee pain; the TOIB study [ISRCTN: 79353052]. Rheumatology
2008;47:1077–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/ken128
293. Hawkins N, Scott DA. Cost-effectiveness analysis: discount the placebo at your peril. Med Decis
Making 2010;30:536–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0272989X10362106
294. Barton GR, Briggs AH, Fenwick EAL. Optimal cost-effectiveness decisions: the role of the
cost-effectiveness acceptability curve (CEAC), the cost-effectiveness acceptability frontier (CEAF),
and the expected value of perfection information (EVPI). Value Health 2008;11:886–97.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1524-4733.2008.00358.x
295. Jordan K, Jinks C, Croft P. A prospective study of the consulting behaviour of older people with
knee pain. Br J Gen Pract 2006;56:269–76.
296. Mitchell HL, Carr AJ, Scott DL. The management of knee pain in primary care: factors associated
with consulting the GP and referrals to secondary care. Rheumatology 2006;45:771–6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kei214
297. Office for National Statistics (ONS). Taxonomy. ONS; 2010. URL: www.ons.gov.uk/ons/taxonomy/
index.html?nscl=Population+Estimates (accessed 16 October 2014).
298. Mitchell HL, Hurley MV. Management of chronic knee pain: a survey of patient preferences
and treatment received. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2008;9:123. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2474-9-123
299. Claxton K, Palmer S, Longworth L, Bojke L, Griffin S, McKenna C, et al. Informing a decision
framework for when NICE should recommend the use of health technologies only in the context
of an appropriately designed programme of evidence development. Health Technol Assess
2012;16(46). http://dx.doi.org/10.3310/hta16460
300. AACP. AACP Homepage. URL: www.aacp.org.uk/ (accessed 20 December 2015).
301. Adedoyin RA, Olaogun MO, Fagbeja OO. Effect of interferential current stimulation in
management of osteo-arthritic knee pain. Physiotherapy 2002;88:493–9. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0031-9406(05)60851-6
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
175
 302. Gundog M, Atamaz F, Kanyilmaz S, Kirazli Y, Celepoglu G. Interferential current therapy in
patients with knee osteoarthritis: comparison of the effectiveness of different amplitude-
modulated frequencies. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2012;91:107–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
PHM.0b013e3182328687
303. Burch FX, Tarro JN, Greenberg JJ, Carroll WJ. Evaluating the benefits of patterned stimulation in
the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee: a multi-center, randomized, single-blind, controlled
study with an independent masked evaluator. Osteoarthr Cartil 2008;16:865–72. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.joca.2007.11.013
304. Longworth L, Rowen. NICE DSU Technical Support Document 10: The Use of Mapping Methods
to Estimate Health State Utility Values. Sheffield; 2011. URL: www.nicedsu.org.uk/TSD%2010%
20mapping%20FINAL.pdf (accessed 20 December 2015).
305. Lu G, Brazier JE, Ades AE. Mapping from disease-specific to generic health-related quality-of-life
scales: a common factor model. Value Health 2013;16:177–84. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jval.2012.07.003
306. Lu G, Kounali D, Ades AE. Simultaneous multioutcome synthesis and mapping of treatment effects
to a common scale. Value Health 2014;17:280–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2013.12.006
307. Shah S, Farrow A, Esnouf A. Availability and use of electrotherapy devices: a survey. Int J Ther
Rehabil 2007;14:260–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.12968/ijtr.2007.14.6.23895
308. Lopez AD, Murray CC. The global burden of disease, 1990–2020. Nat Med 1998;4:1241–3.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/3218
309. Kirsch I, Deacon BJ, Huedo-Medina TB, Scoboria A, Moore TJ, Johnson BT. Initial severity and
antidepressant benefits: a meta-analysis of data submitted to the Food and Drug Administration.
PLOS Med 2008;5:e45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0050045
310. Smith CA, Hay PP, MacPherson H. Acupuncture for depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2010;1:CD004046. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.cd004046.pub3
311. Mellor-Clark J, Simms-Ellis R, Burton M. National survey of counsellors working in primary care:
evidence for growing professionalisation? Occas Pap R Coll Gen Pract 2001;79:vi–7.
312. Bower P, Knowles S, Coventry PA, Rowland N. Counselling for mental health and psychosocial
problems in primary care. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011;9:CD001025. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/14651858.cd001025.pub3
313. MacPherson H, Richmond S, Bland JM, Lansdown H, Hopton A, Kang’ombe A, et al.
Acupuncture, Counseling, and Usual care for Depression (ACUDep): study protocol for a
randomized controlled trial. Trials 2012;13:209. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1745-6215-13-209
314. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II. San Antonio, TX:
Psychological Corporation; 1996.
315. MacPherson H, Schroer S. Acupuncture as a complex intervention for depression: a consensus
method to develop a standardised treatment protocol for a randomised controlled trial.
Complement Ther Med 2007;15:92–100. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ctim.2006.09.006
316. Roth A, Hill A, Pilling S. The Competences Required to Deliver Effective Humanistic Psychological
Therapies. London: University College London; 2009. URL: www.ucl.ac.uk/clinical-psychology/
CORE/Humanistic_Competences/clinicians_guide.pdf (accessed 28 July 2014).
317. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression severity measure.
J Gen Intern Med 2001;16:606–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1525-1497.2001.016009606.x
318. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 2006;3:77–101.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
176
 319. Charmaz K. Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide through Qualitative Analysis.
London: Sage; 2006.
320. Hopton A, Eldred J, MacPherson H. Patients’ experiences of acupuncture and counselling for
depression and comorbid pain: a qualitative study nested within a randomised controlled trial.
BMJ Open 2014;4:e005144. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005144
321. Hopton A, Macpherson H, Keding A, Morley S. Acupuncture, counselling or usual care for
depression and comorbid pain: secondary analysis of a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open
2014;4:e004964. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2014-004964
322. Vannoy SD, Arean P, Unützer J. Advantages of using estimated depression-free days for evaluating
treatment efficacy. Psychiatr Serv 2010;61:160–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/ps.2010.61.2.160
323. Ritchie J, Lewis J. Qualitative Research Practice: A Guide for Social Science Students and
Researchers. London: Sage; 2003.
324. MacPherson H, Newbronner L, Chamberlain R, Richmond SJ, Lansdown H, Perren S, et al.
Practitioner perspectives on strategies to promote longer-term benefits of acupuncture or
counselling for depression: a qualitative study. PLOS ONE 2014;9:e104077. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0104077
325. Kind P. The EuroQoL Instrument: An Index of Health-Related Quality of Life. In Spilker B, editor.
Quality of Life and Pharmacoeconomics in Clinical Trials. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1996.
pp. 191–201.
326. MacPherson H, Tilbrook H, Bland JM, Bloor K, Brabyn S, Cox H, et al. Acupuncture for irritable
bowel syndrome: primary care based pragmatic randomised controlled trial. BMC Gastroenterol
2012;12:150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-230X-12-150
327. NHS Choices. Acupuncture. URL: www.nhs.uk/Conditions/acupuncture/Pages/Introduction.aspx
(accessed 16 July 2016).
328. Dolan P, Gudex C. Time preference, duration and health state valuations. Health Econ
1995;4:289–99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hec.4730040405
329. Manca A, Hawkins N, Sculpher MJ. Estimating mean QALYs in trial-based cost-effectiveness
analysis: the importance of controlling for baseline utility. Health Econ 2005;14:487–96.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hec.944
330. Willan AR, Lin DY, Manca A. Regression methods for cost-effectiveness analysis with censored
data. Stat Med 2005;24:131–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sim.1794
331. Macpherson H, Elliot B, Hopton A, Lansdown H, Richmond S. Acupuncture for depression:
patterns of diagnosis and treatment within a randomised controlled trial. Evid Based Complement
Alternat Med 2013;2013:286048. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/286048
332. Perren S, Richmond S, MacPherson H. The human face of an RCT: reflections on providing
counselling for clients with moderate to severe depression in a randomised controlled trial.
Healthc Counsell Psychother J January 2015, pp. 8–13.
333. Allen JJB, Schnyer R, Hitt SK. The efficacy of acupuncture in the treatment of major depression in
women. Psychol Sci 1998;9:397–401. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00074
334. Allen JJ, Schnyer RN, Chambers AS, Hitt SK, Moreno FA, Manber R. Acupuncture for depression:
a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Psychiatry 2006;67:1665–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.4088/
JCP.v67n1101
335. Cape J, Whittington C, Buszewicz M, Wallace P, Underwood L. Brief psychological therapies for
anxiety and depression in primary care: meta-analysis and meta-regression. BMC Med 2010;8:38.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1741-7015-8-38
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
177
 336. McMillan D, Gilbody S, Richards D. Defining successful treatment outcome in depression using
the PHQ-9: a comparison of methods. J Affect Disord 2010;127:122–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jad.2010.04.030
337. Burt DB, Zembar MJ, Niederehe G. Depression and memory impairment: a meta-analysis of the
association, its pattern, and specificity. Psychol Bull 1995;117:285–305. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
0033-2909.117.2.285
338. Hawker GA, Gignac MA, Badley E, Davis AM, French MR, Li Y, et al. A longitudinal study to
explain the pain–depression link in older adults with osteoarthritis. Arthritis Care Res
2011;63:1382–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/acr.20298
339. White DK, Wilson JC, Keysor JJ. Measures of adult general functional status: SF-36 Physical
Functioning Subscale (PF-10), Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ), Modified Health
Assessment Questionnaire (MHAQ), Katz Index of Independence in activities of daily living,
Functional Independence Measure (FIM), and Osteoarthritis-Function-Computer Adaptive Test
(OA-Function-CAT). Arthritis Care Res 2011;63:S297–307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/acr.20638
340. Eccleston C, Williams A de C, Morley S. Psychological Therapies for the Management of Chronic
Pain (Excluding Headache) in Adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. Chichester:
John Wiley; 2009. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/14651858.CD007407.pub2
(accessed 19 August 2016).
341. Robinson MJ, Edwards SE, Iyengar S, Bymaster F, Clark M, Katon W. Depression and pain.
Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 2009;14:5031–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.2741/3585
342. Hannes K. Chapter 4: Critical Appraisal of Qualitative Research. In Noyes J, Booth A, Hannes K,
Harden A, Harris J, Lewin S, Lockwood C, editors. Supplementary Guidance for Inclusion of
Qualitative Research in Cochrane Systematic Reviews of Interventions. Version 1 (updated August
2011). Cochrane Collaboration Qualitative Methods Group; 2011. URL: http://cqrmg.cochrane.
org/supplemental-handbook-guidance (accessed 31 March 2014).
343. MacPherson H, Thorpe L, Thomas K. Beyond needling – therapeutic processes in acupuncture
care: a qualitative study nested within a low-back pain trial. J Altern Complement Med
2006;12:873–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.2006.12.873
344. Perren S, Godfrey M, Rowland N. The long-term effects of counselling: the process and
mechanisms that contribute to ongoing change from a user perspective. Couns Psychother Res
2009;9:241–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14733140903150745
345. Yeung AS, Ameral VE, Chuzi SE, Fava M, Mischoulon D. A pilot study of acupuncture
augmentation therapy in antidepressant partial and non-responders with major depressive
disorder. J Affect Disord 2011;130:285–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2010.07.025
346. Mischoulon D, Brill CD, Ameral VE, Fava M, Yeung AS. A pilot study of acupuncture monotherapy
in patients with major depressive disorder. J Affect Disord 2012;141:469–73. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jad.2012.03.023
347. Richmond SJ, Keding A, Hover M, Gabe R, Cross B, Torgerson D, et al. Feasibility, acceptability
and validity of SMS text messaging for measuring change in depression during a randomised
controlled trial. BMC Psychiatry 2015;15:68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12888-015-0456-3
348. Keding A, Böhnke JR, Croudace TJ, Richmond SJ, MacPherson H. Validity of single item responses
to short message service texts to monitor depression: an mHealth sub-study of the UK ACUDep
trial. BMC Med Res Methodol 2015;15:56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12874-015-0054-6
349. Abrahams S, Demetriou P. A comparison of the benefits of physiotherapy and anti-inflammatory
drugs for osteoarthritis of the knee. J Orthop Med 2002;24:79–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
1355297X.2002.11736170
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
178
 350. Alcidi L, Beneforti E, Maresca M, Santosuosso U, Zoppi M. Low power radiofrequency
electromagnetic radiation for the treatment of pain due to osteoarthritis of the knee.
Reumatismo 2007;59:140–5.
351. An B, Dai K, Zhu Z, Wang Y, Hao Y, Tang T, et al. Baduanjin alleviates the symptoms of knee
osteoarthritis. J Altern Complement Med 2008;14:167–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
acm.2007.0600
352. Arman MI. Therapeutischer Effekt der Kryotherapie bei der aktivierten Gonarthrose. Eine
untersucherblinde, kontrollierte Studie. Z Phys Med Baln Med Klim 1988;17:368–9.
353. Baker KR, Nelson ME, Felson DT, Layne JE, Sarno R, Roubenoff R. The efficacy of home based
progressive strength training in older adults with knee osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled
trial. J Rheumatol 2001;28:1655–65.
354. Baker K, Goggins J, Xie H, Szumowski K, LaValley M, Hunter DJ, et al. A randomized crossover
trial of a wedged insole for treatment of knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:1198–203.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.22516
355. Bálint GP, Buchanan WW, Adám A, Ratkó I, Poór L, Bálint PV, et al. The effect of the thermal
mineral water of Nagybaracska on patients with knee joint osteoarthritis – a double blind study.
Clin Rheumatol 2007;26:890–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10067-006-0420-1
356. Bao F, Wu Z. Observation on therapeutic effect of knee osteoarthritis treated by
electroacupuncture. Int J Clin Acupuncture 2007;16:191–5.
357. Berman BM, Singh BB, Lao L, Langenberg P, Li H, Hadhazy V, et al. A randomized trial of
acupuncture as an adjunctive therapy in osteoarthritis of the knee. Rheumatology 1999;38:346–54.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/38.4.346
358. Bezalel T, Carmeli E, Katz-Leurer M. The effect of a group education programme on pain and
function through knowledge acquisition and home-based exercise among patients with knee
osteoarthritis: a parallel randomised single-blind clinical trial. Physiotherapy 2010;96:137–43.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physio.2009.09.009
359. Bilgici A, Akdeniz O, Kuru O, Ulusoy H. The effect of a home-based exercise therapy versus an
aerobic exercise programme on pain and functional disability in patients with knee osteoarthritis.
Ann Rheum Dis 2004;63:364–5.
360. Brismée JM, Paige RL, Chyu MC, Boatright JD, Hagar JM, McCaleb JA, et al. Group and
home-based tai chi in elderly subjects with knee osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial.
Clin Rehabil 2007;21:99–111. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0269215506070505
361. Bülow PM, Jensen H, Danneskiold-Samsøe B. Low power Ga-Al-As laser treatment of painful
osteoarthritis of the knee. A double-blind placebo-controlled study. Scand J Rehabil Med
1994;26:155–9.
362. Callaghan MJ, Oldham JA, Hunt J. An evaluation of exercise regimes for patients with
osteoarthritis of the knee: a single-blind randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil 1995;9:213–18.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/026921559500900306
363. Callaghan MJ, Whittaker PE, Grimes S, Smith L. An evaluation of pulsed shortwave on knee
osteoarthritis using radioleucoscintigraphy: a randomised, double blind, controlled trial. Joint Bone
Spine 2005;72:150–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbspin.2004.03.010
364. Cantarini L, Leo G, Giannitti C, Cevenini G, Barberini P, Fioravanti A. Therapeutic effect of spa
therapy and short wave therapy in knee osteoarthritis: a randomized, single blind, controlled trial.
Rheumatol Int 2007;27:523–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00296-006-0266-5
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
179
 365. Cheing GL, Hui-Chan CW, Chan KM. Does four weeks of TENS and/or isometric exercise produce
cumulative reduction of osteoarthritic knee pain? Clin Rehabil 2002;16:749–60. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1191/0269215502cr549oa
366. Chen CY, Chen CL, Hsu SC, Chou SW, Wang KC. Effect of magnetic knee wrap on quadriceps
strength in patients with symptomatic knee osteoarthritis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil
2008;89:2258–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2008.05.019
367. Christensen R, Astrup A, Bliddal H. Weight loss: the treatment of choice for knee osteoarthritis?
A randomized trial. Osteoarthr Cartil 2005;13:20–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2004.10.008
368. Clarke GR, Willis LA, Stenners L, Nichols PJ. Evaluation of physiotherapy in the treatment of
osteoarthrosis of the knee. Rheumatol Rehabil 1974;13:190–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
rheumatology/13.4.190
369. Defrin R, Ariel E, Peretz C. Segmental noxious versus innocuous electrical stimulation for chronic
pain relief and the effect of fading sensation during treatment. Pain 2005;115:152–60.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pain.2005.02.018
370. Durmus
¸ D, Alayli G, Cantürk F. Effects of quadriceps electrical stimulation program on
clinical parameters in the patients with knee osteoarthritis. Clin Rheumatol 2007;26:674–8.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10067-006-0358-3
371. Ettinger WH, Burns R, Messier SP, Applegate W, Rejeski WJ, Morgan T, et al. A randomized trial
comparing aerobic exercise and resistance exercise with a health education program in older
adults with knee osteoarthritis. The Fitness Arthritis and Seniors Trial (FAST). JAMA
1997;277:25–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1997.03540250033028
372. Fioravanti A, Iacoponi F, Bellisai B, Cantarini L, Galeazzi M. Short- and long-term effects of spa
therapy in knee osteoarthritis. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2010;89:125–32. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1097/PHM.0b013e3181c1eb81
373. Fischer G, Pelka RB, Barovic J. [Adjuvant treatment of knee osteoarthritis with weak pulsing
magnetic fields. Results of a placebo-controlled trial prospective clinical trial]. Z Orthop Ihre
Grenzgeb 2005;143:544–50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-2005-836830
374. Flusser D, Abu-Shakra M, Friger M, Codish S, Sukenik S. Therapy with mud compresses for knee
osteoarthritis: comparison of natural mud preparations with mineral-depleted mud. J Clin
Rheumatol 2002;8:197–203. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00124743-200208000-00003
375. Forestier R, Desfour H, Tessier JM, Françon A, Foote AM, Genty C, et al. Spa therapy in the
treatment of knee osteoarthritis: a large randomised multicentre trial. Ann Rheum Dis
2010;69:660–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ard.2009.113209
376. Fukuda TY, Ovanessian V, Cunha RAD, Filho ZJ, Cazarini C, Rienzo FA, et al. Pulsed short wave
effect in pain and function in patients with knee osteoarthritis. J Applied Res 2008;8:189–98.
377. Garland D, Holt P, Harrington JT, Caldwell J, Zizic T, Cholewczynski J. A 3-month, randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a highly optimized,
capacitively coupled, pulsed electrical stimulator in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee.
Osteoarthr Cartil 2007;15:630–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2007.01.004
378. Grimmer K. A controlled double blind study comparing the effects of strong burst mode
TENS and high rate TENS on painful osteoarthritic knees. Aust J Physiother 1992;38:49–56.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0004-9514(14)60551-1
379. Gür H, Cakin N, Akova B, Okay E, Küçükog
˘ lu S. Concentric versus combined concentric-eccentric
isokinetic training: effects on functional capacity and symptoms in patients with osteoarthrosis of
the knee. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2002;83:308–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/apmr.2002.30620
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
180
 380. Gür A, Cosut A, Sarac AJ, Cevik R, Nas K, Uyar A. Efficacy of different therapy regimes of low-
power laser in painful osteoarthritis of the knee: a double-blind and randomized-controlled trial.
Lasers Surg Med 2003;33:330–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/lsm.10236
381. Hasegawa R, Islam MM, Nasu E, Tomiyama N, Lee SC, Koizumi D, et al. Effects of combined
balance and resistance exercise on reducing knee pain in community-dwelling older adults. Phys
Occup Ther Geriatr 2010;28:44–56. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/02703180903381086
382. Hay EM, Foster NE, Thomas E, Peat G, Phelan M, Yates HE, et al. Effectiveness of community
physiotherapy and enhanced pharmacy review for knee pain in people aged over 55 presenting
to primary care: pragmatic randomised trial. BMJ 2006;333:995. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.38977.590752.0B
383. Hinman MR, Ford J, Heyl H. Effects of static magnets on chronic knee pain and physical function:
a double-blind study. Altern Ther Health Med 2002;8:50–5.
384. Huang MH, Lin YS, Lee CL, Yang RC. Use of ultrasound to increase effectiveness of isokinetic
exercise for knee osteoarthritis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2005;86:1545–51. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.apmr.2005.02.007
385. Hurley MV, Walsh NE, Mitchell HL, Pimm TJ, Patel A, Williamson E, et al. Clinical effectiveness of
a rehabilitation program integrating exercise, self-management, and active coping strategies for
chronic knee pain: a cluster randomized trial. Arthritis Rheum 2007;57:1211–19. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/art.22995
386. Itoh K, Hirota S, Katsumi Y, Ochi H, Kitakoji H. A pilot study on using acupuncture and
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) to treat knee osteoarthritis (OA). Chin Med
2008;3:2. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1749-8546-3-2
387. Itoh K, Hirota S, Katsumi Y, Ochi H, Kitakoji H. Trigger point acupuncture for treatment of knee
osteoarthritis – a preliminary RCT for a pragmatic trial. Acupunct Med 2008;26:17–26.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/aim.26.1.17
388. Jacobson JI, Gorman R, Yamanashi WS, Saxena BB, Clayton L. Low-amplitude, extremely low
frequency magnetic fields for the treatment of osteoarthritic knees: a double-blind clinical study.
Altern Ther Health Med 2001;7:54–64, 66–9.
389. Jan MH, Lin JJ, Liau JJ, Lin YF, Lin DH. Investigation of clinical effects of high- and low-resistance
training for patients with knee osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial. Phys Ther
2008;88:427–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20060300
390. Jenkinson CM, Doherty M, Avery AJ, Read A, Taylor MA, Sach TH, et al. Effects of dietary
intervention and quadriceps strengthening exercises on pain and function in overweight people
with knee pain: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2009;339:b3170. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.b3170
391. Jubb RW, Tukmachi ES, Jones PW, Dempsey E, Waterhouse L, Brailsford S. A blinded randomised
trial of acupuncture (manual and electroacupuncture) compared with a non-penetrating sham for
the symptoms of osteoarthritis of the knee. Acupunct Med 2008;26:69–78. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/aim.26.2.69
392. Kang T, Kim S, Kim S. The efficacy of low power laser therapy in patients with knee osteoarthritis.
Ann Rheum Dis 2006;65(Suppl. 2):233.
393. Kang RW, Lewis PB, Kramer A, Hayden JK, Cole BJ. Prospective randomized single-blinded
controlled clinical trial of percutaneous neuromodulation pain therapy device versus sham for the
osteoarthritic knee: a pilot study. Orthopedics 2007;30:439–45.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
181
 394. Karagülle M, Karagülle MZ, Karagülle O, Dönmez A, Turan M. A 10-day course of spa therapy is
beneficial for people with severe knee osteoarthritis. A 24-week randomised, controlled pilot
study. Clin Rheumatol 2007;26:2063–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10067-007-0618-x
395. Keefe FJ, Blumenthal J, Baucom D, Affleck G, Waugh R, Caldwell DS, et al. Effects of
spouse-assisted coping skills training and exercise training in patients with osteoarthritic knee
pain: a randomized controlled study. Pain 2004;110:539–49. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.pain.2004.03.022
396. Keogan F, Gilsenan C, Hussey J, O’Connell P. Open or closed chain quadriceps exercises in
treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee; which is more effective? A blinded randomised controlled
trial. Physiother Ire 2007;28:47–8.
397. Kovács I, Bender T. The therapeutic effects of Cserkeszölö thermal water in osteoarthritis of
the knee: a double blind, controlled, follow-up study. Rheumatol Int 2002;21:218–21.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00296-001-0167-6
398. Kovar PA, Allegrante JP, MacKenzie CR, Peterson MG, Gutin B, Charlson ME. Supervised fitness
walking in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee. A randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern
Med 1992;116:529–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-116-7-529
399. Kuptniratsaikul V, Tosayanonda O, Nilganuwong S, Thamalikitkul V. The efficacy of a muscle
exercise program to improve functional performance of the knee in patients with osteoarthritis.
J Med Assoc Thai 2002;85:33–40.
400. Law PP, Cheing GL. Optimal stimulation frequency of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
on people with knee osteoarthritis. J Rehabil Med 2004;36:220–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
16501970410029834
401. Lee HJ, Park HJ, Chae Y, Kim SY, Kim SN, Kim ST, et al. Tai Chi Qigong for the quality of life of
patients with knee osteoarthritis: a pilot, randomized, waiting list controlled trial. Clin Rehabil
2009;23:504–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0269215508101746
402. Lewis B, Lewis D, Cumming G. The analgesic efficacy of transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS) compared with a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (naprosyn) in painful
osteoarthritis (OA) of the knee. Aust NZ J Med 1988;18(Suppl. 1):224.
403. Lewis B, Lewis D, Cumming G. The comparative analgesic efficacy of transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation and a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug for painful osteoarthritis. Br J
Rheumatol 1994;33:455–60. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/33.5.455
404. Lewis D, Lewis B, Sturrock RD. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation in osteoarthrosis: a
therapeutic alternative? Ann Rheum Dis 1984;43:47–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ard.43.1.47
405. Lim BW, Hinman RS, Wrigley TV, Sharma L, Bennell KL. Does knee malalignment mediate the
effects of quadriceps strengthening on knee adduction moment, pain, and function in medial
knee osteoarthritis? A randomized controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum 2008;59:943–51.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.23823
406. Lin D-H, Lin C-HJ, Lin Y-F, Jan M-H. Efficacy of 2 non-weight-bearing interventions,
proprioception training versus strength training, for patients with knee osteoarthritis: a
randomized clinical trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2009;39:450–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.2519/
jospt.2009.2923
407. Lund H, Weile U, Christensen R, Rostock B, Downey A, Bartels EM, et al. A randomized controlled
trial of aquatic and land-based exercise in patients with knee osteoarthritis. J Rehabil Med
2008;40:137–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.2340/16501977-0134
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
182
 408. Mahboob N, Sousan K, Shirzad A, Amir G, Mohammad V, Reza M, et al. The efficacy of a topical
gel prepared using Lake Urmia mud in patients with knee osteoarthritis. J Altern Complement
Med 2009;15:1239–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.2009.0304
409. Maillefert JF, Hudry C, Baron G, Kieffert P, Bourgeois P, Lechevalier D, et al. Laterally elevated
wedged insoles in the treatment of medial knee osteoarthritis: a prospective randomized
controlled study. Osteoarthr Cartil 2001;9:738–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/joca.2001.0470
410. Maurer BT, Stern AG, Kinossian B, Cook KD, Schumacher HR. Osteoarthritis of the knee:
isokinetic quadriceps exercise versus an educational intervention. Arch Phys Med Rehabil
1999;80:1293–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0003-9993(99)90032-1
411. Mazzuca SA, Page MC, Meldrum RD, Brandt KD, Petty-Saphon S. Pilot study of the effects
of a heat-retaining knee sleeve on joint pain, stiffness, and function in patients with knee
osteoarthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2004;51:716–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.20683
412. McCarthy CJ, Mills PM, Pullen R, Richardson G, Hawkins N, Roberts CR, et al. Supplementation of
a home-based exercise programme with a class-based programme for people with osteoarthritis
of the knees: a randomised controlled trial and health economic analysis. Health Technol Assess
2004;8(46). http://dx.doi.org/10.3310/hta8460
413. Messier SP, Loeser RF, Miller GD, Morgan TM, Rejeski WJ, Sevick MA, et al. Exercise and dietary
weight loss in overweight and obese older adults with knee osteoarthritis: the Arthritis, Diet, and
Activity Promotion Trial. Arthritis Rheum 2004;50:1501–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.20256
414. Miller GD, Nicklas BJ, Davis C, Loeser RF, Lenchik L, Messier SP. Intensive weight loss program
improves physical function in older obese adults with knee osteoarthritis. Obesity 2006;14:1219–30.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/oby.2006.139
415. Miranda-Filloy JA, Barbazán AC, Monteagudo Sánchez B, Graña GJ, Galdo Fernández F. [Effect of
transcutaneous electrical quadriceps muscle stimulation in knee osteoarthritis symptomatology].
Rehabilitación 2005;39:167–70. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7120(05)74340-1
416. Molsberger A, Böwing G, Jensen KU, Lorek M. [Acupuncture treatment for the relief of
gonarthrosis pain – a controlled clinical trial]. Schmerz 1994;8:37–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
BF02527508
417. Moss P, Sluka K, Wright A. The initial effects of knee joint mobilization on osteoarthritic
hyperalgesia. Man Ther 2007;12:109–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.math.2006.02.009
418. Ng MML, Leung MCP, Poon DMY. The effects of electro-acupuncture and transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation on patients with painful osteoarthritic knees: a randomized controlled
trial with follow-up evaluation. J Altern Complement Med 2003;9:641–9. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1089/107555303322524490
419. Nguyen M, Revel M, Dougados M. Prolonged effects of 3 week therapy in a spa resort on lumbar
spine, knee and hip osteoarthritis: follow-up after 6 months. A randomized controlled trial. Br J
Rheumatol 1997;36:77–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/36.1.77
420. Ni GX, Song L, Yu B, Huang CH, Lin JH. Tai chi improves physical function in older Chinese
women with knee osteoarthritis. J Clin Rheumatol 2010;16:64–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
RHU.0b013e3181cf344f
421. Nigg BM, Emery C, Hiemstra LA. Unstable shoe construction and reduction of pain in
osteoarthritis patients. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2006;38:1701–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1249/
01.mss.0000228364.93703.53
422. Nivbrant B, Friberg S. Therapeutic laser treatment in gonarthrosis. Acta Orthop
1989;60(Suppl. 231):33.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
183
 423. Péloquin L, Bravo G, Gauthier P, Lacombe G, Billiard JS. Effects of a cross-training exercise
program in persons with osteoarthritis of the knee a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Rheumatol
1999;5:126–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00124743-199906000-00004
424. Perlman AI, Sabina A, Williams AL, Njike VY, Katz DL. Massage therapy for osteoarthritis of the
knee: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:2533–8. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1001/archinte.166.22.2533
425. Perrot S, Marty M, Kahan A, Menkes CJ. Efficacy of Pulsed Electromagnetic Therapy in Painful
Knee Osteoarthritis. Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the American College of
Rheumatology, San Diego, CA, USA, November 1998. Abstract S357.
426. Petrou P, Winkler V, Genti G, Balint G. Double blind trial to evaluate the effect of acupuncture
treatment on knee osteoarthritis. Scand J Acupunc Electrother 1988;3:112–15.
427. Pietrosimone BG, Hart JM, Saliba SA, Hertel J, Ingersoll CD. Immediate effects of transcutaneous
electrical nerve stimulation and focal knee joint cooling on quadriceps activation. Med Sci Sports
Exerc 2009;41:1175–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181982557
428. Pipitone N, Scott DL. Magnetic pulse treatment for knee osteoarthritis: a randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled study. Curr Med Res Opin 2001;17:190–6. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1185/03007990152673828
429. Pollard H, Ward G, Hoskins W, Hardy K. The effect of a manual therapy knee protocol on
osteoarthritic knee pain: a randomised controlled trial. J Can Chiropr Assoc 2008;52:229–42.
430. Rapp W, Boeer J, Albrich C, Heitkamp HC. Efficiency of vibration or strength training for knee
stability in osteoarthritis of the knee. Aktuelle Rheumatol 2009;34:240–5. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1055/s-0029-1225366
431. Rattanachaiyanont M, Kuptniratsaikul V. No additional benefit of shortwave diathermy over
exercise program for knee osteoarthritis in peri-/post-menopausal women: an equivalence trial.
Osteoarthr Cartil 2008;16:823–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2007.10.013
432. Røgind H, Bibow-Nielsen B, Jensen B, Møller HC, Frimodt-Møller H, Bliddal H. The effects of a
physical training program on patients with osteoarthritis of the knees. Arch Phys Med Rehabil
1998;79:1421–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0003-9993(98)90238-6
433. Rosemffet MG, Schneeberger EE, Citera G, Sgobba ME, Laiz C, Schmulevich H, et al. Effects of
functional electrostimulation on pain, muscular strength, and functional capacity in patients with
osteoarthritis of the knee. J Clin Rheumatol 2004;10:246–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
01.rhu.0000141831.40350.91
434. Sangdee C, Teekachunhatean S, Sananpanich K, Sugandhavesa N, Chiewchantanakit S,
Pojchamarnwiputh S, et al. Electroacupuncture versus diclofenac in symptomatic treatment of
osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Complement Altern Med 2002;2:3.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6882-2-3
435. Schilke JM, Johnson GO, Housh TJ, O’Dell JR. Effects of muscle-strength training on the functional
status of patients with osteoarthritis of the knee joint. Nurs Res 1996;45:68–72. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1097/00006199-199603000-00002
436. Selfe TK, Bourguignon C, Taylor AG. Effects of noninvasive interactive neurostimulation on
symptoms of osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized, sham-controlled pilot study. J Altern
Complement Med 2008;14:1075–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/acm.2008.0305
437. Shen X, Zhao L, Ding G, Tan M, Gao J, Wang L, et al. Effect of combined laser acupuncture on
knee osteoarthritis: a pilot study. Lasers Med Sci 2009;24:129–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10103-007-0536-9
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
184
 438. Sherman G, Zeller L, Avriel A, Friger M, Harari M, Sukenik S. Intermittent balneotherapy at the
Dead Sea area for patients with knee osteoarthritis. Isr Med Assoc J 2009;11:88–93.
439. Smith CR, Lewith GT, Machin D. TNS and osteo-arthritic pain. Preliminary study to establish a
controlled method of assessing transcutaneous nerve stimulation as a treatment for the pain
caused by osteo-arthritis of the knee. Physiotherapy 1983;69:266–8.
440. Stelian J, Gil I, Habot B, Rosenthal M, Abramovici I, Kutok N, et al. Improvement of pain
and disability in elderly patients with degenerative osteoarthritis of the knee treated with
narrow-band light therapy. J Am Geriatr Soc 1992;40:23–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1532-5415.1992.tb01824.x
441. Sukenik S, Flusser D, Codish S, Abu-Shakra M. Balneotherapy at the Dead Sea area for knee
osteoarthritis. Isr Med Assoc J 1999;1:83–5.
442. Takeda W, Wessel J. Acupuncture for the treatment of pain of osteoarthritic knees. Arthritis Care
Res 1994;7:118–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.1790070304
443. Talbot LA, Gaines JM, Ling SM, Metter EJ. A home-based protocol of electrical muscle stimulation
for quadriceps muscle strength in older adults with osteoarthritis of the knee. J Rheumatol
2003;30:1571–8.
444. Tascioglu F, Armagan O, Tabak Y, Corapci I, Oner C. Low power laser treatment in patients with
knee osteoarthritis. Swiss Med Wkly 2004;134:254–8.
445. Taylor P, Hallett M, Flaherty L. Treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee with transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation. Pain 1981;11:233–40. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-3959(81)90008-7
446. Thamsborg G, Florescu A, Oturai P, Fallentin E, Tritsaris K, Dissing S. Treatment of knee
osteoarthritis with pulsed electromagnetic fields: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. Osteoarthr Cartil 2005;13:575–81. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2005.02.012
447. Thorstensson CA, Roos EM, Petersson IF, Ekdahl C. Six-week high-intensity exercise program for
middle-aged patients with knee osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial [ISRCTN20244858].
BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2005;6:27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-6-27
448. Tishler M, Rosenberg O, Levy O, Elias I, Amit-Vazina M. The effect of balneotherapy on
osteoarthritis. Is an intermittent regimen effective? Eur J Intern Med 2004;15:93–6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2004.01.002
449. Toda Y, Tsukimura N. Influence of concomitant heeled footwear when wearing a lateral wedged
insole for medial compartment osteoarthritis of the knee. Osteoarthr Cartil 2008;16:244–53.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2007.06.010
450. Topp R, Woolley S, Hornyak J, Khuder S, Kahaleh B. The effect of dynamic versus isometric
resistance training on pain and functioning among adults with osteoarthritis of the knee.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2002;83:1187–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1053/apmr.2002.33988
451. Trans T, Aaboe J, Henriksen M, Christensen R, Bliddal H, Lund H. Effect of whole body vibration
exercise on muscle strength and proprioception in females with knee osteoarthritis. Knee
2009;16:256–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knee.2008.11.014
452. Trock DH, Bollet AJ, Markoll R. The effect of pulsed electromagnetic fields in the treatment of
osteoarthritis of the knee and cervical spine. Report of randomized, double blind, placebo
controlled trials. J Rheumatol 1994;21:1903–11.
453. Tucker M, Brantingham JW, Myburg C. Relative effectiveness of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
medication (Meloxicam) versus manipulation in the treatment of osteo-arthritis of the knee. Eur J
Chiropractic 2003;50:163–84.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
185
 454. Tukmachi E, Jubb R, Dempsey E, Jones P. The effect of acupuncture on the symptoms of knee
osteoarthritis – an open randomised controlled study. Acupunct Med 2004;22:14–22.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/aim.22.1.14
455. Wang C, Schmid CH, Hibberd PL, Kalish R, Roubenoff R, Rones R, et al. Tai Chi is effective in
treating knee osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum 2009;61:1545–53.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/art.24832
456. Wigler I, Elkayam O, Paran D, Yaron M. Spa therapy for gonarthrosis: a prospective study.
Rheumatol Int 1995;15:65–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00262710
457. Wolsko PM, Eisenberg DM, Simon LS, Davis RB, Walleczek J, Mayo-Smith M, et al. Double-blind
placebo-controlled trial of static magnets for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee: results of
a pilot study. Altern Ther Health Med 2004;10:36–43.
458. Wu ZH, Bao F. [Observation on therapeutic effects of electroacupuncture for the treatment of
knee osteoarthritis.] Zhongguo Gu Shang 2008;21:170–2.
459. Young SL, Woodbury MG, Fryday-Field K, Donovan T, Bellamy N, Haddad R. Efficacy of
interferential current stimulation alone for pain reduction in patients with osteoarthritis of
the knee: a randomized placebo control clinical trial. Phys Ther J Am Phys Ther Assoc
1991;71(Suppl. 6):52.
460. Yurtkuran M, Kocagil T. TENS, electroacupuncture and ice massage: comparison of treatment for
osteoarthritis of the knee. Am J Acupunct 1999;27:133–40.
461. Yurtkuran M, Yurtkuran M, Alp A, Nasircilar A, Bingöl U, Altan L, et al. Balneotherapy and
tap water therapy in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis. Rheumatol Int 2006;27:19–27.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00296-006-0158-8
462. Zizic TM, Hoffman KC, Holt PA, Hungerford DS, O’Dell JR, Jacobs MA, et al. The treatment of
osteoarthritis of the knee with pulsed electrical stimulation. J Rheumatol 1995;22:1757–61.
463. Arazpour M, Bani MA, Maleki M, Ghomshe FT, Kashani RV, Hutchins SW. Comparison of the
efficacy of laterally wedged insoles and bespoke unloader knee orthoses in treating medial
compartment knee osteoarthritis. Prosthet Orthot Int 2013;37:50–7. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/0309364612447094
464. Bennell KL, Bowles KA, Payne C, Cicuttini F, Williamson E, Forbes A, et al. Lateral wedge insoles
for medial knee osteoarthritis: 12 month randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2011;342:d2912.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d2912
465. Bliddal H, Leeds AR, Stigsgaard L, Astrup A, Christensen R. Weight loss as treatment for knee
osteoarthritis symptoms in obese patients: 1-year results from a randomised controlled trial. Ann
Rheum Dis 2011;70:1798–803. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ard.2010.142018
466. Brosseau L, Wells GA, Kenny GP, Reid R, Maetzel A, Tugwell P, et al. The implementation
of a community-based aerobic walking program for mild to moderate knee osteoarthritis:
a knowledge translation randomized controlled trial: part II: clinical outcomes. BMC Public Health
2012;12:1073. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-1073
467. Bruce-Brand RA, Walls RJ, Ong JC, Emerson BS, O’Byrne JM, Moyna NM. Effects of home-based
resistance training and neuromuscular electrical stimulation in knee osteoarthritis: a randomized
controlled trial. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2012;13:118. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2474-13-118
468. Fary RE, Carroll GJ, Briffa TG, Briffa NK. The effectiveness of pulsed electrical stimulation in
the management of osteoarthritis of the knee: results of a double-blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled, repeated-measures trial. Arthritis Rheum 2011;63:1333–42. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/art.30258
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
186
 469. Foroughi N, Smith RM, Lange AK, Baker MK, Fiatarone Singh MA, Vanwanseele B. Lower limb
muscle strengthening does not change frontal plane moments in women with knee osteoarthritis:
a randomized controlled trial. Clin Biomech 2011;26:167–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.clinbiomech.2010.08.011
470. Fukuda TY, Alves da Cunha R, Fukuda VO, Rienzo FA, Cazarini C, Carvalho Nde A, et al. Pulsed
shortwave treatment in women with knee osteoarthritis: a multicenter, randomized, placebo-
controlled clinical trial. Phys Ther 2011;91:1009–17. http://dx.doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20100306
471. Fukuda VO, Fukuda TY, Guimarães M, Shiwa S, de Lima Bdel C, Martins RÁ, et al. Short-term
efficacy of low-level laser therapy in patients with knee osteoarthritis: a randomized
placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. Rev Bras Ortop 2011;46:526–33. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1590/S0102-36162011000500008
472. Giombini A, Di Cesare A, Di Cesare M, Ripani M, Maffulli N. Localized hyperthermia induced by
microwave diathermy in osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized placebo-controlled double-blind
clinical trial. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 2011;19:980–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s00167-010-1350-7
473. Hsieh R-L, Lo M-T, Lee W-C, Liao W-C. Therapeutic effects of short-term monochromatic infrared
energy therapy on patients with knee osteoarthritis: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled
study. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2012;42:947–56. http://dx.doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2012.3881
474. Imoto AM, Peccin MS, Trevisani VF. Quadriceps strengthening exercises are effective in improving
pain, function and quality of life in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee. Acta Ortop Bras
2012;20:174–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1590/S1413-78522012000300008
475. Lim JY, Tchai E, Jang SN. Effectiveness of aquatic exercise for obese patients with knee
osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial. PM R 2010;2:723–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.pmrj.2010.04.004
476. Mavrommatis CI, Argyra E, Vadalouka A, Vasilakos DG. Acupuncture as an adjunctive therapy
to pharmacological treatment in patients with chronic pain due to osteoarthritis of the knee:
a 3-armed, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Pain 2012;153:1720–6. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.pain.2012.05.005
477. Miller E, Maimon Y, Rosenblatt Y, Mendler A, Hasner A, Barad A, et al. Delayed effect of
acupuncture treatment in OA of the knee: a blinded, randomized, controlled trial. Evid Based
Complement Alternat Med 2011;2011:792975. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ecam/nen080
478. Perlman AI, Ali A, Njike VY, Hom D, Davidi A, Gould-Fogerite S, et al. Massage therapy for
osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized dose-finding trial. PLOS ONE 2012;7:e30248.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0030248
479. Salacinski AJ, Krohn K, Lewis SF, Holland ML, Ireland K, Marchetti G. The effects of group cycling
on gait and pain-related disability in individuals with mild-to-moderate knee osteoarthritis:
a randomized controlled trial. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2012;42:985–95. http://dx.doi.org/
10.2519/jospt.2012.3813
480. Salli A, Sahin N, Baskent A, Ugurlu H. The effect of two exercise programs on various functional
outcome measures in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee: a randomized controlled clinical
trial. Isokinet Exerc Sci 2010;18:201–9.
481. Vance CG, Rakel BA, Blodgett NP, DeSantana JM, Amendola A, Zimmerman MB, et al. Effects of
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation on pain, pain sensitivity, and function in people with
knee osteoarthritis: a randomized controlled trial. Phys Ther 2012;92:898–910. http://dx.doi.org/
10.2522/ptj.20110183
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
187
 482. Wang TJ, Lee SC, Liang SY, Tung HH, Wu SF, Lin YP. Comparing the efficacy of aquatic exercises
and land-based exercises for patients with knee osteoarthritis. J Clin Nurs 2011;20:2609–22.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2702.2010.03675.x
483. MacPherson H, Altman DG, Hammerschlag R, Youping L, Taixiang W, White A, et al. Revised
STandards for Reporting Interventions in Clinical Trials of Acupuncture (STRICTA): extending the
CONSORT statement. PLOS Med 2010;7:e1000261. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.1000261
484. Centre for Outcomes Research and Effectiveness (CORE). Humanistic Psychological Therapies
Competences Framework. University College London Division of Psychology and Language
Sciences; 2013. URL: www.ucl.ac.uk/pals/research/cehp/research-groups/core#,2009 (accessed
17 December 2015).
485. Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary. 64 edn. London: BMJ Group and
Pharmaceutical Press; 2012.
486. Department of Health. NHS Reference Costs 2011–2012. London: Department of Health; 2012.
REFERENCES
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
188
 Appendix 1 Review data related to Chapter 1
MEDLINE search strategy
Acupuncture
acupuncture OR electro-acupuncture OR electroacupuncture
Back pain
back pain OR backache OR Intervertebral disk OR lumbar* OR sciatica
Neck pain
neck OR cervic* OR spinal OR torticollis OR whiplash
Shoulder pain
shoulder OR rotator cuff OR bursitis OR tendinitis OR tendonitis OR adhesive capsulitis
Osteoarthritis knee pain
Knee OR Arthralgia* OR Arthriti* OR Osteoarthrit* OR Hip
Headache pain
headache OR migrain* OR cephalgi* OR hemicrania
Randomised trials of acupuncture for pain
Pain with “Randomized Controlled Trial” as a limit
Outcome measure preferences
This section is to guide the selection of end points to be included in the meta-analyses. End points are
classified by domain (e.g. WOMAC pain is in the ‘pain intensity’ domain; days of headache is in the ‘pain
frequency’ domain). This section specifies which end point should be chosen if a trial has data on more
than one end point per domain. In general, we have given preference to measures that are specific to pain
types, then to the most widely used measures.
Pain frequency
Headache
l
For trials with only migraine patients:
(a)
days with migraine
(b)
days with migraine symptoms
(c)
have you had a migraine during the last 4 weeks (1 = yes/0 = no)?
(d)
migraine attacks
(e)
list as below.
l
For trials including non-migraine headache patients:
(f)
days with moderate/strong headache
(g)
days with headache
(h)
days with strong headache
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
189
 (i)
total headache hours
(j)
days with headache from other causes
(k)
during the past 4 weeks have you experienced a TTH (1 = yes/0 = no)?
(l)
do you have other pain than a TTH (1 = yes/0 = no)?
(m) days with impaired activity
(n)
during the past 4 weeks have you had migraine as well (as a TTH) (1 = yes/0 = no)?
(o)
do you have other pain in addition to a migraine headache (1 = yes/0 = no)?
(p)
days with at least one accompanying symptom
(q)
days with a minimum of one accompanying symptom.
Lower back pain
(a)
Days with pain in the past month (diary 31 days maximum).
Knee and/or hip osteoarthritis
(a)
Days with pain in the past week (diary 7 days maximum).
Shoulder
(a)
Pain persistent at time of assessment.
(b)
New episode of pain at time of assessment.
Pain intensity
1. Diary scores (if pain diaries use more than one measure of pain, then preference is as below).
2. VAS and NRS will be combined by multiplication (NRS × 10 = VAS).
–
Average pain measured by the VAS or NRS will be first choice
–
If a trial measures:
–
if worst, day and night scores, we will average day and night scores
–
if day and night scores are given, we will take the average
–
if good and bad knee scores are given, we will average the two scores
–
if average, highest intensity, lowest and current are given, we will use the average
–
if pain severity in the past week, unpleasantness in the past week and severity of main problem
are given, we will use severity in the past week.
3. WOMAC pain.
4. Self-Efficacy Scale pain affective/sensoric.
5. Arthritis Self-Efficacy Scale – pain subscale.
6. Shoulder Pain and Disability Index (SPADI) pain component (0–50).
7. Quality of life (SF-36): bodily pain.
8. McGill Pain Questionnaire.
9. Global headache severity.
10. CMS pain component.
11. von Korff scale Q1–3 (pain intensity).
Functional impairment
1. WOMAC function.
2. CMS activity component.
3. Disability: Oswestry Disability Index.
APPENDIX 1
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
190
 4. Disability: Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire.
5. Back function score [FFbH-R (Hannover Functional Ability Questionnaire) 0–100%].
6. SPADI disability (0–80).
7. Days with impairment because of pain:
–
days with limited function because of pain (180 days maximum)
–
days unable to do household work
–
days with inability to work because of pain.
8. Disability: Pain Disability Index.
9. von Korff scale Q5–7 (impairment).
10. Walking ability.
Combined pain and functional impairment
1. WOMAC index/combined.
2. Neck pain and disability score.
3. CMS total.
4. Northwick Park Neck Pain Questionnaire (measures pain and disability).
5. OARSI-OMERACT Responder Index (pain structure function scale).
6. SPADI global (0–130).
7. Oxford Knee Score.
Mental quality of life
1. Quality of life (SF-36): MCS score.
2. Average quality of life (SF-36): social functioning, role emotional and mental health components.
3. SF-12 mental health summary score.
4. Average of Profile of Quality of Life in the Chronically Ill psychological, positive mood, negative mood,
social functioning and social well-being components.
5. Average of Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale anxiety and depression components.
6. Worry about neck pain compared with worry felt at previous questionnaire.
7. Other depression scores.
8. Other anxiety scores.
Physical quality of life
1. Quality of life (SF-36): PCS score.
2. Average quality of life (SF-36): physical activity and role physical.
3. Profile of Quality of Life in the Chronically Ill physical component.
4. SF-12 physical health summary score.
Overall quality of life
1. SF-36 total score (1–100).
2. Quality of life (SF-36): general health perception.
3. Quality of life: COOP/WONCA (World Organization of Colleges, Academies and Academic Associations
of General Practitioners/Family Physicians) charts (30–0) (lower scores mean higher quality of life).
4. Quality of life (SF-36): vitality.
5. EQ-5D.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
191
 Range of motion/stiffness
1. WOMAC stiffness.
2. Average of CMS range of motion, abduction, flexion, external rotation, internal rotation, strength.
3. Average of active and passive cervical mobility.
4. Range of movement.
Health change
1. Self-evaluated improvement (NRS 0–10).
2. Assessment of treatment effect (1–5).
3. Global assessment of change (1–5).
4. Quality of life (SF-36): health change over the past year (0–10).
5. Globally improved, judged by clinician (yes/no).
6. Physician-evaluated improvement (NRS 0–10).
Satisfaction
1. Satisfaction with treatment outcome.
2. Satisfaction with care.
3. Satisfaction with information.
Medication
1. Days taking medication.
2. Medication quantification scale.
3. Consumption of drugs (none; less than, equal to, greater than or extra than what was prescribed).
4. Any use of pain medication.
5. Amount of trial drug taken (diclofenac) measured by weight of remaining pills.
6. Other.
APPENDIX 1
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
192
 Trial-level information
Trials evaluating acupuncture for osteoarthritis pain (n = 9)
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Primary
outcome
Time
point
Results reported by authors
Dropout rate (in parentheses)
Assessment
of blindinga
Berman
2004134
Total n = 391: acupuncture,
n = 142; sham – both penetrating
and non-penetrating needles,
n = 141; no acupuncture control –
non-specific advice, n = 108
WOMAC
pain subscore
6 months
Mean (SE): acupuncture –3.79 (0.33); sham
–2.92 (0.30); no acupuncture –1.69 (0.33)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 0.87 (0.16 to 1.58;
p = 0.003); acupuncture vs. no acupuncture
(not given)
Total 391/570 (31%): acupuncture
142/190 (25%); sham 141/191
(26%); non-specific advice
108/189 (43%)
A
Vas 2004120
Total n = 88: acupuncture, n = 47;
sham – non-penetrating needles,
n = 41
WOMAC
pain subscore
3 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 1.7 (2.6); sham 6.4
(5.8)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 4.7 (2.9 to 6.5;
p < 0.001)
Total 88/97 (9%): acupuncture
47/48 (2%); sham 41/49 (16%)
A
Witt 200569
Total n = 285: acupuncture,
n = 145; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 73; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 67
WOMAC
index
2 months
Mean (SE): acupuncture 26.9 (1.4); sham
35.8 (1.9); no acupuncture 49.6 (2.0)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 8.8 (4.2 to 13.5;
p < 0.001); acupuncture vs. no acupuncture
22.7 (17.9 to 27.5; p < 0.001)
Total 285/300 (5%): acupuncture
145/150 (3%); sham 73/76 (4%);
usual care 67/74 (9%)
A
Scharf 200670
Total n = 985:b acupuncture,
n = 318; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 360; no acupuncture
control – ancillary care, n = 307
WOMAC
pain subscore
6 months
Mean (95% CI): acupuncture 2.9 (2.65 to
3.17); sham 3.2 (2.93 to 3.43); no
acupuncture 4.0 (3.69 to 4.22)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 0.3 (–0.05 to 0.59;
no p-value given); acupuncture vs. no
acupuncture 1.0 (0.71 to 1.38;
no p-value given)
Total 985/1039 (5%): acupuncture
318/330 (4%); sham 360/367
(2%); usual care 307/342 (10%)
A
Witt 200677
Total n = 579:b acupuncture,
n = 300; no acupuncture control –
usual care, n = 279
WOMAC
index
3 months
Mean (SEM): acupuncture 30.5 (1.0); no
acupuncture 47.3 (1.0)
Difference between groups (SEM): acupuncture
vs. no acupuncture 16.7 (1.4; p < 0.001)
Total 579/712 (19%): acupuncture
300/357 (16%); usual care
279/355 (21%)
NA
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
193
 Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Primary
outcome
Time
point
Results reported by authors
Dropout rate (in parentheses)
Assessment
of blindinga
Foster 2007135
Total n = 325: acupuncture,
n = 108; sham – non-penetrating
needles, n = 112; no acupuncture
control – ancillary care, n = 105
WOMAC
pain subscore
6 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 7.07 (4.4); sham
6.50 (4.8); no acupuncture 6.78 (4.5)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham: not given;
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture 0.08
(–1.0 to 0.9; p = 0.9)
Total 325/352 (8%): acupuncture
108/117 (8%); sham 112/119
(6%); usual care 105/116 (9%)
A
Williamson
2007136
Total n = 181:c acupuncture, n = 60;
no acupuncture control – non-
specific advice, n = 61;
physiotherapy, n = 60 (not analysed)
Oxford Knee
Score
2 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 36.8 (7.20);
no acupuncture 40.3 (8.48)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture 3.5
(0.66 to 6.33; Bonferroni p = 0.016)
Total 161/181 (11%): acupuncture
59/60 (2%); usual care 49/61
(20%); physiotherapy 53/60 (12%)
NA
Lansdown
2009126
Total n = 30: acupuncture, n = 15;
no acupuncture control – usual
care, n = 15
WOMAC
pain subscore
3 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 3.6 (2.92);
no acupuncture 6.57 (4.54)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture –2.62
(–0.77 to –4.47; p = 0.007)
Total 28/30 (7%): acupuncture
14/15 (7%); usual care 14/15 (7%)
(Not evaluated)
Suarez-
Almazor
2010125
Total n = 494: acupuncture,
n = 139; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 283; no acupuncture
control – ancillary care, n = 72
WOMAC
pain subscore
3 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 30.8 (17.9); sham
31.0 (19.1); no acupuncture 42.4 (16.8)
Difference between groups: acupuncture vs.
no acupuncture p = 0.0002 (no estimate
given); acupuncture vs. sham p > 0.20 (no
estimate given)
Acupuncture 139/153 (91%);
sham 283/302 (94%); usual care
72/72 (100%)
(Not evaluated)
NA, not available; SEM, standard error of the mean.
a A, low likelihood of bias; NA, open trials with no patient blinding.
b Patient counts lower in the forest plots because of missing baseline scores for some patients.
c Patient counts lower in the forest plots as number reported in paper includes imputed data.
Note
Ancillary care – programme of care received by both acupuncture and non-acupuncture groups (e.g. trial comparing physiotherapy plus acupuncture with physiotherapy alone); usual care –
protocol did not specify treatments received in control group (e.g. trials with ‘waiting list controls’); non-specific advice – patients in control group received general advice and support
(‘attention control’).
APPENDIX 1
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
194
 Trials evaluating acupuncture for chronic headache pain (n = 7)
Pain
type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Primary
outcome
Time
point
Results reported by author
Dropout rate
Assessment
of blindinga
Migraine
n = 2
Linde 200568
Total n = 272: acupuncture,
n = 132; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 76; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 64
Moderate
to severe
pain days
3 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 2.8 (2.3); sham
2.6 (2.4); no acupuncture 4.3 (2.2)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 0.0 (–0.7 to 0.7;
p > 0.9); acupuncture vs. no
acupuncture 1.4 (0.8 to 2.1; p < 0.001)
Total 272/302 (10%):
acupuncture 132/145 (9%);
sham 76/81 (6%); usual care
64/76 (16%)
A
Diener 200672
Total n = 794:b acupuncture,
n = 290; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 317; no
acupuncture control –
guidelined care, n = 187
Migraine
days
6 months
Change from baseline, mean (SD):
acupuncture –2.8 (3.8); sham –2.0
(3.9); no acupuncture –2.7 (4.2)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 0.57 (0.09 to
1.05; p = 0.021); acupuncture vs. no
acupuncture 0.50 (–0.06 to 1.05;
p = 0.4)
Total 794/960 (7%):
acupuncture 290/313 (7%);
sham 317/339 (6%);
guidelined care 187/308
(39%)
B
TTH
(n = 3)
Coeytaux
2005128
Total n = 71: acupuncture,
n = 34; no acupuncture control
– ancillary care, n = 37
Headache
Impact Test
1 month
Change from baseline, mean (95% CI):
acupuncture –3.9 (–6.5 to –1.2); no
acupuncture –0.4 (–1.8 to 1.0)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture 3.0
(1.0 to 4.9; no p-value given)
Total 71/74 (4%):
acupuncture 34/35 (3%);
usual care 37/39 (5%)
NA
Melchart 200567
Total n = 238: acupuncture,
n = 118; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 57; no acupuncture
control – usual, care n = 63
Migraine
days
3 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 9.9 (8.7); sham
10.8 (8.3); no acupuncture 16.3 (7.4)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 0.06 (–1.2 to 2.4;
p = 0.5); acupuncture vs. no
acupuncture 5.8 (4.0 to 7.6; p < 0.001)
Total 238/270 (12%):
acupuncture 118/132 (11%);
sham 57/63 (10%); usual care
63/75 (16%)
A
Endres 200773
Total n = 398: acupuncture,
n = 204; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 194
Headache
days
6 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 6.0 (6.2); sham
8.4 (7.9)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 1.94 (0.69 to
3.18; p = 0.002)
Total 398/413 (3%):
acupuncture 204/209 (2%);
sham 194/200 (3%)
A
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
195
 Pain
type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Primary
outcome
Time
point
Results reported by author
Dropout rate
Assessment
of blindinga
Both
(n = 2)
Vickers 200460
Total n = 301: acupuncture,
n = 161; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 140
Severity
score
12 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 16.2 (13.7); no
acupuncture 22.3 (17.0)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture 4.6
(2.2 to 7.0; p = 0.0002)
Total 301/401 (25%):
acupuncture 161/205 (21%);
usual care 140/196 (29%)
NA
Jena 200876
Total n = 2871:c acupuncture,
n = 1447; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 1424
Headache
days
3 months
Percent reduction, mean (95% CI):
acupuncture 43.0 (41.0 to 45.1); no
acupuncture 15.2 (13.3 to 17.0)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture 27.9
(25.1 to 30.6; p < 0.001)
Total 2871/3404 (16%):
acupuncture 1447/1711
(15%); usual care 1424/1693
(16%)
NA
NA, not available.
a A, low likelihood of bias; B, intermediate likelihood of bias; NA, open trials with no patient blinding.
b These differ from the patient counts in the forest plot. Authors confirmed that this was an error on their part and have published an erratum.
c Patient counts lower in the forest plots because of missing baseline scores for some patients.
Note
Ancillary care – programme of care received by both acupuncture and non-acupuncture groups (e.g. trial comparing physiotherapy plus acupuncture with physiotherapy alone); usual care –
protocol did not specify treatments received in control group (e.g. trials with ‘waiting list controls’); guidelined care – patients in control group received care according to national guidelines.
APPENDIX 1
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
196
 Trials evaluating acupuncture for non-specific musculoskeletal pain (n = 15)
Pain
type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Primary
outcome
Time
point
Results reported by author
Dropout rate
Assessment
of blindinga
Back
(n = 10)
Carlsson
2001119
Total n = 27: acupuncture,
n = 21; sham – non-needle,
n = 6
Pain VAS
6 months
Mean weekly VAS in percent of baseline,
mean (SD):b acupuncture – morning VAS 75
(33), night VAS 68 (31); sham – morning
VAS 132 (76), night VAS 101 (48)
Difference between groups: acupuncture vs.
sham – morning VAS p = 0.13 (no estimate
given), night VAS p = 0.056 (no estimate
given)
Total 27/50 (46%):
acupuncture 21/34 (38%);
sham 6/16 (63%)
B
Cherkin
2001131
Total n = 249:c acupuncture,
n = 89; no acupuncture control
– non-specific advice, n = 83;
massage, n = 77 (not analysed)
Roland Morris
Disability
Questionnaire
2 months
Mean (95% CI): acupuncture 7.9 (6.5 to
9.3); no acupuncture 8.8 (7.4 to 10.2)
Difference between groups: acupuncture vs.
no acupuncture – adjusted p = 0.75 (no
estimate given)
Total 249/262 (7%):
acupuncture 89/94 (5%);
usual care 83/90 (8%);
massage 77/78 (1%)
NA
Molsberger
2002129
Total n = 124: acupuncture,
n = 47; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 41; no acupuncture
control – ancillary care, n = 36
Pain VAS
3 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 23 (20); sham 43
(23); no acupuncture control 52 (19)
Difference between groups:d acupuncture
vs. sham p < 0.001 (no estimate given);
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control
p < 0.001 (no estimate given)
Total 124/186 (33%):
acupuncture 47/65 (28%);
sham 41/61 (33%); usual care
36/60 (40%)
(Not
evaluated)
Kerr
2003117
Total n = 46: acupuncture,
n = 26; sham – non-needle,
n = 20
Pain VAS
1 month
Mean (SD): acupuncture 51.3 (22.4); sham
61.7 (30.6)
Difference between groups: acupuncture vs.
sham p = 0.2 (no estimate given)
Total 46/60 (23%):
acupuncture, 26/30 (13%);
sham 20/30 (33%)
B
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
197
 Pain
type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Primary
outcome
Time
point
Results reported by author
Dropout rate
Assessment
of blindinga
Brinkhaus
200666
Total n = 284: acupuncture,
n = 140; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 70; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 74
Pain VAS
2 months
Mean change from baseline (SD):
acupuncture 28.7 (30.3); sham 23.6 (31.0);
no acupuncture 6.9 (22.0)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 5.1 (–3.7 to 13.9;
p = 0.3); acupuncture vs. no acupuncture
21.7 (13.9 to 30.0; p < 0.001)
Total 284/301 (6%):
acupuncture 140/147 (5%);
sham 70/75 (7%); usual care
74/79 (6%)
A
Thomas
200661
Total n = 182: acupuncture,
n = 123; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 59
SF-36 bodily
pain
24 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 67.8 (24.1); no
acupuncture 59.5 (23.4)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture 8.0 (2.8 to
13.2; p = 0.003)
Total 182/241 (24%):
acupuncture 123/160 (23%);
usual care 59/81 (27%)
NA
Witt 200674
Total n = 2594:e acupuncture,
n = 1350; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 1244
Back function
measured with
the Hannover
Functional
Ability
Questionnaire
3 months
Mean (SE): acupuncture 12.1 (0.4); no
acupuncture 2.7 (0.4)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture 9.4 (8.3 to
10.5; p < 0.001)
Total 2594/3093 (16%):
acupuncture 1350/1549
(13%); usual care 1244/1544
(19%)
A
Haake
200771
Total n = 1117:f acupuncture,
n = 377; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 376; no
acupuncture control –
guidelined care, n = 364
von Korff
chronic pain
scale
6 months
Mean (SD) of von Korff chronic pain scale:
acupuncture 40.2 (22.5); sham 43.3 (23.0);
no acupuncture 52.3 (21.2)
Difference between groups in treatment
success (95% CI) (%):
g acupuncture vs. no
acupuncture 20.2 (13.4 to 26.7; p < 0.001);
acupuncture vs. sham 3.4 (–3.7 to 10.3;
p = 0.4)
Total 1117/1162 (4%):
acupuncture 377/387 (3%);
sham 376/387 (3%); usual
care 364/388 (6%)
A
Kennedy
2008130
Total n = 40: acupuncture,
n = 22; sham – needle,
non-penetrating, n = 18
Roland Morris
Disability
Questionnaire
3 months
Mean (SEM): acupuncture 5.0 (1.0); sham
7.7 (1.5)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 2.6 (–0.7 to 5.9;
p = 0.12)
Total 40/48 (17%):
acupuncture 22/24 (8%);
sham 18/24 (25%)
A
APPENDIX 1
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
198
 Pain
type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Primary
outcome
Time
point
Results reported by author
Dropout rate
Assessment
of blindinga
Cherkin
2009124
Total n = 606: acupuncture,
n = 299h (individualised
n = 147, standardised n = 152);
sham – non-needle, n = 159;
no acupuncture control – usual
care, n = 148
Roland Morris
Disability
Questionnaire
2 months
Mean (SD): individualised acupuncture 6.4
(5.3), standardised acupuncture 6.3 (5.7);
sham 5.4 (4.9); no acupuncture 8.9 (6.0)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
individualised vs. standardised 0.16 (–0.90
to 1.22; p ≥ 0.05); individualised vs. sham
0.45 (–0.61 to 1.50; p ≥ 0.05);
individualised vs. no acupuncture –2.47
(–3.53 to –1.40; p < 0.05)
Total 606/638 (5%):
individualised acupuncture
147/157 (6%); standardised
acupuncture 152/158 (4%);
sham 159/162 (2%); usual
care 148/161 (8%)
(Not
evaluated)
Neck
(n = 5)
Irnich
2001118
Total n = 108: acupuncture,
n = 51; sham – non-needle,
n = 57; massage, n = 57
(not analysed)
Pain VAS
1 month
Change from baseline, mean (95% CI):
acupuncture 24.22 (16.5 to 31.9); sham
17.28 (10.0 to 24.6)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 6.9 (–5.0 to 18.9;
p = 0.3)
Total 165/177 (8%):
acupuncture 51/56 (9%);
sham 57/61 (7%); massage
57/60 (5%)
B
White
2004132
Total n = 124:i acupuncture,
n = 63; sham – non-needle,
n = 61
Pain VAS
1 month
Mean (SD): acupuncture 20.39 (20.26);
sham 30.69 (22.00)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 6.3 (1.4 to 11.3;
p = 0.012)
Total 124/135 (8%):
acupuncture 63/70 (10%);
sham 61/65 (6%)
A
Salter
2006133
Total n = 21: acupuncture,
n = 9; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 12
Northwick Park
Neck Pain
Questionnaire
3 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 22.73 (18.64); no
acupuncture 25.72 (16.29)
Difference between groups: acupuncture vs.
no acupuncture 1.75 (no CI given; p = 0.8)
Total 21/24 (13%):
acupuncture 9/10 (10%);
usual care 12/14 (14%)
NA
Vas 2006121
Total n = 123:
j acupuncture,
n = 61; sham – non-needle,
n = 62
Pain VAS
1 month
Change from baseline, mean (SD):
acupuncture 42.1 (21.1); sham 14.0 (15.7)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 28.1 (21.4 to 34.7;
p < 0.001)
Total 115/123 (7%):
acupuncture 58/61 (5%);
sham 57/62 (8%)
A
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
199
 Pain
type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Primary
outcome
Time
point
Results reported by author
Dropout rate
Assessment
of blindinga
Witt 200675
Total n = 3162:e acupuncture,
n = 1618; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 1544
Neck Pain and
Disability Scale
3 months
Change from baseline, mean (SE):
acupuncture 16.2 (0.4); no acupuncture
3.9 (0.4)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture 12.3
(11.3 to 13.3; p < 0.001)
Total 3162/3766 (16%):
acupuncture 1618/1880
(14%); usual care 1544/1886
(18%)
NA
NA, not available.
a A, low likelihood of bias; B, intermediate likelihood of bias; NA, open trials with no patient blinding.
b These numbers were taken from data provided; can be estimated only from what is given in the paper.
c One person in the no acupuncture control group was missing Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire data but this was not reported in the paper.
d Pain relief ≥ 50%.
e Patient counts lower in the forest plots because of missing baseline scores for some patients.
f
Lower patient counts in our analyses are due to missing randomisation stratification variables: baseline von Korff scores, chronification, fear avoidance belief, levels of activity, patient
expectations or trial centre.
g Values are given as percentage of patients (95% CI). Success was defined as ≥ 33% improvement on three pain-related items on the Chronic Pain Grade Scale.
h We combined the individualised and standardised acupuncture estimates in our analyses.
i
We averaged weeks 4, 5 and 6 to obtain a 1-month score.
j
Patient counts lower in the forest plots as number reported in paper includes imputed data.
Note
Ancillary care – programme of care received by both acupuncture and non-acupuncture groups (e.g. trial comparing physiotherapy plus acupuncture with physiotherapy alone); usual care –
protocol did not specify treatments received in control group (e.g. trials with ‘waiting list controls’); non-specific advice – patients in control group received general advice and support
(‘attention control’); guidelined care – patients in control group received care according to national guidelines.
APPENDIX 1
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
200
 Trials evaluating acupuncture for specific shoulder pain (n = 4)
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Primary
outcome
Time
point
Results reported by author
Dropout rate
Assessment
of blindinga
Kleinhenz 1999137
Total n = 45: acupuncture,
n = 22; sham – non-penetrating
needles, n = 23
CMS
1 month
Mean change from baseline (SD): acupuncture
19.2 (16.1), sham 8.4 (14.6)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham (no estimate given)
(2.3 to 19.4; p = 0.001)
Total 45/52 (13%):
acupuncture 22/25 (12%);
sham 23/27 (15%)
A
Guerra de Hoyos
2004138
Total n = 110: acupuncture,
n = 55; sham – non-penetrating
needles, n = 55
Pain VAS
6 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 3.5 (3.0); sham 1.2
(1.9)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 2.0 (1.2 to 2.9;
p < 0.0005)
Total 110/130 (15%):
acupuncture 55/65 (15%);
sham 55/65 (15%)
A
Vas 2008122
Total n = 425:b acupuncture,
n = 205; sham – non-needle,
n = 220
CMS
1 month
Mean change from baseline (SD): acupuncture
16.6 (15.6); sham 10.6 (13.5)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 6.0 (3.2 to 8.8;
p < 0.001)
Total 409/425 (4%):
acupuncture 202/205 (1%);
sham 207/220 (6%)
A
Molsberger 2010127
Total n = 308: acupuncture,
n = 128; sham – non-penetrating
needles, n = 74; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 106
VAS
6 months
Mean (SD): acupuncture 19 (23.3); sham 33
(29.6); no acupuncture 33 (26.6)
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 14 (7.87 to 20.13;
p < 0.001); acupuncture vs. no acupuncture 14
(8.22 to 19.78; p < 0.001)
Total 308/424 (27%):
acupuncture 128/154 (17%);
sham 74/135 (45%); usual care
106/135 (21%)
(Not evaluated)
a A, low likelihood of bias.
b Patient counts lower in the forest plots as number reported in paper includes imputed data.
Note
Usual care – protocol did not specify treatments received in control group (e.g. trials with ‘waiting list controls’).
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
201
  Appendix 2 Acupuncture characteristics related
to trials in Chapter 2
Trial- and patient-level information when analysed
Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Chronic headache/migraine (n = 6)
Migraine (n = 2)
Linde 200568
Total n = 272: acupuncture,
n = 132; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 76; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 64
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 0.0 (–0.7 to 0.7; p > 0.9);
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control 1.4
(0.8 to 2.1; p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: combination of traditional
Chinese and Western
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 3
Maximum number of sessions: 12
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1.5
Duration of sessions (minutes): 29
Number of needles used: 17
Diener 200672
Total n = 794:a acupuncture,
n = 290; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 317; no
acupuncture control –
guidelined care, n = 187
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 0.57 (0.09 to 1.05;
p = 0.021); acupuncture vs. no acupuncture
control 0.50 (–0.06 to 1.05; p = 0.4)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
203
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 2
Maximum number of sessions: 10
Frequency of sessions (per week): 2
Duration of sessions (minutes): 32 (patient-level
data analysed)
Number of needles used: 16 (patient-level data
analysed)
TTH (n = 2)
Melchart
200567
Total n = 238: acupuncture,
n = 118; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 57; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 63
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 0.06 (–1.2 to 2.4; p = 0.5);
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control 5.8
(4.0 to 7.6; p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: combination of traditional
Chinese and Western
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 3
Maximum number of sessions: 12
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1.5
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: 15
Endres 200773
Total n = 398: acupuncture,
n = 204; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 194
Difference between groups (95% CI): acupuncture
vs. sham 1.94 (0.69 to 3.18; p = 0.002)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
APPENDIX 2
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
204
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Maximum number of sessions: 10
Frequency of sessions (per week): 2
Duration of sessions (minutes): 32
Number of needles used: 16
Both migraine and
headache (n = 2)
Vickers
200460
Total n = 301: acupuncture,
n = 161; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 140
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control 4.6
(2.2 to 7.0; p = 0.0002)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: fully individualised
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: yes
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Maximum number of sessions: 24 (patient-level
data analysed)
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: not provided
Jena 200876
Total n = 2871:b acupuncture,
n = 1447; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 1424
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control 27.9
(25.1 to 30.6; p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: combination of traditional
Chinese and Western
Point prescription: fully individualised
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
205
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Deqi elicited: not provided
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Age of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Sex of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Maximum number of sessions: 30 (patient-level
data analysed)
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): not provided
Number of needles used: not provided
Non-specific musculoskeletal (n = 13)
Back (n = 8)
Carlsson
2001119
Total n = 27: acupuncture,
n = 21; sham – non-needle,
n = 6
Difference between groups: acupuncture vs.
sham – morning VAS p = 0.13 (no estimate
given), night VAS p = 0.056 (no estimate given)
Style of acupuncture: combination of traditional
Chinese and Western
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: yes
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 5
Maximum number of sessions: 10
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 20
Number of needles used: 16
Cherkin
2001131
Total n = 172:c acupuncture,
n = 89; no acupuncture control,
non-specific advice, n = 83
Difference between groups: acupuncture vs. no
acupuncture control – adjusted p = 0.75 (no
estimate given)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: fully individualised
APPENDIX 2
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
206
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: yes
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: yes
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 3
Maximum number of sessions: 10
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1.5
Duration of sessions (minutes): 28
Number of needles used: 12
Kerr 2003117
Total n = 46: acupuncture,
n = 26; sham – non-needle,
n = 20
Difference between groups: acupuncture vs.
sham p = 0.2 (no estimate given)
Style of acupuncture: Western
Point prescription: fixed formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Maximum number of sessions: 6
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: 11
Brinkhaus
200666
Total n = 284: acupuncture,
n = 140; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 70; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 74
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 5.1 (–3.7 to 13.9;
p = 0.3); acupuncture vs. no acupuncture
control 21.7 (13.9 to 30.0; p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: flexible formula
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
207
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 3
Age of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Sex of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Maximum number of sessions: 12 (patient-level
data analysed)
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1.5
Duration of sessions (minutes): 28 (patient-level
data analysed)
Number of needles used: 17 (patient-level data
analysed)
Thomas
200661
Total n = 182: acupuncture,
n = 123; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 59
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control 8.0
(2.8 to 13.2; p = 0.003)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: fully individualised
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: yes
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: yes
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 3
Maximum number of sessions: 10
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 25
Number of needles used: 10
APPENDIX 2
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
208
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Witt 200674
Total n = 2594:b acupuncture,
n = 1350; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 1244
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control 9.4
(8.3 to 10.5; p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: combination of traditional
Chinese and Western
Point prescription: fully individualised
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: not provided
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Age of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Sex of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Maximum number of sessions: 25 (patient-level
data analysed)
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): not provided
Number of needles used: not provided
Haake 200771
Total n = 1117:d acupuncture,
n = 377; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 376; no
acupuncture control –
guidelined care, n = 364
Difference between groups in treatment success
(95% CI):e acupuncture vs. no acupuncture
control 20.2% (13.4% to 26.7%; p < 0.001);
acupuncture vs. sham 3.4% (–3.7% to 10.3%;
p = 0.4)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 2
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
209
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Maximum number of sessions: 10
Frequency of sessions (per week): 2
Duration of sessions (minutes): 32 (patient-level
data analysed)
Number of needles used: 16 (patient-level data
analysed)
Kennedy
2008130
Total n = 40: acupuncture,
n = 22; sham – non-
penetrating needles, n = 18
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 2.6 (–0.7 to 5.9; p = 0.12)
Style of acupuncture: Western
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 10
Maximum number of sessions: 12
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1.5
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: 11
Neck (n = 5)
Irnich 2001118
Total n = 108: acupuncture,
n = 51; sham – non-needle,
n = 57
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 6.9 (–5.0 to 18.9; p = 0.3)
Style of acupuncture: combination of traditional
Chinese and Western
Point prescription: fully individualised
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 0
APPENDIX 2
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
210
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Maximum number of sessions: 5
Frequency of sessions (per week): 2
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: 9
White 2004132
Total n = 124:f acupuncture,
n = 63; sham – non-needle,
n = 61
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 6.3 (1.4 to 11.3;
p = 0.012)
Style of acupuncture: Western
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 5
Maximum number of sessions: 8
Frequency of sessions (per week): 2
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: 6
Salter 2006133
Total n = 21: acupuncture,
n = 9; no acupuncture control –
usual care, n = 12
Difference between groups: acupuncture vs. no
acupuncture control 1.75 (no CI given; p = 0.8)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: fully individualised
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: yes
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: yes
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 3
Maximum number of sessions: 10
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
211
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 25
Number of needles used: 13
Vas 2006121
Total n = 123:
g acupuncture,
n = 61; sham – non-needle,
n = 62
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 28.1 (21.4 to 34.7;
p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 3
Maximum number of sessions: 5
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1.5
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: 10
Witt 200675
Total n = 3162:b acupuncture,
n = 1618; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 1544
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control 12.3
(11.3 to 13.3; p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: combination of traditional
Chinese and Western
Point prescription: fully individualised
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: not provided
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Age of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
APPENDIX 2
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
212
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Sex of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Maximum number of sessions: 30 (patient-level
data analysed)
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): not provided
Number of needles used: not provided
Osteoarthritis (n = 7)
Berman
2004134
Total n = 391: acupuncture,
n = 142; sham – both
penetrating and
non-penetrating needles,
n = 141; no acupuncture
control – non-specific advice,
n = 108
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 0.87 (0.16 to 1.58;
p = 0.003); acupuncture vs. no acupuncture
control not given
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: fixed formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: yes
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 2
Maximum number of sessions: 23
Frequency of sessions (per week): 0.88
Duration of sessions (minutes): 20
Number of needles used: 11
Vas 2004120
Total n = 88: acupuncture,
n = 47; sham – non-penetrating
needles, n = 41
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 4.7 (2.9 to 6.5; p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: yes
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
213
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 3
Maximum number of sessions: 13
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: 8
Witt 200569
Total n = 285: acupuncture,
n = 145; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 73, no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 67
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 8.8 (4.2 to 13.5;
p < 0.001); acupuncture vs. no acupuncture
control 22.7 (17.9 to 27.5; p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: combination of traditional
Chinese and Western
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 3
Age of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Sex of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Maximum number of sessions: 12 (patient-level
data analysed)
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1.5
Duration of sessions (minutes): 29 (patient-level
data analysed)
Number of needles used: 17 (patient-level data
analysed)
Scharf 200670
Total n = 985:b acupuncture,
n = 318; sham – penetrating
needles, n = 360; no
acupuncture control – ancillary
care, n = 307
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham: 0.3 (–0.05 to 0.59; no
p-value given); acupuncture vs. no acupuncture
control 1.0 (0.71 to 1.38; no p-value given)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: flexible formula
APPENDIX 2
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
214
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 2
Maximum number of sessions: 10
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1.67
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30 (patient-level
data analysed)
Number of needles used: 13 (patient-level data
analysed)
Witt 200677
Total n = 579:b acupuncture,
n = 300; no acupuncture
control – usual care, n = 279
Difference between groups (SEM): acupuncture
vs. no acupuncture control 16.7 (1.4) (p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: combination of traditional
Chinese and Western
Point prescription: fully individualised
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: not provided
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Age of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Sex of acupuncturists: yes (patient-level data
analysed)
Maximum number of sessions: 15 (patient-level
data analysed)
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): not provided
Number of needles used: not provided
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
215
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Foster 2007135
Total n = 325: acupuncture,
n = 108; sham –
non-penetrating needles,
n = 112; no acupuncture
control – ancillary care, n = 105
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham not given; acupuncture
vs. no acupuncture control 0.08 (–1.0 to 0.9;
p = 0.9)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: yes
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Maximum number of sessions: 9 (patient-level
data analysed)
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: 8
Williamson
2007136
Total n = 121:
g acupuncture,
n = 60; no acupuncture
control – non-specific advice,
n = 61
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. no acupuncture control 3.5
(0.66 to 6.33; Bonferroni p = 0.016)
Style of acupuncture: Western
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Maximum number of sessions: 6
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 20
Number of needles used: 9
APPENDIX 2
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
216
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Specific shoulder (n = 3)
Kleinhenz
1999137
Total n = 45: acupuncture,
n = 22; sham –
non-penetrating needles,
n = 23
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham no estimate given (2.3 to
19.4; p = 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: flexible formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Maximum number of sessions: 8
Frequency of sessions (per week): 2
Duration of sessions (minutes): 20
Number of needles used: 10
Guerra de
Hoyos 2004138
Total n = 110: acupuncture,
n = 55; sham – non-penetrating
needles, n = 55
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 2.0 (1.2 to 2.9; p < 0.0005)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: fixed formula
Location of needles: both local and distal points
Electrical stimulation allowed: yes
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 0
Maximum number of sessions: 7
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 15
Number of needles used: 7
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
217
 Pain type
Trial
Patient counts for those
included in primary analysis
Results and data reported by author
Vas 2008122
Total n = 425:
g acupuncture,
n = 205; sham – non-needle,
n = 220
Difference between groups (95% CI):
acupuncture vs. sham 6.0 (3.2 to 8.8; p < 0.001)
Style of acupuncture: traditional Chinese
Point prescription: fixed formula
Location of needles: distal points only
Electrical stimulation allowed: no
Manual stimulation allowed: yes
Moxibustion allowed: no
Deqi elicited: yes
Acupuncture-specific patient–practitioner
interactions: no
Minimum years of experience required: 0.5
Maximum number of sessions: 3
Frequency of sessions (per week): 1
Duration of sessions (minutes): 30
Number of needles used: 1
a This differs from the patient counts in the forest plots of the primary research.196 The authors confirmed that this was an
error on their part and have published an erratum.
b Patient counts lower in the forest plots of the primary research196 because of missing baseline scores for some patients.
c One person in the no-acupuncture control group was missing Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire data but this was
not reported in the paper.
d Lower patient counts in our analyses of the primary research196 are due to missing randomisation stratification variables:
baseline von Korff scores, chronification, fear avoidance belief, levels of activity, patient expectations or trial centre.
e Values are given as percentage of patients (95% CI). Success was defined as a ≥ 33% improvement on three
pain-related items on the Chronic Pain Grade Scale.
f
We averaged weeks 4–6 to obtain a 1-month score.
g Patient counts lower in the forest plots of the primary research196 as number reported in paper includes imputed data.
Note
Ancillary care – programme of care received by both acupuncture and non-acupuncture groups (e.g. trial comparing
physiotherapy plus acupuncture with physiotherapy alone); usual care – protocol did not specify treatments received in
control group (e.g. trials with ‘waiting list controls’); non-specific advice – patients in control group received general advice
and support (‘attention control’); guidelined care – patients in control group received care according to national guidelines.
APPENDIX 2
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
218
 Appendix 3 Review data related to Chapter 3
Databases searched
l
MEDLINE.
l
MEDLINE In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations.
l
EMBASE.
l
Allied and Complementary Medicine Database.
l
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
l
Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects.
l
Health Technology Assessment database.
l
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials.
l
Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature.
l
MANTIS.
l
PASCAL.
l
Inside Conferences.
l
Conference Proceedings Citation Index – Science.
l
PEDro.
l
CAMbase.
l
LILACS.
l
ClinicalTrials.gov.
MEDLINE search strategy
The following search strategy was developed in Ovid MEDLINE and adapted for use in the other databases
searched. The strategy incorporates the sensitivity-maximising version of the Cochrane Highly Sensitive
Search Strategy for randomised trials in MEDLINE.
1. Osteoarthritis, Knee/ (8978)
2. (gonarthrosis or gonarthritis).ti,ab. (912)
3. 1 or 2 (9707)
4. Osteoarthritis/ (27,166)
5. (Osteoarthriti$ or OA or osteo arthriti$ or osteoarthros$ or osteo arthros$ or arthropath$ or arthrosis
or arthroses).ti,ab. (50,583)
6. degenerative arthriti$.ti,ab. (969)
7. degenerative joint disease.ti,ab. (1515)
8. 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 (61,760)
9. Knee/ (10,013)
10. Knee Joint/ (36,003)
11. (knee$ or patella$ or knee cap$ or kneecap$ or femorotibial or femoro tibial or tibiofemoral or tibio
femoral or patellofemoral or patello femoral).ti,ab. (87,341)
12. 9 or 10 or 11 (98,496)
13. 8 and 12 (16,792)
14. Arthralgia/ (4180)
15. (arthralgi$ or (joint$ adj3 pain$)).ti,ab. (11,723)
16. Chronic Pain/ (1255)
17. chronic pain$.ti,ab. (17,043)
18. 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 (31,979)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
219
 19. 12 and 18 (2629)
20. 3 or 13 or 19 (21,357)
21. Acupuncture/ (1115)
22. exp Acupuncture Therapy/ (15,218)
23. acupuncture$.ti,ab. (12,290)
24. (electroacupuncture$ or electro acupuncture$).ti,ab. (2514)
25. (osteopuncture$ or osteo puncture$).ti,ab. (2)
26. (perioste$ adj3 (stimulati$ or therap$ or needling)).ti,ab. (74)
27. exp Physical Therapy Modalities/ (115,890)
28. (physiotherap$ or physio therap$ or physical therap$ or manual therap$).ti,ab. (24,353)
29. (massage$ or acupressure or shiatsu or shiatzu or zhi ya or chih ya).ti,ab. (6745)
30. Chiropractic/ (2970)
31. Traction/ (5704)
32. (chiropractic or manipulat$ or traction or kinesiolog$ or mobilis$ or mobiliz$).ti,ab. (165,625)
33. Osteopathic medicine/ (2472)
34. osteopath$.ti,ab. (3568)
35. (hydrotherap$ or hydro therap$ or water therap$ or pool therap$).ti,ab. (801)
36. exp Exercise/ (99,442)
37. exp Sports/ (101,842)
38. Physical Fitness/ (20,358)
39. (exercise$ or workout$ or work out$ or train$ or physical$ activ$ or kinesiotherap$ or keep$ fit or
aerobics).ti,ab. (450,237)
40. (muscle$ adj3 (stretch$ or strengthen$)).ti,ab. (3418)
41. (walk$ adj3 (fitness or aerobic or program$ or intervention$ or session$ or regime$)).ti,ab. (1398)
42. pedometer$.ti,ab. (1102)
43. (bicycl$ or cycle$ or cycling).ti,ab. (373,541)
44. (run$ or jog$ or treadmill$).ti,ab. (122,114)
45. (swim$ or water sport$ or aquatic$ or water aerobic$ or aqua aerobic$ or water gymnastics).ti,ab.
(41,769)
46. (tai ji or taiji or taijiquan or tai chi or t ai chi or taichi or shadow boxing).ti,ab. (666)
47. (yoga or yogic or pilates or danc$).ti,ab. (4740)
48. (qigong or qi gong or chi kung or chikung or ch i kung).ti,ab. (347)
49. (CPM or (passive adj (motion or movement))).ti,ab. (5468)
50. vibration/ (18,338)
51. (vibrati$ or mechanical stimul$).ti,ab. (32,959)
52. (balneology or balneotherap$ or balneo therap$ or bath$ or crenobalneotherap$ or thalassotherap$
or spa or spas).ti,ab. (42,994)
53. (thermotherap$ or thermo therap$ or hypertherm$ or hyper therm$ or diatherm$ or short wave or
shortwave or ultrasonic or cryotherap$ or cryo therap$).ti,ab. (64,704)
54. (heat or hot or ice or cold).ti,ab. (227,320)
55. exp Cryotherapy/ (19,170)
56. exp Orthotic Devices/ (9055)
57. (brace$ or bracing or orthotic$ or orthoses).ti,ab. (8251)
58. (insert$ or insole$).ti,ab. (180,523)
59. (TENS or ALTENS).ti,ab. (6246)
60. (transcutaneous adj2 nerve stimulation).ti,ab. (1425)
61. (electroanalgesia or electro analgesia).ti,ab. (215)
62. (electric$ nerve stimulation or electrostimulation or electro stimulation).ti,ab. (4261)
63. EMS.ti,ab. (7219)
64. ((muscle or electric$) adj3 stimulat$).ti,ab. (55,060)
65. (neuromodulation or neuro modulation or neurostimulation or neuro stimulation).ti,ab. (3051)
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
220
 66. interferential.ti,ab. (256)
67. Electromagnetic Fields/ (13,738)
68. Magnetic Field Therapy/ (516)
69. PEMF.ti,ab. (308)
70. ((electromagnetic$ or magnetic$) adj3 field$).ti,ab. (20,877)
71. (biomagnetic$ or bio magnetic$ or pulsed signal).ti,ab. (391)
72. Laser Therapy, Low-Level/ (2660)
73. laser.ti,ab. (124,281)
74. phototherapy/ (5215)
75. (light or phototherap$ or photo therap$).ti,ab. (347,805)
76. or/21-75 (2,221,346)
77. 20 and 76 (4608)
78. exp Obesity/ (125,953)
79. Overweight/ (9213)
80. body mass index/ (69,416)
81. (obese or obesity).ti,ab. (141,323)
82. (overweight or over weight).ti,ab. (29,555)
83. Weight Loss/ (21,542)
84. Weight Gain/ (20,613)
85. (weight adj3 los$).ti,ab. (52,781)
86. (weight adj3 reduc$).ti,ab. (20,417)
87. (weight adj3 decreas$).ti,ab. (13,520)
88. (weight adj3 gain$).ti,ab. (41,860)
89. (weight adj3 increas$).ti,ab. (27,215)
90. (weight adj3 chang$).ti,ab. (14,373)
91. (BMI or body mass index).ti,ab. (102,658)
92. or/78-91 (367,063)
93. Bariatrics/ (209)
94. exp Diet/ (178,778)
95. exp Diet Therapy/ (38,718)
96. (diet$ or slim or slimming).ti,ab. (336,098)
97. (weight adj3 control$).ti,ab. (10,820)
98. (weight adj3 manage$).ti,ab. (2468)
99. low calorie$.ti,ab. (1958)
100. calorie control$.ti,ab. (64)
101. (calorie adj3 count$).ti,ab. (79)
102. (caloric adj3 restrict$).ti,ab. (2805)
103. (calorie$ adj3 restrict$).ti,ab. (1998)
104. (energy adj3 restrict$).ti,ab. (1894)
105. (protein adj3 restrict$).ti,ab. (3973)
106. (weight watchers or weightwatchers or slimfast or nutrition class$ or meal replacement$).ti,ab. (470)
107. or/93-106 (436,733)
108. exp Anti-Obesity Agents/ (10,515)
109. ((anti obes$ or antiobes$) adj3 (agent$ or drug$ or therap$ or medicine$)).ti,ab. (877)
110. appetite suppressant$.ti,ab. (492)
111. appetite depressant$.ti,ab. (108)
112. (orlistat or xenical).ti,ab,rn. (1224)
113. phentermine.ti,ab,rn. (794)
114. Phentermine/ (659)
115. (sibutramine or reductil).ti,ab,rn. (1067)
116. (rimonabant or acomplia).ti,ab,rn. (2109)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
221
 117. or/108-116 (13,527)
118. 107 or 117 (447,143)
119. 20 and 92 and 118 (119)
120. 77 or 119 (4647)
121. randomized controlled trial.pt. (342,334)
122. controlled clinical trial.pt. (85,694)
123. randomized.ab. (244,919)
124. placebo.ab. (136,550)
125. drug therapy.fs. (1,588,363)
126. randomly.ab. (175,193)
127. trial.ab. (253,825)
128. groups.ab. (1,145,730)
129. 121 or 122 or 123 or 124 or 125 or 126 or 127 or 128 (2,960,405)
130. exp animals/ not humans/ (3,812,817)
131. 129 not 130 (2,515,366)
132. 120 and 131 (1614)
Methods for rating study quality and risk of bias
Method for rating overall study quality
See column headings in following table for description of questions.
l
Excellent – answers ‘yes’ for questions 1–3, 5, 6, 8–14 and ‘yes’ or ‘not applicable’ for question 4.
l
Good – answers ‘yes’ for questions 1, 5, 8, 9, 11–14 and ‘yes’ or ‘unclear/not stated’ for questions 2–4
(or ‘not applicable’ for question 4).
l
Satisfactory – answers ‘yes’ for questions 1, 5, 11–13 and not ‘no’ for question 4.
l
Poor – the answer is not ‘yes’ for one of the criteria required for ‘satisfactory’.
Comparability of quality assessment and risk of bias
In applying the risk-of-bias tool we included the level of patient blinding when assessing the blinding of
the outcome assessment. This was necessary given that patients recorded their pain level and response to
treatment. Therefore, even in studies in which the outcome assessor was reported as blinded, if patient
were not blinded the risk of bias was recorded as high. Note that both patients and outcome assessor had
to be blinded for a trial to be rated as being of ‘good’ quality.
All of the studies rated as being of ‘poor’ quality were found to have a high or unclear risk of bias. Of the
27 trials rated ‘satisfactory’, 21 were found to have a high risk of bias, three an unclear risk of bias and
three a low risk of bias. Of the 21 rated as being at high risk of bias, the explanation in most cases was
that the study was not blinded: the above method for rating study quality made allowances for the
difficulties of blinding treatments in trials of physical therapies, so a trial could be ‘satisfactory’ (but not
‘good’) if it was not blinded. In addition, this method accounted for poor reporting of randomisation and
allocation concealment methods, meaning that a study could be rated as ‘satisfactory’ (but not ‘good’) if
these were unclear, providing the study groups appeared to have similar baseline characteristics (i.e. the
aim of randomisation/allocation concealment appeared to have been achieved). Of the four ‘good’ studies,
two had an unclear risk of bias and two a low risk of bias.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
222
 Study quality assessment/risk-of-bias details for original review in 2011
For algorithm to produce overall study quality ratings see previous section.
Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Abrahams 2002
349
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
No
Yes
No
No
UC/NS
No
Yes
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
High
UC
UC
High
Adedoyin 2002
301
Yes
No
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
UC
UC
Poor
High
UC
Low
Low
UC
High
Aglamis
¸ 2009
189
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
UC/NS
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
UC
High
High
High
High
Alcidi 2007
350
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
UC
High
High
High
An 2008
351
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
UC
High
High
High
High
Arman 1988
352
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
UC
High
UC
High
Baker 2001
353
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
Low
low
High
High
High
Baker 2007
354
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
UC
Low
UC
UC
UC
Bálint 2007
355
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
High
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Bao 2007
356
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
UC/NS
No
Yes
No
Yes
UC
Poor
UC
UC
Low
UC
UC
UC
Berman 1999
357
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Poor
Low
Low
High
High
Low
High
Berman 2004
134
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
223
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Bezalel 2010
358
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Poor
Low
UC
High
High
Low
High
Bilgici 2004
359
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
No
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
Börjesson 1996
190
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Brismée 2007
360
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Bülow 1994
361
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
Low
UC
Low
Low
UC
Burch 2008
303
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
Low
High
Low
High
High
Callaghan 1995
362
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
High
High
UC
High
Callaghan 2005
363
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
High
High
Cantarini 2007
364
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
UC
High
Low
High
Cheing 2002
365
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
UC
High
High
High
Cheing 2003
191
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
No
UC/NS
No
No
UC/NS
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
High
High
High
High
Chen 2008
366
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Christensen 2005
367
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
High
High
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
224
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Clarke 1974
368
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
UC
Low
UC
Defrin 2005
369
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
UC/NS
No
Yes
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
High
UC
UC
High
Dias 2003
187
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
UC
High
High
High
Durmus
¸ 2007
370
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
UC
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Ettinger 1997
371
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Poor
Low
Low
UC
High
Low
High
Fioravanti 2010
372
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
UC/NS
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Fischer 2005
373
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
High
High
Low
Low
High
High
Flusser 2002
374
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
Low
Low
UC
UC
Forestier 2010
375
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
High
High
Fukuda 2008
376
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
UC
Yes
No
No
UC/NS
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Garland 2007
377
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
High
Low
High
High
Grimmer 1992
378
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
UC
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
UC
Low
UC
UC
Gür 2002
379
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
No
No
UC
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
UC
UC
UC
Gür 2003
380
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
UC
UC
Low
High
Low
High
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
225
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Hasegawa 2010
381
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Hay 2006
382
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
Low
Low
High
High
High
Hinman 2002
383
No
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
Low
UC
UC
High
High
Huang 2005
384
Yes
No
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
UC/NS
Yes
No
No
Yes
UC
Yes
Poor
High
Low
Low
UC
UC
High
Hurley 2007
385
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
UC
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Itoh 2008
386
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
UC
UC
High
High
High
Itoh 2008
387
Yes
UC/NS
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
High
Low
High
High
High
Jacobson 2001
388
No
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Poor
UC
Low
UC
Low
High
High
Jan 2008
389
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
UC
Low
High
High
High
Jenkinson 2009
390
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
High
Jubb 2008
391
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
UC
High
Low
High
High
Kang 2006
392
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
No
No
UC
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
Kang 2007
393
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
Low
High
High
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
226
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Karagülle 2007
394
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
High
Keefe 2004
395
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
UC
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
UC
High
Keogan 2007
396
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
No
No
Yes
UC
Poor
UC
UC
Low
UC
UC
UC
Kovács 2002
397
No
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
UC
No
Poor
Low
UC
UC
Low
UC
UC
Kovar 1992
398
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
UC
High
High
High
High
Kuptniratsaikul 2002
399
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
UC/NS
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
High
High
Lansdown 2009
126
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
UC
High
Low
High
Law 2004
400
No
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
UC
UC
Poor
Low
UC
Low
Low
UC
UC
Lee 2009
401
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Lewis 1988
402
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
No
No
UC
No
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
Lewis 1994
403
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
UC
UC
Low
High
High
Lewis 1984
404
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
High
High
Lim 2008
405
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
High
Lin 2009
406
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
High
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
227
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Lu 2010
192
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
UC
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Lund 2008
407
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
Low
High
High
Low
High
Mahboob 2009
408
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
UC
Poor
UC
Low
UC
Low
UC
UC
Maillefert 2001
409
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
UC
UC
Low
UC
Low
UC
Maurer 1999
410
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
UC
No
Poor
Low
UC
Low
High
UC
High
Mazzuca 2004
411
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
Low
Low
High
High
McCarthy 2004
412
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
UC
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
UC
High
Messier 2004
413
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
High
Miller 2006
414
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
High
High
Miranda-Filloy 2005
415
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
No
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
No
No
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
Molsberger 1994
416
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
UC
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
Low
UC
UC
Moss 2007
417
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Good
UC
UC
Low
Low
Low
UC
Ng 2003
418
Yes
Yes
No
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
UC
UC
Poor
Low
High
Low
High
UC
High
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
228
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Nguyen 1997
419
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
Low
UC
UC
High
Low
High
Ni 2010
420
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
Low
Low
High
High
High
Nigg 2006
421
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Nivbrant 1989
422
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
No
No
UC
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
Péloquin 1999
423
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
UC
Low
High
High
High
Perlman 2006
424
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Poor
Low
UC
High
High
Low
High
Perrot 1998
425
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
No
Yes
UC
No
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
Petrou 1988
426
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
Low
Low
UC
Pietrosimone 2009
427
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
Low
Low
High
Low
High
Pipitone 2001
428
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Poor
Low
Low
High
Low
Low
High
Pollard 2008
429
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
UC
Low
Low
UC
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
229
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Rapp 2009
430
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
UC
High
UC
High
Rattanachaiyanont
2008
431
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
High
Low
High
High
Røgind 1998
432
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
UC
UC
High
High
High
Rosemffet 2004
433
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Poor
Low
UC
High
High
High
High
Sangdee 2002
434
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
High
High
Schilke 1996
435
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Poor
Low
UC
High
High
UC
High
Selfe 2008
436
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Shen 2009
437
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Sherman 2009
438
No
Yes
UC/NS
No
No
No
UC/NS
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
UC
High
High
High
High
Smith 1983
439
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Stelian 1992
440
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
No
No
Yes
UC
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
Sukenik 1999
441
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
High
High
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
230
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Takeda 1994
442
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
Low
UC
UC
Talbot 2003
443
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
UC
High
High
High
High
Tascioglu 2004
444
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
UC
UC
Low
High
Low
High
Taylor 1981
445
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
Poor
UC
UC
Low
Low
High
High
Thamsborg 2005
446
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
Low
High
High
Thorstensson 2005
447
Yes
No
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
High
Low
High
High
High
Tishler 2004
448
Yes
UC/NS
No
N/A
Yes
No
UC/NS
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
High
Low
High
High
High
Toda 2008
449
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
High
Topp 2002
450
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
UC/NS
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
UC
High
Trans 2009
451
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
UC
Low
Low
UC
Low
UC
Trock 1994
452
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
UC
Poor
Low
Low
Low
Low
High
High
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
231
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Tucker 2003
453
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
High
High
Tukmachi 2004
454
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
High
Vas 2004
120
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Good
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Wang 2009
455
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
No
No
No
No
UC/NS
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
High
UC
Low
High
Weiner 2007
188
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Good
UC
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Wigler 1995
456
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
No
Yes
No
UC
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
Williamson 2007
136
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
High
Witt 2005
69
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
UC
Low
UC
Witt 2006
77
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
High
Low
High
Wolsko 2004
457
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
High
Low
Low
High
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
232
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Wu 2008
458
Yes
No
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
UC
UC
Poor
High
Low
High
UC
High
Yip 2007
193
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
UC/NS
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Poor
Low
UC
UC
High
Low
High
Young 1991
459
No
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
Yes
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
UC
Yurtkuran 1999
460
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
UC/NS
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
UC
Low
Low
UC
Yurtkuran 2006
461
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Zizic 1995
462
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
UC/NS
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
UC
Low
UC
High
High
N/A, not applicable; NS, not specified; UC, unclear.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
233
 Study quality assessment/risk-of-bias details for the 22 studies identified for the 2013 update
For algorithm to produce overall study quality rating see earlier.
Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Arazpour 2013
463
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
UC
UC
Poor
UC
UC
Low
High
UC
High
Bennell 2011
464
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Good
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Bliddal 2011
465
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Brosseau 2012
466
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
UC
Low
Low
High
High
Bruce-Brand 2012
467
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
UC
High
Low
High
High
Fary 2011
468
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
a
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
a
Low
Low
UC
Low
Low
Low/UC
a
Foroughi 2011
469
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
Yes
No
No
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
UC
Low
UC
High
High
Fukuda 2011
470
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
UC
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Fukuda 2011
471
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Good
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Giombini 2011
472
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Gundog 2012
302
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Good
Low
UC
Low
Low
Low
UC
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
234
 Study
1. Number
of patients
randomised
to treatment
stated?
2. Method of
randomisation
appropriate?
3. Appropriate
allocation
concealment?
4. Appropriate
type of
placebo used?
5. Group
baseline
characteristics
comparable?
6. Described
as double
blind?
7. Treatment
giver
blinded?
8. Patient
blinded?
9. Outcome
assessor
blinded?
10. Use of
a power
calculation
reported?
11. Eligibility
criteria
adequately
reported?
12. Clear
reporting
of losses to
follow-up?
13. Intention-
to-treat data
reported/
analysed?
14. At least
90% full
follow-up
achieved?
Overall
study
quality/
risk of bias
Hsieh 2012
473
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Good
UC
Low
Low
Low
Low
UC
Imoto 2012
474
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Lim 2010
475
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
Low
Low
Low
High
High
Mavrommatis
2012
476
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
UC
Low
Low
High
High
Miller 2011
477
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Perlman 2012
478
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Salacinski 2012
479
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Poor
Low
Low
High
High
High
High
Salli 2010
480
Yes
UC/NS
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Satisfactory
UC
UC
Low
Low
Low
UC
Suarez-Almazor
2010
125
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Good
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Vance 2012
481
Yes
UC/NS
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Poor
b
UC
Low
High
Low
Low
High
Wang 2011
482
Yes
Yes
UC/NS
N/A
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Poor
Low
UC
Low
High
High
High
N/A, not applicable; NS, not specified; UC, unclear.
a Lack of baseline comparability on BMI could reduce the overall score from excellent to poor. However, as the BMI actual mean difference was not large (27 kg/m2 vs. 29 kg/m2) and
groups were comparable on all other important characteristics, including pain, WOMAC score and SF-36 score, and because the authors stated that ‘adjustment for covariates did not
alter any of the findings’, an overall rating of satisfactory was considered appropriate for this study.
b Baseline characteristics not comparable and also duration of treatment too short.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
235
 List of individual studies included in the systematic review
by intervention
Acupuncture studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
unless
stated
Weight
(kg)
BMI
(kg/m2)
Method of
diagnosis
Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Bao 2007
356
Acupuncture (2),
standard care (4)
40, yes
China
63
62
NR
NR
Clinical
NR
Berman
1999
357
Acupuncture (2),
standard care (2)
73, yes
USA
60
65
NR
Mean 32
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Berman
2004
134
Acupuncture, sham
acupuncture
330, yes
USA
63
66
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Itoh 2008
386
Acupuncture (1),
TENS (1), standard
care (2)
18, yes
Japan
66
Range
62–83
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Itoh 2008
387
Acupuncture (2),
sham acupuncture
(2)
24, yes
Japan
77
73
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Jubb 2008
391
Acupuncture, sham
acupuncture
62, yes
UK
81
65
NR
Mean 32
Clinical and
radiological
2 or 3
Lansdown
2009
126
Acupuncture (2),
standard care (2)
30, yes
UK
60
64
NR
NR
Clinical
NR/unclear
Lu 2010
192
Acupuncture (2),
sham acupuncture
(2)
20, yes
China
NR
64
Mean 66
NR
Clinical and
radiological
2 or 3
Mavrommatis
2012
476
Acupuncture,
sham acupuncture,
standard care
117, yes
Greece
76
62
NR
Mean 31
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Miller 2011
477
Acupuncture,
sham acupuncture
55, yes
Israel
69
71
NR
NR
Unclear/not
stated
NR/unclear
Molsberger
1994
416
Acupuncture,
sham acupuncture
97, no
b
Germany
63
60
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR (Wirth
classification)
Ng 2003
418
Acupuncture (3),
TENS (3), standard
care (3)
14 (imputed),
yes (only vs.
TENS)
China
96
85
NR
NR
Clinical
NR/unclear
Petrou 1988
426
Acupuncture (1),
sham acupuncture
(1)
31, yes
Hungary
74
62
Mean 80
NR
Clinical
NR/unclear
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
236
 Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total
number of
sessions
Duration
of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Number of
points
needled
Depth of
insertion
Electrical
stimulation
used?
Pain outcomes
assessed
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
Poor
20
12
4
7
Unclear
Yes
Lysholm scores
No
Poor
20
16
8
5
0.4–0.6 inches
Yes
WOMAC pain
5-point Likert
scale
Yes
Satisfactory
20
23
26
9 (11 for
sham: 9
knee, 2
abdomen)
0.3–1.0 inches;
unclear for sham
Yes; no for
sham
WOMAC pain
5-point Likert
scale, range 0–20
Other overall
score: patient
global
assessment
Poor
15–25; extra
10 minutes
when deqi
achieved
5
5
6
10 mm
No
Other pain VAS,
10-cm VAS scale
(0–100)
Yes
Poor
30
5
5
6 for
standard
acupuncture;
mean of 3.3
for trigger
acupuncture;
3.1 for sham
10 mm for
standard
acupuncture;
10–30 mm for
trigger
acupuncture;
0 mm for sham
No
Other pain VAS,
100 mm
Yes probably
using Likert
scale
Poor
Manual
acupuncture:
10; electrical
acupuncture:
anterior part
10, then
posterior
part 10
10
5
9
Varied between
1 and 1.5 cm;
needle not
inserted for sham
Yes; no for
sham
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–100; other pain
VAS, overall knee
pain (0–100)
Individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported
Poor
10–30
Up to 10
(as necessary)
Around 10
Varied from
4 to 24
Varied from 3 to
30 mm
Unclear/not
stated
WOMAC pain
5-point Likert
scale
Yes
Satisfactory
30
1
Unclear/not
stated
5
1–1.5 cm for
both acupuncture
and sham
Yes; no for
sham
Other pain VAS
1–10 (note: SD
for post-
treatment pain
read off graph)
No
Poor
Unclear/not
stated
16
8
10
Unclear/not
stated; sham:
retractable
needles
(Streitberger)
Yes
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–100; other pain
VAS 0–100
Yes
Satisfactory
20; manually
manipulated
every 5
minutes
16
8
7
Unclear/not
stated; sham: not
inserted into skin
No
Other pain VAS:
Knee Society
knee pain score
No
Poor
20
10
5
9
0.5–1.5 cm;
0.5 cm for sham
Unclear/not
stated
Other pain VAS
0–10
No
Poor
20
8
2
2
10–15 mm
Yes
NRS of pain
No
Poor
20
8
2
12
Unclear/not
stated;
‘superficially’ for
sham
No
Graded standard
pain scale
(4 points = severe,
3 points =
moderate,
2 points = mild,
1 point = none)
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
237
 Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
unless
stated
Weight
(kg)
BMI
(kg/m2)
Method of
diagnosis
Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Sangdee
2002
434
Acupuncture, sham
acupuncture,
standard care
186, yes
Thailand
78
63
Mean 60
NR
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 1
Suarez-
Almazor
2010
125
Acupuncture, sham
acupuncture,
standard care
455, yes
USA
64
64
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR/unclear
Takeda
1994
442
Acupuncture (2),
sham acupuncture
(2)
40, yes
Canada
50
62
Mean 90
Mean 33
Clinical and
radiological
NR/unclear
Tukmachi
2004
454
Acupuncture (1 and
2), standard care (2)
29, yes
UK
83
61
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
2 or 3
Vas 2004
120
Acupuncture (4),
sham acupuncture
(4)
88, yes
Spain
84
67
NR
Mean 33
Clinical and
radiological
NR - used
Ahlbäck
grade 1 or
higher
Weiner
2007
188
Acupuncture (2),
sham acupuncture
(2)
88, yes
USA
55
71
NR
Mean 32
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Williamson
2007
136
Acupuncture (2),
MSE (2), standard
care (3)
181, yes
UK
54
71
NR
Mean 32
Clinical and
radiological
(patients
awaiting
arthroplasty)
NR/unclear
Witt 2005
69
Acupuncture (2),
sham acupuncture
(2), standard care
(2)
285, yes
Germany
66
64
NR
Mean 29
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Witt 2006
77
Acupuncture (2),
standard care (2)
342, yes
Germany
60
61
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR/unclear
Wu 2008
458
Acupuncture (2),
standard care (4)
34 (imputed),
yes
China
63
62
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR/unclear
Yurtkuran
1999
460
Acupuncture (2),
ice/cooling
treatment (2), TENS
(2), placebo TENS
(2)
100, yes
Turkey
91
58
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR/unclear
MSE, muscle-strengthening exercise; NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
238
 Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total
number of
sessions
Duration
of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Number of
points
needled
Depth of
insertion
Electrical
stimulation
used?
Pain outcomes
assessed
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
Poor
20
12
4
4
0.5 inches;
patched
electrodes used
for sham
Yes; sound
generated
for sham
WOMAC pain
5-point Likert
scale; other pain
VAS; patient’s
global pain as
100-mm VAS
Yes
Good
20
12
6
7
0.7–4.0 cm
(0.2–1.2 cun);
sham: 0.7–1.7 cm
(0.2–0.5 cun)
Yes
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–100
No
Poor
30
9
3
5
30 mm; sham:
‘just enough to
puncture skin’
No
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–10; Pain
Rating Index of
McGill Pain
Questionnaire
Individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported:
pain, stiffness
and function
indices
Satisfactory
20–30
10
5
9
1–1.5 cm
Yes
WOMAC pain,
5-point Likert
scale; other pain
VAS 0–10 cm
Other overall
score: global
assessment
VAS 0–10
Good
20
12
12
8
Unclear/not
stated
Yes for
acupuncture
and sham
WOMAC pain,
5-point Likert
scale; other pain
VAS 0–100
Yes
Good
30
6
6
6
Until just touched
the bone
Yes, four
needles for
30 minutes,
two for
2 minutes;
sham: two
needles for
1 minute
WOMAC pain
5-point Likert
scale
Individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported:
WOMAC
function
Satisfactory
20
6
6
7–10
Unclear/not
stated
No
Other pain VAS;
VAS pain
0–10 cm
Yes
Good for
acupuncture
vs. sham;
satisfactory
for
acupuncture
vs. standard
care
30
12
8
At least 8 for
unilateral
pain and at
least 16 for
bilateral pain
Unclear/not
stated;
‘superficial’ for
sham
No
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–100
Yes
Satisfactory
Individually
prescribed
On average
11
12
Individually
prescribed
Unclear/not
stated
No
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–10
Yes
Poor
20
12
4
At least 8
Unclear/not
stated
Yes
Lysholm score
No
Poor
Unclear
10
2
4
0.5–1.0 inches
Yes
5-point Likert
scale
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
239
 Muscle-strengthening exercise studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg)
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Abrahams 2002
349
MSE, standard
care
56, no
b
UK
NR
Range
22–83
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
An 2008
351
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
21, yes
China
100
Mean
65
NR
26
Clinical
Baker 2001
353
MSE (2), placebo
(2)
38, yes
USA
78
Mean
69
NR
32
Clinical and
radiological
Bezalel 2010
358
MSE (2), heat
treatment (2)
50, yes
Israel
74
Mean
74
NR
NR
Unclear/NR
Börjesson 1996
190
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
68, yes
Sweden
50
Mean
64
Mean 83
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Bruce-Brand 2012
467
MSE, NMES,
standard care
26, yes
Republic
of Ireland
42
Mean
64
NR
33
Clinical and
radiological
Callaghan 1995
362
MSE, standard
care, placebo
27, no
b
UK
31
Median
53
NR
NR
Radiological
Cheing 2002
365
MSE (2), TENS
(2), placebo
TENS (2)
47, yes
China
89
Mean
63
Mean 67
28
Clinical and
radiological
Durmus
¸ 2007
370
MSE (2), PES (2)
50, yes
Turkey
100
Mean
55
NR
33
Clinical and
radiological
Ettinger 1997
371
MSE (2), aerobic
exercise (2),
standard care (3)
364, yes
USA
70
Mean
69
NR
53%
> 30 kg/m2
Clinical and
radiological
Foroughi 2011
469
MSE, placebo
45, yes
Australia
100
Mean
66
Mean 83
32
Clinical
Gür 2002
379
MSE (1), no
treatment (1)
23, yes
Turkey
NR
Mean
56
Mean 79
NR
Radiological
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
240
 Kellgren
and Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total number
of sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Intervention
also
incorporated
home exercise?
Pain outcomes used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
NR/unclear
Poor
Unclear/NR
Unclear/NR
12
Unclear/NR
Other pain VAS, VAS
slide indicator version
(0-–100) but no data
reported
No
Other method
used to classify
osteoarthritis
severity: ACR
criteria
Poor
30
40
8
No
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
No
NR/unclear,
median 3
Poor
Unclear/NR
48 (patients
exercised three
times per week
for 16 weeks at
home, with
12 supervised
visits)
16
Yes
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
Pain and
physical
function
subscores
reported
NR/unclear
Poor
45
4
4
Yes
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale;
data for post treatment
and follow-up read off
graph – not very
precise
Yes
Other method
used to classify
osteoarthritis
severity: Ahlbäck
grades I–III
Satisfactory
40
15
5
Yes
Borg scale (11-grade
category scale, 0 = no
pain to 10 = worse
pain)
No
≥ 3
Poor
30
18
6
Yes
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
No
NR/unclear
Poor
20
8
4
No
Other pain VAS 0–10
scale
No
≥ 2
Poor
20
20
4
No
Other pain VAS
0–100, with baseline
score standardised to
100
No
≤ 3
Satisfactory
20
20
4
No
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–10;
other pain VAS 0–10
All three
individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported
NR/unclear
Poor
60
216
72
Yes
Disability score
five-point Likert scale;
pain score: 1 (no pain)
to 6 (excruciating
pain)
No
Other method
used: modified
Outerbridge
classification
Poor
Not stated
78
26
No
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
Yes
2 or 3
Poor
Unclear/NR
24
8
No
Other pain VAS, NRS
0–10 (10 unbearable
pain); score is the sum
of scores for pain at
night, after inactivity,
on sitting, on rising
from a chair, climbing
stairs, descending
stairs
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
241
 Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg)
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Hasegawa 2010
381
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
28, yes
Japan
64
Mean
77
Mean 55
24
Clinical diagnosis
was of knee joint
pain
Hay 2006
382
MSE, standard
care
217, yes
UK
65
Mean
68
NR
NR
Clinical patients
with knee pain –
osteoarthritis of
the knee not
specified
Huang 2005
384
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
98, yes
Taiwan
81
Mean
62
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Hurley 2007
385
MSE, standard
care
53, no
b
UK
70
Mean
67
Mean 81
30
Clinical
Imoto 2012
474
MSE, standard
care
100, yes
Brazil
92
Mean
60
NR
30
Clinical and
radiological
Jan 2008
389
MSE (1), no
treatment (1)
98, yes
Taiwan
81
Mean
63
Mean 63
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Keogan 2007
396
MSE, aerobic
exercise,
standard care
80, no
c
Republic of
Ireland
64
Mean
66
NR
30.6
Clinical and
radiological
Kuptniratsaikul
2002
399
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
366, yes
Thailand
78
Mean
68
NR
11% were
obese
Radiological
Lim 2008
405
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
55, yes
Australia
62
Mean
62
Mean 78
29
Clinical and
radiological
Lin 2009
406
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
72, yes
Taiwan
69
Mean
63
Mean 62
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Lund 2008
407
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
79, yes
Denmark
78
Mean
68
Mean 75
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Maurer 1999
410
MSE (2),
standard care (3)
98, yes
USA
42
Mean
65
Mean 85
NR
Clinical and
radiological
McCarthy 2004
412
MSE (3),
standard care (3)
172, yes
UK
58
Mean
65
NR
30
Clinical and
radiological
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
242
 Kellgren
and Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total number
of sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Intervention
also
incorporated
home exercise?
Pain outcomes used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
NR/unclear
Poor
80 (60 exercise
plus 20
warm-up/
-down)
12 (also a
minimum of
24 home
exercise sessions)
12
Yes
Other pain VAS;
0–10 NRS (pain on
movement)
No
NR/unclear
Poor
20
3–6
10
Yes
WOMAC pain Likert
5; other pain VAS;
pain severity over
previous 7 days on
scale 0–10
No
NR; patients
with Altman
grade II were
included
Poor
Unclear/NR
24
8
Yes, but only
after 8 weeks
of treatment
(i.e. during
post-treatment
follow-up)
Other pain VAS 1–10
No
NR/unclear
Satisfactory
35–45
12
6
No, but
did include
self-management
and coping skills
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
Yes
≥ 2
Satisfactory
30–40
16
8
No
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale;
NRS 0–10
No
≤ 3
Satisfactory
30 high-
resistance
exercise, 50
low-resistance
exercise
24
8
No
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
Only physical
subscale
reported
NR/unclear
Poor
Unclear/NR
Unclear/NR
6
Unclear/NR
Other pain VAS,
NR – likely 0–10
No
2 or 3
Poor
60
16
8
Unclear/NR
Other AIMS pain
subscale (0–10)
No
≥ 2
Satisfactory
Unclear/NR
60 (7 with
physiotherapist
at weeks 1–5, 7
and 10)
12
Yes, exercise was
home based but
participants also
visited the
physiotherapist
seven times
during the
12-week period
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
(transformed to a
0–100 scale)
No
≤ 3
Satisfactory
Unclear/NR
24
8
No, told to cease
other exercises
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
Pain and
function
subscores
reported
Other method
used to classify
osteoarthritis
severity:
Lequesne
(1 –26) score.
Mean score of
participants was
11
Poor
50
16
8
Unclear/NR
Other pain VAS
0–100
No
≤ 3
Poor
Unclear/NR
24
8
Unclear/NR
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
Pain and
function
subscores
reported
Satisfactory
45
16
8
Yes
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale;
other pain VAS, VAS
pain score 0–100
No (only at
baseline)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
243
 Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg)
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Péloquin 1999
423
MSE (3),
standard care (3)
124, yes
Canada
70
Mean
66
NR
30
Clinical and
radiological
Rapp 2009
430
MSE (2), manual
therapy (2),
standard care (2)
39, yes
Germany
64
Mean
60
Mean 83
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Røgind 1998
432
MSE, standard
care
23, no
b
Denmark
91
Mean
71
Mean 71
27
Clinical and
radiological
Rosemffet 2004
433
MSE, NMES
18, no
b
Argentina
77
Median
60
NR
30.9
Clinical and
radiological
Salli 2010
480
MSE, standard
care
71, yes
Turkey
82
Mean
57
NR
32
Clinical and
radiological
Schilke 1996
435
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
20, yes
USA
85
Mean
66
NR
NR
Clinical
Topp 2002
450
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
102, yes
USA
73
Mean
63
Mean 89
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Trans 2009
451
MSE (2),
standard care (2)
52, yes
Denmark
100
Mean
60
Mean 81
30
Clinical and
radiological
Williamson 2007
136
MSE (2),
acupuncture (2),
standard care (3)
181, yes
UK
54
Mean
71
NR
32
Clinical and
radiological,
patients on NHS
arthroplasty
waiting list
MSE, muscle-strengthening exercise; NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
c Only change from baseline scores reported.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
244
 Kellgren
and Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total number
of sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Intervention
also
incorporated
home exercise?
Pain outcomes used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
≤ 3
Poor
60
36
12
No
Other AIMS2 subscale
for pain
No
≥ 2
Poor
45
16
8
Unclear/NR
Other pain VAS 0–10
No
≥ 3
Poor
Unclear/NR
24 or 26
(two per week
for 3 months)
12
Yes
Other pain VAS, pain
on an 11-point scale.
Separate scores for
pain at night, at rest
and on weight
bearing
No
≥ 2
Poor
75
16
8
Unclear/NR
Other pain VAS
20–80 mm
Yes
≤ 2
Satisfactory
Not stated
24
8
No
Other VAS 0–10
No
NR/unclear
Poor
Unclear/NR
24
8
No
Other pain VAS:
Osteoarthritis
Screening Index
10-cm VAS
No
NR/unclear
Poor
50
48
16
Yes
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
No
NR/unclear
Satisfactory
Up to 10.5
16
8
No, both
interventions
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
All three
individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported
NR/unclear
Satisfactory
60
6
6
No
Other pain VAS; VAS
pain 0–10 cm
Yes
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
245
 Aerobic exercise studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg)
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Aglamis
¸ 2009
189
Aerobic exercise
(2), standard
care (2)
25, yes
Turkey
100
Mean
56
NR
33
Clinical and
radiological
Bilgici 2004
359
Aerobic exercise,
standard care
NR, no
b
Turkey
NR
Mean
54
NR
NR
Clinical
Brosseau 2012
466
Aerobic exercise,
standard care
84, yes
Canada
69
Mean
63
Mean 82
30
Clinical and
radiological
Dias 2003
187
Aerobic exercise,
standard care
NR, no
b
Brazil
88
Median
75
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Ettinger 1997
371
Aerobic exercise
(2), MSE (2),
standard care (3)
364, yes
USA
70
Mean
69
NR
53% > 30
Clinical and
radiological
Keefe 2004
395
Aerobic exercise
(2), standard
care (2)
30 (imputed),
yes
USA
50
Mean
59
NR
NR
Clinical
Keogan 2007
396
Aerobic exercise,
MSE, standard
care
80, no
c
Republic of
Ireland
64
Mean
66
NR
31
Clinical and
radiological
Kovar 1992
398
Aerobic exercise
(2), standard
care (3)
92, yes
USA
83
Mean
69
Mean 77
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Lim 2010
475
Aerobic exercise,
standard care
66, yes
Korea
87
Mean
66
NR
28
Clinical and
radiological
Messier 2004
413
Aerobic exercise
(2), weight loss
(2), standard
care (3)
240, yes
USA
72
Mean
69
Mean 94
34
Clinical and
radiological
Salacinski 2012
479
Aerobic exercise,
standard care
28, yes
USA
73
Mean
58
NR
24
Clinical and
radiological
Thorstensson
2005
447
Aerobic exercise,
standard care
56, no
c
Sweden
51
Mean
56
NR
30
Clinical and
radiological
Wang 2011
482
Aerobic exercise,
standard care
78, yes
Taiwan
86
Mean
68
NR
26
Clinical and
radiological
KOOS, Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score; MSE, muscle-strengthening exercise; NMA, network meta-analysis;
NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
c Only change from baseline scores reported.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
246
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total
number of
sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Individual or
group sessions?
Also
incorporated
home
exercise?
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
≥ 2
Poor
20
36
12
Unclear/NR
No
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–10
Yes
NR/unclear
Poor
60
16
8
Unclear/NR
Unclear/NR
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–10; unclear
what form of
WOMAC was
used: no data
reported
No
NR/unclear
Poor
65
Approximately
18
52
Group
No
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
Yes
NR/unclear
Poor
40
12
6 (followed
by 6 weeks
of home
exercise)
Sessions given to
groups
Yes for
6 weeks,
following the
6-week
intervention
SF-36 bodily
pain; insufficient
pain outcome
data reported for
data extraction
No
NR/unclear
Poor
60
216
72
Sessions given to
groups
Yes
Other pain 5-
point Likert scale;
Likert scale 1
(no pain) to 6
(excruciating
pain)
No
NR/unclear
Poor
60
36
12
Sessions given to
groups
No
Other; AIMS
four-item pain
scale
No, but
Arthritis
Self-efficacy
Scale used
NR/unclear
Poor
Unclear/NR
Unclear/NR
6
Unclear/NR
Unclear/NR
Other pain VAS;
VAS 0–10 most
likely to have
been used
No
NR/unclear
Poor
90
24
8
Sessions given to
groups
No
Other: AIMS VAS
10
No
≥ 2
Poor
Aquatic
group 40;
land group
40
Aquatic 24;
land NR
Both 8
Groups
Unclear/NR
Brief pain
inventory (0–10)
Yes
≤ 3
Satisfactory
60
234
78
Sessions given to
individuals
Yes
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
Pain and
physical
function
subscores
reported
≤ 3
Poor
40–60
24
12
Groups
No
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
Yes
≥ 3
Poor
60
12
6
Sessions given to
groups
Yes
Other pain VAS:
KOOS
No
NR/unclear
Poor
60
36
12
Groups
Unclear
KOOS pain
(0–100)
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
247
 T’ai chi studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at end
of treatment,
data suitable for
pain analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Brismée 2007
360
T’ai chi (2);
standard care (3)
41, yes
USA
83
70
73
28
Clinical
Lee 2009
401
T’ai chi (2);
standard care (2)
44, yes
Korea
93
69
61
26
Clinical and
radiological
Ni 2010
420
(retracted study)
T’ai chi (2);
standard care (3)
29, yes (but
excluded –
retracted study)
China
100
63
66
27
Clinical
Wang 2009
455
T’ai chi; standard
care
40, yes
USA
75
65
NR
30
Clinical and
radiological
Yip 2007
193
T’ai chi (1);
standard care (2)
182, yes
Hong
Kong
84
65
NR
NR
Clinical
NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
248
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total number
of sessions
Duration of
treatment period
(weeks)
Pain outcomes
used
Overall WOMAC
score reported?
NR
Satisfactory
40
36 (18 classes and
18 home sessions)
12
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
(reported as 7–35);
knee pain VAS 0–10
Yes (scale 26–130)
≥ 2
Satisfactory
60
16
8
WOMAC used but
reported as 26–130
Yes (scale 26–130);
all three individual
WOMAC subscores
reported
NR
Poor
40
72
24
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
Yes
≥ 2
Poor
60
24
12
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–100; global knee
pain VAS 0–10
All three individual
WOMAC subscores
reported
NR
Poor
15 (within a
2-hour self-
management
session)
6
6
VAS 0–100
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
249
 Weight-loss studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at end
of treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
Weight
(kg)
BMI
(kg/m2)
Method of
diagnosis
Bliddal 2011
465
Weight loss,
standard care
89, yes
Denmark
89
63
Mean
96
Mean 36
Clinical and
radiological
Christensen
2005
367
Weight loss,
standard care
78, yes
Denmark
89
63
Mean
97
Mean 36
Clinical and
radiological
Jenkinson 2009
390
Weight loss
(2 and 3),
standard care (3)
389, yes
UK
66
61
Median
93
Median
33
Clinical
Messier 2004
413
Weight loss (2),
aerobic exercise
(2), standard care
(3)
240, yes
USA
72
69
Mean
94
Mean 34
Clinical and
radiological
Miller 2006
414
Weight loss (3),
standard care (3)
74, yes
USA
26
70
(all ≥ 60)
Mean
98
Mean 35
Clinical
NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
Balneotherapy studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg), mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Bálint 2007
355
Balneotherapy (3),
placebo (3)
52, yes
Hungary
63
Range
50–75
NR
NR
Clinical
Cantarini
2007
364
Balneotherapy,
heat treatment,
standard care
74, no
b
Italy
63
Mean
64
71
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Fioravanti
2010
372
Balneotherapy (2),
standard care (2)
80, yes
Italy
75
Mean
70
NR
26
Clinical and
radiological
Flusser 2002
374
Balneotherapy (2),
placebo (2)
58, yes
Israel
85
Mean
65
76
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Forestier 2010
375
Balneotherapy,
standard care
309, no
b
France
47
Mean
64
NR
30
Clinical and
radiological
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
250
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
dieting
period
(weeks)
Difference in
weight loss
between treatment
groups (kg)
Weight-loss cut-off
used to analyse effect
on pain or WOMAC
(e.g. 10% of body
weight)
Pain outcomes
used
Overall WOMAC
score reported?
2 or 3
Satisfactory
52
7.3
8%
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
Yes
2 or 3
Poor
8
6.6 (95% CI 5.3 to
7.9; p < 0.0001);
percentage of
patients achieving
10% body weight
loss was 50% in
weight-loss group
and 0% in standard
care group
10%
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
Yes
≤ 4; 41%
had a
score of 0
Satisfactory
104
NR/unclear
Cut-off used; dietary
interventions aimed for
a weight loss of
0.5–1.0 kg per week;
weight loss NR
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
No
≤ 3
Satisfactory
78
Mean weight loss by
group: weight-loss
group 4.61 kg,
exercise group
3.46 kg, standard
care group 1.1 kg
Cut-off used; average
weight-loss goal was 5%
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
Individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported: pain,
physical function
NR/
unclear
Poor
26
8 kg
Cut off used; 10%
weight loss was goal
for intervention group
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert scale
Yes
Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Number
of sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Temperature (°C)
Type of
treatment
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
NR
Poor
30
20
4
36
Bathing
mineral water
WOMAC pain
subscale
Yes
≤ 3
Poor
35
15
3
Water 38, mud
packs 45
Bathing
mineral water
and mud packs
Pain VAS 0–100
No
≤ 3
Satisfactory
35
12
2
Mud packs 45,
mineral bath 38
Bathing
mineral water
and mud packs
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–100
No
2 or 3
Poor
20
15
3
30–35
Mud packs
Pain VAS 0–10
Lequesne index
≥ 1
Poor
65
18
3
Mineral hydrojet
37, massages by
physiotherapist
38, mineral
matured mud 45,
collective mineral
water pool 32
Bathing
mineral water
and mud packs
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–100; other
pain VAS 0–100
WOMAC
function
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
251
 Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses
a)
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg), mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Karagülle
2007
394
Balneotherapy,
standard care
20, no
b
Turkey
85
Mean
60
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Kovács 2002
397
Balneotherapy,
placebo
68, no
b
Hungary
Range
58–78
NR
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Mahboob
2009
408
Balneotherapy (2),
placebo (2)
50, yes
Iran
100
Range
44–79
NR
NR
Clinical
Nguyen 1997
419
Balneotherapy,
standard care
64, no
b
France
81
NR
NR
61% > 24
Clinical
Sherman 2009
438
Balneotherapy (2),
placebo (2)
44, yes
Israel
80
Mean
67
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Sukenik 1999
441
Balneotherapy (2),
placebo (2)
36, yes
Israel
89
Mean
63
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Tishler 2004
448
Balneotherapy,
standard care
68, yes
Israel
78
Mean
64
NR
NR
Clinical
Wigler 1995
456
Balneotherapy (2),
placebo (2)
33, yes
Israel
88
Mean
65
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Yurtkuran
2006
461
Balneotherapy (5),
placebo (5)
52, yes
Turkey
97
Mean
54
77
32
Clinical and
radiological
NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
252
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Number
of sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Temperature (°C)
Type of
treatment
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
≥ 2
Satisfactory
30
20
10 days
38 ± 1
Bathing
mineral water
Pain VAS 0–10
Lequesne
Algofunctional
Index
NR/unclear
Poor
30
15
15 days
36
Bathing
mineral water
Pain VAS
No
NR
Poor
20
30
30 days
NR
50 g of mud
gel
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
Individual
WOMAC
subscores for
pain, function
and stiffness
NR
Poor
Unclear
Unclear
3
NR
Bathing
mineral water
Pain VAS 0–100
No
≥ 1
Poor
20
12
6
35–36
Bathing
mineral water
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–10; pain VAS
0–100
Individual
WOMAC
subscores for
pain, function
and stiffness
Lequesne
index of
severity
Poor
20
14
2
Dead sea sulphur
pools 37, sweet
water control
24–25
Bathing
mineral water
VAS 0–10
No
NR
Poor
30
6
6
37
Bathing
mineral water
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale; other pain
VAS 0–100
WOMAC
subscores
reported for
pain, function
and stiffness
NR
Poor
40
7
2
Water 38, mud
pack 45
Bathing
mineral water
and mud packs
Pain VAS 0–10
No
2 or 3
Poor
20
10
2
37
Bathing
mineral water
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale; pain VAS
0–100
Yes
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
253
 Insoles studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses)
a
Number
analysed
at end of
treatment, data
suitable for
pain analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Arazpour 2013
463
Insoles, braces
24, yes
Iran
63
59.5
NR
27
Clinical and
radiological
Baker 2007
354
Insoles, placebo
172, no
b
USA
59
68
NR
33
Clinical or
radiological
Bennell 2011
464
Insoles, placebo
200, yes
Australia
59
64
NR
29
Clinical and
radiological
Maillefert 2001
409
Insoles (4),
placebo (4)
156, yes
France
74
65
NR
29
Clinical and
radiological
Nigg 2006
421
Insoles, placebo
123, no
c
Canada
54
58
85
30
Clinical and
radiological
Toda 2008
449
Insoles, placebo
122, no
c
Japan
88
64
NR
25
Radiological
NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
c Only change from baseline scores reported.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
Static magnets studies
Study
Treatments
Number
analysed
at end of
treatment, data
suitable for
pain analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Chen 2008
366
Static magnets,
placebo
42, no
a
Taiwan
79
Mean 65
64
27
Clinical and
radiological
Hinman 2002
383
Static magnets,
placebo
43, yes
USA
60
Mean 63
NR
NR
Clinical
Wolsko 2004
457
Static magnets,
placebo
46, yes
USA
69
Median
63
NR
30
Clinical and
radiological
NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a No means.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
254
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Time spent
wearing
(per day)
(minutes)
Number of
days worn per
week
Duration of
treatment period
(weeks)
Ankle
support also
worn?
Pain outcome
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
≤ 2
Poor
7.6 hours
Unclear
6 weeks
No
Other pain VAS
0–10
No
≥ 1
Poor
Approximately
420 (7 hours)
Unclear
6; phase 1: 6,
phase 2: 6,
washout period: 4
No
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
No
2 or 3
Good
Unclear
7
12 months
Unclear
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
No
≥ 2
Satisfactory
Wear
permanently
Wear
permanently
Unclear: up to 24
months
No
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
No
≥ 2
Satisfactory
As much as
possible
7
12
No
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
Yes
≤ 4
Satisfactory
300–600
7
12
Sock-type
ankle support
Other pain VAS
0–100%
No
Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Strength of
magnetic field
(gauss or tesla)
When to wear magnets
Duration of
treatment
period (weeks)
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
Ahlbäck
classification
(grade I)
Poor
35 mT, as measured
with a Lakeshore
430 gaussmeter
Only during waking hours
12
HAQ pain scale
0–100
No
NR
Poor
1.08 T
Magnet group: 1.0–23.5
hours per day, mean
number of hours magnet
worn 116.33 (range
25–235); placebo group:
1–24 hours per day, the
mean number of hours
magnet worn 85.12
(range 6.5–213)
2
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–10
No
≥ 1
Poor
40–850 G
At least 6 hours a day
6
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
and VAS 0–100
with five scales
(maximum 500)
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
255
 Braces studies
Study
Treatments
Number analysed
at end of
treatment, data
suitable for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Arazpour
2013463
Braces,
insoles
24, yes
Iran
63
59.5
NR
27
Clinical and
radiological
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct code
in parentheses)
a
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Alcidi 2007
350
TENS (2), heat
treatment (2)
40, yes
Italy
85
Mean
66
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Burch 2008
303
TENS, interferential
therapy
116, no
b
USA
72
Mean
62
86
31
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 1
Cheing 2002
365
TENS (2), MSE (2),
placebo (2)
47, yes
China
89
Mean
63
67
28
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Cheing 2003
191
TENS (2), placebo (2)
38, yes
China
89
Mean
66
66
NR
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Grimmer 1992
378
TENS (1), placebo (1)
60, yes
Australia
62
Mean
67
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Itoh 2008
386
TENS (1), acupuncture
(1), standard care (2)
12, yes (only
one study)
Japan
66
Range
62–83
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Kang 2007
393
TENS (2), placebo (2)
63, yes
USA
71
Mean
57
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Law 2004
400
TENS, placebo
34, no
c
Hong Kong
97
Mean
83
57
26
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Lewis 1988
402
TENS, placebo
Unknown, no
c
Australia
NR
NR
NR
NR
Unclear/not
stated
NR
Lewis 1994
403
TENS (1), standard
care (4)
56, yes
Australia
58
Mean
66
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Lewis 1984
404
TENS, placebo
30, no
c
UK
73
Median
61
NR
NR
Unclear/not
stated
NR
Ng 2003
418
TENS,
electroacupuncture,
standard care
14, yes
China
96
Mean
85
NR
NR
Clinical
NR
Pietrosimone
2009
427
TENS (1), ice/cooling
treatment (1), no
treatment (1)
33, yes
USA
48
Mean
56
88
30
Radiological
NR
Selfe 2008
436
TENS (2), placebo (2)
37, yes
USA
68
Mean
67
NR
31
Clinical and
radiological
NR
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
256
 Kellgren and
Lawrence
score
Overall study
quality
Time spent
wearing
(per day)
(hours)
Number of days
worn per week
Duration of
treatment
period (weeks)
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
≤ 2
Poor
7.3
Unclear
6
Other pain VAS
0–10
No
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Number
of
sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Frequency
of current
(Hz)
Intensity
of current
(mA)
Pulse
width/duration
(microseconds)
Electrodes
placed at
acupuncture
points?
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
Poor
20
5
1
50
‘Well
tolerated
tingling’
0.5
No
Other pain VAS
1–100
No
Poor
35
56
8
0.2
60
300
Unclear/not
stated
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
All three
individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported
Poor
60
20
4
80
To achieve
a tingling
sensation
140
Yes
Other pain VAS
0–100
No
Poor
20–60
10
2
100
NR
200
Yes
Other pain VAS
0–10
No
Poor
30
1
1 session
80
NR
NR
Yes
Other pain VAS
No
Poor
15
5
5
4
NR
NR
No
Other pain VAS
0–100
Yes
Poor
30
1
1 session
NR
16% at
start,
increased to
23% at
15 minutes
NR
No
Other pain VAS
0–10
All three
individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported
Poor
40
10
2
2, 100 or
alternating
2/100
25–35
2 Hz:
576,100 Hz:
200
Yes
Other pain VAS
0–100
No
Poor
NR
NR
9
Unclear/
not stated
Unclear/not
stated
Unclear/not
stated
Unclear/not
stated
McGill Pain
Questionnaire,
Pain Index
No
Poor
30–60
63
3
70
Adjusted
until
comfortable
100
Spleen 9
and 10,
stomach 34
and 35
VAS 0–100
No
Poor
30–60
63
7
70
NR
NR
Yes
VAS
No
Poor
20
8
2
2
NR
200
Yes
NRS
No
Poor
45
1
1 day
150
NR
150
No
VAS
No
Poor
20–30
17
8
NR
NR
NR
Sometimes
WOMAC pain
VAS 0–10; NRS
Yes
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
257
 Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct code
in parentheses)
a
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Smith 1983
439
TENS, placebo
30, no
c
UK
67
Mean
68
NR
NR
Clinical
NR
Taylor 1981
445
TENS, placebo
20, no
b
USA
90
72
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Vance 2012
481
TENS, placebo
75, yes
USA
61
56
NR
36
Clinical and
radiological
NR/
unclear
Yurtkuran
1999
460
TENS (2), acupuncture
(2), ice/cooling (2),
placebo (2)
100, yes
Turkey
91
58
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NR
MSE, muscle-strengthening exercise; NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
c Only change from baseline scores reported.
d Defined as any of the following two criteria being fulfilled (and no worsening in the remaining criterion): (1) a 10-point
or 50% decrease in weekly pain score, (2) a 50% decrease in analgesic intake compared with baseline and (3) a 5-point
improvement in the weekly sleep disturbance score.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
258
 Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Number
of
sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Frequency
of current
(Hz)
Intensity
of current
(mA)
Pulse
width/duration
(microseconds)
Electrodes
placed at
acupuncture
points?
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
Poor
20
8
4
32–50
Adjusted
until
comfortable
80
Yes
Other significant
pain relief
d
No
Poor
30
NR
2
NR
NR
NR
No
Five-point Likert
scale
No
Poor
40–50
1
3 hours
100
High
frequency
27, low
frequency
24
100
No
Other pain VAS
0–100
No
Poor
20
10
2
4
0.4–2.5 V
1000 ms
Yes
Five-point Likert
scale
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
259
 Pulsed electrical stimulation studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses)
a
Number
analysed
at end of
treatment, data
suitable for
pain analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Callaghan 2005
363
PES (2), placebo
(2)
21, yes
UK
48
60
NR
28
Radiological
Durmus
¸ 2007
370
PES (2), MSE (2)
50, yes
b
Turkey
100
55
NR
33
Clinical and
radiological
Fary 2011
468
PES, placebo
70, yes
Australia
47
70
NR
28.1
Clinical and
radiological
Fukuda 2008
376
PES, standard
care, placebo
NR, no
d
Brazil
100
61
67
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Fukuda 2011
470
PES, placebo,
no treatment
112, yes
Brazil
100
60
71
28
Radiological
Garland 2007
377
PES (2), placebo
(2)
58, yes
USA
66
66
NR
31
Clinical and
radiological
Miranda-Filloy
2005
415
PES (2), placebo
(2)
18 (imputed), yes
Spain
80
> 40
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Zizic 1995
462
PES, placebo
71, no
d
USA
46
NR
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
MSE, muscle-strengthening exercise; NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b Only one study of this comparison.
c Lack of baseline comparability on BMI reduced overall score from excellent to poor. However, as the BMI actual mean
difference was not too large (27 kg/m2 vs. 29 kg/m2) and groups were comparable on all other important characteristics,
including pain, WOMAC score and SF-36, and as the authors also stated that ‘adjustment for covariates did not alter any
of the findings’, an overall rating of satisfactory has been considered appropriate for this study.
d Only change from baseline scores reported.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
260
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total number
of sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Frequency of
current (Hz)
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
≥ 3
Poor
20
6
2
High-frequency
group 27 MHz;
low-frequency
group 27 MHz
VAS 0–10 and pain
subscale of AIMS
No
≤ 3
Satisfactory
20
20
4
50
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–10;
pain VAS 0–10
All three
individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported
≤ 4
Satisfactory
c
7 hours
182
26
100
Other pain VAS
Yes
NR; grade II
or III using
Gupta
criteria
Poor
38 for 33-KJ
dose group; 19
for 17-KJ dose
group and
placebo group
39 (3 per week
for 3 months)
(13 weeks)
13
33 kJ vs. 17 kJ
(27.12 Hz with
a pulse
frequency of
145 Hz)
Other pain VAS;
VAS (unclear what
scoring)
Other
overall
score:
Lequesne
NR/unclear
Poor
Low dose 19;
high dose 38
9
3
145
NRS 0–10
No
≥ 3
Poor
≥ 6 hours
Unclear/NR;
each day
13
100
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–100
Yes
≥ 3
Poor
20
24
8
35
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS
0–100; other pain
VAS; VAS 0-100
No
NR/unclear
Poor
6–10 hours a day
Unclear/NR
4
100
Other pain VAS
0–10
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
261
 Pulsed electromagnetic fields studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct code
in parentheses)
a
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg), mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Fischer 2005
373
PEMF (2), placebo (2)
69, yes
Slovenia
72
Mean 60
NR
29.3
Radiological
Jacobson
2001
388
PEMF (1), placebo (1)
176, yes
USA
NR
NR
NR
NR
Unclear/not
stated
Perrot 1998
425
PEMF (2), placebo (2)
40, yes
France
80
Mean 69
NR
NR
Unclear/not
stated
Pipitone 2001
428
PEMF, placebo
69, no
b
UK
28
Median
around
63 (range
40–84)
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Thamsborg
2005
446
PEMF (2), placebo (2)
83, yes
Denmark
54
Mean 60
NR
27
Clinical and
radiological
Trock 1994
452
PEMF, placebo
84, yes
USA
70
Mean 67
80
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct code
in parentheses)
a
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Bruce-
Brand
2012
467
MSE, NMES,
standard care
26, yes
Republic of
Ireland
42
Mean
64
NR
33
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 3
Rosemffet
2004
433
NMES, MSE
18, no
b
Argentina
77
Median
60
NR
30.9
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Talbot
2003
443
NMES (3), standard
care (3)
34, yes
USA
79
Mean
71
NR
30
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 1
MSE, muscle-strengthening exercise; NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
262
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total
number
of
sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Frequency of
pulse (Hz)
Strength of
magnetic
field (gauss
or tesla)
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
NR/unclear
Poor
16
30
6
Unclear/not
stated; low
frequency
Varied
between 3.4
and 13.6 μT
VAS 0–100 and
5-point Likert
scale
No (Knee
Society score)
NR/unclear
Poor
6
8
2
0.976–7.7
2.74 × 10–7–
3.4 × 10–8 G
Scale from 1 to
10 (no further
details)
No
NR
Poor
60
9
1.3
Unclear/not
stated
Unclear/not
stated
Other Pain VAS
0–100
No
NR/unclear
Poor
Unclear/not
stated
147
6
7.8 in morning
and afternoon,
3 in the evening
< 0.5 G
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
Yes
≥ 1
Poor
120
30
6
50
Unclear/not
stated
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
All three
individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported
NR/unclear
Poor
30
18
Around 4–6
5 for 10 minutes,
10 for 10 minutes
and 12 for
10 minutes
10–15 G for
10 minutes
and 15–25 G
for 20 minutes
Other pain VAS
0–10
No
Overall
study
quality
Duration
of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total
number
of
sessions
Duration
of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Frequency
of current
(Hz)
Intensity
of current
Pulse
width/duration
(microseconds)
Electrodes
placed at
acupuncture
points?
Pain
outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
Poor
20
30
6
50
18 mA
100–400
No
WOMAC pain
five-point
Likert scale
No
Poor
30
24
8
25
According
to patient
tolerance
Unclear/NR
Unclear/NR
20–80 VAS
scale
Yes
Poor
15
36
12
Unclear/NR
Unclear/NR
300
Unclear/NR
McGill Pain
Rating Index
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
263
 Interferential therapy studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses)
a
Number
analysed at
end of
treatment,
data suitable
for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age (years)
Weight
(kg), mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Adedoyin
2002
301
Interferential
therapy (5),
placebo (5)
26 (imputed),
yes
Nigeria
67
Mean 59
78
28
Clinical and
radiological
Burch 2008
303
Interferential TENS
106, no
b
USA
72
Mean 62
86
31
Clinical and
radiological
Defrin 2005
369
Interferential
therapy (2),
placebo (2),
no treatment (2)
55 (imputed),
yes
Israel
NR
Mean 67
NR
NR
Clinical
Gundog 2012
302
Interferential
therapy, placebo
60, yes
Turkey
80
Mean 60
NR
29
Clinical and
radiological
Young 1991
459
Interferential
therapy, placebo
NR, no
c
Canada
NR
Range 18–75
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
NMA, network meta-analysis.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b Only change from baseline scores reported.
c No means.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
264
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
individual
sessions
(minutes)
Total
number
of
sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Frequency (Hz)
Pulse
width/duration
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
NR/unclear
Poor
20
8
4
100 for
15 minutes,
reduced to 80 for
a further
5 minutes
0.033 seconds
VAS 0–10
No
≥ 1
Poor
15 of
interferential
followed by
20 of patterned
stimulation
56
8
Base of 5000,
and a pre-
modulated beat
frequency
sweeping
between 1 and
150
Between 3 and
102 microseconds
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
All three
individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported
NR/unclear
Poor
20
12
4
Constantly
ranged between
30 and 60
NR
VAS 0–10
No
2 or 3
Good
20
15
3
Group 1 40,
group 2 100,
group 3 180
NR
WOMAC Likert
scale
No
NR/unclear
Poor
25
10
1.7
NR/unclear
NR/unclear
Reported WOMAC
but unclear how
assessed
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
265
 Heat treatment studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses)
a
Number
analysed
at end of
treatment, data
suitable for
pain analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Alcidi 2007
350
Heat (2), TENS (2)
40, yes
Italy
85
66
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Bezalel 2010
358
Heat (2), MSE (2)
50, yes
Israel
74
74
NR
NR
NR
Cantarini 2007
364
Heat,
balneotherapy,
standard care
74, no
b
Italy
63
64
71
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Clarke 1974
368
Heat (2),
ice/cooling
treatment (2),
placebo (2)
30, yes
UK
69
61
NR
NR
Radiological
Giombini 2011
472
Heat treatment,
placebo
63, yes
Italy
67
67
NR
27
Clinical and
radiological
Mazzuca 2004
411
Heat (2), placebo
(2)
51, yes
USA
77
63
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Rattanachaiyanont
2008
431
Heat, placebo
104, no
c
Thailand
100
63
NR
26
Clinical
MSE, muscle-strengthening exercise; N/A, not applicable; NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
c Only change from baseline scores reported.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
Ice/cooling studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct code
in parentheses)a
Number
analysed
at end of
treatment, data
suitable for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years)
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Arman 1988352
Ice/cooling, standard
care
33, nob
Turkey
NR
NR
NR
NR
Clarke 1974368
Ice/cooling (2),
heat treatment (2),
placebo (2)
45, yes
UK
69
Mean
61
NR
NR
Pietrosimone
2009427
Ice/cooling (1),
TENS (1), no
treatment (1)
33, yes
USA
48
Mean
56
88
30
Yurtkuran
1999460
Acupuncture (2),
ice/cooling (2),
TENS (2), placebo
TENS (2)
100, yes
Turkey
91
Mean
58
NR
NR
NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
266
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
sessions
(minutes)
Number
of
sessions
Duration of
treatment period
(weeks)
Type of
treatment
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
NR
Poor
20
5
0.7
Radiofrequency
electromagnetic
radiation
VAS 1–100
No
NR
Poor
20
6
4
Short-wave
diathermy
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
Yes
≤ 3
Poor
15
10
3
Short-wave
diathermy
VAS 0–100
No
NR
Poor
NR
9
3
Short-wave
diathermy
Likert scale 0–3;
maximum score 17
No
2 or 3
Satisfactory
30
12
4
Short-wave
diathermy
WOMAC pain
Yes
≥ 2
Poor
N/A
N/A
4
Heat-retaining
knee sleeve
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
Individual
WOMAC
subscores
NR
Poor
20
9
3
Short-wave
diathermy
WOMAC pain VAS
0–10
Yes
Method of
diagnosis
Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration
of sessions
(minutes)
Number
of
sessions
Duration of
treatment
period (weeks)
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Poor
10
40
3
NR
No
Radiological
NR
Poor
NR
9
3
Likert scale 0–3
(maximum score
17)
No
Radiological
NR
Poor
20
1
1 day
VAS
No
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Poor
20
10
2
Likert scale 1–5
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
267
 APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
268
Laser/light therapy studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct
code in
parentheses)
a
Number
analysed
at end of
treatment, data
suitable for
pain analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Method of
diagnosis
Bülow 1994
361
Laser, placebo
29, no
b
Denmark
83
≥ 74
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Fukuda 2011
471
Laser/light
therapy, placebo
47, yes
Brazil
72
63
75
29
Clinical and
radiological
Gür 2003
380
Laser, placebo
90, no
b
Turkey
80
60
NR
30
Clinical and
radiological
Hsieh 2012
473
Laser/light
therapy, placebo
72, yes
Taiwan
86
60
NR
26
Clinical and
radiological
Kang 2006
392
Laser, standard
care
Unclear, no
c
Korea
NR
NR
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Nivbrant 1989
422
Laser, placebo
Unclear, no
c
Sweden
NR
NR
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Shen 2009
437
Laser (2), placebo
(2)
40, yes
China
90
58
NR
NR
Clinical and
radiological
Stelian 1992
440
Laser (2), placebo
(2)
50, yes
Israel
68
68
NR
NR
NR
Tascioglu 2004
444
Laser (4), placebo
(4)
60, yes
Turkey
70
62
NR
29
Clinical and
radiological
NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b No means.
c Only change from baseline scores reported.
Note
Studies identified from the 2013 update searches are italicised.
 Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
sessions
(minutes)
Number
of
sessions
Duration of
treatment
period (weeks)
Light dose
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
NR
Poor
15
9
3
Accumulated dose
202.5 J
Likert scale 0–3
(maximum score
126)
No
≥ 2
Good
NR
9
3
27 J per session
Visual numerical
pain scale 0–10
No
≥ 2
Satisfactory
5
10
2
Group 1, 30 J
accumulated dose;
group 2, 20 J
accumulated dose
VAS 0–10
Yes
≥ 2
Good
40
6
2
2.08 J/cm2/minute
per session
Knee injury and
Osteoarthritis
Outcome Score VAS
No
≥ 2
Poor
30
56
8
402 laser diodes,
650 nm, 50 mW
WOMAC pain
subscale VAS 0–10
Individual
WOMAC
subscores
reported
Osteoarthritis
severity,
radiographic
grades 2–4
Poor
20
6
6
NR
VAS
No
≥ 2
Satisfactory
20
12
4
283 J
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale
All three
individual
WOMAC
subscale
scores
NR
Poor
30
20
10 days
Red light 10.3 J;
infrared light
11.1 J
Other pain VAS
0–10; pain Likert
scale 0–5
No
2 or 3
Satisfactory
10 minutes
for first
group,
5 minutes for
second group
10
2
Group 1, 3 J per
tender joint (five
joints in all), dose
per treatment 15 J;
group 2, 1.5 J per
tender joint (five
joints in all), dose
per treatment 7.5 J
WOMAC pain
five-point Likert
scale; other pain
VAS 0–100
All three
individual
WOMAC
subscale
scores
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
269
 Manual therapy studies
Study
Treatments
(if suitable for
NMA, adjunct code
in parentheses)a
Number
analysed
at end of
treatment, data
suitable for pain
analyses?
Country
% Female
Age
(years),
mean
Weight
(kg),
mean
BMI
(kg/m2),
mean
Moss 2007417
Manual therapy,
placebo
114, nob
Australia
66
65
NR
NR
Perlman 2006424
Manual therapy,
standard care
68, nob
USA
78
68
NR
29
Perlman 2012478
Manual therapy,
standard care
119, yes
USA
70
64
NR
32
Pollard 2008429
Manual therapy (2),
placebo (2)
43, yes (only
study)
Australia
NR
56
NR
NR
Rapp 2009430
Manual therapy (2),
MSE (2), standard
care (2)
39, yes
Germany
64
60
83
NR
Tucker 2003453
Manual therapy (2),
standard care (4)
103, yes
South
Africa
63
59
82
NR
MSE, muscle-strengthening exercise; NMA, network meta-analysis; NR, not reported.
a 1, no medication; 2, treatment as usual; 3, treatment as usual + exercise/education; 4, treatment as usual + analgesia;
5, no medication + exercise/education.
b Only change from baseline scores reported.
APPENDIX 3
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
270
 Method of
diagnosis
Kellgren
and
Lawrence
score
Overall
study
quality
Duration of
sessions
(minutes)
Number
of
sessions
Duration of
treatment
period
(weeks)
Pain outcomes
used
Overall
WOMAC
score
reported?
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Good
10
1
10 minutes
WOMAC
five-point Likert
scale; VAS 0–10
No
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Poor
60
12
8
WOMAC VAS
0–100; pain VAS
0–100
Yes
Clinical and
radiological
NR/unclear
Satisfactory
Varied across
four groups
(30 or 60)
8 or 12
depending
on group
8
WOMAC VAS
0–100
Yes
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Poor
NR
6
2
VAS 0–10
No
Clinical and
radiological
≥ 2
Poor
20
16
8
VAS 0–10
No
Clinical and
radiological
NR
Poor
NR
8
3
VAS 0–100; NRS
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
271
  Appendix 4 Review data related to Chapter 4
Mapping and standardised pain descriptive results
ID
Study
Pain
group
(type)
Treatment
HRQoL
mapped
outcome
Score, mean (SD)
Predicted EQ-5D
Pain
standard
outcome
Standardised pain
t0 –
baseline
t1 – 3
months
t0 –
baseline
t1 – 3
months
1
Diener
200672
H
Usual care
SF-12
0.68
(0.268)
0.759
(0.213)
Migraine
days
1.795
(1.142)
1.222
(1.114)
Sham
acupuncture
0.696
(0.248)
0.76
(0.218)
1.629
(0.948)
1.08
(1.036)
Acupuncture
0.683
(0.251)
0.783
(0.203)
1.705
(0.95)
0.996
(0.865)
2
Endres
200773
H
Sham
acupuncture
0.666
(0.263)
0.765
(0.237)
TTH days
2.863
(1.065)
1.258
(1.103)
Acupuncture
0.633
(0.281)
0.757
(0.219)
2.728
(0.931)
0.943
(0.865)
10
Haake
200771
MSK
Usual care
0.633
(0.216)
0.648
(0.231)
von Korff
pain
intensity
score
4.877
(1.051)
2.809
(0.944)
Sham
acupuncture
0.656
(0.208)
0.666
(0.212)
4.86
(0.946)
2.485
(1.001)
Acupuncture
0.631
(0.236)
0.668
(0.199)
4.87
(1.002)
2.325
(0.995)
24
Scharf
200670
OAK
Usual care
0.533
(0.309)
0.536
(0.325)
WOMAC
total score
3.609
(0.992)
2.148
(0.999)
Sham
acupuncture
0.494
(0.34)
0.593
(0.318)
3.646
(1.021)
1.697
(0.978)
Acupuncture
0.514
(0.323)
0.596
(0.32)
3.591
(0.986)
1.566
(0.933)
3
Jena
200876
H
Usual care
SF-36
0.725
(0.198)
0.754
(0.191)
Headache
days
1.171
(0.97)
1.225
(1.033)
Acupuncture
0.726
(0.202)
0.826
(0.159)
1.2
(1.029)
0.765
(0.911)
4
Linde
200568
H
Usual care
0.741
(0.175)
0.744
(0.13)
Days of
moderate to
severe pain
2.082
(1.132)
1.797
(0.9)
Sham
acupuncture
0.767
(0.128)
0.815
(0.133)
1.933
(0.927)
1.099
(1.018)
Acupuncture
0.737
(0.142)
0.809
(0.138)
2.001
(0.97)
1.178
(0.963)
5
Melchart
200567
H
Usual care
0.737
(0.164)
0.721
(0.159)
Headache
days
2.534
(1.017)
1.883
(0.855)
Sham
acupuncture
0.75
(0.167)
0.846
(0.126)
2.59
(0.982)
1.248
(0.954)
Acupuncture
0.766
(0.135)
0.834
(0.144)
2.56
(1.006)
1.145
(1.001)
6
Vickers
200460
H
Usual care
0.834
(0.148)
0.806
(0.182)
Severity
score
1.732
(1.088)
1.48
(1.05)
Acupuncture
0.789
(0.171)
0.809
(0.189)
1.593
(0.915)
1.125
(0.927)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
273
 ID
Study
Pain
group
(type)
Treatment
HRQoL
mapped
outcome
Score, mean (SD)
Predicted EQ-5D
Pain
standard
outcome
Standardised pain
t0 –
baseline
t1 – 3
months
t0 –
baseline
t1 – 3
months
7
Brinkhaus
200666
MSK
Usual care
0.612
(0.185)
0.635
(0.24)
VAS pain
score
4.714
(0.97)
1.979
(0.847)
Sham
acupuncture
0.598
(0.168)
0.728
(0.187)
4.749
(1.121)
1.474
(1.005)
Acupuncture
0.616
(0.192)
0.763
(0.196)
4.508
(0.944)
1.165
(0.963)
17
Vas
2006121
MSK
Sham
acupuncture
0.556
(0.226)
0.611
(0.203)
VAS pain
score
4.842
(1.033)
2.326
(0.724)
Acupuncture
0.605
(0.271)
0.752
(0.215)
4.603
(0.959)
0.918
(0.697)
20
Witt
200675
MSK
Usual care
0.663
(0.217)
0.684
(0.22)
Neck pain
and
disability
score
3.394
(1.004)
2.698
(0.966)
Acupuncture
0.65
(0.209)
0.769
(0.188)
3.46
(0.995)
2.079
(0.937)
21
Witt
200674
MSK
Usual care
0.596
(0.232)
0.638
(0.241)
Hanover
functional
ability score
–3.027
(0.994)
–3.051
(1.012)
Acupuncture
0.585
(0.235)
0.732
(0.225)
–2.957
(1.005)
–3.453
(0.95)
27
Witt
200569
OAK
Usual care
0.564
(0.185)
0.59
(0.2)
WOMAC
total score
2.675
(1.042)
2.084
(0.813)
Sham
acupuncture
0.561
(0.2)
0.626
(0.218)
2.751
(0.991)
1.57
(1.001)
Acupuncture
0.564
(0.218)
0.71
(0.19)
2.664
(1.032)
1.119
(0.921)
28
Witt
200677
OAK
Usual care
0.56
(0.213)
0.57
(0.225)
WOMAC
total score
2.057
(1.002)
1.876
(0.921)
Acupuncture
0.576
(0.234)
0.682
(0.234)
2.062
(0.999)
1.185
(0.956)
8
Carlsson
2001119
MSK
Sham
acupuncture
VAS pain
0.604
(0.222)
0.434
(0.314)
VAS pain
score
2.386
(1.022)
2.251
(1.154)
Acupuncture
0.481
(0.197)
0.685
(0.246)
2.79
(0.978)
1.684
(0.911)
9
Guerra de
Hoyos
2004138
MSK
Sham
acupuncture
0.526
(0.229)
0.632
(0.256)
VAS pain
score
2.857
(0.871)
1.134
(1.07)
Acupuncture
0.525
(0.202)
0.666
(0.229)
2.732
(1.118)
0.488
(0.814)
11
Irnich
2001118
MSK
Sham
acupuncture
0.551
(0.236)
0.642
(0.259)
VAS pain
score
2.381
(1.113)
1.527
(1.055)
Acupuncture
0.562
(0.225)
0.636
(0.233)
2.256
(0.913)
1.277
(0.918)
12
Kennedy
2008130
MSK
Sham
acupuncture
0.61
(0.25)
0.653
(0.242)
Roland
Morris
disability
score
2.382
(1.033)
1.265
(1.155)
Acupuncture
0.568
(0.22)
0.562
(0.247)
2.359
(0.988)
0.813
(0.825)
13
Kerr
2003117
MSK
Sham
acupuncture
0.523
(0.178)
0.548
(0.204)
VAS pain
score
3.981
(0.924)
2.324
(1.154)
Acupuncture
0.5
(0.132)
0.514
(0.266)
4.176
(1.065)
1.943
(0.849)
APPENDIX 4
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
274
 ID
Study
Pain
group
(type)
Treatment
HRQoL
mapped
outcome
Score, mean (SD)
Predicted EQ-5D
Pain
standard
outcome
Standardised pain
t0 –
baseline
t1 – 3
months
t0 –
baseline
t1 – 3
months
18
Vas
2008122
MSK
Sham
acupuncture
0.556
(0.171)
0.585
(0.254)
CMS
–3.123
(0.971)
–3.346
(0.975)
Acupuncture
0.563
(0.155)
0.623
(0.249)
–3.281
(1.026)
–4.102
(0.874)
19
White
2004132
MSK
Sham
acupuncture
0.548
(0.129)
0.679
(0.202)
VAS pain
score
3.971
(1.073)
1.18
(1.039)
Acupuncture
0.572
(0.133)
0.653
(0.228)
3.64
(0.906)
0.871
(0.943)
22
Foster
2007135
OAK
Usual care
0.543
(0.214)
0.566
(0.279)
WOMAC
pain score
2.463
(1.004)
1.626
(0.999)
Sham
acupuncture
0.531
(0.205)
0.621
(0.234)
2.428
(0.903)
1.418
(1.029)
Acupuncture
0.576
(0.213)
0.559
(0.266)
2.52
(1.092)
1.513
(0.969)
25
Vas
2004120
OAK
Sham
acupuncture
WOMAC
total
0.37
(0.381)
0.565
(0.352)
WOMAC
total score
3.308
(1.068)
1.589
(1.037)
Acupuncture
0.345
(0.366)
0.76
(0.233)
3.273
(0.937)
0.333
(0.452)
26
Williamson
2007136
OAK
Usual care
0.424
(0.304)
0.487
(0.314)
Oxford
Knee Score
4.886
(1.039)
5.104
(1.02)
Acupuncture
0.405
(0.278)
0.508
(0.262)
4.841
(0.922)
4.774
(0.861)
14
Kleinhenz
1999137
MSK
Sham
acupuncture
CMS and
VAS pain
0.558
(0.127)
0.577
(0.071)
CMS
–3.986
(1.037)
–3.462
(0.965)
Acupuncture
0.566
(0.101)
0.578
(0.109)
–4.483
(0.909)
–4.417
(0.795)
15
Salter
2006133
MSK
Usual care
EQ-5D
available –
no mapping
necessary
0.546
(0.322)
0.67
(0.254)
Northwick
Park pain
score
2.395
(1.156)
1.518
(0.961)
Acupuncture
0.614
(0.268)
0.734
(0.269)
2.138
(0.73)
1.342
(1.1)
16
Thomas
200661
MSK
Usual care
0.532
(0.284)
0.655
(0.274)
SF-36 bodily
pain score
–1.815
(1.075)
–2.316
(1.064)
Acupuncture
0.534
(0.293)
0.753
(0.19)
–1.839
(0.964)
–2.545
(0.962)
23
Berman
2004134
OAK
Usual care
0.65
(0.196)
0.628
(0.24)
WOMAC
pain score
2.577
(1.059)
1.851
(1.098)
Sham
acupuncture
0.615
(0.246)
0.693
(0.169)
2.547
(0.969)
1.587
(0.981)
Acupuncture
0.608
(0.232)
0.682
(0.184)
2.552
(0.979)
1.345
(0.892)
H, headache; MSK, musculoskeletal; OAK, osteoarthritis of the knee.
WinBUGS code (models 1 and 2)
The WinBUGS modelling code is provided in the following section followed by a summary table of
all variables included in the data sets and the R-code describing the specification of initial values for
two chains.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
275
 WinBUGS model code
APPENDIX 4
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
276
  
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
277
 Description of data sets and variables
Data set
Variable
Description
Data set descriptors, constants
n.subjects
Number of subjects in data set
n.arms
Number of arms in studies in data set
n.trials
Number of trials in data set
NT
Number of treatments in data set
Data at individual patient level
study
Study code
treat
Treatment code
baseline
Baseline (lowest index) treatment in study
y
EQ-5D or standardised pain at follow-up
bl_y
EQ-5D or standardised pain at baseline
index
Sequential numbering of study arms in data set
Data at study arm level
pain1
Dummy variable indicating whether or not study was conducted
in patients with headache pain
pain2
Dummy variable indicating whether or not study was conducted
in patients with musculoskeletal pain
treat1
Treatment code
baseline1
Baseline (lowest index) treatment in study
m
Code for each study arm indicating whether it is the first,
second, third, fourth or fifth arm in the study
Data at study level
start
Number of the first line of IPD data set including study data
end
Number of the last line of IPD data set including study data
R-code used to generate initial values (two sets)
 
APPENDIX 4
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
278
 Appendix 5 Review data related to Chapter 5
Data requirements
Studies were included in the data set if they provided post-baseline mean outcomes for all dimensions of
any of the following HRQoL instruments: EQ-5D, SF-36 (individual dimensions or PCS and MCS scores),
SF-12 (individual dimensions or PCS or MCS scores), WOMAC, pain VAS and pain NRS. Although a wide
range of additional HRQoL data was reported, mapping algorithms were not available to translate these
data to EQ-5D preference scores. [Note: for the Nottingham Health Profile (NHP) an algorithm was available
but this was estimated from a small sample of patients in a very different disease area (hepatitis C). Data
from the NHP were not therefore included in the analysis. One study reported Assessment of Quality of Life
preference scores but as these were reported to only one decimal place these data were not included.]
Absolute values and change from baseline values were included. When reported, baseline data were also
extracted. When change from baseline data were reported studies were included only if baseline data
were also reported, to enable calculation of absolute scores at follow-up time points. SEs were extracted
directly or derived from reported SDs or CIs. Studies for which no measure of variance was reported were
retained within the analysis and the missing SDs were imputed (see Chapter 5, Health-related quality of life
for cost-effectiveness analysis). Methods for deriving final value variances from baseline value and change
score variances are not currently available. In cases in which change from baseline data were reported the
variance at follow-up was therefore assumed to be equal to the variance at baseline.
The WOMAC instrument can be administered in a variety of ways resulting in a range of possible scoring
ranges. Mapping from the WOMAC score to the EQ-5D, however, requires the WOMAC score range to be
0–96. Reporting of the WOMAC score range in the data was often ambiguous;183 only data in which the
scoring range was sufficiently clear to allow the data to be transformed onto the 0–96 range were
therefore included in the data set. Where all subcomponents of the WOMAC (pain, stiffness and physical
function) were reported, they were aggregated to produce a total WOMAC score. Calculation of the
variance for the resulting total WOMAC score required the covariance of the subcomponents to be
accounted for. The covariance for each study was therefore imputed using correlations between
subcomponents derived from the IPD studies.
Study characteristics for the analysis data set
Study
Intervention
n analysed
Quality-
of-life
instrument
Analysis
time
point
(weeks)
IPD
available
Adequate
allocation
concealment
Adequate
allocation
concealment
3–13 weeks
Adedoyin 2002301
Interferential
therapy
15
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Adedoyin 2002301
Placebo
15
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Aglamis
¸ 2009189
Exercise –
aerobic
16
SF-36
dimensions
6
No
No
No
Aglamis
¸ 2009189
Usual care
9
SF-36
dimensions
6
No
No
No
Alcidi 2007350
Heat
treatment
20
Pain VAS
0.71
No
No
No
Alcidi 2007350
TENS
20
Pain VAS
0.71
No
No
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
279
 Study
Intervention
n analysed
Quality-
of-life
instrument
Analysis
time
point
(weeks)
IPD
available
Adequate
allocation
concealment
Adequate
allocation
concealment
3–13 weeks
An 2008351
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
11
WOMAC
8
No
No
No
An 2008351
Usual care
10
WOMAC
8
No
No
No
Arazpour 2013463
Braces
12
Pain VAS
6
No
No
No
Arazpour 2013463
Insoles
12
Pain VAS
6
No
No
No
Baker 2001353
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
19
SF-36
dimensions
16
No
Yes
No
Baker 2001353
Placebo
19
SF-36
dimensions
16
No
Yes
No
Bálint 2007355
Balneotherapy
27
WOMAC
4
No
Yes
Yes
Bálint 2007355
Placebo
25
WOMAC
4
No
Yes
Yes
Bennell 2011464
Insoles
90
WOMAC
52
No
Yes
No
Bennell 2011464
Usual care
89
WOMAC
52
No
Yes
No
Berman 1999357
Acupuncture
36
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Berman 1999357
Usual care
37
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Berman 2004134
Acupuncture
154
EQ-5D
8
Yes
Yes
Yes
Berman 2004134
Sham
acupuncture
145
EQ-5D
8
Yes
Yes
Yes
Brismée 2007360
Usual care
19
WOMAC
9
No
No
No
Brismée 2007360
T’ai chi
22
WOMAC
9
No
No
No
Brosseau 2012466
Exercise –
aerobic
44
SF-36
dimensions
52.18
No
No
No
Brosseau 2012466
Exercise –
aerobic
44
SF-36
dimensions
52.18
No
No
No
Brosseau 2012466
Usual care
41
SF-36
dimensions
52.18
No
No
No
Bruce-Brand
2012467
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
10
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Bruce-Brand
2012467
NMES
10
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Bruce-Brand
2012467
Usual care
6
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Burch 2008303
Interferential
therapy
52
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Burch 2008303
TENS
53
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Callaghan 2005363
Placebo
9
Pain VAS
2
No
No
No
Callaghan 2005363
PES
9
Pain VAS
2
No
No
No
Callaghan 2005363
PES
9
Pain VAS
2
No
No
No
Cheing 2003191
Placebo
8
Pain VAS
1.43
No
No
No
Cheing 2003191
TENS
10
Pain VAS
1.43
No
No
No
Cheing 2003191
TENS
10
Pain VAS
1.43
No
No
No
Cheing 2003191
TENS
10
Pain VAS
1.43
No
No
No
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
280
 Study
Intervention
n analysed
Quality-
of-life
instrument
Analysis
time
point
(weeks)
IPD
available
Adequate
allocation
concealment
Adequate
allocation
concealment
3–13 weeks
Durmus
¸ 2007370
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
25
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Durmus
¸ 2007370
PES
25
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Fary 2011468
Placebo
36
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
4
No
Yes
Yes
Fary 2011468
PES
34
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
4
No
Yes
Yes
Fischer 2005373
Placebo
35
Pain VAS
6
No
No
No
Fischer 2005373
PEMFs
34
Pain VAS
6
No
No
No
Flusser 2002374
Balneotherapy
40
Pain VAS
3
No
No
No
Flusser 2002374
Placebo
18
Pain VAS
3
No
No
No
Foroughi 2011469
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
20
WOMAC
26.09
No
No
No
Foroughi 2011469
Placebo
25
WOMAC
26.09
No
No
No
Fukuda 2011470
Placebo
21
Pain NRS
3
No
Yes
Yes
Fukuda 2011470
PES
30
Pain NRS
3
No
Yes
Yes
Fukuda 2011470
PES
29
Pain NRS
3
No
Yes
Yes
Fukuda 2011470
Usual care
32
Pain NRS
3
No
Yes
Yes
Fukuda 2011471
Laser/light
therapy
25
Pain VAS
6
No
Yes
Yes
Fukuda 2011471
Placebo
22
Pain VAS
6
No
Yes
Yes
Garland 2007377
Placebo
19
WOMAC
13.04
No
Yes
Yes
Garland 2007377
PES
39
WOMAC
13.04
No
Yes
Yes
Grimmer 1992378
Placebo
20
Pain VAS
0.14
No
Yes
No
Grimmer 1992378
TENS
20
Pain VAS
0.14
No
Yes
No
Grimmer 1992378
TENS
20
Pain VAS
0.14
No
Yes
No
Gundog 2012302
Interferential
therapy
15
WOMAC
4.35
No
No
No
Gundog 2012302
Interferential
therapy
15
WOMAC
4.35
No
No
No
Gundog 2012302
Interferential
therapy
15
WOMAC
4.35
No
No
No
Gundog 2012302
Placebo
15
WOMAC
4.35
No
No
No
Hasegawa 2010381
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
14
Pain NRS
12
No
No
No
Hasegawa 2010381
Usual care
14
Pain NRS
12
No
No
No
Huang 2005384
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
25
Pain VAS
8
No
Yes
Yes
Huang 2005384
Usual care
28
Pain VAS
8
No
Yes
Yes
Imoto 2012474
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
38
SF-36
dimensions
8
No
Yes
Yes
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
281
 Study
Intervention
n analysed
Quality-
of-life
instrument
Analysis
time
point
(weeks)
IPD
available
Adequate
allocation
concealment
Adequate
allocation
concealment
3–13 weeks
Imoto 2012474
Usual care
43
SF-36
dimensions
8
No
Yes
Yes
Itoh 2008386
Acupuncture
6
WOMAC
5
No
No
No
Itoh 2008386
Usual care
6
WOMAC
5
No
No
No
Itoh 2008386
TENS
6
WOMAC
5
No
No
No
Itoh 2008387
Acupuncture
9
WOMAC
5
No
No
No
Itoh 2008387
Acupuncture
8
WOMAC
5
No
No
No
Itoh 2008387
Sham
acupuncture
7
WOMAC
5
No
No
No
Jubb 2008391
Acupuncture
31
WOMAC
5
No
No
No
Jubb 2008391
Sham
acupuncture
31
WOMAC
5
No
No
No
Kang 2007393
Placebo
28
Pain VAS
0.29
No
No
No
Kang 2007393
TENS
35
Pain VAS
0.29
No
No
No
Kovar 1992398
Exercise –
aerobic
47
Pain VAS
8
No
No
No
Kovar 1992398
Usual care
45
Pain VAS
8
No
No
No
Kuptniratsaikul
2002399
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
173
Pain VAS
8
No
No
No
Kuptniratsaikul
2002399
Usual care
193
Pain VAS
8
No
No
No
Lansdown 2009126
Acupuncture
15
EQ-5D
13.04
No
Yes
Yes
Lansdown 2009126
Usual care
15
EQ-5D
13.04
No
Yes
Yes
Lee 2009401
Usual care
15
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Lee 2009401
T’ai chi
29
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Lewis 1994403
Placebo
28
Pain VAS
3
No
No
No
Lewis 1994403
TENS
28
Pain VAS
3
No
No
No
Lim 2010475
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
22
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
Yes
Yes
Lim 2010475
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
24
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
Yes
Yes
Lim 2010475
Usual care
20
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
Yes
Yes
Lu 2010192
Acupuncture
10
Pain VAS
0.14
No
No
No
Lu 2010192
Sham
acupuncture
10
Pain VAS
0.14
No
No
No
Lund 2008407
Exercise –
aerobic
25
Pain VAS
8
No
Yes
Yes
Lund 2008407
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
27
Pain VAS
8
No
Yes
Yes
Lund 2008407
Usual care
27
Pain VAS
8
No
Yes
Yes
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
282
 Study
Intervention
n analysed
Quality-
of-life
instrument
Analysis
time
point
(weeks)
IPD
available
Adequate
allocation
concealment
Adequate
allocation
concealment
3–13 weeks
Maillefert 2001409
Insoles
82
WOMAC
4.35
No
No
No
Maillefert 2001409
Placebo
74
WOMAC
4.35
No
No
No
Maurer 1999410
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
49
WOMAC
8
No
No
No
Maurer 1999410
Usual care
49
WOMAC
8
No
No
No
Mavrommatis
2012476
Acupuncture
39
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Mavrommatis
2012476
Sham
acupuncture
40
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Mavrommatis
2012476
Usual care
38
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Mazzuca 2004411
Heat
treatment
26
WOMAC
4
No
Yes
Yes
Mazzuca 2004411
Placebo
25
WOMAC
4
No
Yes
Yes
McCarthy 2004412
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
80
EQ-5D
4
No
Yes
Yes
McCarthy 2004412
Usual care
71
EQ-5D
4
No
Yes
Yes
Messier 2004413
Exercise –
aerobic
69
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
39.13
No
Yes
No
Messier 2004413
Usual care
68
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
39.13
No
Yes
No
Miranda-Filloy
2005415
Placebo
10
WOMAC
8
No
No
No
Miranda-Filloy
2005415
PES
10
WOMAC
8
No
No
No
Ng 2003418
Acupuncture
8
Pain NRS
4
No
No
No
Ng 2003418
TENS
8
Pain NRS
4
No
No
No
Nguyen 1997419
Balneotherapy
91
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Nguyen 1997419
Usual care
97
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Nigg 2006421
Insoles
57
WOMAC
12
No
No
No
Nigg 2006421
Usual care
66
WOMAC
12
No
No
No
Perlman 2006424
Manual
therapy
34
WOMAC
8
No
No
No
Perlman 2006424
Usual care
34
WOMAC
8
No
No
No
Perlman 2012478
Manual
therapy
22
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Perlman 2012478
Manual
therapy
24
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Perlman 2012478
Manual
therapy
24
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Perlman 2012478
Manual
therapy
25
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Perlman 2012478
Usual care
24
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Perrot 1998425
Placebo
19
Pain VAS
1.29
No
No
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
283
 Study
Intervention
n analysed
Quality-
of-life
instrument
Analysis
time
point
(weeks)
IPD
available
Adequate
allocation
concealment
Adequate
allocation
concealment
3–13 weeks
Perrot 1998425
PEMFs
21
Pain VAS
1.29
No
No
No
Pietrosimone
2009427
Ice/cooling
treatment
11
Pain VAS
0.14
No
Yes
No
Pietrosimone
2009427
Usual care
12
Pain VAS
0.14
No
Yes
No
Pietrosimone
2009427
TENS
10
Pain VAS
0.14
No
Yes
No
Pipitone 2001428
Placebo
35
WOMAC
6
No
Yes
Yes
Pipitone 2001428
PEMFs
34
WOMAC
6
No
Yes
Yes
Pollard 2008429
Manual
therapy
26
Pain VAS
2
No
Yes
No
Pollard 2008429
Placebo
17
Pain VAS
2
No
Yes
No
Rapp 2009430
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
9
Pain VAS
8
No
No
No
Rapp 2009430
Manual
therapy
15
Pain VAS
8
No
No
No
Rapp 2009430
Usual care
15
Pain VAS
8
No
No
No
Rattanachaiyanont
2008431
Heat
treatment
50
WOMAC
3
No
Yes
Yes
Rattanachaiyanont
2008431
Placebo
54
WOMAC
3
No
Yes
Yes
Salacinski 2012479
Exercise –
aerobic
13
WOMAC
12
No
Yes
Yes
Salacinski 2012479
Usual care
15
WOMAC
12
No
Yes
Yes
Salli 2010480
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
24
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Salli 2010480
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
23
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Salli 2010480
Usual care
24
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
8
No
No
No
Sangdee 2002434
Acupuncture
46
WOMAC
4
No
No
No
Sangdee 2002434
Acupuncture
46
WOMAC
4
No
No
No
Sangdee 2002434
Placebo
45
WOMAC
4
No
No
No
Sangdee 2002434
Usual care
49
WOMAC
4
No
No
No
Selfe 2008436
Placebo
19
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Selfe 2008436
TENS
18
WOMAC
8
No
Yes
Yes
Shen 2009437
Laser/light
therapy
18
WOMAC
4
No
Yes
Yes
Shen 2009437
Placebo
9
WOMAC
4
No
Yes
Yes
Sherman 2009438
Balneotherapy
24
WOMAC
7
No
No
No
Sherman 2009438
Placebo
20
WOMAC
7
No
No
No
Stelian 1992440
Laser/light
therapy
15
Pain VAS
1.43
No
No
No
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
284
 Study
Intervention
n analysed
Quality-
of-life
instrument
Analysis
time
point
(weeks)
IPD
available
Adequate
allocation
concealment
Adequate
allocation
concealment
3–13 weeks
Stelian 1992440
Laser/light
therapy
18
Pain VAS
1.43
No
No
No
Stelian 1992440
Placebo
17
Pain VAS
1.43
No
No
No
Suarez-Almazor
2010125
Acupuncture
153
SF-12 MCS
and PCS
6
No
Yes
Yes
Suarez-Almazor
2010125
Sham
acupuncture
302
SF-12 MCS
and PCS
6
No
Yes
Yes
Sukenik 1999441
Balneotherapy
10
Pain VAS
2
No
No
No
Sukenik 1999441
Balneotherapy
10
Pain VAS
2
No
No
No
Sukenik 1999441
Balneotherapy
7
Pain VAS
2
No
No
No
Sukenik 1999441
Placebo
9
Pain VAS
2
No
No
No
Tascioglu 2004444
Laser/light
therapy
20
WOMAC
3
No
No
No
Tascioglu 2004444
Laser/light
therapy
20
WOMAC
3
No
No
No
Tascioglu 2004444
Placebo
20
WOMAC
3
No
No
No
Thamsborg
2005446
Placebo
41
WOMAC
6
No
No
No
Thamsborg
2005446
PEMFs
42
WOMAC
6
No
No
No
Thorstensson
2005447
Exercise –
aerobic
28
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
6
No
No
No
Thorstensson
2005447
Usual care
28
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
6
No
No
No
Tishler 2004448
Balneotherapy
44
Pain VAS
6
No
No
No
Tishler 2004448
Usual care
24
Pain VAS
6
No
No
No
Toda 2008449
Insoles
43
Pain VAS
12
No
Yes
Yes
Toda 2008449
Insoles
41
Pain VAS
12
No
Yes
Yes
Toda 2008449
Placebo
38
Pain VAS
12
No
Yes
Yes
Topp 2002450
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
35
WOMAC
16
No
No
No
Topp 2002450
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
32
WOMAC
16
No
No
No
Topp 2002450
Usual care
35
WOMAC
16
No
No
No
Trock 1994452
Placebo
44
Pain VAS
5
No
Yes
Yes
Trock 1994452
PEMFs
40
Pain VAS
5
No
Yes
Yes
Tucker 2003453
Manual
therapy
30
Pain VAS
3
No
No
No
Tucker 2003453
Usual care
30
Pain VAS
3
No
No
No
Tukmachi 2004454
Acupuncture
9
Pain VAS
5
No
Yes
Yes
Tukmachi 2004454
Acupuncture
10
Pain VAS
5
No
Yes
Yes
Tukmachi 2004454
Usual care
10
Pain VAS
5
No
Yes
Yes
Vance 2012481
Placebo
25
Pain VAS
0.14
No
Yes
No
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
285
 Study
Intervention
n analysed
Quality-
of-life
instrument
Analysis
time
point
(weeks)
IPD
available
Adequate
allocation
concealment
Adequate
allocation
concealment
3–13 weeks
Vance 2012481
TENS
25
Pain VAS
0.14
No
Yes
No
Vance 2012481
TENS
25
Pain VAS
0.14
No
Yes
No
Vas 2004120
Acupuncture
47
WOMAC
12
Yes
Yes
Yes
Vas 2004120
Sham
acupuncture
43
WOMAC
12
Yes
Yes
Yes
Wang 2009455
Usual care
20
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
12
No
Yes
Yes
Wang 2009455
T’ai chi
20
SF-36 MCS
and PCS
12
No
Yes
Yes
Wigler 1995456
Balneotherapy
11
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Wigler 1995456
Balneotherapy
10
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Wigler 1995456
Placebo
12
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Williamson 2007136
Acupuncture
59
WOMAC
8
Yes
Yes
Yes
Williamson 2007136
Exercise –
muscle
strengthening
53
WOMAC
8
Yes
Yes
Yes
Williamson 2007136
Usual care
49
WOMAC
8
Yes
Yes
Yes
Witt 200569
Acupuncture
145
SF-36
dimensions
8
Yes
Yes
Yes
Witt 200569
Sham
acupuncture
73
SF-36
dimensions
8
Yes
Yes
Yes
Witt 200569
Usual care
67
SF-36
dimensions
8
Yes
Yes
Yes
Witt 200677
Acupuncture
250
SF-36
dimensions
12
Yes
Yes
Yes
Witt 200677
Usual care
244
SF-36
dimensions
12
Yes
Yes
Yes
Wolsko 2004457
Placebo
13
WOMAC
6
No
Yes
Yes
Wolsko 2004457
Static
magnets
13
WOMAC
6
No
Yes
Yes
Yip 2007193
Usual care
70
Pain VAS
1
No
No
No
Yip 2007193
T’ai chi
79
Pain VAS
1
No
No
No
Yurtkuran 2006461
Balneotherapy
27
WOMAC
2
No
Yes
No
Yurtkuran 2006461
Placebo
28
WOMAC
2
No
Yes
No
Zizic 1995462
Placebo
33
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
Zizic 1995462
PES
38
Pain VAS
4
No
No
No
WinBUGS code
The WinBUGS modelling code is provided in the following section followed by a summary table of all
variables included in the data sets and the R-code describing the specification of initial values for
two chains.
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
286
 WinBUGS model code
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
287
 APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
288
 DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
289
  
Description of data sets and variables
Data set
Variable
Description
Data set descriptors,
constants
n.subjects.ipd
Number of subjects in IPD
n.arms.ipd
Number of arms in IPD trials
n.trials.ipd
Number of IPD trials
n.trials.ad
Number of AD trials
n.arms.ad
Number of arms in AD trials
n.treatments
Total number of treatments
alpha
Alpha and beta parameters for gamma distribution, used to impute
missing SDs
beta
mod1
Dummy variable indicating whether or not to include age covariate
mod2
Dummy variable indicating whether or not to include BMI covariate
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
290
 Data set
Variable
Description
Data at individual patient
level (IPD studies)
study.ipd
Study code
treat.ipd
Treatment code
baseline.ipd
Baseline (lowest index) treatment in study
y.ipd
EQ-5D at follow-up
basey.ipd
Baseline EQ-5D
age.ipd
Centred baseline age
bmi.ipd
Centred baseline BMI
index.ipd
Sequential numbering of study arms in IPD set
Data at study arm level
(IPD studies)
study.ipd.sum
Study code
treat.ipd.sum
Treatment code
baseline.ipd.sum
Baseline (lowest index) treatment in study
start.ipd.sum
Number of the first line of data including study arm
end.ipd.sum
Number of the last line of data including study arm
m.ipd.sum
Code for each study arm indicating whether it is the first, second, third,
fourth or fifth arm in the study. Labelled as m = 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, respectively
Data at study arm level
(AD studies)
study.ad
Study code
treat.ad
Treatment code
baseline.ad
Baseline (lowest index) treatment in study
y.ad
Mean EQ-5D at follow-up
sd.y.ad
SD for EQ-5D at follow-up (set to zero if missing)
n.ad
Number of patients
imb.ad
Difference in baseline EQ-5D from baseline treatment (imbalance)
m.ad
Code for each study arm indicating whether it is the first, second, third,
fourth or fifth arm in the study. Labelled as m = 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, respectively
Data at study level
(AD studies)
age.ad
Centred baseline age
bmi.ad
Centred baseline BMI
AD, aggregate data.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
291
 R-code used to generate initial values
Mapped EQ-5D values
Study
Intervention
Quality-of-life
instrument
EQ-5D score, mean (SE)
Baseline
Follow-up
Change in
Adedoyin 2002301
Interferential therapy
Pain VAS
0.48 (N/A)
0.69 (N/A)
0.22 (N/A)
Adedoyin 2002301
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.49 (N/A)
0.63 (N/A)
0.13 (N/A)
Aglamis
¸ 2009189
Usual care
SF-36 dimensions
0.41 (0.08)
0.50 (0.08)
0.08 (0.07)
Aglamis
¸ 2009189
Exercise – aerobic
SF-36 dimensions
0.68 (0.05)
0.87 (0.03)
0.19 (0.04)
Alcidi 2007350
Heat treatment
Pain VAS
0.53 (0.04)
0.59 (0.06)
0.06 (0.05)
Alcidi 2007350
TENS
Pain VAS
0.56 (0.05)
0.60 (0.05)
0.03 (0.05)
An 2008351
Usual care
WOMAC
0.70 (0.03)
0.62 (0.08)
–0.08 (0.07)
An 2008351
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
WOMAC
0.66 (0.06)
0.68 (0.06)
0.02 (0.06)
Arazpour 2013463
Insoles
Pain VAS
0.52 (0.02)
0.61 (0.02)
0.09 (0.02)
Arazpour 2013463
Braces
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.02)
0.61 (0.02)
0.07 (0.02)
Baker 2001353
Placebo
SF-36 dimensions
0.76 (0.04)
0.75 (0.05)
–0.02 (0.03)
Baker 2001353
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
SF-36 dimensions
0.69 (0.05)
0.78 (0.04)
0.09 (0.04)
Bálint 2007355
Balneotherapy
WOMAC
0.56 (0.01)
0.60 (0.01)
0.04 (0.01)
Bálint 2007355
Placebo
WOMAC
0.56 (0.01)
0.65 (0.01)
0.10 (0.01)
Bennell 2011464
Usual care
WOMAC
0.61 (0.02)
0.64 (0.02)
0.03 (0.02)
Bennell 2011464
Insoles
WOMAC
0.60 (0.02)
0.63 (0.02)
0.03 (0.02)
Berman 1999357
Acupuncture
WOMAC
0.47 (0.05)
0.64 (0.03)
0.17 (0.05)
Berman 1999357
Usual care
WOMAC
0.46 (0.04)
0.46 (0.05)
0.00 (0.04)
Berman 2004134
Acupuncture
EQ-5D
0.61 (0.02)
0.68 (0.01)
0.07 (0.02)
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
292
 Study
Intervention
Quality-of-life
instrument
EQ-5D score, mean (SE)
Baseline
Follow-up
Change in
Berman 2004134
Sham acupuncture
EQ-5D
0.62 (0.02)
0.69 (0.01)
0.07 (0.02)
Brismée 2007360
T’ai chi
WOMAC
0.34 (0.08)
0.48 (0.08)
0.14 (0.08)
Brismée 2007360
Usual care
WOMAC
0.41 (0.07)
0.38 (0.07)
–0.02 (0.07)
Brosseau 2012466
Usual care
SF-36 dimensions
0.81 (0.02)
0.82 (0.02)
0.02 (0.02)
Brosseau 2012466
Exercise – aerobic
SF-36 dimensions
0.82 (0.02)
0.81 (0.02)
–0.01 (0.02)
Brosseau 2012466
Exercise – aerobic
SF-36 dimensions
0.79 (0.02)
0.81 (0.02)
0.03 (0.02)
Bruce-Brand 2012467
Usual care
SF-36 MCS and PCS
N/A (N/A)
0.42 (0.26)
0.42 (0.26)
Bruce-Brand 2012467
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
SF-36 MCS and PCS
N/A (N/A)
0.46 (0.17)
0.46 (0.17)
Bruce-Brand 2012467
NMES
SF-36 MCS and PCS
N/A (N/A)
0.44 (0.15)
0.44 (0.15)
Burch 2008303
TENS
WOMAC
0.48 (0.04)
0.57 (0.04)
0.09 (0.04)
Burch 2008303
Interferential therapy
WOMAC
0.49 (0.04)
0.64 (0.02)
0.15 (0.03)
Callaghan 2005363
PES
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.08)
0.56 (0.09)
0.03 (0.08)
Callaghan 2005363
PES
Pain VAS
0.57 (0.11)
0.58 (0.12)
0.01 (0.11)
Callaghan 2005363
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.55 (0.02)
0.54 (0.07)
–0.01 (0.06)
Cheing 2003191
TENS
Pain VAS
0.59 (0.04)
0.67 (0.04)
0.08 (0.04)
Cheing 2003191
TENS
Pain VAS
0.57 (0.03)
0.71 (0.02)
0.14 (0.03)
Cheing 2003191
TENS
Pain VAS
0.56 (0.04)
0.68 (0.03)
0.12 (0.03)
Cheing 2003191
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.58 (0.03)
0.59 (0.03)
0.01 (0.03)
Durmus
¸ 2007370
PES
Pain VAS
0.57 (N/A)
0.68 (N/A)
0.10 (N/A)
Durmus
¸ 2007370
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
Pain VAS
0.55 (N/A)
0.67 (N/A)
0.12 (N/A)
Fary 2011468
Placebo
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.58 (0.04)
0.64 (N/A)
0.06 (0.04)
Fary 2011468
PES
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.59 (0.04)
0.66 (N/A)
0.07 (0.04)
Fischer 2005373
PEMFs
Pain VAS
0.56 (0.02)
0.58 (0.03)
0.02 (0.03)
Fischer 2005373
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.55 (0.02)
0.62 (0.03)
0.07 (0.03)
Flusser 2002374
Balneotherapy
Pain VAS
0.53 (0.03)
0.55 (0.03)
0.02 (0.03)
Flusser 2002374
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.05)
0.53 (0.05)
–0.02 (0.04)
Foroughi 2011469
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
WOMAC
0.65 (0.04)
0.70 (0.02)
0.05 (0.03)
Foroughi 2011469
Placebo
WOMAC
0.62 (0.04)
0.66 (0.03)
0.04 (0.04)
Fukuda 2011470
Usual care
Pain NRS
0.58 (0.04)
0.60 (0.04)
0.02 (0.04)
Fukuda 2011470
Placebo
Pain NRS
0.49 (0.04)
0.54 (0.05)
0.05 (0.04)
Fukuda 2011470
PES
Pain NRS
0.53 (0.05)
0.68 (0.03)
0.15 (0.04)
Fukuda 2011470
PES
Pain NRS
0.55 (0.05)
0.64 (0.04)
0.10 (0.04)
Fukuda 2011471
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.02)
0.57 (0.04)
0.03 (0.04)
Fukuda 2011471
Laser/light therapy
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.04)
0.59 (0.02)
0.05 (0.03)
Garland 2007377
PES
WOMAC
0.46 (0.05)
0.54 (0.06)
0.08 (0.05)
Garland 2007377
Placebo
WOMAC
0.53 (0.05)
0.52 (0.07)
–0.01 (0.06)
Grimmer 1992378
TENS
Pain VAS
0.52 (0.06)
0.65 (0.05)
0.13 (0.05)
Grimmer 1992378
TENS
Pain VAS
0.55 (0.05)
0.68 (0.03)
0.13 (0.04)
Grimmer 1992378
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.05)
0.62 (0.06)
0.08 (0.05)
Gundog 2012302
Interferential therapy
WOMAC
0.31 (0.06)
0.73 (0.01)
0.42 (0.05)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
293
 Study
Intervention
Quality-of-life
instrument
EQ-5D score, mean (SE)
Baseline
Follow-up
Change in
Gundog 2012302
Interferential therapy
WOMAC
0.24 (0.08)
0.74 (0.01)
0.50 (0.07)
Gundog 2012302
Interferential therapy
WOMAC
0.22 (0.06)
0.71 (0.03)
0.48 (0.05)
Gundog 2012302
Placebo
WOMAC
0.27 (0.06)
0.41 (0.05)
0.14 (0.05)
Hasegawa 2010381
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
Pain NRS
0.64 (0.05)
0.72 (0.05)
0.08 (0.05)
Hasegawa 2010381
Usual care
Pain NRS
0.68 (0.05)
0.67 (0.06)
–0.01 (0.05)
Huang 2005384
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
Pain VAS
0.58 (0.03)
0.61 (0.01)
0.04 (0.02)
Huang 2005384
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.58 (0.03)
0.60 (0.03)
0.02 (0.03)
Imoto 2012474
Usual care
SF-36 dimensions
0.52 (0.04)
0.60 (0.04)
0.09 (0.03)
Imoto 2012474
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
SF-36 dimensions
0.52 (0.03)
0.66 (0.04)
0.14 (0.03)
Itoh 2008386
Acupuncture
WOMAC
0.45 (0.08)
0.59 (0.05)
0.14 (0.06)
Itoh 2008386
TENS
WOMAC
0.44 (0.13)
0.60 (0.04)
0.16 (0.11)
Itoh 2008386
Usual care
WOMAC
0.49 (0.06)
0.52 (0.06)
0.03 (0.06)
Itoh 2008387
Acupuncture
WOMAC
0.39 (0.08)
0.54 (0.03)
0.16 (0.07)
Itoh 2008387
Acupuncture
WOMAC
0.46 (0.08)
0.63 (0.05)
0.17 (0.06)
Itoh 2008387
Sham acupuncture
WOMAC
0.45 (0.06)
0.48 (0.05)
0.03 (0.05)
Jubb 2008391
Sham acupuncture
WOMAC
0.41 (0.07)
0.48 (0.06)
0.07 (0.06)
Jubb 2008391
Acupuncture
WOMAC
0.37 (0.06)
0.54 (0.05)
0.17 (0.05)
Kang 2007393
TENS
Pain VAS
0.56 (N/A)
0.59 (N/A)
0.02 (N/A)
Kang 2007393
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.55 (N/A)
0.57 (N/A)
0.01 (N/A)
Kovar 1992398
Exercise – aerobic
Pain VAS
0.57 (0.03)
0.61 (0.02)
0.04 (0.02)
Kovar 1992398
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.58 (0.03)
0.58 (0.03)
0.00 (0.03)
Kuptniratsaikul
2002399
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
Pain VAS
0.56 (0.01)
0.60 (0.02)
0.04 (0.01)
Kuptniratsaikul
2002399
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.55 (0.01)
0.57 (0.02)
0.02 (0.01)
Lansdown 2009126
Usual care
EQ-5D
0.67 (0.04)
0.66 (0.06)
–0.01 (0.06)
Lansdown 2009126
Acupuncture
EQ-5D
0.61 (0.06)
0.71 (0.07)
0.10 (0.08)
Lee 2009401
Usual care
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.58 (0.10)
0.56 (0.12)
–0.02 (0.06)
Lee 2009401
T’ai chi
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.51 (0.09)
0.49 (0.09)
–0.01 (0.10)
Lewis 1994403
TENS
Pain VAS
N/A (N/A)
0.58 (N/A)
0.58 (N/A)
Lewis 1994403
Placebo
Pain VAS
N/A (N/A)
0.56 (N/A)
0.56 (N/A)
Lim 2010475
Usual care
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.51 (0.07)
0.54 (0.08)
0.04 (0.02)
Lim 2010475
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.57 (0.04)
0.65 (0.03)
0.08 (0.02)
Lim 2010475
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.53 (0.06)
0.63 (0.03)
0.10 (0.03)
Lu 2010192
Acupuncture
Pain VAS
0.56 (0.03)
0.60 (0.03)
0.03 (0.03)
Lu 2010192
Sham acupuncture
Pain VAS
0.57 (0.04)
0.58 (0.04)
0.02 (0.04)
Lund 2008407
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.58 (0.05)
0.55 (0.04)
–0.03 (0.04)
Lund 2008407
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.03)
0.56 (0.04)
0.01 (0.03)
Lund 2008407
Exercise – aerobic
Pain VAS
0.57 (0.06)
0.57 (0.04)
0.00 (0.05)
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
294
 Study
Intervention
Quality-of-life
instrument
EQ-5D score, mean (SE)
Baseline
Follow-up
Change in
Maillefert 2001409
Insoles
WOMAC
0.48 (0.04)
0.45 (0.04)
–0.02 (0.04)
Maillefert 2001409
Placebo
WOMAC
0.47 (0.04)
0.49 (0.04)
0.01 (0.04)
Maurer 1999410
Usual care
WOMAC
0.60 (N/A)
0.64 (N/A)
0.04 (N/A)
Maurer 1999410
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
WOMAC
0.62 (N/A)
0.67 (N/A)
0.05 (N/A)
Mavrommatis 2012476
Usual care
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.46 (0.04)
0.60 (0.02)
0.14 (0.02)
Mavrommatis 2012476
Sham acupuncture
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.43 (0.05)
0.61 (0.02)
0.18 (0.03)
Mavrommatis 2012476
Acupuncture
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.48 (0.03)
0.72 (0.02)
0.23 (0.02)
Mazzuca 2004411
Heat treatment
WOMAC
0.46 (0.07)
0.52 (0.06)
0.06 (0.06)
Mazzuca 2004411
Placebo
WOMAC
0.47 (0.07)
0.53 (0.05)
0.07 (0.06)
McCarthy 2004412
Usual care
EQ-5D
0.50 (N/A)
0.52 (N/A)
0.02 (N/A)
McCarthy 2004412
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
EQ-5D
0.54 (N/A)
0.60 (N/A)
0.06 (N/A)
Messier 2004413
Usual care
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.55 (0.03)
0.61 (0.02)
0.06 (0.01)
Messier 2004413
Exercise – aerobic
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.58 (0.02)
0.63 (0.02)
0.06 (0.01)
Miranda-Filloy
2005415
PES
WOMAC
0.51 (N/A)
0.69 (N/A)
0.18 (N/A)
Miranda-Filloy
2005415
Placebo
WOMAC
0.46 (N/A)
0.55 (N/A)
0.09 (N/A)
Ng 2003418
Acupuncture
Pain NRS
0.65 (0.05)
0.70 (0.04)
0.05 (0.05)
Ng 2003418
TENS
Pain NRS
0.67 (0.04)
0.69 (0.04)
0.02 (0.04)
Nguyen 1997419
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.58 (0.02)
0.58 (0.02)
0.00 (0.02)
Nguyen 1997419
Balneotherapy
Pain VAS
0.57 (0.02)
0.62 (0.02)
0.05 (0.02)
Nigg 2006421
Insoles
WOMAC
0.61 (0.03)
0.66 (0.02)
0.05 (0.03)
Nigg 2006421
Usual care
WOMAC
0.60 (0.03)
0.65 (0.03)
0.06 (0.03)
Perlman 2006424
Manual therapy
WOMAC
0.49 (0.06)
0.65 (0.04)
0.16 (0.05)
Perlman 2006424
Usual care
WOMAC
0.42 (0.06)
0.47 (0.06)
0.05 (0.06)
Perlman 2012478
Manual therapy
WOMAC
0.44 (0.08)
0.60 (0.05)
0.16 (0.07)
Perlman 2012478
Manual therapy
WOMAC
0.47 (0.07)
0.62 (0.05)
0.15 (0.06)
Perlman 2012478
Manual therapy
WOMAC
0.44 (0.07)
0.64 (0.04)
0.20 (0.06)
Perlman 2012478
Manual therapy
WOMAC
0.49 (0.07)
0.66 (0.04)
0.17 (0.06)
Perlman 2012478
Usual care
WOMAC
0.45 (0.06)
0.52 (0.05)
0.06 (0.05)
Perrot 1998425
PEMFs
Pain VAS
0.52 (N/A)
0.60 (N/A)
0.08 (N/A)
Perrot 1998425
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.50 (N/A)
0.54 (N/A)
0.05 (N/A)
Pietrosimone 2009427
TENS
Pain VAS
0.68 (0.04)
0.70 (0.02)
0.03 (0.04)
Pietrosimone 2009427
Ice/cooling treatment
Pain VAS
0.67 (0.04)
0.69 (0.04)
0.02 (0.04)
Pietrosimone 2009427
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.67 (0.04)
0.67 (0.05)
0.00 (0.04)
Pipitone 2001428
Placebo
WOMAC
0.44 (0.05)
0.46 (0.05)
0.01 (0.05)
Pipitone 2001428
PEMFs
WOMAC
0.44 (0.07)
0.49 (0.06)
0.05 (0.06)
Pollard 2008429
Manual therapy
Pain VAS
0.63 (0.04)
0.67 (0.03)
0.04 (0.03)
Pollard 2008429
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.62 (0.06)
0.63 (0.05)
0.01 (0.05)
Rapp 2009430
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
Pain VAS
N/A (N/A)
0.67 (0.05)
0.67 (0.05)
Rapp 2009430
Manual therapy
Pain VAS
N/A (N/A)
0.66 (0.04)
0.66 (0.04)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
295
 Study
Intervention
Quality-of-life
instrument
EQ-5D score, mean (SE)
Baseline
Follow-up
Change in
Rapp 2009430
Usual care
Pain VAS
N/A (N/A)
0.64 (0.05)
0.64 (0.05)
Rattanachaiyanont
2008431
Heat treatment
WOMAC
0.60 (0.03)
0.66 (0.02)
0.07 (0.02)
Rattanachaiyanont
2008431
Placebo
WOMAC
0.58 (0.03)
0.66 (0.02)
0.07 (0.03)
Salacinski 2012479
Usual care
WOMAC
0.66 (0.04)
0.64 (0.05)
–0.02 (0.04)
Salacinski 2012479
Exercise – aerobic
WOMAC
0.65 (0.04)
0.71 (0.02)
0.06 (0.04)
Salli 2010480
Usual care
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.54 (0.07)
0.59 (0.05)
0.04 (0.03)
Salli 2010480
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.55 (0.08)
0.62 (0.05)
0.07 (0.08)
Salli 2010480
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.53 (0.09)
0.60 (0.08)
0.07 (0.11)
Sangdee 2002434
Acupuncture
WOMAC
0.42 (0.06)
0.65 (0.03)
0.23 (0.05)
Sangdee 2002434
Acupuncture
WOMAC
0.42 (0.06)
0.65 (0.03)
0.23 (0.05)
Sangdee 2002434
Usual care
WOMAC
0.44 (0.05)
0.63 (0.03)
0.19 (0.04)
Sangdee 2002434
Placebo
WOMAC
0.44 (0.05)
0.60 (0.03)
0.16 (0.04)
Selfe 2008436
Placebo
WOMAC
0.45 (0.08)
0.63 (0.05)
0.18 (0.07)
Selfe 2008436
TENS
WOMAC
0.44 (0.10)
0.64 (0.05)
0.21 (0.08)
Shen 2009437
Laser/light therapy
WOMAC
0.58 (0.06)
0.69 (0.03)
0.11 (0.06)
Shen 2009437
Placebo
WOMAC
0.66 (0.03)
0.73 (0.01)
0.07 (0.04)
Sherman 2009438
Placebo
WOMAC
0.40 (0.09)
0.50 (0.08)
0.10 (0.08)
Sherman 2009438
Balneotherapy
WOMAC
0.36 (0.08)
0.49 (0.08)
0.13 (0.08)
Stelian 1992440
Laser/light therapy
Pain VAS
0.53 (0.06)
0.62 (0.06)
0.09 (0.05)
Stelian 1992440
Laser/light therapy
Pain VAS
0.51 (0.05)
0.63 (0.05)
0.11 (0.05)
Stelian 1992440
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.05)
0.54 (0.05)
0.00 (0.05)
Suarez-Almazor
2010125
Sham acupuncture
SF-12 MCS and PCS
0.61 (0.02)
0.69 (0.02)
0.08 (0.02)
Suarez-Almazor
2010125
Acupuncture
SF-12 MCS and PCS
0.61 (0.02)
0.71 (0.02)
0.10 (0.02)
Sukenik 1999441
Balneotherapy
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.05)
0.55 (0.04)
0.01 (0.04)
Sukenik 1999441
Balneotherapy
Pain VAS
0.53 (0.03)
0.56 (0.05)
0.03 (0.04)
Sukenik 1999441
Balneotherapy
Pain VAS
0.52 (0.03)
0.61 (0.06)
0.09 (0.05)
Sukenik 1999441
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.05)
0.54 (0.04)
0.00 (0.04)
Tascioglu 2004444
Laser/light therapy
WOMAC
0.46 (0.05)
0.48 (0.05)
0.02 (0.04)
Tascioglu 2004444
Laser/light therapy
WOMAC
0.42 (0.05)
0.45 (0.05)
0.03 (0.05)
Tascioglu 2004444
Placebo
WOMAC
0.43 (0.06)
0.46 (0.05)
0.03 (0.05)
Thamsborg 2005446
PEMFs
WOMAC
0.46 (0.04)
0.54 (0.03)
0.08 (0.04)
Thamsborg 2005446
Placebo
WOMAC
0.42 (0.05)
0.48 (0.05)
0.05 (0.05)
Thorstensson 2005447
Usual care
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.72 (N/A)
0.73 (N/A)
0.01 (N/A)
Thorstensson 2005447
Exercise – aerobic
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.71 (N/A)
0.74 (N/A)
0.02 (N/A)
Tishler 2004448
Balneotherapy
Pain VAS
0.53 (0.03)
0.66 (0.03)
0.13 (0.03)
Tishler 2004448
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.52 (0.04)
0.53 (0.04)
0.01 (0.04)
Toda 2008449
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.59 (0.03)
0.58 (0.02)
–0.01 (0.03)
Toda 2008449
Insoles
Pain VAS
0.61 (0.03)
0.60 (0.03)
–0.01 (0.03)
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
296
 Study
Intervention
Quality-of-life
instrument
EQ-5D score, mean (SE)
Baseline
Follow-up
Change in
Toda 2008449
Insoles
Pain VAS
0.59 (0.03)
0.60 (0.04)
0.01 (0.03)
Topp 2002450
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
WOMAC
0.35 (0.06)
0.40 (0.09)
0.05 (0.08)
Topp 2002450
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
WOMAC
0.40 (0.06)
0.45 (0.05)
0.04 (0.05)
Topp 2002450
Usual care
WOMAC
0.41 (0.06)
0.39 (0.06)
–0.01 (0.05)
Trock 1994452
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.53 (0.03)
0.57 (0.03)
0.04 (0.03)
Trock 1994452
PEMFs
Pain VAS
0.51 (0.03)
0.59 (0.03)
0.08 (0.03)
Tucker 2003453
Manual therapy
Pain VAS
0.62 (0.03)
0.69 (0.02)
0.07 (0.02)
Tucker 2003453
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.63 (0.04)
0.69 (0.02)
0.06 (0.03)
Tukmachi 2004454
Acupuncture
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.06)
0.63 (0.08)
0.08 (0.07)
Tukmachi 2004454
Acupuncture
Pain VAS
0.54 (0.05)
0.67 (0.06)
0.12 (0.05)
Tukmachi 2004454
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.51 (0.04)
0.52 (0.06)
0.01 (0.05)
Vance 2012481
TENS
Pain VAS
0.65 (0.04)
0.68 (0.04)
0.02 (0.04)
Vance 2012481
TENS
Pain VAS
0.64 (0.04)
0.66 (0.04)
0.02 (0.04)
Vance 2012481
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.64 (0.04)
0.68 (0.03)
0.04 (0.04)
Vas 2004120
Acupuncture
WOMAC
0.40 (0.06)
0.75 (0.04)
0.35 (0.08)
Vas 2004120
Sham acupuncture
WOMAC
0.35 (0.06)
0.56 (0.06)
0.21 (0.07)
Wang 2009455
Usual care
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.50 (0.06)
0.56 (0.05)
0.06 (0.02)
Wang 2009455
T’ai chi
SF-36 MCS and PCS
0.58 (0.05)
0.71 (0.04)
0.13 (0.03)
Wigler 1995456
Balneotherapy
Pain VAS
0.51 (N/A)
0.55 (N/A)
0.04 (N/A)
Wigler 1995456
Balneotherapy
Pain VAS
0.51 (N/A)
0.56 (N/A)
0.05 (N/A)
Wigler 1995456
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.51 (N/A)
0.54 (N/A)
0.03 (N/A)
Williamson 2007136
Acupuncture
WOMAC
0.44 (0.04)
0.43 (0.04)
–0.01 (0.05)
Williamson 2007136
Exercise – muscle
strengthening
WOMAC
0.43 (0.05)
0.46 (0.05)
0.03 (0.06)
Williamson 2007136
Usual care
WOMAC
0.43 (0.04)
0.36 (0.04)
–0.06 (0.05)
Witt 200569
Acupuncture
SF-36 dimensions
0.57 (0.02)
0.70 (0.02)
0.14 (0.02)
Witt 200569
Sham acupuncture
SF-36 dimensions
0.55 (0.02)
0.62 (0.03)
0.07 (0.02)
Witt 200569
Usual care
SF-36 dimensions
0.56 (0.03)
0.57 (0.02)
0.01 (0.02)
Witt 200677
Acupuncture
SF-36 dimensions
0.57 (0.01)
0.67 (0.02)
0.10 (0.02)
Witt 200677
Usual care
SF-36 dimensions
0.57 (0.01)
0.56 (0.02)
–0.01 (0.01)
Wolsko 2004457
Static magnets
WOMAC
0.47 (0.12)
0.64 (0.07)
0.17 (0.10)
Wolsko 2004457
Placebo
WOMAC
0.48 (N/A)
0.66 (N/A)
0.18 (N/A)
Yip 2007193
Usual care
Pain VAS
0.59 (0.02)
0.59 (0.03)
0.00 (0.03)
Yip 2007193
T’ai chi
Pain VAS
0.57 (0.02)
0.61 (0.02)
0.04 (0.02)
Yurtkuran 2006461
Placebo
WOMAC
0.44 (0.04)
0.58 (0.04)
0.14 (0.04)
Yurtkuran 2006461
Balneotherapy
WOMAC
0.47 (0.06)
0.64 (0.03)
0.17 (0.05)
Zizic 1995462
PES
Pain VAS
0.53 (N/A)
0.59 (N/A)
0.06 (N/A)
Zizic 1995462
Placebo
Pain VAS
0.54 (N/A)
0.58 (N/A)
0.04 (N/A)
N/A, not applicable.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
297
 Results of sensitivity analysis using upper and lower values for
intervention costs and private costs for acupuncture sessions
(See Chapter 5, Cost-effectiveness analysis for values used.)
All trials
Treatment
Cost-effective intervention at threshold of £20,000 per QALY
(ICER, £ per QALY)
Use of minimum cost
Use of maximum cost
Standard care
TENS (2691)
TENS (2695)
Acupuncture
Acupuncture (19,033)
TENS (2694)
Braces
TENS (2693)
TENS (2691)
Heat treatment
TENS (2694)
TENS (2691)
Insoles
TENS (2690)
TENS (2694)
Interferential therapy
Interferential therapy (7626)
TENS (2687)
Laser light therapy
TENS (2690)
TENS (2694)
Manual therapy
TENS (2695)
TENS (2692)
NMES
TENS (2689)
TENS (2691)
PES
TENS (2690)
TENS (2693)
PEMFs
TENS (2688)
TENS (2695)
Static magnets
TENS (2696)
TENS (2689)
TENS
TENS (1426)
TENS (3959)
Trials with a low risk of bias for allocation concealment
Treatment
Cost-effective intervention at threshold of £20,000 per QALY
(ICER, £ per QALY)
Use of minimum cost
Use of maximum cost
Usual care
Acupuncture (13,501)
Acupuncture (13,500)
Acupuncture
Acupuncture (5842)
Acupuncture (17,690)
Heat treatment
Acupuncture (13,499)
Acupuncture (13,500)
Insoles
Acupuncture (13,501)
Acupuncture (13,501)
Interferential therapy
Acupuncture (13,502)
Acupuncture (13,500)
Laser light therapy
Acupuncture (13,503)
Acupuncture (13,499)
Manual therapy
Acupuncture (13,500)
Acupuncture (13,503)
PES
Acupuncture (13,503)
Acupuncture (13,502)
PEMFs
Acupuncture (13,498)
Acupuncture (13,500)
Static magnets
Acupuncture (13,499)
Acupuncture (13,501)
TENS
Acupuncture (14,701)
Acupuncture (12,297)
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
298
 Trials with a low risk of bias for allocation concealment reporting at
3–13 weeks
Treatment
Cost-effective intervention at threshold of £20,000 per QALY
(ICER, £ per QALY)
Use of minimum cost
Use of maximum cost
Usual care
Acupuncture (14,271)
Acupuncture (14,272)
Acupuncture
Acupuncture (6518)
Acupuncture (18,697)
Heat treatment
Acupuncture (14,278)
Acupuncture (14,275)
Insoles
Acupuncture (14,271)
Acupuncture (14,272)
Interferential therapy
Acupuncture (14,274)
Acupuncture (14,275)
Laser light therapy
Acupuncture (14,273)
Acupuncture (14,280)
Manual therapy
Manual therapy (9500)
Acupuncture (14,276)
PES
Acupuncture (14,272)
Acupuncture (14,276)
PEMFs
Acupuncture (14,276)
Acupuncture (14,276)
Static magnets
Acupuncture (14,273)
Acupuncture (14,269)
TENS
Acupuncture (15,544)
Acupuncture (13,704)
When the private cost was used for acupuncture sessions the conclusions of the analysis of all trials were
unaffected. The results of the analysis restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment were
affected and TENS became the cost-effective comparator (ICER £6142 per QALY vs. usual care). The results
of the analysis restricted to trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting between 3 and 13 weeks
were also affected and manual therapy became the cost-effective comparator (ICER £19,942 per QALY
vs. TENS).
Results of sensitivity analysis using shorter treatment
durations and a range of assumptions around efficacy
Relationship between EQ-5D
treatment effect and session
duration
Cost-effective intervention at threshold of £20,000 per QALY (ICER, £ per
QALY)
All trials
Trials with adequate
allocation
concealment
Trials with adequate
allocation concealment,
reporting at 3–13 weeks
Scenario 1: linear relationship
TENS (2695)
Acupuncture (17,669)
Acupuncture (19,253)
Scenario 2: linear up to
60 minutes followed by plateau
TENS (2693)
Acupuncture (17,664)
Acupuncture (19,240)
Scenario 3: 75% benefit in
0–30 minutes, remaining
benefit 30–60 minutes
Interferential therapy
(18,159)
Acupuncture (13,516)
Acupuncture (14,423)
Scenario 4: all benefit achieved
in first 20/30 minutes
Interferential therapy
(4324)
Interferential therapy
(8150)
Interferential therapy
(8356)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
299
 Results of sensitivity analysis using upper and lower credible
intervals from network meta-analysis
Bold text indicates scenarios in which the optimal decision remains as per the base case (assuming a
cost-effectiveness threshold of £20,000 per QALY). Black text indicates scenarios in which the optimal
decision switches. The last column indicates the effect size required to alter the decision and the univariate
posterior probability of observing a value of the treatment effect this extreme. This was calculated only
when use of the upper or lower 95% CrI altered the decision.
All trials
Intervention
Cost-effective treatment at threshold of
£20,000 per QALY (ICER, £ per QALY)
Parameter value required to
alter decision (probability)
Lower 95% CrI
Upper 95% CrI
Acupuncture
TENS (2691)
Acupuncture (£19,154)
Effect > 0.12 (0.05)
Braces
TENS (2692)
Braces (2509)
Effect > 0.08 (0.08)
Heat treatment
TENS (2689)
TENS (2692)
–
Insoles
TENS (2693)
TENS (5515)
–
Interferential therapy
TENS (2689)
TENS (2687)
–
Laser/light therapy
TENS (2690)
TENS (2689)
–
Manual therapy
TENS (2689)
TENS (2692)
–
NMES
TENS (2693)
NMES (8043)
Effect > 0.22 (0.18)
PES
TENS (2686)
TENS (2694)
–
PEMFs
TENS (2692)
TENS (2697)
–
Static magnets
TENS (2694)
Static magnets (325)
Effect > 0.07 (0.25)
TENS
Acupuncture (15,070)
TENS (1740)
Effect < 0.05 (0.15)
Trials with adequate allocation concealment
Intervention
Cost-effective treatment at threshold of £20,000
per QALY (ICER, £ per QALY)
Parameter value required to
alter decision (probability)
Lower 95% CrI
Upper 95% CrI
Acupuncture
TENS (6143)
Acupuncture (9273)
Effect < 0.08 (0.05)
Heat treatment
Acupuncture (13,507)
Acupuncture (13,504)
–
Insoles
Acupuncture (13,500)
Insoles (1389)
Effect > 0.05 (0.09)
Interferential therapy
Acupuncture (13,500)
Acupuncture (13,500)
–
Laser/light therapy
Acupuncture (13,499)
Acupuncture (13,501)
–
Manual therapy
Acupuncture (13,501)
Manual therapy (11,583)
Effect > 0.14 (0.10)
PES
Acupuncture (13,504)
Acupuncture (13,500)
–
PEMFs
Acupuncture (13,502)
Acupuncture (13,501)
–
Static magnets
Acupuncture (13,500)
Static magnets (335)
Effect > 0.05 (0.29)
TENS
Acupuncture (11,687)
TENS (2002)
Effect > 0.06 (0.21)
APPENDIX 5
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
300
 Trials with adequate allocation concealment reporting at 3–13 weeks
Intervention
Cost-effective treatment at threshold of £20,000
per QALY (ICER, £ per QALY)
Parameter value required to
alter decision (probability)
Lower 95% CrI
Upper 95% CrI
Acupuncture
TENS (9784)
Acupuncture (9568)
Effect < 0.09 (0.14)
Heat treatment
Acupuncture (14,271)
Heat treatment (11,425)
Effect > 0.12 (0.05)
Insoles
Acupuncture (14,274)
Insoles (676)
Effect > 0.05 (0.35)
Interferential therapy
Acupuncture (14,272)
Acupuncture (14,274)
–
Laser/light therapy
Acupuncture (14,274)
Acupuncture (14,272)
–
Manual therapy
Acupuncture (14,271)
Manual therapy (8484)
Effect > 0.14 (0.35)
PES
Acupuncture (14,278)
Acupuncture (14,277)
–
PEMFs
Acupuncture (14,272)
Acupuncture (14,273)
–
Static magnets
Acupuncture (14,271)
Static magnets (315)
Effect > 0.05 (0.30)
TENS
Acupuncture (13,709)
TENS (1034)
Effect > 0.06 (0.40)
Results of sensitivity analysis of extending the duration of
treatment benefit by 50%
Intervention
Cost-effective treatment at threshold of £20,000 per QALY (ICER, £ per QALY)
All trials
Trials with adequate
allocation concealment
Trials with adequate
allocation concealment,
reporting at 3–13 weeks
Standard care
TENS (2693)
Acupuncture (13,500)
Acupuncture (14,276)
Acupuncture
Acupuncture (14,732)
Acupuncture (8000)
Acupuncture (8373)
Braces
TENS (2691)
NA
NA
Heat treatment
TENS (2689)
Acupuncture (13,499)
Acupuncture (14,270)
Insoles
TENS (2691)
Acupuncture (13,501)
Acupuncture (16,061)
Interferential therapy
Interferential therapy (19,286)
Acupuncture (13,503)
Acupuncture (14,270)
Laser/light therapy
TENS (2689)
Acupuncture (13,502)
Acupuncture (14,277)
Manual therapy
TENS (2690)
Acupuncture (13,507)
Manual therapy (11,678)
NMES
TENS (2689)
NA
NA
PES
TENS (2694)
Acupuncture (13,499)
Acupuncture (14,270)
PEMFs
TENS (2692)
Acupuncture (13,494)
Acupuncture (14,280)
Static magnets
TENS (2697)
Acupuncture (13,505)
Acupuncture (14,269)
TENS
TENS (1849)
Acupuncture (16,857)
Acupuncture (18,794)
NA, not available because of intervention not providing information to network.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
301
  Appendix 6 Trial data related to Chapter 6
Details of acupuncture treatment based on the Revised
STandards for Reporting Interventions in Clinical Trials of
Acupuncture (STRICTA) reporting guidelines,483 an official
extension to the Consolidated Standards of Reporting
Trials (CONSORT)
STRICTA item
Details of acupuncture treatment within the trial (n = 266)
1. (a) Style
Traditional Chinese medicine
1. (b) Reasoning for treatment provided
Systematic Cochrane review312 and consensus methods315 were used to
develop a treatment protocol in a pragmatic trial designed to evaluate
acupuncture as provided in routine care
1. (c) Variation
Individualised treatments using common theoretical frameworks of TCM as
reported separately
2. (a) Number of needles per treatment
On average, 13 needles were inserted per session (range 3–26)
2. (b) Names
246 different points were used. Common points were SP-6, LIV-3, ST-36 and
LI-4, which were used within a course of treatment on 91%, 89%, 83% and
74% of patients, respectively
2. (c) Depth of insertion
Range of minimum mean depths was 0.49 cm, maximum 1.41 cm. Total range
0.05–2.5 cm
2. (d) Response sought
The response sought varied, most commonly deqi by 96% of acupuncturists
2. (e) Needle stimulation
Manual methods: tonifying (68%), reducing (43%) and even method (55%)
2. (f) Retention
Average 22.5 minutes (range 15–45 minutes)
2. (g) Needle type
Needle length ranged from 5 mm to 40 mm and needle diameter ranged from
0.13 mm to 0.35 mm
3. (a) Number of sessions
Patients were offered 12 sessions and completed an average of 10.3 sessions
(median 12, range 1–12)
3. (b) Frequency and duration
Average number of sessions per week: 0.74. Average number of weeks
between sessions: 1.36. Average duration of session: 53 minutes (range
28–95 minutes)
4. (a) Other components of treatment
Acupuncturists were allowed to use moxa, electroacupuncture, ear seeds,
cupping, acupressure and heat lamps. Most commonly used were acupressure
(used with 13% of patients), moxa (12%) and electroacupuncture (7%).
Acupuncturists were allowed to provide acupuncture theory-based lifestyle
advice. In total, 66% of patients received lifestyle advice, most commonly diet
(42%), exercise (30%) and relaxation (25%) advice. Advice unrelated to
acupuncture theory as well as herbs and magnets were proscribed
4. (b) Setting and context
Provision or treatments in independent clinics. Acupuncturists encouraged to
practice as closely as possible to their normal practice and 96% reported
applying acupuncture exactly the same way or similarly as they did routinely
5. Participating acupuncturists
BAcC members with > 3 years of post-qualification experience
6. Control or comparator interventions
Patients continued to receive usual care as an adjunct from their GP, as well as
over-the-counter treatments according to need, based on a need to evaluate
the impact of acupuncture plus usual care compared with the impact of usual
care alone
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
303
 Details of the competences that underpinned the delivery of
humanistic counselling
The counselling was designed to be humanistic in approach and based on relevant competences. These
competences were developed independently by Anthony D Roth, Andrew Hill and Stephen Pilling,316 as
commissioned by Skills for Health, supported by an Expert Reference Group and now documented by the
Centre for Outcomes Research and Effectiveness at University College London.484 A manualised protocol
was developed using an evidence-based methodology. These competences for the delivery of high-quality
humanistic psychological therapies covered the following three domains:
1. Basic competences in humanistic psychological therapies. Humanistic counselling interventions are
underpinned by a range of more specific humanistic techniques. These basic competences set out a
range of activities that humanistically oriented therapists should be able to acknowledge as fundamental
to their practice and that should be delivered to patients within the trial.
2. Metacompetences. These are the competences needed to implement higher-order links between theory
and practice and will adapt the implementation of the humanistic approach to the needs of individual
patients. These competences are more abstract than those in other domains; however, they will guide
the procedures and practice used by counsellors within the trial.
3. Specific humanistic psychological therapies competences. These are technical interventions employed
by some (although not all) forms of humanistic psychological therapies. These include, for example,
competences related to approaches to working with emotions and emotional meaning.
Baseline characteristics for patients with and without missing data
at 3 months
Characteristic
Patients with
Total (n = 755)
Available data at
3 months (n = 616)
Missing data at
3 months (n = 139)
Age (years)
Mean (SD)
44.6 (13.01)
38.2 (13.42)
43.5 (13.37)
Median (min., max.)
43.5 (18, 89)
35.0 (18, 93)
43 (18, 93)
Interquartile range
35–54
27–46
33–53
Missing, n (%)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Sex, n (%)
Male
164 (26.6)
37 (26.6)
201 (26.6)
Female
452 (73.4)
102 (73.4)
554 (73.4)
Missing
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Depression, n (%)
In last 2 weeks
457 (74.2)
117 (84.2)
574 (76.0)
Missing
11 (1.8)
1 (0.7)
12 (1.6)
Not first major episode
408 (89.4)
105 (89.7)
513 (89.4)
Missing
8 (1.8)
1 (0.9)
9 (1.6)
Four or more previous episodes
309 (75.7)
80 (76.2)
389 (75.8)
Missing
4 (1.0)
0 (0.0)
4 (0.8)
APPENDIX 6
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
304
 Characteristic
Patients with
Total (n = 755)
Available data at
3 months (n = 616)
Missing data at
3 months (n = 139)
Age at first major depressive episode (years)
Mean (SD)
25.7 (12.5)
22.9 (10.8)
25.2 (12.28)
Median (min., max.)
22 (0, 79)
20 (3, 78)
22 (0, 79)
Interquartile range
16.5–32
15–30
16–31
Missing, n (%)
12 (1.9)
4 (2.9)
16 (2.1)
Medication, n (%)
Depression medication in last 3 months
426 (69.2)
93 (66.9)
519 (68.7)
Missing
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Analgesic medication in last 3 months
301 (48.9)
58 (41.7)
359 (47.5)
Missing
4 (0.7)
2 (1.4)
6 (0.8)
EQ-5D anxiety/depression, n (%)
Not anxious/depressed
17 (2.8)
4 (2.9)
21 (2.8)
Moderately anxious/depressed
465 (75.7)
89 (64.0)
554 (73.6)
Extremely anxious/depressed
132 (21.5)
46 (33.1)
178 (23.6)
Missing
2 (0.3)
0 (0.0)
2 (0.3)
PHQ-9 score
Mean (SD)
15.7 (5.32)
17.3 (4.94)
16.0 (5.29)
Median (min., max.)
16 (3, 27)
17 (6, 27)
16 (3, 27)
Interquartile range
12–20
14–21
12–20
Missing, n (%)
1 (0.2)
0 (0.0)
1 (0.1)
PHQ-9 group, n (%)
None (0–4)
6 (1.0)
0 (0.0)
6 (0.8)
Mild (5–9)
78 (12.7)
9 (6.5)
87 (11.5)
Moderate (10–14)
182 (29.6)
35 (25.2)
217 (28.8)
Moderately severe (15–19)
184 (29.9)
47 (33.8)
231 (30.6)
Severe (20–27)
165 (26.8)
48 (34.5)
213 (28.2)
Missing
1 (0.2)
0 (0.0)
1 (0.1)
BDI-II score
Mean (SD)
32.0 (8.62)
34.5 (8.91)
32.5 (8.72)
Median (min., max.)
31 (20, 60)
34 (20, 53)
31 (20, 60)
Interquartile range
25–37.5
28–41
26–38
Missing, n (%)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
BDI-II group, n (%)
Moderate (20–28)
248 (40.3)
36 (25.9)
284 (37.6)
Severe (29–63)
368 (59.7)
103 (74.1)
471 (62.4)
Missing
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
305
 Characteristic
Patients with
Total (n = 755)
Available data at
3 months (n = 616)
Missing data at
3 months (n = 139)
SF-36 bodily pain
Mean (SD)
57.2 (28.54)
59.6 (28.01)
57.6 (28.44)
Median (min., max.)
56.5 (0, 100)
52 (0, 100)
52 (0, 100)
Interquartile range
31–82
41–84
32–84
Missing, n (%)
4 (0.6)
0 (0.0)
4 (0.5)
Treatment preference, n (%)
Acupuncture
343 (55.7)
87 (62.6)
430 (57.0)
Counselling
137 (22.2)
27 (19.4)
164 (21.7)
Usual care
10 (1.6)
0 (0.0)
10 (1.3)
No preference
122 (19.8)
22 (15.8)
144 (19.1)
Missing
4 (0.7)
3 (2.2)
7 (0.9)
Max., maximum; min., minimum.
Details of the usual care provided to patients in all three arms
(Except medication, which is set out in Table 38.)
APPENDIX 6
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
306
 Number of patients seeing a health professional and average number of visits (total and specifically for depression) for
these patients in the preceding 3 months
Health
professional
Time point
(months)
Intervention
Total
Acupuncture + usual care
Counselling + usual care
Usual care
Patients
Mean number of
visits
Patients
Mean number of
visits
Patients
Mean number of
visits
Patients
Mean number of
visits
n
%
Total
Depressiona
n
%
Total
Depressiona
n
%
Total
Depressiona
n
%
Total
Depressiona
GP
3b
106
45.1
–
2.2
108
50.2
–
2.3
70
58.8
–
2.2
284
49.9
–
2.2
6
153
73.6
2.8
0.8
134
68.0
2.5
0.8
73
74.5
2.6
1.1
360
71.6
2.7
0.9
9
135
67.2
2.2
0.7
121
66.5
2.2
0.8
81
75.7
2.3
0.9
337
68.8
2.3
0.8
12
127
63.2
2.4
1.0
131
68.2
2.3
0.7
73
69.5
2.4
0.7
331
66.5
2.4
0.8
Practice nurse
3b
7
3.7
–
1.4
12
6.9
–
2.0
8
9.1
–
1.8
27
6.3
–
1.8
6
58
26.1
1.7
0.0
63
29.9
1.5
0.1
36
33.0
1.4
0.0
157
29.0
1.6
0.0
9
55
25.0
1.7
0.1
50
25.1
1.9
0.0
28
25.5
1.8
0.3
133
25.1
1.8
0.1
12
54
25.0
1.6
0.0
63
30.7
1.4
0.0
39
35.5
1.8
0.0
156
29.4
1.6
0.0
Outpatient
clinic
3b
11
4.6
–
2.0
13
5.9
–
2.1
9
7.4
–
3.3
33
5.7
–
2.6
6
46
20.6
2.3
0.1
60
28.4
2.2
0.1
25
23.1
1.3
0.0
131
24.2
2.1
0.1
9
50
22.4
1.8
0.2
44
22.3
2.0
0.2
27
25.2
1.5
0.1
121
23.0
1.8
0.2
12
61
28.1
1.7
0.3
57
28.4
1.8
0.2
35
32.4
1.7
0.1
153
29.1
1.8
0.2
Mental health
nurse
3b
5
2.2
–
1.6
1
0.5
–
5.0
4
3.5
–
4.5
10
1.8
–
3.1
6
4
1.8
4.0
2.3
1
0.5
8.0
–
2
1.8
3.5
3.5
7
1.3
4.4
2.8
9
7
3.2
4.1
2.9
3
1.5
5.3
6.5
4
3.8
3.0
1.8
14
2.7
4.1
3.1
12
11
5.1
3.5
2.3
4
2.1
2.3
1.8
3
2.9
4.0
2.3
18
3.5
3.3
2.2
Psychologist
or psychiatrist
3b
4
1.8
–
1.8
5
2.4
–
6.2
6
5.4
–
2.7
15
2.7
–
3.6
6
10
4.5
1.7
1.2
9
4.5
4.7
1.7
7
6.5
2.9
1.6
26
4.9
3.0
1.5
9
7
3.3
2.3
2.1
7
3.6
1.9
1.3
4
3.8
5.5
5.3
18
3.5
2.8
2.5
12
11
5.1
3.5
3.5
7
3.7
2.9
2.0
5
4.8
2.2
1.4
23
4.5
3.0
2.6
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
307
 Health
professional
Time point
(months)
Intervention
Total
Acupuncture + usual care
Counselling + usual care
Usual care
Patients
Mean number of
visits
Patients
Mean number of
visits
Patients
Mean number of
visits
Patients
Mean number of
visits
n
%
Total
Depressiona
n
%
Total
Depressiona
n
%
Total
Depressiona
n
%
Total
Depressiona
NHS
counsellor
3b
5
2.2
–
3.0
4
1.9
–
3.0
5
4.4
–
2.4
14
2.5
–
2.8
6
9
4.2
2.7
1.0
5
2.5
3.2
3.8
5
4.8
1.4
0.5
19
3.6
2.5
1.6
9
5
2.3
3.0
1.8
2
1.0
3.5
3.5
4
3.9
3.8
3.0
11
2.1
3.4
2.6
12
10
4.7
3.8
3.1
3
1.5
3.3
4.0
5
5.0
2.2
2.2
18
3.5
3.3
2.9
Other NHS
health
professional
3b
16
8.9
–
3.9
10
6.1
–
2.5
15
19.0
–
3.1
41
9.7
–
3.2
6
20
9.1
2.3
0.3
26
12.6
2.7
0.0
14
13.3
2.1
0.0
60
11.3
2.4
0.1
9
24
11.2
2.8
0.6
26
13.3
2.5
0.3
16
14.5
2.2
0.5
66
12.7
2.5
0.4
12
25
11.5
2.3
0.5
32
16.2
2.7
0.0
20
18.7
3.1
0.2
77
14.8
2.7
0.2
a Specifically for depression (out of total).
b Questions at 3 months were phrased differently from those at following time points, asking for responses in relation to depression only.
Number of patients attending accident and emergency departments and number of attendances in the preceding 3 months
Time point
(months)
Intervention
Total
Acupuncture + usual care
Counselling + usual care
Usual care
Patients
Number of attendances
Patients
Number of attendances
Patients
Number of attendances
Patients
Number of attendances
n
%
Mean
SD
n
%
Mean
SD
n
%
Mean
SD
n
%
Mean
SD
3
1
0.4
3.0
–
3
1.3
1.7
1.15
3
2.4
1.3
0.58
7
1.2
1.7
0.95
6
17
7.5
1.1
0.33
20
8.8
1.8
2.51
11
9.7
1.1
0.30
48
8.5
1.4
1.65
9
11
4.8
1.3
0.47
13
6.3
1.4
0.96
12
10.7
1.5
1.00
36
6.6
1.4
0.84
12
21
9.2
1.2
0.40
11
5.3
1.3
0.47
12
10.5
1.1
0.29
44
8.0
1.2
0.39
APPENDIX 6
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
308
 Number of patients admitted to hospital and number of overnight stays in the preceding 3 months
Time point (months)
Intervention
Total
Acupuncture + usual care
Counselling + usual care
Usual care
Patients
Number of overnight
stays
Patients
Number of overnight
stays
Patients
Number of overnight
stays
Patients
Number of overnight
stays
n
%
Mean
SD
n
%
Mean
SD
n
%
Mean
SD
n
%
Mean
SD
Hospital ward
3
2
0.8
3.5
0.71
0
0.0
–
–
0
0.0
–
–
2
0.3
3.5
0.71
6
6
2.8
2.0
0.89
10
4.8
5.6
6.59
2
1.8
6.0
1.41
18
3.4
4.4
5.15
9
4
1.9
3.8
3.20
4
2.0
6.8
4.79
7
6.1
3.1
3.76
15
2.9
4.3
3.95
12
6
2.7
2.0
0.89
7
3.4
1.9
1.46
8
7.1
2.5
2.00
21
3.9
2.1
1.53
Intensive care
3
0
0.0
–
–
0
0.0
–
–
0
0.0
–
–
0
0.0
–
–
6
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.5
2.0
–
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.2
2.0
–
9
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.5
4.0
–
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.2
4.0
–
12
1
0.5
6.0
–
0
0.0
–
–
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.2
6.0
–
Mental health unit
3
0
0.0
–
–
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.8
1.0
–
1
0.2
1.0
–
6
1
0.5
7.0
–
1
0.5
3.0
–
0
0.0
–
–
2
0.4
5.0
2.82
9
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.5
3.0
–
1
0.9
18.0
–
2
0.4
10.5
10.61
12
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.5
2.0
–
1
0.9
21.0
–
2
0.4
11.5
13.44
Other
3
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.5
3.0
–
1
0.8
1.0
–
2
0.3
2.0
1.41
6
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.5
1.0
–
0
0.0
–
–
1
0.2
1.0
–
9
2
0.9
3.5
3.54
3
1.5
1.0
0.00
0
0.0
–
–
5
1.0
2.0
2.24
12
1
0.5
7.0
–
1
0.5
1.0
–
0
0.0
–
–
2
0.4
4.0
4.24
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
309
 Number of patients paying for private health care and money spent in the preceding 3 months
Time point (months)
Intervention
Total
Acupuncture + usual care
Counselling + usual care
Usual care
Patients
Money spent (£)
Patients
Money spent (£)
Patients
Money spent (£)
Patients
Money spent (£)
n
%
Mean
SD
n
%
Mean
SD
n
%
Mean
SD
n
%
Mean
SD
Private acupuncture
3
3
1.2
60.0
21.79
1
0.4
300.0
–
2
1.6
117.5
116.67
6
1.0
119.2
107.49
6
27
11.5
96.8
73.29
3
1.3
146.7
80.83
3
2.5
63.3
49.33
33
5.7
98.4
72.48
9
27
11.6
91.5
68.32
2
0.9
130.0
70.71
2
1.7
750
63.64
31
5.5
93.0
66.68
12
22
9.6
108.1
68.75
2
0.9
129.5
43.13
2
1.7
75.0
63.64
26
4.6
107.2
65.80
Private counselling
3
2
0.8
162.5
53.03
3
1.3
453.3
646.71
2
1.6
152.5
137.89
7
1.2
284.3
409.96
6
4
1.7
116.7
57.74
13
5.8
198.5
103.35
1
0.8
130.0
–
18
3.1
180.0
98.04
9
0
0.0
–
–
10
4.7
162.5
112.18
0
0.0
–
–
10
1.8
162.5
112.18
12
3
1.3
175.0
238.48
10
4.6
170.8
107.65
1
0.9
65.0
–
14
2.5
164.1
132.63
Psychotherapy
3
0
0.0
–
–
7
3.2
175.7
218.26
2
1.9
40.0
–
9
1.6
158.8
207.69
6
0
0.0
–
–
2
0.9
152.5
67.18
1
0.8
160.0
–
3
0.5
155.0
47.70
9
0
0.0
–
–
2
10
291.5
362.75
0
0.0
–
–
2
0.4
291.5
362.75
12
1
0.4
450.0
–
2
0.9
182.5
166.17
1
0.9
65.0
–
4
0.7
220.0
189.16
APPENDIX 6
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
310
 Effect of trial arm on PHQ-9 depression score at 3 months and
BDI-II depression score at 12 months (non-imputed data)
Analysis
n
Group
Group difference
1
2
Mean
SE
Mean
SE
Acupuncture
Usual care
Mean
SE
95% CI
p-value
PHQ-9a
376
9.8
0.35
12.4
0.48
–2.58
0.598
–3.76 to –1.40
< 0.001
BDI-IIb
335
21.3
1.25
24.6
1.70
–3.27
1.462
–6.14 to –0.39
0.026
Counselling
Usual care
PHQ-9a
365
11.0
0.38
12.9
0.52
–1.97
0.639
–3.22 to –0.71
0.002
BDI-IIb
321
23.9
1.37
27.2
1.62
–3.37
1.445
–6.21 to –0.52
0.021
Acupuncture
Counselling
PHQ-9a
485
10.0
0.36
10.7
0.37
–0.65
0.516
–1.67 to 0.36
0.207
BDI-IIb
354
21.7
1.21
21.1
1.37
0.62
1.300
–1.95 to 3.18
0.636
a Effect of trial arm on non-imputed PHQ-9 score at 3 months (ANCOVA, adjusting for baseline PHQ-9 score).
b Effect of trial arm on non-imputed BDI-II score at 12 months (ANCOVA, adjusting for baseline BDI-II score, baseline
expectation of counselling and baseline expectation of allocated treatment; for the comparison between acupuncture
and counselling, treatment time*3 months and practitioner’s empathy were additionally included).
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
311
 Counselling and usual care
Participants
(n = 21)
Mean age
(n = 44)
(SD 12.4 years; range 22–63 years)
Number of sessions attended = range 6–12
Male
(n = 5)
Female
(n = 5)
Male
(n = 5)
Female
(n = 6)
Acupuncture and usual care
Participants
(n = 21)
Mean age
(n = 47)
(SD 13.3 years; range 29–74 years)
Number of sessions attended = range 4–12
Male
(n = 5)
Female
(n = 5)
Male
(n = 5)
Female
(n = 6)
Usual care alone
Participants
(n = 10)
Mean age
(n = 50)
(SD 16.4 years; range 27–89 years)
Chronic
pain at
baseline
(n = 10)
No pain 
at baseline
(n = 11)
Chronic
pain at
baseline
(n = 10)
No pain
at baseline
(n = 11)
Chronic
pain at
baseline
(n = 5)
No pain 
at baseline
(n = 5)
Male
(n = 2)
Female
(n = 3)
Male
(n = 2)
Female
(n = 3)
FIGURE 31 Sampling frame of the patients interviewed in nested substudy 1 (experience of treatment from the patient perspective).
APPENDIX 6
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
312
 Demographics and variables of interest at baseline comparing
the pain and the no-pain groups in substudy 2
Characteristic
Group
Total (n = 755)
(100%)
No pain (n = 371)
(49%)
Moderate to extreme pain
(n = 384) (51%)
Age (years)
Mean (SD)
39.9 (11.58)
46.83 (14.11)
43.5 (13.37)
Median (min., max.)
39 (18, 75)
46 (18, 93)
43 (18, 93)
Interquartile range (25%, 75%)
31, 48
38, 56
33, 53
Missing, n (%)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Sex, n (%)
Male
88 (23.7)
113(29.4)
201 (26.6)
Female
283 (76.3)
271(70.6)
554(73.4)
Missing
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Age left education (years)
Mean (SD)
18.3 (3.90)
17.53 (4.61)
18.0 (4.37)
Median (min., max.)
17.0 (13, 52)
16 (14, 54)
16 (13-54)
Interquartile range (25%, 75%)
16, 21
16, 18
16, 19
Missing, n (%)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Employment, n (%)
Full-time education
13 (3.5)
10 (2.6)
23 (3.1)
Working full-time
167 (45.0)
114 (29.7)
281 (37.2)
Working part-time
83 (22.4)
61 (15.9)
144 (19.5)
Unable to work
19 (5.1)
76 (19.8)
95 (12.9)
Looking after home
41 (11.1)
42 (10.9)
83 (11.0)
Retired
14 (3.8)
51 (13.3)
65 (8.8)
Other
26 (7.0)
22 (5.7)
48 (6.5)
Missing
8 (2.2)
8 (2.1)
16 (2.1)
Painful health or medical condition, n (%)
Current painful health or medical condition
41 (12.7)
299 (77.9)
346 (45.8)
Onset before depression
32 (8.6)
216 (56.2)
248 (32.8)
Missing
2 (0.5)
4 (1)
6 (0.8)
Type of health problem, n (%)
Musculoskeletal
21 (6)
221 (58)
242 (32)
Other
27 (7)
81 (21)
108 (14)
No health problem
321 (87)
81 (21
402 (53)
SF-36 bodily pain
Mean (SD)
76.97 (22.53)
39.03(22.5)
57.6 (28.44)
Median (min., max.)
77.5 (12, 100)
41 (0, 100)
52 (0, 100)
Interquartile range (25%, 75%)
62, 100
22, 51
32, 84
Missing, n (%)
3 (0.39)
1 (1.3)
4 (0.5)
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
313
 Characteristic
Group
Total (n = 755)
(100%)
No pain (n = 371)
(49%)
Moderate to extreme pain
(n = 384) (51%)
Depression, n (%)
In last 2 weeks
264 (71.2)
310 (80.7)
574 (76.1)
Missing
2 (0.5)
10 (2.6)
12 (1.6)
Not first major episode
240 (64.7)
273 (71.1)
513 (67.9)
Missing
108 (29.1)
82 (21.3)
190 (25.2)
Four or more previous episodes
162 (43.7)
227 (59.1)
389 (51.5)
Missing
133 (35.8)
113 (29.4)
246 (32.6)
Age at first major depressive episode
Mean (SD)
24.89 (11.56)
25.47 (12.9)
25.2 (12-28)
Median (min., max.)
21 (6, 72)
23 (0, 79)
22 (0, 79)
Interquartile range (25%, 75%)
16, 32
16, 31
16, 31
Missing, n (%)
7 (0.9)
9 (1.2)
16 (2.1)
Medication, n (%)
Depression medication in last 3 months
250 (67.3)
269 (70)
519 (68.7)
Missing
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Analgesic medication in last 3 months
114 (30.7)
245 (63.8)
359 (47.5)
Missing
4 (1)
2 (0.52)
6 (0.8)
EQ-5D pain, n (%)
No pain
371 (49.1)
0 (0.0)
371 (49.1)
Moderate pain or discomfort
0 (0.0)
298 (77.6)
298 (39.5)
Extreme pain or discomfort
0 (0.0)
86 (22.4)
86 (11.4)
Missing
3
4
7 (0.9)
EQ-5D anxiety/depression, n (%)
Not anxious/depressed
13 (3.5)
8 (2.1)
21 (2.8)
Moderately anxious/depressed
282 (76.0)
272 (70.8)
554 (73.4)
Extremely anxious/depressed
74 (19.9)
104 (27.1)
178 (23.6)
Missing
2 (0.5)
0 (0.0)
2 (0.3)
EQ-5D mobility, n (%)
No problems walking about
361 (31)
234 (31)
595 (79.0)
Some problems walking about
9 (1.2)
148 (19.7)
157 (20.8)
Confined to bed
0 (0)
1 (0.1)
1 (0.1)
Missing
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
EQ-5D self-care, n (%)
No problems with self-care
358 (47.5)
314 (41.7)
672 (89.2)
Some problems with self-care
11 (1.5)
68 (9)
79 (10.5)
Unable to wash or dress
1 (0.1)
1 (0.1)
2 (0.3)
Missing
1 (0.1)
1 (0.1)
2 (0.3)
APPENDIX 6
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
314
 Characteristic
Group
Total (n = 755)
(100%)
No pain (n = 371)
(49%)
Moderate to extreme pain
(n = 384) (51%)
EQ-5D usual activities, n (%)
No problems performing usual activities
251 (33.2)
111 (14.7)
362 (48.1)
Some problems performing usual activities
115 (15.3)
247 (32.8)
115 (48.1)
Unable to perform usual activities
5 (0.7)
24 (3.2)
29 (3.9)
Missing
2 (0.3)
0 (0)
2 (0.3)
PHQ-9 score
Mean (SD)
14.97 (5.15)
17.0 (5.23)
16.0 (5.29)
Median (min., max.)
15 (3, 27)
17 (3, 27)
16 (3-27)
Interquartile range (25%, 75%)
11, 19
13, 21
12, 20
Missing, n (%)
0 (0.0)
1 (0.2)
1 (0.1)
BDI-II score
Mean (SD)
31.3 (8.3)
33.6 (8.9)
32.5 (8.7)
BDI-II group, n (%)
Moderate (20–28)
155 (41.8)
129 (33.6)
284 (37.6)
Severe (29–63)
216 (52.8)
255 (66.4)
471 (62.4)
Trial arm allocation, n (%)
Acupuncture
156 (20.7)
146 (19.3)
302 (40)
Counselling
151 (20)
151 (20)
302 (40)
Usual care
64 (8.5)
87 (11.5)
151 (20)
Missing
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
0 (0.0)
Expectation of treatment allocated, n (%)
Very ineffective
13 (3.5)
21 (9.6)
34 (4.5)
Fairly ineffective
39 (10.5)
57 (14.8)
96 (12.8)
Can’t decide
159 (42.9)
178 (46.4)
337(44.9)
Fairly effective
122 (32.9)
87 (22.7)
209 (27.8)
Very effective
38 (10.2)
37 (9.6)
75 (10.0)
Missing
0 (0.0)
4 (0.5)
4 (0.5)
Treatment preference, n (%)
Acupuncture
196 (52.8)
234 (60.9)
430 (57.5)
Counselling
94 (25.3)
70 (18.2)
164(21.9)
Usual care
3 (0.8)
7 (1.8)
10 (1.3)
No preference
76 (20.5)
68 (17.7)
144 (19.3)
Missing
2 (0.5)
5 (1.3)
7 (0.9)
Max., maximum; min., minimum.
DOI: 10.3310/pgfar05030
PROGRAMME GRANTS FOR APPLIED RESEARCH 2017 VOL. 5 NO. 3
© Queen’s Printer and Controller of HMSO 2017. This work was produced by MacPherson et al. under the terms of a commissioning contract issued by the Secretary of State for
Health. This issue may be freely reproduced for the purposes of private research and study and extracts (or indeed, the full report) may be included in professional journals
provided that suitable acknowledgement is made and the reproduction is not associated with any form of advertising. Applications for commercial reproduction should be
addressed to: NIHR Journals Library, National Institute for Health Research, Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre, Alpha House, University of Southampton Science
Park, Southampton SO16 7NS, UK.
315
 Details of acupuncturists and counsellors participating in an
interview or focus group in nested substudy 3
Group
Number involved in
Total number
participating
Main trial
One-to-one interviews
Focus group
Acupuncturists
23
13
4
17
Counsellors
41
15
4
19
Total
64
28
8
36
Unit costs 2012
Resource
Unit
cost (£)
Description
Source
Depression medication
0.047
Per dose of fluoxetine
BNF485
Pain medication
0.330
Per dose of co-codamol
BNF485
GP
43
Appointment of 11.7 minutes
Curtis 2012291
Practice nurse
22
Band 5, appointment of 15.5 minutes
Curtis 2012291
Other health professional
43
Appointment of 11.7 minutes
Curtis 2012291
NHS hospital outpatient clinic
131
Community setting mental health services
Curtis 2012291
Hospital ward
254
Non-elective inpatient (long stay) excess bed day
HRG data
NHS Reference
Costs 2011–2012486
Hospital ICU
654
Mental health services inpatient attendances,
intensive care – adult
Curtis 2012291
Hospital mental health unit
338
Weighted average of all adult mental health
inpatient bed-days
Curtis 2012291
Accident and emergency
122
Weighted average of ‘leading to admission’ and
‘not leading to admission’
NHS Reference
Costs 2011–2012486
Community mental health nurse
85
Band 5, per hour of client contact
Curtis 2012291
Psychologist or psychiatrist
136
Band 8a, per hour of client contact
Curtis 2012291
NHS counsellor
65
Band 7, per hour of client contact
Curtis 2012291
Acupuncturist (initial session)
47.5
Average of initial sessions costs of £35 and £60
MacPherson et al.326
Acupuncturist (further session)
37.5
Average of further session costs of £25 and £50
MacPherson et al.326
BNF, British National Formulary; HRG, Healthcare Resource Group; ICU, intensive care unit.
APPENDIX 6
NIHR Journals Library www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
316
  Part of the NIHR Journals Library 
www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk
Published by the NIHR Journals Library
This report presents independent research funded by the 
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). The views 
expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily 
those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health
EME
HS&DR
HTA
PGfAR
PHR
