  
 
 
 
 
 
Maddocks, O. D.K. et al. (2017) Modulating the therapeutic response of tumours to 
dietary serine and glycine starvation. Nature, 544(7650), pp. 372-376. 
 
 
 
 
There may be differences between this version and the published version. You are 
advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite from it. 
 
 
 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/140432/ 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposited on: 25 May 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enlighten – Research publications by members of the University of Glasgow 
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk 
 Modulating the therapeutic response of tumours to dietary serine 
and glycine starvation 
 
Oliver D. K. Maddocks1,2, Dimitris Athineos1, Eric C. Cheung1, Pearl Lee1†, Tong Zhang2, 
Niels J. F. van den Broek1, Gillian M. Mackay1, Christiaan F. Labuschagne1, David Gay1, 
Flore Kruiswijk1, Julianna Blagih1, David F. Vincent1, Kirsteen J. Campbell1, Fatih 
Ceteci1†, Owen J. Sansom1, Karen Blyth1 & Karen H. Vousden1†. 
 
1 Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK 
2 University of Glasgow Institute of Cancer Sciences, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 
1QH, UK 
† Present addresses: Abrahamson Family Cancer Research Institute, 421 Curie 
Boulevard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA (P.L.); Institute for Tumor Biology 
and Experimental Therapy, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 42-44, 60596 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany (F.C.); The Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London NW1 
1AT, UK (K.H.V.). 
 
Abstract 
 
The non-essential amino acids serine and glycine are used in multiple anabolic processes that 
support cancer cell growth and proliferation (reviewed in ref. 1). While some cancer cells upregulate 
de novo serine synthesis2, 3, 4, many others rely on exogenous serine for optimal growth5, 6, 7. 
Restriction of dietary serine and glycine can reduce tumour growth in xenograft and allograft 
models7, 8. Here we show that this observation translates into more clinically relevant autochthonous 
tumours in genetically engineered mouse models of intestinal cancer (driven by Apc inactivation) or 
lymphoma (driven by Myc activation). The increased survival following dietary restriction of serine 
and glycine in these models was further improved by antagonizing the anti-oxidant response. 
Disruption of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (using biguanides) led to a complex response 
that could improve or impede the anti-tumour effect of serine and glycine starvation. Notably, Kras-
driven mouse models of pancreatic and intestinal cancers were less responsive to depletion of serine 
and glycine, reflecting an ability of activated Kras to increase the expression of enzymes that are part 
of the serine synthesis pathway and thus promote de novo serine synthesis. 
 
 
 To assess the effect of dietary serine and glycine (SG) restriction in autochthonous tumour models, 
we used genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) of lymphoma (Eμ-Myc) and intestinal 
tumours (defective Apc). Eμ-Myc mice develop pre-neoplastic lesions within 28–42 days after birth9, 
and adenoma initiation is evident days after birth in ApcMin/+ mice10. Accordingly, ApcMin/+mice carried 
high tumour numbers at 80 days, which subsequently increased in size but not number (Extended 
Data Fig. 1a). Transferring mice from normal chow diet to experimental diets 60–80 days after birth 
showed that an SG-free diet significantly extended survival in these models carrying pre-malignant 
lesions (Fig. 1a, b), with a slightly lower tumour burden in ApcMin/+ mice on the SG-free diet at clinical 
end point (Extended Data Fig. 1a). The diet reproducibly decreased serum SG from around 150 μM 
to 65 μM (Fig. 1c–e), while showing minimal or inconsistent impact on other amino acids, glucose 
and lactate (Fig. 1c, d and Extended Data Figs 1b, 2a, b), These results were further validated using 
an inducible intestinal tumour model (Lgr5-creER;Apcfl/fl); transferring mice to the SG-free diet a 
week after induction. Again, the experimental diet caused a significant increase in survival compared 
to control diet (containing purified amino acids) or normal chow (containing whole protein as a 
source of amino acids) (Fig. 1f). 
 
 Figure 1: SG-free diet is an effective therapeutic intervention in GEMMs for lymphoma and intestinal cancer. 
 
 
a, ApcMin/+ mice received normal chow until 80 days of age, then were transferred to either a control diet (containing SG) or 
a matched diet lacking SG (−SG) until clinical end point (intestinal-tumour-related survival). Survival was calculated from 
change of diet. See Source Data. b, Eμ-Myc mice received normal chow until 60 days of age, then were transferred to 
either a control diet (containing SG) or a matched diet lacking SG until clinical end point (lymphoma-related survival). 
Survival was calculated from change of diet. See Source Data. c, d, Serum samples from ApcMin/+ (c, control, n = 14; 
−SG, n = 13) and Eμ-Myc (d, control, n = 24; −SG, n = 24) cohorts were analysed by liquid chromatography–mass 
spectrometry (LC–MS), relative abundance (by metabolite peak area) is shown. Ctrl, control. Error bars are s.d., P values 
were calculated by t-test (unpaired, two-tailed). See Extended Data Fig. 2 for relative quantification of all amino acids. e, 
Serum concentration for serine and glycine in the ApcMin/+ cohort (control, n = 14; −SG, n = 13) was determined using six-
point calibration curves with 13C–15N-labelled serine and glycine diluted in serum. Error bars are s.d., P values were 
calculated by t-test (unpaired, two-tailed). f, Lgr5-creER;Apcfl/fl mice were induced at 7–10 weeks of age, diet was changed 
seven days after first tamoxifen treatment and maintained until clinical end point (intestinal-tumour-related survival). 
Survival is calculated from first tamoxifen treatment. For all survival plots, P values calculated by Mantel–Cox test; NS, not 
significant. n, number of mice; MS, median survival in days. See Source Data. 
 
 To test the effect of SG starvation on larger, established tumours (to mimic a therapeutic 
intervention), we transferred mice carrying measurable HCT116 (an invasive human colorectal 
cancer cell line) tumours onto the SG-free diet, which significantly retarded tumour growth 
(Extended Data Fig. 3a). The in vitro growth of HCT116 cells was similarly diminished (in a cell-
autonomous context) under SG concentrations detected in tumours (Extended Data Fig. 3b–d). Using 
subcutaneous allografts of Eμ-Myc tumour cells, we transferred mice to SG-free diet after tumour 
formation and collected the tumours at a single temporal end point (6 days post diet change). Even 
with this relatively short period of SG restriction, a trend towards decreased tumour volume and cell 
number was seen, although no differences in cleaved caspase-3 (a marker of apoptosis) or BrdU 
incorporation (a marker of proliferation) were detected (Extended Data Fig. 4a–c). However, 
haematoxylin and eosin staining showed a clear increase in necrosis in cross-sections of tumours 
from mice on the SG-free diet (Extended Data Fig. 4d, e). ApcMin/+ mice analysed at temporal end 
point (14 days post diet change) showed a trend for decreased cell number and increased apoptosis 
(Extended Data Fig. 4f) but no evidence of necrosis, suggesting that tumour-specific factors, such as 
tissue of origin, tumour size and proliferation rate, influence tumour response. 
Serine starvation activates de novo serine synthesis, diverting glycolytic intermediates away from 
energy production11, 12. Cells respond by increasing oxidative phosphorylation to maintain ATP 
turnover, and inhibiting oxidative phosphorylation (for example, by using biguanides to inhibit 
mitochondrial complex I) can enhance the anti-proliferative effect of serine starvation7, 8. A maximal 
dose (100 mg kg−1 per day)13 of the biguanide phenformin was tolerated by Eμ-Myc mice on the 
control diet, but elicited marked toxicity (symptoms resembling dyschezia) in Eμ-Myc mice on the 
SG-free diet. While this prevented further recruitment, mice that survived on the SG-free diet with 
phenformin (7/14) did not suffer further adverse effects, and showed a trend for improved survival 
compared to animals on the SG-free diet alone (Fig. 2a), consistent with a previous study in a tumour 
allograft system8. 
 
 Figure 2: Manipulation of anti-oxidant response enhanced diet-induced anti-cancer effect. 
 
a, Eμ-Myc mice received control or SG-free diet (−SG) with 100 mg kg−1 per day phenformin by gavage at 60 days of age 
and taken to clinical end point. Lymphoma-related survival was calculated from change of diet. Mice in the SG-free diet 
plus phenformin cohort that were removed due to phenformin-related toxicity are included as censored observations in 
the survival plot. See Source Data. b, ApcMin/+ mice were transferred to control or SG-free diet at 80 days of age, then five 
days later received metformin 200 mg kg−1 per day in drinking water. Intestinal-tumour-related survival calculated from 
change of diet. See Extended Data Fig. 5a for complete comparison of survival curves. See Source Data. For ease of 
comparison, dashed lines indicating survival from diet-only cohorts shown in Fig. 1a, b are replicated in a, b. c, Post-
mortem count of tumour number was performed on the small intestine (SI) of ApcMin/+ mice. P values calculated by t-test 
(unpaired, two-tailed). Diet-only tumour number also shown in Extended Data Fig. 1a. See Extended Data Fig. 5b for 
tumour area data. See Source Data. d, Intestinal tumour organoids derived from a Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl mouse were grown 
with or without SG and with or without metformin at the stated concentrations for two days. Relative change (versus drug-
free control) in organoid diameter is plotted. Data are average of four independent experiments, error bars are 
s.e.m. P values calculated by t-test (unpaired, two-tailed, corrected for multiple comparisons). e, Vil1-
creER;Apcfl/fl organoids were grown with or without SG and with or without metformin for two days, then fixed and 
immunostained for lipid peroxidation product malondialdehyde (MDA). Data are average of three independent 
experiments, error bars are s.e.m. P values calculated by t-test (unpaired, two-tailed, corrected for multiple 
comparisons). f, Eμ-Myc mice were crossed with Tigar−/− mice, cohorts were placed on diets at 55 days of age and taken 
 until clinical end point (lymphoma-related survival). Survival was calculated from change of diet. For all survival 
plots, P values calculated by Mantel–Cox test; NC, not calculable; NS, not significant. See Source Data. 
 
Metformin is a biguanide with lower toxicity than phenformin that is widely used in the clinic as an 
anti-diabetic agent and is being trialled as an anti-cancer agent14. While systemic availability of oral 
metformin is generally poor, some tissues (including the intestine) express OCT1 transporters that 
facilitate metformin uptake15. In humans, metformin doses of 0.5–1 g per day have been used in 
multiple clinical trials in colorectal cancer14. Using a dose of metformin (200 mg kg−1 per day) in mice 
equivalent (by body surface area calculation16) to a daily human dose of 1 g per day, we failed to 
detect a significant impact of metformin on the survival of ApcMin/+ mice, although the beneficial 
effect of SG-starvation persisted (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 5a). Intriguingly, metformin 
increased the number of tumours in the SG-free diet group (Fig. 2c), without impacting average 
tumour area (Extended Data Fig. 5b). 
Serum metformin ranged from 2 to 22 μM in ApcMin/+ mice, with tissue metformin concentration 
ranging from 0.1 to 11 μM (Extended Data Fig. 6a–c), consistent with metformin pharmacokinetics in 
other tumour-bearing mice given metformin in drinking water17, 18. No difference in serum glucose 
and lactate levels were seen (Extended Data Fig. 6d), indicating that this dose had minimal impact on 
systemic metabolism. Using Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl mouse-derived organoids to assess the cell-
autonomous effects of metformin showed that high metformin doses inhibited organoid growth as 
expected. Notably, a lower metformin dose (20 μM) tended to increase organoid size (Fig. 2d), 
although this did not reach statistical significance. While complex I inhibition by biguanides can 
increase the levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), metformin also has anti-oxidant 
properties19,20, 21, 22 and we have shown that limiting ROS improves cell survival during SG starvation7. 
Consistently, under SG starvation, low-dose metformin decreased ROS levels, while higher doses 
increased ROS (Fig. 2e). Treatment of SG-starved organoids with another ROS inducer (daunorubicin) 
decreased growth and increased ROS at low and high doses (Extended Data Fig. 6e, f). The 
differential effect of metformin on the response to SG starvation therefore correlates with its 
potential anti- and pro-oxidant effects, although further studies will be necessary to fully explore the 
role of biguanides and ROS in this context. 
Our study suggests that the metformin levels achieved in our GEMMs were too low to inhibit tumour 
growth. Although the metformin doses used here were comparable with clinically effective doses for 
diabetes treatment in humans, species differences in the pharmacodynamics and/or 
pharmacokinetics of metformin could make it difficult to translate these responses from mouse to 
humans17, 18. While the response to metformin is dose-dependent, our data support the results of in 
vitro studies that show that manipulating ROS can modulate the response of tumours to SG 
starvation7. To test directly whether increasing ROS in vivo could enhance the anti-tumour effect of 
the SG-free diet, we used Tigar−/− mice that do not express Tigar, a protein that can support tumour 
development by limiting ROS23, 24, 25, 26. While Eμ-Myc expression on this mixed strain background 
caused mice to die of lymphoma more rapidly than pure BL6 Eμ-Myc mice (shown in Fig. 2a), a 
combination of Tigar deletion with SG-free diet produced a significantly additive overall increase in 
survival (Fig. 2f). Many chemotherapeutics and radiotherapy induce ROS, suggesting that there may 
be a benefit to combining this diet with standard anti-cancer treatments. 
Previous studies have shown that the response to SG starvation can be modulated by other genetic 
alterations in the tumour, including amplification of the serine synthesis pathway (SSP) enzymes 
(making cells less reliant on extracellular serine) or loss of the tumour suppressor p53 (increasing 
 vulnerability to serine starvation)3, 7. Surprisingly, two mouse models of pancreatic cancer (PDAC) 
driven by activation of Kras with either loss (Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53fl/+) or mutation (Pdx1-
cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53R172H/+) of p5327, 28 showed no significant change in survival in response to SG-free 
diet, despite a clear decrease in serum SG levels (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Figs 7, 8a, b). 
Intravenous injection of 13C–15N-labelled serine revealed that serine uptake was comparable in 
normal pancreatic and tumour tissue, whereas intestinal tumours in the ApcMin/+ model took up 
significantly more serine (with subsequent conversion to glycine) compared to normal intestinal 
tissue (Fig. 3b). In contrast to the ApcMin/+ tumours, Kras mutant pancreatic tumours appeared to be 
less reliant on exogenous serine, explaining their resistance to the diet. 
 
Figure 3: Activated Kras confers resistance to the anti-cancer effects of SG-free diet. 
 
a, Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53fl/+ mice received control or SG-free (−SG) diet at 60 days of age until clinical end point. PDAC-
related survival was calculated from change of diet. P value calculated by Mantel–Cox test. n, number of mice; MS, median 
survival in days. See Source Data. b, Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53R172H/+ mice (n = 3), non-cre-expressing isogenic control mice 
with normal pancreas (n = 3) and ApcMin/+ mice (n = 3) were injected in the tail vein with 100 μl of 100 mM 13C3–15N1-serine 
 and left for 2 h. PDAC/normal pancreas/intestinal adenoma/normal intestine tissue were excised and analysed by LC–
MS. P values were calculated using t-test (unpaired for pancreas, paired for intestine, one-tailed). Error bars are s.d. c, Kras-
inducible cell lines (iKras1, iKras3 and AK196) were grown in complete medium with doxycycline (Kras-ON) or without 
doxycycline (Kras-OFF) for 48 h. Messenger RNA expression of serine synthesis pathway enzymes was analysed by qRT–
PCR. Data are average of three independent experiments each performed with technical duplicates, error bars are s.e.m. d, 
Kras-inducible cell lines were grown with or without doxycycline for 72 h, protein expression was analysed by western blot. 
For gel source data, see Supplementary Fig. 1. See Extended Data Fig. 10a for quantification of changes in expression. e, 
Kras-inducible cell lines were grown in medium with or without serine and glycine and counted after 48 and 96 h. Data are 
averages of three independent experiments, each performed in triplicate for each condition, error bars are s.e.m. 
 
Kras can reprogram glucose and glutamine metabolism to support anabolism and redox balance29,30, 
but the SG-free diet did not significantly alter serum glutamine, glucose or lactate (Extended Data 
Figs 7, 8b, c), or Ampk phosphorylation in PDAC (or Eμ-Myc) tumours (Extended Data Fig. 9a). 
Activated Kras increases protein scavenging by macropinocytosis, a mechanism likely to make cells 
less dependent on circulating serine levels31, 32. However, we did not detect any change in 
macropinocytosis in pancreatic cells with doxycycline-inducible KrasG12D(ref. 30) in response to SG 
starvation (Extended Data Fig. 9b). Activated Kras also increases the transcription of Nrf2 (ref. 33), 
which can drive SSP enzyme expression34, potentially negating dependence on extracellular serine. 
Using the KrasG12D-inducible cells, we found a consistent decrease in SSP enzyme expression at both 
the RNA and protein level following downregulation of Kras expression (Fig. 3c, d and Extended Data 
Fig. 9c). Cells induced to express activated Kras were resistant to SG starvation, whereas non-
induced cells were sensitive to SG starvation (Fig. 3e). PDAC tumours of both genotypes responded 
to dietary SG restriction by upregulating SSP enzyme expression, a response that was not seen in the 
starvation-sensitive Eμ-Myc tumours (which do not have activated Kras) (Extended Data Fig. 9d). 
Glycine levels and the GSH/GSSG ratio were maintained in PDAC but not Eμ-Myc tumours on SG-free 
diet (Extended Data Fig. 10a). Unbiased metabolomics confirmed that serine and glycine were the 
major metabolites depleted by the diet in tumours from Eμ-Myc mice (Extended Data Fig. 10b). 
Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl intestinal tumour organoids grow rapidly in vitro, but after five days in SG-free 
medium their ability to recover and grow was severely impaired. Addition of activated Kras allowed 
recovery from starvation and continued growth (Fig. 4a, b). These differences were reflected in 
higher basal expression of the genes encoding SSP enzymes in the activated Kras-expressing cells 
(Fig. 4c). Growth of organoids in labelled glucose showed that labelled serine levels (derived from 
glucose through the SSP) were higher in the KrasG12D cells, indicating increased rates of serine 
synthesis (Fig. 4d). Analysis of Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl and Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl;KrasG12D/+intestinal tissue 
showed that while Apc deregulation alone increased Psat1 and Psph expression—probably reflecting 
the ability of β-catenin-driven Myc to support SSP expression34—the addition of activated Kras 
further enhanced SSP enzyme expression (Fig. 4e). Finally, we wished to assess the effect of Kras 
activation in an intestinal GEMM. Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl;KrasG12D/+ mice die within five days of induction 
due to hyperproliferative crypts, while addition of KrasG12D to the Lgr5-creER;Apcfl/fl model markedly 
accelerates tumour development. Therefore, to allow comparison with the Apc-only models 
employed so far, we used Vil1-creER;Apcfl/+;KrasG12D/+ mice, which have survival times comparable to 
our Apc-only models, and transferred mice to diet before Cre induction. In line with the ability of 
activated Kras to upregulate SSP enzyme expression, KrasG12D expression abrogated the pro-survival 
effect of the SG-free diet (Fig. 4f), although a trend for decreased tumour area was retained 
(Extended Data Fig. 10c). 
 
 
 Figure 4: Kras(G12D)-expressing cells resist SG starvation by upregulating de novo serine synthesis. 
 
a, Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl (Apc) and Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl;KrasG12D/+ (Apc Kras) intestinal tumour organoids (from n = 3 mice per 
genotype) were grown without SG for five days then dissociated and seeded into complete growth medium. 
Representative images of the organoids are shown on day 5 (after seeding), and after 1 and 2 days of recovery. b, Organoid 
diameter was measured for each day in complete (recovery) medium. Data are averages of organoids from three mice, 
obtained in a single experiment, error bars are s.e.m. c, Messenger RNA was extracted from Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl and Vil1-
creER;Apcfl/fl;KrasG12D/+ organoids grown with or without SG for 48 h and analysis of SSP enzyme expression was performed 
using qRT–PCR (n = 3 mice per genotype, qRT–PCR performed in technical triplicate). Error bars are s.e.m. d, Organoids 
(from n = 3 mice per genotype) were grown in the presence of 13C6-glucose for 5 h, metabolites were extracted and 
analysed by LC–MS. Wells containing Matrigel only were used as controls. Error bars are s.d. P values calculated by t-test 
(unpaired, one-tailed). Major mass isotopomers occurring due to 13C labelling are shown as M+3 or M+6, M+0 denotes no 
labelling. e, Messenger RNA was extracted from wild-type, Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl and Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl;KrasG12D/+ intestinal 
tissue 3–4 days after induction with tamoxifen. Analysis of SSP enzyme expression was performed using qRT–PCR (n = 6 
mice per genotype, qRT–PCR performed in technical duplicate). Error bars are s.e.m. f, Vil1-creER;Apcfl/+;KrasG12D/+ mice 
were placed on SG-free or control diet at 6–8 weeks of age, then induced with tamoxifen after two weeks. Survival to 
clinical end point is shown. n, number of mice per cohort; MS, median survival in days. P value calculated by Mantel–Cox 
test from day of induction. See Source Data. 
 We show that dietary limitation of SG can be effective in the treatment of some cancers, although 
whether dietary SG restriction would change serum or tumour amino acid levels in humans remains 
unknown. Combination of diet with agents that increase ROS is predicted to increase the therapeutic 
response. While elevation of SSP enzyme expression following Kras activation will make tumours less 
responsive to serine starvation treatment, the overall sensitivity of tumour cells to serine depletion 
will depend on the combinatorial effect of multiple genetic alterations. So although activation of 
Myc (directly or following Apc loss) can enhance SSP enzyme expression, the Eμ-Myc lymphoma 
model remained sensitive to SG starvation. In this context, mutation of Kras further enhanced SSP 
expression and increased resistance to the SG-free diet. By contrast, despite carrying activated Kras, 
HCT116 cells remain partially sensitive to SG depletion—a dependency that is further exacerbated 
by loss of p53 (ref. 7). A role for other tumour associated changes has recently been demonstrated 
in a study showing LKB1 deletion enhances activation of the SSP35. We therefore anticipate that 
while individual genetic alterations can give an indication of the sensitivity of cancers to SG 
limitation, the final response will be influenced by both tissue of origin36 and its wider genetic 
landscape. 
 
 
 
 Methods 
 
Cell lines and cell culture 
HCT116 cells were obtained from ATCC and authenticated using Promega GenePrint 10. iKras cells 
(iKras1, iKras3, AK196) were supplied by R. DePinho30 (University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center). Cell culture media were purchased from Gibco (Thermo Fisher Scientific), product numbers 
are shown in parentheses. iKras (DMEM - 21969) and HCT116 cells (RPMI-1640 - 31870) were 
maintained in the stated media supplemented with 10% FBS (10270), penicillin–streptomycin and 
amphotericin with L-glutamine at final concentration of 2 mM. Stock iKras cells were grown in the 
presence of doxycycline 2 μg ml−1 (Kras-ON) and in medium with/without doxycycline (Kras-ON/OFF) 
for experiments. Cells were maintained in 37 °C, 5% CO2 humidified incubators. Cultured cells were 
routinely tested for mycoplasma using Mycoalert detection kit (Lonza). 
 
Proliferation assays 
iKras cells were seeded in complete DMEM medium plus doxycycline 2 μg ml−1 in 24-well plates and 
allowed to adhere overnight. Cells were then washed with PBS and received either assay medium 
with or without SG, with or without doxycycline 2 μg ml−1. HCT116 cells (2.5 × 104 per well) were 
seeded in complete RPMI medium in 24-well plates and allowed to adhere overnight. Cells were 
then washed with PBS and received modified MEM medium supplemented with various 
concentrations of SG7. Medium was replaced with fresh medium every 24 h. Wells were counted 
(using Casy TT cell counter, Innovatis, Roche Applied Science) at the stated time points, using a 
‘time = 0’ plate to calculate relative cell number from time of medium change. 
 
Tumour organoid culture 
Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl and Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl;KrasG12D/+ mice were induced with 80 mg kg−1tamoxifen at 8–
10 weeks, and crypts were isolated from intestinal tissue 3–4 days after induction (1 day before 
humane clinical end point in this model). Organoids were grown in Advanced DMEM/F-12 (ADF), 
supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 1% penicillin–streptomycin solution, 0.1% AlbuMAX I BSA, 
10 mM HEPES (all Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Adenomatous small intestine tissue was excised 
and cut into smaller pieces and washed five times with ice-cold PBS. Pieces were incubated in 5 mM 
EDTA for 10 min at 4 °C on a roller. Crypts were washed two times with ice-cold PBS to remove EDTA 
and incubated in 10× trypsin for 30 min at 37 °C. The crypt-enriched supernatant was collected and 
washed approximately five times with 5 ml ADF through mechanical pipetting. Crypts were pelleted 
via centrifugation at 1,200 r.p.m. for 5 min. Crypts were re-suspended in growth-factor-reduced 
Matrigel (BD Biosciences) and 20 μl was plated per well in a 12-well plate. Matrigel was allowed to 
solidify for 30 min in a 37 °C incubator before appropriate ADF was added supplemented with 
0.05 μg ml−1 EGF and 0.1 μg ml−1 noggin (Total volume per well 1 ml). Crypts were split by harvesting 
in ice-cold PBS and spun down at 600 r.p.m. for 3 min. Supernatant was aspirated and the pellet 
dissociated with 100 μl ice-cold PBS using mechanical pipetting. Five millilitres of PBS was added to 
tube and spun down at 600 r.p.m. for 3 min, repeated until supernatant was clear of debris. The final 
crypt pellet was re-suspended with growth-factor-reduced Matrigel and plated as before. For SG 
starvation, amino-acid-free Advanced DMEM/F-12 (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to 
construct assay medium for organoids with or without SG (0.2 mM), containing all other amino acids. 
For LCMS analysis organoids were grown in 12-well plates in complete medium for three days. 
Medium was aspirated and organoids were washed with PBS. The medium was replaced with 
 glucose-free Advanced DMEM/F-12 (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 15 mM 13C6-
glucose (CK-Gas/Cambridge Isotopes). After five hours media was aspirated, organoids were briefly 
washed in PBS and metabolites were extracted as described below. 
 
Organoid imaging 
Organoids were seeded in the stated media with or without metformin/daunorubicin (both from 
Sigma-Aldrich) and allowed to grow for two days. Images for size quantification (performed using 
ImageJ software) were taken using a light microscope then organoids were fixed in 4% 
paraformaldehyde. ROS damage was assessed by immunostaining organoids with anti-
malondialdehyde (MDA) (Abcam, ab6463), with Alexa Fluor 594 secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific). Images were captured on an Olympus FV1000 inverted laser scanning confocal 
microscope and MDA staining was quantified using ImageJ software. 
 
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC–MS) 
Samples were prepared in cold (−20 °C) lysis solvent (LS) consisting of methanol, acetonitrile, and 
H2O (50:30:20). Serum (isolated from terminal bleeds and stored at −80 °C) samples of 10 μl were 
added to 490 μl of LS and vortexed, precipitated protein was cleared by centrifugation (15,000 r.p.m. 
for 10 mins at 4 °C). Organoid extracts were prepared by briefly washing wells with excess PBS then 
adding 250 μl LS per well and placing on a rocking shaker at 4 °C for 10 min, LS was removed from 
wells (without mechanical disruption of organoids/Matrigel) and then vortexed and cleared by 
centrifugation. Tissue samples were snap-frozen and stored at −80 °C. Prior to lysis, frozen samples 
were weighed. Tissues were then homogenized in 1 ml cold LS using a Precellys homogenizer (Bertin 
Technologies) or a TissueLyser II (Qiagen). Lysates were cleared of protein by centrifugation and 
lysate concentrations normalized post-homogenization with LS to 10 mg ml−1based on original tissue 
weight. 
Extracts were analysed on an LC–MS platform consisting of an Accela 600 LC system and an Exactive 
mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Two LC methods were applied for metabolite separation 
before MS detection. Method 1 employed a SeQuant ZIC-pHILIC column (2.1 mm × 150 mm, 5 μm) 
(Merck) with the mobile phase mixed by A = ammonium carbonate 20 mM (adjusted to pH 9.4) and 
B = acetonitrile. A gradient program starting at 20% of A and after 2 min linearly increasing to 80% at 
17 min was used followed by washing and re-equilibration steps. The total run time of the method 1 
was 25 min. Method 2 employed a ZIC-HILIC column (4.6 mm × 150 mm, 3.5 μm) (Merck) with the 
mobile phase mixed by A = water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and B = acetonitrile with 0.1% formic 
acid. A gradient program starting at 20% of A and linearly increasing to 80% at 30 min was used 
followed by washing and re-equilibration steps. The total run time of method 2 was 46 min. The LC 
stream was desolvated and ionized in the HESI probe. The Exactive mass spectrometer was operated 
in full-scan mode over a mass range of 75–1,000 m/z at a resolution of 50,000 with polarity 
switching. LC–MS quantification of serine and glycine was achieved with six-point standard curves 
using 13C–15N-labelled amino acids (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in a relevant matrix matched to the 
analytical sample. The raw data was analysed by LCquan (Thermo Scientific) and MZMine 2.10 for 
metabolite identification and quantification. 
 
 Unbiased metabolomics 
Raw LC–MS data was converted into mzML files using ProteoWizard and imported into MZMine 2.10 
for peak extraction and sample alignment. The generated.csv file was imported into an in-house 
macro (Microsoft Excel 2010) for metabolite identification and removal of background signals. The 
detailed procedure and setting parameters are previously described37. SIMCA 14 (Umetrics) was used 
for multivariate analysis. The S-plots were produced in OPLS-DA (orthogonal partial least squares 
discriminant analysis) models for targeting the most influential metabolites. 
 
Diets 
From weaning, mice received ‘normal chow’ (Rat and Mouse Breeder and Grower, 801730, Special 
Diet Services, SDS, UK) and water ad libitum. On normal chow, dietary amino acids are derived from 
whole proteins contained in the raw ingredients (wheat, wheatfeed, barley, de-hulled extracted 
toasted soya, maize and fish meal), with a small amount of purified lysine added as a supplement. 
Two sets of experimental diets were used, both based on Baker Purified Amino Acid Diet38 from 
TestDiet (Richmond, IN): ‘Diet 1-Control’ contained all essential amino acids plus serine, glycine, 
glutamine, arginine, cystine, and tyrosine; ‘Diet 1-SG-free’ was the same as Diet 1-Control, but 
without serine and glycine, with the other amino acid levels increased proportionally to achieve the 
same total amino acid content. These ‘Diet 1’ formulations were used previously7. ‘Diet 2-Control’ 
contained all essential amino acids plus serine, glycine, glutamine, arginine, cystine, tyrosine, 
alanine, proline, glutamate and asparagine; ‘Diet 2-SG-free’ was the same as Diet 2-Control, but 
without serine and glycine, with the other amino acid levels increased proportionally to achieve the 
same total amino acid content. ‘Diet 2’ formulations were used for the Eμ-Myc;Tigar experiment 
(Fig. 2f). All other cohorts received the previously published Diet 1 formulations. 
 
GEMMs 
All animal work was carried out in line with the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 and the EU 
Directive 2010 (PPLs 60/4181, 70/8645 and 70/8646) and was sanctioned by the local ethical review 
process (University of Glasgow). Mus musculus cohorts were housed in a barrier facility proactive in 
environmental enrichment. Mice were genotyped by Transnetyx (Cordova, Tennessee, USA). The Eμ-
Myc (ref. 9), ApcMin/+ (refs 39, 40), Lgr5-creER;Apcfl/fl (ref. 41) Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl(ref. 42) Vil1-
creER;Apcfl/+;LSL-KrasG12D, Pdx1-cre;LSL-KrasG12D/+;Trp53fl/+ and Pdx1-cre;LSL-KrasG12D/+;LSL-
Trp53R172H/+ (refs 27, 28) alleles/models have been described previously. Mixed male and female 
populations were used for each genotype. The number of mice (or number of samples from 
individual mice) is shown in each figure or its legend. Eμ-Myc, and ApcMin/+ mice were at least 20 
generations C57BL/6J (BL6). Eμ-Myc;Tigar−/− mice were a mixed strain but at least 50% C57BL/6J. 
Pancreatic (PDAC) cohorts were on a mixed strain background but all cohorts consisted of litter-
matched controls. Mice were put on the appropriate diet at the following times: Eμ-Myc (BL6) 60 
days post-natal, Eμ-Myc;Tigar−/− 55 days post-natal, ApcMin/+80 days post-natal, Lgr5-creER;Apcfl/fl 7 
days post-induction, Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53fl/+ or Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53R172H/+ 60 days post-natal. 
Recombination in Lgr5-creER mice was induced with two intraperitoneal injections of 120 mg 
kg−1 tamoxifen, with a day’s rest between the injections. For the phenformin experiment, Eμ-
Myc mice were gavaged daily with 100 mg kg−1mouse body weight, starting the same day as the diet 
change. For the metformin experiment, ApcMin/+ mice were given 200 mg kg−1 per day in their 
drinking water, starting five days after the diet change. Vil1-creER;Apcfl/+;KrasG12D/+ mice (C57Bl/6J 
N10) were placed on experimental diet at 6–8 weeks of age, kept on diet for two weeks, and then 
 induced with a single intraperitoneal injection of tamoxifen (80 mg kg−1). Intestines were fixed in 
methacarn (4:2:1 ratio of methanol, chloroform, acetic acid) to facilitate scoring of tumour number 
and measurement of tumour area (width × length for each adenoma). Apart from n = 6 Apcmin/+ mice, 
which were taken at a temporal end point for BrdU and caspase staining, all other GEMMs were 
killed at humane clinical end point. 
Sample sizes for mouse studies were estimated from previous experience with these models where 
potential differences in survival are tested by Mantel–Cox (log rank) analysis. No statistical methods 
were used to predetermine sample size. After data was collected for the first experimental groups 
(for example, Eμ-Myc and ApcMin/+ on diet only, Fig. 1a, b) subsequent groups were reduced in size to 
minimize animal numbers used (for example, phenformin and metformin treatment groups, Fig. 2a, 
b). In all experiments mice with overt phenotype at time of enrolment into the study were excluded 
(that is, not enrolled): for example, enlarged lymph nodes or signs of enlarged thymus in the Eμ-
Myc cohorts, anaemia in the ApcMin/+ cohorts. Animals that died as a result of illness unrelated to 
tumour(s) were included as censored observations. Mice were allocated into the experimental 
groups according to a randomized block design: as mice became available through breeding, they 
were split into blocks based on gender and then randomly assigned to a treatment arm. Care was 
taken to keep the male/female ratio similar in order to remove gender as a potential source of 
variability. The investigator allocating mice to the experimental groups and collecting the end point 
data was not blinded. 
 
In vivo13C3–15N1-serine uptake 
Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53R172H/+ mice, non-Cre-expressing isogenic control mice with normal pancreas 
and ApcMin/+ mice were injected in the tail vein with 100 μl of 100 mM 13C3–15N1-serine 
(CKGas/Cambridge Isotopes) and left for two hours. PDAC/normal pancreas/adenoma/normal 
intestine tissues were excised and snap-frozen on dry ice for LC–MS analysis. 
Xenografts/allografts in mice 
HCT116 cells were implanted by bilateral subcutaneous injections (3 × 106 cells per flank) into 
Crl:CD1-Foxn1nu (CD1-Nude) female mice (Charles River, UK). Mice were maintained on normal chow 
diet and monitored daily until visible, measurable tumours had formed. Tumour-bearing mice were 
placed onto control or SG-free diet, tumours were measured with callipers three times per week, 
any opposing flank tumours, which developed subsequent to diet change were excluded from the 
analysis. Average tumour volumes are plotted for the first five weeks on diet. Tumour volumes were 
calculated using the formula: 
 
Eμ-Myc lymphoma cells were isolated from tumour bearing lymph nodes of mixed background Eμ-
Myc mice by FACS. These cells were initially expanded in cell culture with irradiated mouse 
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and passaged until they could grow independently. Culture medium 
was DMEM/F-12 (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% FBS, 50 μM β-
mercaptoethanol, penicillin, streptomycin, gentamycin and amphotericin. Cells were implanted by 
bilateral subcutaneous injections (5 × 105 cells per flank) into CD1-Nude female mice (Charles River, 
UK). Mice were maintained on normal chow diet and monitored daily until visible, measurable 
tumours (~5 mm) had formed. Tumour-bearing mice were placed onto control or SG-free diets, 
tumours were measured with callipers every 2 or 3 days. Once the first mouse in the cohort reached 
clinical end point (maximum permitted tumour size) all mice in the cohort were killed and tumours 
 removed (this occurred after 6 days on diet). Tumours were fixed in formalin, paraffin-embedded 
and sections cut for histology. 
All experiments adhered strictly to the limits of the project licence authority (maximum permitted 
tumour size of 15 mm or ulceration), at which point the animals were humanely killed. In none of 
the experiments were these limits exceeded. 
 
BrdU and caspase staining and necrosis quantification 
Two hours before death, mice were injected with 250 μl of cell proliferation labelling reagent 
containing BrdU (RPN201, Amersham/GE Heathcare). Antibodies used: cleaved caspase 3 ASP-175 
(Cell Signaling Technology, 9661), anti-BrdU (BD Biosciences, 347580) and EnVision anti-rabbit (Dako, 
K4003). Tissue sections were counterstained with haematoxylin Z (CellPath). Stained slides were 
scanned using a Leica SCN400F scanner and analysed using HALO Image analysis software (Indica 
Labs). For Eμ-Myc tumours cell number and BrdU and caspase staining were quantified across the 
whole tumour with necrotic areas excluded. For ApcMin/+ mice, single cross-sections of the entire 
small intestine were analysed, adenomas were manually identified and cell number, caspase and 
BrdU staining in each adenoma was quantified and averaged for each mouse. Necrosis was 
quantified using haematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained whole tumour cross-sections, necrotic areas 
were manually defined using HALO software and total necrotic versus non-necrotic surface area 
were calculated. 
 
Glucose and lactate quantification 
Serum (from terminal blood samples) from mouse cohorts were analysed for glucose and lactate 
levels using a YSI 2950 Biochemistry Analyser (Xylem) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. 
 
Macropinocytosis assay 
Analysis of macropinocytosis was based on a previously descried protocol31. Initially, iKras cells were 
grown with (Kras-ON) or without (Kras-OFF) doxycycline for 48 h. Cells were then seeded onto glass 
coverslips in medium with or without doxycycline and with or without SG. After 24 h the medium 
was replaced with matched medium lacking FBS and left for a further 16 h. Finally, medium was 
replaced with matched medium containing 10% FBS and tetramethylrhodamine-labelled dextran 
(TMR-dextran, Thermo Fisher Scientific) particles (0.5 mg ml−1). After 30 min with dextran, cells were 
washed with PBS and fixed in 4% formaldehyde. Cells were counterstained with DAPI and green 
Whole Cell Stain (Thermo Scientific) and mounted in Vectasheild Hardset (Vector Laboratories). 
Images were captured on an Olympus FV1000 inverted laser scanning confocal microscope and 
dextran uptake was quantified using ImageJ/Fiji image analysis software. 
 
Western blot 
Western blots on cells were performed as described previously6, 7, 43. In brief, whole-cell protein 
lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer supplemented with complete protease inhibitors (Roche), 
sodium orthovanadate, and sodium fluoride (both Sigma-Aldrich). Tissue samples were lysed in RIPA 
buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce/Thermo Scientific) 
using a TissueLyser II (Qiagen). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation and separated using precast 
 4–12% ‘NuPAGE’ or ‘Bolt’ gels (Invitrogen, Life Technologies) and transferred to nitrocellulose 
membranes. Proteins were detected and quantified using a Li-Cor Odyssey Infrared scanner and 
software (Li-Cor Biosciences). Secondary antibodies for the relevant species were IRDye680 and 
IRDye800 conjugated (Li-Cor Biosciences). Primary antibodies used were: PHGDH (Sigma-Aldrich Life 
Science, HPA021241), PSAT1 (Novus Biologicals, NBP1-32920), PSPH (Santa Cruz, sc-98683), Actin I-
19-R (Santa-Cruz, sc-1616-R), pERK (phospho-p44/p42 MAPK (Erk1/2) (Thr202/Tyr204)) (Cell 
Signalling Technology 9101), AMPKa1 (R&D Systems, AF3197) and phospho-AMPK T172 (Cell 
Signalling Technology 2535). 
 
qRT–PCR 
RNA was extracted from iKras cells and organoids using RNeasy kit with DNase (both Qiagen) to 
remove DNA. qRT–PCR was performed as described previously7 using an Applied Biosystems 7500 
Fast Real-Time PCR system with SYBR Green master mix (Applied Biosystems). Intestinal tissues were 
obtained from 6–8-week-old wild-type, Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl or Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl;LSL-KrasG12D/+ mice. The 
mice were sampled 3–4 days after induction with tamoxifen (80 mg kg−1). RNA from intestinal tissue 
was extracted using a Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
A DyNAmo SYBR Green 2-step qPCR kit (Finnzymes) was used to reverse-transcribe 1 μg of RNA in a 
reaction volume of 20 μl. Finally, qPCR was carried out using a MesaGreen kit according to the 
manufacturer’s intructions (Eurogentec) and a Chromo4 thermocycler (Biorad). Expression results 
obtained were normalized to β-actin levels. Mouse SSP primers are previously published44 sequences 
(5′–3′): mouse Phgdh F: TGGCCTCGGCAGAATTGGAAG; mouse Phgdh R: TGTCATTCAGCAAGCCTGTGG
T; mouse Psat1-For GATGAACATCCCATTTCGCATTGG; mouse Psat1 R: GCGTTATACAGAGAGGCACGAA
TG; mouse Psph F: GAGATGGAGCTACGGACATGGAAG; mouse Psph R: CTCCTCCAGTTCTCCCAGCAGCT
C. Sequences synthesized and purified by Eurofins MWG Operon. Mouse Actb was purchased from 
Primer Design (HK-SY-mo-900 ACTB). 
 
Statistics 
Statistical comparisons for survival data were calculated with Graphpad Prism (v6) software using 
Mantel–Cox (Log Rank) test. t-tests were either performed using Microsoft excel (v14.6.1) or 
Graphpad Prism (v7). Type 1/paired (for example, samples taken from the same animal) and type 
2/unpaired (for example, samples taken from different animals) t-tests were used. Where no 
prediction was made about the direction of potential difference a two-tailed t-test was used (for 
example, across all amino acid levels in serum samples, Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 2a). Where 
pre-existing data supported a prediction in the direction of difference between samples a one-
tailed t-test was used (for example, de novo serine synthesis, Fig. 4c). Where data presented is the 
mean of individual data points, error bars are s.d., where data are a mean of means, error bars are 
s.e.m. In each instance the relevant type of t-test or error bar is specified in the figure legend. 
Where t-tests were performed with multiple comparisons, P values were corrected using the Holm–
Sidak method using GraphPad Prism (v7) software. 
 
Data availability 
Data are available in Supplementary Information and on request from the authors. 
 
 
 Acknowledgements 
 
We thank the BSU facilities at the CRUK Beatson Institute, C. Nixon, the histology facility and A. Hock 
for technical assistance, G. Kalna and R. Daly for advice on statistics and C. Winchester for reading 
the manuscript. We also thank R. DePinho for the Kras-inducible pancreatic cell lines. This work was 
funded by Cancer Research UK Grant C596/A10419, ERC Grant 322842-METABOp53 and a CRUK 
Career Development Fellowship (O.D.K.M.) C53309/A19702. O.S. and D.F.V. are funded by CRUK and 
an ERC Starting Grant (311301). 
 
References 
 
1. Locasale, J. W. Serine, glycine and one-carbon units: cancer metabolism in full circle. Nat. Rev. 
Cancer 13, 572–583 (2013).  
2. Locasale, J. W. & Cantley, L. C. Genetic selection for enhanced serine metabolism in cancer 
development. Cell Cycle 10, 3812–3813 (2011).  
3. Possemato, R. et al. Functional genomics reveal that the serine synthesis pathway is essential in 
breast cancer. Nature 476, 346–350 (2011).  
4. Snell, K. Enzymes of serine metabolism in normal and neoplastic rat tissues. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta 843, 276–281 (1985).  
5. Jain, M. et al. Metabolite profiling identifies a key role for glycine in rapid cancer cell proliferation. 
Science 336, 1040–1044 (2012).  
6. Labuschagne, C. F., van den Broek, N. J., Mackay, G. M., Vousden, K. H. & Maddocks, O. D. Serine, 
but not glycine, supports one-carbon metabolism and proliferation of cancer cells. Cell Reports 7, 
1248–1258 (2014).  
7. Maddocks, O. D. et al. Serine starvation induces stress and p53-dependent metabolic remodelling 
in cancer cells. Nature 493, 542–546 (2013).  
8. Gravel, S. P. et al. Serine deprivation enhances antineoplastic activity of biguanides. Cancer Res. 
74, 7521–7533 (2014).  
9. Adams, J. M. et al. The c-myc oncogene driven by immunoglobulin enhancers induces lymphoid 
malignancy in transgenic mice. Nature 318, 533–538 (1985).  
10. Shoemaker, A. R., Moser, A. R. & Dove, W. F. N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea treatment of multiple 
intestinal neoplasia (Min) mice: age-related effects on the formation of intestinal adenomas, cystic 
crypts, and epidermoid cysts. Cancer Res. 55, 4479–4485 (1995).  
11. Chaneton, B. et al. Serine is a natural ligand and allosteric activator of pyruvate kinase M2. 
Nature 491, 458–462 (2012).  
12. Ye, J. et al. Pyruvate kinase M2 promotes de novo serine synthesis to sustain mTORC1 activity 
and cell proliferation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 6904–6909 (2012).  
13. Shackelford, D. B. et al. LKB1 inactivation dictates therapeutic response of non-small cell lung 
cancer to the metabolism drug phenformin. Cancer Cell 23, 143–158 (2013).  
 14. Quinn, B. J., Kitagawa, H., Memmott, R. M., Gills, J. J. & Dennis, P. A. Repositioning metformin for 
cancer prevention and treatment. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 24, 469–480 (2013).  
15. Wang, D. S. et al. Involvement of organic cation transporter 1 in hepatic and intestinal 
distribution of metformin. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 302, 510–515 (2002).  
16. Reagan-Shaw, S., Nihal, M. & Ahmad, N. Dose translation from animal to human studies 
revisited. FASEB J. 22, 659–661 (2008).  
17. Dowling, R. J. et al. Metformin pharmacokinetics in mouse tumors: implications for human 
therapy. Cell Metab. 23, 567–568 (2016).  
18. Chandel, N. S. et al. Are metformin doses used in murine cancer models clinically relevant? Cell 
Metab. 23, 569–570 (2016).  
19. Chakraborty, A., Chowdhury, S. & Bhattacharyya, M. Effect of metformin on oxidative stress, 
nitrosative stress and inflammatory biomarkers in type 2 diabetes patients. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 
93, 56–62 (2011). 
20. Esteghamati, A. et al. Effects of metformin on markers of oxidative stress and antioxidant reserve 
in patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes: a randomized clinical trial. Clin. Nutr. 32, 179–185 
(2013).  
21. Hou, X. et al. Metformin reduces intracellular reactive oxygen species levels by upregulating 
expression of the antioxidant thioredoxin via the AMPK–FOXO3 pathway. Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 396, 199–205 (2010).  
22. Wheaton, W. W. et al. Metformin inhibits mitochondrial complex I of cancer cells to reduce 
tumorigenesis. eLife 3, e02242 (2014).  
23. Bensaad, K., Cheung, E. C. & Vousden, K. H. Modulation of intracellular ROS levels by TIGAR 
controls autophagy. EMBO J. 28, 3015–3026 (2009).  
24. Bensaad, K. et al. TIGAR, a p53-inducible regulator of glycolysis and apoptosis. Cell 126, 107–120 
(2006).  
25. Cheung, E. C. et al. Opposing effects of TIGAR- and RAC1-derived ROS on Wnt-driven 
proliferation in the mouse intestine. Genes Dev. 30, 52–63 (2016).  
26. Cheung, E. C., Ludwig, R. L. & Vousden, K. H. Mitochondrial localization of TIGAR under hypoxia 
stimulates HK2 and lowers ROS and cell death. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 20491–20496 (2012).  
27. Hingorani, S. R. et al. Trp53R172H and KrasG12D cooperate to promote chromosomal instability 
and widely metastatic pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in mice. Cancer Cell 7, 469–483 (2005).  
28. Morton, J. P. et al. Mutant p53 drives metastasis and overcomes growth arrest/ senescence in 
pancreatic cancer. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 246–251 (2010).  
29. Son, J. et al. Glutamine supports pancreatic cancer growth through a KRAS-regulated metabolic 
pathway. Nature 496, 101–105 (2013).  
30. Ying, H. et al. Oncogenic Kras maintains pancreatic tumors through regulation of anabolic glucose 
metabolism. Cell 149, 656–670 (2012).  
 31. Commisso, C. et al. Macropinocytosis of protein is an amino acid supply route in Ras-transformed 
cells. Nature 497, 633–637 (2013).  
32. Kamphorst, J. J. et al. Human pancreatic cancer tumors are nutrient poor and tumor cells actively 
scavenge extracellular protein. Cancer Res. 75, 544–553 (2015).  
33. DeNicola, G. M. et al. Oncogene-induced Nrf2 transcription promotes ROS detoxification and 
tumorigenesis. Nature 475, 106–109 (2011).  
34. DeNicola, G. M. et al. NRF2 regulates serine biosynthesis in non-small cell lung cancer. Nat. 
Genet. 47, 1475–1481 (2015). 
35. Kottakis, F. et al. LKB1 loss links serine metabolism to DNA methylation and tumorigenesis. 
Nature 539, 390–395 (2016).  
36. Mayers, J. R. et al. Tissue of origin dictates branched-chain amino acid metabolism in mutant 
Kras-driven cancers. Science 353, 1161–1165 (2016). 
 
 Extended Data Figure 1: Effect of SG-free diet on tumour burden in ApcMin/+ 
mice, and on serum glucose and lactate in ApcMin/+ and Eμ-Myc mice. 
 
a, ApcMin/+ mice received normal chow until 80 days of age, then were transferred to either a 
control diet (containing SG) or a matched diet lacking serine and glycine (−SG) until clinical end point 
(intestinal-tumour-related survival). Post-mortem tumour measurement was performed on 
intestinal tissue at time of diet change (80 days) or clinical end point. P values calculated by t-test 
(unpaired, two-tailed, with correction for multiple comparisons). Diet-only tumour number data also 
shown in Fig. 2c. Diet-only tumour area data also shown in Extended Data Fig. 5b. See Source 
Data. b, ApcMin/+ and Eμ-Myc mice received normal chow until 80 and 60 days of age, respectively, 
then were transferred to either a control diet containing SG (Ctr) or a matched diet lacking SG (−SG) 
until clinical end point. Serum isolated from terminal bleeds was analysed with a YSI 2950 
Biochemistry Analyser for glucose and lactate concentration. Error bars are s.d. 
 
 
 Extended Data Figure 2: Effect of SG-free diet on serum amino acids. 
 
a, ApcMin/+ mice received normal chow until 80 days of age, then were transferred to either a control 
diet (containing SG) or a matched diet lacking serine and glycine (−SG) until clinical end point 
(intestinal-tumour-related survival). Post-mortem tumour measurement was performed on 
intestinal tissue at time of diet change (80 days) or clinical end point. P values calculated by t-test 
(unpaired, two-tailed, with correction for multiple comparisons). Diet-only tumour number data also 
shown in Fig. 2c. Diet-only tumour area data also shown in Extended Data Fig. 5b. See Source 
Data. b, ApcMin/+ and Eμ-Myc mice received normal chow until 80 and 60 days of age, respectively, 
then were transferred to either a control diet containing SG (Ctr) or a matched diet lacking SG (−SG) 
until clinical end point. Serum isolated from terminal bleeds was analysed with a YSI 2950 
Biochemistry Analyser for glucose and lactate concentration. Error bars are s.d. 
 Extended Data Figure 3: SG starvation impedes the growth of established 
HCT116 tumours by decreasing intratumoural serine and glycine concentration. 
 
a, HCT116 cells were injected bilaterally (3 × 106 per flank, n = 8) and allowed to form tumours. Once 
tumours were visible and measurable by callipers mice were transferred to control diet or SG-free 
diet (−SG). Tumours were measured three times per week and average weekly tumour volume is 
plotted, error bars are s.e.m. P values were calculated by t-test (unpaired, one-tailed). See Source 
Data. b, HCT116 tumours (taken at clinical end point) were analysed by LC–MS for absolute 
concentration of SG (1–3 pieces of each tumour were analysed). Data are averages, error bars are 
s.d. P values were calculated by t-test (unpaired, one-tailed). c, HCT116 cells were grown in 
vitro (24-well plates) in the intratumoural SG concentrations displayed in b. Medium was replaced 
 every 24 h and cell counts were performed on the stated days. Data are averages of 12 replicate 
wells for each condition from an individual experiment, error bars are s.d. d, HCT116 cells were 
grown in vitro (24-well plates, 12 replicate wells for each condition) in the intratumoural SG 
concentrations displayed in b. Medium was replaced every 24 h and cell counts were performed 
after four days. Data are averages of three independent experiments, error bars are s.e.m. P values 
were calculated by t-test (unpaired, one-tailed). 
 
 
 Extended Data Figure 4: Effect of SG-free diet on ApcMin/+ and Eμ-Myc allograft 
tumours at temporal end points. 
 
a, Lymphoma cells were isolated from Eμ-Myc mice and allowed to replicate in culture. Cells were 
injected subcutaneously (5 × 105 per flank) into nude mice and allowed to form tumours. Once 
tumours (Ctr, n = 4; −SG, n = 4) were visible and measurable, mice were transferred to control (Ctr) 
or SG-free diet (−SG). Mice were killed and tumours excised at single temporal end point (6 days on 
diet). Average tumour volume (as percentage of starting tumour volume) is shown, error bars are 
s.d. See Source Data. b, To assess cell number per subcutaneous Eμ-Myc tumour cross-section, two 
separate cell counts per tumour (using H&E-stained cross-sections) were performed and averaged, 
mean of means is shown, error bars are s.e.m. P values calculated by t-test (unpaired, one-tailed). c, 
Whole subcutaneous Eμ-Myc tumour tissue sections (Ctr, n = 3; −SG, n = 4) were immunostained for 
cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) and BrdU. Image analysis of non-necrotic regions of whole tumours allowed 
quantitative evaluation of the percentage of cleaved caspase-3-positive cells per tumour and the 
percentage of BrdU-positive cells per tumour. Data are averages, error bars are s.d. d, Eμ-
Myc tumour (as described in a–c above) cross-sections were H&E stained, the scale bar for each 
 image is 4 mm, demonstrative necrotic regions marked with arrows. Additional tumour tissue 
sections (marked with asterisks) are included for comparison from tumours, which developed after 
diet change (these three tumours were measurable 2 days post diet change and were present for 4 
days on diet before end point). e, Necrosis was quantified by image analysis of necrotic and non-
necrotic surface area of H&E stains for the sections shown in d. Error bars are s.d. P value was 
calculated by t-test (unpaired, one-tailed; Ctr, n = 5; −SG, n = 6). f, ApcMin/+ mice were placed on 
control diet (Ctr, n = 3) or SG-free diet (−SG, n = 3) at 80 days of age. At a single temporal end point 
(14 days on diet) mice were killed the small intestine was removed for histological analysis. Tissue 
sections were immunostained for cleaved caspase-3 and BrdU. Image analysis of whole intestines 
allowed quantitative evaluation of cell number per adenoma, percentage of CC3-positive cells and 
percentage of BrdU-positive cells per adenoma. Data are averages of all adenomas identified in each 
small intestine section, error bars are s.e.m., P values calculated by t-test (unpaired, one-tailed). For 
all analyses (a–f), P values below 0.1 are shown. 
 
 
 Extended Data Figure 5: Metformin treatment did not enhance the anti-tumour 
effect of SG-free diet in ApcMin/+ mice. 
 
a, To clearly display the effect of metformin on survival of ApcMin/+ mice data from Fig. 2b is re-
plotted on two separate graphs; ApcMin/+ mice were transferred to control or SG-free diet (−SG) at 80 
days of age, then five days later received Metformin 200 mg kg−1 per day in drinking water. 
Intestinal-tumour-related survival calculated from change of diet. n, number of mice in cohort; MS, 
median survival in days. P values calculated by Mantel–Cox test. See Source Data. b, Post-mortem 
intestinal tumour measurement was performed on intestine tissue. P values calculated by t-test 
(unpaired, two-tailed). ‘Diet only’ data are replicated from Extended Data Fig. 1a. See Source Data. 
 Extended Data Figure 6: Quantification of metformin levels in ApcMin/+ mice. 
 
a, ApcMin/+ mice were transferred to control or SG-free diet (−SG) then received metformin 200 mg 
kg−1 per day in drinking water. Serum isolated from terminal bleeds was analysed by LC–MS. Error 
bars are s.d. b, Tissue samples from metformin-treated mice were analysed by LC–MS. NC, normal 
colon; NSI, normal small intestine; TC, tumour colon; TSI, tumour small intestine. Error bars are 
s.d. c, For mice where matching serum and tumour (small intestine or colon) tissue samples were 
available (Ctr diet, n = 7; −SG diet, n = 6), serum versus tumour metformin concentrations are 
plotted. Metformin concentrations were determined in all samples using a six-point calibration curve 
using the relevant biological matrix (tissue/serum). d, Serum from ApcMin/+ mice treated with 
metformin was analysed for glucose and lactate levels using a YSI 2950 Biochemistry Analyser. e, 
Intestinal tumour organoids derived from a Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl mouse were grown with or without 
serine and glycine and with or without daunorubicin at the stated concentrations for two days. 
Relative change (versus no drug control) in organoid diameter is plotted. Data are average of three 
independent experiments, error bars are s.e.m. f, Vil1-creER;Apcfl/fl organoids were grown with or 
 without serine and glycine, and with or without daunorubicin for two days, then fixed and stained 
for malondialdehyde (MDA), data are average of three independent experiments, bars are 
s.e.m. P values calculated by t-test (unpaired, two-tailed, with correction for multiple comparisons). 
 
 
 Extended Data Figure 7: Effect of SG-free diet on serum amino acids in PDAC 
mice. 
 
Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53fl/+ mice received normal chow until 60 days of age, then were transferred to 
either a control diet containing serine and glycine (Ctr) or a matched diet lacking serine and glycine 
(−SG) until clinical end point. Serum isolated from terminal bleeds was analysed by LC–MS. Relative 
quantity of metabolites are shown (y axis = peak area). Error bars are s.d. P values were calculated 
for each amino acid by t-test (unpaired, two-tailed), P values <0.05 are shown. 
 
 
 Extended Data Figure 8: Effect of SG-free diet on PDAC mice. 
 
a, Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53R172H/+ mice received control or SG-free (−SG) diet at 60 days of age until 
clinical end point. PDAC-related survival was calculated from change of diet. P value calculated by 
Mantel–Cox test. n, number of mice; MS, median survival in days. See Source Data. b, Serum 
isolated from terminal bleeds of Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53R172H/+ mice was analysed by LC–MS. Relative 
 quantity of metabolites are shown (y axis = peak area). Error bars are s.d. P values were calculated 
for each amino acid by t-test (unpaired, two-tailed), P values <0.05 are shown. c, Serum samples 
from PDAC mice were analysed for glucose and lactate levels using a YSI 2950 Biochemistry Analyser. 
 
 
 Extended Data Figure 9: Effect of SG-starvation on AMPK phosphorylation, 
macropinocytosis and SSP protein expression. 
 
 a, Tumour-bearing spleens from Eμ-Myc mice and PDAC tissue were analysed by western blot for 
Ampk and phospho-Ampk levels, bands were quantified by LiCor infrared detection. For gel source 
data, see Supplementary Fig. 1. Data are averages, error bars are s.d. b, Macropinocytosis in iKras 
cells was assessed using TMR-labelled dextran uptake assay. Cells were initially grown with or 
without doxycycline for 48 h then seeded with or without doxycycline and with or without SG for 
40 h (final 16 h without FBS), then given TMR dextran/FBS in matched medium for 30 min. Bars and 
lines show average and s.d. c, Relative changes Kras-ON/Kras-OFF (measured by LiCor infrared 
quantification) in expression of SSP and phospho-Erk1 protein averaged across iKras1, iKras3 and 
AK196 cells; the quantified bands are those shown in the western blot of Fig. 3d. Error bars are 
s.d. d, Protein lysates of tumour-bearing spleens from Eμ-Myc mice and PDAC tissue were analysed 
for SSP enzyme expression by western blot quantified using a Li-Cor scanner. Relative expression 
(versus control diet) of SSP enzymes is shown, bars are s.d. Each tissue sample was taken from a 
different mouse, numbers of mice/tumours are shown above the bars. 
 
 
 Extended Data Figure 10: Effect of SG-free diet on tumour metabolite levels and 
tumour burden in GEMMs. 
 
a, PDAC from Pdx1-cre;KrasG12D/+;Trp53fl/+ mice and tumour-bearing spleens from Eμ-Myc mice were 
analysed by LC–MS for serine, glycine, GSH (reduced glutathione) and GSSG (oxidized 
glutathione). P values calculated by t-test, unpaired, two-tailed. Error bars are s.d. b, S-plot of 
unbiased metabolomic analysis (OPLS-DA, orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis) 
of Eμ-Myc tumour-bearing spleens (Ctr, n = 20; −SG, n = 13). The detected metabolites showing the 
greatest decrease due to diet are serine and glycine. Decreased levels of carnitine-related and 
choline-related metabolites were also observed. Increased levels of phosphatidylcholine (PC) 
metabolites and alanine and threonine were also seen (as in Extended Data Fig. 2b). SG starvation is 
known to influence glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation (potentially explaining changes in 
 carnitine and alanine levels), and one-carbon metabolism (potentially explaining changes in choline-
related metabolites). c, Vil1-creER;Apcfl/+;KrasG12D/+ mice were placed on SG-free or control diet at 6–8 
weeks of age, then induced with tamoxifen after two weeks and survived until clinical end point 
(intestinal-tumour-related survival). Post-mortem count of intestinal tumour number and tumour 
measurement was performed on intestine tissue. Error bars are s.d. P values were calculated by t-
test (unpaired, two-tailed). See Source Data. 
