 June 2017 | Volume 2 | Article 7
1
ConCeptual analysis
published: 02 June 2017
doi: 10.3389/fsoc.2017.00007
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Tiago Correia, 
 
ISCTE – University Institute 
 
of Lisbon, Portugal
Reviewed by: 
Guido Giarelli, 
 
Magna Græcia University, Italy 
 
Maria Berghs, 
De Montfort University, 
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Mary Madden 
 
m.t.madden@leeds.ac.uk; 
Ewen Speed 
 
esspeed@essex.ac.uk
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted 
 
to Medical Sociology, 
 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Sociology
Received: 22 February 2017
Accepted: 15 May 2017
Published: 02 June 2017
Citation: 
Madden M and Speed E (2017) 
Beware Zombies and Unicorns: 
Toward Critical Patient and Public 
Involvement in Health Research 
 
in a Neoliberal Context. 
Front. Sociol. 2:7. 
 
doi: 10.3389/fsoc.2017.00007
Beware Zombies and unicorns: 
toward Critical patient and public 
involvement in Health Research  
in a neoliberal Context
Mary Madden 1* and Ewen Speed 2*
1 
Faculty of Medicine and Health, School of Healthcare, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 
2 
School of Health and Human Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, United Kingdom
Patient and public involvement (PPI) in UK National Health Service (NHS) research has 
become an imperative in policy and practice. However, lack of clarity on what PPI is (or 
might be) has given rise to a poorly monitored, complex field of activity, variously framed 
by the expectations of policy makers, funders, host organizations, researchers, health 
professionals, individual recruits, volunteers, activists, and third sector organizations. 
The normative shift toward PPI has taken place within a neoliberal policy context, the 
implications of which needs to be explicitly considered, particularly after the Brexit refer-
endum which has left policy makers and researchers wondering how to better appeal to 
a distrustful public subjected to “post-truth” and “dog whistle” politics. This commentary 
examines the prospects for a more critical approach to PPI which addresses context, is 
evidence-informed and mindful of persistent inequalities in health outcomes, at a time 
when models of PPI in NHS health research tend to be conceptually vague, derived from 
limited clinical and managerial settings, and centered on a construction of the abstract, 
rational, compliant, and self-managing patient or layperson.
Keywords: patient and public involvement, public participation, evidence-informed health care, health inequalities, 
neoliberalism
intRoDuCtion
Patient and public involvement (PPI) in health research can be spontaneous or planned, invited or 
sponsored, with citizens engaging in a range of ways, from being compliant data gatherers, sources 
of data or legitimization, to user leaders and makers of challenging theory (Wehling et al., 2015). At 
its best, PPI may have the potential for increased democratic accountability, for improving health 
outcomes, and for addressing the social determinants of health, through for example, improved 
understanding of different cultures of research and engagements with evidence. At its worst, how-
ever, PPI runs the risk of being insignificant, tokenistic, and overly managerialist.
As promissory technoscientific innovations change the organization and practices of contempo-
rary biomedicine, health research is becoming an increasingly complex field of patient expectations, 
financial incentives, and medical–legal concerns. More research and more medicine are not neces-
sarily leading to more health (Godlee, 2015). If the aim of clinical research is to improve patient 
care, clinical trials should evaluate the outcomes that most reflect real-world settings and concerns 
(Heneghan et al., 2017). However, most continue to ignore patient-centered outcomes (Ioannidis, 
2016). In the light of these concerns, there has been a growing concern to include patients and other 
 2
Madden and Speed
Neoliberalism and Critical PPI
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 2 | Article 7
stakeholders in the health research process (from topic selection 
through to the dissemination and implementation of results) on 
the premise that this will produce more trustworthy and useable 
information, which is more likely to be taken up in health-care 
practice.
In the US, the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute 
has been established as an independent non-profit, non- 
governmental organization to improve the quality and rel-
evance of evidence available and so aid better-informed health 
decisions.1 The European Patients’ Academy (EUPATI) is a 
pan-European project of the Innovative Medicines Initiative, 
which works to involve patients in medicines research and 
development.2 EUPATI is led by The European Patients’ Forum 
with partners from patient organizations, universities, not-for-
profit organizations, and pharmaceutical companies. In the UK, 
the non-profit making organization, the James Lind Alliance 
(JLA), which supports priority setting partnerships of patients, 
carers, and health-care professionals affected by a health-care 
condition, has become a partner organization of the National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR).3 The JLA has its origins 
in the evidence-informed health-care movement rather than 
formal National Health Service (NHS) and NIHR PPI policy or 
patient/service user movements and has had limited engagement 
with industry in its processes because commercial interests may 
not align with scientific or public interests. The NIHR itself was 
created in 2006 and is funded by the Department of Health “to 
improve the health and wealth of the nation through research” 
(Department of Health Research and Development Directorate, 
2006). INVOLVE, established as “Consumers in Research” in 
1996, is funded by the NIHR to support, “active public involve-
ment in NHS, public health and social care research”; in 2015, 
they headed a strategic review of public involvement in the NIHR 
(INVOLVE, 2015a).
In the last decade, PPI in UK NHS research has become a 
requisite condition for securing funding. The involvement 
imperative has led to an increase in the levels of PPI activity, but 
it is not yet the case that, “involvement is a mainstream activity 
that sits alongside other policy and performance requirements in 
the NHS” (Ocloo and Fulop, 2011; Crowe and Ceinwen, 2016). 
Furthermore, the empirical evidence-base demonstrating the 
worth and impact of PPI remains poor, with supporting evidence 
tending to be descriptive rather than evaluative (Brett et al., 2010; 
Wilson et al., 2015). Consequently, there is a lack of consensus 
about what effective PPI in research processes might look like 
and how to develop and maintain such processes over time. 
There are many localized case studies examining PPI in research 
and service delivery but little conclusive evidence about the 
best (or worst) ways to invoke PPI in research design, research 
practice, or research commissioning. The extent to which policy 
support for PPI in health research results in any actual influence 
on health research agendas also remains unclear (Madden and 
Morley, 2016).
1 http://www.pcori.org.
2 https://www.eupati.eu.
3 http://www.jla.nihr.ac.uk.
This commentary is a provocation stemming from a concern 
that the investment of time and resources in much mainstream 
UK PPI in applied health research is taking a form of “busywork,” 
i.e., a time-consuming technocratic distraction. Ironically, the 
notion of the usefully participating, evidence-engaged patient 
or citizen has become ubiquitous at the same time as ignorance 
(McGoey, 2012) and “bullshit” (Frankfurt, 2005) have been 
successfully harnessed as resources in “post-truth” politics. 
Simultaneously, UK health policy is being subordinated to the 
demands of the market while socialized health care is subjected 
to forces of marketization and privatization (Whitfield, 2012). 
The NHS has been radically reorganized and spending on key 
determinants of health has fallen as a result of postcrash austerity 
policies.
tHe uK iMpeRatiVe FoR ppi
A recent statement from NHS England on the benefits of patient 
and public participation in NHS services makes grand claims for 
the participatory potential of PPI.
We encourage patient and public participation in the 
NHS, treat them respectfully and put their interests 
first. This allows us to develop the insight to help us 
improve outcomes and guarantee no community is left 
behind or disadvantaged (NHS England, 2015).
These aspirations draw impetus from the need to respond 
to scandals reported in the Francis (2013) review and Berwick 
(2013) report. They are laudable, but declarations such as this 
acknowledge none of the messy history and complexity of PPI 
and democratic politics or the power imbalances therein. There 
is no guarantee that participation “per se” improves outcomes or 
addresses the causes or effects of disadvantage. This statement 
conflates aims with achievements via the assertion that everyone 
is treated with respect and that this somehow puts the apparently 
complementary interests of patients and publics first, without any 
competing interests from the professions, third sector or even 
private sector actors, never mind the state.
In terms of the PPI expectations of key UK research bodies, the 
NHS Health Research Authority (2013) stipulates that by public 
involvement it means:
…a range of activities that enable patients and the public 
to have a say in decisions about the way health research 
is planned, designed, delivered, developed, evaluated, 
managed and regulated. It also means where patients 
and the public are actively involved in the conduct of 
research studies (p. 12).
Similarly, the NIHR (currently seen as a PPI leader in an 
international context—INVOLVE, 2014), states that PPI in 
research is, “an important part of the research that we fund as well 
as being part of our research commissioning and management 
processes. We expect researchers to actively involve the public in 
their research” (National Institute for Health Research, 2015). The 
 3
Madden and Speed
Neoliberalism and Critical PPI
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 2 | Article 7
NIHR clarify that, in talking about the “public,” they draw from 
the definition offered by INVOLVE (2015b) to include, “patients, 
potential patients, carers, and people who use health and social 
care services as well as people from organizations that represent 
people who use services.” INVOLVE defines public involvement 
as research being carried out “with” or “by” members of the public 
rather than “to,” “about,” or “for” them.
Researchers applying for NIHR research funding must 
therefore design PPI strategies into their research proposals, 
which may variously facilitate the involvement and engagement 
of the public, patients, potential patients, carers, service users, 
and representative bodies, in ways that will positively influence 
some or all of the planning, design, delivery, development, 
evaluation, management, and regulation of research. Consider 
the complexity involved in the social relations across this range 
of actors and the potential range of different vested interests. 
Consider also the relative degrees of power and influence that 
different actors might have within and across these groups. As 
part of review panels for these research bids, the strength of PPI 
in submitted research proposals is commented on by individu-
als appointed as lay PPI experts. If the approaches described by 
researchers are considered weak, there is little room for feedback 
to applicants about how to improve (Crowe and Ceinwen, 2016). 
The outcome of this field of self-definition and complexity is a 
wide range of PPI activity with various models of patients and 
public as citizens, consumers, partners in their own care and 
co-researchers, involving a plethora of potentially conflicting 
values (Gradinger et al., 2015). The problematic conflation and 
elision of distinctions between patients and the public identified 
in health-care service decision-making (Fredriksson and Tritter, 
2017) requires further investigation in the field of PPI in health 
research.
All of which raises a question of why, despite this ongoing 
lack of clarity about its practices, processes, and means of 
evaluation, has this drive for PPI in UK health research become 
ubiquitous? The PPI imperative can be seen as part of a wider 
“participatory shift” in policy which encourages citizens to par-
ticipate in democratic decision-making by actively contributing 
as partners, collaborators, and consultees in political processes 
(Petersen and Lupton, 1996). This mirrors broader international 
shifts away from models of “government” toward models of “new 
public governance,” informed by a perceived need to address a 
purported “democratic deficit,” as established representative 
democracies were criticized for failing to match citizens’ aspira-
tions for democracy (Norris, 2011). This shift signaled a move 
from a position that saw involvement, “in relation to people as 
citizens with rights to receive public services and responsibilities 
to be involved in their development and accountability,” toward 
a more consumerist model, “in which the relationship is between 
the layperson and a particular service or organisation” (Taylor, 
2007). Moves toward PPI may speak to the perceived democratic 
deficit, but PPI continues to be so conceptually and theoreti-
cally vague that it can mean anything (and nothing) and serve 
a variety of purposes. In a competitive health research market, 
prioritizing the perspectives of consumers directly affected by 
certain conditions has wider implications for public health 
and public resource distribution. Certain conditions affecting 
some consumer/citizens currently get lots of research attention 
and resources while other (more common conditions) get little 
(Ioannidis, 2016).
typoloGies oF ppi
Different models of PPI carry distinctive and sometimes 
 
contradictory assumptions about the types of public to be 
involved, the knowledge those publics might bring to bear, and 
their degree of involvement in decision-making processes. Ives 
et al. (2013) in questioning, “whether the concept/practice of PPI 
is internally coherent” (p. 181), identify two broad sets of motiva-
tions for PPI. The first is a pragmatic and outcome orientated type 
of PPI which positively impacts on the “quality of research pro-
cesses and outputs, and promotes more reliable, relevant research” 
 
(p. 181). The second is a more ideological, rights-based type 
of PPI which, “draws on broader social and ethical narratives 
around democratic representation, transparency, accountability, 
responsibility and the redressing of power imbalances,” (p. 181). 
Ives et al. set up a dichotomy between a pragmatic, transaction-
based model, and a more ideological, process-orientated model, 
arguing that if lay people become too expert at carrying out 
research they will jeopardize their “genuine” lay status. The 
implication is that public involvement should be confined to 
funding decisions, prioritization of research agendas, research 
governance, and ethical review, where “layness” is the required 
asset.
Knaapen and Lehoux (2016) similarly find confusion and 
contradiction in the underlying principles guiding PPI in clinical 
standard setting. They categorize arguments in favor of PPI into 
three main types. These are first, a theoretical case for citizen 
participation premised on notions of individual rights, civic 
responsibility, social justice, and political accountability (a demo-
cratic voice model of PPI); second, a consumerist argument for 
involving autonomous consumers in personalizing clinical care 
(a consumer choice model); and third, an argument which claims 
that experiential knowledge from those affected improves health 
research (a lay expertise model). There is a clear overlap across 
these three types, but also, each has a somewhat different concep-
tion of the use and utility of PPI, which at times, pull the constitu-
ent PPI actors in opposite directions. For example, consider the 
impossibility of trying to reconcile a consumer choice model of 
PPI with the altruism and surrendering of choice required of 
those being asked to take part in randomized controlled trials 
as research subjects. Ethical standards dictate that patients and 
clinicians should not consent to randomization unless there 
is uncertainty about whether any of the treatment options in 
a trial offers greater harm or benefit than any other. However, 
explaining the uncertainty principle is challenging (Madden and 
Morley, 2016) and there is some evidence of “therapeutic mis-
conception,” where, despite explanation, participants maintain 
the view that taking part in research is to benefit them directly 
rather than to test or compare treatment methods and resolve 
uncertainty (Appelbaum et al., 1987). As Dean (2017) points out, 
the empowered self-interest of the neoliberal consumer-citizen is 
somewhat at odds with the, “other-oriented, reasoning-citizen of 
deliberative democracy,” (p. 2).
 4
Madden and Speed
Neoliberalism and Critical PPI
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 2 | Article 7
This tension is something that Dean (2017) attempts to 
address by proposing a new typology of public participation 
(involvement) in policy decisions. In this model, Dean identi-
fies two intersecting dimensions that underpin all PPI activity, 
a dimension of sociality and a dimension of negotiability. The 
sociality dimension is the extent to which PPI activities are 
agonistic or solidaristic. Agonistic participation is “…conflictual 
with individuals and groups predominantly concerned with 
promoting and defending their own interests and values against 
other participants,” (p. 4). Solidaristic participation is where, 
“participants view themselves as interdependent members of a 
social collective and participation is oriented towards collective 
ends and the common good,” (p. 5). In negotiated participatory 
spaces, the conditions of participation are determined by the 
participants themselves, as part of the process. In prescribed 
participatory spaces, issues of who participates and how they do 
so, “are determined outside of the space (perhaps by the com-
missioning organisation, perhaps by circumstance) and imposed 
upon the participants, who thus have little scope to determine the 
conditions of their participation,” (p. 5).
For Dean, different modes of participation are reflective of 
changing notions of the form and function of the state, com-
bined with, “characteristic participatory practices and concep-
tions of the citizen” (p. 14). Dean does not propose this model 
as a schema for characterizing all forms of participation, but 
the notion of dimensionality is useful as a means for identify-
ing specific tropes, processes, and practices that might play out 
across PPI activity. Dean’s dimensional approach enables us to 
make sense of the inherent tensions between consumer choice 
models of PPI versus lay expertise and democratic models, 
allowing us to begin to understand how these contradictory 
and indeed conflictual models can exist and persist in the 
same field at the same time. For example, the JLA approach 
moves beyond the aggregation of individual/patient concerns 
to include the prioritization of research through deliberation 
but within a narrow topic focus and only from the perspective 
of those directly affected (and relevant health professionals). 
Wider societal perspectives, including inequities in what 
attracts most research attention and how public resources 
are allocated among competing interests are outside its scope 
(Cullum et al., 2016).
applyinG types oF ppi
Limited engagement with its own history and the skills, experience 
and evidence-base outside the narrow disciplinary boundaries of 
health sciences fuels a sense that mainstream NHS and NIHR 
PPI initiatives constantly reinvent the wheel (INVOLVE, 2015a). 
For example, social movements, charities, and non-governmental 
organizations have invented and experimented with a range of 
participatory mechanisms (including user-controlled research 
and service provision) to bring together citizens and experts in 
new forms of cooperative inquiry. These have often been critical 
of established policy and political contexts and have employed 
a range of participatory techniques intended to strengthen civil 
society while also problematizing how participation works 
 
(e.g., Cooke and Kothari, 2001). In this context, PPI can be seen as 
a field of solidaristic, non-governmental public-spirited experi-
mentation, much of it located in the memories and documentary 
traces of citizens and activists whose attempts at an informal type 
of PPI often get overlooked and “forgotten” within formal, more 
individualistic PPI processes.
Formal PPI policy initiatives proliferate alongside a huge 
growth in the amount of health research funded and published, 
although, “there is little to suggest increased outputs have led 
to real improvements in patient care” (Heneghan et al., 2016). 
Despite the rise of the evidence-based medicine movement, 
Maynard (2012) argues that UK health care is still (and perhaps 
more than ever) an arena of faith-based policy making. For 
Bambra (2013), “politics has primacy” in policy making regard-
less of the rhetorical emphasis on evidence. Yet, thorny issues of 
politics and power are backgrounded in the resulting dominant 
individualistic, politely agonistic forms of participation, meaning 
that insufficient attention is paid to connections between clinical 
(bio-medical) and public (social) health contexts.
aRnstein ReDuX?
Arnstein’s (Arnstein, 1969) much-cited ladder of participation 
clearly equates participation (involvement) with the power 
of citizens to make decisions. It has been both influential and 
controversial (see Tritter and McCallum, 2006). Dean (2017) 
characterizes Arnstein as having an activist’s view of participa-
tion, as, “insurgency against government power” and indeed as 
a redistribution of power (p. 2). Certainly, Arnstein is clear that 
there is a critical difference between going through the empty 
ritual of participation/involvement and having the real power 
needed to affect the outcome of the process. Participation without 
redistribution of power is an empty and frustrating process, “it 
allows the powerholders to claim that all sides were considered, 
but makes it possible for only some of those sides to benefit. It 
maintains the status quo…” (p. 217). The political implications 
of contemporary PPI, when and if they are discussed, tend to 
be couched in “moral” rather than redistributive terms (Wilson 
et al., 2015). Arnstein’s view resonates with the hubristic statement 
from NHS England above and with Wilson et al.’s (Wilson et al., 
2015) findings that patients involved in health research are most 
often involved in steering committees with uncertain powers to 
steer or in reviewing participant information leaflets.
This is not to say Arnstein’s work is without criticism. She was 
the first to point out why her ladder, “obviously…a simplifica-
tion” (p. 217), should be used to generate discussion rather than 
as an off the peg “tool” or model. However, Arnstein’s depiction 
does offer a contra view to current contexts, where public policy 
issues are increasingly presented as arising from aggregated 
individual choices made in a marketplace rather than the out-
come of structural or political arrangements. Formal NHS PPI 
processes draw from an under-socialized view of a consumerist 
subject constituted within a transactional and individualistic par-
ticipatory paradigm, which leaves matters of public value as free 
floating arbitrary ideas to be determined by individual choice. 
The potential for the conflictual nature of democratic politics 
is underplayed, as the nature of the public good is reduced to 
a matter of personal preference and individual experience. In 
 5
Madden and Speed
Neoliberalism and Critical PPI
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 2 | Article 7
this context, PPI “experts by experience” are in danger of being 
reduced to another commodity, as an opportunity for profession-
als to consume affective individual testimony without the need 
to engage with wider publics or more contextualized forms of 
research. Narratives of experience are structured, performative, 
means of understanding, and persuasion, not an unproblematic 
means of transparent access to truth. Those asked to narrate their 
experience are subject to the quest for particular forms of expert, 
but not too expert, experience (Martin, 2008; Thompson et al., 
2012; Snow, 2016).
ConClusion
It is in this context that we assert that PPI operates as an empty 
signifier, intermittently populated with whatever policy ideas 
of citizen engagement are a la mode (Stewart, 2012). Maynard 
(2012) depicts contemporary health policy making as Nirvania, 
a land of faith inhabited by zombies and unicorns. This draws on 
Evans et al.’s (Evans et al., 1994) characterization of zombie ideas 
as, “intellectually dead but…never buried,” because they, “offer a 
simple and intuitively appealing ‘solution’ to a complex and urgent 
policy problem,” (p. 1). Applying Maynard’s (Maynard, 2012) 
Nirvanian terminology, formal PPI can be seen as a ghastly com-
posite of a zombie policy that continually pops up, offering (but 
never providing) a solution to purported deficits in democratic 
engagement, despite being useless in the last policy round, and a 
unicorn policy, a mythical beast, prevalent, and much discussed 
but never discovered in replicable form in any health-care system. 
This zombie/unicorn hybrid creates PPI as a form of busywork in 
which the politics of social movements are entirely displaced by 
technocratic discourses of managerialism.
Meanwhile, patients are becoming competitive consumers for 
public and private funds as neoliberal policy delegates ever more 
of the state’s functions to capital, transforming the value of the 
public good to the benefit of private individuals. PPI is part of a 
wider politics of knowledge in which patient groups, clinicians 
and universities are co-opted into a corporatized health research 
agenda (Gabe et al., 2012). Involvement should be about popula-
tions engaging in the decisions that impact their lives, identify-
ing opportunities and strategies for action. Being “critically 
involved” requires acknowledging processes of situated contes-
tation rather than epistemic authority, identifying varieties of 
publics and the contingency and complexity of the construction 
of evidence. The ongoing narrow technocratic co-option of PPI is 
not grounds for yet more cynicism but for a renewed skepticism 
that actively seeks evidence and understanding of the fields of 
power within which health equity and meaningful participation 
for transformative health and social change lie. For example, it 
might be useful for patients and the public interested in health 
research to know more about the difficulty of producing health 
research which addresses meaningful clinical and public health 
outcomes. Despite the technocratic ratcheting up of expecta-
tions and claims for impact, many experts by experience of 
research acknowledge that most clinical research is not useful 
and is in need of reform (Ioannidis, 2016), that the EBM “quality 
mark” has been misappropriated by vested interests (Greenhalgh 
et al., 2014) and that while the UK has been recognized as a 
global leader in research and policy on health inequalities, these 
inequalities continue to widen leaving some researchers feeling 
that all they are doing is counting the bodies (Garthwaite et al., 
2016). PPI offers the opportunity to help address some or all 
of these failings, but not if context and history continue to be 
ignored and there is failure to properly evaluate because we are 
off chasing the Nirvanian zombie/unicorns that spring from the 
landscape of NHS redisorganization (c.f., Oxman et al., 2005).
autHoR ContRiButions
Both authors have contributed equally to the production of this 
manuscript.
ReFeRenCes
Appelbaum, P., Roth, L., Lidz, C., Benson, P., and Winslade, W. (1987). False hopes 
and best data: consent to research and the therapeutic misconception. Hastings 
Cent. Rep. 17, 20–24. doi:10.2307/3562038 
Arnstein, S. R. (1969). A ladder of citizen participation. J. Am. Inst. Plann. 35, 
216–224. doi:10.1080/01944366908977225 
Bambra, C. (2013). The primacy of politics: the rise and fall of evidence-based 
public health policy? J. Public Health 35, 486–487. doi:10.1093/pubmed/fdt113 
Berwick, D. (2013). A Promise to Learn – A Commitment to Act: Improving the 
Safety of Patients in England. London: Department of Health.
Brett, J., Staniszewska, S., Mockford, C., Seers, K., Herron-Marx, S., and Bayliss, H.  
(2010). The PIRICOM Study: A Systematic Review of the Conceptualisation, 
Measurement, Impact and Outcomes of Patients and Public Involvement in 
Health and Social Care Research. Warwick: University of Warwick.
Cooke, B., and Kothari, U. (2001). Participation: The New Tyranny? London: Zed 
Books.
Crowe, S., and Ceinwen, G. (2016). Making patient relevant clinical research a 
reality. BMJ 355, i6627. doi:10.1136/bmj.i6627 
Cullum, N., Buckley, H., Dumville, J., Hall, J., Lamb, K., Madden, M., et al. 
(2016). Wounds research for patient benefit: a 5-year programme of research. 
Programme Grants Appl. Res. 4, 303. doi:10.3310/pgfar04130 
Dean, R. (2017). Beyond radicalism and resignation: the competing logics for 
public participation in policy decisions. Policy Polit. 45, 213–230. doi:10.1332/
030557316X14531466517034 
Department of Health Research and Development Directorate (2006). Best 
Research for Best Health. A New National Health Research Strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/568772/dh_4127152_v2.pdf
Evans, R., Barer, M., Stoddart, G., and Bhatia, V. (1994). Who Are the Zombie 
Masters and What Do They Want? BC, Canada: University of British Columbia.
Francis, R. (2013). Report of the Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust Public 
Inquiry. London: Crown Copyright.
Frankfurt, H. (2005). On Bullshit. Oxfordshire: Princeton University Press.
Fredrikkson, M., and Tritter, J. (2017). Disentangling patient and public involve-
ment in healthcare decisions: why the difference matters. Sociology of Health 
and Illness. 39, 95–111. doi:10.1111/1467-9566.12483
Gabe, J., Chamberlain, K., Norris, P., Dew, K., Madden, H., and Hodgetts, D. (2012). 
The debate about the funding of Herceptin: a case study of ‘countervailing 
powers’
. Soc. Sci. Med. 75, 2353–2361. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2012.09.009 
Garthwaite, K., Smith, K. E., Bambra, C., and Pearce, J. (2016). Desperately seeking 
reductions in health inequalities: perspectives of UK researchers on past, pres-
ent and future directions in health inequalities research. Sociol. Health Illn. 38, 
459–478. doi:10.1111/1467-9566.12374 
Godlee, F. (2015). Too much medicine. BMJ 350, h1217. doi:10.1136/bmj.h1217 
Gradinger, F., Britten, N., Wyatt, K., Froggatt, K., Gibson, A., Jacoby, A., et al. 
(2015). Values associated with public involvement in health and social care 
research: a narrative review. Health Expect. 18, 661–675. doi:10.1111/hex.12158 
Greenhalgh, T., Howick, J., and Maskrey, N. (2014). Evidence based medicine: a 
movement in crisis? BMJ 348, g3725. doi:10.1136/bmj.g3725 
 6
Madden and Speed
Neoliberalism and Critical PPI
Frontiers in Sociology | www.frontiersin.org
June 2017 | Volume 2 | Article 7
Heneghan, C., Goldacre, B., and Mahtani, K. (2017). Why clinical trial out-
comes fail to translate into benefits for patients. Trials 18, 122. doi:10.1186/
s13063-017-1870-2 
Heneghan, C., Mahtani, K., Goldacre, B., Godlee, F., Macdonald, H., and Snow, R.  
(2016). EBM Manifesto. Available at: http://evidencelive.org/manifesto/V1.5
INVOLVE. (2014). NIHR Senior Investigators: Leaders for Patient and Public 
Involvement in Research. Eastleigh: INVOLVE.
INVOLVE. (2015a). What Is Public Involvement in Research? Available at: http://
www.invo.org.uk/find-out-more/what-is-public-involvement-in-research-2
INVOLVE. (2015b). Going the Extra Mile: Improving the Nation’s Health and 
Wellbeing through Public Involvement in Research. Eastleigh: INVOLVE.
Ioannidis, J. (2016). Why most clinical research is not useful. PLoS Med 13, 
e1002049. 
Ives, J., Damery, S., and Redwod, S. (2013). PPI, paradoxes and Plato: who’s 
sailing the ship? J. Med. Ethics 39, 181–185. doi:10.1136/medethics-2011- 
100150 
Knaapen, L., and Lehoux, P. (2016). Three conceptual models of patient and public 
involvement in standard-setting: from abstract principles to complex practice. 
Sci. Cult. 25, 239–263. doi:10.1080/09505431.2015.1125875 
Madden, M., and Morley, R. (2016). Exploring the challenge of health research pri-
ority setting in partnership: reflections on the methodology used by the James 
Lind Alliance Pressure Ulcer Priority Setting Partnership. Res. Involvement 
Engagement 2, 12. doi:10.1186/s40900-016-0026-y 
Martin, G. (2008). ‘Ordinary people only’: knowledge, representativeness, and 
the publics of public participation in healthcare. Sociol. Health Illn. 30, 35–54. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9566.2007.01027.x 
Maynard, A. (2012). The Maynard doctrine: the chronicles of Nirvania, home of 
unicorns and zombies. Health Policy Insight. Available at: http://www.healthpol-
icyinsight.com/?q=node/1433
McGoey, L. (2012). Strategic unknowns: towards a sociology of ignorance. Econ. 
Soc. 41, 1–16. doi:10.1080/03085147.2011.637330 
National Institute for Health Research. (2015). Patient and Public Involvement. 
Available at: https://www.nihr.ac.uk/patients-and-public/
NHS England. (2015). About NHS England. Available at: https://data.england.nhs.
uk/organization/about/nhs-england
NHS Health Research Authority. (2013). Strategy for Public Involvement. Available at: 
http://www.hra.nhs.uk/documents/2013/10/hra-public-involvement-strategy- 
circulation-september-2013.pdf
Norris, P. (2011). Democratic Deficit: Critical Citizens Revisited. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Ocloo, J., and Fulop, N. (2011). Developing a ‘critical’ approach to 
patient and public involvement in patient safety in the NHS: learning 
lessons from other parts of the public sector? Health Expect. 15, 424–432. 
doi:10.1111/j.1369-7625.2011.00695.x 
Oxman, A., Sackett, D., Chalmers, I., and Prescott, T. (2005). A surrealistic 
mega-analysis of redisorganization theories Journal of the Royal. Soc. Med. 98, 
563–568. doi:10.1258/jrsm.98.12.563 
Petersen, A., and Lupton, D. (1996). The New Public Health: Health and Self in the 
Age of Risk. London: SAGE.
Snow, R. (2016). What makes a real patient? BMJ Blogs. Available at: http://blogs.
bmj.com/bmj/2016/07/19/rosamund-snow-what-makes-a-real-patient
Stewart, E. (2012). Governance, Participation and Avoidance: Everyday Public 
Involvement in the Scottish NHS. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh.
Taylor, P. (2007). “The lay contribution to public health,” in Public Health for the 
21st Century: Policy, Participation and Practice, 2nd edn, eds  J. Orme,  M. 
Grey,  T. Harrison,  J. Powell, and  P. Taylor (Berkshire: Open University Press/
McGraw Hill Education), 100–101.
Thompson, J., Bissell, P., Cooper, C., Armitage, C., and Barber, R. (2012). 
Credibility and the ‘professionalized’ lay expert: reflections on the dilemmas 
and opportunities of public involvement in health research. Health 16, 602–618. 
doi:10.1177/1363459312441008 
Tritter, J., and McCallum, A. (2006). The snakes and ladders of user involve-
ment: moving beyond Arnstein. Health Policy 76, 156–168. doi:10.1016/j.
healthpol.2005.05.008 
Wehling, P., Viehöver, W., and Koenen, S. (2015). The Public Shaping of Medical 
Research: Patient Associations, Health Movements and Biomedicine. Abingdon 
Oxon: Routledge.
Whitfield, D. (2012). In Place of Austerity: Reconstructing the Economy, State and 
Public Services. Nottingham: Spokesman.
Wilson, P., Mathie, E., Keenan, J., McNeilly, E., Goodman, C., Howe, A., et al. 
(2015). ReseArch with patient and public invOlvement: a realisT evaluation – 
 
the RAPPORT study. Health Serv. Deliv. Res. 3, 38. doi:10.3310/hsdr03380 
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Madden and Speed. This is an open-access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribu-
tion or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) 
or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in 
accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is 
permitted which does not comply with these terms.
