 1 3
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
DOI 10.1007/s00421-016-3346-6
INVITED REVIEW
Rate of force development: physiological and methodological 
considerations
Nicola A. Maffiuletti1 · Per Aagaard2 · Anthony J. Blazevich3 · Jonathan Folland4 · 
Neale Tillin5 · Jacques Duchateau6 
Received: 23 November 2015 / Accepted: 17 February 2016 / Published online: 3 March 2016 
© The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
provide evidence-based practical recommendations for 
rational quantification of rate of force development in both 
laboratory and clinical settings.
Keywords Explosive strength · Ballistic contraction · 
Motor unit discharge rate · Musculotendinous stiffness · 
Strength training · Dynamometry
Abbreviations
EMG 
 
Electromyogram
MU 
 
Motor unit
MVC 
 
Maximal voluntary contraction
RFD 
 
Rate of force development
Introduction
Explosive strength is the ability to increase force or torque 
as quickly as possible during a rapid voluntary contraction 
realised from a low or resting level. Rate of force devel-
opment (RFD), which is derived from the force- or torque-
time curves recorded during explosive voluntary contrac-
tions (Aagaard et al. 2002a)—hereafter also referred to 
as rapid or ballistic actions—is increasingly evaluated to 
characterise explosive strength of athletes, elderly indi-
viduals and patients. This is mainly due to the facts that, 
as compared to pure maximal voluntary contraction (MVC) 
strength, RFD seems to be (1) better related to most per-
formances of both sport-specific and functional daily tasks 
(see, e.g., Maffiuletti et al. 2010; Tillin et al. 2013a), (2) 
more sensitive to detect acute and chronic changes in 
neuromuscular function (see, e.g., Angelozzi et al. 2012; 
Crameri et al. 2007; Jenkins et al. 2014b; Penailillo et al. 
2015) and (3) potentially governed by different physiologi-
cal mechanisms (see, e.g., Andersen and Aagaard 2006; 
Abstract The evaluation of rate of force development 
during rapid contractions has recently become quite popu-
lar for characterising explosive strength of athletes, elderly 
individuals and patients. The main aims of this narrative 
review are to describe the neuromuscular determinants of 
rate of force development and to discuss various methodo-
logical considerations inherent to its evaluation for research 
and clinical purposes. Rate of force development (1) seems 
to be mainly determined by the capacity to produce maxi-
mal voluntary activation in the early phase of an explosive 
contraction (first 50–75 ms), particularly as a result of 
increased motor unit discharge rate; (2) can be improved 
by both explosive-type and heavy-resistance strength train-
ing in different subject populations, mainly through an 
improvement in rapid muscle activation; (3) is quite diffi-
cult to evaluate in a valid and reliable way. Therefore, we 
Communicated by Nigel A. S. Taylor.
 
* Nicola A. Maffiuletti 
 
nicola.maffiuletti@kws.ch
1 
Human Performance Lab, Schulthess Clinic, Lengghalde 6, 
8008 Zurich, Switzerland
2 
Department of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, 
SDU Muscle Research Cluster (SMRC), University 
of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
3 
Centre for Exercise and Sports Science Research (CESSR), 
School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan 
University, Joondalup, Australia
4 
School of Sport, Exercise and Health Sciences, 
Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK
5 
Department of Life Sciences, University of Roehampton, 
London, UK
6 
Laboratory of Applied Biology, ULB Neurosciences Institute, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium
 1092
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
Van Cutsem et al. 1998). The ability to properly quantify 
and interpret RFD obtained during voluntary isometric 
contractions is therefore extremely important not only for 
researchers in the field of human and exercise physiology, 
but also for practitioners in the fields of physical training 
and rehabilitation.
The aim of this narrative review is to provide the main 
physiological and methodological considerations for ensur-
ing accurate assessment and interpretation of RFD in 
research and clinical settings. A better knowledge of these 
critical aspects is helpful for designing interventions not 
only to increase explosive force production in athletes but 
also to improve physical function and reduce injury and fall 
risk in elderly and patient populations.
Physiological considerations: the underlying 
mechanisms
The purpose of this section is to review the main neuro-
muscular mechanisms underlying explosive strength and 
to discuss their potential contribution to RFD. This section 
examines successively the neural and muscular determi-
nants of RFD and describes the neuromuscular adaptations 
to training that influence RFD.
Neural determinants
Motor unit (MU) recruitment and discharge rate
Despite some technical limitations (Farina et al. 2010), 
muscle activation is often assessed non-invasively by the 
use of surface electromyography. Using this approach, 
contrasting electromyogram (EMG) patterns are observed 
when comparing “slow” and “rapid” contractions. Whereas 
a monotonic augmentation in EMG activity is classically 
observed during a contraction realized with a slow and pro-
gressive (ramp-like) increase in force, a rapid/ballistic con-
traction is characterised by a highly synchronised burst of 
activity at the onset of the action (Bawa and Calancie 1983; 
Desmedt and Godaux 1977; Van Cutsem et al. 1998). The 
magnitude of the activation, and hence the force produced 
by a muscle, depends on the number of MUs activated 
(MU recruitment) and the rates at which motor neurones 
discharge action potentials (rate coding). The recruitment 
order of MUs during rapid contractions is similar to that 
observed during slower contractions and follows the “size 
principle” (i.e., low threshold units are recruited before 
larger ones) (see Duchateau and Enoka 2011). However, 
the relative contributions of recruitment and discharge 
rate modulation to the force exerted by a muscle vary with 
contraction speed. Slow contractions are characterised 
by a progressive activation of MUs to an upper limit of 
recruitment that reaches ~80–90 % of the maximum force 
in most limb muscles (De Luca et al. 1982; Kukulka and 
Clamann 1981; Van Cutsem et al. 1997). In contrast, MUs 
are recruited at much lower forces (i.e., lower recruitment 
thresholds) during rapid actions. For example, most MUs in 
the tibialis anterior are recruited during a ballistic contrac-
tion when the force is only 1/3 of maximum (Desmedt and 
Godaux 1977). Furthermore, the reduction in recruitment 
threshold of MUs with increased contraction speed is more 
notable for slow-contracting (e.g., soleus) than for fast-
contracting muscles (e.g., masseter) (Desmedt and Godaux 
1978). As a consequence, the increase in muscle force 
beyond the upper limit of MU recruitment is entirely due 
to an increased discharge rate. In most muscles, the maxi-
mal rate at which MUs discharge action potentials during 
sustained, high-force isometric contractions is 30–60 Hz 
(Duchateau and Enoka 2011). In contrast, the instantaneous 
MU discharge rates at the onset of a rapid contraction often 
reach values of 60–120 Hz in untrained subjects (Desmedt 
and Godaux 1977) and above 200 Hz in trained individu-
als. During such rapid actions, the activated MUs discharge 
only a few times (~1–6) (Van Cutsem and Duchateau 2005; 
Van Cutsem et al. 1998). Contrary to slow contractions, 
during which the discharge rate of MUs increases progres-
sively, rapid contractions are characterised by a high ini-
tial discharge rate at the onset of activation that declines 
progressively with successive discharges (Desmedt and 
Godaux 1977; Klass et al. 2008; Van Cutsem et al. 1998). 
These observations underscore the speed-related difference 
in MU activation pattern.
Association between muscle activation and RFD
The relative contribution of neural and muscular factors 
to the performance of a rapid contraction has been inves-
tigated by comparing RFD in contractions induced by vol-
untary activation and electrical stimulation. Using such an 
approach, several studies have shown that muscle activa-
tion, as assessed by surface EMG, is a major factor influ-
encing the expression of RFD in vivo (Blazevich et al. 
2009; de Ruiter et al. 2004; Del Balso and Cafarelli 2007; 
Folland et al. 2014; Klass et al. 2008). For example, and 
despite a great variability among subjects (see Fig. 1), the 
force attained 40 ms after the onset of a rapid voluntary 
knee extension was less (−60 %) than for an electrically 
induced tetanic contraction (de Ruiter et al. 2004). Fur-
thermore, voluntary force, expressed relative to the force 
produced by electrical stimulation at the same time point, 
was positively associated (r2 = 0.76) with the surface EMG 
of the quadriceps before the onset of force development 
but not with that induced by electrical stimulation. These 
results indicate that the ability to produce force rapidly 
depends predominantly on the increase of muscle activation 
 1093
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
at the onset of the contraction and less on the speed-related 
properties of the muscle. Such a conclusion is supported 
indirectly by the work of Andersen and Aagaard (2006), 
who observed a moderate association (r2 = 0.36) between 
voluntary RFD measured in the first 40 ms of a rapid con-
traction of the knee extensors and electrically evoked twitch 
contractile properties. This suggests that mechanisms other 
than intrinsic muscle properties explain most of the vari-
ance of voluntary RFD.
Because the relative contribution of neural and con-
tractile factors may vary during the early and late phases 
of rising force during a rapid contraction, Folland et al. 
(2014) examined their relative contribution through-
out the rising phase of the force–time curve by record-
ing surface EMG activity in the knee extensors. On the 
basis of multiple linear regressions, the contribution of 
neural (volitional EMG activity) and contractile (force 
responses to evoked twitch and octet (train of 8 pulses at 
300 Hz) contractions) determinants of voluntary explo-
sive force attained at different time points was analysed. 
A major finding was that the primary determinant of the 
voluntary RFD changed throughout the rising phase of 
the contraction. The results indicated that agonist EMG 
activity was an important contributor to the explained 
variance in force throughout the entire 150 ms of rising 
muscle force, but more particularly in the initial phase 
(25–75 ms). In contrast, the evoked RFD evaluated from 
the octet (tetanic) contraction (reflecting intrinsic muscle 
contractile properties) was the primary determinant of 
the steeper phase of voluntary RFD (50–100 ms). These 
Fig. 1  Illustration of the early phase of the torque- and EMG-time 
curves of the knee extensor muscles in two subjects during an explo-
sive voluntary isometric contraction (continuous line) and in response 
to electrical stimulation (8 pulses at 300 Hz; discontinuous line). 
The rate of torque development during the two types of contraction 
is similar for subject 2 (b), whereas it is substantially smaller dur-
ing voluntary activation for subject 1 (a). Interestingly, EMG activity 
(expressed as % of EMG during MVC) of the vastus lateralis is much 
greater at the onset of muscle activation in subject 2 (d) compared 
to subject 1 (c). These data indicate that the rate of torque develop-
ment is mainly limited by muscle activation (neural factors) in subject 
1 whereas it is more likely constrained by muscular factors in sub-
ject 2. Arrows and vertical lines indicate, respectively, the onset of 
torque development and the force attained 40 ms after the onset of the 
contraction. Figure reproduced with permission from de Ruiter et al. 
(2004)
 1094
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
results are consistent with previous studies indicating a 
role for neural factors at the onset (<75 ms) of a rapid 
contraction (Aagaard et al. 2002a; de Ruiter et al. 2004; 
Del Balso and Cafarelli 2007; Klass et al. 2008; Van 
Cutsem et al. 1998). For contractions of longer duration 
(>75 ms), however, the voluntary RFD becomes more 
strongly influenced by the speed-related properties of the 
muscle and MVC force per se (Andersen and Aagaard 
2006; Folland et al. 2014).
Association between maximal MU discharge rate and RFD
As described in the preceding paragraph, the neural input 
to the muscle is of functional importance for muscle per-
formance at the onset of rapid contractions. In that con-
text, parallel changes in RFD and discharge characteris-
tics of MUs during ballistic isometric ankle dorsiflexions 
have been reported when the initial condition was modi-
fied. For example, the average discharge rate for the first 
three interspike intervals in tibialis anterior was reduced 
by 22 % and RFD by 16 % when ballistic contractions 
were superimposed on a submaximal isometric contrac-
tion (Van Cutsem and Duchateau 2005). Such concurrent 
changes have also been observed with long-term adapta-
tions such as with ageing (Klass et al. 2008). In agree-
ment with the reduced speed-related capacity associated 
with ageing, older adults (71–84 years) displayed a much 
slower RFD (−48 %) and MU discharge rate (−27 %) at 
the activation onset of ballistic ankle dorsiflexions com-
pared with young subjects (~20 years). Furthermore, the 
number of doublet discharges (an index of motor neu-
rone excitability) at brief interspike intervals (<5 ms) was 
reduced by about half in older adults (4.6 vs. 8.4 % of 
total number of MUs).
In an attempt to document in humans, the results of 
Buller and Lewis (1965) and de Haan (1998) showing the 
importance of MU activation rate on RFD in animal mus-
cles (cat and rat), a simulation study was performed by 
Duchateau and Baudry (2014). For that purpose, mechani-
cal properties of MUs obtained using the spike-triggered 
averaging method recorded in the tibialis anterior (Van 
Cutsem et al. 1997) were inserted into the model developed 
by Fuglevand et al. (1993). The results indicated that an 
increase in discharge rate up to 100–200 Hz substantially 
augmented the RFD of all units within the MU pool. As 
expected, further increases in discharge rate had less influ-
ence except for the faster units, thus reflecting a difference 
in speed-related properties between low- and high-thresh-
old MUs (Kernell 2006).
Together these experimental and simulated studies 
underscore the critical role of maximal MU discharge rate 
on the ability to rapidly develop force at the onset of a bal-
listic voluntary contraction.
Limiting mechanisms of MU discharge rate
As for MVCs (Allen et al. 1995), there is a great inter-
individual variability in the magnitude of muscle activation 
during rapid contractions (de Ruiter et al. 2004; Folland 
et al. 2014; Klass et al. 2008). Such variability is greater 
during the early phase of the contraction (first 40–50 ms) 
meaning that neural factors contribute substantially to the 
between-subject variance (Folland et al. 2014). Potential 
mechanisms that may explain such a deficit in voluntary 
activation likely involve various loci within the nervous 
system (Duchateau and Enoka 2002).
Different supraspinal centres are involved in the initia-
tion of a motor action as well as the acquisition of a new 
motor skill (Doyon and Benali 2005). Presumably, part of 
the deficit in muscle activation during a rapid contraction 
is due to the inability to generate sufficient volitional drive 
in a brief period of time. In addition to a suboptimal output 
from the primary motor cortex, part of this submaximal 
performance can be due to an ineffective activation pattern 
of the agonist and antagonist/synergist muscles involved 
in the task (Duchateau and Enoka 2002; Geertsen et al. 
2008, 2011). It is, however, not currently possible to pre-
cisely determine the reasons why volitional drive from the 
brain is insufficient to maximally activate muscles during 
rapid motor actions (Duchateau and Baudry 2014). Such 
differences in voluntary activation between individuals 
may reflect differences not only in their inherent capacity 
to produce rapid coordinated actions with a well-focused 
efferent drive to the involved agonist (and antagonist) mus-
cles but also in their training status. Indeed, differences in 
muscle activation between subjects can be reduced quickly 
through learning, and even simple movements performed 
with muscles that only span a single joint can be improved 
substantially after a limited number of repetitions in a 
single practice session (Hinder et al. 2011; Jensen et al. 
2005; Lee et al. 2010; Muellbacher et al. 2002; Rogasch 
et al. 2009). For example, Lee and colleagues (Lee et al. 
2010) reported that multiple sets (each consisting of ten 
repetitions) of index finger abductions performed as fast 
as possible increased peak abduction acceleration by 
64 and 93 % after 150 and 300 repetitions, respectively. 
The increase in acceleration was accompanied by an 
augmented corticospinal excitability of the first dorsal 
interosseous (43 and 63 % after 150 and 300 repetitions, 
respectively), as assessed by the size of the motor evoked 
potential induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation. In 
agreement with other experiments (Hinder et al. 2011; Lee 
et al. 2010; Muellbacher et al. 2002; Rogasch et al. 2009), 
this observation indicates that the motor cortex is impli-
cated in motor learning and that the rapid improvement in 
such high-speed actions depends on short-term changes at 
the motor cortex level. This suggestion is consistent with 
 1095
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
the observation of an increased motor evoked potential 
in response to transcranial magnetic stimulation without 
change in motor evoked potential amplitude when the 
descending tract was stimulated at the cervico-medullary 
junction to bypass cortical centres (Muellbacher et al. 
2001). Together, these studies indicate that small differ-
ences in the rate of acquisition processes in an unusual 
motor task likely contribute to the inter-individual variabil-
ity observed during a rapid action.
It is well accepted that arousal can further influence the 
neural command sent to the muscles, thereby modulating 
physical performance (Jokela and Hanin 1999), muscle 
strength (Schmidt et al. 2009) and possibly RFD. Although 
little is currently known about the nature of these changes, 
recent animal studies have shown that monoaminergic 
input from the brainstem can change the gain of the MU 
pool to adjust their excitability to the requirements of the 
task (Heckman and Enoka 2012). Modulation can be pro-
vided by input from the noradrenergic system that is known 
to vary with arousal (Aston-Jones et al. 2000). Further-
more, changes in the activity of the serotonergic system 
appear to modulate the responsiveness of the motor neu-
rones (Wei et al. 2014). In addition to the different propor-
tion of slow and fast motor neurones between individuals 
and their respective intrinsic capacity to discharge at high 
rates (Desmedt and Godaux 1978), intra- and inter-individ-
ual variations in the level of these neuromodulatory inputs 
might influence the response of spinal motor neurones to 
the descending command. Furthermore, the observations 
that the number of doublet discharges decreases with age-
ing and the instantaneous MU discharge rate declines 
from the onset of muscle activation during rapid actions in 
untrained, and even more in aged individuals (Klass et al. 
2008), suggest that intrinsic motor neurone properties and/
or concurrent involvement of spinal inhibitory mechanisms 
may also modulate the level of muscle activation.
Despite some progress in recent years, more knowledge 
is needed to understand the inter-individual variability in 
the capacity to produce maximal voluntary activation dur-
ing rapid muscle contractions.
Muscular determinants
While rapid muscle activation is a critical determinant 
of RFD, muscular factors evidently also play a role. For 
example, the large inter-muscular (e.g., plantar flex-
ors vs. knee extensors) and inter-individual differences 
in RFD cannot be explained completely on the basis of 
differences in muscle activation rates, and MVC force is 
strongly associated with late-phase RFD (Andersen and 
Aagaard 2006) so factors such as muscle size and archi-
tecture as well as others that influence muscle strength 
might also influence RFD.
Muscle fibre type composition
Although caution is required when deducing the func-
tional significance of differences in single fibre properties 
(see Enoka and Duchateau 2015), fibre type is often con-
sidered a major factor influencing muscular RFD based 
on the observation that the rate of tension development is 
faster in type II than type I fibres (Buchthal and Schmal-
bruch 1970; Harridge et al. 1996). This phenomenon is 
related to type II fibres having a greater total Ca2+ release 
per action potential (Baylor and Hollingworth 1988) and 
faster time constants of Ca2+ currents (e.g., Close 1972), 
as well as fast myosin, troponin and tropomyosin isoforms 
(Schiaffino and Reggiani 1996) and thus faster cross-bridge 
cycling rates (Bottinelli et al. 1996). There is a large vari-
ability in fibre type composition between various skeletal 
muscles. For example, vastus lateralis, vastus medialis and 
vastus intermedius contain ~50 % type I fibres (Johnson 
et al. 1973; Luden et al. 2008; Taylor et al. 1997) whilst 
soleus contains 75 % and gastrocnemius 45–75 % type I 
fibres (Dahmane et al. 2005; Edgerton et al. 1975; John-
son et al. 1973; Luden et al. 2008). Furthermore, very large 
inter-individual differences in human skeletal muscle fibre 
type composition also exist, for instance in the quadri-
ceps femoris. Indeed, the percentage of type II fibres in 
vastus lateralis was found to vary between 25 and 80 % 
in a group of 21 randomly selected young untrained men, 
with no clear “average” fibre type percentage amongst the 
group (Andersen 2001). These differences in fibre type are 
qualitatively linked to inter-muscular differences in RFD. 
For example, Harridge et al. (1996) found that RFD (nor-
malised to maximum force) elicited by 50-Hz electrical 
stimulation increased in the order plantar flexors < knee 
extensors < elbow extensors, which was consistent with 
the increase in type II myosin heavy chain percentages of 
soleus (30 %) < vastus lateralis (53 %) < triceps brachii 
(67 %) (Fig. 2; the same was observed for type II fibre per-
centages). Inter-individual differences in RFD measured in 
the same muscle group have also been correlated with fibre 
type in humans. Taylor et al. (1997) reported a moderate, 
albeit non-significant, correlation (r2 = 0.34) between vas-
tus lateralis type II percentage and maximal voluntary knee 
extensor RFD, whilst Hvid et al. (2010) reported a signifi-
cant correlation (r2 = 0.49) between vastus lateralis type 
II fibre area and knee extensor RFD measured to 50 ms in 
young men, although this was not observed in older men. 
Despite fibre type proportion having a substantial genetic 
basis (~50 %) (Simoneau and Bouchard 1995), it is also 
characterised by a high degree of adaptability (cf. Andersen 
and Aagaard 2000), and changes in fibre type have been 
linked to changes in RFD in the early rise in force (Hak-
kinen et al. 1985). These associations between fibre type 
and RFD measured in the early time phase of force rise 
 1096
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
are consistent with the moderate-to-strong correlations 
observed between RFD measured during twitch and vol-
untary contractions (Andersen and Aagaard 2006; Folland 
et al. 2014), given that twitch contractile properties are 
strongly influenced by muscle fibre type (e.g., Harridge 
et al. 1996). These data indicate that fibre type composi-
tion may be an important discriminating factor for inter-
individual and inter-muscular differences in RFD measured 
particularly in the early force rise.
Nonetheless, a large portion of the explained variance in 
inter-individual or longitudinal changes in voluntary RFD 
in previous studies remained unaccounted for by myofi-
bre properties (e.g., ~70 % in Hakkinen et al. 1985; ~60 % 
in Taylor et al. 1997; ~50 % in Hvid et al. 2010), indicat-
ing that other factors in the muscle–tendon unit and/or the 
nervous system must account for much of the variance.
Myofibrillar mechanisms
Prolonged or transient (e.g., milliseconds) (Abbate et al. 
2002; Cheng et al. 2013) increases in action potential-stim-
ulated Ca2+ release, and thus muscular force output, occur 
when higher frequency trains or short bursts (at contraction 
onset), respectively, propagate along the sarcolemma as 
input signals for muscle contraction. Changes in processes 
influencing this input–output relationship are thus likely 
to influence RFD (Wahr and Rall 1997). Exercise train-
ing, including 5 weeks of cycle sprint training in humans 
(Ortenblad et al. 2000), increases the total amount of sarco-
plasmic reticulum in skeletal muscle, which can allow for a 
greater diffusion of excitatory potentials and a greater total 
number of voltage-sensitive dihydropyridine and Ca2+-
release ryanodine receptors. Thus, the rate and magnitude 
of Ca2+ release can increase. Indeed, moderate-intensity 
exercise training has increased dihydropyridine content in 
both type I and II fibres (Ferreira et al. 2010; Saborido et al. 
1995), and increases in exercise-induced upregulation of 
dihydropyridine gene expression are commonly observed 
in animal models (Manttiri et al. 2006; Anttila et al. 2006). 
These changes appear to be associated with an increase in 
Ca2+ release rate (e.g., measured as the AgNO3-induced 
Ca2+ rate) (Ortenblad et al. 2000) even when no change 
in ryanodine receptor density is observed. Subsequent 
research is required to determine whether such changes 
meaningfully impact RFD in vivo.
As evidenced by the effects of post-activation potentia-
tion on RFD, increases in the sensitivity of the acto-myosin 
complex to Ca2+ might also influence RFD. Type II fibres 
have a lower Ca2+ sensitivity than type I fibres (Gardetto 
et al. 1989; Metzger and Moss 1990) leaving them particu-
larly susceptible to stimuli that improve sensitivity (Grange 
et al. 1993). Repeated muscular contractions promote 
kinase-dependent phosphorylation of the myosin regula-
tory light chain that render the complex more sensitive to 
Ca2+, allowing a greater force production for a given Ca2+ 
release and thus an increase in the rate of force rise. In sup-
port of this notion, Vandenboom et al. (1993) found that 
increases in both twitch and tetanic maximal RFD in fast-
twitch mouse extensor digitorum longus muscle elicited by 
a 20-s, 5-Hz electrical stimulation conditioning stimulus 
Fig. 2  Distribution of myosin heavy chain (MHC)-II (IIA + IIB) iso-
forms in soleus (squares), vastus lateralis (triangles) and triceps bra-
chii (circles) in relation to a twitch time to peak torque (TPT), and b 
maximal rate of rise of evoked torque at 50 Hz (dPo50). Between-
muscle differences were strongly associated with differences in mus-
cle fibre type, although the relationship with within-muscle variability 
was less pronounced. Figure reproduced with permission from Har-
ridge et al. (1996)
 1097
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
were strongly correlated with the increase in light chain 
phosphate content (r2 = 0.94 and 0.92, respectively), and 
increases in RFD after similar electrical stimulation proto-
cols (and presumably similar increases in phosphorylation) 
have been observed in humans (Baudry and Duchateau 
2007; Hamada et al. 2000).
Nonetheless, notwithstanding the lack of substantial evi-
dence, changes in Ca2+ sensitivity may not have a particu-
larly strong influence on RFD in many circumstances. For 
example, despite Ca2+ sensitivity often being shown to be 
greater in type I than II fibres (Hvid et al. 2011; Malisoux 
et al. 2006; Fitts and Widrick 1996), this cannot explain the 
finding of a greater RFD in muscles (or individuals) with a 
higher type II fibre content. Also, there appears to be a lim-
ited effect of exercise training on Ca2+ sensitivity in type 
II fibres (Godard et al. 2002; Lynch et al. 1994; Malisoux 
et al. 2006), which would not improve their contractile 
capacity and thus not strongly influence RFD.
Interaction between neural and fibre‑dependent 
mechanisms?
Both MU discharge rate and fibre type each appear to influ-
ence RFD, especially in the early rise in force. However, 
speculatively, the interactive (i.e., synergistic) effects of 
these factors might have a more potent influence on RFD 
for several reasons. First, high-threshold MUs that con-
tain type II fibres generally have faster contraction speeds 
so their earlier recruitment as a result of increased MU 
discharge rates and lower recruitment thresholds ensure 
a faster whole-muscle force rise (Desmedt and Godaux 
1978). Second, type II fibres have a greater Ca2+ release 
per action potential (Baylor and Hollingworth 2003), 
resulting from a 200 % greater ryanodine receptor content, 
larger number of junctional t-tubular segments (Franzini-
Armstrong 2007) and greater total sarcoplasmic reticulum 
development (Luff and Atwood 1971; Schiaffino and Mar-
greth 1969). Therefore, the Ca2+ release per action poten-
tial, and hence the increase in force per action potential, 
will be greater in type II fibres. Third, the rate of cross-
bridge formation is Ca2+ dependent, being 3–8 times faster 
in type II than type I fibres and with the difference increas-
ing with increases in Ca2+ concentration (Metzger and 
Moss 1990). Thus, the increases in Ca2+ release triggered 
by high discharge rates may have a cumulatively greater 
effect in type II fibres. Finally, type II fibres have a 200–
300 % greater Na+ channel density, and therefore might 
be better able to conduct high rates of excitatory potentials 
resulting from high discharge rates (Schiaffino and Reg-
giani 2011). For these reasons, increases in neural drive to 
the muscle may have a more substantive influence on RFD 
in muscles that have a greater proportion of type II fibres. 
This theory is consistent with the rate of force rise early 
in a voluntary contraction being strongly related to both 
the rate of muscle activation as well as the rate of twitch 
force rise (as described above). This phenomenon was sup-
ported by the modelling results of Duchateau and Baudry 
(2014), who found that an increase in discharge rate up 
to 100–200 Hz augmented RFD of all MUs in a pool but 
that further increases in discharge rate preferentially influ-
enced only the faster units (see “Association between 
maximal MU discharge rate and RFD”). A purpose of 
future research is to more explicitly examine the interac-
tions between neural and muscular mechanisms that influ-
ence RFD to develop a more complex mechanistic model 
describing RFD change.
Muscle size and architecture
Maximal strength capacity is significantly correlated with 
voluntary RFD (Mirkov et al. 2004), and the strength of 
this relationship increases with time from contraction onset 
in a sigmoidal manner (Andersen and Aagaard 2006; Fol-
land et al. 2014), e.g., MVC strength explained 18, 29, 57 
and 78 % of the variance in voluntary RFD recorded over 
the first 10, 50, 100 and 200 ms, respectively, of a rapid 
voluntary contraction (Andersen and Aagaard 2006). It 
is therefore reasonable to suggest that factors influencing 
MVC strength (whose main determinants are neural drive 
and muscle cross-sectional area) may also influence RFD. 
Therefore, both the ability to activate the muscle at high 
force levels (which is not necessarily associated with the 
ability to rapidly activate the muscle at force onset) (de 
Ruiter et al. 2004) and muscle size might be influential 
(Andersen and Aagaard 2006; Erskine et al. 2014). The 
effect of muscle architecture on RFD is currently poorly 
understood, but increases in pennation (fascicle) angle 
allow for a greater muscle physiological cross-sectional 
area for a given muscle size (volume), and thus for a greater 
absolute rate of force rise (particularly later in the rise of 
force). Nonetheless, contractile forces are more directly 
transmitted to the tendon in muscles with lesser penna-
tion; i.e., muscular force output decreases proportionally to 
the cosine of fibre angulation. During low-force isometric 
twitch contractions, where the effects of fibre length and 
rotation on force rise are minimal (due to little changes in 
fibre length or angle) (Spector et al. 1980), the net impulse 
(i.e., force–time integral) developed by a parallel-fibered 
muscle is greater than that of a pennate muscle (assuming 
identical peak forces are generated) (Spector et al. 1980). 
Nonetheless, the benefit of a parallel-fibred muscle design 
may not be so significant in some contexts as increases in 
pennation also increase fibre rotation during muscular con-
tractions (i.e., gearing effects) (Azizi et al. 2008; Brainerd 
and Azizi 2005), which increases origin-to-insertion mus-
cle shortening speed (Gans 1982) and possibly the rate of 
 1098
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
force rise. This is particularly useful in muscles that trans-
fer forces through long tendons because substantial muscle 
shortening would occur as the tendon lengthens in the force 
transfer process. However, a direct investigation is needed 
to fully explore the impact of pennation angle on RFD in 
human skeletal muscle.
According to Edman and Josephson (2007), ~40 % 
of the variance in the force rise measured early in a con-
traction (to 50 % maximum force) is associated with the 
requirement to take up series elastic slack in muscle fibres, 
indicating that muscles with greater series compliance may 
have a slower RFD. Therefore, longer muscles, or muscles 
with longer fascicles, could theoretically exhibit a slower 
force rise because of a greater extent of series elastic 
material (i.e., actin–myosin filaments, titin protein, cross-
bridges and potentially a need for a longer internal aponeu-
rosis). Some preliminary evidence has been presented for 
this in human muscles (Blazevich et al. 2009) and it is well 
known that muscles developing high RFD during human 
movement, such as soleus and gastrocnemius during run-
ning and jumping, possess short muscle fibres (Lieber and 
Ward 2011). However, the plantar flexors have a slower 
isometric RFD than, for example, the knee extensors, prob-
ably because of the cost to rapid force rise of their pennate 
structure and because forces are delivered through a long 
and compliant structure (Achilles tendon and plantar fas-
cia for plantar flexion) which slows the rate of force deliv-
ery (Wilkie 1949). Therefore, whilst muscle architectural 
characteristics likely influence the contractile properties 
of muscles, a lack of experimental data makes it difficult 
to accurately determine their true effect on RFD within a 
complex muscle–tendon system.
Musculotendinous stiffness
The speed of force transmission through a material is 
influenced by the material’s stiffness: v =
�
kx/
µ, where v 
is the force transmission velocity, k is the material’s stiff-
ness, x is the length relative to resting length, and μ is 
the mass:length ratio of the material. As tissue stiffness 
is inversely proportional to length, longer tissues (both 
muscles and tendons) are more compliant and force trans-
mission may be slower. This concept was clearly demon-
strated by Wilkie (1949) and might explain the large dif-
ferences between muscles; e.g., slower force transmission 
is expected for the plantar flexors, which work through 
the Achilles tendon and plantar fascia of the foot, than 
the quadriceps, which work through the shorter patel-
lar tendon. It also may contribute to inter-individual dif-
ferences in RFD. For example, the ~500 % variability in 
both patellar (Bojsen-Moller et al. 2005) and Achilles 
(Waugh et al. 2013) tendon stiffness was positively cor-
related with RFD obtained for respective agonist muscle 
groups (r2 = 0.29–0.90; measured to different time inter-
vals). Nonetheless, changes in tendon stiffness induced by 
strength training (typically <50 %) (Wiesinger et al. 2015) 
are small when compared to the variability observed within 
a population (~500 %). A similar effect may be seen in 
detraining/unloading studies. For example, small reduc-
tions in vastus lateralis tendon stiffness (with “tendon” 
elongation measured at the fascicle–aponeurosis junc-
tion) after a period of bed rest were not correlated with the 
decline in RFD (r2 = 0.19, n = 6) (Kubo et al. 2000), sug-
gesting that changes in tendon properties and RFD may be 
divergent. Since force transmission speeds through materi-
als such as tendons are extremely fast (i.e., milliseconds for 
Achilles tendon) (DeWall et al. 2014; Nordez et al. 2009), 
considerably large changes in stiffness might be needed 
with training or disuse to significantly impact RFD.
Of note is the lack of information regarding the possible 
influence of muscle stiffness on RFD. If the rate of force 
transmission is influenced by tissue stiffness then changes 
in (active) muscular stiffness should theoretically impact 
RFD. Given the significant mass of muscle compared to 
tendon in humans, one might speculate that the effect of 
muscle stiffness on RFD may be more significant than that 
of tendon. Whilst no studies have explicitly isolated the 
effects of muscle stiffness on RFD, the influence of mus-
cle–tendon unit stiffness on RFD has been examined. Han-
nah and Folland (2015) found muscle–tendon unit stiffness 
to be associated with late-phase RFD, although this effect 
appeared to be dependent upon maximum strength as rela-
tive RFD was unrelated to muscle–tendon unit stiffness. 
Theoretically, inter-individual and inter-muscular varia-
tions in RFD may be partly expected to be influenced by 
musculo-tendinous stiffness, however, existing data are 
inconsistent and a causative relationship has not been 
clearly demonstrated. Clearly, additional data are needed to 
evaluate these hypotheses.
Adaptive changes in rapid force capacity with training
Contribution of neural factors
The ability to produce a rapid rise in contractile force dur-
ing the initial phase of a voluntary contraction (0–300 ms), 
as reflected by a high RFD, is vital not only to the trained 
athlete but also to the elderly individual who needs to coun-
teract sudden perturbations in postural balance. As dis-
cussed in this subsection, various modalities of strength 
training may evoke parallel increases in RFD and muscle 
activation (EMG amplitude, rate of EMG rise, H-reflex 
amplitude) during the initial phase of a voluntary contrac-
tion. Although these observations support the contention 
that neural adaptations are a strong contributor to the gain 
in RFD induced by training (Aagaard 2003), additional 
 1099
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
contributions may also occur from concurrent increases 
in muscle size, type II muscle fibre proportion and tendon 
stiffness characteristics.
Both heavy-resistance strength training and explosive-
type strength training have a strong stimulatory effect on 
RFD. Driven by the strong influence of muscle activation 
on RFD demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo (see “Asso-
ciation between muscle activation and RFD”), parallel 
gains in RFD and muscle activation, the latter evaluated by 
EMG analysis, have been consistently observed following 
weeks to months of strength training (Aagaard et al. 2002a; 
Hakkinen et al. 1985, 2001a, 2003; Schmidtbleicher and 
Buehrle 1987; Tillin and Folland 2014) (for illustrative data 
obtained in a representative subject, see Fig. 3a). For exam-
ple, 33 % higher RFD values were recorded in the knee 
extensors by Vila-Chã and co-workers following 6 weeks 
of lower-limb strength training (leg press, leg extension, 
and leg curl; 60–85 % 1-repetition maximum loads), which 
was accompanied by 80–100 % increases in EMG activity 
(Vila-Cha et al. 2010) (Fig. 4). Interestingly, no changes in 
RFD or muscle activation (EMG amplitude) were observed 
in response to 6 weeks of endurance training performed on 
a bicycle ergometer at an exercise intensity corresponding 
to 50–75 % heart rate reserve (Fig. 4).
Observations of a positive linear relationship between 
RFD and integrated EMG (de Ruiter et al. 2007; Del 
Fig. 3  Motor unit (MU) 
discharge rate at the onset of 
maximal ballistic contrac-
tions, obtained in the tibialis 
anterior muscle before and 
after 12 weeks of ballistic-type 
strength training. a Repre-
sentative MU action potential 
recordings obtained before 
(left) and after (right) training. 
Note the marked increases in 
MU discharge rate and RFD 
with training. b Mean discharge 
rate (and SEM) recorded in the 
first, second and third inter-
spike intervals, respectively. 
All post-training values were 
greater than pre-training values 
(p < 0.001). The number of MU 
action potentials analysed in 
each interspike interval ranged 
between 243 and 609. Figure 
reproduced with permission 
from Van Cutsem et al. (1998) 
and Aagaard (2003)
post training
pre training
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
200
    Post > Pre, P < 0.001
I.
II.
III.
Interspike intervals
I.
II.
III.
*
*
*
*
Motor unit 
discharge rate  (Hz)
a
b
 1100
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
Fig. 4  a Representative linear-array EMG recordings obtained in the 
vastus lateralis muscle during explosive isometric contractions of the 
knee extensors. EMG signals were analysed in two intervals of 50 ms 
(shaded boxes I and II) that were initiated 70 ms before the onset of 
force (I) and centered at the time instant of maximal RFD (peak slope) 
(II). b Mean RFD (and SEM) obtained before, during (3 weeks) and 
after 6 weeks of heavy-resistance strength training, endurance training 
or no training. *p < 0.05. c, d Average rectified EMG amplitude (ARV; 
mean and SE) measured for the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis 
muscles in time intervals I (c) and II (d). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.001. Note 
that increases in RFD and EMG activity were only observed following 
strength training, while absent in response to endurance training and 
in non-trained controls. Figure reproduced with permission from Vila-
Cha et al. (2010)
 1101
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
Balso and Cafarelli 2007; Klass et al. 2008) as well as 
between the training-induced increases in these param-
eters (Andersen et al. 2009; Blazevich et al. 2008) support 
that a causative relationship exists between the training-
induced gains in muscle activation and RFD, respectively. 
Stressing that adaptive changes in neuronal motor func-
tion exert a strong influence on the gain in RFD induced 
by strength training, moderate-to-strong positive associa-
tions (r2 = 0.46–0.81) between training-induced changes 
in RFD and EMG amplitude (including rate of EMG rise) 
have been reported for the human quadriceps femoris 
(Blazevich et al. 2008; de Ruiter et al. 2012) and trapezius 
(Andersen et al. 2009) in response to 4–10 weeks of heavy-
resistance strength training. As further evidence of a causal 
link between training-induced gains in muscle activation 
and RFD, systematic progressive improvements along the 
linear relationship between EMG activity and RFD were 
observed with successive training sessions during 4 weeks 
of isometric plantar flexor training (Del Balso and Cafarelli 
2007).
In addition to potential cortical plasticity at the early 
stage of the learning process of a new motor task (see 
“Limiting mechanisms of MU discharge rate”), other train-
ing-related adaptations should occur at different levels of 
the neural system. Most likely, modulations in spinal cir-
cuitry contribute to the adaptation in RFD with strength 
training. In support of this notion, a positive correlation 
(r2 = 0.35) was observed between gains in RFD measured 
during MVC efforts and increases in soleus H-reflex ampli-
tude recorded during isometric plantar flexions performed 
at submaximal force levels following 3 weeks of isometric 
plantar flexor training (Holtermann et al. 2007), the latter 
parameter suggesting improvements in spinal motor neu-
rone excitability and/or Ia afferent synaptic transmission 
efficacy (Aagaard 2003). Addressing the aspect of spinal 
modifications with strength training and their importance 
for the adaptation in RFD, marked increases in the maximal 
discharge rate of MUs during rapid isometric dorsiflexions 
have been observed in response to ballistic-type strength 
training (Van Cutsem et al. 1998) and following more tra-
ditional heavy-resistance strength training regimes in both 
young and old adults (Christie and Kamen 2010; Kamen 
and Knight 2004; Patten et al. 2001). Given the governing 
influence of MU discharge rates on RFD (see “Association 
between maximal MU discharge rate and RFD”), the obser-
vation of very large increases in MU discharge rate at the 
onset of muscle contraction, along with an increased ability 
to sustain a high discharge rate from the first to the second 
and third interspike intervals, was suggested to be strongly 
responsible for the training-induced rise in RFD (Van Cut-
sem et al. 1998) (see Fig. 3). It is possible, however, that 
such large increases in MU discharge rate are most readily 
achieved by use of explosive-type exercise and/or ballistic 
movement training given the fact that discharge rates are 
2–3 times higher during ballistic than slow contractions 
(Desmedt and Godaux 1977; Van Cutsem et al. 1998).
In addition to the increase in maximal MU discharge 
rates evoked by weeks or months of ballistic-type strength 
training in both young and old adults, an increased inci-
dence of doublet discharges (i.e., successive MU action 
potentials with an interspike interval ≤5 ms) was observed 
following 12 weeks of dynamic ballistic training of the 
human dorsiflexors (tibialis anterior), representing a change 
towards ultra-high discharge rate behaviour (≥200 Hz) 
of MUs at the onset of ballistic muscle contractions (Van 
Cutsem et al. 1998). The presence of doublet discharges 
at the onset of muscle contraction is known to result in a 
marked increase in contractile force production, and in par-
ticular leads to large increases in RFD (Binder-Macleod 
and Kesar 2005; Burke et al. 1976; Moritani and Yoshitake 
1998). Specifically, the incidence of such ultra-high dis-
charge rates increased from 5 % of all MUs recorded prior 
to training to comprise 33 % of all MUs recorded follow-
ing 12 weeks of ballistic strength training (Van Cutsem 
et al. 1998). This adaptive change in the discharge output 
of spinal motor neurones is likely to take increasing advan-
tage of the so-called catch-like property of skeletal muscle, 
where the arrival of doublet action potentials at the motor 
end plate and their signalling throughout the cell mem-
brane triggers an amplified magnitude of Ca2+ efflux from 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum to the cell cytosol (Duchateau 
and Hainaut 1986), in turn evoking an extraordinary steep 
rise in contractile force development (Binder-Macleod and 
Kesar 2005; Cheng et al. 2013).
Several lines of evidence suggest that exercise involv-
ing explosive-type muscle contractions (i.e., muscle actions 
performed with maximal intentional RFD) is the most effi-
cient training modality, regardless of the training load used, 
for inducing maximal gains in RFD and muscle activation 
at contraction onset. For example, 4 weeks of isometric 
knee extensor training using a maximal intentional RFD 
and high peak force level (90 % MVC) produced mark-
edly larger gains in RFD and muscle activation, respec-
tively, than conventional hypertrophy training performed 
using lower intensities (75 % MVC) and submaximal RFD 
efforts (Tillin and Folland 2014). In addition, robust con-
current increases in RFD and EMG activity have been dem-
onstrated by employing explosive-type resistance exercise 
in young adults (de Ruiter et al. 2012; Tillin and Folland 
2014; Van Cutsem et al. 1998), old to very old individuals 
(Caserotti et al. 2008), and frail elderly patients recovering 
from elective hip replacement surgery (Suetta et al. 2004). 
These findings collectively indicate that explosive-type 
strength training is not only highly effective in eliciting 
marked gains in rapid force capacity (RFD and impulse) 
and increased muscle activation at the onset of muscle 
 1102
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
contraction, but is also tolerable across a wide range of 
individual backgrounds from young untrained/trained indi-
viduals to inactive frail elderly. On the other hand, it should 
be recognised that the use of non-explosive albeit heavy 
(≥75 % of 1-repetition maximum) training loads also 
seems effective in eliciting substantial increases in contrac-
tile RFD (Aagaard et al. 2002a; Andersen et al. 2009).
Contribution of musculotendinous factors
In addition to the adaptive changes induced in the nervous 
system in response to strength training described above (for 
more detailed reviews, see Aagaard 2003, 2010; Sale 2003), 
a number of contributing alterations might also be elicited 
in the musculoskeletal system (Aagaard and Thorstensson 
2003; Folland and Williams 2007). Although beyond the 
main scope of this review, these contributing factors will be 
briefly discussed below to acknowledge that the training-
induced adaptation of RFD during rapid contractions is not 
solely driven by changes isolated to the nervous system.
Duchateau and Hainaut (1984) were the first to demon-
strate an important role of muscle adaptation in the adap-
tive gain in RFD induced by strength training. The authors 
reported 18–31 % increases in peak RFD values when elec-
trical stimulation of the motor nerve was applied to evoke 
tetanic contractions of the human adductor pollicis fol-
lowing 3 months of explosive-type isometric or dynamic 
strength training. These observations strongly suggest that 
training-induced changes in RFD can be evoked indepen-
dently (or even in the absence) of changes in muscle activa-
tion (i.e., adaptive changes in the central nervous system) 
(Duchateau and Hainaut 1984). Elaborating on the muscu-
lar component of RFD adaptation, increasing overall ana-
tomical muscle size (cross-sectional area or volume) with 
training represents an effective means to increase RFD, 
since maximal contractile force capacity (and thereby 
RFD) is strongly governed by the macroscopic size of the 
muscle (Moss et al. 1997). Notably, increases in anatomi-
cal muscle cross-sectional area and/or volume appear to be 
a highly robust finding following heavy-resistance strength 
training in both young, old and very old adults (Aagaard 
et al. 2001; Esmarck et al. 2001; Hakkinen et al. 1998; 
Harridge et al. 1999; Holm et al. 2008; Narici et al. 1989; 
Suetta et al. 2004; Vikne et al. 2006).
While non-selective myofibre hypertrophy likely con-
tributes to increased RFD by increasing MVC strength, 
preferential type II hypertrophy (Aagaard et al. 2001; Hak-
kinen et al. 2001b; Staron et al. 1990; Suetta et al. 2008) is 
expected to increase RFD to an even greater extent given 
the higher intrinsic RFD of type II versus type I fibres 
(Metzger and Moss 1990). Furthermore, given the 10–50 % 
higher specific force of type II compared to type I fibres 
observed in both young and old individuals (Bottinelli et al. 
1999; Hvid et al. 2011; Larsson et al. 1997; Trappe et al. 
2003), heavy-resistance exercise regimes evoking pref-
erential type II hypertrophy are likely to achieve an even 
greater relative gain in MVC force and RFD compared 
to more non-selective training regimes. In support of this 
notion, Hakkinen et al. (1985) reported a positive associa-
tion (r2 = 0.30) between the change in type II:I fibre ratio 
and the change in time to reach 30 % of MVC force after 
24 weeks of explosive strength training. Further highlight-
ing the influence of muscular changes on RFD, Andersen 
et al. (2010) found that a decrease in relative RFD (i.e., nor-
malised to MVC) measured in the very initial contraction 
phase (0–50 ms relative to force onset) after 14 weeks of 
non-explosive heavy strength training was correlated with 
the decrease in the relative proportion of type IIX muscle 
fibres (r2 = 0.37).
It is well established that the content of myosin heavy 
chain IIX isoforms in human skeletal muscle is markedly 
reduced (50–90 %) along with a corresponding upregula-
tion in myosin heavy chain IIA isoforms in response to 
prolonged heavy-resistance strength training protocols 
(Andersen and Aagaard 2000; Andersen et al. 2010; Krae-
mer et al. 1995). This interaction may account for the find-
ing that short-term (e.g., 2–8 weeks) strength training pro-
grams tend to increase RFD significantly (e.g., Holtermann 
et al. 2007; Ogasawara et al. 2013; Tillin et al. 2012b), 
when increases in MU discharge rates are elicited with-
out substantive fibre type transformation or hypertrophy, 
whereas longer periods of strength training may have less 
effect on (or might even reduce) RFD (Hakkinen et al. 
1985; Ogasawara et al. 2013), when less change in MU 
discharge rate presumably occurs but reductions in type 
IIX myosin heavy chain content are triggered (Andersen 
et al. 2010). A purpose of future research, therefore, is to 
more explicitly examine the interactions between neural 
and muscular mechanisms that influence RFD to develop a 
more complex mechanistic model describing the adaptabil-
ity in RFD with training.
Training-induced changes in muscle–tendon stiff-
ness might speculatively (and partially) contribute to the 
observed increase in RFD with strength training. In support 
of this notion, it has previously been demonstrated that ten-
don and aponeurosis stiffness is positively related to RFD 
in vivo (Bojsen-Moller et al. 2005; Waugh et al. 2014) (see 
“Musculotendinous stiffness”) and that increased in-series 
compliance of the muscle–tendon unit leads to decreased 
RFD (Wilkie 1949). In addition, substantial increases 
(+15–25 %) in tendon stiffness have been reported for the 
patellar and Achilles tendons in response to prolonged peri-
ods of strength training in both young and old individuals 
(Arampatzis et al. 2007; Duclay et al. 2009; Kongsgaard 
et al. 2007; Reeves et al. 2003; Waugh et al. 2014; Seynnes 
et al. 2009). Thus, training-induced increases in tendon 
 1103
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
stiffness may potentially be a factor influencing RFD, at 
least partly, however, further research is required to confirm 
a causative role in this association.
Implications for selected subject groups
Cross-sectional studies show that top-level power ath-
letes (track and field sprinters and jumpers) are character-
ised by a markedly greater knee extensor RFD measured 
during the initial 150 ms of muscle contraction than age-
matched habitually active individuals, which may be partly 
explained by a greater muscle activation in power athletes 
at the initiation of muscle contraction (0–50 ms relative 
to force onset) (Tillin et al. 2010). When normalised to 
MVC, RFD represented by the force developed at specific 
time points was also greater in power athletes compared to 
non-athletes (Tillin et al. 2010), indicating the presence of 
qualitative adaptations in this group of athletes that could 
potentially rely on higher MU discharge rates and more 
pronounced doublet discharge behaviour, greater pro-
portions of type II muscle fibres and/or elevated tendon 
stiffness.
The above observations, and their associated mecha-
nisms in the neuromotor system, have important impli-
cations for athletic performance. For example, strength-
trained athletes (elite rugby players) with a high RFD 
demonstrated substantially faster 5-m sprint (acceleration) 
times (<1 s) than athletes with a lower RFD (slower 5-m 
sprint times, ≥1 s) (Tillin et al. 2013a). Further underlin-
ing the importance of a high RFD for superior sprint/accel-
eration capacity in sports, a negative linear relationship 
(r2 = 0.42, p < 0.05) was observed between 5-m sprint time 
and relative RFD obtained at 100 ms (Tillin et al. 2013a).
The gains in muscle activation and particularly in maxi-
mal MU discharge rate induced by strength training, and 
the resulting improvement in RFD are of great importance 
not only for athletes but also for elderly individuals. In the 
case of untrained individuals, maximal MU discharge rates 
recorded during MVC efforts are reduced in old compared 
to young adults (Christie and Kamen 2010; Connelly et al. 
1999; Kamen and Knight 2004; Klass et al. 2008). Moreo-
ver, maximal MU discharge rates are substantially reduced 
at the onset of rapid isometric muscle actions in old com-
pared to young adults (Klass et al. 2008). As a consequence 
(although other factors such as type II myofibre atrophy 
contribute as well), maximal RFD is substantially reduced 
in old versus young adults (Barry et al. 2005; Clarkson 
et al. 1981; Hakkinen et al. 1998; Hvid et al. 2010; Izqui-
erdo et al. 1999; Klass et al. 2008; Korhonen et al. 2006; 
Suetta et al. 2009). In turn, the age-related reduction in 
RFD and maximal MU discharge rate may present seri-
ous functional consequences for elderly people. In older 
individuals a reduced RFD is associated with a decreased 
postural stability during upright standing (Izquierdo et al. 
1999) while a reduced rate of EMG increase, representing 
the neural equivalent of RFD, is associated with impaired 
balance recovery during tripping (Pijnappels et al. 2005).
Notably, life-long strength-trained elderly (weight lift-
ers) demonstrate maximal MU discharge rates that are 
~25 % higher than those observed in age-matched (67–
79 years) untrained individuals (Leong et al. 1999), sug-
gesting that the age-related decline in maximal MU dis-
charge rates may, to a large extent, be counteracted by 
(particularly explosive) strength training. In strong sup-
port of this, maximal MU discharge rates recorded during 
MVCs appear to consistently increase in old as well as 
young individuals in response to strength training (Chris-
tie and Kamen 2010; Kamen and Knight 2004; Patten 
et al. 2001; Van Cutsem et al. 1998). Notably, when com-
pared following a period of strength training, maximal 
MU discharge rates no longer seem to differ between old 
and young subjects (Christie and Kamen 2010; Kamen 
and Knight 2004; Patten et al. 2001), suggesting that 
heavy-resistance exercise is highly effective in remov-
ing the age-related deficit in maximal MU discharge rate 
during conditions of maximal muscle force production. 
This important adaptation in motor neurone function may 
explain the observation of marked gains in RFD in old 
(60 years) and very old (80 years) women when exposed to 
12 weeks of explosive-type heavy-resistance strength train-
ing (Caserotti et al. 2008). Notably, the age-related deficit 
in RFD observed between the 60- and 80-year-old women 
was reduced from 43 % prior to training to 15 % following 
training with no statistical age-related difference observed 
(Caserotti et al. 2008).
Concluding remarks
Increasing the maximal voluntary force-generating capacity 
by means of strength training may affect RFD by increas-
ing it proportionally across the force–time curve (i.e., 
where time to attain a given relative force level, say 50 % 
MVC, remains unchanged). However, as shown diagram-
matically in Fig. 5, this relative rate for force rise can be 
modulated by a number of factors. For example, rapid mus-
cle activation through reductions in MU recruitment thresh-
olds and (perhaps more significantly) increases in MU dis-
charge rates at the onset of contraction appear to be major 
factors influencing RFD, particularly in the early (first 
50–75 ms) rise in force during a maximal voluntary muscle 
contraction. The ability to activate the muscle rapidly may 
in turn be influenced by factors at both supraspinal (e.g., 
motor cortical outflow, agonist–antagonist control) and spi-
nal (e.g., neuromodulatory synaptic input) levels. In addi-
tion, differences in muscle fibre type composition between 
muscles and between individuals may also influence the 
 1104
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
observed differences in RFD. Moreover, evidence exists 
to indicate both a synergistic and multiplicative relation-
ship between the rate of muscle activation by the nervous 
system and fibre type composition, which may be explored 
more explicitly in future research. The effects of training-
induced changes in muscle architecture (potentially of 
small-to-moderate effect) and tendon stiffness remain 
unclear, with changes in tendon mechanical properties 
potentially influencing the adaptive change in RFD with 
strength training, but more likely (and to a greater extent) 
influencing RFD variation between muscles and between 
individuals. Although the amount and rate of Ca2+ release 
from the sarcoplasmic reticulum likely influence the RFD 
in vivo, it is unclear whether training-induced alterations in 
muscle fibre Ca2+ sensitivity play a role.
To briefly summarise the observations and data pre-
sented in this section, it is clear that explosive-type strength 
training has a large positive effect on RFD, and that heavy-
resistance strength training can also elicit improvements in 
rapid force capacity (particularly in the later rise in force 
during contraction). It is also clear that the effect of age-
ing (a reduced RFD is observed in older adults) as well 
as differences between athlete populations (faster RFD 
is observed in athletes with a speed-power training back-
ground) comply well with our understanding of the above 
factors in their influence of RFD in human skeletal muscle.
Methodological considerations: RFD evaluation
Because RFD variables are typically measured in isomet-
ric conditions to control for the confounding influence of 
joint angle and angular velocity changes, this section will 
focus exclusively on isometric RFD, unless explicitly 
stated otherwise. It is notable that RFD measures are less 
reliable than MVC force, and substantially so during the 
early phase of contraction. Therefore, there is a need for a 
strict methodological approach to maximise reliability and 
to collect worthwhile data.
Dynamometer and recording
Task
The purpose, whether practical (e.g., for performance/
training monitoring, injury screening, fall or balance pre-
diction) or experimental, largely determines the choice of 
task for RFD measurements. If the purpose is practical, 
the task for RFD measurement should be specific to the 
practical activity of interest, as RFD is known to be influ-
enced by the muscle group(s) and joint angle(s) at which 
it is measured (Bellumori et al. 2011; de Ruiter et al. 2004; 
Tillin et al. 2012a). RFD has most often been measured 
in isolated single-joint tasks such as elbow flexion/exten-
sion (Barry et al. 2005; Bellumori et al. 2011; Sahaly et al. 
2001), knee extension/flexion (Aagaard et al. 2002b; de 
Ruiter et al. 2004; Hannah et al. 2014; Tillin et al. 2010) 
and ankle plantar/dorsiflexion (Gruber et al. 2007; Van 
Cutsem and Duchateau 2005; Waugh et al. 2013), via the 
use of a commercial isokinetic dynamometer with a rota-
tional torque transducer (Aagaard et al. 2002b; Waugh et al. 
2013), or a custom-built dynamometer incorporating a lin-
ear strain gauge load cell measuring force (Hannah et al. 
2014; Mirkov et al. 2004; Tillin et al. 2010). Measuring the 
individual’s external lever arm (e.g., from the linear strain 
gauge load cell to the joint centre) facilitates conversion 
between force and torque, and the use of torque values may 
facilitate wider comparison of data sets.
Occasionally, RFD has been measured during multiple-
joint actions such as squats (Nuzzo et al. 2008; Tillin et al. 
2013a), leg press (Hakkinen and Keskinen 1989; Marcora 
and Miller 2000), and mid-thigh pulls (Kawamori et al. 
2006), typically via the use of a force plate (Tillin et al. 
2013a) or a linear force transducer (Marcora and Miller 
2000). Isolated single-joint tasks typically provide an 
experimentally controlled situation in which to assess the 
underlying physiological determinants of RFD, whereas 
multiple-joint tasks may be more appropriate/relevant for 
practical outcomes.
Compliance
Any compliance or distensibility within the dynamom-
eter system allows uncontrolled changes in joint angle 
and velocity (Wilkie 1949), as well as dissipation and 
thus attenuation of force during the period of movement. 
Fig. 5  Rate of force development (RFD) is influenced by numerous 
factors within the neuromuscular system; those contributing to maxi-
mal muscular strength will improve the mean RFD (assuming the 
rate at which a given proportional force level is reached remains con-
stant), whereas those affecting the time to reach a given force level 
may additionally influence the RFD measured at different time inter-
vals during the rise in muscle force. CSA cross-sectional area
 1105
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
These effects confound RFD measurements and are 
highly undesirable. Some biological compliance is inevi-
table, however, due to compression of soft-tissue, lead-
ing to small unavoidable changes in joint angle. Nev-
ertheless, compliance of the dynamometer depends on 
its mechanical rigidity and ability to restrain/minimise 
joint movement. Some dynamometers (particularly com-
mercially available isokinetic dynamometers that are in 
large part designed for the comfort of patients; Fig. 6a) 
have been found to allow large changes in joint angle 
(>15° knee angle change during isometric knee exten-
sion) (Tsaopoulos et al. 2007) in comparison to rigid 
custom-built dynamometers (4° knee angle change dur-
ing isometric knee extension) (Folland et al. 2014) 
(Fig. 6b), presumably due to the excessive compliance 
of commercial dynamometers. Compliance within the 
dynamometer is caused by non-rigid components, loose 
or poorly designed strapping and restraint of the partici-
pant, and excessive padding on the chair/table and crank-
arm adaptor (Fig. 6a). We recommend using custom-built 
dynamometers or customising commercial dynamom-
eters for minimal compliance.
For multiple-joint tasks (e.g., mid-thigh pull, squatting) 
there are more degrees of freedom and movement available 
within the musculoskeletal system which makes consistent 
positioning and restraint more problematic. In this instance 
it is advisable to start the explosive contraction from a 
standardized low-level of active pre-tension (Tillin et al. 
a
b
c
d
Fig. 6  Photograph and baseline-torque recordings from a commer-
cial isokinetic dynamometer (a, c) and a custom-built dynamom-
eter (b, d), measuring knee extensor torque at ~60° knee flexion in 
the same participant. The padding on the chair/crank-arm adaptor in 
a, that is not present in b, contributes to dynamometer compliance. 
Torque in d is the product of force and moment arm. The baseline-
torque recordings in c and d are prior to and during the early phase 
of an explosive contraction, and presented in the same scale for both 
absolute (Nm) and relative (% MVC) units. The dashed lines are 
±3 SDs of the baseline mean which is often used as a threshold for 
detecting contraction onset, and is comparable with typical objec-
tive criteria thresholds for detecting an unstable baseline (e.g., shift 
above/below this threshold in the preceding 200 ms). The consider-
ably greater baseline noise amplitude in c makes the thresholds for 
detecting contraction onset and/or an unstable baseline, including any 
pre-tension or countermovement, markedly less sensitive than in d
 1106
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
2013a), even if it may partly affect peak RFD (Van Cutsem 
and Duchateau 2005).
Acquisition and filtering
The dynamometer used to measure RFD should ideally 
have low baseline noise amplitude, as this will improve 
the accuracy of the measurements and particularly the 
determination of contraction onset (discussed in more 
detail below). Commercial isokinetic dynamometers are 
often noisier than strain gauges (another reason for using 
custom-built dynamometers; see Fig. 6). For example, 
in knee extensor experiments baseline noise ranges of 
<0.1 % MVC force have been observed with custom-built 
dynamometers incorporating a strain gauge load cell (de 
Ruiter et al. 2006; Folland et al. 2014) compared with 
>1 % MVC force with a commercial isokinetic dynamom-
eter (Tillin et al. 2012a).
Early-phase (first 25–50 ms) RFD appears important 
for performance (de Ruiter et al. 2006; Tillin et al. 2010) 
and injury avoidance (Domire et al. 2011; Krosshaug et al. 
2007), yet can be small, e.g., 2–12 % of MVC force (Tillin 
et al. 2012a). Therefore it is important that the recording 
apparatus (strain gauge load cell, amplifier, sampling hard-
ware and software) has low-noise and high-amplitude reso-
lution to discern differences in early-phase RFD between 
individuals or sessions. To give an example, recent stud-
ies have used apparatus that allow force measurements to 
be resolved to 0.2 N over a 1 kN range (1 part in 5000) 
(Haider and Folland 2014).
The force signal should be sampled at a high frequency 
(≥1 kHz; ≥1 data point per millisecond) for several rea-
sons: (1) to accurately measure the high RFD that human 
skeletal muscle is capable of producing (>10 maximum 
isometric forces per second) (de Ruiter et al. 1999); (2) to 
accurately identify contraction onset (Tillin et al. 2013b); 
(3) to synchronise the force signal with EMG, which has a 
Nyquist limit of ≥1 kHz (Konrad 2006); (4) to accurately 
measure motor response times such as electromechanical 
delay, which can be <7 ms for involuntary and <13 ms for 
voluntary contractions (Tillin et al. 2010); and (5) because 
the high-frequency (low-amplitude) baseline noise can pro-
vide a useful signal pattern from which contraction onset 
is manually identified (Tillin et al. 2013b). Following data 
acquisition there should be minimal filtering or smoothing 
of the signal to maintain the baseline noise pattern (if man-
ually identifying contraction onset) and to avoid time shifts 
in the force signal caused by the smoothing function, which 
are particularly problematic if relating contraction onset to 
the onset of other biological responses, e.g., EMG to deter-
mine electromechanical delay. If filtering is unavoidable 
due to high baseline noise amplitude then we recommend 
using a zero lag, low-pass digital filter (e.g., fourth-order 
Butterworth) (Winter 1990) at the highest possible cut-off 
frequency, to minimise time shifts.
Protocol
Instruction and feedback
RFD measurements are sensitive to the instructions given 
to the participant prior to the contraction. In an early study, 
Bemben et al. (1990) compared the force–time characteris-
tics of isometric handgrip contractions in response to two 
different instructions: (1) you should reach peak force as 
quickly as possible by squeezing “hard and fast” versus (2) 
peak force is of no concern, and you should just squeeze 
as “fast” as possible. Whilst peak forces were greatest in 
the “hard and fast” condition, peak RFD was greatest in the 
“fast” condition. Very similar results were observed dur-
ing both isometric elbow flexion and leg press exercises by 
Sahaly et al. (2001), who reported 20–46 % improvements 
in peak RFD when participants were instructed to push 
“fast” compared with “hard and fast” (see also Duchateau 
and Baudry 2014). Collectively, these results highlight that 
instruction should emphasise the importance of contracting 
as “fast” as possible if the aim is to achieve maximal RFD, 
and attempting to achieve maximal force and RFD within 
the same contraction may result in suboptimal measures of 
both parameters. Thus, contractions used to measure MVC 
force should be separated from those used to measure RFD 
(whenever possible), and the instruction in both situations 
should be specific to the objective of that contraction, i.e., 
as “hard” as possible for MVC force or as “fast” as pos-
sible for RFD. However, RFD has been found to have a 
strong positive relationship with the peak force achieved in 
that contraction (Bellumori et al. 2011; Van Cutsem et al. 
1998). This suggests that participants should be encouraged 
to achieve high peak forces even if the emphasis is on con-
tracting as fast as possible to measure RFD. Therefore, we 
recommend instructing participants to contract as “fast and 
hard” as possible with the emphasis on the “fast/explosive/
rising” phase of contraction, and discarding any contrac-
tions with low peak forces, e.g., <70 % (de Ruiter et al. 
2004) or <80 % MVC force (Folland et al. 2014).
If using distinct contractions to measure RFD (i.e., sepa-
rate from those used to measure MVC force), we recom-
mend keeping the explosive (“fast and hard”) contractions 
short (0.5–1.5 s) (Barry et al. 2005; Bellumori et al. 2011; 
Tillin et al. 2010; Van Cutsem et al. 1998). This minimises 
any fatigue or discomfort, which may be favourable in 
clinical patients, and enables completion of a larger num-
ber of trials (≥10) in a short period of time (e.g., 15–20-s 
rest periods between efforts) which might be expected to 
facilitate reliable and representative measures of RFD (see 
below).
 1107
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
During a test session it is important to provide visual 
RFD feedback to the participant after each explosive con-
traction, 
with 
appropriate 
explanation/interpretation, 
and encouragement to improve performance. Examples 
from the literature of how this feedback has been pro-
vided include displaying peak RFD (Tillin et al. 2010) or 
the time between 2–30 % of MVC force (de Ruiter et al. 
2004). Within the RFD literature investigators have typi-
cally imposed the start of an explosive contraction through 
an auditory signal (e.g., 3-2-1-go); however, it is unknown 
whether this results in greater RFD measures than if the 
participant self-selects the start of the contraction.
Pre‑tension and countermovement
Active tension in the muscle prior to the onset of an explo-
sive contraction (pre-tension) alters the shape of the rising 
force–time curve increasing the initial (40 ms) torque-time 
integral (de Ruiter et al. 2006) and decreasing peak RFD 
(Van Cutsem and Duchateau 2005), in part due to a change 
in MU discharge pattern during the explosive action (Van 
Cutsem and Duchateau 2005) (see “Association between 
maximal MU discharge rate and RFD”). Similarly, a coun-
termovement (i.e., the production of a negative/antagonist 
force) immediately prior to the onset of an explosive con-
traction also appears to influence RFD, as a function of the 
amplitude and duration of the countermovement (Grabiner 
1994; Kamimura et al. 2009). Therefore, pre-contraction 
conditions should be standardised across contractions, par-
ticipants and sessions to ensure reliable measures of RFD, 
and contractions with uncontrolled pre-tension or counter-
movement should be rejected. On a practical level, stand-
ardising the pre-contraction conditions can be done by dis-
playing the baseline force on a sensitive scale in real time 
during the test session (Tillin et al. 2010) to provide this 
feedback to participants, and rejecting attempts where the 
baseline force is not sufficiently stable (e.g., shift >0.5 N 
in the preceding 200 ms) (Blazevich et al. 2009; de Ruiter 
et al. 2004; Tillin et al. 2010). During off-line analysis, 
objective criteria for a stable baseline should also be strictly 
applied. It is worth noting that the magnitude of counter-
movement/pre-tension that can be detected during the test 
session or analysis is dependent on the baseline noise, with 
lower noise amplitude facilitating a more sensitive detec-
tion of countermovement/pre-tension (Fig. 6).
Familiarisation and number of trials
Due to the need to maximise the reliability of RFD meas-
ures, we would recommend participants to complete a min-
imum of one familiarisation session prior to any measure-
ments. Whilst there is no quantitative data describing the 
influence of the number of contractions on reliability, we 
recommend that investigators ensure they have collected at 
least five acceptable trials (stable baseline, high RFD score, 
explosive contractions) and average across the best three 
efforts to provide maximal RFD measures. If there is a 
clear trend toward an increase or decrease of RFD variables 
across the different trials, then this may signify potentiation 
or fatigue effects. Prolonged warm-up/practice procedures 
and/or inter-trial rest periods may potentially alleviate the 
problem.
Analysis
As discussed above, contractions with discernible coun-
termovement or pre-tension (according to objective cri-
teria) should be excluded from the analysis. The major-
ity of measurements available from the rising force–time 
curve involve determination of the onset, or start, of the 
contraction.
Contraction onset
Different onset detection methods have been proposed 
including threshold methods and systematic manual/visual 
approaches. Within the wider scientific literature on detect-
ing signal onsets manual/visual approaches are generally 
considered as the gold standard/reference for validation of 
other approaches, i.e., automated detection methods (Di 
Fabio 1987; Soda et al. 2010; Uliam Kuriki et al. 2011). 
Within the RFD literature, determining contraction onset 
as the point at which force increases above a specified 
threshold has been widely employed, and as identifying 
this point is easily automated the method is considered reli-
able and time efficient. The threshold level has been set in 
absolute units (e.g., 7.5 Nm) (Andersen and Aagaard 2006; 
Blazevich et al. 2009) or relative to individual MVC force 
[e.g., 2 % MVC (Granacher et al. 2009) or 2.5 % MVC 
(Johnson et al. 2015; Rousanoglou et al. 2010)]. Whilst 
absolute thresholds provide a simple approach they may be 
unsuitable for comparisons of individuals, cohorts or mus-
cle groups that have differing levels of function. Therefore, 
relative thresholds would seem to be preferable assuming 
they are based on a sufficiently robust reference measure.
As can be seen from the values above, studies utilising 
automated threshold methods (including absolute and rela-
tive) have often employed relatively high thresholds, likely 
due to the use of commercially available dynamometers 
that tend to have high inherent noise (noise range of ~5 Nm 
or >1 % MVC; Fig. 6c) (Tillin et al. 2012a) in compari-
son to custom-built dynamometers (<0.1 Nm; Fig. 6d) (de 
Ruiter et al. 2007; Tillin et al. 2010). These high thresh-
olds may be relatively inaccurate in defining force onset, as 
recent studies using a low-noise dynamometer and system-
atic manual onset detection have found that knee extensor 
 1108
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
torques of >5 Nm or 2.5 % MVC are not achieved until 
>25 ms after contraction onset (Haider and Folland 2014; 
Hannah et al. 2012) (Fig. 7). This degree of inaccuracy for 
high-threshold automatic methods may invalidate meas-
urements of RFD during the early phase of the contraction 
(e.g., first 50 ms). An alternative method for defining an 
automatic threshold is relative to the noise of the baseline 
force recording (e.g., 3 SDs; Fig. 6), which has produced 
low thresholds when used with custom-built dynamometers 
(~1 N or 0.5 Nm) (de Ruiter et al. 2004, 2006).
A wholly different approach involves systematic man-
ual/visual identification of the actual instant of force 
onset. Whilst this approach appears to provide good valid-
ity (Tillin et al. 2013b), the potential influence of subjec-
tivity could compromise its reliability (Staude and Wolf 
1999), and it is undoubtedly less time efficient than auto-
mated methods. To maximise reliability of manual onset 
detection, these methods employ a systematic approach 
that includes the use of specific definitions to determine 
the actual instant of onset, e.g., “the last trough before 
force deflects above the range of the baseline noise” (Fol-
land et al. 2014; Tillin et al. 2010) or “the first derivative 
of the filtered torque signal crossed zero for the last time 
before torque rise” (de Ruiter et al. 2007), and viewing 
the force recordings on a consistent scale (e.g., 300 ms vs. 
1 N). When utilised with a low-noise dynamometer and 
minimal filtering this approach has been found to produce 
reliable onsets (intra- and inter-investigator SD of 0.33 
and 0.52 ms) (Folland et al. 2014) and this inconsistency 
appears small in comparison to the >25 ms delay in onset 
identification with some high-threshold automated meth-
ods. However, with a high-noise dynamometer or extensive 
filtering/smoothing the manual visual method may be sub-
stantially less reliable.
In summary, if the initial phase of the rising force–time 
curve is of interest then a low-threshold automated method 
or a systematic method of manual onset detection is recom-
mended. In either case, accurate onset detection is largely 
dependent on the noise of the dynamometer.
Variables
Once contraction onset has been defined, a number of dif-
ferent measures can be obtained from the rising force–time 
curve. Some of the more common include force at specific 
time points (Rousanoglou et al. 2010; Tillin et al. 2010) 
(Fig. 8a) as well as RFD and impulse, which can both be 
measured over either overlapping periods starting from 
0, e.g., RFD/impulse from 0 to 100 ms relative to onset 
(Aagaard et al. 2002b; Barry et al. 2005) (Fig. 8a), or con-
secutive periods, e.g., RFD/impulse from 50 to 100 ms 
Fig. 7  An unfiltered force–time curve recorded during an explosive 
contraction of the knee extensors (force is expressed relative to maxi-
mal voluntary force). Force onset (0 ms) was detected manually/visu-
ally using the systematic method detailed in Tillin et al. (2010). Some 
automated systems for detecting contraction onset have used arbitrary 
thresholds between 2 and 3.6 % maximal voluntary force which in 
this example occurs 24–30 ms after manually detected onset. Figure 
reproduced with permission from Tillin et al. (2013b)
Fig. 8  Common measurements of the rising force–time curve. a 
Force at specific time points (F50, F100, etc.) and overlapping RFD 
measurements all starting from force onset (RFD0–50, RFD0–100, etc.). 
b An identical force trace showing measurements of sequential RFD 
and sequential impulse both assessed over consecutive periods
 1109
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
relative to onset (Folland et al. 2014; Penailillo et al. 2015) 
(Fig. 8b). Irrespective of the measure, in all cases multiple 
time points/periods clearly provide a more comprehensive 
description of the whole rising curve than single measures. 
In addition, all measures should be corrected for the gravi-
tational force on the limb.
Force at a specific time point from 0 (e.g., 300 N at 
100 ms) is numerically equivalent to RFD from 0 to that 
point (3 N/ms), so it is strongly recommended not to report 
both of these measures to avoid redundant data. Consecu-
tive RFD measurements provide additional information 
that may help identify when any divergence in the force–
time curve occurs and isolate the physiological determi-
nants contributing to this divergence (Folland et al. 2014). 
Another widely used variant of RFD is peak RFD, i.e., the 
steepest part of the curve over a specific epoch. Smaller 
epochs will be more sensitive to changes in the slope of 
the curve, but also more sensitive to unsystematic vari-
ability and thus less reliable, so thought should be given 
to the purpose of the measure (e.g., relevance to a func-
tional action or physiological mechanism) before select-
ing an epoch. Nevertheless, peak RFD is a single metric at 
an inconsistent point on the force–time curve—except for 
brief impulse-like ballistic contractions (Bellumori et al. 
2011; Casartelli et al. 2014; Klass et al. 2008; Van Cutsem 
et al. 1998)—and thus provides a less comprehensive and 
standardised measure than RFD or impulse over set time 
periods.
During dynamic functional activities, the change in 
momentum of a body/limb is directly proportional to impulse, 
and thus impulse is arguably the most functionally relevant 
RFD measure that can be taken during the rising force–time 
curve of explosive isometric contractions. It is therefore sur-
prising that this measure has not been more widely used.
Another less common approach is to use time as the 
independent variable and assess time to achieve a specific 
force (Hakkinen and Keskinen 1989; Hannah and Folland 
2015), or the time to increase from one force to another 
(Mirkov et al. 2004). Using time as the independent vari-
able may be relevant to tasks where a specific force must 
be achieved. This measurement also facilitates comparisons 
over the same range of forces and may relate more directly 
to the physiological determinants specific to that range of 
forces (which may not be the case for fixed time periods 
with achievement of variable forces that involve changing 
determinants). Of the various measures discussed, time 
between two different forces, and peak RFD are the only 
measures that are independent of contraction onset.
Normalisation
Normalisation of the measures taken from the rising 
force–time curve can provide additional information. 
Normalisation to body mass may be useful for compar-
ing individuals or groups of differing body size. The ideal 
normalisation function (i.e., ratio or allometric scaling) is 
beyond the scope of this review but may depend on the 
kinetic variable assessed (force or torque) (for more infor-
mation see Folland et al. 2008; Jaric 2002). Another com-
mon normalisation procedure is comparison of RFD vari-
ables to MVC force or torque, which measures the ability 
to express the available force-generating capacity in an 
explosive situation. A less common, but physiologically 
revealing normalisation procedure is to compare volun-
tary RFD to equivalent values from an evoked contraction 
(de Ruiter et al. 2004; Tillin et al. 2012b). Specifically, 
an evoked octet of 8 supramaximal pulses at 300 Hz has 
been shown to drive the muscle at its maximal capacity 
for RFD during the early phase of contraction (de Ruiter 
et al. 2004; Deutekom et al. 2000). The voluntary:octet 
force ratio at 50 ms into the contraction has been termed 
“neural efficacy” (Buckthorpe et al. 2012; Hannah et al. 
2012) as it indicates the effectiveness of volitional neu-
ral drive to utilise the muscle’s full capacity for explosive 
strength/RFD.
Reliability
Based on simple test–retest correlation analyses, high-to-
moderate reliability has been documented for the assess-
ment of RFD in the knee extensors (Buckthorpe et al. 
2012), elbow flexors (Mirkov et al. 2004) and plantar flex-
ors (Clark et al. 2007) as well as in isometric multi-joint 
movements such as the static squat (Tillin et al. 2013a). 
Despite the use of strict methodological procedures, RFD 
variables have been found to be less reliable than MVC 
strength (within-subject CV of 2–4 %) (Tillin et al. 2010, 
2011, 2013a). In particular, the reliability of RFD and 
impulse measurements has consistently been found to be 
lower during the early phase of contraction, e.g., within-
subject CV for force measurements over repeated meas-
urement sessions: 12.8–16.6 % (0–50 ms); 4.5–5.3 % 
(0–100 ms); 4.5–5.1 % (0–150 ms) (Buckthorpe et al. 
2012; Tillin et al. 2011), and other studies have found nota-
bly lower reliability (Jenkins et al. 2014a). Regarding con-
secutive RFD measures during the different phases of an 
explosive contraction, RFD from 50 to 100 ms relative to 
onset has been found to be more reliable than RFD from 
0 to 50 ms or RFD from 100 to 150 ms relative to force 
onset, but similar to peak RFD, which is not surprising as 
peak RFD typically occurs within this middle time period 
(Buckthorpe et al. 2012). Impulse measurements have been 
found to have similar reliability to RFD measurements over 
the same periods (Buckthorpe et al. 2012), and qualitatively 
we have observed that there is often agreement between the 
two measures.
 1110
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
The high variability in early-phase volitional RFD meas-
ures appears likely to be due to neural factors, as measure-
ments of contractile explosive force at the same time point 
are markedly less variable (supramaximal evoked octet CV 
50 ms: 3.3–5.4 %) (Buckthorpe et al. 2012; Folland et al. 
unpublished data). The evoked octet has also been found 
to be a more reliable measure of evoked explosive force 
than the contractile response to a single twitch (Buckthorpe 
et al. 2012).
Additional remarks
Whilst this section focuses on the assessment of isometric 
RFD, it is important to give some consideration to RFD 
obtained during dynamic contractions, as logically these 
are more relevant to functional tasks. In dynamic isoin-
ertial contractions the mechanics of the system (joint 
angle, velocity and acceleration) interact with force/
torque in a non-linear manner—according to the torque–
angle-velocity relationship (King et al. 2006) and New-
ton’s second law of motion—confounding the evaluation 
of RFD. Nevertheless, it is conceivable that RFD and 
its determinants may be influenced by contraction type. 
Tillin et al. (2012a) compared torque at 25-ms time points 
from torque onset in concentric, eccentric, and isometric 
explosive knee extensions. The concentric and eccentric 
contractions were performed at a constant acceleration 
(2000° s−2), and torque at each time point in each condi-
tion was normalised to the MVC torque at that specific 
joint angle and velocity, to control for the confounding 
influence of angle and velocity changes. This normalisa-
tion approach also enabled comparison of the ability to 
utilise the available MVC torque in the different condi-
tions. Results showed that normalised RFD was 60 % 
greater in concentric compared to eccentric and isomet-
ric conditions at all measured time points, and that avail-
able MVC torque could be achieved in less than half 
the time (≤125 ms) in concentric contractions than pre-
viously recorded in isometric contractions (>300 ms) 
(Aagaard et al. 2002a; Thorstensson et al. 1976). This 
appeared to be attributable to neural mechanisms as the 
authors also measured a greater voluntary:evoked torque 
ratio and EMG amplitude during the concentric condi-
tion. More recent work (Tillin et al. 2013c) has shown 
that the influence of contraction type on RFD is further 
delineated by contractile velocity, whereby the ability to 
utilise the available MVC torque in explosive actions is 
greatest in fast concentric contractions, followed by slow 
concentric, isometric, and eccentric contractions. Collec-
tively, these studies provide unique evidence that dynamic 
contractions influence the ability to develop a high RFD, 
although more work is required to understand this phe-
nomenon and its relevance to function.
Concluding remarks and recommendations
To briefly summarise the observations presented in this 
methodological section, we recommend the application 
of rigorous procedures for the assessment of RFD, which 
include the following precautions:
 1) using rigid custom-built dynamometers (or custom-
ising commercially available dynamometers) where 
possible to minimise both compliance and baseline 
noise;
 2) sampling the force signal at more than 1 kHz to max-
imise accuracy;
 3) avoiding (or minimising) signal filtering and smooth-
ing to maintain baseline noise and prevent time shifts;
 4) completing a separate familiarisation session;
 5) instructing participants to contract “as fast and hard as 
possible” with particular emphasis on a fast increase 
in force;
 6) using short (~1 s) contractions interspersed by short 
rest periods (e.g., 20 s) to record RFD separately from 
MVC force, where possible;
 7) collecting at least five good contractions, from which 
the average RFD of the three best trials is retained;
 8) rejecting trials with an unstable baseline (uncontrolled 
pre-tension and visible countermovement);
 9) detecting the force onset with a low-threshold auto-
mated or systematic manual methods;
 
10) quantifying RFD/impulse at multiple time points 
rather than at a single instant;
 
11) considering that reliability is consistently lower dur-
ing the early phase of the contraction.
Conclusion
For more than five decades, isometric MVC strength has 
been extensively quantified to characterise in vivo skeletal 
muscle function in a variety of subject populations and 
conditions. The widespread use of this variable has resulted 
from its relatively easy (and valid) evaluation in both labo-
ratory and clinical settings as well as to its good sensitivity 
to detect acute and chronic changes in neuromuscular func-
tion, while its functional value has often been questioned 
(see, e.g., Aalund et al. 2013). Since their first evaluation 
back in the 1970s (Thorstensson et al. 1976), RFD out-
comes have been considered to have important functional 
consequences because of their temporal similarity with 
respect to sport and daily activities (Aagaard et al. 2002a) 
and because of their positive correlation with performances 
in both sporting and functional daily tasks (see, e.g., Maffi-
uletti et al. 2010; Tillin et al. 2013a). Contrary to single-
measure MVC strength, there are multiple RFD variables 
 1111
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
that are differently governed by neural and muscular deter-
minants depending on their temporal occurrence and quan-
tification. One of the key points of this narrative review is 
that rapid muscle activation—likely through the critical 
role of MU discharge rate—may be considered as the main 
determinant of RFD in the early phase of the contraction 
(first 50–75 ms). Thus, changes in early-phase RFD esti-
mates associated with fatigue, training or detraining have 
the potential to be used as a surrogate for neural function 
when techniques such as EMG and twitch interpolation are 
not implementable, e.g., for the evaluation of specific mus-
cle groups (such as those around the hip) (Casartelli et al. 
2014), in the applied/clinical setting. Another important 
point developed in our present article deals with the effec-
tiveness of explosive-type and heavy-resistance strength 
training to improve the earlier (through an improvement in 
rapid muscle activation) and later rise in force, respectively, 
which have crucial implications for designing successful 
training and rehabilitation programs for athletes, elderly 
individuals and patients with different pathologies. A final 
key point of this current review is that the evaluation of 
RFD is quite challenging from a methodological point of 
view (much more than the simple assessment of pure MVC 
strength), primarily because of the large variability in rapid 
muscle activation capacity at the onset of the contraction, 
and therefore it should be conducted with particular care. 
The recommendations we have provided should favour a 
more valid and widespread quantification of RFD—as a 
complement, or alternative, to MVC strength—in both lab-
oratory and clinical settings.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://crea-
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a 
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were 
made.
References
Aagaard P (2003) Training-induced changes in neural function. Exerc 
Sport Sci Rev 31:61–67
Aagaard P (2010) Neural adaptations to resistance exercise. In: Cardi-
nale M, Newton RU, Nosaka K (eds) Strength and conditioning: 
biological principles and practical applications. Wiley-Black-
well, New York, pp 105–124
Aagaard P, Thorstensson A (2003) Neuromuscular aspects of exer-
cise: adaptive responses evoked by strength training. In: Kjaer 
M (ed) Textbook of sports medicine. Blakwell, London, pp 
70–106
Aagaard P, Andersen JL, Dyhre-Poulsen P, Leffers AM, Wagner A, 
Magnusson SP, Halkjaer-Kristensen J, Simonsen EB (2001) A 
mechanism for increased contractile strength of human pen-
nate muscle in response to strength training: changes in muscle 
architecture. J Physiol 534:613–623
Aagaard P, Simonsen EB, Andersen JL, Magnusson P, Dyhre-Poulsen 
P (2002a) Increased rate of force development and neural drive 
of human skeletal muscle following resistance training. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) 93:1318–1326
Aagaard P, Simonsen EB, Andersen JL, Magnusson P, Dyhre-Poulsen 
P (2002b) Neural adaptation to resistance training: changes in 
evoked V-wave and H-reflex responses. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
92:2309–2318
Aalund PK, Larsen K, Hansen TB, Bandholm T (2013) Normalized 
knee-extension strength or leg-press power after fast-track total 
knee arthroplasty: which measure is most closely associated 
with performance-based and self-reported function? Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil 94:384–390
Abbate F, Bruton JD, De Haan A, Westerblad H (2002) Prolonged 
force increase following a high-frequency burst is not due to 
a sustained elevation of [Ca2+]i. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 
283:C42–C47
Allen GM, Gandevia SC, McKenzie DK (1995) Reliability of meas-
urements of muscle strength and voluntary activation using 
twitch interpolation. Muscle Nerve 18:593–600
Andersen JL (2001) Muscle fibre type characteristics of the runner. 
In: Bangsbo J, Larsen HB (eds) Running & science in an inter-
disciplinary perspective. Munksgaard Publishing, Copenhagen, 
pp 49–65
Andersen JL, Aagaard P (2000) Myosin heavy chain IIX overshoot in 
human skeletal muscle. Muscle Nerve 23:1095–1104
Andersen LL, Aagaard P (2006) Influence of maximal muscle 
strength and intrinsic muscle contractile properties on contrac-
tile rate of force development. Eur J Appl Physiol 96:46–52
Andersen LL, Andersen JL, Suetta C, Kjaer M, Sogaard K, Sjogaard 
G (2009) Effect of contrasting physical exercise interventions 
on rapid force capacity of chronically painful muscles. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) 107:1413–1419
Andersen LL, Andersen JL, Zebis MK, Aagaard P (2010) Early and 
late rate of force development: differential adaptive responses to 
resistance training? Scand J Med Sci Sports 20:e162–e169
Angelozzi M, Madama M, Corsica C, Calvisi V, Properzi G, McCaw 
ST, Cacchio A (2012) Rate of force development as an adjunc-
tive outcome measure for return-to-sport decisions after anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 
42:772–780
Anttila K, Manttari S, Jarvilehto M (2006) Effects of different train-
ing protocols on Ca2+ handling and oxidative capacity in skel-
etal muscle of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.). J Exp Biol 
209:2971–2978
Arampatzis A, Karamanidis K, Albracht K (2007) Adaptational 
responses of the human Achilles tendon by modulation of the 
applied cyclic strain magnitude. J Exp Biol 210:2743–2753
Aston-Jones G, Rajkowski J, Cohen J (2000) Locus coeruleus and 
regulation of behavioral flexibility and attention. Prog Brain 
Res 126:165–182
Azizi E, Brainerd EL, Roberts TJ (2008) Variable gearing in pennate 
muscles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105:1745–1750
Barry BK, Warman GE, Carson RG (2005) Age-related differences in 
rapid muscle activation after rate of force development training 
of the elbow flexors. Exp Brain Res 162:122–132
Baudry S, Duchateau J (2007) Postactivation potentiation in a human 
muscle: effect on the rate of torque development of tetanic 
and voluntary isometric contractions. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
102:1394–1401
Bawa P, Calancie B (1983) Repetitive doublets in human flexor carpi 
radialis muscle. J Physiol 339:123–132
Baylor SM, Hollingworth S (1988) Fura-2 calcium transients in frog 
skeletal muscle fibres. J Physiol 403:151–192
 1112
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
Baylor SM, Hollingworth S (2003) Sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium 
release compared in slow-twitch and fast-twitch fibres of mouse 
muscle. J Physiol 551:125–138
Bellumori M, Jaric S, Knight CA (2011) The rate of force develop-
ment scaling factor (RFD-SF): protocol, reliability, and muscle 
comparisons. Exp Brain Res 212:359–369
Bemben MG, Clasey JL, Massey BH (1990) The effect of the rate of 
muscle contraction on the force-time curve parameters of male 
and female subjects. Res Q Exerc Sport 61:96–99
Binder-Macleod S, Kesar T (2005) Catchlike property of skeletal 
muscle: recent findings and clinical implications. Muscle Nerve 
31:681–693
Blazevich AJ, Horne S, Cannavan D, Coleman DR, Aagaard P (2008) 
Effect of contraction mode of slow-speed resistance training on 
the maximum rate of force development in the human quadri-
ceps. Muscle Nerve 38:1133–1146
Blazevich AJ, Cannavan D, Horne S, Coleman DR, Aagaard P (2009) 
Changes in muscle force-length properties affect the early rise 
of force in vivo. Muscle Nerve 39:512–520
Bojsen-Moller J, Magnusson SP, Rasmussen LR, Kjaer M, Aagaard 
P (2005) Muscle performance during maximal isometric and 
dynamic contractions is influenced by the stiffness of the tendi-
nous structures. J Appl Physiol (1985) 99:986–994
Bottinelli R, Canepari M, Pellegrino MA, Reggiani C (1996) Force–
velocity properties of human skeletal muscle fibres: myosin 
heavy chain isoform and temperature dependence. J Physiol 
495(Pt 2):573–586
Bottinelli R, Pellegrino MA, Canepari M, Rossi R, Reggiani C (1999) 
Specific contributions of various muscle fibre types to human 
muscle performance: an in vitro study. J Electromyogr Kinesiol 
9:87–95
Brainerd EL, Azizi E (2005) Muscle fiber angle, segment bulging and 
architectural gear ratio in segmented musculature. J Exp Biol 
208:3249–3261
Buchthal F, Schmalbruch H (1970) Contraction times and fibre types 
in intact human muscle. Acta Physiol Scand 79:435–452
Buckthorpe MW, Hannah R, Pain TG, Folland JP (2012) Reliability 
of neuromuscular measurements during explosive isometric 
contractions, with special reference to electromyography nor-
malization techniques. Muscle Nerve 46:566–576
Buller AJ, Lewis DM (1965) The rate of tension development in iso-
metric tetanic contractions of mammalian fast and slow skeletal 
muscle. J Physiol 176:337–354
Burke RE, Rudomin P, Zajac FE 3rd (1976) The effect of activation 
history on tension production by individual muscle units. Brain 
Res 109:515–529
Casartelli NC, Lepers R, Maffiuletti NA (2014) Assessment of the 
rate of force development scaling factor for the hip muscles. 
Muscle Nerve 50:932–938
Caserotti P, Aagaard P, Larsen JB, Puggaard L (2008) Explosive 
heavy-resistance training in old and very old adults: changes in 
rapid muscle force, strength and power. Scand J Med Sci Sports 
18:773–782
Cheng AJ, Place N, Bruton JD, Holmberg HC, Westerblad H (2013) 
Doublet discharge stimulation increases sarcoplasmic reticulum 
Ca2+ release and improves performance during fatiguing con-
tractions in mouse muscle fibres. J Physiol 591:3739–3748
Christie A, Kamen G (2010) Short-term training adaptations in maxi-
mal motor unit firing rates and afterhyperpolarization duration. 
Muscle Nerve 41:651–660
Clark BC, Cook SB, Ploutz-Snyder LL (2007) Reliability of tech-
niques to assess human neuromuscular function in vivo. J Elec-
tromyogr Kinesiol 17:90–101
Clarkson PM, Kroll W, Melchionda AM (1981) Age, isometric 
strength, rate of tension development and fiber type composi-
tion. J Gerontol 36:648–653
Close RI (1972) Dynamic properties of mammalian skeletal muscles. 
Physiol Rev 52:129–197
Connelly DM, Rice CL, Roos MR, Vandervoort AA (1999) Motor 
unit firing rates and contractile properties in tibialis anterior of 
young and old men. J Appl Physiol (1985) 87:843–852
Crameri RM, Aagaard P, Qvortrup K, Langberg H, Olesen J, Kjaer 
M (2007) Myofibre damage in human skeletal muscle: effects 
of electrical stimulation versus voluntary contraction. J Physiol 
583:365–380
Dahmane R, Djordjevic S, Simunic B, Valencic V (2005) Spatial fiber 
type distribution in normal human muscle Histochemical and 
tensiomyographical evaluation. J Biomech 38:2451–2459
de Haan A (1998) The influence of stimulation frequency on force–
velocity characteristics of in situ rat medial gastrocnemius mus-
cle. Exp Physiol 83:77–84
De Luca CJ, LeFever RS, McCue MP, Xenakis AP (1982) Behaviour 
of human motor units in different muscles during linearly vary-
ing contractions. J Physiol 329:113–128
de Ruiter CJ, Jones DA, Sargeant AJ, de Haan A (1999) Temperature 
effect on the rates of isometric force development and relaxa-
tion in the fresh and fatigued human adductor pollicis muscle. 
Exp Physiol 84:1137–1150
de Ruiter CJ, Kooistra RD, Paalman MI, de Haan A (2004) Initial 
phase of maximal voluntary and electrically stimulated knee 
extension torque development at different knee angles. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) 97:1693–1701
de Ruiter CJ, Van Leeuwen D, Heijblom A, Bobbert MF, de Haan 
A (2006) Fast unilateral isometric knee extension torque 
development and bilateral jump height. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
38:1843–1852
de Ruiter CJ, Vermeulen G, Toussaint HM, de Haan A (2007) Isomet-
ric knee-extensor torque development and jump height in vol-
leyball players. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39:1336–1346
de Ruiter CJ, Hutter V, Icke C, Groen B, Gemmink A, Smilde H, de 
Haan A (2012) The effects of imagery training on fast isometric 
knee extensor torque development. J Sports Sci 30:166–174
Del Balso C, Cafarelli E (2007) Adaptations in the activation of 
human skeletal muscle induced by short-term isometric resist-
ance training. J Appl Physiol (1985) 103:402–411
Desmedt JE, Godaux E (1977) Ballistic contractions in man: charac-
teristic recruitment pattern of single motor units of the tibialis 
anterior muscle. J Physiol 264:673–693
Desmedt JE, Godaux E (1978) Ballistic contractions in fast or slow 
human muscles: discharge patterns of single motor units. J 
Physiol 285:185–196
Deutekom M, Beltman JG, de Ruiter CJ, de Koning JJ, de Haan A 
(2000) No acute effects of short-term creatine supplementation 
on muscle properties and sprint performance. Eur J Appl Phys-
iol 82:223–229
DeWall RJ, Slane LC, Lee KS, Thelen DG (2014) Spatial variations 
in Achilles tendon shear wave speed. J Biomech 47:2685–2692
Di Fabio RP (1987) Reliability of computerized surface electromyo-
graphy for determining the onset of muscle activity. Phys Ther 
67:43–48
Domire ZJ, Boros RL, Hashemi J (2011) An examination of possible 
quadriceps force at the time of anterior cruciate ligament injury 
during landing: a simulation study. J Biomech 44:1630–1632
Doyon J, Benali H (2005) Reorganization and plasticity in the adult 
brain during learning of motor skills. Curr Opin Neurobiol 
15:161–167
Duchateau J, Baudry S (2014) Maximal discharge rate of motor units 
determines the maximal rate of force development during bal-
listic contractions in human. Front Hum Neurosci 8:234
Duchateau J, Enoka RM (2002) Neural adaptations with chronic 
activity patterns in able-bodied humans. Am J Phys Med Reha-
bil 81:S17–S27
 1113
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
Duchateau J, Enoka RM (2011) Human motor unit recordings: ori-
gins and insight into the integrated motor system. Brain Res 
1409:42–61
Duchateau J, Hainaut K (1984) Isometric or dynamic training: dif-
ferential effects on mechanical properties of a human muscle. J 
Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 56:296–301
Duchateau J, Hainaut K (1986) Nonlinear summation of contractions 
in striated muscle. II. Potentiation of intracellular Ca2+ move-
ments in single barnacle muscle fibres. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 
7:18–24
Duclay J, Martin A, Duclay A, Cometti G, Pousson M (2009) Behav-
ior of fascicles and the myotendinous junction of human medial 
gastrocnemius following eccentric strength training. Muscle 
Nerve 39:819–827
Edgerton VR, Smith JL, Simpson DR (1975) Muscle fibre type popu-
lations of human leg muscles. Histochem J 7:259–266
Edman KA, Josephson RK (2007) Determinants of force rise time 
during isometric contraction of frog muscle fibres. J Physiol 
580:1007–1019
Enoka RM, Duchateau J (2015) Inappropriate interpretation of sur-
face EMG signals and muscle fiber characteristics impedes pro-
gress on understanding the control of neuromuscular function. J 
Appl Physiol (1985) jap 00280 02015
Erskine RM, Fletcher G, Folland JP (2014) The contribution of mus-
cle hypertrophy to strength changes following resistance train-
ing. Eur J Appl Physiol 114:1239–1249
Esmarck B, Andersen JL, Olsen S, Richter EA, Mizuno M, Kjaer M 
(2001) Timing of postexercise protein intake is important for 
muscle hypertrophy with resistance training in elderly humans. 
J Physiol 535:301–311
Farina D, Holobar A, Merletti R, Enoka RM (2010) Decoding the 
neural drive to muscles from the surface electromyogram. Clin 
Neurophysiol 121:1616–1623
Ferreira JC, Bacurau AV, Bueno CR Jr, Cunha TC, Tanaka LY, Jardim 
MA, Ramires PR, Brum PC (2010) Aerobic exercise training 
improves Ca2+ handling and redox status of skeletal muscle in 
mice. Exp Biol Med (Maywood) 235:497–505
Fitts RH, Widrick JJ (1996) Muscle mechanics: adaptations with exer-
cise-training. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 24:427–473
Folland JP, Williams AG (2007) The adaptations to strength train-
ing: morphological and neurological contributions to increased 
strength. Sports Med 37:145–168
Folland JP, Mc Cauley TM, Williams AG (2008) Allometric scal-
ing of strength measurements to body size. Eur J Appl Physiol 
102:739–745
Folland JP, Buckthorpe MW, Hannah R (2014) Human capacity for 
explosive force production: neural and contractile determinants. 
Scand J Med Sci Sports 24:894–906
Franzini-Armstrong C (2007) ER-mitochondria communication. How 
privileged? Physiology (Bethesda) 22:261–268
Fuglevand AJ, Winter DA, Patla AE (1993) Models of recruitment 
and rate coding organization in motor-unit pools. J Neurophys-
iol 70:2470–2488
Gans C (1982) Fiber architecture and muscle function. Exerc Sport 
Sci Rev 10:160–207
Gardetto PR, Schluter JM, Fitts RH (1989) Contractile function of 
single muscle fibers after hindlimb suspension. J Appl Physiol 
(1985) 66:2739–2749
Geertsen SS, Lundbye-Jensen J, Nielsen JB (2008) Increased central 
facilitation of antagonist reciprocal inhibition at the onset of 
dorsiflexion following explosive strength training. J Appl Phys-
iol (1985) 105:915–922
Geertsen SS, van de Ruit M, Grey MJ, Nielsen JB (2011) Spinal 
inhibition of descending command to soleus motoneurons is 
removed prior to dorsiflexion. J Physiol 589:5819–5831
Godard MP, Gallagher PM, Raue U, Trappe SW (2002) Alterations in 
single muscle fiber calcium sensitivity with resistance training 
in older women. Pflugers Arch 444:419–425
Grabiner MD (1994) Maximum rate of force development is increased 
by antagonist conditioning contraction. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
77:807–811
Granacher U, Gruber M, Gollhofer A (2009) Resistance training 
and neuromuscular performance in seniors. Int J Sports Med 
30:652–657
Grange RW, Vandenboom R, Houston ME (1993) Physiological sig-
nificance of myosin phosphorylation in skeletal muscle. Can J 
Appl Physiol 18:229–242
Gruber M, Gruber SB, Taube W, Schubert M, Beck SC, Gollhofer 
A (2007) Differential effects of ballistic versus sensorimotor 
training on rate of force development and neural activation in 
humans. J Strength Cond Res 21:274–282
Haider G, Folland JP (2014) Nitrate supplementation enhances the 
contractile properties of human skeletal muscle. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc 46:2234–2243
Hakkinen K, Keskinen KL (1989) Muscle cross-sectional area and 
voluntary force production characteristics in elite strength- and 
endurance-trained athletes and sprinters. Eur J Appl Physiol 
Occup Physiol 59:215–220
Hakkinen K, Komi PV, Alen M (1985) Effect of explosive type 
strength training on isometric force- and relaxation-time, elec-
tromyographic and muscle fibre characteristics of leg extensor 
muscles. Acta Physiol Scand 125:587–600
Hakkinen K, Newton RU, Gordon SE, McCormick M, Volek JS, 
Nindl BC, Gotshalk LA, Campbell WW, Evans WJ, Hakkinen 
A, Humphries BJ, Kraemer WJ (1998) Changes in muscle mor-
phology, electromyographic activity, and force production char-
acteristics during progressive strength training in young and 
older men. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 53:B415–B423
Hakkinen K, Kraemer WJ, Newton RU, Alen M (2001a) Changes in 
electromyographic activity, muscle fibre and force production 
characteristics during heavy resistance/power strength training 
in middle-aged and older men and women. Acta Physiol Scand 
171:51–62
Hakkinen K, Pakarinen A, Kraemer WJ, Hakkinen A, Valkeinen H, 
Alen M (2001b) Selective muscle hypertrophy, changes in 
EMG and force, and serum hormones during strength training 
in older women. J Appl Physiol (1985) 91:569–580
Hakkinen K, Alen M, Kraemer WJ, Gorostiaga E, Izquierdo M, 
Rusko H, Mikkola J, Hakkinen A, Valkeinen H, Kaarakainen 
E, Romu S, Erola V, Ahtiainen J, Paavolainen L (2003) Neuro-
muscular adaptations during concurrent strength and endurance 
training versus strength training. Eur J Appl Physiol 89:42–52
Hamada T, Sale DG, MacDougall JD, Tarnopolsky MA (2000) 
Postactivation potentiation, fiber type, and twitch contraction 
time in human knee extensor muscles. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
88:2131–2137
Hannah R, Folland JP (2015) Muscle–tendon unit stiffness does not 
independently affect voluntary explosive force production or 
muscle intrinsic contractile properties. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 
40:87–95
Hannah R, Minshull C, Buckthorpe MW, Folland JP (2012) Explo-
sive neuromuscular performance of males versus females. Exp 
Physiol 97:618–629
Hannah R, Minshull C, Smith SL, Folland JP (2014) Longer elec-
tromechanical delay impairs hamstrings explosive force versus 
quadriceps. Med Sci Sports Exerc 46:963–972
Harridge SD, Bottinelli R, Canepari M, Pellegrino MA, Reggiani 
C, Esbjornsson M, Saltin B (1996) Whole-muscle and single-
fibre contractile properties and myosin heavy chain isoforms in 
humans. Pflugers Arch 432:913–920
 1114
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
Harridge SD, Kryger A, Stensgaard A (1999) Knee extensor strength, 
activation, and size in very elderly people following strength 
training. Muscle Nerve 22:831–839
Heckman CJ, Enoka RM (2012) Motor unit. Compr Physiol 
2:2629–2682
Hinder MR, Schmidt MW, Garry MI, Carroll TJ, Summers JJ (2011) 
Absence of cross-limb transfer of performance gains following 
ballistic motor practice in older adults. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
110:166–175
Holm L, Reitelseder S, Pedersen TG, Doessing S, Petersen SG, Fly-
vbjerg A, Andersen JL, Aagaard P, Kjaer M (2008) Changes in 
muscle size and MHC composition in response to resistance 
exercise with heavy and light loading intensity. J Appl Physiol 
(1985) 105:1454–1461
Holtermann A, Roeleveld K, Engstrom M, Sand T (2007) Enhanced 
H-reflex with resistance training is related to increased rate of 
force development. Eur J Appl Physiol 101:301–312
Hvid L, Aagaard P, Justesen L, Bayer ML, Andersen JL, Orten-
blad N, Kjaer M, Suetta C (2010) Effects of aging on muscle 
mechanical function and muscle fiber morphology during short-
term immobilization and subsequent retraining. J Appl Physiol 
(1985) 109:1628–1634
Hvid LG, Ortenblad N, Aagaard P, Kjaer M, Suetta C (2011) Effects 
of ageing on single muscle fibre contractile function following 
short-term immobilisation. J Physiol 589:4745–4757
Izquierdo M, Aguado X, Gonzalez R, Lopez JL, Hakkinen K (1999) 
Maximal and explosive force production capacity and balance 
performance in men of different ages. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup 
Physiol 79:260–267
Jaric S (2002) Muscle strength testing: use of normalisation for body 
size. Sports Med 32:615–631
Jenkins ND, Buckner SL, Bergstrom HC, Cochrane KC, Goldsmith 
JA, Housh TJ, Johnson GO, Schmidt RJ, Cramer JT (2014a) 
Reliability and relationships among handgrip strength, leg 
extensor strength and power, and balance in older men. Exp 
Gerontol 58:47–50
Jenkins ND, Housh TJ, Traylor DA, Cochrane KC, Bergstrom HC, 
Lewis RW, Schmidt RJ, Johnson GO, Cramer JT (2014b) The 
rate of torque development: a unique, non-invasive indica-
tor of eccentric-induced muscle damage? Int J Sports Med 
35:1190–1195
Jensen JL, Marstrand PC, Nielsen JB (2005) Motor skill train-
ing and strength training are associated with different plastic 
changes in the central nervous system. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
99:1558–1568
Johnson MA, Polgar J, Weightman D, Appleton D (1973) Data on 
the distribution of fibre types in thirty-six human muscles. An 
autopsy study. J Neurol Sci 18:111–129
Johnson ST, Kipp K, Norcross MF, Hoffman MA (2015) Spinal and 
supraspinal motor control predictors of rate of torque develop-
ment. Scand J Med Sci Sports 25:623–629
Jokela M, Hanin YL (1999) Does the individual zones of optimal 
functioning model discriminate between successful and less 
successful athletes? A meta-analysis. J Sports Sci 17:873–887
Kamen G, Knight CA (2004) Training-related adaptations in motor 
unit discharge rate in young and older adults. J Gerontol A Biol 
Sci Med Sci 59:1334–1338
Kamimura T, Yoshioka K, Ito S, Kusakabe T (2009) Increased rate of 
force development of elbow flexors by antagonist conditioning 
contraction. Hum Mov Sci 28:407–414
Kawamori N, Rossi SJ, Justice BD, Haff EE, Pistilli EE, O’Bryant 
HS, Stone MH, Haff GG (2006) Peak force and rate of force 
development during isometric and dynamic mid-thigh clean 
pulls performed at various intensities. J Strength Cond Res 
20:483–491
Kernell D (2006) The motoneurone and its muscle fibres. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford
King MA, Wilson C, Yeadon MR (2006) Evaluation of a torque-driven 
model of jumping for height. J Appl Biomech 22:264–274
Klass M, Baudry S, Duchateau J (2008) Age-related decline in rate 
of torque development is accompanied by lower maximal motor 
unit discharge frequency during fast contractions. J Appl Phys-
iol (1985) 104:739–746
Kongsgaard M, Reitelseder S, Pedersen TG, Holm L, Aagaard P, 
Kjaer M, Magnusson SP (2007) Region specific patellar ten-
don hypertrophy in humans following resistance training. Acta 
Physiol (Oxf) 191:111–121
Konrad P (2006) The ABC of EMG: A practical introduction to kine-
siological electromyography. Noraxon USA Inc, Scottsdale 
Korhonen MT, Cristea A, Alen M, Hakkinen K, Sipila S, Mero A, Vii-
tasalo JT, Larsson L, Suominen H (2006) Aging, muscle fiber 
type, and contractile function in sprint-trained athletes. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) 101:906–917
Kraemer WJ, Patton JF, Gordon SE, Harman EA, Deschenes MR, 
Reynolds K, Newton RU, Triplett NT, Dziados JE (1995) Com-
patibility of high-intensity strength and endurance training 
on hormonal and skeletal muscle adaptations. J Appl Physiol 
(1985) 78:976–989
Krosshaug T, Nakamae A, Boden BP, Engebretsen L, Smith G, 
Slauterbeck JR, Hewett TE, Bahr R (2007) Mechanisms of 
anterior cruciate ligament injury in basketball: video analysis of 
39 cases. Am J Sports Med 35:359–367
Kubo K, Akima H, Kouzaki M, Ito M, Kawakami Y, Kanehisa H, 
Fukunaga T (2000) Changes in the elastic properties of tendon 
structures following 20 days bed-rest in humans. Eur J Appl 
Physiol 83:463–468
Kukulka CG, Clamann HP (1981) Comparison of the recruitment and 
discharge properties of motor units in human brachial biceps 
and adductor pollicis during isometric contractions. Brain Res 
219:45–55
Larsson L, Li X, Frontera WR (1997) Effects of aging on shortening 
velocity and myosin isoform composition in single human skel-
etal muscle cells. Am J Physiol 272:C638–C649
Lee M, Hinder MR, Gandevia SC, Carroll TJ (2010) The ipsilateral 
motor cortex contributes to cross-limb transfer of performance 
gains after ballistic motor practice. J Physiol 588:201–212
Leong B, Kamen G, Patten C, Burke JR (1999) Maximal motor unit 
discharge rates in the quadriceps muscles of older weight lifters. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc 31:1638–1644
Lieber RL, Ward SR (2011) Skeletal muscle design to meet functional 
demands. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 366:1466–1476
Luden N, Minchev K, Hayes E, Louis E, Trappe T, Trappe S (2008) 
Human vastus lateralis and soleus muscles display divergent 
cellular contractile properties. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp 
Physiol 295:R1593–R1598
Luff AR, Atwood HL (1971) Changes in the sarcoplasmic reticulum 
and transverse tubular system of fast and slow skeletal mus-
cles of the mouse during postnatal development. J Cell Biol 
51:369–383
Lynch GS, McKenna MJ, Williams DA (1994) Sprint-training effects 
on some contractile properties of single skinned human muscle 
fibres. Acta Physiol Scand 152:295–306
Maffiuletti NA, Bizzini M, Widler K, Munzinger U (2010) Asym-
metry in quadriceps rate of force development as a functional 
outcome measure in TKA. Clin Orthop Relat Res 468:191–198
Malisoux L, Francaux M, Nielens H, Renard P, Lebacq J, Theisen D 
(2006) Calcium sensitivity of human single muscle fibers fol-
lowing plyometric training. Med Sci Sports Exerc 38:1901–1908
Manttiri S, Anttila K, Kaakinen M, Jarvilehto M (2006) Effects 
of low-intensity training on dihydropyridine and ryanodine 
 1115
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116 
1 3
receptor content in skeletal muscle of mouse. J Physiol Bio-
chem 62:293–301
Marcora S, Miller MK (2000) The effect of knee angle on the exter-
nal validity of isometric measures of lower body neuromuscular 
function. J Sports Sci 18:313–319
Metzger JM, Moss RL (1990) Calcium-sensitive cross-bridge transi-
tions in mammalian fast and slow skeletal muscle fibers. Sci-
ence 247:1088–1090
Mirkov DM, Nedeljkovic A, Milanovic S, Jaric S (2004) Muscle 
strength testing: evaluation of tests of explosive force produc-
tion. Eur J Appl Physiol 91:147–154
Moritani T, Yoshitake Y (1998) 1998 ISEK Congress Keynote Lec-
ture: the use of electromyography in applied physiology. Inter-
national Society of Electrophysiology and Kinesiology. J Elec-
tromyogr Kinesiol 8:363–381
Moss BM, Refsnes PE, Abildgaard A, Nicolaysen K, Jensen J (1997) 
Effects of maximal effort strength training with different loads on 
dynamic strength, cross-sectional area, load-power and load-veloc-
ity relationships. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 75:193–199
Muellbacher W, Ziemann U, Boroojerdi B, Cohen L, Hallett M (2001) 
Role of the human motor cortex in rapid motor learning. Exp 
Brain Res 136:431–438
Muellbacher W, Ziemann U, Wissel J, Dang N, Kofler M, Facchini S, 
Boroojerdi B, Poewe W, Hallett M (2002) Early consolidation 
in human primary motor cortex. Nature 415:640–644
Narici MV, Roi GS, Landoni L, Minetti AE, Cerretelli P (1989) 
Changes in force, cross-sectional area and neural activation dur-
ing strength training and detraining of the human quadriceps. 
Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 59:310–319
Nordez A, Gallot T, Catheline S, Guevel A, Cornu C, Hug F (2009) 
Electromechanical delay revisited using very high frame rate 
ultrasound. J Appl Physiol (1985) 106:1970–1975
Nuzzo JL, McBride JM, Cormie P, McCaulley GO (2008) Relation-
ship between countermovement jump performance and multi-
joint isometric and dynamic tests of strength. J Strength Cond 
Res 22:699–707
Ogasawara R, Yasuda T, Ishii N, Abe T (2013) Comparison of mus-
cle hypertrophy following 6-month of continuous and periodic 
strength training. Eur J Appl Physiol 113:975–985
Ortenblad N, Lunde PK, Levin K, Andersen JL, Pedersen PK (2000) 
Enhanced sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) release following 
intermittent sprint training. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp 
Physiol 279:R152–R160
Patten C, Kamen G, Rowland DM (2001) Adaptations in maximal 
motor unit discharge rate to strength training in young and older 
adults. Muscle Nerve 24:542–550
Penailillo L, Blazevich A, Numazawa H, Nosaka K (2015) Rate of 
force development as a measure of muscle damage. Scand J 
Med Sci Sports 25:417–427
Pijnappels M, Bobbert MF, van Dieen JH (2005) Control of support 
limb muscles in recovery after tripping in young and older sub-
jects. Exp Brain Res 160:326–333
Reeves ND, Maganaris CN, Narici MV (2003) Effect of strength 
training on human patella tendon mechanical properties of older 
individuals. J Physiol 548:971–981
Rogasch NC, Dartnall TJ, Cirillo J, Nordstrom MA, Semmler JG 
(2009) Corticomotor plasticity and learning of a ballistic thumb 
training task are diminished in older adults. J Appl Physiol 
(1985) 107:1874–1883
Rousanoglou EN, Herzog W, Boudolos KD (2010) Moment–angle 
relations in the initial time of contraction. Int J Sports Med 
31:651–655
Saborido A, Molano F, Moro G, Megias A (1995) Regulation of dihy-
dropyridine receptor levels in skeletal and cardiac muscle by 
exercise training. Pflugers Arch 429:364–369
Sahaly R, Vandewalle H, Driss T, Monod H (2001) Maximal volun-
tary force and rate of force development in humans–importance 
of instruction. Eur J Appl Physiol 85:345–350
Sale DG (2003) Neural adaptations to strength training. In: Komi PV 
(ed) Strength and power in sport. Blackwell Science, Oxford, 
pp 281–314
Schiaffino S, Margreth A (1969) Coordinated development of the sar-
coplasmic reticulum and T system during postnatal differentia-
tion of rat skeletal muscle. J Cell Biol 41:855–875
Schiaffino S, Reggiani C (1996) Molecular diversity of myofibrillar 
proteins: gene regulation and functional significance. Physiol 
Rev 76:371–423
Schiaffino S, Reggiani C (2011) Fiber types in mammalian skeletal 
muscles. Physiol Rev 91:1447–1531
Schmidt L, Clery-Melin ML, Lafargue G, Valabregue R, Fossati P, 
Dubois B, Pessiglione M (2009) Get aroused and be stronger: 
emotional facilitation of physical effort in the human brain. J 
Neurosci 29:9450–9457
Schmidtbleicher D, Buehrle M (1987) Neuronal adaptation and 
increase of cross-sectional area studying different strength 
training methods. In: Johnson B (ed) Biomechanics. Human 
Kinetics, Champaign, pp 615–620
Seynnes OR, Erskine RM, Maganaris CN, Longo S, Simoneau EM, 
Grosset JF, Narici MV (2009) Training-induced changes in 
structural and mechanical properties of the patellar tendon are 
related to muscle hypertrophy but not to strength gains. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) 107:523–530
Simoneau JA, Bouchard C (1995) Genetic determinism of fiber type 
proportion in human skeletal muscle. FASEB J 9:1091–1095
Soda P, Mazzoleni S, Cavallo G, Guglielmelli E, Iannello G (2010) 
Human movement onset detection from isometric force 
and torque measurements: a supervised pattern recognition 
approach. Artif Intell Med 50:55–61
Spector SA, Gardiner PF, Zernicke RF, Roy RR, Edgerton VR (1980) 
Muscle architecture and force–velocity characteristics of cat 
soleus and medial gastrocnemius: implications for motor con-
trol. J Neurophysiol 44:951–960
Staron RS, Malicky ES, Leonardi MJ, Falkel JE, Hagerman FC, Dud-
ley GA (1990) Muscle hypertrophy and fast fiber type conver-
sions in heavy resistance-trained women. Eur J Appl Physiol 
Occup Physiol 60:71–79
Staude G, Wolf W (1999) Objective motor response onset detection in 
surface myoelectric signals. Med Eng Phys 21:449–467
Suetta C, Aagaard P, Rosted A, Jakobsen AK, Duus B, Kjaer M, Mag-
nusson SP (2004) Training-induced changes in muscle CSA, 
muscle strength, EMG, and rate of force development in elderly 
subjects after long-term unilateral disuse. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
97:1954–1961
Suetta C, Andersen JL, Dalgas U, Berget J, Koskinen S, Aagaard P, 
Magnusson SP, Kjaer M (2008) Resistance training induces 
qualitative changes in muscle morphology, muscle architecture, 
and muscle function in elderly postoperative patients. J Appl 
Physiol (1985) 105:180–186
Suetta C, Hvid LG, Justesen L, Christensen U, Neergaard K, Simon-
sen L, Ortenblad N, Magnusson SP, Kjaer M, Aagaard P (2009) 
Effects of aging on human skeletal muscle after immobilization 
and retraining. J Appl Physiol (1985) 107:1172–1180
Taylor AD, Humphries B, Smith P, Bronks R (1997) Electrophoretic 
separation of myosin heavy chain isoforms in the human m. 
vastus lateralis: references to reproducibility and relationships 
with force, electromechanical delay, fibre conduction veloc-
ity, endurance and electromyography. Arch Physiol Biochem 
105:10–18
Thorstensson A, Karlsson J, Viitasalo JH, Luhtanen P, Komi PV 
(1976) Effect of strength training on EMG of human skeletal 
muscle. Acta Physiol Scand 98:232–236
 1116
 
Eur J Appl Physiol (2016) 116:1091–1116
1 3
Tillin NA, Folland JP (2014) Maximal and explosive strength training 
elicit distinct neuromuscular adaptations, specific to the training 
stimulus. Eur J Appl Physiol 114:365–374
Tillin NA, Jimenez-Reyes P, Pain MT, Folland JP (2010) Neuromus-
cular performance of explosive power athletes versus untrained 
individuals. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42:781–790
Tillin NA, Pain MT, Folland JP (2011) Short-term unilateral resist-
ance training affects the agonist–antagonist but not the force–
agonist activation relationship. Muscle Nerve 43:375–384
Tillin NA, Pain MT, Folland JP (2012a) Contraction type influences 
the human ability to use the available torque capacity of skeletal 
muscle during explosive efforts. Proc Biol Sci 279:2106–2115
Tillin NA, Pain MT, Folland JP (2012b) Short-term training for explo-
sive strength causes neural and mechanical adaptations. Exp 
Physiol 97:630–641
Tillin NA, Pain MT, Folland J (2013a) Explosive force production 
during isometric squats correlates with athletic performance in 
rugby union players. J Sports Sci 31:66–76
Tillin NA, Pain MT, Folland JP (2013b) Identification of contraction 
onset during explosive contractions. Response to Thompson 
et al. “Consistency of rapid muscle force characteristics: influ-
ence of muscle contraction onset detection methodology” [J 
Electromyogr Kinesiol 2012;22(6):893–900]. J Electromyogr 
Kinesiol 23:991–994
Tillin NA, Pain MT, Haider G, Montgomery G, Brownlee T, Folland 
J (2013c) The human capacity to produce explosive torque is 
influenced by contraction type and acceleration. Paper pre-
sented at the XXIV Congress of the International Society of 
Biomechanics, Natal, Brazil, 4th–9th August
Trappe S, Gallagher P, Harber M, Carrithers J, Fluckey J, Trappe T 
(2003) Single muscle fibre contractile properties in young and 
old men and women. J Physiol 552:47–58
Tsaopoulos DE, Baltzopoulos V, Richards PJ, Maganaris CN (2007) 
In vivo changes in the human patellar tendon moment arm 
length with different modes and intensities of muscle contrac-
tion. J Biomech 40:3325–3332
Uliam Kuriki H, Micolis de Azevedo F, de Faria Negrao Filho R, 
Alves N (2011) Comparison of different analysis techniques 
for the determination of muscle onset in individuals with patel-
lofemoral pain syndrome. J Electromyogr Kinesiol 21:982–987
Van Cutsem M, Duchateau J (2005) Preceding muscle activity influ-
ences motor unit discharge and rate of torque development dur-
ing ballistic contractions in humans. J Physiol 562:635–644
Van Cutsem M, Feiereisen P, Duchateau J, Hainaut K (1997) 
Mechanical properties and behaviour of motor units in the tibi-
alis anterior during voluntary contractions. Can J Appl Physiol 
22:585–597
Van Cutsem M, Duchateau J, Hainaut K (1998) Changes in single 
motor unit behaviour contribute to the increase in contrac-
tion speed after dynamic training in humans. J Physiol 513(Pt 
1):295–305
Vandenboom R, Grange RW, Houston ME (1993) Threshold for force 
potentiation associated with skeletal myosin phosphorylation. 
Am J Physiol 265:C1456–C1462
Vikne H, Refsnes PE, Ekmark M, Medbo JI, Gundersen V, Gundersen 
K (2006) Muscular performance after concentric and eccentric 
exercise in trained men. Med Sci Sports Exerc 38:1770–1781
Vila-Cha C, Falla D, Farina D (2010) Motor unit behavior during sub-
maximal contractions following six weeks of either endurance 
or strength training. J Appl Physiol (1985) 109:1455–1466
Wahr PA, Rall JA (1997) Role of calcium and cross bridges in deter-
mining rate of force development in frog muscle fibers. Am J 
Physiol 272:C1664–C1671
Waugh CM, Korff T, Fath F, Blazevich AJ (2013) Rapid force pro-
duction in children and adults: mechanical and neural contribu-
tions. Med Sci Sports Exerc 45:762–771
Waugh CM, Korff T, Fath F, Blazevich AJ (2014) Effects of resist-
ance training on tendon mechanical properties and rapid force 
production in prepubertal children. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
117:257–266
Wei K, Glaser JI, Deng L, Thompson CK, Stevenson IH, Wang Q, 
Hornby TG, Heckman CJ, Kording KP (2014) Serotonin 
affects movement gain control in the spinal cord. J Neurosci 
34:12690–12700
Wiesinger HP, Kosters A, Muller E, Seynnes OR (2015) Effects of 
increased loading on in vivo tendon properties: a systematic 
review. Med Sci Sports Exerc 47:1885–1895
Wilkie DR (1949) The relation between force and velocity in human 
muscle. J Physiol 110:249–280
Winter DA (1990) Biomechanics and motor control of human move-
ment. Wiley, New York
