 A critical review of clinical trials in systemic lupus 
erythematosus
Mary A. Mahieu1, Vibeke Strand, MD2, Lee S. Simon3, Peter E. Lipsky4, and Rosalind 
Ramsey-Goldman1
1Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
2Division of Immunology/Rheumatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, 
USA
3SDG LLC, Cambridge, MA, USA
4AMPEL BioSolutions, Charlottesville, VA, USA
Abstract
One challenge in caring for patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a paucity of 
approved therapeutics for treatment of the diverse disease manifestations. In the last 60 years, only 
one drug, belimumab, has been approved for SLE treatment. Critical evaluation of investigator 
initiated and pharma-sponsored randomized controlled trials (RCTs) highlights barriers to 
successful drug development in SLE, including disease heterogeneity, inadequate trial size or 
duration, insufficient dose finding before initiation of large trials, handling of background 
medications, and choice of primary endpoint. Herein we examine lessons learned from landmark 
SLE RCTs and subsequent advances in trial design, as well as discuss efforts to address limitations 
in current SLE outcome measures that will improve detection of true therapeutic responses in 
future RCTs.
Keywords
Systemic lupus erythematosus; outcome measures; clinical trials
Disclosures
M.A.M.: No disclosures
V.S.: Past/Present Consultant to Abbvie, Amgen, Anthera, Aspreva, Astra Zeneca, BiogenIdec, BioMarin, BMS, EMD Serono, 
Genelabs, Genentech/Roche, Human Genome Sciences, GSK, Idera, Janssen, La Jolla Pharmaceuticals, Lilly, Pfizer, Regeneron, 
Sanofi, UCB, XTL.
L.S.S.:Consultant for Pfizer, XTL, Lilly, Genelabs, Human Genome Sciences, BMS, Aspreva, Anthera, Idera, EMD Serono. Biogen, 
and Medimmune.
P.E.L.: Consultant to Pfizer, EMD, Serono, GSK, BMS, Medimmune, and UCB.
R.R.G.: Principle investigator or co-site investigator for Genelabs, LaJolla Pharmaceutical Company, Aspreva Pharmaceuticals 
Corporation, Human Genome Sciences Inc, GSK, and Genentech. Data safety monitoring board member and term chair for BMS. 
Consultant for GSK and Eli Lilly.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Lupus. 2016 September ; 25(10): 1122–1140. doi:10.1177/0961203316652492.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease with diverse 
manifestations, ranging from mild rash or arthritis to severe, organ-threatening involvement 
of the kidneys or the central nervous system.1 One challenge in caring for patients with SLE 
is a paucity of approved medications despite numerous recent efforts to identify efficacious 
drugs in clinical development programs. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) evaluating 
novel biologic and synthetic immune modulators in SLE have been largely unsuccessful at 
achieving primary endpoints required to gain United States Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) approval. Only one new agent, belimumab, has been approved for treatment of SLE 
in the last 60 years.
Despite these difficulties, methodological and clinically important findings have been 
detected in sub- and post-hoc analyses from these “failed” RCTs. These analyses have 
highlighted the limitations in SLE trial design that should be addressed, including 
heterogeneity of disease, inadequate trial size or duration, insufficient dose finding prior to 
entering pivotal RCTs, choice of primary endpoints, and non-standardized use of 
background therapy.
Pharma-sponsored RCTs in SLE are a rather recent development, with the first large trials 
being initiated in 2000. It quickly became clear that there was no consensus on the best way 
to conduct these trials, resulting in a rapid evolution in thinking concerning the best 
practices in SLE RCTs. One important component of this changing landscape was the 
guidance issued by regulatory agencies, which differed between FDA and European 
Medicines Agency (EMA). For example, FDA issued a guidance for product development in 
generalized SLE in 2005 and currently has no issued guidance for SLE nephritis.2 Reflecting 
the SLE community’s thinking, the 2005 FDA guidance document embraced the use of 
composite endpoints, even though they had never been successfully applied in SLE RCTs, 
did not include patient-reported outcomes, and were not amenable to use in clinical practice, 
even in academic centers. EMA, on the other hand, issued a detailed and comprehensive 
draft guideline in 2013, which was subsequently abbreviated in final form in 2015. The 
expectation that a “complete response” can be achieved in SLE nephritis is a laudable goal 
articulated by the EMA,3 but may not be a reasonable or achievable threshold for drug 
approval. Therapies that provide a statistically significant, measurable benefit (such as 
partial clinical responsiveness defined a priori) is a threshold clearly applied in other 
autoimmune diseases and could be reconsidered as a more appropriate outcome by 
regulators in both the United States and Europe.
Although both regulatory bodies have tried to interact with the trialist community to develop 
coherent and clinically meaningful outcome measures, presently available ones were devised 
mostly from observational data sets, not prospective RCTs, and some are very difficult to 
interpret or even to score. Thus, the complexity of the currently employed responder indices, 
often involving the use of external adjudication committees to further interpret reported 
responses from individual principal investigators, significantly complicates trial conduct and 
cost. The utility, clinical relevance, and practicality of currently employed outcome 
Mahieu et al.
Page 2
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measures, as well as their ability to detect clinically meaningful change, have emerged as 
issues from recent SLE RCTs.4
The nature of recent lupus clinical development programs has also contributed to their lack 
of success. The purpose of RCTs in clinical development is to estimate the overall safety and 
efficacy of a product. This requires multiple experiments in determining dose/dose regimen, 
which are often not explored extensively because of both time and economic constraints—
decisions by sponsors are typically made in attempts to shorten time to approval. It is 
common practice to telescope the time spent in phase II, which normally would permit a 
better understanding of the effect of the therapy at specific doses/dose regimens. Rather than 
invest in extensive and informative phase II RCTs, often there is rapid progression to phase 
III or pivotal trials for regulatory approval, and typically phase III RCTs have been 
conducted in parallel and not sequentially. Thus, the lessons learned from one RCT cannot 
be implemented in the second trial. Several examples below will describe the negative 
impact of implementing identical parallel phase III pivotal RCTs when a full understanding 
of the inclusion/exclusion criteria, dose, dose regimen/duration, effect of background 
therapy, allowance of rescue therapy, measures of responsiveness, and definitions of 
treatment failure are not entirely understood.
There are many issues that evolve from the heterogeneity of the patient population. For 
example, the 2005 FDA guidance document established a pathway for approval of therapies 
for generalized SLE. This resulted in numerous RCTs in which most patients were recruited 
with skin or musculoskeletal manifestations. Although these symptoms and signs are of 
concern to affected patients, such RCTs do not specifically enroll patients with other organ 
involvement, including renal, central nervous system, and cardiopulmonary. Therefore, little 
is learned about the impact of a therapy on more serious organ manifestations. Other 
problems include variable use of background therapies some of which, although not 
approved for use in SLE, may have significant efficacy. Rescue therapies used for flares of 
the underlying disease during RCTs can then interfere with measuring the true effect of the 
study drug. Finally, there is lack of consensus on the role of glucocorticoid use in SLE 
treatment. The most appropriate way to taper doses and the optimal target dose are not well 
defined, resulting in a variety of approaches to deal with these potent medications in RCTs. 
A clear definition of a clinically meaningful decrease in glucocorticoid dose as an outcome 
measure is also not established, although it often has been recommended to be attainment of 
a low dose, eg ≤7.5 mg daily.
The Outcome Measures in Rheumatology (OMERACT) international consensus effort, 
FDA, and EMA have provided guidance for domains to be measured in SLE clinical 
development that include change in disease activity, change in rate of cumulative organ 
damage, health-related quality of life (HRQOL), and adverse events.2 Determining treatment 
effect is currently limited by the use of inadequate available instruments, such as disease 
activity measures that were developed in longitudinal observational cohorts for clinical 
epidemiology research, not RCTs testing therapeutic interventions, and composite responder 
indices that do not reflect standard clinical practice and lack measurement of patient-
reported outcomes (PROs). OMERACT and the Lupus Industrial Council of the Lupus 
Research Institute (LRI) have now begun to develop comprehensive instruments for use in 
Mahieu et al.
Page 3
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RCTs that will be sensitive to change in both global and organ-specific disease activity, 
inclusive of PROs, and relevant to clinical practice.
Herein we review the successes and failures of SLE RCTs (Tables 1 and 2), and examine in 
detail a subset of these trials to illustrate challenges and learning points. We also discuss 
OMERACT and LRI efforts to evaluate data from these trials and develop composite 
endpoints that capture important therapeutic responses (Table 3).
Non-Renal SLE Clinical Trials
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
DHEA is a weak androgen with modest immune modulatory effects.5 Early studies found 
lower levels of DHEA in SLE patients compared to healthy controls, and low circulating 
levels correlated with increased SLE disease activity.6, 7 These observations led to the 
investigation of DHEA supplementation in the treatment of SLE.
In an open label study, van Vollenhoven and colleagues reported significant improvements in 
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI) and physician global 
assessment (PGA) scores, as well as reduced prednisone doses in 50 female SLE patients 
taking DHEA 50–200mg/day over 6–12 months.8 Two subsequent small investigator 
designed placebo RCTs evaluated DHEA treatment in women with mild-to-moderate (n=28) 
and severe SLE (n=19).9, 10 These RCTs demonstrated no significant improvement in 
SLEDAI score with DHEA treatment compared to placebo, but were limited by small 
sample size. In the study of women with severe SLE, there was also higher disease activity 
in the DHEA-treated women compared to placebo despite randomization.
Larger-scale, industry-sponsored RCTs were pursued to establish the effect of prasterone (a 
DHEA formulation manufactured by Genelabs) on clinical SLE endpoints. A phase II/III 
RCT enrolled 191 SLE women meeting criteria for glucocorticoid dependence, defined by a 
failed attempt to taper prednisone in the preceding 12 months or stable prednisone dose for 
at least 3 months preceding enrollment if no taper had been attempted. In retrospect, these 
two described groups of patients may have differed in terms of disease activity. Patients were 
randomized to treatment with prasterone 200mg/day, 100mg/day, or placebo followed by a 
prednisone taper per protocol over a minimum of 7 months.11 The primary endpoint was a 
decrease in prednisone dose to ≤7.5mg/day sustained for at least 2 months. Response rates 
were not significantly different in patients treated with prasterone 100mg/day or 200mg/day 
compared to placebo (p=0.110). When patients with active SLE (SLEDAI >2) were 
considered separately in a pre-specified analysis, the primary endpoint was met for patients 
taking prasterone 200mg/day compared to placebo (p=0.031). Patients with inactive SLE 
(SLEDAI ≤2) had a higher likelihood of achieving the primary endpoint even with placebo 
administration. The protocols of two multi-center, phase III RCTs were subsequently 
amended to incorporate SLEDAI >2 into the inclusion criteria.12, 13 Petri and colleagues 
randomized 381 SLE women to prasterone 200mg/day or placebo and evaluated a composite 
primary endpoint consisting of improvements in disease activity and fatigue/HRQOL with 
the absence of new organ damage.13 The number of responders was not significantly 
different between treatment arms at 52 weeks when the full sample was considered. 
Mahieu et al.
Page 4
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 However, in a pre-specified analysis of data from the 293 patients with baseline SLEDAI >2, 
the primary endpoint was met with 58.5% of the prasterone group responding to treatment 
compared to 44.5% of the placebo group (p=0.017); as noted, however, this change in 
inclusion/exclusion criteria occurred after initiation of the trial.
Taken together, these RCTs suggest that DHEA may mildly reduce SLE disease activity and 
have a steroid-sparing effect among women with mild-to-moderately active SLE. However, 
the change in protocol during the phase III RCTs was a barrier to understanding the impact 
of DHEA treatment –therefore FDA approval was not granted and further clinical 
development ultimately discontinued. These studies underscore the importance of 
appropriate patient selection and adherence to inclusion/exclusion criteria for SLE RCTs by 
excluding subjects with a high likelihood of response even without the therapeutic 
intervention. They also emphasize the need for better outcome measures, as the responder 
index employed in the phase III RCT was constructed by the sponsor with FDA input, but 
without being evidence based.
Rituximab
Rituximab is a monoclonal antibody (mAb) directed against CD20 that results in B-cell 
depletion. A number of uncontrolled studies and case series demonstrated improvements in 
SLE disease activity and steroid-sparing effects with rituximab treatment,14 leading to more 
rigorous evaluation of it for treatment of SLE. It should be emphasized, however, that no 
pre-clinical work, no dose ranging studies, and no preliminary phase II studies were 
performed in SLE prior to launch of large and pivotal RCTs.
EXPLORER was a multicenter placebo RCT designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of 
rituximab in patients with moderate-to-severe non-renal SLE.15 The study randomized 257 
patients with baseline active SLE (defined as ≥1 new BILAG A scores or ≥2 BILAG B 
scores) to rituximab or placebo. An oral prednisone burst was initiated at study entry with a 
protocol-required prolonged taper to a goal of ≤5mg/day by week 52. Background 
immunosuppressants (azathioprine, methotrexate, or mycophenolate mofetil [MMF]) were 
continued for the duration of the study. The primary endpoint was the proportion of 
rituximab versus placebo-treated patients achieving a “complete clinical response”, “partial 
clinical response”, or no response at week 52. Definitions of complete and partial response 
were based on BILAG improvement by week 24, duration of response, and absence of a 
BILAG-defined flare. The primary endpoint was not met, with similar rates of complete and 
partial responses in rituximab and placebo arms at 52 weeks. Differences in time to first 
moderate or severe flare and change in HRQOL were also not significant. Laboratory 
evidence of B-cell depletion was confirmed in 89.5% of rituximab-treated patients, as were 
significant decreases in anti-double stranded DNA antibodies (anti-dsDNA) and increases in 
complement C3 and C4 levels compared to placebo.
This trial enrolled SLE patients with high disease activity despite standard of care treatment, 
and therefore succeeded in identifying a patient population with a possibility of responding 
to the intervention. However, patients in both treatment arms had significant improvement in 
disease activity in the first month, suggesting that the initial glucocorticoid exposure induced 
similar disease control in both treatment arms that persisted over the duration of the study, 
Mahieu et al.
Page 5
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 even following the prolonged taper. A robust placebo response as the result of improved 
access to standard of care medications in RCTs has been noted to further complicate 
detection of early and clinically important improvement from an investigational agent.
Additionally, the definition of treatment failure incorporated into the EXPLORER primary 
endpoint in the second 6 months of the study was not the same as a severe flare, defined as 
occurrence of one new BILAG B score, representing new moderate disease activity. 
Variation in the handling of background therapy, requirement of a prolonged prednisone 
taper, and too strict a primary endpoint may have contributed to the failure to detect a 
clinical response to rituximab despite evidence of biologic activity. It is also quite possible 
that rituximab at doses administered in the RCTs with permitted background medications is 
not effective, or not to a sufficient degree to be detected in a trial the size of EXPLORER.
Abatacept
Abatacept is a CTLA-4 fusion protein that binds to CD80/86 on the surface of antigen 
presenting cells and blocks signaling through CD-28 required for T-cell activation. By 
inhibiting full activation of T-cells, treatment with abatacept may mitigate differentiation of 
autoreactive B-cells in SLE.16 Abatacept for treatment of non-renal SLE has been evaluated 
in one phase IIb RCT.17 The study enrolled 175 patients with active musculoskeletal, 
cutaneous, or cardiovascular/respiratory SLE, defined by ≥1 new BILAG A or ≥2 BILAG B 
scores. Background therapy with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 
azathioprine, MMF, antimalarials, or methotrexate was continued. Up to 30mg of prednisone 
was administered as initial flare treatment, then tapered slowly per protocol to a goal of 
5mg/day. Patients were randomized 2:1 to receive either abatacept or placebo every 2 weeks 
for three doses, then every 4 weeks. The primary endpoint was development of new SLE 
flare, defined as new BILAG A or B score in any organ system, after the initiation of steroid 
taper through 52 weeks. The primary endpoint was not met, with similar rates of new flare in 
abatacept (79.7%) and placebo (82.5%) groups (95% CI −15.3, 8.3). However, in post-hoc 
analyses, significantly fewer abatacept-treated patients had BILAG A flares compared to 
placebo, most pronounced in patients primarily with polyarthritis. Significant improvements 
in HRQOL (Medical Outcomes Survey Short Form-36), fatigue (Visual Analog Scale), and 
sleep quality (Medical Outcomes Survey Sleep Problems Index) at 52 weeks (pre-specified 
analyses) were reported with abatacept. This phase IIb RCT was designed to study a more 
homogeneous SLE population by specifying organ system involvement in the inclusion 
criteria. A PRO assessment, a component of the FDA SLE guidance, was also included. 
However, similar to EXPLORER, the strict BILAG-based flare definition is sensitive to 
relatively minor fluctuations in disease activity, making it difficult for primary efficacy 
endpoint to be achieved.
Atacicept
The fusion protein atacicept contains the ligand-binding portion of the TACI receptor 
(transmembrance activator and calcium-modulator and cyclophilin ligand [CAML] 
interactor) and modulates B-cell activation by blocking B-cell activating factor (BAFF; also 
known as B-lymphocyte stimulator [BLyS]) and a proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL). 
Efficacy of atacicept for the treatment of SLE was evaluated in two phase II/III placebo 
Mahieu et al.
Page 6
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RCTs. The APRIL-LN trial was designed to compare renal response to atacicept versus 
placebo plus standard of care (newly initiated MMF and glucocorticoids) in patients with 
SLE nephritis.18 The trial was discontinued after enrolling only 6 patients because of 
hypogammaglobulinemia and serious infections, likely related to the newly initiated MMF 
interacting with the study drug. Meanwhile, APRIL-SLE randomized 455 patients with 
moderate-to-severe general SLE to atacicept 150mg weekly, 75mg weekly, or placebo; the 
150mg arm was ultimately discontinued early for safety concerns.19 Each patient also 
received an oral glucocorticoid burst with taper per protocol. The primary endpoint was the 
proportion of patients who developed an SLE flare, defined as at least one BILAG A or B 
score, at 52 weeks. There was no difference in flare rates between patients taking atacicept 
75mg compared to placebo (background standard of care therapy alone) (58% and 54%, 
respectively, p=0.543). Time to first flare was also similar between treatment groups. Post-
hoc analyses of the suspended atacicept 150mg arm, however, suggested lower flare rates 
than placebo. Further studies evaluating the efficacy and safety of atacicept for the treatment 
of general SLE are ongoing (ADDRESS II trial and extension study, clinicaltrials.gov ID 
NCT01972568 and NCT02070978)
It is notable that the aforementioned RCTs all failed to meet primary efficacy endpoints 
despite different trial designs and outcome measures. The DHEA and rituximab RCTs 
enrolled patients with or without active SLE and assessed improved disease activity, whereas 
the abatacept and atacicept RCTs monitored flare occurrence in patients with stable disease. 
It remains unclear which approach, if not both, are appropriate for evaluating efficacy of 
novel therapeutics. Further, these RCTs underscore the need for validated and 
comprehensive disease assessment tools that are sensitive to induced changes in disease 
activity. Additionally, the use of prolonged glucocorticoid treatment regimens demonstrates 
their clear benefit in treatment of SLE patients, even after tapering, that may have obscured 
any therapeutic benefit of study drug. Finally, variation in the background 
immunosuppressive medications, as well as a lack of standardization in their use, may have 
obscured the results.
Belimumab
Belimumab is a mAb that inhibits B-cell survival and persistence of autoreactive B-cells by 
binding the soluble form of BAFF/BLyS. The phase II RCT randomized 449 patients with 
non-renal SLE to one of three doses of belimumab (1, 4, or 10mg/kg) or placebo.20 A 
history of positive autoantibodies (anti-nuclear antibody [ANA], anti-dsDNA, anti-Smith, 
anti-RNP, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, or anticardiolipin) was an inclusion criterion, but serologic 
positivity was not required at time of enrollment. Changes in glucocorticoid and 
immunosuppressant doses were allowed at investigators’ discretion. The co-primary 
endpoints were 1) change in Safety of Estrogens in Lupus Erythematosus National 
Assessment (SELENA) -SLEDAI score at week 24 and 2) time to first SLE flare (SELENA-
SLEDAI Flare Index [SFI]) over 52 weeks. Though the primary endpoints were not met, an 
exploratory post-hoc subgroup analysis suggested that serologically active patients (71% of 
the study cohort) had significant improvement in SELENA-SLEDAI score, physician global 
assessment (PGA), and HRQOL with belimumab compared to placebo. Additionally, the 
Mahieu et al.
Page 7
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 unrestricted use of background medications may have inflated response in the placebo 
treatment arm.
The phase II belimumab RCT also highlighted the limitations of applying available disease 
activity indices as solitary endpoints in clinical trials. As previously mentioned, SLEDAI 
and BILAG were developed for use in observational cohort studies, and each index has 
recognized strengths and weaknesses.21, 22 The SLEDAI and its modifications (2000 update 
[SLEDAI-2K]23 and SELENA-SLEDAI24) measure changes in global disease activity, but 
are not sensitive to worsening or improvement in individual organ systems. BILAG, which is 
based on physicians’ intention to treat, discriminates SLE disease activity at the organ level 
but at the expense of greater complexity. Additionally, the FDA draft guidance includes 
provisions that observed improvements in a disease activity score should correspond with 
clinical benefit and occur without worsening of other disease manifestations.2 The novel 
SLE Responder Index (SRI) was therefore developed, based on the phase II belimumab data, 
as a composite endpoint for use in clinical trials and to define clinically meaningful 
improvement.25 The SRI incorporates SELENA-SLEDAI score to measure improvement, 
BILAG score over baseline to evaluate for worsening in organ system manifestations, and 
PGA to ensure no overall decline in health. SRI-4 response is defined as 1) a ≥4 point 
decrease in SELENA-SLEDAI score (a cutoff chosen based on the established minimal 
clinically important difference26), 2) no new BILAG A or ≤1 new BILAG B scores, and 3) 
no deterioration in PGA by ≥0.3 points. In a post-hoc analysis of seropositive patients in the 
belimumab phase II RCT, SRI-4 response at 52 weeks was significantly higher in the pooled 
belimumab group compared to the placebo group (46% vs 29%, respectively, p=0.006).25 
SRI-4 response was thus chosen as the primary efficacy endpoint for subsequent belimumab 
RCTs.
BLISS-52 and BLISS-76 were both multicenter phase III RCTs, run in parallel, evaluating 
efficacy of belimumab 1mg/kg or 10mg/kg every 4 weeks compared to placebo in patients 
with non-renal SLE.27, 28 Taking advantage of lessons learned from the phase II RCT, only 
seropositive patients (ANA and/or anti-dsDNA positive during screening) were enrolled, and 
stricter control of background glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants was required. The 
belimumab 10mg/kg group met the primary efficacy endpoint, SRI-4 response rate at 52 
weeks, in both RCTs. SRI-4 response rates with belimumab 10mg/kg and placebo were 58% 
and 44%, respectively in BLISS-52 (total n=867, p=0.006) and 43.2% and 33.5%, 
respectively, in BLISS-76 (total n=819; p=0.017). It is notable, however, that the efficacy of 
belimumab was lost at 76 weeks in BLISS-76. Key secondary endpoints were also met. In 
BLISS-52, the belimumab 10mg/kg group had fewer severe flares, measured with SFI and 
BILAG, while fewer severe flares over 76 weeks were seen with belimumab 1mg/kg in 
BLISS-76. Clinically meaningful improvements in HRQOL and fatigue were also evident in 
a pooled analysis of both RCTs.29
Based on this evidence, belimumab was approved by FDA and EMA in 2011 for the 
treatment of seropositive patients with active SLE despite standard of care treatment. 
Unfortunately, these RCTs included relatively few African American patients, and those that 
were included did not appear to benefit when clinical response was assessed. A post-
approval study was required to recruit larger numbers of such patients to define the expected 
Mahieu et al.
Page 8
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 response, which is ongoing (clinicaltrials.gov ID NCT01632241). Additionally, other 
regulatory agencies in the United Kingdom have not approved belimumab because of 
concerns of modest efficacy in the setting of high cost. A post-hoc analysis has since 
suggested benefit to patients with SLE nephritis, and RCTs evaluating efficacy in patients 
with active SLE nephritis are ongoing (clinicaltrials.gov ID NCT01639339, NCT02260934). 
A subcutaneous belimumab formulation also demonstrated efficacy in the BLISS-SC trial 
despite a large placebo response.30
Tabalumab
Another B-cell targeted therapy, tabalumab is an anti-BAFF/BLyS monoclonal antibody that 
antagonizes both soluble and membrane-bound BAFF/BLyS. Efficacy and safety of 
tabalumab were evaluated in the ILLUMINATE-1 and ILLUMINATE-2 studies, two 52-
week, phase III placebo RCTs of patients with moderate-to-severe SLE.31, 32 In 
ILLUMINATE-1, 1164 patients were randomized to receive tabalumab 120mg every 2 
weeks, 120mg every 4 weeks, or placebo.31 Background therapy with antimalarials and 
immunosuppressants was allowed, but participants with any change in dose, including 
decrease in dose if the patient improved, were considered treatment non-responders. 
Unrestricted use of glucocorticoids was allowed until week 24 when it was required that the 
glucocorticoid dose be equal to or lower than enrollment and only dose decreases were 
allowed for the remainder of the study period. The primary efficacy endpoint was SRI-5 
response at 52 weeks, a modified version of the SRI requiring a 5-point SLEDAI 
improvement to be considered a responder. The primary endpoint was not met, although 
there was a trend towards greater response with tabalumab 120mg every 4 weeks compared 
to placebo (35.2% and 29.3%, respectively, p=0.052). Additionally, when patients who 
decreased antimalarial or immunosuppressant dose were not considered to be non-
responders (a pre-specified sensitivity analysis), there were significantly more SRI-5 
responders in the tabalumab 120mg every 4 weeks group compared to the placebo group 
(37.0% and 29.8%, respectively, p=0.021). Key secondary endpoints, such as time to SLE 
flare and ability to taper glucocorticoids, were also not met despite pharmacodynamic 
evidence of tabalumab biological activity (significant decreases in anti-dsDNA, total B-cells, 
and immunoglobulins). Of interest, pharmacokinetics between the two selected dose 
regimens were overlapping.
The ILLUMINATE-2 study,32 which was nearly identical to ILLUMINATE-1, randomized 
1124 patients to the same tabalumab or placebo treatment arms, handled background 
medications similarly, and used the same primary endpoint (achievement of SRI-5 at 52 
weeks) as ILLUMINATE-1. However, patients who lowered antimalarial or 
immunosuppressant dose were not considered per-protocol non-responders in 
ILLUMINATE-2. The primary endpoint was met in the tabalumab 120mg every 2 weeks 
group, with 38.4% responders compared to only 27.7% in the placebo group (p=0.002); 
there was a trend towards higher response in the tabalumab 120mg every 4 weeks group 
(34.8% vs 27.7%, respectively, p=0.051). Similar to ILLUMINATE-1, tabalumab-treated 
patients had significant improvement in laboratory parameters compared to placebo, but no 
key secondary endpoints were met.
Mahieu et al.
Page 9
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Despite evidence of efficacy in ILLUMINATE-2 and a trend towards efficacy in 
ILLUMINATE-1, tabalumab development was suspended given the small effect size and 
inability to meet other important clinical endpoints. Of note, when the belimumab SRI-4 
endpoint was applied to the data, the primary endpoint was met in both ILLUMINATE-1 
(for both tabalumab doses) and ILLUMINATE-2 (for the every 2 week dose). The 
ILLUMINATE studies succeeded in attaining a large sample size and long study duration. 
However, achievement of the primary endpoint is strongly influenced by the definition of 
response to study drug—both in the choice to use the modified SRI-5 and to designate 
patients with any change in antimalarial or immunosuppressant as a non-responder. 
Furthermore, little phase II work preceded the slightly staggered implementation of these 
two large phase III pivotal RCTs, which demonstrated similar pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic effects with both dose regimens.
Epratuzumab
Epratuzumab, another mAb, modulates B-cell activity by binding to CD22 on the surface of 
mature B-cells. The phase IIb placebo RCTs, ALLEVIATE 1 and 2, were designed to assess 
the efficacy of epratuzumab with a BILAG-based primary endpoint in patients with 
moderate-to-severe SLE.33 The trials were ultimately suspended early because of limited 
supply of study drug, but analysis of available data showed a trend towards clinical efficacy. 
The primary endpoint, which was assessed in a pooled analysis (n=90) and at 12 instead of 
the planned 24 weeks, was met by more patients treated with epratuzumab than placebo. 
Epratuzumab treatment also led to improvements in HRQOL and mean glucocorticoid 
dose.34
A second epratuzumab phase IIb dose-ranging RCT, EMBLEM, was the first to use the 
BILAG-Based Composite Lupus Assessment (BICLA) as the primary efficacy endpoint.35 
BICLA, another composite responder index, requires improvement in baseline disease 
activity, no disease worsening (global or organ-specific), and no treatment failure to be 
considered a responder.36 Specific criteria for BICLA response include 1) all BILAG A 
scores at study entry improved to B/C/D and all BILAG B scores improved to C/D, 2) no 
new BILAG A or ≤2 BILAG B scores, no worsening of SLEDAI score from baseline to 
endpoint, and no worsening in PGA (<10% worsening), and 3) no addition of non-protocol 
SLE treatment, such as new or increased immunosuppressants or antimalarials.
In EMBLEM, 227 patients with moderate-to-severe SLE were randomized to one of five 
epratuzumab doses or placebo.35 Background glucocorticoids were tapered per investigator 
discretion after week 4, while immunosuppressant and antimalarial doses were held 
constant. BICLA response at 12 weeks, the primary endpoint, was greater with all doses of 
epratuzumab than placebo, but the effect was not statistically significant. Improved HRQOL 
and decreased glucocorticoid use were also seen with epratuzumab treatment in EMBLEM 
and the open-label extension study.34 However, the subsequent multicenter phase III RCTs, 
EMBODY 1 (n= 786) and EMBODY 2 (n= 791), employed every 3 month dosing cycles, 
which had never been tested, and showed no significant benefit.37 Patients with moderate-to-
severe SLE were randomized to receive epratuzumab 600mg every week, 1200mg every 
other week, or placebo; study drug was administered for a 4-week period in 12-week cycles. 
Mahieu et al.
Page 10
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The primary efficacy endpoint, BICLA response at 48 weeks, was not met. Moreover, no 
significant differences were seen in secondary endpoints such as total SLEDAI-2K score, 
PGA, or mean glucocorticoid dose. The EMBODY studies included a robust study design 
and large sample size, and the negative results of these phase III RCTs indicate that 
epratuzumab was truly not effective for the treatment of SLE. It is also possible that, as 
observed in other RCTs, early rescue of non-responders with increased doses of 
glucocorticoids confounded the data.
PF-04236921
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that is elevated in SLE patients. The 
efficacy of PF-04236921, a mAb that binds soluble IL-6, was evaluated in a phase II RCT of 
183 patients with active SLE.38 Patients were randomized to receive either subcutaneous 
PF-04236921 10mg, 50mg, or 200mg or placebo every 8 weeks; the 200mg dose arm was 
discontinued early because of 3 deaths. The primary efficacy endpoint was SRI-4 response at 
24 weeks, with BICLA as a secondary endpoint. The primary endpoint was not met, but 
there was a trend towards higher SRI-4 response rate in the 10mg group compared to 
placebo (59.9% vs 40.1%, respectively, p=0.076). Among secondary endpoints, BICLA 
response was significantly higher in the 10mg group compared to placebo (p=0.026). In a 
pooled analysis, patients receiving PF-04236921 also had significantly fewer severe SLE 
flares (defined by SFI) than placebo (p=0.004) (10mg: 0; 50mg: 2; placebo: 10). The 
discrepancy in responder rates – a significant response to PF-04236921 when assessed with 
BICLA but not SRI-4 – further underscores that clinical trial success could hinge on choice 
of primary endpoint, even when composite indices are used.
Anifrolumab
Anifrolumab, a type I interferon (IFN) receptor antagonist, inhibits type I interferon 
signaling that has been implicated in the pathogenesis of SLE. In a phase II placebo RCT, 
305 patients with moderate-to-severe active SLE were randomized to either anifrolumab 
300mg, 1000mg, or placebo every 4 weeks for 48 weeks.39 Patients were stratified by a 
number of variables, including high versus low IFN gene signature defined by the company. 
The primary efficacy endpoint, SRI-4 response at 24 weeks, was met by more anifrolumab 
300mg treated patients than placebo (34.3% vs 17.6%, respectively, p=0.014), but not by 
patients receiving 1000mg. Importantly, significant clinical benefit was only observed in 
subjects with an increased interferon gene expression signature. Additionally, two key 
secondary endpoints were met by the anifrolumab-treated high interferon group: 1) 
composite endpoint of SRI-4 response at 52 weeks with sustained reduction in prednisone 
dosage between 40 and 52 weeks, and 2) reduction of prednisone to ≤7.5mg/day at week 52 
among patients who were taking ≥10mg at enrollment (300mg dose only). Decrease in IFN-
regulated gene expression was documented with both doses of anifrolumab, confirming 
biologic activity. In sum, the primary and key secondary endpoints were all met in this phase 
II trial, and an extension study and two phase III RCTs to further evaluate the efficacy and 
safety of anifrolumab for the treatment of SLE are underway (clinicaltrials.gov ID 
NCT02446899 and NCT02446912). Despite noting benefit only in the interferon high 
group, these trials will enroll both interferon high and interferon low subjects.
Mahieu et al.
Page 11
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Renal SLE Clinical Trials
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
Interest in large-scale evaluation of the role of MMF in the treatment of SLE nephritis 
stemmed from small trials and meta-analyses indicating that MMF was as or more effective 
than standard of care IV cyclophosphamide with fewer adverse effects.40, 41 The ALMS trial 
was an international, open-label randomized trial designed to determine whether MMF was 
non-inferior to IV cyclophosphamide for induction treatment of SLE nephritis.42 Three 
hundred and seventy patients with active, biopsy-proven International Society of 
Nephrology/Renal Pathology Society (ISN/RPS) class III, IV, or V SLE nephritis were 
randomized to treatment with either MMF or cyclophosphamide. MMF was titrated to a 
target of 1.5g twice daily by week 3, and 0.5–1.0g/m2 IV cyclophosphamide was 
administered once a month. Patients in both treatment arms were administered oral 
prednisone 60mg/day with a per protocol taper; IV glucocorticoids were not allowed within 
2 weeks of randomization or throughout the study. The primary endpoint was the proportion 
of patients with renal response at 24 weeks, defined as 1) decrease in urine protein/creatinine 
ratio (UPC) to <3 in patients with baseline UPC ≥3 or by ≥50% and 2) stabilization (±25%) 
or improvement in serum creatinine. The primary endpoint was met by a similar proportion 
of patients in the MMF (56.2%) and cyclophosphamide (53.0%) treatment arms (p=0.58). 
Thus, the study established that MMF was not different than cyclophosphamide for 
induction treatment of SLE nephritis. An important difference in response to treatment 
among racial groups was also noted. Patients who self-identified as black or mixed race had 
a greater response to MMF than cyclophosphamide (60.4% vs 38.5%, respectively, 
p=0.033). A post-hoc analysis also showed a greater MMF treatment response in Hispanic 
patients (60.9% response with MMF vs 38.8% with cyclophosphamide, p=0.011).43 Renal 
response at 24 weeks was similar among white and Asian patients in both treatment arms. 
There was no significant difference in secondary endpoints, such as change in SELENA-
SLEDAI score or serologic activity, with either treatment. Patients who met renal response 
criteria at 24 weeks were subsequently re-randomized to either MMF or azathioprine as 
maintenance therapy.44 Using time to treatment failure as a primary endpoint, this second 
phase of ALMS established that MMF was superior to azathioprine in maintaining renal 
response and preventing relapse.
ALMS suggested that MMF is similar to the effects of IV cyclophosphamide for induction 
treatment of SLE nephritis, but it was not possible for FDA to conclude that MMF was non-
inferior to cyclophosphamide. Although cyclophosphamide is widely used for the treatment 
of SLE nephritis, the drug is not approved for this indication and no clinical trials have been 
conducted to document the effect size. As an unapproved comparator, the non-inferiority 
margin for MMF could not be determined, and the trial could not serve as grounds for 
approval. Nonetheless, MMF is increasingly used for the treatment of SLE nephritis.
Rituximab
LUNAR was a phase III double-blind, placebo-controlled, RCT that evaluated the efficacy 
and safety of rituximab in 144 patients with active proliferative SLE nephritis.45 Inclusion 
criteria were ANA positive patients, ISN/RPS class III or IV nephritis on renal biopsy within 
Mahieu et al.
Page 12
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the last 12 months, and proteinuria (UPC >1.0); active urinary sediment was required if renal 
biopsy was >3 months before enrollment. Nearly half of participants were enrolled with 
their first SLE nephritis flare. All patients were treated with background standard of care 
treatment that included IV methylprednisolone at study enrollment then prolonged protocol 
mandated taper of prednisone, as well as MMF titration to 3g/day, as tolerated. No other 
immunosuppressant agents were allowed. The primary endpoint was complete renal 
response, partial renal response, or no response at 52 weeks. Complete renal response was 
defined as 1) normal serum creatinine if abnormal at baseline or ≤115% of baseline if 
normal at baseline, 2) inactive urinary sediment (<5 RBCs/hpf and no RBC casts), and 3) 
UPC <0.5. Partial renal response was defined as 1) serum creatinine ≤115% of baseline, 2) 
RBCs/hpf ≤50% above baseline and no RBC casts, and 3) at least 50% decrease in UPC to 
<1 (if baseline UPC was ≤3) or to <3 (if baseline UPC was >3). Patients were considered 
non-responders if they did not meet criteria for complete or partial response or required 
rescue therapy with an additional immunosuppressant. Previously noted concerns were the 
heterogeneity of the patient population in terms of renal disease activity, as well as use of 
effective background therapy including MMF and glucocorticoids.
The primary endpoint of the study was not met. Rates of renal response in rituximab and 
placebo-treated arms, respectively, were 26.5% and 30.6% for complete response, 30.6% 
and 15.3% for partial response, and 43.1% and 54.2% for no response (p=0.55). Although 
there were more partial renal responders and fewer non-responders in the rituximab arm, the 
study was small, and not powered to assess these endpoints. A number of pre-specified 
secondary clinical endpoints, such as time to complete renal response and change in 
HRQOL, were also not significant at 52 weeks. Important exploratory analyses suggested 
that rituximab-treated patients had improvement in proteinuria and higher rates of complete 
or partial renal response compared to placebo at week 78 but not at week 52.
There are several flaws to the LUNAR study design that may have resulted in an apparent 
lack of efficacy with rituximab treatment. First, whereas rituximab was reported to be 
effective in treatment of refractory SLE nephritis in uncontrolled studies, half of LUNAR 
participants were treated during their first renal flare – it is possible that rituximab is more 
effective for refractory nephritis. Additionally, significant improvements in proteinuria were 
not observed until 78 weeks, indicating that the trial duration may have been too short to see 
an effect. The relatively small sample size precluded a statistical assessment of differences in 
partial renal response rates between treatment arms. Finally, despite these shortcomings in 
the LUNAR trial design, it is also possible that rituximab is simply not effective for the 
treatment of SLE nephritis. RITUXILUP, a phase III RCT evaluating rituximab plus MMF 
without oral glucocorticoids for the treatment of lupus nephritis, is ongoing 
(clinicaltrials.gov ID NCT01773616; EudraCT ID 2012-004893-25).
Abatacept
To date, two RCTs have evaluated the efficacy of abatacept as add-on therapy for the 
treatment of proliferative SLE nephritis. Furie and colleagues reported the results of a 52-
week phase II/III placebo RCT in 298 patients with active, biopsy-proven ISN/RPS class III 
or IV SLE nephritis treated with abatacept or placebo in addition to background MMF and 
Mahieu et al.
Page 13
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glucocorticoids.46 Abatacept treatment included two arms with patients receiving either 
30mg/kg loading doses then 10mg/kg monthly (30/10 group), or 10mg/kg loading doses 
then 10mg/kg monthly (10/10 group). MMF was titrated to a target dose determined based 
on race/ethnicity, and administration of glucocorticoids (clearly proven to be a successful 
treatment but limited by associated chronic adverse events) was allowed at investigator 
discretion. The primary endpoint was time to confirmed complete renal response, defined as 
1) estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) ≥90% of screening level if normal at baseline 
or eGFR ≥90% 6 month pre-flare value if abnormal at screening, 2) UPC <0.26, and 3) 
inactive urinary sediment (RBCs and WBCs per hpf within normal limits and no RBC or 
WBC casts). Criteria had to be met 4 weeks later to be considered a confirmed complete 
response. The primary endpoint was not met, with similar time to confirmed complete renal 
response across all treatment arms. Further, few patients achieved the primary endpoint at 
any time during the study: 22.2% of abatacept 30/10 group, 27.3% of abatacept 10/10 group, 
and 20.0% of placebo group. It is also notable that mean UPC was lower in placebo than 
abatacept arms despite randomization. The definition of confirmed complete renal response 
has been criticized as being too strict. A post-hoc analysis suggested that the primary 
endpoint may have been met if the LUNAR definition of complete renal response had been 
applied.47 Additionally, the unrestricted use of background glucocorticoids could have 
mitigated differences in partial renal response between abatacept and placebo treatment. A 
second phase III trial of abatacept with MMF and glucocorticoids for the treatment 
proliferative SLE nephritis is ongoing (clinicaltrials.gov ID: NCT01714817).
ACCESS, a 52-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, RCT evaluated the efficacy of 
abatacept for SLE nephritis treatment in the setting of induction with background 
cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids and maintenance with azathioprine.48 All 134 
patients were initially treated with IV cyclophosphamide per the Euro-Lupus Nephritis trial 
protocol49 and prednisone 60mg/day. The use of pulse-dose IV glucocorticoids was per 
investigator discretion. Sixty-six patients randomized to the abatacept arm began treatment 
with monthly abatacept (weight-based dosing) concurrent with IV cyclophosphamide and 
glucocorticoid therapy. A predefined prolonged prednisone taper was started after 2 weeks. 
Azathioprine was initiated following six doses of IV cyclophosphamide. The primary 
endpoint was the proportion of patients achieving a complete renal response at 24 weeks. 
Complete renal response was defined as 1) UPC of <0.5, 2) serum creatinine level ≤1.2 
mg/dl or ≤125% of baseline, and 3) adherence to the prednisone taper to 10mg/day by 12 
weeks. The primary endpoint was not met, and the proportion of patients achieving complete 
renal response was 33% and 31% in abatacept and placebo-treated patients, respectively. A 
number of pre-specified secondary endpoints were also not met at week 24, including 
difference in BILAG score, number of renal and non-renal SLE flares, and PROs. All 
endpoints were also evaluated at 52 weeks as exploratory analyses, and no significant 
differences were detected between treatment arms. The definition of complete renal response 
in the ACCESS trial was less strict and more attainable than in the study by Furie and 
colleagues. The recommended glucocorticoid taper, albeit quite prolonged, was also a 
strength of the study protocol by minimizing a placebo response from standard of care 
medications. However, the trial suffered from relatively small sample size and also a short 
duration to primary endpoint assessment.
Mahieu et al.
Page 14
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tacrolimus
The calcineurin inhibitor tacrolimus, frequently employed following solid organ transplant 
to prevent rejection, has been evaluated for a role in treatment of SLE nephritis. Several 
uncontrolled studies and small RCTs of SLE patients showed successful treatment of 
membranous or refractory nephritis with tacrolimus.50–52
A large-scale, open randomized trial was designed to compare the efficacy of tacrolimus to 
MMF for treatment of active SLE nephritis.53 The study enrolled 150 Chinese SLE patients 
with biopsy-proven ISN/RPS class III, IV, or V nephritis within 4 weeks of study entry. 
Patients were randomized to receive MMF 2–3g/day for 6 months or tacrolimus 0.06–
0.1mg/kg/day for 6 months, titrated depending on dose response at 3 months and patient 
tolerance. All patients were treated with a weight-based dose of prednisone for 6 weeks then 
forced taper per protocol to <10mg/day. The primary outcome was proportion of patients 
achieving complete renal response at 6 months. Complete renal response was defined as 1) 
stabilization (within 25%) or improvement in serum creatinine with UPC <1, 2) inactive 
urinary sediment, and 3) persistent improvement in C3 and anti-dsDNA levels. For patients 
with a complete or good partial response to either tacrolimus or MMF at 6 months, therapy 
was changed to azathioprine maintenance, while non-responders were treated with salvage 
cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids. Participants were monitored for a follow-up period 
of 5 years. There was no difference in the proportion of patients meeting the primary 
endpoint at 6 months, with complete renal response in 62% and 59% of the tacrolimus and 
MMF groups, respectively (p=0.71). Tacrolimus efficacy was similar to MMF even when the 
stricter American College of Rheumatology definition of complete renal response (creatinine 
clearance ≥90ml/min, UPC <0.2, and inactive urinary sediment) was applied, although few 
patients in each arm achieved this endpoint (14% and 11% in tacrolimus and MMF groups, 
respectively, p=0.59). The need for salvage cyclophosphamide treatment was also similar 
between groups. In long-term follow-up, there was a non-significant suggestion of a higher 
incidence of nephritis flares in patients receiving tacrolimus compared to MMF induction 
therapy (p=0.13 for trend). Strengths of this trial design included long duration of follow-up 
and tight control of background medications, including a forced glucocorticoid taper.
OMERACT/LRI Project overview
As has been demonstrated in the previous discussion, outcome measures for SLE are 
complex, not uniform, poorly responsive to trial interventions, and are not relevant to the 
practicing clinician. The presently used instruments were not developed originally for use as 
outcomes in RCTs, and composite responder indices are also only intermittently successful. 
One way to develop more effective and appropriate outcome measures is to analyze the 
available clinical trial data base, deconstruct the data captured in the current measures, and 
reconstruct them in a manner that more effectively separates responders from non-
responders.
The approach will involve an analysis of data from the available RCTs, beginning with the 
BLISS trial data sets that led to the approval of belimumab. The data collected in these 
RCTs will be dissected to determine whether novel combinations can be employed as new 
outcome measures to be assessed in future clinical trials. The statistical analysis will be 
Mahieu et al.
Page 15
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 informed by an iterative process with a committee of experienced clinicians, trialists, and 
statisticians.
Several voluntary organizations including the LRI and the Alliance for Lupus Research, 
collaborating with the LRI-Lupus Industry Council and the international consensus effort, 
OMERACT, have developed a working committee along with statistical support to collect 
the data bases from SLE RCTs. The working committee will deconstruct and analyze the 
available data to develop better composite outcome measures that will demonstrate 
responsiveness in clinical trials. Following processes outlined by OMERACT over the years 
to define such outcomes measures, table 3 demonstrates the steps to evaluate the data sets.
Conclusion
Many therapeutics have failed to reach efficacy endpoints in SLE clinical trials, but lessons 
learned from these unsuccessful trials have led to advances in trial design. Building on 
weaknesses identified in the phase II belimumab RCTs, for example, the BLISS studies 
enrolled only seropositive SLE patients and employed the novel composite SRI efficacy 
endpoint. However, even composite responder indices have limited success as primary 
efficacy endpoints. Ongoing efforts to develop composite endpoints for SLE clinical trials 
may lead to advances in capturing clinically meaningful therapeutic responses.
Acknowledgments
Funding
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and 
Skin Diseases T32-AR007611 (M.A.M.).
References
1. Lahita, RG. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. 5th. San Diego, CA: Elsevier; 2011. The Clinical 
Presentation of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus; p. 525-39.
2. United States Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for industry. Systemic lupus erythematosus–
Developing medical products for treatment. Jun. 2010 http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM072063.pdf
3. European Medicines Agency. Guideline on clinical investigation of medicinal products for the 
treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus and lupus nephritis. Sep. 2015 http://
www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientific_guideline/2015/03/
WC500184889.pdf
4. Strand V, Chu AD. Measuring outcomes in systemic lupus erythematosus clinical trials. Expert 
review of pharmacoeconomics & outcomes research. 2011; 11:455–68. [PubMed: 21831027] 
5. Sawalha AH, Kovats S. Dehydroepiandrosterone in systemic lupus erythematosus. Current 
rheumatology reports. 2008; 10:286–91. [PubMed: 18662508] 
6. Lahita RG, Bradlow HL, Ginzler E, Pang S, New M. Low plasma androgens in women with 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis and rheumatism. 1987; 30:241–8. [PubMed: 3032210] 
7. Suzuki T, Suzuki N, Engleman EG, Mizushima Y, Sakane T. Low serum levels of 
dehydroepiandrosterone may cause deficient IL-2 production by lymphocytes in patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Clinical and experimental immunology. 1995; 99:251–5. 
[PubMed: 7851019] 
Mahieu et al.
Page 16
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8. van Vollenhoven RF, Morabito LM, Engleman EG, McGuire JL. Treatment of systemic lupus 
erythematosus with dehydroepiandrosterone: 50 patients treated up to 12 months. The Journal of 
rheumatology. 1998; 25:285–9. [PubMed: 9489820] 
9. van Vollenhoven RF, Engleman EG, McGuire JL. Dehydroepiandrosterone in systemic lupus 
erythematosus. Results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial. Arthritis and 
rheumatism. 1995; 38:1826–31. [PubMed: 8849355] 
10. van Vollenhoven RF, Park JL, Genovese MC, West JP, McGuire JL. A double-blind, placebo-
controlled, clinical trial of dehydroepiandrosterone in severe systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus. 
1999; 8:181–7. [PubMed: 10342710] 
11. Petri MA, Lahita RG, Van Vollenhoven RF, et al. Effects of prasterone on corticosteroid 
requirements of women with systemic lupus erythematosus: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-
controlled trial. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2002; 46:1820–9. [PubMed: 12124866] 
12. Chang DM, Lan JL, Lin HY, Luo SF. Dehydroepiandrosterone treatment of women with mild-to-
moderate systemic lupus erythematosus: a multicenter randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2002; 46:2924–7. [PubMed: 12428233] 
13. Petri MA, Mease PJ, Merrill JT, et al. Effects of prasterone on disease activity and symptoms in 
women with active systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2004; 50:2858–68. 
[PubMed: 15452837] 
14. Mok CC. Current role of rituximab in systemic lupus erythematosus. International journal of 
rheumatic diseases. 2015; 18:154–63. [PubMed: 25522652] 
15. Merrill JT, Neuwelt CM, Wallace DJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of rituximab in moderately-to-
severely active systemic lupus erythematosus: the randomized, double-blind, phase II/III systemic 
lupus erythematosus evaluation of rituximab trial. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2010; 62:222–33. 
[PubMed: 20039413] 
16. Merrill JT. Co-stimulatory molecules as targets for treatment of lupus. Clinical immunology 
(Orlando, Fla). 2013; 148:369–75.
17. Merrill JT, Burgos-Vargas R, Westhovens R, et al. The efficacy and safety of abatacept in patients 
with non-life-threatening manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus: results of a twelve-
month, multicenter, exploratory, phase IIb, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. 
Arthritis and rheumatism. 2010; 62:3077–87. [PubMed: 20533545] 
18. Ginzler EM, Wax S, Rajeswaran A, et al. Atacicept in combination with MMF and corticosteroids 
in lupus nephritis: results of a prematurely terminated trial. Arthritis research & therapy. 2012; 
14:R33. [PubMed: 22325903] 
19. Isenberg D, Gordon C, Licu D, Copt S, Rossi CP, Wofsy D. Efficacy and safety of atacicept for 
prevention of flares in patients with moderate-to-severe systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE): 52-
week data (APRIL-SLE randomised trial). Annals of the rheumatic diseases. 2015; 74:2006–15. 
[PubMed: 24951103] 
20. Wallace DJ, Stohl W, Furie RA, et al. A phase II, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
dose-ranging study of belimumab in patients with active systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis 
and rheumatism. 2009; 61:1168–78. [PubMed: 19714604] 
21. Bombardier C, Gladman DD, Urowitz MB, Caron D, Chang CH. Derivation of the SLEDAI. A 
disease activity index for lupus patients. The Committee on Prognosis Studies in SLE. Arthritis 
and rheumatism. 1992; 35:630–40. [PubMed: 1599520] 
22. Hay EM, Bacon PA, Gordon C, et al. The BILAG index: a reliable and valid instrument for 
measuring clinical disease activity in systemic lupus erythematosus. The Quarterly journal of 
medicine. 1993; 86:447–58. [PubMed: 8210301] 
23. Gladman DD, Ibanez D, Urowitz MB. Systemic lupus erythematosus disease activity index 2000. 
The Journal of rheumatology. 2002; 29:288–91. [PubMed: 11838846] 
24. Petri M, Kim MY, Kalunian KC, et al. Combined oral contraceptives in women with systemic 
lupus erythematosus. The New England journal of medicine. 2005; 353:2550–8. [PubMed: 
16354891] 
25. Furie RA, Petri MA, Wallace DJ, et al. Novel evidence-based systemic lupus erythematosus 
responder index. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2009; 61:1143–51. [PubMed: 19714615] 
Mahieu et al.
Page 17
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 26. Gladman DD, Urowitz MB, Kagal A, Hallett D. Accurately describing changes in disease activity 
in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. The Journal of rheumatology. 2000; 27:377–9. [PubMed: 
10685800] 
27. Navarra SV, Guzman RM, Gallacher AE, et al. Efficacy and safety of belimumab in patients with 
active systemic lupus erythematosus: a randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 
(London, England). 2011; 377:721–31.
28. Furie R, Petri M, Zamani O, et al. A phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled study of 
belimumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits B lymphocyte stimulator, in patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2011; 63:3918–30. [PubMed: 22127708] 
29. Strand V, Levy RA, Cervera R, et al. Improvements in health-related quality of life with 
belimumab, a B-lymphocyte stimulator-specific inhibitor, in patients with autoantibody-positive 
systemic lupus erythematosus from the randomised controlled BLISS trials. Annals of the 
rheumatic diseases. 2014; 73:838–44. [PubMed: 23524886] 
30. Stohl, W.; Schwarting, A.; Okada, M., et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 52-
week study of the efficacy and safety of belimumab administered subcutaneously plus standard of 
care to patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) [abstract 3218]. 2015 ACR/ARHP 
Annual Meeting; San Francisco, CA, USA. 
31. Isenberg DA, Petri M, Kalunian K, et al. Efficacy and safety of subcutaneous tabalumab in patients 
with systemic lupus erythematosus: results from ILLUMINATE-1, a 52-week, phase III, 
multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Annals of the rheumatic diseases. 
2016; 75:323–331. [PubMed: 26338095] 
32. Merrill JT, van Vollenhoven RF, Buyon JP, et al. Efficacy and safety of subcutaneous tabalumab, a 
monoclonal antibody to B-cell activating factor, in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: 
results from ILLUMINATE-2, a 52-week, phase III, multicentre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study. Annals of the rheumatic diseases. 2016; 75:332–340. [PubMed: 
26293163] 
33. Wallace DJ, Gordon C, Strand V, et al. Efficacy and safety of epratuzumab in patients with 
moderate/severe flaring systemic lupus erythematosus: results from two randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, multicentre studies (ALLEVIATE) and follow-up. Rheumatology (Oxford, 
England). 2013; 52:1313–22.
34. Strand V, Petri M, Kalunian K, et al. Epratuzumab for patients with moderate to severe flaring 
SLE: health-related quality of life outcomes and corticosteroid use in the randomized controlled 
ALLEVIATE trials and extension study SL0006. Rheumatology (Oxford, England). 2014; 53:502–
11.
35. Wallace DJ, Kalunian K, Petri MA, et al. Efficacy and safety of epratuzumab in patients with 
moderate/severe active systemic lupus erythematosus: results from EMBLEM, a phase IIb, 
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre study. Annals of the rheumatic diseases. 
2014; 73:183–90. [PubMed: 23313811] 
36. Wallace DJ, Strand V, Furie R, et al. Evaluation of treatment success in systemic lupus 
erythematosus clinical trials: Development of the British Isles Lupus Assessment Group-Based 
Composite Lupus Assessment Endpoint [abstract]. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2011; 63(Suppl 10):
22645.
37. Clowse, ME.; Wallace, DJ.; Furie, R., et al. Efficacy and safety of epratuzumab in patients with 
moderate-to-severe systemic lupus erythematosus: Results from two phase 3 randomized, placebo-
controlled trials [abstract 4L]. 2015 ACR/ARHP Annual Meeting; San Francisco, CA, USA. 
38. Wallace, DJ.; Popa, S.; Spindler, AJ., et al. Improvement of disease activity and reduction of severe 
flares following subcutaneous administration of an IL-6 monoclonal antibody (mAb) in subjects 
with active generalized systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) [abstract L5]. 2014 ACR/ARHP 
Annual Meeting; Boston, MA, USA. 
39. Furie, R.; Merrill, J.; Werth, VP., et al. Anifrolumab, an anti-interferon alpha receptor monoclonal 
antibody, in moderate to severe systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) [abstract 3223]. 2015 ACR/
ARHP Annual Meeting; San Francisco, CA, USA. 
40. Moore RA, Derry S. Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials and cohort studies 
of mycophenolate mofetil in lupus nephritis. Arthritis research & therapy. 2006; 8:R182. 
[PubMed: 17163990] 
Mahieu et al.
Page 18
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 41. Walsh M, James M, Jayne D, Tonelli M, Manns BJ, Hemmelgarn BR. Mycophenolate mofetil for 
induction therapy of lupus nephritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical journal of the 
American Society of Nephrology : CJASN. 2007; 2:968–75. [PubMed: 17702723] 
42. Appel GB, Contreras G, Dooley MA, et al. Mycophenolate mofetil versus cyclophosphamide for 
induction treatment of lupus nephritis. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology : JASN. 
2009; 20:1103–12. [PubMed: 19369404] 
43. Isenberg D, Appel GB, Contreras G, et al. Influence of race/ethnicity on response to lupus nephritis 
treatment: the ALMS study. Rheumatology (Oxford, England). 2010; 49:128–40.
44. Dooley MA, Jayne D, Ginzler EM, et al. Mycophenolate versus azathioprine as maintenance 
therapy for lupus nephritis. The New England journal of medicine. 2011; 365:1886–95. [PubMed: 
22087680] 
45. Rovin BH, Furie R, Latinis K, et al. Efficacy and safety of rituximab in patients with active 
proliferative lupus nephritis: the Lupus Nephritis Assessment with Rituximab study. Arthritis and 
rheumatism. 2012; 64:1215–26. [PubMed: 22231479] 
46. Furie R, Nicholls K, Cheng TT, et al. Efficacy and safety of abatacept in lupus nephritis: a twelve-
month, randomized, double-blind study. Arthritis & rheumatology (Hoboken, NJ). 2014; 66:379–
89.
47. Wofsy D, Hillson JL, Diamond B. Comparison of alternative primary outcome measures for use in 
lupus nephritis clinical trials. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2013; 65:1586–91. [PubMed: 23529285] 
48. The ACCESS Trial Group. Treatment of lupus nephritis with abatacept: the Abatacept and 
Cyclophosphamide Combination Efficacy and Safety Study. Arthritis & rheumatology (Hoboken, 
NJ). 2014; 66:3096–104.
49. Houssiau FA, Vasconcelos C, D’Cruz D, et al. Immunosuppressive therapy in lupus nephritis: the 
Euro-Lupus Nephritis Trial, a randomized trial of low-dose versus high-dose intravenous 
cyclophosphamide. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2002; 46:2121–31. [PubMed: 12209517] 
50. Fei Y, Wu Q, Zhang W, et al. Low-dose tacrolimus in treating lupus nephritis refractory to 
cyclophosphamide: a prospective cohort study. Clinical and experimental rheumatology. 2013; 
31:62–8. [PubMed: 22935463] 
51. Lee YH, Lee HS, Choi SJ, Dai Ji J, Song GG. Efficacy and safety of tacrolimus therapy for lupus 
nephritis: a systematic review of clinical trials. Lupus. 2011; 20:636–40. [PubMed: 21382917] 
52. Chen W, Tang X, Liu Q, et al. Short-term outcomes of induction therapy with tacrolimus versus 
cyclophosphamide for active lupus nephritis: A multicenter randomized clinical trial. American 
journal of kidney diseases : the official journal of the National Kidney Foundation. 2011; 57:235–
44. [PubMed: 21177013] 
53. Mok CC, Ying KY, Yim CW, et al. Tacrolimus versus mycophenolate mofetil for induction therapy 
of lupus nephritis: a randomised controlled trial and long-term follow-up. Annals of the rheumatic 
diseases. 2016; 75:30–6. [PubMed: 25550339] 
54. Dooley MA, Houssiau F, Aranow C, et al. Effect of belimumab treatment on renal outcomes: 
results from the phase 3 belimumab clinical trials in patients with SLE. Lupus. 2013; 22:63–72. 
[PubMed: 23263865] 
55. Urowitz MB, Isenberg DA, Wallace DJ. Safety and efficacy of hCDR1 (Edratide) in patients with 
active systemic lupus erythematosus: results of phase II study. Lupus science & medicine. 2015; 
2:e000104. [PubMed: 26301100] 
56. Khamashta, M.; Merrill, J.; Werth, VP., et al. Safety and efficacy of sifalimumab, an anti IFN-alpha 
monoclonal antibody, in a phase 2B study of moderate to severe systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) [Abstract L4]. 2014 ACR/ARHP Annual Meeting; Boston, MA, USA. 
57. Alarcon-Segovia D, Tumlin JA, Furie RA, et al. LJP 394 for the prevention of renal flare in 
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: results from a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2003; 48:442–54. [PubMed: 12571854] 
58. Cardiel MH, Tumlin JA, Furie RA, Wallace DJ, Joh T, Linnik MD. Abetimus sodium for renal 
flare in systemic lupus erythematosus: results of a randomized, controlled phase III trial. Arthritis 
and rheumatism. 2008; 58:2470–80. [PubMed: 18668592] 
Mahieu et al.
Page 19
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 59. Strand V, Aranow C, Cardiel MH, et al. Improvement in health-related quality of life in systemic 
lupus erythematosus patients enrolled in a randomized clinical trial comparing LJP 394 treatment 
with placebo. Lupus. 2003; 12:677–86. [PubMed: 14514130] 
60. Linnik, MD.; Tansey, MJ.; Joh, T. Dose dependent reduction in anti-dsDNA antibody levels 
observed with abetimus sodium through 52 weeks in the phase 3 ASPEN study (Abetimus Sodium 
in Patients with a history of lupus Nephritis) [abstract 1077]. 2008 ACR/ARHP Annual Scientific 
Meeting; San Francisco, CA, USA. 
61. BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. Results of first interim efficacy analysis for Riquent phase 3 trial 
ASPEN trial: Continuation of the trial is futile. Feb 12. 2009 http://investors.bmrn.com/
releasedetail.cfm?releaseid=703081
62. Dall’Era M, Stone D, Levesque V, Cisternas M, Wofsy D. Identification of biomarkers that predict 
response to treatment of lupus nephritis with mycophenolate mofetil or pulse cyclophosphamide. 
Arthritis care & research. 2011; 63:351–7. [PubMed: 21080348] 
63. Mysler EF, Spindler AJ, Guzman R, et al. Efficacy and safety of ocrelizumab in active proliferative 
lupus nephritis: results from a randomized, double-blind, phase III study. Arthritis and 
rheumatism. 2013; 65:2368–79. [PubMed: 23740801] 
Mahieu et al.
Page 20
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mahieu et al.
Page 21
Table 1
Summary of clinical trials in non-renal systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Drug
Target
Mechanism
Study and Design
Key Findings
DHEA
Unknown
Sex hormone precursor
Chang et al.12
•
RCT
•
Females 
with mild-
to-moderate 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
SLAM 
score at 24 
weeks
•
1° endpoint not met
•
Patient global 
assessment scores 
improved and fewer 
SLE flares in DHEA 
group compared to 
placebo
Petri et al.11
•
Phase II/III 
RCT
•
Females 
with GC-
dependent 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
Sustained 
decrease in 
prednisone 
(≤7.5mg/
day) for 2 
consecutive 
months
•
1° endpoint not met
•
Patients with active 
SLE (SLEDAI >2) 
had significant 
decrease in GC dose 
with 200mg/day of 
DHEA compared to 
placebo
Petri et al.13
•
Phase III 
RCT
•
Females 
with active 
SLE&
•
1° endpoint: 
Clinical 
response§ at 
52 weeks
•
1° endpoint not met
•
More responders 
among patients with 
SLEDAI >2 treated 
with DHEA than 
placebo
•
Development 
program suspended, 
but DHEA studies 
guided choice of 
study population for 
subsequent trials
Rituximab
CD20
Deplete CD20+ B-cells
Merrill et al.15 (EXPLORER)
•
Phase II/III 
RCT
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
SLE
•
1° 
endpoints: 
a) Major* or 
b) partialˆ 
clinical 
response at 
52 weeks
•
1° endpoints not met
•
Pre-specified 
subgroup analysis 
found better 
response in blacks 
and Hispanic group 
treated with 
rituximab vs placebo
•
Strict definitions for 
major and partial 
clinical response
•
Amount of 
background therapy 
mitigated 
differences between 
treatment arms
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mahieu et al.
Page 22
Drug
Target
Mechanism
Study and Design
Key Findings
Abatacept
CD80/86
Inhibit T-cell co-stimulation
Merrill et al.17
•
Phase IIb 
RCT in 
mild-to-
moderate 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
≥1 BILAG 
A or B flare 
during 52 
weeks
•
1° endpoint not met; 
similar flare rates 
with abatacept and 
placebo
•
Improvements in 
PROs (health-related 
quality of life, 
fatigue, and sleep) 
with abatacept
Atacicept
BAFF/BLyS and APRIL
Neutralize BAFF/BLyS (TNFSF13B) 
and APRIL (TNFSF13A)
Isenberg et al.19 (APRIL-SLE)
•
Phase II 
RCT
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
≥1 BILAG 
A or B flare 
during 52 
weeks
•
1° endpoint not met
•
Atacicept 75mg and 
placebo had similar 
flare rate
•
Atacicept 150mg 
arm halted for 
adverse events, but 
signal of fewer 
flares relative to 
placebo
Belimumab
BAFF/BLyS
Neutralize BAFF/BLyS (TNFSF13B)
Wallace et al.20
•
Phase II 
RCT
•
Active SLE
•
1° 
endpoints: 
a) Change 
in 
SELENA-
SLEDAI 
score from 
baseline to 
24 weeks 
and b) time 
to first flare 
(SFI) in 52 
weeks
•
1° endpoints not 
met; guided choice 
of patient selection 
and endpoints for 
phase III RCTs
•
Serologically active 
patients (ANA or 
anti-dsDNA 
antibody positive) 
had significant 
improvement in 
SELENA-SLEDAI 
and 2° endpoints at 
week 52
•
Led to development 
of SRI composite 
endpoint
•
Unlimited changes 
in 
immunosuppressants 
and GC confounded 
results
Navarra et al.27 and Furie et al.28 
(BLISS-52 and BLISS-76)
•
Phase III 
RCTs
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
seropositive 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
SRI-4 
response at 
52 weeks
•
1° endpoint met; 
greater SRI-4 
response with 
belimumab vs 
placebo in both 
studies
•
First use of SRI 
composite endpoint
•
Stricter control of 
GC and 
immunosuppressants 
near end of study
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mahieu et al.
Page 23
Drug
Target
Mechanism
Study and Design
Key Findings
•
Pre-specified 
analyses showed 
improvements in 
HRQOL, fatigue29
•
Pooled post-hoc 
analysis suggested 
benefit in renal 
disease54
Tabalumab
BAFF/BLyS
Neutralize BAFF/BLyS (TNFSF13B)
Isenberg et al.31 and Merrill et al.32 
(ILLUMINATE 1 and 2)
•
Phase III 
RCTs
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
SRI-5 
response at 
52 weeks
•
ILLUMINATE 1 did 
not meet 1° endpoint
•
ILLUMINATE 2 
met 1° endpoint; 
greater SRI-5 
response with 
tabalumab vs 
placebo
•
Neither study met 
key secondary 
endpoints (fatigue, 
time to flare, GC 
dose)
•
Patients with any 
change in 
immunosuppression 
dose, including 
decrease, were 
considered non-
responders
•
Development 
suspended
Epratuzumab
CD22
Alter B-cell responsiveness
Wallace et al.33 (ALLEVIATE 1 and 
2; SL0006 open label extension)
•
Phase II 
RCTs
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
SLE
•
1° endpoint 
(modified): 
BILAG 
response# 
with no 
treatment 
failure at 
week 12
•
Enrollment 
suspended early for 
low supply of study 
drug; 1° endpoint 
evaluated at 12 
weeks instead of 
intended 24 weeks
•
Greater achievement 
of 1° endpoint with 
epratuzumab than 
placebo
•
Improvements in 
HRQOL and 
reduced GC doses at 
48 weeks34
Wallace et al.35 (EMBLEM)
•
Phase IIb 
dose-
ranging 
study
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
BICLA 
response at 
12 weeks
•
First use of BICLA 
composite endpoint
•
Not powered for 
significance, but 
suggested efficacy 
and safety of 
2400mg combined 
monthly dose
•
More homogeneous 
patient population 
than prior RCTs
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mahieu et al.
Page 24
Drug
Target
Mechanism
Study and Design
Key Findings
Clowse et al.37 (EMBODY 1 and 2)
•
Phase III 
RCT
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
BICLA 
response at 
48 weeks
•
1° endpoint not met; 
no difference in 
BICLA response 
rate and secondary 
efficacy measures 
between 
epratuzumab and 
placebo
PF-04236921
IL-6
Neutralize IL-6
Wallace et al.38
•
Phase II 
RCT
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
SRI-4 at 24 
weeks
•
1° endpoint met for 
10mg dose; also 
showed 
improvements in 
BICLA and HRQOL 
(secondary pre-
specified endpoints)
•
Reduction of flares 
(SFI) with 50mg 
dose
•
200mg treatment 
arm discontinued for 
serious adverse 
events
Edratide
Unknown
Unknown
Urowitz et al.55
•
Phase II 
RCT
•
Mild-to-
moderate 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
Reduction 
in 
SLEDAI-2K 
and 
Adjusted 
Mean 
SLEDAI 
(AMS) 
through 26 
weeks
•
1° endpoint not met, 
but significant 
improvements in 
BILAG were seen 
(secondary pre-
specified endpoint)
•
Background GC use 
may have 
confounded results
Sifalimumab
IFN- α
Neutralize some species of IFN-α
Khamashta et al.56
•
Phase IIb 
RCT
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
SRI-4 
response at 
52 weeks
•
Statistical 
significance 
set at 
p<0.098
•
1° endpoint met; 
greater achievement 
of SRI-4 and 
improvements in 
skin disease, joint 
count, and fatigue 
with sifalimumab 
compared to placebo
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mahieu et al.
Page 25
Drug
Target
Mechanism
Study and Design
Key Findings
Anifrolumab
Type 1 IFN receptor
Neutralize type 1 IFN activity
Furie et al.39
•
Phase II 
RCT
•
Moderate-
to-severe 
SLE
•
1° endpoint: 
SRI-4 
response at 
24 weeks 
and 
sustained 
reduction in 
GC dose
•
1° endpoint met; 
more SRI-4 
responders and 
reduced GC doses 
with anifrolumab 
than placebo
•
Effect size greater in 
patients with high 
IFN at baseline
DHEA = dehydroepiandrosterone; RCT = randomized controlled trial; SLAM = Systemic Lupus Activity Monitor; GC = glucocorticoid; SLEDAI 
= Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index; BAFF = B-cell activating factor; BLyS = B-lymphocyte stimulator; SELENA-SLEDAI = 
Safety of Estrogens in Lupus Erythematosus National Assessment–SLEDAI; SFI = SLE Flare Index; ANA = anti-nuclear antibody; dsDNA = 
double-stranded DNA; SRI = SLE Responder Index; HRQOL = health-related quality of life; BILAG = British Isles Lupus Assessment Group; 
BICLA = BILAG-based Combined Lupus Assessment; APRIL = a proliferation inducing ligand; PRO = patient-reported outcome; IFN = 
interferon.
&Defined as SLAM score ≥7; amended to include SLEDAI >2 during enrollment
§Composite endpoint of improvement or stabilization of two disease activity measures (SLAM and SLEDAI) and two HRQoL measures (patient 
global assessment and fatigue severity scale) without evidence of clinical deterioration (organ damage)
*Defined as BILAG C or better score in all organs at week 24 without a severe flare (≥1 new BILAG A or ≥2 new BILAG B scores) from day 1 to 
week 24 and maintaining this response without moderate or severe flare (≥1 BILAG A or B score) to week 52
ˆDefined as 1) BILAG C scores or better at week 24 and maintaining response without a new BILAG A or B scores for 16 weeks; 2) no more than 
1 organ with BILAG B score at week 24 a new BILAG A or B score to week 52; 3) 2 BILAG B scores at week 24 without developing BILAG A or 
B scores in new domains until week 52 if baseline BILAG score was 1 A score plus ≥2 B scores, ≥2 A scores, or ≥4 B scores.
#Defined as BILAG A scores decreased to B or lower OR both BILAG B scores decreased to C or lower and no new BILAG A or <2 BILAG B 
scores in other organ systems
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mahieu et al.
Page 26
Table 2
Summary of clinical trials in renal systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Drug
Target
Mechanism
Study and Design
Key Findings
Abetimus sodium
Anti-DNA
Bind anti-DNA antibodies
Alarcon-Segovia et al.57; Cardiel et 
al.58
•
Phase II/III 
RCT; phase 
III RCT
•
Previously 
treated SLE 
nephritis
•
1° endpoint: 
Time to 
renal flare 
over 76 
week 
treatment 
period%
•
1° endpoint not met; 
similar time to renal 
flare and number of 
renal flares in abetimus 
vs placebo despite 
reduction in anti-
dsDNA antibodies in 
both studies
•
Post-hoc analysis57 
analysis demonstrated 
longer time to renal 
flare and fewer flares in 
patients with high 
affinity for abetimus
•
Stable or improved 
HRQOL in patients 
receiving abetimus 
during active treatment 
for renal flare; HRQOL 
worsened in placebo59 
arm
ASPEN trial
•
Phase III 
RCT
•
Higher 
doses of 
abetimus 
than above 
studies
•
1° endpoint: 
Time to 
renal flare%
•
Reduced anti-dsDNA 
antibodies with 
abetimus compared to 
placebo in interim 
analysis60
•
Study and further drug 
development 
discontinued when 
interim analysis failed 
to show efficacy61
Mycophenolate Mofetil (MMF)
Purine biosynethesis
Inhibits T- and B-cell proliferation
Appel et al.42 (ALMS)
•
MMF vs IV 
CYC for 
induction 
therapy
•
1° endpoint: 
Renal 
response# at 
24 weeks
•
MMF non-inferior to 
CYC for SLE nephritis 
induction therapy
•
Better response to 
MMF in blacks and 
Hispanics43
•
Baseline renal function 
and early reduction in 
proteinuria predicted 
renal response at 24 
weeks in post-hoc 
analysis62
Rituximab
CD20
Depletes CD20+ B-cells
Rovin et al.45 (LUNAR)
•
Phase III 
RCT
•
Background 
MMF and 
GC
•
1° endpoint: 
Complete or 
partial renal 
•
1° endpoint not met
•
Underpowered
•
Duration of study too 
short. Improvement in 
proteinuria not 
statistically significant 
until 78 weeks
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mahieu et al.
Page 27
Drug
Target
Mechanism
Study and Design
Key Findings
response* at 
52 weeks
Abatacept
CD80/86
Inhibits T-cell co-stimulation
Furie et al.46
•
Phase II/III 
RCT
•
Background 
MMF and 
GC
•
1° endpoint: 
Time to 
complete 
renal 
response¶
•
1° endpoint not met
•
Strict definition of renal 
response; achieved by 
very few patients
•
Positive response to 
abatacept seen in post-
hoc analysis when 
LUNAR definition of 
complete renal response 
applied47
•
Unrestricted use of GC 
likely obscured partial 
responses
ACCESS Trial Group48
•
Phase III 
RCT
•
Background 
CYC and 
GC 
induction, 
AZA 
maintenance
•
1° endpoint: 
Complete 
renal 
responseγ 
at 24 weeks
•
1° endpoint not met
•
Limited by short 
interval to assessment 
of primary outcome
•
No significant 
differences in 
secondary outcomes at 
24- or 52-week follow-
up
Tacrolimus
FK-BP12
Inhibits calcineurin-mediated signaling
Mok et al.53
•
Tacrolimus 
vs MMF for 
induction 
therapy
•
1° endpoint: 
Renal 
response§ at 
24 weeks
•
Tacrolimus non-inferior 
to MMF for SLE 
nephritis induction 
therapy
•
Used less stringent 
definition of complete 
renal response
Ocrelizumab
CD20
Depletes CD20+ B-cells
Mysler et al.63 (BELONG)
•
Phase III 
RCT
•
Background 
GC and 
CYC or 
MMF
•
Discontinued for 
adverse events (serious 
infections in 
ocrelizumab treatment 
arms)
•
More frequent IV GC 
use resulted in higher 
placebo effect in 
patients on MMF than 
CYC
Atacicept
BAFF/BLyS and APRIL
Neutralize BAFF/BLyS (TNFSF13B) 
and APRIL (TNFSF13A)
Ginzler et al.18 (APRIL-LN)
•
Phase II/III 
RCT
•
Halted after only 6 
patients enrolled for 
adverse events (serious 
infections and 
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mahieu et al.
Page 28
Drug
Target
Mechanism
Study and Design
Key Findings
•
Background 
MMF and 
GC
hypogammaglobulinemi 
a)
RCT = randomized control trial; dsDNA = double-stranded DNA; HRQOL = health-related quality of life; CYC = cyclophosphamide; GC = 
glucocorticoid; IV = intravenous; BAFF = B-cell activating factor; BLyS = B-lymphocyte stimulator; APRIL = a proliferation inducing ligand; 
AZA = azathioprine
%Defined by any of the following: reproducible increase in 24-hour urine protein based on baseline value (to >1g/day if baseline was <0.2g/day, to 
>2g/day if baseline was between 0.2–1g/day, and twice baseline value if baseline >1g/day); reproducible increase in serum creatinine by >20% or 
0.3mg/dl, whichever was greater, accompanied by proteinuria (>1g/day), hematuria (≥4 RBCs/hpf), and/or RBC casts; or new, reproducible 
hematuria (≥11–20 RBCs/hpf) or a reproducible in hematuria by 2 grades compared with baseline accompanied by a 0.8g/day increase in 
proteinuria or new RBC casts.
#Defined as decrease in urine protein/creatinine ratio (UPC) to <3 in patients with baseline UPC ≥3 or by ≥50% AND stabilization or improvement 
in serum creatinine
§Defined as stabilization (within 25%) or improvement in serum creatinine with UPC <1, inactive urinary sediment, and persistent improvement in 
C3 and anti-dsDNA antibody levels
*Complete renal response defined as normal serum creatinine if abnormal at baseline or ≤115% of baseline if normal at baseline; inactive urinary 
sediment (<5 RBCs/hpf and no RBC casts); UPC <0.5. Partial renal response defined as serum creatinine ≤115% of baseline; RBCs/hpf ≤50% 
above baseline and no RBC casts; at least 50% decrease in UPC to <1 (if baseline UPC was ≤3) or to <3 (if baseline UPC was >3).
¶Defined as estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) ≥90% of screening level if normal at baseline or eGFR ≥90% 6 month pre-flare value if 
abnormal at screening; UPC <0.26; and inactive urinary sediment (RBCs and WBCs per hpf within normal limits and no RBC or WBC casts). 
Criteria had to be met again 4 weeks later to be considered a complete response.
γDefined as UPC of <0.5 on 24-hour urine collection; serum creatinine level ≤1.2 mg/dl or ≤125% of baseline; and adherence to the prednisone 
taper to 10mg/day by 12 weeks.
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mahieu et al.
Page 29
Table 3
Steps to developing outcome measures in SLE clinical trials
•
Review of the data from SLE RCTs to determine whether a unique combination of outcome measures distinguishes 
responders to active therapy plus standard of care from those receiving placebo plus standard of care.
–
Detailed statistical review of data from RCTs reporting both significant benefit and those that 
failed to achieve their primary outcome.
–
Establish whether changes in background therapy confound response by analyzing changes over 
time within individuals.
–
Determine if organ-specific versus global measures are more appropriate depending the study 
design.
–
Ascertain if individual components of response correlate with outcomes.
•
Proposed new response measures will be reviewed, discussed and agreed upon by the participants as applied to one data 
set will be tested in subsequent data sets for confirmation
•
Review of the utility of patient-reported outcomes will be included (ex: are patient-reported outcomes useful in 
assessing responder status; what do patient-reported outcomes add to the responder assessment; when should patient-
reported outcomes be included—always, specific to study, other?).
–
Review of patient global assessment of disease activity if included in trial.
–
Review of patient-reported HRQOL including specific domains of SF-36 and transition question.
–
Review of patient-reported fatigue.
•
Review of physician-reported measures of global disease activity and disease flare as well as time to flare.
•
Review of glucocorticoid doses and whether attainment of a “clinically meaningful” definition of taper, such as 
prednisone ≤7.5mg/day, corresponds with a response.
SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; RCT = randomized clinical trial; HRQOL = health-related quality of life.
Lupus. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 01.
