 1
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Shear stress induces endothelial-
to-mesenchymal transition via the 
transcription factor Snail
Marwa M. Mahmoud1, Jovana Serbanovic-Canic1, Shuang Feng1, Celine Souilhol1, Rouyu Xing 
 
2, Sarah Hsiao1, Akiko Mammoto3, Jing Chen4, Markus Ariaans1, Sheila E. Francis1, Kim Van 
der Heiden2, Victoria Ridger  
1 & Paul C. Evans1
Blood flow influences atherosclerosis by generating wall shear stress, which alters endothelial cell (EC) 
physiology. Low shear stress induces dedifferentiation of EC through a process termed endothelial-to-
mesenchymal transition (EndMT). The mechanisms underlying shear stress-regulation of EndMT are 
uncertain. Here we investigated the role of the transcription factor Snail in low shear stress-induced 
EndMT. Studies of cultured EC exposed to flow revealed that low shear stress induced Snail expression. 
Using gene silencing it was demonstrated that Snail positively regulated the expression of EndMT 
markers (Slug, N-cadherin, α
-SMA) in EC exposed to low shear stress. Gene silencing also revealed 
that Snail enhanced the permeability of endothelial monolayers to macromolecules by promoting 
EC proliferation and migration. En face staining of the murine aorta or carotid arteries modified with 
flow-altering cuffs demonstrated that Snail was expressed preferentially at low shear stress sites that 
are predisposed to atherosclerosis. Snail was also expressed in EC overlying atherosclerotic plaques in 
coronary arteries from patients with ischemic heart disease implying a role in human arterial disease. 
We conclude that Snail is an essential driver of EndMT under low shear stress conditions and may 
promote early atherogenesis by enhancing vascular permeability.
Endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndMT) is characterised by multiple morphological and physiological 
changes including loss of cell polarity, disruption of intercellular junctions, increased proliferation, delamination 
and migration of cells into surrounding tissue1, 2. This process is essential for atrioventricular valve formation 
where EC expressing mesenchymal markers invade the cardiac jelly to form a cardiac cushion which subse-
quently forms the valves3. Recent studies have also implicated EndMT in the pathophysiology of vascular dis-
eases including cerebral cavernous malformations4, pulmonary hypertension5, vascular graft remodelling6 and 
atherosclerosis7–10.
Wall shear stress, imposed on the vessel lumen by the flow of blood, controls the localization of atherosclerotic 
lesions by regulating fundamental physiological activities in EC11. Low shear stress at branches and bends of 
arteries promotes atherosclerosis by inducing endothelial injury and proliferation12–15, which enhances perme-
ability to cholesterol-rich lipoproteins16. By contrast, high shear stress protects arteries by inducing a quiescent, 
protected state in EC17, 18. The endothelium at disease-prone sites constitutes a highly heterogeneous population 
of cells that display multiple pathophysiological features including inflammatory activation, proliferation, apop-
tosis and senescence11–15. Notably, recent studies revealed that low shear stress can also promote EndMT7–9, 19. 
Moreover, EC with mesenchymal characteristics were identified overlying atherosclerotic plaques suggesting 
that EndMT may contribute to atherogenesis7, 8. The signaling intermediaries that link mechanical forces to 
EndMT are only partially understood. Moonen et al. found that laminar shear stress protects EC from mesen-
chymal transition via activation of MEK5/ERK5 signalling which activates the transcription factors KLF4 and 
KLF28. On the other hand, we recently demonstrated that low shear stress promotes EndMT via activation of 
the transcription factors GATA4 and TWIST19. However, the mechanisms that promote EndMT downstream 
from TWIST1 in sheared EC remain uncertain and are an important focus of the current study. We assessed 
1Department of Infection, Immunity and Cardiovascular Disease, the INSIGNEO Institute for In Silico Medicine and 
the Bateson Centre, University of Sheffield, England, UK. 2ERASMUS MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 3Vascular 
Biology Program, Department of Surgery, Boston, MA, USA. 4Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children’s 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Correspondence and requests for materials should be 
addressed to P.C.E. (email: paul.evans@sheffield.ac.uk)
Received: 18 January 2017
Accepted: 28 April 2017
Published: xx xx xxxx
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
whether the transcription factor Snail fulfills this role because it is essential for epithelial-to-mesenchymal transi-
tion (EMT) during development20–22, but its role in mechanical EndMT has not previously been studied. Here we 
used cultured EC exposed to flow and animal models with varying levels of flow to demonstrate that Snail plays 
an essential role in the induction of EndMT in response to disturbed flow.
Material and Methods
Study approval. 
For studies of human cells, experiments were approved by the University of Sheffield 
Research Ethics Committee (reference SMBRER310) and all subjects gave informed consent. Studies using 
human cells and tissues were used in accordance to the standards set by the Declaration of Helsinki. For ani-
mal studies, all procedures were approved by the University of Sheffield ethics committee and performed in 
accordance with the UK Home Office Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 and in accordance with Directive 
2010/63/EU of the European Parliament on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes.
Antibodies and reagents. 
Antibodies targeting human and murine Snail (ab180714, Abcam), human 
N-cadherin (ab12221, Abcam), human VE-cadherin (555661, BDPharmingen), murine CD31 (102514, 
Biolegend) and Ki67 (ab15580, Abcam) were obtained commercially. AlexaFluor-conjugated secondary antibod-
ies and TO-PRO-3 were from Invitrogen.
Isolation of EC from porcine aortae. 
Pig aortas from 4–6 month old animals (approximately 80 kg) were 
obtained immediately after slaughter from a local abattoir. They were cut longitudinally along the outer curvature 
to expose the lumen. EC exposed to high (outer curvature) or low (inner curvature) shear stress were harvested 
using collagenase (1 mg/ml for 10 minutes at room temperature) prior to gentle scraping. RNA was extracted 
using an RNeasy MiniKit (Qiagen) and concentrated using an RNeasy MinElute Cleanup kit (Qiagen) and the 
purity and integrity of total RNA samples was assessed using a Bioanalyser (Agilent).
EC culture and exposure to shear stress. 
Human umbilical vein EC (HUVEC) and porcine aortic EC 
(PAEC) were isolated using collagenase digestion and cultured. The purity of HUVEC was assessed by measuring 
the expression of VE-cadherin which was typically observed in >99% cells (Supplementary Fig. 1). It was con-
firmed that collagenase-isolated PAEC expressed PECAM-1 and had negligible expression of α
-smooth muscle 
actin (SMA) or CD14 (monocyte/macrophage marker)15. EC at passage 3–5 were cultured until confluent in 6 
well plates and exposed to flow using an orbital shaking platform (PSU-10i; Grant Instruments) housed inside 
a cell culture incubator9, 13, 23. The radius of orbit of the orbital shaker was 10 mm and the rotation rate was set to 
210 rpm. Previous computational fluid dynamic analysis revealed that these conditions generate low shear stress 
(approximately 5 dyn/cm2) with rapid variations in direction in the centre and high shear stress (approximately 
15 dyn/cm2) with relatively uniform direction at the periphery13, 23. In some experiments, cells were harvested 
by scraping from specific regions of the well using a standardized template to identify the high and low shear 
stress regions. Alternatively, EC were cultured on Ibidi gelatin-coated µ-Slides (Ibidi GmbH) until they reached 
confluency and exposed to low unidirectional (4 dyn/cm2), low oscillatory (+/−
4 dyn/cm2, 0.5 Hz) or high uni-
directional (13 dyn/cm2) shear stress using the Ibidi pump system9.
Flow cytometry. 
Adherent endothelial cells were detached from culture flasks with trypsin, washed and 
resuspended in PBS containing 7% foetal calf serum. Cells were then incubated with anti-VE-cadherin antibodies 
conjugated to PeCy7 (clone 16B1, eBioscience) or IgG1K-PeCy7 (eBioscience) for 30 min at 4 °C. After 2 washes, 
fluorescence was measured using a LSRII BD Bioscience flow cytometer.
RNA interference. 
Gene silencing was performed using siRNA against Snail1 (OnTargetPlusSMARTPOOL, 
L-010847-01, Dharmacon) using the Lipofectamine RNAiMAX transfection system as described9. Non-targeting 
scrambled sequences were used as a control (D-001810-01-50 ON-TARGETplus Non targeting siRNA#1, 
Dharmacon).
Comparative real time PCR. 
The levels of human or porcine transcripts were assessed by quantitative 
real time PCR (qRT-PCR) using gene-specific primers as described9, 15. Relative gene expression was calculated 
by comparing the number of thermal cycles that were necessary to generate threshold amounts of product. Fold 
changes were calculated using the Δ
Δ
Ct method.
Immunofluorescent staining of cultured EC. 
The expression levels of proteins were assessed by 
immunofluorescent staining using antibodies against Snail, N-cadherin or Ki67 and AlexaFluor488- or 
Alexafluor568-conjugated secondary antibodies. Nuclei were identified using DAPI (Sigma). Image analysis was 
performed using Image J software (1.49p) to calculate average fluorescence. Isotype controls or omission of the 
primary antibody was used to control for non-specific staining.
In vitro migration assay. 
Wounds were created on confluent EC monolayers using a pipette tip and migra-
tion of EC into the wounded area was visualised using time-lapse confocal microscopy (Leica AF6000 Timelapse 
microscope) as described24. Images were captured at 3 min intervals for 20 h after wounding. The distance 
migrated was determined by measuring the position of the monolayer edge in relation to the starting position 
using LAS_AF Software.
Assay of permeability. 
The permeability of EC monolayers exposed to flow was determined using 
rhodamine-labelled albumin as described9. HUVEC were cultured in Transwell inserts and then exposed 
to orbital shaking for 72 h or to static conditions as a control. The media in the upper compartment was then 
replaced with 10% serum-supplemented DMEM containing 1% BPA and rhodamine-labeled albumin (1 mg/
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
ml). Media in the lower compartment was sampled at 1 h and fluorescence was measured using a fluorimeter 
(Varioskan, Thermoscientific) with excitation at 570 nm and emission at 600 nm.
Mice. 
Mice were housed under specific-pathogen free conditions. Mice with EC deletion of Twist1 
(Tie2-Twist1KO) were generated by crossing Tie2-Cre expressing mice (Jackson Laboratory stock #004128) 
with Twist1 floxed mice (Twist1flox|flox)25. Constrictive cuffs were applied to the right carotid artery of 
isofluorane-anaesthetized mice following published methods26. Both halves of the cast are placed around the 
common carotid artery and secured with sutures. To minimise vascular injury the diameter of the internal groove of 
the cuff was carefully chosen to generate a stenosis of 75%. After 2 weeks mice were killed using Pentobarb (200 mg/
kg i.p.). The expression levels of specific proteins were assessed in EC by en face staining as described9, 13, 15.
Histology. 
Coronary arteries from patients undergoing cardiac transplantation for ischaemic heart disease or 
dilated cardiomyopathy were obtained under the Sheffield Teaching Hospitals Institutional Review Board author-
isation STH16346 (12/NW/0036). Sections made from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues were incubated 
in xylene for 10 min, hydrated by sequential exposure to decreasing concentrations of ethanol (100% to 50%) and 
water. Heat-mediated antigen retrieval was carried out in tris-sodium citrate in a heated water bath. The sections 
were then blocked for endogenous peroxidase activity and incubated in 1% milk prior to overnight incubation 
with primary antibodies followed by HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies and substrate (VECTASTAIN Elite 
ABC kit; Vector laboratories and Dako). Sections were then counterstained with hematoxylin and visualized by 
bright field microscopy.
Statistics. 
Differences between samples were analysed using an unpaired or paired Student’s t-test or ANOVA 
(*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001).
Data availability statement. 
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this pub-
lished article (and its Supplementary Information files).
Results
Low shear stress promoted endothelial expression of mesenchymal genes via Snail. 
To deter-
mine whether shear stress regulates the expression of mesenchymal genes we exposed cultured EC to flow. qPCR 
revealed that the expression of several mesenchymal markers (Snail, Slug, N-cadherin and α
SMA) was elevated 
in HUVEC exposed to low, oscillatory shear compared to high shear stress using a parallel plate apparatus 
(Fig. 1a). Similarly, PAEC exposed to low shear using an orbital system expressed higher levels of Snail, Slug and 
N-cadherin compared to cells under high shear (Fig. 1b). Thus we conclude that low shear stress promotes mesen-
chymal marker expression in cultured EC. Similarly, immunofluorescent staining (Fig. 1c) and Western blotting 
(Fig. 1d) revealed that N-cadherin protein was expressed in a proportion of cells exposed to low shear stress but 
not in cells exposed to high shear.
A full EndMT involves reduced expression of VE-cadherin, a component of EC adherens junctions that plays 
a central role in vascular homeostasis27. We measured the expression of VE-cadherin in cultured EC exposed 
to flow using a combination of qRT-PCR, immunofluorescent staining and Western blotting. Interestingly, 
qRT-PCR revealed that VE-cadherin mRNA levels were enhanced in HUVEC exposed to low shear compared to 
high shear conditions (Fig. 1a). However low shear stress did not induce VE-cadherin mRNA in PAEC (Fig. 1b), a 
finding which may relate to differences between arterial and venous responses to flow. Moreover, Western blotting 
(Fig. 1d) and immunofluorescent staining (Fig. 1c) demonstrated that VE-cadherin protein levels in HUVEC 
were unaltered by shear (apart from the loss of VE-cadherin from occasional cells; Fig. 1c). Collectively, these data 
lead us to conclude that VE-cadherin expression was not reduced in EC exposed to low shear stress despite their 
acquisition of mesenchymal markers suggesting that the EC transition towards a mesenchymal state was partial.
We tested the hypothesis that Snail regulates mesenchymal genes under low shear stress. Consistent with this, 
immunofluorescent staining revealed that Snail protein expression was significantly higher in EC exposed to 
low compared to high shear stress (Fig. 1e). The function of Snail was studied using Snail-targeting siRNA that 
reduced Snail mRNA and protein expression (Supplementary Fig. 2). Silencing of Snail significantly reduced the 
expression of Slug, α
SMA and N-cadherin in EC exposed to low shear stress (Fig. 1f). Thus we conclude that Snail 
drives EndMT in response to low shear stress by inducing mesenchymal genes.
Snail promoted migration, proliferation and permeability of EC. 
Since Snail was regulated by flow, 
we studied its function in sheared endothelium by gene silencing. Firstly, we studied the role of Snail in EC 
migration because this function is a key characteristic of EndMT. Scratch assays revealed that EC pre-conditioned 
under low shear stress migrated with higher velocity than cells pre-exposed to high shear (Supplementary Fig. 3a). 
Silencing of Snail significantly reduced migration of cells exposed to low shear stress (Fig. 2, lower panels) but 
did not influence cells exposed to high shear (Fig. 2, upper panels) or static conditions (Supplementary Fig. 3b).
We next studied the influence of Snail on cell division and observed that the rate of proliferation of EC exposed 
to low shear stress was significantly reduced by silencing of Snail (Fig. 3a), indicating that Snail is a positive reg-
ulator of this process. By contrast, silencing of Snail did not influence proliferation of EC exposed to high shear 
(Fig. 3a) or static conditions (Supplementary Fig. 4). The permeability of endothelial monolayers to macromol-
ecules was also studied because this is tightly linked to mitosis rate16. Endothelial permeability was tested by 
culturing EC monolayers on transwell inserts prior to their exposure to low shear stress using an orbital platform 
and assessment of rhodamine-albumin transport from the upper to the lower chamber (Fig. 3b, left panel). EC 
permeability was reduced by silencing of Snail (Fig. 3b, right panel) indicating that Snail promotes permeability to 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
Figure 1. Low shear stress induced mesenchymal genes via Snail. (a) HUVEC were exposed to low oscillatory 
(+/−
4 dyn/cm2) or high (13 dyn/cm2) wall shear stress (WSS) using a parallel plate system. (b) PAEC were 
exposed to orbital flow to generate low (5 dyn/cm2) or high (15 dyn/cm2) wall shear stress. (a,b) After 72 h, levels 
of EndMT marker transcripts and VE-cadherin transcripts were quantified by qRT-PCR. The expression level at 
the low WSS site is presented relative to the expression at the high WSS site (normalised to 1; dotted line). Data 
were pooled from six independent experiments using cells from different donors and mean levels +/−
 SEM are 
shown. (c–e) HUVEC were exposed to orbital flow to generate low (5 dyn/cm2) or high (15 dyn/cm2) WSS for 
72 h. (c) Expression of N-cadherin (green) and VE-cadherin (red) was determined by immunofluorescent staining 
and co-staining using DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 50 μ
m. The proportion of cells that expressed N-cadherin or VE-
cadherin was measured. (d) The expression levels of N-cadherin (left) and VE-cadherin (right) were assessed 
by Western blotting using specific antibodies and anti-PDHX antibodies were used to control for total protein 
levels. Representative blots are shown. Bands were quantified by densitometry. (e) Expression of Snail (green) was 
determined by immunofluorescent staining and co-staining using DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 50 μ
m. Fluorescence 
intensity was quantified in multiple cells. (f) HUVEC were transfected with siRNA targeting Snail or with 
scrambled sequences and exposed to orbital flow for 72 h. Cells exposed to low WSS (5 dyn/cm2) were collected 
and transcript levels of Slug, N cadherin and α
-SMA were quantified by qRT-PCR. (c–f) Data were pooled from 
three independent experiments using cells from different donors and mean levels +/−
 SEM are shown.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
macromolecules in low shear conditions. By contrast, silencing of Snail did not influence permeability in HUVEC 
monolayers under static conditions (Supplementary Fig. 5).
Thus it was concluded that Snail influenced the physiological properties of EC exposed to low shear stress by 
promoting EC migration, proliferation and increased permeability to macromolecules, but it did not influence 
cells exposed to high shear stress or static conditions.
Low shear stress induced Snail expression at atherosusceptible sites. 
Since Snail was induced by 
low shear stress in vitro, we predicted that it would be expressed at atherosusceptible sites in the aorta. Consistent 
with this, qPCR analysis revealed that the expression of Snail and several of its downstream targets (Slug, 
N-cadherin, α
SMA) was elevated in EC freshly-isolated from a low shear (inner curvature) region compared to 
Figure 2. Snail enhanced migration under low shear stress. HUVEC were treated with siRNA targeting Snail, 
or with scrambled non-targeting siRNA (or were untreated as a control). They were then cultured in 6 well 
plates prior to exposure to low or high wall shear stress (WSS) for 72 h using an orbital plate system. To assess 
cell migration, a scratch wound was made in the monolayer, and cells were imaged for 20 h. Representative 
images are shown (scale bar 100 μ
m). The distance migrated at multiple time points (lower left) and average 
velocity (lower right) was determined and mean values +/−
 SEM are shown. Data were pooled from four 
independent experiments using cells from different donors and mean levels +/−
 SEM are shown. Differences 
between means were assessed using a two-way ANOVA.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
those freshly-isolated from a high shear region (outer curvature) of the porcine aorta (Fig. 4A). By contrast, the 
expression of VE-cadherin was similar at low and high shear stress regions (Fig. 4a). En face staining revealed 
that Snail protein expression was enriched at a low shear stress site in the murine aorta (Fig. 4b). It is notable that 
Snail localized to the nucleus of EC at the low shear stress site suggesting that it is active under these mechanical 
Figure 3. Snail enhanced proliferation and permeability in EC exposed to low shear stress. HUVEC were 
treated with siRNA targeting Snail or with scrambled (Scr) non-targeting siRNA. (a) Cells were subsequently 
cultured in 6 well plates prior to exposure to orbital flow to generate low or high wall shear stress (WSS) for 
72 h. Cell proliferation was quantified by immunofluorescent staining using anti-Ki67 antibodies and co-
staining using DAPI. Representative images are shown (Scale bar, 50 μ
m). The % Ki67-positive cells were 
calculated for multiple fields of view in four independent experiments using cells from different donors and 
mean levels +/−
 SEM are shown. Differences between means were assessed using a 2-way ANOVA. (b) Cells 
cultured on Transwell inserts were exposed to orbital flow (low WSS) for 72 h prior to assessment of endothelial 
permeability under static conditions using rhodamine (Rd)-albumin as a tracer. A schematic is shown (left 
panel). The concentration of Rd-albumin in the lower compartment was measured. Data were pooled from four 
independent experiments using cells from different donors and mean values +/−
 SEM are shown (right panel). 
Differences between means were assessed using an unpaired t-test.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
conditions. We have previously demonstrated that Twist1 promotes EndMT and lesion development at low shear 
stress sites9. To assess the role of Twist1 in the regulation of Snail in vivo we deleted Twist1 from EC by crossing 
floxed mice (Twist1flox/flox) with Tie2-Cre transgenics (knockout mice are referred to as Tie2-Twist1KO). En face 
staining revealed that endothelial expression of Snail at the low shear stress site was reduced in Tie2-Twist1KO 
Figure 4. Snail was preferentially expressed at low shear atherosusceptible sites. (a) EC were freshly-isolated 
from low wall shear stress (WSS; inner curvature) and high WSS (outer curvature) regions of the aorta in six 
pigs. Levels of Snail, Slug, N-cadherin, α
-SMA and VE-cadherin mRNA were quantified by qRT-PCR. The 
expression level at the low WSS site is presented relative to the expression at the high WSS site (normalised to 
1; dotted line). Mean levels +/−
 SEM are shown. (b,c) EC at low WSS (susceptible) or high WSS (protected) 
regions of the aorta were studied by en face staining. (b) C57BL/6 mice (n = 5) were stained using anti-Snail 
antibodies (red), co-stained using anti-CD31 antibodies (green) and counterstained using TO-PRO-3 (DNA; 
blue). (c) TWIST1cKO or TWIST1fl/fl mice (n = 4 each group) were stained using anti-Snail antibodies (green) 
and counterstained using TO-PRO-3 (DNA; blue). Representative images (scale bar, 10 μ
m) and quantitation of 
Snail fluorescence levels (mean +/−
 SEM) are shown. Differences between means were assessed using a paired 
t-test (b) or two-way ANOVA (c).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
compared to Twist1flox/flox mice (Fig. 4c), indicating that Twist1 positively regulates Snail in atherosusceptible 
endothelium.
Atherosusceptible regions of arteries are associated with altered mass transport, inflammation and other phys-
iological features as well as low shear stress. Therefore, to examine directly whether altered shear stress can induce 
Snail expression in vivo we modified flow in the murine carotid artery using a constrictive cuff. This causes taper-
ing of the lumen to generate higher shear at the stenosis and low oscillatory shear downstream26. Cuff placement 
for 14 days led to enhanced expression of Snail at the downstream site indicating that low oscillatory shear stress 
is an activating signal for Snail in vivo (Fig. 5).
Figure 5. Snail was induced by low oscillatory shear stress in murine carotid arteries. Flow-altering, 
constrictive cuffs were placed on the right carotid arteries of C57BL/6 mice. They generated anatomically 
distinct regions exposed to high or low oscillatory wall shear stress (WSS; as indicated). Contralateral arteries 
were used as an experimental control. Experimental arteries were harvested after 14 days and en face staining 
was performed using anti-Snail antibodies (red), anti-CD31 antibodies (green) and the nuclear counter stain 
TO-PRO-3 (blue). Representative images (scale bar, 10 μ
m) and quantitation of Snail expression (n = 3; mean 
+/−
 SEM) are shown.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
Snail was expressed in EC of human atherosclerotic plaques. 
Previous studies demonstrated that 
EC overlying human atherosclerotic plaques express mesenchymal markers7, 8. Given our observation that Snail 
promotes EndMT under low shear stress conditions, we wished to know whether it is involved in human ather-
osclerosis. Immunohistochemistry of coronary arteries from patients that underwent cardiac transplantation for 
ischemic heart disease revealed that Snail was expressed in luminal cells overlying coronary artery plaques and 
co-staining for von Willebrand Factor confirmed that they were of endothelial lineage (Fig. 6). Moreover, the 
proportion of Snail-positive EC was significantly higher in coronary arteries from patients with ischemic heart 
disease (advanced atherosclerosis) compared to patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (without symptomatic 
Figure 6. Expression of Snail in endothelium overlying human coronary artery plaques. The expression of 
Snail in coronary arteries of patients with ischemic heart disease (IHD) or dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) 
was studied by immunohistochemistry using specific primary antibodies and HRP-conjugated secondary 
antibodies (brown). Consecutive sections were stained for EC using anti-vWF antibodies (brown). Sections 
were counterstained using hematoxylin. Representative images are shown. The region boxed (upper panel, 10X 
magification) is shown at higher magnifications (centre and lower panels, 40X). Scale bar 20 μ
m. The proportion 
of EC that expressed Snail was calculated for each section. Data were pooled from six plaques and mean values 
+/−
 SEM are presented. Differences between means were assessed using an unpaired t-test.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
atherosclerosis; Fig. 6). Thus Snail was detected in EC overlying coronary artery plaques and its expression corre-
lated with advanced atherosclerosis.
Discussion
EndMT in atherosclerosis. 
In addition to its established roles in development3, recent studies have revealed 
that EndMT also contributes to several vascular pathophysiological processes including vascular malformations4, 
pulmonary hypertension5 and vascular graft remodelling6. Notably several laboratories, including our own, have 
shown recently that EndMT also contributes to the development of atherosclerosis7–10. Chen et al.7 revealed that 
EndMT in atherosclerosis is driven by an imbalance in TGF-β
 and FGFR1 signaling leading to the activation of 
central regulators of mesenchymal transition including Twist, Snail and Slug. EndMT is also sensitive to local 
hemodynamics; specifically in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrated that low shear stress is a positive regulator 
of EndMT whereas high shear stress is protective7–9. The mechanism involved ERK5, which was required for 
high shear stress-mediated protection8 and GATA4-TWIST1 signalling which drives EndMT in response to low 
shear9. In the current study, we further investigated the mechanism that promotes EndMT under low shear stress 
conditions and identified an essential role for the transcription factor Snail.
Our study demonstrated that Snail was expressed at sites of endogenous low shear stress in healthy murine 
and porcine arteries, and was induced by the imposition of low shear stress on carotid arteries. Thus we conclude 
that Snail is expressed at low shear stress regions that are predisposed to atherosclerosis and may therefore con-
tribute to vascular injury and lesion formation. To determine the effects of Snail on EC function and its potential 
role in vascular dysfunction we carried out gene silencing experiments in vitro. This revealed that Snail expression 
enhanced the permeability to macromolecules in EC exposed to low shear stress. Thus our observation implies 
that Snail may promote the build-up of cholesterol-rich lipoproteins and other biomolecules in the vessel wall 
at sites of low shear stress and has obvious implications for the initiation of atherosclerosis, which involves the 
accumulation of lipoproteins in the intima. Excessive mitosis of EC at atheroprone sites leads to the transient for-
mation of intercellular gaps which enhances the permeability of endothelial monolayers to macromolecules12, 16. 
Thus our observation that Snail positively regulates proliferation of EC provides an explanation for its ability to 
promote permeability in low shear conditions. Snail also promoted migration of EC exposed to low shear stress, 
a function that is characteristic of EndMT. Although migration of EC has been documented in the aorta28, its 
relationship to atherosclerosis is uncertain and requires further investigation. Since EndMT has been linked to 
increased vascular inflammation9 it will also be important in future studies to determine the effects of Snail on 
inflammatory pathways including NF-κ
B and mitogen-activated protein kinases.
Although it is established that EndMT accompanies atherosclerosis, the extent to which this process contrib-
utes to lesion initiation and progression remains uncertain. Evrard et al. implicated EndMT in plaque progression 
because the proportion of endothelial-derived mesenchymal cells in human plaques correlated positively with 
the severity of disease10. However, further work is required to determine the contribution of EndMT to plaque 
composition and its effects on the physiological and mechanical properties of rupture-prone plaques.
Reversibility of mechanical EndMT and therapeutic implications. 
Although it leads to a profound 
alteration in EC behaviour and appearance, EndMT represents part of a spectrum of EC phenotypes and an exam-
ple of cellular plasticity29–31. EndMT can be reversed in some instances, for example mesenchymal-to-endothelial 
transition has been described following myocardial infarction29. Reversal may be more easily achieved in EC 
that undergo partial EndMT which involves the activation of mesenchymal genes and simultaneous retention 
of endothelial marker expression. Partial EndMT has been observed during sprouting angiogenesis in tip cells 
which lose apical-basal polarity, delaminate and migrate30. Although tip cells express markers of EndMT they 
retain expression of VE-cadherin and other EC markers and continue have contact with neighbouring EC. 
Because of these characteristics they have been described as undergoing partial EndMT30. Similarly, we observed 
in the current study that low shear stress induced mesenchymal genes whilst retaining expression of VE-cadherin 
which is consistent with a partial EndMT. The corollary is that atherosclerosis is associated with a partial form of 
EndMT that may be amenable to reversal towards an endothelial state. This hypothesis should be addressed in 
future studies to determine whether therapeutic targeting of Snail can treat atherosclerosis by reversing EndMT. 
Although it is possible that vascular diseases could be treated via EndMT reversal, this is unlikely to be achieved 
via inhibition of Snail because transcription factors are difficult to target therapeutically. Thus future studies 
should identify the target genes that are activated by Snail in sheared EC since some of them could provide a 
therapeutic target to prevent or reverse EndMT.
Limitations of the study. 
To assess the role of Snail in EC responses to low shear stress we silenced it by 
transfecting cells with specific siRNA sequences. It is plausible that the transfection process per se can alter cell 
physiology because it involves electroporation and addition of nucleic acids. Indeed in this study we observed 
that cells transfected with a non-targeting control siRNA had reduced migration compared to untransfected cells 
(compare Fig. 2 with Supplementary Fig. 3a), suggesting that siRNA transfection itself can modulate EC function. 
Nevertheless cell migration under low shear stress was consistently reduced in cells transfected with siRNA tar-
geting Snail compared to control non-targeting sequences. Thus we concluded that silencing of Snail had an effect 
above and beyond that observed with control sequences indicating that Snail is a positive regulator of migration 
under low shear conditions.
Another important technical consideration relates to the orbital in vitro system that was used to apply flow to 
cultured EC. Using this system, EC monolayers cultured in 6-well plates were exposed to orbital shaking which 
generates relatively low shear at the centre of the well and high shear at the periphery. The regions studied were 
defined previously using computational fluid dynamics to calculate the shear stress distribution over the orbited 
well13, 23. Moreover the altered flow at the centre and periphery was validated by particle imaging velocimetry13. 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
Since shear stress is sensitive to changes in the orbital radius of the rotating platform, the frequency of rotation 
and the viscosity of the cell culture medium, it was ensured that these values were consistent between the cur-
rent study and those used for computational fluid dynamic calculations13. We used a standardized template to 
identify the regions that were used for EC collection. Nevertheless, the approach is subject to potential sampling 
errors which could contribute to experimental variation. This was captured by carrying out multiple independent 
experiments with cells cultured from different individuals. It was observed that low shear stress had consistent 
effects on several physiological parameters; thus sampling errors were not high enough to mask these biological 
effects. Finally, since in vitro systems do not fully mimic the complex physiology of in vivo systems we validated 
our observations by studying Snail expression in murine, porcine and human arteries.
Although our studies of the aortic arch in pigs and mice demonstrated that Snail expression was enriched in 
EC located at the inner curvature they did not reveal a causal relationship between shear stress and Snail expres-
sion. To address this we modified shear stress in the murine carotid artery using a constrictive cuff developed 
by Krams26. One potential concern with this study is that cuff placement could injure the vessel. However we 
observed enhanced expression of Snail at a downstream region that was exposed to low oscillatory shear stress 
but was not exposed to the cuff itself. Another important consideration is the change in shear stress induced by 
the cuff. This has recently been calculated by Krams who used microCt and ultrasound data to inform computa-
tional fluid dynamic simulations32. Notably it was found that although shear stress is highly sensitive to geometry 
there was <10% variation in shear magnitude between cuffed arteries. Similarly, we observed that the expression 
of Snail at low oscillatory shear stress regions was also consistent between animals and was significantly higher 
compared to the high shear region or contralateral artery.
References
 1. Lim, J. & Thiery, J. P. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions: Insights from development. Development. 139, 3471–3486 (2012).
 2. Gonzalez, D. M., Medici, D. Signaling mechanisms of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Science Signal. 7 (2014).
 3. Camenisch, T. D. et al. Temporal and distinct tgf beta ligand requirements during mouse and avian endocardial cushion 
morphogenesis. Dev. Biol. 248, 170–181 (2002).
 4. Maddaluno, L. et al. Endmt contributes to the onset and progression of cerebral cavernous malformations. Nature. 498, 492–496 
(2013).
 5. Ranchoux, B. et al. Endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition in pulmonary hypertension. Circulation. 131, 1006–1018 (2015).
 6. Cooley, B.C. et al. Tgf-beta signaling mediates endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (endmt) during vein graft remodeling. Sci. 
Trans. Med. 6 (2014).
 7. Chen, P. Y. et al. Endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition drives atherosclerosis progression. J. Clin. Invest. 125, 4514–4528 (2015).
 8. Moonen, J.-R. A. J. et al. Endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition contributes to fibro-proliferative vascular disease and is modulated 
by fluid shear stress. Cardiovasc. Res. 108, 377–386 (2015).
 9. Mahmoud, M. et al. TWIST1 integrates endothelial responses to flow in vascular dysfunction and atherosclerosis. Circ. Res. 119, 
450–462 (2016).
 
10. Evrard, S. M. et al. Endothelial to mesenchymal transition is common in atherosclerotic lesions and is associated with plaque 
instability. Nat. Commun. 7, 11853 (2016).
 
11. Kwak, B. R. et al. Biomechanical factors in atherosclerosis: Mechanisms and clinical implications. Eur. Heart J. 35, 3013–3020 (2014).
 
12. Davies, P. F., Remuzzi, A., Gordon, E. J., Dewey, C. F. & Gimbrone, M. A. Turbulent fluid shear-stress induces vascular endothelial-
cell turnover invitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 2114–2117 (1986).
 
13. Warboys, C. M. et al. Disturbed flow promotes endothelial senescence via a p53-dependent pathway. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 
34, 985–995 (2014).
 
14. Schober, A. et al. Microrna-126-5p promotes endothelial proliferation and limits atherosclerosis by suppressing dlk1. Nat. Med. 20, 
368–376 (2014).
 
15. Serbanovic-Canic, J. et al. A zebrafish model for functional screening of mechanosensitive genes. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 37, 
130–143 (2017).
 
16. Cancel, L. M. & Tarbell, J. M. The role of mitosis in ldl transport through cultured endothelial cell monolayers. Am. J. Physiol.-Heart 
Circ. Physiol. 300, H769–H776 (2011).
 
17. Lin, K. et al. Molecular mechanism of endothelial growth arrest by laminar shear stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 9385–9389 (2000).
 
18. Dai, G. et al. Distinct endothelial phenotypes evoked by arterial waveforms derived from atherosclerosis-susceptible and -resistant 
regions of human vasculature. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 14871–14876 (2004).
 
19. ten Dijke, P., Egorova, A. D., Goumans, M. J., Poelmann, R. E., Hierck, B. P. Tgf-beta signaling in endothelial-to-mesenchymal 
transition: The role of shear stress and primary cilia. Sci. Signal. 5 (2012).
 
20. Leptin, M. Twist and snail as positive and negative regulators during drosophila mesoderm development. Genes Dev. 5, 1568–1576 
(1991).
 
21. Carver, E. A., Jiang, R. L., Lan, Y., Oram, K. F. & Gridley, T. The mouse snail gene encodes a key regulator of the epithelial-
mesenchymal transition. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 8184–8188 (2001).
 
22. Timmerman, L. A. et al. Notch promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition during cardiac development and oncogenic 
transformation. Genes Dev. 18, 99–115 (2004).
 
23. Dardik, A. et al. Differential effects of orbital and laminar shear stress on endothelial cells. J. Vasc. Surg. 41, 869–880 (2005).
 
24. Liang, C.-C., Park, A. Y. & Guan, J.-L. In vitro scratch assay: A convenient and inexpensive method for analysis of cell migration in 
vitro. Nat. Protoc. 2, 329–333 (2007).
 
25. Li, J. et al. Endothelial twist1 promotes pathological ocular angiogenesis. Invest. Ophthalmol. Visual Sci. 55, 8267–8277 (2014).
 
26. Cheng, C. et al. Shear stress affects the intracellular distribution of enos: Direct demonstration by a novel in vivo technique plenary 
paper shear stress affects the intracellular distribution of enos: Direct demonstration by a novel in vivo technique. Blood. 106, 
3691–3698 (2005).
 
27. Giannotta, M., Trani, M. & Dejana, E. VE-cadherin and endothelial adherens junctions: active guardians of vascular integrity. Dev. 
Cell. 26, 441–54 (2013).
 
28. Kiosses, W. B., McKee, N. H. & Kalnins, V. I. Evidence for the migration of rat aortic endothelial cells toward the heart. Arterioscler. 
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 17, 2891–2896 (1997).
 
29. Ubil, E. et al. Mesenchymal-endothelial transition contributes to cardiac neovascularization. Nature. 514, 585–590 (2014).
 
30. Welch-Reardon, K. M. et al. Angiogenic sprouting is regulated by endothelial cell expression of slug. J. Cell Sci. 127, 2017–2028 (2014).
 
31. Park, J. A., Kim, D. Y., Kim, Y. -M., Lee, I. -K., Kwon, Y. -G. Endothelial snail regulates capillary branching morphogenesis via 
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 expression. Plos. Genet. 11 (2015).
 
32. Pedrigi, R. M. et al. Influence of shear stress magnitude and direction on atherosclerotic plaque composition. R. Soc. Open Sci. 3, 
160588 (2016).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific RepoRts | 7: 3375  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
Author Contributions
M.M.M., J.S.-C., S.F., C.S., R.X., S.H., M.A. generated, analysed and interpreted data. A.M., J.C., S.E.F., K.V.D.H., 
V.R. interpreted data and revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. P.C.E. designed the study, 
interpreted data and wrote the manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at doi:10.1038/s41598-017-03532-z
Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2017
