 Genetic identification of brain cell types underlying 
schizophrenia
Nathan G Skene1,2,†, Julien Bryois3,†, Trygve E Bakken4, Gerome Breen5,6, James J 
Crowley7, Héléna A Gaspar5,6, Paola Giusti-Rodriguez7, Rebecca D Hodge4, Jeremy A 
Miller4, Ana B Muñoz-Manchado1, Michael C O’Donovan8, Michael J Owen8, Antonio F 
Pardiñas8, Jesper Ryge9, James T R Walters8, Sten Linnarsson1, Ed S Lein4, Major 
Depressive Disorder Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium10, Patrick F 
Sullivan3,7,*, and Jens Hjerling-Leffler1,*
1Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden. 2UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, 
London WC1N 3BG, UK. 3Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska 
Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden. 4Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, Washington 
98109, USA. 5King’s College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, MRC 
Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP) Centre, London, UK. 6National Institute for 
Health Research Biomedical Research Centre, South London and Maudsley National Health 
Service Trust, London, UK. 7Departments of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 
NC, 27599-7264, USA. 8MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Division of 
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, UK. 9Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland. 10Members of Major Depressive Disorder Working Group of the Psychiatric 
Genomics Consortium are in the Supplementary Note
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspond with Dr Hjerling-Leffler (jens.hjerling-leffler@ki.se) and Dr Sullivan (patrick.sullivan@ki.se).
†Equal contributions.
Author contributions
Study design: N.G.S., J.B., P.F.S., J.H.L.; Writing and review of manuscript: N.G.S., J.B., P.F.S., J.H.L.; Analyses using LDSC were 
performed by N.G.S.; Analyses using MAGMA were performed by J.B.; Generation of human mid-temporal cortex data: T.E.B., 
R.D.H., J.A.M., E.S.L; Generation of KI single cell data: A.B.M-M., J.R., S.L., J.H.L.; MDD GWAS: PGC MDD working group; 
Schizophrenia CLOZUK GWAS: J.T.R.W., J.J.C., P.G.R., M.C.O’D., M.J.O., A.F.P.; Antipsychotic drug targets: G.B., H.A.G.; All 
authors read and approved the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors reports the following potentially competing financial interests. PF Sullivan: Lundbeck (advisory committee), Pfizer 
(Scientific Advisory Board member), and Roche (grant recipient, speaker reimbursement). J Hjerling-Leffler: Cartana (Scientific 
Adviser) and Roche (grant recipient).
Data availability
The RNAseq data used in this report can be obtained from the Hjerling-Leffler lab website (URLs), and includes the KI single-cell 
RNAseq superset, processed versions of the human and mouse snRNAseq DroNc-seq data, and the Allan Brain Institute human 
snRNAseq data. The specificity values for the KI single-cell RNAseq superset are included in Supplementary Table 4. The dataset has 
also been made available in the ‘MAGMA_Celltyping’ R package (URLs).
Code availability
An R package which can be used for running the cell type association analysis can be obtained from https://github.com/NathanSkene/
MAGMA_Celltyping
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2018 June ; 50(6): 825–833. doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0129-5.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Abstract
With few exceptions, the marked advances in knowledge about the genetic basis of schizophrenia 
have not converged on findings that can be confidently used for precise experimental modeling. 
Applying knowledge of the cellular taxonomy of the brain from single-cell RNA-sequencing, we 
evaluated whether the genomic loci implicated in schizophrenia map onto specific brain cell types. 
We found that the common variant genomic results consistently mapped to pyramidal cells, 
medium spiny neurons, and certain interneurons but far less consistently to embryonic, progenitor, 
or glial cells. These enrichments were due to sets of genes specifically expressed in each of these 
cell types. We also found that many of the diverse gene sets previously associated with 
schizophrenia (synaptic genes, FMRP interactors, antipsychotic targets, etc.) generally implicate 
the same brain cell types. Our results suggest a parsimonious explanation: the common-variant 
genetic results for schizophrenia point at a limited set of neurons, and the gene sets point to the 
same cells. The genetic risk associated with medium spiny neurons did not overlap with that of 
glutamatergic pyramidal cells and interneurons, suggesting that different cell types have 
biologically distinct roles in schizophrenia.
Introduction
Knowledge of the genetic basis of schizophrenia has markedly improved in the past five 
years1. We now know that much of the genetic basis and heritability of schizophrenia is due 
to common variation2,3. However, identifying “actionable” genes in sizable studies4,5 has 
proven difficult with a few exceptions6–8. For example, there is aggregated statistical 
evidence for diverse gene sets including genes expressed in brain or neurons3,5,9, genes 
highly intolerant of loss-of-function variation10, synaptic genes11, genes whose mRNA bind 
to FRMP12, and glial genes13 (Supplementary Table 1). Several gene sets have been 
implicated by both common and rare variant studies of schizophrenia, and this convergence 
strongly implicates these gene sets in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. However, the 
gene sets in Supplementary Table 1 often contain hundreds of functionally distinctive genes 
that do not immediately suggest reductive targets for experimental modeling.
Connecting the genomic results to cellular studies is crucial since it would allow us to 
prioritize for cells fundamental to the genesis of schizophrenia. Enrichment of schizophrenia 
genomic findings in genes expressed in macroscopic samples of brain tissue has been 
reported3,14,15 but these results are insufficiently specific to guide subsequent 
experimentation.
A more precise approach has recently become feasible. Single-cell RNA-sequencing 
(scRNAseq) can be used to derive empirical taxonomies of brain cell types. We thus 
rigorously compared genomic results for schizophrenia to brain cell types defined by 
scRNAseq. Our goal was to connect human genomic findings to specific brain cell types 
defined by gene expression profiles: to what specific brain cell types do the common variant 
genetic findings for schizophrenia best “fit”? A schematic of our approach is shown in 
Figure 1.
Skene et al.
Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Results
Cell type specificity of gene expression
We assembled a superset of brain scRNAseq data from Karolinska Institutet (KI; 
Supplementary Tables 2–3). Brain regions in the KI superset include neocortex16, 
hippocampus16, hypothalamus17, striatum, and midbrain18 plus samples enriched for 
oligodendrocytes, dopaminergic neurons, and cortical parvalbuminergic interneurons (total 
of 9,970 cells, Figure 1c). These data were generated using identical methods from the same 
labs with unique molecular identifiers that allow for direct comparison of transcription 
across regions. Quality control and alignment are described elsewhere16. We did not identify 
important batch effects (Supplementary Figure 1). Based on the scRNAseq data and 
subsequent clustering each cell have been assigned to a Level 1 classification (e.g., 
pyramidal cell, microglia, or astrocyte). Level 2 classifications are subtypes of a Level 1 
grouping (e.g., medium spiny neurons expressing Drd1 or Drd2). Clustering was based on 
patterns of correlations across hundreds of genes and not on single markers. After clustering, 
cell type identities were derived using known expression patterns, histology, and/or 
molecular studies16–18 (Supplementary Table 2). The KI mouse superset identified 24 Level 
1 brain cell types (Supplementary Figure 2) and 149 Level 2 cell types (all sub-groupings of 
Level 1), far more than any other brain scRNAseq or single nuclei RNA-seq (snRNAseq) 
dataset presently available (Figure 1a).
For each scRNAseq and snRNAseq dataset, we estimated the specificity of each gene and 
cell type. This measure represents the proportion of the total expression of a gene found in 
one cell type compared to all cell types (i.e., the mean expression in one cell type divided by 
the mean expression in all cell types). If the expression of a gene is shared between two or 
more cell types, it will get a lower specificity measure. For example, Drd2 is highly 
expressed in medium spiny neurons (MSNs), adult dopaminergic neurons, and hypothalamic 
interneurons, and its specificity measure in MSNs of 0.17, but this placed Drd2 in the top 
specificity decile for MSNs (Figure 1b). Figure 1c shows cell type specificity for seven 
genes with known expression patterns. Because expression is spread over several cell types, 
the pan-neuronal marker Atp1b1 has lower specificity than Ppp1r1b (DARPP-32, an MSN 
marker), Aif1 (a microglia marker), or Gfap (an astrocyte marker).
Cell type specificity of schizophrenia genetic associations
For each cell type, we ranked the expression specificity of each gene into groups (deciles or 
40 quantiles). The underlying hypothesis is that if schizophrenia is associated with a 
particular cell type, then more of the genome-wide association (GWA) signal should be 
concentrated in genes with greater cell type specificity. For example, we plotted the 
enrichment of SNP-heritability for schizophrenia and human height in the cell-type 
specificity deciles of for MSNs and found a positive relationship for schizophrenia but no 
relationship with human height (Figures 1d–1e). To ensure rigor, we required that two 
different statistical methods (LDSC9 and MAGMA19) each give strong evidence for 
connecting schizophrenia GWA results to a cell type. These two methods are based on 
different assumptions and algorithms. LDSC assessed enrichment of the common SNP-
heritability of schizophrenia in the most cell type-specific genes. MAGMA evaluated 
Skene et al.
Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 whether gene-level genetic association with schizophrenia linearly increased with cell type 
expression specificity. Both methods account in different ways for confounders like gene 
size and linkage disequilibrium. We required that both methods give similar results after 
correcting for multiple comparisons to minimize the chance of a spurious conclusion. As 
described in the Online Methods, we evaluated and excluded multiple potential threats to the 
validity of these analyses.
To identify brain cell types associated with schizophrenia, we used the largest available 
GWA study of schizophrenia: CLOZUK identified ~140 genome-wide significant loci in 
40,675 cases and 64,643 controls20. We first compared the CLOZUK results to GTEx 
(RNA-seq of macroscopic samples from multiple human tissues)21 using MAGMA and 
confirmed3 that smaller schizophrenia GWA P-values were substantially enriched in brain 
and pituitary (Supplementary Figure 3).
We evaluated the relation of the CLOZUK GWA schizophrenia results to the 24 KI Level 1 
brain cell types. Both LDSC and MAGMA strongly highlighted only four cell types: 
hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells, striatal medium spiny neurons, neocortical 
somatosensory pyramidal cells, and cortical interneurons (Figure 2a, Supplementary Figures 
4–5). Each exceeded a Bonferroni significance level by several orders of magnitude. The 
results were not pan-neuronal as multiple other types of neurons did not show enrichment. 
Schizophrenia risk was greater in mature cells than in embryonic or progenitor cells. We 
extended the analysis to 149 KI Level 2 cell types (subtypes of Level 1 cells): for 
hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells, both major subgroups were significant; for striatum, 
medium spiny neurons expressing Drd2, Drd1 and striatal Pvalb-expressing interneurons 
were consistently significant; and for neocortical somatosensory pyramidal cells, cortical 
layers 2/3, 4, 5, and 6 were significant (Supplementary Figure 6). The cortical Level 1 
interneuron signal appeared to result from four interneuron subcategories all expressing 
Reln.
Additional analyses showed that these results were not influenced by the total number of 
molecules detected per cell type or total number of cells per cell type (Supplementary Table 
3). We conducted null simulations and confirmed that there was no Type 1 error inflation 
(Supplementary Figure 7). We also applied an alternative approach based on differential 
expression22, and replicated the association of MSNs, pyramidal CA1, and neocortical 
somatosensory pyramidal cells with schizophrenia using a third method (Supplementary 
Figure 8). These additional analyses suggest the robustness of our results.
We next evaluated whether these results were specific to schizophrenia or if they resulted 
from some feature common across human traits. Heat maps of KI Level 1 enrichment P-
values for GWA results from eight studies of human complex traits are depicted in Figure 
2b. Seven studies evaluated common variants associations for brain-related diseases or traits 
with ≥20,000 cases and ≥10 genome-wide significant associations. Human height was 
included as a non-brain comparator. The results from the earlier PGC GWA study of 
schizophrenia3 were similar to those from CLOZUK. Although we observed cell types being 
enriched in other sets, none had the specific signal observed in the two schizophrenia sets. 
For example, for major depressive disorder, we found that GABAergic interneurons, 
Skene et al.
Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 embryonic midbrain neurons, and dopaminergic interneurons were the most enriched cell 
types. For each cell type, we tested whether the enrichment observed in other GWA studies 
was significantly different from that in CLOZUK. We observed no significant difference for 
SCZ2 (a subset of CLOZUK) and years of education but all other studies contained 
significantly different cell type enrichments (Supplementary Figure 9).
Replication of results in additional single cell datasets
We replicated most findings in independent scRNAseq/snRNAseq mouse brain studies. We 
found significant enrichment for schizophrenia in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells, 
neocortical pyramidal cells, cortical interneurons (although not in all data sets), and medium 
spiny neurons23–26. We also saw enrichment in pyramidal neurons from CA3 and dentate 
gyrus granule cells. (Supplementary Figures 10a–d). Replication of our results in external 
other datasets again highlight the robustness of our cell type association results.
We identified an important technical issue for scRNAseq/snRNAseq studies of brain. 
scRNAseq is readily done in mouse brain but more difficult in larger and more fragile 
human brain neurons. Nearly all currently available human data have been generated using 
snRNAseq. The isolated nuclei used in snRNAseq lack the cytoplasmic compartment and 
proximal dendrites, and there are systematic differences between the types and amounts of 
mRNA in nucleus versus cell soma27. To evaluate the impact of this issue, we analyzed 
multiple mouse and human datasets. We confirmed that transcripts destined for export to 
synaptic neuropil28 were better captured by scRNAseq and specifically depleted in 
snRNAseq (Figure 3a). This is important for the purposes of this study because synaptic 
neuropil transcripts are enriched for genetic associations with schizophrenia (P=1.6×10−4). 
This places an important caveat on the use of snRNAseq to evaluate brain cell type 
associations with schizophrenia given that snRNAseq from human or mouse brain may not 
comprehensively capture the relevant transcriptome.
With these caveats in mind, we evaluated human snRNAseq datasets from mid-temporal 
cortex (Allen Institute for Brain Science, unpublished) and DroNc-seq in prefrontal cortex 
and hippocampus26. Using hierarchical clustering on specificity scores, we found that 
human and mouse cell types clustered together (Supplementary Figure 11); Level 1 cell 
types had greater similarity to the same cell type across species than to a different cell type 
in the same species. We confirmed enrichment of schizophrenia SNP-heritability in cortical 
pyramidal neurons (glutamatergic cells) and cortical interneurons (GABAergic cells) in two 
different human datasets (Figure 3b). In the DroNc-seq dataset26, we confirmed enrichment 
in hippocampal pyramidal neurons (glutamatergic cells) along with greater enrichment in 
Reln-expressing GABAergic interneurons compared to those expressing Pvalb. In both 
human studies, oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) were significant or close to 
significance but it is hard to judge if this is related to a loss of neuronal-specific signal in 
snRNAseq (note that OPCs showed stronger signal in OPCs in mouse snRNAseq vs 
scRNAseq; Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure 10d). In a small scRNAseq study29, human 
adult and fetal cortical neurons were significantly enriched for schizophrenia SNP-
heritability. These are likely pyramidal cells but the small numbers of cells sequenced 
precluded further exploration. No significant enrichments were found in another snRNAseq 
Skene et al.
Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 study of a single human30, perhaps due to a lack of cellular diversity (data not shown). We 
are unaware of scRNAseq/snRNAseq data from human striatum. The specificity of the 
human cortical signal for schizophrenia was confirmed in relation to the same set of brain-
specific GWA studies (Figure 2d). In summary, all major findings from the KI dataset were 
replicated in independent mouse or human studies.
Cell type enrichments of schizophrenia associated gene sets
A major question in the field regards interpretation of the large and diverse gene sets that 
have been compellingly related to schizophrenia (Supplementary Table 1). These gene sets 
are highly significant, replicate well, and are often implicated in both common and rare 
variant studies. However, their implications for an experimentalist are unclear: what do these 
large sets of genes really tell us? These gene sets are large, and could be expected to 
recapitulate the cell type enrichments found above. However, all neurons have synapses and 
NeuN (the protein product of Rbfox3) is a widely used neuronal marker, so another 
possibility is that the RBFOX, PSD95, and FMRP gene sets could simply be pan-neuronal.
We thus evaluated whether gene sets previously implicated in schizophrenia were 
specifically expressed in the KI level 1 brain cell types (using Expression Weighted Cell 
type Enrichment, EWCE)31. The inputs to EWCE are a list of genes (e.g., FRMP interacting 
genes or genes intolerant to loss-of-function variation) and the same scRNAseq cell type 
specificity matrix used in the MAGMA and LDSC analyses above. Association with 
schizophrenia is not a direct input although these data are incorporated indirectly (why a 
gene set was selected in the first place). However, these effects are subtle. For instance, there 
is a CLOZUK significant GWA hit in only 7.0% of genes that interact with FMRP versus 
4.0% that do not interact with FMRP (using MAGMA gene-wise P-values), and there is a 
CLOZUK significant GWA hit in only 4.1% of genes with ExAC pLI > 0.9 versus 3.3% 
with low pLI. We also determined that overlap between gene sets was relatively low. For 10 
key gene sets (antipsychotic targets, CELF4, FMRP, high or low dN/dS, high pLI, NMDAR, 
PSD, PSD95, and RBFOX), of 45 pairs of correlations (count of intersection/union), only 
two correlations exceeded 0.25 (RBFOX-CELF4 0.31 and RBFOX-high pLI 0.28), and most 
other correlations were near zero.
First, pharmacologically-defined molecular targets of antipsychotics (the mainstay of 
treatment for schizophrenia) have been associated with schizophrenia32, and we found that 
antipsychotic medication targets were associated with the same cell types as for the 
schizophrenia GWA results: neocortical S1 pyramidal cells, MSNs, and hippocampal CA1 
pyramidal cells, while cortical interneurons were just above the significance threshold 
(Figure 4a). Expanding these analyses, we found that other gene sets associated with 
schizophrenia were specifically expressed in schizophrenia-relevant cell types (Figures 4b–
d). The gene sets consistently associated with schizophrenia – intolerant to loss-of-function 
variation, NMDA receptor complex, post-synaptic density, PSD95 complex, RBFOX 
binding, CELF4 binding, and FMRP associated genes – all had more specific expression in 
neocortical S1 and hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells, MSNs from the dorsal striatum, and 
cortical interneurons (with the exception of NMDA receptor complex genes). Because some 
of these gene sets are involved in diverse cellular functions, there were, as expected, 
Skene et al.
Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 associations with other Level 1 cell types. For example, genes intolerant to loss-of-function 
variation had significantly greater expression in progenitor cells (dopaminergic neuroblasts, 
neuroblasts, and embryonic GABAergic neurons). Notably, none of the gene sets previously 
associated with schizophrenia was pan-neuronal. A prior study33 reported that expert-
curated glial gene sets were enriched for schizophrenia associations. We confirmed that 
those gene sets were significantly associated with glia (Supplementary Figure 12) but could 
not replicate the association of these gene sets with schizophrenia using MAGMA. Finally, 
we observed that gene sets previously associated with schizophrenia were substantially less 
associated with schizophrenia after controlling for the pyramidal neurons, MSNs, cortical 
interneurons (Supplementary Figure 13). Only loss of function intolerant, CELF4-binding 
and Rbfox-binding gene sets remained significant after controlling for the cell type 
enrichments. Our findings highlight that non-overlapping subsets of risk genes each point at 
the same cell types. Indeed, gene set analysis results can be further subdivided according to 
cell type-specific expression. Improved methods are thus needed for gene set analysis 
explicitly accounting for cell types – particularly given intensive efforts to conduct a census 
of the cellular complexity of the human body.
As neurological diseases are generally not genetically correlated with schizophrenia34, we 
evaluated the associations of Level 1 cell types with gene sets associated with neurological 
diseases. Genes associated with Alzheimer’s disease35,36 and multiple sclerosis37 were 
associated with microglia. Risk genes for leukodystrophy38 were associated with 
oligodendrocytes (Figure 4e). We analysed genes associated with neurological phenotypes 
from the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) and subcellular localization data from the 
Human Protein Atlas (Supplementary Figures 14–19). We found that these mostly targeted 
cell types distinct from those implicated in schizophrenia. For example, the HPO category 
“neural tube defect” was associated with neural progenitor cells (p=0.0002) and “abnormal 
myelination” was associated with oligodendrocytes (p<0.0001). We analysed genes with 
weak or strong conservation between human and mouse (low or high dN/dS scores), and 
found that highly conserved genes were specific to some types of neuron (e.g., serotonergic) 
while divergent genes were associated to other cell types (e.g., hypothalamic glutamatergic). 
None of the schizophrenia associated cell types showed unusually weak or strong 
evolutionary pressure on their coding sequences (Figure 4f).
Independence of genetic association between cell types
Finally, we assessed how much of cell type connections to schizophrenia was due to shared 
gene expression between cell types. For instance, the association of cortical interneurons 
with schizophrenia is weaker than for MSNs: are these independent connections to 
schizophrenia? Alternatively, given that both are GABAergic neurons, are both associations 
being driven by a common set of genes? We tested this using resampling without 
replacement: if the interneuron enrichment is driven solely by overlapping genes with 
MSNs, then an equivalent level of interneuron association should be found if the 
schizophrenia association scores of genes within each MSN specificity decile are 
randomized (Supplementary Figure 20). We performed 10,000 resamplings for each Level 1 
cell type while controlling for all four of the significantly associated cell types (Figure 4a). 
We found that MSNs, cortical interneurons, and hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons were 
Skene et al.
Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 independently associated with schizophrenia. However, the association with somatosensory 
pyramidal neurons was largely due to shared expression with hippocampal CA1 pyramidal 
neurons. We confirmed this using conditional analysis (Supplementary Figure 21a). We then 
tested whether each cell type remained significant after conditioning on the three other 
significant cell types together. Strikingly, only MSNs remained significantly associated with 
schizophrenia (Supplementary Figure 21b), indicating that the association of MSNs with 
schizophrenia is independent from that of pyramidal neurons and cortical interneurons.
To evaluate whether the main sources of enrichment signal in different cell types were from 
overlapping genes, we used a qualitative measure. We plotted the overlap of the top 1,000 
genes associated with schizophrenia (MAGMA gene-wise P-values) that also fell in the top 
decile of specificity scores for each of the four main cell types (Figure 5b). About half of the 
schizophrenia-associated genes enriched in pyramidal cells and MSNs were shared but those 
conferring risk-enrichment in interneurons were to a larger extent exclusive. We then 
evaluated enrichment of gene sets previously associated with schizophrenia (Rbfox, CELF4 
or FMRP binding genes, loss of function intolerant gene, genes involved in synapse 
function, and dendritically transported genes) and genes involved in dopaminergic signalling 
(Online Methods) in the different areas of Figure 5b using a hypergeometric test. The most 
associated Rbfox genes were enriched in CA1 pyramidal cells, genes related to loss of 
function intolerant genes, and dopamine signalling were specifically enriched in medium 
spiny neurons (Figure 5c). A subset of synaptic genes associated with schizophrenia were 
shared by all cell types. These findings show that neuronal classes express a combination of 
overlapping and non-overlapping functional sets of risk genes.
Discussion
A major issue in schizophrenia genomics is the meaning of the many GWA findings – how 
do we interpret the hundreds of common variant associations? Similarly, many sets of genes 
have been compellingly associated with schizophrenia: what are these diverse functional 
findings telling us? Thus, we attempted to connect human genomic findings for 
schizophrenia to specific brain cell types defined by their scRNAseq expression profiles: to 
what specific brain cell types do the common variant genetic findings for schizophrenia best 
“fit”? Other studies have addressed this question3,9,14, but using gene expression based on 
aggregates of millions of cells. As described more fully in the Online Methods 
(“Rationale”), we used scRNAseq data to answer this question. We set a high bar: we 
required that the connections to cell types be identified using two different methods and 
exceed an appropriately rigorous statistical threshold.
The results were not pan-neural, pan-neuronal, or in cell types prominent in early 
development. We found clear connections to just four of 24 main brain cell types: MSNs, 
pyramidal cells in hippocampal CA1, pyramidal cells in somatosensory cortex, and cortical 
interneurons. Most of the strong results found in the mouse data replicated in external mouse 
data and in the more limited human data sets. Intriguingly, many of the diverse gene sets 
(e.g., antipsychotic drug targets or genes that interact with FMRP or RBFOX proteins) 
robustly associated with schizophrenia connected to the same cell types. Our results suggest 
that these discrete cell types are central to the etiology of schizophrenia, and provide an 
Skene et al.
Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 empirical rationale for deeper investigation of these cell types in regard to the basis of 
schizophrenia. These results can be used to guide in vivo studies and in vitro modeling (e.g., 
patient-derived neurons from induced pluripotent stem cells) and provide a basis for 
analyzing how different risk genes interact to produce the symptoms of schizophrenia.
Our results also suggest that single-nuclei RNAseq of neurons leads to systematic 
underrepresentation of dendritically exported mRNA species. We hypothesize that this is due 
to destination-specific differences in rates of mRNA decay39. Our data on single-nuclei 
versus single-cell mRNA capture warrants caution when using single-nuclei data sets for the 
study of neuronal disorders or processes. This fact should be taken into consideration in the 
design or analysis of future large scale sequencing efforts.
There are several important caveats as described more fully in the Online Methods 
(“Limitations”, including discussion and analyses of gene conservation). Despite our use of 
multiple statistical methods and efforts to identify and resolve any spurious explanations for 
our findings, our work has to be considered in light of inevitable limitations. Although the 
KI scRNAseq data cover a broad range of brain regions thought to be relevant to the 
neurobiology of schizophrenia, extensive coverage of cortical and striatal development is 
lacking at present (gestation, early postnatal, or adolescence). The currently available 
functional genomic data in human brain are limited but improving rapidly via 
PsychENCODE40 and similar efforts, but precisely how schizophrenia GWAS signals 
impact cell-specific gene expression is not yet a solved problem. Finally, the genetic signals 
we captured were reflected in the expression levels of hundreds of genes. It is certainly 
possible for a gene to play an important role in schizophrenia and yet not be in one of the 
cell types we implicated. For example, genetic polymorphisms in C4a appear to be 
etiologically involved in schizophrenia7 but the expression of C4a is highest in astrocytes, 
vascular leptomeningeal cells, and microglia. We were thus careful with our conclusions: we 
can implicate a cell type (e.g., MSNs show positive evidence) but it is premature to exclude 
cell types for which we do not have data, or those with dissimilar function or under selection 
pressure between mouse and human.
In sum, our results support a parsimonious hypothesis: the common variant GWA results for 
schizophrenia point to a limited set of brain cells, and that subsets of these genes - the gene 
sets associated with schizophrenia (including antipsychotic medication targets) – each point 
at the same cell types.
Online Methods
Mouse-to-human gene mapping
We used the expert curated human-mouse homolog list (Mouse Genome Informatics, 
Jackson Laboratory, URLs, version of 11/22/2016). Only genes with a high-confidence, 1:1 
mapping were retained. This is discussed further in the Supplementary Note.
Calculation of cell type expression specificity
A key metric used for our cell type analyses is the specificity (proportion of expression) for 
a given gene. This metric is calculated separately for each single cell dataset. This is a 
Skene et al.
Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measure of cell type specificity scaled so that a value of 1 implies that the gene is completely 
specific to a cell type and a value of 0 implies the gene is not expressed in that cell type. It 
was calculated using the generate.celltype.data function of the EWCE package (URLs). See 
Supplementary Note for further details.
Thresholding of low expressed transcripts
Because sg,c is independent of the overall expression level of a gene, it is desirable to 
exclude genes with very low or sporadic gene expression levels, as a small number of reads 
in one cell can falsely make that gene appear to be a highly specific cell marker. Direct 
thresholding of low expressed genes is not ideal for performing this as thresholds need to be 
set individually for each dataset, and some individual cells can show exceptionally and 
anomalously high expression of the sporadically expressed gene. We reasoned that all the 
genes we want to include in the study should be differentially expressed in at least one Level 
2 cell type included in the study. We thus excluded sporadically expressed genes via 
ANOVA with the Level 2 cell type annotations as groups, and excluding all genes with P > 
0.00001. Gene filtering was performed separately for each single cell dataset; importantly 
though, the KI dataset was filtered as a merged superset. A consequence of this (and of 
differences in sample preparation and sequencing) is that different genes are used for 
example in the analysis of the KI superset than were used for the Habib et al (Mouse 
Hippocampus Div-Seq) dataset. For datasets where level 2 cell type annotations were not 
available (e.g. the Allan Brain Institute Human Cortex dataset) we used the same approach 
but with level 1 cell type annotations instead.
LD Score Regression (LDSC) and partitioning SNP-heritability
To partition SNP-heritability using LDSC (URLs)9, it is necessary to pass LDSC annotation 
files (one per chromosome) with a row per SNP and a column for each sub-annotation (1=a 
SNP is part of that sub-annotation). To map SNPs to genes, we used dbSNP 
SNPContigLocusId file (build 147 and hg19/NCBI Build 37 coordinates). All SNPs not 
annotated in this file were given a value of 0 in all sub-annotations. Template annotation 
files obtained from the LDSC Github repository were used as the basis for all cell type and 
gene set annotations (“cell_type_group.1*”). Only SNPs present in the template files were 
used. If an annotation had no SNPs, then 50 random SNPs from the same chromosome were 
selected as part of the annotation (if no SNPs are selected then the software fails to calculate 
SNP-heritability).
URLS
Expression Weighted Cell type Enrichment (EWCE), https://github.com/NathanSkene/EWCE
Linnarsson lab data, http://linnarssonlab.org/data
Mouse Genome Informatics, Jackson Laboratory, http://www.informatics.jax.org/homology.shtml
LDSC, https://github.com/bulik/ldsc and https://github.com/bulik/ldsc/wiki
PGC results, https://www.med.unc.edu/pgc/results-and-downloads
AlzGene database, http://www.alzgene.org/TopResult.asp
AlsGene database, http://www.alsgene.org/TopResult.asp
GREAT, http://great.stanford.edu/public/html
Hjerling-Leffler lab website, http://www.hjerling-leffler-lab.org/data/scz_singlecell
Human Phenotype Ontology, http://compbio.charite.de/hpoweb
MAGMA_Celltyping, https://github.com/NathanSkene/MAGMA_Celltyping
Skene et al.
Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Annotation files were created for each cell type for which we applied partitioned LDSC. 
Twelve sub-annotations were created for each cell type. The first represented all SNPs which 
map onto named regions which are not MGI annotated genes or which map onto a gene 
which does not have a 1:1 mouse:human homolog. The second contained all SNPs which 
map onto genes not expressed in a cell type. The other 10 sub-annotations are associated 
with genes with increasing levels of expression specificity for that cell type. To assign these, 
the deciles of sg,c were calculated over all values of g (separately for each value of c) to give 
ten equal length sets of genes. These are then mapped to SNPs as described above. To 
partition SNP-heritability amongst the gene sets (not the cell types), a single set of 
annotation files was created with each of the gene sets used as a sub-annotation column.
LDSC was then run using associated data files from phase 3 of the 1000 Genomes Project41. 
We computed LD scores for cell type annotations using a 1 cM window (--ld-wind-cm 1). 
As recommended (LDSC Github Wiki, URLs), we restricted the analysis to using Hapmap3 
SNPs, and, as in the original report9, excluded the major histocompatibility region due to its 
high gene density and exceptional LD. The LDSC “munge_sumstats.py” script was used to 
prepare the summary statistics files. The SNP-heritability is then partitioned to each sub-
annotation. We used LD weights calculated for HapMap3 SNPs, excluding the MHC region, 
for the regression weights available from the Github page (files in the 
‘weights_hm3_no_hla’ folder).
For the LD score files used as independent variables in LD Score regression we used the full 
baseline model9 and the annotations described above. We used the ‘--overlap-annot’ 
argument and the minor allele frequency files (‘1000G_Phase3_frq’ folder via the ‘--frqfile-
chr’ argument).
Partitioned LDSC computes the proportion of SNP-heritability associated with each 
annotation column while taking into account all other annotations. Based on the proportion 
of total SNPs in an annotation, LDSC calculates an enrichment score and an associated 
enrichment P-value (one-tailed as we were only interested in annotations showing 
enrichments of SNP-heritability). All figures showing partitioned LDSC results show P-
values associated with the enrichment of the most specific decile for each cell type.
Cell type identification using MAGMA
We used MAGMA (v1.04)19, a leading program for gene set analysis42, to evaluate the 
association of gene-level schizophrenia association statistics with cell-type specific 
expression under the hypothesis that, in relevant cell types, genes with greater cell type 
specificity should be more associated with schizophrenia. Gene level association statistics 
were obtained using MAGMA (window size 10 kb upstream and 1.5 kb downstream of each 
gene – see below for discussion window size) using an approach based on Brown’s 
method43 (model: snpwise-unweighted). This approach allows to combine P-values in the 
specified windows surrounding each gene into a gene-level pvalue while accounting for LD 
(computed using the European panel of 1000 Genomes Project Phase 341).
The tissue specific expression metric for each gene in each cell type was obtained by 
dividing the gene expression level in a particular cell type by the sum of the expression of 
Skene et al.
Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the gene in all cell types (see sg,c, defined above). The distributions of sg,c were complex 
(point mass at zero expression, substantial right-skewing). For each cell type, we 
transformed S into 41 bins (0=not expressed, 1=below 2.5th percentile, 2=2.5–5th percentile, 
…, 40=above 97.5th percentile), so that each cell type would be comparable.
MAGMA was then used to test for a positive association (one-sided test) between the binned 
fractions in each cell type and the gene-level associations (option --gene-covar onesided). 
For a given mouse or human brain cell type, this tested whether increasing tissue specificity 
of gene expression is associated with increasing common-variant genetic findings for 
schizophrenia using information from all genes. By default, the linear regression performed 
by MAGMA is conditioned on the following covariates: gene size, log(gene size), gene 
density (representing the relative level of LD between SNPs in that gene) and log(gene 
density). The model also takes into account gene-gene correlations. For the conditional 
analysis, we used the condition modifier of the —gene-covar parameter to condition on each 
of the significant cell types
Random permutations of MAGMA
For the analysis in Supplementary Figure 7, we randomly permuted gene labels of gene-
level association statistics of MAGMA and looked for cell type association with 
schizophrenia using 1,000 permutations. We observed a mean of 24.8 significant results 
across cell types at P<0.05 indicating that MAGMA is conservative using our approach (50 
significant results expected by chance).
Schizophrenia association using alternative cell type specificity method
We tested another recent approach to associate cell types with traits using differentially 
expressed genes22. We computed a normalization factor for each single cell using the scran 
R package44 using the 50% of the genes with mean expression higher than the median. The 
normalization factors were computed after clustering cells using the scran quickcluster 
function to account for cell type heterogeneity. We then performed 24 differential expression 
analysis using BPSC45 testing each cell type against the 23 other cell types with the 
normalization factors as covariate. For each cell type, we then selected the 10% most 
upregulated genes and created bed files with the coordinate of these genes extended by 
100kb upstream and 100kb downstream. SNPs of the baseline model from Finucane et al. 
located in the top 10% of the genes were used to create a cell type specific annotation that 
was added to the “baseline” model. We then used LDSC46 to test for association between the 
cell type specific annotations and schizophrenia using a one-sided P-value based on the 
coefficient Z-score from the output of LDSC.
Enrichment analyses of gene sets and antipsychotic drug targets
Expression Weighted Cell type Enrichment (EWCE, URLs)31 was used to test for cell types 
which show enriched expression of genes associated with particular schizophrenia-
associated gene sets. These analyses used the same specificity (S) values for the KI Level 1 
data that were used for the MAGMA and LDSC analyses. EWCE was run with 10,000 
bootstrap samples. Enrichment P-values were corrected for multiple testing using the 
Bonferroni method calculated over all cell types and gene lists tested. EWCE returns a Z-
Skene et al.
Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 score assessing standard deviations from the mean. Values < 0 (depletion of expression) 
were recoded to zero.
Schizophrenia common variant association results
The schizophrenia GWA results were from the CLOZUK and PGC studies3,20. CLOZUK is 
the largest currently obtainable GWA for schizophrenia (40,675 cases and 64,643 controls), 
and the authors identified ~150 genome-wide significant loci. It includes the schizophrenia 
samples from earlier PGC papers. For selected analyses, we also included the PGC 
schizophrenia results from the Nature 2014 report (URLs). This paper included 36,989 cases 
and 113,075 controls, and identified 108 loci associated with schizophrenia. Results from 
the published PGC and CLOZUK studies were qualitatively similar with the CLOZUK data 
generally showing increased significance owing to its larger sample size.
Comparison GWA results for other traits
We included comparisons for a selected set of brain related traits as well as height as a 
negative control. As power to identify cell types is directly proportional to the sample size of 
the GWA study, we only included traits with at least 20’000 samples that discovered at least 
20 genome-wide significant loci. The GWA results were from the following sources: 
schizophrenia3 from the PGC; Alzheimer’s disease35; educational attainment47; IQ48; MDD 
from the PGC (unpublished); Parkinson’s disease49 and height50.
Test of cell-type association differences between traits
We tested whether the beta coefficient in MAGMA were significantly different between two 
traits for each cell type using the approach described in Paternoster et al, 199851. We first 
compute a Z-score for each cell type: Z =
β1 − β2
SEβ1
2 + SEβ2
2. Where β1 and β2 are the SNP-
heritability enrichments for trait 1 and 2 (or beta coefficients in MAGMA) and SE are the 
standard errors. A two-sided p-value is then computed based on the Z-score using the R 
pnorm function.
Gene sets associated with schizophrenia
The gene set results for schizophrenia are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. For 
CELF4 binding genes52, we used genes with iCLIP occupancy > 0.2 from Table S4. For 
FMRP binding genes, we used genes from Table S2A12. Genes intolerant to loss-of-function 
variation were from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (pLI > 0.9)10. Genes containing 
predicted miR-137 target sites were from microrna.org. NMDA receptor complex genes 
came from Genes-to-Cognition database entry L0000000753. The human post−synaptic 
density gene set was from Table S254. The PSD95 complex came from Table S1 using all 
genes marked with a cross in the ‘PSD-95 Core Complex’ column55. For RBFOX binding, 
we took all genes with RBFOX2 count > 4 or summed RBFOX1 and RBFOX3 > 12 from 
Table S156. For antipsychotic drug targets, we used a gene list provided by Drs Gerome 
Breen and Héléna Gaspar as reported in the biorXiv preprint32. The oligodendrocyte and 
astrocyte gene lists came from Supplementary Table 413. All EWCE P-values were corrected 
with the Benjamini–Hochberg method.
Skene et al.
Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Gene sets for neurological disorders & human phenotype ontology & dN/dS
For multiple sclerosis, we used results from the largest available GWAS (the Multiple 
Sclerosis Genomic Map); we used the genes listed in the Supplementary table37. For 
Alzheimer’s disease, we used the top results from the AlzGene database36 (URLs) as well as 
genome-wide significant genes35. For genes associated with leukodystrophy (HP:0002415,) 
we used the Human Phenotype Ontology38 (URLs). For amyotrophic lateral sclerosis we 
used the top results from the ALSGene database (URLs). For epilepsy, migraine, and stroke 
we used the EBI GWAS catalog. For the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) gene sets, the 
‘ALL_SOURCES_ALL_FREQUENCIES_phenotype_to_genes.txt’ file was downloaded 
from build 133. To obtain the genes with the top 500 highest/lowest dN/dS between humans 
and mice we obtained the dN and dS values through BioMart.
Gene sets associated with subcellular localization
Subcellular localization data were downloaded from the Human Protein Atlas website (HPA, 
v17)57. Only gene lists with >100 genes were used. Lysosomal genes were downloaded from 
the Human Lysosome Gene Database58. Mitochondrial genes were obtained from Human 
MitoCarta2.059. Axonal (Adult) and Axonal (E17) were obtained from a study which used 
axon-TRAP-RiboTags to capture the mRNAs from retinal ganglion cell axons projecting to 
the superior colliculus60 (Supplementary Table 1). Presynaptic genes come from 
Supplementary Table 161. Synaptic vesicle genes came from Supplementary Table 162.
Depletion of dendritically enriched transcripts in nuclei datasets
Dendritically enriched transcripts were obtained from28 (Supplementary Table 10). This list 
was produced from pyramidal cells from rat hippocampus and human 1:1 homologs were 
obtained. We refer to this set of genes as Ldendritic. To enable direct comparisons between 
datasets, all datasets were reduced to contain a common set of six KI Level 1 cell types: 
pyramidal neurons, interneurons, astrocytes, interneurons, microglia, and oligodendrocyte 
precursors. For the KI dataset, we used S1 Pyramidal neurons. The specificity metric 
(denoted as sg,c) was recalculated for each dataset using this reduced set of cell types. 
Comparisons were then made between datasets (denoted in the graph with the format ‘X vs 
Y’). We denote the mean pyramidal neuron specificity scores for dendritically enriched 
genes in dataset X as SD = X, Ldendritic, Pyramidal
−
. We then get the difference in pyramidal 
specificity of for list L between two datasets as 
DX, Y, L = SD = X, L, Pyramidal
−
−  SD = Y, L, Pyramidal
−
. We then calculate values of DX,Y,L for 
20,000 random gene lists, having the same length as the dendritically enriched gene list, 
with the genes randomly selected from the background gene set. We denote the nth random 
gene list as Rn. The mean and standard deviation of the bootstrapped DX,Y,L values are 
denoted μDX, Y, R and σDX, Y, R respectively. The depletion Z-score is then calculated as: 
ZX, Y, Ldendritic =
DX, Y, Ldendritic
− μDX, Y, R
σDX, Y, R
 
. A large positive Z-score thus indicates that 
dendritically enriched transcripts are specifically depleted from pyramidal neurons from 
dataset Y relative to dataset X.
Skene et al.
Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Conditional cell type enrichments
Gene association Z-scores for schizophrenia were calculated in MAGMA as described 
above. To enable randomization of the Z-scores and recalculation of the associations to be 
done programmatically, these were then loaded into R and associations with disease were 
calculated within this environment without external calls to MAGMA. All genes within the 
extended MHC region (chr6 25–34 mb) were removed due to its confounding effects. We 
controlled for gene size and gene density by regressing out the effect of NSNPS and 
NDENSITY parameters (and the log of each) on the Z-score. To ensure a meaningful 
number of genes were randomized within each group, associations were calculated over 
deciles rather than the smaller percentile bins used earlier with MAGMA. Probabilities of 
association are calculated using the lmFit and ebayes functions from the limma package to 
enable rapid computation. We denote the set of cells studied as C such that ci represents the 
ith celltype. The original Z-scores are denoted Z such that zi is the Z-score of the ith gene 
while the randomized Z-scores are denoted R. The set of genes in the ith specificity decile of 
the controlled cell type, cx and the jth specificity decile of target cell type, cy are denoted Si, j
x, y
and thus ⋃k ∈ CSi, k
x, y contains all genes in the ith specificity decile of cell type, cx.
The basis of the approach (Supplementary Figure 23) is to randomise the Z-scores with 
respect to the specificity deciles of the target cell type, cy but not with respect to the 
specificity deciles of the controlled cell type, cx. Thus for each of the deciles indexed by i 
we randomly resampled without replacement the Z-scores such that 
Rg g ∈ ⋃k ∈ CSi, k
x, y = Zg g ∈ ⋃k ∈ CSi, k
x, y and yet Rg ≠ Zg. In practical terms, this would 
mean that if we controlled for MSN’s and targeted cortical interneurons, the mean Z-score in 
the 10th MSN decile would remain the same but would be different in cortical interneurons; 
the question being tested is the degree to which this equates to total randomisation in terms 
of the schizophrenia association found in cortical interneurons.
The baseline association values shown in Figure 4a leftmost column (described as 
PcelltypeY,baseline) were calculated using Z. The values of PcelltypeY,celltypeX (probability of 
cell type y being associated with schizophrenia controlling for cell type x) are calculated 
using intermediate probabilities: 10,000 association p-values are calculated for resampled 
values of R. We selected the 500th lowest of these p-values (equivalent to the value which 
the baseline association probability would need to exceed to be declared independently 
associated with a probability of 95%) and denote this px, y
bootstrap. The value of 
PcelltypeY,celltypeX is then calculated as exp(log(PcelltypeY,celltypeX)-log(px, y
bootstrap)). If the 
value of PcelltypeY,celltypeX exceeds 1 (indicating that the randomised samples were actually 
more significantly associated than was found to be the case) then it is set to 1. We were also 
able to evaluate whether the probability of schizophrenia association in cell type y is greater 
than would be expected based solely on the expression in cell type x by asking whether the 
actual association p-value was lower than 95% of the bootstrapped p-values. As expected, all 
self-self comparisons were found to be non-significant by this metric (i.e. after accounting 
for expression in CA1 pyramidal neurons, CA1 pyramidal neurons are no longer 
significant). In Figure 4a, a red box was placed around the CA1 Pyramidal vs 
Skene et al.
Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Somatosensory Pyramidal square because this was the only comparison involving the four 
significantly associated cell types in which controlling for expression of a different cell type 
abolished the enrichment.
Venn diagram enrichments
The Venn diagram shown in Figure 5 was generated using by selecting the top 1000 genes 
most associated with schizophrenia based on the MAGMA gene specific Z-scores. All genes 
within the extended MHC region (chr6 25–34mb) were dropped from the analysis. We 
controlled for gene size and gene density by regressing out the effect of NSNPS and 
NDENSITY parameters (and the log of each) on the Z-score. We then took the intersection 
of the top 1000 genes with the top decile for each of the four significantly associated level 1 
cell types and generated the Venn diagram using the R VennDiagram package. The 
dopamine gene set include all genes associated with any of the following GO terms: GO:
0090494 (“dopamine uptake”), GO:0090493 (“catecholamine uptake”), GO:0051584 
(“regulation of dopamine uptake involved in synaptic transmission”), GO:0032225 
(“regulation of synaptic transmission, dopaminergic”), GO:0001963 (“synaptic transmission, 
dopaminergic”) and GO:0015872 (“dopamine transport”). The synaptic gene list comprised 
a combination of three published gene lists: the human post-synaptic density (referenced 
above); presynaptic active vesicle docking sites63 and synaptic vesicle genes62. For the 
presynaptic gene list, the data came from Supplementary table 1, the geneInfo numbers were 
converted from genInfo accessions to Refseq IDs using Entrez Batch then from Rat RefSeq 
to HGNC symbols keeping only 1:1 homologs. The synaptic vesicle gene list came from 
Supplementary table 1, and were converted from Rat RefSeq to HGNC symbols using only 
1:1 homologs. Enrichment probabilities were calculated using a hypergeometric test against 
a background set of all MGI genes with 1:1 homologs in human (as described above).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
JHL was funded by the Swedish Research Council (Vetenskapsrådet, award 2014–3863), StratNeuro, the Wellcome 
Trust (108726/Z/15/Z), and the Swedish Brain Foundation (Hjärnfonden). PFS gratefully acknowledges support 
from the Swedish Research Council (Vetenskapsrådet, award D0886501). NS was supported by the Wellcome Trust 
(108726/Z/15/Z). JB was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation. The PGC has received major 
funding from the US National Institute of Mental Health (U01 MH109528 and U01 MH109532). HG was 
supported by a Psychiatric Genomics Consortium grant (1U01MH109514–01). Primary schizophrenia GWAS data 
was generated with support from Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre (MR/L010305/1), Program Grant 
(G0800509) and Project Grant (MR/L011794/1), and funding from the European Union’s Seventh Framework 
Programme for research, technological development and demonstration under grant agreement n° 279227 
(CRESTAR Consortium).
References
1. Sullivan PF, Daly MJ & O’Donovan M Genetic architectures of psychiatric disorders: the emerging 
picture and its implications. Nature Reviews Genetics 13, 537–51 (2012).
2. Purcell SM et al. A polygenic burden of rare disruptive mutations in schizophrenia. Nature 506, 
185–90 (2014). [PubMed: 24463508] 
Skene et al.
Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3. Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. Biological insights from 
108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature 511, 421–7 (2014). [PubMed: 25056061] 
4. Fromer M et al. De novo mutations in schizophrenia implicate synaptic networks. Nature 506, 179–
84 (2014). [PubMed: 24463507] 
5. Genovese G et al. Increased burden of ultra-rare protein-altering variants among 4,877 individuals 
with schizophrenia. Nature Neuroscience 19, 1433–1441 (2016). [PubMed: 27694994] 
6. Singh T et al. Rare loss-of-function variants in SETD1A are associated with schizophrenia and 
developmental disorders. Nat Neurosci 19, 571–7 (2016). [PubMed: 26974950] 
7. Sekar A et al. Schizophrenia risk from complex variation of complement component 4. Nature 530, 
177–83 (2016). [PubMed: 26814963] 
8. CNV Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium & Schizophrenia Working Groups of 
the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. Contribution of copy number variants to schizophrenia from 
a genome-wide study of 41,321 subjects. Nat Genet 49, 27–35 (2016). [PubMed: 27869829] 
9. Finucane HK et al. Partitioning heritability by functional category using GWAS summary statistics. 
Nature Genetics 47, 1228–35 (2015). [PubMed: 26414678] 
10. Exome Aggregation Consortium et al. Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 
humans. Nature 536, 285–91 (2016). [PubMed: 27535533] 
11. Lips ES et al. Functional gene group analysis identifies synaptic gene groups as risk factor for 
schizophrenia. Molecular psychiatry 17, 996–1006 (2012). [PubMed: 21931320] 
12. Darnell JC et al. FMRP stalls ribosomal translocation on mRNAs linked to synaptic function and 
autism. Cell 146, 247–61 (2011). [PubMed: 21784246] 
13. Goudriaan A et al. Specific glial functions contribute to schizophrenia susceptibility. Schizophrenia 
bulletin 40, 925–935 (2013). [PubMed: 23956119] 
14. Fromer M et al. Gene expression elucidates functional impact of polygenic risk for schizophrenia. 
Nature Neuroscience 19, 1442–1453 (2016). [PubMed: 27668389] 
15. Pers TH et al. Comprehensive analysis of schizophrenia-associated loci highlights ion channel 
pathways and biologically plausible candidate causal genes. Hum Mol Genet 25, 1247–54 (2016). 
[PubMed: 26755824] 
16. Zeisel A et al. Cell types in the mouse cortex and hippocampus revealed by single-cell RNA-seq. 
Science 347, 1138–42 (2015). [PubMed: 25700174] 
17. Romanov RA et al. Molecular interrogation of hypothalamic organization reveals distinct 
dopamine neuronal subtypes. Nat Neurosci 20, 176–188 (2016). [PubMed: 27991900] 
18. La Manno G et al. Molecular Diversity of Midbrain Development in Mouse, Human, and Stem 
Cells. Cell 167, 566–580 e19 (2016). [PubMed: 27716510] 
19. de Leeuw CA, Mooij JM, Heskes T & Posthuma D MAGMA: generalized gene-set analysis of 
GWAS data. PLoS Comput Biol 11, e1004219 (2015). [PubMed: 25885710] 
20. Pardiñas AF et al. Common schizophrenia alleles are enriched in mutation-intolerant genes and 
maintained by background selection. Nature Genetics (In press).
21. GTEx Consortium. Human genomics. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot analysis: 
multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science 348, 648–60 (2015). [PubMed: 25954001] 
22. Finucane H et al. Heritability enrichment of specifically expressed genes identifies disease-relevant 
tissues and cell types. Nature Genetics (In press).
23. Gokce O et al. Cellular Taxonomy of the Mouse Striatum as Revealed by Single-Cell RNA-Seq. 
Cell Rep 16, 1126–37 (2016). [PubMed: 27425622] 
24. Habib N et al. Div-Seq: Single-nucleus RNA-Seq reveals dynamics of rare adult newborn neurons. 
Science 353, 925–8 (2016). [PubMed: 27471252] 
25. Tasic B et al. Adult mouse cortical cell taxonomy revealed by single cell transcriptomics. Nat 
Neurosci 19, 335–46 (2016). [PubMed: 26727548] 
26. Habib N et al. Massively parallel single-nucleus RNA-seq with DroNc-seq. Nat Methods 14, 955–
958 (2017). [PubMed: 28846088] 
27. Abdelmoez MN et al. Correlation of gene expressions between nucleus and cytoplasm reflects 
single-cell physiology. bioRxiv, 206672 (2017).
Skene et al.
Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 28. Cajigas IJ et al. The local transcriptome in the synaptic neuropil revealed by deep sequencing and 
high-resolution imaging. Neuron 74, 453–66 (2012). [PubMed: 22578497] 
29. Darmanis S et al. A survey of human brain transcriptome diversity at the single cell level. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 112, 7285–90 (2015). [PubMed: 26060301] 
30. Lake BB et al. Neuronal subtypes and diversity revealed by single-nucleus RNA sequencing of the 
human brain. Science 352, 1586–90 (2016). [PubMed: 27339989] 
31. Skene NG & Grant SG Identification of Vulnerable Cell Types in Major Brain Disorders Using 
Single Cell Transcriptomes and Expression Weighted Cell Type Enrichment. Front Neurosci 10, 
16 (2016). [PubMed: 26858593] 
32. Gaspar HA & Breen G Pathway analyses of schizophrenia GWAS focusing on known and novel 
drug targets. bioRxiv (2017).
33. Goudriaan A et al. Specific glial functions contribute to schizophrenia susceptibility. Schizophr 
Bull 40, 925–35 (2014). [PubMed: 23956119] 
34. Anttila V et al. Analysis of shared heritability in common disorders of the brain. Science (In press).
35. Lambert JC et al. Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Genet 45, 1452–8 (2013). [PubMed: 24162737] 
36. Bertram L, McQueen MB, Mullin K, Blacker D & Tanzi RE Systematic meta-analyses of 
Alzheimer disease genetic association studies: the AlzGene database. Nature genetics 39, 17–23 
(2007). [PubMed: 17192785] 
37. Patsopoulos N et al. The Multiple Sclerosis Genomic Map: Role of peripheral immune cells and 
resident microglia in susceptibility. bioRxiv (2017).
38. Yang H, Robinson PN & Wang K Phenolyzer: phenotype-based prioritization of candidate genes 
for human diseases. Nature methods 12, 841–843 (2015). [PubMed: 26192085] 
39. Burow DA et al. Dynamic regulation of mRNA decay during neural development. Neural Dev 10, 
11 (2015). [PubMed: 25896902] 
40. Psych EC et al. The PsychENCODE project. Nat Neurosci 18, 1707–12 (2015). [PubMed: 
26605881] 
41. Genomes Project, C. et al. A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature 526, 68–74 
(2015). [PubMed: 26432245] 
42. de Leeuw CA, Neale BM, Heskes T & Posthuma D The statistical properties of gene-set analysis. 
Nat Rev Genet 17, 353–64 (2016). [PubMed: 27070863] 
43. Brown MB A Method for Combining Non-Independent, One-Sided Tests of Significance. 
Biometrics 31, 987–992 (1975).
44. Lun AT, McCarthy DJ & Marioni JC A step-by-step workflow for low-level analysis of single-cell 
RNA-seq data with Bioconductor. F1000Research 5(2016).
45. Vu TN et al. Beta-Poisson model for single-cell RNA-seq data analyses. Bioinformatics 32, 2128–
2135 (2016). [PubMed: 27153638] 
46. Finucane HK et al. Partitioning heritability by functional annotation using genome-wide 
association summary statistics. Nature genetics 47, 1228–1235 (2015). [PubMed: 26414678] 
47. Okbay A et al. Genome-wide association study identifies 74 loci associated with educational 
attainment. Nature 533, 539–42 (2016). [PubMed: 27225129] 
48. Sniekers S et al. Genome-wide association meta-analysis of 78,308 individuals identifies new loci 
and genes influencing human intelligence. Nat Genet 49, 1107–1112 (2017). [PubMed: 28530673] 
49. Nalls MA et al. Large-scale meta-analysis of genome-wide association data identifies six new risk 
loci for Parkinson’s disease. Nature genetics 46, 989–993 (2014). [PubMed: 25064009] 
50. Wood AR et al. Defining the role of common variation in the genomic and biological architecture 
of adult human height. Nat Genet 46, 1173–86 (2014). [PubMed: 25282103] 
51. Paternoster R, Brame R, Mazerolle P & Piquero A Using the correct statistical test for the equality 
of regression coefficients. Criminology 36, 859–866 (1998).
52. Wagnon JL et al. CELF4 regulates translation and local abundance of a vast set of mRNAs, 
including genes associated with regulation of synaptic function. PLoS Genet 8, e1003067 (2012). 
[PubMed: 23209433] 
Skene et al.
Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 53. Collins MO et al. Molecular characterization and comparison of the components and multiprotein 
complexes in the postsynaptic proteome. J Neurochem 97 Suppl 1, 16–23 (2006). [PubMed: 
16635246] 
54. Bayes A et al. Characterization of the proteome, diseases and evolution of the human postsynaptic 
density. Nat Neurosci 14, 19–21 (2011). [PubMed: 21170055] 
55. Fernandez E et al. Targeted tandem affinity purification of PSD-95 recovers core postsynaptic 
complexes and schizophrenia susceptibility proteins. Mol Syst Biol 5, 269 (2009). [PubMed: 
19455133] 
56. Weyn-Vanhentenryck SM et al. HITS-CLIP and integrative modeling define the Rbfox splicing-
regulatory network linked to brain development and autism. Cell Rep 6, 1139–52 (2014). 
[PubMed: 24613350] 
57. Thul PJ et al. A subcellular map of the human proteome. Science 356, eaal3321 (2017). [PubMed: 
28495876] 
58. Brozzi A, Urbanelli L, Luc Germain P, Magini A & Emiliani C hLGDB: a database of human 
lysosomal genes and their regulation. Database 2013, bat024 (2013). [PubMed: 23584836] 
59. Calvo SE, Clauser KR & Mootha VK MitoCarta2. 0: an updated inventory of mammalian 
mitochondrial proteins. Nucleic acids research 44, D1251–D1257 (2015). [PubMed: 26450961] 
60. Shigeoka T et al. Dynamic axonal translation in developing and mature visual circuits. Cell 166, 
181–192 (2016). [PubMed: 27321671] 
61. Boyken J et al. Molecular profiling of synaptic vesicle docking sites reveals novel proteins but few 
differences between glutamatergic and GABAergic synapses. Neuron 78, 285–297 (2013). 
[PubMed: 23622064] 
62. Takamori S et al. Molecular anatomy of a trafficking organelle. Cell 127, 831–846 (2006). 
[PubMed: 17110340] 
63. Boyken J et al. Molecular profiling of synaptic vesicle docking sites reveals novel proteins but few 
differences between glutamatergic and GABAergic synapses. Neuron 78, 285–97 (2013). 
[PubMed: 23622064] 
Skene et al.
Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Specificity metric calculated from single cell transcriptome sequencing data can be 
used to test for increased burden of schizophrenia SNP-heritability in brain cell types.
(A) Comparison of Level 2 cell type categories and number of cells with snRNAseq or 
scRNAseq from adult brain tissue. Plum colored circles are mouse studies and blue are 
human studies. The number of different tissues is reflected in size of circle. See 
Supplementary Table 2 for citations. AIBS=Allen Institute for Brain Science. KI=Karolinska 
Institutet. (B) Histogram of specificity metric (SMSN,KI) for medium spiny neurons from the 
KI superset level 1. Colored regions indicate deciles (the brown region contains the genes 
most specific to MSNs). Specificity value for dopamine receptor D2 (Drd2, 
SMSN,KI,Drd2=0.17) is indicated by the arrow. (C) Schematic highlighting the brain regions 
sampled in the KI dataset in blue (D) Specificity values in the KI level 1 dataset for a range 
of known cell type markers. (E) Enrichment of schizophrenia SNP-heritability in each of the 
specificity deciles for medium spiny neurons (calculated using LDSC). Color of dots 
corresponds to regions of the specificity matrix in B. Error bars indicate the 95% confidence 
intervals. The light blue dot (marked ‘X’) represents all SNPs which map onto named 
transcripts which are not MGI annotated genes or which map onto a gene which does not 
have a 1:1 mouse:human homolog. The dark blue dot (marked ‘N’) represents all SNPs 
which map onto genes not expressed in MSNs. Blue line slows the linear regression slope 
fitted to the enrichment values. (F) Enrichment of height SNP-heritability in each of the 
specificity deciles for MSNs.
Skene et al.
Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Evaluation of enrichment of common variant CLOZUK schizophrenia GWA results in 
the KI brain scRNAseq dataset from mouse.
(A) KI Level 1 brain cell types. Both LDSC and MAGMA show enrichment for pyramidal 
neurons (somatosensory cortex and hippocampus CA1), striatal medium spiny neurons, and 
cortical interneurons. The black line is the Bonferroni significance threshold (0.05/
((24+149)*8). (B) Heat map of association pvalues of diverse human GWA with KI Level 1 
mouse brain cell types using MAGMA (left panel) and LDSC (right panel). Bonferroni 
significant results are marked with red borders (0.05/((24+149)*8). Total number of cases 
and controls used in the GWAS are shown in the top bar plots, where numbers in red 
indicate the amount of genome-wide significant loci identified. The CLOZUK results do not 
generalize indiscriminately across human diseases/traits. In the more sensitive MAGMA 
analysis major depressive disorder (MDD) is primarily enriched in cortical interneurons and 
embryonic midbrain neurons, unlike schizophrenia. Similar but non-significant trends can be 
observed using LDSC.
Skene et al.
Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Comparison of single-cell and single-nuclei RNAseq, and evaluation of enrichment of 
common variant CLOZUK schizophrenia GWA results in brain single-nuclei RNAseq datasets 
from adult human.
(A) Each bar represents a comparison between two datasets (X vs Y), with the bootstrapped 
Z-scores representing the extent to which dendritically enriched transcripts28 have lower 
specificity for pyramidal neurons in dataset Y relative to X. Larger Z-scores indicate greater 
depletion of dendritically enriched transcripts, and red bars indicate a statistically significant 
depletion. Supplementary Table 2 describes the studies. (B) Human mid-temporal cortex 
brain cell type enrichment. Cortical pyramidal neurons and cortical interneurons show 
significant enrichment. Oligodendrocyte precursors also show enrichment that was not 
observed in the KI Level 1 data. The black line is the Bonferroni significance threshold (6×8 
comparisons). (C) Human prefrontal cortex and hippocampus brain cell type enrichments 
from26. These data show enrichment in cortical and hippocampal glutamatergic (i.e., 
pyramidal and granule) cells. There is also an enrichment in cortical interneurons with the 
highest level in Reln/Vip cells. The black line is the Bonferroni significance threshold (15×8 
comparisons). (D) Heat map of enrichment of diverse human GWA studies with human mid-
temporal cortex Level 1 brain cell types using MAGMA and LDSC. The CLOZUK results 
do not generalize across human diseases. MDD again shows significant enrichments in 
cortical interneurons. Common variant genetic associations for Alzheimer’s disease were 
enriched in microglia. Bonferroni significant results are marked with red borders.
Skene et al.
Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Cell type enrichment of gene sets associated with schizophrenia, neurological disorders, 
and the evolutionary divergence between human and mouse.
(A) Antipsychotic medication targets. (B-F) Gene sets previously shown to be enriched for 
schizophrenia SNP-heritability. (B) Genes intolerant to loss-of-function variation. (C) 
Synaptic gene sets. (D) Gene sets mediating DNA or RNA interactions. (E) Gene sets 
associated with neurological disorders. (F) The top 500 genes with lowest or highest dN/dS 
ratios between human and mouse (i.e., non-synonymous to synonymous exon changes). The 
Level 1 cell types associated with schizophrenia (MSNs, pyramidal CA1, pyramidal SS, and 
cortical interneurons) show enrichment in A-D but neurological diseases do not. Asterisks 
denote Benjamini–Hochberg corrected p-value <0.05 calculated using EWCE.
Skene et al.
Page 23
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. CA1 pyramidal neurons, medium spiny neurons, and cortical Interneurons are 
independently associated with schizophrenia and distinct molecular pathways contribute to each 
cell type.
(A) Conditional enrichment analysis accounting for correlated gene expression between cell 
types. The left column shows baseline cell type enrichment probabilities values for 
schizophrenia calculated by fitting a linear model to specificity deciles against MAGMA 
gene enrichment Z-scores. The central four columns show the enrichment probabilities 
calculated using bootstrapping to control for correlated expression in other cell types; these 
probabilities approaching zero indicate that after accounting for expression of the other cell 
type, there is no enrichment remaining. The red box highlights that there is no longer 
enrichment in somatosensory pyramidal neurons after accounting for expression in CA1 
pyramidal neurons; however, the converse is not true. The bar plot on the right shows the 
minimum value of the conditional probabilities (excluding self-self-comparisons). (B) 
Overlap of genes in the schizophrenia-associated cell types. Venn-diagram of the top 1,000 
schizophrenia-associated genes from the highest enrichment-deciles in the four Level 1 cell 
types. (C) Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-values for hypergeometric enrichment of genes 
in Figure 5b. We note enrichment for Rbfox in CA1 pyramidal cells, Mir137 targets and 
dopamine signaling in MSNs, along with shared synaptic genes between pyramidal cells but 
separate for GABAergic cells. Areas with striped shading indicates region with gene number 
<10.
Skene et al.
Page 24
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2019 April 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
