 Convergent Science Physical Oncology
PAPER
Clonal diversity revealed by morphoproteomic and
copy number profiles of single prostate cancer
cells at diagnosis
To cite this article: Paymaneh D Malihi et al 2018 Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 015003
 
View the article online for updates and enhancements.
Recent citations
Multiplex protein detection on circulating
tumor cells from liquid biopsies using
imaging mass cytometry
Erik Gerdtsson et al
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 77.173.35.219 on 03/06/2019 at 16:50
 © 2018 IOP Publishing Ltd
Introduction
Despite early detection and aggressive intervention, 
prostate cancer (PCa) is the third-leading cause of 
death among men in United States, with an estimated 
160 000 new cases and approximately 26 000 annual 
deaths in 2017 [1, 2]. Multiple therapeutic agents 
have been shown to improve overall survival in end-
stage metastatic castrate-resistant PCa (mCRPC). 
Additionally, recent clinical trials have provided 
evidence that use of combination therapies, including 
docetaxel, with first-line androgen deprivation 
therapy (ADT), significantly increases overall survival 
in de novo metastatic patients [3, 4]. However, not all 
Clonal diversity revealed by morphoproteomic and copy number 
profiles of single prostate cancer cells at diagnosis
Paymaneh D Malihi1, Michael Morikado1, Lisa Welter1, Sandy T Liu2, Eric T Miller2, Radu M Cadaneanu2, 
Beatrice S Knudsen3, Michael S Lewis4, Anders Carlsson1, Carmen Ruiz Velasco1 , Anand Kolatkar1, 
Mariam Rodriguez-Lee1, Isla P Garraway2,4,5, James Hicks1 and Peter Kuhn1
1 USC Michelson Center for Convergent Biosciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
2 Department of Urology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
3 Departments of Biomedical Sciences and Pathology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
4 Greater Los Angeles VA Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
5 Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
E-mail: pmalihi@usc.edu (P Malihi), pkuhn@usc.edu (P Kuhn), igarraway@mednet.ucla.edu (I P Garraway), Beatrice.Knudsen@
cshs.org (B S Knudsen), EricMiller@mednet.ucla.edu (E T Miller), STLiu@mednet.ucla.edu (S T Liu), ruizvela@usc.edu (C R Velasco), 
kolatkar@usc.edu (A Kolatkar), lisawelt@usc.edu (L Welter), mariamro@usc.edu (M Rodriguez-Lee), morikado@usc.edu  
(M Morikado), jameshic@usc.edu (J Hicks), RCadaneanu@mednet.ucla.edu (R M Cadaneanu), michaellewis05@gmail.com  
(M S Lewis) and ncarlsso@usc.edu (A Carlsson)
Keywords: prostate cancer, tumor heterogeneity, metastatic tumor cells, liquid biopsies, circulating tumor cells, high definition single cell 
analysis (HD-SCA)
Abstract
Tumor heterogeneity is prevalent in both treatment-naïve and end-stage metastatic castration-
resistant prostate cancer (PCa), and may contribute to the broad range of clinical presentation, 
treatment response, and disease progression. To characterize molecular heterogeneity associated 
with de novo metastatic PCa, multiplatform single cell profiling was performed using high definition 
single cell analysis (HD-SCA). HD-SCA enabled morphoproteomic and morphogenomic profiling 
of single cells from touch preparations of tissue cores (prostate and bone marrow biopsies) as well 
as liquid samples (peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirate). Morphology, nuclear features, copy 
number alterations, and protein expression were analyzed. Tumor cells isolated from prostate tissue 
touch preparation (PTTP) and bone marrow touch preparation (BMTP) as well as metastatic tumor 
cells (MTCs) isolated from bone marrow aspirate were characterized by morphology and cytokeratin 
expression. Although peripheral blood was examined, circulating tumor cells were not definitively 
observed. Targeted proteomics of PTTP, BMTP, and MTCs revealed cell lineage and luminal prostate 
epithelial differentiation associated with PCa, including co-expression of EpCAM, PSA, and PSMA. 
Androgen receptor expression was highest in MTCs. Hallmark PCa copy number alterations, 
including PTEN and ETV6 deletions and NCOA2 amplification, were observed in cells within the 
primary tumor and bone marrow biopsy samples. Genomic landscape of MTCs revealed to be a 
mix of both primary and bone metastatic tissue. This multiplatform analysis of single cells reveals 
several clonal origins of metastatic PCa in a newly diagnosed, untreated patient with polymetastatic 
disease. This case demonstrates that real-time molecular profiling of cells collected through prostate 
and bone marrow biopsies is feasible and has the potential to elucidate the origin and evolution 
of metastatic tumor cells. Altogether, biological and genomic data obtained through longitudinal 
biopsies can be used to reveal the properties of PCa and can impact clinical management.
PAPER
RECEIVED  
26 September 2017
REVISED  
30 November 2017
ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION  
8 December 2017
PUBLISHED  
16 January 2018
https://doi.org/10.1088/2057-1739/aaa00b
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 2
P D Malihi et al
patients respond to combination therapy, and it is 
unknown whether or not the efficacy of combinatorial 
approaches can be optimized based upon biological 
and genomic features of the tumor.
Intra-patient spatiotemporal molecular profil-
ing has the potential to provide treatment response 
signatures, insight into heterogeneity, and prognos-
tic information for patients with metastatic PCa. 
While primary tumor and metastasis biopsies provide 
information about tumor type, grade, and pathologi-
cal features, information on heterogeneity, clonality, 
and the likelihood of treatment response is limited. 
In contrast, liquid biopsies provide access to circulat-
ing tumor cells (CTCs) from routine peripheral blood 
(PB) samples, disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) or 
metastatic tumor cells (MTCs) from the bone mar-
row aspirates (BMA), and cell-free DNA (cfDNA) [5]. 
DTCs and MTCs describe two different clinical stages 
in PCa. DTCs describe tumor cells present in bone 
marrow of a patient without clinical bone metastatic 
whereas MTCs are tumor cells found in bone marrow 
of a patient with clinical bone metastasis [5]. Compre-
hensive analysis of these specimens will provide an in 
depth assessment of tumor heterogeneity and clonal-
ity and may lead to improved prognostication and pre-
diction of treatment efficacy. Many new technological 
advances allow for high-resolution single cell analysis 
and when combined with rare cell detection, provide 
clinical insights that may impact clinical management.
We have previously developed and technically 
validated the high definition single cell analysis (HD-
SCA) workflow for enumeration, morphoproteomic, 
and morphogenomic characterization of rare cells in 
order to identify and quantify cellular heterogeneity 
[5–9, 18]. The workflow utilizes single-cell profiling 
to characterize CTCs, DTCs, and MTCs followed by 
genomic and proteomic characterization that can be 
correlated with morphology data [6, 7, 10]. CfDNA 
extraction from a liquid biopsy prior to HD-SCA sam-
ple processing allows for genomic assessment of cir-
culating tumor DNA (ctDNA) found in both PB and 
BMA. The same multiplatform single-cell analysis can 
be used not only for liquid biopsy samples, but also for 
genomic and proteomic characterization of primary 
and metastatic tissue preparation [9]. Additionally, 
as demonstrated by our recently published data, the 
HD-SCA platform can be adapted to the fluid form of 
BMA, allowing characterization and comparison of 
circulatory and bone marrow cancer cells [5]. Carlsson 
et al demonstrated the value of non-guided BMA as a 
feasible and cost-effective procedure for longitudinal 
sampling during cancer progression and treatment 
similar to current clinical practice in the liquid malig-
nancies [11].
In this report, we used the HD-SCA workflow to 
characterize cancer cells in a patient with newly diag-
nosed de novo polymetastatic PCa. Single-cell mor-
phoproteomic and morphogenomic analysis allowed 
direct comparison of solid phase primary and meta-
static tissue tumor cells with those extracted from liq-
uid biopsies. The clinical utility of liquid biopsy (CTC, 
DTC, MTC, and/or ctDNA) lies in the ability to illu-
minate indicators of treatment response/resistance 
that may guide therapeutic selection. This report dem-
onstrates that genomic and proteomic data collected 
from the HD-SCA workflow provides information 
on heterogeneity, clonality, and marker expression 
that may influence prognostication and treatment 
response in patients harboring lethal PCa.
Material and methods
Specimen collection and HD-SCA sample 
preparation
The patient is a 73 year-old African–American male 
diagnosed with de novo polymetastatic PCa via 
prostate needle biopsy (PNBX) within the Greater 
Los Angeles Veterans’ Affairs Healthcare System. PB 
and bone marrow aspiration/biopsy were collected 
at the time of diagnostic PNBX and placed into 
10 ml cfDNA BCT Streck tubes (STRECK, Omaha, 
USA, Cat#62790315). Approximately 12 prostate 
tissue cores were obtained in a random fashion from 
the right and left base, mid-gland, and apex under 
transrectal ultrasound guidance. Prostate tissue 
touch preparation (PTTP) was performed with each 
biopsy core by gentle rolling onto glass slides prior to 
formalin fixation and paraffin embedding (FFPE). 
A standard percutaneous bone marrow biopsy and 
aspiration were performed at the right posterior iliac 
crest. The bone marrow core was gently rolled onto a 
glass slide to prepare bone marrow touch preparation 
(BMTP). Samples were shipped overnight to the Kuhn 
laboratory at the University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA. Upon arrival of PB and BMA 
samples in Streck tubes, red blood cells were lysed, 
and remaining cells were plated on a custom-made 
adhesive glass slide (Marienfeld, Lauda-Königshofen, 
Germany) as a monolayer of 3.0  ×  106 nucleated cells 
[5]. Unstained slides were covered with coverslips and 
stored at  −80 °C before analysis (figure 1). All touch 
preparation slides were air dried, blocked with 7% BSA 
in PBS, and stored in  −80 °C until processing.
Detailed sample processing procedures have been 
described previously [7]. Briefly, two slides per sam-
ple were stained using four fluorescent markers. Cell 
nuclei were identified using DAPI (4′,6-Diamidino-
2-Phenylindole, Dihydrochloride, Cat#D1306, Inv-
itrogen, Waltham, MA). Epithelial cells were iden-
tified using a mix of cytokeratin (CK) 19 (1:100; 
Dako, Carpinteria, USA, Cat#M0888) and pan-CK 
antibodies (1:100; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA, 
Cat#C2562) with an Alexa Fluor 555 secondary anti-
body (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA, Cat#A21127). An 
anti-CD45 Alexa Fluor 647–conjugated antibody 
(1:125; Biorad, Hercules, USA, Cat#MCA87A647X) 
was used as a leukocyte exclusion marker. An androgen 
receptor (AR) rabbit monoclonal antibody (1:250; Cell 
 
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 3
P D Malihi et al
Signaling Technology, Danvers, USA, Cat#5153) 
and Alexa Fluor 488 secondary antibody (Invitrogen, 
Carlsbad, USA, Cat#A11034) were used for evalua-
tion of AR levels in cells [5, 10] (figure 1).
Candidate cell imaging and morphological analysis
PB and BMA slides were imaged at 10×  magnification 
using 
automated 
high-throughput 
microscopy. 
Candidate cells were computationally identified and 
semi-manually classified using morphology and 
DAPI+/CK+/CD45− expression criteria as previously 
established (figure 1) [12, 13]. PTTP and BMTP were 
manually imaged at 10×  and 40×  magnification. 
AR expression and localization were reviewed and 
quantified using average fluorescent intensity within 
a fixed-size circle centered around the cell [14]. The 
threshold for AR positivity was defined as a signal 
more than 6 standard deviations over the mean signal 
intensity (SDOM) observed in the surroundings 
leukocytes (background). For morphometric analysis 
of candidate cells, nuclear area and nuclear circularity 
was measured using DAPI intensity within a fixed-
size circle centered around the cell using image object 
features from the EBImage R package [15].
Single-cell next-generation sequencing and analysis
Single cells from PB, BMA, PTTP, and BMTP were 
isolated and underwent genomic amplification 
as previously described [16, 17] (figure 2(a)). In 
short, tumor cells were isolated off the slides using 
a robotic micromanipulator system and placed in 
individual tubes for whole genome amplification 
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA, Cat#WGA4). 
Prior to cell capture, PTTP and BMTP slides 
were incubated with dispase type II (1:1000; 
ThermoFisher, Waltham, USA, Cat#17105041) 
and collagenase (1:1000; ThermoFisher, Waltham, 
USA, Cat#17018029) in PBS at 37 °C for 30 min. 
PTTP and BMTP slides were washed with PBS 
twice for 3 min, and individual cells or cell clusters 
from PTTP and BMTP were isolated and extracted 
in the same manner. Following DNA purification, 
50 ng of DNA was sonicated to 200 bp fragments in 
AFA fiber pre-slit snap-cap microtubes (Covaris, 
Woburn, USA, Cat# 520077) with the Covaris S2 
using the following setting: intensity of 5, 10% duty 
cycle, 200 cycles per burst, 3 min treatment time, and 
temperature less than 7 °C. Sonicated DNA was used 
for library construction with the DNA Ultra Library 
Prep Kit and Multiplex Oligos for Illumina (New 
England Biolabs, Ipswich, USA, Cat#E7370 and 
E7600). Copy number alteration (CNA) profiles and 
heatmaps were created as previously described, with 
R unsupervised hierarchical clustering using the 
Ward method and Euclidian distance to distinguish 
subclones [16, 17].
Figure 1. HD-SCA platform for morphoproteogenomic profiling of liquid biopsy. PB and BMA samples are initially spun down 
for plasma extraction. Next, they undergo red blood cell lysis before plating approximately 3 million nucleated cells on each slide. 
Prepared slides are stored at  −80 °C until needed for fluorescent antibody staining. Stained slides are first morphometrically 
profiled using automated digital microscopy at 10  ×  magnification, followed by classification by a technical analyst. Identified 
tumor cells are then re-imaged at 40  ×  magnification and proceed for genomic CNA or targeted protein analysis via imaging mass 
cytometry.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 4
P D Malihi et al
CfDNA next-generation sequencing and analysis
PB and BMA were fractionated by centrifugation at 
2000 g for 10 min at RT, 2 ml of plasma were collected 
from each sample, and the removed plasma volume 
was reconstituted to its original concentration with 
1  ×  PBS. Plasma was spun at 14 000 g for 10 min 
at RT and supernatant was stored at  −80 °C for 
future analysis. CfDNA was extracted with the 
QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit (Qiagen, 
Hilden, Germany, Cat# 55114) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. Illumina libraries were 
constructed from 5 ng cfDNA using the NEBNext 
Ultra II DNA Library Prep Kit and Multiplex Oligos for 
Illumina according to the manufacturer’s instructions 
(New England Biolabs, Ipswich, USA, Cat#E7370 
and E7600) as seen in figure 2(a). CNA profiles were 
created as described under single-cell next-generation 
sequencing and analysis.
Single-cell targeted proteomic analysis
Previously identified candidate cells from BMA, 
PTTP, and BMTP slides were subjected to protein 
analysis using Fluidigm Hyperion Imaging System 
(IMC) (Fluidigm, San Francisco, USA). Slides were 
washed in PBS to remove cell media before secondary 
staining. Slides were stained with 21 markers out of 
the 40 available channels to detect the expression of 
leukocyte, epithelial, endothelial, and prostate cell 
protein markers (table 2). Slides were blocked using 
1% BSA with 0.2 mg ml−1 mouse IgG Fc fragment 
(Thermofisher, Waltham, USA, Cat#31205) in PBS 
for 60 min at 37 °C. The MaxPar™ metal-labeled 
antibody cocktail was prepared in 0.1% Tween and 
1% BSA in PBS with antibodies from Fluidigm 
according to the manufacturer’s dilutions. Antibody 
cocktail was added to each slide for 90 min at room 
temperature and washed with PBS twice for 3 min. 
IR-193 DNA intercalator (Fluidigm, San Francisco, 
USA, Cat#201192 A) was added to slides for 30 min 
at room temperature. Slides were washed with PBS 
twice for 3 min and dipped in ddH2O for 5 s to remove 
salt. Slides were dried for 2 h and stored at room 
temperature until IMC runs [18].
Laser ablation with time-of-flight detection and 
analysis was performed using the IMC as seen in 
 
figure 2(b). A 400 µm  ×  400 µm region of interest 
around each cell of interest was ablated aerosolizing a 
1 µm2 area/pulse (200 Hz), followed by ionization and 
quantification in the CyTOF Helios instrument. Ion 
mass data were collected, resulting in the construction 
of 1 µm2 resolution images depicting the tumor cells 
of interest and surrounding white blood cells (WBC) 
as reference. For BMA, this section encompasses the 
MTC of interest and the surrounding WBCs totaling 
approximately 500 cells. For BMTP and PTTP, the 
ablated area contained hundreds to thousands of cells, 
depending on cell density and the size of the imprint.
A four-level scoring system was developed where 
0 is below limit of detection (LOD), 1 is at LOD, 
and 2–3 is above. The LOD for each marker was set 
as equal to signal to noise ratio (S/N)  ⩾  3 or stand-
ard deviation of mean (SDOM)  >  3.3. A score of 1 
was given to cells exceeding the LOD, a score of 2 was 
given to signals with S/N of 7–20 or SDOM  >  6, and 
finally a score of 3 was assigned to signals of S/N  >  20 
or SDOM  >  12.
Figure 2. (a) Single cell and cfDNA genomic preparation for next-generation sequencing and CNA analysis. Single cells are 
extracted from slides with a robotic micromanipulator prior to whole genome amplification and DNA purification followed by 
Illumina DNA library preparation for sequencing. CfDNA is extracted from plasma and Illumina DNA libraries are constructed 
similarly to single cells. CNA profiles are created using the human genome as reference where copy number is calculated then 
displayed as the ratio to the median. (b) Targeted proteomic analysis via IMC. Slides previously labeled with fluorescent antibodies 
are stained with 21 metal-conjugated antibodies. Regions of interest are laser ablated with plasma ionization and ions are detection 
using Cytometry by Time of Flight (CyTOF) technology. Rasterized images are generated from ion count data, and protein 
expression on tumor cells are scored for expression levels.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 5
P D Malihi et al
Results and discussion
Single cell morphometric analysis of identified 
tumor cells
To examine intra-patient heterogeneity at time of 
diagnosis, samples were collected from a patient 
with de novo polymetastatic PCa. During a routine 
examination in 2016, the patient was found to have an 
elevated serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) level of 
234 ng ml−1, which triggered a diagnostic workup for 
PCa. A bone scan demonstrated widespread metastatic 
disease involving skull, bilateral ribs, multilevel lumbar 
spine, and pelvic bone. Diagnostic PNBX revealed high-
grade PCa with a Gleason score of 8 (4  +  4) in 9 of 12 
biopsy cores. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining 
of FFPE PNBX and bone marrow biopsy core revealed 
adenocarcinoma that expressed AR and PSA (figure 3).
For the HD-SCA workflow, PB, BMA, and bone 
marrow tissue (BMT) were collected at the time of 
PNBX. Following processing and staining as described 
in Materials and Methods, we identified and cat-
egorized candidate cells from PB and BMA using a 
semi-automated reporting system. Candidate cells 
were evaluated based on DAPI+/CK+/CD45− criteria 
and marked as CTCs in PB and MTCs in BMA [6, 7]. 
Enumeration of tumor cells revealed a high count of 
MTCs and lack of CTCs. Counts for CTCs in PB and 
MTCs in BMA were 0 cells ml−1 and 3673 cells ml−1, 
respectively (figure 4(a)). The HD-SCA threshold for 
a positive sample is  ⩾1 cell per case based on previous 
studies, making BMA positive for this patient [23, 24]. 
MTCs were detected as both single cells and clusters of 
2–5 cells (25%), 6–10 cells (3%), and 11  +  cells (1%) 
(figure 4(a)).
Figure 3. IHC staining of FFPE PT from diagnostic PNBX and BMT from bone marrow biopsy. IHC staining for AR and PSA were 
performed on both PT and BMT samples. Samples were imaged using a light microscope at 10 and 20×  objective. Staining results 
were reported as positive or negative for each marker.
Figure 4. (a) MTC enumeration in BMA. Total counts are reflected by cluster group size. The y-axis reflects the number of cells 
within each cluster group and the x-axis reflects each cluster group category including single cells, cluster of 2 cells, cluster of 3–5 
cells, cluster of 6–10 cells, and clusters of 11 and more cells. Overall, 3673 cells ml−1 were detected in BMA. (b) AR expression 
heterogeneity in MTCs. Each row shows both composite and individual DAPI, CK, CD45, and AR channel for each cell. DAPI is 
shown in blue, CK in red, AR in white, and CD45 in green. AR expression was located in the nucleus in both single cells and cell 
clusters despite differences in expression levels. Other single cells or cell clusters had no AR at all, showing heterogeneity in MTCs.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 6
P D Malihi et al
AR expression was observed in both BMTP and 
PTTP via IHC analysis (figure 3). Single-cell mor-
phometric analysis of MTCs revealed AR expres-
sion localized to the nucleus (figure 4(b)). Despite 
observed heterogeneity in AR expression, AR staining 
was confined to the nucleus as expected, regardless 
of expression levels (figure 4(b)). To further confirm 
nuclear localization, detailed confocal images were 
acquired (figure 5(a)). We observed marked heteroge-
neity across MTCs in nuclear area, nuclear circularity, 
CK stain intensity SDOM, and AR expression SDOM 
(figure 5(b)), revealing several MTC subclones. Col-
lectively, these data demonstrate that tumor heteroge-
neity can be detected at a morphometric level using 
measurements such as protein expression and nuclear 
features.
Single cell and cfDNA genomic analysis using CNA
To explore tumor heterogeneity on a molecular level, 
we selected a total of 73 single cells for CNA analysis 
from 3 sample types: BMA (n  =  22), BMTP (n  =  17), 
and PTTP (n  =  32). This analysis included WBC as 
controls (2 from BMA). CNA profiles of tumor cells in 
prostate tissue (PT) and BMT showed prostate-specific 
alterations across the genome as well as clonality, which 
we analyzed further (figure 6). Table 1 summarizes all 
observed alterations with their frequency in MTCs, 
BMTP, and PTTP and their function and implications 
in cancer. We define clonality as two or more cells that 
share two or more genomic alterations. Alterations 
of tumor suppressor genes such as PTEN, RB1, 
and TP53 have been shown to contribute to tumor 
and metastatic development as well as invasiveness 
 
Figure 5. (a) Confocal images of MTCs. Nuclear localization and heterogeneity of AR expression are shown in three different 
clusters of MTCs. DAPI is shown in blue, CK in red, AR in white, and CD45 in green. Some clusters were entirely AR-positive or 
AR-negative while others presented mixed expression within the cluster. (b) Morphometric analysis of MTCs in BMA. A wide range 
of nuclear area, nuclear circularity, CK intensity SDOM, and AR intensity SDOM was displayed, highlighting the ability to detect 
tumor heterogeneity through morphometric measurements. The distribution of cells is shown along the y-axis for nuclear area, 
nuclear circularity, CK intensity SDOM, and AR intensity SDOM.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 7
P D Malihi et al
[19, 20]. PTEN deletion was observed in 77% (17/22) 
and 34% (11/32) of MTCs and PTTP, respectively. 
Partial chromosome 13 loss was observed in 23% 
(4/17) of BMTP, resulting in at least hemizygous loss 
of RB1. TP53 loss was observed in 68% (15/22) of 
MTCs and 82% (14/17) of BMTP. No TP53 deletion 
was observed in PT; thus, TP53 loss may have been 
acquired after the cancer cells left the PT and settled 
in the BM. Research has shown that in the absence of 
or dysregulation of TP53, DNA damage and spindle 
damage occur, resulting in polyploidy in tumor cells 
[21]. 64% (14/22) of MTCs have four copies of each 
chromosome and are thus polyploid. Regardless of this 
increase in DNA content, they remain clonal and share 
common alterations with the rest of the tumor cells.
Genomic alterations affecting DNA repair path-
ways like ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CDK2, and MLH1 
have been shown to affect sensitivity to platinum-based 
treatment in metastatic PCa patients [22]. Invest-
igation of these alterations in this patient revealed 
genomic changes in DNA repair pathway genes. 
Deletions affecting ATM were found in 77% (17/22), 
94% (16/17), and 47% (15/32) of MTCs, BMTP, and 
PTTP, respectively. Next, we investigated BRCA1 and 
detected a deletion in 9% (2/22), 29% (5/17), and 9% 
(3/32) of MTCs, BMTP, and PTTP, respectively. We 
found partial chromosome 13 loss in 23% (4/17) of 
BMTP, resulting in at least hemizygous loss of BRCA2. 
CDK2 gene deletions were also detected at frequencies 
of 36% (8/22), 23% (4/17), and 9% (3/32) of MTCs, 
BMTP, and PTTP, respectively. MLH1 deletion was 
only detected in BMTP and PTTP at frequencies of 2% 
(3/17) and 19% (6/32), respectively. Collectively, these 
data demonstrate multiple genomic alterations associ-
ated with DNA damage repair. These alterations were 
identified in a subset of tumor cells and required sin-
gle-cell analysis for detection. Furthermore, we found 
the frequency of tumor cells harboring genomic aber-
rations to be increased in bone marrow tumor cells 
relative to prostate resident cells. This genomic hetero-
geneity and low frequency of alterations would have 
been overlooked in bulk analysis, demonstrating the 
power of single-cell sequencing.
Next, we focused on PCa specific alterations, such 
as in chromosome Xq12 where the AR gene resides. 
We did not observe focal amplification of the AR gene 
locus in any sample but noted a whole-chromosome 
gain of the X chromosome in 6% (1/17) and 3% (1/32) 
Figure 6. Heatmap and phylogenic tree of CNAs across the entire population of cells from MTC, PTTP, and BMTP. Sample type and 
clones are identified using color key. Three clones were identified: clone 1 consisting of prostate cells with hallmark alterations, clone 
2 with few CNAs, and clone 3 of bone marrow specimens with additional alterations from that of clone 1. Key genes such as MYC, 
NCOA2, PTEN, and TP53 are highlighted by chromosome location across clone and sample type.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 8
P D Malihi et al
of BMTP and PTTP, respectively. In addition, NCOA2 
(AR co-regulator) amplification was detected in 68% 
(15/22), 100% (17/17), and 28% (9/32) of MTCs, 
BMTP, and PTTP, respectively [20]. MYC amplifi-
cation was observed in 12% (2/17) and 3% (1/32) of 
BMTP and PTTP, respectively [20]. All cells with MYC 
amplification have NCOA2 amplification as well. Con-
sistent with published data showing that NCOA2 and 
MYC on 8q13 and 8q24 function as driver oncogenes, 
we observed an increased frequency of amplifications 
of these genes in MTCs compared to primary tumors 
[20, 23]. Thus, our observation of AR expression in 
MTCs and BMTP is likely linked to NCOA2 and MYC 
gene amplification in a majority of these cells. AR 
Table 1. Summary of observed CNAs. Gene functions, alteration types, and implications are displayed with the frequencies of occurrence 
in MTCs, BMTP, and PTTP.
Gene
Function
Type of  
alteration
MTCs
BMTP
PTTP
Implications
PTEN
Tumor  
suppressor
Deletion
77%  
(17/22)
0%  
(0/17)
34%  
(11/32)
Increased cell proliferation and 
reduced cell death due to dysfunction 
in cell cycle regulation
RB1
Tumor  
suppressor
Hemizygous  
Deletion
0%  
(0/22)
23%  
(4/17)
0%  
(0/32)
Excessive cell growth due to 
 
dysregulation of cell cycle  
inhibition
TP53
Tumor  
suppressor
Deletion
68%  
(15/22)
82%  
(14/17)
0% (0/32) Dysfunction in DNA repair activation, 
cell cycle inhibition, activation of 
apoptosis and senescence response to 
short telomeres
ATM
Coordinates  
DNA repair
Deletion
77%  
(17/22)
94%  
(16/17)
47%  
(15/32)
Dysfunction in recognition of DNA 
damage and activation of DNA repair 
pathways
BRCA1
Tumor  
suppressor  
DNA repair
Deletion
9%  
(2/22)
29%  
(5/17)
9%  
(3/32)
Dysfunction in repairing damaged 
DNA properly. Cell can no longer 
sense DNA damage and sent appro-
priate signals
BRCA2
Tumor  
suppressor  
DNA repair
Hemizygous  
deletion
0%  
(0/22)
23%  
(4/17)
0%  
(0/32)
Dysfunction in repairing damaged 
DNA properly. BRCA2 directly binds 
DNA and interact with other protein 
to initiation strand invasion during 
repair
CDK2
Cell cycle  
regulator
Deletion
36%  
(8/22)
23%  
(4/17)
9%  
(3/32)
Dysfunction in cell cycle 
 
regulation specifically G1-S  
transition
MLH1
DNA mismatch 
repair
Deletion
0%  
(0/22)
2%  
(3/17)
19%  
(6/32)
Dysfunction in DNA specifically in 
recognition and initiation of mis-
match repair, therefore, elevating 
spontaneous mutation rate
NCOA2
Transcription  
co-regulator
Amplification
68%  
(15/22)
100%  
(17/17)
28%  
(9/32)
Upregulation of DNA expression for 
nuclear hormone receptors such as 
AR and ESR1
MYC
Transcription  
factor
Amplification
0%  
(0/22)
12%  
(2/17)
3%  
(1/32)
Upregulation of many genes involved 
in cell proliferation and cellular trans-
formation via DNA over-replication
NKX3.1
Tumor  
suppressor
Deletion
73%  
(16/22)
94%  
(16/17)
50%  
(16/32)
As a transcription factor with critical 
function in prostate development 
NKX3.1 deletion results in increase 
prostate epithelial cell growth
AR
Transcription  
factor
Amplification
0%  
(0/22)
0%  
(0/17)
0%  
(0/32)
As a transcription factor, AR amplifi-
cation results in DNA over expression 
of genes such as IGFR and PSA that 
promote cell proliferation
ETV6
Transcription  
factor
Deletion
45%  
(10/22)
41% (7/17)
6%  
(2/32)
As a transcription factor it interacts 
with DNA to mostly inhibit transcrip-
tion of its target genes that regulate 
both differentiation and cell growth
polyploidy
—
Numerical  
change in a  
whole set of  
chromosomes
64%  
(14/22)
0%  
(0/17)
0%  
(0/32)
Polyploidy occurs due to abnormal 
cell division and have associated with 
TP53 deletion
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 9
P D Malihi et al
plays a major role in disease initiation as well as pro-
gression and is a target of first-line therapy in PCa. AR 
overexpression in PCa is well documented, and AR 
gene amplification or mutation are linked to castra-
tion-resistant PCa, which is believed to be a result of 
treatment pressure as opposed to natural disease evo-
lution [20, 24]. Consequently, samples collected from a 
metastatic hormone-naïve PCa patient may present a 
higher expression of AR but not a genomic amplifica-
tion, as seen here.
Other alterations observed include a loss in ERCC3, 
a DNA helicase that is involved in DNA damage repair. 
Studies have shown that an age-related decline in this 
gene leads to declining repair capacity in cells and may 
lead to development of cancer [25]. The gain in NFκB2 
observed in this patient has been demonstrated to con-
tribute to tumorigenesis by uncoupling the normal 
mode of regulation in immune regulation and inflam-
mation [26]. We also detected deletion of transcrip-
tion factor ETV6 in 45% (10/22), 41% (7/17), and 6% 
Figure 7. Cell lineage of dominant clone starting from the primary tumor. Cells in the bone marrow gained additional alterations, 
such as losses in chromosomes 1 and 17 as well as amplifications in 4q, 10q, and 14q as they evolved from PT. A subpopulation 
within the MTC was distinguished by the addition of a loss in 16p, and BMTP cell exhibited a 10p gain. Deviations from the original 
dominant population are highlighted with amplifications in red and deletions in blue. Through this analysis, the lineage of the 
cancer cells can be tracked from PT to MTCs to BMT. DAPI is shown in blue, CK in red, AR in white, and CD45 in green.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 10
P D Malihi et al
(2/32) of MTCs, BMTP, and PTTP, respectively. Stud-
ies have shown that ETV6 is deleted in 25% of PCa and 
is involved in tumor development and proliferation as 
an oncogene [27]. One of the most common forms of 
alterations in PCa is a loss of chromosome 8p encoding 
NKX3.1, a transcription factor suppressing cell growth 
in PT [28]. In this patient, NKX3.1 loss was observed in 
73% (16/22), 94% (16/17), and 50% (16/32) of MTCs, 
BMTP, and PTTPs, respectively. Other observed gene 
deletions important for PCa initiation and progres-
sion include MEEK1, KRAS, and BCL2. Amplifica-
tions of the MET tyrosine kinase, BRAF threonine/
serine kinase, and the methyltransferase and tran-
scription suppressor EZH2 were also observed across 
MTCs, BMTP, and PTTP.
Comparison of PTTP, BMA, and BMTP CNAs 
across sample types enabled construction of a phyloge-
netic tree demonstrating heterogeneity as well as com-
mon patterns of CNAs between tumor cells in prostate 
and bone marrow (figure 6). Clones of tumor cells can be 
divided into three groups: clonal cells consisting of PCa 
hallmark genomic alterations residing in the PT (clone 
1), tumor cells with a minimal number of CNAs (clone 
2), and tumor cells similar to clone 1 and with additional 
CNAs residing only in the bone marrow (clone 3).
Amplification of chromosome 10p and loss of 
chromosome 16p distinguish two subclones contained 
in clone 3. Within the primary and MTCs additional 
sub-clonal populations were identified: a subclone of 
cells with a deletion in chromosome 2, a subclone with 
focal deletions in chromosome 5, a subclone with an 
amplification in chromosome 9, and a subclone with 
a deletion in chromosome 16. This heatmap also dem-
onstrates the development of subclones just within 
prostate cells and those exclusive to the metastatic 
site. CNAs only in BM (MTCs and BMTP) included a 
deletion in chromosome 1 and amplifications in chro-
mosomes 4, 10, and 14. An alteration unique to PTTP 
included the deletion in chromosome 4.
A single dominant clone was identified in all three 
compartments (BMA, BMTP, and PTTP) and was 
traced back to a few cells (9/32) in the primary tumor 
(figure 7). Based on genomic profiles, these cells did 
not share all of the CNAs of the clonal BM population 
(figure 6). At its origin in the primary tumor, the clonal 
population included losses in chromosomes 8p, 10, 
11q, and 14q. MTCs in the BM descending from this 
clone gained additional alterations such as amplifica-
tions in 4q, 10q, and 14q as well as losses in 1p and 17p. 
In addition, MTCs from the BM aspirate gained addi-
tional alterations seen in the BM biopsy, such as gain 
in 10p. These changes can be tracked from PT to BMT. 
Further examination revealed subclones in the PTTP 
cells that have developed independently; for example, 
Figure 8. CNA profile comparison of PB and BMA ctDNA to MTCs and BMTP cells. Genomic alterations in cfDNA analysis match 
CNA of domianant clonal poplation in BMTP and MTCs. Common amplifications across profile types are highlighted in red while 
common deletions are shown in blue.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 11
P D Malihi et al
Table 2. Targets and descriptions of 21 metal-conjugated antibodies for IMC analysis. Markers are subdivided into epithelial, endothelial, 
leukocyte, and prostate-specific panels for classification of cell type and origin.
Target
Description
ALDH1 belongs to the aldehyde dehydrogenase family. Nineteen ALDHs are present in humans, expressed in a 
variety of organelles, and having different substrate preferences. It is also expressed in the epithelium of many 
organs
Caspase-3 is activated during the early stages of apoptosis. Caspase-3 is either partially or totally responsible 
for the proteolytic cleavage of many key proteins, such as the nuclear enzyme polymerase. Caspase-3 is widely 
distributed including high expression in cells of lymphoid origin and active caspase-3 is a marker for cells 
undergoing apoptosis
CD14 is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked membrane glycoprotein. CD14 is expressed at high levels 
on antigen presenting innate immune cells including monocytes and macrophages and at lower levels of 
granulocytes. It has also been reported to be expressed on some dendritic cell sub-populations
CD24 is expressed on the surface of B cells, granulocytes, follicular dendritic cells, and epithelial cells and may 
play a role in the regulation of B-cell proliferation and maturation
CD3 is a transmembrane subunit of the T Cell receptor complex. It is a member of the immunoglobulin super-
family that plays a role in antigen recognition, signal transduction, and T cell activation. CD3 is expressed by T 
lymphocytes (thymocytes) at the highest levels on mature cell types
CD31, also known as platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1, is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein. It 
binds CD38 and plays a role in wound healing, angiogenesis, removing aged neutrophils and cellular migration 
in an inflammatory situation
CD38 is a transmembrane glycoprotein. It is expressed at variable levels across most human hematopoietic 
cells and in other tissues (i.e. Brain, muscle, and kidney). It is expressed at the highest levels on plasma cells 
(memory B cells) as well as activated T and B cells
CD44 is a cell surface glycoprotein. It is involved in a variety of cellular functions including: cell-to-cell interac-
tions, adhesion, homing and migration, as well as being a receptor for hyaluronic acid. CD44 is expressed on a 
number of cell types including leukocytes, endothelial cells, hepatocytes, and mesenchymal cells and has been 
reported to be a marker for memory cell subsets
CD45 is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein. It is expressed on the plasma membrane of all hematopoietic 
cells, except mature red blood cells and platelets. Its intracellular domain is a tyrosine phosphatase that serves 
to regulate signal transduction in most hematopoietic cells.
CD45A is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein. It is a specific splice variant of the transmembrane tyros-
ine phosphatase CD45. The CD45RA isoform is most highly expressed on resting/naïve T cells, B cells and 
monocytes. Like CD45, CD45A’s intracellular domain is a tyrosine phosphatase that servers to regulate signal 
transduction event—in particular, enhancing both T cell receptor and B cell receptor signalling
CD62 is a type I transmembrane glycoprotein. CD61 is a member of integrin family and is expressed on plate-
lets and megakaryocytes playing a role in platelet activation and aggregation. CD61 in complex with CD51 has 
also been reported on osteoclasts, fibroblast, macrophages and some tumour cells
CD66a is a glycoprotein belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily. It plays a role in multiple cellular 
activities such as differentiation and arrangement of tissue 3D structure, angiogenesis, apoptosis, tumour sup-
pression, metastasis and the modulation of innate and adaptive immune responses. It can be found expressed 
on the surface of endothelial/epithelial cells, neutrophils and monocytes and can be induced on T cells, B cells, 
and CD16-negative NK cells
CD8 is a type I membrane glycoprotein. CD8 is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily found on the 
majority of thymocytes, a subset of PB T cells, and natural killer cells (which express almost exclusively CD8a 
homodimers). CD8 acts as a co-receptor with MHC class I-restricted T cell receptors in antigen recognition 
and T cell activation and has been shown to play a role in thymic differentiation
CytoKeratin 8 and 18 are intermediate filaments that provides mechanical support and serves variety of func-
tions in epithelial cells. They are part of the cytoskeleton of the cell. CK8/18 is used by pathologist to evaluate 
pathogenesis of biopsy tissue in breast cancer
E-Cadherin (Epithelial cadherin) is a member of the cadherin superfamily. E-cadherin is a calcium-dependent, 
transmembrane cell–cell adnesion glycoprotein composed of 4 extracellular cadherin repeats and a highly 
conserved cytoplasmic tail region. It functions as cell adhesion molecule involved in development, bacterial, 
pathogenesis, and tumour invasion
Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM) is a type I transmembrane protein. EpCAM functions as homo-
typic calcium-independent cell adhesion molecule and believed to be involved in carcinogenesis by inducing 
genes involved in cellular metabolism and proliferation. It is highly expressed in bone marrow, colon, lung, 
most epithelial cells and on carcinomas of gastrointestinal origin
(Continued)
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 12
P D Malihi et al
cells in PTTP with a gain in chromosome 9q were not 
found in the BM cells. Similarly, subclones in MTCs 
with a loss in chromosome 16p were observed that 
were not otherwise found in BMTP cells.
The HD-SCA genomic analysis extends beyond 
rare cells. Plasma was isolated from both PB and BMA 
for CNA analysis of cfDNA. Analysis of cfDNA from 
PB plasma finds shared genomic alterations of cfDNA 
with both MTCs and BMTP (figure 8). A detailed anal-
ysis revealed that the PB plasma profile is more closely 
related to tumor cells in the MTC than the BMTP sam-
ple. Deletions in chromosomes 1, 6, 10, 11, and 14 as 
well as amplifications in chromosomes 4, 8, and 10 
in PB ctDNA matched with those found in the clonal 
population (figure 8). For ctDNA from BMA, CNA 
comparison revealed features present in both BMTP 
and MTCs. Such features included deletions in chro-
mosomes 6 and amplifications in chromosomes 8, 10, 
and 11. Using in-house software, the fraction of tumor 
DNA to normal DNA in plasma can be estimated by 
comparing the amplitude of amplification and dele-
tions of cfDNA to those observed in a single tumor 
cell where the gains and losses fall in integer steps. PB 
cfDNA consisted of 75% (3:1 ratio of tumor: normal) 
ctDNA whereas BMA cfDNA consisted of 50% ctDNA 
(1:1 ratio of tumor: normal). Thus, the data demon-
strate that analysis of cfDNA in the liquid biopsy ena-
bles detection of genomic alterations that are present 
in both primary and metastatic tissue.
Targeted proteomics reveals origin of cells in BM
To generate single-cell targeted proteomic data we 
selected MTCs, PTTP, and BMTP tissue imprints for 
analysis. We have previously validated a panel of 21 
protein markers including a comprehensive leukocyte, 
epithelial, endothelial, and prostate protein panel for 
analysis (table 2). A total of 13 MTCs immobilized 
on a glass slide, 12 BMTP tissue imprints, and 19 
PTTP tissue imprints were stained and laser ablated 
for analysis. Each region of interest was scanned for 
ablation by the Fluidigm Hyperion Imaging System 
using a highly focused, pulsed laser that atomizes 
and ionizes a 1 µm2 region and the resulting ions are 
introduced into the inductively coupled plasma time-
of-flight mass spectrometer [18, 29, 30]. The ion count 
for each pulse is reconstructed into a 1 µm2 images, 
and ion count for each protein is scored. The scores 
for each single MTC as well as BMTP and PTTP tissue 
imprints are demonstrated as a heatmap in figure 9(a).
Targeted proteomics of MTCs, BMTP, and PTTP 
revealed co-expression of epithelial cellular adhesion 
molecule (EpCAM), PSA, and prostate specific mem-
brane antigen (PSMA) in a majority of cells. E-Cad-
herin was expressed in 23% (3/13), 67% (8/12), and 
100% (19/19) of MTCs, BMTP, and PTTP, respectively. 
CK8/18 was expressed in 38% (5/13), 100% (12/12), 
and 84% (16/19) of MTCs, BMTP, and PTTP, respec-
tively. Evaluation of these markers in MTCs, PTTP, 
and BMTP revealed epithelial and prostatic cellular 
origin consistent with luminal PCa. Expression level 
of PSA and PSMA varied both within and between tis-
sue sections. Expression of EpCAM, PSA, and PSMA 
was consistent across all 3 sample types, but expres-
sion of CK8/18 and E-Cadherin was mainly observed 
in BMTP and PTTP. Such observation may be due to 
microenvironmental pressures. Once MTCs reach their 
final destination in the bone marrow, that new micro-
environment may lead to higher expression of CK8/18 
and E-Cadherin. Examination of EpCAM also revealed 
higher expression in PTTP than BMTP, suggesting that 
once MTCs have established a BM metastasis, moder-
ate EpCAM expression may be sufficient [31].
The prostate consists of both epithelial and stro-
mal cells where the stromal cells express mesenchymal 
markers such as Vimentin [32]. We observed a mix of 
stromal and epithelial cells in some of the PTTP sec-
HLA-DR or human leukocyte antigen DR is an MHC class II cell surface receptor that is a cell surface glycoprotein. 
HLA-DR is expressed on B cells, activated T cells, monocytes/macrophages, dendritic cells, and other non-profes-
sional antigen presenting cells (APCs). HLA-DR is critical for efficient antigen presentation to CD4  +  T cells
Ki-67 protein is a cellular marker for proliferation. It is strictly associated with cell proliferation. During inter-
phase, the Ki-67 antigen can exclusively detected within the cell nucleus, whereas in mitosis most of the protein 
is relocated to the surface of the chromosomes
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is a glycoprotein enzyme encoded in humans by the KLK3 gene. PSA is a mem-
ber of the kallikrein-related peptidase family and is secreted by the epithelial cells of the prostate gland
Human prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is a type II transmembrane zinc metallopeptidase. As a 
tumour marker in PCa, PSMA expression has been shown to correlate with disease progression
Vimentin are class-III intermediate filaments found in various non-epithelial cells, especially mesenchymal 
cells. It is highly expressed in fibroblasts, low in T- and B-lymphocytes. Vimentin has dynamic structural 
changes and spatial re-organization in response to extracellular stimuli help to coordinate various signalling 
pathways. Remodelling of Vimentin and other intermediate filaments is important during lymphocyte adhe-
sion and migration through the endothelium
Epithelial Markers | Endothelial Markers | Leukocyte Markers | Prostate-specific Markers
Table 2. (Continued)
Target
Description
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 13
P D Malihi et al
tions as seen by both EpCAM and Vimentin expression 
in different parts of the tissue (figure 9(b)). Expansion 
of our proteomic panel to include proteins such as 
NKX3.1, ERG, ATM, PTEN, and other markers could 
help further stratify the subclones of tumor cells. Het-
erogeneity of protein expression between each cell or 
cell cluster was visible even within each sample type 
in the same patient, revealing the power of single-cell 
data to study variability.
Conclusion
Assessment of liquid and solid biopsies from a patient 
with de novo polymetastatic PCa using single-cell 
technology revealed tumor heterogeneity, protein 
expression variability, and genomic clonality at the intra 
and inter-biopsy level. Such high-content extraction 
is feasible with a single cell biology research workflow 
that preserves morphology and molecular integrity 
following preservation of cells, identification, and 
enumeration. This preservation and maintenance of 
identity through the workflow enables genomic and 
proteomic analysis using CNA and protein expression, 
which can be correlated through the morphology. 
A detailed study of the dominant clonal population 
revealed modifications such as amplifications in NCOA2 
and MYC and deletions in ETV6, PTEN, and TP53, 
among others. Genomic clonality was demonstrated 
Figure 9. (a) Four-level scoring heatmap for IMC analysis of single MTC and tissue imprints of BMTP and PTTP. Each protein is 
scored by ion count, and the LOD is determined by a signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio  ⩾  3 or a standard deviation of the mean (SDOM) 
above 3.3. For each marker, below the LOD is a 0, above the LOD is a 1, a S/N ratio between 7 and 20 or SDOM  >  6 is a 2, and a S/N 
ratio above 20 or SDOM above 12 is a 3. (b) Composite images comparing fluorescent imaging to IMC analysis of all three sample 
types. The first panel on the left shows fluorescent images with DAPI in blue, CK in red, and CD45 in green. All subsequent panels 
are IMC-generated composite images showing DAPI in blue followed by two different markers in red and green. EpCAM confirmed 
epithelial character of most of the cells while PSA and PSMA verified the prostatic source of the samples. Vimentin (VIM) expression 
in regions of PTTP highlighted the stromal cells of the prostate.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 14
P D Malihi et al
both within and between each biopsy source (MTCs, 
BMTP, and PTTP). Tumor heterogeneity via protein 
expression has also been demonstrated in this patient. 
Proteomic analysis data shows heterogeneity in 
expression level of EpCAM, PSA, and PSMA within and 
across all three sample types.
Deletions in genes such as BRCA1, BRCA2, CDK2, 
and MLH1 revealed dysfunction in the DNA repair 
pathway. Many of these genes are candidate targets for 
therapeutics, and prior knowledge of such gene altera-
tions may be relevant when it comes to choosing the 
optimal combination therapy. For other therapeutic 
targets such as PTEN and MYC, having knowledge of 
both genomic and proteomic status of these genes may 
lead to optimal combination therapy and personalized 
medicine for each patient.
We also identified specific gene alterations that are 
found only in BM while some are shared across all three 
compartments (BMA, BMTP, PTTP). Similar to Klein 
et al, our results show that once cells leave the primary 
tumor and enter the circulation and BM, they acquire 
independent alterations [33]. Using our single-cell 
analysis, we were able to demonstrate the same inde-
pendent evolution in MTCs and BMTP. Such details 
can be revealed through single-cell study approaches 
where non-dominant molecular features are detected 
rather than masked by the dominant population, as is 
the case in bulk sampling. Information on such detailed 
features of each compartment (PT versus BM) may 
influence therapeutic recommendations in the future.
We used liquid biopsy as a source for both cellular 
and acellular tumor associated components. PB and 
BMA ctDNA analysis revealed a CNA profile similar 
to that of the dominant clonal population in BMT. 
CfDNA analysis has the potential for evaluation and 
close monitoring of tumor evolution and progression 
of the dominant clone when CTCs and/or MTCs are 
not available for analysis.
Cell lineage of MTCs and BMTP cells can be traced 
back to the primary tumor based on their genomic 
profile [34, 35]. Interestingly, we observed genomic 
heterogeneity not only between but also within each 
compartment. Detailed evaluation of individual CNAs 
revealed the rise of several small sub-clonal popula-
tions within each compartment, demonstrating inde-
pendent evolution at each site. Tumor lineage of the 
dominant clonal population revealed that this popu-
lation started in PT, gained additional alterations as a 
MTC, and evolved with additional genomic modifica-
tions once metastasized. This lineage resulted in a vast 
genomic diversity with sub-clonal populations within 
each compartment in this patient case study.
In conclusion, these results demonstrate the high 
content characterization that can be obtained using 
the HD-SCA workflow for profiling of liquid and solid 
biopsies. Using previously published data as valida-
tion, BMA was shown to be a feasible and applicable 
approach and provides additional opportunities for 
analysis in advanced PCa [5]. BMAs are easier and 
more cost-effective to obtain compared to image-
guided biopsies and can be collected repeatedly dur-
ing treatment cycles and progression. Longitudinal 
sampling and assessment provides critical insights into 
treatment response and allow monitoring of disease 
progression. Using morphology to integrate genomics 
and proteomics of single cells throughout the work-
flow maintains the single cell identity of CTCs, MTCs, 
and cells isolated from solid tissues. This viable, lon-
gitudinal approach has the potential to support treat-
ment decisions throughout the disease course, an 
important precision medicine objective. Future stud-
ies include comprehensive investigation of a broader 
cohort of both treatment-naïve organ-confined PCa 
patients as well as additional metastatic cases to further 
characterize the biology of metastatic tumors.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank all of our patients and their 
families who participate in our studies. We would like 
to thank Xiomara 
Villasenor, Tayebeh Hosseinzadegan, 
and the rest of the Kuhn Lab team for their support 
every day.
The authors would like to acknowledge fund-
ing for this project has been made in whole or in 
part by the Prostate Cancer Foundation Challenge 
Award 17CHAL04 (IPG, BSK, JH, PK); Prostate Can-
cer Foundation-Movember Foundation 17CHAL01 
USA Award (AA, PK); Prostate Cancer Foundation-
Movember Foundation 16CHAL04 (KP, PK); DOD 
CDMRP PC130244 (BSK); Federal funds from the 
National Cancer Institute PO1CA098912 (BSK); 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Leidos Biomedical Research under contract 
number HHSN261200800001E (JH, PK); the Jean 
Perkins Foundation (BSK); David and Janet Polak 
Foundation Fellowship in Convergent Science (PM, 
PK); and the Vicky Joseph Research Fellow and the 
Vassiliadis Research Fellow (LW, PK); Schlegel Fam-
ily Endowed Fellowship Fund (PK); Kalayil and Leela 
Chacko, MD Fellowship (PK);. The content of this arti-
cle is solely the responsibility of the authors and does 
not necessarily reflect the views of the foundations 
nor the Department of Health and Human Services, 
National Cancer Institute or the National Institutes of 
Health nor does mention of trade names, commercial 
products, or organizations imply endorsement.
Competing Financial Interests are PK: Advisor to 
Epic Sciences, royalty recipient from Epics Sciences, 
shareholder at Epic Sciences; JBH: On the Clinical 
Advisory Boards of Epic Sciences, Inc., La Jolla, CA and 
CelMatix, Inc. of NY, NY.
ORCID iDs
Carmen Ruiz Velasco  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-
2370-3000
Peter Kuhn  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2629-4505
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
 15
P D Malihi et al
References
 [1] Howlader N N A et al (ed) 2017 SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 
1975–2014 National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD (http://
seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2014/, based on November 2016 
SEER data submission, posted to the SEER web site, April 
2017)
 [2] Bernard B, Muralidhar V, Chen Y H, Sridhar S S, Mitchell E P, 
Pettaway C A, Carducci M A, Nguyen P L and Sweeney C J 
2017 Impact of ethnicity on the outcome of men with 
metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer Cancer 
123 1536–44
 [3] James N D et al 2017 Abiraterone for prostate cancer not 
previously treated with hormone therapy New Engl. J. Med. 
377 338–51
 [4] van Soest R J and de Wit R 2015 Irrefutable evidence for the use 
of docetaxel in newly diagnosed metastatic prostate cancer: 
results from the STAMPEDE and CHAARTED trials BMC 
Med. 13 304
 [5] Carlsson A et al 2017 Paired high-content analysis of prostate 
cancer cells in bone marrow and blood characterizes increased 
androgen receptor expression in tumor cell clusters Clin. 
Cancer Res. 23 1722–32
 [6] Marrinucci D et al 2007 Case study of the morphologic 
variation of circulating tumor cells Hum. Pathol. 38 514–9
 [7] Marrinucci D et al 2012 Fluid biopsy in patients with 
metastatic prostate, pancreatic and breast cancers Phys. Biol. 
9 016003
 [8] Marrinucci D, Bethel K, Luttgen M, Bruce R H, Nieva J 
and Kuhn P 2009 Circulating tumor cells from well-
differentiated lung adenocarcinoma retain cytomorphologic 
features of primary tumor type Arch. Pathol. Lab Med. 
133 1468–71
 [9] Nieva J et al 2012 High-definition imaging of circulating 
tumor cells and associated cellular events in non-small 
cell lung cancer patients: a longitudinal analysis Phys. Biol. 
9 016004
 [10] Dago A E et al 2014 Rapid phenotypic and genomic change in 
response to therapeutic pressure in prostate cancer inferred 
by high content analysis of single circulating tumor cells PLoS 
One 9 e101777
 [11] Riley R S, Hogan T F, Pavot D R, Forysthe R, Massey D, Smith E, 
Wright L Jr and Ben-Ezra J M 2004 A pathologist’s perspective 
on bone marrow aspiration and biopsy: I. Performing a bone 
marrow examination J. Clin. Lab Anal. 18 70–90
 [12] Marrinucci D, Bethel K, Lazar D, Fisher J, Huynh E, Clark P, 
Bruce R, Nieva J and Kuhn P 2010 Cytomorphology of 
circulating colorectal tumor cells: a small case series J. Oncol. 
2010 861341
 [13] Hsieh H B et al 2006 High speed detection of circulating tumor 
cells Biosens. Bioelectron. 21 1893–9
 [14] Lazar D C, Cho E H, Luttgen M S, Metzner T J, Uson M L, 
Torrey M, Gross M E and Kuhn P 2012 Cytometric 
comparisons between circulating tumor cells from prostate 
cancer patients and the prostate-tumor-derived LNCaP cell 
line Phys. Biol. 9 016002
 [15] Pau G, Fuchs F, Sklyar O, Boutros M and Huber W 2010 
EBImage—an R package for image processing with 
applications to cellular phenotypes Bioinformatics 26 979–81
 [16] Navin N et al 2011 Tumour evolution inferred by single-cell 
sequencing Nature 472 90–4
 [17] Baslan T et al 2012 Genome-wide copy number analysis of 
single cells Nat. Protocols 7 1024–41
 [18] Gerdtsson E et al 2017 Multiplex protein detection on 
circulating tumor cells from liquid biopsies using imaging 
mass cytometry Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 015002
 [19] Krohn A et al 2012 Genomic deletion of PTEN is associated 
with tumor progression and early PSA recurrence in ERG 
fusion-positive and fusion-negative prostate cancer Am. J. 
Pathol. 181 401–12
 [20] Taylor B S et al 2010 Integrative genomic profiling of human 
prostate cancer Cancer Cell 18 11–22
 [21] Storchova Z and Pellman D 2004 From polyploidy to aneuploidy, 
genome instability and cancer Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 5 45–54
 [22] Mateo J et al 2015 DNA-repair defects and olaparib in 
metastatic prostate cancer New Engl. J. Med. 2015 1697–708
 [23] Agoulnik I U, Vaid A, Bingman W E III, Erdeme H, Frolov A, 
Smith C L, Avala G, Ittmann M M and Weigel N L 2005 Role 
of SRC-1 in the promotion of prostate cancer cell growth and 
tumor progression Cancer Res. 65 7959–67
 [24] Liu Y 2017 The context of prostate cancer genomics in 
personalized medicine Oncol Lett 13 3347–53
 [25] DePinho R A 2000 The age of cancer Nature 408 248
 [26] Haefner B 2002 NF-κB: arresting a major culprit in cancer 
Drug Discovery Today 7 653–63
 [27] Demichelis F et al 2009 Distinct genomic aberrations 
associated with ERG rearranged prostate cancer Genes 
Chromosomes Cancer 48 366–80
 [28] He W W et al 1997 A novel human prostate-specific, androgen-
regulated homeobox gene (NKX3. 1) that maps to 8p21, 
a region frequently deleted in prostate cancer Genomics 
43 69–77
 [29] Di Palma S and Bodenmiller B 2015 Unraveling cell 
populations in tumors by single-cell mass cytometry Curr. 
Opin. Biotechnol. 31 122–9
 [30] Giesen C et al 2014 Highly multiplexed imaging of tumor 
tissues with subcellular resolution by mass cytometry Nat. 
Methods 11 417–22
 [31] Plaks V, Koopman C D and Werb Z 2013 Circulating tumor 
cells Science 341 1186–8
 [32] Gregg J L, Brown K E, Mintz E M, Piontkivska H and 
Fraizer G C 2010 Analysis of gene expression in prostate cancer 
epithelial and interstitial stromal cells using laser capture 
microdissection BMC Cancer 10 165
 [33] Klein C A 2009 Parallel progression of primary tumours and 
metastases Nat. Rev. Cancer 9 302–12
 [34] Jiang R et al 2015 A comparison of isolated circulating tumor 
cells and tissue biopsies using whole-genome sequencing in 
prostate cancer Oncotarget 6 44781
 [35] Heitzer E et al 2013 Complex tumor genomes inferred from 
single circulating tumor cells by array-CGH and next-
generation sequencing Cancer Res. 73 2965–75
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015003
