 Enabling Technologies for Cell-Based Clinical Translation
Magnetic Resonance Imaging-Guided Delivery of
NeuralStemCellsIntotheBasalGangliaofNonhuman
Primates Reveals a Pulsatile Mode of Cell Dispersion
KRISTEN E. MALLOY,a,b JINQI LI,b GOURAV R. CHOUDHURY,a APRIL TORRES,a SHRUTI GUPTA,c
CHRIS KANTORAK,c TIM GOBLE,c PETER T. FOX,b GEOFFREY D. CLARKE,b MARCEL M. DAADIa,b
Key Words. Interventional magnetic resonance imaging x Stem cell delivery x Cell flow x
Nonhuman primate x ClearPoint system x Rheology x
Real-time interventional magnetic resonance imaging-guided cell transplantation
ABSTRACT
Optimal stem cell delivery procedures are critical to the success of the cell therapy approach. Variables
such as flow rate, suspension solution, needle diameter, cell density, and tissue mechanics affect tissue
penetration,backflowalongtheneedle,andthedispersionandsurvivalofinjectedcellsduringdelivery.
Mostcelltransplantationcentersengagedinhumanclinicaltrialsusecustom-designedcannulaneedles,
syringes, or catheters, sometimes precluding the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-guided de-
livery to target tissue. As a result, stem cell therapies may be hampered because more than 80% of
grafted cells do not survive the delivery—for example, to the heart, liver/pancreas, and brain—which
translates to poor patient outcomes. We developed a minimally invasive interventional MRI (iMRI) ap-
proach for intraoperatively imaging neural stem cell (NSC) delivery procedures. We used NSCs prela-
beled with a contrast agent and real-time magnetic resonance imaging to guide the injection
cannula to the target and to track the delivery of the cells into the putamen of baboons. We provide
evidence that cell injection into the brain parenchyma follows a novel pulsatile mode of cellular dis-
charge from the delivery catheter despite a constant infusion flow rate. The rate of cell infusion signif-
icantly affects the dispersion and viability of grafted cells. We report on our investigational use of a
frameless navigation system for image-guided NSC transplantation using a straight cannula. Through
submillimeter accuracy and real-time imaging, iMRI approaches may improve the safety and efficacy
of neural cell transplantation therapies. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1–9
SIGNIFICANCE
Optimal stem cell delivery procedures are critical to the success of the cell therapy approach. A min-
imally invasive interventional magnetic resonance imaging approach was developed for imaging
intraoperatively neural stem cell (NSC) delivery procedures. NSC delivery was imaged in real time
in nonhuman primate forebrain. Evidence indicates that cell injection follows novel pulsatile mode
of dispersion and that the rate of cell infusion significantly affects the dispersion and viability of
grafted cells. This approach willimprove the safety and efficacy of neural transplantation and address
some of the current bottlenecks in translating stem cell therapies to the clinic.
INTRODUCTION
Optimizing stem cell delivery procedures will be
critical to the success of cell therapy approaches.
Unlike small molecules and growth or neurotro-
phic factors, stem cells are more sensitive to their
microenvironment. Variables such as flow rate,
needle diameter, cell density, tissue porosity,
and mechanics affect the penetration and disper-
sion of the cells in the target tissue, and ultimately
their survival and function. Most translational re-
search and cell transplantation centers engaged
in human clinical trials use standard microsyringes
or long cannulas or catheters that sometimes pre-
clude use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-
guided delivery to target tissue. As a result, the full
therapeuticpotentialofstemcelltherapiesmaybe
compromised by the lack of target precision and
cell death caused by suboptimal injection parame-
ters.Infact,themajorityofcellsgrafted(morethan
80%) do not survive the delivery in the heart [1],
liver/pancreas [2], and brain [3], which translates
to poor results in patients. There is a critical need
for a regulated preapproved device along with a
standardized delivery procedure with optimal pa-
rameters to ensure cell survival, consistency, and
aSouthwest National Primate
Research Center, Texas
Biomedical Research
Institute, San Antonio, Texas,
USA; bRadiology, Research
Imaging Institute, University
of Texas Health Science
Center, San Antonio, Texas,
USA; cMRI Interventions, Inc.,
Irvine, California, USA
Correspondence: Marcel M.
Daadi, Ph.D., Southwest National
Primate Research Center, Texas
Biomedical Research Institute,
P.O. Box 760549, San Antonio,
Texas 78245-0549, USA.
Telephone: 210-258-9210;
E-Mail: mdaadi@txbiomed.org
Received June 3, 2016; accepted
for publication August 29, 2016.
©AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2016-0269
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2016;5:1–9 www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR CELL-BASED CLINICAL
TRANSLATION
This is an open access article
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License,
which permits use, distribution
and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is
properly cited.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT
2017;6:877–885
e-mail:
Received June 3, 2016; accepted
for publication August 29, 2016;
published Online First on Septem-
ber 22, 2016.
O
c AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2016/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2016-0269
Magnetic Resonance Imaging-Guided Delivery of
Neural Stem Cells into the Basal Ganglia of Nonhuman
Primates Reveals a Pulsatile Mode of Cell Dispersion
ID: srinivasanv
Time: 13:51
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00603/170036/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM170036
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2017;6:877–885 www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 comparability of data from multicenter clinical studies. Such ap-
proach is paramount to the success of translational stem cell
therapies.
Extrapolating from work in our and other laboratories on
drug and viral vector delivery into the central nervous system
(CNS) [4–8], it has been shown that the exertion of increasing
positive pressure, which creates a gradient, improves the vol-
ume of distribution (Vd) to the volume of infusion (Vi) (Vd/Vi)
ratio and prevents backflow of the infusate. This approach fa-
vors dispersion of very small particles by convection rather by
diffusion [9]. In addition, smaller diameter cannulas (i.e., ,32
gauge) and slow injection rates (i.e., 0.5 ml per minute) are op-
timal parameters to prevent backflow and enhance tissue distri-
bution for the injection of very small particles, such as drugs and
viral vectors [10, 11]. The backflow is also reduced by theuse of a
stepped cannula design in which the cannula decreases in diam-
eter in discrete steps approaching the tip [12–14]. These steps
provide a physical barrier that reduces backflow of drugs and vi-
ral vector particles during injections. However, it’s not clear
whether this approach would apply to neural cell injections into
the CNS. A recent report has demonstrated MRI-guided intrace-
rebral transplantation of neural cells using radially branched
cannula that enable multiple deposits through the same cannula
insertion [15, 16].
Although injection parameters have been well-studied and
controlled for small particles, like drugs and viral vectors, the tech-
nology for stem cell delivery remains undeveloped and limited by
inconsistentcellsurvival,andsuboptimalinjectionaccuracyandtis-
sue penetrance. Parameters that have been optimized for drugs
and viral vectors, may not apply directly to stem cell delivery al-
though they provide a starting point.
We developed a minimally invasive interventional MRI (iMRI)
approach for imaging intraoperatively a neural stem cell (NSC)
deliveryprocedureandforachievingaccuratecannulatipplacement.
We used NSCs prelabeled with a contrast agent and real-time mag-
netic resonance imaging to guide the injection cannula to the target
andtotrackthedeliveryofthecellsintotheputamenofbaboons.We
provideevidencethatcellinjectionintothebrainparenchymafollows
a novel pulsatile mode of dispersion and that the rate of cell infusion
significantly impacts the viability of grafted cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Neural Stem Cell Derivation and Preparation
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) were generated from
humanskinfibroblastprocuredfromtheNIH(ND29802;NationalIn-
stitute for Neurological Disorders and Stroke Repository, Coriell In-
stitute, Camden, NJ, https://catalog.coriell.org/1/NINDS). We used
theepisomalapproachpreviouslydescribedindetail[17].NSCswere
derived from iPSCs, as we previously described [18]. To label NSCs
priorto thecelltransplantation,weincubatedthem inaneuralstem
cell medium supplemented with superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles (Feridex) and poly-L-lysine for 48 hours, as we previ-
ously described [19] (Fig. 1). The cells were collected the day of
theinjection,suspendedinneuralstemcellmediaataconcentration
of 70,000 cells per microliter, and stored on ice until injected.
NSC Injection Into Brain Phantom Gel
The superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO)-labeled NSCs were in-
fused into 0.6% agarose gel (Fig. 2) using an MRI-compatible
cannula with an inner diameter of 530 mm (NeoNeuron LLC, Palo
Alto, CA, http://neoneuron.org/index.html) connected to a 25- to
100-ml microsyringe (SGE Analytical Science, Victoria, Australia,
http://www.sge.com) via a polyurethane infusion line (VAHBPU;
Instech Laboratories, Plymouth Meeting, PA, http://www.
instechlabs.com).Theseexperimentswereperformedintriplicate
inthreeindependentexperiments.Themicrosyringewaspositioned
in an MRI-compatible syringe pump (Chemyx, Stafford, TX, https://
www.chemyx.com). The volume cell suspension needed for injec-
tion was loaded at the tip of the cannula using the MRI-compatible
microsyringe pump. Once the volume of cell suspension needed
was uploaded, the cannula was immediately inserted into the
brain, and cell infusion started. The cell infusion was monitored
using a repeating single-slice TurboFLASH sequence (echo time
[TE] = 2.25 millisecond, repetition time [TR] = 1,700 millisecond,
0.523 3 0.523 3 2.5 mm, 128 3 128 3 1 pixels, number of exci-
tations [NEX] = 1, flip angle = 5°). The image series was initiated
prior to cannula insertion and continued for the duration of each
injection for the two injection rates tested: 20-ml volume at 1 ml
per minute and 20-ml volume at 5 ml per minute. The cannula was
removed 5 minutes after the completion of cell injection.
Following injection into the phantom the viability of the cells
was determined by dye exclusion method using 0.4% trypan blue
solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific Life Sciences, Waltham, MA,
http://www.thermofisher.com). The cells were collected from
the phantom and suspended in fresh media. A sample of the cell
suspension was mixed with an equal volume of trypan blue and
Figure 1.
SPIO labeling of neural stem cells (NSCs). (A): Schematic
drawing of SPIO particles’ negatively charged complexes through
electrostatic interactions with the positively charged PLL molecule
and take-up (encapsulation) by the cells after incubation, thus form-
ingintracellular endosomes. (B):Electron microscopescanningimage
showing the actual size of the SPIO nanoparticles. (C): Photomicro-
graph of NSCs after 72-hour incubation with SPIO-PLL complex shows
intracellular SPIO nanoparticles revealed with Prussian blue staining.
Scale bars = 200 nm (B), 15 mm (C). Abbreviations: PLL, poly-L-lysine;
SPIO, superparamagnetic iron oxide.
2
MRI-Guided Stem Cell Delivery in Nonhuman Primate
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: srinivasanv
Time: 13:52
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00603/170036/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM170036
878
MRI-Guided Stem Cell Delivery in Nonhuman Primate
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 loaded on to a hemocytometer. Viable cells with clear cytoplasm
were counted and expressed as a percentage of total cells (live
and dead cells). GraphPad prism software was used to plot the
graphs and perform statistical analysis.
MRI-Guided Injection of NSCs Into the Baboon
Basal Ganglia
We used the ClearPoint system (MRI Interventions, Irvine, CA,
http://www.mriinterventions.com) for the iMRI-guided delivery of
NSCs. ClearPoint is a frameless navigation system for intraoperative
MRI that uses fiducial placed on a head-mounted aiming device.
Determination of the Entry Point
An MRI-compatible head-fixation frame (Fig. 3) was fastened into
the notches on the sides of the MRI table and placed close to the
bore of the magnet, a Siemens Trio 3T system. The cadaveric ba-
boon heads (n = 3) were secured into the head-fixation frame, ori-
ented in a supine position. The SmartGrid is a 6 3 6 array of
MRI-sensitive gadolinium-filled squares used in the treatment-
planning software to determine the optimal cannula entry point
to the target structure. It was placed on the skull, covering the esti-
mated entry point of the needle. A T1-weighted three-dimensional
(3D) gradient echo image (TE = 2.6 millisecond, TR = 14 millisecond,
1 3 1 3 1 mm, 320 3 320 3 208 pixels, NEX = 1, flip angle = 15°)
was acquired and transferred to the ClearPoint software via Digital
Imaging and Communications in Medicine network. The software
automatically detected the anterior commissure (AC), posterior
commissure (PC), and midsagittal plane to position the brain in a
3D coordinate system. The injection target was selected and can-
nulatrajectory was established, andthe softwarecalculated the in-
tersection of the cannula trajectory with the SmartGrid. The target
access was checked to confirm that the injection site is reachable
from the selected entry point, and corresponding coordinates of
the SmartGrid for this entry point were used to drill a burr hole.
SmartFrame Alignment
The base of the SmartFrame was positioned directly over the
burr hole and secured to the skull with three self-taping screws
fixed to the base. The SmartFrame tower is then mounted to the
base.Ahandcontrollerwithmatchingcolored knobswasmounted
on the SmartFrame to adjust the cannula from a distance without
moving the head from MRI isocenter. The baboon head was then
movedtotheMRIisocenter.A3DT1-weightedgradientechoseries
wasrepeatedandtransferredtotheClearPointworkstation,ensur-
ing that the four MRI-sensitive fiducial markers of the SmartFrame
wereincludedintheseries.(TE=2.6millisecond,TR=14millisecond,
1 3 1 3 1 mm, 320 3 320 3 208 pixels, NEX = 1, flip angle = 15°).
The software segmented the SmartFrame fiducial markers and
used their locations to calculate the scan plane parameters nec-
essary to acquire a single-slice T1-weighted two-dimensional (2D)
image aligned axially with the planned trajectory of the cannula
and in the plane of the cannula guide tip (TE = 6.8 millisecond,
TR=500 millisecond,3.90633.906 35 mm, 128 312831 pixels,
NEX = 1, flip angle = 180°). The ClearPoint software used the result-
ing image slice to calculate pitch and roll SmartFrame adjustments
to correct cannula angle and match the planned trajectory. The
SmartFrame hand controller was used to rotate the pitch (blue)
and roll (orange) thumb wheels. The same single- slice 2D image
was acquired, and this procedure was repeated until the cannula
alignment error was within an acceptable range.
Finalizing Trajectory
The software calculated the scan plane parameters needed to ac-
quire two orthogonal 3D image series aligned axially with the tra-
jectory of the cannula (TE = 9.5 millisecond, TR= 1,530 millisecond,
13131mm,2563256315pixels,NEX=2,flipangle=152°).For
the first “Align adjustment” set, software calculated the required
adjustments for pitch and roll directions. The second scan, the
“Off-set adjustment,” used the X and Y (yellow and green) knobs,
respectively.For bothAlignandOffsetadjustmentsthecorrections
were made, and additional scans were reacquired and corrections
made until the cannula alignment error was within an acceptable
Figure2.
Impactofinfusionrateandphysicalconstraintsoncelldisper-
sion and survival in a brain phantom gel. Magnetic resonance imaging
scans showing the progression of superparamagnetic iron oxide-labeled
neural stem cells (NSCs) infused into agarose gel phantoms at 1 ml per
minute (A1–A3) and 5 ml per minute (B1–B3). The schematic drawings
(A2,B2)depicttheflowanddispersion(redarrows)ofcells(1mlperminute)
(A2) and backflow of cells up the cannula trajectory (5 ml per minute)
(B2).Thepostinjectionscans(cannulaout)showawell-formedcloudof
NSCs at 1 ml per minute (A3) and backflow of NSCs along the cannula
trajectory at 5 ml per minute (B3). (C): NSCs injected either into the
phantom gel or into the air inside a microtube show that slow injection
(1 ml per minute) causes morecell death than does fasterinjectionrate
(5 ml per minute), although no significant change in viability was ob-
served when NSCs were injected into a microtube. Data represent
the mean 6 SEM of experiments performed in triplicate in three inde-
pendent experiments. p, p , .05. Abbreviation: ns, not significant.
Malloy, Li, Choudhury et al.
3
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: srinivasanv
Time: 13:52
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00603/170036/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM170036
Malloy, Li, Choudhury et al.
879
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 range (,1 mm3). Once the trajectory was finalized, the software
calculated the cannula depth to reach the target. A depth stopper
was attached to the cannula at this position.
NSC-SPIO Injection Into the Putamen
The pump was used to withdraw 20 ml of NSC suspension. The in-
fusionlinewasprimed,andtheinjectionbeganat1mlperminute.
The cannula was slowly lowered into the brain tissue until it
reached the depth stop. The injection was initiated and moni-
tored using a repeated single-slice TurboFLASH image series
(TE = 2.25 millisecond, TR = 1,700 millisecond, 0.523 3 0.523 3
2.5 mm, 128 3 128 3 1 pixels, NEX = 1, flip angle = 5°). The Turbo-
FLASHserieswasinitiatedduringtheinjectionandended5minutes
after end of the injection upon the removal of the cannula. Two
postinjection sequences were acquired to visualize the graft, a
3D T1-weighted gradient echo series (TE = 2.6 millisecond, TR =
14 millisecond, 1 3 1 3 1 mm, 320 3 320 3 208 pixels, NEX = 1,
flip angle = 15°) and a coronal Turbo Spin Echo series (TE =
83 millisecond, TR = 3,000 millisecond, 0.938 3 0.938 3
1.2 mm, 128 3 128 3 27 pixels, flip angle = 131°)
Histopathology, Immunocytochemistry, and
Microscopical Analysis
The cadaveric baboon brains were extracted from the skull;
postfixed in 4% paraformaldehyde; cryoprotected in an in-
creasing gradient of 10%, 20%, and 30% sucrose solution;
and cryostat-sectioned at 40 mm. For Prussian blue staining,
sections were fixed using 2% glutaraldehyde, washed in
phosphate-buffered solution (PBS), and incubated with Pearls
reagent (4% potassium ferrocyanide per 12% HCL, 50:50 volume)
for 40 minutes under agitation. Sections were then washed
in PBS and twice in water, dehydrated through graded alco-
hols, and counterstained with nuclear fast red. For immuno-
cytochemistry, brain sections were rinsed in PBS for 3 3 5
minutes, then incubated overnight with the STEM121 (1:200;
StemCells Inc., Newark, CA, http://www.stemcellsinc.com) pri-
mary antibody. Secondary antibodies raised in mouse conju-
gated to fluorescein isothiocyanate, rhodamine-B-isothiocyanate,
aminomethylcoumarin acetate, CY3, or CY5 chromogenes (Jackson
ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA, https://www.jacksonimmuno.
com) were used. Sections were counterstained with the nuclear
marker 4´,6-diamidino-2´-phenylindole dihydrochloride. Positive
and negative controls were included in each run. Immunostained
sections were coverslipped using fluorsave (Calbiochem) as the
mountingmediumandanalyzedusingtheLSM-800ZEISSlaserscan-
ning confocal microscope.
Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase 2´-Deoxyuridine,
5´-Triphosphate Nick-End Labeling Assay
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) 2´-deoxyuridine, 5´-
triphosphate nick-end labeling (TUNEL) was done using the TACS
2 TdT-3,39-diaminobenzidine (DAB) in situ apoptosis detection kit
(R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, https://www.rndsystems.com)
to quantify the apoptosis in the graft. Briefly, the frozen sections
were hydrated and treated with proteinase K solution before in-
cubating with TdT end- labeling cocktail. The sections were then
rinsed and incubated with streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase
andtreatedwithDABsolution.Weused1%methylgreentocoun-
terstain nuclei of viable cells. Images were taken with Nikon
eclipse te2000 and analyzed using Image-J software. The number
of TUNEL+ cells was determined by counting the number of cells
at 363 magnification in 15 randomly chosen microscopic obser-
vation fields per graft section. Within the same randomly chosen
fields and at the same magnification, the total numbers of live cell
nuclei stained with methyl green were also determined. The total
counts were then expressed as percentage of the total methyl
green stained nuclei.
Statistical Analysis
Outcome measurements for each experiment were reported as
mean 6 SEM. The data were analyzed using GraphPad prism soft-
ware. Significance of intergroup differences was performed by
applying Student’s t test where appropriate. One-way analysis
of variance was used to compare group differences. Differences
between themeanswere determined usingBonferroni’sposthoc
test. A p value of less than .05 was considered to be statistically
significant.
RESULTS
Real-Time MRI Monitoring of NSC Injection Into a
Simulated Brain Phantom Gel
To investigate the effects of injection rateand themicroenviron-
ment on cell survival and dispersion, we used a surrogate brain
model consisting of 0.6% agarose gel [20–24] with real- time
MRI. The gel formulation offers poroelastic material with
Figure 3.
ClearPoint system used for interventional magnetic reso-
nance imaging (iMRI)-guided transplantation of neural stem cells.
(A): The ClearPoint is a frameless navigation system that uses fiducials
(white arrow) placed on a head-mounted aiming device. The system
includes the SmartFrame trajectory guide(A), which ishand controlled
torotate andalign the cannulaguide usinginitiallythe blue(pitch;blue
arrows)andorange(roll;orange arrows)knobs,followed bythe yellow
(X; yellow arrows) and green (Y; green arrows) knobs for the final fine
adjustments. (B): Head-fixation frame. (C): Three-dimensional (3D)
surface rendering of a representative baboon head positioned in the
head-fixation frame locked to the MRI table. The surface rendering
was constructed from a postinjection MRI series using the “build sur-
face” feature in the software Mango. The 3D surface was smoothed
and overlaid with the original MRI slices at the cut planes corresponding
to the injection site. Abbreviation: MR, magnetic resonance.
4
MRI-Guided Stem Cell Delivery in Nonhuman Primate
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: srinivasanv
Time: 13:52
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00603/170036/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM170036
880
MRI-Guided Stem Cell Delivery in Nonhuman Primate
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 mechanical properties and hydraulic conductivity similar to that
of soft brain tissue and has been previously used to test various
drug delivery parameters and to understand the biophysics of tis-
suepenetration and backflow of infusate[23–26].Tovisualize the
cell injection in real time under MRI, we labeled the NSCs with
superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO), a clinical-grade magnetic
resonance contrast agent. SPIO nanoparticles (Fig. 1) were first
mixed and incubated with poly-L-lysine (PLL) for an hour, and
the SPIO-PLL mixture was then used to treat cultured NSCs for
3 days in vitro (Fig. 1). The NSCs were infused at two different
rates, 1 ml per minute and 5 ml per minute and magnetic reso-
nance imaged using TurboFLASH sequence (Materials and Meth-
ods section).
The injection at 1 ml per minute resulted in cell dispersion and
formation of a cloud at the tip of the cannula with no evidence of
cell backflow along the cannula track (Fig. 2A). The cells were ob-
served to flow in a pulsatile manner with multiple (four) distinct
burstsof cells, three occurring intermittently throughout the injec-
tion and one upon removal of the cannula (supplemental online
Video 1). This was consistent in multiple trials. Interestingly, in ev-
ery trial the cells appeared to flow laterally from the cannula into
the phantom gel and initially formed an oval-shaped cloud (Fig.
2A2; supplemental online Video 1).
Theinfusionat5 mlper minuteshowed asimilar pulsatileflow
but with fewer (two) bursts of cells, one during infusion and one
upon removal of the cannula (supplemental online Video 2; Fig.
2B).However,atthisrate,thecellsdidnot penetrateanddisperse
into the phantom gel nor did they form a cloud at the tip; instead,
there was a backflow of NSCs during the injection along the can-
nula track.
To determine the impact of the infusion pressure and shear
forces on cell survival, we collected the infused NSCs and deter-
minedtheirviabilityintriplicateinthreeindependentexperiments.
Interestingly, the cell viability was significantly reduced at the slow
1mlperminuterateversusthe5mlperminuterateinthephantom
gel in comparison with injection in an Eppendorf microtube (Fig.
2C). The injection of the NSCs into the Eppendorf microtube dem-
onstratedthatneitherthephysicalinfusion(pass-throughcannula)
nor the rate of infusion (1 versus 5 ml per minute) affected the
viability of the cells (Fig. 2C).
MRI-Guided Delivery of NSC-SPIO Into the Putamen
of Baboon
The cadaveric baboon heads (n = 3) were positioned in a supine
positioninanmagneticresonance-compatible fixationframe(Fig.
3) for the identification of the entry point of the cannula to the
putamen and the skull area to mount the frameless device (Fig.
3). A maximum-intensity projection of the 3D T1-weighted series
acquired with the SmartGrid (Fig. 4A) was used to identify the en-
try point during the planning phase. Once the target was selected
(Fig. 4B), the software determined the trajectory (Fig. 4C, 4D) to
pass through rows A–F, columns 1–6, of the SmartGrid (Fig. 4A).
ToaligntheSmartFramewiththeskull,weperformedamaximum
intensity projection image (Fig. 4C) rendered from the MRI scans
showing the four fiducial markers. Three of the fiducial markers
distributed in an axial plane were detected by the software and
used to calculate the SmartFrame adjustments. The software
used the forth fiducial marker at the tip of the cannula guide to
determine the cannula trajectory. We took multiple 2D T1 align-
ment images to align the cannula guide trajectory with the
planned trajectory using the pitch and roll adjustments (Fig. 3).
Two orthogonal 3D images (Fig. 5A) enabled the software to seg-
ment the cannula guide, and final adjustments to the pitch, roll,
and X and Y offsets were made (Fig. 5).
Once the error of cannula trajectory was less than 1 mm, the
NSCslabeled withSPIOwereuploaded totheMRI-compatiblenee-
dle and positioned for entry into the basal ganglia of the baboon
brain. The software calculated the depth to the target structure,
andadepthstopwasfixedtothecannulaatthedetermineddepth.
To image and monitor the NSC injections in real time, we used
the TurboFLASH time series (Materials and Methods section). We
selected 1 ml/ml because we found that this injection rate pro-
moted cell dispersion and eliminated backflow of cells up along
the cannula track. A 20-ml cell suspension was injected over
20 minutes. The results showed similar pulsatile mode of NSC dis-
persion into the brain parenchyma, as we observed using the
brain phantom. The real-time MRI showed little evidence of cell
suspension flowing in the beginning of the infusion followed by a
pulsatile injection of cells appearing at the tip of the cannula after
approximately 10 minutes of the infusion time (supplemental
online Video 3).
The grafted SPIO-labeled NSCs were readily visible in a T2-
weighted magnetic resonance image as a hypointense area (Figs.
5B, 6A). The accuracy of the injection is evident in Figure 5B with
theoverlayoftheplannedtrajectory(redcircle)anddevicetip(yel-
low circle) locations clearly within the cell graft.
Immunohistopathological Confirmation of the NSCs’
Graft Identity and Target Location
To confirm the location of the NSC graft, we sectioned brains and
processed them for histology and immunocytochemistry. SPIO-
labeled NSC grafts were readily detected with Prussian blue stain-
ing in the putamen target structure (Fig. 6B), confirming the MRI
data.Immunostaining withhumanmarkerSTEM121andconfocal
analysisconfirmedthehumanNSCgraftidentityandlocation(Fig.
6C). To determine viability inside the grafts, we processed brain
sections for TUNEL assay and counterstained them with the live
cell marker methyl green. Using the 1 ml per minute infusion rate,
the analysis revealed that 25.1% 6 3.2% of grafted cells died after
grafting (Fig. 6D).
DISCUSSION
Stem cell-based therapy is emerging as a promising treatment for
a variety of diseases and injuries. The first step in evaluating the
potentialofdifferenttherapeuticstemcelllinesistodevelopasafe
and effectively reproducible delivery system. Real-time iMRI-
guided delivery of cellular products into the target tissue is critical
to the success of the therapy. A noninvasive iMRI approach is be-
coming a necessity in the clinical application to enhance the safety
ofpatientsand the efficacy of the therapeutic approach.Currently,
theeffectsofflowrate,infusionpressure,andshearforcesimposed
bythephysicalpropertiesofthemicroenvironmentoncellsurvival,
penetration,anddispersionare not well documented.Thesetrans-
lational bottlenecks are significant because even with the best cell
preparation, failure of the product to show efficacy may be simply
due to a compromised delivery approach. Thus, interventional de-
livery parameters can in fact make or break a clinical study.
We report optimal parameters affecting cell dispersion and
survival in brain phantom gel and the application of these param-
eters in nonhuman primate target brain structure using minimally
Malloy, Li, Choudhury et al.
5
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: srinivasanv
Time: 13:52
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00603/170036/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM170036
Malloy, Li, Choudhury et al.
881
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 invasive iMRI-guided NSC transplantation into the brain. This pro-
cedure was realized using the ClearPoint system with frameless
SmartFrame stereotaxic fiducial-based navigation that achieved
accurate cannula tip placement of iPSC-derived NSC grafts. We de-
scribe a novel pulsatile mode of cell dispersion into both the brain
phantom gel and brain parenchyma. NSCs prelabeled with SPIO
were magnetic resonance-imaged in real time during the iMRI-
guided injection process to the putamen of baboon and location
was confirmed by immunohistopathological approach. We found
that the rate of injection affected both the dispersion and survival
of the NSCs in the brain phantom gel. The injection rate of 1 ml per
minuteledtoacomparableviabilityofapproximately60%and75%
in the phantom gel and baboon brain, respectively. The difference
may be attributed to the physiologically supportive and neurotro-
phic environment in the brain parenchyma in comparison with the
synthetic phantom gel.
Ourresultssuggestthatcellinfusionanddispersioninbrainphan-
tom gel and brain parenchyma followa pulsatilemode, implying that
unlike drugs, cells do not flow smoothly at a specified rate but rather
are emitted in small bursts. This may be caused by the buildup and
release of pressure caused by the cells progressing through the infu-
sion line. Indeed, we found that using injection cannula of 200- to
300-mm diameter or lower with a 10-foot-long infusion line caused
anincreasedpressurewithnocelldeliveryduringtheintendedperiod
(data not shown). The cells remained blocked in the cannula during
the total duration of infusion (20 minutes). It is plausible that the
Figure 4.
Trajectory alignment. (A): Maximum intensity projection (MIP) of the SmartGrid, a 6 3 6 array of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-
sensitive gadolinium-filled squares placed on the skull covering the estimated entry point of the needle. (B): Three-dimensional T1-weighted
gradientechoseriestransferredtotheClearPointworkstationandusedtoselectthetarget.(C):MIPoftheSmartFrametrajectoryguideshowing
fiducial markers used by the software to segment the SmartFrame and to calculate magnetic resonance scanning parameters for planning the
trajectoryofthecannula. (D):Pointofentryand trajectorytothetarget setbasedon theanteriorandposterior commissuresand themidsagittal
plane and adjusted, if needed, to ovoid particular structures, ventricular systems, or blood vessels using the “fly-through” trajectory option.
Abbreviations: A, anterior; H, head; L, left.
6
MRI-Guided Stem Cell Delivery in Nonhuman Primate
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: srinivasanv
Time: 13:52
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00603/170036/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM170036
882
MRI-Guided Stem Cell Delivery in Nonhuman Primate
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 densityofcellsuspensionmediummayplayanimportantroleinrhe-
ologyandcellbuoyancy,whichmayminimizecellsedimentation and
facilitatetheflowofcells.Inthisstudy,weusedcellculturemediumin
whichcellscansedimentifleftforanextendedperiodoftime.Tomin-
imize the sedimentation, we loaded NSCs to the injection needle just
before insertion in the brain. In addition, the supine position of the
baboon head minimized the effects of gravity on cell sedimentation
in the needle. More viscous cell suspension solutions may reduce
shear forces, adherence, clumping, and sedimentation and improve
rheology and cell survival [27, 28].
Rate of infusion plays an important role in the distribution of
therapeutics in the target tissue. Convection-enhanced delivery has
Figure 5.
Finalizing trajectory and cannula entry. (A): Representative slices of the orthogonal alignment images shown in the ClearPoint soft-
ware. The yellow lines outline the segmentation of the cannula guide. The software-calculated adjustments are shown in orange (Roll) and blue
(Pitch) on the bottom right. (B): Postinjection magnetic resonance image overlaid with the planned target and cannula tip (Left Device Tip) as
calculated by the ClearPoint software showing the superparamagnetic iron oxide-labeled neural stem cell graft (arrow, hypointense area) on
target. Abbreviations: A, anterior; H, head; L, left.
Malloy, Li, Choudhury et al.
7
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: srinivasanv
Time: 13:52
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00603/170036/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM170036
Malloy, Li, Choudhury et al.
883
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 been shown to bean effectivemethod for the direct injection of ther-
apeutic agents into the brain [9, 10]. This method uses positive pres-
sure to deliver an infusate by convection as opposed to diffusion,
which because of the pressure gradient helps to both increase the
Vd/Vi ratio and prevent backflow. It has been shown that smaller-
diameter cannulas (,32 gauge) and slow injection rates (,1 ml per
minute) are ideal parameters for injection [10]. Chen et al. reported
that backflow of C-albumin in the rat model was significantly reduced
withinjectionratesslowerthan1mlperminuteandwitha28-gaugeor
smaller cannula [11]. Backflow is also reduced by theuseof a stepped
cannuladesign,inwhichthecannuladecreasesindiameterindiscrete
steps approaching the tip [12, 13]. These steps provide a physical bar-
rierthatreducesbackflow.Othertypesofcannulaswerealsodesigned
withtheideaofdecreasingbackflowofcells,suchasradiallybranched
cannula, that enable the use of the ClearPoint system with access to
multiple sites through the same insertion track [16]. Although the pa-
rameters established in gene therapy and drug-based experiments
provide a good starting point for stem cell therapy, the ideal param-
eters for stem cell therapy have yet to be defined.
CONCLUSION
The ClearPoint iMRI-based navigation platform initially devel-
oped for iMRI-guided deep brain stimulation (DBS) [29–32] has
received clearance in the United States and the European Union
for clinical use and has significantly improved clinical outcome for
DBS patients [31, 32]. The system has also been used for (a) drug
infusion into gliomas and for adeno-associated viral vector-
expressing glial-derived neurotrophic factor into Parkinsonian
patients [33], (b) brain biopsies [34, 35], (c) targeted ablation in
epilepsy [36], and (d) the BranchPoint Radially Branched Deploy-
mentdeviceforstemcelldeliverytolargebraintargets,whichisin
developmentforhumanuse[16].WereporttheuseoftheClearPoint
system with an MRI-compatible straight injection cannula that elim-
inatesbackflowforiMRI-guidedNSCtransplantation.WiththeClear-
Point system, this cannula allowed for monitoring and avoiding
unwantedstructures,suchasblood vessels,and for preventing hem-
orrhages during cell transplantation. This iMRI approach may im-
prove the safety and efficacy of neural cell transplantation therapy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Worth Family Fund, the Perry &
Ruby Stevens Charitable Foundation, the Robert J., Jr., and Helen
C. Kleberg Foundation, the NIH Primate Center base grant (Office
of Research Infrastructure Programs, OD P51 OD011133) (to
M.M.D.), the Research Imaging Institute (to P.T.F. and G.D.C.),
and Diabetes Research Center (to P.T.F.).
Figure 6.
Postinjection magnetic resonance image and immunohistochemistry of superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO)-labeled neural stem
cells (NSCs). (A): MRI shows the SPIO-labeled NSCs as a hypointense region indicated by the red arrow on the horizontal T2-weighted scan. (B):
Image of Prussian blue staining of a frontal section of the brain counterstained with nuclear fast red, visualizing the NSC graft in blue. (C): Inset
from (B) showing high-power immunofluorescence staining of the NSC graft with the human marker STEM121. (D): Terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase 2´-deoxyuridine, 5´-triphosphate nick-end labeling assay staining of NSC grafts in baboon brain showing dead cells (black arrow)
inside the graft and live cell nuclei stained with methyl green. Scale bars =2.5 mm (B), 500 mm (C), and 20 mm (D).
8
MRI-Guided Stem Cell Delivery in Nonhuman Primate
©AlphaMed Press 2016
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
ID: srinivasanv
Time: 13:52
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00603/170036/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM170036
884
MRI-Guided Stem Cell Delivery in Nonhuman Primate
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K.E.M.: collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and
interpretation, manuscript writing; J.L., G.R.C., A.T., S.G., C.K.,
and T.G.: collection and/or assembly of data; P.T.F. and G.D.C.: ad-
ministrative support, provision of study material; M.M.D.: con-
ception and design, financial support, administrative support,
provision of study material, collection and/or assembly of data, data
analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, final approval of
manuscript.
DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
S.G., C.K., and T.G. are employees of MRI Interventions, Inc.
M.M.D. is founder of NeoNeuron, a biotechnology company.
The other authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1
Liu J, NarsinhKH, LanF etal. Earlystemcell
engraftment predicts late cardiac functional re-
covery:Preclinical insights from molecular im-
aging.CircCardiovascImaging2012;5:481–490.
2
ShapiroAM,GengHaoE,LakeyJRetal.De-
fining optimal immunosuppression for islet
transplantation based on reduced diabetoge-
nicity in canine islet autografts. Transplantation
2002;74:1522–1528.
3
Hagell P, Brundin P. Cell survival and clin-
icaloutcomefollowingintrastriataltransplanta-
tion in Parkinson disease. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol 2001;60:741–752.
4
Daadi MM, Pivirotto P, Bringas J et al. Dis-
tributionofAAV2-hAADC-transducedcellsafter
3 years in Parkinsonian monkeys. Neuroreport
2006;17:201–204.
5
Bankiewicz K, Daadi M, Pivirotto P et al. Focal
dopamine production in the striatum potentiaties
dyskinesiasinnon-humanprimate modelofParkin-
son’sdiseaseandmayexplaininductionofrun-away
dyskinesias in PD patients after fetal mesencephalic
implantation. Neurology 2004;62:A11–A12.
6
Lieberman DM, Laske DW, Morrison PF
etal.Convection-enhanceddistributionoflarge
moleculesingray matterduringinterstitialdrug
infusion. J Neurosurg 1995;82:1021–1029.
7
Heiss JD, Walbridge S, Asthagiri AR et al.
Image-guided convection-enhanced delivery
of muscimol to the primate brain. J Neurosurg
2010;112:790–795.
8
Lonser RR, Walbridge S, Garmestani K et al.
Successful and safe perfusion of the primate
brainstem: In vivo magnetic resonance imaging
of macromolecular distribution during infusion.
J Neurosurg 2002;97:905–913.
9
Bobo RH, Laske DW, Akbasak A et al.
Convection-enhanced delivery of macromole-
cules in the brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;
91:2076–2080.
10
Morrison PF, Chen MY, Chadwick RS et al.
Focaldeliveryduringdirectinfusiontobrain:role
of flow rate, catheter diameter, and tissue me-
chanics. Am J Physiol 1999;277:R1218–R1229.
11
ChenMY,LonserRR,MorrisonPFetal.Var-
iables affecting convection-enhanced delivery to
the striatum: A systematic examination of rate
of infusion, cannula size, infusate concentration,
and tissue-cannula sealing time. J Neurosurg
1999;90:315–320.
12
Gill T, Barua NU, Woolley M et al. In vitro
and in vivo testing of a novel recessed-step
catheter for reflux-free convection-enhanced
drug delivery to the brain. J Neurosci Methods
2013;219:1–9.
13
Yin D, Forsayeth J, Bankiewicz KS. Opti-
mized cannula design and placement for
convection-enhanced delivery in rat striatum.
J Neurosci Methods 2010;187:46–51.
14
Rosenbluth KH, Luz M, Mohr E et al. De-
sign of an in-dwelling cannula for convection-
enhanced delivery. J Neurosci Methods 2011;
196:118–123.
15
SilvestriniMT, YinD,CoppesVGetal.Radi-
ally branched deployment for more efficient cell
transplantation at the scale of the human brain.
Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 2013;91:92–103.
16
SilvestriniMT, Yin D,MartinAJetal. Inter-
ventional magnetic resonance imaging-guided
cell transplantation into the brain with radi-
ally branched deployment. Mol Ther 2015;
23:119–129.
17
Okita K, Hong H, Takahashi K et al. Gener-
ation of mouse-induced pluripotent stem cells
withplasmidvectors.NatProtoc2010;5:418–428.
18
Daadi MM, Maag AL, Steinberg GK. Ad-
herent self-renewable human embryonic stem
cell-derivedneuralstemcell line:Functionalen-
graftment in experimental stroke model. PLoS
One 2008;3:e1644.
19
DaadiMM,LiZ, Arac Aetal.Molecularand
magnetic resonance imaging of human embry-
onic stemcell-derived neural stemcell grafts inis-
chemic rat brain. Mol Ther 2009;17:1282–1291.
20
Panse SJ, Fillmore HL, Chen ZJ et al. A
novel coaxial tube catheter for central nervous
system infusions: Performance characteristics
in brain phantom gel. J Med Eng Technol
2010;34:408–414.
21
ChenZJ,GilliesGT,BroaddusWCetal.Are-
alistic brain tissue phantom for intraparenchymal
infusion studies. J Neurosurg 2004;101:314–322.
22
Chen ZJ, Broaddus WC, Viswanathan RR
et al. Intraparenchymal drug delivery via
positive-pressure infusion: Experimental and
modeling studies of poroelasticity in brain phan-
tom gels. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng2002;49:85–96.
23
Sillay K, Schomberg D, Hinchman A et al.
Benchmarking the ERG valve tip and MRI Inter-
ventionsSmartFlowneurocatheterconvection-
enhanced delivery system’s performance in a
gel model of the brain: Employing infusion pro-
tocols proposed for gene therapy for Parkin-
son’s disease. J Neural Eng 2012;9:026009.
24
Ivanchenko O, Sindhwani N, Linninger A.
Experimental techniques for studying poroelas-
ticity in brain phantom gels under high flow
microinfusion. J Biomech Eng 2010;132:051008.
25
Casanova F, Carney PR, Sarntinoranont
M. Influence of needle insertion speed on back-
flow for convection-enhanced delivery. J Bio-
mech Eng 2012;134:041006.
26
Linninger AA, Somayaji MR, Mekarski M
et al. Prediction of convection-enhanced drug
delivery to the human brain. J Theor Biol
2008;250:125–138.
27
Murhammer DW, Goochee CF. Struc-
tural features of nonionic polyglycol polymer
molecules responsible for the protective effect
in sparged animal cell bioreactors. Biotechnol
Prog 1990;6:142–148.
28
Smith CM 2nd, Hebbel RP, Tukey DP et al.
Pluronic F-68reduces the endothelialadherence
and improves the rheology of liganded sickle
erythrocytes. Blood 1987;69:1631–1636.
29
Starr PA, Martin AJ, Ostrem JL et al. Sub-
thalamic nucleus deep brain stimulator place-
ment using high-field interventional magnetic
resonance imaging and a skull-mounted aiming
device: Technique and application accuracy.
J Neurosurg 2010;112:479–490.
30
Larson PS, Starr PA, Bates G et al. An op-
timized system for interventional magnetic res-
onance imaging-guided stereotactic surgery:
Preliminaryevaluationoftargetingaccuracy.Neu-
rosurgery 2012;70(Suppl Operative):95–103; dis-
cussion 103.
31
Starr PA, Markun LC, Larson PS et al.
Interventional MRI-guided deep brain stimula-
tion in pediatric dystonia: First experience with
the ClearPoint system. J Neurosurg Pediatr
2014;14:400–408.
32
Ostrem JL, Ziman N, Galifianakis NB et al.
Clinical outcomes using ClearPoint interven-
tional MRI for deep brain stimulation lead
placement in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosurg
2016;124:908–916.
33
Chittiboina P, Heiss JD, Lonser RR. Accu-
racy of direct magnetic resonance imaging-
guided placement of drug infusion cannulae. J
Neurosurg 2015;122:1173–1179.
34
Mohyeldin A, Lonser RR, Elder JB. Real-
time
magnetic
resonance
imaging-guided
frameless stereotactic brain biopsy: Technical
note. J Neurosurg 2016;124:1039–1046.
35
Chen CC, White NS, Farid N et al. Pre-
operative cellularity mapping and intra-MRI
surgery: Potential for improving neurosurgical
biopsies. Expert Rev Med Devices 2015;12:1–5.
36
Gross RE, Willie JT, Drane DL. The role of
stereotactic laser amygdalohippocampotomy
in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurosurg
Clin N Am 2016;27:37–50.
See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.
Malloy, Li, Choudhury et al.
9
www.StemCellsTM.com
©AlphaMed Press 2016
ID: srinivasanv
Time: 13:52
I
Path: //chenas03/Cenpro/ApplicationFiles/Journals/Wiley/SCTM/Vol00603/170036/Comp/APPFile/JW-SCTM170036
Malloy, Li, Choudhury et al.
885
www.StemCellsTM.com
O
c 2016 The Authors
STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of AlphaMed Press
