 Early cytoplasmic uncoating is associated with
infectivity of HIV-1
João I. Mamedea, Gianguido C. Ciancia, Meegan R. Andersona, and Thomas J. Hopea,1
aDepartment of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611
Edited by John M. Coffin, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, and approved July 14, 2017 (received for review May 5, 2017)
After fusion, HIV delivers its conical capsid into the cytoplasm. To
release the contained reverse-transcribing viral genome, the capsid
must disassemble in a process termed uncoating. Defining the
kinetics, dynamics, and cellular location of uncoating of virions
leading to infection has been confounded by defective, noninfec-
tious particles and the stochastic minefield blocking access to host
DNA. We used live-cell fluorescent imaging of intravirion fluid phase
markers to monitor HIV-1 uncoating at the individual particle level.
We find that HIV-1 uncoating of particles leading to infection is a
cytoplasmic process that occurs ∼30 min postfusion. Most, but not
all, of the capsid protein is rapidly shed in tissue culture and primary
target cells, independent of entry pathway. Extended time-lapse
imaging with less than one virion per cell allows identification of
infected cells by Gag-GFP expression and directly links individual
particle behavior to infectivity, providing unprecedented insights
into the biology of HIV infection.
HIV-1 early steps | HIV-1 uncoating | live-cell imaging
H
IV is the etiological agent of the AIDS pandemic. To infect
a target cell, HIV must complete a series of steps initiating
with fusion and release into the cytoplasm, followed by reverse
transcription, nuclear translocation, and integration into the host
chromatin. After cell fusion, HIV delivers its conical core, referred
to as the capsid, into the cytoplasm. The capsid, formed by CA
protein hexamers and pentamers, contains several viral and host
cell proteins as well as the viral genome (1), and is an interesting
target for new antiviral therapies. The disassembly of this fullerene
cone composed of CA is termed uncoating, and it is critical to
infection (2). Determinants in CA have been shown to influence
multiple steps of infection, such as nuclear translocation pathway
and preference of HIV sites of integration (3–8), and to influence
host responses, such as DNA sensing mediated by cyclic GMP-
AMP synthase (cGAS) (9, 10).
To date, there are disagreeing models for the timing and cellular
location of HIV-1 uncoating (11). An early model advocated for
uncoating at viral fusion, based on the inability to detect CA as-
sociated with purified reverse transcription complexes (RTCs) or
preintegration complexes (PICs) (12–14). The discovery of
TRIM5α and TRIM-CypA’s ability to target HIV-1 capsids and
block HIV-1 infection revealed the persistence of the viral cone in
the cytoplasm after fusion (15–23). Another model suggests that
CA is not shed from the RTC and that the intact capsid docks at
the nuclear pore (3, 5). This possibility is supported by the obser-
vation that CA is a viral determinant in several important steps that
occur in the nucleus, including nuclear import and integration site
selection of the viral genetic material in the host DNA (3–5, 24). A
third proposed model is that uncoating takes place in the cytoplasm
as the reverse-transcribing viral genome is transported to the nu-
cleus. This model is based on both fluorescence microscopy ob-
servations and assays that exploit the impact on infection from
modulated TRIM5 susceptibility (25–29). The HIV-1 capsid un-
coating dependence on microtubule stability also supports a cyto-
plasmic uncoating (25, 26, 30–34). Recently, the importance and
dependence on CA of most of the early steps of infection have
been partially explained by the identification of a small amount of
CA that associates with the PIC in the nucleus (35–38). Because of
the differences between these models, the kinetics, dynamics, and
cellular location of uncoating of infectious HIV-1 particles have
remained controversial topics (4, 25–29, 37, 39, 40).
A major hurdle to the clarification of HIV-1 uncoating is that
most uncoating assays examine populations of viral particles.
These populations include defective or noninfectious virions
and stochastic events leading to nonproductive aborted infection,
which confounds data interpretation. These assays inevitably av-
erage the behavior of different viral particle phenotypes. So far,
the field has been unable to differentiate between defective or
ineffectual particles with an anomalous behavior and particles that
are associated with productive infection of a target cell. In this
study, we leverage a live-cell imaging assay to distinguish particles
associated with infection and define their associated behavior. We
study the behavior of individual labeled viral particles in cell lines,
and primary cells that are HIV-1 targets of infection.
Results
Development of a Live-Cell Imaging Fluorescent Microscopy Assay to
Measure HIV-1 Capsid Integrity Loss. To observe the state of the
integrity of the HIV conical capsid, we use live-cell fluorescent
imaging to monitor HIV-1 capsid integrity by tracking single
particles that are dual-labeled with Gag-iGFP, a fluid phase marker,
and with the viral genome complex labeled by mCherryVpr (25, 41).
The loss of capsid integrity is observed as a loss of fluid phase GFP
contained within an intact conical capsid. Multiple groups have
shown that the generation of HIV-1 particles with a Gag-GFP
polyprotein (HIV-iGFP) releases free GFP after proteolytic viral
maturation. The liberated GFP then becomes an intravirion fluid
phase marker (41–43). We previously demonstrated that a minority
subset of the fluid phase GFP is trapped within the capsid structure
(42, 44). This minority of fluid phase GFP trapped within capsids
allows the prefusion virions to be differentiated from postmembrane
fusion intact conical capsids and capsids that have lost their integrity
when particles are dual-labeled with a viral genome complex marker,
Significance
After fusion, HIV delivers its capsid formed of CA proteins into the
cytoplasm. The regulated disassembly of the capsid (uncoating) is
critical to the timely exposure of the viral genome and infection.
The timing of this process is controversial. Utilizing an intravirion
GFP fluid phase marker with a live-cell imaging approach, where
we use less than one virion per cell, we demonstrate that the
uncoating of HIV-1 particles is an early cytoplasmic process taking
place ∼30 minutes after fusion, and dependent on ongoing reverse
transcription. Early uncoating is observed in culture cells, primary
T cells, and macrophages with either HIV or pseudotyped enve-
lope. Partial CA retention with the viral complex facilitates late CA
functions, including nuclear import and integration site selection.
Author contributions: J.I.M., G.C.C., and T.J.H. designed research; J.I.M. and M.R.A. per-
formed research; J.I.M. and T.J.H. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; J.I.M., G.C.C.,
and T.J.H. analyzed data; and J.I.M., G.C.C., and T.J.H. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: thope@northwestern.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1706245114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706245114
PNAS
|
Published online August 7, 2017
|
E7169–E7178
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 such as mCherryVpr (Fig. 1A). The mCherryVpr is an effective tool
to track RTCs as they initiate reverse transcription (14, 25). Here, we
leverage the ability to detect the stepwise loss of the GFP fluid phase
marker to monitor loss of HIV-1 capsid integrity within living cells
using time-lapse fluorescent microscopy (Fig. 1A).
To determine the timing of HIV-1 capsid integrity loss after vi-
rion fusion, we initially used Chinese hamster ovary (CHOpgsa745)
cells infected with vesicular stomatitis virus G glycoprotein (VSV-G)
pseudotyped HIV-1–iGFP–mCherryVpr particles (Movie S1). This
mutant CHO cell line lacks expression of glycosaminoglycans,
resulting in high efficiency of particle fusion and cytoplasmic entry
upon cellular engagement (16). The analysis of a well-characterized
preparation of virions (Fig. S1) that entered imaged cells reveals
that the majority of viral particles show a dramatic loss of most of
their GFP, consistent with fusion within an endosome within
∼30 min of cell engagement (Fig. 1 A and B). This considerable
GFP loss is concurrent with fusion, as revealed by using viral
particles with S15-tdTomato–labeled membranes (Movie S2).
However, as anticipated, a majority of the cytoplasmic viral
complexes retain a subset of the GFP trapped within the intact
cone. The level of residual GFP is lost from the mCherryVpr RTC
marker ∼30 min after fusion, revealing a dual-step loss of GFP
from the viral complex.
While this dual-step GFP loss represents the most common
phenotype, other viral behaviors are present (Figs. 1D and 2A).
Some particles lose their entire GFP signal after fusion, likely due to
incomplete formation of a mature and intact capsid (42). A notable
minority population appears to fuse but does not lose the totality of
its GFP signal before the end of the data acquisition period
(>120 min). We fit the GFP signal with a heuristic double-sigmoid
equation (Fig. S2 B and C) to determine Δt: the time between the
first drop in intensity (indicating fusion) and the subsequent loss of
the remaining GFP (indicating capsid integrity loss). We find a me-
dian postfusion capsid integrity loss of Δt = 25.0 ± 7.3 min (Fig. 1D).
Fig. 1.
Live-cell imaging of HIV-iGFP reveals an early timing to capsid integrity loss associated with infection. (A) Time course of HIV-iGFP-mCherryVpr infection
reveals two independent GFP signal drops leading to complete loss of signal; the mCherryVpr signal is used to track HIV particles. A particle interacts with a target
cell; when fusion occurs, there is a first drop of the GFP signal; and when the capsid integrity is compromised, there is a complete loss of the GFP signal. (Scale bar:
500 nm.) (B) Time-lapse quantification of mean particle intensity of GFP signal (green) and mCherryVpr (red). (C) Cells from a live imaging experiment over 22 h
were fixed and stained for p24/p55 (red) and Lamin-B (blue), and de novo signal of HIV-iGFP was also acquired (green). A single particle was able to fuse to this
cell, demonstrating a dual-drop phenotype, as shown in Movie S1. (Scale bar: 10 μm.) (D) Median time of capsid integrity loss is 25.0 min for dual-drop events:
kinetics of iGFP-mCherryVpr particles that undergo total loss of GFP signal Δ(time of total integrity loss − time of fusion) (∼290 cells). Particles that lost all GFP
simultaneously to fusion were given a value of 0 (white circles), particles that kept GFP until the end of the time lapse were given a value of 120 min (green circles),
particles that had two signal drops were given a value of Δ(time of total integrity loss − time of fusion) obtained with data fitting and were dual-labeled with
mCherryVpr (black circles), and particles with two iGFP signal drops without mCherryVpr marker are shown as gray circles. (D, Right) Median time of capsid
integrity loss is 29.3 min for cells that became infected, only infected cells that presented one virus phenotype were plotted, and all cells that became infected had
a dual-drop HIV-iGFP phenotype (∼4,000 cells). Medians are shown as gray horizontal bars. STDEV, standard deviation.
E7170
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706245114
Mamede et al.
 In complementary experiments, we labeled HIV-iGFP viruses with
an Integrase (IN)-mRuby fusion protein that has been shown to
remain with the PIC after entry into the nucleus (30, 36). We used
this alternative marker for the RTC/PIC and measured approxi-
mately the same timing of integrity loss as when using mCherryVpr
as an RTC marker, 23.6 ± 8.0 min after fusion (Fig. 2A and Movie
S3). These results provided validation for the ability to measure
capsid integrity loss of the cytoplasmic HIV complex containing the
viral genome.
Phenotypical Differentiation of Virions Associated with Infectious
Events. To understand the biological consequences of HIV-1 un-
coating, it is critical to directly connect either the dual-step drop
or stable cone integrity phenotype to infection. To tie infectiv-
ity to individual virion behavior, we developed an extended
time-lapse imaging approach. We follow multiple fields of the
CHOpgsa745 cells for ∼2 h, capturing a two-color z-series every
4.5 min. After this initial period, we imaged with an increasing
time lapse extending up to every 30 min for the next 24–42 h.
Because the HIV-iGFP construct contains a Gag-GFP fusion, any
infected cell that is producing new viruses is readily identified by its
de novo Gag-GFP expression and new virion assembly (Fig. 1 C
and D). These studies were done under conditions of very low
virus concentrations, where there is typically less than one virion
per cell. This allows the ability to directly connect individual par-
ticle capsid integrity behavior to infection. Examining ∼4,000 cells
in this manner led to the identification of 21 infected cells. As
expected, only cells that were shown to be associated with a GFP-
labeled particle later became infected, as demonstrated by the
expression of the iGFP-Gag fusion protein. Analysis of the be-
havior of viral particles that fused with the infected cells showed
that 17 of these cells interacted with a single virion. Eleven of these
cells interacted with a dual-labeled particle (black solid dots in Fig.
1D and Movie S4), while six cells were infected by particles that
were labeled with HIV-iGFP but not mCherryVpr (gray solid dots
in Fig. 1D and Movie S4). In all 11 dual-labeled cases, the in-
fectious event is associated with a single virion that lost its capsid
iGFP signal within 45 min after fusion. The Δt measured by GFP
intensity is presented in Fig. 1D, with a median of 28.7 ± 9.1 min.
This occurred in the cytoplasm for all observed virions that went
on to infect the cells. This observation demonstrates that only the
early loss of cone integrity ∼30 min postfusion is followed by in-
fection. The remaining four infected cells that interacted with
more than one fused viral particle are not shown in Fig. 1D. Within
each of these latter four cells, we observed the presence of a
particle with a dual-step loss of GFP.
Modulation of Viral Capsid Integrity. Building on the correlation of
early capsid integrity loss with virion infectivity, we extended our
studies to evaluate the potential impact of conditions previously
suggested to alter the timing of uncoating to determine if they
modulated the time between fusion and cone integrity loss (Δt) on
our findings. To establish a parallel between a previous assay that
indirectly examines HIV-1 uncoating and infection with HIV-
iGFP (28, 39, 45), we performed a CsA washout assay that veri-
fied a similar timing of capsid integrity loss as observed by the
imaging assay. The CsA washout assay showed an integrity loss at
28 min (50% of GFP+ cells) in CHOpgsa745 cells that were stably
expressing TRIM-CypA (Fig. S2A). As we previously showed with
the CsA washout (28), delaying reverse transcription with the
transient presence of nevirapine (NVP) pauses capsid integrity
loss until NVP removal from the media (Fig. 2A and Movie S5).
The insertion of an N74D mutation into the HIV-iGFP CA causes
a delay in integrity loss, a finding also coincident with previous
indirect studies (28) (Fig. 2A). In another approach to evaluate the
live-imaging assay’s ability to correctly measure the integrity of
HIV-iGFP capsid, we measured the impact on capsid integrity by
modulating TRIM-CypA restriction. Typical TRIM-CypA re-
striction is demonstrated by a quick destruction of HIV-iGFP
particles after fusion (Fig. S3B) that is not present after protea-
some function is inhibited with MG132 (46). Preventing TRIM-
CypA restriction with CsA shows normal capsid integrity loss
progression, while the incubation with MG132 blocks the loss of
HIV-1 viral capsid integrity by capturing intact viral capsids in
TRIM-CypA bodies (44) (Fig. 2B and Movie S6).
Inhibiting First-Strand Transfer of Reverse Transcription by Reversibly
Inhibiting RNase H Delays Capsid Integrity Loss. After observing that
integrity loss of the capsid happens ∼30 min after fusion and is
dependent on the ability of HIV-1 to perform reverse transcrip-
tion, we explored the impact of the first steps of early reverse
transcription product formation on the loss of capsid integrity. An
emerging hypothesis to the link between early reverse transcrip-
tion products and the loss of capsid integrity has been recently
backed by a study based on both theoretical and mutational
studies. Cosnefroy et al. (29) suggested that the first-strand
transfer of reverse transcription might play a crucial role in core
disassembly. However, another concurrent report that measured
the binding of tetrameric CypA to the capsid as a tool to follow
Fig. 2.
Modulation of HIV-iGFP capsid integrity loss. (A) NH4Cl-synchronized
infection with either WT or N74D capsid and with NVP washout 50 min
postfusion. The capsid integrity loss was delayed until NVP removal. N74D
capsid integrity loss is ∼30 min slower compared with WT, and HIV-iGFP viruses
labeled with IN-Ruby behave like mCherryVpr particles. (B) NH4Cl-synchronized
infection of CHO or CHO-TRIMCypA cells has a normal phenotype in the
presence of CsA, and viral capsid integrity was maintained in TRIM bodies in
the presence of MG132. STDEV, standard deviation. *P < 0.5; ***P < 0.01.
Mamede et al.
PNAS
|
Published online August 7, 2017
|
E7171
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 CA pointed to no correlation between first-strand transfer and
uncoating (27). This study used a reverse transcription RnaseH–
deficient mutant with no visible impact over time on the levels of
CypA binding to the capsid compared with WT (27). Using an
RnaseH inhibitor specific to HIV-1 reverse transcription (7390;
shown as 8b in ref. 47), we can block the first-strand transfer of
reverse transcription while allowing reverse transcription activity
(Fig. S4). Using the CsA washout assay, we observe that the re-
moval of the RnaseH inhibitor 105 min after fusion allows res-
toration of a normal course of infection (Fig. 3A). The direct
measurement of the integrity of individual capsid cores in the
presence of RnaseH inhibitor showed a delay on capsid integrity
loss. When the inhibitor 7390 was removed, capsid integrity loss
was rapidly observed (Fig. 3). This finding supports the model that
changes in HIV-1 capsid integrity are influenced by the occurrence
of first-strand transfer of the reverse transcription process within
an intact capsid core.
Early Capsid Integrity Loss Is Observed in Primary Blood Cells. An
advantage of our live-cell imaging assay is that it can be applied to
different cell types and viral tropisms. To extend our studies to
more biologically relevant cell types, we infected CD3/CD28-
activated CD4+ T cells with replication-competent, CXCR4-tropic
HIV–iGFP–NL4-3 labeled with mCherryVpr. Here, our live-
imaging assay yields a median postfusion capsid integrity loss of
Δt = 22.8 ± 8.5 min (Fig. 4 and Movie S7). This result is consistent
with the early capsid integrity loss of Δt = 28.7 ± 9.1 min observed
in CHOpgsa745 cells challenged with VSV-G pseudotyped viruses
associated with infection (Fig. 1D and Movie S4). Infection of
monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) with VSV-G HIV-iGFP
shows integrity loss with an average Δt = 17.2 ± 7.2 min (Fig. 4).
Infection in MDMs might be expected to result in a slower capsid
integrity loss since it has been reported that macrophages have
relatively low dNTP concentrations (40, 48, 49) and delayed
completion of reverse transcription (28). However, the imaging
assay has suggested that capsid integrity loss is associated with
early reverse transcription, which might be less sensitive to dNTP
concentrations (29, 50). Consistent with this interpretation, we
show that the timing of capsid integrity loss in macrophages can be
modulated by transitory NVP treatment (Fig. 4). The clear delay
of capsid integrity loss upon NVP treatment is present both in
primary and tissue culture cell lines, and therefore supports the
concept that HIV capsid integrity loss does not require the com-
pletion of reverse transcription, but is influenced by the early steps
of provirus generation, to result in a successful infection.
Capsid Integrity Loss Happens Simultaneously with CA Shedding.
These data demonstrate a loss of capsid integrity in infectious
particles, as measured by total GFP loss from the viral capsid.
However, monitoring capsid integrity cannot differentiate between
leaking through a small hole in the capsid cone or a catastrophic
loss of a majority of CA from the RTC. Historically, uncoating is
defined as a loss of the CA that forms the cone structure. How-
ever, it is not anticipated that this loss is complete since a small
amount of CA has been shown to play a role in viral trafficking,
microtubule association, nuclear pore translocation, and prefer-
ential site of integration, and it has more recently been associated
with HIV nuclear complexes (35–37). It is therefore crucial to
assess the level of CA when the cone integrity is changing. To
directly quantitate the loss of CA and compare it with capsid in-
tegrity loss, we used time-lapse fluorescent imaging, followed by
correlative fixed immunofluorescence structured illumination mi-
croscopy (3D-SIM). We performed our HIV-iGFP live-imaging
capsid integrity assay and fixed the samples 40 min after NH4Cl-
synchronized fusion. At this time point, we anticipated that ap-
proximately half of the cores would remain intact. The samples
were permeabilized and stained for CA, with DAPI counterstain.
In Fig. 5A, we show anti-CA antibody staining of a represen-
tative particle that was observed to undergo a dual drop of GFP
intensity (Movie S8). Measurement of CA levels of individual
particles that are intact, are fused, or have entered a cell and then
lost capsid integrity shows statistically significantly lower levels of
CA associated with the viral complex (Fig. 5 B and C). These
observations effectively and crucially link the step of capsid in-
tegrity loss measured by complete loss of fluid phase GFP to the
loss of most of the CA from the complex. This loss of the majority
of CA under the current experimental conditions is likely a con-
sequence of the disassembly of much of the cone (i.e., uncoating).
By measuring the distances to the plasma membrane and nuclear
membranes with a previously described method (25), we de-
termine that all the uncoated viral complexes are located in the
cytoplasm. We do not observe any viral complexes in nuclei at the
moment of cone integrity loss. These findings are consistent with
Fig. 3.
Transient inhibition of reverse transcription RNAseH activity results in
a delay of capsid integrity loss. (A) CsA washout of CHO-TRIMCypA cells in the
absence of 7390 (black) and with 7390 washed out for all wells at 105 min
(gray). (B) Δt for infection of CHO cells incubated and washed with DMSO
mock (Left) and 7390 (Right); the capsid integrity loss was delayed in accor-
dance with 7390 removal (50 min postaverage fusion of all particles). Medians
are shown as gray horizontal bars. (C) Mean particle intensity of GFP signal
(green) and mCherryVpr (red) in the presence of 7390, followed by its washout
(arrow) 50 min postfusion. STDEV, standard deviation. *P < 0.5.
E7172
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706245114
Mamede et al.
 capsid uncoating in the cytoplasm in accordance with findings
linking microtubule dependence on uncoating (25, 26, 30–34) (Fig.
5 A and C).
To provide additional kinetic insight, and further technical
validation, where antibody binding will not be a factor of staining
or temporal detection, we used particles with a tetracysteine
motif inserted in CA and directly labeled with ReAsH (46).
Labeling with CA-ReAsH, together with iRFP670-Vpr incor-
poration into HIV-iGFP, generates triple-labeled particles, allow-
ing the simultaneous detection of changes in both GFP and CA
(Movie S9). The complete loss of GFP from the capsid and loss of
the ability to detect CA-ReAsH signal happen quasi-simultaneously,
and are well correlated in time (Rspearman = 0.62) (Fig. 5D). Al-
though the CA-ReAsH signal suffers a big drop in signal concur-
rently with capsid integrity loss and appears to be completely lost
during the live-imaging acquisition, fixation and CA staining 45 min
postfusion show small amounts of CA-ReAsH that are associated
with the complex (Fig. 5E). The small amount of ReAsH signal
cannot be efficiently detected in the less optimal conditions of live-
cell imaging, but are readily detectable in the more optimal condi-
tions of fixed-cell imaging. To ascertain that the CA-ReAsH signal
loss is not due to photobleaching, we applied our analysis to viruses
that did not fuse, but were on the glass coverslip or on cell mem-
branes in the same live-cell imaging experiments (Fig. S5). These
unfused viruses were photostable well beyond the typical uncoating
times. We also performed photobleaching control analysis on sev-
eral thousand virions that were spun onto glass and then imaged
with the same experimental conditions as the live-cell imaging ex-
periments (Fig. S6 and SI Text). We find that photobleaching is a
smooth monotonic process which cannot be the cause of the abrupt
CA-ReAsH signal loss we observe during uncoating.
Together, two different approaches, correlative quantification
of immunostained CA levels in fixed cells and live-cell imaging of
ReAsH-labeled CA, allowed the direct measurement of CA
levels within the viral complexes. Both approaches show a cor-
relation between the loss of iGFP and a substantial, but partial,
loss of CA.
CA Shedding Is an Early Cytoplasmic Event in Primary Cells. To de-
termine if uncoating kinetics were similar in the more bi-
ologically relevant context of the infection of primary T cells with
an HIV envelope, we performed live-cell imaging experiments
with replicative HIV-iGFP with WTEnv (pNL4-3) followed by
fixation at 1 h after viral challenge with unsynchronized entry.
The infected cells were then counterstained with DAPI and
mAbs to p24. Quantification of p24 levels in the three different
populations (unfused particles, fused particles with intact cores,
and complexes where core integrity is lost) shows distinct levels
of p24 associated with each population. This analysis reveals the
capsid integrity loss is coincidental with a statistically significant
loss in CA that happens early after fusion and is a cytoplasmic
process (Fig. 6 A and B) in activated primary CD4 T cells. The
levels of p24 in the three populations defined by the GFP fluid
phase marker in the primary CD4 T cells infected with an HIV
envelope (Fig. 6C) are similar to those observed during infection
of the CHO cells in an analogous experiment (Fig. 5B).
We also performed complementary experiments where we in-
fected MDMs with VSV-G pseudotyped HIV-iGFP that was
double-labeled with IN-mRuby in the presence of Vpx virus-like
particles (VLPs). The fusion was synchronized by the presence of
NH4Cl in the media. After starting the live-cell imaging, we
allowed fusion to occur by removing the NH4Cl in the system and
fixed the sample ∼50 min after fusion. Although macrophages
showed a high particle deletion rate, as observed by the disap-
pearance of several particles that fused into the cell in comparison
to cell lines or primary CD4 T cells, it was possible to capture
representative events of IN-mRuby–labeled particles that were
unfused or fused and particles where the capsid integrity was lost.
Using the same CA staining conditions as for the CD4 T cells, it
was again observed within this small dataset that the complete loss
of GFP also results in a reduction of the amount of CA in the
particles (Fig. 6 A, C, and D and Movie S10).
Together, these experiments performed in primary cells that
are the natural targets of HIV show that HIV-1 uncoating occurs
at the moment of capsid integrity loss, which is also indicated by
iGFP loss from particles in the cytoplasm.
Discussion
In this study, we followed HIV-1 uncoating using a live-imaging
approach where we can analyze one viral particle per cell and
directly connect the behavior of that particle to infection, as
revealed by the expression of the GFP-tagged Gag polyprotein
after integration. Most of what is currently known about HIV-1
uncoating has come from in vitro biochemical approaches,
mutation-based methods, and indirect observations that result
from cellular mechanisms of viral restriction. The approaches re-
lated to restriction were limited by a lack of demonstration that the
loss of sensitivity to restriction was a consequence of uncoating. In
contrast, in situ imaging of fixed or live cells was able to show
changes in CA amounts in postfusion particles (26–28, 36). Un-
fortunately, these methods provided minimal kinetic information
and no ability to determine which behaviors of individual particles
led to a successful infection. This is because, typically, most of
the HIV viral complexes within a cell are not able to infect a cell
(51). In some cases, this is likely due to defects in the particle.
However, the virus also faces a minefield of stochastic events
where restriction factors and innate antiviral responses, correctly
completing reverse transcription, nuclear translocation, and cor-
rect integration while avoiding recombination and autointegration,
stand as obstacles to infection even though the viral function is
normal. For example, only one-third of the reverse-transcribed viral
genomes that reach the nucleus go on to integrate as required
for productive infection (52). This is a high rate of attrition that can
be a consequence of stochastic events rather than genetic defects
(51). The only way to account for such stochastic events is direct
observation of individual particles.
The live-cell imaging method that was used in this study allowed
the ability to connect the detailed behavior of HIV-1 particles to
cell infection. In this study, we show that the HIV-1 core loses its
integrity and a majority of its CA protein ∼30 min after being re-
leased into the cytoplasm after fusion. Uncoating of all observed
particles that go on to infect a cell is completed by 45 min after
fusion. By using a “one-particle, one-cell” approach, it was possible
to follow the actual fate of capsid, specifically in HIV-1 particles
Fig. 4.
Early capsid integrity loss is observed in primary HIV target cells. In-
fection of CD4+ T cells (WTEnv) and macrophages (VSV-G pseudotypes) resul-
ted in a similar timing of capsid integrity loss. Uncoating in macrophages was
delayed by NVP washout (washed 40 min postaverage fusion). Medians are
shown as gray horizontal bars. STDEV, standard deviation. *P < 0.5.
Mamede et al.
PNAS
|
Published online August 7, 2017
|
E7173
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 Fig. 5.
Quantification of CA in viral complexes links capsid integrity loss to uncoating. (A) Three-dimensional SIM superresolution imaging of cells fixed after live
imaging for 40 min. (Scale bar: 10 μm.) (Inset) Particle that showed two drops and complete GFP signal loss shows a positive signal for CA (green) and Vpr (red),
using nuclear staining with DAPI (blue). (Scale bar: 250 nm.) (B) Mean intensity and signal-to-noise ratio of all live-imaged individual particles. Groups were
defined by their live-imaging GFP capsid integrity phenotype. Medians of the individual events are represented by the gray bars, and interquartile ranges are
shown as error bars. (C) Particles with a complete loss of capsid integrity locate in the cytoplasm after measurement of the distance from the particle to plasma
and nuclear membranes [value of 1 means nuclear membrane location, value of 0 means located at the plasma membrane (PM)]. (D) HIV-iGFP-ReAsH-iRFP670Vpr
particles were plotted by timing of complete loss of GFP (x axis) and timing of complete loss of ReAsH signal (y axis). (E) Three-dimensional SIM superresolution
imaging of cells that were fixed after live imaging for 45 min: p24 (green), Lamin-B (blue), and iRFP670Vpr (red). (Scale bar, 10 μm.) (Inset) Magnification rep-
resents a particle where two intensity drops were observed, resulting in a complete loss of GFP signal. An uncoated particle fixed after live imaging that is positive
for p24 (green), CA-ReAsH (blue), and iRFP670Vpr (red) is shown (Scale bar: 200 nm.) *P < 0.5; **P < 0.1; ***P < 0.01.
E7174
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706245114
Mamede et al.
 that ultimately went on to infect a cell and begin producing Gag
and budding virions. The observed infectious events in these in-
fections at less than one particle per cell likely underrepresent the
potential infected cells within the cultures due to length of ob-
servation time, cellular stress due to phototoxicity, and imperfect
culture environment. In typical infectivity assays with reporter
viruses, the experiments are run for 48 h to achieve maximal de-
tection of infection. For these studies, we cultured the cells for up
to 42 h, but often stopped earlier to preserve the observed cells for
subsequent correlative analysis. Likewise, cellular state in the ox-
idative environment of phototoxicity and other cellular stresses of
continuous imaging probably negatively impacted the cellular
environment experienced by the virus. It is also difficult to trans-
late the outcomes typically observed at the population level down
to the limited observations at the individual cell level. The de-
velopment of automated image analysis will allow the behavior of
thousands of virions to be quantified to provide additional insights
into the particle-to-infectivity ratio and the efficiency of the early
steps of the HIV life cycle.
Another important consideration in interpreting the one particle
per cell studies is the possibility of unlabeled viral particles that can
be generated by the cotransfection of multiple plasmids. This issue
is potentially relevant because single-particle analysis showed that
the HIV-iGFP particle populations with different viral complex
markers (Vpr or IN) or envelopes (pNL4-3 WT or VSV-G) tested
here had 53–90% maturation in HIV-iGFP–labeled particles (Fig.
S1). The viral preparations are generated by cotransfection of iGFP,
a gag-pol expression vector, mCherryVpr, and VSV-G envelope,
and, theoretically, unlabeled infectious particles could be present. In
our experimental setting, only the viral RNA expressed from the
HIV-Gag-iGFP plasmids contains LTRs, ensuring that infection
will be reported by newly produced Gag-GFP fusion proteins.
Therefore, under the conditions of virus production used here, it
seems unlikely that particles could be produced which contain the
iGFP genomic RNA but not the iGFP GFP-tagged Gag.
To validate this assumption, we performed RNA fluorescent in
situ hybridization (FISH) targeting GFP, whose coding sequence
is only present in the HIV-iGFP plasmid and genomic RNA (Fig.
S1I). The analysis showed that ∼97% of the mature HIV particles
(AG3+) containing iGFP genomic RNA are GFP-labeled (Fig. S1
G–I), while the control HIV-iCherry particles that were produced
in similar fashion to HIV-iGFP were negative for GFP containing
RNA (Fig. S1 G and I). In contrast, only 0.6% of the GFP− ma-
ture particles contain iGFP genomic RNA. This analysis reveals
that there are no substantial populations of unlabeled viral par-
ticles that could confound the analysis connecting timing of capsid
integrity loss and infectivity. Further supporting this viewpoint, we
never observed any infected cells (GFP+) that were not associated
with iGFP-labeled particles, even under conditions where most
cells never associated with a fluorescently labeled viral particle.
The HIV-iGFP construct allows the study of HIV-1 viral capsid
status over time and the detection of the production of new viral
particles that result from cell infection. The retention of cleaved
GFP as a fluid phase marker inside of a virion and capsid uniquely
allows detection of both the fusion event and subsequent loss
of capsid integrity (Fig. 1 A and B). To address the possibility
of GFP signal reduction in an acidic endosome in the case of
VSV-G pseudotyping (43), we measured fusion directly with S15-
tdTomato (Movie S2) and indirectly by the observation that after
fusion, viruses are trapped in cytoplasmic TRIM bodies in the
presence of MG132 (Fig. 2B). In recent years, several groups
have discovered that it is possible to modulate “uncoating” of HIV-
1 particles either by delaying or blocking reverse transcription, or by
introducing certain mutations into the CA protein that forms the
conical core (2, 23, 28, 29, 53, 54). A well-established mechanism
to disrupt HIV capsid stability is to exploit the mechanism of
TRIM5 restriction that recruits the proteasome to direct capsid
disruption (16, 44). Specifically, TRIMCypA restriction can be
modulated for the binding and disruption of the incoming viral
capsid by the presence of the CsA washout assay. We used this
ability to switch TRIMCypA restriction on and off to demonstrate
that using the iGFP fluid phase marker validated the system
presented here to monitor capsid integrity. In the absence of
TRIMCypA function, thanks to the presence of CsA, we observed
a median Δt (time between fusion and integrity loss) of ∼25 min
(Fig. 2B). This result is in accordance with nonrestrictive infection.
In an experimental setting where TRIMCypA can bind to the
capsid but the proteasome-mediated capsid disruption is pre-
vented by proteasome inhibitors, the HIV-iGFP capsids accumu-
late in an intact form within TRIMCypA bodies (Fig. 2B).
Fig. 6.
Quantification of CA in viral complexes in
primary cells shows a loss of CA after capsid integrity
loss. (A) Mean particle intensity of GFP signal (green)
and mCherryVpr (red) of an individually tracked,
dual-labeled HIV-1 particle; the sample was fixed
at 55 min and represents the same event as in B.
(B) Three-dimensional SIM superresolution imaging
of a CD4 T cell fixed after live imaging for 55 min.
(Scale bar: 5 μm.) (Inset) Particle that showed two
drops and complete GFP signal loss shows a positive
signal for CA (green) and Vpr (red), using nuclear
staining with DAPI (blue) and cytoplasmic localiza-
tion. (Scale bar: 100 nm.) (C) Mean intensity and
signal-to-noise ratio of all live-imaged particles that
were individually tracked. Groups were defined by
their live-imaging GFP capsid integrity phenotype.
Medians of the individual events are represented by
gray bars, and interquartile ranges are shown as
error bars. Open symbols show particles that chal-
lenged CD4 T cells, and red symbols show represen-
tative events measured from MDMs. (D) Three-
dimensional SIM superresolution imaging of an
MDM that was fixed after live imaging for 50 min.
(Scale bar: 5 μm.) (Inset) Particle that showed two
drops and complete GFP signal loss shows a positive
signal for CA (green) and Vpr (red), using nuclear
staining with DAPI (blue) and cytoplasmic localiza-
tion. (Scale bar: 100 nm.) *P < 0.5; ***P < 0.01.
Mamede et al.
PNAS
|
Published online August 7, 2017
|
E7175
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 Because TRIMCypA requires an intact capsid to be able to bind
and restrict HIV-1 infection, we have shown that the temporal
measurement of GFP retention within the cone is a suitable
method to measure capsid integrity. This timing is consistent with
the CsA washout assay, which measured the time of loss of sen-
sitivity to TRIM-CypA associated with virus infection (28), as well
as with other systems that supported early changes in the integrity
of the cone (16, 26, 27, 39, 55).
Recently, it was proposed that the ability of HIV-1 to escape
cytoplasmic innate immunity is due to the shielding of the reverse-
transcribed DNA by the viral capsid (9, 10). These studies showed
that viral challenge to blood cells with a myeloid origin with the
CA mutant N74D or P90A resulted in an antiviral state where the
virus cannot replicate. This was interpreted as the activation of
innate sensors by the prematurely exposed reverse-transcribing
HIV genome. However, this hypothesis is not compatible with
an early cytoplasmic uncoating, as demonstrated here, or with the
demonstration that N74D uncoats with delayed kinetics. Here, we
confirm that the N74D mutation leads to delayed uncoating (Fig.
2A), as originally revealed by the CsA washout assay (54). The
observation that early uncoating is associated with infection calls
for a reinterpretation of the mechanisms leading to the antiviral
state described by Rasaiyaah et al. (10). Alternatively, it seems
more likely that the induction of the antiviral state is caused by
accumulation of dead-end reverse transcription products that
could be more susceptible to innate recognition, especially at the
high multiplicity of infection (MOI) used in such study. This
possibility has recently been explored with another assay to detect
capsid integrity in infected cells (56).
Here, we showed that HIV-iGFP capsid integrity can be sus-
tained by the presence of NVP, a nonnucleoside reverse tran-
scriptase inhibitor (Figs. 2A and 4). Strikingly, the removal of NVP
from the live-imaging system results in a prompt loss of the in-
tegrity of the cone. The swift capsid integrity loss after resumption
of reverse transcription supports a direct connection between
uncoating and reverse transcription. The potential role of the in-
terplay of reverse transcription and uncoating has been recently
suggested to provide an enclosed environment facilitating first-
strand transfer during HIV-1 reverse transcription (29). With
the easy adaptability of our live-imaging fluorescence HIV-iGFP
system, we tested this possibility in the transient presence of 7390,
an RNase H activity inhibitor specific to HIV-1 reverse tran-
scription (47) (Fig. 5B). The blocking of the RNase H-mediated
degradation of the RNA template results in an inability of the
newly synthesized ssDNA to anneal the complementary R region
on the 3′ LTR RNA template during the first-strand transfer.
Both in our live-imaging system and by using the CsA washout, we
observed that the inhibition of RNase H activity delayed un-
coating. The lack of an RNase H mutation to alter uncoating ki-
netics when monitored by DsRed-CypA tetramer labeling of the
core remains a curious observation that raises questions related to
the averaging of a large number of particles that do not lead to
infection (27). We hypothesize that the contained environment of
an intact capsid could be advantageous to the first-strand transfer
between the DNA and RNA distinct and unlinked molecules.
Within a constraining core, the two molecules would not diffuse
away from each other. These data suggest that uncoating is
delayed until first-strand transfer occurs, rather than the simple
initiation of reverse transcription.
Historically, it has been suggested that uncoating kinetics might
be distinct in different cell types or pathways leading to fusion. The
flexibility of the HIV-iGFP live-imaging assay allows for testing
under different experimental conditions, including different cell
types and particles containing different envelope proteins. Impor-
tantly, we find that the general kinetics of uncoating are detectable
∼30 min after fusion in the cell lines, primary CD4+ T cells, and
macrophages investigated here. Likewise, we find the same kinetics
of uncoating with disparate envelopes, including X4 tropic HIV
and VSV-G. Rather than cell type and entry pathway influencing
uncoating, it appears that the efficiency of reverse transcription is
more important (Figs. 2–4 and 6). However, it is not clear that this
is how uncoating proceeds in other cell types. For example, it was
recently reported that reverse transcription, nuclear localization, and
loss of capsid took place at a slower rate in primary macrophages, as
monitored by specific labeling of the viral DNA (38). Other cir-
cumstances in vivo may also show different kinetics of uncoating. For
example, it was previously shown that virions can persist up to a
week in the cytoplasm of peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs), and when the cells were activated, it resulted in viral
growth out of the cultures (57, 58). That being said, most HIV
replication studies are done in tissue culture systems similar to those
used here and the presented results likely represent the series of
events that takes place during the early phase of the HIV life cycle.
A big technical challenge to study uncoating was the ability to
distinguish between integrity loss or a rearrangement of the capsid
and the shedding of CA from the RTC. In this study, we observed a
correlation between the loss of the GFP that is trapped within an
intact core and a significant loss of CA that is present in the viral
complex. This simultaneous loss of iGFP and reduction of the levels
of CA, together with the observation that only early integrity loss of
the capsid is associated with infection, allows us to describe uncoating
as an early cytoplasmic process that is influenced by the first-strand
transfer process of reverse transcription both in a cell line model and
in primary cells that are known targets of HIV-1 (Figs. 5 and 6).
Critically, the “one-virus, one-cell” method pioneered here
allowed us to identify that early uncoating is necessary for particle
infectivity. The stochastic nature of infectivity and the unavoidable
presence of defective particles have historically slowed progress in
the field. We believe that this live-imaging system will be able to
provide invaluable insight into host cofactor interactions with
HIV, the cellular location and timing of specific events in HIV-1
infection, and innate sensor immunity at play. The ability to di-
rectly connect individual particle behavior through live-cell fluo-
rescence microscopy to infectivity promises to bring clarity to
our understanding of the early events of the HIV life cycle.
Materials and Methods
Cells. HEK-293T and CHOpgsa745 cells were cultured in DMEM, 10% FBS,
L-glutamine, MEM nonessential amino acids solution (MEM-NEAA), and anti-
biotics. CHOpgsa745-TcypA cells were transduced and selected as reported
before (59). CD14+ cells were isolated from blood PBMCs with a Miltenyi Biotec
MACS CD14 MicroBeads human kit (Fig. 4) or from blood with a StemCell
Technologies EasySep Human Monocyte Isolation Kit (Fig. 6) following manu-
facturer instructions and differentiated to macrophages with macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) (50 ng/mL), being washed every 2–3 d for 14 d
preimaging. CD4+ T cells were isolated from blood with a StemCell Technolo-
gies EasySep Human CD4+ T-Cell Enrichment Kit and activated with CD3/
CD28 antibodies 1 or 2 d before live imaging. MDMs and CD4+ T cells were
cultured in RPMI, 15% FBS, L-glutamine, and antibiotics. Stremlau cells were
used in TRIM capture assays as previously reported (42).
Plasmids. HIV-Gag-iGFPΔEnv, HIV-Gag-iGFPWTEnv, HIV-N74DGag-iGFP-ΔEnv,
and HIV-Gag-iCherryΔEnv full proviruses (with or without a point mutation
in Env), which have a coding GFP in between the MA and CA proteins
cleavage maturation sites in gag reading frame (41), are based in pNL4-3
HIV-1 plasmid. The psPAX2 was used as a Gag-Pol packaging vector that
provided WT-Gag at a 1:1 ratio (Gag-iGFP/Gag-WT). Only HIV-Gag-iGFP
plasmids contain LTRs. The pFSM-Gag plasmid was used for a tetracysteine
motif suitable for ReAsH labeling (46). The pHIV-GFP (used for CsA washout)
and pCMV–VSV-G were previously described (28). The pmCherry-Vpr and
pGFP-Vpr were previously described (25, 42), and iRFP670Vpr plasmid was
generated by replacing the mCherry sequence in pmCherry-Vpr by
iRFP670 obtained from Addgene piRFP670-N1. The pLHA-owlTCypA-SN and
pL57GPMoBeB sequences were previously described (59). The pGag-IN-
mRuby was created by replacing GFP with the mRuby sequence; the origi-
nal plasmid has been described elsewhere (36).
Virus Production. Viral particles were produced by polyethylenimine HEK-293T
transfection, where DMEM medium was replaced 16 h posttransfection and
viruses were collected 24 to 36 h posttransfection. HIV-iGFP-mCherryVpr viruses
were produced by transfection with 3 μg of HIV-Gag-iGFP, 3 μg of psPAX2, 4 μg
of pCMV–VSV-G, and 1.5 μg of mCherryVpr plasmids. ReASH-labeled viruses
were produced by transfection with 3 μg of HIV-Gag-iGFP, 3 μg of pFSM-Gag,
4 μg of pCMV–VSV-G and 1.5 μg of iRFP670Vpr. HIV-iGFP and Gag-IN-mRuby
E7176
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706245114
Mamede et al.
 were produced by transfection with 5 μg of HIV-Gag-iGFP, 3 μg of pGag-IN-
mRuby, and 4 μg of pCMV–VSV-G. Viruses transducing CHOpgsa745 cells to
stably express HA-owlTRIMCypA were produced as previously reported (59).
Reagents. CsA was used at 5 μM; NVP was obtained from the NIH repository of
the NIH AIDS Reagent Program, Division of AIDS, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, NIH, and used at 10 μM (dissolved in water according
to NIH AIDS Reagent Program solubility limit); MG132 was used at 1 μg/mL;
Polybrene was used at 10 μg/mL; Oxyfluor/OxyRase was used at a 1:200 di-
lution; DL-lactate was used at 15 mM; and RnaseH inhibitor 7390 (shown as 8b
in ref. 47) was used at 10 μM for live imaging and CsA washout experiments.
Western Blot Analysis. Viruses and whole-cell extracts were diluted with
Laemmli buffer with β-mercaptoethanol, followed by boiling at 96 °C for
5 min, and loaded into precast Mini-PROTEAN TGX (5–20% gradient) gels.
Nitrocellulose membranes were incubated with 1:1,000 241D antibody (NIH
AIDS Reagent Program) and IRDye700 anti-human antibody. TRIM-CypA
expression was measured with 3F10 (Roche) antibody and β-actin (Abcam),
and with IRDye700 and IRDye800 secondary antibodies. Membranes were
imaged with an Odyssey system.
ReAsH Labeling. HIV-iGFP-tetracysteine-CA-iRFP670Vpr (VSV-G) viruses were
labeled for 2 h in a rotation chamber at 21 °C with TC-ReAsH II as described
elsewhere (60, 61), replacing β-mercaptoethanol incubation with DTT (1 mM).
Flow Cytometry. Singlet cells (forward scatter (FSC)-height (H) by width (W)
and side scatter (SSC) H by W) for the diverse mentioned infections were
analyzed using a BD Fortessa FACS for the percentage of GFP signal using
noninfected cells as a control. Controls to the infection level of one-particle,
one-cell conditions (Fig. S1) were done under the same conditions as the
imaged plates (detailed in Live Imaging) but maintained in a 37 °C 5% CO2
incubator for 42 h. The cells in the plates (challenged with same amount of
virus and viral incubation time, or without viruses) were detached with
250 μL of trypsin and fixed with 250 μL of fix solution (4:1 PBS/10% form-
aldehyde) before flow cytometry analysis.
CsA Washout Assay. CHOpgsa745-HA-owlTCypA cells were plated in 96-well
dishes. Each experimental condition was performed in triplicate. Cells were
spinoculated with HIV-GFP reporter virus and Polybrene for 1.5 h at 14 °C.
Cells were washed with media at 37 °C and with CsA. CsA removal was done
at different time points, as shown in Fig. 3A and Fig. S2A. As shown in Fig.
3A, the experiment was also exposed to RnaseH inhibitor 7390 incubation, in
both the inoculation and first wash media. After 105 min, RnaseH inhibitor
7390 was removed from all reactions by replacement with warm media. Two
days after infection, cells were detached with 50 μL of trypsin and fixed with
50 μL of fix solution (4:1 PBS/10% formaldehyde). The time of 50% un-
coating was determined by curve fitting (28).
Live Imaging. A DeltaVision wide-field microscope (GE Life Sciences) equipped
with an electron-multiplying charge-coupled device (EM CCD) camera, solid state
illumination (SSI-LED) light path, or OMX DeltaVision Microscopy Imaging System
(GE Life Sciences) equipped with complementary metal-oxide semiconductor
(CMOS) cameras was used to acquire fluorescent values of HIV-iGFP viruses,
tagged Vpr, or p24CA-ReaSH infecting cells plated in Delta T culture dishes. Cells
were kept in a 37 °C heated chamber, together with a blood gas mixture (5%
CO2, 20% oxygen), throughout the imaging process. Oxyfluor and D-lactate
were in solution with Fluorobrite DMEM (or RPMI without phenol red) with 20%
FBS, L-glutamine, and MEM-NEAA. When used, NH4Cl was used at a 10 mM
concentration to synchronize infection from 20 to 45 min postvirus incubation.
All VSV-G pseudotyped infections were done with Polybrene concentration of
5 μg/μL. Z-stacking spacing was set to 0.5 μm, with a total of 8- to 9-μm z-axis
imaging. Experiments were done with the following emission conditions: GFP,
10% transmission and 50-ms exposure; mCherry, 10% transmission and 55-ms
exposure (45 ms for Fig. 1 and 70 ms for Fig. 4); and brightfield, 32% trans-
mission and 10-ms exposures (only a single Z in the middle of a cell is acquired
for brightfield). Experiments illustrated in Fig. 5 were done with the following
emission conditions: GFP, 32% transmission and 30-ms exposure; mCherry, 32%
transmission and 40-ms exposure. When applicable, ReAsH imaging was per-
formed at 10% transmission and 80-ms exposure, iRFP670Vpr was imaged at
32% transmission and 75-ms exposure, and IN-Ruby was imaged at 10%
transmission 60-ms exposure. The number of experiments in each condition is
detailed in Statistics and Reproducibility. Nominal magnification was 100× for
all experiments with the exception of the one-particle, one-cell experiments,
where a magnification of 60× was used to analyze a higher number of cells.
CD4+ T cells were immobilized to Delta T culture dishes coated for 30 min with
Cell-TAK cell and tissue adhesive, according to manufacturer instructions.
Live Imaging Analysis. Z-stacks were deconvolved and z-projected using
SoftWorx (GE Life Sciences) before individual mCherryVpr or iRFP670Vpr
particle tracking over time using Imaris software (Bitplane). Mean intensities
of HIV-iGFP or p24CA-ReAsH individual channels were analyzed by fitting
discrete time points to a double-sigmoid equation with in-house–made Python
scripts using scipy curvefit optimization, which uses the Levenberg–Marquardt
algorithm (62). Centered particle video recordings were automatically gener-
ated by in-house–made Python scripts using matplotlib, with the data analyzed
and exported from Imaris (63).
Fluorescence Kinetics Fitting. When analyzing fluorescence signal to estimate
the timing of signal changes, it is important to avoid bias due to operator error.
Data fitting provides reproducibility and precision. We therefore fit the fluo-
rescence time series I(t) in these experiments to the following heuristic
double-sigmoidal form:
IðtÞ = Imax − Imid
2
erfcðs1ðt − t1ÞÞ + Imid − Imin
2
erfcðs2ðt − t2ÞÞ + Imin,
where erfc(x) is the complementary error function, t1 estimates the time of
virus-cell fusion, and t2 estimates the time of capsid integrity loss. We can
then obtain the fusion-to-integrity-loss interval Δt = t1 − t2, which we plot in
Figs. 1, 2, and 4. The final goodness of fit was estimated in Python/SciPy by
calculating the Spearman correlation between the data and model. All
Spearman correlations were greater than 0.8, with P values <0.00001.
Post–Time-Lapse Fixed Imaging. Live-imaged cells were washed with PBS and
readily fixed with final 3.7% formaldehyde in piperazine-N,N′-bis (PIPES)
buffer for 5 min, followed by three PBS washes. Cells were permeabilized for
10 min in block buffer (10% normal donkey serum, 0.01% NaN3, 0.1% Triton
X-100), followed by 241D and 71-31 mAbs (NIH AIDS Reagent Program) in-
cubation at 1:1,000 for 1 h. The mAbs were washed three times with PBS and
stained with anti-human AF647 antibodies (1:2,000) and DAPI (1:25,000) for
30 min. Secondary antibodies were washed three times with PBS and
mounted overnight on 40-mm-radius coverslips with ProlongGold antifade.
Cells were found using brightfield and iGFP/mCherryVpr virus references in
the Deltavision microscope, followed by imaging in the superresolution 3D-
SIM OMX DeltaVision Microscopy Imaging System. The synchronization of
both microscopes’ trays was used to find the correct cells and viral particles
that were previously live-imaged. Mean intensities of particles were ana-
lyzed using ImageJ software (NIH) at the Z-slice that presented the highest
p24CA staining signal for a given particle.
Virus on Glass. Viral preparations were spun on fibronectin-coated coverslips
at 2,400 × g (90 min). Staining was performed with the same fixation and
permeabilization as for cells (Fig. S1 E and F). In Fig. S1 G–I, Stellaris FISH
Probes, using EGFP with Quasar 670 dye, were used following the protocol
provided by the manufacturer (70% ethanol permeabilization for 1 h and
hybridization with a probe concentration of 500 nM for 5 h).
Statistics and Reproducibility. Datasets in Fig. 1D were obtained from four
independent experiments totaling 48 fields of view for the 2-h experiments
(all events) and from four independent experiments totaling 400 fields of
view for the >24-h experiments, where infection was directly linked to a
single virion. All dual-drop data points were assumed nonnormal, and the
Kruskal–Wallis test was performed (Fig. 2). The statistical null hypothesis
showed a significant difference between different conditions by Kruskal–
Wallis test rejection. The P values of Dunn’s test of multiple comparisons for
the different experiment conditions are then shown in the figures. The same
analysis was performed for the dataset represented in Fig. 3B and 6B for the
measurement of p24 intensities in the fixed samples. Each condition repre-
sents three independent experiments totaling 48 fields of view, 20 fields of
view for the CD4 T-cell experiments, and 26 total fields of view for MDMs. To
compare the simultaneous loss of GFP and ReAsH, and after performing
data-fitting to the experimental data for each channel (as described in
Fluorescence Kinetics Fitting), a nonparametric Spearman correlation co-
efficient and P value were calculated, as shown in Fig. 3D. The presented
data were obtained from five independent experiments. In Fig. 4B, all data
were assumed nonnormal, and a Mann–Whitney test was performed
showing statistical significance between the datasets obtained from three
independent experiments (48 fields of view) that are represented in the plot.
Mamede et al.
PNAS
|
Published online August 7, 2017
|
E7177
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank B. K. Chen for the HIV-iGFP construct and
M. A. Parniak for the RnaseH inhibitor 7390. The following reagents were
obtained through the NIH AIDS Reagent Program (Division of AIDS, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH): anti–HIV-1 p24 mAb (71-31,
241-D) from Dr. Susan Zolla-Pazner, mAb to HIV-1 p24 (AG3.0) from Dr. Jonathan
Allan, and NVP. We thank R. T. D’Aquila and E. M. Campbell for critical review
of this manuscript. We thank the James B. Pendleton Charitable Trust and the
Third Coast Center for AIDS Research (CFAR) (P30 AI117943) for imaging equip-
ment support. This work was supported by NIH Grant P50 GM082545 (subcon-
tract to T.J.H.).
1. Ganser-Pornillos BK, Cheng A, Yeager M (2007) Structure of full-length HIV-1 CA: A
model for the mature capsid lattice. Cell 131:70–79.
2. Forshey BM, von Schwedler U, Sundquist WI, Aiken C (2002) Formation of a human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 core of optimal stability is crucial for viral replication.
J Virol 76:5667–5677.
3. Schaller T, et al. (2011) HIV-1 capsid-cyclophilin interactions determine nuclear import
pathway, integration targeting and replication efficiency. PLoS Pathog 7:e1002439.
4. Lee K, et al. (2010) Flexible use of nuclear import pathways by HIV-1. Cell Host
Microbe 7:221–233.
5. Matreyek KA, Engelman A (2011) The requirement for nucleoporin NUP153 during
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection is determined by the viral capsid.
J Virol 85:7818–7827.
6. Brass AL, et al. (2008) Identification of host proteins required for HIV infection
through a functional genomic screen. Science 319:921–926.
7. Marini B, et al. (2015) Nuclear architecture dictates HIV-1 integration site selection.
Nature 521:227–231.
8. Lelek M, et al. (2015) Chromatin organization at the nuclear pore favours HIV repli-
cation. Nat Commun 6:6483.
9. Lahaye X, et al. (2013) The capsids of HIV-1 and HIV-2 determine immune detection of
the viral cDNA by the innate sensor cGAS in dendritic cells. Immunity 39:1132–1142.
10. Rasaiyaah J, et al. (2013) HIV-1 evades innate immune recognition through specific
cofactor recruitment. Nature 503:402–405.
11. Campbell EM, Hope TJ (2015) HIV-1 capsid: The multifaceted key player in HIV-1 in-
fection. Nat Rev Microbiol 13:471–483.
12. Miller MD, Farnet CM, Bushman FD (1997) Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 pre-
integration complexes: Studies of organization and composition. J Virol 71:5382–5390.
13. Bukrinsky MI, et al. (1993) Association of integrase, matrix, and reverse transcriptase
antigens of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 with viral nucleic acids following
acute infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:6125–6129.
14. Fassati A, Goff SP (2001) Characterization of intracellular reverse transcription com-
plexes of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Virol 75:3626–3635.
15. Forshey BM, Shi J, Aiken C (2005) Structural requirements for recognition of the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 core during host restriction in owl monkey
cells. J Virol 79:869–875.
16. Kutluay SB, Perez-Caballero D, Bieniasz PD (2013) Fates of retroviral core components
during unrestricted and TRIM5-restricted infection. PLoS Pathog 9:e1003214.
17. Li Y-L, et al. (2016) Primate TRIM5 proteins form hexagonal nets on HIV-1 capsids.
eLife 5:e16269.
18. Sayah DM, Sokolskaja E, Berthoux L, Luban J (2004) Cyclophilin A retrotransposition
into TRIM5 explains owl monkey resistance to HIV-1. Nature 430:569–573.
19. Sebastian S, Luban J (2005) TRIM5alpha selectively binds a restriction-sensitive ret-
roviral capsid. Retrovirology 2:40.
20. Shi J, Aiken C (2006) Saturation of TRIM5 alpha-mediated restriction of HIV-1 in-
fection depends on the stability of the incoming viral capsid. Virology 350:493–500.
21. Stremlau M, et al. (2006) Specific recognition and accelerated uncoating of retroviral
capsids by the TRIM5alpha restriction factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:5514–5519.
22. Stremlau M, et al. (2004) The cytoplasmic body component TRIM5alpha restricts HIV-1
infection in old world monkeys. Nature 427:848–853.
23. Yang Y, Fricke T, Diaz-Griffero F (2013) Inhibition of reverse transcriptase activity
increases stability of the HIV-1 core. J Virol 87:683–687.
24. Arhel NJ, et al. (2007) HIV-1 DNA Flap formation promotes uncoating of the pre-
integration complex at the nuclear pore. EMBO J 26:3025–3037.
25. McDonald D, et al. (2002) Visualization of the intracellular behavior of HIV in living
cells. J Cell Biol 159:441–452.
26. Lukic Z, Dharan A, Fricke T, Diaz-Griffero F, Campbell EM (2014) HIV-1 uncoating is
facilitated by dynein and kinesin 1. J Virol 88:13613–13625.
27. Francis AC, Marin M, Shi J, Aiken C, Melikyan GB (2016) Time-resolved imaging of
single HIV-1 uncoating in vitro and in living cells. PLoS Pathog 12:e1005709.
28. Hulme AE, Perez O, Hope TJ (2011) Complementary assays reveal a relationship be-
tween HIV-1 uncoating and reverse transcription. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108:
9975–9980.
29. Cosnefroy O, Murray PJ, Bishop KN (2016) HIV-1 capsid uncoating initiates after the
first strand transfer of reverse transcription. Retrovirology 13:58.
30. Dharan A, et al. (2016) KIF5B and Nup358 cooperatively mediate the nuclear import
of HIV-1 during infection. PLoS Pathog 12:e1005700.
31. Jayappa KD, et al. (2015) Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 employs the cellular
dynein light chain 1 protein for reverse transcription through interaction with its
integrase protein. J Virol 89:3497–3511.
32. Malikov V, et al. (2015) HIV-1 capsids bind and exploit the kinesin-1 adaptor FEZ1 for
inward movement to the nucleus. Nat Commun 6:6660.
33. Pawlica P, Berthoux L (2014) Cytoplasmic dynein promotes HIV-1 uncoating. Viruses 6:
4195–4211.
34. Sabo Y, et al. (2013) HIV-1 induces the formation of stable microtubules to enhance
early infection. Cell Host Microbe 14:535–546.
35. Chin CR, et al. (2015) Direct visualization of HIV-1 replication intermediates shows
that capsid and CPSF6 modulate HIV-1 intra-nuclear invasion and integration. Cell
Rep 13:1717–1731.
36. Hulme AE, Kelley Z, Foley D, Hope TJ (2015) Complementary assays reveal a low level of CA
associated with viral complexes in the nuclei of HIV-1-infected cells. J Virol 89:5350–5361.
37. Peng K, et al. (2014) Quantitative microscopy of functional HIV post-entry complexes
reveals association of replication with the viral capsid. eLife 3:e04114.
38. Stultz RD, Cenker JJ, McDonald D (2017) Imaging HIV-1 genomic DNA from entry
through productive infection. J Virol 91:e00034-17.
39. Xu H, et al. (2013) Evidence for biphasic uncoating during HIV-1 infection from a
novel imaging assay. Retrovirology 10:70.
40. Rivière L, Darlix J-L, Cimarelli A (2010) Analysis of the viral elements required in the
nuclear import of HIV-1 DNA. J Virol 84:729–739.
41. Hübner W, et al. (2007) Sequence of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
Gag localization and oligomerization monitored with live confocal imaging of a
replication-competent, fluorescently tagged HIV-1. J Virol 81:12596–12607.
42. Yu Z, et al. (2013) Unclosed HIV-1 capsids suggest a curled sheet model of assembly.
J Mol Biol 425:112–123.
43. Padilla-Parra S, et al. (2013) Fusion of mature HIV-1 particles leads to complete release
of a gag-GFP-based content marker and raises the intraviral pH. PLoS One 8:e71002.
44. Wu X, Anderson JL, Campbell EM, Joseph AM, Hope TJ (2006) Proteasome inhibitors
uncouple rhesus TRIM5α restriction of HIV-1 reverse transcription and infection. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 103:7465–7470.
45. Battivelli E, Lecossier D, Clavel F, Hance AJ (2013) Delaying reverse transcription does
not increase sensitivity of HIV-1 to human TRIM5α. PLoS One 8:e52434.
46. Campbell EM, Perez O, Anderson JL, Hope TJ (2008) Visualization of a proteasome-
independent intermediate during restriction of HIV-1 by rhesus TRIM5α. J Cell Biol
180:549–561.
47. Ilina T, Labarge K, Sarafianos SG, Ishima R, Parniak MA (2012) Inhibitors of HIV-1 re-
verse transcriptase-associated ribonuclease H activity. Biology (Basel) 1:521–541.
48. Arfi V, et al. (2008) Characterization of the early steps of infection of primary blood
monocytes by human immunodeficiency virus type 1. J Virol 82:6557–6565.
49. Laguette N, et al. (2011) SAMHD1 is the dendritic- and myeloid-cell-specific HIV-1 re-
striction factor counteracted by Vpx. Nature 474:654–657.
50. Zhang H, et al. (1996) Kinetic analysis of intravirion reverse transcription in the blood
plasma of human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected individuals: Direct assess-
ment of resistance to reverse transcriptase inhibitors in vivo. J Virol 70:628–634.
51. Thomas JA, Ott DE, Gorelick RJ (2007) Efficiency of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 postentry infection processes: Evidence against disproportionate numbers of
defective virions. J Virol 81:4367–4370.
52. Butler SL, Hansen MS, Bushman FD (2001) A quantitative assay for HIV DNA in-
tegration in vivo. Nat Med 7:631–634.
53. Ambrose Z, et al. (2012) Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 capsid mutation N74D
alters cyclophilin A dependence and impairs macrophage infection. J Virol 86:4708–4714.
54. Hulme AE, Kelley Z, Okocha EA, Hope TJ (2015) Identification of capsid mutations that
alter the rate of HIV-1 uncoating in infected cells. J Virol 89:643–651.
55. Perez-Caballero D, Hatziioannou T, Zhang F, Cowan S, Bieniasz PD (2005) Restriction
of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 by TRIM-CypA occurs with rapid kinetics and
independently of cytoplasmic bodies, ubiquitin, and proteasome activity. J Virol 79:
15567–15572.
56. Da Silva Santos C, Tartour K, Cimarelli A (2016) A novel entry/uncoating assay reveals
the presence of at least two species of viral capsids during synchronized HIV-1 in-
fection. PLoS Pathog 12:e1005897.
57. Zack JA, et al. (1990) HIV-1 entry into quiescent primary lymphocytes: Molecular
analysis reveals a labile, latent viral structure. Cell 61:213–222.
58. Zack JA, Haislip AM, Krogstad P, Chen IS (1992) Incompletely reverse-transcribed
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 genomes in quiescent cells can function as
intermediates in the retroviral life cycle. J Virol 66:1717–1725.
59. Mamede JI, Sitbon M, Battini J-L, Courgnaud V (2013) Heterogeneous susceptibility of
circulating SIV isolate capsids to HIV-interacting factors. Retrovirology 10:77.
60. Lelek M, et al. (2012) Superresolution imaging of HIV in infected cells with FlAsH-
PALM. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:8564–8569.
61. Lelek M, Di Nunzio F, Zimmer C (2014) FlAsH-PALM: Super-resolution pointillist im-
aging with FlAsH-tetracysteine labeling. Methods Mol Biol 1174:183–193.
62. van der Walt S, Colbert SC, Varoquaux G (2011) The NumPy array: A structure for
efficient numerical computation. Comput Sci Eng 13:22–30.
63. Hunter JD (2007) Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. Comput Sci Eng 9:90–95.
E7178
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1706245114
Mamede et al.
