 Continual renewal and replication of persistent Leishmania
major parasites in concomitantly immune hosts
Michael A. Mandella,1 and Stephen M. Beverleya,2
aDepartment of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110
Contributed by Stephen M. Beverley, December 15, 2016 (sent for review November 22, 2016; reviewed by Arturo Casadevall and Phillip Scott)
In most natural infections or after recovery, small numbers of Leish-
mania parasites remain indefinitely in the host. Persistent parasites
play a vital role in protective immunity against disease pathology
upon reinfection through the process of concomitant immunity, as
well as in transmission and reactivation, yet are poorly understood.
A key question is whether persistent parasites undergo replication,
and we devised several approaches to probe the small numbers in
persistent infections. We find two populations of persistent Leish-
mania major: one rapidly replicating, similar to parasites in acute
infections, and another showing little evidence of replication. Per-
sistent Leishmania were not found in “safe” immunoprivileged cell
types, instead residing in macrophages and DCs, ∼60% of which
expressed inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). Remarkably, par-
asites within iNOS+ cells showed normal morphology and genome
integrity and labeled comparably with BrdU to parasites within
iNOS− cells, suggesting that these parasites may be unexpectedly
resistant to NO. Nonetheless, because persistent parasite numbers
remain roughly constant over time, their replication implies that
ongoing destruction likewise occurs. Similar results were obtained
with the attenuated lpg2− mutant, a convenient model that rapidly
enters a persistent state without inducing pathology due to loss of
the Golgi GDP mannose transporter. These data shed light on Leish-
mania persistence and concomitant immunity, suggesting a model
wherein a parasite reservoir repopulates itself indefinitely, whereas
some progeny are terminated in antigen-presenting cells, thereby
stimulating immunity. This model may be relevant to understand-
ing immunity to other persistent pathogen infections.
latency | quiescence | trypanosomatid protozoan parasite | vaccination |
stem cell-like
A
s long-term infection of a host can increase a pathogen’s
chances of transmission, many have evolved the ability to
prolong their survival within their hosts. Leishmania, Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis, Toxoplasma gondii, and latent herpesviruses
can remain indefinitely within their hosts in small numbers
without overt pathology. Such low-level persistent infections
differ considerably from “chronic” infections, where pathogen
numbers are typically much higher and often accompanied by
disease symptoms (1). Unfortunately the terms persistent and/or
chronic are applied inconsistently or even interchangeably across
pathogens, in part reflecting the evolution of our understanding,
organism-specific lexicons, and diverse mechanisms used by
pathogens for long-term survival within the host (1, 2). Here we
focus on persistent infections exclusively of the “low numbers”
type, which are of medical importance due to their ability to
reactivate to severe disease (3, 4), to serve as reservoirs for trans-
mission, and to engender a protective response against subsequent
infections, a process known as concomitant immunity (5).
Persistence is a significant but understudied aspect of the bi-
ology of parasites of the genus Leishmania, the causative agents
of leishmaniasis. These parasites are responsible for an esti-
mated 12 million active cases, at least 120 million asymptomatic
infections, and 1.7 billion people are at risk (6–9). Leishmania sp.
are transmitted as metacyclic-stage promastigotes to humans by
the bite of an infected sand fly. In the skin, parasites are engulfed
by phagocytic cells, where they differentiate into the amastigote
stage and begin to replicate. Although most infections are
asymptomatic, a significant fraction go on to produce ulcerating
skin lesions; in both cases, parasites can metastasize to other sites
and cause more severe disease such as visceral or mucocutane-
ous leishmaniasis (9). For Leishmania major, in most human
cases and experimental infections of “resistant” mouse strains,
the infection is eventually controlled by an adaptive Th1 immune
response, in a manner requiring inducible NOS (iNOS) (10, 11).
Thereafter, the number of parasites in infected tissue declines
dramatically, the lesion heals, and the host becomes im-
mune to subsequent L. major infection (12, 13). However, a
small and steady population of parasites remains at the site of
infection and in the lymph node draining that site for the rest of
the host’s life (14).
These persistent parasites play vital roles in Leishmania bi-
ology. Despite their limited numbers (∼1,000), persistent para-
sites can be transmitted to sand fly vectors and thus could
function as a transmission reservoir (6, 15, 16). Second, they pose
a substantial risk to infected people in the event of immuno-
suppression, as the persistent parasites can “reactivate,” leading
to severe disease (17). Finally, they maintain protective immunity
to subsequent Leishmania infections through concomitant immu-
nity, which results in amelioration of disease pathology without
sterilization of either the persistent or incoming parasite (18, 19).
Indeed, healed Leishmania infections are the gold standard in
anti-Leishmania immunity, and to date no other vaccination ap-
proaches have proven as successful in humans (18). Importantly,
treatment of persistently infected mice to achieve a sterile cure
renders those mice susceptible to new infections (14, 20), sug-
gesting that the persistent parasites are required for strong, long-
lasting anti-Leishmania immunity.
Significance
Persistent parasites contribute to the maintenance of pro-
tective immune responses through concomitant immunity, but
our understanding of how they do so has been limited by the
difficulties associated with their low numbers. Our studies in-
dicate that for Leishmania substantial parasite replication oc-
curs in persistent infections, with most parasites found within
activated antigen-presenting cells. Parasite replication serves
to maintain the infection and likely also provides a constant
source of parasite antigens for immune stimulation and the
maintenance of protective immunity. Collectively, these studies
suggest a framework to understand concomitant immunity
that may be applicable to other persistent pathogens.
Author contributions: M.A.M. and S.M.B. designed research; M.A.M. performed research;
M.A.M. and S.M.B. analyzed data; and M.A.M. and S.M.B. wrote the paper.
Reviewers: A.C., Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health; and P.S., University
of Pennsylvania.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
1Present address: Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of New
Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: stephen.beverley@wustl.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1619265114/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619265114
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2017
|
E801–E810
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 The host immune response is important to simultaneously
prevent reactivation and clearance of persistent parasites (21, 22).
Treatment of persistently infected mice with immunosuppressive
drugs, iNOS inhibitors, or the blockade of IFN-γ signaling rapidly
results in increased parasite numbers and the reappearance of
disease symptoms (11). In contrast, depletion of CD4+CD25+
regulatory T cells or the blockade of IL-10 signaling results in
sterile cure in mice (20, 23). The mechanisms used by persistent
parasites to modulate the host’s immune responses or to maintain
protective immunity are less well understood. Indeed recent
studies have drawn attention to continuing antigenic stimulation
arising from the site of infection, which is better understood from
the host’s than parasite’s perspective (24).
The study of persistent parasites poses significant experimen-
tal challenges. Typically persistence is studied after resolution of
disease in a resistant (Th1) murine model, which requires >4 mo
to attain (11, 25) (Fig. S1D). Furthermore, the low number of
persistent Leishmania renders their visualization, much less
characterization, a daunting task (26). Here we established sev-
eral methods facilitating the study of both replication and host
cellular localization of the scarce persistent parasites. Our data
show that persistent parasites constitute two populations, one
replicating and one seemingly quiescent. Similar results were
found with the lpg2− mutant L. major lacking the Golgi GDP-
mannose transporter, which fails to induce disease pathology
even in susceptible (Th2) mice but persists indefinitely for the life
of the animal (25), where it confers strong protective immunity
(14, 27). Our studies suggest a model explaining how persistent
Leishmania maintain concomitant immunity in which a small
replicating reservoir acts to maintain a perpetual infection needed
for transmission, while spinning off a pool of parasites destined for
immune destruction and stimulation. This model potentially ap-
plies to other persistent pathogens.
Results
Assay of Leishmania Replication by BrdU Incorporation in Vitro.
L. major promastigotes were incubated with 0.1 mM BrdU for
various periods, followed by fixation and staining with a rat anti-
BrdU monoclonal antibody to detect incorporation (28). To
detect the parasite nuclei, we chose a pool of antibodies specifically
recognizing Leishmania histones, as these epitopes proved durable
to the harsh acid fixations needed to monitor BrdU incorporation.
BrdU was incorporated into both the kinetoplast (mitochondri-
al) DNA network and the nucleus (Fig. 1A), and under condi-
tions where parasites replicated with a doubling time of ∼8 h, the
percent of BrdU+ cells rose steadily to 90% over 9 h (Fig. 1B).
Longer labeling times did not lead to further increase, suggesting
that this was the maximum technically achievable. Under condi-
tions of slow growth (serum reduction), a lower fraction of BrdU+
parasites was observed, arising by an increase in the length of G1
phase as in most eukaryotes (Fig. S1 A–C). No BrdU+ cells were
seen in stationary phase promastigotes following 24 h of labeling.
L. major-infected macrophages (MΦs) grown in the presence of
BrdU for 72 h resulted in 90% BrdU+ labeling of the intracellular
amastigote stage nuclei. These studies show that BrdU labels
Leishmania as expected, in both parasite stages and within MΦ.
Visualizing Persistent Leishmania and Replication in Infected Animals
in Situ. For these studies, we chose to use the classical s.c. footpad
inoculation model of L. major infection, as this allowed us to
put our findings in the context of a large body of literature
addressing Leishmania pathogenesis, immunology, persistence,
and vaccination (21). To detect the low numbers of “persistent
infection parasites” (PIPs), the site of footpad infection was ex-
cised, the tissue fixed, and 10 μm-thick serial sections prepared
and labeled with the anti-Leishmania histones for confocal mi-
croscopy. In some sections, as many as 10–100 parasites were
evident, wheras others had none. Integration of parasite num-
bers across serial sections from a single footpad yielded numbers
comparable to those typically obtained with limiting dilution
assays (100–2,000), suggesting that this approach was capable of
detecting most parasites.
We then combined the BrdU incorporation and in situ
Leishmania detection protocols to visualize parasite replication
in infected animals. There, Leishmania replicates rapidly for
the first 4–6 wk after inoculation (13); we refer to parasites
during this period as “acute-infection parasites” (AIPs). Bio-
luminescent imaging of luciferase-expressing parasites showed
that AIPs replicate exponentially with a doubling time of ∼60 h
and as such provided an ideal setting to optimize in vivo BrdU
incorporation assays.
Because mammals rapidly clear nucleosides from circulation
(29), we tested several different BrdU delivery protocols as de-
scribed in Materials and Methods, sacrificing treated mice 24 h
Fig. 1.
BrdU incorporation assay demonstrates per-
sistent parasite replication in situ. (A) Labeling of log-
phase promastigotes with BrdU. (B) Parasite density
and extent of BrdU labeling of log-phase promasti-
gotes cultured for 24 h in the presence of BrdU. Dark-
shaded diamonds, parasite number; light-shaded
squares, percent BrdU+. (C) The effect of increasing
the number of BrdU doses (simultaneous local and
systematic injection) on the percent BrdU+ parasites
during acute mouse footpad infections where para-
sites are growing logarithmically. n = 3 mice; >1,000
total parasites. (D) Confocal microscopic analysis of
BrdU incorporation of footpad PIPs. (E) Comparison
of the percent BrdU+ intracellular parasites in AIPS
versus PIPs. Data points, mean percent BrdU labeling
for individual mice. Horizontal bars, mean for all
mice. (F) Analysis of the BrdU-labeling intensity of
parasite nuclei. n = 20 parasites per category.
Graph shows mean ± SEM; *P < 0.05; n.s., not sig-
nificant by Student’s t test or ANOVA. Arrowheads,
BrdU-labeled nuclei; arrows, BrdU-labeled kinetoplast
(mitochondrial) DNA. (Scale bar, 5 μM.)
E802
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619265114
Mandell and Beverley
 after the start of the dosing period. Although all yielded abun-
dant BrdU+ host cell nuclei, BrdU+ parasites were only detected
in mice receiving multiple i.p. and s.c. footpad injections. The
percentage of parasites labeled increased linearly with the
number of doses, and we adopted as the maximum practicable a
regimen of 6 doses given every 3 h as a “standard” (Fig. 1C).
Assuming a 24-h labeling period and a parasite doubling time of
60 h, we calculated that 40% of AIPs should be BrdU+; by the
protocol above, 44 ± 6% were BrdU+, in good agreement.
PIPs Replicate in Vivo. We then tested whether PIPs incorporated
BrdU into their DNA. We defined the asymptomatic persistent
infection phase as >1 mo following the resolution of footpad
swelling at the inoculation site (typically ∼4 mo postinfection;
Fig. S1D). In all studies, multiple experiments, mice and sections
were analyzed, enabling statistical tests of distribution and sig-
nificance [represented as N = E (experiments)/M (mice)/P
(parasites)]. We found that 19 ± 6% of PIPs showed BrdU+
nuclei (Fig. 1 D and E), about half that seen in AIPs (P <
0.0001). The intensity of BrdU labeling per cell was similar for
AIPs or PIPs (Fig. 1F), implying that differences reflected the
number of replicating parasites rather than the rate of BrdU
incorporation. If one assumed a homogeneously replicating
population, a doubling time of about 120 h could be calculated
for PIPs.
For confirmation, we formulated an indirect assay based on
the number of parasites per cell. This approach assumes that for
PIPs, host cells are initially infected by a single parasite, as the
low number renders the chance of multiple independent infec-
tions unlikely. From this we inferred that host cells containing
two or more PIPs (here termed “clusters” as opposed to sin-
gletons) must have arisen exclusively through parasite replica-
tion, thereby providing an indirect metric. In contrast, for in vitro
MΦ infections, which are usually performed at high multiplicities
of infection (and possibly for AIPs where parasite numbers can
be quite high), such an inference would not be valid. Thus, PIP
cluster analysis provides an alternative perspective on replication.
In both AIPs and PIPs, we readily found clusters containing
2–20 parasites per host cell in mice that were not subjected to
BrdU dosing. Consistent with the results of the BrdU in-
corporation assay, AIPs showed a higher proportion of parasites
found in clusters, with a higher fraction containing >8 parasites
than seen for PIPs (Fig. 2 A and B). Nevertheless, in persistent
infections, roughly half of all infected cells contained clusters
with two or more PIPs (Fig. 2A), and ∼80% of all PIPs were
found in clusters (Fig. 2B). This provided independent support of
PIP replication. Across all studies, singletons and clusters were
interspersed, arguing against the possibility of segregation of
cells harboring replicating and nonreplicating PIPs.
Persistent Leishmania Show Two Populations with Different Replication
Rates: One “Fast,” One Slow/Nonreplicating. Combining the BrdU
incorporation and cluster assays allowed us to test whether PIPs
replicated as a homogeneous population. We plotted the percent
of parasite clusters as a function of the percent BrdU+ within
those clusters (Fig. 2C). For a homogeneous population, a dis-
tribution centered about the mean was anticipated, and indeed,
this was seen with AIPs (mean BrdU+ = 44 ± 6%; Fig. 2C). In
contrast, PIPs did not show a single distribution centered around
19% labeling, instead exhibiting two peaks (Fig. 2C). The first
peak, accounting for ∼60% of the total clusters, showed no
BrdU+ cells under these labeling conditions, whereas the second
peak, accounting for the remaining 40% of clusters, showed a
mean BrdU+ of 57 ± 21%. The distribution and mean of the
second population resembled that of AIP clusters (mean BrdU+
of 46 ± 29%; Fig. 2C).
Although this suggested the existence of two populations, we
were concerned that the analysis excluded singleton parasites not
in clusters, about ∼20% of all PIPs. We thus reanalyzed the data
by plotting the percent BrdU+ cells as a function of cluster size.
Assuming homogeneous parasite replication, roughly 44% of
AIPs and 19% of PIPs should be BrdU+, regardless of the
number of parasites per host cell. AIPs very closely matched this
prediction, with 40–50% BrdU+ uniformly across cluster size
(Fig. 2D). However, for PIPs only ∼12% of the parasites in host
cells bearing 1–3 parasites were BrdU+, whereas ∼46% of the
parasites within clusters containing four or more parasites were
BrdU+ (Fig. 2D), a value very close to the maximum obtainable
by these labeling conditions (Fig. 1).
By integrating the data shown in Fig. 2 B–D and correcting for
BrdU labeling efficiency, we conclude that there are two pop-
ulations in persistent Leishmania infections: one comprising
about 61% of the total cells, whose replication properties re-
semble those of AIPs (replicating with a doubling time of ∼60 h;
Fig. 1). In contrast, a second population comprises about 39% of
the cells, which under the conditions used fail to incorporate
BrdU significantly. This second population is much less abundant
in AIPs (Fig. 2C; 0% BrdU+ population). Although one could
interpret the “BrdU null” population as evidence of arrested or
nonreplicating PIPs, we cannot exclude the possibility that their
replication is just very slow, beyond the limits of our in vivo BrdU
labeling protocol.
Fig. 2.
Parasite cluster analysis indicates two populations of persistent
parasites: actively replicating and quiescent. (A) Frequency of infected cells
plotted as a function of the number of intracellular parasites per cell for
both AIPs and PIPs, respectively. Dark bars, persistent; light bars, acute.
Clusters are defined as host cells containing two or more parasites. (B) Dis-
tribution of parasites as a function of the number of parasites per infected
cell for both AIPs and PIPs. For A and B, n = 386 infected cells, 888 parasites,
from 8 infected mice (PIPs) and 380 infected cells, 865 parasites, 3 mice (AIPs).
Tissue sections analyzed for A and B were obtained from mice that were not
treated with BrdU. (C) Distribution of clusters as a function of the percent
BrdU+ parasites within that cluster. For PIPs, n = 127 infected cells, 755 para-
sites, 5 mice; for AIPs, n = 176 infected cells, 976 parasites, 5 mice. (D) Percent
of BrdU+ parasites within individual clusters plotted as a function of cluster
size. For PIPs, n = 167 infected cells, 237 parasites, 6 mice; for AIPs, n = 176
infected cells, 976 parasites, 5 mice.
Mandell and Beverley
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2017
|
E803
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 PIPs Predominantly Reside in MΦs and DCs. We next determined the
localization of PIPs within different host cell types. Sections were
taken as before and labeled with anti-Leishmania histone anti-
sera and anti-host cell type-specific markers for subsequent vi-
sualization by confocal microscopy. This allowed us to confirm
that parasites were actually “within” the host cells visualized
across all focal planes. Three cell types have been proposed as
hosts for PIPs: reticular fibroblasts (RFs), MΦs, and DCs (26,
30). Here, we defined RFs as ER-TR7+, DCs as CD11c+ (F4/80+
or F4/80−), and MΦ as F4/80+, CD11c−.
At the footpad site of inoculation, only 2 ± 3% of PIPs resided
within ER-TR7+ RFs (Fig. 3 A and B and Table 1), despite the
presence of uninfected cells in all fields. In contrast, 79 ± 12%
were found within F4/80+ cells (MΦ + DC) and 13 ± 7% were
within CD11c+ DCs (Fig. 3 A and B and Table 1). By dual-
staining footpad sections (Fig. 3 A and C), we found that 78 ±
9% of PIPs were within F4/80+CD11c− MΦ, and 16 ± 6% were
within F4/80+CD11c+ DCs (Table 1). Virtually all PIPs were res-
ident within MΦ, DCs, or RFs (Fig. 3C), suggesting that all PIP-
harboring host cell types had been found.
A prior study reported that 43% of PIPs resided in ER-TR7+
cells in the draining lymph node (DLN) (26). When we analyzed
PIPs in DLN, the number of infected ER-TR7+ RFs was
somewhat greater (10 ± 7%), but as before most cells were F4/80+
(87 ± 12%; Fig. 3 A and B and Table S1). Unlike the footpad,
where most persistent parasites resided in MΦ, in the DLN most
parasites were in CDC11c+ DCs (61 ± 19%; Fig. 3 A and B and
Table S1). This was confirmed by dual staining, with 30 ± 18%
within F4/80+CD11c− MΦs and 61 ± 19% within F4/80+CD11c+
DCs (Fig. 3 A and C and Table S1). Again, the data showed that
virtually all PIPs could be assigned to MΦs, DCs, or RFs. Thus,
although we did not find high levels of PIPs within RFs in either
site, there was a shift from host MΦs in the footpad to DCs in
the DLN.
“Cluster” Analysis Suggests Intracellular Replication in both MΦs and
DCs in Persistent Infections. Because the harsh treatments needed
to visualize BrdU incorporation destroy most cell type-specific
epitopes, we used cluster analysis to assess in which host cell type
parasite replication takes place. These studies showed that 73 ±
11% of clusters occurred within F4/80+ cells (MΦ + DC; n = 3E/
8M/168 clusters), whereas 17 ± 10% were within CD11c+ DCs (n =
3E/8M/124 clusters). These values are similar to that seen with in-
dividual parasites (79 ± 12% and 13 ± 7%, respectively) (Table 1).
We also plotted the percent of CD11c+-infected cells as function of
the number of parasites per cell to determine if DCs preferentially
harbor the “static” subpopulation, which tends to be within host
cells containing <3 parasites, but did not see any obvious correla-
tion. Together, these data suggest that PIP replication occurs sim-
ilarly in both MΦs and DCs.
F4/80+ MΦ-Bearing PIPs Do Not Express an Alternative Activation
Marker or Gr-1 (Ly6C). Alternatively activated (M2) macrophages
MΦ might provide a more hospitable environment for PIPs, and
we tested this by reactivity with the diagnostic markers RELMα
and CD206 (31). As before, PIPs were within F4/80+ cells (96 ±
2%), none of which expressed RELMα (Fig. S2A). F4/80+
RELMα+ cells were seen elsewhere in the sections (Fig. S2A,
Inset), and 70–80% cells were RELMα+ following IL-4 and IL-13
treatment of peritoneal MΦ (PEM) (Fig. S2B). Similar results
were obtained with CD206 (Fig. S2C). During the resolution
phase of acute infections, many Leishmania parasites are found
in inflammatory Gr-1+ cells (32, 33), which we confirmed for AIPs
(71%; Fig. S2D). However, in PIPs this number drops to only 7%
Fig. 3.
PIPs are predominantly found within MΦs and DCs in footpads (inoculation site) and in DLNs. (A) Representative confocal micrographs of the as-
sociation between PIP nuclei (green) and indicated host cell markers in footpad (FP, Top) and DLN (Bottom) tissue. (Scale bar, 5 μM.) (B and C) Quantitation of
images from A. Data points, mean association between parasites and markers in a mouse; horizontal bars, mean for all mice.
E804
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619265114
Mandell and Beverley
 (Fig. S2D). In combination with the prior results, the majority of
PIPs appear to reside within tissue MΦ.
Most PIPs Are Found Within iNOS+ MΦs and DCs and Show Unexpectedly
Normal Morphology, Genome Integrity, and Replication. The number of
parasites in persistent Leishmania infections remains relatively
steady for extended periods of time (14, 25), implying that PIP
replication must be balanced in some manner by destruction. A
likely executioner is nitric oxide (NO), generated from L-arginine
via iNOS, given its role in the control of L. major in vivo (10, 11).
Thus, we asked whether some fraction of persistent parasites was
found within iNOS+ host cells.
In the footpad, 59 ± 15% of PIPs were found within iNOS+
cells (Table 1), whereas in the DLN 80 ± 19% percent of PIPs
were within iNOS+ cells (Table S1), in agreement with previous
reports (34). For footpad PIPs, we confirmed the iNOS+ cells
were MΦs and/or DCs; 10 ± 6% of PIPs were found within
CD11c+/iNOS+ cells (Fig. 4A and Table 1), whereas 42 ± 14%
were found within F4/80+iNOS+cells, most of which are MΦs
(Fig. 4B and Table 1).
We asked whether PIPs residing in iNOS+ cells showed evi-
dence of immune attack. To assess morphology, we used GFP-
expressing parasites; for these, PIPs within iNOS+ host cells were
morphologically normal and indistinguishable from PIPs in iNOS−
host cells (Fig. 4C).
Parasite genome integrity was assessed by the TUNEL assay
(35). PIPs visualized in iNOS+ cells showed no TUNEL+ nuclei,
but 26 ± 15% of PIPs showed TUNEL+ kinetoplast (mito-
chondrial) DNA (Fig. 4D). This is expected in healthy cells as
kinetoplast replication involves the transient formation of dou-
ble-stranded breaks (36).
The “healthy” TUNEL+ kinetoplast/TUNEL− nucleus pattern
suggested that PIPs replicated within iNOS+ cells. We tested this
idea using the BrdU incorporation assay, as the iNOS antigen
proved resistant to the treatments required for BrdU immuno-
labeling. In these experiments, 82 ± 10% of total parasites were
within iNOS+ cells, slightly higher than what we had observed
previously. Simultaneous labeling for Leishmania histones and
iNOS and BrdU incorporation showed that a very similar per-
centage of the BrdU+ parasites (85 ± 15%; n = 2E/3M/254P)
were within iNOS+ cells. This suggests that PIPs do not prefer-
entially replicate within iNOS-negative cells. This was verified by
PIP cluster analysis, where 61 ± 9% occurred within iNOS+ cells
Table 1.
Quantitative immunolabeling of L. major PIPs at the
footpad inoculation site
Labeling parameter
Percent cells
N, experiments (E)/mice
(M)/parasites (P), in total
ER-TR7+
2 ± 3
3E/6M/528P
F4/80+
79 ± 12
3E/8M/983P
CD11c+
13 ± 7
3E/8M/1074P
F4/80+ CD11c−
78 ± 9
F4/80+ CD11c+
16 ± 6
2E/4M/266P
F4/80− CD11c+
3 ± 3
F4/80− CD11c−
3 ± 3
iNOS+
59 ± 15
3E/8M/2535P
F4/80+ iNOS+
42 ± 14
3E/8M/983P
CD11c+ iNOS+
10 ± 6
3E/8M/1074P
RELMα+
0 ± 0
2E/3M/284P
CD206+
0 ± 0
2E/3M/218P
Arg1+, within
3 ± 3
Arg1, adjacent
12 ± 11
3E/5M/317P
Arg1, within + adjacent
15 ± 14
Arg2+
0 ± 0
2E/2M/175P
Fig. 4.
PIPs are morphologically intact and replicate
within iNOS-expressing cells. (A and B) Representa-
tive images of parasite nuclei (green) within iNOS-
positive CD11c+ (A) or F4/80+ cells (B) in persistently
infected footpad tissue. (C) GFP-expressing L. major
(green) within iNOS-positive cells in persistently in-
fected tissue shows expected morphology for in-
tracellular parasites. (D) TUNEL labeling of PIPs within
iNOS-expressing cells. K (arrow), kinetoplast showing
TUNEL+. No TUNEL labeling of parasite nuclei was
observed. n = 2E/3M/80P. (E) BrdU labeling of PIPs
within iNOS-expressing cells. K, kinetoplast showing
BrdU-labeling. Arrowheads, BrdU+nuclei. (F) Percent
of clusters within iNOS+ cells plotted as a function of
the number of intracellular parasites per cell. Num-
bers within the bars are the number of cells visual-
ized. (Scale bar, 5 μM.) (G) Representative image of
starch elicited PEMs that were cultured in the pres-
ence of IFN-γ and LPS for 24 h and then stained to
detect parasite histones (green), iNOS (red), and nu-
clei (blue). (H) Representative image of an infected
cell in footpad tissue stained and imaged identically
to the cells in G. Arrows, PIP nuclei within iNOS+ cells.
Images of activated MΦs in vitro or iNOS-expressing
infected cells from footpad tissue were captured by
confocal microscopy using identical settings. (Scale bar,
5 μm.) (I) Comparison of average red (iNOS) fluores-
cence intensity per μm2 within in vitro-activated PEMs
or iNOS-expressing infected cells from footpad tissue.
Each data point represents one cell. Black horizontal
bars represent mean for all cells. *P < 0.05, Student’s
t test.
Mandell and Beverley
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2017
|
E805
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 (n = 3E/8M/329 clusters). A similar percentage was seen across
all cluster sizes, suggesting that neither the replicating nor non-
replicating PIPs were preferentially associated with iNOS (Fig.
4F). This established that PIPs replicate comparably in both
iNOS+ and iNOS− host cells.
Interestingly, about half of the uninfected F4/80+ cells adja-
cent to PIP-infected host cells also were iNOS+ (50 ± 15%; n = 3
mice/11 fields/343 cells). In contrast, more distant cells were
rarely iNOS+. These data show that “bystander” cell activation
occurs during persistent infections, as has also been observed in
acute infections (37), and raise the possibility that once released,
PIPs may enter into either iNOS+ or iNOS− cells.
Evidence That Multiple Inoculations of BrdU Do Not Perturb PIP
Replication or iNOS Expression. Multiple injections were required
in the vicinity of the parasite infection site to obtain sufficient
BrdU labeling of both AIPs and PIPs (Fig. 1C). This prompted
us to ask whether this necessary experimental perturbation could
cause induction and/or inhibition of PIP replication in some
manner. We compared PIP replication in BrdU-treated mice
with that of untreated mice by the “cluster analysis” method. PIP
clustering from BrdU-treated mice was determined by imaging
tissue sections stained to detect parasite histones and iNOS,
whereas the data from control mice were determined as part of
the analysis of the host cell types containing persistent Leish-
mania (Fig. 3). This comparison showed that the distribution of
parasite clusters was indistinguishable in experiments in which
BrdU labeling was performed from those where it was not (Fig.
S3; P > 0.6 by two-way ANOVA). We also tested whether the
BrdU administration protocol affected the level of iNOS ex-
pression in infected host cells. In tissue from BrdU-treated mice,
65 ± 21% of the parasites were within iNOS+ cells, not signifi-
cantly different than that seen in mice that had not been sub-
jected to BrdU treatment (59 ± 15%; P = 0.38). Thus, neither
the multiple inoculations nor the presence of BrdU appear to
result in detectable perturbation of either iNOS expression or
PIP replication in vivo.
How Do PIPs Survive Within iNOS Host Cells? We considered several
models to account for the unexpected abundance, survival, and
morphological normality of PIPs within iNOS+ host cells. Methods
for direct in situ detection of NO are not well developed nor
readily applied to the low levels of tissue PIPs seen; thus, our
attempts to establish NO production by PIP-infected iNOS+ cells
were unsuccessful (on both control and test samples). Neverthe-
less, we found that iNOS expression in PIP-infected cells was
somewhat higher than in IFN-γ/LPS-activated PEMs (1.6-fold;
Fig. 4 G–I; P < 0.001) that kill L. major promastigotes in an
iNOS-dependent manner (38), indicating that PIP survival is not
explained by reduced iNOS expression. Next, we asked whether
host or parasite arginase was up-regulated, which could deprive
cells of the essential substrate for NO synthesis. PIP-bearing host
cells were scored for expression of iNOS and arginase 1 (cytosolic)
or 2 (mitochondrial) (39), as were adjacent cells in physical con-
tact with the parasite-infected cell, as these could deplete arginine
in their immediate vicinity (40). Although 83 ± 14% of PIPs were
within iNOS+ cells in these experiments, only 3 ± 3% were within
iNOS+Arg1+ cells, and only 12 ± 11% of PIPs in iNOS+ were
adjacent to Arg1+ cells (Fig. S4A and Table 1). This result is in
keeping with our finding that PIPs were not found within MΦs
showing hallmarks of alternative activation. We did not detect any
spatial association between PIPs and Arg2+ host cells (Table 1),
which could be seen distantly from parasites (>75 μm; Fig. S4B).
Lastly, although L. major also express arginase, promastigotes do
not express enough to affect NO production by activated MΦs in
vitro (41). Our studies revealed that arginase levels were reduced
twofold in PIPs relative to cultured promastigotes (Fig. S4 C–E;
P = 10−6). Thus, up-regulation of arginase does not contribute to
PIP survival in iNOS+ cells.
PIPs could be intrinsically resistant to NO, as there is increasing
evidence that NO may act against amastigotes by mechanisms
other than toxicity (42–44). In the absence of an in vitro PIP
model, as a surrogate we compared the relative NO tolerance of
amastigotes to purified infectious metacyclic promastigotes fol-
lowing MΦ infection and induction of NO by IFN-γ/LPS activa-
tion (45). Activation increased NO levels by 20–30-fold (Fig. 5A)
and reduced the number of parasites remaining in infected cells by
90% (P < 0.05; Fig. 5B) by 24 h after stimulation. Stimulated MΦs
died by 48 h after IFN-γ/LPS activation, precluding assessment at
later time points. Inclusion of the specific iNOS inhibitor L-NIL
restored metacyclic survival, establishing iNOS dependency (Fig. 5
A and B). Amastigote tests were performed by first infecting with
metacyclics and allowing parasites to differentiate into amastigotes
before activation. Whereas prior promastigote infection interferes
with MΦ activation and NO production (46), we found this effect
was only transient, with infected host cells fully able to express
iNOS and generate NO 3 d following infection (Fig. S5). Despite
the induction of high levels of NO comparable to that seen in
metacyclic infections, many more amastigotes (64 ± 2%) now
survived, which was restored to 85% by NIL treatment (Fig. 5 A
and B). These data suggest that amastigotes are more tolerant of
NO than promastigotes (64% vs. 9% survival; P < 0.001), a finding
which could extrapolate to both AIPs and PIPs in vivo.
Attenuated lpg2– L. major Closely Resembles WT in Persistent Infections.
L. major lacking the Golgi GDP-mannose transporter required for
lipophosphoglycan synthesis encoded by LPG2 (lpg2−) persist in the
absence of pathology in mouse infections and vaccinate mice ef-
fectively (25). lpg2− may be a more amenable model for the study of
persistence, as it immediately attains numbers comparable to WT
PIPs within a few days after inoculation (25). Thus, we determined
the cell types infected by lpg2− in footpad tissue in BL6 mice and
whether these parasites replicate. Experiments were performed 1
mo after infection to exclude potential nonspecific inflammatory
responses induced immediately after infection.
Fig. 5.
Intracellular amastigotes are unexpectedly resistant to NO killing.
PEMs were either pretreated with IFN-γ and LPS 2 h before infection with
metacyclic promastigote-stage parasites (promastigotes, open bars) or were
first infected with metacyclic-stage parasites and then treated with IFN-γ and
LPS 72 h after infection (amastigotes, gray bars). NO production (A) and the
number of parasites per infected MФ were determined by microscopy 24 h
after IFN γ/LPS treatment. (B) The percent of parasites remaining relative to
that seen in untreated MФs at the same time point. Graphs show mean ±
SEM; *P < 0.05; n.s., not significant by Student’s t test. (C) Model of Leish-
mania persistence and concomitant immunity. Persistent Leishmania (green
oval) are found in two populations. The first population replicates similarly
to parasites in acute infections, whereas the other population replicates very
slowly and may be quiescent. Although some of the progeny of the repli-
cating parasites repopulate the replicating or quiescent parasite pools, many
progeny parasites are killed. Parasite replication serves to maintain persis-
tence while simultaneously providing a continuous supply of Leishmania
antigen, resulting in life-long immune stimulation.
E806
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619265114
Mandell and Beverley
 For most properties, lpg2− PIPs were similar to WT, including
the extent of BrdU labeling and residence primarily within tissue
MΦ and DCs, as assessed by labeling for F4/80, CDC11c, iNOS,
RELMα, ER-TR7, and Arg2 (Table S2). These data suggest that
lpg2− parasites provide an excellent model for long-term persis-
tent L. major.
For three markers, modest differences were seen. First, tran-
siently elevated levels of lpg2− PIPs were found in CD206+ cells
after 1 mo (50 ± 26%; P < 0.05), which declined to the WT levels
(4 ± 5%) after 5 mo (Fig. S6A and Table S1). Second, the fre-
quency of lpg2− PIPs within CD11c+ cells was elevated threefold
relative to WT (46 ± 29%; Fig. S6B; P < 0.006; Table S1), and
their association with Arg1 elevated fivefold (Fig. S6C and Table
S1; P = 0.002; 37% within and 35% adjacent). Unlike CD206
localization, these differences did not return to WT after 5 mo
(Fig. S6C). Whether these differences contribute to the ability of
lpg2− to vaccinate (14, 27) will be addressed in future studies.
Discussion
Persistent Infection Leishmania Comprise Two Populations, One Fast
Replicating and a Second Showing Little if any Replication. Because
the number of persistent parasites remains steady over long
periods of time in L. major following resolution of infection
pathology, an unanswered question was whether these parasites
lay in a quiescent, nonreplicating state. As in other pathogens,
this has profound consequences to strategies used for MΦ sur-
vival and immune evasion. Here, we demonstrate that a major
fraction of PIPs replicate comparably to AIPs, using three in-
dependent approaches. First, we formulated a parasite cluster
assay, reasoning that host cells bearing more than one parasite
arose via parasite replication rather than multiple infections. Such
clusters were identified both in footpads and DLNs (Figs. 2 and 3 A
and B), indirectly suggesting PIP replication at both sites. Second,
by the TUNEL assay, we detected significant levels of kinetoplast
(mitochondrial) DNA replication (Fig. 4). The definitive evidence
for PIP replication came from BrdU incorporation, which revealed
that a substantial percentage of PIPs were BrdU+ (Fig. 1). Thus,
many PIPs undergo active replication.
As the fraction of BrdU+ PIPs was about half of that seen with
AIPs (19 vs. 44%; Fig. 1E), we asked whether this arose from
differences in overall replication rate or population heteroge-
neity. This was tested by quantitative analysis of the distribution
of BrdU+ parasites versus cluster size (Fig. 2), postulating that
clusters comprising multiple parasites/host cells were a sign of
parasite replication. As expected, AIPs showed the distribution
expected for a homogeneously replicating population, with sim-
ilar BrdU labeling across all cluster sizes. In contrast, PIPs
showed two populations—one of whose properties closely re-
sembled that of AIPs and a second of small clusters—showing no
BrdU incorporation by our labeling protocol; indeed, BrdU−
“singletons” were most numerous (Fig. 2C). Although we cannot
rule out that these parasites are very slowly replicating by the
methods available, we estimate that about 39% of PIPs fall into
this nonreplicating class.
Do Slowly/Nonreplicating PIPs Enter a Quiescent Metabolic State?
Potentially, slowly/nonreplicating BrdU− PIPs have entered a
different metabolic state than the actively replicating BrdU+
PIPs. Indeed, recently it was shown that progressive chronic in-
fections of Leishmania mexicana were comprised of slowly rep-
licating parasite populations that were metabolically relatively
quiescent (47). However, the methods used there for the study of
large numbers of parasites in chronic infections are not exten-
sible to the low levels of PIPs seen in L. major nor for mixed
populations showing widely varying replication rates. Thus, other
approaches will be required to explore the metabolic status of
the slowly/nonreplicating L. major PIPs. NO synthesis may act to
dampen parasite metabolism in AIPs (42, 43), and this likely
occurs with PIPs as well. The quiescent forms of many pathogens
show differences in gene expression from actively replicating
forms (48, 49). Similar knowledge would aid our understanding
of Leishmania persistence considerably.
Is There a “Safe” Cell for Leishmania in Persistent Infections? Res-
olution of L. major infections following infection of resistant
mouse strains is known to be dependent on the production of
NO via iNOS (34). To account for the emergence of PIPs, in-
vestigators have posited the existence “safe cells” free from im-
mune attack (26, 50). Although RFs or alternatively activated
MΦs were attractive candidates to harbor persistent organisms
(26, 31), few PIPs could be found within them (Table 1).
Instead, virtually all PIPs were found in cells often considered
“unsafe”—namely, MΦs or DCs—especially given that most of
these expressed iNOS at levels comparable to that seen in clas-
sically activated MΦs (Table 1 and Fig. 4). PIPs in iNOS+ host
cells appeared strikingly normal: their replication profiles re-
sembled those parasites within iNOS− host cells, as did their
morphology (amastigote-like) and genome integrity.
This raised the question as to how PIPs could withstand the
presumptive action of iNOS through NO production. Using MΦ
infections in vitro as a surrogate for AIPs and PIPs, we found the
survival of amastigotes to greatly exceed that of infectious
metacyclics (Fig. 5). Correspondingly, several studies suggest that the
action of NO against amastigotes may be based more on meta-
bolic inhibition rather than killing (42, 43), arising from a tissue-
wide “collective” effect (44). This would likely be less effective at
low PIP densities seen in persistent infections. We saw no evi-
dence of attenuation of NO production by substrate competition
with host or parasite arginase nor of other previously described
mechanisms of modulating or rendering iNOS activity ineffective
(51, 52). An interesting question concerns the contribution of
reactive oxidant species, as infections of phox– mice lacking the
major phagocyte oxidase (gp91/phox) often yield uncontrolled
infections, albeit less reproducibly and progressing much less
rapidly than seen in infections of iNOS knockout mice (53, 54).
However, the lack of gp91 oxidase-specific inhibitors has pre-
cluded tests of its role specifically in PIP control, as shown ele-
gantly using specific inhibitors of iNOS (11).
The most plausible scenario accounting for current data is that
PIP-bearing host cells synthesize NO via iNOS expression, to
which PIPs are largely but perhaps not entirely resistant. We
have as yet not seen evidence of PIPs destruction microscopi-
cally, although the rapidity by which killed parasites disappear
(Fig. 5B) (35) suggests the anticipated “corpses” might be diffi-
cult to visualize in vivo.
lpg2– as a Model for Persistence. Previous work has shown that
although attenuated in acute infections and unable to induce
pathology, the L. major lpg2− mutant can persist indefinitely in
numbers comparable to WT persistent parasites (25) and can
vaccinate susceptible (BALB/c) mice against virulent challenge
(27). Because lpg2− effectively enters the “persistent” phase very
quickly, we proposed that it could provide a more convenient
model than the study of healed persistent WT infections, which
require >5 mo to establish. This prediction is now supported by
our finding that after only 1 mo lpg2− was indistinguishable from
WT PIPs in most respects, including the extent of replication and
residence primarily with MΦs and DCs, the majority of which
were iNOS+ (Table S1). Preliminary data also suggest that lpg2−
recruits Foxp3+ cells to the site of infection in BALB/c mice, a
phenomenon reported for WT PIPs (20). Modest differences
were seen with a few markers (CD206 transiently, Arg1, and
CD11c; Fig. S5), which may reflect the absence of phosphogly-
cans or other metabolites in the lpg2− and could contribute to the
immune response and ability to vaccinate (25, 27, 55). Overall,
Mandell and Beverley
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2017
|
E807
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 these data support the continued use of lpg2– parasites as a
model of Leishmania persistence and vaccination.
A Model of Leishmania Persistence and Concomitant Immunity. Our
data show that PIPs comprise two populations of cells: one
replicating similarly to logarithmically growing acute phase par-
asites (∼60 h doubling time), and a second population replicating
much less rapidly, and possibly not at all. However, despite
replication of the fast population, estimated to comprise ∼61%
of the total cells, PIP numbers do not increase over time, im-
plying that parasite replication is matched by killing. Thus, the
offspring of replicating parasites have three potential fates: They
may continue active replication, enter a nonreplicating state, or
be destroyed (Fig. 5C). Similarly, nonreplicating parasites may
remain dormant or at some frequency resume replication. How
these eventual fates are decided is not yet known. This could
be under cellular regulation and control, transitioning between
an active, replicating state and a potentially quiescent non-
replicating state, as seen in other pathogens exhibiting dormancy
or latency. Alternatively, the fact that both replicating and quies-
cent PIPs reside in similarly unsafe host cells suggests a stochastic
model, where forces favoring parasite persistence (such as IL-10/
Treg-dependent suppression) are balanced against those favoring
destruction (56), leading to maintenance of roughly constant
numbers. In reality, knowledge is limited concerning how “steady”
persistent Leishmania numbers actually are, with current data be-
ing mostly of low temporal resolution and high granularity. Thus, a
model wherein parasite numbers oscillate within some range over
time in response to these competing forces could be invoked.
Strong perburbations of the host’s response could further push
persistent parasites along either path, resulting in reactivation or
sterile cure (11, 20).
The ongoing replication and destruction of persistent Leish-
mania provides an attractive model for concomitant immunity
and a compelling rationale for the superiority of “live” vaccina-
tion strategies in Leishmania. Killed parasites arising as a
byproduct of parasite replication would be a good source of an-
tigen for maintaining a robust anti-Leishmania response at the
very site of initial infection (24). Provision of “dead antigen” in
situ would also overcome the ability of live parasites to inhibit
antigen presentation (57–59). Thus, from the host’s perspective,
persistent parasites serve as a continually self-renewing stimula-
tory vaccine. In some respects, the model proposed for PIP rep-
lication and “termination” is reminiscent of a stem cell cycle (Fig.
S7) with some of the progeny of replicating PIPs serving as a
continually self-renewing “stem” maintaining parasite persis-
tence, whereas the remainder meet their terminal fate in antigen-
presenting cells.
The continually replicating immunogen model may provide a
new perspective with which to view the immune response to
other persistent pathogens. For most of these, the experimental
focus has been on the role of the immune system in pathogen
suppression and containment, leaving the question of whether
this contributes to resistance to subsequent challenges as seen
with L. major. Following resolution of primary infections and
the generation of persistent (Toxoplasma bradyzoites) or latent
states (herpesviruses), sporadic subclinical reactivations often
occur, leading to the synthesis of antigen and immune stimulation
(60, 61). There is evidence that both of these persistent/latent
infections may confer protection to rechallenge (62–64). Simi-
larly, there is evidence that latent M. tuberculosis may undergo
limited replication (65) and that latent, asymptomatic infections
are associated with significant resistance to active disease (66).
Future work will be needed to establish whether a continually
renewing “stem-like” immunogen model is relevant to these or
other persistent pathogens.
Materials and Methods
Parasite Strains and Culture. L. major strain LV39c5 (Rho/SU/59/P) and its
derivative lpg2− (Δlpg2::HYG/Δlpg2::HYG) (25) were used in all experiments,
except for the promastigote experiments show in Fig. 1 and Fig. S1, which
used L. major strain Friedlin V1 (MHOM/IL/80/Friedlin). Parasites were grown
at 26 °C in M199 medium (US Biologicals) supplemented with 40 mM
4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazine-ethanesulfonic acid (Hepes) pH 7.4, 50 μM
adenosine, 1 μg·mL−1 biotin, 5 μg·mL−1 hemin, 2 μg·mL−1 biopterin, and
10% (vol/vol) heat-inactivated FCS (67). “Slow-growing” promastigote cul-
tures were grown in RPMI 1640 + L-glutamine (Invitrogen) supplemented
with 37 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 47 μM adenosine, 0.93 μg·mL−1 biotin, 4.7 μg·mL−1
hemin, 1.9 μg·mL−1 biopterin, and 0.9% (vol/vol) heat-inactivated FCS (68).
The WT LV39c5 parasites used here expressed GFP from the ribosomal locus
(SSU::IR1SAT-GFP) and were generated by transfecting SwaI-cut plasmid
B3538 into WT LV39c5 as described (67) and selecting for resistance to
100 μM nourseothricin and bright green fluorescence. The clone used in this
study exhibited virulence similar to WT in BALB/c mice. Null mutants of the
parasite arginase gene (Δarg::HYG/Δarg::PAC) (69) were cultured in the
above media supplemented with 50 mM putrescine. Infective metacyclic-
stage parasites were recovered using the density gradient centrifugation
method (70). Propidium iodide staining of promastigotes was performed as
described (71).
Antibodies Used. L. major nuclei were detected with a pool of rabbit anti-
bodies raised against L. major histones H2A, H2Avariant, H2B, H3, and H4
(pooled at a ratio of 3:2:3:3:1 by titer, kindly provided by I. L. K. Wong,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis) (72). For some experi-
ments, this pool was used at a dilution of 1:750. For others, this pool of
antibodies was directly conjugated to Alexafluor488 according to the
manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen) and used at a final concentration of
0.15 mg·mL−1. GFP was detected with a chicken anti-GFP antibody (AbCam)
at a final concentration of 0.02 mg·mL−1. F4/80 was detected with a rat
monoclonal antibody (clone A3-1, AbD Serotec) diluted to 1:250. CD11c was
detected with a hamster monoclonal antibody (clone N418, eBioscience)
diluted to 1:250. ER-TR7 was detected with a rat monoclonal antibody (BMA
Biomedicals) used at a final concentration of 0.01 mg·mL−1. iNOS was de-
tected with a rabbit anti-iNOS (BD Transduction Labs) used at 1 μg·mL−1.
Relmα was detected with a rabbit polyclonal antibody (Abcam) used at
0.8 μg·mL−1. BrdU was detected with a rat monoclonal antibody (Abcam) used
at 10 μg·mL−1. Goat anti-Arg1 (Santa Cruz) and goat anti-Arg2 (Santa Cruz)
were used at 2 μg·mL−1. Rat anti-Gr1 mAb (clone RB6-8C5; kindly provided
by L. D. Sibley, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis) was used
at a 1:250 dilution. Rabbit anti-Leishmania arginase (kindly provided by
B. Ullman, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, OR) was used at a
1:1,000 dilution. The following antisera were screened for reactivity to nitro-
tyrosine in IFN-γ/LPS-stimulated MΦs: rabbit anti-nitrotyrosine (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, sc-55256; Millipore, #06–284; Abcam, ab50185), mouse anti-
nitrotyrosine (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-32757), and rat anti-nitrotyrosine
(Abcam, ab6479).
The following fluorescent secondary antibodies were used: Alexafluor555
goat anti-rabbit, Alexafluor633 goat anti-rabbit, Alexafluor488 goat anti-rat,
Alexafluor555 goat anti-rat, Alexafluor633 goat anti-rat, Alexafluor568 goat
anti-hamster, Alexafluor488 goat anti-chicken, Alexaflour555 donkey anti-
goat, and Alexafluor647 donkey anti-rabbit (Invitrogen, all used at 2 μg·mL−1
concentrations).
Statement Identifying Institutional Committee Approving Animal Experiments.
Animal handling and experiments were carried out in strict accordance with
the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals of the US National Institutes of Health (73). Animal studies were
approved by the Animal Studies Committee at Washington University
(protocol 20090086) in accordance with the Office of Laboratory Animal
Welfare’s guidelines and the Association for Assessment and Accreditation
of Laboratory Animal Care International.
Mouse Infections. Female C57BL/6J mice (6–10 wk old; Jackson Labs) were
injected s.c. in the left hind footpad with either 105 metacyclic WT or 106
metacyclic lpg2– parasites. Following infection with WT parasites, the mice
developed lesions that resolved, as determined by the absence of footpad
swelling relative to the uninfected foot, ∼4 mo after infection. For the
purposes of this study, persistent infections were defined as any time >1 mo
following the resolution of footpad swelling. Unless otherwise indicated,
studies with lpg2− were performed between 1 and 2 mo following infection.
Possible lpg2− revertants showing amastigote virulence (74), defined here as
E808
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619265114
Mandell and Beverley
 having >150 parasites in a single section, were excluded from analysis. PEMs
were harvested and infected as described (75).
MΦ Infections. Starch-elicited PEMs were harvested and infected as described
(75). Cells were activated with 100 U·mL−1 recombinant IFN-γ (Chemicon)
and 100 ng·mL−1 LPS (Sigma) with or without the iNOS-inhibitor
L-NIL
(Cayman Chemical) at a concentration of 10 μM either immediately before
or 72 h after infection. Nitrite production (determined by the Greiss assay;
Sigma) and parasite survival were determined 24 h after MΦ stimulation. For
these experiments, “percent survival” is defined as the ratio of the number
of parasites per 100 MΦs compared with the same statistic in MΦs that were
not treated with LPS/IFN-γ. For these experiments, percent survival is defined
as the ratio of the number of parasites per 100 PEMs at either 24 or 96 h
after infection versus the number of parasites per 100 PEMs 24 h earlier. To
generate alternatively activated (M2) MΦs, PEMs were treated with media
containing 100 U·mL−1 each of recombinant IL-4 (BD Pharmingen) and IL-13
(BD Pharmingen) for 48 h.
BrdU Staining and in Vitro Labeling Experiments. For all BrdU immunode-
tection experiments, paraformaldehyde-fixed samples were permeabilized
with 0.1% Triton-X-100 in PBS for 15 min, washed in distilled water, and then
immersed in 2 M HCl for 40 min to denature the DNA. After extensive washing
with PBS, the samples were incubated in a blocking buffer containing PBS and
5% (vol/vol) normal goat sera and 0.1% (vol/vol) Triton-X-100 and were then
stained as described in the text in the methods above. All BrdU stains used a
2-h incubation with the anti-BrdU antibody.
To test BrdU labeling in promastigotes in culture, either log- or stationary-
phase L. major promastigotes were cultured in M199 media containing
0.1 mM BrdU (Sigma) for the indicated time, after which they were fixed in
4% (wt/vol) paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 min and stained as described
above. To test BrdU labeling in infected MΦs in vitro, PEMS were harvested
and infected as described with stationary-phase parasites (75). Two hours
after parasites were added, the MΦs were washed to remove extracellular
parasites and placed in media containing 0.1 mM BrdU, where they were
maintained. At 2 h, 1 d, 2 d, and 5 d postinfection, samples were fixed and
stained as described above.
BrdU Incorporation Assay in Vivo. Several different methods were attempted
to administer BrdU to the infected mice. In the preferred method, infected
mice were injected every 3 h for 18 h with 200 μL of PBS containing 4 mg·mL−1
BrdU into the peritoneal cavity and 50 μL of this solution directly into the
infected footpad, yielding a total dose of 6 mg BrdU. Mice were killed and
frozen tissue sections prepared 24 h after the first dose of BrdU. In addition
to our standard approach, we also tried administering BrdU in the drinking
water (1 mg·mL−1) via infusion using osmotic pumps (Alzet #2001D, 7.2 mg
total dose) and single i.p. injections of 200 μL of PBS containing 4 mg·mL−1
BrdU. At 24 h after the first dose, the mice were euthanized and footpad
tissue prepared and stained as described above. Volocity image analysis
software (Improvision) was used to assist quantitation.
Tissue Preparation and Histological Staining. After euthanasia, infected draining
popliteal lymph nodes or feet were harvested. The infected tissue was then
fixed for 1 h at room temperature in 4% (wt/vol) paraformaldehyde in PBS.
After fixation, tissues were incubated at 4 °C for 1 h in 10% and 20% (wt/vol)
sucrose in PBS, followed by an overnight incubation in 30% sucrose. The tis-
sues were then embedded in O.C.T. compound (Ted Pella, Inc.), cut into 10 μm-
thick sections using a cryostat, and mounted onto microscope slides.
Unless otherwise indicated, tissue sections were stained as follows. Slides
were washed in PBS, and tissues were then blocked and permeabilized in
PBS containing 5% (vol/vol) normal goat sera (Vector laboratories) and 0.1%
Triton-X-100 for 30 min. The sections were then stained with primary anti-
bodies for 1 h. Unbound antibody was then washed off in PBS, and primary
antibodies were detected with fluorescent secondary antibodies for 40 min,
followed by a second wash in PBS. For some experiments, we needed to
simultaneously stain tissue sections with different antibodies that were both
generated in rabbits. To do this, the tissue was stained with an unlabeled
rabbit primary antibody and a fluorescently labeled secondary antibody as
described above. Next, the tissue was blocked for 30 min with a buffer
containing 5% (vol/vol) normal rabbit sera (Sigma Aldrich), and then the
second fluorescently conjugated primary antibody was used.
For TUNEL staining of the tissue sections, after all primary and secondary
antibody staining was finished, the sections were stained with the In Situ Cell
Death Detection Kit, TMR Red (Roche), according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. All sections were mounted in ProLong Gold reagent (Invitrogen).
Confocal Microscopy and Image Analysis. Microscopy was performed on a Zeiss
510 META confocal laser scanning microscope. Image analysis was performed
using ImageJ or Volocity software.
Comparison of BrdU Staining Intensity. Samples were stained to detect par-
asite histones and BrdU, and three-dimensional confocal image stacks were
acquired. Parasite nuclei were manually circumscribed in ImageJ software,
and the average intensity in the anti-BrdU channel was determined from two-
dimensional image stacks. As a control for comparison of iNOS staining in-
tensity, PEMs were activated with media containing 100 U·mL−1 recombinant
IFN-γ (Chemicon) and 100 ng·mL−1 LPS (Sigma). Twenty-four hours later, the
cells were fixed in 4% (vol/vol) paraformaldehyde and stained in parallel
with footpad tissue sections from PIP-infected mice with antibodies against
L. major histones and iNOS, and nuclei were stained with TOPRO-3 (Invi-
trogen). To determine the fluorescence intensity of iNOS per cross-sectional
area, the outline of each cell from a confocal stack was traced in Volocity
software (Improvision), and the sum intensity of all “red” pixels (iNOS) in the
selected area was divided by the total number of pixels in that area, yielding
the mean pixel intensity for the cross-section.
Comparison of Arginase Staining Intensity Between Persistent Parasites and
Promastigotes. Footpad tissue sections infected with persistent WT (PIPs) or
log-phase WT promastigotes were labeled to detect parasite arginase with
anti-Leishmania arginase antibody and parasite histones (with the fluo-
rescently conjugated anti-histone antibody). Confocal images were acquired
using identical settings, and then Volocity image analysis software was used
to determine the total arginase fluorescence intensity on a per-cell basis.
Confocal stacks were compressed into a single plane, and then the total
arginase fluorescence intensity was determined within a 2.28-μm radius
circle centered on parasite nuclei.
Statistics. Data are presented as the geometric mean ± SE. P values are
calculated by the Student’s t test method or ANOVA.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank I.L.K. Wong for providing the antibodies
against L. major histones, L. D. Sibley for providing the antibodies against
F4/80 and CD11c, B. Ullman for providing the anti-Leishmania arginase an-
tibody, and W. Beatty, C. Bogdan, D. E. Dobson, S. Khader, T. Margolis,
D. Sacks, L. D. Sibley, T. Vickers, H. W. Virgin, and J. Uzonna, as well as the
referees, for discussions and/or comments on the manuscript. This work was
funded by NIH Grants R01 AI31078 and AI29646 (to S.M.B.) and a Berg/Morse
Graduate Fellowship (to M.A.M.).
1. Monack DM, Mueller A, Falkow S (2004) Persistent bacterial infections: The interface
of the pathogen and the host immune system. Nat Rev Microbiol 2(9):747–765.
2. Virgin HW, Wherry EJ, Ahmed R (2009) Redefining chronic viral infection. Cell 138(1):
30–50.
3. Pawlowski A, Jansson M, Sköld M, Rottenberg ME, Källenius G (2012) Tuberculosis
and HIV co-infection. PLoS Pathog 8(2):e1002464.
4. Roizman B, Whitley RJ (2013) An inquiry into the molecular basis of HSV latency and
reactivation. Annu Rev Microbiol 67:355–374.
5. Brown SP, Grenfell BT (2001) An unlikely partnership: Parasites, concomitant immu-
nity and host defence. Proc Biol Sci 268(1485):2543–2549.
6. Singh OP, Hasker E, Sacks D, Boelaert M, Sundar S (2014) Asymptomatic Leish-
mania infection: A new challenge for Leishmania control. Clin Infect Dis 58(10):
1424–1429.
7. Pigott DM, et al. (2014) Global distribution maps of the leishmaniases. eLife 3:3.
8. WHO (2010) Control of the Leishmaniases: WHO Expert Committee on the Control of
Leishmaniases. World Health Organization Technical Reports 949:1–186.
9. Bañuls AL, et al. (2011) Clinical pleiomorphism in human leishmaniases, with special
mention of asymptomatic infection. Clin Microbiol Infect 17(10):1451–1461.
10. Wei XQ, et al. (1995) Altered immune responses in mice lacking inducible nitric oxide
synthase. Nature 375(6530):408–411.
11. Stenger S, Donhauser N, Thüring H, Röllinghoff M, Bogdan C (1996) Reactivation of
latent leishmaniasis by inhibition of inducible nitric oxide synthase. J Exp Med 183(4):
1501–1514.
12. Launois P, Louis JA, Milon G (1997) The fate and persistence of Leishmania major in
mice of different genetic backgrounds: An example of exploitation of the immune
system by intracellular parasites. Parasitology 115(Suppl):S25–S32.
13. Belkaid Y, et al. (2000) A natural model of Leishmania major infection reveals a
prolonged “silent” phase of parasite amplification in the skin before the onset of
lesion formation and immunity. J Immunol 165(2):969–977.
14. Okwor I, Uzonna J (2008) Persistent parasites and immunologic memory in cutaneous
leishmaniasis: Implications for vaccine designs and vaccination strategies. Immunol
Res 41(2):123–136.
Mandell and Beverley
PNAS
|
Published online January 12, 2017
|
E809
MICROBIOLOGY
PNAS PLUS
 15. Svobodová M, Votýpka J, Nicolas L, Volf P (2003) Leishmania tropica in the black rat
(Rattus rattus): Persistence and transmission from asymptomatic host to sand fly
vector Phlebotomus sergenti. Microbes Infect 5(5):361–364.
16. Kimblin N, et al. (2008) Quantification of the infectious dose of Leishmania major
transmitted to the skin by single sand flies. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105(29):
10125–10130.
17. Aebischer T (1994) Recurrent cutaneous leishmaniasis: A role for persistent parasites?
Parasitol Today 10(1):25–28.
18. Sacks DL (2014) Vaccines against tropical parasitic diseases: A persisting answer to a
persisting problem. Nat Immunol 15(5):403–405.
19. Mandell MA, Beverley SM (2016) Concomitant immunity induced by persistent
Leishmania major does not preclude secondary re-infection: Implications for genetic
exchange, diversity and vaccination. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 10(6):e0004811.
20. Belkaid Y, Piccirillo CA, Mendez S, Shevach EM, Sacks DL (2002) CD4+CD25+ regula-
tory T cells control Leishmania major persistence and immunity. Nature 420(6915):
502–507.
21. Sacks D, Noben-Trauth N (2002) The immunology of susceptibility and resistance to
Leishmania major in mice. Nat Rev Immunol 2(11):845–858.
22. Kaye P, Scott P (2011) Leishmaniasis: Complexity at the host-pathogen interface. Nat
Rev Microbiol 9(8):604–615.
23. Belkaid Y, et al. (2001) The role of interleukin (IL)-10 in the persistence of Leishmania
major in the skin after healing and the therapeutic potential of anti-IL-10 receptor
antibody for sterile cure. J Exp Med 194(10):1497–1506.
24. Pagán AJ, et al. (2013) Tracking antigen-specific CD4+ T cells throughout the course
of chronic Leishmania major infection in resistant mice. Eur J Immunol 43(2):
427–438.
25. Späth GF, et al. (2003) Persistence without pathology in phosphoglycan-deficient
Leishmania major. Science 301(5637):1241–1243.
26. Bogdan C, et al. (2000) Fibroblasts as host cells in latent leishmaniosis. J Exp Med
191(12):2121–2130.
27. Uzonna JE, Späth GF, Beverley SM, Scott P (2004) Vaccination with phosphoglycan-
deficient Leishmania major protects highly susceptible mice from virulent challenge
without inducing a strong Th1 response. J Immunol 172(6):3793–3797.
28. Gratzner HG (1982) Monoclonal antibody to 5-bromo- and 5-iododeoxyuridine: A
new reagent for detection of DNA replication. Science 218(4571):474–475.
29. Tattersall MHN, Brown B, Frei E, 3rd (1975) The reversal of methotrexate toxicity
by thymidine with maintenance of antitumour effects. Nature 253(5488):
198–200.
30. Moll H, Flohé S, Röllinghoff M (1995) Dendritic cells in Leishmania major-immune
mice harbor persistent parasites and mediate an antigen-specific T cell immune re-
sponse. Eur J Immunol 25(3):693–699.
31. Gordon S (2003) Alternative activation of macrophages. Nat Rev Immunol 3(1):23–35.
32. De Trez C, et al. (2009) iNOS-producing inflammatory dendritic cells constitute the
major infected cell type during the chronic Leishmania major infection phase of
C57BL/6 resistant mice. PLoS Pathog 5(6):e1000494.
33. Goncalves R, Zhang X, Cohen H, Debrabant A, Mosser DM (2011) Platelet activation
attracts a subpopulation of effector monocytes to sites of Leishmania major infection.
J Exp Med 208(6):1253–1265.
34. Stenger S, Thüring H, Röllinghoff M, Bogdan C (1994) Tissue expression of inducible
nitric oxide synthase is closely associated with resistance to Leishmania major. J Exp
Med 180(3):783–793.
35. Prina E, Roux E, Mattei D, Milon G (2007) Leishmania DNA is rapidly degraded fol-
lowing parasite death: An analysis by microscopy and real-time PCR. Microbes Infect
9(11):1307–1315.
36. Liu B, Liu Y, Motyka SA, Agbo EE, Englund PT (2005) Fellowship of the rings: The
replication of kinetoplast DNA. Trends Parasitol 21(8):363–369.
37. Carvalho LP, Pearce EJ, Scott P (2008) Functional dichotomy of dendritic cells fol-
lowing interaction with Leishmania braziliensis: Infected cells produce high levels of
TNF-alpha, whereas bystander dendritic cells are activated to promote T cell re-
sponses. J Immunol 181(9):6473–6480.
38. Green SJ, Meltzer MS, Hibbs JB, Jr, Nacy CA (1990) Activated macrophages destroy
intracellular Leishmania major amastigotes by an L-arginine-dependent killing
mechanism. J Immunol 144(1):278–283.
39. Popovic PJ, Zeh HJ, 3rd, Ochoa JB (2007) Arginine and immunity. J Nutr 137(6, Suppl
2):1681S–1686S.
40. Bronte V, Serafini P, Mazzoni A, Segal DM, Zanovello P (2003) L-arginine metab-
olism in myeloid cells controls T-lymphocyte functions. Trends Immunol 24(6):
302–306.
41. Muleme HM, et al. (2009) Infection with arginase-deficient Leishmania major reveals
a parasite number-dependent and cytokine-independent regulation of host cellular
arginase activity and disease pathogenesis. J Immunol 183(12):8068–8076.
42. Müller AJ, et al. (2013) Photoconvertible pathogen labeling reveals nitric oxide con-
trol of Leishmania major infection in vivo via dampening of parasite metabolism. Cell
Host Microbe 14(4):460–467.
43. Olekhnovitch R, Bousso P (2015) Induction, propagation, and activity of host nitric
oxide: Lessons from Leishmania infection. Trends Parasitol 31(12):653–664.
44. Olekhnovitch R, Ryffel B, Müller AJ, Bousso P (2014) Collective nitric oxide production
provides tissue-wide immunity during Leishmania infection. J Clin Invest 124(4):
1711–1722.
45. Liew FY, Millott S, Parkinson C, Palmer RM, Moncada S (1990) Macrophage killing of
Leishmania parasite in vivo is mediated by nitric oxide from L-arginine. J Immunol
144(12):4794–4797.
46. Liu D, Uzonna JE (2012) The early interaction of Leishmania with macrophages and
dendritic cells and its influence on the host immune response. Front Cell Infect
Microbiol 2:83.
47. Kloehn J, Saunders EC, O’Callaghan S, Dagley MJ, McConville MJ (2015) Character-
ization of metabolically quiescent Leishmania parasites in murine lesions using heavy
water labeling. PLoS Pathog 11(2):e1004683.
48. Cleary MD, Singh U, Blader IJ, Brewer JL, Boothroyd JC (2002) Toxoplasma gondii
asexual development: Identification of developmentally regulated genes and distinct
patterns of gene expression. Eukaryot Cell 1(3):329–340.
49. Betts JC, Lukey PT, Robb LC, McAdam RA, Duncan K (2002) Evaluation of a nutrient
starvation model of Mycobacterium tuberculosis persistence by gene and protein
expression profiling. Mol Microbiol 43(3):717–731.
50. Mirkovich AM, Galelli A, Allison AC, Modabber FZ (1986) Increased myelopoiesis
during Leishmania major infection in mice: Generation of ‘safe targets’, a possible
way to evade the effector immune mechanism. Clin Exp Immunol 64(1):1–7.
51. Pandit L, Kolodziejska KE, Zeng S, Eissa NT (2009) The physiologic aggresome medi-
ates cellular inactivation of iNOS. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(4):1211–1215.
52. Miller BH, et al. (2004) Mycobacteria inhibit nitric oxide synthase recruitment to
phagosomes during macrophage infection. Infect Immun 72(5):2872–2878.
53. Blos M, et al. (2003) Organ-specific and stage-dependent control of Leishmania major
infection by inducible nitric oxide synthase and phagocyte NADPH oxidase. Eur J
Immunol 33(5):1224–1234.
54. Diefenbach A, et al. (1998) Type 1 interferon (IFNalpha/β) and type 2 nitric oxide
synthase regulate the innate immune response to a protozoan parasite. Immunity
8(1):77–87.
55. Liu D, et al. (2009) Leishmania major phosphoglycans influence the host early immune
response by modulating dendritic cell functions. Infect Immun 77(8):3272–3283.
56. Peters N, Sacks D (2006) Immune privilege in sites of chronic infection: Leishmania and
regulatory T cells. Immunol Rev 213:159–179.
57. Courret N, et al. (1999) Presentation of the Leishmania antigen LACK by infected
macrophages is dependent upon the virulence of the phagocytosed parasites. Eur J
Immunol 29(3):762–773.
58. Reiner NE, Ng W, McMaster WR (1987) Parasite-accessory cell interactions in murine
leishmaniasis. II. Leishmania donovani suppresses macrophage expression of class I
and class II major histocompatibility complex gene products. J Immunol 138(6):
1926–1932.
59. Fruth U, Solioz N, Louis JA (1993) Leishmania major interferes with antigen pre-
sentation by infected macrophages. J Immunol 150(5):1857–1864.
60. van Lint AL, et al. (2005) Latent infection with herpes simplex virus is associated with
ongoing CD8+ T-cell stimulation by parenchymal cells within sensory ganglia. J Virol
79(23):14843–14851.
61. Theil D, et al. (2003) Latent herpesvirus infection in human trigeminal ganglia causes
chronic immune response. Am J Pathol 163(6):2179–2184.
62. Brandão GP, et al. (2011) Susceptibility to re-infection in C57BL/6 mice with re-
combinant strains of Toxoplasma gondii. Exp Parasitol 128(4):433–437.
63. Hiszczy�
nska-Sawicka E, Gatkowska JM, Grzybowski MM, Długo�
nska H (2014) Veteri-
nary vaccines against toxoplasmosis. Parasitology 141(11):1365–1378.
64. Centifanto-Fitzgerald YM, Varnell ED, Kaufman HE (1982) Initial herpes simplex virus
type 1 infection prevents ganglionic superinfection by other strains. Infect Immun
35(3):1125–1132.
65. Gideon HP, Flynn JL (2011) Latent tuberculosis: What the host “sees”? Immunol Res
50(2-3):202–212.
66. Esmail H, Barry CE, 3rd, Young DB, Wilkinson RJ (2014) The ongoing challenge of
latent tuberculosis. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 369(1645):20130437.
67. Kapler GM, Coburn CM, Beverley SM (1990) Stable transfection of the human parasite
Leishmania major delineates a 30-kilobase region sufficient for extrachromosomal
replication and expression. Mol Cell Biol 10(3):1084–1094.
68. Vickers TJ, et al. (2006) Biochemical and genetic analysis of methylenetetrahy-
drofolate reductase in Leishmania metabolism and virulence. J Biol Chem 281(50):
38150–38158.
69. Reguera RM, Balaña-Fouce R, Showalter M, Hickerson S, Beverley SM (2009) Leish-
mania major lacking arginase (ARG) are auxotrophic for polyamines but retain in-
fectivity to susceptible BALB/c mice. Mol Biochem Parasitol 165(1):48–56.
70. Späth GF, Beverley SM (2001) A lipophosphoglycan-independent method for isolation
of infective Leishmania metacyclic promastigotes by density gradient centrifugation.
Exp Parasitol 99(2):97–103.
71. Akopyants NS, et al. (2009) Demonstration of genetic exchange during cyclical de-
velopment of Leishmania in the sand fly vector. Science 324(5924):265–268.
72. Anderson BA, et al. (2013) Kinetoplastid-specific histone variant functions are con-
served in Leishmania major. Mol Biochem Parasitol 191(2):53–57.
73. Committee on Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (2011) Guide for the Care and Use
of Laboratory Animals (National Academies Press, Washington, DC), 8th Ed.
74. Späth GF, Lye LF, Segawa H, Turco SJ, Beverley SM (2004) Identification of a com-
pensatory mutant (lpg2-REV) of Leishmania major able to survive as amastigotes
within macrophages without LPG2-dependent glycoconjugates and its significance to
virulence and immunization strategies. Infect Immun 72(6):3622–3627.
75. Capul AA, Hickerson S, Barron T, Turco SJ, Beverley SM (2007) Comparisons of mu-
tants lacking the Golgi UDP-galactose or GDP-mannose transporters establish that
phosphoglycans are important for promastigote but not amastigote virulence in
Leishmania major. Infect Immun 75(9):4629–4637.
E810
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1619265114
Mandell and Beverley
