 Structure–based discovery of opioid analgesics with reduced 
side effects
Aashish Manglik1,*, Henry Lin2,*, Dipendra K. Aryal3,*, John D. McCorvy3, Daniela Dengler4, 
Gregory Corder5, Anat Levit2, Ralf C. Kling4,6, Viachaslau Bernat4, Harald Hübner4, Xi-Ping 
Huang3, Maria F. Sassano3, Patrick M. Giguère3, Stefan Löber4, Da Duan2, Grégory 
Scherrer1,5, Brian K. Kobilka1, Peter Gmeiner4, Bryan L. Roth3, and Brian K. Shoichet2
1Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California 94305, USA
2Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco, California 
94158, USA
3Department of Pharmacology, UNC Chapel Hill Medical School, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 
27514, USA
4Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Schuhstraße 19, 91052 Erlangen, Germany
5Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, Neurosurgery, Stanford 
Neurosciences Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA
6Institut für Physiologie und Pathophysiologie, Paracelsus Medical University, 90419 Nuremberg, 
Germany
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B.K.K. (kobilka@stanford.edu), P.G. (peter.gmeiner@fau.de), 
B.L.R. (bryan_roth@med.unc.edu) or B.K.S. (shoichet@cgl.ucsf.edu).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version 
of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Author Contributions A.M. and H.L. initiated the project. H.L. performed docking and identified compounds to be tested in the 
initial and analogue screens. A.M. performed binding studies to identify initial hits and devised structure-guided optimization 
strategies for subsequent analogues. D.K.A. performed in vivo studies, including analgesia assays, mouse plethysmography, faecal boli 
accumulation studies, open field locomotor assay, and conditioned place preference. J.D.M., M.F.S. and P.M.G. performed radioligand 
binding and signalling studies. X.P.H. performed signalling studies and assessed compound activity against the GPCRome. D.De., 
V.B., S.L. and H.H. synthesized compounds and determined affinities by radioligand binding and performed signalling studies. A.L. 
and A.M. docked PZM21 and TRV130 and R.C.K. simulated PZM21 binding to μOR. G.C. performed reflexive and affective 
analgesia studies of μOR knockout mice and was supervised by G.S. D.Du. performed pharmacokinetic studies. The manuscript was 
written by A.M., H.L. and B.K.S. with editing and suggestions from B.L.R. and input from D.K.A., B.K.K. and P.G. P.G. supervised 
chemical synthesis of compounds and the separation and identification of diastereomers, B.K.K. supervised testing of initial docking 
hits, B.L.R. supervised radioligand binding, signalling and in vivo studies and B.K.S. supervised the compound discovery and design. 
The project was conceived by A.M., H.L., B.K.K., P.G., B.K.S and B.L.R.
The authors declare competing financial interests: details are available in the online version of the paper. Readers are welcome to 
comment on the online version of the paper.
Reviewer Information Nature thanks G. Henderson, E. Kelly, B. Kieffer and J. Meiler for their contribution to the peer review of this 
work.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 September 08; 537(7619): 185–190. doi:10.1038/nature19112.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Abstract
Morphine is an alkaloid from the opium poppy used to treat pain. The potentially lethal side 
effects of morphine and related opioids—which include fatal respiratory depression—are thought 
to be mediated by μ-opioid-receptor (μOR) signalling through the β-arrestin pathway or by actions 
at other receptors. Conversely, G-protein μOR signalling is thought to confer analgesia. Here we 
computationally dock over 3 million molecules against the μOR structure and identify new 
scaffolds unrelated to known opioids. Structure-based optimization yields PZM21—a potent Gi 
activator with exceptional selectivity for μOR and minimal β-arrestin-2 recruitment. Unlike 
morphine, PZM21 is more efficacious for the affective component of analgesia versus the reflexive 
component and is devoid of both respiratory depression and morphine-like reinforcing activity in 
mice at equi-analgesic doses. PZM21 thus serves as both a probe to disentangle μOR signalling 
and a therapeutic lead that is devoid of many of the side effects of current opioids.
Opiate addiction, compounded by the potentially lethal side effects of opiates such as 
respiratory depression, has driven optimization campaigns for safer and more effective 
analgesics since the 19th century. Although the natural products morphine and codeine, and 
the semi-synthetic drug heroin, are more reliably effective analgesics than raw opium, they 
retain its liabilities. The classification of opioid receptors into μ, δ, and κ and nociception 
subtypes1,2 raised hopes that subtype-specific molecules would lack the liabilities of 
morphinan-based opiates. Despite the introduction of potent synthetic opioid agonists like 
methadone and fentanyl, and the discovery of endogenous opioid peptides3, developing 
analgesics without the drawbacks of classic opioids has remained an elusive goal. Recent 
studies have suggested that opioid-induced analgesia results from μOR signalling through 
the G protein Gi, while many side effects, including respiratory depression and constipation, 
may be conferred via β-arrestin pathway signalling downstream of μOR activation (Fig. 
1a)4–6. Agonists specific to the μOR and biased towards the Gi signalling pathway are 
therefore sought both as therapeutic leads and as molecular probes to understand μOR 
signalling. Recent progress has supported the feasibility and potential clinical utility of such 
biased μOR agonists7,8.
The determination of the crystal structures of the μ, δ, κ and nociceptin opioid receptors9–12 
(Fig. 1b, c) provided an opportunity to seek new μOR agonists via structure-based 
approaches. Recent discovery campaigns have used crystal structures of other Family A G-
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to computationally dock large libraries of molecules, 
identifying ligands with new scaffolds and with nanomolar-range potencies13–17. We thus 
targeted the μOR for structure-based docking, seeking ligands with new chemotypes. We 
reasoned that such new chemotypes might confer signalling properties with new biological 
effects, as has been true for other structure-based campaigns18,19.
Structure-based docking to the μOR
We docked over 3 million commercially available lead-like compounds20 against the 
orthosteric pocket of inactive μOR9, prioritizing ligands that interact with known affinity-
determining residues and with putative specificity residues that differ among the four opioid 
receptor subtypes (Fig. 1b, d). For each compound, an average of 1.3 million configurations 
Manglik et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 was evaluated for complementarity to the receptor using the physics-based energy function21 
in DOCK3.6. As is common in docking22,23 and screening, the top ranking molecules were 
inspected for features not explicitly captured in the scoring function. We manually examined 
the top 2,500 (0.08%) docked molecules for their novelty, their interactions with key polar 
residues such as Asp1473.32 (superscripts indicate Ballesteros-Weinstein numbering24), and 
deprioritized those that showed conformational strain (a term occasionally poorly modelled 
by the scoring function). Ultimately, 23 high-scoring molecules with ranks ranging from 237 
to 2,095 out of the over 3 million docked were selected for testing (Fig. 1e). Compared to 
the 5,215 μOR ligands annotated in ChEMBL1625, these docking hits had Extended 
Connectivity Fingerprint 4 (ECFP4)-based Tanimoto coefficients (Tc) ranging from 0.28 to 
0.31, which is consistent with the exploration of novel scaffolds26. Of the 23 tested, seven 
had μOR binding affinities (Ki) ranging from 2.3 μM to 14 μM (Extended Data Table 1, 
Extended Data Fig. 1).
The new ligands are predicted to engage the μOR in new ways (Fig. 1f and Extended Data 
Fig. 1). Most opioid ligands use a cationic amine to ion-pair with Asp1473.32, a canonical 
interaction27 observed in structures of the μOR, δOR, κOR and nociceptin receptor bound to 
ligands of different scaffolds9–12,28. As anticipated, the docked ligands recapitulated this 
interaction. Much less precedence exists for the formation of an additional hydrogen bond 
with this anchor aspartate, often mediated in the docking poses by a urea amide. In several 
of the new ligands the urea carbonyl is modelled to hydrogen bond with Tyr1483.33, while 
the rest of the ligands often occupy sites unexplored by morphinans (Extended Data Fig. 1). 
To our knowledge, the double hydrogen bond coordination of Asp1473.32 modelled in the 
docking poses has not been anticipated or observed previously for opioid ligands, and only 
50 of the 5,215 annotated opioid ligands in ChEMBL16 contain a urea group.
Despite the structural novelty of the initial docking hits, their affinities were low. To enhance 
binding and selectivity, we docked 500 analogues of compounds 4, 5 and 7 that retained the 
key recognition groups but added packing substituents or extended further towards the 
extracellular side of the receptor, where the opioid receptors are more variable. Of the 15 
top-scoring analogues that were tested, seven had Ki values between 42 nM and 4.7 μM 
(Extended Data Table 2). Encouragingly, several were specific for the μOR over κOR 
(compounds 12–15, Extended Data Table 2). We then investigated the more potent 
analogues for signalling potency and efficacy. Although the structure we docked against was 
the inactive state of the μOR, compounds 8 and 12–14 activated Gi/o (Extended Data Table 
2). A similar enrichment for agonists was previously seen in a docking study against the 
inactive state of the κOR23, perhaps reflecting the small changes in the orthosteric pocket 
associated with opioid receptor activation29. Encouragingly, the most potent compound, 12 
(Fig. 2a, b), strongly activated Gi/o with low levels of β-arrestin-2 recruitment (Fig. 2c, d).
Structure-guided synthetic optimization
To optimize compound 12, we synthesized stereochemically pure isomers and introduced a 
phenolic hydroxyl (Fig. 3a). The synthesis of the (S,S) stereoisomer of 12 improved affinity 
(Ki) to 4.8 nM and had a signalling EC50 of 65 nM; it was the most potent and efficacious 
Gi/o signalling agonist among the four isomers (Fig. 3e). The phenolic hydroxyl, introduced 
Manglik et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to make compound (S,S)-21, was designed to exploit a water-mediated hydrogen bond with 
His2976.52, an interaction observed in the structure of μOR in complex with β-
funaltrexamine (β-FNA) (Fig. 3b) and in other structures of the δOR28 and κOR11. This 
hydroxyl was readily accommodated in the docked μOR-12 complex, improving the 
predicted docking energy (Fig. 3c). Compound (S,S)-21 had an EC50 of 4.6 nM in a Gi/o 
activation assay, with 76% efficacy (Fig. 3f), and a Ki of 1.1 nM in radioligand binding 
assays (Extended Data Table 3), an improvement of 40-fold versus 12. The other three 
stereoisomers of (S,S)-21 were much less potent or efficacious (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b), 
suggesting a specific stereochemical requirement for both potency and efficacy in agreement 
with the docked poses of (S,S)-21 to the inactive and active structures29 of μOR (Fig. 3c, 
Extended Data Fig. 2c, d). We refer to (S,S)-21 as compound PZM21 henceforth.
Because PZM21 was discovered against the inactive structure of μOR, its docked complex to 
active μOR retains ambiguities. To investigate its receptor-bound structure further, more 
detailed docking and molecular dynamics simulations were conducted. The resulting model 
was tested by synthesizing molecules that either perturbed or exploited specific modelled 
interactions (Fig. 3c, d, Extended Data Figs 2 and 3). Neutralization of charge by amidation 
(compound PZM28) decreases potency by 1,000-fold, supporting a key ionic interaction 
between the PZM21 tertiary amine and Asp1473.32 (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 3). 
Compound PZM27, which adds steric bulk to the tertiary amine, was synthesized to disrupt 
putative hydrophobic interactions between the N-methyl group and Met1513.36 and 
Trp2936.48, consistent with its 30-fold loss of potency and decreased efficacy (Fig. 3d and 
Extended Data Fig. 3). Compounds PZM23, PZM24 and PZM25, which were synthesized to 
disrupt hydrogen bonding interactions in the model between the urea and Asp1473.32, 
Tyr3267.43 and Gln1242.60, lose between 30- and 230-fold potency despite their decreased 
solvation penalties (Fig. 3d and Extended Data Fig. 3). These key ionic and hydrogen-
bonding interactions are maintained for 3 μs of molecular dynamics simulations of PZM21 
in complex with active μOR, as are interactions between the phenolic hydroxyl and the 
bridging waters to His2976.52, further supporting their relevance to the modelled pose 
(Extended Data Fig. 2g). The thiophene of PZM21, modelled to fit in the more open 
specificity region of the μOR, can be replaced with a larger benzothiophene without loss of 
potency (Extended Data Fig. 3). Interactions of this thiophene with residues that differ 
among the opioid receptor sub-types may contribute to PZM21 specificity (Extended Data 
Fig. 2e). More compellingly, the simulations and docking predict that the PZM21 thiophene 
comes within 6 Å of Asn1272.63 in the active μOR (Extended Data Fig. 2g). Accordingly, we 
synthesized an irreversible version of PZM21 (compound PZM29) designed to form a 
covalent bond with μOR engineered with an N127C mutation. Compound PZM29 binds 
irreversibly to this mutant but not the wild-type receptor and retains its efficacy as an agonist 
(Extended Data Fig. 3), supporting the overall orientation of PZM21 as modelled and 
simulated in the orthosteric μOR site.
PZM21 is a selective Gi-biased μOR agonist
PZM21 had no detectable κOR or nociceptin receptor agonist activity—it is actually an 18 
nM κOR antagonist—while it is a 500-fold weaker δOR agonist (Extended Data Fig. 4 and 
Extended Data Table 3), making it a selective μOR agonist. To investigate specificity more 
Manglik et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 broadly, PZM21 was counter-screened for agonism against 316 other GPCRs30. Activity at 
10μM was observed at several peptide and protein receptors; however, no potent activity was 
confirmed with a full dose–response experiment at these receptors. PZM21 therefore has 
high agonist specificity among GPCRs (Extended Data Fig. 5a–c). PZM21 was also tested 
for inhibition of the hERG ion channel and the dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin 
neurotransmitter transporters. At hERG, PZM21 had an IC50 of between 2 and 4 μM, 500- to 
1,000-fold weaker than its potency as a μOR agonist (Extended Data Fig. 5d). Its inhibition 
of the neurotransmitter transporters, which are also analgesia targets, was even weaker with 
IC50 values ranging from 7.8 to 34 μM (Extended Data Fig. 5e). Thus, PZM21 is a potent, 
selective, and efficacious μ opioid agonist.
A major goal of this study was to find new chemotypes that might display biased signalling 
and perhaps, unlike canonical opioid drugs, have more favourable in vivo profiles. Signalling 
by PZM21 and other μOR agonists appears to be mediated primarily by the heterotrimeric G 
protein Gi/o, as its effect on cAMP levels was eliminated by pertussis toxin and no activity 
was observed in a calcium release assay (Extended Data Fig. 6a–d). A maximal 
concentration of PZM21 led to no detectable β-arrestin-2 recruitment in the PathHunter 
assay (DiscoverRx) (Fig. 3g and Extended Data Fig. 6c) and a minimal level of μOR 
internalization compared to DAMGO and morphine (Extended Data Fig. 6e). Indeed, β-
arrestin-2 recruitment was too low to even permit a formal calculation of bias31, which 
quantifies the preference for one signalling pathway over another. Since β-arrestin 
recruitment can depend on the expression level of G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 
(GRK2)32, we also investigated Gi/o signalling and arrestin recruitment in cells co-
transfected with this kinase. Even in the presence of overexpressed GRK2, PZM21 still has 
weak arrestin recruitment efficacy compared to DAMGO and even to morphine (Extended 
Data Fig. 6g–i). In fact, the signalling bias of PZM21 was undistinguishable from TRV130, 
a Gi-biased opioid agonist now in Phase III clinical trials (Fig. 3f, g), whereas its G-protein-
bias substantially exceeded that of herkinorin, which has also been purported to be a Gi-
biased agonist33 (Extended Data Fig. 6). An intriguing distinction in these signalling studies 
is the lack of agonist activity of PZM21 at κOR. While PZM21 is an 18-nM antagonist of 
this receptor, the other biased agonist, TRV130, activates κOR with similar potency to 
morphine (Extended Data Fig. 6f). Additionally, despite having similar levels of signalling 
bias, in modelling studies TRV130 and PZM21 appear to engage the μOR in distinct ways 
(Extended Data Fig. 2f).
Analgesia with diminished side effects
Consistent with its μOR agonist activity, PZM21 displayed dose-dependent analgesia in a 
mouse hotplate assay, with a per cent maximal possible effect (% MPE) of 87% reached 15 
min after administration of the highest dose of drug tested (Fig. 4a). The highest dose of 
morphine tested plateaued at 92% after 30 min. Intriguingly, we observed no analgesic effect 
for PZM21 in the tail-flick assay (Fig. 4b). Such a distinction is unprecedented among 
opioid analgesics. The hotplate experiment assesses analgesia at both higher-level central 
nervous system (CNS) brain and spinal nociceptive circuits, while the tail-flick experiment 
is more specific for spinal reflexive responses34. Subcategorizing the behavioural responses 
in the hotplate experiment as either affective (CNS mediated) or reflexive (spinally 
Manglik et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mediated) showed that, unlike morphine, PZM21 solely confers analgesia to the affective 
component of pain (Fig. 4c and Extended Data Fig. 7a, b). Though separation of these two 
analgesic pathways is unique to PZM21 among known opioid analgesics, it has been 
observed by selective chemogenetic activation35 or toxin-induced inactivation of CNS 
neurons in rodents36. Indeed, PZM21 is also active in a formalin injection nociception assay, 
likely from supraspinal activation of descending inhibitory circuits37 (Fig. 4d). Whether this 
circuit-specificity reflects the biased signalling of PZM21, its specificity for the μOR versus 
other opioid receptors and other GPCRs, an unusual CNS distribution phenomenon, or some 
other signalling property, is uncertain at this time. More certain is that PZM21 analgesia 
results from μOR activation in vivo as genetic knockout of the μOR completely ablates the 
observed analgesic response in the hotplate assay (Fig. 4e). Meanwhile, PZM21 is 
metabolized relatively slowly by mouse liver microsomes, with only 8% metabolism over 
one hour. Signalling experiments with the resulting metabolite pool show no evidence of a 
metabolite with more potent activation of the μOR, confirming that the observed analgesic 
activity results primarily from the originally administered dose of PZM21 (Extended Data 
Fig. 7e, f).
Based on previous genetic studies with arrestin knockout mice and pharmacological studies 
with biased compounds4–7, we anticipated that PZM21 would confer longer-lasting 
analgesia with decreased respiratory depression and constipation—both key dose-limiting 
side-effects of classic opioid agonists. Analgesia induced by PZM21 lasts up to 180 min, 
substantially longer than that induced by a maximal dose of morphine (Extended Data Fig. 
7a, b) and the biased agonist TRV130 (Fig. 4a). Whereas PZM21 does reduce defecation, its 
constipating effect is substantially less than morphine (Fig. 4f). Respiratory depression was 
investigated by dosing unrestrained mice with equi-analgesic doses of PZM21, TRV130 and 
morphine (40 mg kg−1, 1.2 mg kg−1, and 10 mg kg−1, respectively), and measuring 
respiration by whole-body plethysmography. While morphine profoundly depressed 
respiration frequency, PZM21 was almost undistinguishable from vehicle (Fig. 4g). By 
comparison, TRV130 significantly depresses respiration at 15 min, correlating with its peak 
analgesic response. Although respiratory depression by μOR may be partially mediated by 
activation of G-protein-coupled inwardly rectifying potassium channels (GIRKs), 
systemically infused opioids can decrease respiratory frequency even in GIRK-deficient 
mice38, consistent with the G-protein-independent signalling mechanisms first suggested by 
the arrestin knockout studies4–6. The rapid respiratory depression observed for morphine and 
TRV130 may reflect GIRK activation. At later time points, however, PZM21 induces 
minimal respiratory depression despite providing robust analgesia. Conversely, morphine 
induces a prolonged course of respiratory depression that does not subside with resolution of 
the analgesic response at 90 min. This dissociation in analgesia and respiratory depression at 
later time points may reflect differential recruitment of β-arrestin-2. Taken together, these 
studies support minima l β-arrestin-2 signalling in vivo by PZM21 (biased signalling, Fig. 
1a).
A major liability of current opioid analgesics is reinforcement and addiction, which are both 
postulated to be mediated—at least in part—by activation of the dopaminergic reward 
circuits39. A biomarker for such activation in mice is an acute hyperlocomotive response, 
reflecting mesolimbic dopaminergic activation40. Whereas morphine induced mouse 
Manglik et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hyperlocomotion in an open-field assay (Fig. 4h), a nearly equi-analgesic dose of PZM21 
had no apparent effect on locomotion versus vehicle. The decreased distance travelled does 
not reflect a cataleptic effect of PZM21 (Extended Data Fig. 7c). Consistent with decreased 
activation of reward circuits, administration of PZM21 also does not induce a conditioned 
place preference response (Fig. 4i), unlike morphine and other opioids41. Though TRV130 
does trend more towards inducing place preference, its activity is also not significant relative 
to vehicle; this lack of conditioned place preference for both biased agonists may support a 
role for G-protein bias in the lack of opioid-induced reinforcing behaviour. The differences 
between morphine and PZM21 in conditioned place preference do not simply reflect 
dissimilarities in CNS penetration between the two drugs, as a substantial fraction of PZM21 
crosses the blood–brain barrier (Extended Data Fig. 7d).
Several caveats deserve to be mentioned. Although structure-based discovery succeeded in 
finding novel scaffolds and supported facile optimization, some of the properties of PZM21 
were likely fortuitous. Biased signalling through G protein and arrestin pathways reflects the 
stabilization of conformations over 30 Å from the orthosteric site where PZM21 binds. We 
did not select molecules that preferentially stabilize these conformations, but instead relied 
on chemical novelty to confer new biological properties. Receptor subtype selectivity was 
attained by simply selecting molecules that extended into variable regions of the receptor, a 
strategy that may not always work. Several aspects of the pharmacology presented here 
remain preliminary, including the metabolic stability studies and the pharmacokinetics, and 
it is not clear at this time whether the unprecedented in vivo activity of PZM21 reflects its 
biased and specific agonism, or some other feature conferred by its novel chemotype. 
Finally, identification of agonists from docking to an inactive state receptor structure cannot 
always be relied upon13,16,42,43, though there is precedence for doing so against opioid 
receptors23.
Discussion
Notwithstanding these caveats, this study supports a structure-based approach for GPCR 
ligand discovery. Whereas this method cannot yet reliably find leads with tailored specificity 
and signalling efficacy, it can reliably identify entirely new scaffolds and chemotypes. These 
new chemotypes may stabilize receptor conformations not explored previously and so 
generate novel biological effects. With a novel chemotype in hand, the docked structure 
provides a straight-forward strategy for optimization. Here, we optimized an initial docking 
hit, compound 7, 1,000-fold to the final lead molecule, PZM21, by evaluating fewer than 50 
molecules. Though this campaign was inspired by existing μOR-biased agonists like 
TRV1307, the structure-based approach led to a compound with novel properties; it was 
structurally distinct compared to previously explored opioid ligands, with not only 
substantial signalling bias but also with unexpected opioid receptor selectivity. These 
features have contributed to favourable biological effects, with long-lasting analgesia 
coupled to apparent elimination of respiratory depression, specificity for central over reflex 
analgesia, lack of locomotor potentiation and conditioned place preference, and hence a 
reduced potential for opioid-induced reinforcement for PZM21 and molecules like it. The 
selectivity, potency, and biased signalling of PZM21 make it a tool molecule of a sort 
previously unavailable to interrogate μOR signalling. More broadly, the in vitro results of 
Manglik et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 multiple GPCR campaigns, and the in vivo results reported here, portend a general approach 
to the problem of new tool and lead discovery for this pharmacologically important family 
of receptors.
METHODS
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size.
Chemicals, reagents, and cell lines
Chemicals and reagents used in this study were purchased from commercial sources (Sigma, 
Tocris, Fisher scientific, ZINC database suppliers) or synthesized as outlined in the 
Supplementary Information. HEK293 (ATCC CRL-1573; 60113019; certified mycoplasma 
free and authentic by ATCC) and HEK293-T (HEK293T; ATCC CRL-11268; 59587035; 
certified mycoplasma free and authentic by ATCC) cells were from the ATCC and are well 
validated for signalling studies. Cells were also validated by analysis of short tandem repeat 
(STR) DNA profiles and these profiles showed 100% match at the STR database from 
ATCC. U2OS cells expressing human μOR were obtained as cryopreserved stocks from 
DiscoverX and were not further authenticated.
Molecular docking and analogue selection
The inactive-state μ-opioid receptor structure (PDB: 4DKL) was used as input for receptor 
preparation with DOCK Blaster (http://blaster.docking.org)44. Forty-five matching spheres 
were used based on a truncated version of the crystallized ligand. The covalent bond and 
linker region of the antagonist β-funaltrexamine were removed for sphere generation. The 
ligand sampling parameters were set with bin size, bin size overlap, and distance tolerances 
of 0.4 Å, 0.1 Å, and 1.5 Å, respectively, for both the matching spheres and for the docked 
molecules. Ligand poses were scored by summing the receptor-ligand electrostatics and van 
der Waals interaction energy corrected for ligand desolvation. Receptor atom partial chargers 
were used from the united atom AMBER force field except for Lys233 and Tyr326, where 
the dipole moment was increased as previously described43. Over 3 million commercially 
available molecules from the ZINC20 (http://zinc.docking.org) lead-like set were docked into 
the receptor using DOCK3.621 (http://dock.compbio.ucsf.edu). Among the top ranking 
0.08% of molecules were inspected and 23 were selected for experimental testing in the 
primary screen. A resource to perform these docking studies is publicly available (http://
blaster.docking.org).
For a secondary screen, analogues of the top three hits from the primary screen (compounds 
4, 5 and 7) with a similarity of greater than 0.7 (as defined in the ZINC search facility) were 
identified in the ZINC database. Additionally, substructure searches were performed using 
the scaffolds of each of these three compounds. The searches yielded 500 purchasable 
compounds, which were then docked as in the primary screen. Analogues were manually 
inspected for interactions and selected for further experimental testing.
Manglik et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Radioligand binding studies
For a primary screen of selected molecules, binding to μOR was assessed by measuring 
competition against the radioligand 3H-diprenorphine (3H-DPN). Each compound was 
initially tested at 20 μM and was incubated with 3H-DPN at a concentration equal to the Kd 
(0.4 nM) of the radioligand in μOR containing Sf9 insect cell membranes. The reaction 
contained 40 fmol of μOR and was incubated in a buffer of 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM 
sodium chloride, and 0.1% bovine serum albumin for 1 h at 25 °C. To separate free from 
bound radioligand, reactions were rapidly filtered over Whatman GF/B filters with the aid of 
a Brandel harvester and 3H-DPN counts were measured by liquid scintillation. Compounds 
with more than 25% of 3H-DPN radioactivity were further tested in full dose–response to 
determine the affinity (Ki) in HEK293 membranes. Subsequently, the 15 analogues were 
tested in full dose–response for affinity at the μOR and the κOR by the National Institutes of 
Mental Health Psychoactive Drug Screen Program (PDSP)45, as were the affinities of 
compounds 12, PZM21, and their stereoisomers at the μOR, δOR, κOR and nociception 
receptor.
Radioligand depletion assays to test the irreversible binding of compound PZM29 were 
performed as described previously46. Human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK 293) cells were 
transiently transfected with μOR or the cysteine mutant μOR:N127C using the Mirus 
TransIT-293 transfection reagent (MoBiTec, Goettingen, Germany), grown for 48 h, 
harvested, and homogenates were prepared as described47. For radioligand depletion 
experiments, homogenates were preincubated in TRIS buffer (50 mM Tris at pH 7.4) at a 
protein concentration of 50–100 μg/ml or 70–120 μg/ml for μOR and μOR:N127C, 
respectively and the covalent ligand (at 5 μM) for different time intervals. Incubation was 
stopped by centrifugation and reversibly bound ligand was washed three times (resuspension 
in buffer for 30 min and subsequent centrifugation). Membranes were then used for 
radioligand binding experiments with 3H-diprenorphine (final concentration: 0.7 nM, 
specific activity: 30 Ci/mmol, purchased from Biotrend, Cologne, Germany) to determine 
specific binding at the μOR (Bmax = 4,000–6,500 fmol/mg protein, KD = 0.25–0.45 nM) and 
the μOR:N127C receptor (Bmax = 1,300–6,000 fmol/mg protein, KD = 0.18–0.25 nM), 
respectively as described48. Non-specific binding was determined in the presence of 10 μM 
naloxone. For data analysis, the radioactivity counts were normalized to values where 100% 
represents effect of buffer and 0% represents non-specific binding. Five independent 
experiments, each done in quadruplicate, were performed and the resulting values were 
calculated and pooled to a mean curve which is displayed.
GTP-γS Binding Experiments
The [35S]-GTPγS binding assay was performed with membrane preparations from HEK 293 
cells coexpressing the human μOR and the PTX insensitive G-protein subunits Gαo1 or 
Gαi249. Cells were transiently transfected using the Mirus TransIT-293 transfection reagent 
(MoBiTec, Goettingen, Germany), grown for 48 h, harvested and homogenates were 
prepared as described47. The receptor expression level (Bmax) and KD values were 
determined in saturation experiments with 3H-diprenorphine (specific activity: 30 Ci/mmol, 
purchased from Biotrend, Cologne, Germany) (Bmax = 3,700 ± 980 fmol/mg protein, KD = 
0.30 ± 0.093 nM for μOR+ Gαo1 or Bmax = 5,800 ± 2,000 fmol/mg, KD = 0.46 ± 0.095 nM 
Manglik et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for μOR+ Gαi2, respectively). The assay was carried out in 96-well plates with a final 
volume of 200 μl. In each well, 10 μM GDP, the compounds (0.1 pM to 100 μM final 
concentration) and the membranes (30 μg/ml final protein concentration) were incubated for 
30 min at 37 °C in incubation buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, 10 mM MgCl2 • 6 H2O and 
70 mg/l saponin. After the addition of 0.1 nM [35S] -GTPγS (specific activity 1,250 Ci/
mmol, PerkinElmer, Rodgau, Germany) incubation was continued at 37 °C for further 30 
min or 75 min for μOR+ Gαo1 or μOR+ Gαi2, respectively. Incubation was stopped by 
filtration through Whatman GF/B filters soaked with ice cold PBS. Bound radioactivity was 
measured by scintillation measurement as described previously48.
Data analysis was performed by normalizing the radioactivity counts (ccpms) to values 
when 0% represents the non-stimulated receptor and 100% the maximum effect of morphine 
or DAMGO. Dose–response curves were calculated by nonlinear regression in GraphPad 
Prism 6.0. Mean values ± s.e.m. for EC50 and Emax values were derived from 3–12 
individual experiments each done in triplicate.
Gi/o induced cAMP inhibition
To measure μOR Gi/o-mediated cAMP inhibition, HEK-293T cells were co-transfected using 
calcium phosphate in a 1:1 ratio with human μOR and a split-luciferase based cAMP 
biosensor (pGloSensor™-22F; Promega). For experiments including GRK2 co-expression, 
cells were transfected with 1 μg/15-cm dish of GRK2. After at least 24 h, transfected cells 
were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and trypsin was used to dissociate the 
cells. Cells were centrifuged, resuspended in plating media (1% dialysed FBS in DMEM), 
plated at a density of 15,000–20,000 cells per 40 μl per well in poly-lysine coated 384-well 
white clear bottom cell culture plates, and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 overnight. For 
inactivation of pertussis-toxin (PTX) Gαi/o experiments, cells were plated with 100 ng/ml 
final concentration PTX. The next day, drug dilutions were prepared in fresh assay buffer 
(20 mM HEPES, 1 × HBSS, 0.1% bovine serum album (BSA), and 0.01% ascorbic acid, pH 
7.4) at 3 × drug concentration. Plates were decanted and 20 μl per well of drug buffer (20 
mM HEPES, 1× HBSS, pH 7.4) was added to each well. Drug addition to 384-well plates 
was performed by FLIPR adding 10 μl of drug per well for a total volume of 30 μl. Plates 
were allowed to incubate for exactly 15 min in the dark at room temperature. To stimulate 
endogenous cAMP via β adrenergic-Gs activation, 10 μl of 4 × isoproterenol (200 nM final 
concentration) diluted in drug buffer supplemented with GloSensor assay substrate was 
added per well. Cells were again incubated in the dark at room temperature for 15 min, and 
luminescence intensity was quantified using a Wallac TriLux microbeta (Perkin Elmer) 
luminescence counter. Data were normalized to DAMGO-induced cAMP inhibition and 
analysed using nonlinear regression in GraphPad Prism 6.0 (Graphpad Software Inc., San 
Diego, CA).
Determination of functional activity of PZM21-29 for SAR studies was performed using a 
BRET-based cAMP accumulation assay50. HEK-293T cells were transiently co-transfected 
with pcDNA3L-His-CAMYEL42 (purchased from ATCC via LCG Standards, Wesel, 
Germany) and human μOR, achieving a cDNA ratio of 2:2 using Mirus TransIT-293 
transfection reagent. 24 h post-transfection, cells were seeded into white half-area 96-well 
Manglik et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 plates at 20 × 104 cells/well and grown overnight. On the following day, phenol-red-free 
medium was removed and replaced by PBS and cells were serum starved for 1 h before 
treatment. The assay was started by adding 10 μl coelenterazine h (Progmega, Mannheim, 
Germany) to each well to yield a final concentration of 5 μM. After 5 min incubation, 
compounds were added in PBS containing forskolin (final concentration 10 μM). Reads of 
the plates started 15 min after agonist addition. BRET readings were collected using a 
CLARIOstar plate reader (BMG LabTech, Ortenberg, Germany). Emission signals from 
Renilla Luciferase and YFP were measured simultaneously using a BRET1 filter set (475-30 
nm/535-30 nm). BRET ratios (emission at 535-30 nm/emission at 475-30 nm) were 
calculated and dose–response curves were fitted by nonlinear regression using GraphPad 
Prism 6.0. Curves were normalized to basal BRET ratio obtained from dPBS and the 
maximum effect of morphine and DAMGO. Each curve is derived from three to five 
independent experiments each done in duplicate.
Calcium release
Calcium release was measured using a FLIPRTETRA fluorescence imaging plate reader 
(Molecular Devices). Calcium release experiments were run in parallel to Gi/o Glosensor 
experiments with the same HEK-293T cells transfected with μOR, except cells for FLIPR 
were plated in poly-lysine coated 384-well black clear bottom cell culture plates. Cells were 
incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 overnight and next day media was decanted and replaced 
with Fluo-4 direct calcium dye (Life Technologies) made up in HBSS with 20 mM HEPES, 
pH 7.4. Dye was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. Afterwards, cells were equilibrated to room 
temperature, and fluorescence in each well was read for the initial 10 s to establish a 
baseline. Afterwards, 10 μl of drug (3×) was added per well and the maximum-fold increase 
in fluorescence was determined as fold-over-baseline. Drug solutions used for the FLIPR 
assay were exactly the same as used for Gi/o Glosensor experiments. To activate endogenous 
Gq-coupled receptors as a positive control for calcium release, TFLLR-NH2 (10μM, PAR-1 
selective agonist) was used.
Receptor internalization
Internalization was measured using the eXpress DiscoveRx PathHunter GPCR 
internalization assay using split β-galactosidase complementation. In brief, cryopreserved 
U2OS cells expressing the human μOR were thawed rapidly and plated in supplied medium 
and 96-well culture plates. Next day, cells were stimulated with drugs (10×) and allowed to 
incubate for 90 min at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Afterwards, substrate was added to cells and 
chemiluminescence was measured on a TriLux (Perkin Elmer) plate counter. Data were 
normalized to DAMGO and analysed using Graphpad Prism 6.0.
β-Arrestin recruitment assays
β-Arrestin recruitment was measured by either the PathHunter enzyme complementation 
assay (DiscoveRx) or by previously described bioluminescence resonance energy transfer 
(BRET) methods51. Assays using DiscoveRx PathHunter eXpress OPRM1 CHO-K1 β-
Arrestin GPCR Assays were conducted exactly as instructed by the manufacturer. Briefly, 
supplied cryopreserved cells were thawed and resuspended in the supplied medium, and 
plated in the furnished 96-well plates. Next day, 10× dilutions of agonist (prepared in HBSS 
Manglik et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) were added to the cells and incubated for 90 min. Next, the 
detection reagents were reconstituted, mixed at the appropriate ratio, and added to the cells. 
After 60 min, luminescence per well was measured on a TriLux (Perkin-Elmer) plate 
counter. Data were normalized to DAMGO and analysed using the sigmoidal dose–response 
function built into GraphPad Prism 6.0.
To measure μOR mediated β-arrestin recruitment by BRET in the presence or absence of 
GRK2 co-expression, HEK-293T cells were co-transfected in a 1:1:15 ratio with human 
μOR containing C-terminal renilla luciferase (RLuc8), GRK2, and venus-tagged N-terminal 
β-arrestin-2, respectively. In the case of experiments where GRK2 expression was varied, 
pcDNA3.1 was substituted for GRK2 to maintain the same concentration of DNA 
transfected. After at least 24 h, transfected cells were plated in poly-lysine coated 96-well 
white clear bottom cell culture plates in plating media at a density of 125,000–250,000 cells 
per 200 μl per well and incubated overnight. The next day, media was decanted and cells 
were washed twice with 60 μl of drug buffer and incubated at room temperature for at least 
10 min before drug stimulation. 30 μl of drug (3×) was added per well and incubated for at 
least 30 min in the dark. Then, 10 μl of the RLuc substrate, coelenterazine H (Promega, 5 
μM final concentration) was added per well, and plates were read for both luminescence at 
485 nm and fluorescent eYFP emission at 530 nm for 1 s per well using a Mithras LB940 
microplate reader. The ratio of eYFP/RLuc was calculated per well and the net BRET ratio 
was calculated by substracting the eYFP/RLuc per well from the eYFP/RLuc ratio without 
venus–arrestin present. Data were normalized to DAMGO-induced stimulation and analysed 
using nonlinear regression in GraphPad Prism 6.0.
Ligand bias calculation
Multiple approaches have been described to quantitate ligand bias, including operational 
models, intrinsic relative activity models, and allosteric models31,52. In the absence of 
GRK2, we observe no β-arrestin-2 recruitment for PZM21 and TRV130. This prevents a 
quantitative assessment of bias by the operational model. In the case where GRK2 is 
overexpressed, we observe arrestin recruitment for PZM21 and TRV130. In this case, we 
utilize the operational model to calculate ligand bias and display equiactive bias plots for 
comparison of ligand efficacy for distinct signalling pathways31,53. The Glosensor Gi/o, 
DiscoverX PathHunter β-arrestin, or net BRET concentration response curves were fit to the 
Black-Leff operational model to determine transduction coefficients (τ/KA). Compound bias 
factors are expressed after normalization against the prototypical opioid agonist DAMGO 
used as a reference. Bias factors are expressed as the value of ΔΔlog[τ/KA].
Assessment of off-target PZM21 activity
To identify potential off-target activity of PZM21, we used the National Institutes of Mental 
Health Psychoactive Drug Screen Program. Compound PZM21 was first tested for activity 
against 320 non-olfactory GPCRs using the PRESTO-Tango GPCRome screening β-arrestin 
recruitment assay30. We used 10 μM PZM21 and activity at each receptor was measured in 
quadruplicate. Potential positive receptor hits were defined as those that increase the relative 
luminescence value twofold. Positive hits were subsequently re-tested in full dose–response 
mode to determine whether the luminescence signal titrates with increasing concentrations 
Manglik et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of PZM21. A number of false-positive hits were discounted by this approach. PZM21 
inhibition of hERG channel was performed as described previously54 and neurotransmitter 
transporter assays were determined used the Molecular Devices Neurotransmitter Assay Kit 
(Molecular Devices).
In vivo studies
Adult male C57BL/6J (aged 3–5 months) obtained from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbour, 
Maine) were used to investigate behavioural responses, respiratory effects, and 
hyperlocomotion induced by PZM21 and compared with morphine or vehicle (0.9% sodium 
chloride). For μOR knockout animals, Oprm1−/− mice (B6.129S2-Oprm1tm1Kff/J) were 
obtained from Jackson Laboratories. All drugs were dissolved in vehicle and injected 
subcutaneously Behavioural studies were conducted at the University of North Carolina and 
Stanford University following the National Institutes of Health’s guidelines for care and use 
of animals and with approved mouse protocols from the institutional animal care and use 
committees. Sample sizes (number of animals) were not predetermined by a statistical 
method and animals were assigned to groups randomly. Drug treatment groups were only 
blinded for measurement of affective versus reflexive analgesia; other experiments were not 
blinded to investigators. Predefined exclusion criteria were set for analgesia and conditioned 
preference experiments. No animals were excluded from statistical analysis. Statistical 
analyses were performed after first assessing the normality of distributions of data sets and 
Leven’s test was used to assess equality of variances.
Measurement of analgesia
Analgesia-like responses in were measured as previously described55 using a hotplate 
analgesia meter with dimensions of 29.2 × 26.7 cm with mice restricted to a cylinder 8.9 cm 
in diameter and 15.2 cm high (IITC Life Sciences, Woodland Hills, California). Response 
was measured by recording the latency to lick, flutter, or splay hind paw(s), or an attempt to 
jump out of the apparatus at 55 °C, with a maximum cut-off time of 30 s. Once a response 
was observed or the cut-off time had elapsed, the subject was immediately removed from the 
hotplate and placed back in its home cage. The animals were acclimated to the hotplate, 
while cool, and a baseline analgesic response time was acquired several hours before drug 
treatment and testing. Mice were injected with either vehicle (n = 8), morphine (5 mg/kg, n 
= 8 or 10 mg/kg, n = 8), TRV130 (1.2 mg/kg, n = 9) or PZM21 (10 mg/kg, n = 8; 20 mg/kg, 
n = 11; or 40 mg/kg, n = 8). After injection of drug, the analgesic effect expressed as 
percentage maximum possible effect (%MPE) was measured at 15, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min 
after drug treatment. If animals did not display hind paw lick, splay, or flutter, they were 
removed from the trial. Additionally, if animals attempted to jump out of the plate or 
urinated on the hotplate they were removed from the trial. To assess analgesia by the tail-
flick assay, a tail-flick analgesia meter (Columbus Instruments, Columbus, Ohio). Mice were 
gently immobilized with a cotton towel and the tail base was placed on a radiant light source 
emitting a constant temperature of 56 °C. The tail withdrawal latency was measured at 
similar time points as the hotplate assay after administration of vehicle (n = 8), morphine (5 
mg/kg, n = 4; 10 mg/kg, n = 8) or PZM21 (10 mg/kg, n = 8; 20 mg/kg; n = 14). The cut-off 
time for the heat source was set at 10 s to avoid tissue damage. Analgesic response times 
were measured similar to the hotplate assay.
Manglik et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Analgesia in μOR knockout mice and subcategorization of affective/reflexive pain
Oprm1−/− and wild-type C57Bl/6J mice (male; 8–11 weeks) were acclimated to the testing 
environment and thermal-plate equipment for three non-consecutive days between 11:00 and 
13:00 before any pharmacological studies. Acclimation was achieved by individually 
confining mice within an enclosed semi-transparent red plastic cylinder (10 cm depth × 15 
cm height) on a raised metal-mesh rack (61 cm height) for 30 min, and then exposing each 
mouse to the thermal-plate equipment (non-heated; floor dimensions, 16.5 × 16.5 cm; 
Bioseb), while confined within a clear plastic chamber (16 cm length × 16 cm width × 30 
cm height). Acclimation exposure to the thermal plate lasted for 30 s, and exposure was 
repeated after 30 min to mimic the test day conditions. The testing environment had an 
average ambient temperature of 22.6 °C and illumination of 309 lx from overhead 
fluorescence lighting. The same male experimenter (G.C.) was present throughout the entire 
duration of habituation and testing to exclude possible olfaction-induced alterations in 
sensory thresholds56.
Cutaneous application of a noxious stimulus, or time spent on a hotplate apparatus can 
broadly elicit several distinct behavioural responses: 1) withdrawal reflexes: rapid reflexive 
retraction or digit splaying of the paw; 2) affective-motivational responses: directed licking 
and biting of the paw, and/or a motivational response characterized by jumping away from 
the heated floor plate. Paw withdrawal reflexes are classically measured in studies of 
hypersensitivity, and involve simple spinal cord and brainstem circuits57. In contrast, 
affective responses are complex, non-stereotyped behaviours requiring processing by limbic 
and cortical circuits in the brain, the appearance of which indicates the subject’s motivation 
and arousal to make the unpleasant sensation cease by licking the affected tissue, or seeking 
an escape route36,57–64. To distinguish between potential differential analgesic effects of 
PZM21, mice were placed on the heated apparatus (52.5 °C), and the latency to exhibition of 
the first sign of a hindpaw reflexive withdraw, and the first sign of an affective response was 
recorded. A maximum exposure cut-off of 30 s was set to reduce tissue damage. Mice were 
injected with either vehicle (n = 6), morphine (10 mg/kg, n = 10), or PZM21 (20 mg/kg, n = 
13). After injection of drug, the analgesic effect on either reflex or attending responses was 
expressed as percentage maximum possible effect (%MPE), and was measured at − 30 
(baseline), 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, and 180 min relative to drug treatment. For studies 
comparing Oprm1−/− and wild-type C57Bl/6J mice, the analgesic response in the hotplate 
assay was measured 30 min after injection of vehicle (n = 5 for both genotypes), morphine 
(10 mg/kg, n = 5 for both genotypes) or PZM21 (20 mg/kg, n = 6 for Oprm1−/− and n = 5 for 
wild-type).
Formalin injection assay
Analgesia to formalin injection was carried out as described previously65. Mice were first 
habituated for 20 min to the testing environment which included a home cage without 
bedding, food, and water. After habituation, vehicle (n = 6), morphine (10 mg/kg, n = 7), or 
PZM21 (40 mg/kg, n = 7) was injected subcutaneously. This was followed by injection of 20 
μl of 1% formalin in 0.9% saline under the skin of the dorsal surface of the right hindpaw. 
Animals were returned to their home cage and behavioural responses were recorded for one 
hour. Nociception was estimated by measuring the cumulative time spent by animals licking 
Manglik et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the formalin-injected paw. As opioids classically display two phases of analgesic action, 
nociceptive behaviour was measured during both the early phase (0 to 5 min) and the late 
phase (20 to 30 min). In Fig. 4, an asterisk indicates a significant difference between drug 
and vehicle (P < 0.05 calculated using a one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction).
Mouse plethysmography
Respiration data was collected using a whole body plethysmography system (Buxco 
Electronics Inc., Wilmington, North Carolina) as described66. This method measures 
respiratory frequency, tidal volume, peak flows, inspiratory time, and expiratory time in 
conscious and unrestrained mice. Briefly, Buxco airflow transducers were attached to each 
plethysmography chamber and a constant flow rate was maintained for all chambers. Each 
chamber was calibrated to its attached transducer before the experiment. Animals were first 
habituated to the clear plexiglass chambers for 10 min. Respiratory parameters were 
recorded for 10 min to establish a baseline before injection of vehicle (n = 8), morphine (10 
mg/kg, n = 8), TRV130 (1.2 mg/kg, n = 8) or PZM21 (40 mg/kg, n = 8). Respiratory 
parameters were then collected on unrestrained mice for 100 min post drug injection. To 
decrease respiratory variability induced by anxiety, mice were shielded from view of other 
animals and experimenter. In Fig. 4, an asterisk indicates a significant difference between 
drug and vehicle (P < 0.05 calculated using a repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni 
correction).
Accumulated faecal boli quantification
To measure constipatory effects of morphine and PZM21, we assessed the total accumulated 
faecal boli as described6. Briefly, mice were injected with vehicle (n = 10), morphine (10 
mg/kg, n = 16) or PZM21 (20 mg/kg, n = 16) and placed within a plexiglass chamber (5 cm 
× 8 cm × 8 cm) positioned on a mesh screen. Mice were maintained without food or water 
for 6 h. Faecal boli were collected underneath the mesh on a paper towel and the cumulative 
mass was measured every hour for six hours. In Fig. 4, an asterisk indicates a significant 
difference between drug and vehicle (P < 0.05 calculated using a repeated measures ANOVA 
with Bonferroni correction).
Open field locomotor response
A photocell-equipped automated open field chamber (40 cm × 40 cm × 30 cm; Versamax 
system, Accuscan Instruments) contained inside sound-attenuating boxes was used to assess 
locomotor activity. Baseline ambulation of freely moving mice was monitored over 30 min, 
followed by injection with vehicle (n = 7), morphine (10 mg/kg, n = 5) or PZM21 (20 
mg/kg, n = 6). Locomotor activity was monitored for another 150 min. In Fig. 4, an asterisk 
indicates a significant difference between drug and vehicle (P < 0.05 calculated using a 
repeated measures ANOVA with Bonferroni correction).
Conditioned place preference
A three-chambered conditioned place preference apparatus (Med-Associates, St. Albans, 
Vermont) consisting of white or black chambers (16.8 × 12.7 × 12.7 cm each) with uniquely 
textured white mesh or black rod floors and separated by a neutral central chamber (7.2 × 
Manglik et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 12.7 × 12.7 cm) was used for conditioned place preference testing. On day 1 
(preconditioning day), mice were placed in the central chamber and allowed to explore 
freely for 30 min. Time spent in each compartment was used to estimate baseline chamber 
preferences and mice showing specific chamber bias more than 70% were not studied 
further. On days 2–9 (conditioning days) mice were injected with either vehicle or drug and 
paired with either the white mesh or the black rod chambers. All mice received vehicle on 
days 2, 4, 6, 8 and drug on days 3, 5, 7, 9. On day 10 (test day), mice were again placed in 
the central chamber as on day 1 and allowed to explore freely for 30 min. Time spent in each 
chamber was expressed as percentage preference. Place preference was tested with morphine 
(10 mg/kg, n = 16), PZM21 (20 mg/kg, n = 8), or TRV130 (1.2 mg/kg, n = 7). In Fig. 4, an 
asterisk indicates a significant difference between vehicle and drug chambers (P < 0.05 by 
one-sample t-test with hypothetical value of 50) while NS indicates non-significance (P > 
0.05).
Cataleptic effect
Drug induced catalepsy was measured in mice using the bar test67, which includes a 
horizontally placed 3-mm diameter wooden bar fixed 4 cm above the floor. Mice were 
habituated with the bar and the environment for 20 min before subcutaneous injection of 
either haloperidol (2 mg/kg, n = 8), morphine (10 mg/kg, n = 8), or PZM21 (20 mg/kg, n = 
8). To measure catalepsy, both forepaws were gently placed on the bar and the length of time 
during which each mouse remained in the initial position was measured. The effect was 
measured at 15, 30 and 90 min after drug injection. Maximum cut-off time for each 
challenge was 90 s.
Pharmacokinetics of PZM21
Studies were performed by the Preclinical Therapeutics Core and the Drug Studies Unit at 
the University of California San Francisco. Ten mice were injected subcutaneously with 20 
mg/kg of PZM21. At each time point, 1 ml of blood was collected from three mice and the 
serum concentration of PZM21 determined by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry 
(LC/MS). Mice were subsequently sacrificed and entire brains were homogenized for 
determination of PZM21 concentrations by LC/MS. All studies were performed with 
approved mouse protocols from the institutional animal care and use committees.
Metabolism of PZM21
Metabolism experiments were performed as described previously68. In brief, pooled 
microsomes from male mouse liver (CD-1) were purchased (Sigma Aldrich) and stored at 
−75 °C until required. NADPH was purchased (Carl Roth) and stored at −8 °C. The 
incubation reactions were carried out in polyethylene caps (Eppendorf 1.5 ml) at 37 °C. The 
incubation mixture contained PZM21 (80 μM) or positive controls (imipramine and 
rotigotine), pooled liver microsomes (0.5 mg of microsomal protein/ml of incubation 
mixture) and Tris-MgCl2 buffer (48 mM Tris, 4.8 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4). The final incubation 
volume was 0.5 ml. Microsomal reactions were initiated by addition of 50 μl of enzyme 
cofactor solution NADPH (final concentration of 1 mM). At 0, 15, 30 and 60 min the 
enzymatic reactions were terminated by addition of 500 μl of ice-cold acetonitrile 
(containing 8 μM internal standard), and precipitated protein was removed by centrifugation 
Manglik et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (15,000 rcf for 3 min). The supernatant was analysed by HPLC/MS (binary solvent system, 
eluent acetonitrile in 0.1% aqueous formic acid, 10–40% acetonitrile in 8 min, 40–95% 
acetonitrile in 1 min, 95% acetonitrile for 1 min, flow rate of 0.3 ml/min). The experiments 
were repeated in three independent experiments. Parallel control incubations were conducted 
in the absence of cofactor solution to determine unspecific binding to matrix. Substrate 
remaining and metabolite formation was calculated as a mean value ± s.e.m. of three 
independent experiments by comparing AUC of metabolites and substrate after 
predetermined incubation time to AUC of substrate at time 0, estimating a similar ionization 
rate, corrected by a factor calculated from the AUC of internal standard at each time point.
Chemical synthesis
The stereochemically pure isomers of 12 and PZM21 were synthesized from corresponding 
(R)- and (S)-amino acid amides, which were either commercially available or readily 
prepared from the corresponding acid or ester (see Supplementary Information). The 
primary amino group was dimethylated using an excess of aqueous formaldehyde and 
sodium triacetoxyborohydride in aqueous acetonitrile. The carboxamides 16a,b were 
converted to primary amines by treatment with borane-tetrahydrofurane complex under 
reflux yielding the diamines 17a,b. Henry reaction of thiophene-3-carbaldehyde with 
nitroethane afforded the nitropropene derivative 18, which was converted into the racemic 
alkylamine 19. Activation with 4-nitrophenyl chloroformate yielded the carbamates 20, 
which were coupled with the enantiopure primary amines 17a,b to achieve diastereomeric 
mixtures of the corresponding ureas 12 and 21. HPLC separation using a semi-preparative 
Chiralpak AS-H column gave the overall eight pure stereoisomers of 12 and 21 including 
PZM21.
To determine the absolute configuration of the final products and efficiently prepare PZM21, 
we synthesized enantiomerically enriched carbamate 20, coupled it with the corresponding 
primary amines. For enantiomeric enrichment, we performed chiral resolution of the racemic 
primary amine 19 via repetitive crystallization with di-p-anisoyl-(S)-tartaric acid. After triple 
crystallization, we obtained 19 enriched in dextrorotatory enantiomer ([α]D25 = + 20.5°). 
The corresponding (R)-acetamide has been previously characterized as dextrorotatory 
([α]D20 = + 49.8°), so enantiomerically enriched 19 was treated with acetic anhydride and 
triethylamine, and the specific rotation of the product was measured. Based on the value of 
specific rotation of the resulting acetamide ([α]D21 = − 46.6°), we assigned the absolute 
configuration of the major isomer to be (S). (S)-enriched 20 was used for synthesis of the 
final urea derivatives and absolute configuration of diastereomers in pairs was assigned 
based on the equality of retention time in chiral HPLC. A full description of the synthetic 
routes and analytical data of the compounds 12, PZM21 and its analogues PZM22-29 are 
presented in the Supplementary Information.
Detailed modelling of PZM21 and TRV130 binding poses
PZM21 was docked to the inactive state μOR structure using DOCK3.6 (ref 21) as described 
for the primary screen, with the exception that the 45 matching spheres used were generated 
based on the docked pose of compound 12. The resulting ligand-receptor complex was 
further optimized through minimization with the AMBER protein force field69 and the 
Manglik et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 GAFF ligand force field supplemented with AM1-BCC charges. Docking of PZM21 and 
TRV130 to the active state μOR structure (PDB: 5C1M) was also performed with DOCK3.6 
with parameters as described above. The amino terminus of the active state μOR, which 
forms a lid over the orthosteric binding site (residues Gly52–Met65) was removed before 
receptor preparation. Matching spheres were generated based on the pose of PZM21 in the 
inactive state. The resulting complexes were then minimized with AMBER. The pose of 
PZM21 in the active state μOR structure was further refined using Glide (Schrödinger) in 
XP mode.
Molecular dynamics simulations were based on crystal structures of μOR in the inactive- 
and active-state conformation (PDB: 4DKL and 5CM1, respectively). In both cases, all non-
receptor residues (T4 lysozyme in the inactive state and Nb39 in the active state) were 
removed. For the active state, amino-terminal residues were removed as in the docking 
studies. Initial coordinates of PZM21 were generated by molecular docking as described 
above. The receptor was simulated with two tautomers of His2976.52, either in the neutral 
Nδ or the Nε state. The μOR-PZM21 complex was embedded in a lipid bilayer consisting of 
dioleoylphosphatidylcholine (DOPC) molecules as described previously47. The charges of 
the inactive- and active-state simulation systems were neutralized by adding 11 and 14 
chloride ions, respectively. To carry out MD simulations, the GROMACS package was used 
as described previously70. Briefly, the general AMBER force field (GAFF)71 was used for 
PZM21 and the lipids and the AMBER force field ff99SB72 for the receptor. Parameters for 
PZM21 were assigned using antechamber, and charges were calculated using Gaussian09 
(Gaussian, Inc.) at the HF/6-31(d,p) level and the RESP procedure according to the 
literature73. During the simulations, PZM21 was protonated at its tertiary amine and 
simulated as a cation. The SPC/E water model74 was used, and the simulations were carried 
out at 310 K. Analysis of the trajectories was performed using GROMACS. Each simulation 
in a given condition was initiated from identical coordinates, but with initial atom velocities 
assigned independently and randomly. An overview of the simulation systems and their 
simulation times is shown in the Supplementary Information.
Data analysis and reporting
Other than the in vivo studies, no statistical analysis was applied to in vitro or cell-based 
signalling assays. Sample size (number of assays for each compound or receptor) was 
predetermined to be in triplicate or quadruplicate for primary screening assays at a single 
concentration. For concentration-response assays, the sample size (number of assays for 
each compound at selected receptors) was also predetermined to be tested for a minimum of 
three assays, each in triplicate or quadruplicate. None of the functional assays were blinded 
to investigators.
Manglik et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Docking poses of active compounds
Seven of 23 experimentally tested compounds bound to the μOR with micromolar affinity. 
Their docked poses often occupy sites not exploited by the antagonist β-funaltrexamine. In 
each case, a canonical ionic interaction with D1473.32 is observed.
Manglik et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Stereochemical structure-activity relationship
a, As with the different stereoisomers of 12, variation of the chiral centres in compound 
PZM21 results in large changes in efficacy and potency. Data are mean ± s.e.m. of 
normalized results (n = 3 measurements). b, Structure–activity relationship of compound 12 
and 21 stereoisomers with affinities displayed as pKi values and agonist potency and 
efficacy in a Gi/o Glosensor assay. c, d, PZM21 docked to active μOR shows a more 
extended conformation as compared to the inactive state. e, In the docked active state, the 
PZM21 thiophene extends into the specificity-determining region of opioid receptors. Key 
Manglik et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 interacting residues here are highlighted as red lines and corresponding residues at the other 
human opioid receptors are indicated. f, Docked pose of TRV130 within the μOR site, 
showing minimal overlap in key pharmacophores with PZM21 besides the ionic interaction 
between the cationic amine and D1473.32. g, Molecular dynamics simulations of PZM21 in 
the inactive μOR state (grey and black traces) leads to a stable conformation with the 
thiophene positioned > 10 Å away from N1272.63 (total of 2 μs of simulation time over three 
independent trajectories). In contrast, PZM21 adopts a more extended pose when simulated 
with active μOR, with an average distance of 6 Å between the thiophene and N1272.63. 
Other key interactions between μOR and PZM21 are also highlighted.
Manglik et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Structure activity relationship defined by PZM21 analogues
Eight analogues were synthesized to probe the binding orientation of PZM21 and their 
efficacy as agonists was tested in a CAMYEL-based Gi/o signalling assay. Analogues were 
compared to a parent reference compound (PZM22) with similar efficacy and potency to 
PZM21. In each case, the EC50 value for PZM22 is shown in black (1.8 nM) and the EC50 
for the analogue is coloured. The covalent compound PZM29 binds to the μOR:N127C 
variant irreversibly, as evidenced by wash-resistant inhibition of radioligand binding. 
Signalling data are mean ± s.e.m. of normalized results (n = 3 measurements).
Manglik et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Signalling properties of PZM21 at the opioid receptors
Displayed are raw luminescence data from a Gi/o Glosensor assay. In agonist mode, agonists 
decrease luminescence while inverse agonists increase it by diminishing basal signalling. 
For each opioid receptor, a prototypical well-characterized agonist (black curves) and 
antagonist (red curves) were used to validate the assay. In antagonist mode, a competition 
reaction is performed with 50 nM agonist and an escalating amount of tested drug. Here, 
true antagonists increase the observed signal, consistent with their ability to compete with 
Manglik et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the agonist but not induce Gi signalling. Data are mean ± s.e.m. of non-normalized results (n 
=3 measurements).
Extended Data Figure 5. PZM21 is selective for μOR
a, Compound PZM21 was screened against 320 non-olfactory GPCRs for agonism in the 
arrestin recruitment TANGO assay. Each point shows luminescence normalized to basal 
level at a given GPCR, with vertical lines indicating the standard error of the mean. b, 
GPCRs for which PZM21 induces an increase in signal twofold over background were 
Manglik et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 further tested in full dose–response mode. Several potential targets (GPR110, MCHR1R, 
PTGER1) did not show dose-dependent increase in signal and probably represent screening 
false positives. CXCR7 and SSTR4 did show dose-dependent signals at high concentrations 
of PZM21, and were further tested in non-arrestin signalling assays. c, PZM21 does not 
show a dose-dependent change in cAMP inhibition in a Gi/o Glosensor assay measuring 
SSTR4 activation, indicating that the single elevated point in b is probably a false positive 
result. d, e, Inhibition assays of hERG (d) and the dopamine transporter (DAT), 
norepinephrine transporter (NET), and serotonin transporter (SERT) (e) show that PZM21 
has weak inhibitory activity ranging from 2–34 μM at these targets. For a, data are mean ± 
s.e.m. of non-normalized results (n = 4 measurements). For b–e, data are mean ± s.e.m. of 
normalized results (n = 3–6 measurements).
Manglik et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. Signalling profile of PZM21 and other μOR agonists
a, PZM21 is an efficacious Gi and Go agonist in a GTP γS assay. b, Like other μOR 
agonists, PZM21 induces a dose-dependent decrease in cAMP levels that is sensitive to 
pertussis toxin, confirming Gi/o mediated signalling. c, Herkinorin is a Gi/o agonist and 
robustly recruits arrestin in a BRET assay performed in the absence of GRK2 
overexpression. TRV130 or PZM21 show undetectable levels of arrestin recruitment in the 
same experiement. d, PZM21 and other opioids show no activity in a calcium-release assay, 
indicating no Gq-mediated second messenger signalling. The positive control TFLLR-NH2 
Manglik et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 efficiently activates the Gq coupled receptor PAR-1. e, PZM21 and TRV130 induce much 
decreased receptor internalization versus DAMGO and even morphine. f, Herkinorin and 
TRV130 are potent agonists of the κOR. PZM21 is a κOR antagonist (see Extended Data 
Fig. 4). g, In HEK293 cells, GRK2 expression levels have minimal effect on the potency and 
efficacy of the unbiased agonist DAMGO in a Gi/o activation assay. Increased GRK2 levels 
change the basal cAMP signal due to increased desentization of μOR, which lowers receptor 
basal activity and leads to elevated isoproterenol-induced cAMP. In an arrestin-recruitment 
BRET assay, increased GRK2 expression increases both the potency and maximal efficacy 
of the unbiased agonist DAMGO. This is likely because GRK2 mediated phosphorylation is 
required for efficient β-arrestin recruitment. h, Gi activation and arrestin recruitment in cells 
co-expressing 1.0 μg/15 cm2 of GRK2. Notably, PZM21 induces a higher maximal level of 
arrestin recruitment as compared to U2OS cells, which express very low levels of GRK2, but 
this level is significantly lower than morphine. Despite the lower efficacy for arrestin 
recruitment observed for morphine, TRV130 and PZM21 compared to DAMGO, a formal 
calculation of bias by the operational models fails to show that this effect is significant. i, 
Table of pEC50 values and Emax values for various signalling assays. All data are mean ± 
s.e.m. of results (n = 2–6 measurements).
Extended Data Figure 7. Additional in vivo studies of PZM21
Manglik et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a, Analgesic responses measured in the hotplate assay were subcategorized into either 
affective or reflexive behaviours and scored separately. b, Morphine (n = 10 animals) 
induces changes in both behaviours, while PZM21 (n = 13 animals) only modulates the 
attending (affective) component. Knockout of the μOR ablates all analgesic responses by 
morphine and PZM21. c, PZM21 shows minimal cataleptic effect compared to morphine at 
different time points. The effect of haloperidol was included as a positive control. d, 
Pharmacokinetic studies of PZM21 (n = 3–4 animals for each time point) show central 
nervous system penetration of the compound, with a peak level of 197 ng of PZM21 per g of 
brain tissue. With a concomitant serum concentration of 1,253 ng/ml, this represents a 
serum:brain concentration ratio of 6.4. These levels are similar to those achieved by 
morphine, which shows a peak brain concentration of approximately 300 ng/g and a 
serum:brain concentration ratio of 3.7 30 min after subcutaneous injection75. e, Metabolism 
of PZM21 over 60 min exposure to mouse liver microsomes. Rotigotine and imipramine 
serve as positive controls for extensive phase I metabolism. The total amount of PZM21 and 
metabolite pool is slightly greater than 100% (101.8%) reflecting cumulative error in 
LC/MS analysis. f, A Gi/o signalling assay shows that none of the metabolites are 
measurably more potent activators of the μOR versus PZM21 alone. The metabolite pool 
after the 60-min incubation was used directly in the signalling assay. As a negative control, 
the pooled material from a reaction carried out in the absence of the key cofactor NADPH 
was used in the signalling assay. All data are mean ±s.e.m. For e, reactions were run in 
triplicate and the s.e.m. was calculated from individual measurements of each reaction.
Extended Data Table 1
Molecules with μOR activity identified in the initial screen
Cmpd
Structure
Rank
Tca
μOR Ki (μM)
Nearest ChEMBL μOR ligand
1
467
0.28
7.2
2
358
0.28
5.8
3
1281
0.30
13.8
4
1465
0.30
2.3
Manglik et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cmpd
Structure
Rank
Tca
μOR Ki (μM)
Nearest ChEMBL μOR ligand
5
2418
0.31
4.7
6
2211
0.30
10.0
7
1140
0.30
2.5
aThe ECFP4 Tanimoto similarity (Tc) to the most similar μOR ligand in ChEMBL16.
Extended Data Table 2
Analogues tested at the μOR
Cmpd
Structure
Docking Score
Tca
μOR Ki (μM)
κOR Ki (μM)
μOR 
Gi 
EC50 
(μM)
Nearest ChEMBL μOR ligand
8
−42.08
0.31
0.82
0.46
6.6
9
−48.30
0.31
>10
1.36
N.A.b
10
−51.73
0.31
4.75
>10
N.A.b
11
−46.79
0.35
1.86
>10
N.A.b
12
−51.88
0.35
0.042
0.46
0.18
Manglik et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cmpd
Structure
Docking Score
Tca
μOR Ki (μM)
κOR Ki (μM)
μOR 
Gi 
EC50 
(μM)
Nearest ChEMBL μOR ligand
13
−51.22
0.35
0.550
1.02
3.1
14
−50.42
0.37
0.087
0.51
0.44
15
−43.17
0.37
0.130
>10
N.A.b
aThe ECFP4 Tanimoto similarity (Tc) to the most similar μOR ligand in ChEMBL16.
bNo measurable activity.
Extended Data Table 3
Binding and signalling properties of compounds 12 and PZM21
12
PZM21
Ki(nM)
 μOR
42
1.1
 δOR
N.A.
506
 κOR
464
18
 nociceptin
N.D.a
N.D.a
Gi/o (Glosensor)
EC50(nM)|Emax(%)
 μOR
180 | 88
4.6 | 77
 δ0R
N.A.b
1900 | 78
 κOR
N.A.b
N.A.b
 nociceptin
1400 | 43
N.A.b
Arrestin recruitment (PathHunter)
EC50(nM)|Emax(%)
 μOR
940 | 9.4
NA.a
aNot determined.
bNo measurable activity.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Manglik et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
Supported by the US National Institutes of Health grants GM106990 (B.K.K., B.K.S. and P.G.), DA036246 
(B.K.K.), GM59957 (B.K.S.), and the National Institutes of Mental Health Psychoactive Drug Screening Program 
(B.L.R.) and DA017204 (B.L.R., D.A.), DA035764 (B.L.R.) and the Michael Hooker Distinguished Professorship 
(B.L.R.) and the German Research Foundation Grants Gm 13/10 and GRK 1910 (P.G). A.M. received support from 
the Stanford University Medical Scientist Training Program (T32GM007365) and the American Heart Association 
(12PRE8120001).
References
1. Lord JAH, Waterfield AA, Hughes J, Kosterlitz HW. Endogenous opioid peptides: multiple agonists 
and receptors. Nature. 1977; 267:495–499. [PubMed: 195217] 
2. Martin WR, Eades CG, Thompson JA, Huppler RE, Gilbert PE. The effects of morphine- and 
nalorphine-like drugs in the nondependent and morphine-dependent chronic spinal dog. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther. 1976; 197:517–532. [PubMed: 945347] 
3. Hughes J, et al. Identification of two related pentapeptides from the brain with potent opiate agonist 
activity. Nature. 1975; 258:577–580. [PubMed: 1207728] 
4. Bohn LM, Gainetdinov RR, Lin FT, Lefkowitz RJ, Caron MG. μ-opioid receptor desensitization by 
β-arrestin-2 determines morphine tolerance but not dependence. Nature. 2000; 408:720–723. 
[PubMed: 11130073] 
5. Bohn LM, et al. Enhanced morphine analgesia in mice lacking β-arrestin 2. Science. 1999; 
286:2495–2498. [PubMed: 10617462] 
6. Raehal KM, Walker JK, Bohn LM. Morphine side effects in β-arrestin 2 knockout mice. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2005; 314:1195–1201. [PubMed: 15917400] 
7. DeWire SM, et al. A G protein-biased ligand at the μ-opioid receptor is potently analgesic with 
reduced gastrointestinal and respiratory dysfunction compared with morphine. J Pharmacol Exp 
Ther. 2013; 344:708–717. [PubMed: 23300227] 
8. Soergel DG, et al. Biased agonism of the μ-opioid receptor by TRV130 increases analgesia and 
reduces on-target adverse effects versus morphine: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
crossover study in healthy volunteers. Pain. 2014; 155:1829–1835. [PubMed: 24954166] 
9. Manglik A, et al. Crystal structure of the μ-opioid receptor bound to a morphinan antagonist. Nature. 
2012; 485:321326.
10. Granier S, et al. Structure of the δ-opioid receptor bound to naltrindole. Nature. 2012; 485:400–
404. [PubMed: 22596164] 
11. Wu H, et al. Structure of the human κ-opioid receptor in complex with JDTic. Nature. 2012; 
485:327–332. [PubMed: 22437504] 
12. Thompson AA, et al. Structure of the nociceptin/orphanin FQ receptor in complex with a peptide 
mimetic. Nature. 2012; 485:395–399. [PubMed: 22596163] 
13. Carlsson J, et al. Ligand discovery from a dopamine D3 receptor homology model and crystal 
structure. Nat Chem Biol. 2011; 7:769–778. [PubMed: 21926995] 
14. de Graaf C, et al. Crystal structure-based virtual screening for fragment-like ligands of the human 
histamine H1 receptor. J Med Chem. 2011; 54:8195–8206. [PubMed: 22007643] 
15. Katritch V, et al. Structure-based discovery of novel chemotypes for adenosine A2A receptor 
antagonists. J Med Chem. 2010; 53:1799–1809. [PubMed: 20095623] 
16. Kolb P, et al. Structure-based discovery of β2-adrenergic receptor ligands. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA. 2009; 106:6843–6848. [PubMed: 19342484] 
17. Langmead CJ, et al. Identification of novel adenosine A2A receptor antagonists by virtual 
screening. J Med Chem. 2012; 55:1904–1909. [PubMed: 22250781] 
18. Powers RA, Morandi F, Shoichet BK. Structure-based discovery of a novel, noncovalent inhibitor 
of AmpC β-lactamase. Structure. 2002; 10:1013–1023. [PubMed: 12121656] 
19. Huang XP, et al. Allosteric ligands for the pharmacologically dark receptors GPR68 and GPR65. 
Nature. 2015; 527:477–483. [PubMed: 26550826] 
Manglik et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 20. Irwin JJ, Sterling T, Mysinger MM, Bolstad ES, Coleman RG. ZINC: a free tool to discover 
chemistry for biology. J Chem Inf Model. 2012; 52:1757–1768. [PubMed: 22587354] 
21. Mysinger MM, Shoichet BK. Rapid context-dependent ligand desolvation in molecular docking. J 
Chem Inf Model. 2010; 50:1561–1573. [PubMed: 20735049] 
22. Mysinger MM, et al. Structure-based ligand discovery for the protein–protein interface of 
chemokine receptor CXCR4. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:5517–5522. [PubMed: 
22431600] 
23. Negri A, et al. Discovery of a novel selective kappa-opioid receptor agonist using crystal structure-
based virtual screening. J Chem Inf Model. 2013; 53:521–526. [PubMed: 23461591] 
24. Ballesteros JA, Weinstein H. Integrated methods for the construction of three-dimensional models 
and computational probing of structure-function relations in G protein-coupled receptors. Methods 
in Neurosciences. 1995; 25:366–428.
25. Gaulton A, et al. ChEMBL: a large-scale bioactivity database for drug discovery. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 2012; 40:D1100–D1107. [PubMed: 21948594] 
26. Muchmore SW, et al. Application of belief theory to similarity data fusion for use in analog 
searching and lead hopping. J Chem Inf Model. 2008; 48:941–948. [PubMed: 18416545] 
27. Pasternak GW, Pan YX. μ opioids and their receptors: evolution of a concept. Pharmacol Rev. 
2013; 65:1257–1317. [PubMed: 24076545] 
28. Fenalti G, et al. Structural basis for bifunctional peptide recognition at human δ-opioid receptor. 
Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015; 22:265–268. [PubMed: 25686086] 
29. Huang W, et al. Structural insights into μ-opioid receptor activation. Nature. 2015; 524:315–321. 
[PubMed: 26245379] 
30. Kroeze WK, et al. PRESTO-Tango as an open-source resource for interrogation of the druggable 
human GPCRome. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015; 22:362–369. [PubMed: 25895059] 
31. Kenakin T, Christopoulos A. Signalling bias in new drug discovery: detection, quantification and 
therapeutic impact. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013; 12:205–216. [PubMed: 23411724] 
32. Nickolls SA, Humphreys S, Clark M, McMurray G. Co-expression of GRK2 reveals a novel 
conformational state of the μ-opioid receptor. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e83691. [PubMed: 24376730] 
33. Groer CE, et al. An opioid agonist that does not induce μ-opioid receptor–arrestin interactions or 
receptor internalization. Mol Pharmacol. 2007; 71:549–557. [PubMed: 17090705] 
34. Le Bars D, Gozariu M, Cadden SW. Animal models of nociception. Pharmacol Rev. 2001; 53:597–
652. [PubMed: 11734620] 
35. Li C, et al. μ opioid receptor modulation of dopamine neurons in the periaqueductal gray/dorsal 
raphe: a role in regulation of pain. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016; 41:2122–2132. [PubMed: 
26792442] 
36. Han S, Soleiman MT, Soden ME, Zweifel LS, Palmiter RD. Elucidating an affective pain circuit 
that creates a threat memory. Cell. 2015; 162:363–374. [PubMed: 26186190] 
37. Gogas KR, Presley RW, Levine JD, Basbaum AI. The antinociceptive action of supraspinal opioids 
results from an increase in descending inhibitory control: correlation of nociceptive behavior and 
c-fos expression. Neuroscience. 1991; 42:617–628. [PubMed: 1659673] 
38. Montandon G, et al. G-protein-gated inwardly rectifying potassium channels modulate respiratory 
depression by opioids. Anesthesiology. 2016; 124:641–650. [PubMed: 26675532] 
39. Spanagel R, Herz A, Shippenberg TS. Opposing tonically active endogenous opioid systems 
modulate the mesolimbic dopaminergic pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1992; 89:2046–2050. 
[PubMed: 1347943] 
40. Bohn LM, et al. Enhanced rewarding properties of morphine, but not cocaine, in β(arrestin)-2 
knock-out mice. J Neurosci. 2003; 23:10265–10273. [PubMed: 14614085] 
41. Tzschentke TM. Measuring reward with the conditioned place preference paradigm: a 
comprehensive review of drug effects, recent progress and new issues. Prog Neurobiol. 1998; 
56:613–672. [PubMed: 9871940] 
42. Weiss DR, et al. Conformation guides molecular efficacy in docking screens of activated β-2 
adrenergic G protein coupled receptor. ACS Chem Biol. 2013; 8:1018–1026. [PubMed: 23485065] 
Manglik et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 43. Carlsson J, et al. Structure-based discovery of A2A adenosine receptor ligands. J Med Chem. 2010; 
53:3748–3755. [PubMed: 20405927] 
44. Irwin JJ, et al. Automated docking screens: a feasibility study. J Med Chem. 2009; 52:5712–5720. 
[PubMed: 19719084] 
45. Besnard J, et al. Automated design of ligands to polypharmacological profiles. Nature. 2012; 
492:215–220. [PubMed: 23235874] 
46. Weichert D, et al. Covalent agonists for studying G protein-coupled receptor activation. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:10744–10748. [PubMed: 25006259] 
47. Möller D, et al. Functionally selective dopamine D2, D3 receptor partia agonists. J Med Chem. 
2014; 57:4861–4875. [PubMed: 24831693] 
48. Hübner H, Haubmann C, Utz W, Gmeiner P. Conjugated enynes as nonaromatic catechol 
bioisosteres: synthesis, binding experiments, and computational studies of novel dopamine 
receptor agonists recognizing preferentially the D3 subtype. J Med Chem. 2000; 43:756–762. 
[PubMed: 10691700] 
49. Lane JR, Powney B, Wise A, Rees S, Milligan G. G protein coupling and ligand selectivity of the 
D2L and D3 dopamine receptors. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008; 325:319–330. [PubMed: 
18218829] 
50. Jiang LI, et al. Use of a cAMP BRET sensor to characterize a novel regulation of cAMP by the 
sphingosine 1-phosphate/G13 pathway. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:10576–10584. [PubMed: 
17283075] 
51. Nakajima, K-i; Gimenez, LD.; Gurevich, V.; Wess, J. Designer Receptors Exclusively Activated by 
Designer Drugs. In: Thiel, G., editor. Neuromethods. Vol. 108. Springer; New York: 2015. p. 
29-48.Ch. 2
52. Rajagopal S, et al. Quantifying ligand bias at seven-transmembrane receptors. Mol Pharmacol. 
2011; 80:367–377. [PubMed: 21610196] 
53. Rajagopal S. Quantifying biased agonism: understanding the links between affinity and efficacy. 
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013; 12:483.
54. Huang XP, Mangano T, Hufeisen S, Setola V, Roth BL. Identification of human Ether-à-go-go 
related gene modulators by three screening platforms in an academic drug-discovery setting. Assay 
Drug Dev Technol. 2010; 8:727–742. [PubMed: 21158687] 
55. Balter RE, Dykstra LA. Thermal sensitivity as a measure of spontaneous morphine withdrawal in 
mice. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods. 2013; 67:162–168. [PubMed: 23416790] 
56. Sorge RE, et al. Olfactory exposure to males, including men, causes stress and related analgesia in 
rodents. Nat Methods. 2014; 11:629–632. [PubMed: 24776635] 
57. Woolf CJ. Long term alterations in the excitability of the flexion reflex produced by peripheral 
tissue injury in the chronic decerebrate rat. Pain. 1984; 18:325–343. [PubMed: 6728499] 
58. Blanchard RJ, Blanchard DC. Passive and active reactions to fear-eliciting stimuli. J Comp Physiol 
Psychol. 1969; 68:129–135. [PubMed: 5793861] 
59. Bolles RC. Species-specific defense reactions and avoidance learning. Psychol Rev. 1970; 77:32.
60. Bolles RC, Fanselow MS. A perceptual-defensive-recuperative model of fear and pain. Behav 
Brain Sci. 1980; 3:291–301.
61. Estes WK. Discriminative conditioning; effects of a Pavlovian conditioned stimulus upon a 
subsequently established operant response. J Exp Psychol. 1948; 38:173–177. [PubMed: 
18913666] 
62. Estes WK, Skinner BF. Some quantitative properties of anxiety. J Exp Psychol. 1941; 29:390.
63. Rescorla RA, Lolordo VM. Inhibition of avoidance behavior. J Comp Physiol Psychol. 1965; 
59:406–412. [PubMed: 14313781] 
64. Skinner, BF. The behavior of organisms; an experimental analysis. D. Appleton-Century Company 
Incorporated; 1938. 
65. Hunskaar S, Hole K. The formalin test in mice: dissociation between inflammatory and non-
inflammatory pain. Pain. 1987; 30:103–114. [PubMed: 3614974] 
66. Clougherty JE, et al. Chronic social stress and susceptibility to concentrated ambient fine particles 
in rats. Environ Health Perspect. 2010; 118:769–775. [PubMed: 20194079] 
Manglik et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 67. Sanberg PR, Bunsey MD, Giordano M, Norman AB. The catalepsy test: its ups and downs. Behav 
Neurosci. 1988; 102:748–759. [PubMed: 2904271] 
68. Hiller C, et al. Functionally selective dopamine D2/D3 receptor agonists comprising an enyne 
moiety. J Med Chem. 2013; 56:5130–5141. [PubMed: 23730937] 
69. Case, D., et al. AMBER 15. San Francisco, CA: University of California; 2015. 
70. Goetz A, Lanig H, Gmeiner P, Clark T. Molecular dynamics simulations of the effect of the G-
protein and diffusible ligands on the β2-adrenergic receptor. J Mol Biol. 2011; 414:611–623. 
[PubMed: 22037586] 
71. Wang J, Wolf RM, Caldwell JW, Kollman PA, Case DA. Development and testing of a general 
amber force field. J Comput Chem. 2004; 25:1157–1174. [PubMed: 15116359] 
72. Hornak V, et al. Comparison of multiple amber force fields and development of improved protein 
backbone parameters. Proteins. 2006; 65:712–725. [PubMed: 16981200] 
73. Bayly CI, Cieplak P, Cornell W, Kollman PA. A well-behaved electrostatic potential based method 
using charge restraints for deriving atomic charges: the RESP model. J Phys Chem. 1993; 
97:10269–10280.
74. Berendsen H, Grigera J, Straatsma T. The missing term in effective pair potentials. J Phys Chem. 
1987; 91:6269–6271.
75. Kissin I, Brown PT, Robinson CA, Bradley EL. Acute tolerance in morphine analgesia continuous 
infusion and single injection in rats. Anesthesiology. 1991; 74:166–171. [PubMed: 1986642] 
Manglik et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Structure based ligand discovery for the μOR
a, Opiate-induced μOR signalling through Gi activates G-protein-gated inwardly rectifying 
potassium channels (GIRKs) and inhibits adenylyl cyclase, leading to analgesia. Conversely, 
recruitment of β-arrestin is implicated in tolerance, respiratory depression, and constipation. 
b, Cutaway of the μOR orthosteric site to which β-FNA binds. Highlighted regions on the 
extracellular side diverge between the opioid receptors. c, Conserved features of opioid 
ligand recognition in the μOR. d, Overlaid docking poses of 23 compounds selected for 
experimental testing. e, Single-point competition binding assay of 23 candidate molecules 
against the μOR antagonist 3H-diprenorphine. Each ligand was tested at 20 μM and for those 
with > 25% inhibition affinity was calculated in full displacement curves; data represent 
mean ± s.e.m. (n = 3 measurements). One of these hits, compound 7, was subsequently 
optimized. f, Docking pose of compound 7.
Manglik et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Discovery of a novel Gi/o-biased μOR agonist
a, Compound 12 was identified among a series of analogues to compound 7 and further 
investigated due to its μOR specificity and efficacy as a μOR agonist. b, Docking pose of 
Compound 12. c, Compound 12 is a μOR agonist in a Gi/o signalling assay with an EC50 of 
180 nM. DAMGO is a prototypical unbiased opioid agonist. d, Despite robust activation of 
Gi/o, compound 12 induces minimal arrestin recruitment as compared to DAMGO. For c, d, 
data are mean ± s.e.m. of normalized results (n = 3–6 measurements).
Manglik et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Structure-guided optimization towards a potent biased μOR agonist
a, Structure guided optimization towards PZM21. b, Docking pose of 12 compared to β-
FNA. The phenolic hydroxyl of β-FNA coordinates His2976.52 with two water molecules, 
providing an optimization strategy for 12. c, PZM21 docked to active μOR with a water-
mediated network between the PZM21 phenol and His2976.52. The co-crystallized agonist 
BU72 is shown as orange sticks. d, μOR–PZM21 interactions include hydrogen bonds (blue 
dash), hydrophobic interactions (green dash), and an ionic bond (red dash). Insets show 
select data from structure–activity relationship and molecular dynamics studies presented in 
more detail in Extended Data. e, Stereoisomers of 12 in a Gi/o signalling assay. f, Gi/o 
signalling assay shows robust μOR agonist activity for PZM21. g, PZM21 shows 
undetectable β-arrestin-2 recruitment in the PathHunter assay. For e–g, data are mean ± 
s.e.m. of normalized results (n = 3–6 measurements).
Manglik et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. PZM21 is an analgesic with reduced on-target liabilities
a, Analgesia in the mouse hotplate assay. Latency of withdrawal to noxious stimuli is shown 
as percentage of the maximal possible effect (% MPE). The highest dose of PZM21 (40 mg 
kg−1) yields an equi-analgesic response to 10 mg kg−1 morphine and 1.2 mg kg−1 TRV130 
at 15 min. b, Compared to morphine, PZM21 shows no analgesia in the tail-flick assay. c, 
Unlike morphine, PZM21 decreases affective pain perception with minimal effect on 
reflexive pain. d, PZM21 and morphine produce sustained analgesia in a formalin injection 
nociception assay e, PZM21 shows no analgesic effect in Oprm1−/− mice, supporting 
engagement of μOR in vivo. f, Constipatory effects of morphine and PZM21 compared to 
vehicle assessed by accumulated faecal boli. g, Whole-body mouse plethysmography shows 
decrease in respiratory frequency for morphine starting 20 min after administration of drug. 
An equi-analgesic dose of PZM21 has no effect on respiration versus vehicle, while TRV130 
induces transient respiratory depression at 15 min. h, Open field locomotor assay. i, Place 
preference is induced by conditioning with 10 mg kg−1 morphine but not with 20 mg kg−1 
Manglik et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PZM21 nor with 1.2 mg kg−1 TRV130. Per cent of time spent in either vehicle or drug 
chamber before (pretest) or after (test) conditioning regimen. All data are mean ± s.e.m. and 
asterisks indicate statistically significant differences between drug and vehicle. The number 
of animals in each group and statistical tests are described in the Methods.
Manglik et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 March 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
