 Circuit mechanisms of a retinal ganglion cell with stimulus 
dependent response latency and activation beyond its dendrites
Adam Mani1 and Gregory W. Schwartz1,2,*
1Department of Ophthalmology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611
2Department of Physiology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611
SUMMARY
Center-surround antagonism has been used as the canonical model to describe receptive fields of 
retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) for decades. We describe a newly identified RGC type in mouse, 
called the ON delayed (OND) RGC, with receptive field properties that deviate from center-
surround organization. Responding with an unusually long latency to light stimulation, OND 
RGCs respond earlier as the visual stimulus increases in size. Furthermore, OND RGCs are 
excited by light falling far beyond their dendrites. We unravel details of the circuit mechanisms 
behind these phenomena, revealing new roles for inhibition in controlling both temporal and 
spatial receptive field properties. The non-canonical receptive field properties of the OND RGC – 
integration of long temporal and large spatial scales – suggest that unlike typical RGCs, it may 
encode a slowly varying, global property of the visual scene.
Keywords
retina; ganglion cells; receptive-field; latency; center-surround; serial inhibition; extra-dendritic; 
mouse; image focus; circuit
INTRODUCTION
Center-surround spatial organization is one of the core features of receptive field structure in 
visual neurons. Beginning at the first synapse in the retina, lateral inhibition shapes signals, 
creating antagonism between local (center) and global (surround) regions of visual space. 
Retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) were the first visual neurons to be described in terms of 
center-surround receptive fields [1], and the circuit mechanisms of receptive field structure 
have been studied extensively in the retina [2–4].
*Correspondence: greg.schwartz@northwestern.edu. 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Author contributions: A.M. and G.W.S. designed research, performed research, analyzed data and wrote the paper.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Published in final edited form as:
Curr Biol. 2017 February 20; 27(4): 471–482. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.033.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Alongside this classical view of receptive field structure has been a growing appreciation for 
the diversity of RGC types and their specific roles in detecting specific visual features [5–
12]. Some of these feature detectors, like object-motion-sensitive RGCs, rely on an 
antagonistic surround [7,13] while others, like M1 intrinsically photosensitive RGCs eschew 
center-surround antagonism to suit their role in reporting global luminance [14]. Despite 
recent progress, few RGC types have been characterized in terms of unique 
electrophysiological responses, and circuit mechanisms responsible for such specific 
responses have only been identified for a handful of RGC types among the ~40 types 
thought to exist in the mammalian retina [12].
Here we describe a new type of RGC in the mouse, named the ON delayed (OND) RGC, 
whose receptive field structure deviates from the center-surround paradigm. Rather than 
being antagonized by large light stimuli, the OND RGC responds earlier than it does to 
smaller stimuli. The range of possible response latencies for OND RGCs is large, and the 
response to a stimulus of a size comparable to the cell’s dendrites is unusually late. In 
addition, opposite to the usual antagonistic effect of the surround, firing in the OND RGC 
can be elicited by light patterns far outside its dendritic field. Our studies of the mechanisms 
responsible for these unusual receptive field characteristics yield new insights into the 
synaptic organization of retinal circuits and broaden our understanding of the varied roles of 
inhibition.
The canonical center-surround organization of RGCs serves to localize their spatial 
responses. The unusual characteristics of the receptive field of OND RGCs lead us to 
suggest that they report a more global property of the scene, requiring integration rather than 
precisely reporting an event in time and space.
RESULTS
Functional and morphological classification of the ON delayed RGC
As part of an effort to catalogue the diversity of RGC light responses in the mouse, we 
encountered a set of cells with unusually long response latencies. Examples of ten of these 
“ON delayed” (OND) RGCs responding to a 200 μm spot of light (intensity 100 rod 
isomerizations (R)*/rod/s, presented from dark and centered on the receptive field) are 
shown in Figure 1A,B. Consistency of the response across trials (Figure 1C), suggested that 
the long latency was not a result of adaptation to repeated light flashes.
The response pattern was highly similar across cells within this group (Figure 1B), 
compared to ON RGCs outside this group that responded differently to the light step (Figure 
1D). While ON alpha, ON direction-selective, and ON orientation-selective are well 
characterized RGC types (independently confirmed by large somata, direction-selectivity, 
and orientation selectivity, respectively), ON transient and ON sustained RGCs were 
grouped according to the temporal profile of their light responses and likely each included 
multiple RGC types. The similarity in response profile among OND RGCs and their 
differences from other ON RGCs suggest that OND RGCs may consist a single functional 
RGC type.
Mani and Schwartz
Page 2
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We further investigated the statistical separation of OND RGCs from other RGC types based 
quantified properties of their light responses. OND RGCs were not direction selective when 
probed with moving bars (see Experimental Procedures, DSI = 0.05 ± .01. n = 14). ON 
direction selective RGCs cells also showed relatively long response latencies to a light step 
(0.28 ± .02 s, n = 54), but were easily distinguished from OND RGCs by their direction 
selectivity (p < 10−10, unpaired t-test; DSI = 0.39 ± .02, n = 56). Among non-direction-
selective ON RGCs we recorded (DSI < 0.2), there was a significantly bimodal distribution 
of response latencies (p < 10−5, Hartigan’s dip test) with a clear separation at 0.3 s (Figure 
1E). Thus, we established the threshold of 0.3 s latency to characterize ON non-direction-
selective RGCs as OND.
A clear statistical separation of the OND RGCs from all other RGCs based on response 
latency provided evidence that OND RGCs may constitute a single RGC type. Results below 
show that cells classified by this functional criterion also shared characteristic receptive field 
properties not found in other RGCs, as well as other physiological and morphological 
characteristics, further supporting the claim that they represent a single RGC type. We found 
no evidence for heterogeneity within OND RGCs that would imply further splitting of this 
population into multiple types.
We filled and imaged OND RGCs to quantify their dendritic morphology (Figure 1F–H, 
Figure S1). OND RGCs stratified near the ON choline acetyl-transferase (ChAT) band and 
distal to the OFF ChAT band (Figure 1G). This represents another example, along with the 
M1 ipRGC [15] and the ON OS RGC [16] of a functionally pure ON RGC with an OFF 
dendritic stratification. We confirmed that OND RGCs retained pure ON polarity in photopic 
conditions (Figure S2).
OND RGCs had relatively small dendritic fields with an equivalent diameter of 141 ± 23 μm 
(mean ± SD) in the ON stratum and 133 ± 19 μm (mean ± SD, n = 16) in the OFF stratum 
(Figure 1H). We also measured the longest axis through a polygon outlining the dendritic 
field in each stratum (Figure S1A). The long axes were only ~40% longer than the 
equivalent diameter, a sign of symmetric morphology shared by most RGCs [16–18]. We 
found OND RGCs in locations throughout the retina with no apparent gradient in density, 
function or morphology.
The most distinctive morphological feature of OND RGCs was their recursive dendrites that 
extended to the OFF stratum before returning back to the ON stratum (Figure S1B). 
Recursive dendrites have been described in a different RGC type in rabbit and mouse, the 
suppressed-by-contrast RGC [19–22]. We found more and longer recursive dendrites in the 
OND RGC than in the mouse suppressed-by-contrast RGC or in two other bistratified RGC 
types (Figure S1C,D). The closest morphological match to the OND RGC in a public online 
database of electron-microscopic reconstructions is the “73” (museum.eyewire.org). More 
tentative matches exist in the published connectomics electron-microscopy data: gc31–56 
from [23], and in a recent functional study of RGC calcium signals: cluster no. 37, “ON 
slow” from [12]. We note that a morphologically similar cell to the OND RGC, the recursive 
bistratified RGC, has been found in non-human primates [24].
Mani and Schwartz
Page 3
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Inverted size-latency tuning and its mechanism
To measure the extent and strength of the OND RGC receptive field center and surround, we 
presented light spots of varying sizes from darkness (to 100 R*/rod/s). Given the small 
dendritic field of the OND RGC, we expected to find a small receptive field center. Figure 
2A shows the spike count during stimulus presentation normalized to its maximum as a 
function of spot size for OND RGCs and four other ON RGC groups. In fact, OND RGCs 
had surprisingly large receptive fields (maximal response diameter, 386 ± 30 μm, n = 16) 
given their dendritic diameter. Unlike most RGC types ([7,16,25]; Figure 2A), OND RGCs 
showed very little surround suppression.
An unusual feature of the OND RGC’s response to the spot stimuli was its inverted size-
latency tuning (Figure 2B). While other RGCs either increased response latency or showed 
no change in latency with increases in spot size, OND RGCs responded earlier to larger 
spots. The range over which the latency varied with spot diameter was large (0.3 ± 0.02 s, n 
= 20) compared to that observed in RGCs in mouse and other species [26]. Examples for the 
same cell responding at five spot sizes are shown in Figure 2C, together with examples of 
two other RGCs for comparison. We also measured inverted size-latency tuning in OND 
RGCs in photopic conditions indicating that this feature of the response was robust across 
luminance conditions (Figure S3).
To determine the mechanisms responsible for inverted size-latency tuning, we performed 
whole-cell voltage clamp recordings from OND RGCs (Figure 3). Excitation to the OND 
RGC (peak current = −122 ±10 pA, n = 11) occurred only at light onset, was slow and 
sustained, and sometimes had a small very transient initial component (Figure 3B). 
Inhibition was large compared to excitation (peak current = 750 ± 70 pA, n = 13; maximum 
excitation-to-inhibition ratio of peak current across cells = 0.2 ± 0.02, n = 11), was present at 
light onset and offset and was more transient than excitation. Two features of the synaptic 
conductances were distinct from patterns typically observed in RGCs. First, inhibition had 
stronger surround suppression than excitation (Figure 3A). Second, inhibition had a shorter 
latency (Figure 3C) and shorter duration (Figure 3D) than excitation. The duration of the 
inhibitory conductance also showed a marked dependence on spot size, becoming briefer for 
larger spots (Figure 3D).
These distinct patterns of excitation and inhibition make a prediction about the mechanism 
of inverted size-latency tuning in the OND RGC. While steady excitation is required to 
depolarize the cell, rather than firing near the onset of excitation, OND RGC firing is 
initiated by a release from inhibition. The latency of this release from inhibition decreases 
with increasing spot size because inhibition becomes smaller and more transient while 
excitation remains sustained and has less suppression. To test whether the synaptic 
conductances were sufficient to explain inverted size-latency tuning, we created a leaky 
integrate-and-fire model of the spiking activity of OND RGCs (Figure 3E–I). Converting 
measured synaptic currents into conductances (Figure 3E) and feeding them into the model, 
we simulated membrane voltage dynamics in response to spots of varying sizes (Figure 3F). 
The only parameters that were chosen per cell were the spiking threshold and an increased 
time constant following a spike. Fixing these based on the spiking response measured for the 
same cell at a single spot size (200 μm), we then produced simulated data across the range of 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 4
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 spot sizes (Figure 3G–I). The model captured the general shape of the OND RGC’s light 
response (Figure 3G), and inverted size-latency tuning (Figure 3H). Surround suppression 
(Figure 3I) seemed somewhat stronger than in experimental results. This may be due to an 
additional current we discovered arising from stimuli beyond the RGC dendrites (see 
Figures 5,6). This current was not included in the model directly, with its own driving force, 
but only via its contribution to the measured excitatory (cation) and inhibitory (chloride) 
currents.
Pharmacology of synaptic inputs to the OND RGC
To gain insights into the circuitry upstream of inhibition onto the OND RGC, we repeated 
our whole-cell receptive field measurements in the presence of different inhibitory receptor 
blockers. Our pharmacology experiments included gabazine, TPMPA, and/or strychnine to 
block GABAA, GABAC or glycine receptors, respectively (Figure 4). Two main results came 
from this set of experiments. First, light induced inhibitory currents are completely 
dependent on a combination of glycine and GABAA receptors. Blocking both of these 
receptor types with gabazine + strychnine eliminated inhibitory currents completely (Figure 
4A,C). The effects of the two blockers were not additive, however. Gabazine alone did not 
substantially reduce the total charge of inhibitory currents in OND RGCs, and strychnine 
alone reduced the currents to about 40% of their control charge. Non-additivity of these 
blockers suggests an upstream interaction between GABAergic and glycinergic circuits (see 
model below).
Second, the strong surround suppression of the inhibitory currents that we found to be 
critical for inverted size-latency tuning (Figure 3) relies on a combination of GABAA and 
GABAC receptors. Both the total charge (Figure 4A,C) and the duration (Figure 4B,C) of 
inhibition was increased in the presence of TPMPA and increased more in the presence of 
TPMPA + gabazine. Again, the effects of TPMPA and gabazine were non-additive, 
suggesting an upstream interaction. Our results are consistent with a simplified model of the 
inhibitory circuit upstream of OND RGCs shown in Figure 4D. In this model, narrow-field 
glycinergic and GABAergic amacrine cells provide inhibition onto the dendrites of the OND 
RGC. Wide-field GABAergic amacrine cells in turn inhibit the narrow-field amacrine cells 
via GABAA and GABAC receptors. While the diagram in Figure 4D is the simplest circuit 
consistent with our data, other interactions are possible. The amacrine cells shown are not 
necessarily single types, and they may interact with each other either directly or through the 
bipolar cells providing excitatory input to them.
Similar experiments measuring the pharmacology of excitatory currents with the same set of 
inhibitory receptor blockers yielded two main results (Figure S4). First, surround 
suppression of excitatory currents is predominantly provided by GABAergic inhibition onto 
GABAC receptors, presumably located on bipolar cell terminals. We also observed an 
apparent strengthening of the surround of excitatory currents when blocking either GABAA 
receptors alone or GABAA and glycine receptors. Later experiments suggested that the 
reduction of current by these blockers was at least in part due to a different source than 
glutamate from bipolar cells (see Figures 5,6). Second, we found that presynaptic inhibition 
shapes the kinetics of the excitatory currents, contributing to their slow rise by eliminating 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 5
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 an early transient component. This inhibition is provided by GABAA and glycine receptors. 
In summary, interactions between GABAA, GABAC, and glycine inhibition shape the spatial 
and temporal properties of the excitatory and inhibitory currents onto OND RGCs, leading 
to the unusual properties of the currents and, ultimately, to inverted size-latency tuning in the 
spike responses of the RGC.
The OND RGC can be stimulated by light falling outside its dendrites
Surround suppression of spiking responses was weak for the OND RGC; only ON alpha 
RGCs had a similarly weak surround among the ON RGCs we tested (Figure 2A). Weak 
surround suppression could merely be the result of weak inhibition onto both the RGC and 
its presynaptic bipolar cells for large spots. However, the discrepancy between the small 
dendritic field of OND RGCs and the observed size of the receptive field center (Fig 2A), 
motivated us to further test the response of OND RGCs to light stimuli beyond the RGC 
dendrites.
To test for activation by distant stimuli, we presented annuli of fixed width and varying 
diameters while measuring the spike responses of both OND RGCs and ON alpha RGCs 
(Figure 5A). The response curves where compared with the dendritic diameter for each of 
the cell types (Figure 5A, vertical bars). While ON alpha RGC responses declined sharply 
for annuli outside the dendritic field, OND RGCs responded to stimuli far outside their 
dendrites. Spikes elicited by annuli outside the dendritic field were apparent in the OND 
RGC, but not the ON alpha (Figure 5A). Despite the fact that ON alpha RGCs fire twice as 
many spikes as OND RGCs at their receptive field maxima, a 480 μm inner diameter 
annulus elicited 20 ± 2 spikes in OND RGCs (n = 20) and 7 ± 3 spikes in ON alpha RGCs (n 
= 6). Thus the seemingly similar weak surround suppression observed for both the ON alpha 
RGC and the OND RGC using spots (Figure 2A) may be due, in part, to different 
mechanisms, as revealed by the annuli stimulus. ON alpha RGCs have weak suppression but 
no activation beyond their dendrites, while OND RGCs receive extra-dendritic activation.
Extra-dendritic activation via disinhibition
What synaptic mechanism accounts for extra-dendritic responses in the OND RGC? Many 
studies have shown excitation in RGCs to be co-extensive with their dendrites [27–29]. This 
is an intuitive result since the receptive fields of bipolar cells, which provide excitation to 
RGCs, are typically much smaller (~45 μm) [30,31] than those of RGCs (~250 μm) [12]. 
Again we turned to voltage-clamp measurements to determine the source of the extra-
dendritic activation, clamping the membrane voltage at either 11.4 mV (near the non-
specific cation reversal potential) or −68.6 mV (near the chloride reversal potential), in an 
attempt to isolate inhibitory and excitatory currents respectively (Figure 5B). Consistent 
with the decreased inhibition for large spots (Figure 3A), annuli beyond the dendritic field of 
the OND RGC elicited no outward inhibitory currents, but, surprisingly, we measured 
inward currents at both the chloride and non-specific cation reversal potentials in response to 
annuli well outside the RGC dendrites (Figure 5B,C). This suggested that perhaps a circuit 
distinct from those active within the dendritic field of the OND RGC provides activation 
beyond the dendritic field.
Mani and Schwartz
Page 6
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To explore the identity of these currents further, we recorded light responses from OND 
RGCs for both a spot and an annulus while holding the membrane potential at a range of 
values (Figure 6). Using a small spot and a large annulus allowed us to measure the current-
voltage relationships of the synaptic conductances elicited by light stimuli either within or 
outside the dendritic field of the RGC. A spot covering mostly the area of the dendrites (200 
μm) elicited a response family as seen in Figure 6A. Consistent with the currents recorded at 
only two different potentials (Figure 5B), the early part of the response (at 200 ms) was 
dominated by an inhibitory chloride current (reversing at −55.8 ± 2 mV, n = 7, Figure 6C) 
while the late part of the response included a substantial excitatory component and thus had 
a reversal potential between the chloride and non-specific cation reversal potentials (−22.7 
± 5 mV, n = 6, Figure 6C).
The light response elicited by annuli (400 μm inner diameter) outside the dendritic field had 
only a late, sustained component (Figure 6B), and this current had a very different voltage-
dependence from those elicited by the spot (Figure 6C, orange). Surprisingly, this current 
became more negative (inward) with increasing holding voltage, and had an apparent 
reversal at −72.8 ± 2 mV (n = 7). The fact that the size of this current depended on holding 
potential excludes gap junctions as its source, as gap-junctional currents are characterized by 
flat current-voltage relationships. The ‘inverted’ current-voltage relationship could be 
explained by disinhibition, the removal of a tonic inhibitory conductance by stimuli outside 
the RGC dendrites. However, the current reversed at a potential too negative for it to be 
carried by chloride. Therefore we hypothesized that the tonic inhibition removed by extra-
dendritic stimuli may at least in part be carried by a potassium conductance, which would 
account for its negatively shifted reversal potential. This would be the case if potassium 
channels controlled by metabotropic GABAB receptors mediate this current. While voltage 
gated potassium channels were blocked in our recordings by cesium ions present in the 
recording pipette, the inward rectifying potassium channels associated with GABAB 
receptors are unaffected by internal cesium block [32].
Again we turned to pharmacology experiments to reveal the circuit elements leading to this 
extra-dendritic disinhibition. While TPMPA (GABAC receptor antagonist) had no effect on 
the disinhibitory current, gabazine (GABAA antagonist) eliminated it completely (Figure 
S5). Tetrodotoxin also had no effect on the disinhibitory current (data not shown), 
suggesting that neither spiking amacrine cells, nor sodium channels in other cells in the 
retina participate in this circuit. While the extra-dendritic disinhibitory current was 
eliminated by gabazine, the inhibitory chloride current elicited by stimuli within the 
dendritic field of the RGC was unchanged in amplitude (Figure S5A). Consistent with the 
hypothesis that metabotropic activation of a potassium current was involved in the extra-
dendritic current, the GABAB agonist, baclofen, eliminated the extra-dendritic current while 
leaving (chloride-mediated) inhibition within the dendritic field intact (Figure S5).
The diagram in Figure 6D summarizes our conclusions regarding the extra-dendritic current. 
OND RGCs may receive a tonic inhibitory conductance from a GABAergic amacrine cell, 
via GABAB receptors. The amacrine cell is in turn inhibited, via GABAA receptors, by a 
wide-field (non-spiking) GABAergic amacrine cell that is activated by distant light 
stimulation. In summary, extra-dendritic activation in the OND RGC (Figure 5A), which 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 7
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contributes to its receptive field center being larger than its dendritic field and its weak 
surround suppression (Figure 2A), may rely on release from tonic inhibition via a serial 
inhibitory circuit.
Discussion
An RGC type with unusual receptive field characteristics
The long history of research on the light responses of RGCs spanning over seven decades 
and numerous species has uncovered many different types of receptive fields. To our 
knowledge, the OND RGC represents a receptive field structure that has not been reported in 
any of the previous literature. Two of its key functional attributes, inverted size-latency 
tuning and extra-dendritic activation, are unique among reported RGC receptive fields and 
among those we have measured. The unusual firing pattern of the OND RGC – in particular 
its long delay (Figure 1) – provides a reliable measure for functional targeting in wild-type 
mice, which can easily be further verified by testing for inverted size-latency tuning (Figure 
2B). This targeting scheme should enable the OND RGC to be studied systematically across 
multiple labs.
New functional roles for inhibition in retinal circuits
Two aspects of the role of inhibition in the non-canonical circuitry of the OND RGC are of 
general importance in sensory and systems neuroscience. The timing of the currents causes 
the RGC to spike upon release from inhibition, controlling the cell’s unusual response 
latency pattern (Figures 2,3). A combination of distinct inhibitory pathways gives rise to 
these special characteristics in the synaptic inputs (Figure 4, Figure S4). The ON direction-
selective RGC in rabbit has a similar release from inhibition mechanism to control speed 
dependence [33]. Glycinergic inhibition has also been shown to play a key role in delaying 
the onset of spiking in rabbit local edge detector RGCs. [34].
Second, we show a role for disinhibition in activating the RGC with stimuli far beyond its 
dendritic field (Figures 5,6). Disinhibition of a tonic glycinergic current onto the RGC is 
known to play an important role in the responses of the two OFF alpha RGC types [5,35]. 
Disinhibition in the OND RGC does not reverse at the reversal potential for chloride (Figure 
6C) and instead is likely carried by a tonic GABAB-receptor-mediated potassium 
conductance (Figure 5A). Unlike the disinhibitory currents measured in OFF alpha cells, the 
current we measured was selectively activated for stimuli beyond the dendrites of the RGC 
(Figures 5B, 6B,C).
Our pharmacology results (Figures 4, S4, S5) constrain models of the circuits upstream of 
the OND RGC that shape the excitatory, inhibitory, and disinhibitory currents we measured 
in the RGC. Generally, these results support previous studies of the different receptors 
mediating direct inhibition onto RGCs, serial inhibition between amacrine cells, and 
surround inhibition onto bipolar cell terminals [34,36,37]. In particular, our results support 
the role of GABAC receptors in lateral inhibition in retinal interneurons (onto both amacrine 
and bipolar cells), but not directly onto RGCs. GABAC receptors limit the spatial extent of 
inhibitory currents into the OND RGC and control their decay in time. We found multiple 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 8
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 roles for GABAA and glycine receptors in the OND RGC circuit, consistent with previous 
reports of their function in other retinal circuits [38]. Our finding that GABAB receptors 
provide tonic inhibition that is suppressed by extra-dendritic activation in OND RGCs 
represents a new role for GABAB receptors in a retinal circuit.
A large dynamic range latency code
RGC response latency can depend on a variety of features of the visual stimulus, and spike 
latency codes have been implicated in encoding contrast and spatial structure [26,39,40]. 
Latency shifts at steady luminance due to parameters like contrast, that have been linked to 
temporal coding, are on the order of several tens of milliseconds [26,40]. Remarkably, the 
OND RGC response latency shifts by more than 300 ms with spot size (Figure 3B).
While the kinetics of many parts of retinal circuits, including phototransduction, accelerate 
with increasing luminance, the long latency of response of OND RGCs and the stimulus size 
latency tuning are robust to a change in luminance (Figure S3). The OND RGC may thus 
encode spatial information temporally. The role of the latency shift in the encoding strategy 
of the OND RGC remains unclear, and future studies with a wide range of stimuli may 
uncover how multiple stimulus features interact to control response latency.
A possible role for the OND RGC in encoding global image focus
What could be the function of the OND RGC? A canonical center-surround organization 
decorrelates responses of neighboring RGCs and enables them to report properties of the 
visual scene locally (i.e. occurring only in the receptive field center) [41]. An exception is 
the M1 ipRGC, which exhibits no surround suppression [14] and encodes global luminance 
[42], rather than local information. RGCs usually also respond quickly, with latencies 
comparable to the minimal time delay imposed by phototransduction.
By contrast, OND RGCs respond to rather large stimuli and respond slowly. We suggest that 
spatial localization and speed are traded off in the OND RGC for achieving high sensitivity, 
via integration over time and space, in detecting a property of the visual field that is not 
highly localized and varies slowly. We further speculate that this property may be the degree 
of image focus detected by the retina.
Defocusing an image changes its spatial frequency content, attenuating high frequencies 
[43]. We measured RGC responses to full-field spatial patterns with equal distributions of 
positive and negative contrasts, but varying degrees of blur and hence varying spatial 
frequency content (Figure 7A,C, [31], see Experimental Procedures). The mean intensity in 
each texture was equal to that of the background presented before and after (1000 R*/rod/s). 
OND RGCs fired at either the onset or offset of texture patterns, or at both times (Figure 
7B). Note that the presence of texture onset and offset responses does not imply a light OFF 
response since there was no net change in overall light intensity between texture and 
background. Because we were interested in the dependence of RGC responses on spatial 
blur and not on local variations in contrast across textures, we quantified the response by 
summing spikes at onset and offset and averaging across 5 different texture patterns at each 
spatial scale. Among RGCs we measured, only some cell types, including OND RGCs, 
responded well to the texture stimulus (> 10 Hz, Fig 7D), while the rest responded poorly or 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 9
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 not at all (38 of 70 cells). Moreover, OND RGCs were sensitive to the highest spatial 
frequencies; the texture scale at which the OND RGC reached 85% of its maximal response 
(21.3 ± 1.4 μm, n = 6) was the smallest among RGC types we measured (Figure 7E). Thus 
the OND RGC is exquisitely sensitive to local contrast in a full-field image. The limiting 
frequency is consistent with both the resolution of single bipolar cells [30,31] and the spatial 
frequency limit of mouse vision [44].
OND RGC’s sensitivity to fine spatial scales is consistent with a model of nonlinear subunits 
for the receptive field of an ON RGC, with the onset to offset response ratio depending on 
the alignment of the bright and dark patches of the texture with receptive field subunits [31]. 
Mechanistic connections between this texture sensitivity and the other receptive field 
properties described in Results remains to be explored in future experiments and modeling. 
The firing of OND RGCs is not selective solely for fine textures, and this one RGC type 
alone probably does not carry the full representation of image focus. Nonetheless, we think 
that it is a good candidate for a role within the focus detection circuit, given the above 
considerations.
Although its cellular substrate is yet to be discovered [45], an image focus signal exists 
within the mouse retina. During development, this signal controls emmetropization, the 
process matching the dimensions of the eye with its refractive power, in species including 
mouse and human [46,47]. Normal emmetropization depends on the ON pathway of the 
retina [48]; disruption of this process results in disorders of refractive index, like myopia. A 
signal of image focus may also have use in the adult animal, in visual accommodation, 
which brings the retinal image into focus. Although the well known lens accommodation 
(change in the lens shape) may be absent in the mouse [47], the pupillary near reflex, 
adjusting the depth-of-focus to the target distance [49–51] may well be present [52].
Future work identifying genetic markers of the OND RGC and tracing its projections in the 
brain will be needed in order to establish its role in reporting image focus or in other 
functions.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Electrophysiology experiments were performed on retinas from wild-type mice presented 
with visual stimuli as described previously [16,22]. Methodological details, including data 
and image analysis and modeling can be found in Supplementary Experimental Procedures.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a Research to Prevent Blindness Career Development Award to G.W.S., by the 
National Institutes of Health / Director’s Fund and National Eye Institute grant DEY026770A to G.W.S., by a Karl 
Kirchgessner Foundation Vision Research Award to G.W.S., and by a Knights Templar Eye Foundation career 
starter grant to A.M. We deeply thank Susan L. Wohlgenant for technical support, Fred M. Rieke, Jon Cafaro, 
William N. Grimes, Michael B. Manookin, and Petri Ala-Laurila for reviewing earlier versions of this manuscript 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 10
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and providing critical feedback, and the Schwartz laboratory members for helpful discussions. The authors declare 
no conflict of interest.
References
1. Kuffler SW. Discharge patterns and functional organization of mammalian retina. J Neurophysiol. 
1953; 16:37–68. [PubMed: 13035466] 
2. Wässle H. Parallel processing in the mammalian retina. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004; 5:747–757. 
[PubMed: 15378035] 
3. Thoreson WB, Mangel SC. Lateral interactions in the outer retina. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2012; 
31:407–441. [PubMed: 22580106] 
4. Lukasiewicz DP. Synaptic mechanisms that shape visual signaling at the inner retina. Prog Brain 
Res. 2004; 147:205–218.
5. Münch TA, da Silveira RA, Siegert S, Viney TJ, Awatramani GB, Roska B. Approach sensitivity in 
the retina processed by a multifunctional neural circuit. Nat Neurosci. 2009; 12:1308–1316. 
[PubMed: 19734895] 
6. Hoggarth A, McLaughlin AJ, Ronellenfitch K, Trenholm S, Vasandani R, Sethuramanujam S, 
Schwab D, Briggman KL, Awatramani GB. Specific wiring of distinct amacrine cells in the 
directionally selective retinal circuit permits independent coding of direction and size. Neuron. 
2015; 86:276–291. [PubMed: 25801705] 
7. Zhang Y, Kim IJ, Sanes JR, Meister M. The most numerous ganglion cell type of the mouse retina is 
a selective feature detector. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2012; 109:E2391–E2398. [PubMed: 22891316] 
8. Ölveczky BP, Baccus SA, Meister M. Segregation of object and background motion in the retina. 
Nature. 2003; 423:401–408. [PubMed: 12754524] 
9. Dhande OS, Estevez ME, Quattrochi LE, El-Danaf RN, Nguyen PL, Berson DM, Huberman AD. 
Genetic Dissection of Retinal Inputs to Brainstem Nuclei Controlling Image Stabilization. J 
Neurosci. 2013; 33:17797–17813. [PubMed: 24198370] 
10. Gollisch T, Meister M. Eye Smarter than Scientists Believed: Neural Computations in Circuits of 
the Retina. Neuron. 2010; 65:150–164. [PubMed: 20152123] 
11. Sanes JR, Masland RH. The Types of Retinal Ganglion Cells: Current Status and Implications for 
Neuronal Classification. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2015; 38:221–246. [PubMed: 25897874] 
12. Baden T, Berens P, Franke K, Román Rosón M, Bethge M, Euler T. The functional diversity of 
retinal ganglion cells in the mouse. Nature. 2016; 529:345–50. [PubMed: 26735013] 
13. Kim T, Soto F, Kerschensteiner D. An excitatory amacrine cell detects object motion and provides 
feature-selective input to ganglion cells in the mouse retina. Elife. 2015; 4:6807.
14. Zhao X, Stafford BK, Godin AL, King WM, Wong KY. Photoresponse diversity among the five 
types of intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells. J Physiol. 2014; 592:1619–1636. 
[PubMed: 24396062] 
15. Dumitrescu ON, Pucci FG, Wong KY, Berson DM. Ectopic retinal ON bipolar cell synapses in the 
OFF inner plexiform layer: Contacts with dopaminergic amacrine cells and melanopsin ganglion 
cells. J Comp Neurol. 2009; 517:226–244. [PubMed: 19731338] 
16. Nath A, Schwartz GW. Cardinal Orientation Selectivity Is Represented by Two Distinct Ganglion 
Cell Types in Mouse Retina. J Neurosci. 2016; 36:3208–3221. [PubMed: 26985031] 
17. Sümbül U, Song S, McCulloch K, Becker M, Lin B, Sanes JR, Masland RH, Seung HS. A genetic 
and computational approach to structurally classify neuronal types. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:3512. 
[PubMed: 24662602] 
18. Völgyi B, Chheda S, Bloomfield SA. Tracer coupling patterns of the ganglion cell subtypes in the 
mouse retina. J Comp Neurol. 2009; 512:664–687. [PubMed: 19051243] 
19. Sivyer B, Vaney DI. Dendritic morphology and tracer-coupling pattern of physiologically identified 
transient uniformity detector ganglion cells in rabbit retina. Vis Neurosci. 2010; 27:159–170. 
[PubMed: 20854715] 
20. Tien NW, Pearson JT, Heller CR, Demas J, Kerschensteiner D. Genetically Identified Suppressed-
by-Contrast Retinal Ganglion Cells Reliably Signal Self-Generated Visual Stimuli. J Neurosci. 
2015; 35:10815–10820. [PubMed: 26224863] 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 11
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 21. Lee S, Zhang Y, Chen M, Zhou ZJ. Segregated Glycine-Glutamate Co-transmission from vGluT3 
Amacrine Cells to Contrast-Suppressed and Contrast-Enhanced Retinal Circuits. Neuron. 2016; 
90:27–34. [PubMed: 26996083] 
22. Jacoby J, Zhu Y, DeVries SH, Schwartz GW. An Amacrine Cell Circuit for Signaling Steady 
Illumination in the Retina. Cell Rep. 2015; 13:2663–2670. [PubMed: 26711334] 
23. Helmstaedter M, Briggman KL, Turaga SC, Jain V, Seung HS, Denk W. Connectomic 
reconstruction of the inner plexiform layer in the mouse retina. Nature. 2013; 500:168–174. 
[PubMed: 23925239] 
24. Masri RA, Percival KA, Koizumi A, Martin PR, Grunert U. Connectivity between the OFF bipolar 
type DB3a and six types of ganglion cell in the marmoset retina. J Comp Neurol. 2016; 524:1839–
1858. [PubMed: 26559914] 
25. Farrow K, Teixeira M, Szikra T, Viney TJ, Balint K, Yonehara K, Roska B. Ambient Illumination 
Toggles a Neuronal Circuit Switch in the Retina and Visual Perception at Cone Threshold. Neuron. 
2013; 78:325–338. [PubMed: 23541902] 
26. Gollisch T, Meister M. Rapid Neural Coding in the Retina with Relative Spike Latencies. Science 
(80-). 2008; 319:1108–1111.
27. Koch C, Poggio T, Torre V. Retinal ganglion cells: a functional interpretation of dendritic 
morphology. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci. 1982; 298:227–263.
28. Masland RH. The fundamental plan of the retina. Nat Neurosci. 2001; 4:877–886. [PubMed: 
11528418] 
29. Freed MA, Smith RG, Sterling P. Computational model of the on-alpha ganglion cell receptive 
field based on bipolar cell circuitry. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1992; 89:236–240. [PubMed: 1309606] 
30. Berntson A, Taylor WR. Response characteristics and receptive field widths of on-bipolar cells in 
the mouse retina. J Physiol. 2000; 524:879–889. [PubMed: 10790165] 
31. Schwartz GW, Okawa H, Dunn FA, Morgan JL, Kerschensteiner D, Wong RO, Rieke F. The spatial 
structure of a nonlinear receptive field. Nat Neurosci. 2012; 15:1572–1580. [PubMed: 23001060] 
32. Hille, B. Ion channels of excitable membranes. 3. 2001. 
33. Sivyer B, Van Wyk M, Vaney DI, Taylor WR. Synaptic inputs and timing underlying the velocity 
tuning of direction-selective ganglion cells in rabbit retina. J Physiol. 2010; 588:3243–3253. 
[PubMed: 20624793] 
34. Venkataramani S, Van Wyk M, Buldyrev I, Sivyer B, Vaney DI, Taylor WR. Distinct Roles for 
Inhibition in Spatial and Temporal Tuning of Local Edge Detectors in the Rabbit Retina. PLoS 
One. 2014; 9:e88560. [PubMed: 24586343] 
35. Manookin MB, Beaudoin DL, Ernst ZR, Flagel LJ, Demb JB. Disinhibition Combines with 
Excitation to Extend the Operating Range of the OFF Visual Pathway in Daylight. J Neurosci. 
2008; 28:4136–4150. [PubMed: 18417693] 
36. Eggers ED, Lukasiewicz PD. Interneuron circuits tune inhibition in retinal bipolar cells. J 
Neurophysiol. 2010; 103:25–37. [PubMed: 19906884] 
37. Eggers ED, Lukasiewicz PD. Multiple pathways of inhibition shape bipolar cell responses in the 
retina. Vis Neurosci. 2011; 28:95–108. [PubMed: 20932357] 
38. Zhang C, McCall MA. Receptor targets of amacrine cells. Vis Neurosci. 2012; 29:11–29. 
[PubMed: 22310370] 
39. Gütig R, Gollisch T, Sompolinsky H, Meister M. Computing Complex Visual Features with Retinal 
Spike Times. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e53063. [PubMed: 23301021] 
40. Bölinger D, Gollisch T. Closed-Loop Measurements of Iso-Response Stimuli Reveal Dynamic 
Nonlinear Stimulus Integration in the Retina. Neuron. 2012; 73:333–346. [PubMed: 22284187] 
41. Shapley RM, Victor JD. The effect of contrast on the transfer properties of cat retinal ganglion 
cells. J Physiol. 1978; 285:275–298. [PubMed: 745079] 
42. Berson DM, Dunn Fa, Takao M. Phototransduction by retinal ganglion cells that set the circadian 
clock. Science. 2002; 295:1070–1073. [PubMed: 11834835] 
43. Burge J, Geisler WS. Optimal defocus estimation in individual natural images. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 2011; 108:16849–16854. [PubMed: 21930897] 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 12
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 44. Umino Y, Solessio E, Barlow RB. Speed, Spatial, and Temporal Tuning of Rod and Cone Vision in 
Mouse. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:189–198. [PubMed: 18171936] 
45. Pardue MT, Stone RA, Iuvone PM. Investigating mechanisms of myopia in mice. Exp Eye Res. 
2013; 114:96–105. [PubMed: 23305908] 
46. Daw, NW. Visual Development. Boston, MA: Springer US; 2014. Visually Induced Myopia and 
Emmetropization BT - Visual Development; p. 217-229.
47. Schmucker C, Schaeffel F. A paraxial schematic eye model for the growing C57BL/6 mouse. 
Vision Res. 2004; 44:1857–1867. [PubMed: 15145680] 
48. Chakraborty R, Park HN, Hanif AM, Sidhu CS, Iuvone PM, Pardue MT. ON pathway mutations 
increase susceptibility to form-deprivation myopia. Exp Eye Res. 2015; 137:79–83. [PubMed: 
26072023] 
49. Kaufman, PL., Alm, A., Adler, FH. Adler’s Physiology of the Eye: Clinical Application. Mosby; 
2003. 
50. Beatty, J., Lucero-Wagoner, B. Handb Psychophysiol. 2. 2000. The pupillary system; p. 142-162.
51. Bando T, Takagi M, Toda H, Yoshizawa T. Functional roles of the lateral suprasylvian cortex in 
ocular near response in the cat. Neurosci Res. 1992; 15:162–178. [PubMed: 1341196] 
52. Pinto LH, Enroth-Cugell C. Tests of the mouse visual system. Mamm Genome. 2000; 11:531–536. 
[PubMed: 10886018] 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 13
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Light response and morphology of the OND RGC
(A) Light response of an OND RGC to a spot of light 200 μm in diameter, at 100 R*/rod/s 
presented from darkness (“Light Step”). Cell-attached spiking response in a single trial. 
Duration of stimulus presentation denoted by yellow rectangle here and elsewhere. (B) Peri-
stimulus time histogram (PSTH) for 10 representative OND RGCs responding to the light 
step stimulus, 10–20 trials each. (C) PSTH of spike activity in response to the light step 
stimulus in representative examples of 5 other RGC types computed from 10–20 trials each. 
ON DS, ON direction selective; ON OS, ON orientation selective; ON trans., ON transient; 
ON sus., ON sustained. (C) Spike raster showing individual trials of an OND RGC 
responding to light step. (E) Distribution of half-maximum latency in response to light step 
across a sample of 382 RGCs containing ON, non-direction selective cells. Vertical line, 
classifier of OND cells at latency = 0.3 s. Cells to the right of this line are OND cells 
(black), whereas cells to the left of this line are not (gray). (F) Top, maximum projection 
confocal image of an OND RGC. Color scale represents depth within the inner plexiform 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 14
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 layer (IPL). Red arrow points to axon stub (white). White arrows point to a recursive 
dendrite. Arrows below color scale denote IPL depth of the ON and OFF ChAT bands. 
Bottom, side view of the same cell, same scale (white) along with starburst amacrine cells 
and ChAT bands (red). (G) Dendritic density profile. IPL depth is in normalized coordinates 
where 0 and 1 correspond to the ON and OFF ChAT bands, respectively (red dashed lines). 
Gray lines, individual cells; Black, mean density ± SEM (n = 3 cells). (H) Equivalent 
diameter of the dendritic fields of the ON and OFF strata of OND RGCs (see Experimental 
Procedures). Empty circles, OND cells; filled symbol and error bars, mean ± SD. (n = 16 
cells). Dashed line is the line of equal ON and OFF dendritic diameters. See also Figures S1, 
S2.
Mani and Schwartz
Page 15
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Response latency and spike count as a function of stimulus size
(A) Spike count during stimulus presentation vs. spot diameter, normalized by its maximum 
(average ± SEM over cells within each group). Numbers of cells: OND n = 16, ON alpha, n 
= 4, ON direction-selective, n = 6, ON sustained, n = 13, ON transient, n = 9. (B) Half 
maximum latency vs. spot diameter (average ± SEM over cells within each group). (C) 
PSTH of an OND RGC (black), ON alpha RGC (green) and a ON direction-selective RGC 
(blue) in response to spots of different sizes. Spot sizes are denoted on the upper left of each 
row. From PSTHs, spike count and latency were extracted. Red triangles, half maximum 
latency for the OND PSTHs. See also Figure S3.
Mani and Schwartz
Page 16
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Stimulus size dependence of synaptic currents in OND RGCs and Leaky integrate-and-
fire model
(A) Total charge of excitatory (blue, n = 10 cells) and inhibitory (red, n = 11 cells) currents 
in OND RGCs, normalized by their maximum, as a function of spot diameter. Thin lines are 
individual cells, thick lines are mean ± SEM throughout figure. (B) Excitatory and inhibitory 
currents as a function of time, measured in an OND RGC for three different spot sizes, 
denoted above each panel (mean traces over 3 trials, same colors as in main figure). From 
current time traces, charge, latency and duration were extracted. (C) Latency of excitatory 
(blue) and inhibitory (red) response currents as a function of spot diameter. Inhibition was 
earlier than excitation: spot diameter ≥ 197 μm, p < 0.0013, one-tailed paired t-test. (D) 
Duration of excitatory (blue) and inhibitory (red) response as a function of spot diameter. 
Inhibition was more transient than excitation: spot diameter ≥ 197 μm, p < 0.0017, one-
Mani and Schwartz
Page 17
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tailed paired t-test. (n = 8 cells in (C, D)). (E) Excitatory (blue) and inhibitory (red) synaptic 
conductances in an OND RGC in response to a 200 μm diameter spot, obtained directly 
from measured synaptic currents (such as those in (B)), and fed into the leaky integrate-and-
fire model. (F) resulting simulated membrane potential, using conductances in (F). Dashed 
line is the spiking threshold. (G) Simulated PSTH for different spot diameters that are 
denoted on the left. Each PSTH was calculated from the spiking in 12 simulated trials. (H) 
Simulated spike count vs. spot diameter for three different OND cells (thin lines); thick line, 
average curve ± SEM. (I) Half max latency vs. spot diameter, measured for the same cells 
and simulated PSTHs as in (H). Thin line, individual cells, thick line, average ± SEM (n=3 
cells).
Mani and Schwartz
Page 18
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Stimulus size dependence of synaptic inhibitory currents of OND RGCs in the presence 
of synaptic blockers
(A) Charge of the inhibitory current in OND RGCs vs. spot diameter, in control condition 
(red, 8 cells), in the presence of gabazine blocking GABAA receptors (green, 4 cells), 
TPMPA blocking GABAC receptors (orange, 4 cells), strychnine blocking glycine receptors 
(grey, 3 cells), TPMPA+gabazine (purple, 3 cells), and strychnine+gabazine (black, 4 cells). 
(B) Duration of inhibitory current in OND RGCs vs. spot diameter, measured as the time the 
current was > 25% of its maximum value (see Experimental Procedures). Colors of curves 
are as in (A). Curves are mean ± SEM over cells in (A, B). (C) Traces of inhibitory current 
vs. time in OND cells, measured for two different spot sizes denoted above. Colors of traces 
are as in (A). Each trace is an average over three trials. (D) Diagram of circuit model to 
explain results in (A–C). AC = amacrine cell; neurotransmitters produced by ACs appear 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 19
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 next to somas. ‘A’, ‘C’ and ‘G’ are synapses containing GABAA, GABAc, and glycine 
receptors, respectively. See also Figure S4.
Mani and Schwartz
Page 20
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Responses of OND to light annuli with varying diameters
(A) Spike count during stimulus presentation (normalized by maximum) vs. inner diameter 
of a bright annulus of constant 60 μm width, shown for OND (black, n = 20 cells) and ON 
alpha RGCs (green, n = 6). Curves represent mean over cells ± SEM throughout figure. 
Maximum absolute numbers of spikes were 49 ± 2 and 98 ± 11 in OND and ON alpha 
RGCs, respectively. Vertical bars in (A, B) are dendritic diameters of OND and ON alpha 
(mean ± SD, OND cells, n = 18; ON alpha cells, n = 3). Stimulus schematics along with an 
OND cell are shown to scale below corresponding values on horizontal axis. Inset: PSTH for 
three different annulus inner diameters, denoted above. (B) Total charge of synaptic currents 
in OND RGCs vs. inner diameter of annuli, measured at a holding voltage of −68.6 mV 
(blue) and +11.4 mV (red) and normalized by their maximum. (−68.6 mV, 18 cells, +11.4 
mV, 15 cells). Inset: currents vs. time at holding voltages of −68.6 mV and +11.4 mV in an 
OND cell for three different annulus inner diameters, denoted above (mean traces over 3 
trials, colors as in main panel in (B)). (C) Charge caculated and normalized separately, for 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 21
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the outward (open symbols) and inward (closed symbols) components of the currents, at a 
holding voltage of +11.4 mV.
Mani and Schwartz
Page 22
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Current-voltage relationships in response to a spot and annulus
(A) Left, currents vs. time at different holding voltages in an OND RGC, in response to a 
center spot of light (200 μm, 200 R*/rod/s from dark). Right, same currents as on left panel, 
zoomed in on last 0.2 s of presentation of spot. Curves for some voltages were omitted for 
clarity. Horizontal black bar above panel, time of stimulus presentation. Dashed line, zero 
current. Vertical purple bars denote time points used in panel (C). (B) Currents vs. time at 
different holding voltages in an OND RGC, in response to a light annulus (400 μm inner 
diameter, 520 μm outer diameter, 200 R*/rod/s from dark; 7 cells). Vertical orange bar, time 
point used in panel (C). Insets in (A, B), light stimulus schematics. (C) Current vs. holding 
voltage curves (mean ± SEM, 7 cells) at time points 0.2 s (dark purple) and 0.9 s (light 
purple) in response to a center spot of light as in (A), as well as a similar curve taken at time 
point 0.9 s, in response to a light annulus as in (B). (D) Diagram of model for circuitry to 
explain the extra-dendritic current (B,C) and the elimination of it by blocking GABAA and 
GABAB receptors (Figure S5). See text. AC = amacrine cell; ‘A’, synapse containing 
GABAA, receptors; ‘B’, synapse containing GABAB receptors, providing tonic inhibition 
onto the OND RGC. See also Figure S5.
Mani and Schwartz
Page 23
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Response of OND to random textures with varying degrees of blur
(A) Full field textures, made with the same random seed and varying Gaussian blur. Denoted 
above each texture is the cutoff spatial scale (‘texture scale’, see text and Experimental 
Procedures). (B) PSTHs measured in an OND RGC in response to each corresponding 
spatial scale as in (A). Each PSTH was taken over 15–20 trials in response to different 
images having the same spatial scale. A texture was presented during the time between red 
dashed lines, and a uniform background having the same mean luminance (1000 R*/rod/s) 
was presented before and afterwards. (C) Spatial frequency content in textures. Relative 
power vs. spatial frequency (bottom horizontal axis) or spatial scale = (spatial frequency)−1 
(top axis). Curves are empirically measured averages over 500 texture patterns at each blur 
size. (D) Spike count during both stimulus onset and offset vs. texture scale, normalized by 
its maximum. Curves represent the average ± SEM over cells within each group. Numbers of 
Mani and Schwartz
Page 24
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells: OND, n = 6, ON alpha, n = 4, ON-OFF direction-selective, n = 3, ON transient, n = 5, 
OFF sustained, n = 4, OFF transient alpha, n = 4, ON sustained, n = 6. (E) Smallest texture 
scale for which the response reached 85% of its maximum for individual cells in (D) 
(average ± SEM within each group of cells). This value was the smallest for OND RGCs: 
relative to ON sustained RGCs, p < 0.05, and to all other groups, p < 0.01, one-tailed 
unpaired t-test.
Mani and Schwartz
Page 25
Curr Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 February 20.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
