 1
Title page
Full title
Stories of survival: Children’s narratives of psychosocial wellbeing following paediatric critical illness
or injury
Running head
Children’s stories of surviving critical illness
Authors
Joseph C. Manning
RN (Child), MNursSci (Hons), PhD
Clinical-Academic Senior Research Fellow in Children, Young People and Families Nursing
School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, The University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK; Children’s and Families Research, Centre for Technology Enabled Health Research,
Coventry University, Coventry, UK; Nottingham Children’s Hospital and Neonatal Services,
Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK
Pippa Hemingway
RGN/RSCN, BSc (Hons), PhD,
Assistant Professor in Nursing Children and Young People/Professional Lead for Child
 2
School of Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, The University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK
Sarah A. Redsell
RGN/RHV, BSc (Hons), PhD
Professor of Public Health
Faculty of Health, Social Care and Education, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK
Corresponding Author
Dr Joseph C. Manning, School of Health Sciences, Room B42, B-floor, Queen’s Medical Centre,
Nottingham, NG7 2HA. Email: joseph.manning@nottingham.ac.uk
Acknowledgements
The children and young people that took the time to participate in this study and generously told
their stories together with members of the study steering group who provided expert guidance.
Conflict of interest
No conflict of interest has been declared by the authors.
Funding
This research was conducted as part of JCMs’ doctoral studies through a Translational Research
Fellowship (2011-2014), which was co-funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)
and Nottingham University Hospitals NHS trust.
 1
Impact Statement

Approximately 1:1000 children, per annum, will experience a critical illness or injury, with the
overwhelming majority surviving this event. Children who survive critical illness can experience
a range of residual physical and psychosocial effects.

This paper offers novel insights, through the stories of childhood survivors of critical
illness/injury, into their long-term psychosocial wellbeing. This will generate awareness and
impart understanding to clinical staff, managers, and service commissioners.

Findings will prompt nurses and other health professionals to reflect on the relevance of the care
and support delivered to children with critical illness, which may generate changes to their
practice in supporting the child’s journey following critical illness.
 1 
Abstract 
Survival from critical illness can expose children to an array of negative physical and psychological 
problems.   While the perspective of parents and professionals have been well documented, there is 
limited understanding of how childhood critical care survivors make sense of their experiences in 
relation to psychosocial wellbeing.  We aimed to explore long-term psychosocial wellbeing of 
childhood survivors of critical illness through their stories.  A qualitative, exploratory study using 
serial in-depth interviews was employed.  Nine children (aged 6-15 years) were recruited to the 
study six to 14 months post-discharge from a Paediatric Intensive Care Unit.  Qualitative art-based 
methods were used with a responsive interviewing technique and data were analysed using 
Narrative Psychological Analysis. Four themes emerged: Disrupted lives and stories; survivors 
revealed uncertainties in their stories as they recalled their critical care event, Exposure to death and 
dying; talking about extreme physical vulnerability provoked anxieties, Mediating between different 
social worlds and identities; revealed the dynamic nature of survival, and Getting on with life; the 
prospective outlook survivors had on their existence despite newly manifesting adversities.  
Childhood survivors’ stories identify challenges and adversities that are faced when attempting to 
readjust to life following critical illness that both enhance and impair psychosocial wellbeing.   
Keywords: nurses, children, paediatric intensive care, survivors, narratives.
 2 
Introduction 
Childhood critical illness is caused by a wide variety of diseases and injuries but is characterised by a 
rapid loss of physiological reserve, which can result in significant morbidity or even death (Aylott, 
2010).  Due to advances in medicine, technology and care, mortality from critical illness is rare, with 
the majority of children admitted to the Paediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) being discharged alive 
(PICANet, 2016).   
Surviving a critical illness or injury in childhood has been recognised as exposing the child (0-18 years 
old) to a range of disease-, treatment-, and environmental-related traumas or harms that can have 
an impact on physical, functional and mental health outcomes (Manning et al., 2016).   However, 
despite high levels of survival, understanding children's outcomes and experiences following critical 
illness significantly lags behind medical advances (Dow et al., 2012).  Existing research in the field has 
predominantly focused on uni-dimensional aspects of children’s survival, by compartmentalising 
experience into either physical/functional (Ong et al., 2016), psychological (Rennick et al., 2011) or, 
in rare cases, social domains (Carnevale, 1997).  This literature has identified that negative 
psychological impact, such as posttraumatic stress and mood changes, has been associated with 
survivors in the immediate to short term (Rennick and Rashotte, 2009; Colville, 2008).  Furthermore, 
physical impairment and residual health problems manifest in the majority of survivors in both short 
and the longer term (Ong et al., 2016).  However, only a limited number of studies have explored the 
phenomena of surviving childhood critical illness using a qualitative approach.   
A systematic review and thematic synthesis of qualitative empirical studies (that included the 
following studies: Atkins et al., 2012; Wallace et al., 2007; Noyes, 2006), found that PICU survival can 
involve an array of adversities (Manning et al., 2014a).  This can emanate from biographical 
disturbances and the misalignment between a focus on the survivor’s ‘normal’ prior self and the 
reality of their potentially changed being.  Subsequently, children are reported to experience 
transformation in relation to their physical status as well as identity in an attempt to overcome the 
 3 
adversities that may be faced, such as disability, and chronic illness.  For some, this involves 
acquiring and exploring other people’s stories in an attempt to fill the missing picture of their time 
spend unconscious in PICU (Manning et al., 2014a).   
However, published literature to date, fails to provide a contemporary, comprehensive and 
contextualised understanding of how PICU survivors construct and experience psychosocial 
wellbeing in the long-term (Rennick and Rashotte, 2009).   Furthermore, the psychosocial 
trajectories of survivors following critical illness as reported by children themselves, and how they 
may change over time is unclear (Manning et al., 2014a).  Therefore the aim of this study was to 
explore childhood critical care survivors, from England, describe and experience long-term 
psychosocial wellbeing through their stories.   
Conceptual framework 
This study explored the narratives of child PICU survivors whose stories have been largely absent 
from previous literature in this field.  A child-centred approach was therefore adopted which views 
children as knowledgeable, interactive, social beings that influence and are influenced by their social 
world (Freeman and Mathison, 2009; Christensen and Prout, 2002).  In this study children were 
central, and involved in order to communicate their own views, experiences and needs (Carter and 
Ford, 2013).  Children were recognised as individuals that viewed and interpreted the world and 
their experiences through their own personal belief systems (Crotty, 1998).  In addition to 
recognising children as autonomous social actors, they were empowered to make decisions and 
choices about involvement, methods and conduct of the inquiry.  
 
 
 
 4 
Study design 
This qualitative, exploratory study was underpinned by a narrative approach.  A narrative approach 
congruent with the study’s interpretivist-constructionist orientation was adopted that did not seek 
historical accuracy, but instead focused on the meanings constructed, and reconstructed, in 
participants’ stories (Riessman, 2008; Polkinghorne, 1988).  Serial in-depth interviews were used to 
understand how patient experiences and needs changed and were re-storied over time.   
Materials and methods 
Sample 
As outlined in the study protocol (Manning et al., 2014b), PICU survivors were recruited using 
purposive sampling and were identified through retrospective screening of a local PICU admission 
database.  From 345 children, 32 were identified as eligible (using the inclusion/exclusion criteria, 
Table 1) and were invited to participate.  
Data collection 
Due to the diversity of the proposed sample (such as age, developmental level, and cognitive ability) 
a responsive interviewing technique was adopted (Rubin and Rubin, 2005).  Similar to how  Riessman 
(2008) conceptualises the narrative approach, responsive interviewing recognises the participant-
researcher as generating the story told.  Furthermore, it focuses on the depth of understanding and 
the researcher’s role in actively listening and adapting lines of inquiry from the unfolding narrative 
(Rubin and Rubin, 2005).     
In conjunction with responsive interviewing technique, child friendly art-based and visual 
approaches were also used to access experiences, views, and perceptions (Coad, 2007).  Specifically, 
photo-elicitation (Croghan et al., 2008) and graphic-elicitation (Campbell et al., 2010; Jolley et al., 
2004) techniques were used.  These open-ended approaches acted as a platform to discuss, evoke 
 5 
and explore participants’ feelings, experiences, and stories (Hurworth, 2003).  Each participant was 
given a digital camera and a box of art based equipment (including pencils, pens, and paper) to use 
and collect visual data during the study.  This was collected during and outside of the interview 
encounters to provide opportunity for the child to construct their narrative at time points significant 
to them.  Visual data collected included photographs, paintings, collage, drawings, writing and 
objects (such as toy or blanket).   
Data were collected from October 2012 to July 2013 with a follow-up period of six to 20 months 
post-PICU discharge.  All data collection visits were conducted by the lead author (JCM), a registered 
children’s nurse and researcher, who had had no prior involvement in participants’ clinical care.  
Data collection was predominantly conducted in participants’ homes or at a location of their choice, 
often with a family member present.  Interviews were audio recoded and individual photographs 
were taken of each visual piece produced.   Survivors created a total of 1200 minutes of audio data 
and 412 images over 26 data collection visits.   All bar one survivor (who withdrew from study after 
first interview) completed a series of three interviews over the six month data collection phase.   
Ethical considerations 
National Health Service (NHS) Research Ethics Committee (REC) permission was obtained from East 
Midlands REC (12/EM/0230), England.  As all participants were aged less than 16 years, parental 
informed consent was obtained.  In addition, assent was gained from each child prior to 
participation in the study as well as at each encounter with the researcher.   As advocated by Bray 
(2007), the assent process involved an interaction between the child and the primary researcher, 
where written, verbal and visual information was available and could be adapted to meet each 
child’s individual needs to enable them to make an informed decision.    
All visits were conducted with the parent present, or co-located in the house with parental 
permission.  At the end of the study, a debrief was conducted to provide an opportunity for 
participants to reflect on their involvement.  This also allowed primary researcher (JCM) to provide 
 6 
signposting to support if required.  Parents and family members were encouraged to participate in 
this debrief session to share their views and opinions about the study and to offer support to the 
child.  
Pseudonyms were used throughout the research and all identifiable information was redacted from 
the transcripts and visual images to maintain the participant anonymity. 
Data analysis 
Prolonged and in-depth analysis of the data was undertaken.    
Narrative psychological analysis (McAdams, 1993; Crossley, 2000) was employed which is an holistic-
content analytical approach.  This form of analysis aligns to an interpretivist-constructionist 
standpoint as it recognises reality as a product of one’s own creation; each individual sees, 
interprets, constructs, and re-stories the world and their experiences through personal belief 
systems (Crossley, 2000; Smith, 1995).  Subsequently,  this analytical approach attempts to gain 
insights into an individual’s psychological and social worlds through understanding the content and 
complexity of meanings produced in interview situations (Crossley, 2000).  As such audio data were 
transcribed verbatim (by JCM), with the visual images inserted into the transcript at the point of 
reference for Narrative Psychological Analysis to be undertaken.    
The analytical process involved five stages (summarised in Table 2).  Narrative Psychological Analysis 
was conducted by hand with each interview transcript.  The visual data was not analysed in isolation, 
but instead as part of the interview encounter.  Analysis focused on the story that accompanied the 
visual data and the meanings, experiences and insights that the child ascribed to it.  A table was then 
populated with the imagery, codes/themes generated from the analysis and excerpts from the 
transcripts to provide transparency to the reader.  From this table, the re-storied account was 
generated and written in full for each participant.   
 7 
Initial analysis was conducted by JCM, with PH and SAR reviewing the audit trail and interpretations 
through discussions and written feedback.    
Rigour 
Strategies were employed to enhance the credibility, dependability, and trustworthiness of this 
study.  All interviews were conducted and transcribed by JCM, a registered children’s nurse and at 
the time also a doctoral student.  It was perceived that continuity and prolonged engagement with 
the participants (over a six month period) enhanced parity and reciprocity during the encounters.  In 
order to explore the situationality of the researcher, comprehensive reflective notes were taken 
with particular focus on relational and performative reflexivity.   
Findings 
Nine survivors were recruited to participate in this study from a regional PICU located in England, 
UK.  Participants included six boys and three girls (aged 6-15 years) with characteristics outlined in 
Table 3.     
Analysis of survivor stories and life chapters resulted in four dominant themes 1) Disrupted lives and 
stories; 2) Exposure to death and dying; 3) Dealing with different social worlds and identities; and 4) 
Getting on with life, and 19 sub-themes (see Table 4).   
Disrupted lives and stories  
Disorder and disturbances featured in all survivor stories.  Disruptions manifested in both the 
content of survivors’ stories, such as imagery from life-events and experiences, as well as their 
performance during the interviews.  Across the majority of survivors, disturbances focused on pre-
disposing deterioration, critical illness and hospitalisation experiences.    
“well this is what I heard cause I couldn’t remember… he [Clare’s Friend] heard a big thud so he came 
back and seen me cause he had heard something so he came back at but I couldn’t remember this is 
 8 
what I have heard he came back then he had seen me tried I think he had tried to wake me up or 
something but couldn’t cause I had just passed out I couldn’t really wake up really so you know he 
tried to wake me up then he called my mum, he really yelled …you know I couldn’t remember 
anything, but that was a good thing cause I wouldn’t have wanted to be through all of that, so you 
know…”  
(Clare, 9 years old. Neuro-trauma)  
Confusion, doubts, and absences were a recurrent theme in the majority of these stories, emanating 
from what appeared to be a near total amnesia surrounding their critical illness event.  Survivors 
appeared to convey this disruption through omitting the event from their story or providing 
descriptions of absences, such as ‘I don’t know’, or openly admitting lack of memories.  However, 
despite amnesia, distress surrounding their critical illness also disrupted survivors’ stories in both the 
content and re-telling.  Distressing memories and thoughts manifested through fears and anxieties, 
which were associated with descriptions of events prior, during and post critical illness.  
Hallucinations, their transitions of care, and observations of other children and patients all 
contributed to disturbed imagery.  
“It was quite scary and like there was this, when I was first in, when they took me to hospital, there 
was an old lady on the ward and she was screaming and screaming, it sounded horrible, and that 
scared me….I get scared easier, easier now of like, I always, bad memory, bad thoughts not 
memories, of like, say I get a pain somewhere I’ll be like oh what’s this, it could be this, it could, oh 
wait it could be this really serious disease, oh no, and then I could die.  And I'm a lot more, I think 
about that a lot more now after I've been in hospital” 
 
(Mark, 12 years old. Respiratory) 
Partially formed stories and memories emanated from confusion or unknown events, states or 
experiences featured as disruption in the telling of their stories.  These were particularly evident if 
the survivor’s story did not align to that of someone else, such as a parent, which subsequently 
 9 
provoked self-doubt. Some survivors appeared reluctant to tell their story and instead avoided 
engaging with the PICU event.  However, for others being exposed to the telling of their story 
provoked negative emotions and adversity.   
“Mother: … when you woke up you were upset because the nurses and the doctors wanted to put a 
mask over your face…And because you didn’t have your implants in you couldn’t hear what the 
doctors and the nurses were saying.  You got fed up and upset cause you were crying because this 
mask was over you 
[insert figure 1] 
Andrew: [starts to cry]…Don’t, don’t…I don’t like you saying it [continuing to cry]”   
(Andrew, 6 year old. Neurological)  
Building their story and life from an unknown states, experiences and events featured in the 
majority of survivor stories.  Survivors situated their past, present and future imagery in their story 
around their critical illness, which for some meant brushing over it and, for others, neglecting it 
completely.  However, for other survivors, it was evident that they rebuilt their life and story 
through telling someone else’s narrative.  Other people’s stories were used to fill in the gaps of their 
own.  However, despite being armed with these narratives, undertones of confusion and 
incomprehension manifested.      
“I was pretty happy with it [my life before being critically ill], and it just was like a nice life, and I can’t 
remember much more… I can’t remember any more much.  Well I think my memory’s gone a little bit.  
If I went as far back as I went before my accident I couldn’t really remember what happened, last 
thing was just getting changed, and then couldn’t remember anything else.  And I can’t really 
remember which month you came on your last visit, so I think my memory’s actually gone a little 
bit….It makes me feel a bit sad.” 
   
 10 
(Ollie, 7 years old. Neurological) 
Thinking and talking about death and dying  
Thinking about death and dying featured in survivor’s stories, situated around the critical care 
experience.  It was from this event that survivors were exposed to their own mortality.  Recognition 
of their extreme physical vulnerability emanated through their descriptions and appeared to force 
survivors to attempt to navigate this imagery of their own exposure to death through reflection, 
sense-making processes, and dissociation.   
“…I went in coma for four days and I was 90% something nearly died, and my mum told me when I 
woke up, and they thought I had brain damage because I wake up late.  [I felt] sad yeah, but I don’t 
really like thinking about that, that I nearly died yeah.”  
(Katherine, 15 years old. Sepsis) 
However, for other survivors (such as Sarah), despite provoking negative imager, dissociation 
appeared challenging as it continued to occupy their thoughts and dreams.  
“Yes, because I just remembered how scared I was, and then I felt, I started to write it....I kept 
thinking that, about if it happened again, so I was quite upset then, and in my dream I actually did 
see one of them...Yeah, I saw one of them in my dream 
[insert Figure 2] 
Big black worry hole…It made me feel really rubbish…I was worrying about if it would happen again, 
or if it would stop me from breathing and I’d have to get intubated again. I cried about it in the 
night…Because she died.  Because I was poorly…My heart didn’t work properly…And grandma gave 
me her heart, best thing that ever happened to me.”   
(Sarah, 8 years old. Respiratory)  
 11 
Contemplation of death of self and others was strongly evident in four of the nine stories with 
consideration of the death of close others used as platforms to reflect on their own existence.  In 
some narratives this appears to enforce and exacerbate anxieties and fixations around their own 
mortality and the focus on the meta-physical beliefs.  Obvious grief and anger are evident through 
the narrative content and performance and are associated with the death events and how the 
information is disclosed.  Fears and anxieties were particularly prominent in stories where the critical 
illness was pivotal to disease diagnosis or a chronic health condition.  For some survivors, the recall 
and engaging with their own mortality provoked fixations and worries.  Their stories provided 
imagery of anxieties about their death and the potential of dying in the future.   
“...Not being able to live again, because you'll just be nothing, but that’s the only thing I worry about, 
if I'm going to die, but kind of been put at ease lately, because I guess I've gone back to school.  It 
was the holidays when I had a whole day to think about it, and now I'm at school for six hours, when I 
get home I do my homework, so I have stuff to do to occupy myself, so I'm not as worried about.  It’s 
only at night, but at night I just use my iPod for a bit, and that seems to put my mind at ease about 
it.”  
(Mark, 12 years old. Respiratory) 
Dealing with different social worlds and identities 
Dealing with different social worlds and identities was a theme that had high unity across survivors, 
with dynamic imagery of changing physical, psychological, emotional and social selves.  Identities 
appeared to be defined and redefined during the survivors’ stories.  Dynamic imagery was evident 
through transforming physical, emotional and social selves which could be attributed to both their 
childhood developmental trajectory, such as growth, exposure to new life events and experiences, 
but also their recovering physical and physiological selves and chronic illness or residual disability.   
 
 12 
Restrictions and social stigma were evident and were associated with physical and emotional health 
constraints, as well as protection from health professionals, family and friends.  For these survivors, 
restrictions were associated with constraining and impairing the evolution of their selves.   
“It’s like really, it wasn’t as good as it like used to be, it was like I, it’s like I can’t, when I run I can’t do 
too much balancing.”  
(Ollie, 7 years old. Neurological) 
Social stigma were apparent in a number of stories but particularly in the narratives of the older 
children. For some survivors’ open disclosure of stigma from peers was used to redefine themselves 
and social identities in order to enhance their own social capital.  Whereas other survivors’ self and 
social identities were defined by their fear of being stigmatised due to their health or psychological 
status. 
“…I've talked with some doctors (about being on intensive care).  I haven’t talked with my friends 
about it, not much because they’ll probably take the mick…They’re just like that…They don’t know 
much.  They just, they know I've got asthma but they don’t know how bad I am.’  
(Steve, 11 years old. Respiratory) 
Subsequently, some survivors actively concealed stories and identities from their social world in an 
attempt to protect themselves and others, such as their family.  In their stories survivors report 
withholding information or not broaching subjects in order to prevent upsetting or harming others.  
This is evident despite an eagerness for some to either harness the knowledge or disclose it in order 
to get help.   
Getting on with life  
 
The majority of survivors used an anti-nostalgic approach to conveying their story which was focused 
on their present and future and not their past.  Even though all survivors’ stories involved temporal 
 13 
events, focus was placed on the present and future tenses.   However, survivors used their life 
experiences to inform future aspirations and goals.  For some survivors, this appeared to inform a 
changed or transformed self, viewing their lives and selves from a different perspective.   
“I think I've changed a lot and I know how life works…Yeah I think I've changed, a lot of things have 
changed really,  and at school, you know, some children and some teachers, they all change; 
everything has all changed now… I've seen some people’s lives, how it is, you know, and what I've 
been through as well, so I've been suffering enough.  So I need to have a great life for my own 
things… all I do is doing my job.  To help some people in Africa, like here they don’t really know about 
bone marrows, they don’t do that in Africa; actually people die because they don’t do that, so maybe 
if I open something new for people in Africa that would be good to save children in Africa….Because I 
just want to do something different for people yeah.  After all this I've been through, it’s more 
important for me to do something for some people as well.  Because someone did something for me, 
so I want to do something for other people as well, like other person did for me.”  
(Katherine, 15 years old, Sepsis) 
However, for others, their experiences appeared to inform what they wanted or did not want from 
their future.  Their physically impaired selves’ post-PICU were not their desired transformation and 
they subsequently reported their wish to return to their prior ‘able’ selves.  In addition to residual 
physical, emotional, psychological and social adversities being reported by survivors, positive 
emotions and enhanced wellbeing were professed by the majority.  Emotional and psychological 
resilience was evident in the accounts of survivors, through imagery of determination and 
realignment of expectations being reported.  
“…well [I’m]  just happy that I got through it all of it and sometimes like just like wow cause like I had 
no clue what had happened to me it’s like waking up on intensive care and then mum saying Clare 
you’ve just done this to yourself [explaining how Clare had injured herself] and then just like wow 
 14 
…just looking back now it’s just like I’m just happy that I can you know stay here and be okay…Well I 
don’t know because it’s sort of different because there’s like how my life was before, then my 
accident happened, that was sort of a pause and then it just carried on as normal really.  And yeah, 
it’s all okay… So it was a bit weird but you just get over it and carry on really.”  
(Clare, 9 years old. Neuro-trauma) 
Furthermore, some survivors’ reported ambitions, aspirations and goals for their future lives that 
demonstrated their resilience and drive to overcome any adversity faced.   
“[insert figure 3] Well when I grow up I want to be a professional football player.  And my dad says I 
play really good at football.  At school I like to do big writing, and I play with my friends at playtime, I 
play games and football with them.” 
 
(Tim, 7 years old. Sepsis) 
Discussion 
Study findings identify that child PICU survivor stories of long-term psychosocial wellbeing are 
influenced, changed and determined by a multitude of factors.  Although this study explored 
constructions over a longitudinal period, clear delineation of stages of adaption or adjustment was 
not captured.  Lau and van Niekerk (2011) confirm this finding in their study on the experiences of 
burns survivors.  They report general themes inferring the phases experienced as opposed to a 
clearly-defined trajectory.  Similarly in this study, findings do not ‘fit’ cleanly into any of the pre-
defined theories that attempt to conceptualise the trajectory of survival.  Instead, children’s 
accounts were messy, chaotic and complex.   
Disturbances in relation to stories of illness align with the concept of biographical disruption (Bury 
(1982) which exposes individuals to disruption in relation to their social and practical selves.  Similar 
to the disruption identified from the findings of the systematic review and thematic synthesis 
 15 
(Manning et al., 2014a), sources of confusion and uncertainty emanated from amnesia of the critical 
illness event.  Colville et al. (2008) report that PICU survivors can experience a mixture of factual, 
delusional, fragmented, and absent memories at three months post critical illness.  Although 
memory coherence varied amongst the survivors in our study, confused and uncertain states 
appeared residual up to 20 months post-PICU event.  This could be partially explained by the 
mechanism of injury for three of the survivors, as they experienced a neurological insult, or from 
induced amnesia through pharmacological methods (Wagner et al., 1997).  However, irrespective of 
cause, amnesia appeared to impede some survivors in navigating their own biography and telling 
their story.  The navigation out of a disrupted state was negotiated by survivors through avoiding or 
suppressing a desire to engage with associated imagery leading to detachment or disassociation.  
Extensive dissociation from traumatic, unknown and damaging experiences has been observed in 
connection with dissociative disorders as well as in PTSD symptoms (Kenardy et al., 2007).   
In this study critical illness or injury exposed each survivor to potential death which provoked 
contemplation, sadness, and fear.  However, this does not appear to align to the existing literature 
conducted with children who have experienced near-death experiences (NDE) (Morse et al., 1986).  
Child reports of NDEs include out-of-physical-body sensations, viewing their own body from a 
vantage point, perception of darkness, travelling in a tunnel, and returning to their body (Morse et 
al., 1986).  However, none of these themes appeared significant in the survivor stories.  Instead the 
findings from this study indicate that it was contemplation on the critical illness event that appeared 
pivotal to survivors in recognising the severity of their condition and the subsequent vulnerability of 
their own existence.  Exposure to their own potential death appeared to challenge not only their 
identity but also situationality within the world.  Concepts of immortality were threatened, which 
appeared to provoke recognition of being different from peers.  Although metaphysical 
contemplation has not been previously associated in the literature with PICU survivors, adult 
intensive care survivors have been reported to experience a ‘spiritual awakening’ (Papathanassoglou 
and Patiraki, 2003).   
 16 
Findings identified that stigma conformed and re-formed survivors’ selves in relation to expected 
social norms and roles.  Social stigma and suffering have been reported by Carnevale (2007) in his 
study with children requiring long-term ventilation at home.  He applies Goffman’s (1963) Theory of 
Stigma, developed from published works on the experiences of people with disabilities, impairment, 
and mental illness.  Goffman (1963) asserts that society categorises people on the basis of normative 
expectations, thereby segregating the ‘normal’ from the ‘deviant’.  Based on this theory, Carnevale 
(2007) proposes that children living with disability and illness, and their families, experience stigma 
through disputes, isolation and distress. However, he notes that children navigate this stigma 
through the use of ‘passing strategies’ in attempts to appear normal to peers (Carnevale, 2007).  
Passing strategies in this context refer to social concealment (avoidance) of the residual effects of 
the critical illness which featured through forward-facing stories and lives that avoided the imagery 
of adversity.  This provoked disruption and mediation between public and family selves.  Even in 
survivors where passing strategies were not an option due to obvious visual effects of critical illness 
such as hemiplegia, mediation was evident.   
Prosperous constructions of psychological and social wellbeing emanated within and across all 
stories through positivity and hope.  This could be explained by the potential therapeutic value of 
narratives.  Telling a story is a way for people ‘to gradually succeed in freeing themselves from the 
dominance of oppressive, problem-saturated life stories’ (Neimeyer, 2000: , p. 234) and replace 
them with more constructive ones.  However, hope and positivity associated with accounts of PICU 
survivors have been largely omitted from the existing literature.  This is unsurprising as the dominant 
lens used to explore PICU survival has problematised or pathologised the phenomenon.  However, 
having a strong positive outlook is recognised in the wider health literature as a mechanism for 
coping with stress or crisis (Walsh, 2003).  Hope, or related concepts such as optimistic bias or 
positive illusions, have been recognised as influential in dealing with adversity (Walsh, 2003; Taylor 
et al., 2000).  In relation to children’s stories, hope has been associated with accounts of home-
ventilated children (Earle et al., 2006).  Findings from a Canadian qualitative multiple-case study, 
 17 
found that, despite children encountering ongoing challenges, they remained focused on positive 
aspects of their life, affiliating their future with hope of ‘becoming someone’ (Earle et al., 2006: , p. 
278).  Similarly, this study highlights that children focus on the future in a manner that appears 
driven by the desire to resume normality. 
Strengths and limitations 
Key strengths of this study include: the longitudinal engagement in data collection and gaining 
different child perspectives of the phenomena of interest; and that children were actively involved in 
the development, design, and data collection approaches employed.  
However, the study does have a number of limitations.  Information pertaining to those who chose 
not participate in the study was not collected and, therefore, comparisons with those who did 
participate cannot be made.  Furthermore, the sample lacked diversity in relation to ethnicity, 
potentially because of the absence of resources to translate information into languages other than 
English.  Moreover, male PICU survivors and those who experienced neurological conditions were 
highly represented.  Collectively, as individuals’ meanings are informed by time, gender, culture and 
situationality, this lack of diversity in the sample could limit insights.   
Conclusion and recommendations 
For the first time, this study has captured longitudinal stories from a heterogeneous group of nine 
child PICU survivors, six to 20 months post-discharge.  Through maintaining the centrality of the 
inquiry on the survivors, novel understanding of long-term psychosocial wellbeing within the context 
of their lives has been illuminated.  Survivor stories involved complex, dynamic and inter-related 
identities and constructs that were inextricably linked to biographical and social worlds.  Vibrant 
imagery of life events and contextual factors such as positivity and hope, death of others, and 
educational issues featured.  Through longitudinal and concurrent engagement with survivors, 
 18 
findings have revealed previously unreported residual and newly-manifesting prosperities and 
adversities in this group.   
The PICU experience featured in all survivor stories.  Congruent with the variance of outcomes 
reported in the existing literature, the significance of the PICU event in informing long-term 
psychosocial wellbeing varied considerably between survivors.  However, survivor biographies 
appeared significant in governing wellbeing as pre-existing health problems and other life events, 
especially traumas, appeared to dictate the significance of the critical illness.   
In contrast to the reports of the negative consequences of survival that dominate the existing 
literature, positive descriptions, meanings and metaphors prevailed within the majority of survivor 
stories.  Hope and quests to be normal were posed, even in traumatic accounts, which constructed 
resilient survivor identities.  Within each story, these polarised descriptions appeared to oscillate 
between the fore- and back-ground, influenced by perceived relevance to the survivor at the time of 
telling.   
It is evident that further exploratory, longitudinal research is warranted in order to comprehensively 
map children’s journeys of psychosocial well-being following critical illness/injury.  This will allow for 
processes and influences involved in mediating psychosocial well-being to be identified.  In turn, this 
will provide a platform for interventions to be developed, implemented and tested that can support 
and optimise survivors’ psychosocial well-being in the longer-term following critical illness or injury.   
 
 
 19 
References 
Atkins E, Colville G and John M. (2012) A ‘biopsychosocial’ model for recovery: A grounded theory 
study of families’ journeys after a Paediatric Intensive Care Admission. Intensive and Critical Care 
Nursing 28(3): 133-140. 
Aylott M. (2010) Caring for children with critical illness. In: Glasper EA and Richardson J (eds) A 
Textbook of Children and Young People’s Nursing 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier, 691-718. 
Bray L. (2007) Developing an activity to aid informed assent when interviewing children and young 
people. Journal of Research in Nursing 12(5): 447-457. 
Bury M. (1982) Chronic illness as biographical disruption. Sociology of Health & Illness 4(2): 167-
182. 
Campbell C, Skovdal M, Mupambireyi Z, et al. (2010) Exploring children's stigmatisation of AIDS-
affected children in Zimbabwe through drawings and stories. Social Science & Medicine 71(5): 975-
985. 
Carnevale FA. (1997) The experience of critically ill children: narratives of unmaking. Intensive and 
Critical Care Nursing 13(1): 49-52. 
Carnevale FA. (2007) Revisiting Goffman’s Stigma: the social experience of families with children 
requiring mechanical ventilation at home. Journal of Child Health Care 11(1): 7-18. 
Carter B and Ford K. (2013) Researching children's health experiences: The place for participatory, 
child-centered, arts-based approaches. Research in Nursing & Health 36(1): 95-107. 
Christensen P and Prout A. (2002) Working with ethical symmetry in social research with children. 
Childhood 9(4): 477-497. 
Coad J. (2007) Using art-based techniques in engaging children and young people in health care 
consultations and/or research. Journal of Research in Nursing 12: 487-497. 
Colville G. (2008) The Psychologic Impact on Children of Admission to Intensive Care. Pediatric 
Clinics of North America 55(3): 605-616. 
Colville G, Kerry S and Pierce C. (2008) Children's factual and delusional memories of intensive care. 
American Journal of Respiratory Critical Care Medicine 177(9): 976-982. 
Croghan R, Griffin C, Hunter J, et al. (2008) Young People's Constructions of Self: Notes on the Use 
and Analysis of the Photo-Elicitation Methods. International Journal of Social Research Methodology 
11(4): 345-356. 
Crossley ML. (2000) Introducing narrative psychology: Self, trauma, and the construction of 
meaning: Open University Press Buckingham. 
 20 
Crotty M. (1998) The Foundations of Social Research: Meaning and Perspective in the Research 
Process, London: Sage. 
Dow B, Kenardy J, Long D, et al. (2012) Children's post-traumatic stress and the role of memory 
following admission to intensive care: A review. Clinical Psychologist 16(1): 1-14. 
Earle RJ, Rennick JE, Carnevale FA, et al. (2006) ‘It's okay, it helps me to breathe’: the experience of 
home ventilation from a child's perspective. Journal of Child Health Care 10(4): 270-282. 
Freeman M and Mathison S. (2009) Researching Children's Experiences, New York: The Guilford 
Press. 
Goffman E. (1963) Stigma, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 
Hurworth R. (2003) Photo-interviewing for research. Social Research Update (Spring) 40: 1-4. 
Jolley RP, Fenn K and Jones L. (2004) The development of children's expressive drawing. British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology 22(4): 545-567. 
Kenardy J, Smith A, Spence SH, et al. (2007) Dissociation in children's trauma narratives: An 
exploratory investigation. Journal of Anxiety Disorders 21(3): 456-466. 
Lau U and van Niekerk A. (2011) Restorying the Self: An Exploration of Young Burn Survivors’ 
Narratives of Resilience. Qualitative Health Research 21(9): 1165-1181. 
Manning JC, Hemingway P and Redsell SA. (2014a) Long‐term psychosocial impact reported by 
childhood critical illness survivors: a systematic review. Nursing in Critical Care 19(3): 145-156. 
Manning JC, Hemingway P and Redsell SA. (2014b) Protocol for a longitudinal qualitative study: 
survivors of childhood critical illness exploring long-term psychosocial well-being and needs—The 
SCETCH Project. BMJ Open 4(1). 
Manning JC, Redsell SA and Latour JM. (2016) Should out of sight mean out of mind? Challenging 
the role of paediatric intensive care in understanding and supporting children and families following 
childhood critical illness. Nurs Crit Care 21(5): 262-264. 
McAdams DP. (1993) The stories we live by: Personal myths and the making of the self: Guilford 
Press. 
Morse M, Castillo P, Vanecia D, et al. (1986) Childhood near-death experiences. American Journal of 
Diseases in Children 140(11): 1110-1114. 
Neimeyer RA. (2000) Narrative Disruptions in the Construction of Self. In: Neimeyer RA and Raskin 
JD (eds) Constructions of Disorder: Meaning-making Frameworks for Psychotherapy. London: 
American Psychological Association, 207-242. 
Noyes J. (2006) Health and quality of life of ventilator-dependent children. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing 56(4): 392-403. 
 21 
Ong C, Lee JH, Leow MK, et al. (2016) Functional Outcomes and Physical Impairments in Pediatric 
Critical Care Survivors: A Scoping Review. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine 17(5): e247-e259. 
Papathanassoglou EDE and Patiraki EI. (2003) Transformations of self: a phenomenological 
investigation into the lived experience of survivors of critical illness. Nursing in Critical Care 8(1): 
13-21. 
PICANet. (2016) November 2016 Annual Report: Summary Report, Leeds: Universities of Leeds and 
Leicester. 
Polkinghorne DE. (1988) Narrative knowing and the human sciences, Albany: State University of 
New York Press. 
Rennick JE, Johnston CC, Lambert SD, et al. (2011) Measuring psychological outcomes following 
pediatric intensive care unit hospitalization: Psychometric analysis of the Children's Critical Illness 
Impact Scale. Pediatric Critical Care Medicine 12(6): 635-642. 
Rennick JE and Rashotte J. (2009) Psychological outcomes in children following pediatric intensive 
care unit hospitalization: a systematic review of the research. Journal of Child Health Care 13(2): 
128-149. 
Riessman CK. (2008) Narrative Methods for the Human Sciences, London: Sage Publications, Inc. 
Rubin H and Rubin I. (2005) Qualitative interviewing: The art of hearing data, London: SAGE. 
Smith JA. (1995) Semi-structured interviewing and qualitative analysis. In: Smith J, Hare R and Van 
Lagenhove L (eds) Rethinking methods in psychology. London: SAGE, 9-26. 
Taylor SE, Kemeny ME, Reed GM, et al. (2000) Psychological resources, positive illusions, and 
health. American Psychologist 55(1): 99-109. 
Wagner B, O'Hara D and Hammond J. (1997) Drugs for amnesia in the ICU. American Journal of 
Critical Care 6(3): 192-201. 
Wallace M, Harcourt D and Rumsey N. (2007) Adjustment to appearance changes resulting from 
meningococcal septicaemia during adolescence: a qualitative study. Developmental 
neurorehabilitation 10(2): 125-132. 
Walsh F. (2003) Family resilience: A framework for clinical practice Family Process 42(1): 1-18. 
 
 Figure 1: Andrew’s self-portrait
 Figure 2: Sarah’s worry holes
 Figure 3: Tim’s future
 1
Table 1: Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria
Children aged between 6 - 18 years
PICU admission due to child protection issues
Survived emergency admission to PICU
On an active end of life care pathway
Invasively intubated and ventilated for at
least 24 hours whilst on PICU
Non-English speaking
Three to 12 months since discharge from
PICU
Consents/assents to participate in study
 1
Table 2: The stages of Narrative psychological analysis
Stage
Description of processes
1. Reading and
familiarising
 This preliminary stage, also referred to as ‘naïve reading’, involved
repeatedly reading through the whole transcript (about five or six times) in
order to familiarise oneself with the material, enabling a general gist of
emerging and significant themes (Crossley 2000)
 This process is reported to allow the researcher to immerse himself in the
content and take note of the atmosphere of the interview.
2. Identifying
important
concepts to look
for.
 This step involves establishing the principal elements of the ‘personal
narrative’. Narrative analysis takes note of the detail within the text, as well as
emerging themes.
 Whilst much of this attention to detail has been developed through
conversation analysis (the pauses and silences), the specific use of language
will be equally as important. (Crossley 2000)
3. Identifying
‘narrative tone’.
 McAdams (1995), McAdams (1993) identifies narrative tone as the most
pervasive feature of biographical narratives. Tone is conveyed in both the
content and the form of narratives. (Crossley 2000)
 This step focuses on what made up the story (e.g. events) and how this is
portrayed (e.g. optimism / sorrow / despair).
4. Identifying
‘imagery’ and
‘themes’.
 This step involves identifying imagery (such as metaphors, descriptions and
actual images) and dominant themes that demonstrate the significance and
mechanisms that surround important events reported in the narrative.
 These are mapped in relation to six aspects of the narrative: life chapters; key
events; significant people; future script; current problems; and personal
ideology. (Crossley 2000)
5. Weaving it all
together.
 The final step is the ‘re-storying’ of the participant’s narrative.
 2
 This stage re-integrates the components of the holistic-content analysis of
verbal and visual stories into a coherent story.
 This is more than description and development of themes as found in other
qualitative approaches (Ollerenshaw and Creswell 2002) as “re-storying” from
original raw data involves: co-constructing the data, transcribing, reading the
transcript, analysing the story to understand the lived experiences, and then
retelling the story (Clandinin and Connelly 2000, Ollerenshaw and Creswell
2002).
 1
Table 3: Study participant characteristics and data collection
Survivor
pseudonym
Gender
Age
Ethnicity
Household
composition
Reason for
PICU
admission
ICD-101
Time
since
critical
illness at
consent
(months)
Time since
critical
illness at
final data
visit
(months)
Underlying
medical
condition
Receipt
of
ongoing
care
Number of
data
collection
visits
Total audio
data
(minutes)
Total
visual data
(images)
Tim
Male
7
White
British
Mother,
Father and
Sister
Sepsis
11
17
No
No
3
83
27
Sarah
Female
8
White
British
Mother
Respiratory
6
12
No
Yes
3
189
44
James
Male
12
White
British
Mother and
Brother
Neurological
11
17
Yes
Yes
4
241
157
Clare
Female
9
White
British
Mother,
Father and
two Sisters
Neuro-
trauma
7
13
No
No
3
120
75
Steve
Male
11
White
British
Mother and
two Sisters
Respiratory
12
18
Yes
Yes
3
113
30
1 ICD-10 (international classification of diseases 10) of disease that resulted in PICU admission as defined by the childhood survivor or their parent.
 2
Katherine
Female
15
Black
African
Mother and
Brother
Sepsis
13
19
Yes
Yes
3
131
25
Andrew
Male
6
White
British
Mother,
Father and
Brother
Neurological
6
-
Yes
Yes
1
53
6
Mark
Male
12
White
British
Mother,
Father and
Brother
Respiratory
14
20
Yes
Yes
3
116
9
Ollie
Male
7
White
British
Mother,
Father and
Brother
Neurological
11
17
No
Yes
3
154
39
 1
Table 4: Themes and sub-themes
Theme
Sub-theme
1. Disrupted lives and
stories
Confusion, doubts or just missing
Distressing memories and thoughts
Story too distressing to revisit
Reluctant to re-tell story
Building my life from an unknown story
Telling someone else’s story
2. Exposed to death and
dying
Contemplating the death of others
Death-provoking fixations and worries
Trying to make sense of own near death experience
Surviving through avoidance
3. Dealing with
different social worlds
and identities
Evolving self and social identities
Critical illness identity linked to chronic illness identity
Protecting others through concealment
Family supporting transitions
Restriction and social stigma
4. Getting on with life
Focused on now and my future, not on the past
Life challenges and future calibrated by own life story
Determined to achieve
Positive emotions and enhanced well-being
