 Mao et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao2586 (2018)     13 June 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
1 of 8
INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Probiotic strains detect and suppress cholera in mice
Ning Mao1,2,3,4*, Andres Cubillos-Ruiz1,2,3*, D. Ewen Cameron1*†, James J. Collins1,2,3‡
Microbiota-modulating interventions are an emerging strategy to promote gastrointestinal homeostasis. Yet, 
their use in the detection, prevention, and treatment of acute infections remains underexplored. We report the 
basis of a probiotic-based strategy to promote colonization resistance and point-of-need diagnosis of cholera, an 
acute diarrheal disease caused by the pathogen Vibrio cholerae. Oral administration of Lactococcus lactis, a com-
mon dietary fermentative bacterium, reduced intestinal V. cholerae burden and improved survival in infected in-
fant mice through the production of lactic acid. Furthermore, we engineered an L. lactis strain that specifically 
detects quorum-sensing signals of V. cholerae in the gut and triggers expression of an enzymatic reporter that is 
readily detected in fecal samples. We postulate that preventive dietary interventions with fermented foods con-
taining natural and engineered L. lactis strains may hinder cholera progression and improve disease surveillance 
in populations at risk of cholera outbreaks.
INTRODUCTION
Cholera is a life-threatening gastrointestinal infection that princi-
pally affects populations where basic sanitation and healthcare are 
insufficient (1). Severe dehydration from cholera can lead to death 
within hours if treatment is not provided promptly. Strengthening 
surveillance and early identification of cholera cases are top priori-
ties of the World Health Organization for the prevention of cholera 
outbreaks. Therefore, implementation of cost-effective measures that 
prevent disease progression—from initial infection to active disease 
and dissemination—is urgently needed. Microbiota interventions 
have been used to treat or alleviate a variety of gastrointestinal dis-
orders (2, 3). In the case of cholera, it has been demonstrated that 
natural members of the human microbiome can reduce coloniza-
tion of Vibrio cholerae in gnotobiotic mice through interference of 
the pathogen’s quorum-sensing signaling (4). Furthermore, engi-
neered probiotics have been used to interfere with bacterial com-
munication to suppress virulence (5), or to compete with intestinal 
receptor binding to the cholera toxins (6). Laboratory strains of 
Escherichia coli have also been engineered for the detection 
of V. cholerae signals under culture conditions (7). However, the 
demonstration of the in vivo functionality of engineered V. cholerae 
detection systems in safely consumed, gut-relevant bacteria is lacking.
Food-associated bacteria play a central role in the function and 
health of the gastrointestinal tract (8). High doses of ingested, live 
bacteria can create a microbiota shift that allows transient modula-
tion of the human intestinal microenvironment (8), a phenomenon 
that can be leveraged to reduce pathogen colonization (9) and en-
able in situ diagnosis at an early stage of infection. We hypothesized 
that dietary-associated bacteria with natural infection-antagonizing 
properties could be identified, applied, and further enabled with en-
gineered diagnostic functions to ameliorate the impact of cholera 
and facilitate disease surveillance in populations at risk of infection.
RESULTS
Promoting colonization resistance against V. cholerae with 
Lactococcus lactis
L. lactis is a food-associated lactic acid bacterium that has been safe-
ly consumed for millennia as part of fermented milk products (10). 
This bacterium displays strong acidification capabilities that stem 
from its high carbon flux metabolism, which is optimized for the 
conversion of simple carbohydrates into lactic acid (11, 12). Given 
that V. cholerae is known to be particularly sensitive to acidic con-
ditions (13) and that both L. lactis and V. cholerae find temporary 
residence in the small intestine (14, 15), we sought to determine 
whether L. lactis could be used to promote intestinal colonization 
resistance against V. cholerae through the production of lactic acid. 
Initial in vitro agar diffusion and liquid coculture assays showed 
that L. lactis could effectively antagonize V. cholerae growth (Fig. 1, 
A and B, and figs. S1 and S2). The L. lactis antibacterial effect on 
V. cholerae was abolished when lactic acid production was impaired 
by mutation of the lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) gene or when the pH 
of the coculture was strongly buffered (Fig. 1, A and B). These re-
sults indicate that lactic acid, a major product of L. lactis metabo-
lism, is a V. cholerae–antagonizing agent (figs. S2 and S3).
We next used an infant mouse model of cholera infection to test 
the ability of L. lactis to enhance colonization resistance against 
V. cholerae (5, 16). We evaluated the intestinal transit dynamics of 
L. lactis in the infant mouse model and determined that dosing 109 
colony-forming units (CFU) of L. lactis cells every 10 hours ensures 
its sustained presence in the mouse small intestine (fig. S4). Four-
day-old mice were inoculated with 107 CFU of V. cholerae either at 
the same time (coadministration regimen) or 5 hours after the first 
L. lactis dose (preadministration regimen), and host survival was 
monitored for the next 42 hours (Fig. 2A). We found that V. cholerae– 
infected mice were substantially more likely to survive when they 
were coinoculated with L. lactis (84.6%) compared to when they 
were mock-fed (45.7%) (Fig. 2B). Three independent trials showed 
that the improved survival is not affected by litter variation (fig. S5). 
Mouse survival was comparable for the coadministration and pre-
administration regimens, indicating that the L. lactis dietary inter-
vention provides protection against V. cholerae infection within the 
10-hour window between the probiotic doses (Fig. 2B). Furthermore, 
in the coadministration regimen, the V. cholerae burden in L. lactis–
fed mice was reduced by about 100-fold compared to that in 
1Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Department of Biological Engineer-
ing, and Synthetic Biology Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 2Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA. 3Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard Uni-
versity, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 4Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston 
University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Present address: Flagship Pioneering, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
‡Corresponding author. Email: jimjc@mit.edu
Copyright © 2018 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim  
to original U.S. 
Government Works. 
Distributed under a 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License 4.0 
(CC BY).
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Mao et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao2586 (2018)     13 June 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
2 of 8
mock-treated mice at 26 hours after infection (Fig. 2C). We found that 
the V. cholerae load correlates with the infection outcome (Fig. 2C). 
Regardless of the probiotic intervention, mice that died from cholera 
have V. cholerae developed to 109 CFU in the gut; the ones that survived 
until the end of study had lower than 108 CFU. This correlation be-
tween reduced V. cholerae burden and mouse survival includes mice 
that were not fed L. lactis (Fig. 2C), further suggesting that L. lactis 
assists in mouse survival through reduced V. cholerae colonization. 
These findings indicate that a regular feeding regimen of L. lactis 
can prevent the aggressive development of cholera by limiting the 
bacterial burden to nonlethal concentrations in infant mice.
To further investigate the involvement of L. lactis lactic acid pro-
duction in the reduction of V. cholerae burden in vivo, we measured 
the intestinal lactate levels during V. cholerae mouse infections. At 
26 hours after infection, mice that were fed L. lactis exhibited in-
creased levels of lactate in the gut compared to mice that had been 
mock inoculated (Fig. 2D). When the lactate dehydrogenase mutant 
strain of L. lactis was used, the protective effect against V. cholerae 
infection disappeared (Fig. 2E). Abolishing lactate dehydrogenase 
function reroutes carbon flux toward mixed acid fermentation path-
ways and results in a slower growth rate (fig. S6), an effect that 
might also contribute to its reduced protective effect in vivo. Genet-
ic complementation with plasmid-encoded ldh restored both the 
strain’s growth rate and acidification capabilities, and consequently 
its protective function in vivo (Fig. 2E and fig. S6). As expected, 
when heat-inactivated cells were used instead of live L. lactis, the 
survival rate of the treated mice was similar to the mock-fed group, 
indicating that metabolically active L. lactis are needed for effective 
protection (Fig. 2F). These findings suggest that in situ production 
of lactic acid by metabolically active bacteria inhibits V. cholerae 
colonization and is essential for L. lactis to provide the observed 
protective effect.
To investigate the effect of direct intake of lactic acid on V. cholerae 
intestinal colonization, we performed oral gavage of lactic acid into 
V. cholerae–infected infant mice and observed a reduction of path-
ogen load similar to the treatment with L. lactis in 62.5% of the 
mice, whereas the rest of the litter showed a colonization akin to the 
mock-treated control (fig. S7). These results indicate that although 
direct administration of lactic acid to the gastrointestinal tract can 
be sufficient to recapitulate the effect of L. lactis in the reduction of 
V. cholerae colonization, it is not as effective as the dietary interven-
tion with live bacteria. Orally administered lactic acid is susceptible 
to neutralization during translocation from the stomach into the 
C
D
E
F
A
B
Co
(hours)
(hours)
Survival
Survival
Fig. 2. L. lactis–derived lactic acid antagonizes V. cholerae infection in mice. 
(A) Intragastric feeding regimens of L. lactis and inoculation time of V. cholerae to 
infant mice. Mock-fed mice were administered GM17 medium instead of L. lactis. 
(B) Effects of L. lactis intervention on infant mouse survival to cholera infection un-
der both feeding regimens. Coadministration with V. cholerae, ***P = 0.0005; pre-
administration, *P = 0.0187, log-rank test against mock-fed (V). V: n = 37, N = 6; V + L, 
coadmin: n = 39, N = 6; V + L, preadmin: n = 19, N = 6. (C) Effect of L. lactis interven-
tion on V. cholerae colonization in the infant mouse gut. (C) Left: V. cholerae intesti-
nal colonization at 26 hours after infection. Right: V. cholerae burden in mice that 
died from cholera and in mice that survived the infection by 42 hours after infec-
tion. Each data point represents an individual mouse. Horizontal lines are medians. 
P values from Mann-Whitney test (n = 7, N = 7 for nontreated/treated; n = 11, N = 7 
for dead versus survived, respectively). Data correspond to coadministration regi-
men. (D) Intestinal lactate concentration in L. lactis–treated and mock-treated 
infant mice at 26 hours after infection. Mann-Whitney test (n = 7, N = 7). Data cor-
respond to coadministration regimen. (E) Effects of lactate dehydrogenase mutant 
(ldh) and plasmid-complemented lactate dehydrogenase (ldh pLDH) L. lactis 
strains on infant mouse survival to cholera infection. Functional knockout of lactate 
dehydrogenase compromises the protective effect against cholera (n = 20, N = 6). 
ns, not significant by log-rank test compared to mock treatment (V). Complemen-
tation with a plasmid-based ldh restores the protective effect (*P = 0.0349, log-rank test; 
n = 9, N = 3). (F) Effect of treatment with heat-inactivated L. lactis on infant mice 
survival to cholera infection. n = 10, N = 3. n, number of individual mice; N, number 
of litters covered in each group.
A
B
Fig. 1. Lactic acid–dependent antibacterial effect of L. lactis against V. cholerae 
in vitro. (A) Top: Agar diffusion assay of wild-type (WT), lactate dehydrogenase 
mutant (ldh), and plasmid-complemented lactate dehydrogenase mutant ldh 
(pLDH) strains of L. lactis grown on a lawn of V. cholerae. Bottom: Agar diffusion as-
say of L. lactis strains in minimally buffered GM17 agar plates containing pH indica-
tor bromocresol purple, which turns yellow when pH drops below 5.2. Inhibition 
zones correlate with the acidification range of L. lactis colonies. (B) Acidification 
dynamics and V. cholerae cell density in coculture with L. lactis in minimally buff-
ered media and strongly buffered media (+buffer). For detailed media conditions, 
see Materials and Methods and fig. S2. Bars represent range of technical duplicates.
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Mao et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao2586 (2018)     13 June 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
3 of 8
upper small intestine; in contrast, in 
situ production of lactic acid by transit-
ing L. lactis cells allows a direct supply 
of acid that is independent of upstream 
gastrointestinal pH changes.
Higher gastrointestinal pH increases 
the susceptibility to V. cholerae infection 
in humans, especially due to the use of 
acid-suppressing drugs such as proton 
pump inhibitors (17). We evaluated the 
effect of the L. lactis intervention on 
V. cholerae–infected infant mice when 
oral gavage is performed using media 
buffered to pH 7.4 (fig. S8). We found 
that under acid-neutralizing conditions, 
the survival of mock-treated mice was 
reduced to 11%, whereas the survival of 
L. lactis–treated mice was 50.8%, which 
suggests that probiotic intervention might 
ameliorate the impact of the disease 
even under conditions of increased sus-
ceptibility of infection.
Engineering cholera-sensing 
functions into L. lactis
Next, we sought to engineer L. lactis to 
specifically detect and report on V. cholerae 
presence in the intestinal environment. 
V. cholerae produces the quorum-sensing 
molecules autoinducer-2 (AI-2) and 
cholera autoinducer 1 (CAI-1), and uses 
the two-component histidine kinase re-
ceptors LuxQ and CqsS to specifically 
detect each molecule, respectively (18). 
Unlike AI-2, CAI-1 is unique to the 
genus Vibrio; therefore, we sought to 
develop a receptor in L. lactis to detect 
CAI-1 from V. cholerae. We took ad-
vantage of CqsS’s specificity to CAI-1 
and the modularity of histidine kinase 
receptors to design an L. lactis hybrid 
receptor (HR) that combines the trans-
membrane ligand binding domain of 
CqsS with the signal transduction domain 
of NisK, a two-component receptor in 
L. lactis that regulates the production 
of the lantibiotic nisin (Fig. 3A) (19). 
We designed 10 HR variants with dif-
ferent CqsS-NisK junction points (fig. 
S9A). Because of the known effect of 
altered NisK expression levels on sig-
naling (20), we cloned a randomized 
ribosome binding site (RBS) sequence 
upstream of each HR variant and 
screened the resulting HR libraries for 
CAI-1–dependent activity (fig. S9B). To 
create a convenient screening platform, 
we cloned the fluorescent reporter gene 
encoding mCherry downstream of the 
B
D
C
E
A
×
Nisin operon
Fig. 3. Construction of HR for V. cholerae sensing. (A) Creation of a CAI-1–sensing function in L. lactis requires the 
fusion of two distantly related quorum-sensing signaling pathways. The proposed HR fuses the CAI-1–binding do-
main of the CqsS receptor with the histidine kinase domain of NisK to achieve CAI-1–dependent signaling in L. lactis. 
The design of the HR cannot predict whether the regulatory outcome of CAI-1 binding will be activation (arrow-headed 
line) or inactivation of NisR (bar-headed line). (B) Functional screen for HR variants. CqsS-NisK fusion variants with 
randomized RBS strengths (fig. S9) were screened for their ability to modulate output gene expression in response to 
CAI-1. CAI-1–deficient V. cholerae (V cqsA) serves as a negative control. (C) mCherry fluorescence output of HR vari-
ants in response to CAI-1. Hybrid receptor 4 mutant (HR4M) is a functional variant. Hybrid receptor 2 (HR2) is an ex-
ample of a nonfunctional variant. (D) Primary sequence map of HR4M. S177 indicates the last residue of N-terminal 
part of CqsS, and A221 indicates the first residue of the C-terminal part of NisK. The HR contains a spontaneous Glu-to-
Gly mutation at residue 182. (E) Reporter gene expression dynamics in L. lactis with HR4M in response to CAI-1. Error 
bars are SEM of three technical replicates. a.u., arbitrary units.
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Mao et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao2586 (2018)     13 June 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
4 of 8
NisR-responsive nisA promoter and assayed each HR variant in a 
high-throughput coculture system with both wild-type V. cholerae 
and a V. cholerae cqsA deletion strain that is unable to produce CAI-1 
(Fig. 3B).
The native nisRK two-component system and the majority of HR 
variants were not responsive to CAI-1 (fig. S9, C and D). However, 
a functional variant with a Glu-to-Gly mutation at residue 182 
(HR4M) displayed robust repression of mCherry in the presence of 
CAI-1 (Fig. 3, C and D). Detailed characterization of the dynamic 
response of HR4M to CAI-1 showed that mCherry repression oc-
curred within 4 hours of L. lactis–V. cholerae coculture initiation, 
and the transcriptional response was entirely dependent on CAI-1 
production by V. cholerae (Fig. 3E). Nisin binding to NisRK is 
known to cause a conformational shift that activates autophosphor-
ylation and induces transcription of the target gene (18). However, 
the transcriptional repression observed suggested that HR4M pre-
serves the phosphorelay properties of CqsS, wherein constitutive 
autophosphorylation is inhibited upon CAI-1 binding, leading to 
reduced transcription of target genes.
In situ detection of V. cholerae infection
We next incorporated a transcriptional inverter circuit that repro-
grams HR4M signaling into an activation response upon pathogen 
detection. As shown in Fig. 4A, we placed the gene encoding the 
transcriptional repressor TetR downstream of the HR4M-controlled 
nisA promoter to enable constitutive repression of an engineered 
Bacillus subtilis xylA-tetO promoter (21) in the absence of CAI-1. 
Upon CAI-1 binding, HR4M repression of TetR expression enabled 
transcription from the xylA-tetO promoter (fig. S10A). We screened 
a library of tetR RBS sequences to identify an optimal TetR transla-
tion rate that would provide a suitable dynamic range of reporter 
gene expression upon CAI-1 induction (fig. S10B). Detection circuit 
characterization in coculture conditions indicates that mCherry ex-
pression increased 60-fold in response to CAI-1 from V. cholerae 
with minimal signal background (Fig. 4B). Although CAI-1–based 
quorum-sensing systems are present in most Vibrio spp., CAI-1 
moieties might display different acyl chain lengths and modifi-
cations depending on the bacterial species (22). We tested the spec-
ificity of HR4M to other CAI-1–producing and nonproducing 
bacterial species and found that the detection circuit did not re-
spond to most of the environmental Vibrio strains tested or to non–
CAI-1–producing bacteria (fig. S11). However, Vibrio spp. producing 
CAI-1 moieties that are compatible with CqsS from V. cholerae 
such as Vibrio alginolyticus (22) were detected by HR4M (fig. S11), 
suggesting that this system might be used for the detection of other 
pathogenic Vibrio spp. that produce CqsS-compatible quorum- 
sensing molecules, such as Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Vibrio anguillarum, 
and Vibrio furnissii (22).
As a proof of concept of a living diagnostic tool with an easy, 
point-of-need readout, we replaced mCherry with a secreted - 
lactamase reporter whose activity is readily visualized by a colorimetric 
shift from yellow to red after hydrolysis of the chromogenic sub-
strate nitrocefin (23, 24). Evaluation by in vitro coculture showed 
that the reporter strain, termed CSL, could generate a visible color 
B
C
A
E
D
O
ml
Fig. 4. Cholera sensing and reporting by engineered L. lactis in vitro and in vivo. (A) Engineered CAI-1–dependent signaling in L. lactis. The HR4M-NisR two-component 
system sensing module and a TetR/Pxyltet signal-processing module constitute the complete V. cholerae–sensing circuit. In the absence of CAI-1, constitutive expression of 
TetR prevents the expression of the output gene. In the presence of CAI-1, the hybrid two-component system stops its phosphorelay, halting TetR expression and leading 
to activation of the output gene. (B) Activation dynamics of the cholera-sensing circuit. Error bars are SEM of three technical replicates. (C) Colorimetric reporting of 
V. cholerae sensing. The L. lactis CSL strain secretes -lactamase, which hydrolyzes nitrocefin and produces a visible color change from yellow to red (maximum absorbance 
at 486 nm). Bars represent range of absorbance for technical duplicates. (D) Schematic of the infant mouse model for in vivo testing of the cholera-sensing strain. Cholera- 
infected mice were fed with L. lactis CSL, and stools were collected between 10 and 20 hours after infection for nitrocefin-based -lactamase assay. (E) Performance of the 
living diagnostic and -lactamase assay for the detection of cholera. Color change in nitrocefin with fecal samples indicates -lactamase activity. V. cholerae WT, CAI-1– 
deficient V. cholerae (V cqsA), and L. lactis cholera-sensing Lactococcus (CSL) strain. Constitutive -lactamase expression L. lactis (-lact.+).
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Mao et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao2586 (2018)     13 June 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
5 of 8
change within 30 min when the coculture had reached a density of 
108 CFU/ml of V. cholerae (Fig. 4C). When the reporter assay was 
tested in the infant mouse model (Fig. 4D), only the fecal pellets of 
mice dosed with a constitutive producer of -lactamase displayed a 
positive signal, demonstrating both the orthogonality and stability 
of the -lactamase reporter in the mouse intestinal environment 
(Fig. 4E). Also, fecal pellets of mice dosed only with the L. lactis CSL 
strain did not display a color change, which demonstrates a tight 
regulation of the engineered detection circuit under in vivo condi-
tions (Fig. 4E). Finally, to determine whether L. lactis CSL could detect 
cholera infection in the infant mouse model, we administered two 
doses of the engineered strain, the first concurrent with V. cholerae 
and the second 10 hours after infection, to mice and collected stool 
samples for colorimetric assays (Fig. 4D). The fecal samples of cholera- 
infected mice treated with L. lactis CSL showed positive signals after 
overnight incubation with nitrocefin, indicating circuit activation 
and -lactamase secretion in the gut (Fig. 4E). In contrast, stool 
samples from uninfected mice and mice infected with the cqsA 
mutant of V. cholerae did not show colorimetric change, demon-
strating that the circuit is CAI-1–specific.
Probiotic intervention with natural and engineered L. lactis
We found that, compared to wild-type L. lactis, the L. lactis CSL 
strain exhibited a reduced protective effect in our infant mouse 
model for cholera infection (Fig. 5A). To understand this phenom-
enon, we studied the strain’s growth and acidification dynamics in 
monoculture and coculture under anaerobic conditions (figs. S12 
and S13). When assayed in the infant mouse model, the engineered 
L. lactis CSL strain had a lower median of recovered cells from the 
gut than the wild-type strain; however, no significant difference was 
detected between strains (fig. S12A). Under liquid culture condi-
tions, L. lactis CSL acidifies medium slower than the wild-type 
strain (fig. S12B). Furthermore, the viability of the L. lactis CSL strain 
decreases under extended coculture condition, and the steady- 
state 
pH is higher than the coculture with wild-type L. lactis (fig. S12B). 
Also, given the observed defect in acidification, the V. cholerae kill-
ing by L. lactis CSL is delayed by 4 hours compared to wild-type 
L. lactis (fig. S12C). The results we obtained indicate that circuit 
activation and -lactamase secretion in the engineered L. lactis strain 
create a metabolic burden that reduces the bacteria’s natural acidi-
fication capacities and its antagonistic effect on V. cholerae, further 
supporting the hypothesis that lactic acid production in the gut en-
vironment plays a key role in the protective effect. To achieve a com-
bined protective and diagnostic function, we introduced a mixed 
population of wild-type and CSL L. lactis into the feeding regimen 
(Fig. 5A). The combined dose of natural and engineered L. lactis 
successfully restored the protective effect and provided an effective 
diagnostic readout in stools (Fig. 5, A and B).
DISCUSSION
Here, we present evidence indicating that the common lactic acid 
bacterium L. lactis, through its natural acidification function, can 
be used to inhibit V. cholerae infection in a mouse model. Our ex-
periments demonstrate that dietary interventions with metabolical-
ly active probiotic bacteria can be used as an effective strategy to 
induce modifications of the intestinal microenvironment that in 
turn lead to the enhancement of colonization resistance against a 
major intestinal pathogen. The infection model used in this work 
allows infant mice to feed ad libitum from the mother, a situation 
that provides them with a constant source of lactose, favoring the 
L. lactis–mediated production of lactic acid in the intestinal envi-
ronment. The beneficial effects of ingesting metabolically active 
L. lactis have been observed in other animal models of cholera 
infection—Zamri et al. (25) noted that oral vaccination of adult rab-
bits with wild-type and recombinant L. lactis expressing V. cholerae 
membrane proteins abolished the diarrheal symptoms of the chol-
era infection. Although antimicrobial properties of lactic acid have 
been widely applied as a food preservation method (26), our find-
ings uncover that regular ingestion of metabolically active L. lactis 
represents an effective means to deliver lactic acid to the intestinal 
environment and create inhospitable conditions for V. cholerae 
proliferation. Future implementation of probiotic interventions 
with L. lactis in humans will require a formulation system that en-
sures the delivery of sufficient quantities of probiotic bacteria and key 
metabolic substrates so that lactic acid production occurs regardless 
A
B
Survival
Fig. 5. L. lactis intervention for combined cholera protection and detection. (A) Left: Strategy of mixed population of natural and engineered L. lactis for cholera 
protection and detection. The natural lactic acid bacteria acidify the intestinal environment to antagonize the proliferation of the pathogen. The engineered probiotics 
detect the quorum-sensing molecule of V. cholerae and produce an easy-to-read reporter. Right: Infant mouse survival to V. cholerae infection after the intervention with 
single or combined L. lactis strains. n = 18, N = 4 for CSL and WT + CSL, respectively. V and V + L WT curves are overlays from Fig.  2B. Log-rank test against the mock-fed 
group (V): ***P = 0.005, WT coadministration; **P = 0.0034, WT and CSL; ns, CSL. (B) In vivo detection of V. cholerae using single or combined doses of L. lactis strains. Dosing 
scheme was performed as described in Fig.  4D. Absorbance at 486 nm was measured on three independent samples in each group. Images on the left column correspond 
to one representative sample. Error bars represent SEM.
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Mao et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao2586 (2018)     13 June 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
6 of 8
of the individual’s diet or intestinal conditions. The use of microbiota- 
modulating interventions represents an emerging strategy that 
might confer rapid protection against fast-developing infections 
like cholera. Notably, Hubbard et al. (27) created a live cholera vac-
cine candidate that provides colonization resistance in a probiotic- 
like fashion, conferring cholera protection within 1 day in an infant 
rabbit model.
Here, we have also demonstrated the rational design and devel-
opment of a synthetic gene circuit that enables L. lactis to detect 
and respond to V. cholerae both in vitro and in the intestinal envi-
ronment. We further coupled the circuit to a proof-of-concept 
enzyme-based assay that reports the in situ detection of the path-
ogen through a simple colorimetric assay on stools, demonstrating 
the potential of engineered probiotics as point-of-need diagnostic 
tools. Our results indicate that in situ biosensing and reporting of 
the pathogen presence is feasible through the use of synthetic gene 
networks and stable, orthogonal reporter enzymes that can survive 
the intestinal environment. Future application of such living diag-
nostics in the field will entail optimization of the response time to 
readable output to obtain diagnostic results within clinically rele-
vant time scales. Furthermore, there are additional technological 
and regulatory limitations that need to be addressed before in vivo 
diagnostic systems are suitable for deployment in cholera endemic 
areas. The -lactamase–based enzymatic reporter used here as sig-
nal output is suitable for laboratory experiments; however, its use in 
the field is restricted due to potential horizontal gene transfer of 
the -lactamase gene to pathogenic bacteria and cost-effectiveness 
of the use of its substrate, nitrocefin. Therefore, there is a need for 
the development of a food-grade enzymatic reporter that is orthog-
onal to the human intestine and whose cognate substrate can be 
produced cost-effectively and distributed en masse in low-resource 
settings.
Our work sets the stage for dietary interventions with natural 
and engineered probiotics as an alternative strategy to combat the 
spread of cholera in vulnerable populations. Household contact 
with infected individuals is among the highest known risk factors 
for subsequent infection and dehydration (28). Regular consump-
tion of affordable, home-fermented food products containing live 
L. lactis may not only diminish the severity of the disease through 
colonization resistance, but if used in combination with a living di-
agnostic L. lactis strain, it may also provide an opportune alert for 
patients to seek further medical intervention and a timely warning 
for close contacts to apply sanitary measures to prevent transmis-
sion. The use of biologics-based prophylaxis, such as the probiotic 
intervention presented in this study or the recently proposed phage-
based prophylaxis (29), could serve as an alternative to convention-
al chemoprophylaxis, limiting the emergence of antibiotic resistance 
in the population (28). The implementation of engineered probiot-
ics, such as the L. lactis CSL strain, has the potential to provide 
community-level surveillance of cholera cases and could help to 
elucidate the contribution of asymptomatic carriage of V. cholerae 
to disease transmission (30). The development of living diagnostic 
bacteria (31–35) represents a promising approach to achieve near 
real-time surveillance of multiple pathological conditions. Our work 
advances this endeavor by demonstrating the design and construc-
tion of a hybrid sensing and reporting system, which provides a mo-
lecular architecture strategy for generalizable “sense-and-respond” 
bioengineering, expanding the possible targets of detection and the 
variety of engineerable sensor bacteria.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The overall objective of this work was to demonstrate that microbiota- 
modulating interventions with natural and engineered probiotics 
might represent a plausible strategy to achieve two high-priority 
goals in the fight against cholera, namely, enhancement of coloniza-
tion resistance and point-of-need diagnostics for disease surveil-
lance. We hypothesized that the transient colocalization of ingested 
L. lactis and V. cholerae could be leveraged to promote colonization 
resistance through the in situ production of lactic acid and to detect 
the presence of the pathogen at an early stage of the infection. We 
used a synthetic biology approach to construct a hybrid-signaling 
pathway in L. lactis that enables the detection of quorum-sensing 
signals that are indicative of V. cholerae infection. After in vitro val-
idation of these hypotheses, we used the infant mouse model of 
cholera infection to evaluate the efficacy of the proposed dietary 
intervention using survival, intestinal colonization, and production 
of diagnostic enzymatic reporters as the principal outcomes. To op-
timize the number of mice needed in each trial without compromis-
ing the power of the study, we performed the survival studies in a 
randomized cross-litter manner (except for the three whole-litter 
studies in fig. S5). Each trial was performed with at least three litters. 
Each litter was randomly divided into two to three groups with a 
random number generator. Each group was assigned to a different 
treatment. Overall, each treatment covered individual mice from at 
least three litters, and data were collected over two or more inde-
pendent trials [apart from the heat-inactivated (Fig. 2F) and ldh- 
complemented (Fig. 2E) L. lactis tests, each from one independent 
trial]. No blinding was performed in either experiments or data 
analysis. Sample sizes were determined by power analysis to reach a 
statistical power of 0.8 or higher using the pwr package in R.
All mice in this study were treated in accordance with protocol 
number IS00000852, approved by Harvard Medical School Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee and the Committee on 
Microbiological Safety. Primary data are reported in table S1. A de-
tailed description of all experimental procedures performed in this 
study is included in the Supplementary Materials and Methods.
Statistical analysis
Statistics were performed with GraphPad Prism 5.0c. Log-rank tests 
were performed for all survival studies, assuming the mice in each 
group were independent and the hazard ratio was consistent over the 
study period. Each treatment group was predefined randomly cross 
litters at the beginning of the study (details in the Supplementary 
Materials and Methods). Mann-Whitney test was used where each 
data point was independent from each other, and no Gaussian dis-
tribution was assumed. P values reported in the figure legends are 
two-tailed. Specific sample size, P value, and other details for each test 
are described in the figure legends.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/10/445/eaao2586/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Homolactic fermentation of glucose by L. lactis leads to growth inhibition of V. cholerae.
Fig. S2. L. lactis–V. cholerae coculture system.
Fig. S3. Lactic acid displays a bactericidal effect on V. cholerae.
Fig. S4. L. lactis transit dynamics in mouse gut.
Fig. S5. Litter variation in infant mouse survival study.
Fig. S6. Growth and acidification capability of L. lactis strains used in this study.
Fig. S7. V. cholerae colonization in infant mice treated with lactic acid.
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Mao et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao2586 (2018)     13 June 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
7 of 8
Fig. S8. Survival of V. cholerae–infected infant mice under acid-neutralizing feeding regimens.
Fig. S9. HR design and screening.
Fig. S10. xyltet promoter testing in L. lactis and circuit-tuning with different TetR translation 
rates.
Fig. S11. Specificity of signal activation of the HR4M HR to other Vibrio spp. and non–Vibrio spp.
Fig. S12. Metabolic burden of L. lactis harboring engineered circuits.
Fig. S13. Growth rate of L. lactis strains used in this study.
Table S1. Primary data.
References (36–51)
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. M. Ali, A. R. Nelson, A. L. Lopez, D. A. Sack, Updated global burden of cholera in endemic 
countries. PLOS Negl. Trop. Dis. 9, e0003832 (2015).
 2. P. R. Marteau, M. de Vrese, C. J. Cellier, J. Schrezenmeir, Protection from gastrointestinal 
diseases with the use of probiotics. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 73, 430S–436S (2001).
 3. N. Kamada, G. Y. Chen, N. Inohara, G. Núñez, Control of pathogens and pathobionts by 
the gut microbiota. Nat. Immunol. 14, 685–690 (2013).
 4. A. Hsiao, A. M. S. Ahmed, S. Subramanian, N. W. Griffin, L. L. Drewry, W. A. Petri Jr., 
R. Haque, T. Ahmed, J. I. Gordon, Members of the human gut microbiota involved in 
recovery from Vibrio cholerae infection. Nature 515, 423–426 (2014).
 5. F. Duan, J. C. March, Engineered bacterial communication prevents Vibrio cholerae 
virulence in an infant mouse model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 11260–11264 (2010).
 6. A. Focareta, J. C. Paton, R. Morona, J. Cook, A. W. Paton, A recombinant probiotic for 
treatment and prevention of cholera. Gastroenterology 130, 1688–1695 (2006).
 7. M. B. Holowko, H. Wang, P. Jayaraman, C. L. Poh, Biosensing Vibrio cholerae with 
genetically engineered Escherichia coli. ACS Synth. Biol. 5, 1275–1283 (2016).
 8. M. Derrien, J. E. T. van Hylckama Vlieg, Fate, activity, and impact of ingested bacteria 
within the human gut microbiota. Trends Microbiol. 23, 354–366 (2015).
 9. C. G. Buffie, E. G. Pamer, Microbiota-mediated colonization resistance against intestinal 
pathogens. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 13, 790–801 (2013).
 10. M. Teuber, The genus Lactococcus, in The Genera of Lactic Acid Bacteria (Springer US, 
1995), pp. 173–234.
 11. B. Teusink, H. Bachmann, D. Molenaar, Systems biology of lactic acid bacteria: A critical 
review. Microb. Cell Fact. 10, S11 (2011).
 12. K. Papadimitriou, Á. Alegría, P. A. Bron, M. de Angelis, M. Gobbetti, M. Kleerebezem, 
J. A. Lemos, D. M. Linares, P. Ross, C. Stanton, F. Turroni, D. van Sinderen, P. Varmanen, 
M. Ventura, M. Zúñiga, E. Tsakalidou, J. Kok, Stress physiology of lactic acid bacteria. 
Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 80, 837–890 (2016).
 13. T. C. Martinsen, K. Bergh, H. L. Waldum, Gastric juice: A barrier against infectious diseases. 
Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 96, 94–102 (2005).
 14. S. Drouault, G. Corthier, S. D. Ehrlich, P. Renault, Survival, physiology, and lysis of 
Lactococcus lactis in the digestive tract. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 4881–4886 (1999).
 15. Y. A. Millet, D. Alvarez, S. Ringgaard, U. H. von Andrian, B. M. Davis, M. K. Waldor, 
K. E. Klose, Insights into Vibrio cholerae intestinal colonization from monitoring 
fluorescently labeled bacteria. PLOS Pathog. 10, e1004405 (2014).
 16. K. E. Klose, The suckling mouse model of cholera. Trends Microbiol. 8, 189–191 (2000).
 17. C. Bavishi, H. L. DuPont, Systematic review: The use of proton pump inhibitors and 
increased susceptibility to enteric infection. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 34, 1269–1281 (2011).
 18. D. A. Higgins, M. E. Pomianek, C. M. Kraml, R. K. Taylor, M. F. Semmelhack, B. L. Bassler, 
The major Vibrio cholerae autoinducer and its role in virulence factor production. Nature 
450, 883–886 (2007).
 19. I. Mierau, M. Kleerebezem, 10 years of the nisin-controlled gene expression system (NICE) 
in Lactococcus lactis. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 68, 705–717 (2005).
 20. M. Kleerebezem, M. M. Beerthuyzen, E. E. Vaughan, W. M. de Vos, O. P. Kuipers, Controlled 
gene expression systems for lactic acid bacteria: Transferable nisin-inducible expression 
cassettes for Lactococcus, Leuconostoc, and Lactobacillus spp. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63, 
4581–4584 (1997).
 21. M. Geissendörfer, W. Hillen, Regulated expression of heterologous genes in Bacillus 
subtilis using the Tn10 encoded tet regulatory elements. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 33, 
657–663 (1990).
 22. W.-L. Ng, L. J. Perez, Y. Wei, C. Kraml, M. F. Semmelhack, B. L. Bassler, Signal production 
and detection specificity in Vibrio CqsA/CqsS quorum-sensing systems. Mol. Microbiol. 
79, 1407–1417 (2011).
 23. Y. Le Loir, V. A. de Carvalho Azevedo, S. C. Oliveira, D. A. Freitas, A. Miyoshi, 
L. G. Bermúdez-Humarán, S. Nouaille, L. A. Ribeiro, S. Leclercq, J. E. Gabriel, 
V. D. Guimaraes, M. N. Oliveira, C. Charlier, M. Gautier, P. Langella, Protein secretion in 
Lactococcus lactis: An efficient way to increase the overall heterologous protein 
production. Microb. Cell Fact. 4, 2 (2005).
 24. M. Sibakov, T. Koivula, A. von Wright, I. Palva, Secretion of TEM -lactamase with  
signal sequences isolated from the chromosome of Lactococcus lactis subsp.  
lactis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 57, 341–348 (1991).
 25. H. F. Zamri, M. N. Shamsudin, R. A. Rahim, V. K. Neela, Oral vaccination with Lactococcus 
lactis expressing the Vibrio cholerae Wzm protein to enhance mucosal and systemic 
immunity. Vaccine 30, 3231–3238 (2012).
 26. R. G. Earnshaw, The antimicrobial action of lactic acid bacteria: Natural food preservation 
systems, in The Lactic Acid Bacteria Volume 1: The Lactic Acid Bacteria in Health and Disease, 
B. J. B. Wood, Ed. (Springer US, 1992), pp. 211–232.
 27. T. P. Hubbard, G. Billings, T. Dörr, B. Sit, A. R. Warr, C. J. Kuehl, M. Kim, F. Delgado, 
J. J. Mekalanos, J. A. Lewnard, M. K. Waldor, A live vaccine rapidly protects against 
cholera in an infant rabbit model. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaap8423 (2018).
 28. A. A. Weil, A. I. Khan, F. Chowdhury, R. C. Larocque, A. S. G. Faruque, E. T. Ryan, 
S. B. Calderwood, F. Qadri, J. B. Harris, Clinical outcomes in household contacts of 
patients with cholera in Bangladesh. Clin. Infect. Dis. 49, 1473–1479 (2009).
 29. M. Yen, L. S. Cairns, A. Camilli, A cocktail of three virulent bacteriophages prevents Vibrio 
cholerae infection in animal models. Nat. Commun. 8, 14187 (2017).
 30. A. A. King, E. L. Ionides, M. Pascual, M. J. Bouma, Inapparent infections and cholera 
dynamics. Nature 454, 877–880 (2008).
 31. H. Kobayashi, M. Kærn, M. Araki, K. Chung, T. S. Gardner, C. R. Cantor, J. J. Collins, 
Programmable cells: Interfacing natural and engineered gene networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. 101, 8414–8419 (2004).
 32. J. W. Kotula, S. J. Kerns, L. A. Shaket, L. Siraj, J. J. Collins, J. C. Way, P. A. Silver, 
Programmable bacteria detect and record an environmental signal in the mammalian 
gut. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 4838–4843 (2014).
 33. T. Danino, A. Prindle, G. A. Kwong, M. Skalak, H. Li, K. Allen, J. Hasty, S. N. Bhatia, 
Programmable probiotics for detection of cancer in urine. Sci. Transl. Med. 7, 289ra84 
(2015).
 34. K. N.-M. Daeffler, J. D. Galley, R. U. Sheth, L. C. Ortiz‐Velez, C. O. Bibb, N. F. Shroyer, 
R. A. Britton, J. J. Tabor, Engineering bacterial thiosulfate and tetrathionate sensors for 
detecting gut inflammation. Mol. Syst. Biol. 13, 923 (2017).
 35. I. Y. Hwang, E. Koh, A. Wong, J. C. March, W. E. Bentley, Y. S. Lee, M. W. Chang, Engineered 
probiotic Escherichia coli can eliminate and prevent Pseudomonas aeruginosa gut 
infection in animal models. Nat. Commun. 8, 15028 (2017).
 36. D. E. Cameron, J. M. Urbach, J. J. Mekalanos, A defined transposon mutant library and its 
use in identifying motility genes in Vibrio cholerae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 
8736–8741 (2008).
 37. W. W. Metcalf, W. Jiang, L. L. Daniels, S. K. Kim, A. Haldimann, B. L. Wanner, Conditionally 
replicative and conjugative plasmids carrying lacZ for cloning, mutagenesis, and allele 
replacement in bacteria. Plasmid 35, 1–13 (1996).
 38. J. P. C. Pinto, A. Zeyniyev, H. Karsens, H. Trip, J. S. Lolkema, O. P. Kuipers, J. Kok, pSEUDO, 
a genetic integration standard for Lactococcus lactis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77, 
6687–6690 (2011).
 39. S. A. Ballal, P. Veiga, K. Fenn, M. Michaud, J. H. Kim, C. A. Gallini, J. N. Glickman, G. Quéré, 
P. Garault, C. Béal, M. Derrien, P. Courtin, S. Kulakauskas, M.-P. Chapot-Chartier, 
J. van Hylckama Vlieg, W. S. Garrett, Host lysozyme-mediated lysis of Lactococcus lactis 
facilitates delivery of colitis-attenuating superoxide dismutase to inflamed colons. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 7803–8 (2015).
 40. H. Holo, I. F. Nes, High-frequency transformation, by electroporation, of Lactococcus lactis 
subsp. cremoris grown with glycine in osmotically stabilized media. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 55, 3119–3123 (1989).
 41. D. E. Cameron, J. J. Collins, Tunable protein degradation in bacteria. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 
1276–1281 (2014).
 42. H. M. Salis, E. A. Mirsky, C. A. Voigt, Automated design of synthetic ribosome binding sites 
to control protein expression. Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 946–950 (2009).
 43. A. E. Borujeni, A. S. Channarasappa, H. M. Salis, Translation rate is controlled by coupled 
trade-offs between site accessibility, selective RNA unfolding and sliding at upstream 
standby sites. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 2646–2659 (2014).
 44. S. F. Altschul, W. Gish, W. Miller, E. W. Myers, D. J. Lipman, Basic local alignment search 
tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403–410 (1990).
 45. The UniProt Consortium, UniProt: A hub for protein information. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, 
D204–D212 (2015).
 46. K. Hofmann, W. Stoffel, TMbase – a database of membrane spanning protein segments. 
Biol. Chem. Hoppe-Seyler 347, 166 (1993).
 47. S. S. Yoon, J. J. Mekalanos, 2,3-butanediol synthesis and the emergence of the Vibrio 
cholerae El Tor biotype. Infect. Immun. 74, 6547–6556 (2006).
 48. M. F. W. Festing, Design and statistical methods in studies using animal models of 
development. ILAR J. 47, 5–14 (2006).
 49. S. Champely, C. Ekstrom, P. Dalgaard, J. Gill, S. Weibelzahl, H. D. Rosario, pwr: Basic 
Functions for Power Analysis (2016).
 50. R Development Core Team, “R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing” 
(Vienna, 2016); www.r-project.org/.
 51. EFSA Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed (FEEDAP), 
Safety and efficacy of lactic acid and calcium lactate when used as technological 
additives for all animal species. EFSA J. 13, 4198 (2015).
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Mao et al., Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao2586 (2018)     13 June 2018
SCIE N C E TR A N S LA T I O NA L M EDI CI NE | RE SE ARCH ARTICL E
8 of 8
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to W. Zhao (Mekalanos Lab, Harvard Medical School) 
and A. Graveline (Wyss Institute) for help on the animal protocol setup. We thank F. Hussain 
and D. VanInsberghe (Polz Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology) for providing us 
with environmental Vibrio spp. strains. We also thank X. Tan, M. Takahashi, and S. Slomovic 
for the helpful discussions. Funding: This work was supported by funding from the 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency grant HDTRA1-14-1-0006 (to J.J.C.), the Gates 
Foundation #OPP1058951 (to D.E.C), and the Paul G. Allen Frontiers Group (to J.J.C.). 
Author contributions: J.J.C., D.E.C., A.C.-R., and N.M. conceived the project. N.M. and 
A.C.-R. designed and performed the colonization resistance studies. N.M. and D.E.C. 
designed and performed the diagnostic circuit experiments. N.M., D.E.C., and A.C.-R. 
designed the animal experiments. N.M. performed the animal experiments and analyzed 
the data. All the authors wrote and edited the manuscript. Competing interests: J.J.C. is the 
scientific co-founder of Synlogic, a biotech startup focused on developing engineered 
probiotics to treat disease. Patent disclosure: Synthetic hybrid receptor and genetic circuit 
in probiotic bacteria to detect enteric pathogenic microorganisms. Inventors: D.E.C., N.M., 
and J. J.C. (U.S. provisional application no. 62/172,971; filed on 9 June 2015). Data and 
materials availability: Primary data for experiments presented here are in the 
Supplementary Materials. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed 
to J.J.C.
Submitted 30 June 2017
Resubmitted 22 January 2018
Accepted 8 May 2018
Published 13 June 2018
10.1126/scitranslmed.aao2586
Citation: N. Mao, A. Cubillos-Ruiz, D. E. Cameron, J. J. Collins, Probiotic strains detect and suppress 
cholera in mice. Sci. Transl. Med. 10, eaao2586 (2018).
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Probiotic strains detect and suppress cholera in mice
Ning Mao, Andres Cubillos-Ruiz, D. Ewen Cameron and James J. Collins
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aao2586
, eaao2586.
10
Sci Transl Med 
approaches to tackling cholera.
indicating the protective effects were not dependent on adaptive immunity. These papers showcase innovative 
 challenge within 24 hours of vaccine administration,
V. cholerae
strain that could protect infant rabbits from 
 strain for a live oral vaccine, which resulted in an attenuated
V. cholerae
extensively modified a contemporary 
.
et al
 to detect breakthrough infection. Hubbard 
L. lactis
 and engineered 
V. cholerae
mouse gut hostile to 
 rendered the infant
Lactococcus lactis
. discovered that lactic acid production by the probiotic 
et al
models. Mao 
this issue, two groups investigated the potential of engineered bacteria to mediate cholera resistance in animal 
 indicate a need for new methods of control; in
Vibrio cholerae
The endemic persistence and outbreaks of 
Designer bugs as drugs
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/10/445/eaao2586
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2018/06/11/10.445.eaao2586.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/11/480/eaau6242.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/11/475/eaau7975.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/382/eaaf1283.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/413/eaak9745.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/9/406/eaah6813.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/445/eaap8423.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/10/445/eaat9483.full
REFERENCES
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/10/445/eaao2586#BIBL
This article cites 47 articles, 16 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science Translational Medicine
title 
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(ISSN 1946-6242) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science Translational Medicine 
 by guest on June 2, 2019
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
