 RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY
◥
NEURODEGENERATION
Pathological a-synuclein
transmission initiated by binding
lymphocyte-activation gene 3
Xiaobo Mao, Michael Tianhao Ou, Senthilkumar S. Karuppagounder, Tae-In Kam,
Xiling Yin, Yulan Xiong, Preston Ge, George Essien Umanah, Saurav Brahmachari,
Joo-Ho Shin, Ho Chul Kang, Jianmin Zhang, Jinchong Xu, Rong Chen, Hyejin Park,
Shaida A. Andrabi, Sung Ung Kang, Rafaella Araújo Gonçalves, Yu Liang, Shu Zhang,
Chen Qi, Sharon Lam, James A. Keiler, Joel Tyson, Donghoon Kim, Nikhil Panicker,
Seung Pil Yun, Creg J. Workman, Dario A. A. Vignali, Valina L. Dawson,*
Han Seok Ko,* Ted M. Dawson*
INTRODUCTION: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is
the second most common neurodegenerative
disorder and leads to slowness of movement,
tremor, rigidity, and, in the later stages of PD,
cognitiveimpairment.Pathologically, PDis char-
acterized by the accumulation of a-synuclein
in Lewy bodies and neurites. There is degen-
eration of neurons throughout the nervous sys-
tem, with the degeneration of dopamine neurons
in the substantia nigra pars compacta leading
to the major symptoms of PD.
RATIONALE:In the brains of PD patients, path-
ologic a-synuclein seems to spread from cell to
cellviaself-amplification,propagation,andtrans-
mission in a stereotypical and topographical
pattern among neighboring cells and/or ana-
tomically connected brain regions. The spread
or transmission of pathologic a-synuclein is
emerging as a potentially important driver of
PD pathogenesis. The underlying mechanisms
and molecular entities responsible for the trans-
mission of pathologic a-synuclein from cell to
cell are not known, but the entry of pathologic
a-synuclein into neurons is thought to occur,
in part, through an active clathrin-dependent
endocytic process.
RESULTS:Using recombinant a-synuclein pre-
formed fibrils (PFF) as a model system with
which to study the transmission of misfolded
a-synucleinfromneurontoneuron,wescreened
a library encoding transmembrane proteins for
a-synuclein-biotin PFF–binding candidates via
detection with streptavidin-AP (alkaline phos-
phatase) staining. Three positive clones were
identified that bind a-synuclein PFF and in-
cludelymphocyte-activation
gene 3 (LAG3), neurexin 1b,
and amyloid b precursor-
like protein 1 (APLP1). Of
thesethreetransmembrane
proteins, LAG3 demon-
strated the highest ratio
of selectivity for a-synuclein PFF over the
a-synuclein monomer. a-Synuclein PFF bind
to LAG3 in a saturable manner (dissociation con-
stant=77nM),whereasthea-synucleinmonomer
does not bind to LAG3. Co-immunoprecipitation
also suggests that pathological a-synuclein PFF
specifically bind to LAG3. Tau PFF, b-amyloid
oligomer, and b-amyloid PFF do not bind to
LAG3, indicating that LAG3 is specific for a-
synuclein PFF. The internalization of a-synuclein
PFF involves LAG3 because deletion of LAG3
reducestheendocytosisofa-synucleinPFF.LAG3
colocalizes with the endosomal guanosine tri-
phosphatases Rab5 and Rab7 and coendocytoses
with pathologic a-synuclein. Neuron-to-neuron
transmission of pathologic a-synuclein and the
accompanying pathology and neurotoxicity is
substantially attenuated by deletion of LAG3 or
by antibodies to LAG3. The lack of LAG3 also
substantially delayed a-synuclein PFF–induced
loss of dopamine neurons, as well as biochem-
ical and behavioral deficits in vivo.
CONCLUSION: We discovered that pathologic
a-synuclein transmission and toxicity is ini-
tiated by binding to LAG3 and that neuron-to-
neuron transmission of pathological a-synuclein
involves the endocytosis of exogenous a-synuclein
PFF by the engagement of LAG3 on neurons.
Depletion of LAG3 or antibodies to LAG3 sub-
stantially reduces the pathology set in motion
by the transmission of pathologic a-synuclein.
The identification of LAG3 as an a-synuclein
PFF–binding protein provides a new target for
developing therapeutics designed to slow the pro-
gression of PD and related a-synucleinopathies.▪
RESEARCH
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
1513
The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online.
*Corresponding author. Email: tdawson@jhmi.edu (T.M.D.);
hko3@jhmi.edu (H.S.K.); vdawson1@jhmi.edu (V.L.D.)
Cite this article as X. Mao et al., Science 353, aah3374
(2016). DOI: 10.1126/science.aah3374
LAG3 deletion or antibodies to LAG3 delay a-synuclein PFF transmission. Compared with wild-
type neurons, binding and endocytosis of a-synuclein PFF is dramatically reduced with antibodies
to LAG3 or when LAG3 is deleted, resulting in delayed pathologic a-synuclein transmission and
toxicity.
ILLUSTRATION CREDIT: I-HSUN WU
ON OUR WEBSITE
◥
Read the full article
at http:/
/dx.doi.
org/10.1126/
science.aah3374
..................................................
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 RESEARCH ARTICLE
◥
NEURODEGENERATION
Pathological a-synuclein
transmission initiated by binding
lymphocyte-activation gene 3
Xiaobo Mao,1,2,3 Michael Tianhao Ou,1,2 Senthilkumar S. Karuppagounder,1,2,3
Tae-In Kam,1,2,3 Xiling Yin,1,2,3 Yulan Xiong,1,2,3* Preston Ge,1,2
George Essien Umanah,1,2,3 Saurav Brahmachari,1,2,3 Joo-Ho Shin,1,2,4
Ho Chul Kang,1,2,5 Jianmin Zhang,1,2† Jinchong Xu,1,2,3 Rong Chen,1,2,3 Hyejin Park,1,2,3
Shaida A. Andrabi,1,2,3‡ Sung Ung Kang,1,2,3 Rafaella Araújo Gonçalves,1,2§ Yu Liang,1,2
Shu Zhang,1,2 Chen Qi,1,2,6 Sharon Lam,1,2 James A. Keiler,1,2 Joel Tyson,1,2,7
Donghoon Kim,1,2 Nikhil Panicker,1,2,3 Seung Pil Yun,1,2,3 Creg J. Workman,8
Dario A. A. Vignali,8,9 Valina L. Dawson,1,2,3,10,11||
Han Seok Ko,1,2,3|| Ted M. Dawson1,2,7,11,12||
Emerging evidence indicates that the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease (PD) may be
due to cell-to-cell transmission of misfolded preformed fibrils (PFF) of a-synuclein (a-syn).
The mechanism by which a-syn PFF spreads from neuron to neuron is not known. Here, we
show that LAG3 (lymphocyte-activation gene 3) binds a-syn PFF with high affinity
(dissociation constant = 77 nanomolar), whereas the a-syn monomer exhibited minimal
binding. a-Syn-biotin PFF binding to LAG3 initiated a-syn PFF endocytosis, transmission,
and toxicity. Lack of LAG3 substantially delayed a-syn PFF–induced loss of dopamine
neurons, as well as biochemical and behavioral deficits in vivo. The identification of
LAG3 as a receptor that binds a-syn PFF provides a target for developing therapeutics
designed to slow the progression of PD and related a-synucleinopathies.
P
arkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most
common neurodegenerative disorder and
is characterized clinically by motor dysfunc-
tion and pathologically by the aggregation
and accumulation of a-synuclein (a-syn)
(1–3).Emergingevidencesuggeststhata-synspreads
from neuron to neuron via self-amplification,
propagation, and transmission in the pathogen-
esis of PD (4–6). In the brains of PD patients, a-syn
aggregates seem to spread in a stereotypical and
topographical pattern (7, 8). Postmortem exam-
ination of fetal grafts in patients with PD found
a-syn–positive Lewy bodies, which is suggestive
of spread of a-syn from host to graft (9, 10). Other
proteins such as b-amyloid and tau in Alzheimer’s
disease are also thought to propagate and spread
and contribute to the onset and progression of
these disorders (11, 12). Pathological a-syn has
been shown to spread among neighboring cells
and/or anatomically connected brain regions.
Recently recombinant a-syn preformed fibrils
(PFF) provide a model system that enables the
study of the transmission of misfolded a-syn from
neuron to neuron both in vitro (13) and in vivo
(14). How pathological a-syn exits cells and trans-
mits to neighboring neurons is not known, but
entry into neurons is thought to occur, in part,
through an active clathrin-dependent endocytic
process (15–17).
Identification of a-syn
PFF-binding proteins
Mouse a-syn was synthesized and conjugated to
biotin (a-syn-biotin) and then aggregated over
7 days followed by sonication to form a-syn PFF
of relatively uniform size (18). We used size ex-
clusion chromatography to separate a-syn PFF
from a-syn monomers (fig. S1A). We validated re-
combinant a-syn-biotin monomers and a-syn PFF
with immunoblot analysis (fig. S1B). We examined
a-syn-biotin monomers and PFF by means of
atomic force microscopy (AFM) and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM). a-Syn-biotin mono-
mers exhibited no regular structure, whereas a-syn-
biotin PFF exhibited short fibrillar structures
(fig. S1, C and D). We then sought to investigate
the interaction between extracellular a-syn and
neurons. a-Syn-biotin PFF binds to cortical neu-
rons as detected with streptavidin-AP (alkaline
phosphatase) staining (19–21), whereas a-syn-
biotin monomers weakly bind nonspecifically to
neurons (fig. S2, A to C). a-Syn-biotin PFF bind-
ing to neurons is saturable with an apparent dis-
association constant (Kd) of 374 nM (fig. S2, A
to C), suggesting the existence of receptor(s) or
binding site(s) for a-syn PFF. We screened a li-
brary of transmembrane proteins for potential
a-syn-biotin PFF-binding candidates via detec-
tionwithstreptavidin-AP staining(fig. S3A) (19–21).
A key requirement for expression cloning is
the existence of a cell line with low a-syn-biotin
PFF background binding. SH-SY5Y cells exhibited
<8% of the binding levels of a-syn-biotin PFF as
compared with cortical neurons, whereas COS7
and HeLa cells exhibited relatively high binding,
and human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293FT cells
exhibited mild binding (fig. S3, B and C). Com-
plementary DNAs encoding 352 transmembrane
proteins (TMGW10001, GFC-transfection array pa-
nel, Origene) were expressed in SH-SY5Y cells
and screened for a-syn-biotin PFF–binding can-
didates. This screening approach is a well-established
method with which to identify ligand receptor
interactions (19, 20) but will not identify recep-
tors composed of heteromeric subunits. Three posi-
tive clones were identified that bind a-syn-biotin
PFF and include lymphocyte-activation gene 3
(LAG3), neurexin 1b, and amyloid b precursor-
like protein 1 (APLP1) (Fig. 1A). Our screen pro-
vides Z-factor coefficients of 0.82, 0.84, and 0.84
through three independent experiments, suggest-
ing that the screen was within the optimal signal
window to preclude false positives or negatives.
a-Syn PFF preferentially binds LAG3
The selectivity of LAG3, neurexin 1b, and APLP1
and related transmembrane proteins for a-syn-
biotin PFF versus a-syn-biotin monomers was
determined via the ratio of Kd values (Fig. 1B).
LAG3 exhibited the highest selectivity with a
ratio of 38, followed by neurexin 1b with a ratio
of 11 and APLP1 with a ratio of 7. The binding of
a-syn-biotin PFF to LAG3 was specific because a-
syn-biotin PFF does not bind to the CD4 recep-
tor, which has 20% homology to LAG3 (Fig. 1B
and fig. S4). In addition to a-syn-biotin PFF binding
RESEARCH
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aah3374-1
1Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 2Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 3Adrienne Helis Malvin Medical Research Foundation, New Orleans, LA 70130-2685, USA. 4Division of Pharmacology, Department of
Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Suwon 440-746, South Korea. 5Department of Physiology, Ajou University School of
Medicine, Suwon 443–721, South Korea. 6Department of Neurology, Xin Hua Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China. 7Johns Hopkins
Institute for NanoBio Technology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA. 8Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
9Tumor Microenvironment Center, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA 15232, USA. 10Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA. 11Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. 12Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
*Present address: Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA. †Present address: State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Immunology,
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China. ‡Present address: Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. §Present address: Institute of Medical Biochemistry Leopoldo de Meis, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
||Corresponding author. Email: tdawson@jhmi.edu (T.M.D.); hko3@jhmi.edu (H.S.K.); vdawson1@jhmi.edu (V.L.D.)
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 to neurexin 1b, it also binds to neurexin 3b and
mildly binds to neurexin 1a and neurexin 2b (Fig.
1B). a-Syn-biotin PFF does not bind the amyloid
precursor protein (APP) or the amyloid precursor–
like protein 2 (APLP2), suggesting that the bind-
ing to APLP1 was specific (Fig. 1B). Because LAG3
exhibited the highest selectivity for a-syn-biotin
PFF, it was advanced for further study. No LAG3
immunoreactive band was observed in HEK293FT
and SH-SY5Y cells, which is consistent with the
absence of a streptavidin signal in these cell lines
(fig. S5A). Immunoblot analysis with a LAG3 anti-
body, 410C9, revealed that LAG3 was expressed
in wild-type (WT) but not LAG3 knockout (LAG3−/−)
cortical cultures, confirming the specificity of the
antibody to LAG3. LAG3 was primarily expressed
in neurons because LAG3 was not detectable in
astrocytes or microglia (fig. S5B). a-Syn-biotin
PFF binds to LAG3 in a saturable manner, with
a Kd of 77 nM (Fig. 1, B and C, and fig. S4). a-Syn-
biotin monomers did not demonstrate specific
binding to LAG3-expressing SH-SY5Y cells up to
3000 nM (Fig. 1, B and C, and fig. S4). In the ab-
sence of cell permeabilization by excluding TX-
100, a-syn-biotin PFF still binds with a Kd of 71 nM
(Fig. 1, B and C, and fig. S4). WT mouse cortical
neurons demonstrated a-syn-biotin PFF–binding,
whereas LAG3−/− mouse cortical neurons had
reduced a-syn-biotin PFF–binding (Fig. 1D and
fig. S6). Specific binding of a-syn-biotin PFF to
LAG3 in cortical neurons was determined by sub-
tracting the binding in WT cultures from the bind-
ing in LAG3−/− cultures and revealed a Kd of
103 nM (Fig. 1D and fig. S6). These results taken
together suggest that a-syn-biotin PFF binds to
extracellular LAG3 on neurons.
In vitro co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) studies
showed that a-syn-biotin PFF, but not a-syn-biotin
monomers, pulls down LAG3 (fig. S7A), and con-
versely, LAG3 pulls down a-syn-biotin PFF but
not a-syn-biotin monomers (fig. S7B). Moreover,
in vivo Co-IP studies showed that misfolded a-syn
from aged transgenic mice pulls down LAG3, but
monomeric a-syn from young transgenic mice
overexpressing human A53T a-syn mutant pro-
tein does not (22), nor do a-syn monomers from
WT aged or young mice (fig. S7C), which suggests
that LAG3 binds specifically to pathological species
of a-syn. We further confirmed using an enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) that a-syn-
biotin PFF binds to human recombinant LAG3
directly with a Kd of 2.7 nM (fig. S7D).
LAG3 specifically binds to a-syn PFF
To test the specificity of a-syn-biotin PFF binding
to LAG3, tau-biotin PFF, b-amyloid-biotin oligo-
mer, and b-amyloid PFF were tested in nontrans-
fected and LAG3-transfected SH-SY5Y cells via
the streptavidin-AP staining assay (Fig. 1E and
figs. S8 and S9) (19, 20). Tau-biotin PFF binds to
aah3374-2
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 1. a-Syn PFF binds to LAG3. (A) Individual clones from a library con-
sisting of 352 individual cDNAs encoding transmembrane proteins (GFC-
transfection array panel, Origene) were transfected into SH-SY5Ycells, and the
relative binding signals of human a-syn PFF to individual transmembrane pro-
teins areshown.Positivecandidates areLAG3 (NM_002286),NRNX1(NM_138735),
and APLP1 (NM_005166). (B) Mouse a-syn-biotin monomer and a-syn-biotin
PFF–binding affinity to SH-SY5Ycells expressing the indicated proteins. LAG3*
Kd assessment was performed without T
riton X-100 (TX-100). All other exper-
iments were performed with 0.1% TX-100. T
ransmembrane proteins similar to
the candidates were also tested. Quantification of bound a-syn-biotin PFF to the
candidates was performed with ImageJ. Kd values are means ± SEM and are
basedonmonomerequivalentconcentrations.Selectivitywascalculatedbydividing
Kd (monomer) by Kd (PFF). Binding of a-syn-biotin monomer was detected at a
concentration of 3000 nM, but binding was not saturable. (C) (T
op) a-Syn-biotin
monomer or a-syn-biotin PFF binding to LAG3-overexpressing SH-SY5Ycells as a
function of total a-syn concentration in 0% TX-100 or 0.1% TX-100 conditions
(monomer equivalent for PFFpreparations). (Bottom) Scatchard analysis. Kd =
71 nM (0% TX-100) and 77 nM (0.1% TX-100); data are the means ± SEM, n = 3
independent experiments. (D) Binding of a-syn-biotin PFF to cultured cortical neu-
rons (21 days in vitro) is reduced by LAG3 knockout (LAG3−/−), as assessed by
meansofalkalinephosphataseassay.a-Syn-biotinPFFWT
-Kd=374nM,LAG3−/−-Kd=
449 nM, estimated Kd for neuronal LAG3 (dotted line, DLAG3 = wild type minus
LAG3−/−) is 103 nM. Data are the means ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments.
*P < 0.05, Student’s t test. Power (1 – b error probability) = 1. (E) Specificity of
LAG3 binding with a-syn-biotin PFF (fig. S4).T
au-biotin PFF (fig. S8), b-amyloid-
biotin oligomer, and b-amyloid-biotin PFF (fig. S9) are negative controls.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 nontransfected SH-SY5Y cells in a saturable man-
ner, whereas overexpression of LAG3 fails to in-
crease the binding of tau-biotin PFF (Fig. 1E and
fig. S8, A and B). b-amyloid-biotin oligomer and
b-amyloid PFF binds to both nontransfected and
LAG3-overexpressing SH-SY5Y cells at high con-
centrations in a nonspecific manner (Fig. 1E and
fig. S9, A and B). Taken together, these results in-
dicate that LAG3 specifically binds to a-syn PFF.
Like other immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily
molecules, LAG3 contains an ectodomain com-
posed of four Ig-like domains (D1 to D4) (23). To
determine the a-syn-biotin PFF–binding domain,
we sequentially deleted each Ig-like domain of
LAG3 and performed the cell surface–binding
assay with overexpression of LAG3 deletion mu-
tants. These experiments revealed that a-syn-biotin
PFFpreferentiallybindstotheD1domain,whereas
deletion of the D2, D3, or intracellular domain
(ICD) substantially weakens binding, but deletion
of the D4 domain does not (fig. S10). Because
a-syn-biotin PFF binding to LAG3 is eliminated
by deletion of the D1 domain, additional deletions
of D1 subdomains (Ddel1-5-D1) were examined.
Ddel2(aa 52-80)-D1 and Ddel3(aa 81-109)-D1 sig-
nificantly reduceda-syn-biotinPFF binding toLAG3,
whereas Ddel1(aa23-51)-D1, Ddel4(aa110-138)-D1,
and Ddel5(aa139-167)-D1 moderately reduced bind-
ing of LAG3 to a-syn-biotin PFF (fig. S10), sug-
gesting that LAG3 residues 52 to 109 in the D1
domain are responsible for the LAG3 interaction
with a-syn-biotin PFF.
The endocytosis of a-syn PFF
involves LAG3
To determine whether LAG3 is involved in the
endocytosis of a-syn PFF, pHrodo red was con-
jugatedtoa-synPFF.pHrodoredisapH-dependent
dye that increases in fluorescence as pH decreases
from the neutral cytosolic pH to the acidic pH of
the endosome (fig. S11A) (24). Conjugation of a-
syn PFF with pHrodo red does not appreciably
change the properties of the a-syn PFF as assessed
with immunoblot and AFM (fig. S11, A and B).
a-Syn-pHrodo PFF undergoes endocytosis in WT
cortical neuron cultures, whereas LAG3−/− neurons
exhibited minimal a-syn-pHrodo PFF endocyto-
sis (Fig. 2, A and B, and fig. S11C). Overexpression
of LAG3 in WT cultures enhanced the endocytosis
of a-syn-pHrodo PFF, and overexpression of LAG3
in the LAG3−/−cortical cultures restored endocyto-
sis of a-syn-pHrodo PFF (Fig. 2, A and B, and fig.
S11C). Adeno-associated virus serotype 2 (AAV2)
expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) via a synapsin promoter was used to iden-
tify neurons and confirmed that a-syn-pHrodo
PFF was endocytosed in WT neurons, but much
less in LAG3−/− neurons (fig. S11D). Examination
of overexpression of the deletion mutants in LAG3−/−
cortical cultures showed that the D1 domain dele-
tion mutant failed to restore the endocytosis of
a-syn-pHrodo PFF (fig. S11, E and F). However,
introduction of LAG3 deletion mutants (D2, D3,
or D4) restored the internalization of a-syn-pHrodo
PFF (fig. S11, E and F).
The Rab5 guanosine triphosphatase is an early
endosomal marker and helps mediate endocyto-
sis (25). As such, we sought to confirm the endo-
cytosis of a-syn-biotin PFF into endosomes by
measuring the intensity of colocalized a-syn-biotin
PFF with Rab5. We found that a-syn-biotin PFF
was colocalized with Rab5 in WT cortical neu-
rons (Fig. 2, C and D). In contrast, there was less
a-syn-biotin PFF in LAG3−/− cortical neurons
(Fig. 2, C and D). Overexpression of LAG3 in WT
and LAG3−/− cortical neurons enhanced the in-
tensity of a-syn-biotin PFF colocalizing with
Rab5 (Fig. 2, C and D). Rab5 appears to be up-
regulated after LAG3 overexpression. LAG3 co-
endocytoses with a-syn PFF as LAG3, Rab5, and
a-syn-biotin PFF were colocalized (fig. S12A).
a-Syn-biotin PFF also colocalized with Rab5 in
dendrites and showed a similar pattern in WT,
WT + LAG3, LAG3−/−, and LAG3−/− + LAG3 neu-
rons (fig. S12, B and C). The endosome markers
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aah3374-3
Fig. 2. Endocytosis of a-syn PFF is dependent on LAG3. (A) Live image analysis of the endocytosis of
a-syn-pHrodo PFF. a-Syn PFF was conjugated with a pH-dependent dye (pHrodo red), in which fluo-
rescence increases as pH decreases from neutral to acidic environments. White arrowheads indicate
nontransfected WTor LAG3−/− neurons, and white arrows indicate LAG3-transfected neurons. Scale bar,
10 mm. (B) Quantification of (A), cell number (5-46) from n = 3 independent experiments. (C) Internalized
a-syn-biotin PFF colocalizes with Rab5. Colocalization of internalized a-syn-biotin PFF and Rab5 was
assessed by means of confocal microscopy. Scale bar, 10 mm. (D) Quantification of (C), cell number (13-32)
from n = 4 independent experiments. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with T
ukey’s correction. Data in
(B) and (D) are as means ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Power (1 – b error probability) = 1.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Rab7 and LAMP1 were also colocalized with
a-syn-biotin PFF (fig. S12D).
Examination of overexpression of the deletion
mutants in LAG3−/− neuronal culturesshowed that
the D1 domain deletion mutants failed to increase
the colocalization of a-syn-biotin PFF with Rab5
(fig. S13). However, introduction of LAG3 deletion
mutants (D2, D3, D4, and the ICD) enhanced the
intensity a-syn-biotin PFF colocalizing with Rab5
(fig. S13). Deletions of D1 subdomains [Ddel(1-5)-
D1] were also examined for a-syn-biotin PFF colo-
calization with Rab5. Consistent with our binding
assays, Ddel2-D1 and Ddel3-D1 exhibited the greatest
effect on reducing the intensity a-syn-biotin PFF
colocalizing with Rab5 (fig. S13).
Endosome-enriched fractions were isolated
via differential centrifugation (26, 27) from WT
and LAG3−/− cultures after treatment with a-syn-
biotin PFF (fig. S14A). Both monomeric and higher-
molecular-weight forms of a-syn-biotin PFF were
found in the endosome-enriched fraction of WT
neuron cultures, whereas there was significantly
less of both forms in LAG3−/− cultures (fig. S14, B
and C). Lentiviral-mediated overexpression of LAG3
in WT cultures enhanced the levels of a-syn-biotin
PFF in the endosome-enriched fractions and re-
stored the levels of a-syn-biotin PFF in LAG3−/−
culture endosome-enriched fractions (fig. S14, B
and C). LAG3 exists in the endosome-enriched
fraction (fig. S14D), which is consistent with the
data that LAG3, Rab5, and a-syn-biotin PFF are
colocalized (fig. S12A). To exclude the possibility
that deletion of LAG3 causes a generalized defect
in endocytosis, we studied the internalization of
latex beads, and there was no difference in the
internalization of latex beads between WT and
LAG3−/− cultures (fig. S14, E and F). LAG3 also
specificallyrecognizeda-synPFFbecausetau-biotin
PFF as characterized by means of TEM (fig. S15A)
were internalized in LAG3−/− neurons and failed
to show greater internalization in neurons over-
expressing LAG3 (fig. S15B), which is consistent
with the observation of the lack of tau-biotin PFF
binding to LAG3 (Fig. 1E and fig. S8, A and B).
Taken together, these results indicate that LAG3
can mediate the endocytosis of a-syn-biotin PFF
into neurons.
The absence of LAG3 prevents a-syn
PFF pathology
We then asked whether knocking out LAG3 pre-
vents the pathology induced by a-syn PFF. Phos-
phorylation of a-syn at serine 129 (P-a-syn) is
associated with pathology in a-synucleinopathies.
Its levels increase after treatment of a-syn PFF to
neuronal cultures (13, 14). Accordingly, we added
a-syn PFF to WT and LAG3−/− cortical cultures at
7 days in vitro. Ten days after a-syn PFF treat-
ment, thelevels of P-a-synwere markedly increased
in WT cultures, whereas the levels of P-a-syn in
LAG3−/− cultures were barely detectable (Fig. 3,
A and B). Overexpression of LAG3 enhanced the
level of P-a-syn in WT cultures and restored P-a-
syn levels in LAG3−/− cultures (Fig. 3, A and B).
Furthermore, the accumulation of P-a-syn colo-
calized with LAG3 (fig. S16A), which is consistent
with binding (fig. S16B) and the coendocytosis of
LAG3 and a-syn PFF (fig. S14D). Overexpressing
the D1 domain deletion mutant in LAG3−/− neu-
ron cultures failed to restore P-a-syn levels (fig.
S17). Overexpression of the D2, D3, and D4 domain
deletion mutants in LAG3−/− cortical cultures
recaptured the a-syn pathology as monitored by
P-a-syn (fig. S17).
Two weeks after a-syn PFF treatment of cor-
tical neurons, we examined immunoblots of a-syn
and P-a-syn from lysates sequentially extracted in
1% Triton X-100 (TX-soluble) followed by 2% SDS
(TX-insoluble). a-Syn PFF led to an accumulation
of a-syn and P-a-syn in the TX-insoluble fraction
in WT cultures, whereas there was significantly
less accumulation in LAG3−/− cultures (Fig. 3, C
and D). a-Syn PFF also caused a reduction in
SNAP25 and synapsin II levels compared with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 14 days after
aah3374-4
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 3. a-Syn PFF induced pathology is reduced by deletion of LAG3 in vitro. (A) WT and LAG3−/−
primarycortical neurons at 7 days in vitro were treated with a-syn PFFor PBS. LAG3 was overexpressed via
Lentivirus (LV) transduction in WT or LAG3−/− neurons at 4 days in vitro. Three days after transduction,
cultures 7 days in vitro were treated with a-syn PFF or PBS. All the cultures were fixed 10 days after
treatment in 4% PFA. Neurons were stained with rabbit mAb MJF-R13 (8-8) for P-a-syn. Scale bar, 40 mm.
(B) Quantification of (A), n = 5 independent experiments, each performed in duplicate.Values are given as
the means ± SEM. Statistical significance was determined by using one-way ANOVA followed with T
ukey’s
correction; ***P < 0.001. Power (1 – b error probability) = 1. (C) Immunoblots in WTand LAG3−/− neuron
lysates of misfolded a-syn, P-a-syn, synapsin II, SNAP25, and LAG3. b-actin served as a loading control.WT
and LAG3−/− neuron lysates were sequentially extracted in 1% TX-100 (TX-soluble) followed by 2% SDS
(TX-insoluble) 14 days after a-syn PFF treatment. a-Syn PFFrecruited endogenous a-syn into TX-insoluble
and hyperphosphorylated aggregates, which was ameliorated by deletion of LAG3. a-Syn PFF caused a
reduction in levels of SNAP25 and synapsin II compared with PBS 14 days after treatment. Deletion of
LAG3 prevented PFF-induced synaptic protein loss. (D to G) Quantification of (C). Values are given as
means ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments. Statistical significance was determine by using one-way
ANOVA followed by T
ukey’s correction; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 treatment, as previously described (13). Deletion
of LAG3 prevented the a-syn PFF–induced syn-
aptic protein loss (Fig. 3, C to G). Overexpression
of LAG3 in WT cultures caused an increase accu-
mulation of a-syn and P-a-syn in the TX-insoluble
fraction in WT cultures and a further reduction in
SNAP25andsynapsinIIlevels,whereasitprevented
the sparing in LAG3−/− cultures (Fig. 3, C to G).
Cell-to-cell transmission of a-syn PFF
is reduced in LAG3−/− neurons
To examine the transmission of a-syn PFF and to
establish the role of LAG3 in the interneuron trans-
mission of a-syn, we used a microfluidic neuro-
nal culture device with three chambers connected
in tandem by a series of microgrooves separating
the chambers (TCND1000, Xona Microfluidics).
The medium volume in chamber 1 (C1) is 50 mL
lower than the one in chamber 2 (C2) and 100 mL
lower than the one in chamber 3 (C3) in order to
prevent diffusion of a-syn PFF to adjacent cham-
bers. Cortical neurons were cultured in each cham-
ber. To ensure that a-syn PFF cannot diffuse
between chambers, primary WT cortical neurons
in C1 were treated with a-syn-biotin PFF. Fourteen
days after treatment, the neurons were fixed in
4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and stained with
streptavidin-568 fluorescence dye. Only neurons
in C1 exhibited immunofluorescence, indicating
that a-syn-biotin PFF cannottransmit from cham-
ber to chamber through diffusion (fig. S18A).
a-Syn transmission from C1 to C3 requires in-
termediating neurons in C2 because a-syn PFF
administration to C1 failed to induce P-a-syn ac-
cumulation in C3 when C2 was left empty (Fig. 4,
A to C). Using this system, the transmission of
a-syn PFF was monitored via P-a-syn levels in
WT and LAG3−/− cultures (Fig. 4, D to F, and fig.
S18B). The microfluidic neuron culture device was
then set up to contain WT cultures in C1 and C3,
whereas C2 either contained WT or LAG3−/− cul-
tures. In another set of chambers, LAG3 was over-
expressed in the C2 chamber containing either
WT or LAG3−/− cultures. Administration of a-syn
PFF to C1 led to increased P-a-syn levels (Fig. 4, E
and F, and fig. S18B). To assess the propagation
of a-syn PFF along dendrites and axons as well as
transmission of misfolded a-syn, we monitored
the levels of P-a-syn in C2 and C3. When C2 con-
tains WT cultures, P-a-syn was observed in both
C2 and C3, and LAG3 overexpression in C2 neurons
enhanced the levels of P-a-syn in both chambers
(Fig. 4, E and F, and fig. S18B). In contrast, when
C2 contains LAG3−/− cultures, P-a-syn levels were
significantly reduced in C2 and were absent in C3
(Fig.4,E andF,andfig.S18B). LAG3overexpression
in C2 neurons restored the propagation of a-syn
PFF as assessed by similar levels of P-a-syn com-
pared with that in WT cultures (Fig. 4, E and F,
and fig. S18B). These results taken together in-
dicate that LAG3 is required for the propagation
and transmission of pathologic a-syn.
a-Syn PFF toxicity is reduced in
LAG3−/− neurons
Treatment of WT cortical cultures with a-syn
PFF causes neuronal cell death, as previously de-
scribed (fig. S19) (13). a-Syn PFF treatment led to
substantial cell death compared with PBS-treated
cultures as assessed with propidium iodide stain-
ing (fig. S19, A and B). LAG3−/− cultures exhibited
significantly less cell death, and overexpression
of LAG3 restored the toxicity to a-syn PFF (fig. S19,
A and B). We also performed neuronal nuclei
(NeuN) antibody staining to assess neuronal num-
ber. a-Syn PFF treatment caused a significant loss
of NeuN immunoreactivity, and overexpression
of LAG3 enhanced neuronal loss (fig. S19, C and D).
NeuN immunoreactivity was preserved in LAG3−/−
cultures after a-syn PFF treatment, whereas over-
expression of LAG3 in LAG3−/− cultures led to a
loss of NeuN immunoreactivity (fig. S19, C and D).
NeuN immunostaining in LAG3−/− neurons with
overexpression of deletion mutants (DD1-DD4
and DICD) indicated that deletion of the D1 do-
main failed to exhibit cell death, but deletion of
D2, D3, D4, or the ICD domains still led to cell
death (fig. S19, E and F). Because deletion of the
LAG3 ICD domain may reduce a-syn PFF tox-
icity, signaling through the ICD of LAG3 may
contribute to a-syn PFF toxicity. Furthermore,
because calcium might be involved in a-syn–
induced neurotoxicity (13, 28–32), calcium in-
flux was monitored in response to a-syn PFF.
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aah3374-5
Fig. 4. a-Syn PFF transmission
is reduced by deletion of LAG3
in vitro. (A) Schematic repre-
sentation of the three chambers in
which neurons were cultured:
chamber 1 (C1), chamber 2 (C2),
and chamber 3 (C3) (top); or C1
and C3 (bottom). (B) a-Syn PFF
was added to C1 of the microfluidic
device. On day 14, P-a-syn was
detected in C2 and C3 when
neurons were present in all three
chambers.T
ransmission to C3
is not detectable when neurons
are not present in C2. Scale bar,
100 mm. (C) Quantification
of immunofluorescent images in
(B). Data are the means ± SEM,
n = 3 independent experiments.
One-way ANOVA followed by
Sidak’s correction; ***P < 0.001
versus C1. Power (1 – b error
probability) = 1. (D) Schematic of
microfluidic neuron device with
three chambers to separate
neurons seeded in three
chambers. (E) T
ransmission of
pathologic P-a-syn from C1 to C2
to C3 14 days after addition of
a-syn PFF in C1.The different
combinations of neurons tested in
C2, listed as C1-(C2)-C3, are WT-(WT)-WT,WT-(WT+LAG3)-WT,WT-(LAG3−/−)-WT,WT-(LAG3−/−+LAG3)-WT. Scale bar, 10 mm. (F) Quantification of (E).Values are
given as means ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments. Statistical significance was determine by using one-way ANOVA followed by T
ukey’s correction; *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Power (1-b error probability) = 1.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Perfusion of a-syn PFF (500 nM) onto WT cortical
neurons led to a gradual increase in intracellular
calcium levels (fig. S20). Lack of LAG3 caused a
significant decrease of a-syn PFF–induced calcium
influx, which may account for the reduced toxicity
in LAG3−/− cultures (fig. S20).
Antibodies to LAG3 reduce a-syn PFF
toxicity and cell-to-cell transmission
Twodifferent antibodies toLAG3,C9B7W(50mg/mL)
(33) and 410C9 (50 mg/mL) (34), blocked the bind-
ing of a-syn-biotin PFF (500 nM) in SH-SY5Y cells
expressing LAG3 (Fig. 5A). The antibodies to LAG3
also reduced the enrichment of a-syn-biotin PFF
(1 mM) in the endosomal-enriched fraction of pri-
mary cortical neurons 12 days in vitro (Fig. 5B),
which is consistent with reduced endocytosis in
LAG3−/− neuron culture. Both antibodies reduced
the subsequent a-syn PFF pathology detected with
phosphorylated a-syn Ser129 (P-a-syn) (Fig. 5C). Rat
or mouse IgG had no effect in these assays. Cell-to-
cell transmission of a-syn PFF as detected with P-a-
syn was significantly reduced by 410C9, whereas
mouse IgG had no effect after 14 days of a-syn PFF
treatment (Fig. 5D and fig. S21).
To determine whether LAG3 mediates the
pathology induced by human a-syn PFF, we as-
sessed P-a-syn immunoreactivity in cortical cul-
tures from mouse prion promoter transgenic mice
overexpressing human A53T mutant a-syn (22)
in the presence or absence of the 410C9 and in
human A53T mutant a-syn cultures lacking LAG3.
Human a-syn PFF treatment of A53T a-syn neu-
ron cultures increased P-a-syn, whereas the absence
of LAG3 or the antibody to LAG3 significantly
reduced P-a-syn immunoreactivity (fig. S22, A
and B). Brain homogenates from 10-month-old
symptomatic human A53T transgenic mice were
used to assess endogenous a-syn aggregates, and
we found that they also increased the level of P-a-
syn, whereas deletion of LAG3 or treatment with
the antibody to LAG3 410C9 reduced the level
of P-a-syn induced by A53T transgenic brain
homogenates (fig. S22, C and D). Human a-syn
PFF induced toxicity in human A53T a-syn trans-
genic neuronal cultures, whereas deletion of LAG3
or 410C9 significantly reduced the toxicity (fig.
S22, E and F). These results, taken together, sug-
gest that LAG3 can mediate the pathology of
human a-syn aggregates.
The absence of LAG3 reduces a-syn PFF
transmission and toxicity in vivo
To determine whether LAG3 is necessary for a-
syn PFF transmission and toxicity in vivo, we
stereotactically injected a-syn PFF into the dorsal
striatum of WT and LAG3−/− mice (35). Repre-
sentative maps (fig. S23A, red dots) and repre-
sentative images and quantification (fig. S23, B
and C) of the distribution of LB/LN-like pathol-
ogy of P-a-syn accumulation and the stereotaxic
injection site indicated by gray circles in the a-
syn PFF–injected hemisphere are shown for mice
sacrificed at 30 and 180 days after injection (fig.
S23). P-a-syn immunoreactivity was monitored
in substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) tyro-
sine hydroxylase (TH)–positive neurons 30 and
aah3374-6
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
Fig. 5. Antibodies to LAG3 block a-syn PFF binding, endocytosis, pathology, and transmission.
(A) C9B7Wand 410C9 (both 50 mg/mL), antibodies to LAG3, block the binding of a-syn-biotin PFF (500 nM)
on SH-SY5Ycells expressing LAG3. Scale bar, 50 mm. (Right) Quantification of images in (A). Data are the
means ± SEM, n =3 independent experiments, Student’s t test; ***P < 0.001. (B) C9B7W and 410C9 (both
50 mg/mL) reduced the endocytosis of a-syn-biotin PFF (1 mM) in primary cortical neurons 12 days in vitro.
Rab7 was used to confirm the isolation of endosomes. (C) P-a-syn as detected with rabbit mAb MJF-R13 (8-8)
was reduced by antibodies to LAG3 in primary cortical neurons. Scale bar, 50 mm. (Bottom) Quantification
of images in (C). Data are the means ± SEM, n = 3 independent experiments, one-way ANOVA followed by
T
ukey’s correction; **P < 0.01. (D) 410C9 delays a-syn PFF transmission in neurons. (T
op left) A schematic
representation of the three microchambers in which neurons were cultured in C1, C2, and C3. a-Syn PFF
was added to C1 of the microfluidic device on day 7
. Mouse IgG or 410C9 (both 50 mg/mL) was added to C2
on day 7
. a-Syn PFF transmission was detected via P-a-syn immunostaining in C2 and C3 on day 21. Scale
bar, 10 mm. (T
op right) Quantification of images at bottom. Data are the means ± SEM, n = 3 independent
experiments, one-way ANOVA followed by T
ukey’s correction. ***P < 0.001; n.s., nonsignificant.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 180 days after a-syn PFF injection. We observed
substantial P-a-syn staining in WT SNpc TH–
positive neurons at 30 and 180 days (Fig. 6A). In
LAG3−/− SNpc TH–positive neurons, P-a-syn stain-
ing is reduced by >50% at both time points. Ac-
companying the a-syn pathology, stereologic
counting of SNpc TH– and Nissl-positive neurons
revealed significant loss of dopamine (DA) neu-
rons in WT mice at 180 days after injection (Fig. 6B).
There was a dramatic preservation of DAneurons
in a-syn PFF–injected LAG3−/− mice (Fig. 6B). High-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analy-
sis demonstrated a significant reduction in DA
and its metabolites 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic
acid (DOPAC), homovanillic acid (HVA), and 3MT
in WT mice and a sparing of the reduction in
LAG3−/− mice (Fig. 6C and fig. S24, A to C). Im-
munoblot analysis demonstrated a significant
reduction in TH and the DA transporter (DAT) in
WT mice anda sparing of the reduction in LAG3−/−
mice (fig. S24D). At 180 days after a-syn PFF in-
jection, WT mice exhibited robust clasping behav-
ior when suspended by their tail similar to prior
reports (14, 36), whereas LAG3−/− mice demon-
strated a response similar to PBS-injected mice
(fig. S24E). WT mice injected with a-syn PFF
showed significant impairment in the pole test,
which is thought to be a sensitive behavioral
indicator of dopaminergic function (37), with in-
creased time to turn and time to reach the base,
whereas LAG3−/− mice injected with a-syn PFF
showed no significant impairments (Fig. 6D). Grip
strength analysis indicated that WT mice have
reduced forelimb and forelimb plus hindlimb
strength after a-syn PFF injection, which is sim-
ilar to prior reports (14, 36), whereas the LAG3−/−
mice showed no significant loss in grip strength
(Fig. 6E). Therefore, LAG3 is crucial for a-syn
PFF–induced neurodegeneration and the devel-
opment of PD-related motor defects.
Conclusion
The major finding of this paper is that a-syn PFF
transmission and toxicity is initiated by binding
LAG3. We isolated LAG3 via an unbiased screen
for a-syn PFF–binding sites. Although our data
indicate that LAG3 is not the sole a-syn PFF–
binding site, it plays a major role in a-syn PFF
endocytosis and transmission. Moreover, mice
lacking LAG3 exhibit delayed a-syn PFF–induced
pathology and reduced toxicity.
Consistent with our observations that the ab-
sence of LAG3 does not completely reduce a-syn
PFF–binding and pathology, we observed that
a-syn PFF also binds to APLP1 and neurexins. A
recent study also identified neurexin 1a and 2a
as a-syn fibril–binding partners (32). The Toll-
like receptor 2 (TLR2) on microglia was shown to
be involved in the activation of microglia because
of exposure to oligomeric a-syn from conditioned
neuronal media (38). Heparan sulfate proteoglycans
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aah3374-7
Fig. 6. a-Syn PFF–induced pathology is reduced by deletion of LAG3
in vivo. (A) Representative P-a-syn immunostaining and quantification in the
substantia nigra par compacta (SNpc) of WTand LAG3−/− mice sacrificed at 30
and 180 days after intrastriatal a-syn PFF injection. Data are the means ± SEM, n =
5 to 9 mice per group, one-way ANOVA with Sidak’s correction. (B) Stereology
counts from TH immunostainingand Nissl staining of SNpc DA neurons of WTand
LAG3−/− mice at 180 days after intrastriatal a-syn PFF, a-syn monomer, or PBS
injection. Data are the mean number of cells per region ± SEM, n = 5 to 9 mice per
group, one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s correction. (C) DA concentrations in the
striatum of a-syn PFF–injected mice and PBS-treated controls measured at 180 days
by means of HPLC. Data are the means ± SEM, n = 5 to 8 mice per group, one-
way ANOVA with T
ukey’s correction. (D and E) 180 days after a-syn PFF injection,
the pole test and grip strength were performed in WTor LAG3−/− mice injected
with PBS or a-syn PFF
. Behavioral abnormalities in the pole test and grip strength
induced by a-syn PFF injection were ameliorated in LAG3−/− mice. Data are the
means ± SEM, n = 7 to 9 mice per group for behavioral studies. Statistical sig-
nificance was determined by using one-way ANOVAwith T
ukey’s correction; *P <
0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001; n.s., nonsignificant. Power (1 – b error probability) = 1.
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 (HSPGs) can mediate a-syn aggregate uptake and
seeding via micropinocytosis (39), and the Α3-
subnit of the Na+/K+–adenosine triphosphatase
(a3-NKA) binds to a-syn fibrils and oligomers (32).
Whether these alternative a-syn–binding partners
contribute to a-syn transmission and pathogenesis
and how they might interact with LAG3 requires
further study.
LAG3 is enriched not only in the thymus and
spleen, but the brain as well (33). Immunoblot anal-
ysis indicates that LAG3 is expressed predomi-
nantly in neurons, which is consistent with the
observation that LAG3 mediates the transmis-
sion of misfolded a-syn from neuron to neuron.
According to the Allen Brain Atlas, LAG3 is local-
ized to neurons throughout the central nervous
system (CNS), including DA neurons. It is becoming
increasingly clear that proteins that were thought to
function primarily in the immune system also have
importantroles inthe nervoussystem, includingthe
functional requirement for class I major histocom-
patibility complex (MHC) in CNS development and
plasticity (40, 41). Class II MHC is also expressed in
the nervous system (42). The function of LAG3 in
theCNSisnotknown,and whether misfolded a-syn
activates downstream signaling after engagement
of LAG3 requires further study.
We propose a previously unknown mechanism
for cell-to-cell transmission of misfolded a-syn that
involves the endocytosis of exogenous a-syn PFF
by the engagement of LAG3 on neurons.
The interaction between LAG3 and a-syn PFF
provides a new target for the development of thera-
peutics designed to slow the progression of PD and
related a-synucleinopathies. This could potentially
be quickly translated in PD because many phar-
maceutical companies are developing agents that
block LAG3 (43). The prion-like spread of a-syn
PFF and other amyloidogenic proteins is a mul-
tistep process involving the uptake, propagation,
andreleaseof pathologicalamyloid proteins. USP19
was recently shown to promote a-syn secretion,
suggesting a pathway by which pathologic a-syn
exits cells in a-synucleinopathies (44). Combined
with LAG3 playing a major role in the internal-
ization of pathologic a-syn, we speculate that more
mediators will be discovered that are involved in
the cell-to-cell transmission of pathologic a-syn.
Materials and methods
a-Syn purification and a-syn
PFF preparation
Recombinant a-syn proteins were purified as pre-
viously described (18). a-Syn PFF were prepared
by agitating a-syn in a transparent glass vial with
a magnetic stirrer (350 rpm at 37°C). After 7 days
of incubation the a-syn aggregates were sonicated
for 30 s at 10% amplitude (Branson Digital Sonifier,
Danbury, CT, USA) and the a-syn monomer and
a-synPFFwereseparated byFPLCusing aSuperose
6 10/300GL column (GE Healthcare, Life Sciences,
Wauwatosa, WI, USA) and fractions containing the
a-syn monomer and a-syn PFF were kept at -80°C.
To characterize a-syn PFF mediators, recombinant
a-synmonomerwaspurifiedandlabeledwithsulfo-
NHS-LC-Biotin(ThermoScientific,GrandIsland, NY,
USA.EZ-linkSulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin,21435).Themolar
ratio of biotin to a-syn was 2~3. After conjugation,
a-syn-biotin monomer and a-syn-biotin PFF was
prepared as mentioned above.
Preparation and characterization
of tau fibrils
Recombinant Tau protein was obtained from
rPeptide (T-1001-2, Bogart, GA, USA). Tau was lab-
eled with sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin as described above
for a-syn. In vitro fibrillization of full-length Tau
(2N4R) was prepared by mixing 50 mM low mole-
cular weight heparin and 2 mM DTT with 300 mM
recombinant Tau in 100 mM sodium acetate buffer
(pH 7.0)under constant orbital agitation(1,000 rpm)
at 37°C for 5-7 days (45). Successful fibrillization was
confirmed using the thioflavin T fluorescence assay
and transmission electron microscopy. The fibrils
were mechanically broken down into small frag-
ments by sonication (30 s, 10% amplitude).
Preparation of synthetic
b-amyloid1-42 oligomers
b-amyloid1-42 peptide was purchased from Anaspec
(AS-64129-1). The b-amyloid1-42 peptide was first
dissolved in Hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP), evapo-
rated overnight in the fume hood, and then com-
pletely dried down for 1 hour using a SpeedVac
(Thermo Scientific, USA). The resulting peptide
film was dissolved in DMSO at 2.2 mM and dil-
uted in PBS to obtain a 250 mM stock solution.
b-amyloid1-42 was labeled with sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin
as described above for a-syn. The solution was in-
cubated at 4°C for at least 24 hours to oligomerize
the peptides (46). The solution was aliquoted after
oligomerization and stored at -80°C until use. Before
usage, the solution was centrifuged at 12,000 g for
10 min to remove the fibril forms of b-amyloid1-42.
The supernatant, which contains the dissolved oli-
gomeric b-amyloid1-42 was used for experiments.
Preparation of synthetic b-amyloid1-42
fibrils and PFF
b-amyloid1-42 peptide was purchased from Anaspec
(AS-64129-1). After HFIP treatment, b-amyloid1-42
monomer was freshly resuspended in DMSO at
concentration of 2.2 mM. The stock solution was
further dissolved in PBS to a final concentration
of 250 mM and labeled with sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin,
then incubated in 37°C for 24 hours. After form-
ing b-amyloid fibrils, the solution was sonicated
for 2 min to fragment and form the pre-formed
fibrils (PFF) before treatment to neurons.
Atomic force microscopy
(AFM) measurements
An atomic force microscope (AFM) (Asylum MFP-
3D-BIOTM, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) was used to
perform AFM experiments. Under ambient con-
dition using Si cantilevers with nominal resonance
frequency of 330 kHz and nominal spring con-
stant 20-80 N/m (Veeco, Horsham, PA, USA) AFM
was performed in the tapping mode.
Transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) measurements
Samples were adsorbed to glow discharged 400
mesh carbon coated copper grids (EMS) for 2 min.
The grids were quickly transferred through three
drops of Tris-HCl (50 mM pH 7.4) rinse, then
floated upon two consecutive drops of 0.75%
uranyl formate 30 s each. Stain was either as-
pirated or blotted off with #1 Whatman filter
paper triangles. Grids were allowed to dry before
imaging on a Phillips CM 120 TEM operating at
80 kV. Images were captured and digitized with
an ER-80 CCD (8 megapixel) by advanced micro-
scopy techniques.
Cell line selection for expression cloning
COS-7, HeLa, HEK293FT and SH-SY5Y cells were
screened for a-syn-biotin PFF binding using a
similar method that was used to identify binding
partners of b-amyloid-biotin oligomer (21). Cells
were incubated with a-syn-biotin PFF (0 mM, 0.5 mM
and 1 mM total a-syn-biotin monomer concentra-
tions) in DMEM media with 10% FBS at room
temperature for 2 hours. We removed unbound
a-syn-biotinPFFby thoroughly washing(4-6 times,
20 min each) with DMEM media with 10% FBS
followed by fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde
in PBS. The cells were then washed three times
with PBS, blocked for 30 min with 10% horse
serum and 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS. Using alkaline-
phosphatase-conjugated streptavidin (final dilution
1:2000) in PBS supplemented with 5% horse serum
and 0.05% Triton X-100, the cells were incubated
for 16 hours and then bound alkaline phospha-
tase was visualized by 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl
phosphate/nitro blue tetrazolium reaction (19, 20).
a-Syn-biotinPFFbindingtomousecorticalneurons
was used as a positive control. Quantification of
bound a-syn-biotin PFF to cells was performed
with ImageJ.
Screening strategy, expression cloning
and SH-SY5Y cell surface binding assays
A focused set of experiments to identify a-syn PFF
mediator(s) was performed. We transfected a li-
brary consisting of 352 individual cDNA clones
encoding transmembrane proteins (TMGW10001,
GFC-transfection array panel, Origene, Rockville,
MD, USA) into SH-SY5Y cells (21). Two days after
transfection, the cells were incubated for 2 hours
with a-syn-biotin PFF (1 mM total a-syn-biotin
monomer concentration) in DMEM media with
10% FBS at room temperature. We removed un-
bound a-syn-biotin PFF by thoroughly washing
(4-6 times, 20 min each) with DMEM media with
10% FBS and then fixed with 4% paraformal-
dehyde in PBS. The cells were then washed three
times with PBS, blocked for 30 min with 10%
horse serum and 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS. Using
alkaline-phosphatase-conjugated streptavidin (final
dilution 1:2000) in PBS supplemented with 5%
horse serum and 0.05% Triton X-100, the cells
were incubated for 16 hours and then bound
alkaline phosphatase was visualized by 5-bromo-
4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate/nitro blue tetrazo-
lium reaction (19–21). Bound a-syn-biotin PFF to
LAG3-transfected SH-SY5Y cells was quantified
with ImageJ. The Z-factor was calculated by the
value of the positive control (neuron) and the
negative control (SH-SY5Y cells expressed GFP)
in each plate.
aah3374-8
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 ImageJ analysis
Threshold was selected under Image/Adjust
in order to achieve a desired range of intensity
values for each experiment. Once determined,
this threshold was applied to all the images in
each experiment. The threshold setting was
also used to exclude the background. After ex-
clusion of the background, the selected area in
the signal intensity range of the threshold was
measured using the measurement option under
the Analyze/Measure menu. The area values with
different concentrations of a-syn-biotin (mono-
mer or PFF) were input into the Prism program
to obtain Kd.
Primary neuronal cultures, a-syn PFF
transduction and neuron binding assays
CD1 mice were obtained from the Jackson Lab-
oratories (Bar Harbor, ME). Primary cortical neu-
rons were prepared from E15.5 pups and cultured
in Neurobasal media supplemented with B-27,
0.5 mM L-glutamine, penicillin and streptomycin
(all from Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) on
tissue culture plates coated with poly-L-lysine. The
neurons were maintained by changing medium
every 3-4 days. a-Syn PFF (final concentration
5 mg/mL) was added at 7 days in vitro (DIV) and
a-syn PFF was incubated for 10-21 days followed
by biochemical experiments or toxicity assays.
Each experiment was performed in duplicate and
repeated 3-6 times. Neurons were harvested for
indirect immunofluorescence and sequential ex-
traction. To determine the amount of bound a-
syn-biotin PFF in WT and LAG3−/− neuronal
cultures, a-syn-biotin PFF with different concen-
trations were used. Quantification of bound a-syn-
biotin PFF to WT and LAG3−/− neurons were
performed with ImageJ.
Primary microglial and astrocyte culture
Primary microglial and astrocyte cultures were
performed as described previously (47). Whole
brains from mouse pups at postnatal day age 1 (P1)
were obtained. After removal of the meninges
the brains were washed in DMEM-F12 supple-
mented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 50 U/mL
penicillin, 50 mg/mL streptomycin, 2 mM L-
glutamine, 100 mM non-essential amino acids, and
2 mM sodium pyruvate (DMEM-F12 complete me-
dium) three times. The brains were transferred
to 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA followed by 10 min of
gentle agitation. DMEM-F12 complete medium
was used to stop the trypsinization. The brains
were washed three times in this medium again.
A single cell suspension was obtained by tritura-
tion. Cell debris and aggregates were removed by
passing the single cell suspension through a 100 mm
nylon mesh. The final single cell suspension thus
achieved was cultured in T-75 flasks for 13 days,
with a complete medium change on day 6. The
mixed glial cell population was separated into
astrocyte rich and microglia rich fractions using
the EasySep Mouse CD11b Positive Selection Kit
(StemCell). The magnetically separated fraction
containing microglia and the pour-off fraction
containing astrocytes were cultured separately,
and harvested 48 hours after plating by scraping.
Mouse strains
C57BL6 and CD1 mice were obtained from the
Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). LAG3−/−
mice (48) were kindly provided Dr. Charles Drake
(Johns Hopkins University) and were maintained
on a C57BL6 background. The mice do not devel-
op any autoimmune or inflammatory phenotype.
However, they do have a defect in T cell homeosta-
sis and at 3-4 months they have enlarged spleens
and lymph nodes (43). All housing, breeding, and
procedures were performed according to the NIH
Guide for the Care and Use of Experimental Ani-
mals and approved by the Johns Hopkins Univ-
ersity Animal Care and Use Committee.
Human A53T a-synuclein
transgenic mice, neuron culture
and brain homogenates
LAG3−/− mice were crossbred to G2-3 human A53T
a-synuclein transgenic mice to obtain A53T a-
synuclein and LAG3−/−/A53T a-synuclein neuron
cultures.Substantialneurodegenerationisobserved
in the human A53T a-synuclein transgenic mice
including serine 129 phosphorylation and the
formation of a-synuclein fibrils (22). Brain areas
that exhibit neuropathology including the brain-
stem and cerebellum of the human A53T a-
synuclein transgenic mice were dissected and
stored at -80°C. The brain tissue was sonicated
in sterile PBS (100 mg per 1 ml of buffer) and cen-
trifuged for 5 min (3000 g at 4°C). The resultant
supernatant was taken and stored at -80°C until
further use.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) analysis
The binding affinity between a-syn-biotin PFF and
LAG3 was analyzed using a sandwich ELISA kit
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) according to the
manufacturer instructions. The lyophilized human
LAG3 protein was added into a human LAG3
antibody-coated ELISA plate and left overnight
at 4°C with gentle shaking. Followed by 5 washes,
20 min each. Different concentrations of a-syn-
biotin PFF (0.1 nM to 100 nM) were added to
each well and were incubated for 2 hours at 22°C
with gentle shaking. HRP-streptavidin solution
was incubated for 45 min at 22°C with gentle
shaking followed by 5 washes, 20 min each.
Finally, the ELISA colorimetric TMB (3,3′,5,5′-
tetramethylbenzidine) reagent was added and
incubated for 10 min at 22°C in the dark with
gentle shaking.
Plasmids
Human and mouse LAG3 cDNA clones were kind-
ly obtained from Dr. Charles Drake at the Johns
Hopkins University, School of Medicine. pcDNA3.1-
APLP1, APP and APLP2 cDNA clone were ob-
tained from Dr. Yasushi Shimoda at Nagaoka
UniversityofTechnologyandDr.GopalThinakaran
at The University of Chicago. pCAG-Neurexin
cDNA clones were obtained from Dr. Thomas
C. Südhof at Stanford University and Dr. Peter
Scheiffele at Basel University. The pMX-CD4 plas-
mid #14614 was obtained from Addgene (Cam-
bridge, MA, USA).
Deletion mutants
LAG3 deletion mutants with a HA tag were con-
structed by PCR using herculase polymerase
(Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA) and
primers were designed to flank the sequences to
be deleted. The DNA was separated on a 1% agar-
ose gel and the appropriate band was excised
and isolated using a gel extraction kit (Qiagen,
Valencia, CA, USA). 100 ng of DNA was phos-
phorylated at the 5′ end using T4 polynucleotide
kinase (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) for
30 min at 37°C and ligated overnight at room
temperature using T4 DNA ligase (Invitrogen,
Grand Island, NY, USA). Reactions were purified
with a PCR purification kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA,
USA) and transformed into competent Stbl3 cells
(Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA). Integrity of
the constructs was verified by sequencing.
Live images
a-SynPFFwaslabeledwithpHrodored(Invitrogen,
Grand Island, NY, USA). pHrodo red is weakly
fluorescent at neutral pH, but fluorescence in-
creases as the pH drops. a-syn-pHrodo PFF was
directly added to LAG3 WT and LAG3−/− neuron
groups. For the WT + LAG3 and LAG3−/− + LAG3
groups, neurons were co-transfected with LAG3
and GFP expression vector 2 days prior to the
addition of a-syn-pHrodo PFF. Live images were
recorded every 0.5~1 min for 20~30 min using
Microscope Axio Observer Z1 (Zeiss, Dublin, CA,
USA). 1~4 min later after a-syn-pHrodo treat-
ment, the cells were suitable for recording. Treat-
ment with calcein AM (C1430, ThermoFisher
Scientific, USA) was used to identify the outline
of neurons for quantification. Transduction with
AAV2-eSYN-EGFP-WPRE in some experiments
(VB4870, Vector Biosystems Inc., USA) was also used
to identify neurons. This AAV is a EGFP construct
driven by the neuron E/SYN promoter, a hybrid
promoter consisting of a 0.4 Kb CMV enhancer (E)
and the 0.45 Kb human Synapsin I promoter frag-
ment (SYN). Outlining the neuron via the Zeiss Zen
Software and then subtracting the background de-
termined the signal intensity of the a-syn-pHrodo
PFF. The baseline was established as the fluores-
cence intensity of the neuron at 2-3 min after a-
syn-pHrodo PFF treatment. The percentage of
internalized a-syn-pHrodoPFF signal at each time
point was obtained by calculating the ratio to the
baseline in each experiment. The live images in
Fig. 2A were normalized to reduce background.
Colocalization of Rab5 and a-syn-biotin PFF
The images were obtained using the same expo-
sure time and treated in the same way for anal-
ysis. The signal of a-syn-biotin PFF colocalized
with Rab5 was measured and quantified by the
Zeiss Zen software, by outlining the colocalization
and measuring the signal intensity and area of
the colocalized signals. The overall signal was
determined by multiplying the signal intensity
by the area to determine the overall value.
Neuronal internalization of latex beads
Latex beads (Sigma, USA) were applied to 12-14
DIVwildtypeandLAG3−/−neuronculture(1mL/mL)
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aah3374-9
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 for 4 hours at 37°C. The numbers of internalized
latex beads were quantified by confocal microscopy.
Calcium imaging
Intracellular calcium levels were monitored with
the fluorescent calcium indicator, Fluo-4 acetoxy-
methyl (AM) ester (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA, USA). Primary cortical neurons
derivedfromwild-typeandLAG3−/−embryomouse
brains were plated on polyornithine-coated glass
coverslips for 18 days, and then were loaded with
Fluo-4 AM for 30 min at 1 mM final concentra-
tion. After one wash with Hank’s balanced salt
solution (HBSS) (with 2 mM Calcium chloride),
the cells were placed in a 37°C heated adaptor on
a confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany). Live
imaging was performed with an excitation wave-
length of 485 nm and an emission wavelength of
525 nm. Regions of interest (ROI) were selected
in a field having usually more than 10 neurons.
PFF (0.5 mM) was added with perfusion when the
baseline fluorescent signals had been steady
for 5 min, and recordings continued for an addi-
tional 70 min. Images were acquired at 30 s inter-
vals, and were analyzed with Zen (Carl Zeiss,
Germany) and ImageJ software.
LAG3 antibody blocking experiments
Anti-LAG3 antibodies (C9B7W and 410C9) were
administered to cell cultures (50 mg/mL) 30 min
before a-syn PFF treatment (33, 34). Rat IgG and
mouse IgG were applied as negative controls at the
same concentration. SH-SY5Y cells overexpressing
LAG3 were used for the binding assay 2 days after
transfection of LAG3. Mouse primary cortical neu-
rons (12 DIV) were used for the endocytosis endo-
some enrichment assay. Neurons (7 DIV) were
treated with a-syn PFF for pathology and trans-
mission assays. The antibodies were added to
chamber 2 of the microfluidic chambers in the
transmission assay.
Endosome enrichment
a-Syn-biotin PFF was administered to neuron
(12 DIV) cultures and incubated for 1.5 hours. To
remove the bound a-syn-biotin PFF, trypsin was
added for 30 s and followed by three brief washes
with culture medium. Endosomes were enriched
as previously described (26, 27). The neurons were
harvested with PBS and prepared with lysis buffer
(250 mM sucrose, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4),
5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA) with
a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, New York,
NY, USA). The suspended cell lysates were pipetted
6 times and passed through a syringe 20 times
(1 ml TB Syringe, BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA).
The endosomes were harvested in the third
pellet followed by three steps of centrifugation
1st(1000 g, 10 min), 2nd (16,000 g, 20 min) 3rd
(100,000 g, 1 h) for immunoblot analysis.
Biochemical analysis
Dissected brain regions of interest or culture
samples were prepared with sequential lysis
buffers. For the soluble fraction, samples were
homogenized in the following TX-soluble buffer
(50 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-
100) containing protease and phosphatase inhib-
itors (Roche, New York, NY, USA) and samples
were centrifuged and the soluble supernatant was
collected. The insoluble pellet was resuspended
in TX-insoluble buffer (50 mM Tris [pH 8.0],
150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2% SDS) contain-
ing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche,
New York, NY, USA). Samples were sonicated and
centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min. Protein con-
centrations were determined using the BCA assay
(Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) and samples (10 mg total
proteins) were separated on SDS-polyacrylamide
gels (13.5%) and transferred onto nitrocellulose
membranes. Blots were blocked in 5% non-fat
milk or 7.5% BSA in TBS-T (Tris-buffered saline-
Tween 20) and probed using various primary
antibodies. Target antigens were incubated with
appropriate secondary antibodies and were detected
using ECL substrate and imaged by ImageQuant
LAS 4000mini scanner (GE Healthcare Life Sci-
ences, Wauwatosa, WI, USA) or via film.
Lentiviral vector construction,
production and transduction
Lentiviral vectors were generated as previously
described (49). LAG3 or deletion mutants of LAG3
with HA tag were subcloned into a lentiviral
cFugw vector by Age I restriction sites. The human
ubiquitin C (hUBC) promoter was used to drive
expression. The recombinant cFugw vector was
transiently transfected into HEK293FT cells to-
gether with three packaging vectors: pLP1, pLP2,
and pVSV-G (1.3:1.5:1:1.5) to generate the lentivi-
ruses. 48 hours and 72 hours after transfection,
the viral supernatants were collected and con-
centrated by ultracentrifugation for 3 hours at
50,000 g. Viral particles were resuspended into
serum free medium and stored at -80°C. At DIV
4 to 5, neurons were infected by lentivirus carry-
ing LAG3, deletion mutants of LAG3, or empty
vector as a control [1 × 109 transduction units
(TU)/ml] for 72 hours.
In vitro co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP)
HEK293FT cells were transfected with cFUGW-
LAG3orcFUGW-GFPbylipofectamine2000.2days
later the cultures were treated with a-syn-biotin
monomer or a-syn-biotin PFF (final concentra-
tion 1 mM) for 2-3 hours. The cells were washed 2
times with PBS and harvested with lysis buffer
containing 50 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl,
1% Triton X-100, and protease inhibitors (Roche,
New York, NY, USA). Samples were frozen and
thawed three times, followed by centrifugation
at 20627 X g for 20 min. Protein concentrations
of the supernatants were determined using the
BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Aliquots
of the samples containing 500 mg of protein were
incubated with Dynabeads MyOneTM Streptavidin
T1 (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) overnight
at 4°C for a-syn-biotin co-IP assay. In LAG3 co-IP,
aliquots of the samples were pre-cleared with
10 mL of Dynabeads® Protein G (Life Technolo-
gies, Grand Island, NY, USA) for 1 hour. Simulta-
neously, 50 mL of Dynabeads® were incubated
for one hour with 4 mL of either mouse 410C9
antibody or mouse IgG (Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX,
USA). Pre-cleared samples were incubated with
Dynabead®-antibody/IgG overnight at 4°C. The IP
complexes were washed 5 times with IP buffer and
then denatured by adding 2 x Laemlli Buffer plus
b-mercaptoethanol, followed by boiling for 5 min.
In vivo co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP)
Transgenic mice overexpressing human A53T a-
synuclein (22), and WT littermate controls were
euthanized at 4 months and 10 months of age.
The brainstem was removed and lysates were pre-
pared with brain lysis buffercontaining50 mM Tris
[pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, and protease
inhibitors (Roche, New York, NY, USA). Samples
were frozen and thawed three times, followed by
centrifugation at 20627 X g for 20 min. Protein
concentrations of the supernatants were determined
using the BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).
Aliquots of the samples containing 500 mg of pro-
tein were pre-cleared with 10 mL of Dynabeads®
Protein G (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY,
USA) for one hour. Simultaneously, 50 mL of
Dynabeads® were incubated for 1 hour with 4 mL
of either rabbit a-synuclein antibody (Cell Sig-
naling, Beverly, MA, USA) or rabbit IgG (Santa
Cruz, Dallas, TX, USA). Pre-cleared samples were
incubated with Dynabead®-antibody/IgG overnight
at 4°C. The immunocomplexes were washed 5 times
with IP buffer and then denatured by adding 2 x
Laemlli Buffer plus b-mercaptoethanol, followed
by boiling for 5 min.
Microfluidic chambers
Triple compartment microfluidic devices (TCND1000)
wereobtainedfromXonaMicrofluidic,LLC(Temecula,
CA, USA). Glass coverslips were prepared and
coated as described, before being affixed to the
microfluidic device (13). Approximately 100,000
neurons were plated per chamber. At 4 DIV, WT
and LAG3−/− neurons were transduced with lenti-
virus LAG3 to create WT + LAG3 and LAG3−/− +
LAG3 neurons. At 7 DIV, 0.5 mg a-syn PFF was
added into chamber 1. To control for direction of
flow, a 50 mL difference in media volume was
maintained between chamber 1 and chamber 2
and chamber 2 and chamber 3 according to the
manufacturers’ instructions. Neurons were fixed
on day 14 after a-syn PFF treatment using 4%
paraformaldehyde in PBS. The chambers were
then processed for immunofluorescence staining.
a-Syn fibril and stereotaxic procedure
Purification of recombinant of a-syn proteins and
in vitro fibril generation was performed as pub-
lished (14). Assembly reactions of a-syn were per-
formed by continuous agitation of a-syn for 7 days
in an amber glass vial with a magnetic stirrer
(350 rpm at 37°C). a-Syn PFF was harvested and
evaluated for the quality of the fibrils. To avoid
repeated freeze and thaw, the PFF were aliquoted
and stored in -80°C. On the day of intrastriatal
injections, preparations were diluted in sterile
PBS and briefly sonicated in a temperature con-
trolled sonicator water bath. Three month old
mice wereanesthetizedwithpentobarbitalandPBS,
recombinant a-syn PFF (5 mg/2 mL) or recombinant
a-syn monomer (5 mg/2 mL) was stereotactically
aah3374-10
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 delivered into one striatum. The following refer-
ence coordinates for the dorsal neostriatum were
used: +0.2 mm Medial-lateral (ML); +2.0 mm
antero-posterior (AP) and +2.8 mm dorso-ventral
(DV)frombregma.Injectionswereperformedusing
a 2 mL syringe (Hamilton, Reno, NV, USA) at a
rate of 0.1 mL per minutes with the needle left in
place for ≥ 5 min before slow withdrawal of the
needle. After surgery, animals were monitored
and post-surgical care was provided. Animal be-
havior was performed at 30 or 180 days and mice
were euthanized for biochemical, neurochemical
and histological studies. For biochemical studies,
tissues were immediately frozen after removal
and stored at -80°C. For histological studies, mice
were perfused transcardially with PBS and 4%
PFA and brains were removed, followed by over-
night fixation in 4% PFA and transfer to 30%
sucrose for cryoprotection.
HPLC for DA, DOPAC, HVA, and 3MT
High-performance liquid chromatography with
electrochemical detection (HPLC-ECD) was used
to measure biogenic amine concentrations. Brief-
ly, mice were sacrificed by decapitation. After
rapid removal of the striatum, it was weighed
and sonicated in 0.2 ml ice cold 0.01 mM per-
chloric acid containing 0.01% EDTA. 60 ng 3,4-
dihydroxybenzylamine (DHBA) was included
as an internal standard. This was followed by
centrifugation (15,000 × g, 30 min, 4°C) and passing
the supernatant through a 0.2 mm filter. Twenty
ml of the supernatant was analyzed in the HPLC
column (3 mm × 150 mm, C-18 reverse phase
column, AcclaimTM Polar Advantage II, Thermo
Scientific, USA) by a dual channel coulochem III
electrochemical detector (Model 5300, ESA, Inc.
Chelmsford, MA, USA). The BCA protein assay
kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) was used to measure
protein concentration of the tissue homogenates.
Data were normalized to protein concentrations
and expressed in ng/mg protein.
Immunohistochemistry,
immunofluorescence and mapping
of a-syn pathology
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and immunofluo-
rescence (IF) was performed on 50 mm thick
serial brain sections. Primary antibodies and work-
ing dilutions are detailed in Table S1. For his-
tological studies, coronal sections were incubated
in primary antibodies for P-a-syn or Tyrosine
Hydroxylase followed by incubation with biotin-
conjugated anti-mouse or anti-Rabbit antibody
respectively (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA),
ABC reagents (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA),
and SigmaFast DAB Peroxidase Substrate (Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Sections were
counterstained with Nissl (0.09% thionin). Immu-
noreactivity in double-labeled sections was labeled
using appropriate fluorescent secondary anti-
bodies conjugated to Alexa-fluor 488, 594 or 647
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Images (IHC)
were captured on AxioCam Mrc camera connected
to Observer. Z1 microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen,
Germany). Images (IF) were obtained by confocal
scanning microscopy (LSM710, Zeiss, Dublin, CA,
USA). Photoshop CS6 (Adobe Systems) was used
to assemble montages. Fine mapping of P-a-syn
pathology was performed by tracing all visible
immunoreactive inclusions/cells and neurites at
10 × magnification from sections at multiple ros-
trocaudal levels corresponding to coronal sec-
tions at approximately +1.92, +0.74, -0.82, and
-2.30, and -3.52 mm relative to Bregma.
Animals
All procedures involving animals were approved
by and conformed to the guidelines of the Insti-
tutional Animal Care Committee of Johns Hopkins
University. Animals were housed in a 12 h dark
and light cycle with free access to water and food.
All mice were acclimatized in the procedure room
before starting any animal experiments. We have
taken great measure to reduce the number of ani-
mal used in these studies and also taken effort to
reduce animal suffering from pain and discomfort.
Behavioral analysis
To evaluate a-syn PFF-induced behavioral defi-
cits, control and a-syn PFF injected mice were
assessed by the pole test, grip strength, and clasping
behavior1-weekpriortosacrifice.The experimenter
was blinded to treatment group for all behavioral
studies. All tests were performed between 10:00-
16:00 in the lights-on cycle.
Pole test
A 9 mm diameter 2.5 foot metal rod wrapped with
bandage gauze was used as the pole. Mice were
placed on the top of the pole (3 inch from the top of
thepole)facinghead-up.Thetime takentoturnand
total time taken to reach the base of the pole was
recorded.Beforetheactualtestthemiceweretrained
for two consecutive days and each training session
consisted of three testtrials. The maximum cutoff of
time to stop the test was 120 s. Results were ex-
pressed in turn and total time (in seconds) (37).
Grip strength
Neuromuscular strength was measured by max-
imum holding force generated by the mice (Biosed,
USA). Mice were allowed to grasp a metal grid
with either by their fore and/or hind limbs or both.
The tail was gently pulled and the maximum hold-
ing force recorded by the force transducer when
the mice released their grasp on the grid. The
peak holding strength was digitally recorded and
displayed as force in grams (50).
Hindlimb clasping
Hindlimb clasping is a marker of disease progres-
sion in neurodegeneration. The procedure was
performed by grasping the mouse-tail and hind-
limb clasping was monitored for 10 s. Mice with
neuropathologic deficits exhibit retracted hind-
limbs and grasping of the abdominal area. In
addition the mice were observed for a hunch-
backed posture (51).
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
M. Goedert, Alpha-synuclein and neurodegenerative diseases.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 492–501 (2001). doi: 10.1038/35081564;
pmid: 11433374
2.
M. Goedert, M. G. Spillantini, K. Del Tredici, H. Braak, 100 years
of Lewy pathology. Neurology 9, 13–24 (2013). doi: 10.1038/
nrneurol.2012.242; pmid: 23183883
3.
V. M. Lee, J. Q. Trojanowski, Mechanisms of Parkinson’s
disease linked to pathological alpha-synuclein: New targets for
drug discovery. Neuron 52, 33–38 (2006). doi: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2006.09.026; pmid: 17015225
4.
B. Dehay, M. Vila, E. Bezard, P. Brundin, J. H. Kordower,
Alpha-synuclein propagation: New insights from animal models.
Mov. Disord. 31, 161–168 (2016). doi: 10.1002/mds.26370;
pmid: 26347034
5.
S. J. Lee, P. Desplats, H. J. Lee, B. Spencer, E. Masliah, Cell-to-
cell transmission of a-synuclein aggregates. Methods Mol. Biol.
849, 347–359 (2012). doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-551-0_23;
pmid: 22528101
6.
T. Tyson, J. A. Steiner, P. Brundin, Sorting out release,
uptake and processing of alpha-synuclein during prion-like
spread of pathology. J. Neurochem. 10.1111/jnc.13449 (2015).
doi: 10.1111/jnc.13449; pmid: 26617280
7.
H. Braak et al., Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic
Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging 24, 197–211 (2003).
doi: 10.1016/S0197-4580(02)00065-9; pmid: 12498954
8.
K. Del Tredici, H. Braak, Review: Sporadic Parkinson’s disease:
development and distribution of a-synuclein pathology.
Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 42, 33–50 (2016). doi: 10.1111/
nan.12298; pmid: 26662475
9.
J. H. Kordower, Y. Chu, R. A. Hauser, T. B. Freeman,
C. W. Olanow, Lewy body-like pathology in long-term
embryonic nigral transplants in Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Med.
14, 504–506 (2008). doi: 10.1038/nm1747; pmid: 18391962
10. J. Y. Li et al., Lewy bodies in grafted neurons in subjects with
Parkinson’s disease suggest host-to-graft disease propagation.
Nat. Med. 14, 501–503 (2008). doi: 10.1038/nm1746;
pmid: 18391963
11. L. C. Walker, M. Jucker, Neurodegenerative diseases:
Expanding the prion concept. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 38, 87–103
(2015). doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-033828;
pmid: 25840008
12. M. Jucker, L. C. Walker, Self-propagation of pathogenic protein
aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases. Nature 501, 45–51
(2013). doi: 10.1038/nature12481; pmid: 24005412
13. L. A. Volpicelli-Daley et al., Exogenous a-synuclein fibrils induce
Lewy body pathology leading to synaptic dysfunction and
neuron death. Neuron 72, 57–71 (2011). doi: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2011.08.033; pmid: 21982369
14. K. C. Luk et al., Pathological a-synuclein transmission initiates
Parkinson-like neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice.
Science 338, 949–953 (2012). doi: 10.1126/science.1227157;
pmid: 23161999
15. T. Ben Gedalya et al., Alpha-synuclein and polyunsaturated
fatty acids promote clathrin-mediated endocytosis and
synaptic vesicle recycling. Traffic 10, 218–234 (2009).
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2008.00853.x; pmid: 18980610
16. F. Cheng et al., a-Synuclein promotes clathrin-mediated NMDA
receptor endocytosis and attenuates NMDA-induced
dopaminergic cell death. J. Neurochem. 119, 815–825 (2011).
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07460.x; pmid: 21883224
17. S. H. Oh et al., Mesenchymal stem cells inhibit transmission of
a-synuclein by modulating clathrin-mediated endocytosis in a
Parkinsonian model. Cell Reports 14, 835–849 (2016).
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.075; pmid: 26776513
18. L. A. Volpicelli-Daley, K. C. Luk, V. M. Lee, Addition of
exogenous a-synuclein preformed fibrils to primary neuronal
cultures to seed recruitment of endogenous a-synuclein to
Lewy body and Lewy neurite-like aggregates. Nat. Protoc. 9,
2135–2146 (2014). doi: 10.1038/nprot.2014.143;
pmid: 25122523
19. H. J. Cheng, J. G. Flanagan, Identification and cloning of ELF-1,
a developmentally expressed ligand for the Mek4 and Sek
receptor tyrosine kinases. Cell 79, 157–168 (1994).
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(94)90408-1; pmid: 7522971
20. H. J. Cheng, J. G. Flanagan, Cloning and characterization of
RTK ligands using receptor-alkaline phosphatase fusion
proteins. Methods Mol. Biol. 124, 313–334 (2001).
pmid: 11100484
21. J. Laurén, D. A. Gimbel, H. B. Nygaard, J. W. Gilbert,
S. M. Strittmatter, Cellular prion protein mediates impairment
of synaptic plasticity by amyloid-b oligomers. Nature 457,
1128–1132 (2009). doi: 10.1038/nature07761; pmid: 19242475
22. M. K. Lee et al., Human alpha-synuclein-harboring familial
Parkinson’s disease-linked Ala-53 → Thr mutation causes
neurodegenerative disease with alpha-synuclein aggregation in
transgenic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 8968–8973
(2002). doi: 10.1073/pnas.132197599; pmid: 12084935
SCIENCE sciencemag.org
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
aah3374-11
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 23. B. Huard et al., Characterization of the major histocompatibility
complex class II binding site on LAG-3 protein. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 5744–5749 (1997). doi: 10.1073/
pnas.94.11.5744; pmid: 9159144
24. J. Han, K. Burgess, Fluorescent indicators for intracellular pH.
Chem. Rev. 110, 2709–2728 (2010). doi: 10.1021/cr900249z;
pmid: 19831417
25. J. Huotari, A. Helenius, Endosome maturation. EMBO J. 30,
3481–3500 (2011). doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.286;
pmid: 21878991
26. F. T. Mu et al., EEA1, an early endosome-associated protein.
EEA1 is a conserved a-helical peripheral membrane protein
flanked by cysteine “fingers” and contains a calmodulin-
binding IQ motif. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 13503–13511 (1995).
doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.22.13503; pmid: 7768953
27. M. S. Taha et al., Subcellular fractionation and localization
studies reveal a direct interaction of the fragile X mental
retardation protein (FMRP) with nucleolin. PLOS ONE 9,
e91465 (2014). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091465;
pmid: 24658146
28. P. R. Angelova et al., Ca2+ is a key factor in a-synuclein-
induced neurotoxicity. J. Cell Sci. 129, 1792–1801 (2016).
doi: 10.1242/jcs.180737; pmid: 26989132
29. N. T. Hettiarachchi et al., alpha-Synuclein modulation of Ca2+
signaling in human neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cells.
J. Neurochem. 111, 1192–1201 (2009). doi: 10.1111/
j.1471-4159.2009.06411.x; pmid: 19860837
30. K. Melachroinou et al., Deregulation of calcium homeostasis
mediates secreted a-synuclein-induced neurotoxicity.
Neurobiol. Aging 34, 2853–2865 (2013). doi: 10.1016/
j.neurobiolaging.2013.06.006; pmid: 23891486
31. S. Nath, J. Goodwin, Y. Engelborghs, D. L. Pountney, Raised
calcium promotes a-synuclein aggregate formation. Mol. Cell.
Neurosci. 46, 516–526 (2011). doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.12.004;
pmid: 21145971
32. A. N. Shrivastava et al., a-synuclein assemblies sequester
neuronal a3-Na+/K+-ATPase and impair Na+ gradient. EMBO J.
34, 2408–2423 (2015). doi: 10.15252/embj.201591397;
pmid: 26323479
33. C. J. Workman, D. S. Rice, K. J. Dugger, C. Kurschner,
D. A. Vignali, Phenotypic analysis of the murine CD4-related
glycoprotein, CD223 (LAG-3). Eur. J. Immunol. 32, 2255–2263
(2002). doi: 10.1002/1521-4141(200208)32:8<2255::AID-
IMMU2255>3.0.CO;2-A; pmid: 12209638
34. S. R. Woo et al., Differential subcellular localization of the
regulatory T-cell protein LAG-3 and the coreceptor CD4. Eur. J.
Immunol. 40, 1768–1777 (2010). doi: 10.1002/eji.200939874;
pmid: 20391435
35. T. Miyazaki, A. Dierich, C. Benoist, D. Mathis, Independent
modes of natural killing distinguished in mice lacking Lag3.
Science 272, 405–408 (1996). doi: 10.1126/
science.272.5260.405; pmid: 8602528
36. K. C. Luk et al., Intracerebral inoculation of pathological
a-synuclein initiates a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative
a-synucleinopathy in mice. J. Exp. Med. 209, 975–986 (2012).
doi: 10.1084/jem.20112457; pmid: 22508839
37. S. S. Karuppagounder et al., The c-Abl inhibitor, nilotinib,
protects dopaminergic neurons in a preclinical animal model of
Parkinson’s disease. Sci. Rep. 4, 4874 (2014). doi: 10.1038/
srep04874; pmid: 24786396
38. C. Kim et al., Neuron-released oligomeric a-synuclein is an
endogenous agonist of TLR2 for paracrine activation of
microglia. Nat. Commun. 4, 1562 (2013). doi: 10.1038/
ncomms2534; pmid: 23463005
39. B. B. Holmes et al., Heparan sulfate proteoglycans mediate
internalization and propagation of specific proteopathic seeds.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, E3138–E3147 (2013).
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1301440110; pmid: 23898162
40. G. S. Huh et al., Functional requirement for class I MHC in CNS
development and plasticity. Science 290, 2155–2159 (2000).
doi: 10.1126/science.290.5499.2155; pmid: 11118151
41. C. J. Shatz, MHC class I: An unexpected role in neuronal
plasticity. Neuron 64, 40–45 (2009). doi: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2009.09.044; pmid: 19840547
42. H. Neumann, Control of glial immune function by neurons. Glia
36, 191–199 (2001). doi: 10.1002/glia.1108; pmid: 11596127
43. A. C. Anderson, N. Joller, V. K. Kuchroo, Lag-3, Tim-3, and
TIGIT: Co-inhibitory receptors with specialized functions in
immune regulation. Immunity 44, 989–1004 (2016).
doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2016.05.001; pmid: 27192565
44. J. G. Lee, S. Takahama, G. Zhang, S. I. Tomarev, Y. Ye,
Unconventional secretion of misfolded proteins promotes
adaptation to proteasome dysfunction in mammalian cells.
Nat. Cell Biol. 18, 765–776 (2016). pmid: 27295555
45. J. L. Guo, V. M. Y. Lee, Seeding of normal Tau by pathological
Tau conformers drives pathogenesis of Alzheimer-like tangles.
J. Biol. Chem. 286, 15317–15331 (2011). doi: 10.1074/
jbc.M110.209296; pmid: 21372138
46. T. I. Kam et al., FcgRIIb mediates amyloid-b neurotoxicity and
memory impairment in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Clin. Invest. 123,
2791–2802 (2013). doi: 10.1172/JCI66827; pmid: 23921129
47. N. Panicker et al., Fyn kinase regulates microglial
neuroinflammatory responses in cell culture and animal
models of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci. 35, 10058–10077
(2015). doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0302-15.2015; pmid:
26157004
48. C. J. Workman, D. A. Vignali, The CD4-related molecule, LAG-3
(CD223), regulates the expansion of activated T cells. Eur. J.
Immunol. 33, 970–979 (2003). doi: 10.1002/eji.200323382;
pmid: 12672063
49. S. A. Andrabi et al., Iduna protects the brain from glutamate
excitotoxicity and stroke by interfering with poly(ADP-ribose)
polymer-induced cell death. Nat. Med. 17, 692–699 (2011).
doi: 10.1038/nm.2387; pmid: 21602803
50. H. Y. Park et al., Inhibition of adenylyl cyclase type 5 prevents
L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in an animal model of Parkinson’s
disease. J. Neurosci. 34, 11744–11753 (2014). doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0864-14.2014; pmid: 25164669
51. T. N. Taylor, J. G. Greene, G. W. Miller, Behavioral phenotyping
of mouse models of Parkinson’s disease. Behav. Brain Res. 211,
1–10 (2010). doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.03.004; pmid: 20211655
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grants from NIH (NS38377) and the
JPB Foundation. P.G. was supported by the Summer Student
Fellowship PDF-SFW-1572 from the Parkinson’s Disease
Foundation. Y.X. is supported by NIH/National Institute on Aging
grant K01-AG046366 and The William N. & Bernice E. Bumpus
Foundation Innovation Awards. H.S.K. is supported by NIH/
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke grant
NS082205. C.J.W. and D.A.A.V. are supported by NIH grant
P01-AI108545. T.M.D. is the Leonard and Madlyn Abramson
Professor in Neurodegenerative Diseases. The authors acknowledge
the joint participation by the Adrienne Helis Malvin Medical Research
Foundation through its direct engagement in the continuous
active conduct of medical research in conjunction with the
Johns Hopkins Hospital and the Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine and the Foundation’s Parkinson’s Disease Program
M-2014. C. Drake from Johns Hopkins University generously
provided LAG3−/− mice. I-H. Wu created fig. S3A and fig. S10A.
410C9 hybridoma cell line is available from D.A.A.V. under a
materials agreement with the University of Pittsburgh. D.A.A.V. and
C.J.W. are inventors on issued patents [U.S. (8,551,481), Europe
(1897548), Australia (2004217526), and Hong Kong (1114339)]
held by St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital and Johns Hopkins
University that cover LAG3. Additional applications are pending.
X.M., V.L.D., H.S.K., C.J.W., D.A.A.V., and T.M.D. are inventors on a
patent application submitted by Johns Hopkins University that
covers the use of inhibitors of LAG3 to treat Parkinson’s disease.
The supplementary materials contain additional data.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencemag.org/content/353/6307/aah3374/suppl/DC1
Figs. S1 to S24
Tables S1 and S2
References
12 June 2016; accepted 24 August 2016
10.1126/science.aah3374
aah3374-12
30 SEPTEMBER 2016 • VOL 353 ISSUE 6307
sciencemag.org SCIENCE
RESEARCH
|
RESEARCH ARTICLE
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 -synuclein transmission initiated by binding lymphocyte-activation gene 3
α
Pathological 
Seok Ko and Ted M. Dawson
Joel Tyson, Donghoon Kim, Nikhil Panicker, Seung Pil Yun, Creg J. Workman, Dario A. A. Vignali, Valina L. Dawson, Han 
Shaida A. Andrabi, Sung Ung Kang, Rafaella Araújo Gonçalves, Yu Liang, Shu Zhang, Chen Qi, Sharon Lam, James A. Keiler,
Essien Umanah, Saurav Brahmachari, Joo-Ho Shin, Ho Chul Kang, Jianmin Zhang, Jinchong Xu, Rong Chen, Hyejin Park, 
Xiaobo Mao, Michael Tianhao Ou, Senthilkumar S. Karuppagounder, Tae-In Kam, Xiling Yin, Yulan Xiong, Preston Ge, George
DOI: 10.1126/science.aah3374
 (6307), aah3374.
353
Science 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6307/aah3374
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2016/09/28/353.6307.aah3374.DC1
CONTENT
RELATED 
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/9/449/ec234.abstract
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/4/195/jc6.full
http://stke.sciencemag.org/content/sigtrans/8/376/ra45.full
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/353/6307/1498.full
REFERENCES
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6307/aah3374#BIBL
This article cites 51 articles, 12 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Science
licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive 
(print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science 
on June 2, 2019
 
http://science.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
