 The use of virtual reality technology in the treatment of anxiety 
and other psychiatric disorders
Jessica L. Maples-Keller, PhD1, Brian E. Bunnell, PhD2, Sae-Jin Kim, BA1, and Barbara O. 
Rothbaum, PhD1
1Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School of Medicine
2College of Nursing, Medical University of South Carolina
Abstract
Virtual reality, or VR, allows users to experience a sense of presence in a computer-generated 
three-dimensional environment. Sensory information is delivered through a head mounted display 
and specialized interface devices. These devices track head movements so that the movements and 
images change in a natural way with head motion, allowing for a sense of immersion. VR allows 
for controlled delivery of sensory stimulation via the therapist and is a convenient and cost-
effective treatment. The primary focus of this article is to review the available literature regarding 
the effectiveness of incorporating VR within the psychiatric treatment of a wide range of 
psychiatric disorders, with a specific focus on exposure-based intervention for anxiety disorders. A 
systematic literature search was conducted in order to identify studies implementing VR based 
treatment for anxiety or other psychiatric disorders. This review will provide an overview of the 
history of the development of VR based technology and its use within psychiatric treatment, an 
overview of the empirical evidence for VR based treatment, the benefits for using VR for 
psychiatric research and treatment, recommendations for how to incorporate VR into psychiatric 
care, and future directions for VR based treatment and clinical research.
Keywords
Technology; virtual reality; anxiety disorders; exposure therapy; psychiatric treatment
The history of the development of VR based technology
Virtual Reality (VR) is a technological interface that allows users to experience computer-
generated environments within a controlled setting. This technology has been increasingly 
used in the context of mental health treatment and within clinical research. The primary 
focus of this article is to review the available literature regarding the effectiveness of VR 
within psychiatric treatment with a specific emphasis on anxiety disorders, asVR is 
particularly well-suited for use within exposure based treatment for anxiety disorders as it 
provides the opportunity for a sense of present and immersion in the feared environment. 
Conflicts of Interest: Dr. Rothbaum owns equity in Virtually Better, Inc. that creates virtual reality products. The terms of this 
arrangement have been reviewed and approved by Emory University in accordance with its conflict of interest policies.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Harv Rev Psychiatry. 2017 ; 25(3): 103–113. doi:10.1097/HRP.0000000000000138.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Potential advantages and disadvantages for the use of VR within psychiatric research and 
treatment and practical recommendations for incorporating VR into psychiatric care will be 
presented.
VR aims to parallel reality and create a world that is both immersive and interactive.1 Users 
fully experience VR when they believe that the paradigm accurately simulates the real-world 
experience that it attempts to recreate. The sense of presence, or “being there” in VR, is 
facilitated through the use of technology such as head-mounted displays, gesture-sensing 
gloves, synthesized sounds, and vibrotactile platforms, which allow for the stimulation of 
multiple senses and active exploration of the virtual environment.1–3 Furthermore, some VR 
paradigms are programmed to react to the actions of the user. This dynamic interaction 
enables the participant to engage with the VR environment in a more naturalistic and 
intuitive way.1,4 In all, VR is potentially a powerful tool for the psychiatric community 
because the user experience can be consistently replicated, tested, and modified within a safe 
environment without compromising real-world applicability. VR’s precise control of sensory 
cues, particularly for auditory, tactile, and olfactory systems, increases the sense of realism 
and memory of the virtual environment.1,4,5
Early development of what is now VR began in the 1950’s and 60’s with several key 
inventions. In 1957, Morton Heilig invented the Sensorama, which aimed to engage all of 
the user’s senses via specific components like smell generators and vibrating chairs to 
provide a complete multi-sensory experience.5 In 1961, the Philco Corporation created 
Headsight, the first head-mounted displays to incorporate motion tracking and dual monitor 
displays, for military training purposes.6 In 1965, Ivan Sutherland developed the Ultimate 
display, which employed the first computer-generated interface, thereby allowing users 
greater real time interaction with VR.7 The concept of VR was eventually formalized in 
1989 when Jaron Lanier coined the term “virtual reality,” at which point VR began to gain 
greater presence in research and psychiatric treatment.8,9 During the 1990’s and early 
2000’s, psychologists began to utilize VR with prolonged exposure therapy. The first study 
to formally investigate the efficacy of VR-based exposure therapy (VRE) focused on the 
treatment of acrophobia and results suggested that VRE was effective,10 leading to 
additional studies on the use of VR-based therapy for anxiety disorders and other psychiatric 
conditions.
Anxiety Disorders
A wide body of research has suggested large treatment effects for exposure-based therapy 
for anxiety disorders.11 Modern exposure therapy is based on emotional processing theory, 
which posits that fear memories are structures that contain information regarding fear 
stimuli, responses, and meaning. As such, the goal of intervention is to activate and modify 
these fear structures by presenting novel incompatible information and facilitating emotional 
processing. VR-based techniques are ideal for exposure therapy, as the sense of presence 
experienced in VR provides the opportunity to immerse the patient in the feared 
environment that is tailored to match specific aspects of their fear structures in order to 
activate and modify these structures. As such, the bulk of VR treatment research has been 
conducted for anxiety disorders, and broadly, results suggest the VRE is related to large 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 2
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 declines in anxiety symptoms,12 demonstrates similar efficacy compared to traditional 
exposure interventions, has a powerful real-life impact, and demonstrates good stability of 
results over time.13 Meta-analytic results for VRE for anxiety disorders even suggest a small 
effect size favoring VRE over in-vivo conditions, despite most studies not demonstrating an 
advantage when considered in isolation.14 There is evidence that treatment gains made in 
VRE generalize to real life, as meta-analytic results suggest that VRE patients, compared to 
wait-list patients, perform significantly better on behavioral assessments post-treatment, and 
found no significant differences between VRE and in-vivo exposure at post-treatment and 
follow up.15 As such, VRE is a promising treatment approach, and evidence for VRE for 
specific anxiety disorders will be reviewed. Given the application of VR to a wide range of 
psychiatric disorders, this literature will also be reviewed.
Advantages for using VR for psychiatric research and treatment
Within traditional exposure therapy, imaginal exposures are dependent on patients being able 
to imagine effectively specific feared stimuli. VR eliminates a potential barrier for patients 
who may experience difficulty with imagining or visualization. In-vivo exposures can be 
costly (e.g., an actual flight), or impractical to conduct (e.g., combat in Iraq or Afghanistan), 
whereas VR approaches allow for an inexpensive approach and the possibility of 
constructing exposures that may be difficult to implement in-vivo. VRE provides the 
opportunity to manipulate exposures in ways that might not be possible in-vivo, such as 
repeating a virtual flight landing multiple times. VRE also affords complete control, as the 
provider can control the dose and specific aspects of the exposure environment to match the 
specific patient’s feared stimuli and optimize individualized pacing through exposures. For 
instance, if a patient with the fear of flying is not ready for turbulence, the therapist can 
guarantee no turbulence. VR approaches allow for confidentiality to remain intact while 
conducting exposures, which may not be the case for in-vivo exposures.
Findings suggest that patients report satisfaction with VR based therapy and may find it 
more acceptable than traditional approaches. An early study on VRE with patients with 
PTSD due to motor vehicle crashes suggested that patients reported very high satisfaction 
with VRE.16 In a sample of 150 patients with specific phobias, the refusal rate for VR 
exposure (3%) was lower than for in-vivo exposure (27%),17 providing preliminary evidence 
that VR-based exposure may be more acceptable to patients. One study in a PTSD sample 
found equivalent satisfaction between VRE and imaginal exposure,18 while another found 
increased satisfaction for VRE.19 In a sample of 352 post 9/11 US soldiers, the majority 
reported that they would be willing to use most of the technology-based approaches for 
mental health care included in the survey (e.g., VR).20 Additionally, 19% of those who 
reported that they would not be willing to talk to a counselor in person reported being 
willing to use VR approaches to access mental health care, suggesting VR may potentially 
address some barriers to treatment.
VR offers several advantages for conducting psychiatric research. The ability to control the 
exposure dose and stimulus presents the opportunity to conduct exquisitely controlled 
clinical and experimental research. For example, in the first human study examining the 
efficacy of combining D-cycloserine with exposure therapy,21 each research participant 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 3
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 received exactly the same exposure to virtual heights. It is also feasible to collect other 
sources of data relevant to treatment process within VRE, such as psychophysiological 
assessment and data specific to the exposure (e.g., stimuli used, time in exposure). For 
example, for VR approaches with substance use disorders, the exact timing of craving and 
decision to use can be monitored in a VR environment. Additionally, testing of a skill or 
medication designed to reduce cravings can be tested in a VR environment rather than in the 
more dangerous “real world”.
While VR provides many advantages, there are also disadvantages to consider in its use. In 
the past, technology and costs were significant disadvantages to the dissemination of VR in 
clinical settings. VR was expensive, difficult to set-up, and would malfunction or “glitch” on 
occasion.1,2,4,22 While initial cost to begin VR continues to be a potential disadvantage, 
prices have decreased over time, and, vendors have recently began selling smartphone-based 
VR therapy systems which currently start at $600. While the technology has improved and 
thus there is diminished likelihood of malfunctions and the programs are more user-friendly 
than in the past,4,23 the possibility of “glitches” remain a consideration and potential 
disadvantage in clinical practice. As such, another potential disadvantage is the need for in-
depth training and practice with VR prior to clinical use, to ensure the ability to effectively 
trouble-shoot glitches while still maintaining competent clinical care.
Treatment course for VRE
A treatment course for VRE follows a typical treatment course, merely substituting VR for 
some other exposures or practices. VRE typically begins with 2–3 initial sessions in which 
psychoeducation regarding the specific disorder, psychosocial history, an overview of 
avoidance and the rationale for exposures, and the process of VR based exposures is 
discussed. Many VRE treatments also include some relaxation and/or coping strategies 
during this introductory period, such as breathing relaxation or cognitive restructuring. 
Typically, all subsequent sessions include conducting a VR exposure in which the patient 
progresses at an individualized pace through a graded exposure hierarchy.
Quality VRE is individualized to the patient. For instance, each step on the hierarchy can be 
repeated until the patient’s anxiety decreases significantly, as noted by their subjective units 
of distress ratings and therapist’s behavioral observation. Progressing through the hierarchy 
should be a collaborative approach in which the therapist discusses with the patient before 
they move on to the next step in the graded exposure. The content available for a fear 
hierarchy are often preselected for VR exposures, as specific VR system content is 
developed for specific disorders and specific traumatic experiences or fears. Thorough 
assessment of the patient’s fear or specific traumatic experience should occur prior to 
exposure in order to individualize how they progress through the steps of the hierarchy and 
the time spent with different content. For instance, the fear of flying hierarchy includes eight 
steps, from walking through an airport terminal to flying during a thunderstorm with 
turbulence. For a patient with panic and agoraphobia, taxiing and take-off may be an 
important focus of treatment, with a focus on specific stimuli linked to these symptoms (i.e., 
the sound of the cabin door closing), whereas for a patient with specific phobia of flying due 
to an underlying fear of the plane crashing, flying through a thunderstorm and turbulence 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 4
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 may be an important focus. For patients with PTSD, a thorough assessment of the patient’s 
index trauma will facilitate the therapist being able to prepare in advance what VR program 
to utilize (e.g., Virtual Iraq) and the specific setting and stimuli (e.g., time of day, specific 
weapon noises) that may be used.
A quality VR exposure will also involve the therapist being skillful in effectively engaging 
the patient in activating the fear structure. Therapists are encouraged to be mindful of 
encouraging and facilitating emotional engagement within VR and discussing response 
prevention of any safety behaviors as necessary. Specifically, patients may attempt to engage 
in safety behaviors (e.g., repeating a specific mantra during take-off in virtual flight), 
distraction, or active coping strategies during VR based exposures, so therapist should 
review the rationale for exposure and importance of not engaging in such behaviors and help 
the patient to emotionally engage during the exposures.
Method
We now turn to a review of the available literature regarding the effectiveness of 
incorporating VR within the treatment of a wide range of psychiatric disorders with a 
specific focus on exposure-based intervention for anxiety disorders. Systematic searches 
were conducted using PsycINFO, MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Google Scholar. Search terms 
included virtual reality, virtual reality exposure therapy, computer-generated exposure, 
virtual reality with psychiatric, therapy, psychological, anxiety, disorder, specific phobia, 
social anxiety disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, panic, agoraphobia, generalized 
anxiety disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, schizophrenia, psychotic, pain, addiction, 
eating disorder, bulimia, anorexia, binge eating, and autism. We identified studies 
mentioning virtual reality based psychiatric treatment in the title, abstract, or keywords. The 
most recent search was in September 2016. Inclusion criteria included studies that enrolled 
patients with a psychiatric condition who received virtual reality based intervention. 
Exclusion criteria included not presenting measurement of outcome for the treatment. Given 
that many VR based approaches are relatively novel and/or preliminary, randomized or 
quasiorandomized controlled trials was not an inclusion criterion.
Specific phobias
Specific phobia (SP) is characterized by marked fear/anxiety relating to a specific object or 
situation (e.g., flying, heights, animals, needles, or blood).24 SPs, particularly flight phobia, 
are among the most researched disorders within the scope of VR-based interventions. Two 
studies on fear of flying using a within-group design have demonstrated significant 
reductions in flight-related anxiety25 as well as an increased likelihood to fly on an airplane 
following treatment.26 Several RCTs have demonstrated symptom reduction and behavioral 
change (e.g., decreased avoidance) for VR-based exposure superior to control conditions and 
equivalent to that of CBT alone.23, 27–32 Further investigation revealed that these treatment 
gains were maintained at one-33,34 and 3-years35 post-treatment. Additional studies have 
found that VRE for fear of flying may be enhanced by the inclusion of physiological 
feedback36 and motion simulation.37 VRE has shown acceptability and efficacy in the 
treatment of other SPs. Specifically, VR is effective for the treatment of acrophobia (fear of 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 5
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 heights) based on within-group38 and controlled between-group data.10,39,40 Similar effects 
have been observed in RCTs for the treatment of arachnophobia (fear of spiders)41–43 and in 
one multiple-baseline study, fear of driving.44
In summary, there have been numerous studies showing efficacy for VR-based CBT for the 
treatment of SPs. Many of these studies have used RCTs with adequate sample sizes and 
have found large treatment effects both within and between treatment groups. Some have 
incorporated behavioral avoidance tests to the actual feared stimulus and have demonstrated 
meaningful behavioral change. Further, data suggest that treatment gains are maintained for 
years following treatment completion. The cumulating data showing efficacy for VRE for 
SPs is very promising, particularly for patients with fears pertaining to situations that may 
not be safe, cost effective, or feasible to conduct in-vivo.
Social anxiety disorder
Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is a psychiatric condition in which the patient experiences 
anxiety in social interactions (e.g., conversations, meeting new people, public speaking) 
during which they might be judged or socially evaluated by others.24 VR-based interventions 
for SAD typically involve the use of computer-generated social environments (e.g., 
classrooms, auditoriums, conference rooms) with virtual audiences. In examination of 
generalized SAD, two RCTs found VR-based CBT to be as effective as traditional CBT45 
and superior to control conditions46. VR-based CBT for fear of public speaking has 
demonstrated effects similar to traditional CBT and above that of controls47–49 and effects 
were maintained at one-year post treatment.47,50 Finally, preliminary data has begun to show 
efficacy for VR in the treatment of school-based anxiety, including test anxiety.51,52
Although there have been fewer studies examining the effects of VRE for SAD compared to 
SPs, the data thus far have been very encouraging. VR can be especially useful for this 
population as finding multiple confederates with whom a patient can interact can be costly 
and time consuming. Given these data and the potential cost savings of using VR-based 
social interactions, VR can be a particularly useful adjunct to CBT for SAD.
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) involves a history of exposure to a traumatic event as 
well as symptoms of intrusion, avoidance, negative alterations in cognitions and mood, and 
alterations in arousal and reactivity.24 Across several studies, VRE for PTSD demonstrates a 
medium-to-large treatment effect size13 and superior treatment outcomes compared to wait-
list controls and comparable outcomes with standard exposure treatment.53 Early 
investigations into VRE for PTSD suggested that this treatment approach held promise for 
PTSD treatment in case studies54–56 and open trial designs across a broad range of traumatic 
experiences.16,57,58 A preliminary study comparing VR based exposure therapy for PTSD 
following the World Trade Center Attacks (n=13) with a waitlist control (n=8) found that the 
VR group demonstrated a significant decline in PTSD scores compared to the waitlist group 
and that this improvement was maintained at a six-month follow-up assessment.59 Results 
demonstrated statistical and clinical significance, as baseline scores in both groups fell 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 6
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 within the severe range, whereas at post-treatment the mean score for the VR group was in 
the mild range and 7 of the 10 VR completers did not meet PTSD diagnostic criteria. No 
significant effect was identified for depressive symptoms or general distress, but notably 
these scores were relatively low at baseline for both groups. The sample in this study was 
not demographically diverse (i.e., mostly middle aged men), but the participants’ exposure to 
the attacks did vary (i.e., firefighters, disaster workers, and civilians), suggesting that the 
standardized virtual stimuli were able to effectively engage individuals with diverse 
experiences of the traumatic event.
The first investigation to compare VRE to another active treatment randomly assigned 
Vietnam veterans to VRE or present-centered therapy.60 Results did not identify a significant 
difference post-treatment, but did identify a moderate advantage of VRE at 6 months post-
treatment. Notably, the sample size was small (N=11), suggesting the need for larger trials 
with sufficient power to detect treatment differences. Open trials have provided further 
support for the use of VRE for PTSD for combat-related PTSD,61,62 and results from a small 
RCT of VRE compared to treatment as usual for active duty personnel with combat-related 
PTSD found that VRE was more effective based on post-treatment PTSD symptoms.63 A 
recent study investigated VRE augmented with D-cycloserine (DCS) or alprazolam 
compared to placebo for military related PTSD with 156 post 9/11 veterans.64 Results 
suggested that there were no overall differences related to medication use, but six sessions of 
VRE was related to significantly improved PTSD symptoms and psychobiological measures 
of startle and cortisol reactivity at post-treatment as well as three, six, and twelve months 
post-treatment, suggesting that VRE for PTSD results in clinical improvement that is 
sustained over time. It is notable that VR has been used as standardized stimuli for 
psychophysiological assessment pre and post PTSD treatment.64
In another randomized double-blind trial, DCS or placebo were administered prior to VR 
exposure treatment sessions for patients with chronic PTSD (N=25).65 Both groups 
demonstrated significant decreases in PTSD symptoms at post-treatment, and the group that 
received DCS demonstrated significantly higher remission rates at post-treatment and 
significantly higher remission rates and lower PTSD scores at a 6-month follow-up 
assessment. The VR-DCS group demonstrated greater improvement in depressive symptoms 
and state anger at 6-month follow-up. These findings suggest that VR exposure therapy for 
PTSD is effective and may be enhanced by DCS. One recent study randomly assigned 162 
active duty soldiers to either 10 sessions of prolonged exposure, VRE, or minimal attention 
waitlist.66 At post-treatment, both VRE and prolonged exposure resulted in greater 
improvement, but there were no significant differences when comparing the treatment 
groups. Contrary to hypotheses, prolonged exposure demonstrated a greater improvement 
than VRE at three and six month follow-up assessments. This suggests that VRE treatment 
may result in less symptom recovery after treatment ends. Authors suggested that individual 
variability in how activating VR environments are may exist and that improved VRE content 
may assist in emotional engagement. While the extant literature on VR exposure treatment 
for PTSD suggests promise, it is notable that many of the studies utilize small sample sizes, 
do not employ randomization, and/or lack a comparison to an active treatment condition, 
suggesting that future research would benefit from more randomized clinical trials with 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 7
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 larger samples and comparison to standard of care treatment, such as traditional prolonged 
exposure therapy.
Panic disorder and agoraphobia
Panic disorder and agoraphobia (PDA) are characterized by a sudden rush of anxiety 
manifested by physiological (e.g., heart palpitations, sweating, choking sensations) and 
cognitive (e.g., racing thoughts, fear of dying) symptoms, leading to fear and/or avoidance of 
specific places or situations.24 VRE for PDA presents situations that commonly elicit panic 
attacks such as tunnels, parking lots, city squares, and highways. Early data making use of 
multiple-baseline designs found initial support for the use of VR in treating PDA.67 
Although RCTs generally have found positive effects for VR-based CBT for PDA, results 
have varied between studies with regard to differences between this and traditional CBT. 
Most studies have found VR-based CBT to be as effective as traditional CBT in ameliorating 
PDA symptoms. Findings from some investigations suggest that whereas VRE may result in 
better treatment response68,69 and fewer required treatment sessions,70 it may not differ from 
traditional CBT,71 particularly when considering long-term outcome. This suggests that any 
incrementally better effects may appear early on in treatment.68 These equivalent longer-
term treatment effects have remained stable for three-,68 six-,72 nine-,73 and 12-months74 
post-treatment. Altogether, investigations of VR-based exposure for PDA using rigorous 
study design and methodology support the efficacy of these tools for the treatment of PDA. 
Moreover, there appear to be several advantages to using VR-based CBT for PDA such as 
improved treatment response and decreased time required for treatment.
Generalized anxiety disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a condition in which the patient experiences 
persistent, excessive and intrusive worrying to the extent that daily functioning becomes 
difficult.24 Gorini and colleagues75 conducted a small-scale RCT (N=20) which used VR in 
conjunction with biofeedback for patients to practice relaxation exercises during treatment. 
Although the study did not have enough power to examine between group differences, it 
provides preliminary support for the feasibility of using VR for patients with GAD. Thus far, 
this has been the only investigation to examine the use of VR in the treatment of GAD. This 
is perhaps due to the difficulty associated with creating standardized VR scenarios that are 
able to capture the numerous, varying individualized worries patients with GAD tend to 
experience. Given this complication, VR-based treatment programs could focus on some of 
the more common worries among patients with GAD (e.g., health anxiety, something 
happening to a loved one). Alternatively, or if a patient’s worries are not readily addressable 
with these scenarios, VR-based treatment could serve as a visual guide for practicing 
relaxation- or mindfulness-based approaches as well as breathing exercises.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is marked by intrusive thoughts, images and/or 
impulses that cause anxiety (e.g., fear of contamination, need for symmetry) and lead to 
compensatory repetitive behaviors (e.g., excessive cleaning, arranging things in a specific 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 8
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 way) that reduce anxiety. Thus far, no RCTs have assessed the efficacy of VR in the 
treatment of OCD, although two studies have examined the ability of VR to elicit anxious 
responding in patients with OCD. Data from these studies suggest that VRE to feared stimuli 
was able to elicit anxiety in patients with OCD relative to controls with no diagnosis. 
Further, participants’ level of anxiety was positively associated with their immersion, or the 
extent to which they felt that they were physically present in the virtual environment.76,77 
This suggests a need for VR scenarios to be realistic and relevant to the patient’s concerns. 
Similar to GAD, the impetus for obsessions and compulsions varies across patients, making 
it difficult to develop all-encompassing VR programs that meet the needs of all patients. 
Further, many patients have numerous obsessions and associated compensatory behaviors, 
which adds to this barrier. VR may not be necessary for OCD, as many of their feared 
stimuli may be readily accessible in their environment (e.g., toilets) or imaginations (e.g., 
making a mistake). Despite these difficulties, using VR during the treatment of OCD may be 
advantageous for patients whose obsessions are not feasible or appropriate for traditional 
exposure therapy (e.g., exposure to public restrooms). As data for VR-based CBT for OCD 
are preliminary but promising, more research in this area is undoubtedly warranted.
Schizophrenia
While the preponderance of research investigating the use of VR in psychiatric care has 
focused on anxiety disorders, this approach demonstrates promise in the treatment of other 
disorders. Schizophrenia is a severe mental illness which includes psychotic symptoms (e.g., 
hallucinations, delusions), disruptions to normal emotional/behavioral functioning (e.g., flat 
affect, reduced pleasurable experiences, isolation), and difficulty with cognitive 
processing.24 Data examining VR as an adjunct to treatment in this population have been 
limited, but initial investigations have provided a promising avenue for the treatment of this 
population. When used in the treatment of schizophrenia, VR scenarios have included social 
situations during which patients have learned to cope with social distress associated with 
delusional convictions and practiced social skills. One small RCT found that combining VR-
based social interactions with exposure and cognitive therapy led to decreases in persecutory 
delusions as well as distress during in-vivo social interactions.78 Three studies have used VR 
as an adjunct to social skill training (SST) for schizophrenic patients, two of which were 
uncontrolled pilot investigations that provide preliminary support for the efficacy of this 
approach in improving social skills and interactivity.79,80 Another RCT of 91 schizophrenic 
individuals found that in comparison to traditional SST, SST including VR components 
resulted in increased interest in SST and generalization of skills learned during treatment 
and an improvement in the ability to converse and be assertive, although patients receiving 
traditional SST demonstrated better nonverbal social skills.81 Although the extant data are 
limited, these preliminary results are promising particularly given the previously reviewed 
barriers to providing exposure to social interactions with repeated practice.
Acute and chronic pain
Given that the experience of pain requires conscious attention, cognitive distraction is often 
incorporated as part of pain management in an attempt to shift attention and focus away 
from painful medical procedures. VR has been studied as a way to facilitate distraction from 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 9
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 acute pain during painful procedures, such as burn-related pain or physical therapy. An 
initial investigation for a small sample of four burn patients found that subjective pain 
ratings were lower when patients were in VR during occupational therapy.82 A subsequent 
case study in a pediatric cancer patient provided further support that VR distraction may be 
useful in decreasing pain during painful medical procedures.83 A within-subjects 
randomized trial comparing routine analgesia and routine analgesia combined with a VR 
game found that VR combined with analgesics was significantly more effective in reducing 
pain responses for children undergoing burn treatment.84 A controlled trial comparing VR 
with other distraction techniques found that VR was more effective than some distraction 
techniques (i.e., child care worker, music, TV with headphone) in reducing subjective pain 
severity, but VR was not significantly more effective than watching television. In an fMRI 
study investigating the impact of VR on pain-related brain activity, participants subjectively 
reported decreased time thinking about pain and decreased pain severity and demonstrated 
significantly reduced activity in brain regions related to both sensory and emotional pain 
processing, providing subjective and objective support that VR techniques can aid in pain 
reduction.85
VR has also been used to help individuals with chronic pain learn and practice pain 
management techniques in combination with existing cognitive and/or behavioral 
interventions, as VR may help non-responders to conventional treatment and can provide the 
ability to standardize instructions and stimuli.86 A VR system for chronic pain populations 
has been developed in which patients take a virtual meditative walk to learn mindfulness-
based stress reduction, and preliminary results suggest that this system is more effective in 
reducing subjective pain compared to a non-VR control mindfulness condition.87 A study in 
a sample of patients with fibromyalgia found that the use of VR with activity management 
treatment, which included VR based sessions involving activity management instructions, 
motivation enhancement, overcoming activity-related barriers, and acknowledgement of 
personal strengths, led to significant improvements with regard to functional disability 
compared to treatment as usual.88
In sum, findings suggest that VR in addition to standard pharmacological pain management 
can be helpful in reducing subjective pain severity when compared to standard analgesia 
alone for short-term acute pain during medical procedures. While this presumably relates to 
cognitive distraction, specific mechanisms are currently unknown89 and future research 
could investigate mechanisms underlying this effect. Preliminary evidence also suggests VR 
may be helpful in helping individuals with chronic pain learn and practice specific pain 
management techniques, such as mindfulness or activity management.
Addiction
Conditioned reactivity to drug-related cues is an important maintenance factor in drug and 
alcohol addiction, as such repeated exposure to drug-related cues has been used to reduce 
cue reactivity craving in order to prevent relapse. VR cue exposure provides the opportunity 
to conduct repeated exposures to drug-related cues in a controlled therapeutic environment. 
An initial pilot study found that VR-based cue exposure (e.g., a virtual bar, syringe, needle) 
was effective at eliciting physiological arousal, subjective craving, and urges to use drugs in 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 10
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 men with opioid dependence.90 Another investigation found that a VR “crack” cocaine 
environment was effective at eliciting craving and physiological arousal in a crack cocaine 
dependent sample.91 A VR casino environment was shown to be effective in eliciting 
psychophysiological arousal and urges to gamble in a sample of recreational gamblers,92 
suggesting that VR based cue elicited craving is effective across different addiction 
populations. In a nicotine dependent sample, a VR-based smoking environment elicited 
increased psychophysiological arousal and craving compared to a neutral cue, and this 
response decreased over the course of a four week VR cue exposure treatment.93 In a sample 
of nicotine-dependent cigarette smokers, self-reported withdrawal symptoms and craving 
prior to a VR cue exposure were predictive of craving experienced in VR and significant 
increases in heart rate were present for three of the four VR smoking cues, providing further 
support for the ability of VR stimuli to effectively elicit subjective craving and physiological 
arousal related to substance-related cues.94 A double-blind placebo study investigated the 
effects of DCS in concurrent cocaine and nicotine-dependent participants (N=29) who 
engaged in VR based cue-exposure therapy in conjunction with brief cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for smoking. Results indicated no significant effect of DCS , however, overall 
significant decreases in smoking at mid and post-treatment compared to baseline and craving 
for cigarettes and cue-induced craving decreased over the course of the study.95 Notably, 
approximately 90% of the treatment sessions were attended, suggesting that VR based cue 
exposure therapy is a tolerable treatment approach. A randomized trial of CBT plus either 
smoking VR cue exposure therapy or placebo VR cue exposure therapy found that the 
smoking VR participants had a higher quit rate and reported significantly fewer cigarettes 
smoked per day at the end of treatment.96 As such, the extant literature suggests that VR-
based environments are effective at eliciting cue reactivity and craving in different substance 
dependent populations and can be effectively incorporated within repeated cue exposure 
treatment.
Eating pathology
VR approaches have been used with different forms of eating pathology to address body 
image disturbances and eating, shape, and weight concerns. VR has been used to explore 
and challenge body image distortions, to implement exposure to food cues in order to 
identify and challenge eating, shape, and weight concerns, and to practice more effective 
eating strategies. An early investigation used several different VR environments, including 
household rooms with food items, to explore patient’s eating, shape, and weight beliefs and 
concerns, and images of different body types to resolve discrepancies in their perception of 
their body, and found preliminary support that these approaches improved body awareness in 
binge eating-disordered patients and obese patients.97 A follow-up controlled investigation 
of 28 obese patients randomized to VR treatment or CBT-based groups found that VR 
treatment resulted in significantly greater improvements with body satisfaction, anxiety 
level, and problematic eating.98 No significant differences were found for self-efficacy or 
stages of change in psychotherapy across the two groups. In a randomized trial comparing 
VR-based CBT for body image disturbances with traditional CBT for 13 eating disordered 
patients, VR-based CBT was found to result in significantly greater symptom improvement 
with regard to body image disturbances; no differences were found for eating disorder 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 11
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 symptoms across the two groups.99 In a controlled study comparing CBT for eating 
disorders with and without an component of VR based body image treatment, the VR group 
demonstrated greater improvement at post-treatment and one month follow-up, however, it is 
notable that they received additional treatment sessions.100 As such, extant literature 
provides preliminary support for the efficacy of incorporating VR into the treatment of 
different types of eating pathology and weight problems, as results suggest that VR may 
result in comparable treatment effects to traditional CBT approaches and may results in 
greater improvement for some specific outcomes.
Autism
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a developmental disorder marked by repetitive or 
restrictive patterns of behavior and difficulties with social communication and interaction. 
Research on the effectiveness of VR in the treatment of ASD suggests preliminary support 
for social improvement. Lahiri and colleagues101 found preliminary evidence for the use of a 
VR-based computer task in improving social communication performance in autistic 
teenagers. However, the applicability of the results is questionable due to the sample and 
proof-of-concept design of the study. Sample size was small (N=8) and the range of ASD 
severity was limited. The researchers only enrolled autistic teenagers with average or above 
average intelligence, because the task utilized a menu-driven communication system that 
required a certain level of reading ability, limiting the samples representativeness. There 
have also been intervention studies that have shown relative improvements with regard to 
theory of mind, emotion recognition, and communication skills.102,103 All of the studies 
mentioned demonstrate low drop-out rates and suggest high acceptability of patients towards 
VR.101–103 Overall, this provides preliminary evidence that VR could be feasibly and 
effectively incorporated into psychiatric treatment for ASD.
Recommendations for how to incorporate VR into psychiatric care
VR is incorporated at the point in treatment when in vivo exposure would normally be 
administered. As an example, a typical protocol using VR for fear of flying teaches anxiety 
management techniques in the first four sessions and incorporates VR exposure to a virtual 
airport and airplane in the last four sessions.23 Specific equipment and training is needed to 
integrate VR into psychiatric practice effectively. A VR system will typically consist of a 
computer with two monitors, one for the provider’s interface in which they are constructing 
the exposure in real time, and another for the provider’s view of the patient’s position in the 
VR environment, and a head-mounted displays and a platform.
VR-specific training is an important consideration in integrating VR into psychiatric 
practice. VR vendors provide both internet-based training courses in VR therapy as well as 
on-site, structured training on VR use within therapy. Providers should be trained 
sufficiently to feel proficient with the VR technology before using it with patients through 
specific training as well as role-plays. Training for providers should include information and 
practice of trouble-shooting for glitches within session, as well as possible contact 
information for individuals from the VR vendor who may be able to help trouble-shoot. 
Additionally, providers should be well trained in the rationale for incorporating VR within 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 12
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 psychiatric care to ensure that they are able to effectively communicate this to patients in 
order to demonstrate credibility. Given that VR is most frequently used during exposure 
therapy for anxiety disorders, it is important to note that sufficient training in exposure 
therapy is a prerequisite to considering VR training and implementation; sufficient training 
and continued supervision and support in exposure therapy should be in place before VR is 
integrated into patient care; bad VR therapy is still just bad therapy.
Future directions for VR-based treatment and clinical research
The empirical literature suggests that VR demonstrates promise in the treatment of 
psychiatric conditions as well as within clinical research. However, a recent review of VRE 
RCTs found that overall methodological rigor was low;104 authors noted that recent research 
has focused on preliminary support for novel uses for VR as opposed to studies becoming 
more methodologically rigorous over time. Another review noted the continued use of small 
samples and no controls,105 echoing the need for more well-powered and controlled studies 
comparing VR-based treatment to other treatment approaches.
Future research could identify factors relevant to who may or may not be a good candidate 
for VR-based treatment. Individual differences related to immersion or sense of presence 
may be relevant. More broadly, research focused on the therapeutic process within VR and 
not just outcome will be important.106 Research testing hypothesized mediators and 
moderators of VR-based treatment will prove informative, for example, investigating factors 
such as emotional processing, psychophysiological markers during exposure, and the 
therapeutic alliance.
When designing a VR study, the use of a control condition and large enough sample sizes to 
be sufficiently powered to detect an effect while considering possible treatment drop-out 
rates and projected attrition over all follow up assessments is recommended. Additionally, 
suggestions on data collection within VR studies will be provided. At the initial assessment, 
a thorough clinical assessment involving standardized semi-structured diagnostic interview 
administered by a trained mental health professional should occur, including assessment of 
possible comorbid conditions. Additionally, it would be beneficial to assess patient outcome 
expectancy, baseline psychophysiological response to standardized relevant VR stimuli, and 
personality and other individual difference variables that could be hypothesized to relate to 
the ability to experience presence/immersion at baseline. Information on current 
psychoactive medications use should be collected, and participants would ideally agree to 
stay on the same dose throughout the course of the study and follow-up assessments. During 
treatment, it is recommended that patients subjective units of distress ratings during each 
VRE session, psychophysiological monitoring during exposure, therapist and patient ratings 
of therapeutic alliance, engagement during exposure, presence/immersion in VR, and global 
improvement are collected. The study therapist can also document the amount of time spent 
in VR, the repetitions of the exposure, and the specific VR environments and cues used. It is 
also recommended that therapy sessions are video or audio-recorded to facilitate 
investigation of process variables or behavioral coding. Post-treatment assessments should 
ideally occur over a long follow-up period of at least 12 months, to allow for the 
investigation of the treatment effects over time. Post-treatment assessment could include 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 13
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 multiple indicators of treatment outcome, including patient-report, blind assessor report, 
therapist-report, behavioral tasks, and quality of life assessment. Methodologically rigorous 
and controlled use of VR within clinical research can help improve as well as elucidate the 
treatment process, as well as processes related to anxiety and fear processes more broadly, 
and lead to personalized medicine.
Conclusions and Summary
Conventional wisdom is that it takes about 20 years from the time the first research is 
published to become common use. The first study using virtual reality to treat a 
psychological disorder was published in 1995,10 and here we are 20 years later! Virtual 
reality has emerged as a viable tool to help in a number of different disorders, with the most 
strength of evidence for use in exposure therapy for patients with anxiety disorders, cue 
exposure therapy for patients with substance use disorders, and distraction for patients with 
acute pain requiring painful procedures. Overall, meta-analyses have indicated that VR is an 
efficacious tool, compares favorably to comparison conditions, and has lasting effects that 
generalize to the real world. However, problems have been noted including small sample 
sizes, lack of methodological rigor, and lack of comparison groups. With the cost of head 
mounted displays coming down and smaller smart phone applications being developed, it is 
likely that virtual reality applications will proliferate. It will be important that these are 
treated as tools and therapists are properly trained in their applications.
Acknowledgments
Source of Funding: Dr. Rothbaum has funding from Wounded Warrior Project, Department of Defense Clinical 
Trial Grant No.W81XWH-10-1-1045, “Enhancing Exposure Therapy for PTSD: Virtual Reality and Imaginal 
Exposure with a Cognitive Enhancer”, National Institute of Mental Health Grant No. 1R01MH094757-01, 
“Prospective Determination of Psychobiological Risk Factors for Posttraumatic Stress,” Brain and Behavior 
Research Foundation (NARSAD) Distinguished Investigator Grant, “Optimal Dose of early intervention to prevent 
PTSD”, and McCormick Foundation “Brave Heart: MLB’s Welcome Back Veterans SouthEast Initiative.” Dr. 
Rothbaum receives royalties from Oxford University Press, Guilford, APPI, and Emory University and received one 
advisory board payment from Genentech. For the remaining authors none were declared.
References
1. Rizzo AA, Buckwalter JG, Neumann U. Virtual reality and cognitive rehabilitation: a brief review of 
the future. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 1997; 12:1–15.
2. Rothbaum BO, Hodges L, Kooper IR. Virtual reality exposure therapy. J Psychother Pract Res. 
1997; 6:219–226. [PubMed: 9185067] 
3. Brooks FP. What’s real about virtual reality? IEEE Comput Graph Appl. 1999; 19:17–27.
4. Anderson PL, Rothbaum BO, Hodges L. Virtual reality: using the virtual world to improve quality 
of life in the real world. Bull Menninger Clin. 2001; 65:78–91. [PubMed: 11280960] 
5. Dinh HQ, Walker N, Song C, Kobayashi A, Hodges LF. Evaluating the importance of multi-sensory 
input on memory and the sense of presence in virtual environments. IEEE VR. 1999:222–228.
6. Comeau C, Bryan J. Headsight television system provides remote surveillance. Electron. 1961; 
34:86–90.
7. Sutherland IE. The ultimate display. Proc IFIP. 1965; 2:506–508.
8. Gorini A, Riva G. Virtual reality in anxiety disorders: the past and the future. Expert Rev Neurother. 
2008; 8:215–233. [PubMed: 18271709] 
9. Lanier J, Minsky M, Fisher S, Druin A. Virtual environments and interactivity: windows to the 
future. ACM Siggraph Comput Graph. 1989; 23:7–18.
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 14
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 10. Rothbaum BO, Hodges LF, Kooper R, Opdyke D, Williford JS, North M. Effectiveness of 
computer-generated (virtual reality) graded exposure in the treatment of acrophobia. Am J 
Psychiatry. 1995; 152:626–628. [PubMed: 7694917] 
11. Bandelow B, Reitt M, Rover C, Michaelis S, Gorlich Y, Wedekind D. Efficacy of treatments for 
anxiety disorders: A meta-analysis. Int Clinical Psychopharm. 30:183–192.
12. Parsons T, Rizzo AA. Affective outcomes of virtual reality exposure therapy for anxiety and 
specific phobias: a meta-analysis. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry. 2008; 39:250–261. [PubMed: 
17720136] 
13. Opriş D, Pintea S, García-Palacios A, Botella C, Szamosközi Ş, David D. Virtual reality exposure 
therapy in anxiety disorders: A quantitative meta-analysis. Depress Anxiety. 2012; 29:85–93. 
[PubMed: 22065564] 
14. Powers MB, Emmelkamp PMG. Virtual reality exposure therapy for anxiety disorders: a meta-
analysis. J Anxiety Disord. 2008; 22:561–569. [PubMed: 17544252] 
15. Morina N, Ijntema H, Meyerbroker K, Emmelkamp PMG. Can virtual reality exposure therapy 
gains be generalized to real-life? a meta-analysis of studies applying behavioral assessments. 
Behav Res Ther. 2015; 74:18–24. [PubMed: 26355646] 
16. Beck JG, Palyo SA, Winer EH, Schwagler BE, Ang EJ. Virtual reality exposure therapy for PTSD 
symptoms after a road accident: an uncontrolled case series. Beh Ther. 2007; 38:39–48.
17. Garcia-Palacios A, Botella C, Hoffman H, Fabregat S. Comparing acceptance and refusal rates of 
virtual reality exposure therapy vs in vivo exposure by patients with specific phobias. 
Cyberpsychol Behav. 2007; 10:722–724. [PubMed: 17927544] 
18. De la Rosa A, Cárdernas-López G. Posttraumatic stress disorder: efficacy of a treatment program 
using virtual reality for victims of criminal violence in Mexican population. Anu psicología. 2012; 
42:377–391.
19. Baños RM, Botella C, Guillen V, et al. An adaptive display to treat stress-related disorders: 
EMMA’s world. Br J Guid Counc. 2009; 37:347–356.
20. Wilson J, Onorati K, Mishkind M, Reger M, Gahm GA. Soldier attitudes about technology-based 
approaches to mental healthcare. Cyberpsychol Behavior. 2008; 11:767–769.
21. Ressler KJ, Rothbaum BO, Tannenbaum L, et al. Cognitive enhancers as adjuncts to 
psychotherapy: use of D-cycloserine in phobic individuals to facilitate extinction of fear. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2004; 61:1136–44. [PubMed: 15520361] 
22. Rothbaum BO, Hodges LF, Kooper R, Opdyke D, Williford JS, North M. Virtual reality graded 
exposure in the treatment of acrophobia: a case report. Behav Ther. 1995; 26:547–554.
23. Rothbaum BO, Hodges L, Smith S, Lee JH, Price L. A controlled study of virtual reality exposure 
therapy for the fear of flying. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2000; 68:1020–1026. [PubMed: 11142535] 
24. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5. 
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2013. 
25. Ferrand M, Ruffault A, Tytelman X, Flahault C, Négovanska V. A cognitive and virtual reality 
treatment program for the fear of flying. Aerosp Med Hum Perform. 2015; 86:723–727. [PubMed: 
26387896] 
26. Kahan M, Tanzer J, Darvin D, Borer F. Virtual reality-assisted cognitive-behavioral treatment for 
fear of flying: acute treatment and follow-up. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2000; 3:387–392.
27. Krijn M, Emmelkamp PMG, Ólafsson RP, et al. Fear of flying treatment methods: virtual reality 
exposure vs cognitive behavioral therapy. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2007; 78:121–128. [PubMed: 
17310883] 
28. Maltby N, Kirsch I, Mayers M, Allen GJ. Virtual reality exposure therapy for the treatment of fear 
of flying: a controlled investigation. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2002; 70:1112–1118. [PubMed: 
12362961] 
29. Mühlberger A, Herrmann MJ, Wiedemann G, Ellgring H, Pauli P. Repeated exposure of flight 
phobics to flights in virtual reality. Behav Res Ther. 2001; 39:1033–1050. [PubMed: 11520010] 
30. Rothbaum BO, Anderson P, Zimand E, Hodges L, Lang D, Wilson J. Virtual reality exposure 
therapy and standard (in vivo) exposure therapy in the treatment of fear of flying. Behav Ther. 
2006; 37:80–90. [PubMed: 16942963] Tortella-Feliu M, Botella C, Llabrés J, Bretón-López JM, 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 15
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 del Amo AR, Baños RM. Virtual reality versus computer-aided exposure treatments for fear of 
flying. Behav Modif. 2011; 35:3–30. [PubMed: 21177516] 
31. Triscari MT, Faraci P, Catalisano D, D’Angelo V, Urso V. Effectiveness of cognitive behavioral 
therapy integrated with systematic desensitization, cognitive behavioral therapy combined with eye 
movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy, and cognitive behavioral therapy combined 
with virtual reality exposure therapy methods in the treatment of flight anxiety: a randomized trial. 
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2015; 11:2591–2598. [PubMed: 26504391] 
32. Rothbaum BO, Hodges L, Anderson PL, Price L, Smith S. Twelve-month follow-up of virtual 
reality and standard exposure therapies for the fear of flying. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2002; 
70:428. [PubMed: 11952201] 
33. Mühlberger A, Weik A, Pauli P, Wiedemann G. One-session virtual reality exposure treatment for 
fear of flying: 1-year follow-up and graduation flight accompaniment effects. Psychother Res. 
2006; 16:26–40.
34. Wiederhold BK, Wiederhold MD. Three-year follow-up for virtual reality exposure for fear of 
flying. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2003; 6:441–445. [PubMed: 14511458] 
35. Wiederhold BK, Jang DP, Gevirtz RG, Kim SI, Kim IY, Wiederhold MD. The treatment of fear of 
flying: a controlled study of imaginal and virtual reality graded exposure therapy. IEEE Trans Inf 
Technol Biomed. 2002; 6:218–223. [PubMed: 12381038] 
36. Mühlberger A, Wiedemann G, Weik A. Efficacy of a one-session virtual reality exposure treatment 
for fear of flying. Psychother Res. 2003; 13:323. [PubMed: 21827246] 
37. Emmelkamp PMG, Bruynzeel M, Drost L, van der Mast CG. Virtual reality treatment in 
acrophobia: a comparison with exposure in vivo. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2001; 4:335–339. 
[PubMed: 11710257] 
38. Emmelkamp PMG, Krijn M, Hulsbosch AM, De Vries S, Schuemie MJ, van der Mast CAPG. 
Virtual reality treatment versus exposure in vivo: a comparative evaluation in acrophobia. Behav 
Res Ther. 2002; 40:509–516. [PubMed: 12038644] 
39. Krijn M, Emmelkamp PM, Biemond R, de Wilde de Ligny C, Schuemie MJ, van der Mast CAPG. 
Treatment of acrophobia in virtual reality: the role of immersion and presence. Behav Res Ther. 
2004; 42:229–239. [PubMed: 14975783] 
40. Garcia-Palacios A, Hoffman H, Carlin A, Furness TU, Botella C. Virtual reality in the treatment of 
spider phobia: a controlled study. Behav Res Ther. 2002; 40:983–993. [PubMed: 12296495] 
41. Michaliszyn D, Marchand A, Bouchard S, Martel MO, Poirier-Bisson J. Randomized, controlled 
clinical trial of in virtuo and in vivo exposure for spider phobia. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. 
2010; 13:689–695. [PubMed: 21142994] 
42. Shiban Y, Pauli P, Mühlberger A. Effect of multiple context exposure on renewal in spider phobia. 
Behav Res Ther. 2013; 51:68–74. [PubMed: 23261707] 
43. Wald J, Taylor S. Preliminary research on the efficacy of virtual reality exposure therapy to treat 
driving phobia. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2003; 6:459–465. [PubMed: 14583121] 
44. Klinger E, Bouchard S, Légeron P, et al. Virtual reality therapy versus cognitive behavior therapy 
for social phobia: a preliminary controlled study. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2005; 8:76–88. [PubMed: 
15738695] 
45. Robillard G, Bouchard S, Dumoulin S, Guitard T, Klinger E. Using virtual humans to alleviate 
social anxiety: preliminary report from a comparative outcome study. Stud Health Technol Inform. 
2010; 154:57–60. [PubMed: 20543270] 
46. Anderson PL, Price M, Edwards SM, et al. Virtual reality exposure therapy for social anxiety 
disorder: a randomized controlled trial. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2013; 81:751–760. [PubMed: 
23796315] 
47. Harris SR, Kemmerling RL, North MM. Brief virtual reality therapy for public speaking anxiety. 
Cyberpsychol Behav. 2002; 5:543–550. [PubMed: 12556117] 
48. Wallach HS, Safir MP, Bar-Zvi M. Virtual reality cognitive behavior therapy for public speaking 
anxiety: a randomized clinical trial. Behav Modif. 2009; 33:314–338. [PubMed: 19321811] 
49. Safir MP, Wallach HS, Bar-Zvi M. Virtual reality cognitive-behavior therapy for public speaking 
anxiety: one-year follow-up. Behav Modif. 2012; 36:235–246. [PubMed: 22180390] 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 16
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 50. Alsina-Jurnet I, Carvallo-Beciu C, Gutiérrez-Maldonado J. Validity of virtual reality as a method of 
exposure in the treatment of test anxiety. Behav Res Methods. 2007; 39:844–851. [PubMed: 
18183899] 
51. Gutiérrez-Maldonado J, Magallón-Neri E, Rus-Calafell M, Peñaloza-Salazar C. Virtual reality 
exposure therapy for school phobia. Anu psicología. 2009; 40:223–236.
52. Gonçalves R, Pedrozo AL, Coutinho ESF, Figueira I, Ventura P. Efficacy of virtual reality exposure 
therapy in the treatment of PTSD: a systematic review. PLoS ONE. 2012; 72:e48469.
53. Rothbaum BO, Hodges L, Alarcon R, et al. Virtual reality exposure therapy for PTSD Vietnam 
veterans: a case study. J Trauma Stress. 1999; 12:263–271. [PubMed: 10378165] Difede J, 
Hoffman HG. Virtual reality exposure therapy for World Trade Center post-traumatic stress 
disorder: a case report. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2002; 5:529–535. [PubMed: 12556115] 
54. Freedman SA, Hoffman HG, Garcia-Palacios A, Weiss PL, Avitzour S, Josman N. Prolonged 
exposure and virtual reality–enhanced imaginal exposure for PTSD following a terrorist bulldozer 
attack: a case study. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. 2010; 13:95–101. [PubMed: 20528299] 
55. Rothbaum BO, Hodges LF, Ready D, Graap K, Alarcon RD. Virtual reality exposure therapy for 
Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2001; 62:617–622. 
[PubMed: 11561934] 
56. Walshe DG, Lewis EJ, Kim SI, O’Sullivan K, Wiederhold BK. Exploring the use of computer 
games and virtual reality in exposure therapy for fear of driving following a motor vehicle 
accident. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2003; 6:329–334. [PubMed: 12855091] 
57. Difede J, Cukor J, Jayasinghe N, et al. Virtual reality exposure therapy for the treatment of 
posttraumatic stress disorder following September 11, 2001. J Clin Psychiatry. 2007; 68:1639–
1647. [PubMed: 18052556] 
58. Ready DJ, Gerardi RJ, Backscheider AG, Mascaro N, Rothbaum BO. Comparing virtual reality 
exposure therapy to present-centered therapy with 11 US Vietnam veterans with PTSD. 
Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. 2010; 13:49–54. [PubMed: 20528293] 
59. Reger GM, Holloway KM, Candy C, et al. Effectiveness of virtual reality exposure therapy for 
active duty soldiers in a military mental health clinic. J Trauma Stress. 2011; 24:93–96. [PubMed: 
21294166] 
60. Rizzo A, Difede J, Rothbaum BO, et al. Development and early evaluation of the virtual Iraq/
Afghanistan exposure therapy system for combat-related PTSD. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010; 
1208:114–125. [PubMed: 20955333] 
61. McLay RN, Wood DP, Webb-Murphy JA, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of virtual reality-
graded exposure therapy for post-traumatic stress disorder in active duty service members with 
combat-related post-traumatic stress disorder. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. 2011; 14:223–229. 
[PubMed: 21332375] 
62. Rothbaum BO, Price M, Jovanovic T, et al. A randomized, double-blind evaluation of D-
cycloserine or alprazolam combined with virtual reality exposure therapy for posttraumatic stress 
disorder in Iraq and Afghanistan War veterans. Am J Psychiatry. 2014; 171:640–648. [PubMed: 
24743802] 
63. Difede J, Cukor J, Wyka K, et al. D-cycloserine augmentation of exposure therapy for 
posttraumatic stress disorder: a pilot randomized clinical trial. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014; 
39:1052–8. [PubMed: 24217129] 
64. Reger GM, Koenen-Woods P, Zetocha K, et al. Randomized controlled trial of prolonged exposure 
using imaginal exposure vs. virtual reality exposure in active duty soldiers with deployment-
related posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). J Consult Clin Psychol. 2016 Advance online 
publication. 
65. Botella C, Baños RM, Villa H, Perpiñá C, García-Palacios A. Virtual reality in the treatment of 
claustrophobic fear: a controlled, multiple-baseline design. Behav Ther. 2000; 31:583–595.
66. Penate W, Pitti CT, Bethencourt JM, de la Fuente J, Gracia R. The effects of a treatment based on 
the use of virtual reality exposure and cognitive-behavioral therapy applied to patients with 
agoraphobia. Int J Clin Health Psychol. 2008; 8:5–22.
67. Pitti C, Peñate W, de la Fuente J, et al. Agoraphobia: combined treatment and virtual reality. 
Preliminary results. Actas Esp Psiquiatr. 2008; 36:94–101. [PubMed: 18365789] 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 17
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 68. Vincelli F, Anolli L, Bouchard S, Wiederhold B, Zurloni V, Riva G. Experiential cognitive therapy 
in the treatment of panic disorders with agoraphobia: a controlled study. Cyberpsychol Behav. 
2003; 6:321–328. [PubMed: 12855090] 
69. Malbos E, Rapee RM, Kavakli M. A controlled study of agoraphobia and the independent effect of 
virtual reality exposure therapy. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2013; 47:160–168. [PubMed: 22790176] 
70. Choi YH, Vincelli F, Riva G, Wiederhold BK, Lee JH, Park KH. Effects of group experiential 
cognitive therapy for the treatment of panic disorder with agoraphobia. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2005; 
8:387–393. [PubMed: 16092896] 
71. Pelissolo A, Zaoui M, Aguayo G, et al. Virtual reality exposure therapy versus cognitive behavior 
therapy for panic disorder with agoraphobia: a randomized comparison study. J Cyber Ther 
Rehabil. 2012; 5:35–43.
72. Botella C, García-Palacios A, Villa H, et al. Virtual reality exposure in the treatment of panic 
disorder and agoraphobia: a controlled study. Clin Psychol Psychother. 2007; 14:164–175.
73. Gorini A, Pallavincini F, Algeri D, Repetto C, Gaggioli A, Riva G. Virtual reality in the treatment 
of generalized anxiety disorders. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2010; 8:831–35.
74. Belloch A, Cabedo E, Carrió C, Lozano-Quilis JA, Gil-Gómez JA, Gil-Gómez H. Virtual reality 
exposure for OCD: is it feasible? Rev Psicopatologia Psicologia Clin. 2014; 19:37–44.
75. Kim K, Kim CH, Cha KR, et al. Anxiety provocation and measurement using virtual reality in 
patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2008; 11:637–641. [PubMed: 
18991527] 
76. Freeman D, Bradley J, Antley A, et al. Virtual reality in the treatment of persecutory delusions: 
randomised controlled experimental study testing how to reduce delusional conviction. Br J 
Psychiatry. 2016; 209:62–67. [PubMed: 27151071] 
77. Ku J, Han K, Lee HR, et al. VR-based conversation training program for patients with 
schizophrenia: a preliminary clinical trial. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2007; 10:567–574. [PubMed: 
17711366] 
78. Rus-Calafell M, Gutiérrez-Maldonado J, Ribas-Sabaté J. A virtual reality-integrated program for 
improving social skills in patients with schizophrenia: a pilot study. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry. 
2014; 45:81–89. [PubMed: 24063993] 
79. Park KM, Ku J, Choi SH, et al. A virtual reality application in role-plays of social skills training 
for schizophrenia: a randomized, controlled trial. Psychiatry Res. 2011; 189:166–172. [PubMed: 
21529970] 
80. Hoffman HG, Patterson DR, Carrougher GJ, Sharer SR. Effectiveness of virtual reality-based pain 
control with multiple treatments. Clin J Pain. 2001; 17:229–235. [PubMed: 11587113] 
81. Gershon J, Zimand E, Lemos R, Rothbaum BO, Hodges L. Use of virtual reality as a distracter for 
painful procedures in a patient with pediatric cancer: a case study. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2003; 
6:657–660. [PubMed: 14756933] 
82. Das DA, Grimmer KA, Sparnon AL, McRae SE, Thomas BH. The efficacy of playing a virtual 
reality game in modulating pain for children with acute burn injuries: a randomized controlled 
trial. BMC Pediatrics. 2005; 5:1. [PubMed: 15745448] 
83. Hoffman HG, Richards TL, Coda B, et al. Modulation of thermal pain-related brain activity with 
virtual reality: evidence from fMRI. Neuroreport. 2004; 15:1245–8. [PubMed: 15167542] 
84. Keefe FJ, Huling DA, Coggins MJ, et al. Virtual reality for persistent pain: a new direction for 
behavioral pain management. Pain. 2012; 153:2163–2166. [PubMed: 22770840] 
85. Gromala D, Tong X, Choo C, Karamnejad M, Shaw CD. The virtual meditative walk: virtual 
reality therapy for chronic pain management. CHI. 2015:521–524.
86. Garcia-Palacios A, Herrero R, Vizcaíno Y, et al. Integrating virtual reality with activity 
management for the treatment of fibromyalgia: acceptability and preliminary efficacy. Clin J Pain. 
2015; 31:564–572. [PubMed: 25551475] 
87. Sharar SR, Miller W, Teeley A, et al. Applications of virtual reality for pain management in burn-
injured patients. Expert Rev Neurother. 2008; 8:1667–74. [PubMed: 18986237] Kuntze MF, 
Stoermer R, Mager R, Roessler A, Mueller-Spahn F, Bullinger AH. Immersive virtual 
environments in cue exposure. Cyberpsychol Behav. 2001; 4:497–501. [PubMed: 11708729] 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 18
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 88. Saladin ME, Brady KT, Graap K, Rothbaum BO. A preliminary report on the use of virtual reality 
technology to elicit craving and cue reactivity in cocaine dependent individuals. Addict Behav. 
2006; 31:1881–1894. [PubMed: 16516397] 
89. Park CB, Park SM, Gwak AR, et al. The effect of repeated exposure to virtual gambling cues on 
the urge to gamble. Addict Behav. 2015; 41:61–64. [PubMed: 25306387] 
90. Choi JS, Park S, Lee JY, et al. The effect of repeated virtual nicotine cue exposure therapy on the 
psychophysiological responses: a preliminary study. Psychiatry Investig. 2011; 8:155–160.
91. Thompson-Lake DGY, Cooper KN, Mahoney JJ, et al. Withdrawal symptoms and nicotine 
dependence severity predict virtual reality craving in cigarette-deprived smokers. Nicotine Tob 
Res. 2015; 17:796–802. [PubMed: 25475087] 
92. Yoon JH, Newton TF, Haile CN, et al. Effects of D-cycloserine on cue-induced craving and 
cigarette smoking among concurrent cocaine- and nicotine-dependent volunteers. Addict Behav. 
2013; 38:1518–1526. [PubMed: 22560371] 
93. Culbertson CS, Shulenberger S, De La Garza R, Newton TF, Brody AL. Virtual reality cue 
exposure therapy for the treatment of tobacco dependence. J Cyber Ther Rehabil. 2012; 5:57–64. 
[PubMed: 25342999] 
94. Riva G, Bacchetta M, Baruffi M, Rinaldi S, Vincelli F, Molinari E. Virtual reality-based 
experiential cognitive treatment of obesity and binge-eating disorders. Clin Psychol Psychother. 
2000; 7:209–219.
95. Riva G, Bacchetta M, Baruffi M, Molinari E. Virtual reality–based multidimensional therapy for 
the treatment of body image disturbances in obesity: a controlled study. Cyberpsychol Behav. 
2001; 4:511–526. [PubMed: 11708731] 
96. Perpiñá C, Botella C, Baños R, Marco H, Alcañiz M, Quero S. Body image and virtual reality in 
eating disorders: is exposure to virtual reality more effective than the classical body image 
treatment? Cyberpsychol Behav. 2009; 2:149–155.
97. Marco JH, Perpina C, Botella C. Effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy supported by virtual 
reality in the treatment of body image in eating disorders: one year follow-up. Psychiatry Res. 
2013; 209:619–625. [PubMed: 23499231] 
98. Lahiri U, Bekele E, Dohrmann E, Warren Z, Sarkar N. A physiologically informed virtual reality 
based social communication system for individuals with autism. J Autism Dev Disord. 2015; 
45:919–931. [PubMed: 25261247] 
99. Kandalaft MR, Didehbani N, Krawczyk DC, Allen TT, Chapman SB. Virtual reality social 
cognition for young adults with high-functioning autism. J Autism Dev Disord. 2013; 43:34–44. 
[PubMed: 22570145] 
100. Mitchell P, Parsons S, Leonard A. Using virtual environments for teaching social understanding to 
6 adolescents with autistic spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 2007; 37:589–600. 
[PubMed: 16900403] McCann RA, Armstrong CM, Skopp NA, et al. Virtual reality exposure 
therapy for the treatment of anxiety disorders: an evaluation of research quality. J Anxiety 
Disord. 2014; 28:625–631. [PubMed: 25093964] 
101. Page S, Coxon M. Virtual reality exposure therapy for anxiety disorders: small samples and no 
controls? Front Psychol. 2016; 7:326. [PubMed: 27014137] 
102. Meyerbröker K, Emmelkamp PMG. Virtual reality exposure therapy in anxiety disorders: a 
systematic review of process-and-outcome studies. Depress Anxiety. 2010; 27:933–944. 
[PubMed: 20734361] 
Maples-Keller et al.
Page 19
Harv Rev Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
