 Serotonin engages an anxiety and fear-promoting circuit in the 
extended amygdala
Catherine A. Marcinkiewcz#1, Christopher M. Mazzone#1,2, Giuseppe D’Agostino3, Lindsay 
R. Halladay4, J. Andrew Hardaway1, Jeffrey F. DiBerto1, Montserrat Navarro5, Nathan 
Burnham5, Claudia Cristiano3, Cayce E. Dorrier1, Gregory J. Tipton1, Charu 
Ramakrishnan6, Tamas Kozicz7,8, Karl Deisseroth6, Todd E. Thiele1,5, Zoe A. McElligott1,9, 
Andrew Holmes4, Lora K. Heisler3, and Thomas L. Kash1,2,5,10
1Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599, USA 2Curriculum in Neurobiology, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 3Rowett Institute of Nutrition and 
Health, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK 4National Institute on Alcohol Abuse 
and Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20852-9411, USA 5Department of 
Psychology & Neuroscience, College of Arts and Sciences, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 6Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, 
Stanford CA 94305, USA 7Hayward Genetics Center, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70112, 
USA 8Department of Anatomy, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, 6500HB Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands 9Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 10Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Summary paragraph
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Please address all correspondence to: Thomas L. Kash, Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, CB# 7178 Thurston Bowles Building, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7178, tkash@email.unc.edu. 
Author Contributions
C.A.M., C.M.M., G.D., Z.A.M., L.K.H. and T.L.K. designed the experiments. A.H. and J.F.D performed triple label fos/tph/flg 
staining and image analysis. L.R.H. performed electrode placement surgeries and in vivo recordings during fear acquisition and recall. 
C.A.M. performed stereotaxic surgeries for evoked 5-HT electrophysiology and optogenetic behavior experiments. Z.A.M performed 
slice FSCV experiments and C.A.M performed evoked 5-HT electrophysiology experiments. C.A.M performed stereotaxic surgeries, 
behavior and data analysis for 5-HTDRN→BNST optogenetic experiments. C.A.M. performed all slice electrophysiology 
experiments and C.M.M and C.A.M. performed stereotaxic surgeries for these experiments (retrograde tracers, ChR2 infusions, and 
hM3D and hM4D infusions etc.) C.M.M, performed stereotaxic surgeries for chemogenetic manipulations in CRFBNST neurons that 
were used in fluoxetine fear conditioning experiments and C.A.M. performed behavior and data analysis. N.M. and J.F.D performed 
surgeries for chemogenetic manipulations in CRFBNST neurons that were used in fluoxetine anxiety (EZM) assays and N.B. and 
C.A.M. performed behavior and data analysis. C.M.M. and J.F.D. performed stereotaxic surgeries for HSVCre::hM3DBNST 
behavioral manipulations and C.A.M. performed behavior and data analysis. C.M.M. also performed imaging and analysis for 
optogenetic experiments, chemogenetic, and Intrsect experiments. C.R. and K.D. designed Intrsect viral contructs. G.D. performed 
surgeries, behavior and data analysis for htr2cCre::hM3DBNST experiments. C.A.M., C.M.M. and T.L.K wrote the manuscript with 
input from Z.A.M, L.H., J.F.D, J.A.H., G.D., T.T., A.H., L.K.H., T.K.
The authors declare no financial conflict of interest.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 September 01; 537(7618): 97–101. doi:10.1038/nature19318.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) is a neurotransmitter that has an essential role in the 
regulation of emotion. The precise circuits through which aversive states are orchestrated by 5-HT, 
however, have not yet been defined. Here we show that 5-HT from the dorsal raphe nucleus (5-
HTDRN) enhances fear and anxiety and activates a subpopulation of corticotropin-releasing factor 
(CRF) neurons in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (CRFBNST). Specifically, 5-HTDRN 
projections to the BNST, via actions at 5-HT2C receptors (5-HT2CRs), engage a CRFBNST 
inhibitory microcircuit that silences anxiolytic BNST outputs to the ventral tegmental area (VTA) 
and lateral hypothalamus (LH). Further, we demonstrate that this CRFBNST inhibitory circuit 
underlies aversive behavior following acute exposure to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs). This early aversive effect is mediated via the corticotrophin releasing factor type 1 
receptor (CRF1R) given that CRF1R antagonism is sufficient to prevent acute SSRI-induced 
enhancements in aversive learning. These results reveal an essential 5-HTDRN→CRFBNST circuit 
governing fear and anxiety and provide a potential mechanistic explanation for the clinical 
observation of early adverse events to SSRI treatment in some patients with anxiety disorders1,2.
Keywords
Serotonin; BNST; anxiety; fear; 5-HT2C receptor; CRF; VTA
In view of multiple converging lines of evidence pinpointing 5-HT as a critical 
neuromodulator of pathological fear learning3,4, we first interrogated the endogenous 
recruitment of the 5-HTDRN→BNST circuit by an aversive footshock stimulus. Using 
fluorogold to retrogradely label BNST-projecting 5-HT neurons in the DRN, we found that 
c-fos, an immediate early gene indicative of in vivo neuronal activation, was significantly 
elevated in 5-HTDRN→BNST neurons after footshock (Figure 1a-f). Using in vivo 
electrophysiology, we then probed the neuronal dynamics of the BNST during fear 
conditioning and recall and found evidence for engagement during both conditioning and 
recall (Extended Data Figure 1).
To decipher the role of this 5-HTDRN→BNST circuit in aversive behavior, Channelrhodopsin2 
(ChR2)-eYFP was selectively expressed in 5-HTDRN neurons through the delivery of a Cre-
inducible viral vector in mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of a serotonin 
transporter promoter (SertCre) for both in vivo and ex vivo analysis. We observed eYFP+ (5-
HT) cell bodies in the DRN and eYFP+ fibers in both the dorsal and ventral aspects of the 
BNST (SertCre::ChR2DRN→BNST), confirming a direct projection of 5-HT neurons 
originating in the DRN to the BNST (Figure 1g-h)5. Optical stimulation of these fibers in 
BNST slices evoked 5-HT release, as measured by fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) 
(Figure 1i-j). Furthermore, bath application of the SSRI fluoxetine reliably decreased the 
rate of 5-HT reuptake, confirming that photostimulation of SERT+ terminals in the BNST 
originating from the DRN induces 5-HT release (Figure 1k-l).
We next examined whether this 5-HTDRN→BNST circuit is functionally relevant for fear and 
anxiety-like behavior. To investigate this, SertCre::ChR2DRN→BNST mice were implanted 
with bilateral optical fibers and photostimulated in the BNST (473 nm, 20 Hz) using a 
standard tone-shock fear conditioning paradigm. Optogenetic stimulation of this pathway 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 was paired with a tone that co-terminated with a scrambled footshock. Cued fear was 
assessed 24 hours after, and contextual fear 48 hours after, the initial fear acquisition session 
(Figure 1m-n). While no changes were observed during fear acquisition, both cued and 
contextual fear recall were significantly heightened in photostimulated 
SertCre::ChR2DRN→BNST mice (Figure 1o-q). We next assessed anxiety-like behavior using 
well-characterized assays, the elevated plus maze (EPM) and novelty-suppressed feeding 
(NSF) tests. Upon stimulation with light, SertCre::ChR2DRN→BNST mice exhibited enhanced 
anxiety-like behavior in both the EPM and NSF (Figure 1r-s and Extended Data Figure 2a-
b). Importantly, photostimulation did not induce hypolocomotion in the EPM or open field 
tests nor did it alter home-cage feeding, thus confirming that hypophagia in the NSF assay 
was due to anxiety and not a reduction in appetitive drive (Extended Data Figure 2c-e). One 
potential explanation of these results is that terminal stimulation in the BNST produces 
antidromic spikes in DRN cell bodies that release 5-HT in other brain regions, which could 
be also be driving these behaviors. In light of this, we probed the mechanism more deeply 
using converging approaches.
To determine a receptor target through which 5-HT is signaling in the BNST, we then 
examined the impact of optogenetically evoked 5-HTDRN release on postsynaptic neuronal 
excitability and found a 3.05 ± 0.59 mV depolarization that was blocked by a 5-HT2CR 
antagonist (Figure 1t-u). In contrast to previous reports demonstrating co-release of 5-HT 
and glutamate from DRN projections to the nucleus accumbens6, we did not observe any 
time-locked light-evoked EPSCs in the BNST (data not shown). These results indicate that 
5-HTDRN→BNST projections have a predominantly excitatory effect that is dependent on 5-
HT2CR signaling. To examine the role of 5-HT2CR containing neurons in anxiety-like 
behavior, we next took advantage of a Htr2cCre mouse line (Extended Data Figure 3a-b)7. 
Using Designer Receptors Exclusively Activated by Designer Drugs (DREADDs)8, we 
found that activation of Gq signaling in 5-HT2CR-expressing neurons in the BNST 
significantly delayed the onset of feeding in the NSF assay without impacting home cage 
feeding behavior (Extended Data Figure 3c-g), thus phenocopying the effect observed with 
5-HTDRN→BNST fiber stimulation during NSF. Taken together, these results provide 
converging evidence that activation of 5-HTDRN→BNST inputs elicits anxiety-like behavior 
via 5-HT2CR signaling.
We then considered the neurochemical phenotype of these target 5-HTDRN→5-HT2CRBNST 
neurons and hypothesized that 5-HT via 5-HT2CR modulates the activity of neurons 
expressing the neuropeptide CRF. This hypothesis was based upon a previous analysis of 5-
HT2CR knockout mice, which exhibit an anxiolytic phenotype associated with a reduction of 
c-fos in CRFBNST neurons9. Initially, using CRF reporter mice to a priori select CRF 
neurons for recordings, we found a heterogeneous 5HT-induced response of CRFBNST 
(Extended Data Figure 4a), with only a subset demonstrating a depolarization. Consistent 
with this, double fluorescence in situ hybridization revealed that only a subset of CRF 
neurons within the dorsal BNST (~70%) and ventral BNST (~43%%) express 5-HT2CRs 
(Extended Data Figure 4b-d).
While CRF signaling within the BNST is classically associated with anxiety-like 
behavior10,11, more recent studies using circuit-based tools have found that optogenetic 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 stimulation of GABAergic projections (which include CRFBNST neurons) to the VTA are 
anxiolytic12. This led us to hypothesize the existence of functionally distinct subsets of 
CRFBNST neurons that gate different behaviors and are differentially sensitive to 5HT. We 
used fluorescent retrograde tracer beads to label CRFBNST neurons as VTA-projecting or 
non-VTA-projecting (Figure 2a) and found that VTA-projecting CRF neurons 
(CRFBNST→VTA neurons) were hyperpolarized by an average of 5.73 ± 1.24 mV and non-
VTA-projecting CRF neurons were depolarized by an average of 2.74 ± 0.39 mV during 5-
HT bath application. Moreover, the excitatory response to 5-HT in non-VTA-projecting CRF 
neurons was reversed in the presence of a 5-HT2C receptor antagonist (Figure 2b). 
Furthermore, all CRFBNST→VTA neurons were non-responsive to the 5-HT2R agonist meta-
Chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP), while all non-VTA projecting CRF neurons were 
depolarized by mCPP by an average of 3.78 ± 1.17 mV (Extended Data Figure 4e-h). These 
findings suggest an anatomically distinct response to 5-HT by different subsets of CRFBNST 
neurons. The subset of CRFBNST neurons expressing 5-HT2CRs do not project to the VTA 
and are depolarized by 5-HT, whereas the CRFBNST→VTA neurons are hyperpolarized by 5-
HT, via actions at another 5-HT receptor.
To determine if this 5-HT-dependent mechanism extended to other anxiolytic efferents, we 
injected retrograde tracer beads into the lateral hypothalamus (LH) of CRF reporter mice 
and found 5-HT had similar bidirectional effects on non-LH and LH projecting CRFBNST 
neurons (Extended Data Figure 5a-c). Noting the functional similarities between these two 
populations, we used retrograde tracing to determine that roughly ~58% of CRFBNST 
neurons have projections to the LH or VTA (Extended Data Figure 5d-f). Notably, ~20-31% 
of these CRFBNST output neurons form parallel projections to these structures.
In light of recent reports that CRFBNST neurons are exclusively GABAergic13, we 
hypothesized that non-VTA-projecting CRFBNST neurons may locally inhibit BNST→VTA 
neurons to promote fear and anxiety. To test this hypothesis, we injected CrfCre mice with a 
Cre-inducible ChR2 into the BNST and retrograde tracer beads into the VTA. We then 
recorded light-evoked IPSCs from non-ChR2 (ChR2-negative, retrograde tracer-positive) 
VTA-projecting BNST neurons (Figure 2c). Photostimulation produced action potentials in 
CRFBNST neurons and light-evoked IPSCs in non-ChR2 VTA-projecting neurons, indicating 
that CRFBNST neurons form local GABAergic synapses with BNST neurons that project to 
the VTA. Repeating these same experiments in CrfCRE::ChR2BNST mice with retrograde 
tracer beads in the LH, we found that we could light-evoke GABA currents in LH projecting 
neurons as well (Extended Data Figure 5g-i). Moreover, we observed that 5-HT increased 
GABAergic transmission on to BNST→VTA projecting neurons in a tetrodotoxin and 5-
HT2CR antagonist dependent manner (Figure 2d-f and Extended Data Figure 5j-n). Similar 
effects of 5-HT on GABAergic transmission were found in BNST→LH projecting neurons 
(Extended Data Figure 5o-v). Furthermore, slice recordings in a CRF reporter line indicates 
that 5-HT does not increase GABAergic transmission on to the general population of 
CRFBNST neurons nor does it directly excite non-CRF VTA projecting neurons (Extended 
Data Figure 6). The 5-HT2R agonist mCPP also increased GABAergic but not glutamatergic 
transmission in the BNST (Extended Data Figure 7). Finally, to test if optically evoked 5-HT 
can inhibit BNST outputs to the VTA, we performed slice recordings in the BNST of 
SertCre::ChR2DRN→BNST mice and found that brief photostimulation of 5-HT terminals in 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 the BNST increased sIPSCs on to VTA projecting BNST neurons in a manner similar to 
bath applied 5-HT (Extended Data Figure 8a-c). Together, these experiments indicate that 
CRFBNST neurons inhibit at least two major BNST outputs to the VTA and LH that are 
reported to be anxiolytic 12,14, providing mechanistic insight into the aversive actions of 5-
HT signaling in the BNST.
We next took advantage of an intersectional strategy for direct visualization of these non 
projecting, putatively local CRFBNST neurons15. By coupling retrograde Cre-dependence 
flpases (HSV-LSL1-mCherry-IRES-flpo) in the VTA and LH with INTRSECT(Creon/flpoff)-
Chr2-eYFP in the BNST of Crfcre mice (CrfCre::Intrsect-ChR2BNST mice), we were able to 
genetically isolate non-VTA/LH projecting CRF neurons in the BNST. We also infused Cre-
dependent HSV-mCherry vector in a subset of CrfCre::Intrsect-ChR2BNST mice as a control. 
In HSV-flp infused CrfCre::Intrsect-ChR2BNST mice, we observed a significant reduction in 
YFP+ cells in the ventral BNST (Extended Data Figure 8d-f), indicating that a large 
proportion of VTA and LH-projecting CRFBNST neurons are located in the ventral BNST. 
We also found that 5-HT robustly depolarized these CrfCre::Intrsect-ChR2BNST neurons 
compared to CRF neurons at large (Figure 2g-i). Furthermore, we observed light evoked 
IPSCs in the BNST of CrfCre::Intrsect-ChR2BNST mice, confirming local GABA release 
from these neurons (Extended Data Figure 8g). These results support the existence of a 
separate population of local CRFBNST neurons that is excited by 5-HT and increases local 
GABAergic transmission in the BNST, distinct from a population of CRFBNST neurons that 
project to and release GABA in the VTA or the LH (Extended Data Figure 8h-j).
To probe the translational relevance of these BNST microcircuits, we adopted a 
pharmacological approach using SSRIs. SSRIs represent one of the most widely used classes 
of drugs for psychiatric disorders. One limitation of SSRIs is that acute administration can 
lead to negative behavioral states1,2, a finding that is recapitulated in rodent models3,16–20. 
Importantly, the BNST has been demonstrated to be an anatomical site of action for some of 
the aversive actions of SSRIs in rodents4. This provided the opportunity to test our model 
that 5-HT in the BNST drives aversive behavior through inhibition of BNST outputs to the 
VTA. We observed that an acute systemic injection of the SSRI fluoxetine increased 
GABAergic transmission on to VTA projecting neurons in the BNST (Figure 3a-d). We then 
interrogated the role of CRFBNST neurons in acute fluoxetine-enhanced anxiety using 
CrfCRE mice transduced in the BNST with the Cre-inducible Gi-coupled DREADD. We 
found that acute fluoxetine potentiated anxiety-like behavior, and this effect was blocked by 
chemogenetic inhibition of CRFBNST neurons (Figure 3e-h).
To evaluate directly whether endogenous 5-HT acts on CRFBNST neurons to enhance cued 
fear memory, we used the same chemogenetic approach to silence CRFBNST neurons during 
fluoxetine treatment and subsequent fear conditioning (Figure 3i). Chemogenetic inhibition 
of CRFBNST neurons also significantly attenuated fluoxetine-induced enhancement of cued 
fear recall, providing proof of concept that augmentation of 5-HT via acute SSRI treatment 
recruits CRFBNST neurons to enhance fear-related behavior (Figure 3j-k). Next, using 
connectivity based chemogenetic approaches; we tested whether inhibition of BNST outputs 
to the VTA and LH is a critical component of 5-HT→BNST-induced aversive states. We 
observed that activation of Gq signaling in VTA- and LH-projecting BNST neurons, targeted 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 by HSV-Cre-eYFP infused in the VTA and LH and Cre-dependent Gq-coupled DREADD 
infused in the BNST (HSVCre::hM3DqBNST), significantly attenuated fluoxetine 
enhancement of cued fear recall (Figure 3l-o). Together, these data provide compelling 
evidence that acute fluoxetine engenders aversive behavior by recruiting CRF neurons in the 
BNST that in turn inhibit putative GABAergic (anxiolytic and stress buffering) outputs from 
the BNST to the VTA and LH. Pharmacological interventions that target this circuit may 
improve adverse symptoms during the initial weeks of SSRI treatment. Based on the critical 
role for CRFBNST neurons in fluoxetine induced aversive behavior, we examined the impact 
of a systemic CRF1R antagonist on SSRI enhancement of cued fear recall. Notably, blocking 
the CRF system reduced this aversive state and abolished the increase in sIPSCs in LH-
projecting neurons in the BNST during bath application of 5-HT (Extended Data Figure 9). 
This provides translational evidence that CRF1R antagonists given in concert with SSRIs 
could be a promising treatment for anxiety disorders.
Taken together, these data reveal a discrete 5-HT responsive circuit in the BNST that 
underlies pathological anxiety and fear associated with a hyperserotonergic state (Extended 
Data Figure 10). SSRIs are currently a first-line treatment for anxiety and panic disorders 
but can acutely exacerbate symptoms, resulting in poor therapeutic compliance. Our results 
strongly implicate 5-HT engagement of a local BNST inhibitory microcircuit in acute SSRI 
induced aversive behaviors in rodents, and could potentially be involved in the early adverse 
events seen in clinical populations, emphasizing the need to identify compounds that 
selectively target both genetically-defined and pathway-specific cell populations.
Methods
Mice
Mice were used in all experiments. For experiments involving Cre lines, mice were crossed 
for several generations to C57 mice before using. All wild-type mice were C57BL/6 mice 
obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). For all behavior experiments 
except those involving Htr2cCre mice, male mice ranging in age from 8-16 weeks were used. 
Female Htr2cCre mice were used in chemogenetic manipulations. Both male and female 
mice aged 6-20 weeks were used for slice electrophysiology and anatomical tracing 
experiments. All behavioral studies or tissue collection for ex vivo slice electrophysiology 
were performed during the light cycle.
All behavioral experiments in Htr2ccre mice were conducted at the University of Aberdeen 
and in accordance with the United Kingdom Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act of 1986. 
All in vivo electrophysiology experiments were conducted in accordance with all rules and 
regulations at the National Institute for Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism at the National 
Institutes of Health. All other procedures were conducted in accordance with the National 
Institutes of Health guidelines for animal research and with the approval of the Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
All animals were group housed on a 12 hour light cycle (lights on at 7 a.m.) with ad libitum 
access to rodent chow and water, unless described otherwise. CRF-ires-Cre (Crfcre) were 
provided by Dr. Bradford Lowell (Harvard University) and were previously described21. 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 C57BL/6J mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). To visualize 
CRF-expressing neurons, CrfCre mice were crossed with either an Ai9 or a cre-inducible 
L10-GFP reporter line (Jackson Laboratory)22 to produce CRF-Ai9 or CRF-L10GFP 
progeny, referred to throughout the manuscript as CRF-reporters. SertCre mice (from 
GENSAT) were a generous gift from Dr. Bryan Roth. Htr2cCre mice were supplied by Dr. 
Lora Heisler and are described in detail elsewhere7.
Male mice were used for in vivo optogenetic behavioral experiments and for assessing the 
involvement of BNST CRF neurons on fluoxetine-induced enhancement of fear. Female 5-
HT2C-Cre mice were used in chemogenetic manipulations. Both male and female mice were 
used for slice electrophysiology and anatomical tracing experiments. All behavioral studies 
or tissue collection for ex vivo slice electrophysiology were performed during the light 
cycle.
Viruses and tracers
All AAV viruses except INTRSECT constructs were produced by the Gene Therapy Center 
Vector Core at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and had titers of >1012 
genome copies/mL. For ex vivo and in vivo optical experiments, mice were injected with 
rAAV5-ef1α-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-eYFP or rAAV5-ef1α-DIO-eYFP as a control. Red IX 
retrobeads (Lumafluor) were used to fluorescently label LH - and VTA-projecting BNST 
neurons during ex vivo slice electrophysiology recordings. The retrograde tracer Fluoro-
Gold (Fluorochrome) was used for anatomical mapping. Choleratoxin B (CTB) 555 and 
CTB 657 retrograde tracers (Invitrogen; C34776, and C34778, respectively) diluted to 0.5% 
(w/v) in sterile PBS were used per injection site for anatomical mapping of collateral 
projections from BNST to LH and VTA. For chemogenetic manipulations, mice were 
injected with 400 nl of rAAV8-hsyn-DIO-hM3D(Gq)-mCherry, rAAV8-hsyn-DIO-
hM4D(Gi)-mCherry, or rAAV8-hsyn-DIO-mCherry bilaterally. HSV-hEF1α-mCherry, HSV-
ef1α-LSL1-mCherry-IRES-flpo, and HSV-ef1α-IRES-Cre (supplied by Rachel Neve at the 
McGovern Institute for Brain Research at MIT) were injected bilaterally into the VTA and 
LH at a volume of 500500 nL per sitesite. The INTRSECT construct AAVdj-hSyn-Con/
Foff-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP was infused at 500 nl per side into the BNST. All AAV 
constructs had viral titers >1012 genome particles/ml.
Stereotaxic injections
All surgeries were conducted using aseptic technique. Adult mice (2-5 months) were deeply 
anesthetized with 5% isoflurane (vol/vol) in oxygen and placed into a stereotactic frame 
(Kopf Instruments) while on a heated pad. Sedation was maintained at 1.5-2.5% isoflurane 
during surgery. An incision was made down the midline of the scalp and a craniotomy was 
performed above the target regions and viruses and fluorescent tracers were microinjected 
using a Neuros Hamilton syringe at a rate of 100 nl/min. After infusion, the needle was left 
in place for 10 minutes to allow for diffusion of the virus before the needle was slowly 
withdrawn. Injection coordinates (in mm, midline, Bregma, dorsal surface): BNST (±1.00, 
0.30, -4.35), LH (±0.9 to 1.10, -1.7, -5.00 to -5.2), VTA (-0.3, -2.9, -4.6), DR (0.0, -4.65, 
-3.2 with a 23° angle of approach). When using retrobeads, injection volumes into the LH 
and VTA were 300 nl and 400 nl, respectively. Fluorogold injection volumes were 200 nl per 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 target site. CTB volumes were 200200 nL per target site. An optical fiber was implanted in 
the BNST (±1.00, 0.20, -4.15) at a 10° angle for in vivo photostimulation studies. After fiber 
implantation, dental cement was used to adhere the ferrule to the skull. Following surgery, 
all mice returned to group housing. Mice were allowed to recover for at least 3 weeks before 
being used for chemogenetic behavioral studies, or 6 weeks for in vivo optogenetic studies.
Drugs
RS 102221, 5-HT and mCPP were from Tocris (Bristol, UK). For electrophysiology 
experiments, RS 102221 was made up to 100 mM in DMSO and then diluted to a final 
concentration of 5 µM in aCSF. 5-HT and mCPP were stocked at 10 and 20 mM, 
respectively, in ddH2O and diluted to their final concentations in aCSF. For 
electrophysiology experiments, clozapine-N-oxide (CNO; from Dr. Bryan Roth) was 
stocked at 100 mM in DMSO and diluted to 10 µM in aCSF. For behavior experiments, 
CNO was dissolved in 0.5% DMSO (in 0.9% saline) to a concentration of 0.1 mg/ml or 0.3 
mg/ml and injected at 10 ml/kg for a final concentration of 1 or 3 mg/kg, i.p. Fluoxetine 
(Sigma) was made up in 0.9% NaCl to a concentration of 1 mg/ml and then injected at 10 
ml/kg for a final concentration of 10 mg/kg, i.p.
In vivo Electrophysiological Procedures
Surgical Procedures—Mice were anesthetized with 2% Isoflurane (Baxter Healthcare, 
Deerfield, IL) and implanted with 2x8 electrode (35um tungsten) micro-arrays (Innovative 
Neurophysiology Inc, Durham, NC) targeted at the BNST (ML: 0.8 mm, AP: ± 0.5 mm , 
and DV: -4.15 mm relative to Bregma). Following surgery, mice were singly housed and 
allowed at least one week to recover prior to behavioral testing.
Fear Conditioning—Fear conditioning took place in 27 × 27 × 11cm conditioning 
chambers (Med Associates, St. Albans, VT), with a metal-rod floor (Context A) and scented 
with 1% vanilla. Mice received 5 parings of a pure tone CS with a .6mA foot shock. 24 h 
following conditioning, mice underwent a CS recall test (10 presentations of the CS alone, 5 
sec ITI), which was conducted in a Plexiglas cylinder (20cm diameter) and scented with 1% 
acetic acid (Context B). Stimulus presentations for both tests were controlled by MedPC 
(Med Associates Inc, St. Albans, VT). Cameras were mounted overhead for recording 
freezing behavior, which was scored automatically using CinePlex Behavioral Research 
System software (Plexon Inc, Dallas, TX).
Electrophysiological recording and single unit analysis—Electrophysiological 
recording took place during both fear conditioning and CS recall tests. Individual units were 
identified and recorded using Omniplex Neural Data Acquisition System (Plexon Inc, 
Dallas, TX). Neural data was sorted using Offline Sorter (Plexon Inc, Dallas, TX). 
Waveforms were isolated manually, using principal component analysis. To be included in 
the analyses, spikes had to exhibit a refractory period of at least 1 ms. Autocorrelograms 
from simultaneously recorded units were examined to ensure that no cell was counted twice. 
Single units were analyzed by generating perievent histograms (3 sec bins) of firing rates 
from 30 sec prior to CS onset until 30 sec after CS offset (NeuroExplorer 5.0, Nex 
Technologies, Madison, AL). Firing rates were normalized to baseline (30 sec prior to CS 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 onset) using z-score transformation. Analysis included a total of 139 cells over three days of 
recording. Data reported for raw firing rates include only putative principal neurons 
(<10Hz).
The formula for computing the suppression ratio was (average freezing rate) / (average 
freezing rate + average movement rate). Each cell was calculated individually. A value of .5 
= no change in rate).
Ex vivo Slice Electrophysiology
Brains were sectioned at 0.07 (mm/s) on a Leica 1200S vibratome to obtain 300 µm coronal 
slices of the BNST, which were incubated in a heated holding chamber containing normal, 
oxygenated aCSF (in mM:124 NaCl, 4.4 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1.2 MgSO4, 1 NaH2PO4, 10.0 
glucose, and 26.0 NaHCO3) maintained at 30 ± 1°C for at least 1 hour before recording. 
Slices were transferred to a recording chamber (Warner Instruments) submerged in normal, 
oxygenated aCSF maintained at 28-30°C at a flow rate of 2 ml/min. Neurons of the BNST 
were visualized using infrared differential interference contrast (DIC) video-enhanced 
microscopy (Olympus). Borosilicate electrodes were pulled with a Flaming-Brown 
micropipette puller (Sutter Instruments) and had a pipette resistance between 3-6 MΩ. 
Signals were acquired via a Multiclamp 700B amplifier, digitized at 10 kHz and analyzed 
with Clampfit 10.3 software (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).
Light-evoked action potentials—In SertCre or CrfCre mice, fluorescently labeled 
neurons expressing ChR2 were visualized and stimulated with a blue (470 nm) LED using a 
1 Hz, 2 Hz, 5 Hz, 10 Hz, and 20 Hz stimulation protocol with a pulse width of 0.5 ms. 
Evoked action potentials were recorded in current clamp mode using a potassium gluconate 
based internal solution (in mM: 135 K+ gluconate, 5 NaCl, 2 MgCl2, 10 HEPES, 0.6 EGTA, 
4 Na2ATP, 0.4 Na2GTP, pH 7.3, 285–290 mOsmol).
Light-evoked synaptic transmission—In CrfCre mice with ChR2 in the BNST and 
retrograde tracer beads in the VTA or LH, we visualized non-ChR2-expressing, beaded 
neurons using green (532 nm) LED. Recordings were conducted in voltage clamp mode 
using a cesium-methansulfonate (Cs-Meth) based internal solution (in mM: 135 cesium 
methanesulfonate, 10 KCl, 1 MgCl2, 0.2 EGTA, 2 QX-314, 4 MgATP, 0.3 GTP, 20 
phosphocreatine, pH 7.3, 285–290 mOsmol) so that we could detect EPSCs (-55 mV) and 
IPSCs (+10 mV) in the same neuron. After confirming the absence of a light-evoked EPSC 
signal, we measured light-evoked IPSCs during a single, 5 ms light pulse of 470 nm. In a 
subset of these experiments, SR95531 (GABAzine, 10 µM) was bath applied for 10 minutes 
to block IPSCs.
Drug effects in CRFBNST neurons—Crf-reporter mice were injected with retrograde 
tracer beads into the VTA (ML -0.5, AP -2.9, DV -4.6). We then recorded from beaded 
(VTA-projecting) and non-beaded (non-projecting) CRF neurons in the BNST. Acute drug 
effects were determined in current clamp mode in the presence of TTX using a potassium 
gluconate-based internal solution. After a 5-minute stable baseline was established, 5HT (10 
µM) or mCPP (20 µM) was bath applied for 10 minutes while recording changes in 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 membrane potential. The difference in membrane potential between baseline and drug 
application at peak effect (delta or Δ MP) was later determined. In a subset of mCPP 
experiments, slices were incubated with RS 102221 (5 µM) for at least 20 minutes before 
experiments began.
Synaptic transmission—Spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic currents (sIPSCs) were 
assessed in voltage clamp using a potassium-chloride gluconate-based intracellular solution 
(in mM: 70 KCl, 65 K+-gluconate, 5 NaCl, 10 HEPES, 0.5 EGTA, 4 ATP, 0.4 GTP, pH 7.2, 
285–290 mOsmol). IPSCs were pharmacologically isolated by adding kynurenic acid (3 
mM) to the aCSF to block AMPA and NMDA receptor-dependent postsynaptic currents. 
The amplitude and frequency of sIPSCs were determined from 2 minute recording episodes 
at -70 mV. The baseline was averaged from the 4 minutes preceding the application of 5-HT 
(10 µM) or mCPP (10 µM) for 10 minutes. In a subset of these experiments, RS 102221 (5 
µM) was added to the aCSF and slices were incubated in this drug solution for at least 20 
minutes before experiments began. For miniature IPSCs (mIPSCs), TTX was included in the 
aCSF to block network activity.
In SertCre::ChR2BNST mice with retrograde tracer beads in the VTA, sIPSCs were recorded 
as described above. After achieving a stable baseline, a 10 s, 20 Hz photostimulation was 
applied.
For assessment of spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents (sEPSCs), a cesium 
gluconate-based intracellular solution was used (in mM: 135 Cs+-gluconate, 5 NaCl, 10 
HEPES, 0.6 EGTA, 4 ATP, 0.4 GTP, pH 7.2, 290–295 mOsmol). AMPAR-mediated EPSCs 
were pharmacologically isolated by adding 25 μM picrotoxin to the aCSF. sEPSC recordings 
were acquired in 2 minute recording blocks at -70 mV.
Fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FSCV)
Electrodes were fabricated as previously described and cut to 50-100 um in length23. 
Animal and slice preparation were as described above for electrophysiology and slices were 
perfused on the rig in ACSF. Using a custom built potentiostat (University of Washington 
Seattle), 5-HT recordings were made in the BNST using TarHeel CV written in lab view 
(National Instruments). Briefly a triangular waveform (-0.1 V to 1.3 V with a 10% phase 
shift at 1000 V/s, vs. Ag/AgCl) was applied to the carbon fiber electrode at a rate of 10 Hz. 
Slices were optically stimulated with 20 5-ms blue (490 nm) light pulses at a rate of 20 Hz 
down the submerged 40x objective. 10 cyclic voltammograms were averaged prior to optical 
stimulation for background subtraction. Voltammograms were digitally smoothed one time 
with a fast Fourier transform following data collection and analyzed with HDCV (UNC 
Chapel Hill). Fluoxetine (10 µM) was bath applied following a stable baseline (20 minutes).
Behavioral Assays
For chemogenetic manipulations, mice were transported to a holding cabinet adjacent to the 
behavioral testing room to habituate for at least 30 minutes before being pretreated with 
CNO (3 mg/kg, i.p. for CrfCre mice and 1 mg/kg, i.p. for Htr2CCre mice). All behavior testing 
began 45 minutes following CNO treatment, with the exception of fear conditioning 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 training, which occurred 30 minutes after a CNO injection. When assessing the effect of 
fluoxetine on fear conditioning, fluoxetine (10 mg/kg, i.p.), or vehicle, was administered 1 
hour before training (30 minutes before CNO treatment). For optogenetic manipulations, 
mice received bilateral stimulation (473 nm, ~10 mW, 5 ms pulses, 20 Hz) when specified. 
Unless specified, all equipment was cleaned with a damp cloth between mouse trials. All 
sessions were video recorded and analyzed using EthoVision software (Noldus Information 
Technologies) except where noted.
Elevated Plus Maze—Mice were placed in the center of an elevated plus maze and 
allowed to explore during a 5 minute session. Light levels in the open arms were ~14 lux. 
During optogenetic manipulations mice received bilateral stimulation during the entire 5 
minute session. Mice that left the maze were excluded from analysis (n= 2 control, 1 ChR2 
from optogenetic experiments).
Open Field—Mice were placed into the corner of a white Plexiglas open field arena (25 x 
25 x 25 cm) and allowed to freely explore for 30 minutes. The center of the open field was 
defined as the central 25% of the arena. For optogenetic studies the 30 minute session was 
divided into three 10-minute epochs consisting of stimulation off, stimulation on, and 
stimulation off periods.
Novelty-Induced Suppression of Feeding—48 hours prior to testing mice were 
provided with access to a single piece of Froot Loops cereal (Kellogg’s) in their home cage. 
24 hours prior to testing, home cage chow was removed and mouse body weights were 
recorded. Water remained available ad lib. Beginning at least one hour before testing mice 
transferred to new clean cages so they were singly housed for the test session and body 
weights were recorded. During the test session mice were placed into an arena (25×25×25 
cm) that contained a single Froot Loop on top of a piece of circular filter paper. Mice were 
monitored by a live observer and the latency for the mouse to begin eating the pellet was 
measured, allowing up to 10 minutes. All mice began eating within this time. Following the 
initiation of feeding, mice were removed from the arena and placed back into their home 
cages. Mice were then provided with 10 minutes of access to a pre-weighed amount of Froot 
Loops™ for a post-test feeding session. After this 10 minute post-test, the remaining Froot 
Loops were weighed and mice were returned to ad lib home cage chow. Mice were returned 
to group housing at the end of this session. For optogenetic experiments, mice received 
constant 20 Hz optical stimulation during both the latency to feed assay and the 10 minute 
post-test. During optogenetic experiments, one control mouse did not feed during the 10 
minute NSF session and was excluded from the results.
Home cage feeding—SertCre mice were food deprived for 24 hours. On the day of the 
experiment, mice were acclimated to the behavior room for 1 hour. A single preweighed 
food pellet was placed in the home cage and the mice were allowed to eat for 10 minutes 
during optogenetic stimulation. At the end of the experimental session, the pellet was 
removed and weighed and mice were given ad lib access to food.
Htr2CCre mice were acclimated in metabolic chambers (TSE Systems, Germany) for 2 days 
before the start of the recordings. After acclimation, mice were food deprived for 24 hours. 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Following fasting, mice received an IP injection of CNO 30 minutes before food presented 
again. Mice were recorded for 12 hours with the following measurements being taken every 
30 minutes: water intake, food intake, ambulatory activity (in X and Z axes), and gas 
exchange (O2 and CO2) (using the TSE LabMaster system, Germany). Energy expenditure 
was calculated according to the manufacturer’s guidelines (PhenoMaster Software, TSE 
Systems).
Fear Conditioning—We used a three day protocol to assess both cued and contextual fear 
recall. On the first day, mice were placed into a fear conditioning chamber (Med Associates) 
that contained a grid floor and was cleaned with a scented paper towel (19.5% EtOH, 79.5% 
H2O, 1% vanilla). After a 3 minute baseline period, mice were exposed to a 30 second tone 
(3 KHz, 80 dB) that co-terminated with a 2 second scrambled foot shock (0.6 mA). A total 
of 5 tone-shock pairings were delivered with a random inter-tone interval (ITI) of 60-120 
seconds. For optogenetic studies, light stimulation occurred only during the 30-second tones 
of this session. Following delivery of the last foot shock, mice remained in the conditioning 
chamber for a two minute consolidation period. 24 hours later, mice were placed into a 
separate conditioning box (Med Associates) that contained a white Plexiglas floor, a striped 
pattern on the walls, and was cleaned and scented with a 70% EtOH solution. After a 3 
minute baseline period, mice were presented with 10 tones (30 seconds, 3 KHz, 80 dB) with 
a 5 second ITI. Mice remained in the chamber after the last tone for a two-minute 
consolidation period. 24 hours later (48 hours after training), mice were returned to the 
original training chamber for 5 minutes. For each session, freezing behavior was hand-
scored every 5 seconds by a trained observer blinded to experimental treatment as described 
previously24. Freezing was defined as a lack of movement except as required for respiration.
Immunohistochemistry and histology
All mice used for behavioral and anatomical tracing experiments were anesthetized with 
Avertin and transcardially perfused with 30 ml of ice-cold 0.01M PBS followed by 30 ml of 
ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. Brains were extracted and stored in 4% PFA 
for 24 hours at 4°C before being rinsed twice with PBS and stored in 30% sucrose/PBS until 
the brains sank. 45 µm slices were obtained on a Leica VT100S and stored in 50/50 PBS/
Glycerol at -20°C. DREADD or ChR2-containing sections were mounted on slides, allowed 
to dry, coverslipped with VectaShield (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA), and stored in the dark 
at 4°C.
Tryptophan hydroxylase/Fluorogold/cfos triple labeling—We stained free-floating 
dorsal raphe sections using indirect immunofluorescence sequentially for first tryptophan 
hydroxylase (TPH) and Fluoro-Gold(FG) and then c-fos. For TPH/FG, we washed sections 
3X for 5 min with 0.01 M PBS, permeabilized them for 30 min in 0.5% Triton/0.01 M PBS, 
and washed the sections again 2X with 0.01 M PBS. We blocked the sections for 1 hour in 
0.1% Triton/0.01 M PBS containing 10%(v/v) Normal Donkey Serum and 1%(w/v) Bovine 
Serum Albumin (BSA). We then added primary antibodies (1:500 Mouse anti-TPH [Sigma 
Aldrich T0678] and 1:3000 Guinea Pig anti-Fluoro Gold [Protos Biotech NM101]) to 
blocking buffer and incubated the sections overnight at 4 degrees C. The next day, we 
washed the sections 3X for 5 min with 0.01 M PBS, then incubated them with 1:500 with 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated Donkey anti-mouse and Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated Donkey 
anti-guinea pig secondary antibodies for 2 hr at RT, and washed the sections 4X for 5 min 
with 0.01 M PBS. We then proceeded directly to the c-fos tyramide signal amplification 
based immunofluorescent staining. We permeabilized the sections in 50% methanol for 30 
min, then quenched endogenous peroxidase activity in 3% hydrogen peroxide for 5 min. 
Followed by two 10 min washes in 0.01 M PBS, we blocked the sections in PBS containing 
0.3% Triton X-100 and 1.0 % BSA for 1 hour. c-fos primary antibody (Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology - sc-52) was added to sections at 1:3000 and sections were incubated for 48 
hours at 4 degrees. On day 3, we washed the sections in TNT buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 
0.15 M NaCl, 0.05% Tween-20) for 10 min, blocked in TNB buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 
0.15 M NaCl, 0.5% Blocking reagent – PerkinElmer FP1020) buffer for 30 min. We then 
incubated the sections in secondary antibody (Goat anti-rabbit HRP-conjugated- 
PerkinElmer) 1:200 in TNB buffer for 30 min., washed the sections in TNT buffer 4X for 5 
min, and then incubated the sections in Cy3 dye diluted in TSA amplification diluents for 10 
min. We washed the sections 2X in TNT buffer, mounted them on microscope slides. We 
coverslipped the slides using Vectashield mounting medium. We acquired 4-5 2x4 tiled z-
stack(5 optical slices comprising 7 µm total) images of the dorsal raphe from each naïve and 
shock mouse on a Zeiss 800 Upright confocal microscope. Scanning parameters and laser 
power were matched between groups. Images were preprocessed using stitching and 
maximum intensity projection and then analyzed using an advanced processing module in 
Zeiss Zen Blue that allows nested analysis of multiple segmented fluorescent channels 
within parent classes. Double and triple-labeled cells were validated in a semi-automated 
fashion. At least 4 sections per mouse were counted in this way. One mouse was identified 
as a significant outlier in the Shock group and was excluded from further analysis.
SertCre::ChR2, and CrfIntrsect-ChR2 validation—To verify expression of ChR2-
expressing fibers in the BNST originating from DR serotonergic neurons, 300 µm slices 
used for ex vivo electrophysiological recordings containing the DR and BNST were stored 
in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C for 24 hours before being rinsed with PBS, mounted, and 
coverslipped with Vectashield mounting medium. Images showing eYFP fluorescence from 
the DR and BNST were obtained on a Zeiss 800 upright confocal microscope using a 10x 
objective and tiled z stacks. To validate the INTRSECT construct, mice received injections 
of HSV-hEF1α-mCherry or HSV-ef1α-LSL1-mCherry-IRES-flpo to both the LH and VTA 
bilaterally (N=4 and 5, respectively). Both groups received AAVDJ-hSyn-Cre-on/Flp-off-
hChR2(H134R)-EYFP to the BNST bilaterally. Six weeks following injection, mice were 
perfused and tissue was collected as described above. To visualize YFP expression in the 
BNST of CrfCre::IntrsectBNST mice, free floating slices containing the BNST were rinsed 
three times with PBS for 5 minutes each. Slices were then incubated in 50% methanol for 30 
minutes then incubated in 3% hydrogen peroxide for 5 minutes. Following three 10-minute 
washes in PBS, slices were incubated in 0.5% Triton X-100 for 30 minutes followed by a 10 
minute PBS wash. Slices were blocked in 10% normal donkey serum/0.1% Triton X-100 for 
1 hour, and then they were incubated overnight at 4°C with a primary chicken anti-GFP 
antibody (GFP-1020, Aves) at 1:500 in blocking solution. Following primary incubation, 
slices were rinsed three times with 0.01M PBS for 10 minutes each and incubated with a 
fluorescent secondary antibody (AlexaFluor 488 Donkey anti-chicken) at 1:200 in PBS for 2 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 hours at room temperature. Slices were then rinsed with four 10-minute PBS washes before 
being mounted onto glass slides and coverslipped with Vectashield with DAPI. A 3x4 tiled z 
stack (7 optical sections comprising 35 µm total) image from both the left and right 
hemispheres of the BNST was obtained at 20x magnification using a Zeiss 800 upright 
confocal microscope. Scanning parameters and laser power were matched between groups. 
Images were preprocessed using stitching and maximum intensity projection. The number of 
fluorescent cells in the dorsal and ventral aspects of the BNST were counted by a blinded 
scorer using the cell counter plug-in in FIJI (ImageJ). Each hemisphere was considered 
independently per mouse. One mouse in the flp-expressing group was a significant outlier 
for number of cells expressed in a ventral BNST hemisphere (ROUT, Q=0.1%) and all data 
from that mouse were excluded.
Choleratoxin retrograde tracer studies in CRF reporter mice—3 male CRF-L10a 
reporter mice were injected with 200 nl of CTB 555 and CTB 647 bilaterally to the LH and 
VTA, respectively, as described above. 5 days following injection, mice were perfused as 
described above, the brains were extracted, and were stored in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 
hours at 4°C before being rinsed with PBS and transferred to 30% sucrose until the brains 
sank. 45 µm sections containing the BNST were collected as described above. Sections 
containing the BNST were mounted on glass slides and coverslipped using Vectashield. An 
image from the left and right hemispheres of a medial section of the BNST was obtained on 
a Zeiss 800 upright microscope using a 20x objective and 3x5 tiled z stacks (5 optical slices 
comprising 7 µm total). Images were preprocessed using stitching and maximum intensity 
projection, and were then analyzed using the cell counter function in FIJI (ImageJ). Only 
cells positive for GFP (putative CRF neurons) were considered. Cells were scored 
exclusively as either 555+ only (LH-projecting), 647+ only (VTA-projecting), 555+ and 
647+ (projecting to both LH and VTA), or 555- and 647- (unlabeled; neither LH- nor VTA- 
projecting). The total number of CRF neurons scored was calculated as the sum of all four 
groups, and percentages of each type were calculated from this value. Each hemisphere was 
scored and plotted independently (N=6 images from 3 mice), and the dorsal and ventral 
BNST were considered separately. The average values were plotted as pie charts (ED 9).
Double Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
For validation of 2C-cre line and comparison of CRF/2C mRNA cellular colocalization, 
mice were anesthetized using isoflurane, rapidly decapitated, and brains rapidly extracted. 
Immediately after removal, the brains were placed on a square of aluminum foil on dry ice 
to freeze. Brains were then placed in a -80°C freezer for no more than 1 week before slicing. 
12 µm slices were made of the BNST on a Leica CM3050S cryostat (Germany) and placed 
directly on coverslips. FISH was performed using the Affymetrix ViewRNA 2-Plex Tissue 
Assay Kit with custom probes for CRF, 5-HT2C, and Cre designed by Affymetrix (Santa 
Clara, CA). Slides were coverslipped with SouthernBiotech DAPI Fluoromount-G. 
(Birmingham, AL). 3x5 tiled z stack (15 optical sections comprising 14 µm total) images of 
the entire 12 µm slice were obtained on a Zeiss 780 confocal microscope for assessment of 
CRF/2C colocalization. A single-plane 40x tiled image of a CRF/2C slice was obtained on a 
Zeiss 800 upright confocal microscope for the magnified image shown in Extended Data 6b, 
right. 3x5 tiled z stack (7 optical sections comprising 18 µm) images of 2C/Cre slices were 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 obtained on a Zeiss 800 upright confocal microscope for the 2C/Cre validation. All images 
were preprocessed with stitching and maximum intensity projection. An image of the BNST 
from 3 mice in each condition was hand counted for each study using the cell counter plugin 
in FIJI (ImageJ). Cells were classified into three groups: probe 1+, probe 2+, or probe 1 and 
2 +. Only cells positive for a probe were considered. Results are plotted as average classified 
percentages across the three images.
Group assignment
No specific method of randomization was used to assign groups. Animals were assigned to 
experimental groups so as to minimize the influence of other variables such as age or sex on 
the outcome.
Inclusion/exclusion criteria
Pre-established criteria for excluding mice from behavioral analysis included 1) missed 
injections, 2) anomalies during behavioral testing, such as mice falling off the elevated plus 
maze, 3) damage to or loss of optical fibers, 4) statistical outliers, as determined by the 
Grubb’s test.
Sample size
A power analysis was used to determine the ideal sample size for behavior experiments. 
Assuming a normal distribution, a 20% change in mean and 15% variation, we determined 
that we would need 8 mice per group. In some cases, mice were excluded due to missed 
injections or lost optical fibers resulting in fewer than 8 mice per group. For 
electrophysiology experiments, we aimed for 5-7 cells from 3-4 mice.
Statistics
Data are presented as means ± SEM. For comparisons with only two groups, p values were 
calculated using paired or unpaired t-tests as described in the figure legends. Comparisons 
across more than two groups were made using a one-way ANOVA, and a two-way ANOVA 
was used when there was more than one independent variable. A Bonferonni posttest was 
used following significance with an ANOVA. In cases in which ANOVA was used, the data 
met the assumptions of equality of variance and independence of cases. If the condition of 
equal variances was not met, Welch’s correction was used. Some of the sample groups were 
too small to detect normality (<8 samples) but parametric tests were used because 
nonparametric tests lack sufficient power to detect differences in small samples (Graphpad 
Statistics Guide – www.graphpad.com). The standard error of the mean is indicated by error 
bars for each group of data. Differences were considered significant at p values below 0.05. 
All data were analyzed with GraphPad Prism software.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. In vivo recordings in BNST neurons during fear conditioning reveal 
opposite patterns of activation during acquisition and recall.
(a) Representative neuron firing rate and (b) population Z score of the firing rate for BNST 
neurons (n=45 cells from 7 mice) 30 s before conditioned stimulus (tone), during the 
conditioned stimulus, and 30 seconds after the unconditioned stimulus. (c) Percentage time 
spent freezing during fear acquisition, cued fear recall and contextual fear recall. (d) 
Electrode placements for BNST recordings. (e) Raw firing rates during freezing (blue) 
versus movement (red) epochs were averaged across all putative principal neurons (firing 
rate <10Hz). Acquisition: Cells in BNST exhibited greater average firing rates during 
freezing epochs compared to movement epochs during CS3 (t44=2.88, p<0.01, Student’s 
unpaired two-tailed t-test), 4 (t44=3.14, p<0.01, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test), and 5 
(t44=4.4, p<0.001, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test) (n=45 cells from 7 mice). CS Recall: 
Average firing rates during freezing epochs decreased over CS presentations such that firing 
during block 5 was significantly less than block 1 (t41=3.44, p=0.001, Student’s unpaired 
two-tailed t-test). Freezing firing rates during block 5 were also significantly less than 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 movement epochs during block 5 (t41=4.03, p<0.001, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test) 
(n=42 cells from 7 mice). CX test: Average firing rate was significantly greater during 
movement versus freezing epochs during minutes 1 (t44=4.83, p<0.001, Student’s unpaired 
two-tailed t-test), 2 (t44=3.17, p<0.01, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test), and 5 (t44=4.36, 
p<0.001, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test) (n=45 cells from 7 mice). (f) Freezing-related 
changes in firing rates during the CS were determined by measuring the ratio of average 
firing rates during freezing versus movement epochs for each session. Acquisition: Activity 
during freezing epochs increased significantly relative to movement epochs during CS4 
(t45=3.26, p<0.01, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test) and CS5 (t45=2.17, p<0.05, Student’s 
unpaired two-tailed t-test) (n=46 cells from 7 mice). CS Recall: Freezing significantly 
suppressed activity relative to movement epochs during the last two CS presentations 
(t47=5.29, p=<0.001, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test) (n=48 cells from 7 mice) CX test: 
Freezing significantly suppressed activity during minutes 1 (t44=6.06, p<0.001, Student’s 
unpaired two-tailed t-test), 2 (t44=2.92, p<0.01, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test), and 5 
(t44=3.55, p=.001, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test) (n=45 cells from 7 mice). (g) Plots 
showing correlation between freezing behavior and firing rate of BNST neurons across 
sessions and for all sessions. Data are mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05 **P<0.01; ***P<0.001. Scale 
bar = 100 µm.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 2. Effects of optogenetic stimulation of 5HT inputs to the BNST on 
feeding, anxiety and locomotion.
(a-c) SertCre::ChR2DRN→BNST mice exhibited reduced probability (t15=2.67, p<0.05, 
Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, n=8 control, n=9 ChR2) and latency (t15=1.003, p>0.05, 
Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, n=8 control, n=9 ChR2) to enter the open arms of the 
EPM without exhibiting locomotor deficits. (d) Photostimulation of 5-HTDRN→BNST 
terminals had no effect on locomotor activity in the open field (n=9 control, n=11 ChR2) or 
(e) home cage feeding (n=4 control, n=6 ChR2). Data are mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 3. Chemogenetic activation of 5-HT2CR expressing neurons in the BNST 
increases anxiety-like behavior.
(a) Confocal images of coronal BNST slices obtained from htr2cCre mice following double 
fluorescence in situ hybridization for 5-HT2CR and cre. Yellow arrows indicate cells in 
which there is colocalization, red arrows indicate cells in which only Cre is expressed and 
green arrows indicate cells in which only 5-HT2CR is expressed. (b) Pie chart representing 
the distribution of genetic markers in BNST neurons. (c) Experimental configuration in 
Htr2ccre::hM3DqBNST mice. (d) Coronal images showing cfos induction in 5-HT2CR 
expressing neurons in the BNST of Htr2cCre::hM3DqBNST or Htr2cCre::mCherryBNST mice 
following CNO injection. (e) Bath application of CNO depolarized 5HT2CR-expressing 
neurons expressing hM3Dq in slice (n=3 cells from 3 mice). (f) Chemogenetic stimulation 
of 5-HT2CR expressing neurons in BNST increased latency to feed in the NSF (t11=2.591, 
p<0.05, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, n=6; mCherry, n=7 hM3Dq). (g) Chemogenetic 
activation of 5-HT2CR-expressing BNST neurons had no effect on home cage feeding (n=5 
mCherry, n=6 hM3Dq). (h) Confocal images from Htr2cCre::mCherryBNST mice showing 
mCherry expression in 5-HT2CR-expressing soma in the BNST and fibers in the LH and 
VTA. Data are mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05. Scale bar = 100 µm.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 4. Electrophysiological characterization of 5-HT responses and 5-HT 
receptor expression in CRFBNST neurons
(a) A pie chart showing the distribution of CRFBNST neurons that were depolarized, 
hyperpolarized, or had no response to 5-HT (n=8 cells from 4 mice). (b) Coronal images of 
the BNST showing colocalization of 5-HT2CRs with CRF mRNA using double fluorescence 
in situ hybridization and (c-d) histograms showing the % of 5-HT2C neurons that express 
CRF and the % of CRF neurons that express 5-HT2CRs in the BNST (n=3 slices from 3 
mice). (e) Recording configuration in CRFBNST neurons. (f) Slice electrophysiology in 
BNST of Crf reporter mice showing depolarization of all (VTA-projecting and non-
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 projecting) CRF neurons following bath application of the 5-HT2 receptor agonist mCPP 
(n=12 cells from 6 mice) and blockade of this response by the 5-HT2C receptor antagonist 
RS 102221 (n=5 cells from 3 mice). (g) Change in membrane potential induced by mCPP 
(t12=2.18, p<0.05, One-sample t-test, n=12 cells from 6 mice) is blocked by a 5-HT2CR 
antagonist (n=5 cells from 3 mice). (h) mCPP selectively depolarizes non-VTA projecting 
CRFBNST neurons (n=3 cells from 2 mice non VTA-projecting CRF, n=5 cells from 4 mice 
VTA-projecting CRF). Data are mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05.
Extended Data Figure 5. 5-HT activates inhibitory microcircuits in the BNST that modulate 
outputs to the LH.
(a) Recording configuration in CRF reporter mice infused with retrograde tracer beads in the 
LH. (b) Average traces of 5-HT induced depolarization in LH projecting vs non-projecting 
neurons (c) Histograms showing 5-HT induced depolarization in non-LH projecting BNST 
neurons (t4=4.425, p<0.05, One-sample t-test, n=5 cells from 3 mice) and hyperpolarization 
in LH-projecting neurons (t5=2.789, p<0.05, One-sample t-test, n=6 cells from 3 mice). (d) 
Confocal image of retrogradely CTB-labeled VTA (red) and LH (green) outputs in a CRF-
L10a reporter (blue). (e-f) Pie charts depicting the percentage of LH-projecting only, VTA-
projecting only, collateralizing, and CTB-negative (unlabeled) CRF in neurons in the dorsal 
and ventral aspects of the BNST (n=6 hemispheres from 3 mice). (g) Experimental 
schematic depicting viral infusions into the BNST and retrograde tracer bead infusions into 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 the LH of CrfCre::ChR2BNST mice. (h) Recording configuration in CrfCre::ChR2BNST mice 
with LH tracer beads (i) Representative trace of light evoked IPSCs in LH projecting 
neurons (n=7 cells from 4 mice) and blockade of this light evoked response by GABAzine 
(n=2 cells from 2 mice). (j) Recording configuration in VTA projecting neurons in the BNST 
of C57BL/6 mice. (k-l) 5-HT has no effect on miniature IPSC frequency or amplitude in 
BNST→VTA projecting neurons (n=7 from 4 mice). (m-n) 5-HT has no effect on sIPSC 
frequency or amplitude in the presence of the 5-HT2CR antagonist RS102221 (n=5 cells 
from 4 mice). (o) Recording configuration in LH projecting neurons in the BNST of 
C57BL/6 mice (p) Representative traces showing an increase in sIPSC frequency in the 
presence of 5-HT for 6 cells from 3 mice (q-r) 5-HT increases sIPSC frequency but not 
amplitude in BNST→LH projecting neurons (F11,55=11.65, p<0.01, Repeated measures 
one-way ANOVA, n=6 cells from 3 mice). (s-t) 5-HT has no effect on miniature IPSC 
frequency or amplitude (n=5 cells from 3 mice). (u-v) 5-HT has no effect on sIPSC 
frequency or amplitude in the presence of RS102221 (n=6 cells from 4 mice). Data are mean 
± s.e.m. *P<0.05.
Extended Data Figure 6. 5-HT does not alter GABAergic transmission in CRF neurons nor does 
it directly excite non-CRF VTA projecting neurons in the BNST.
(a) Recording configuration in CRFBNST neurons in a CRF reporter. (b-c) 5-HT has no effect 
on sIPSC frequency or amplitude in the total population of CRF neurons (n=5 cells from 3 
mice). (d) Recording configuration in non-CRF, VTA projecting neurons in the BNST and 
average trace of 5-HT effect on membrane potential in non-CRF, VTA projecting neurons in 
the presence of TTX. (e) Histogram summarizing 5-HT effects on membrane potential in 
local and VTA projecting CRF neurons and local CRF neurons in the presence of the 5-
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 HT2C receptor antagonist RS102221 (same data shown in Figure 2b) juxtaposed with the 
lack of effect of 5-HT on membrane potential in non-CRF, VTA projecting neurons 
(t4=0.9381, ns, One-sample t-test, n=5 cells from 3 mice). Data are mean ± s.e.m. **P<0.01; 
***P<0.001.
Extended Data Figure 7. The 5-HT2 agonist mCPP increases GABAergic but not glutamatergic 
transmission in the BNST.
(a-b) mCPP increases sIPSC frequency (F15,30=1.863, p<0.001, Repeated measures one-way 
ANOVA, n=3 cells from 3 mice) but not amplitude in the BNST of C57BL/6 mice. (c-d) 
mCPP has no effect on sEPSC frequency or amplitude in the BNST of C57BL/6 mice (n=5 
cells from 3 mice). Data are mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 8. Optogenetic and Intrsectional characterization of 5-HT-CRF circuits in 
the BNST and outputs to the midbrain
(a) Experimental design and recording configuration from SertCre::ChR2DRN→BNST mouse 
with retrograde tracer beads in the VTA. (b) Representative traces for 5 cells from 3 mice 
depicting the increase in sIPSCs in VTA projecting neurons in the BNST following light-
evoked 5-HT release (c) Histogram summarizing the effect of light evoked 5-HT release on 
sIPSC frequency in VTA projecting neurons (t4=4.890, p<0.01, One-sample t-test, n=5 cells 
from 3 mice). (d) Experimental configuration in CrfCre::Intrsect-ChR2BNST mice. (e) 
Representative images from 4 CrfCre::HSV-LSL1-mCherry-flpoVTA/LH mice and 4 
CrfCre::HSV-LSL1-mCherryVTA/LH mice injected with Intrsect-ChR2-eYFP in the BNST. (f) 
Cell counts of eYFP+ neurons from HSV-LSL1-flpo and HSV-LSL1-mCherry injected 
CrfCre::Intrsect-ChR2BNST mice indicating the number of non-projecting CRF neurons 
compared to the total CRF population in the dorsal (top panel; t14=1.959, ns, Student’s 
unpaired two-tailed t-test, n=4 mice, 8 hemispheres per group) and ventral aspects of the 
BNST (bottom panel; t7=2.431, p<0.05, Student’s unpaired Welch’s corrected two-tailed t-
test, n=4 mice, 8 hemispheres per group) (g) Recording configuration and light evoked IPSC 
showing local GABA release from non-projecting CRF neurons in the BNST. (h) Sterotaxic 
injection of ChR2 in Crfcre mouse (i-j) Light evoked IPSCs in the VTA and LH indicating 
that CRF projections to these regions are GABAergic. Data are mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05; 
**P<0.01.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 9. Pharmacological blockade of CRF1 receptors reduces fluoxetine 
induced aversive behavior and 5-HT enhancement of GABAergic transmission in the BNST.
(a) Experimental schedule of injections and behavior. (b) CRF1R antagonist does not modify 
fear acquisition but reduces fluoxetine enhancement of cued fear recall (F1,20=13.70, 
p<0.01, Two-way ANOVA, n=6 per group). (c) Recording configuration in BNST neurons 
that project to the LH in C57BL/6 mice. (d) Bath application of a CRF1R antagonist blocks 
the 5-HT induced increase in sIPSC frequency in LH projecting neurons in the BNST 
(F10,30=0.2213, ns, Repeated measures one-way ANOVA, n=4 cells from 2 mice). (e) There 
was a reduction in sIPSC amplitude during 5-HT bath application and CRF1R blockade 
(F10,30=2.941, p<0.05, Repeated measures one-way ANOVA, n=4 cells from 2 mice). Data 
are mean ± s.e.m. **P<0.01.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Extended Data Figure 10. Model of a serotonin-sensitive inhibitory microcircuit in the BNST 
that modulates anxiety and aversive learning.
Serotonin inputs to the BNST activate 5-HT2CRs expressed in non-projecting “local” CRF 
neurons. These “local” CRF neurons promote anxiety and fear by inhibiting anxiolytic 
outputs to the VTA and LH that are putatively GABAergic. Another discrete subset of CRF 
neurons, which are inhibited by 5-HT, send direct, inhibitory projections to the VTA and 
LH. These CRFBNST output neurons are GABAergic and putatively anxiolytic and stress 
buffering. Blue dashed lines indicate hypothesized additional synapses between CRFBNST 
neurons. Dashed red line indicates a putatively GABAergic synapse.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Bryan Roth for providing DREADD viral constructs and Sertcre mice, and Bradford Lowell for 
providing Crfcre mice. We also thank Alberto Lopez, Dan Perron, and Alexis Kendra for technical as sistance with 
stereotaxic surgeries on mice ,Bram Geenen for technical assistance with immunohistochemistry and Elyse 
Dankoski for technical assistance with the FSCV. This work was supported by NIH grants AA019454, AA011605 
(T.L.K.), the Wellcome Trust (098012) and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Countil grant (BB/
K001418/1) (L.K.H.) and by NIH grant K01AA023555 and the Alcohol Beverage Medical Research Fund 
(Z.A.M.). C.A.M. was supported by a postdoctoral NIAAA F32 fellowship (AA021319-02). C.M.M is supported 
by a predoctoral NIAAA F31 fellowship (F31AA023440).
References
1. Gorman J, et al. An open trial of fluoxetine in the treatment of panic attacks. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol. 1987; 7:329–332. [PubMed: 3500189] 
2. Westenberg HGM, den Boer J. Serotonin-influencing drugs in the treatment of panic disorder. 
Psychopathology. 1989; 22:68–77. [PubMed: 2498967] 
3. Burghardt NS, Bush DEa, McEwen BS, LeDoux JE. Acute selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
increase conditioned fear expression: blockade with a 5-HT(2C) receptor antagonist. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2007; 62:1111–8. [PubMed: 17524369] 
4. Ravinder S, Burghardt NS, Brodsky R, Bauer EP, Chattarji S. A role for the extended amygdala in 
the fear-enhancing effects of acute selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment. Transl 
Psychiatry. 2013; 3:e209. [PubMed: 23321806] 
5. Phelix C, Liposits Z, Paull W. Serotonin-CRF interaction in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis: a 
light microscopic double-label immunocytochemical analysis. Brain Res Bull. 1992; 28:943–948. 
[PubMed: 1638421] 
6. Liu Z, et al. Dorsal raphe neurons signal reward through 5-HT and glutamate. Neuron. 2014; 
81:1360–74. [PubMed: 24656254] 
7. Burke LK, et al. Sex difference in physical activity, energy expenditure and obesity driven by a 
subpopulation of hypothalamic POMC neurons. Mol Metab. 2016; 5:245–52. [PubMed: 26977396] 
8. Armbruster BN, Li X, Pausch MH, Herlitze S, Roth BL. Evolving the lock to fit the key to create a 
family of G protein-coupled receptors potently activated by an inert ligand. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 2007; 104:5163–8. [PubMed: 17360345] 
9. Heisler LK, Zhou L, Bajwa P, Hsu J, Tecott LH. Serotonin 5-HT(2C) receptors regulate anxiety-like 
behavior. Genes Brain Behav. 2007; 6:491–6. [PubMed: 17451451] 
10. Olive MF, Koenig HN, Nannini Ma, Hodge CW. Elevated extracellular CRF levels in the bed 
nucleus of the stria terminalis during ethanol withdrawal and reduction by subsequent ethanol 
intake. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2002; 72:213–220. [PubMed: 11900791] 
11. Huang MM, et al. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) sensitization of ethanol withdrawal-
induced anxiety-like behavior is brain site specific and mediated by CRF-1 receptors: relation to 
stress-induced sensitization. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010; 332:298–307. [PubMed: 19843974] 
12. Jennings JH, et al. Distinct extended amygdala circuits for divergent motivational states. Nature. 
2013; 496:224–8. [PubMed: 23515155] 
13. Dabrowska J, et al. Neuroanatomical evidence for reciprocal regulation of the corticotrophin-
releasing factor and oxytocin systems in the hypothalamus and the bed nucleus of the stria 
terminalis of the rat: Implications for balancing stress and affect. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 
2011; 36:1312–26. [PubMed: 21481539] 
14. Kim S-Y, et al. Diverging neural pathways assemble a behavioural state from separable features in 
anxiety. Nature. 2013; 496:219–23. [PubMed: 23515158] 
15. Fenno LE, et al. Targeting cells with single vectors using multiple-feature Boolean logic. Nat 
Methods. 2014; 11:763–72. [PubMed: 24908100] 
16. Dekeyne, a; Denorme, B.; Monneyron, S.; Millan, M. Citalopram reduces social interaction in rats 
by activation of serotonin (5-HT)2C receptors. Neuropharmacology. 2000; 39:1114–1117. 
[PubMed: 10727723] 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 17. Belzung C, Le Guisquet aM, Barreau S, Calatayud F. An investigation of the mechanisms 
responsible for acute fluoxetine-induced anxiogenic-like effects in mice. Behav Pharmacol. 2001; 
12:151–162. [PubMed: 11485052] 
18. Javelot H, et al. Efficacy of chronic antidepressant treatments in a new model of extreme anxiety in 
rats. Depress Res Treat. 2011; 2011:531435. [PubMed: 21808731] 
19. Liu J, et al. Acute administration of leptin produces anxiolytic-like effects: A comparison with 
fluoxetine. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2010; 207:535–545. [PubMed: 19823809] 
20. Mombereau C, Gur TL, Onksen J, Blendy Ja. Differential effects of acute and repeated citalopram 
in mouse models of anxiety and depression. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2010; 13:321–34. 
[PubMed: 20003619] 
21. Krashes MJ, et al. An excitatory paraventricular nucleus to AgRP neuron circuit that drives hunger. 
Nature. 2014; 507:238–42. [PubMed: 24487620] 
22. Madisen L, et al. A robust and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the 
whole mouse brain. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13:133–140. [PubMed: 20023653] 
23. Bath BD, et al. Subsecond adsorption and desorption of dopamine at carbon-fiber microelectrodes. 
Anal Chem. 2000; 72:5994–6002. [PubMed: 11140768] 
24. Hefner K, et al. Impaired fear extinction learning and cortico-amygdala circuit abnormalities in a 
common genetic mouse strain. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:8074–8085. [PubMed: 18685032] 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 1. Optogenetic identification of a 5-HTDRN→BNST projection that elicits anxiety and 
fear-related behavior.
(a) Experimental timeline for c-fos labeling of 5-HTDRN→BNST neurons following an 
aversive footshock stimulus. (b) Representative images of fluorogold (blue), tryptophan 
hydroxylase (violet), and c-fos (green) staining in the DRN for 13 mice. Scale bars: 100 µm. 
(c-f) Histograms depicting the number of double and triple labeled neurons in the DRN of 
naïve and shocked mice. (c) There were no significant differences in the number of BNST 
projecting 5-HTDRN neurons between groups. (d-f) Footshock lead to significant elevations 
in the number of c-fos+ (“activated”) 5-HT neurons (t11=2.975, p<0.05, Student’s unpaired 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 two-tailed t-test, n=7 naïve and n=6 shock mice), c-fos+, fluorogold labeled neurons 
(t11=2.836, p<0.05, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, n=7 naïve and n=6 shock mice), and 
triple labeled neurons (t11=2.374, p<0.05, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, n=7 naïve and 
n=6 shock mice). (g) Experimental configuration for light-evoked FSCV experiments in 
SertCre::ChR2DRN→BNST mice (h) Coronal images showing ChR2-YFP expression in soma 
of the DRN and axons of the BNST. Scale bars: 500 µm. (i) Representative color plot of 5-
HT release to optical stimulation (blue bar, 20 Hz 20 pulses) for 3 mice (j) Representative 
cyclic voltammogram at peak 5-HT (blue dashed line panel E) for 3 mice. (k) Representative 
Current vs. Time trace at baseline (black) and following 10 µM fluoxetine (red) for 3 mice. 
(l) Clearance half-life of 5-HT at baseline (white bar) and following 10 µM fluoxetine (red 
bar). (t2=8.43, p<0.05, Student’s paired two-tailed t-test, n = 3 slices from 3 mice) (m) 
SertCre mice were transduced in the DRN and implanted with bilateral optical fibers in the 
BNST. (n) Schematic of fear conditioning procedures in SertCre::ChR2DRN→BNST mice. (o-
q) Photostimulation during fear acquisition had no effect on freezing behavior during fear 
learning but increased freezing during cued (t17=2.436, p<0.05, Student’s unpaired two-
tailed t-test, n=10 control, n=9 ChR2) and contextual fear recall (t17=2.271, p<0.05, 
Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, n=10 control, n=9 ChR2). (r) Light delivery to the 
BNST reduced open arm time in the EPM (t15=2.79, p<0.05, Student’s unpaired two-tailed 
t-test, n=8 control, n=9 ChR2) and (s) increased latency to feed in the NSF (t17=2.19, 
p<0.05, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, n=9 control, n=10 ChR2). (t) Action potentials 
generated by photostimulation in the DRN (5 Hz (top), 10 Hz (middle), 20 Hz (bottom), 473 
nm). (u) Depolarization in cells (t8=5.20, p<0.01, One-sample t-test, n=9 cells from 4 mice) 
after photostimulation in the BNST (5 Hz, 10 s, 473 nm) and blockade of this response by 5 
µM RS 102221 (t4=2.5, p>0.05, One-sample t-test, n=5 cells from 2 mice). Data are mean ± 
s.e.m. *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 2. Serotonin activates a local population of CRFBNST neurons that inhibits outputs to the 
midbrain.
(a) Recording scheme for CRF reporter mice injected with retrograde tracer beads in the 
VTA. (b) 5-HT depolarizes local CRF neurons (t5=7.06 , p<0.001, One-sample t-test, n=6 
cells from 4 mice) in the BNST while hyperpolarizing CRFBNST→VTA neurons (t6=4.64, 
p<0.01, One-sample t-test, n=7 cells from 6 mice). Non VTA projecting CRF neurons are 
hyperpolarized by 5-HT in the presence of the 5-HT2CR antagonist RS102221 (t4=4.74, 
p<0.01, One-sample t-test, n=5 cells from 3 mice) (ci-ii) Schematic depicting infusions and 
recording configuration for CrfCre::ChR2BNST mice injected with retrograde tracer beads in 
the VTA. (ciii) Representative trace of light-evoked IPSC in beaded (i.e. VTA projecting), 
non-ChR2 expressing neurons in the BNST of CrfCre::ChR2 mice with retrograde tracer 
beads in the VTA (n=8 cells from 3 mice) and blockade of this response by GABAzine 
(F11,33=53.16, p<0.001, Repeated Measures One-way ANOVA, n=4 cells from 3 mice). (d) 
Recording scheme for C57BL/6 mice with retrograde tracer beads in the VTA or LH (e) 
Representative traces of sIPSCs in BNST neurons that project to the VTA before and after 5-
HT application for 5 cells from 4 mice (f) Bar graphs showing magnitude of 5-HT effect on 
average sIPSC frequency in BNST neurons that project to the VTA (t4=3.257, p<0.05, One-
sample t-test, n=5 cells from 4 mice) and in BNST neurons that project to the LH (t5=3.027, 
p<0.05, One-sample t-test, n=6 cells from 3 mice) and blockade of these responses by TTX 
and RS 102221. Effects on amplitude were non-significant. (g) Experimental scheme for 
experiments with CrfCre::Intrsect-ChR2BNSTmice. (h-i,) 5-HT significantly depolarizes non-
projecting CRF (“Intrsect”) neurons in the BNST (t6=2.501, p < 0.05, One-sample t-test, 
n=7 cells from 5 mice) and produces a significant change in membrane potential in CRF 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Intrsect neurons compared to all CRF neurons (t26=2.08, p<0.05, Student’s unpaired two-
tailed t-test, n=21 cells from 14 mice for experiments in all CRF neurons and n=7 cells from 
5 mice for CrfCre::Intrsect-ChR2BNST experiments). Data are mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05; 
**P<0.01; ***P<0.001. # donates P<0.05 for the Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test 
between all CRF neurons and CRF Intrsect neurons in panel 2h.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Acute fluoxetine elicits aversive behavior by engaging inhibitory CRF circuits in the 
BNST.
(a) Schematic of recording for in vivo fluoxetine experiments in CRF reporter mice. (b) 
Representative traces of sIPSCs in VTA projecting neurons in the BNST for 5 experiments 
in 2 saline-treated mice and 7 experiments in 2 fluoxetine-treated mice. (c-d) Bar graphs 
showing that fluoxetine increases in sIPSC frequency (t10=2.55, p<0.05, Student’s unpaired 
two-tailed t-test, n=5 cells from 2 saline-treated mice, n=7 cells from 2 fluoxetine-treated 
mice), but not amplitude (t10=0.4752, p>0.05, Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test, n=5 cells 
from 2 saline mice, n=7 cells from 2 fluoxetine mice) in VTA projecting neurons in the 
BNST. (e) Experimental configuration for assessment of anxiety in fluoxetine-treated 
CrfCre::hM4DiBNST mice and a coronal slice of the BNST expressing hM4Di-mCherry. 
Scale bar: 100 µm. (f) Confirmatory electrophysiology in the BNST showing 
hyperpolarization of hM4Di-mCherry-expressing cells following bath application of CNO 
(t5=4.32, p<0.01, One-sample t-test, n=6 cells from 4 mice) (g-h) Chemogenetic silencing of 
CRF neurons attenuates fluoxetine-induced anxiety like behavior on the elevated zero maze 
(F1,30=7.086, p<0.05, Two-way ANOVA, n=10 fluoxetine/hM4Di and n=8 for all other 
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 groups) without any concomitant locomotor effects. (i) Experimental configuration for fear 
conditioning experiments in CrfCre::hM4DiBNST mice. (j-k) Chemogenetic silencing of 
CRFBNST neurons had no effect on freezing behavior during fear learning but prevented 
fluoxetine enhancement of cued fear recall (F1,17=8.73, p<0.01, Two-way ANOVA, n=6 
mCherry/vehicle and n=5 per group for all other groups). (l) Experimental configuration for 
assessment of the role of BNST outputs to the VTA and LH in fluoxetine-induced aversive 
behavior. (m) Confocal image of the BNST from HSVCre::hM3DqBNST mice. Scale bars: 
500 µm.. (n-o) Chemogenetic activation of BNST neurons that project to the midbrain did 
not impact fear acquisition but attenuated fluoxetine induced enhancement of cued fear 
recall (F1,27=7.541, p<0.05, Two-way ANOVA, n=7 vehicle/hM3D and n=8 for all other 
groups). Data are mean ± s.e.m. *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001.
Marcinkiewcz et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
