 *For correspondence:
marchetto@salk.edu (MCM);
ksemende@ucsd.edu (KS);
gage@salk.edu (FHG)
†These authors contributed
equally to this work
Competing interest: See
page 19
Funding: See page 19
Received: 13 April 2018
Accepted: 20 December 2018
Published: 07 February 2019
Reviewing editor: Paola Arlotta,
Harvard University, United States
Copyright Marchetto et al.
This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License,
which permits unrestricted use
and redistribution provided that
the original author and source are
credited.
Species-specific maturation profiles of
human, chimpanzee and bonobo neural
cells
Maria C Marchetto1†*, Branka Hrvoj-Mihic2†, Bilal E Kerman3†, Diana X Yu4,
Krishna C Vadodaria1, Sara B Linker1, In
˜ igo Narvaiza1, Renata Santos1,5,
Ahmet M Denli1, Ana PD Mendes1, Ruth Oefner1, Jonathan Cook1,
Lauren McHenry1, Jaeson M Grasmick1, Kelly Heard1, Callie Fredlender1,
Lynne Randolph-Moore1, Rijul Kshirsagar1, Rea Xenitopoulos1, Grace Chou1,
Nasun Hah1, Alysson R Muotri6,7, Krishnan Padmanabhan8,
Katerina Semendeferi2,9*, Fred H Gage1*
1Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, United
States; 2Department of Anthropology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
United States; 3Regenerative and Restorative Medicine Research Center (REMER),
Istanbul Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey; 4Department of Oncological Sciences,
Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, United States; 5Laboratory of Dynamic of
Neuronal Structure in Health and Disease, Institute of Psychiatry and Neuroscience
of Paris (UMR S894 INSERM, University Paris Descartes), Paris, France; 6Department
of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla,
United States; 7Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Rady Children’s
Hospital San Diego, La Jolla, United States; 8Department of Neuroscience,
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, United States;
9Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
United States
Abstract Comparative analyses of neuronal phenotypes in closely related species can shed light
on neuronal changes occurring during evolution. The study of post-mortem brains of nonhuman
primates (NHPs) has been limited and often does not recapitulate important species-specific
developmental hallmarks. We utilize induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology to investigate
the development of cortical pyramidal neurons following migration and maturation of cells grafted
in the developing mouse cortex. Our results show differential migration patterns in human neural
progenitor cells compared to those of chimpanzees and bonobos both in vitro and in vivo,
suggesting heterochronic changes in human neurons. The strategy proposed here lays the
groundwork for further comparative analyses between humans and NHPs and opens new avenues
for understanding the differences in the neural underpinnings of cognition and neurological disease
susceptibility between species.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.001
Introduction
Since the split from the last common ancestor of hominins (Homo) and African apes (Gorilla and Pan
spp), human brain evolution has been characterized by several waves of increases in cranial capacity
(Carlson et al., 2011; Falk et al., 2000) and selective expansion of regions implicated in complex
cognition (Semendeferi et al., 2010; Semendeferi and Damasio, 2000). The increase in the cranial
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
1 of 23
RESEARCH ARTICLE
 capacity in fossil hominins has been tied to behavioral changes, including the appearance of the first
stone tools and their subsequent elaboration, increases in population size, and the spread of homi-
nins into ecologically challenging habitats (Ambrose, 2001; Stout, 2011). Equally important were
the subtle changes in brain organization at the microscopic level. While these changes cannot be
inferred directly from the fossil specimens, comparative analyses of cortical organization between
extant primate species suggest that the human brain indeed differs from the brain of other hominid
species in several important microstructural aspects (Semendeferi et al., 2001; Barger et al., 2007;
Semendeferi et al., 2011). One of these is the dendritic morphology of cortical pyramidal neurons,
which differs between humans and the common chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) (Bianchi et al.,
2013a). Since cortical pyramidal neurons represent the most common type of neuron in the cortex
and form basic units of cortical microcircuitry (DeFelipe and Farin
˜as, 1992), comparative analyses
directed specifically at pyramidal neurons can yield insights into the organization of the microcir-
cuitry that is typical of each species.
Differences observed in the adult phenotype between humans and chimpanzees likely reflect dif-
ferences in timing and/or rate of cortical development. Developmental differences between species
represent an important component in evolutionary studies, as small changes in the timing of devel-
opment translate into morphological differences in adulthood, often with important functional impli-
cations. In the case of human brain evolution, sequential hypermorphosis, a type of heterochrony
characterized by prolongation of all stages of brain development compared to the ancestral state
(McNamara, 2002; Vrba, 1998; McKinney, 2002), has been proposed as an evolutionary mecha-
nism underlying cerebral expansion in humans. Humans and apes share a pattern of prolonged post-
natal growth in brain size that sets them apart from Old World monkeys (Leigh, 2004). Similarly, the
maturation of pyramidal neurons appears to be protracted in hominids compared to macaques
(Cupp and Uemura, 1980; Petanjek et al., 2011; Sedmak et al., 2018) and in humans compared to
chimpanzees (Bianchi et al., 2013a; Teffer et al., 2013), possibly accounting for longer and more
branched dendrites with higher numbers of dendritic spines in humans (Bianchi et al., 2013b;
Petanjek et al., 2008). Because there is little evidence that the simple addition or subtraction of
genes is sufficient to explain the observed differences (Hill and Walsh, 2005), changes in the regula-
tion (levels and patterns of expression) of genes shared between humans and chimpanzees have
been proposed to play an important role (King and Wilson, 1975; Enard et al., 2002). In particular,
the expression of genes relevant to developmental events such as migration and dendritic matura-
tion in pyramidal neurons can provide important insights into the underlying mechanisms shaping
the differences in the organization of neuronal networks observed in humans and other primates.
Although studies using post-mortem brains from human and NHPs have provided important
insights into developmental differences across species, the availability of specimens often limits the
extent of the hypotheses that can be addressed. Recent advances in somatic reprogramming tech-
nology make comparative studies possible even in the absence of post-mortem specimens
(Marchetto et al., 2013). The work presented here specifically addresses neural progenitor cell
(NPC) migration and the development and functional maturation of cortical neurons in humans and
chimpanzees. While changes in neural migration and cortical layering may pathologically affect early
dendritic organization and microcircuitry formation in humans (Pramparo et al., 2015; Reiner et al.,
2016; Muraki and Tanigaki, 2015; Brennand et al., 2015), previous research has not examined
migration and early development of pyramidal neurons from an evolutionary perspective. We there-
fore hypothesized that the neurodevelopmental differences between humans and chimpanzees
would become visible during distinct processes of NPC migration and during the initial establish-
ment of the organization of dendritic trees and functional neuronal maturation in the neocortex. To
test this hypothesis, we utilized induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology to model NPC
migration in Homo and Pan spp. (chimpanzee and bonobo) and in the early development of cortical
neurons.
We found differential migration patterns in human NPCs compared to those of chimpanzee and
bonobo based on RNA expression profile analysis and live-cell imaging. Next, we observed morpho-
logical and functional developmental differences between human and chimpanzee neurons, suggest-
ing differences in the timing of neuronal maturation between the two species. We report here in
vitro and in vivo comparative analyses of the neural development of two closely related primate spe-
cies. The strategy applied in this work can be utilized for further studies addressing human brain
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
2 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 evolution and the mechanisms underlying the cellular and molecular aspects that are unique to the
human brain.
Results
Analysis of the expression profiles of human, chimpanzee and bonobo
NPCs shows differentially regulated genes related to cell migration
Fibroblasts from chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), bonobos (Pan paniscus) and humans (Homo sapi-
ens) were reprogrammed to their pluripotent state as previously described (Brennand et al., 2015)
and then differentiated into NPCs. Briefly, we initiated neural differentiation by plating neuralized
embryoid bodies (EBs) for a week until neural rosettes became apparent in the dish. Dissociated
rosettes formed a homogeneous population of NPCs that continued to proliferate in the presence
of the mitogen FGF2 and were positive for the pan-neural progenitor marker Nestin (Figure 1A and
B) and cortical neural progenitor markers Pax6 and Foxg1 (Figure 1—figure supplement 1A–C). To
determine whether there was a difference in cortical layer identity between species at the population
level, we performed single cell RNA sequencing on NPCs derived from a human, bonobo, or chim-
panzee sample. The results revealed that each species had similar proportions of cortical markers,
indicating that within the cortical-fated cells there was no enrichment for any given layer between
the species (Figure 1—figure supplement 2A–C, see Materials and methods for details).
We also investigated whether human and Pan NPCs were similarly specified to cortical and hind-
brain fates. For this analysis, we determined the proportion of NPCs expressing well-known cortical
and hindbrain markers (Figure 1—figure supplement 2C) SOX2 and NESTIN expression were used
to identify NPCs; PAX6, NEUROD6 and TBR1 to identify cortical NPCs; and EN1, EN2, ISL1, and
LHX3 to identify hindbrain NPCs. We identified similar proportions of all NPCs, cortical NPCs, and
hindbrain NPCs in all species. This analysis further indicated that there was no detectable species-
dependent bias in regional patterning.
To gain insights into differences in gene expression between human, chimpanzee and bonobo
NPCs, we performed high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analyses on eight human and five
nonhuman primate (chimpanzee and bonobo) NPC lines. We assessed the RNA-sequencing data
from NPCs for developing brain regional signatures. Using BrainImageR tool (Linker et al., 2019),
we
calculated
the
enrichment
of
each
differentially
expressed
gene
(described
on
Supplementary file 1) within tissues of the developing brain. Genes upregulated in Homo NPCs
exhibited similar regional enrichment to genes upregulated in Pan (chimpanzee and bonobo) NPCs,
indicating that the differences observed in RNA sequencing were not influencing broad fate specifi-
cation between NPCs from Homo versus Pan (Figure 1—figure supplement 1D). The expression
profiles of NPCs from chimpanzee and bonobo clustered closer to each other than to human NPC
lines derived from iPSC or human embryonic stem cell (ES) (Figure 1C–E). The Venn diagram in
Figure 1D represents protein-coding expressed genes with non-significant differences between spe-
cies, differentially regulated genes with estimated false discovery rates (FDR) of less than 5% and a
fold change greater than 2-fold (434 genes for human and 762 genes for chimpanzees and bono-
bos). Importantly, a principal component analysis (PCA) plot confirmed that human samples clus-
tered separately from nonhuman primates (Pan) unbiasedly. The first principal component (33% of
the variance) separated human from chimpanzee and bonobo samples (Figure 1E). We next focused
on genes differentially expressed between Homo and Pan NPCs and found that, among the 1196
differentially expressed genes (Supplementary file 1), 52 genes were involved in pathways related
to cellular migration (Fisher’s exact test, p<1.07e-24) (Figure 1F, Figure 1—figure supplement 1E
and Supplementary file 2 and 3).
Differential migration properties in human compared to chimpanzee
and bonobo NPCs in vitro
We performed a scratch assay, that is wound healing assay, (see Materials and methods) to further
evaluate the migration properties of NPCs (Liang et al., 2007). In Figure 2A, representative images
taken at the time of the scratch (0) and after 12 and 24 hr for the different species are shown. While
both chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs were confluent by 24 hr, a gap remained at 24 hr in the human
NPCs (Figure 2A, bottom panels). To better explore the migration differences between species, we
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
3 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Figure 1. Characterization of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) derived from human (Homo), chimpanzee and bonobo (Pan) iPSCs. (A) Scheme showing
the main steps and timeline involved in the generation of NPCs from iPSCs. (B) Morphological aspects of neural rosettes derived from embryoid bodies
(EBs) (BF: Bright Field). Neural rosettes are positive for the early neural marker Nestin (red). In the presence of FGF2, dissociated rosettes form a
homogeneous monolayer population of proliferating Nestin-positive NPCs. Upon FGF2 withdrawal, NPCs differentiate readily in Tuj-1-positive neurons
Figure 1 continued on next page
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
4 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 quantified two features of NPC migration: 1) the path taken by NPCs in response to the scratch and
2) the dynamics of the cells as they moved along that path. Individual NPCs were randomly selected
from the population in each experiment and tracked manually (Figure 2—figure supplement 1A)
for the three species. A total of 340 human, 165 chimpanzees, and 186 bonobo NPCs were analyzed
from 57 human, 36 chimpanzee, and 34 bonobo movies (see Materials and methods). Representative
cell tracks for each species are shown (Figure 2B–D). The starting point for each example cell in the
track was marked with a colored circle (Figure 2B, human = black, chimpanzee = red and
bonobo = blue), the path taken was marked with a colored line and the final location was marked
with a gray circle. To test if the cells migrated toward the scratch, the distance difference (DD) for
each NPC of each species was calculated and compared to the DD for simulated random migration.
For all three species, migration movement was directed toward the scratch when compared to ran-
dom migration (Figure 2—figure supplement 1B–D). Therefore, we determined that the scratch
assay can be used to compare directional migration of NPCs from humans, chimpanzees and
bonobos.
Next, we characterized features of the migration process itself and focused on the speed of NPC
migration (Figure 2). For single NPCs, we first characterized the speed at each frame with respect to
both space (Figure 2—figure supplement 1E–G) and over time (Figure 2—figure supplement 1H–
J). Although cells from all species showed periods of slow migration (between 0 mm /min and 1 mm /
min), only chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs had periods of rapid migration (1.25 mm /min to 2.5 mm /
min). As a result, the distribution of speed for chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs had a heavy tail corre-
sponding to these periods of rapid migration. To compare the speed profiles across the three spe-
cies, we first calculated the cumulative distance covered by each cell and the mean cumulative
distance covered for each species and calculated the migration speed per cell (Figure 2E,F). The dis-
tribution of migration speed of cells from the three species differed, with human NPCs moving sig-
nificantly
more
slowly
than
either
chimpanzee
or
bonobo
NPCs
(mean
migration
speed:
human = 0.46 ± 0.19 mm /min, chimpanzee = 0.70 ± 0.31 mm /min, bonobo = 0.72 ± 0.35 mm /min,
Figure 2F). By contrast, we did not find significant differences in the migration speeds between
chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs.
We next confirmed the cell migration differences between species by performing an independent
assay, the neurosphere outgrowth assay. We measured the distance that NPCs migrated radially
from a plated neurosphere. We compared outgrowth from human-, chimpanzee- and bonobo-
derived spheres generated by culturing NPCs in non-adherent conditions for 48 hr and then plating
them on coated plates, as previously described (Brennand et al., 2015; Delaloy et al., 2010). We
observed significantly reduced outgrowth from human neurospheres (331.7 ± 14.24 mm, total of 123
neurospheres analyzed) relative to chimpanzee and bonobo (392.7 ± 18.86 mm for chimpanzees and
404.3 ± 20.98 mm for bonobos; total of 135 neurospheres analyzed) (Figure 2G and H). To evaluate
if differential migratory properties were influenced by the presence of cells from other brain regions
due to loss of cell purity during migration, we post-stained human and NHP cells after neurosphere
migration experiment with cortical progenitor marker (PAX6) and neuroblast migration marker
Figure 1 continued
(green). Scale bars: 50 mm. (C) Heat map representation of mapped reads corresponding to protein coding genes. Chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs
clustered closer to each other than to human NPC lines and to human embryonic stem cell-derived NPCs (HUES6 and H9 ES lines). (D) Venn diagram
showing pairwise comparison of protein-coding genes. Red or green: significantly differentially expressed genes (FDR < 0.05 and fold change >2). Red
and green: total of expressed genes with no significant differences in mRNA levels between compared species. (E) Principal component analysis (PCA)
of human, chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs showing human samples (green circles) clustering separately from NHPs (red and pink circles) on the first
principal component (33% of the variance). (F) Heat map showing comparison between Homo and Pan NPC expression profiles of genes related to cell
migration.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.002
The following figure supplements are available for figure 1:
Figure supplement 1. Similar expression of cortical progenitor markers and similar spatial enrichment of differentially regulated genes in Homo and
Pan.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.003
Figure supplement 2. Single cell analysis on human and Pan NPCs.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.004
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
5 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Figure 2. NPC differential migration patterns in humans, chimpanzees and bonobos. (A) DIC (differential interference contrast) (left) and fluorescent
(GFP) (right) images of time-lapse NPC migration from humans, chimpanzees, and bonobos at 0 hr (top row), 12 hr (middle row), and 24 hr (bottom row)
following a scratch made with a glass pipette in the center of the field of view (at 0 hr). (B–D) Individual tracks with NPC origin marked with a black
circle for human NPCs (B), red circle for chimpanzee NPCs (C), and blue circle for bonobo NPCs (D). Migration paths for each NPC are marked with a
Figure 2 continued on next page
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
6 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 (doublecortin, DCX). We did not observe significant differences between species, even though the
migration distances covered by human NPCs were significantly shorter than the distances covered
by NHP cells (Figure 2—figure supplement 1K–M). In conclusion, individual NHP NPCs reached
higher instantaneous speeds, had higher migration speeds and migrated further than human NPCs.
Taken together, differences in migration speed and neurosphere outgrowth demonstrated that
human NPCs migrated more slowly in vitro than chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs.
Differential migration properties in human compared to chimpanzee
NPCs in vivo
We then asked if the difference seen in the migration speeds was influenced by the in vitro culture
conditions or represented a bona fide difference in underlying developmental programs that have
changed during evolution. To address this question, we grafted NPCs from two human and two
chimpanzee NPC lines into the developing postnatal mouse cortex (Figure 3A). Chimpanzee and
human NPCs expressed different fluorescent markers (GFP and TdTomato) and were mixed together
at a 1:1 ratio prior to transplantation. Mice were sacrificed at two weeks post-transplantation (PST)
and two different migration parameters were analyzed: (1) the area covered by migrating NPCs and
(2) the distance migrated by NPCs from the injection site (Figure 3B,C and D and Figure 3—figure
supplement 1A,B). Once again, chimpanzee NPCs showed an increase in area coverage and dis-
tance traveled from injection site. In summary, our data show that chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs
migrated faster and covered longer distances than human NPCs, independent of culture conditions.
We conclude that faster migration represents a cell autonomous feature of NHP NPCs that could
influence the differences in brain size and brain organization between species.
Differential neuronal maturation of human and chimpanzee cells after
transplantation
Neuronal progenitor migration and neuronal maturation are distinct processes that could be inter-
connected; therefore, we chose to compare human and chimpanzee neuronal differentiation in vivo
by looking at morphological characteristics that are indicative of neuronal developmental steps. To
provide an enriched niche and environmental cues for proper neuronal development, we grafted
NPCs from two human and two chimpanzee lines into the developing postnatal mouse brain (see
Materials
and
methods
for
details).
Mice
were
sacrificed
at
different
time
points
post transplantation (PST), and the morphological characteristics of transplanted neurons were quan-
tified (Figure 4, Figure 4—figure supplements). The selected duration of in vivo neuronal growth
was 19 weeks, which, based on human post-mortem studies, spans most of the period of prenatal
development of pyramidal neurons in the human cortex, that is from the emergence of the first cells
with pyramidal morphology at 17 weeks gestation until birth (Mrzljak et al., 1988). Neurons with
pyramidal morphology were identified and traced at each time point of the study. They were distin-
guishable by their large soma, neurites emerging from the cell body, and visible dendritic spines
Figure 2 continued
line and the end of the migration is marked with a gray circle. The scratch location is marked with a gray line. Inserts contain vectors for each cell
showing net migration (from beginning of the track to the end – colored arrows for each NPC) relative to the scratch (gray line). (E) Cumulative distance
from each NPC over time from all human (black lines), chimpanzee (red lines) and bonobo (blue lines). Also shown is the mean cumulative distance for
each species (green line). (F) Cumulative histogram of motion coefficients of NPCs from three species and mean motion coefficient for NPCs from three
species (inset) (**p<0.01, Mann-Whitney U test), showing that chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs migrate longer distances at higher speeds compared to
human NPCs. (G–H) Migration analysis using neurosphere outgrowth assay. (G) Representative images of iPSC forebrain neurospheres from human and
chimpanzee showing differential outgrowth migration of NPCs. The average distance between the radius of the inner neurosphere and outer
circumference of cells was calculated using (DAPI)-stained nuclei (blue). Four measurements were taken and averaged for each neurosphere (examples
of distances shown in red). (H) Graph showing quantification of distances migrated by human, chimpanzee and bonobo NPCs. The data confirmed that
NPCs from chimpanzees and bonobos migrate longer distances than human NPCs. Comparative statistics as follows: Human versus Chimpanzee,
p=0.0058; Human versus Bonobo, p=0.0108; Chimpanzee versus Bonobo, p=0.6831. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, Welch’s t test).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.005
The following figure supplement is available for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. Characterization of migration patterns on NPCs.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.006
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
7 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 (Figure 4B). We identified pyramidal neurons distributed across all cortical layers, in callosal fibers
and clustered around ventricles; however, given that the focus of this study is the development of
cortical neurons, only the neurons with cell bodies located in the cortex and corpus callosum were
included in the analysis (Figure 4B,C).
Transplanted iPSC-derived neurons show changes in dendritic features
over time
We analyzed changes in dendritic parameters over time to investigate dendritic development. Spe-
cifically, we measured total dendritic length (TDL), mean segment length (MSL), dendritic spine num-
ber (DSN), dendritic spine density (DSD), dendritic segment count (DSC), number of dendrites
(TREE), and cell body area (SOMA) (Figure 4D–K).
Figure 3. In vivo migration comparative analysis. (A) Scheme of the transplantation experimental procedure to detect in vivo cell migration. Fibroblasts
from human and chimpanzee were reprogrammed to iPSCs and differentiated to NPCs and then transduced with lentiviral vectors expressing either
green fluorescent protein (GFP) or TdTomato. NPC lines from human and chimpanzee were mixed and grafted into the developing postnatal mouse
cortex. Mice were sacrificed at two weeks post-transplantation. (B) Representative image of grafted human (green) and chimpanzee (red) NPCs
migrating away from the injection site (indicated by the white dashed line). (C) Representation of the area covered by human and chimpanzee migrating
NPCs (D) Distance migrated by single NPCs from the injection site. (****p<0.0001, Mann-Whitney U test).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.007
The following figure supplement is available for figure 3:
Figure supplement 1. In vivo migration of human and chimpanzee NPCs two weeks after transplantation in mouse brain.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.008
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
8 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Figure 4. Comparative morphometric analyses on iPSC-derived transplanted neurons over time. (A) Scheme of the transplantation experimental
procedure. NPCs were obtained from both species and transduced with lentiviral vectors expressing either green fluorescent protein (GFP) or
TdTomato (Red). The NPCs from both species were dissociated together and mixed before injection into brains of mice at postnatal day P4-6. The
brains of the animals were harvested after 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 19 weeks post transplantation (PST). Each brain was cryosectioned and the anatomy of GFP-
Figure 4 continued on next page
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
9 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 The variables reflecting dendritic spine number and density (DSN and DSD) in iPSC-derived neu-
rons significantly differed across the time points examined for both species (Figure 4H–K). The cor-
relation between these morphometric variables and time was calculated via regression analysis to
define the coefficient of determination (R2), and statistical significance was determined for each
regression analysis. The regression analysis allows us to summarize and study relationships between
two continuous quantitative variables (morphometric measurements and time) (insets on Figure 4D–
K and Figure 4—figure supplement 2A–F). The slopes that showed significant positive correlation
for both human and chimpanzee values were DSD and DSN, indicating that the number of dendritic
spines from transplanted neurons increased over time, implying neuronal maturation for both
species.
Cross-species comparison revealed significant changes in timing of
dendritic maturation
The absolute values and the timing of developmental events differed between the species for most
of the variables examined, but the extent of the differences varied (Figure 4L–N and Figure 4—fig-
ure supplement 2G–I). Comparison between human and chimpanzee iPSC-derived neurons
revealed a significant effect of species for the variables TDL, MSL, DSN and TREE at different time
points.
The growth of dendrites, quantified as increase in TDL over the 19 week period, displayed differ-
ent trajectories in each species (Figure 4L). At four weeks PST, neurites from human transplanted
neurons began elongating and continued growing until the last time point examined (19 weeks). In
contrast, the length of dendrites in chimpanzee iPSC-derived neurons increased at two weeks PST,
with little change afterward. The difference between the species was significant at 2, 8 and 19
weeks. Similarly, MSL was significantly higher in human neurons compared to chimpanzee neurons
at 6, 8 and 19 weeks (Figure 4M). The DSN displayed little difference between the species for the
first six weeks PST but, at 8 and 19 weeks, the DSN increased rapidly in the human iPSC-derived
neurons, producing significantly higher numbers of spines compared to the chimpanzee iPSC-
derived neurons at eight weeks (Figure 4N).
Our results suggest that some aspects of dendritic morphology develop at earlier time-points in
chimpanzee neurons compared to human neurons (1–2 weeks; TDL, MSL, and DSN). However, the
pattern is not seen in all of the dendritic variables (Figure 4L–N and Figure 4—figure supplement
2 G, H and J), indicating that parts of dendrites with different functions may mature at different
rates in each species.
Figure 4 continued
and TdTomato-positive pyramidal neurons in the cortex was analyzed. Parameters used for the morphometric analysis are listed. (B) Representative
confocal images from human and chimpanzee pyramidal neurons eight weeks PST. Arrowheads indicate potential apical dendrites. Scale bar = 10 mm.
(C) Number of pyramidal neurons used for the morphometric analysis at different time points following transplantation. (D–K) Graphs illustrating
changes in morphometric variables in human and chimpanzee iPSC-derived pyramidal neurons over time after transplantation. (D, E) Total dendritic
length; (F, G) mean segment length; (H, I) dendritic spine number; and (J, K) dendritic spine density. Each point in the bar graphs represents an
individual neuron. Statistical significance is shown between adjacent time points and between the earliest (1 week) and the latest (19 weeks) time point
after transplantation. The top left corner insets show regression lines (red) of respective variables correlated with weeks PST. Coefficient of
determination (R2) and statistical significance are indicated for each regression analysis (***p<0.001, Pearson’s correlation test). (L–N) Comparative
morphometric analyses on iPSC-derived transplanted neurons showed significant difference between species on specific time points. (L) Total dendritic
length (TDL: 2 weeks, p=0.0100; 8 weeks, p=0.0039; 19 weeks, p=0.0316); (M) mean segment length (MSL: 6 weeks, p=0.0483; 8 weeks, p=0.0086; 19
weeks, p=0.0016); and (N) dendritic spine number (DSN: 8 weeks, p=0.0482). (*p<0.05; **p<0.01, Unpaired t test).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.009
The following figure supplements are available for figure 4:
Figure supplement 1. In vivo differentiation of human and chimpanzee neurons post-transplantation.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.010
Figure supplement 2. Morphometric analysis of human and chimpanzee neurons post- transplantation.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.011
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
10 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Differential functional maturation of human, chimpanzee and bonobo
neurons
We then asked if there were functional changes related to the differences observed in morphological
neuronal maturation. To quantify neuronal function over time, we differentiated NPC lines from four
human, two chimpanzee and two bonobo individuals (total of eight individuals and two lines each)
(differentiation scheme, Figure 5A). The cells stopped dividing and neural processes became appar-
ent in the dish. At this stage, neurons were positive for pan-neuronal markers (Tuj1, Map2AB, Synap-
sin1) (Figure 5B and C) and cortical markers (Figure 5—figure supplement 1). We did not observe
significant differences in the percentage of cells positive for these markers between human, chim-
panzee and bonobo lines at two, four or six weeks of differentiation (Figure 5C and Figure 5—fig-
ure supplement 1). To address neuronal development functionally over time, we used the multi-well
microelectrode array platform (MEA, Maestro, Axion Biosystems, Figure 5D). The system allows for
simultaneous recordings of extracellular voltage changes associated with electrical events on the cell
lines, thereby allowing for the detection of functional changes during the course of neuronal matura-
tion (one to six weeks). We then analyzed the normalized neuronal spiking and network bursts from
differentiating neurons over time. While chimpanzee and bonobo cultures showed significantly
increased firing rates at earlier time points (two weeks after differentiation), human cultures showed
increased firing rates at later time points (six weeks after differentiation, Figure 5E and F). The func-
tional data corroborated the developmental differences observed in the morphological features
between human and chimpanzee transplanted cells (Figure 4L–M). Interestingly, there was a similar
time window (about four to five weeks) when human neuronal developmental features exceeded
those of NHPs both in vitro and in vivo (compare Figure 4L with Figure 5F), indicating the presence
of species-specific cell-autonomous features consistent across the two lines of analysis.
Discussion
Here we present evidence for differential migration patterns in human NPCs compared to those in
chimpanzees and bonobos and for differences in the early development of pyramidal neurons in
humans and chimpanzees. We reveal that the species-specific differences in migration remain pre-
served after NPC grafting into the mouse cortex, suggesting a strong cell-autonomous effect. Fur-
ther molecular and mechanistic analyses should address the question of which specific genes – or
pathways – underlie the observed differences in migration between the two species. The observation
of differential gene expression, carries implications that extend beyond evolutionary studies, since
differential expression of genes related to cell migration and aberrant in vitro cell migration has
been reported in NPCs derived from patients with neuropsychiatric disorders (Brennand et al.,
2015). Our results support the notion that NPC migration is a tightly regulated process in primates,
and changes in features related to this process are correlated with alterations in fetal cortical neuro-
genesis and, potentially, pathogenesis. Recently, Otani et al. showed that the level of individual cor-
tical progenitor cell clonal output in primates is also regulated cell autonomously, opening the
possibility for comparative in vitro studies using human and NHP NPCs (Otani et al., 2016). This
approach will be essential to help define the neurodevelopmental pathways that shaped human
uniqueness and whose disruption is likely to contribute to neural developmental disorders.
One important consideration when modeling neurodevelopment in a dish with iPSC-derived cells
is to have relevant milestones recapitulated in a defined cellular type. For the CNS, not only is the
neuronal subtype relevant, but extrinsic factors also play a crucial role in the neuronal maturation. To
overcome this limitation and to take advantage of a neutral in vivo setting, we engrafted iPSC-
derived NPCs into mouse brains, using the rodent cortex as a scaffold for neuronal development. By
analyzing the change in the morphology of transplanted neurons over time, it was possible to inves-
tigate neurodevelopmental aspects of two distinct primate species exposed to the same in vivo envi-
ronment (mouse cortex). Our focus was specifically on the morphology of pyramidal neurons.
Although pyramidal neurons represent a morphological class of neurons with different functional
properties (Chagnac-Amitai et al., 1990; Connors and Gutnick, 1990; Mainen and Sejnowski,
1996), we have adhered to the morphological definition of pyramidal neurons (DeFelipe and Fari-
n
˜as, 1992; Nieuwenhuys, 1994; Spruston, 2008), which, combined with the quantification of neu-
ronal morphology as utilized in post-mortem studies, enabled a direct comparison of our findings
with previous research (Bianchi et al., 2013a; Petanjek et al., 2008; Mrzljak et al., 1988;
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
11 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Figure 5. Neuronal functional analysis of human, chimpanzee and bonobo over time. (A) Differentiation scheme using EBs, neural rosettes and NPCs as
intermediate cell lines. (B) iPSC-derived neurons in culture can be visualized by infection with a lentiviral vector carrying the EGFP reporter gene under
the activity of the neuron-specific Synapsin promoter (Syn::eGFP). Most of the eGFP-positive neurons expressed the mature neuronal marker Synapsin.
Scale bar: 20 mm. (C) No significant change was observed in the percentage of neurons expressing the neuronal markers Map2AB and Synapsin::eGFP
between human, chimpanzee and bonobo lines. (D–E) Multielectrode array (MEA) analysis was performed in differentiating neurons from human,
chimpanzee and bonobo lines. (D) Example of chimpanzee neurons growing on top of electrodes on a multiwell plate. (E) Representative MEA traces
Figure 5 continued on next page
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
12 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Mrzljak et al., 1992). Our findings suggest that transplanted human and chimpanzee progenitors
can differentiate into neurons, with the morphology typical of pyramidal cells, and can display pat-
terns of development similar to those documented in the literature (Mrzljak et al., 1988). At the
same time, iPSC-derived neurons from the two species can also display differences in the timing of
certain developmental events, suggesting the role of cell-autonomous developmental programs typi-
cal of each species.
The differences in neuronal development between Homo and Pan are often examined in the con-
text of changes in timing or rate (i.e., heterochronic changes) of specific developmental events
(Vrba, 1998; McKinney, 2002; Leigh, 2004). The present study supports this approach by identify-
ing three distinct processes – NPC migration, dendritic development, and functional maturation of
neurons – that also display differences in timing of their development in humans compared to the
Pan species analyzed. Previous reports comparing human, chimpanzee and macaque post-mortem
brain expression profiles reported that the most prominent human-specific expression changes dur-
ing development affected genes associated with synaptic functions, representing an extreme shift in
the timing of synaptic development in the human prefrontal cortex (Liu et al., 2012; Somel et al.,
2009). A more specific focus on one developmental parameter, coupled with gene expression stud-
ies, could reveal a more consistent pattern, especially if applied to a larger number of species. In
addition to their evolutionary importance for specifying species-specific features, early developmen-
tal events are important for understanding the neuroanatomical changes observed in neurodevelop-
mental disorders, since pathologies in dendritic organization tend to appear during the initial
establishment of dendrites in Down syndrome, Rett syndrome, autism spectrum disorder, and Frag-
ile X (Marin-Padilla, 1972; Belichenko et al., 1994; Hutsler and Zhang, 2010; Irwin et al., 2001;
Liu et al., 2016).
Thus, in the present study we have observed several patterns that are largely in accordance with
heterochrony, a mechanism previously suggested to underlie changes in human brain size and orga-
nization during its evolutionary history (Vrba, 1998; McKinney, 2002; Leigh, 2004). Focusing specif-
ically on the morphology of dendrites, post-mortem studies have suggested that the dendrites of
human pyramidal neurons in adulthood are longer and more branched and have a higher number of
dendritic spines compared to the same class of neurons in the chimpanzee neocortex (Bianchi et al.,
2013b). The analysis of dendritic development of pyramidal neurons in the two species using iPSC-
derived neurons suggested that the observed difference in adulthood might be a consequence of
differences in the early development between humans and chimpanzees. As our results suggest,
dendrites on human neurons are initially shorter and less branched and have fewer dendritic spines
compared to the dendrites of chimpanzee iPSC-derived neurons. At one point in development –
ranging from six weeks for MSL and eight weeks for TDL and DSN – dendrites on human iPSC-
derived neurons enter a rapid growth and surpass the chimpanzee iPSC-derived neurons
(Figure 4L–N), suggesting the possibility of late initiation of dendritic growth in humans.
The morphological findings are supported by the analysis of neuronal function. The human neu-
rons in culture also displayed functional developmental delay compared to chimpanzee and bonobo
neurons, with human neurons showing increased firing rates and neuronal bursts at later time points.
Interestingly, we observed a similar time window (between four and five weeks) wherein human neu-
ronal developmental parameters surpass NHPs in both in vivo and in vitro analyses (compare
Figure 4L and N with Figure 5F). Our results suggest the presence of cell-autonomous characteris-
tics of neuronal maturation in humans that are different from those of chimpanzees and bonobos
and support the idea that developmental delay in humans results in increased neuronal complexity
Figure 5 continued
on two- and six-week-old neurons from humans, chimpanzees and bonobos showing neural spikes (black dashes), neural bursts (blue dashes) and
network bursts among channels (pink lines). (F) Comparative analysis between species over differentiation time showing that while chimpanzee and
bonobo neurons have accelerated functional maturation (1.5 weeks, p=0.0147), human neural cultures show increased firing rates at later time points (5
weeks, p=0.0239 and 6 weeks, p=0.0018). (*p<0.05; **p<0.01, Unpaired t test).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.012
The following figure supplement is available for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Immunocytochemistry of iPSC-derived neurons from humans and chimpanzees.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.013
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
13 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 (increased dendritic length, spine density) and neuronal function (increased firing rates and network
bursts) at later time points during maturation.
As soft tissue remains scarce in human developmental and evolutionary neuroanatomy studies,
the novel strategy we present here - combining the use of iPSC technology with in vitro analysis of
cell migration and in vivo grafting - offers a paradigm aimed at elucidating the genetic underpin-
nings of the observed changes and the evolutionary timing of human emergence and suggests fur-
ther implications for the evolution of cortical microcircuitry across different primate clades.
Materials and methods
Cell line statement
Fibroblasts from three human subjects (WT126, WT33, Adrc40), two chimpanzees (PR00818 and
PR01209), two bonobos (PR01086 and AG05253), were reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSC) at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies (La Jolla, CA) and differentiated into neural
progenitor cell as previously described (Marchetto et al., 2013; Marchetto et al., 2010). Fibro-
blasts from chimpanzee and bonobo were obtained from Coriell Institute and their use was
approved by the US Fish and Wildlife Service, under permit number MA206206. Protocols describing
the use of human iPSCs were previously approved by the University of California, San Diego (UCSD)
and the Salk Institute Institutional Review Board. Authentication: Cell identity was confirmed by
G-banding karyotyping and routine immunofluorescence assays. Primary antibodies used in this
study to characterize the cell lines were: human Nestin (1:250, Chemicon cat# ABD69) and SOX2
(1:200, Santa Cruz cat# sc-17320), for neuroprogenitor cells, and Map2 (1:500, Abcam, cat#
ab5392); GFP (1:500, Invitrogen, cat# A6455); and CTIP2 (1:200, Abcam, cat# ab18465), for neurons.
Mycoplasma Contamination: All the lines have been tested negative for Mycoplasma contamination.
We test all lines on a monthly basis using a mycoplasma detection kit that uses polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and can detect over 95% of commonly occurring mycoplasma species contaminating
cell lines.
Cell culture reprogramming and neuronal differentiation
Fibroblasts from humans and nonhuman primates were reprogrammed to iPSCs using Yamanaka ret-
roviral vectors expressing reprograming genes (Klf4, Oct4, Sox2 and cMyc) and differentiated into
NPCs as previously described (Marchetto et al., 2013; Marchetto et al., 2010). Established iPSC
colonies were kept in feeder-free conditions indefinitely and passed using mechanical dissociation.
To obtain NPCs from iPSCs, EBs were formed by mechanical dissociation of iPSC clusters and plated
into low-adherence dishes in DMEM/F12 plus N2 and B27 (Invitrogen) medium in the presence of
Noggin (R and D) for forebrain induction for approximately seven days. Then, floating EBs were
plated onto poly-ornithine/laminin (Sigma)-coated dishes in DMEM/F12 supplemented with N2 and
B27 (Invitrogen) and Noggin. Rosettes were collected after seven days. Rosettes were then dissoci-
ated with Accutase (Chemicon) and plated again onto coated dishes in DMEM/F12 supplemented
with N2 and B27 and 10 ng/ml of FGF2 (R and D). Homogeneous populations of NPCs were
obtained after one to two passages with Accutase under the same conditions. To obtain neurons,
NPCs were cultured in DMEM/F12 supplemented with N2 and B27, laminin (1 mg/ml), BDNF (20 ng/
ml), GDNF (20 ng/ml) and cyclic AMP (500 mg/ml) for up to eight weeks.
Immunofluorescence in vitro
Cells were briefly fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min and then permeabilized with 0.5% Tri-
ton-X100 in PBS. Cells were then blocked in 0.5% Triton-X100 with 5% donkey serum for 1 hr before
incubation with primary antibody overnight at 4˚C. After three washes in PBS, cells were incubated
with secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 1 hr at room temperature. Fluorescent sig-
nals were detected using a Zeiss LSM 710 Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope and images were
processed with Photoshop CS3 (Adobe Systems). Primary antibodies used in this study were human
Nestin (1:100, Chemicon); Tuj-1 (1:500, Covance); Map2 (1:100, Sigma); GFP (1:200, Molecular
Probes-Invitrogen) Synapsin1 (1:200, Calbiochem), GABA (1:200, Sigma) and CTIP2 (1:200, Abcam).
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
14 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Single cell capture and library preparation for RNA sequencing
NPCs were dissociated into single cell suspension with Accutase enzyme (Chemicon) and cell sus-
pension from each sample (human [wt33 c1], chimpanzee [PR00818 c5] and bonobo [PR01086 c1])
were directly loaded on each sample well to generate single-cell GEMs (gel beads in emersion) using
Chromium Single Cell Controller (10X Genomics Inc). Approximately 10,000–13,000 NPCs were cap-
tured and single-cell RNA-Seq libraries were prepared using Single-Cell 30 Gel Bead and Library Kit
(10X Genomics Inc) following manufacturer’s instruction. The barcoded sequencing libraries were
loaded and sequenced on Illumina NextSeq 500 sequencer using 98 bp for Read1, 8 bp for I7 Index,
26 bp for Read2 with an average sequencing depth of 12,000–13,000 reads per cell.
Single cell transcriptome analysis
Sequenced samples were processed using the Cell Ranger 1.2 pipeline (10X Genomics Inc) with an
expectation of 7,000 cells per sample. All reads were mapped to the GRCh38-1.2.0 reference assem-
bly. Analysis of reads mapped to transcriptome showed an average of 2306 genes/cell for human
[wt33 c1], 2606 genes/cell for chimpanzee [PR00818 c5] and 2756 genes/cell for bonobo [PR01086
c1]. To reduce the dimensionality of the cell-by-gene expression matrix and visualize the diversity of
gene expression among NPCs of different primate species in a 2-dimensional scatter plot, we
applied the t-distributed stochastic neighborhood-embedding (tSNE) algorithm (Mahfouz et al.,
2015). The default parameters from Cell Ranger were used for tSNE (perplexity = 30, theta = 0.5).
To determine whether there was a difference in the cortical layer identity between species, we
referred to Molyneaux et al. (2007) for markers for each cortical layer (Molyneaux et al., 2007).
Region membership was calculated by summing the presence or absence of marker gene expression
within the SOX2 positive population. Layer Vb = FOXO1, ECPN, LIX1, SYT9, S100A10, OMA1,
LDB2, CRIM1, PCP4, RAC3, and DIAP3; layer VI = LXN, FOXP2, DARPP32, IGH6; layer II/III = RORB,
CYP39A1, LHX2, UNC5D, GPR6, MEF2C, DTX4, CUX1, CUX2, KITL, SVETL; Hindbrain = EN2, PAX2,
EN1, ISL1, LHX3. Each species showed similar proportions of layer markers, indicating that within
the cortex there was no particular preference for a given layer between the species (Figure 1—fig-
ure supplement 2A).
RNA sequencing analysis of NPCs
Total cellular RNA was extracted from ~5�106 cells using the RNeasy Protect Mini kit or RNeasy Plus
kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA quality was assayed
using Agilent Technologies 2200 TapeStation and samples with integrity superior to RIN 8.5 were
used for library preparation. PolyA+ RNA was fragmented and prepared into sequencing libraries
using the Illumina TruSeq RNA sample preparation kit and analyzed on an Illumina HiSeq 2000
sequencer at the UCSD Biomedical Genomics Laboratory (BIOGEM). Libraries were sequenced using
single-end 100 bp reads at a depth of 15–30 million reads per library (100 ± 25 bp fragments). RNA-
sequencing FASTA files were aligned to the Human GRCh37 reference and separately to the Pan
troglodytes CSAC 2.1.4 reference using the STAR aligner (Dobin et al., 2013). All reads from
human, chimpanzee and bonobo species were filtered to retain only those that uniquely mapped to
both the human and the Pan troglodytes reference sequence, with a maximum of three mismatches
to the species of origin and a maximum of five mismatches to the alternate species. There was no
noticeable decrease in alignment or expression for the bonobo sample. The filtered set of reads was
annotated using the human genome coordinates and the respective Ensembl gene annotations.
Counts per gene were calculated using the HTseq-count algorithm (Anders et al., 2015). Differential
expression was performed using EdgeR (Robinson et al., 2010) and a threshold of adjusted p value
(padj) <0.05 was used to call differentially expressed genes. GO term annotation was performed
using BioMart available from Bioconductor (Smedley et al., 2015). For the heatmap display, expres-
sion was first normalized by sample to transcripts per million (TPM) and then normalized by gene
using a Z-score calculation. Principal components analysis was performed on all genes and samples
using the R pca Methods package. RNA-seq data have been deposited in the Gene Expression
Omnibus.
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
15 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Scratch assay and live imaging of NPC migration
Human, chimpanzee or bonobo NPCs were transfected with a GFP-expressing plasmid (pmaxGFP
Vector) using the Nucleofactor technology as described by the manufacturer (Transfection kit VPG-
1005, Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) and plated on 3 mm coverslip bottom dishes (GWst-3533, WilCO
Wells BV). Once cells reached confluence, six scratches (three parallel to each other and vertical to
other three) were made using a glass pipette (Figure 2—figure supplement 1A). Several regions of
interest along the scratches were imaged every 10 min for varying times (often for 24 hr or 48 hr),
taking 5 z-sections using a Pln Apo 20 � 0.8 NA objective on an inverted Zeiss CSU Spinning Disk
Confocal Microscope (Zeiss). Cells were kept at 37˚C and under 5% CO2 during imaging in a stage-
top incubation system (Zeiss).
The table below summarizes the number of movies recorded and cell lines analyzed per species.
Species
Number of Cell
Lines (NPCs)
Number of clones
for each cell line
Number of movies
Number of
cells analyzed
Human
4 (WT33, WT126, A40, H9)
2 each + 1 (H9)
57
340
Chimpanzee
2 (PR00818, PR01209)
2 each
36
165
Bonobo
2 (AG05253B, PR01086)
2 each
34
186
Tracking and analyzing migrating NPCs
Optical z-sections were flattened and color levels were adjusted to make single cells distinguishable
from
each
other
on
ImageJ
(NIH).
Individual
cells
were
tracked
using
MTrackJ
plugin
(Meijering et al., 2012) by personnel who were blind to the working hypothesis (Figure 2—figure
supplement 1). The health of the cells and scratch closure were monitored using the DIC channel.
To confirm that the filling-in process after scratch assay was due to NPCs migrating toward the
scratch rather than simply a random walk process we calculated two features for each NPC: 1) cumu-
lative distance travelled (CDT) and 2) distance difference (DD) metric. NPCs with a CDT shorter than
a quarter of the viewing area were not included in the calculations to prevent bias from non-migrat-
ing cells. The DD metric measures the net displacement (path independent) either toward (0 to posi-
tive infinity, mm) or away (0 to negative infinity, mm) from the scratch. All the migration paths were
plotted with respect to the center of the scratch, denoted with a gray line. Using this criterion, we
found that 84% of human cells moved toward the scratch (Figure 2—figure supplement 1B, black
line), 76% of chimpanzee cells moved toward the scratch (Figure 2—figure supplement 1C, red
line), and 72% of bonobo cells moved toward the scratch (Figure 2—figure supplement 1D, blue
line). To test the significance of the DD toward the scratch for each species’ NPCs, we simulated ran-
dom motion paths with random scratch locations (N = 200 random cells/species). For each species,
the distribution of random DD was uniform around 0 (Figure 2—figure supplement 1B–D), consis-
tent with a random migration process that would have no bias either toward or away from the
scratch.
Calculation of migration speed
Migration speed was calculated in two ways. First, the mean speed was determined as the mean of
the distance traveled over the time for each tracked cell. We also confirmed this calculation by
determining the cumulative distance traveled (CDT) and then fit this to a linear regression with the
slope serving as the mean speed (distance covered/time), which yielded equivalent values for the
speed of migration.
Neurosphere migration assay
The neurosphere migration assay described here was performed according to previously published
protocols (Brennand et al., 2015; Delaloy et al., 2010). Briefly, NPCs were dissociated with Accu-
tase and then cultured for 72 hr in non-adherent plates to generate neurospheres. Neurosphere cul-
ture is defined as a culture system composed of free-floating clusters of NPCs. Neurospheres were
then manually picked and plated in Matrigel matrix (0.5 mg Matrigel was used to coat a 24-well
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
16 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 plate 1 hr before neurosphere plating) and fixed 48 hr later to access NPC migration. Average NPC
migration distance from each neurosphere was measured using Image J software (NIH).
NPC preparation and grafting
Transplantation was performed using human or chimpanzee NPCs that had previously been infected
with lentiviral vector constitutively expressing EGFP (enhanced green fluorescent protein) or TdTom
(tandem dimer tomato) and had been passaged for at least three passages before grafting to elimi-
nate lentiviral particles from the culture media prior to grafting. NPCs were lifted from the culture
plate using Accutase enzyme and re-suspended in saline buffer (PBS) with 0.5% BSA, ROK inhibitor,
BDNF, ascorbic acid, cyclic AMP, and laminin, at 50,000 cells per ml. On postnatal day 3–5 NOD-
SCID (Nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficiency), mouse pups were anesthetized on
ice and 0.5 ml of cell suspension was delivered to the right hemisphere of the frontal motor cortex
by stereotaxic surgery. We chose motor cortex as the grafting site because it represents an area
that is similar in rodents and primates both in organization and in function. The injection site was
determined using the difference between bregma and lamba (d), using the position of the bregma
as reference: anterior-posterior -(1/2) x d mm; lateral, 1 mm; ventral, 0.5 mm (from dura). To observe
in vivo migration, NPCs from two human and two chimpanzee lines were grafted into the developing
postnatal mouse cortex. Mice were sacrificed at two weeks PST and two different migration parame-
ters were analyzed: 1) area covered by migrating NPCs and 2) distance migrated by NPCs from
injection site (Figure 3). To observe the temporal sequence of neuronal development, the mice were
sacrificed at 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 19 weeks post-transplantation and the morphology of the transplanted
cells differentiated into pyramidal neurons was quantified at each of the time points (see scheme on
Figure 4A). We chose to focus specifically on pyramidal neurons since they are easy to identify
based on their morphology, they represent the most common type of neuron in the cortex, and dif-
ferences in dendritic organization have previously been reported between the two species under
study, namely humans and the common chimpanzee (Bianchi et al., 2013a). The time period under
study spans the time points at which, based on post-mortem studies in humans, pyramidal neurons
in the cortex commence their post-natal development and accomplish most of their growth (Marin-
Padilla, 1970). All experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee at The Salk Institute for Biological Studies.
Tissue preparation
At 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 19 weeks PST, animals were anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine (100 mg/kg and
10 mg/kg, respectively) and perfused transcardially with 0.9% saline followed by 4% paraformalde-
hyde. The brain samples were dissected and post-fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 18 hr and
equilibrated in 30% sucrose at 4˚C. Coronal sections of 40 mm thickness were prepared for samples
from one-, two- and four-week PST brains. As the dendrites became too large to be contained within
40 mm sections, samples from 6-, 8- and 19 week PST brains were prepared at 80 mm using a sliding
microtome. Tissue was mounted onto glass microscope sides with glycerol mounting medium with
DAPI. The sections were immunostained with the antibodies GFP (1:400, Molecular probes) and
TdTomato (1:400, LifeSpan Biosciences, Inc) to increase the signal of human and chimpanzee trans-
planted neurons. CTIP2 antibody (1:200, Abcam) and SATB2 (1:200, Abcam) were used to character-
ize cortical layer identity of the transplanted cells (Figure 4—figure supplement 1A–D).
Quantification of neuronal morphology
The analysis of neuronal morphology was conducted on transplanted cells located in the cortex and
within the callosal white matter. Only the neurons that were relatively isolated from other neurons or
neuronal clusters and had a fluorescent signal strong enough to allow for accurate tracings were
included in the analysis. In addition, the analyzed neurons had to display distinct pyramidal-shaped
somata co-stained with DAPI, at least one dendrite emerging from the soma, and dendritic trees
that were free from obvious signs of cutting- or other processing-related damages. Dendritic mor-
phology was quantified along x, y, and z coordinates using ’Live Image’ option on Neurolucida v.10
software (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT) interfaced with Nikon Eclipse E600 using a Plan Fluor 40x/
1.30 oil lens. In accordance with other studies in humans (Petanjek et al., 2008; Jacobs et al., 2001)
and chimpanzees (Bianchi et al., 2013a; Bianchi et al., 2013b), we conducted dendritic tree analysis
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
17 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 with the following variables: soma size (SOMA), the surface area of the cell body; total dendritic
length (TDL), the summed length of all dendrites/neuron; tree number (TREE), the total number of
dendritic trees/neuron; dendritic segment count (DSC), the number of dendritic segments per neu-
ron; dendritic spine number (DSN), the total number of dendritic spines/neuron; and dendritic spine
density (DSD), the average number of spines/1 mm of dendritic length. Dendritic segments were
assigned numbers following a centrifugal ordering scheme. The segments closest to the soma were
termed first order segments; those after the first branching point were second order segments, with
segment order increasing after each branching point. Neuronal morphology was quantified from a
total of 141 neurons, encompassing 75 chimpanzee and 66 human cells, that is between 6 and 18
cells per species for each time point (Figure 4C).
Confocal imaging
Fixed, unstained brain sections were imaged using confocal microscopy. Images were acquired with
the 63x or 100x objectives on a Zeiss LSM 710 Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope. Confocal
microscopy images were taken from representative images of neurons after morphometric analysis
was performed.
Multielectrode array analysis (MEA)
Using the 96-well MEA plate from Axion Biosystems, we plated cells derived from four humans, two
chimpanzees and two bonobos (two clones from each line) and we repeated the experiment three
times. Each well was seeded with 15,000 NPCs that were induced into neuronal differentiation as
described previously and summarized on Figure 5A. Each well was coated with poly-ornithine and
laminin prior to cell seeding. Cells were fed three times a week and measurements were taken
before media changes. Recordings were performed in a Maestro MEA system and AxIS software
(Axion Biosystems) using a bandwidth with a filter for 10 Hz to 2.5 kHz cutoff frequencies. Spike
detection was performed using an adaptive threshold set to 5.5 times the standard deviation of the
estimated noise on each electrode. Each plate rested for 10 min for acclimatization in the Maestro
instrument and then was recorded for an additional 10 min to calculate spike and burst rates. Multi-
electrode data analysis was performed using the Axion Biosystems Neural Metrics Tool, and an
active electrode was considered once five spikes occurred over the period of 1 min (five spikes/min).
Bursts were identified in the data recorded from each individual electrode using an adaptive Poisson
surprise algorithm. Network bursts were identified for each well, using a non-adaptive algorithm
requiring a minimum of 10 spikes with a maximum inter-spike interval of 100 ms.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was conducted using PRISM software (Graph Pad, San Diego, CA). Morphometric
and neuronal functional variables between the species were examined with unpaired t-tests for each
time point. Where appropriate, ANOVA, Mann-Whitney U and Student’s t-test post-hoc analysis was
performed with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, and the p-values presented are
those of the corrected values. Linear regression analysis was performed for respective variables
(morphometric measurements) correlated with weeks (time) post transplantation. Statistical signifi-
cance was determined with Pearson’s correlation test.
Data availability
Source for bulk and single cell RNA-seq data sets are available with GEO accession code
GSE124706.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants MH095741, MH088485,
DP2-OD006495-01,
R01MH094753,
R01MH103134,
R01MH100175,
K99MH101634,
and
U19MH107367; the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM) TR2-01814 and TR4-06747;
a NARSAD Independent Investigator award, The G Harold and Leila Y Mathers Foundation, The
Leona M. and Harry B Helmsley Charitable Trust, and JPB Foundation. KP is supported by NIH
MH101634, MH113924, a Crick-Jacobs Junior Fellowship, a NARSAD Young Investigator Award,
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
18 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 and the Lieber Foundation. This work was supported by the Next Generation Sequencing Core
(NGS) Facility of the Salk Institute with funding from NIH-NCI CCSG: P30 014195, the Chapman
Foundation and the Helmsley Charitable Trust. The authors would like to thank M.L. Gage for edito-
rial comments.
Additional information
Competing interests
Fred H Gage: Reviewing editor, eLife. Alysson R Muotri: is a co-founder and has equity interest in
TISMOO, a company dedicated to genetic analysis and cellular models focusing on therapeutic
applications customized for autism spectrum disorder and other neurological disorders with genetic
origins. The terms of this arrangement have been reviewed and approved by the University of Cali-
fornia San Diego in accordance with its conflict of interest policies. The other authors declare that no
competing interests exist.
Funding
Funder
Grant reference number
Author
National Institutes of Health
Research Project Grant
Maria C Marchetto
Alysson R Muotri
Krishnan Padmanabhan
Fred H Gage
California Institute for Regen-
erative Medicine
Research Grant
Alysson R Muotri
National Institutes of Health
Pathway to independence
award
Krishnan Padmanabhan
National Alliance for Research
on Schizophrenia and Depres-
sion
Young Investigator award
Krishnan Padmanabhan
Leona M. and Harry B. Helms-
ley Charitable Trust
Research Project Grant
Fred H Gage
Salk Cancer Center
NCI P30 CA014195
Fred H Gage
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Maria C Marchetto, Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Visualiza-
tion, Methodology, Writing—original draft, Project administration, Writing—review and editing,
Revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content; Branka Hrvoj-Mihic, Conceptuali-
zation, Supervision, Validation, Investigation, Methodology, Writing—original draft, Writing—review
and editing; Bilal E Kerman, Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Investigation, Method-
ology, Writing—original draft, Writing—review and editing; Diana X Yu, Conceptualization, Formal
analysis, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing—original draft; Krishna C Vadodaria, For-
mal analysis, Supervision, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing—original draft, Writ-
ing—review and editing; Sara B Linker, Data curation, Formal analysis, Visualization, Methodology,
Writing—review and editing; In
˜ igo Narvaiza, Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Meth-
odology; Renata Santos, Ruth Oefner, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology; Ahmet M Denli,
Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing—review and editing; Ana PD Mendes, Investigation, Visuali-
zation, Methodology, Writing—review and editing; Jonathan Cook, Formal analysis, Investigation,
Methodology; Lauren McHenry, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing—original draft; Jaeson M
Grasmick, Kelly Heard, Callie Fredlender, Rea Xenitopoulos, Formal analysis, Visualization, Method-
ology; Lynne Randolph-Moore, Grace Chou, Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology; Rijul
Kshirsagar, Formal analysis, Methodology; Nasun Hah, Resources, Formal analysis, Writing—review
and editing, Experimental design; Alysson R Muotri, Conceptualization, Revising the manuscript
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
19 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 critically for important intellectual content; Krishnan Padmanabhan, Data curation, Formal analysis,
Investigation, Methodology; Katerina Semendeferi, Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing—origi-
nal draft, Writing—review and editing, Interpretation, Revising the manuscript critically for important
intellectual content; Fred H Gage, Conceptualization, Resources, Funding acquisition, Writing—orig-
inal draft, Writing—review and editing, Revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual
content
Author ORCIDs
Maria C Marchetto
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0449-9051
Bilal E Kerman
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1106-3288
Renata Santos
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3085-5128
Fred H Gage
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0938-4106
Ethics
Clinical trial registration
Human subjects: Fibroblasts from 3 human subjects (WT126, WT33, Adrc40), 2 chimpanzees
(PR00818 and PR01209), 2 bonobo (PR01086 and AG05253), were reprogrammed to induced plurip-
otent stem cells (iPSC) at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies (La Jolla, CA) and differentiated
into neural progenitor cell as previously described {Marchetto, 2013; Marchetto, 2010}. Fibroblasts
from chimpanzee and bonobo were obtained from Coriell Institute and their use was approved by
the US Fish and Wildlife Service, under permit number MA206206. Protocols describing the use of
human iPSCs were previously approved by the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) and the
Salk Institute Institutional Review Board. Authentication: Cell identity was confirmed by G-banding
karyptyping and routine immunofloerescence assays. Primary antibodies used in this study to charac-
terize the cell lines were: human Nestin (1:250, Chemicon cat# ABD69) and SOX2 (1:200, Santa Cruz
cat# sc-17320), for neuroprogenitor cells, and Map2 (1:500, Abcam, cat# ab5392); GFP (1:500, Invi-
trogen, cat# A6455); and CTIP2 (1:200, Abcam, cat# ab18465), for neurons. Mycoplasma Contamina-
tion: All the lines have been tested negative for Mycoplasma contamination. We test all lines on a
monthly basis using a mycoplasma detection kit that uses polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and can
detect over 95% of commonly occurring mycoplasma species contaminating cell lines.
Decision letter and Author response
Decision letter https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.023
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.024
Additional files
Supplementary files
. Supplementary file 1. Table showing the full list of genes differentially expressed in nonhuman pri-
mates versus human.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.015
. Supplementary file 2. Table showing the list of genes in the Gene Ontology (GO) category of
migration that are differentially expressed in nonhuman primates versus human.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.016
. Supplementary file 3. Summary of the subjects and clones utilized for each experiment and addi-
tional information on RNA sequencing (total counts, raw counts and normalized counts).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.017
. Transparent reporting form
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527.018
Data availability
RNA sequencing data comparing human samples with non human primate samples have been
deposited in GEO.
The following dataset was generated:
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
20 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Author(s)
Year Dataset title
Dataset URL
Database and
Identifier
Linker SB, Gage
FH, Maria C March-
etto
2019
Species-specific maturation profiles
of human, chimpanzee and bonobo
neural cells
https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/geo/query/acc.
cgi?acc=GSE124706
NCBI Gene
Expression Omnibus,
GSE124706
References
Ambrose SH. 2001. Paleolithic technology and human evolution. Science 291:1748–1753. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.1059487, PMID: 11249821
Anders S, Pyl PT, Huber W. 2015. HTSeq–a Python framework to work with high-throughput sequencing data.
Bioinformatics 31:166–169. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu638, PMID: 25260700
Barger N, Stefanacci L, Semendeferi K. 2007. A comparative volumetric analysis of the amygdaloid complex and
basolateral division in the human and ape brain. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 134:392–403.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.20684, PMID: 17661399
Belichenko PV, Oldfors A, Hagberg B, Dahlstro
¨ m A. 1994. Rett syndrome: 3-D confocal microscopy of cortical
pyramidal dendrites and afferents. Neuroreport 5:1509–1513. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-
199407000-00025, PMID: 7948850
Bianchi S, Stimpson CD, Bauernfeind AL, Schapiro SJ, Baze WB, McArthur MJ, Bronson E, Hopkins WD,
Semendeferi K, Jacobs B, Hof PR, Sherwood CC. 2013a. Dendritic morphology of pyramidal neurons in the
chimpanzee neocortex: regional specializations and comparison to humans. Cerebral Cortex 23:2429–2436.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs239, PMID: 22875862
Bianchi S, Stimpson CD, Duka T, Larsen MD, Janssen WG, Collins Z, Bauernfeind AL, Schapiro SJ, Baze WB,
McArthur MJ, Hopkins WD, Wildman DE, Lipovich L, Kuzawa CW, Jacobs B, Hof PR, Sherwood CC. 2013b.
Synaptogenesis and development of pyramidal neuron dendritic morphology in the chimpanzee neocortex
resembles humans. PNAS 110:10395–10401. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1301224110, PMID: 23754422
Brennand K, Savas JN, Kim Y, Tran N, Simone A, Hashimoto-Torii K, Beaumont KG, Kim HJ, Topol A, Ladran I,
Abdelrahim M, Matikainen-Ankney B, Chao SH, Mrksich M, Rakic P, Fang G, Zhang B, Yates JR, Gage FH.
2015. Phenotypic differences in hiPSC NPCs derived from patients with schizophrenia. Molecular Psychiatry 20:
361–368. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2014.22, PMID: 24686136
Carlson KJ, Stout D, Jashashvili T, de Ruiter DJ, Tafforeau P, Carlson K, Berger LR. 2011. The endocast of MH1,
Australopithecus sediba. Science 333:1402–1407. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1203922, PMID: 21903
804
Chagnac-Amitai Y, Luhmann HJ, Prince DA. 1990. Burst generating and regular spiking layer 5 pyramidal
neurons of rat neocortex have different morphological features. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 296:
598–613. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.902960407, PMID: 2358553
Connors BW, Gutnick MJ. 1990. Intrinsic firing patterns of diverse neocortical neurons. Trends in Neurosciences
13:99–104. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-2236(90)90185-D, PMID: 1691879
Cupp CJ, Uemura E. 1980. Age-related changes in prefrontal cortex of Macaca mulatta: quantitative analysis of
dendritic branching patterns. Experimental Neurology 69:143–163. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-4886
(80)90150-8, PMID: 6771151
DeFelipe J, Farin
˜ as I. 1992. The pyramidal neuron of the cerebral cortex: morphological and chemical
characteristics of the synaptic inputs. Progress in Neurobiology 39:563–607. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
0301-0082(92)90015-7, PMID: 1410442
Delaloy C, Liu L, Lee JA, Su H, Shen F, Yang GY, Young WL, Ivey KN, Gao FB. 2010. MicroRNA-9 coordinates
proliferation and migration of human embryonic stem cell-derived neural progenitors. Cell Stem Cell 6:323–
335. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2010.02.015, PMID: 20362537
Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, Drenkow J, Zaleski C, Jha S, Batut P, Chaisson M, Gingeras TR. 2013. STAR:
ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29:15–21. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
bts635, PMID: 23104886
Enard W, Khaitovich P, Klose J, Zo
¨ llner S, Heissig F, Giavalisco P, Nieselt-Struwe K, Muchmore E, Varki A, Ravid
R, Doxiadis GM, Bontrop RE, Pa
¨a
¨bo S. 2002. Intra- and interspecific variation in primate gene expression
patterns. Science 296:340–343. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1068996, PMID: 11951044
Falk D, Redmond JC, Guyer J, Conroy C, Recheis W, Weber GW, Seidler H. 2000. Early hominid brain evolution:
a new look at old endocasts. Journal of Human Evolution 38:695–717. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1006/jhev.1999.
0378, PMID: 10799260
Hill RS, Walsh CA. 2005. Molecular insights into human brain evolution. Nature 437:64–67. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature04103, PMID: 16136130
Hutsler JJ, Zhang H. 2010. Increased dendritic spine densities on cortical projection neurons in autism spectrum
disorders. Brain Research 1309:83–94. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2009.09.120, PMID: 19896929
Irwin SA, Patel B, Idupulapati M, Harris JB, Crisostomo RA, Larsen BP, Kooy F, Willems PJ, Cras P, Kozlowski PB,
Swain RA, Weiler IJ, Greenough WT. 2001. Abnormal dendritic spine characteristics in the temporal and visual
cortices of patients with fragile-X syndrome: a quantitative examination. American Journal of Medical Genetics
98:161–167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/1096-8628(20010115)98:2<161::AID-AJMG1025>3.0.CO;2-B,
PMID: 11223852
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
21 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Jacobs B, Schall M, Prather M, Kapler E, Driscoll L, Baca S, Jacobs J, Ford K, Wainwright M, Treml M. 2001.
Regional dendritic and spine variation in human cerebral cortex: a quantitative Golgi study. Cerebral Cortex
11:558–571. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/11.6.558, PMID: 11375917
King MC, Wilson AC. 1975. Evolution at two levels in humans and chimpanzees. Science 188:107–116.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1090005, PMID: 1090005
Leigh SR. 2004. Brain growth, life history, and cognition in primate and human evolution. American Journal of
Primatology 62:139–164. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ajp.20012, PMID: 15027089
Liang CC, Park AY, Guan JL. 2007. In vitro scratch assay: a convenient and inexpensive method for analysis of cell
migration in vitro. Nature Protocols 2:329–333. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2007.30, PMID: 17406593
Linker SB, Hsu JY, Pfaff A, Amatya D, Ko SM, Voter S, Wong Q, Gage FH. 2019. BrainImageR: spatiotemporal
gene set analysis referencing the human brain. Bioinformatics 35:343–345. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/bty618, PMID: 30010719
Liu X, Somel M, Tang L, Yan Z, Jiang X, Guo S, Yuan Y, He L, Oleksiak A, Zhang Y, Li N, Hu Y, Chen W, Qiu Z,
Pa
¨a
¨bo S, Khaitovich P. 2012. Extension of cortical synaptic development distinguishes humans from
chimpanzees and macaques. Genome Research 22:611–622. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.127324.111,
PMID: 22300767
Liu X, Han D, Somel M, Jiang X, Hu H, Guijarro P, Zhang N, Mitchell A, Halene T, Ely JJ, Sherwood CC, Hof PR,
Qiu Z, Pa
¨a
¨bo S, Akbarian S, Khaitovich P. 2016. Disruption of an evolutionarily novel synaptic expression
pattern in autism. PLOS Biology 14:e1002558. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1002558, PMID: 276
85936
Mahfouz A, van de Giessen M, van der Maaten L, Huisman S, Reinders M, Hawrylycz MJ, Lelieveldt BP. 2015.
Visualizing the spatial gene expression organization in the brain through non-linear similarity embeddings.
Methods 73:79–89. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.10.004, PMID: 25449901
Mainen ZF, Sejnowski TJ. 1996. Influence of dendritic structure on firing pattern in model neocortical neurons.
Nature 382:363–366. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/382363a0, PMID: 8684467
Marchetto MC, Carromeu C, Acab A, Yu D, Yeo GW, Mu Y, Chen G, Gage FH, Muotri AR. 2010. A model for
neural development and treatment of Rett syndrome using human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell 143:
527–539. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.10.016, PMID: 21074045
Marchetto MCN, Narvaiza I, Denli AM, Benner C, Lazzarini TA, Nathanson JL, Paquola ACM, Desai KN, Herai
RH, Weitzman MD, Yeo GW, Muotri AR, Gage FH. 2013. Differential L1 regulation in pluripotent stem cells of
humans and apes. Nature 503:525–529. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12686, PMID: 24153179
Marin-Padilla M. 1970. Prenatal and early postnatal ontogenesis of the human motor cortex: a Golgi study. I. the
sequential development of the cortical layers. Brain Research 23:167–183. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-
8993(70)90037-5, PMID: 4097697
Marin-Padilla M. 1972. Structural abnormalities of the cerebral cortex in human chromosomal aberrations: a
Golgi study. Brain Research 44:625–629. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-8993(72)90324-1, PMID: 4263073
McKinney ML. 2002. Brain evolution by stretching the global mitotic clock of development. In: Minugh-Purvis N,
McNamara KJ (Eds). Human Evolution Through Developmental Change. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins
University Press. p. 173–188.
McNamara KJ. 2002. Sequential hypermorphosis. Stretching ontogeny to the limit. In: Minugh-Purvis N,
McNamara K. J (Eds). Human Evolution Through Developmental Change. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press. p. 102–121.
Meijering E, Dzyubachyk O, Smal I. 2012. Methods for cell and particle tracking. Methods in Enzymology 504:
183–200. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-391857-4.00009-4, PMID: 22264535
Molyneaux BJ, Arlotta P, Menezes JR, Macklis JD. 2007. Neuronal subtype specification in the cerebral cortex.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 8:427–437. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2151, PMID: 17514196
Mrzljak L, Uylings HB, Kostovic I, Van Eden CG. 1988. Prenatal development of neurons in the human prefrontal
cortex: I. A qualitative golgi study. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 271:355–386. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1002/cne.902710306, PMID: 2454966
Mrzljak L, Uylings HB, Kostovic I, van Eden CG. 1992. Prenatal development of neurons in the human prefrontal
cortex. II. A quantitative golgi study. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 316:485–496. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/cne.903160408, PMID: 1577996
Muraki K, Tanigaki K. 2015. Neuronal migration abnormalities and its possible implications for schizophrenia.
Frontiers in neuroscience 9:74. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2015.00074, PMID: 25805966
Nieuwenhuys R. 1994. The neocortex. An overview of its evolutionary development, structural organization and
synaptology. Anatomy and Embryology 190:307–337. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00187291, PMID: 7
840420
Otani T, Marchetto MC, Gage FH, Simons BD, Livesey FJ. 2016. 2d and 3D stem cell models of primate cortical
development identify Species-Specific differences in progenitor behavior contributing to brain size. Cell Stem
Cell 18:467–480. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.03.003, PMID: 27049876
Petanjek Z, Judas M, Kostovic
´ I, Uylings HB. 2008. Lifespan alterations of basal dendritic trees of pyramidal
neurons in the human prefrontal cortex: a layer-specific pattern. Cerebral Cortex 18:915–929. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1093/cercor/bhm124, PMID: 17652464
Petanjek Z, Judas
ˇ M, S
ˇ imic G, Rasin MR, Uylings HB, Rakic P, Kostovic I. 2011. Extraordinary neoteny of synaptic
spines in the human prefrontal cortex. PNAS 108:13281–13286. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1105108108, PMID: 21788513
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
22 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
 Pramparo T, Lombardo MV, Campbell K, Barnes CC, Marinero S, Solso S, Young J, Mayo M, Dale A, Ahrens-
Barbeau C, Murray SS, Lopez L, Lewis N, Pierce K, Courchesne E. 2015. Cell cycle networks link gene
expression dysregulation, mutation, and brain maldevelopment in autistic toddlers. Molecular Systems Biology
11:841. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15252/msb.20156108, PMID: 26668231
Reiner O, Karzbrun E, Kshirsagar A, Kaibuchi K. 2016. Regulation of neuronal migration, an emerging topic in
autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Neurochemistry 136:440–456. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13403,
PMID: 26485324
Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK. 2010. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression
analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26:139–140. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btp616, PMID: 19910308
Sedmak D, Hrvoj-Mihic
´ B, Dz
ˇaja D, Habek N, Uylings HB, Petanjek Z. 2018. Biphasic dendritic growth of
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex associative neurons and early cognitive development. Croatian Medical Journal
59:189–202. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3325/cmj.2018.59.189, PMID: 30394011
Semendeferi K, Armstrong E, Schleicher A, Zilles K, Van Hoesen GW. 2001. Prefrontal cortex in humans and
apes: a comparative study of area 10. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 114:224–241. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1002/1096-8644(200103)114:3<224::AID-AJPA1022>3.0.CO;2-I, PMID: 11241188
Semendeferi K, Barger N, Schenker NN. 2010. Brain reorganization in humans and apes. In: Broadfield D, Schick
KD, Toth N, Yuan M (Eds). The Human Brain Evolving: Paleoneurological Studies in Honor of Ralph L. Holloway.
Gosport, IN: Stone Age Institute Press. p. 119–156.
Semendeferi K, Teffer K, Buxhoeveden DP, Park MS, Bludau S, Amunts K, Travis K, Buckwalter J. 2011. Spatial
organization of neurons in the frontal pole sets humans apart from great apes. Cerebral Cortex 21:1485–1497.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhq191, PMID: 21098620
Semendeferi K, Damasio H. 2000. The brain and its main anatomical subdivisions in living hominoids using
magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of Human Evolution 38:317–332. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1006/jhev.1999.
0381, PMID: 10656781
Smedley D, Haider S, Durinck S, Pandini L, Provero P, Allen J, Arnaiz O, Awedh MH, Baldock R, Barbiera G,
Bardou P, Beck T, Blake A, Bonierbale M, Brookes AJ, Bucci G, Buetti I, Burge S, Cabau C, Carlson JW, et al.
2015. The BioMart community portal: an innovative alternative to large, centralized data repositories. Nucleic
Acids Research 43:W589–W598. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv350, PMID: 25897122
Somel M, Franz H, Yan Z, Lorenc A, Guo S, Giger T, Kelso J, Nickel B, Dannemann M, Bahn S, Webster MJ,
Weickert CS, Lachmann M, Pa
¨a
¨bo S, Khaitovich P. 2009. Transcriptional neoteny in the human brain. PNAS
106:5743–5748. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900544106, PMID: 19307592
Spruston N. 2008. Pyramidal neurons: dendritic structure and synaptic integration. Nature Reviews Neuroscience
9:206–221. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2286, PMID: 18270515
Stout D. 2011. Stone toolmaking and the evolution of human culture and cognition. Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 366:1050–1059. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0369,
PMID: 21357227
Teffer K, Buxhoeveden DP, Stimpson CD, Fobbs AJ, Schapiro SJ, Baze WB, McArthur MJ, Hopkins WD, Hof PR,
Sherwood CC, Semendeferi K. 2013. Developmental changes in the spatial organization of neurons in the
neocortex of humans and common chimpanzees. Journal of Comparative Neurology 521:4249–4259.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.23412, PMID: 23839595
Vrba ES. 1998. Multiphasic growth models and the evolution of prolonged growth exemplified by human brain
evolution. Journal of Theoretical Biology 190:227–239. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1006/jtbi.1997.0549, PMID:
9514650
Marchetto et al. eLife 2019;8:e37527. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.37527
23 of 23
Research article
Developmental Biology
