 Altered proliferation and networks in neural cells derived from 
idiopathic autistic individuals
Maria C. Marchetto#1, Haim Belinson#2, Yuan Tian3, Beatriz C. Freitas4, Chen Fu5, Krishna 
Vadodaria1, Patricia Beltrao-Braga4,6, Cleber A. Trujillo4, Ana P.D. Mendes1, Krishnan 
Padmanabhan7, Yanelli Nunez1,4, Jing Ou3, Himanish Ghosh1, Rebecca Wright1, Kristen 
Brennand8, Karen Pierce9, Lawrence Eichenfield9, Tiziano Pramparo9, Lisa Eyler9, Cynthia 
C. Barnes9, Eric Courchesne9, Daniel H. Geschwind3, Fred H. Gage1, Anthony Wynshaw-
Boris2,5,*, and Alysson R. Muotri4,*
1The Salk Institute, Laboratory of Genetics, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
2University of California San Francisco, Department of Pediatrics, Institute for Human Genetics, 
CA 94143, USA
3University of California Los Angeles, Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, 
Center for Autism Research and Treatment, Semel Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, CA 90402, USA
4University of California San Diego, Department of Pediatrics/Rady Children’s Hospital San 
Diego, Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Stem Cell Program, La Jolla, CA 
92093-0695, USA
5Case Western Reserve University, Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Cleveland, 
OH 44106, USA
6University of São Paulo, Department of Obstetrics, Department of Surgery, Center for Cellular 
and Molecular Therapy, São Paulo, Brazil
7University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Department of Neuroscience, 601 
Elmwood Avenue, Box 603 Rochester, NY 14642
8Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1425 Madison Avenue, New 
York, NY 10029, USA
9University of California San Diego, Department of Neurosciences, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are common, complex and heterogeneous neurodevelopmental 
disorders. Cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for ASD pathogenesis have been 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dr. Muotri: muotri@ucsd.edu, or Dr. Wynshaw-Boris: ajw168@case.edu. 
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Supplementary information is available at Molecular Psychiatry’s website.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Mol Psychiatry. 2017 June ; 22(6): 820–835. doi:10.1038/mp.2016.95.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 proposed based on genetic studies, brain pathology, and imaging, but a major impediment to 
testing ASD hypotheses is the lack of human cell models. Here, we reprogrammed fibroblasts to 
generate induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and neurons from 
ASD individuals with early brain overgrowth and non-ASD controls with normal brain size. ASD-
derived NPCs display increased cell proliferation due to dysregulation of a β-catenin/BRN2 
transcriptional cascade. ASD-derived neurons display abnormal neurogenesis and reduced 
synaptogenesis leading to functional defects in neuronal networks. Interestingly, defects in 
neuronal networks could be rescued by IGF-1, a drug that is currently in clinical trials for ASD. 
This work demonstrates that selection of ASD subjects based on endophenotypes unraveled 
biologically relevant pathway disruption and revealed a potential cellular mechanism for the 
therapeutic effect of IGF-1.
Keywords
Autism spectrum disorders; induced pluripotent stem cells; macrencephaly; disease modeling; cell 
proliferation; neuronal networks; multi-electrode arrays; IGF-1; personalized medicine
INTRODUCTION
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) comprise a group of complex neurodevelopmental 
disorders that affect more than 1% of children in the United States. ASD is characterized by 
impaired social interaction and limited and repetitive interests and behavior at its core. ASDs 
are phenotypically and etiologically heterogeneous, making it challenging to uncover the 
underlying genetic, pathologic and cellular pathophysiology. Family history and twin studies 
suggest that, at least in some cases, these disorders share genetic roots1, 2. Mounting 
evidence proposes that heritable and de novo genetic variation plays a significant role, but 
these studies also demonstrate striking genetic heterogeneity3-5. Neuropathological imaging 
and gene expression studies of postmortem brains from ASD patients have revealed 
disruption of developmental and proliferation gene networks6, 7. Recent studies integrating 
ASD candidate genes with spatiotemporal coexpression networks demonstrate that gene 
expression converge on the transcriptional regulation in pyramidal, glutamatergic cortical 
neurons during mid-fetal human development8, 9. One relevant observation in ASD 
pathophysiology has been the occurrence of macrencephaly and altered growth trajectory 
with early overgrowth and later normalization in a subset of affected individuals. An 
increase in brain size in autistic individuals in the first three years of life precedes the first 
clinical signs10-15, and excess neuron numbers are reported for abnormally enlarged young 
ASD brains16. Excess cortical neuron numbers and patches of abnormal cortical 
organization and cell migration are pathologies that also implicate mid-fetal development as 
being crucial in ASD pathophysiology16, 17. Gene expression changes in postmortem brain 
overlap with developmentally regulated genes involved in cortical patterning as well as in 
cell cycle, proliferation and neural differentiation6, 7. Taken together, these observations 
highlight the relevance of early fetal brain development factors in the pathophysiology of 
ASD.
Marchetto et al.
Page 2
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 One of the major impediments to ASD research is the genetic and brain pathological 
heterogeneity that makes it difficult to produce relevant animal and cell models. 
Reprogramming of somatic cells to a pluripotent state by over-expression of specific genes 
has been accomplished using human cells18, 19. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are 
attractive models for understanding complex diseases and disorders with heritable and 
sporadic conditions20. Although iPSCs have been generated for monogenetic ASD 
diseases4, 21, 22, the demonstration of disease-specific pathogenesis in complex and 
heterogeneous disease such as sporadic ASD is a current challenge in the field23. 
Nonetheless, extending the iPSC modeling technology beyond monogenetic ASD to the 
study of non-syndromic forms of autism could uncover molecular and cellular pathways that 
overlap among many forms of autism, leading to a better understanding of the disease and 
potentially developing novel ASD biomarkers and targets for therapeutics24.
We reasoned that ASD patients sharing a common phenotype, early developmental brain 
enlargement ranging from mild to extreme macrencephaly, might also share underlying 
molecular and cellular pathway dysregulation. We therefore pre-selected ASD infants and 
toddlers who displayed this phenotype, including pre-selection that provided a range from 
mild to extreme that enabled generalization of results to ASD beyond those with pure and 
extreme macrencephaly. We took advantage of reprogramming technologies to generate 
iPSCs from a cohort of ASD patients who displayed brain overgrowth early in life. Neural 
progenitor cells (NPCs) derived from ASD-iPSCs displayed altered proliferation resulting 
from dysregulation of a β-catenin/BRN2 transcriptional cascade. As a consequence, we 
observed that ASD-derived neurons formed fewer excitatory synapses and matured into 
defective neuronal networks with less bursting. Importantly, all ASD patients showed 
improved network strength after treatment with IGF1 (a drug that is currently in clinical trial 
for ASD), but the levels of improvement were unique to the patients, revealing a potential 
novel assay to pre-screen patients for future clinical trials. Together, our results suggest that, 
when stratified into measurable endophenotypes, idiopathic ASD can be modeled using 
iPSC technology to reveal novel cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying brain 
abnormalities.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient ascertainment
Subjects were recruited through the UCSD Autism Center of Excellence from a pool of 
volunteers formerly included in previous brain imaging studies. Control subjects were 
selected randomly from lists of typically developing individuals who had had an MRI scan 
when they were toddlers. ASD subjects were selected from lists of ASD subjects who had 
been identified and diagnosed with ASD and MRI scanned when they were toddlers; from 
among these potential ASD subjects, we selected those with larger than normal average total 
brain volume as compared to typically developing toddlers. The ASD subjects demonstrated 
a behavioral presentation consistent with autism as defined by the criteria set forth in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV; APA)25. 
Assessment of the history and presence of the disorder was achieved via standardized 
behavioral, cognitive, and functional assessments, including the appropriate Wechsler 
Marchetto et al.
Page 3
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Intelligence Scale, the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS), the Autism 
Diagnostic Interview, Revised (ADI-R), and Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales (VABS). 
Participants in the control group had no history of psychological, genetic, or other disorder. 
This project was approved by the Ethics Committees of the institutes at which the study was 
conducted. After a complete description of the study, written informed consent was provided 
by the parents.
CNV (Copy-Number Variation) analyses
High-confidence CNV calls were made using the CNVision pipeline as previously 
described 7, 26. In brief, patients and controls were genotyped using the Illumina 660W 
array. Probe intensity signals were analyzed to make CNV calls using e types of software 
PennCNV, QuantiSNP and GNOSIS. High-confidence calls were made by merging the 
prediction output of these 3 different algorithms. Rare events were defined based on the 
database of genomic variants (DGV) (http://dgv.tcag.ca/).
Exome sequencing
Fibroblasts derived from the 8 ASD individuals were cultured. DNA was extracted and 
exome libraries were generated for each line using Nextera Rapid Capture Exome kit from 
Illumina. Illumina Hi-Seq 2500 Pair-end sequencing was conducted (read length=100bp), 
resulting in 308,082,362 reads in average for each library. Short reads were aligned to the 
human genome (hg19) using BWA 27 and Samtools 28. Mutations were first filtered based on 
the reading depth (D>=10), alignment quality (q>=20) and base quality (Q>=30), and 
4712088 variants passed filtering. Next, we used two different software programs, 
ANNOVAR31 and IlluminaVariantStudio (https://www.illumina.com/content/dam/illumina-
marketing/documents/products/datasheets/datasheet_illumina_variantstudio_software.pdf) to 
annotate the variants. The results from ANNOVAR 29 and IlluminaVariantStudio were very 
similar (Supplementary Table S1A), so we further analyzed variants found in the 
IlluminaVariantStudio only. There were a total of 485 stop-gains and 103 stop losses found 
in all ASD lines, but several variants were found in multiple lines. Therefore, a total of 275 
unique stop gain/loss mutations were detected, of which 222 were listed in dbSNP while 53 
rare mutations were not (Supplementary Table S1B). We further filtered the 58278 missense 
variants found in IlluminaVariantStudio by PolyPhen and SIFT scores. Of these, 3403 
variants were considered both “deleterious” in SIFT and “probably damaging” in PolyPhen. 
Again, several of these variants were found in multiple patients, so the total number of 
unique “deleterious” and “probably damaging” SNVs was 1829. Of these, 1564 were found 
in dbSNP while 265 rare variants were not (Supplementary Table S1C).
Cellular reprogramming
IPSCs were obtained from skin fibroblasts of ASD patients and controls, collected by the 
UC San Diego Autism Center of Excellence. Briefly, fibroblasts were transduced with 
retroviruses containing OCT4, SOX2, KFL4, and MYC to induce overexpression of these 
genes 30. Two days after transduction, the cells were transferred to a co-culture system with 
murine embryonic fibroblasts (mEFs) maintained with DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen, CA), 20% 
Knockout Serum Replacement (Invitrogen, CA), 1% non-essential amino acids, and 100 μM 
beta-mercaptoethanol and treated with 1 mM valproic acid (Sigma) for 5 days. The iPSC 
Marchetto et al.
Page 4
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 colonies were identified after approximately 2 weeks in this culture system, transferred to 
Matrigel (BD Biosciences)-coated plates, and maintained in mTeSR media (Stem Cell 
Technologies). To avoid potential variability caused by retroviral insertions in the genome, 
the experiments were performed with at least 2 independent iPSCs clones.
Karyotype
Standard G-banding karyotype analyses were performed by Cell Line Genetics (Madison, 
WI).
Neural differentiation
The iPSC colonies were plated on Matrigel (BD Biosciences)-coated plates and maintained 
for 5 days in mTSeR medium (Stem Cell Technologies). On the fifth day, the medium was 
changed to N2 media [DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 1× N2 supplement 
(Invitrogen) and 1× B27 supplement (Invitrogen). After 2 days, the colonies were removed 
from the plate and cultured in suspension as EBs for 2 weeks using NPC medium with 
dorsomorphin during the entire procedure. The EBs were then gently dissociated with 
accutase (Gibco), plated on Matrigel-coated dishes, and maintained in NBF medium 
(DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 1× N2, 1× B7 supplements, 20 ng/mL FGF2 and 
1% penicillin/streptomycin). The rosettes that emerged after 3 or 4 days were manually 
selected, gently dissociated with accutase, and plated in dishes coated with 10 μg/mL poly-
ornithine and 5 μg/mL laminin. This NPC population was expanded using NBF medium. To 
differentiate the NPCs into neurons, the cells were re-plated in the absence of FGF2, with 
regular medium changes every 3 or 4 days.
Immunofluorescence
Cells were washed once with PBS and then permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS 
for 5 minutes. After washing with PBS and blocking with 10% Donkey serum, 0.5% Triton 
X-100 in PBS (blocking solution), cells were incubated with the primary antibodies diluted 
in blocking solution for 16 hours at 4°C. Primary antibodies used were: anti-Pax6 (Covance 
PRB-278P); anti-Sox1 (R&D, AF3369); anti-Otx2 (Milipore, AB9566); anti-Vimentin 
(abcam, RV202) anti-phospho-Histone H3 (Sigma, H0412); anti-Ki67 (Novocastra NCL-
Ki67p); Anti-Brn2 (Santa Cruz, cs6029) anti-Brn2 (2R2) 31; anti-Ngn2 (Santa-cruz, 
sc-19233); anti-Mash1/Ascl1 (BD 556604 and Chemicon AB5696s); anti-NKX2.1 
(Novacastra, TTF-1-L-CE); anti-Olig2 (Millipore, AB9610); anti-Tuj1 (Covance, 
MMS-435P) and anti-Doublecortin (Santa Cruz, cs-8066); anti-GABA (Sigma, A2052), 
anti-Map2AB (Abcam, ab5392). After PBS washes, cells were incubated with labeled 
secondary antibodies for 60 minutes. Nuclei were stained after incubation with 1 μg/ml 
DAPI for 5 minutes. The slides were mounted using prolong-gold (Invitrogen, P36930).
Proliferation and LiCl treatment of NPC lines
After NPCs grew close to confluence (4~9 days), the cell number in each well was counted 
using a cell counter (Invitrogen countess automated cell counter). The population doubling 
time was inferred for each well based on the culture time and the ratio between input and 
harvest. Differences in doubling time between LiCl-treated and untreated conditions in each 
Marchetto et al.
Page 5
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 NPC line were compared using 2-tail t test. Also, doubling time differences between LiCl-
treated and untreated conditions were tested for all 5 autistic lines (treated=27, non-
treated=28) and all 5 control lines (treated=11, non-treated=10) using the two-tail t test.
Cell cycle analysis
Monolayer-adherent NPCs were harvested, washed with PBS, resuspended in PBS and fixed 
for 1 hour in 4°C in 100% ethanol (−20°C). Cells were collected, resuspended in PBS 
containing 100 μg/ml RNase A for 30 minutes in 37°C, and stained with 1 mg/ml propidium 
iodide solution (10 mg / 1×10^6 cells stained) for 2 hours at 4°C. For each sample, 50,000 
cells were collected in the appropriate gate for analysis on FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences, 
Mountain View, CA) using FlowJo software (Tree Star, Ashland, OR).
Western blotting
NPCs cultured as monolayers were washed with cold PBS. Protein was extracted with 50 
mM Tris pH 7.6, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 1% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS and 
protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, # 1 836 153). Lysates were centrifuged for 25 minutes at 
15,000 rpm at 4°C. The resulting supernatant was collected and the total protein content of 
the samples was determined by the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Biotechnology, #23225). 
SDS gel electrophoresis was performed utilizing 15 μ5 protein per lane. Gels were 
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (BioRad, 9004-70-0). Proteins were detected with 
anti-Pax6 (Covance PRB-278P), anti-Sox1 (R&D, AF3369), anti-Otx2 (Milipore, AB9566), 
anti-Vimentin (abcam, RV202), anti-Brn2 (2R2) 31, anti-β-III-tubulin (Covance, 
MMS-435P) and anti-GAPDH (Acris, ACR001P). All membranes were visualized using 
ECL (Thermo Scientific, 34080) and exposure to autoradiography film (Denville Scientific 
Inc. E3018).
RT-PCR (Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction)
Total cellular RNA was extracted with TRIzol (Invitrogen) and purified on a column using 
the RNeasy Mini Kit. DNAase treatment was performed on the column. Extracted RNA (1 
μg) samples were reverse transcribed into cDNA according to the manufacturer’s protocol 
for RT-PCR (BioRad, 170-8891). RT-qPCR was performed by using SsoFast EvaGreen 
Supermix (Biorad) and run on the Eppendorf Mastercycler EP Realplex 2 thermal cycler. 
The specific primers used for RT-qPCR were: HPRT1 realtime primers.com, VHPS-4263, 
Pax6 realtime primers.com, VHPS-6650, Otx2 realtime primers.com, VHPS-6546, Sox1 
Left primer: GGGAAAACGGGCAAAATAAT; Right primer: 
TTTTGCGTTCACATCGGTTA. Brn2 Left primer: TGACGATCTCCACGCAGTAG; Right 
primer: GAGGGTGTGGGACCCTAAAT.
Neurotransmitter Receptors quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) Array
For neurotransmitter receptors analysis, iPSC-derived neurons from ASD and related 
controls were rapidly frozen and placed in TRIzol (Life Technologies) for subsequent RNA 
isolation and purification. One microgram of RNA of each individual/clone were converted 
into cDNA using the RT2 First Strand Kit (SABiosciences). Quantitative RNA expression 
analysis of 84 neurotransmitter receptors-related genes was simultaneously analyzed using 
Marchetto et al.
Page 6
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 human RT2 Profiler PCR Array (#PAHS-060Z; SABiosciences) on a Bio-Rad CFX96 
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Data normalization was based on correcting all Ct 
values for the average Ct values of five constantly expressed housekeeping genes present on 
the array, and reported as fold changes over similar values from controls samples.
NPC transfection
Transfection was performed in NPC medium, which was replaced 24 hours following 
transfection. Transfection efficiency was measured by GFP expression and was ~45%. Super 
Top-Flashx8 (50 ng), super Fop-Flashx8 (50 ng) and Renilla (10 ng) plasmids were 
transiently transfected into NPCs (40,000 cells per well of a 96-well plate) using 
Lipofectamine LTX+ in NPC medium, which was replaced 24 hours following transfection. 
After 48 hours, cells were lysed in the 96-well plates with passive lysis buffer (Promega). 
Firefly luciferase and Renilla luciferase activity in the lysates were measured on a Synergy 2 
microplate reader (BioTek Instruments, Winooski, VT) in replicates of 3, using the Dual-
Luciferase reporter assay system (Promega). The ratios for firefly luciferase:Renilla 
luciferase were determined and expressed as relative luciferase activity.
Quantification of neuronal synaptic puncta
Neuronal tracing was performed on neurons in which the shortest dendrite was at least 3 
times longer than the cell soma diameter, as determined using a semi-automatic ImageJ 
plug-in (NeuroJ). Spines and VGLUT1 puncta were quantified after 3-dimensional 
reconstruction of z-stack confocal images. The same density of neurons was plated in each 
condition. Final cell density was confirmed by DAPI. Only Tuj1- or Map2-positive neurons 
were scored. Images were taken randomly for each individual and from 2 different 
experiments, using at least 2 different clones. Quantification was performed blind to the cell 
genotype. No distinction was made between different types of spines due to the unviability 
of this assessment using the present method. All experiments were performed with 
independent clones and different controls. All analyses were performed double blinded to 
avoid bias.
Image acquisition and analysis
The immunofluorescent slides were viewed and photographed with 40× or 60× objectives 
using a Nikon C1si microscope. Analysis of the thickness and/or cell counts of 
immunohistochemical staining were captured and quantified across the entire image taken 
by the Image-Pro Plus system (version 5.1; Media Cybernetics).
Whole-cell patch clamp and electrophysiology analyses
Whole-cell patch clamp recordings were performed on neurons co-cultured with rat 
hippocampal astrocytes for 8 weeks. The same density of neurons was plated in each 
condition. Neurons were labeled with a synapsin-GFP lentiviral marker. Cells were perfused 
with ACSF solution containing (in mM): 119 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 2 
CaCl2, 1.3 MgSO4, 11 glucose, 0.1 picrotoxin. 2-5 MΩ pipettes were pulled on a horizontal 
micropipette puller (Sutter P-97). For sEPSPs and Na+/K+ currents, pipettes were filled with 
a cesium-gluconate internal solution that consisted of (in mM): 130 D-Gluconic Acid, 130 
Marchetto et al.
Page 7
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CsOH, 5 NaCl, 12 Phosphocreatine, 10 HEPES, 10 EGTA, 3 adenosine triphosphate, 0.2 
guanosine triphosphate (pH 7.3). For spontaneous and evoked action potentials, cells were 
recorded with a potassium-gluconate internal solution that consisted of (in mM): 120 K-
gluconate, 15 KCl, 4 MgCl2, 0.1 EGTA, 10 Hepes, 4 MgATP, 0.3 Na2GTP, 7 
phosphocreatine (pH, 7.2). The mean access resistance was 7.5 ± 1.0 MΩ. Recordings were 
collected using an Axoclamp-200B amplifier (Axon Instruments) and analyzed with 
Clampfit 10 software (Molecular Devices). Signals were low-pass filtered at 2kHz and 
digitized at 5kHz. Na+/K+ currents were recorded by stepping cells in +5-mV increments. 
For evoked action potentials, current injections were applied to hold cells at approximately 
−50 mV. A series of 300-ms current steps were injected into cells, starting at −0.2 nA, and 
increasing by +0.1 nA increments. Statistical comparisons of control and autism cells were 
made using two-tailed Student t-tests with a significance threshold of p = 0.05.
Multi-electrode arrays (MEA)
Using the 12-well MEA plate from Axion Biosystems, we plated cells derived from 5 
control individuals and 7 ASD patients in triplicate. Each well was seeded with 10,000 
NPCs that were induced into neuronal differentiation as described above. Each well was 
coated with poly-ornithine and laminin prior to cell seeding. Cells were fed once a week and 
measurements were taken before media changes. Recordings were performed in a Maestro 
MEA system and AxIS software (Axion Biosystems) using a bandwidth with a filter for 
10Hz to 2.5kHz cutoff frequencies. Spike detection was performed using an adaptive 
threshold set to 5.5 times the standard deviation of the estimated noise on each electrode. 
Each plate rested for 5 minutes in the Maestro Instrument, and then was recorded for 10 
minutes to calculate the spike rate per well. Multi-electrode data analysis was performed 
using the Axion Biosystems Neural Metrics Tool, and an active electrode was considered 
once 5 spikes occurred over the length of 1 minute (5 spikes/min). Bursts were identified in 
the data recorded from each individual electrode using an adaptive Poisson surprise 
algorithm. Network bursts were identified for each well; using a non-adaptive algorithm 
requiring a minimum of 10 spikes with a maximum inter-spike interval of 100ms. Only the 
wells that exhibited bursting activity were included in this analysis. For the rescue 
experiments, 10ng/ml of recombinant human IGF1 (PeproTech) was added to the neuronal 
cultures on day 35 of differentiation. Media was changed every week (with or without the 
drug for the blank wells) for the duration of the experiment.
RNA sequencing
RNAs were isolated from 88 cell lines (31 iPSCs, 29 NPCs and 28 neurons) derived from 
idiopathic ASD patients with macrencephaly and non-autistic controls using the RNeasy 
Mini kit (QIAGEN). A total of 1,000 ng of RNA was used for library preparation using the 
Illumina TruSeq RNA Sample Preparation Kit. The RNAs were sequenced on Illumina 
HiSeq2000 with 50bp paired-end reads, generating 50 million high quality sequencing 
fragments per sample on average. We first utilized TopHat2 aligner to align the reads against 
the human reference genome from the 1000 Genomes Project (i.e., human_g1k_v37), and 
then summarized the read counts to Genecode11 union-exon gene models using htseq-count 
(http://www-huber.embl.de/users/anders/HTSeq/doc/count.html). Of the reads, 85% could 
be uniquely mapped, and 74% of those uniquely aligned reads fell into exonic and UTR 
Marchetto et al.
Page 8
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regions. Next, we processed the expression data for each experimental stage separately. At 
every differentiation stage, outlier samples were defined by low inter-sample correlations as 
previously described 32 and subsequently excluded in the follow-up expression analysis. 
Eighty-three samples were retained for further analysis, including 28 iPSCs, 30 NPCs, and 
25 neuronal samples. Gene-based read counts were further median-normalized and log2-
transformed to bring their distribution to normality. Batch effects were corrected afterwards 
using R ComBat package with the non-parametric model option. Lastly, we filtered 
expressed genes requiring count per million (cpm) values larger than 1 in at least 1 group of 
the samples (ASD or controls). Consequently, 14,291 genes in iPSCs, 14,413 in NPCs, and 
14,974 in neurons were identified as expressed and were retained for further analysis. All 
gene expression data is deposited at GEO (GSE67528).
Differential expression (DE) analysis
DE analysis at static experimental stage was performed using the linear mixed effect model 
from R limma package. Samples derived from the same subject were considered as 
replicates, where their variations were accounted for the random effects in the model. RNA 
qualities may greatly influence the DE analysis. Therefore, we included RNA integrity 
numbers (RIN) as a covariate in our regression model. DE genes were detected based on the 
significance threshold of p-value <0.005, unless we specified otherwise. To identify the 
genes showing differentiation-induced expression changes, we first paired progenitors with 
neurons if they were from the same iPSC clone and plated for differentiation in 1 
experiment. Next, we computed the gene-based ratios of progenitor expression over 
neuronal expression for every differentiation pair and we used the log2-transformed ratios as 
the input for the follow-up regression model. The comparison was conducted using the 
linear mixed model via the lme function provided by R package nlme. Ratios computed for 
the same subject were considered as replicates. Significant events were detected if p-value 
<0.005.
Functional enrichment analysis
Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was assessed using the GO-Elite Pathway Analysis 
tool. GO-Elite performs permutations to obtain an over-representation Z score and 
enrichment p-value for each GO term. We used the default permutations settings in GO-Elite 
package (see supplementary materials for details).
Weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA)
We conducted signed co-expression network analysis on 25 neuronal samples using R 
WGCNA package, as previously described 6, 8. Briefly, 14,974 expressed protein-coding 
genes were used in our analysis, and the soft thresholding power was chosen to be 16 based 
on the approximate scale-free topology criterion. We set the minimum module size to 100 
genes and required the dissimilarities among modules to be at least 15%. Each identified 
module was summarized by the module eigengene (first component of the standardized 
expression patterns) and was thereafter correlated with ASD disease status. The disease 
association significance was evaluated by a linear mixed effect model via R lme function. 
Four modules (brown, tan, magenta, and purple) were considered significantly associated 
with ASD status with an association of FDR<0.1. Furthermore, genes were prioritized based 
Marchetto et al.
Page 9
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 on their correlations with the module eigengene, named kME. The top 200 connected genes 
ranked by kME values were used to generate the network plots via the R igraph package.
Statistical Analyses
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 12. The control and ASD groups 
were compared by Student’s t-test and, for the doubling time, we used the repeated 
measurement analysis. For the pCAG-Brn2 over-expression and LiCl experiments two-way 
ANOVA was used. Where appropriate, Student’s t-test post-hoc analysis was performed 
with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, and the p-values presented are those of 
the corrected values.
A summary Table containing number of patients and control cell lines used of each 
experiment can be found on Supplementary Table S7.
RESULTS
Identification of genetic variants in macrencephaly ASD individuals and controls
We recruited 8 ASD Individuals with quantitative MRI-validated early brain enlargement 
ranging from mild brain enlargement to macrencephaly and 5 age/gender-matched control 
individuals for skin biopsies and phenotypic characterization (Supplementary Table S2). The 
ASD donors displayed larger brain size compared to the normal average brain size of 
typically developing control subjects at any given age (Figure 1A, B). Copy Number 
Variation (CNV) analysis, using DNA extracted from the donors’ whole blood did not show 
the presence of any rare structural variant known to be associated with ASD (Supplementary 
Table S3). A small duplication involving intron 2 of the NLGN1 gene was detected in one 
ASD case; however, this event has also been reported in typically developing controls (http://
dgv.tcag.ca/). Exome sequencing was performed on DNA from the 8 ASD fibroblasts. 
Variants were called by two pipelines (lluminaVariantStudio and ANNOVAR) that allowed 
for the detection of variant alleles with higher frequency, since we reasoned that both rare 
and common variants may contribute to the ASD phenotypes. Using these criteria, more than 
50,000 total variants (58866 and 53101 from each of the two pipelines) in all 8 libraries 
were found (Supplementary Table S1A). Since both pipelines gave similar results, we 
focused our analysis on stop-gain, stop-loss and non-synonymous variants identified by the 
lluminaVariantStudio pipeline. A total of 275 unique stop gain/loss mutations were detected, 
of which 222 were listed in dbSNP while 53 rare mutations were not (Supplementary Table 
S1B). Filtering the non-synonymous variants that were considered both “deleterious” in 
SIFT and “probably damaging” in PolyPhen, a total of 1829 unique variants were detected 
(Supplementary Table S1C). Of these, 1564 were found in dbSNP (common) while 265 rare 
variants were not in dbSNP (Supplementary Table S1C).
Notably, novel stop-gains were found in both pipelines in the canonical Wnt pathway genes 
CTNNB1, coding for β-catenin, and FZD6, coding for Frizzled 6 (Table 1A). Additionally, 
two more common missense variants listed in dbSNP in FRZB (rs288326), coding for a 
secreted Frizzled antagonist, and WNT10B (rs121908120), coding for a WNT ligand, were 
also detected (Table 1A). These three missense variants were predicted to be damaging by 
Marchetto et al.
Page 10
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 both SIFT and PolyPhen algorithms. No mutations were found in 2 alleles of a single gene 
in any patient (i.e., all variants were heterozygous). In addition, stop-gain or damaging 
mutations by both SIFT and PolyPhen algorithms of 97 known autistic genes found in 
SFARI Gene (https://sfari.org/resources/sfari-gene) were detected (Supplementary Table 
S4), including one mutation found in PTEN (rs181113165), previously implicated in ASD 
brain growth trajectory33. Of the mutations found in these 97 genes, 78 were found in 
dbSNP and 19 were novel. Gene ontogeny (GO) analysis revealed that 11 GO terms were 
significantly represented among the variants detected in these ASD samples after correction 
for multiple testing (Table 1B, Supplementary Table S5). These GO terms included sensory 
perception, cognition, neural systems, adhesion terms, as well as G-protein and cell surface 
receptor signaling terms. Pathway analysis using DAVID revealed that two pathways, 
olfactory transduction and ABC transporters, were significantly represented among the 
variants detected in these ASD samples after correction for multiple testing (Table 1C, 
Supplementary Table S6).
Generation of iPSCs from macrencephaly ASD individuals and controls
ASD and non-affected control fibroblasts were transduced with 4 retroviral reprogramming 
vectors (Sox2, Oct4, c-Myc and Klf4), as described elsewhere 30. Following 2 to 3 weeks of 
culture in human embryonic stem cells (hESC)-supporting conditions, compact refractile 
ESC-like colonies emerged from a background of fibroblasts. iPSC colonies were then 
manually picked and cultured under feeder-free conditions. Cells were mechanically 
expanded for at least 10 passages and tested for the expression of pluripotent markers. We 
obtained several clones that continuously expressed pluripotent markers, such as Nanog, 
Lin28, Tra-1-81 and Sox2, from each control wild-type (WT)-iPSCs and ASD-iPSCs. We 
excluded all karyotypically unstable clones from further experiments (Figure S1).
iPSC-derived NPCs from ASD Individuals with early brain overgrowth display rapid 
proliferation
Our recent analyses showed that iPSC-derived neural cell types could recapitulate human 
fetal cortical development and thus could be used to model this developmental stage in 
ASD34. We used our previous published protocol to generate NPCs from iPSCs4 in the 
presence of Noggin. Briefly, we initiated neural differentiation by plating 1-week-old 
embryoid bodies (EBs) treated with Noggin. After a week in culture, EB-derived rosettes 
became apparent in the dish. Rosettes were then manually collected, dissociated and re-
plated. The NPCs derived from rosettes formed a homogeneous population after a few 
passages from ASD individuals and controls, and continued to proliferate in the presence of 
FGF2 as adherent monolayers.
We hypothesized that an alteration of the rates of NPC proliferation could result in early 
brain overgrowth. Proliferation was measured in (2 clones per line) by calculating the 
population doubling time from plating at passages 3 to 7 (P3-7) in continuous culture, and 
the doubling times of all ASD and control lines were pooled to calculate averages. From P4, 
the population doubling time decreased in ASD NPCs from all 8 Individuals compared to 
NPCs from all 5 controls, reaching statistical significance at P6 (Figure 1C and Figure S2A). 
Surprisingly, all ASD NPC clones proliferated faster than all control NPC clones. Cell cycle 
Marchetto et al.
Page 11
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analysis at P6 revealed that shortening of G1 and S phases was the main reason for the 
decrease in the population doubling time, with no change of G2-M phase length (Figure 1D 
and Figure S2B). Double labeling for Ki67 and pHH3 revealed an increased percentage of 
Ki67+ (cycling cells) in ASD relative to control NPCs, whereas the percentage of 
pHH3+Ki67+ (G2-M phase mitotic cells) was unaffected in autistic NPCs (Figure 1E, F and 
Figure S2C). After patient and control age-matching correction, we performed pair-wise 
correlations between brain size (volume) and NPC proliferation and doubling time. We 
observed a positive correlation with NPC proliferation and an inverse correlation with NPC 
doubling time across all samples (ASD and controls) (Figure 1G and Figure S2D). 
Strikingly, proliferation (represented by percentage of Ki67 positive cells) is robustly 
significant in its correlation with brain volume, suggesting that it may be proliferation that 
specifically contributes to the large brain early on in ASD. These findings demonstrate that 
iPSC-derived NPCs from ASD Individuals with macrencephaly proliferated faster than those 
derived from controls and NPC proliferation is correlated increase in brain volume. To our 
knowledge, this is the first time that clinical data is significantly correlated to an iPSC-neural 
phenotype and open the doors for potential use of vitro assays as diagnostic tools for 
complex multigenic disorders such ASD.
β-catenin/BRN2 transcriptional activity regulates proliferation of NPCs from ASD 
individuals
Based on the genomic analyses of the ASD individuals, we hypothesized that the alterations 
in the canonical Wnt pathway might govern the aberrant proliferation in ASD-derived NPCs. 
To test our hypothesis, we examined Wnt/β-catenin transcriptional activity using TOP-flash 
assays and found that β-catenin transcriptional activity was indeed reduced in ASD NPCs 
compared to control NPCs (Figure 2A and Figure S2E). Activation of canonical Wnt 
signaling with 5 mM LiCl, which inhibits GSK3β-mediated degradation of β-catenin, 
elevated β-catenin transcriptional activity in both ASD and control NPCs. However, β-
catenin transcriptional activity was significantly reduced in LiCl-treated ASD NPCs 
compared to control NPCs, suggesting that the cause of reduced β-catenin transcriptional 
activity is downstream of GSK3β. While the elevation of β-catenin transcriptional activity 
with LiCl treatment in ASD NPCs is modest, LiCl treatment was able to rescue the 
overproliferation defects on ASD NPCs. Importantly, since the level of Wnt transcriptional 
activity required for normal proliferation is currently unknown, it is conceivable that a 
moderate increase of Wnt is sufficient to rescue abnormal over proliferation in ASD. In our 
experiments, LiCl treatment increased Wnt transcriptional activity by over 2 fold on ASD 
NPCs and that is potentially sufficient to elicit normal proliferation. Activation of canonical 
Wnt signaling with Wnt3A resulted in a marked but non-significant elevation of β-catenin 
transcriptional activity in both control and ASD NPCs, with a similar trend of reduced β-
catenin transcriptional activity in the ASD NPCs (Figure 2A and Figure S2E). Notably, 
NPCs derived from the patient with the heterozygous stop-gain mutation in CTNNB1, Arch, 
displayed the weakest responses to LiCl and Wnt3a stimulation (Figure S2E). To determine 
if this reduced β-catenin transcriptional activity was responsible for the growth defects 
displayed, we repeated the proliferation experiment in ASD-derived and control NPCs in the 
presence and absence of LiCl. In the absence of LiCl, all ASD-derived NPC lines displayed 
faster growth (reduced doubling times) than all control NPC lines. LiCl treatment slowed the 
Marchetto et al.
Page 12
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 growth of ASD-derived NPCs close to doubling times of control NPCs, whereas the growth 
of control NPCs was unaffected (Figure 2B and Figure S2F). These findings indicate that the 
reduced β-catenin transcriptional activity played a functional role in the accelerated 
proliferation found in ASD-derived NPCs.
Dvl1−/−3+/− mutant mice display reduced social interaction and transient embryonic brain 
overgrowth, the result of reduced β-catenin transcriptional activity and reduced levels of the 
transcription factor Brn2 or Pou3f235. To test if BRN2 levels were similarly affected in 
NPCs from ASD patients with early brain overgrowth, we performed immunocytochemistry 
for BRN2 on ASD and control NPCs. The percentage of BRN2+ cells was in fact reduced in 
ASD NPCs compared to controls (Figure 2C, D and Figure S2G), Western blot analysis 
confirmed that BRN2 protein levels were reduced in ASD NPCs compared to controls 
(Figure 2E, F and Figure S2H). To examine whether exogenous BRN2 rescued the increased 
rate of proliferation observed in ASD NPCs, we transfected CAG-BRN2 into control and 
ASD NPCs and performed immunocytochemistry for BRN2 and Ki67. Transfection 
efficiency was similar between control and ASD NPCs (around 45%). The number of DAPI+ 
cells (as an index of proliferation) in ASD NPCs was similar to controls after BRN2 
overexpression (Figure 2G, H and Figure S2I, J). The expression pattern of BRN2 and Ki67 
in the BRN2 transfected ASD NPCs resembled that of control NPCs, providing additional 
support for the direct regulation of proliferation of autistic NPCs by BRN2. These data also 
suggest that partially conserved pathways regulate proliferation of NPCs in a mouse model 
of social behavior and ASD-derived NPCs from patients with early brain overgrowth (Figure 
S2K).
ASD-derived neurons display reduced synaptogenesis
Evidence from the literature suggests an imbalance in excitatory versus inhibitory signals in 
developing ASD36, 37. In addition, analysis of Brn1/Brn2 double mutant mice31, 38 
demonstrated that these genes regulate neurogenesis and proliferation in the cerebral cortex 
of glutamatergic precursor fields. Therefore, we tested whether glutamatergic and 
GABAergic cell fate determination were affected in ASD NPCs. Indeed, a reduction in the 
percentage of glutamatergic NGN2+ NPCs in ASD NPCs compared to controls was 
observed (Figure 2I, J and Figure S2L). In contrast, markers of GABAergic inhibitory 
precursors present in the subpallium (MASH1, DLX2 and NKX2.1) were up-regulated in 
ASD compared to control NPCs, whereas OLIG2, another subpallium marker, was 
unchanged between control and ASD NPCs (Figure 2J and Figure S2L). In light of these 
findings, we tested whether this change in fate determination had an impact on neurogenesis 
and synaptogenesis. We did not detect a significant alteration in ASD neuronal survival after 
differentiation when compared to controls, as measured by MAP2 staining.
Upon neuronal differentiation of these NPCs, we detected a significant reduction in 
inhibitory excitatory neurotransmitters GABA (γ-amino butyric acid) ASD neurons 
compared to controls (Figure 3A, B and S3A) while the percentage of neurons (assessed by 
Map2 staining) and astrocytes (assessed by GFAP staining) was unchanged (Figure S3 B, 
C). We also found a clear reduction in the density of both Synapsin and VGLUT1 (vesicular 
glutamate transpoter-1) puncta from ASD neurons, suggesting a specific defect in vesicular 
Marchetto et al.
Page 13
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glutamate transport in ASD cultures (Figure 3C-E and Figure S3D-G). To confirm the 
specificity of glutamatergic neurons in our cultures, we demonstrated that VGLUT1 puncta 
were mostly adjacent to the postsynaptic density-95 (PSD95) protein, a postsynaptic 
glutamatergic marker39 (Figure 3C). The distribution of puncta densities for both Synapsin 
and VGLUT1 displayed a distinctly increased number of ASD neurites with lower densities 
and an increased number of control-derived neurites with higher densities, corroborating the 
defect in glutamatergic synapses. We also found significant differences in the area size of 
synaptic puncta between the 2 groups (Figure S3H, I).
A decrease in the number of excitatory synapses may directly affect other neurotransmission 
systems in ASD cultures40. To investigate whether the expression of neurotransmitters was 
affected in ASD-derived neurons, we performed a qPCR array of 84 neurotransmitter 
receptors-related genes in both ASD and control neurons. Interestingly, we detected a 
tendency for GABA-related and neuropeptide Y receptors to be down-regulated in ASD-
derived neurons (Figure 3F and Supplementary Table S8). In this experiment, only the 
subunits GABRQ and NPY2R were significantly down-regulated in ASD compared to 
control neurons. We then investigated the expression of 86 different gene indicators for 
different developmental stages of neural differentiation, neurotransmitters maturation and 
cortical layer formation using the Fluidigm Biomark qPCR Dynamic Array (Figure 3G and 
Supplementary Table S8). We detected down-regulation of the GABA receptor GABRR1, 
plus other relevant neurotransmitters and synapse-related genes, such as KCNA1, TH, 
PHOX2A and DRD3, in ASD neurons. In contrast, genes related to early stages of neural 
differentiation, such as NEUROG3, FOXG1, SOX10 and P2RY2, were significantly up-
regulated in ASD. Together the results described above indicate that, while ASD neurons 
initiate an earlier differentiation program, ASD neurons do not mature as extensively as 
controls.
Network defects in ASD-derived neurons
Next, electrophysiological recordings using single-cell patch clamp were used to investigate 
the functional properties of iPSC-derived neurons 6 weeks after differentiation. Spontaneous 
action potentials were observed in control and ASD-derived neurons. However, no 
difference was observed in the frequency of spontaneous action potentials between iPSC-
derived neurons from control (4.3 ± 1.2Hz, n = 21) and ASD (3.0 ± 0.7Hz, n = 27, p = 0.3) 
cultures. iPSC-derived neurons further exhibited spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic 
currents (sEPSCs), with comparable amplitudes (p = 0.7) between control (26.5 ± 2.6pA, n 
= 20) and ASD (27.7 ± 2.6pA, n = 32) cultures. Likewise, no significant difference was 
found in terms of mean sEPSC frequency (control: 7.6 ± 1.4Hz, ASD: 5.3 ± 1.0Hz, p = 0.2, 
Figure S4A-D). Despite the lack of significant sEPSC frequency differences between control 
and ASD neurons, there was a trend of lower frequencies in ASD cultures (Figure S4E). 
Both control and ASD-derived cells exhibited characteristics of functional neurons, 
including transient voltage-gated sodium and potassium currents evoked by voltage-step 
depolarizations and action-potentials generated following depolarizing current injections.
Next, we analyzed spike activity within the neuronal networks by multielectrode arrays 
(MEA). Connectivity defects have been commonly observed in postmortem ASD brains, but 
Marchetto et al.
Page 14
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 connectivity cannot be studied during early stages of embryogenesis41, 42. Unlike single-cell 
patch clamp recordings, MEA allow for the dynamic interrogation of how human-derived 
neurons behave in circuits. We plated paired control and ASD NPCs to mature in MEA 
dishes and recorded their activity over time. After 30 days, the total number of spikes in 
control and ASD neuronal networks was similar. As the cultures matured, the number of 
spikes increased in control neurons but the numbers of spikes in ASD did not, leading to a 
significant difference between ASD and control networks (Figure 4A-C). After 50 days, we 
also detected a reduction in the number of synchronized bursts, i.e., spikes that were not 
singular or random (sequential 10 spikes over 100 ms) in the ASD cultures (Figure 4D). 
While the number of network bursts was variable at 30 days of maturation, with a tendency 
toward more synchronized events in control neurons, within 50 days of maturation this 
difference was 6 times higher in control compared to ASD neurons and highly significant 
(Figure 4C, D).
We then treated the cells with IGF1, a drug that has been previously shown to rescue 
synaptic deficits in other ASD monogenetic syndromes such as Rett and Phelan-McDermid 
Syndromes, and is currently in clinical trials for idiopathic ASD4, 21. When IGF1 was used 
during the differentiation process, we observed an increase in the number of GABAergic 
neurons in all ASD-derived cultures, but no effect in controls (Figure S4 F-I). We next used 
IGF1 to treat mature neuronal cultures after differentiation, starting on day 35 of 
differentiation. Collectively, ASD patients displayed a tendency to improve neuronal spike 
number that became significant at day 72 of differentiation (Figure 4E). Interestingly, when 
we looked at individual patients’ response to the drug, while most patients improved the 
neuronal activity, Apex did not show any response (Figure S4J). Further investigation should 
clarify the mechanistic reasons for such drug response variation, but nonetheless, the assay 
may have the sensitivity to pre-screen patients for future clinical trials. To address the 
involvement of stabilization of Wnt-β-cat pathway in NPCs and the consequence effect on 
neuronal function, we treated NPCs with LiCl and assessed the differentiation by 
quantifying the number of GABAergic neurons after 4 weeks of differentiation and also 
analyzed neuronal functional maturation using Multi Electrode Array (MEA) technology. 
Interestingly, treatment of NPCs with LiCl did not improve the percentage of GABA 
positive cells 4 weeks after differentiation or improved MEA activity on ASD neurons 
(Figure S4I and S4K). Hence, contrary to IGF1 treatment, LiCl treatment (and consequent 
stabilization Wnt-β-catenin pathway and rescue of NPC proliferation) does not affect 
neuronal function significantly, suggesting that there are multiple pathways involved in the 
ASD phenotypical deficit or that stabilization of the Wnt-β-catenin pathway is also required 
at the early stages of differentiation35. These results demonstrate an impairment followed by 
a partial rescue with IGF1, but not LiCl of network formation in ASD-derived neuronal 
cultures.
RNA sequencing in neural cells identifies altered gene expression in macrencephaly ASD 
individuals
Strong evidence implicates a convergence of pathways at the transcriptome level in 
postmortem brains from ASD patients8, 32. Therefore, we performed RNA sequencing 
analysis in iPSCs and in iPSC-derived NPCs and neurons to evaluate whether any 
Marchetto et al.
Page 15
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 convergent transcriptional alterations could be identified to be associated with early brain 
overgrowth in ASD during development in this in vitro model. At the transcriptome level, 
samples were explicitly separated into 3 distinct clusters by cell-type differences based on 
the top 2 principal components, strongly supporting the reproducibility of our iPSC 
generation and neural differentiation procedures (Figure S5A, B).
We first conducted a standard differential expression (DE) analysis to evaluate individual 
gene expression pattern changes at the NPC and neuronal stages. We identified 71 genes that 
were significantly differentially expressed in ASD compared to controls at the NPC stage 
and 154 genes at the neuronal stage, which by hierarchical clustering clearly 
distinguished(the ASD cell lines from controls (Figure 5A and Supplementary Table S9). 
The expression fold changes of the top dysregulated genes are shown in Figure 5B. Of note, 
while the expressions of both CTNNB1 (coding for β-catenin) or POU3F2 (coding for 
BRN2) mRNAs were reduced, neither was significantly altered in ASD-derived NPCs, 
although β-catenin activity in the canonical Wnt pathway is primarily regulated at the post-
transcriptional level. To reveal the biological pathways associated with the differentially 
expressed genes, we performed GO enrichment analysis. We found that the up-regulated 
genes in ASD progenitors were significantly enriched for GO category of brain 
development, which agrees with the observations of the high NPC proliferation rate and 
differentiation defects in ASD cultures (Figure S5C, D). At the neuronal stage, the up-
regulated genes in ASD were enriched for the GO categories related to extracellular matrix, 
whereas the down-regulated genes were significantly enriched for the GO categories of 
cilium and axoneme, consistent with the observed synaptic dysregulation (Figure S5E, F).
To explore the network organization of the transcriptome6, 43, 44, we next applied a Weighted 
Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) to provide a higher order view of the 
biological processes altered in the patient cells. Given the substantial transcriptomic 
alterations in the patient-derived neurons, we mainly focused on determining the gene co-
expression organizations at the neuronal stage. We identified 17 gene co-expression modules 
in the assigned co-expression network (each labeled in a different color). We also observed a 
striking clustering pattern of the case-associated genes and known ASD susceptibility genes 
(curated from SFARI database), respectively, upon the identified co-expression structure by 
plotting the module assignment under the gene clustering dendrogram (Figure 5C, D and 
Figure S5E, F).
Comparing the expression patterns of the modules between ASD and controls (see 
Methods), we found 4 modules that were significantly associated with ASD status (FDR 
<0.1): brown, tan, purple, and magenta (Supplementary Table S10). Remarkably, known 
autism candidate genes were significantly enriched in these autism-correlated modules 
(Supplementary Table S11). Genes that were commonly affected by ASD-associated CNVs 
were overrepresented in the brown module (OR=1.5, enrichment p-value=0.02), whereas the 
tan module was enriched for genes known to be affected by ASD-associated protein-
disrupting and missense rare de novo variations (RDNVs) (OR=1.6, p-value=0.02). Because 
co-expressed genes imply co-regulation, our results provide further evidence for the 
suggested convergent transcriptional regulation in ASD8.
Marchetto et al.
Page 16
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Since ASD NPCs exhibited abnormal differentiation phenotypes, we evaluated whether 
there were dynamic expression changes in patient cells upon differentiation. Our analysis 
identified 35 genes showing significant differences in their expression trajectories between 
ASD NPCs and controls in the progenitor to neuron transition (p<0.005) (Figure 5E). These 
genes were significantly enriched for voltage-gated cation channels (Figure 5F), including 
CACNG5, KCNA6, KCNC2, and KCNIP2. As shown in Figure 5G and H, those channel 
genes were up-regulated in control cells, but this increase was attenuated in the ASD cells. 
These data further implicate voltage-gated cation channel dysregulation in ASD neural 
differentiation, consistent with decreased excitatory glutamatergic synapses, likely affecting 
synaptic transmission.
DISCUSSION
The use of iPSCs to study genetic disorders is a powerful tool to dissect molecular and 
cellular pathways implicated in disease pathology during early stages of human 
neurodevelopment. However, modeling highly complex idiopathic disorders such as ASD is 
challenging due to a high level of heterogeneity in the patient population. Here, we took 
advantage of iPSCs derived from a carefully clinically characterized cohort of ASD patients 
who have an anatomical phenotypic trait that occurs in about 20-30% of idiopathic ASD: an 
early developmental enlargement of brain volume, including macrencephaly, that is 
frequently associated with poor prognosis. Recent evidence suggests that abnormal brain 
growth and organization in ASD are underway by mid-fetal life16, 17 and continue during the 
first few years of life10, 13, 15, 45-47. The ASD patients recruited here had their brain scans 
between the ages of 2 and 5 years, confirming the anatomical phenotype. Their brain 
volumes ranged between 3.3% and 23.5% (median=12%, mean=12.5%) above the normal 
average for age when compared with large samples of age-matched control subjects10.
We hypothesized that the increased brain volume and neuron numbers found in ASD might 
result from increased rates of proliferation in neural progenitors. Consistent with this 
hypothesis, NPCs derived from iPSCs of such autistic patients displayed rapid rates of 
proliferation when compared to NPCs derived from non-affected typically developing 
individuals, a finding that also supports the cell cycle dysregulation/proliferation theory 
proposed to explain early brain overgrowth in some ASD13, 16, 48. Interestingly, all ASD-
derived NPCs displayed faster proliferation than all control-derived NPCs. This cellular 
phenotype results from alterations in a canonical Wnt-β-catenin/BRN2 transcriptional 
cascade. In further support of this iPSC-derived NPC phenotype, we found that Dvl mutants 
displayed adult social behavior abnormalities and transient brain overgrowth during 
embryonic deep layer cortical neuron formation mediated by a similar β-catenin/Brn2/Tbr2 
transcriptional cascade35. Transient activation of the canonical Wnt pathway in utero 
normalized the adult social behavior deficits in Dvl mutant mice. Thus, common 
transcriptional mechanisms that include β-catenin and BRN2 appear to regulate NPC 
proliferation in a mouse model with social and repetitive behavioral deficits and a cellular 
model of human autism. Cross-talk between the Wnt and insulin signaling pathways has 
been demonstrated in different disorders such as diabetes and cancer49-53. IGF-1 has been 
shown to stimulate the β-catenin pathway through signaling cascades involving the 
activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-K)/Akt and the inhibition of glycogen 
Marchetto et al.
Page 17
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3)53. Since LiCl treatment of ASD NPCs stabilized cell 
proliferation via inhibition of GSK-3 and subsequent increase in β-catenin levels, it is 
feasible to hypothesize that stimulation of IGF-1 pathway could potentially rescue 
proliferation deficits in developing ASD NPCs. Future studies will elucidate the mechanistic 
nature of the relationship between WNT and IGF1 pathways in neurodevelopmental 
disorders.
Finally, stop-gain mutations were found in the canonical Wnt pathway genes CTNNB1 and 
FZD6, while a novel missense mutation was found in DVL2, and two more common 
missense variants listed in dbSNP in FRZB and WNT10B were also detected, consistent 
with an important role for the canonical Wnt pathway in the pathogenesis of brain 
enlargement in ASD. It is known that Wnt signaling controls NPCs proliferation and 
differentiation in a temporal and context-dependent fashion during brain development. Early 
in neurogenesis, Wnt stimulation results in NPC proliferation, whereas later in development 
Wnts induce neuronal differentiation by promoting terminal neurogenesis 54-56. Moreover, 
the same transcription factors may have opposing effects in different cell types. Finally, a 
missense mutation was found in PTEN (rs181113165) in one patient, consistent with a role 
for this gene in ASD brain growth trajectory and Wnt signaling33. Taken together, these 
findings indicate that increased proliferation rates found in NPCs are the likely cause of 
abnormal prenatal numbers of cortical neurons in the genesis of autism 16.
These proliferation abnormalities were associated with abnormalities in differentiation. The 
percentage of excitatory NGN2+ NPCs was reduced, whereas markers of inhibitory 
precursors present in the subpallium (MASH1, DLX2 and NKX2.1) were up-regulated in 
ASD compared to control NPCs. Interestingly, a decrease of NGN2+ NPC did not resulted 
in an increase in GABAergic neurons, but ASD neuronal cultures have a significant 
reduction in inhibitory neurons. When examining excitatory synapses, ASD-derived neurons 
also displayed decreased Vglut1 puncta density. This imbalance of excitatory/inhibitory 
neurons could also explain our network results during neuronal maturation in the MEAs, 
where we detected a significant reduction in the amount of spontaneous activity in ASD 
neurons, leading to a pronounced deficiency in network connectivity that was ameliorated 
with addition of IGF1. IGF-1 is a naturally occurring neurotrophic factor essential for brain 
development and plasticity57, 58. In the CNS, IGF-1 binds to its receptor (IGF1R), and 
activates MAP Kinase and PI3 kinase pathways, which are both involved in synaptic 
function and plasticity59, 60. IGF1 treatment of rodent neurons in vitro resulted in an 
increase in neuronal outgrowth, as well as increased expression of Synapsin1, a pre-synaptic 
marker responsible for regulating neurotransmitter release, and post-synaptic density 
protein-95 (PSD-95), a scaffolding protein responsible for proper synapse and receptor 
formation61, 62. While the precise mechanisms through which IGF1 induces changes in 
synaptic proteins and improve neuronal function in ASD cultures remain to be elucidated, 
one possibility is that it acts indirectly on neurons through the activation of IGF1R and its 
many neurotrophic downstream cascades. Another possibility is that IGF1 contributes to the 
increase in synaptic markers by acting on glial cells and improving maintenance of synapses. 
Future studies will reveal and dissect precise pathways downstream of IGF1 during different 
stages of neuronal development and neuronal circuit maturation in ASD.
Marchetto et al.
Page 18
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The proliferation and maturation defects displayed by ASD patient-derived NPCs and 
neurons are consistent with early brain overgrowth, but the dramatic in vitro phenotypes are 
perhaps greater than one would expect based on the pathological and MRI studies of ASD 
brains so far reported. In support of our data, a recent study with macrocephaly ASD also 
revealed high level of NPC proliferation in another four ASD individuals, which may be due 
to a deficiency in FOXG1-mediated pathways63. Thus, it is conceivable that the phenotypes 
are amplified in vitro due to the lack of tissue architectural constraints that occur during in 
vivo development. However, it is unclear if these proliferation and differentiation defects 
result from macrencephaly, ASD or both. The consistency in proliferation and differentiation 
phenotypes shared among the ASD-patient derived cells in these two studies suggests that 
these findings are relevant to ASD pathology. Future studies will be needed to clearly 
distinguish these possibilities; using normocephalic ASD-patient derived NPCs and neurons 
as well as iPSC models of macrencephaly without ASD.
In summary, we have used a selected group of individuals with mild to extreme 
macrencephaly to address a specific hypothesis about the origin of ASD: namely, that a 
specific, early developmental brain enlargement might be generated from an underlying 
molecular and cellular pathway dysregulation. We employed patient-derived iPSCs to 
investigate this hypothesis and found that NPCs derived from this cohort displayed increased 
proliferation and abnormal differentiation, consistent with this hypothesis. Our data support 
the hypothesis that proliferation of NPCs is tightly regulated during mammalian brain 
development and that abnormalities of proliferation can lead to a long lasting differentiation 
abnormalities and defects seen in ASD.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grants from the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM) TR2-01814 and 
TR4-06747, the National Institutes of Health through the NIH Director’s New Innovator Award Program (1-DP2-
OD006495-01), an R01 MH100175-01 and U19MH107367 from NIMH, the International Rett Syndrome 
Foundation (IRSF grant # 2915); a NARSAD Independent Investigator Award to A.R.M., and NIMH Autism Center 
of Excellence Program Project grant (to E.C., K.P., A.W.-B., and F.H.G.); the work was supported by the Helmsley 
Trust, the JPB Foundation, the Engmann Foundation, a grant from the CDMRP Autism Research Program (to 
A.W.-B. and F.H.G.); a KL2 CTRI (KL2TR00099) to T.P and Postdoctoral Translational Fellowship from Autism 
Speaks to H.B.
REFERENCES
1. Piven J, Palmer P, Jacobi D, Childress D, Arndt S. Broader autism phenotype: evidence from a 
family history study of multiple-incidence autism families. The American journal of psychiatry. 
1997; 154(2):185–190. [PubMed: 9016266] 
2. Ronald A, Happe F, Bolton P, Butcher LM, Price TS, Wheelwright S, et al. Genetic heterogeneity 
between the three components of the autism spectrum: a twin study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc 
Psychiatry. 2006; 45(6):691–699. [PubMed: 16721319] 
3. Garber K. Neuroscience. Autism’s cause may reside in abnormalities at the synapse. Science. 2007; 
317(5835):190–191. [PubMed: 17626859] 
Marchetto et al.
Page 19
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4. Marchetto MC, Carromeu C, Acab A, Yu D, Yeo GW, Mu Y, et al. A model for neural development 
and treatment of Rett syndrome using human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell. 2010; 143(4):
527–539. [PubMed: 21074045] 
5. Sanders SJ, Murtha MT, Gupta AR, Murdoch JD, Raubeson MJ, Willsey AJ, et al. De novo 
mutations revealed by whole-exome sequencing are strongly associated with autism. Nature. 2012; 
485(7397):237–241. [PubMed: 22495306] 
6. Voineagu I, Wang X, Johnston P, Lowe JK, Tian Y, Horvath S, et al. Transcriptomic analysis of 
autistic brain reveals convergent molecular pathology. Nature. 2011; 474(7351):380–384. [PubMed: 
21614001] 
7. Chow ML, Pramparo T, Winn ME, Barnes CC, Li HR, Weiss L, et al. Age-dependent brain gene 
expression and copy number anomalies in autism suggest distinct pathological processes at young 
versus mature ages. PLoS genetics. 2012; 8(3):e1002592. [PubMed: 22457638] 
8. Parikshak NN, Luo R, Zhang A, Won H, Lowe JK, Chandran V, et al. Integrative functional genomic 
analyses implicate specific molecular pathways and circuits in autism. Cell. 2013; 155(5):1008–
1021. [PubMed: 24267887] 
9. Willsey AJ, Sanders SJ, Li M, Dong S, Tebbenkamp AT, Muhle RA, et al. Coexpression networks 
implicate human midfetal deep cortical projection neurons in the pathogenesis of autism. Cell. 
2013; 155(5):997–1007. [PubMed: 24267886] 
10. Courchesne E, Campbell K, Solso S. Brain growth across the life span in autism: age-specific 
changes in anatomical pathology. Brain Res. 2011; 1380:138–145. [PubMed: 20920490] 
11. Courchesne E, Redcay E, Morgan JT, Kennedy DP. Autism at the beginning: microstructural and 
growth abnormalities underlying the cognitive and behavioral phenotype of autism. Dev 
Psychopathol. 2005; 17(3):577–597. [PubMed: 16262983] 
12. Hazlett HC, Poe MD, Gerig G, Styner M, Chappell C, Smith RG, et al. Early brain overgrowth in 
autism associated with an increase in cortical surface area before age 2 years. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2011; 68(5):467–476. [PubMed: 21536976] 
13. Courchesne E, Karns CM, Davis HR, Ziccardi R, Carper RA, Tigue ZD, et al. Unusual brain 
growth patterns in early life in patients with autistic disorder: an MRI study. Neurology. 2001; 
57(2):245–254. [PubMed: 11468308] 
14. Courchesne E, Carper R, Akshoomoff N. Evidence of brain overgrowth in the first year of life in 
autism. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. 2003; 290(3):337–344. 
[PubMed: 12865374] 
15. Shen MD, Nordahl CW, Young GS, Wootton-Gorges SL, Lee A, Liston SE, et al. Early brain 
enlargement and elevated extra-axial fluid in infants who develop autism spectrum disorder. 
Brain : a journal of neurology. 2013; 136(Pt 9):2825–2835. [PubMed: 23838695] 
16. Courchesne E, Mouton PR, Calhoun ME, Semendeferi K, Ahrens-Barbeau C, Hallet MJ, et al. 
Neuron number and size in prefrontal cortex of children with autism. JAMA. 2011; 306(18):2001–
2010. [PubMed: 22068992] 
17. Stoner R, Chow ML, Boyle MP, Sunkin SM, Mouton PR, Roy S, et al. Patches of disorganization 
in the neocortex of children with autism. The New England journal of medicine. 2014; 370(13):
1209–1219. [PubMed: 24670167] 
18. Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic and adult 
fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell. 2006; 126(4):663–676. [PubMed: 16904174] 
19. Yu J, Vodyanik MA, Smuga-Otto K, Antosiewicz-Bourget J, Frane JL, Tian S, et al. Induced 
pluripotent stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells. Science. 2007; 318(5858):1917–
1920. [PubMed: 18029452] 
20. Freitas BC, Trujillo CA, Carromeu C, Yusupova M, Herai RH, Muotri AR. Stem cells and 
modeling of autism spectrum disorders. Exp Neurol. 2012
21. Shcheglovitov A, Shcheglovitova O, Yazawa M, Portmann T, Shu R, Sebastiano V, et al. SHANK3 
and IGF1 restore synaptic deficits in neurons from 22q13 deletion syndrome patients. Nature. 
2013; 503(7475):267–271. [PubMed: 24132240] 
22. Pasca SP, Portmann T, Voineagu I, Yazawa M, Shcheglovitov A, Pasca AM, et al. Using iPSC-
derived neurons to uncover cellular phenotypes associated with Timothy syndrome. Nat Med. 
2011; 17(12):1657–1662. [PubMed: 22120178] 
Marchetto et al.
Page 20
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 23. Beltrao-Braga PC, Pignatari GC, Russo FB, Fernandes IR, Muotri AR. In-a-dish: induced 
pluripotent stem cells as a novel model for human diseases. Cytometry Part A : the journal of the 
International Society for Analytical Cytology. 2013; 83(1):11–17. [PubMed: 23281003] 
24. Griesi-Oliveira K, Acab A, Gupta AR, Sunaga DY, Chailangkarn T, Nicol X, et al. Modeling non-
syndromic autism and the impact of TRPC6 disruption in human neurons. Molecular psychiatry. 
2014
25. Gmitrowicz A, Kucharska A. [Developmental disorders in the fourth edition of the American 
classification: diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM IV -- optional book)]. 
Psychiatria polska. 1994; 28(5):509–521. [PubMed: 7527563] 
26. Sanders SJ, Ercan-Sencicek AG, Hus V, Luo R, Murtha MT, Moreno-De-Luca D, et al. Multiple 
Recurrent De Novo CNVs, Including Duplications of the 7q11.23 Williams Syndrome Region, Are 
Strongly Associated with Autism. Neuron. 2011; 70:863–885. [PubMed: 21658581] 
27. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. 
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25(14):1754–1760. [PubMed: 19451168] 
28. Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, Fennell T, Ruan J, Homer N, et al. The Sequence Alignment/Map 
format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25(16):2078–2079. [PubMed: 19505943] 
29. Wang K, Li M, Hakonarson H. ANNOVAR: functional annotation of genetic variants from high-
throughput sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38(16):e164. [PubMed: 20601685] 
30. Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, Narita M, Ichisaka T, Tomoda K, et al. Induction of pluripotent 
stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell. 2007; 131(5):861–872. [PubMed: 
18035408] 
31. McEvilly RJ, de Diaz MO, Schonemann MD, Hooshmand F, Rosenfeld MG. Transcriptional 
regulation of cortical neuron migration by POU domain factors. Science. 2002; 295(5559):1528–
1532. [PubMed: 11859196] 
32. Voineagu I. Gene expression studies in autism: moving from the genome to the transcriptome and 
beyond. Neurobiol Dis. 2012; 45(1):69–75. [PubMed: 21839838] 
33. Chen Y, Huang WC, Sejourne J, Clipperton-Allen AE, Page DT. Pten Mutations Alter Brain 
Growth Trajectory and Allocation of Cell Types through Elevated beta-Catenin Signaling. J 
Neurosci. 2015; 35(28):10252–10267. [PubMed: 26180201] 
34. Stein JL, de la Torre-Ubieta L, Tian Y, Parikshak NN, Hernandez IA, Marchetto MC, et al. A 
quantitative framework to evaluate modeling of cortical development by neural stem cells. Neuron. 
2014; 83(1):69–86. [PubMed: 24991955] 
35. Belinson H, Nakatani J, Babineau BA, Birnbaum RY, Ellegood J, Bershteyn M, et al. Prenatal beta-
catenin/Brn2/Tbr2 transcriptional cascade regulates adult social and stereotypic behaviors. Mol 
Psychiatry. 2016
36. Rubenstein JL. Three hypotheses for developmental defects that may underlie some forms of 
autism spectrum disorder. Curr Opin Neurol. 2010; 23(2):118–123. [PubMed: 20087182] 
37. Zikopoulos B, Barbas H. Altered neural connectivity in excitatory and inhibitory cortical circuits in 
autism. Frontiers in human neuroscience. 2013; 7:609. [PubMed: 24098278] 
38. Sugitani Y, Nakai S, Minowa O, Nishi M, Jishage K, Kawano H, et al. Brn-1 and Brn-2 share 
crucial roles in the production and positioning of mouse neocortical neurons. Genes Dev. 2002; 
16(14):1760–1765. [PubMed: 12130536] 
39. Niethammer M, Kim E, Sheng M. Interaction between the C terminus of NMDA receptor subunits 
and multiple members of the PSD-95 family of membrane-associated guanylate kinases. J 
Neurosci. 1996; 16(7):2157–2163. [PubMed: 8601796] 
40. Takamori S, Rhee JS, Rosenmund C, Jahn R. Identification of a vesicular glutamate transporter that 
defines a glutamatergic phenotype in neurons. Nature. 2000; 407(6801):189–194. [PubMed: 
11001057] 
41. Hahamy A, Behrmann M, Malach R. The idiosyncratic brain: distortion of spontaneous 
connectivity patterns in autism spectrum disorder. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18(2):302–309. [PubMed: 
25599222] 
42. Davis G, Plaisted-Grant K. Low endogenous neural noise in autism. Autism : the international 
journal of research and practice. 2014
Marchetto et al.
Page 21
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 43. Oldham MC, Konopka G, Iwamoto K, Langfelder P, Kato T, Horvath S, et al. Functional 
organization of the transcriptome in human brain. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11(11):1271–1282. 
[PubMed: 18849986] 
44. Konopka G, Bomar JM, Winden K, Coppola G, Jonsson ZO, Gao F, et al. Human-specific 
transcriptional regulation of CNS development genes by FOXP2. Nature. 2009; 462(7270):213–
217. [PubMed: 19907493] 
45. Carper RA, Moses P, Tigue ZD, Courchesne E. Cerebral lobes in autism: early hyperplasia and 
abnormal age effects. NeuroImage. 2002; 16(4):1038–1051. [PubMed: 12202091] 
46. Sparks BF, Friedman SD, Shaw DW, Aylward EH, Echelard D, Artru AA, et al. Brain structural 
abnormalities in young children with autism spectrum disorder. Neurology. 2002; 59(2):184–192. 
[PubMed: 12136055] 
47. Hazlett HC, Poe M, Gerig G, Smith RG, Provenzale J, Ross A, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging 
and head circumference study of brain size in autism: birth through age 2 years. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2005; 62(12):1366–1376. [PubMed: 16330725] 
48. Courchesne E, Pierce K, Schumann CM, Redcay E, Buckwalter JA, Kennedy DP, et al. Mapping 
early brain development in autism. Neuron. 2007; 56(2):399–413. [PubMed: 17964254] 
49. Garcia-Jimenez C, Garcia-Martinez JM, Chocarro-Calvo A, De la Vieja A. A new link between 
diabetes and cancer: enhanced WNT/beta-catenin signaling by high glucose. Journal of molecular 
endocrinology. 2014; 52(1):R51–66. [PubMed: 24049067] 
50. Palsgaard J, Emanuelli B, Winnay JN, Sumara G, Karsenty G, Kahn CR. Cross-talk between 
insulin and Wnt signaling in preadipocytes: role of Wnt co-receptor low density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein-5 (LRP5). J Biol Chem. 2012; 287(15):12016–12026. [PubMed: 
22337886] 
51. Doble BW, Woodgett JR. GSK-3: tricks of the trade for a multi-tasking kinase. J Cell Sci. 2003; 
116(Pt 7):1175–1186. [PubMed: 12615961] 
52. Desbois-Mouthon C, Cadoret A, Blivet-Van Eggelpoel MJ, Bertrand F, Cherqui G, Perret C, et al. 
Insulin and IGF-1 stimulate the beta-catenin pathway through two signalling cascades involving 
GSK-3beta inhibition and Ras activation. Oncogene. 2001; 20(2):252–259. [PubMed: 11313952] 
53. Siddle K. Signalling by insulin and IGF receptors: supporting acts and new players. Journal of 
molecular endocrinology. 2011; 47(1):R1–10. [PubMed: 21498522] 
54. Chenn A, Walsh CA. Regulation of cerebral cortical size by control of cell cycle exit in neural 
precursors. Science. 2002; 297(5580):365–369. [PubMed: 12130776] 
55. Hirabayashi Y, Itoh Y, Tabata H, Nakajima K, Akiyama T, Masuyama N, et al. The Wnt/beta-
catenin pathway directs neuronal differentiation of cortical neural precursor cells. Development. 
2004; 131(12):2791–2801. [PubMed: 15142975] 
56. Munji RN, Choe Y, Li G, Siegenthaler JA, Pleasure SJ. Wnt signaling regulates neuronal 
differentiation of cortical intermediate progenitors. J Neurosci. 2011; 31(5):1676–1687. [PubMed: 
21289176] 
57. Cheng CM, Reinhardt RR, Lee WH, Joncas G, Patel SC, Bondy CA. Insulin-like growth factor 1 
regulates developing brain glucose metabolism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000; 97(18):10236–
10241. [PubMed: 10954733] 
58. Ciucci F, Putignano E, Baroncelli L, Landi S, Berardi N, Maffei L. Insulin-like growth factor 1 
(IGF-1) mediates the effects of enriched environment (EE) on visual cortical development. PLoS 
One. 2007; 2(5):e475. [PubMed: 17534425] 
59. Yoshii A, Constantine-Paton M. BDNF induces transport of PSD-95 to dendrites through PI3K-
AKT signaling after NMDA receptor activation. Nat Neurosci. 2007; 10(6):702–711. [PubMed: 
17515902] 
60. Sweatt JD. The neuronal MAP kinase cascade: a biochemical signal integration system subserving 
synaptic plasticity and memory. J Neurochem. 2001; 76(1):1–10. [PubMed: 11145972] 
61. Ozdinler PH, Macklis JD. IGF-I specifically enhances axon outgrowth of corticospinal motor 
neurons. Nat Neurosci. 2006; 9(11):1371–1381. [PubMed: 17057708] 
62. Corvin AP, Molinos I, Little G, Donohoe G, Gill M, Morris DW, et al. Insulin-like growth factor 1 
(IGF1) and its active peptide (1-3)IGF1 enhance the expression of synaptic markers in neuronal 
Marchetto et al.
Page 22
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 circuits through different cellular mechanisms. Neurosci Lett. 2012; 520(1):51–56. [PubMed: 
22609570] 
63. Mariani J, Coppola G, Zhang P, Abyzov A, Provini L, Tomasini L, et al. FOXG1-Dependent 
Dysregulation of GABA/Glutamate Neuron Differentiation in Autism Spectrum Disorders. Cell. 
2015; 162(2):375–390. [PubMed: 26186191] 
Marchetto et al.
Page 23
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Altered ASD iPSC-derived NPCs proliferation. (A) Left panel, scatterplot of Total Brain 
Volume (TBV) across ages. Open black circles indicate brain size of typically developing 
subjects. Black solid dots represent control donors. Red solid dots represent ASD donors. 
(B) Three-dimensional reconstructions of the brain from one control donor and one ASD 
donor. (C) iPSCs from ASD and control were differentiated to NPCs. From passages 2 to 6 
cells were plated at the same density and population-doubling time at each passage was 
calculated. Results of all lines (2 clones per line) are presented as mean ± SEM (*repeated 
Marchetto et al.
Page 24
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 measurements p=0.02, post-hoc p<0.04). (D) Adherent monolayer NPCs from control and 
ASD iPSCs were dissociated, counted for calculation of population doubling time and 
prepared for cell cycle analysis. Results are presented as the time spent in each cell cycle 
stage (n≥4, mean ± SEM, ANOVA p<0.04, post-hoc p<0.04 for comparing the time spent in 
G1 phase in the ASD NPCs with those of the control NPCs, respectively). (E) Control and 
ASD NPCs were immunostained with DAPI (Blue), anti-pHH3 (Green) and anti-ki67 (Red) 
(Scale bar: 200 μm). Representative images of the staining are shown. (F) Quantification of 
the percentage of Ki67+ and Ki67+pHH3+ labeled cells are presented as mean ± SEM (n≥5; 
*p<0.03 for comparing the results of the ASD with those of the control NPCs). (G) Pairwise 
correlation between individual brain size (volume) and respective NPC cell line proliferation 
rates (% of Ki67 positive cells).
Marchetto et al.
Page 25
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Regulation of NPC proliferation by the Wnt pathway and differential expression of early fate 
determinants. (A) Control and ASD NPCs were transfected with TOP-Flash and firefly 
renilla reporters and treated with either 5 mM LiCl or 100 ng/ml Wnt3A. Results are 
presented as mean ± SEM (n≥5, *p<0.04 for comparing the luminescence ratio in the ASD 
NPCs with those of the control NPCs). (B) Doubling time of control and ASD NPCs, treated 
or not with 5 mM LiCl. Results are presented as mean ± SEM (n≥5, ANOVA<0.05 *p<0.05 
for comparing the ASD NPCs doubling time with control NPCs). (C) Control and ASD 
Marchetto et al.
Page 26
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 NPCs were fixed and immunostained for Brn2 and representative images of the staining are 
shown (Scale bar: 200 μm). (D) Quantification of the percentage of Brn2+-labeled cells is 
presented as mean±SEM (n≥5; *p<0.001 for comparing the results of the ASD with those of 
the control NPCs). (E) Representative immunoblot of control and ASD-derived NPCs that 
were lysed and immunoblot for Brn2, β-catenin and GAPDH. (F) The levels of Brn2 and β-
catenin, which were normalized to GAPDH levels were quantified and results are presented 
as mean ± SEM (n≥5; *p<0.03 for comparing the results of the ASD with those of the 
control NPCs). (G) The percentage of Brn2+ and (H) Ki67+ cells were measured. Results 
are presented as mean ± SEM (n≥4, ANOVA<0.02 *p<0.05, comparing the results of the 
GFP-transfected ASD NPCs with those of the control and the Brn2 transfected ASD NPCs). 
(I) Representative images of the control and ASD NPCs immunostained for Ngn2 and 
Mash1. (Scale bar: 200um) (G) Quantification of the percentage of Ngn2+, Mash1+, Olig2, 
Dlx2+ and Nkx2.1+ labeled cells is presented as mean ± SEM (n≥5; *p<0.03 for comparing 
the results of the ASD with those of the control NPCs).
Marchetto et al.
Page 27
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Synaptic alterations in ASD neuronal networks. (A) Representative images of cells after 
neuronal differentiation. iPSC-derived neurons express a marker for inhibitory neurons, 
GABA. Bar = 20 μm. (B) The graph shows the quantification of GABA-positive neurons in 
all ASD-derived neurons compared to all controls (*p<0.001). (C) Representative images of 
cells after neuronal differentiation. iPSC-derived neurons express markers for excitatory 
neurons, such as postsynaptic density protein 95 (Psd95) and vesicular glutamate transporter 
1 (VGlut1). (Scale bar: 5 μm) (D) Bar graphs show synaptic density and (E) synaptic puncta 
Marchetto et al.
Page 28
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 size in ASD and control neurons. (**p<0.001 for comparing the results of the ASD with 
those of the control neurons for (D) and *p<0.05 for (E)). (F and G) Volcano plots of qPCR 
array data. Plot illustrates differences in expression patterns of neurotransmitters receptor-
related genes of iPSC-derived neurons from ASD (n = 13) and related controls (n = 7). The 
blue-gray plots represent more than or equal to 2.0-fold differentially expressed genes 
between the groups at P<0.05 (unpaired two-sample Student’s t-test). Insert: Bar graphs 
show the distribution of ΔCt values (inverse to gene expression) of each individual for 
GABRQ and NYR2 genes in control and ASD.
Marchetto et al.
Page 29
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Functional defects in ASD-derived neuronal networks shown by Multielectrode array 
activity (MEA). Representative spike raster plots of 10 channels from one well plated with 
control and ASD cultures over (A) 30 days and (B) 50 days. XY graphs on the left show 
overlay of a representative generated from the raw data of a spike raster plot, using the 
number of spikes recorded over 10 minutes at 30 days and 50 days of culture maturation 
(n=3 wells per cell type). (C) Total number of spikes from data obtained from controls (n=6) 
and ASD (n=10) clonal lines differentiating over 30 days and controls (n=4) and ASD (n=9) 
Marchetto et al.
Page 30
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 clonal lines at 50 days after differentiation over 10 minutes of recording. Results are 
presented as mean ± SEM (*p=0.0046 for comparing the results of the ASD with control 
networks). (D) Number of network bursts from wells that were able to generate bursts (10 
spikes over 100 ms). Results are presented as mean ± SEM (*p<0.0001 for comparing the 
results of the ASD with control networks). (E) ASD neuronal cultures were treated with 
IGF1 as indicated in the graph (arrow) and was kept in the cultures for the duration of the 
experiment.
Marchetto et al.
Page 31
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Gene expression changes in neurons and NPCs derived from idiopathic ASD Individuals 
with macrencephaly. (A) Hierarchical clustering using the differentially expressed (DE) 
genes identified in NPCs (left) and neurons (right). The heatmap shows color-coded scaled 
expression values, up-regulation in red and down-regulation in green. Each column 
represents a line from an iPSC clone. The horizontal bar on the top shows disease status: 
white cell lines are derived from ASD cases, and black represents cell lines from controls. 
(B) Log2 transformed fold changes of the top 20 down-regulated (blue) and top 20 up-
Marchetto et al.
Page 32
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 regulated (red) genes in patient neural progenitors (left) and neurons (right) as compared to 
controls. Genes highlighted with * have log2 fold change > 3. (C) Visualization of the top 
connections in the brown module, which is down-regulated in ASD neurons. Genes are 
connected if their pairwise correlation is larger than 0.8. Pie chart: genes in GO category 
“axoneme” (red); genes in ASD CNVs (yellow); differentially expressed genes (p<0.005)
(green). (D) Visualization of the top connections in the tan module, which shows up-
regulation in ASD neurons. Genes are connected if their pairwise correlation is larger than 
0.8. Pie chart: genes that are previously identified to be affected by ASD-associated 
missense (red) and protein disrupting (green) rare de novo variation (RDNVs), and 
differentially expressed genes (p<0.005) (yellow). (E) Barplot showing the ratios of 
neuronal/progenitor expression of the DE genes in the progenitor to neuron transition. Black 
bars represent the ratios in control samples, and white bars represent the ratios in ASD 
samples. (F) The top 5 enriched GO categories among the genes showing differentiation-
dependent expression changes in ASD Individuals vs. controls. (G and H) Dynamic 
expression patterns (log2 transformed read counts) of the genes that show significant 
differentiation-dependent expression alterations during neuronal differentiation (p<0.005) 
and that are in the GO category “voltage gated ion channel activity.” White: cell samples 
derived from ASD individuals; black: cell samples from controls. P-value in the interaction 
plot shows the significance of the interaction effect between cell type and disease status. P-
values in the neuronal and progenitor plots represent the significance of the difference 
between ASD cases vs. controls.
Marchetto et al.
Page 33
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Marchetto et al.
Page 34
Table 1
All variants were both deleterious (SIFT) and “probably damaging” (PolyPhen).
A. WNT pathway genes with deleterious variants in ASD subjects. Rows in bold indicate that the variant resulted in a stop gain, and the 
asterisk (*) represents a stop codon.
WNT 
pathway 
related genes
Sample
coordiant
Variant
dbSNP ID
Allele Freq
Amino Acids
Codons
CTNNB1
arch
chr3:41266229
C>C/T
0
Q/*
Caa/Taa
FZD6
acai
chr8:104330986
C>C/T
0
R/*
Cga/Tga
FRZB
acai
chr2:183703336
G>G/A
rs288326
5
R/W
Cgg/Tgg
WNT10A
arch
chr2:219755011
T>T/A
rs121908120
1
F/I
Ttt/Att
B. Significant GO terms for genes with deleterious variants in ASD subjects.
Term
Count
%
PValue
Fold
Enrichment
Bonferroni
Benjamini
FDR
Sensory Perception of Smell
111
7.43
4.62E-30
3.28
1.52E-26
1.52E-26
8.4E-27
Sensory Perception of Chemical
 Stimulus
113
7.56
4.02E-27
3.01
1.32E-23
6.62E-24
7.31E-24
Sensory Perception
148
9.91
3.37E-23
2.33
1.11E-19
3.7E-20
6.13E-20
Cognition
152
10.17
5.88E-20
2.13
1.94E-16
4.85E-17
1.07E-16
Neurological System Process
173
11.58
1.85E-15
1.82
6.22E-12
1.24E-12
3.43E-12
G-protein Coupled Receptor
 Protein Signaling Pathway
159
10.64
7.75E-14
1.80
2.55E-10
4.26E-11
1.41E-10
Biological Adhesion
99
6.63
9.57E-09
1.80
3.16E-05
4.51E-06
1.74E-05
Cell Surface Receptor Linked
 Signal Transduction
210
14.06
1.26E-08
1.44
4.14E-05
5.17E-06
2.28E-05
Cell Adhesion
98
6.56
1.81E-08
1.78
5.97E-05
6.64E-06
3.3E-05
Cell-Cell Adhesion
47
3.15
8.11E-07
2.17
0.002671
0.000267
0.001476
Homophilic Cell Adhesion
25
1.67
7.49E-05
2.43
0.218923
0.022212
0.13627
C. Significant pathways for genes with deleterious variants in ASD subjects.
Term
Count
%
PValue
Fold Enrichment
Bonferroni
Benjamini
FDR
Olfactory Transduction
106
7.10
4.02E-29
3.12
7.36E-27
7.36E-27
4.97E-26
ABC Transporters
14
0.94
7.74E-05
3.55
0.014069
0.007059
0.095583
Mol Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 May 23.
