 Lutein and Zeaxanthin Isomers in Eye Health and Disease
Julie Mares
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 
53726-2336
Abstract
Current evidence suggests lutein and its isomers play important roles in ocular development in 
utero and throughout the life span, in vision performance in young and later adulthood, and in 
lowering risk for the development of common age-related eye diseases in older age. These 
xanthophyll (oxygen-containing) carotenoids are found in a wide variety of vegetables and fruits, 
and they are present in especially high concentrations in leafy green vegetables. Additionally, egg 
yolks and human milk appear to be bioavailable sources. The prevalence of lutein, zeaxanthin, and 
meso-zeaxanthin in supplements is increasing. Setting optimal and safe ranges of intake requires 
additional research, particularly in pregnant and lactating women. Accumulating evidence about 
variable interindividual response to dietary intake of these carotenoids, based on genetic or 
metabolic influences, suggests that there may be subgroups that benefit from higher levels of 
intake and/or alternate strategies to improve lutein and zeaxanthin status.
Keywords
macula; carotenoids; macular degeneration; cataract; vision; retinopathy
Introduction
Certain xanthophyll (oxygen-containing) carotenoids are highly concentrated in the light-
exposed structures in plants and in the human retina. These carotenoids include lutein (L), 
its structural isomer zeaxanthin (Z), and meso-zeaxanthin (meso-Z), a lutein metabolite (19, 
30, 31) and zeaxanthin stereoisomer (31, 129). L and Z are widely distributed in nature and 
are common in plants. Animals do not synthesize carotenoids. In primates, dietary L and its 
isomers are selectively concentrated in the visual system (eye and brain) over other 
carotenoids in the blood, comprising 80% to 90% of carotenoids in human eyes and the 
majority of carotenoids in the brain (48, 185). They are the exclusive carotenoids in the 
neural retina and lens (19).
This article provides an overview of evidence accumulated over the past three decades and a 
description of these compounds' functions and roles in ocular health and vision performance 
[for details, see previous reviews (18, 65, 89, 92, 97, 121, 123, 161, 183)]. The focus of the 
present review is on incorporating recent advances and current controversies. In particular, 
Disclosure Statement: The author is not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be 
perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Published in final edited form as:
Annu Rev Nutr. 2016 July 17; 36: 571–602. doi:10.1146/annurev-nutr-071715-051110.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 this review discusses newly available information that describes genetic, dietary, and 
physiological influences on the variable levels of L and Z accumulation between individuals. 
In addition, new evidence that hints at their role in ocular development and protection in the 
neonatal period is summarized, and studies that demonstrate specific improvements in vision 
performance with supplementation are discussed. Finally, the review describes the levels and 
sources of L and Z in human diets and highlights current gaps in knowledge, offering 
suggestions for future research needed to establish guidelines for intake.
Distribution and Roles of Lutein and Zeaxanthin in The Eye
Distribution
Lutein is the most abundant isomer in vision-related tissues (the eye and brain) (83). Nearly 
all human ocular structures (Figure 1) except the vitreous, cornea, and sclera contain L, Z, 
and metabolites (recently reviewed) (19). The highest concentration of L and Z in the eye is 
in the macula of the retina. Only humans (and nonhuman primates) have a macula with a 
central fovea, and concentrations of L and Z in the central fovea are 100-fold higher than 
elsewhere in the eye (Figure 2) (170). This cone-rich area confers the highest visual acuity 
and has the highest exposure to light in the retina. The selective distribution within the 
macula and throughout the retina and visual cortex of the brain suggest distinct properties 
and functions of the different isomers. In the macula of the eye, the ratio of Z to L declines 
and concentrations of Z (Figure 3) decrease with increasing distance away from the fovea. 
Concentrations of lutein metabolite meso-Z decrease with distance from the foveal center 
(31). The retina is a highly specialized tissue with ten discernible layers from the anterior to 
posterior poles (Figures 2 and 4); L and Z exist in varying amounts in specific layers, where 
they may play different predominant physiological functions.
L and Z (193) and oxidized metabolites (19) are also the only carotenoids present in the lens 
of the eye (19). The most light-exposed and metabolically active lens tissue of the epithelial/
cortical lens layers contains about 75% of the L/Z (193). The center (nuclear) region has 
lower levels. Approximately ten percent of the L and Z in the eye is contained in ciliary 
body, which is the metabolically active tissue responsible for aqueous humor formation; 
defects in aqueous humor flow contribute to the major form of glaucoma. Relationships of L 
and Z status to cataracts and glaucoma are discussed in the section titled Lutein and 
Zeaxanthin Status in Relation to Disease.
Biological Functions
Light absorption—Macular carotenoids are estimated to absorb 40% to 90% of incident 
blue light (depending on concentration) (95); this absorption protects the retina from light-
related damage (10) and reduces light scatter. The highest density of macular carotenoids in 
the fovea is in the outer plexiform layer, a layer of neuronal synapses in the retina that is 
localized between rod and cone photoreceptors and their axons and other retinal neurons. 
This location is thought to be ideal to protect the outer retina (containing rod and cone 
photoreceptors) from photo-oxidative damage (171).
Mares
Page 2
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Protection against oxidative stress—L and Z, like all carotenoids, are potent 
antioxidants (for a review, see 91) and also reduce oxidative damage indirectly by light 
absorption (as described above). In the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), lens, ciliary body, 
and iris, the presence of oxidized metabolites (19) suggests that L and Z protect against 
oxidative stress. Oxidative metabolism in the RPE is higher than anywhere else in the body; 
L and Z are two of many carotenoids contained in the RPE, and they are the predominant 
carotenoids in membranes (189). In the rod and cone photoreceptor outer segment 
membranes, they are most abundant in the lipid-rich bulk domain, which also contains the 
visual pigment rhodopsin, responsible for the first step of visual transduction (189). In this 
domain are also high concentrations of long-chain polyunsaturated lipids that are 
particularly vulnerable to oxidative damage (151, 189).
Protection against inflammation—Evidence indicates that L also protects against 
inflammation, a pathogenic mechanism in many ocular diseases, that can affect many 
regions of the eye. Possible mechanisms include preventing the increase in oxidation-
induced cytokines and upregulating the expression of inflammation-related genes (24, 162). 
L may also indirectly influence ocular inflammation by reducing systemic inflammation via 
reducing factor D, a rate-limiting enzyme of the alternative complement activation pathway 
(reviewed in 178).
Other functions—Evidence suggests that carotenoids can play a role in cell-to-cell 
communication, through intercellular membrane structures known as gap junctions, which 
can play a role in homeostasis (108, 167). However, this role has not, to this author's 
knowledge, been specifically investigated in ocular tissues.
The presence of L and Z in membranes and their unique alignment decrease membrane 
fluidity, which could influence many membrane functions in photoreceptors and other parts 
of the neural retina and brain (discussed in 189). Outside the fovea, macular carotenoids are 
most dense in the inner plexiform layer (171), where lateral interneuronal processes transmit 
light to the nerve fiber layers (which also contain L and Z). Neurons from the fovea and 
parafovea transmit impulses from the axons of cone and rod photoreceptors to the brain, 
through the optic nerve. L is also the predominant carotenoid in the visual (occipital) cortex 
of human and nonhuman primates (48, 184, 185). Interestingly, levels in the visual cortex 
are highly correlated with levels in the retina (185). The presence of L and Z throughout the 
neural retina and brain supports the possibility that L might play a role in preserving long-
chain polyunsaturated-rich neural tissue and ultimately enhance the transmission of visual 
impulses to the brain. Relationships between L and Z status and measurements of critical 
flicker frequency (thought to reflect visual processing speed) are supportive of this 
possibility (discussed in the section titled Visual Performance).
Measurement of Macular Pigment Levels
Several techniques exist to noninvasively assess levels of macular pigment (MP) (composed 
of L, Z, and meso-Z) by reliable psychophysical and optical means in adults (for a recent 
review, see 18). Efforts to adapt these methods for 7- to 10-year-old children, to date, have 
been demonstrated to be moderately reliable (125). Recently, new methods have been 
Mares
Page 3
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 introduced to assess MP in infants (20, 26). Most of these measures use the unit of “optical 
density”; one optical density unit obtained from in vivo assessment of MP levels is 
equivalent to approximately 0.025 ng MP over a 1 mm2 area of retinal tissue (30), with a 
few percent variation, based on the nonrandom orientation of these molecules (R. Bone, 
personal communication).
Some evidence suggests that macular pigment optical density (MPOD) levels reflect 
carotenoid status throughout the eye and brain. Biochemically assessed levels of macular 
carotenoids are correlated with levels in more peripheral retinal areas (29) and in the brain 
(185). Autopsy specimens from donors who took L- and/or Z-containing carotenoid 
supplements had elevated xanthophyll carotenoid levels not only in the macula but also in 
the peripheral retina and lens (25). Thus, the sum of the current evidence suggests that levels 
in the macula are likely to be markers for levels in other areas of visual systems, enabling 
studies with broader ocular outcomes.
Influences on Accumulation in Retinal Tissues
Levels of L and Z in the serum and macula vary between individuals more than tenfold, 
whether assessed in autopsy tissues by high-performance liquid chromatography (19, 30, 31, 
33) or by noninvasive assessment of MPOD. A substantial amount of evidence, summarized 
below, suggests numerous dietary, metabolic, and genetic influences on L and Z absorption, 
transport in the blood, and accumulation in the eye. Consistent with this idea, responses to 
dietary supplementation with L and Z are quite variable between individuals. Dietary 
supplementation with macular carotenoids for 6 to 24 months has been observed to increase 
MPOD in 36% (138) to 95% (135) of subjects, with many studies suggesting estimates 
between these two extremes (3, 4, 15, 28, 32, 52, 68, 71, 84, 88, 94, 116, 138, 156, 164, 
179). The magnitude of individual response within studies is also quite variable, although 
the definition of macular “response” varies across studies.
The large interindividual variability in response to supplementation suggests there are many 
exogenous and endogenous influences on the uptake, transport, and retinal capture of L and 
Z. Several recent reviews detail the many dietary and host phenotypes and genotypes that 
influence the absorption of L and Z, their transport in the blood (35, 104, 166), and their 
uptake and stabilization in the retina (161). A summary is provided below, together with 
more recent evidence. Figure 5 provides an overview of phenotypes and genotypes 
associated with variation in MPOD levels in the Carotenoids in Age-Related Eye Disease 
Study (CAREDS) sample, the largest study sample in which a broad array of potential 
phenotype and genotype correlates of MPOD have been evaluated.
Absorption—Some of the variability in MPOD levels appears to be the result of variable 
absorption. A large body of evidence indicates that the serum response to ingested L and/or 
Z is highly variable (similar to that of other carotenoids) (reviewed in 35, 60, 166). This 
variation may stem from differences in food preparation methods, bioavailability of L and/or 
Z in foods, genetic variations that influence the expression of proteins that regulate 
absorption, and competition with other nutrients. Grinding or cooking foods (which may 
release carotenoids from the food matrix) and consuming L or Z with a fat source increases 
Mares
Page 4
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 blood response (38, 197). The context of food matters. For example, L and Z are more 
bioavailable in eggs than in spinach (45). Recent evidence suggests that this higher 
bioavailability may be the result of carotenoid presence within the lipid matrix of the egg 
and/or increased transfer to blood high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) (87, 132, 181, 182). In 
contrast to other carotenoids, at least half of these more polar carotenoids are carried on 
HDLs.
The bioavailability may also depend on polymorphisms in genes for proteins that influence 
cholesterol uptake into the intestinal lumen (73). Results of human cell studies and L feeding 
studies in humans suggest that L is transported (129) into the intestinal mucosal cells on 
cholesterol transporter proteins (for a recent review, see 35). In the intestinal lumen, these 
and other proteins on the apical side of the enterocyte can modulate the uptake of 
xanthophylls from micelles (35, 36). Common variants in genes (ABCG5, ABCG8, 
NPC1L1, SCARB1, and CD36) encoding these proteins were related to levels of serum L 
plus Z in the CAREDS sample (130).
Absorption of L and Z also appears to be related to intake and/or status of beta-carotene and 
the activity of the enzyme beta-carotene oxygenase 1 (BCO1), which catalyzes the cleavage 
of beta-carotene to yield retinoids. Within the intestinal cell, BCO1 and retinoid cleavage 
products were demonstrated to be part of a regulatory network that controls the absorption of 
L and Z, other carotenoids, and fat-soluble vitamins (188). A series of experiments in mouse 
knockout models (188) provided evidence of a negative feedback regulation of xanthophyll 
absorption catalyzed by BCO1 and indicated that both retinoids and homeobox transcription 
factor ISX suppress the expression of BCO1 in the presence of beta-carotene. Further 
evidence indicated that ISX signaling also targets the apical membrane protein SR-B1 
receptor, reducing xanthophyll absorption. These results are consistent with the observation 
that ISX polymorphisms are among the genotypes selected in a model that best explains L 
absorption into chylomicrons in humans (36). These findings provide a mechanistic 
explanation for other recent evidence indicating that polymorphisms for the BCO1 gene are 
a predictor of L absorption (36) and of levels of L in MP (126) and serum (130, 194).
Jointly, these data would predict that beta-carotene availability in the diet, together with 
active cleavage by BCO1, reduces the absorption of L and Z. Consistent with this prediction, 
BCO1 polymorphisms associated with higher BCO1 activity are associated with higher 
levels of beta-carotene and lower levels of L and Z in serum (54). Interestingly, this might 
also explain a result of the recent second Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS2) (1, 41). 
In this randomized trial, adding L and Z to a high-dose antioxidant that contained beta-
carotene did not lower age-related macular degeneration (AMD) progression to late AMD, 
except among individuals who received a formulation lacking beta-carotene. In addition, 
after five years, serum levels of L and Z were higher in participants taking supplements 
containing L and Z without, compared to supplements with, beta-carotene, suggesting that 
absorption of L and Z was higher when beta-carotene was omitted.
Transport and tissue distribution—Carotenoid efflux from the enterocytes occurs via 
their secretion in chylomicrons and transport to the liver, where they are repackaged into 
lipoproteins and distributed throughout the body. Evidence implicates the involvement of 
Mares
Page 5
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 several transport proteins that are related to chylomicron assembly and lipoprotein clearance 
in the efflux of L from the intestine and transport in the blood (for recent reviews, see 36, 
104). Common variants in the ABCA1, ApoB, and LPL genes, which express different 
carrier proteins, were related to postprandial L response in chylomicrons (36). Variants in 
ABCA1 were also related to levels of serum L and Z in CAREDS (130) and to the response 
to L and Z supplements in a separate study (194).
Adipose tissue is a storage tissue for carotenoids. Current evidence suggests that the 
metabolic status of individuals might influence the distribution of carotenoids between 
adipose tissue and the eye. A large body of evidence indicates that obesity and diabetes are 
associated with lower levels of serum carotenoids and lower MPOD. Moreover, we recently 
observed a strong linear and inverse relationship between MPOD and metabolic syndrome 
risk scores composed of these and other phenotypes (e.g., serum triglycerides >3 mmol/L, 
use of cholesterol-lowering medications, history of hypertension) and of genotypes related to 
low HDL levels. Women with scores ≥5 had more than two-fold higher MPOD than women 
with scores of 0, even after limiting the sample to women with above-average L and Z intake 
(128).
At least three possible explanations exist for lower levels of L and Z in serum and MPOD in 
individuals with metabolic syndrome phenotypes. First, a large body of evidence indicates 
that metabolic syndrome phenotypes are associated with higher oxidative stress and 
inflammation, which could increase the turnover of carotenoids. Second, larger body fat 
compartments may shift the distribution of carotenoids away from the blood and retina and 
into adipose tissue. Third, interesting recent evidence suggests that carotenoid status and/or 
carotenoid cleavage enzymes directly influence adiposity (5, 74, 112).
Uptake, transport, and stability in the retina—An individual's MPOD level and 
spatial distribution have been observed to be relatively stable over at least a decade in one 
study (70) and are also stable despite short-term fluctuations in intake in other studies (96, 
136). This is expected because an individual's retinal microstructure and lipid environment, 
and the activity of proteins that facilitate uptake into the retina and transport or stabilization 
within the retina, are all suspected of influencing the levels and spatial distribution of MP. 
Diminished levels or abnormal distributions of MP have been associated with the presence 
of a variety of retinal diseases, such as macular telangiectasia, albinism, and Sjörgen-
Larsson syndrome (for a recent review, see 18). The relative stability of MP levels, selective 
accumulation of xanthophyll carotenoids in the retina, and specific localization of L and Z 
isomers within the primate retina all suggest the presence of transport and binding proteins 
with affinity for these carotenoids, which populate and stabilize them in specific retinal 
layers. Figure 4 describes the large number of retinal proteins that previous evidence 
suggests may be related to the distribution of L and Z isomers in the primate retina (161). 
Common genetic variants in genes for most of these proteins (except APOA1, LPL, and 
TUB polymorphisms, which were not studied) were observed to be related to levels of 
MPOD in CAREDS (Figure 5) (126). An exception is the gene for a carotenoid cleavage 
enzyme, beta-carotene 9,10-dioxygenase (BCO2).
Mares
Page 6
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The recent results of Li and colleagues' studies (102), but not those of Babino et al. (7), 
suggested that inactivity of BCO2 plays a role in the selective accumulation of lutein and 
zeaxanthin in the primate retina. This evidence, and other evidence from Babino et al. (for a 
recent review, see 143) suggests, instead, that BCO2 activity is localized to the inner 
mitochondrial membrane, where it plays a role in protecting against oxidative stress. Data 
from CAREDS support this second interpretation. Polymorphisms in BCO2 were unrelated 
to MPOD (126) but related to higher odds of AMD, which is known to be promoted by 
oxidative stress (130).
It has been argued that the selective localization of L, Z, and meso-Z in the retina might also 
be the result of their uniquely polar nature and shape (relative to other carotenoids), 
influencing their alignment into specific membrane domains that are rich in long-chain 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (189). Consistent with this idea, polymorphisms in genes for 
proteins involved in the metabolism and synthesis of long-chain fatty acids have been related 
to MPOD levels (Figure 5) (126). The unique chemical properties of macular carotenoids 
could influence their affinity for and interaction with membrane proteins. Genotypes for 
many proteins related to MPOD levels (126) are for proteins that traffic cholesterol and other 
lipids within the retina (and possibly elsewhere in the eye).
Accumulation of Lutein and Isomers Over the Neonatal Period
Considerably less is known about the levels of L in the eye in neonatal development and 
infancy. Two recent reviews have suggested that exposure to L and Z in fetal life and infancy 
might be important for early-life visual development and may have a lifelong influence on 
vision (64, 83). Also, a role for L and Z in ocular development in utero is suggested by the 
fact that L and Z appear transiently in the fetal vitreous in the second and third trimesters 
(79), which is consistent with the appearance of L and oxidized metabolites in arterial cord 
blood at levels that peak in the beginning of the third trimester and then decline later in 
gestation (146). L and Z have been found in human retinas as early as 20 weeks of gestation 
(30). At birth, all parts of the eye have been formed except the macula; differentiation of this 
region continues until age four (148), but the timing for the majority of L and Z 
accumulation is related to the maturation of the fovea of the retina, which permits the ability 
to see fine detail (20). During this time, there is also maturation of the RPE and its relation 
to photoreceptors (196).
L and Z levels in the macula appear to increase with age, particularly in the first year of life 
(30). Also, the proportion of L and Z isomers change over the first few years of life; the 
evidence for this in human and nonhuman primates has been described (97). Briefly, L is the 
dominant carotenoid through about age two (30). After that age the ratio changes, and Z 
becomes the dominant carotenoid in the fovea, as it is in adults. Meso-Z concentrations in 
macaques are below the limits of detection at birth and presumably are also absent in human 
retinas; concentrations increase in proportion to age in young humans (31) and macaques 
(97).
Significant direct relationships between L and Z concentrations in the macula and age from 
birth to seven years have been observed (20, 30). Premature human infants and monkeys 
Mares
Page 7
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 born to mothers raised on L- and Z-free diets do not have MP (20, 134). Accumulation of 
macular L and Z is likely to depend on maternal L and Z status, and this hypothesis has been 
supported by evidence from a small sample that indicated direct relationships between 
maternal serum Z and infant MPOD levels (72). More studies are needed to confirm this 
finding. Recent evidence indicates that MPOD is higher in older women with early-life 
exposure to L and Z in breast milk, which contains higher concentrations than formulas 
made from cow's milk (111). (Cow's milk was the predominant source of formula for infants 
not breast fed in the 1920s to 1940s.) These early data suggest that levels later in life may be 
influenced by L and Z exposure in the first years.
Breast milk appears to selectively concentrate these carotenoids, particularly in early 
lactation. L and Z are proportionally more prevalent in breast milk than in maternal serum 
(105, 107). The molar ratio of carotenoids in human milk to maternal plasma was observed 
to be highest for L relative to other carotenoids (107). Currently, carotenoids are not 
routinely added to infant formulas, and they were not added to any formulas prior to about 
2012.
L and Z were the most abundant carotenoids in samples of human milk in one multinational 
study (107), but not in five of nine countries in other multinational studies to date (39). 
Breast-milk carotenoids are related to maternal serum carotenoids (107), which are 
influenced not only by diet but also likely by conditions known to influence serum 
carotenoid levels, such as obesity, smoking, and alcohol use and markers of inflammation 
(63). L in breast milk appears to be approximately fourfold more bioavailable than L in 
infant formulas to date (22, 106). Given the presence and accumulation of L and Z in the eye 
in gestation and infancy, and the potential for influence on lifelong vision, additional 
research is critically needed to establish requirements for L and Z intake in infancy. Such 
requirements would help to determine guidelines for the intake of L and Z by pregnant and 
nursing mothers and infants who are not breast fed.
Roles in Visual Health
Visual Performance
For more than a century, it has been speculated that MP plays a role in enhancing visual 
performance; in the past two decades, observational studies have, indeed, suggested that MP 
influences performance on visual tasks (for a recent review and critical discussion, see 65, 
173). New observational, experimental, and clinical evidence (summarized below and in 
Table 1) suggests that L, Z, and/or meso-Z could improve performance on tasks involving 
several different aspects of the visual system, from the eye to the brain, in both young, 
healthy people and people with ocular diseases.
Visual acuity—Visual acuity reflects the ability to resolve objects that are in high contrast 
to their background, as measured by the ability to distinguish smaller and smaller letters at a 
given distance. Results of some but not all intervention studies (1, 11, 115, 133, 135, 187, 
192) indicate improvements in visual acuity when L and/or Z are supplemented alone (77, 
113, 139) or, more often, in conjunction with other antioxidants and/or omega-3 fatty acids 
(1, 12, 43, 49, 147, 155). Three of seven randomized trials in >50 individuals with early or 
Mares
Page 8
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 advanced AMD (116, 156) or with diabetic retinopathy (77) indicate improvements in visual 
acuity. A recent meta-analysis of L and/or Z supplementation (six months to three years) in 
individuals with AMD indicates a significant protective effect (109) and a direct relationship 
between improvement in visual acuity and the change in MPOD level achieved. To date, the 
magnitude of effect in these short trials is modest.
In AREDS2 (1), adding L and Z to high-dose antioxidants did not significantly lower the 
loss of visual acuity by 15 letters or more over five years in people who already had 
intermediate or advanced AMD. Observing an impact of this magnitude might require 
longer periods of time and be limited to people who have a higher MPOD response and/or 
who receive a higher dose of supplements. In a study of middle-aged individuals, 
supplementation for six months with 20 mg L and/or Z resulted in significant improvement 
in visual acuity (113). This level (20 mg) is approximately five times the levels that are 
expected to be achieved if an individual follows dietary guidelines for fruit and vegetable 
intakes. Better L and Z status over a long period might also lead to better visual acuity in 
middle age and old age as a result of a lower risk for the common causes of visual 
impairment (see Lutein and Zeaxanthin Status in Relation to Disease section). Results of 
ongoing prospective studies are expected to provide an estimate of the magnitude of 
improvement of visual acuity that results from these combined effects.
Regardless of whether MP improves the most common measure of acuity in indoor tests, it 
could help us see farther. It is estimated that a person with 1.0 density unit of MP can see 
26% farther through the atmosphere than someone with little or no MP (190). This 
improvement in vision, which might have conferred an advantage for previous humans in 
hunting, gathering, and remaining safe from predators, would, in today's world, be of 
greatest benefit to people for whom long-range acuity is important, such as pilots and 
sailors.
Contrast sensitivity—Impairments in contrast sensitivity occur before visual acuity is 
affected by aging or disease (for a recent review, see 140). Contrast sensitivity is the ability 
to detect contrasts in levels of lightness or darkness of an object, or of colors, relative to the 
objects background. Detecting contrasts can be especially difficult in dim lighting, as occurs 
at dawn and twilight. An example would be the ability to distinguish the edges of stairs; in 
this case, better contrast sensitivity could reduce the likelihood of falls and improve 
confidence in walking down steps. Contrast sensitivity is well correlated with various 
aspects of visual ability, such as orientation and mobility, reading speed, and driving (157), 
and with the satisfaction of individuals with their visual function and how their visual ability 
affects their quality of life (53). Supplements containing L and Z at various amounts and 
taken for three months to three years have improved contrast sensitivity in most previous 
studies, including in young, healthy subjects (37, 67, 94, 113, 115), in people with early (78, 
116, 156) and/or advanced (12) AMD, and in individuals with diabetes (43, 77). Four of five 
randomized, placebo-controlled trials of solely L and/or Z isomers in >50 subjects observed 
improvements in spatial contrast sensitivity (77, 78, 116, 192); results of one other trial did 
not (135). The long-term influences of L and Z status on contrast sensitivity in later life 
would include not only these short-term effects but also protection against age- and disease-
Mares
Page 9
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 related changes. Long-term relationships between L and Z status and contrast sensitivity 
have not yet been described.
Photostress recovery and glare reduction—A considerable body of observational 
evidence suggests that higher levels of MP reduce the impact of bright lights by shortening 
the time needed to recover from bright lights (photostress recovery) and by enhancing the 
ability to see in conditions of glare (lower glare disability) (66, 174, 175), as might occur 
from oncoming headlights while driving at night. High MP levels may also enhance visual 
performance in moderate and bright lights by increasing the range over which vision-related 
tasks can be comfortably performed (173). For example, it has been estimated that 
increasing MPOD at a 1° diameter around the center of the fovea by 0.3 density units would 
roughly double the intensity of white light necessary to produce visual discomfort. One 
(116) in four randomized trials in more than 50 people indicated a benefit of L and/or Z 
supplements on glare disability; one (78) of three trials found beneficial effects on 
photostress recovery (see Table 1).
Visual processing speed—MP density levels appear to be a marker for L and Z status 
throughout the visual system. Better health of neurons in the eye and brain might speed 
transmission of visual impulses from the photoreceptors to the visual cortex in the brain 
and/or increase lateral neural connections on this path, improving the speed of resolving 
changes in visual stimuli (67, 69, 153, 201). Improved speed could be important in 
performing vision-related tasks safely as we age; however, improvements in visual 
processing speed might also be relevant at other ages. Improved critical flicker-frequency 
thresholds, visual motor reaction time, and visual processing speed have been observed in 
adults 18 to 32 years of age who received Z supplements, alone or with L and omega-3 fatty 
acids, for only four months (37). Increases in about 0.09 MPOD units through 
supplementation were estimated to significantly improve visual processing speed in these 
young, healthy adults. These findings, if replicated, suggest that high MP levels might 
improve vision function for people of all ages in tasks requiring quick responses, such as 
tasks in computer-related work.
Dark adaptation—It has been hypothesized (144) that MP could protect against 
impairments in rod-mediated dark adaptation, such as is required to regain visual sensitivity 
when moving from bright to dim lights. Impairments were recently observed in more than 
20% of people ≥60 years of age without clinical signs of retinal disease (142). Impairment in 
dark adaptation rate is thought to be related to the accumulation of hydrophobic lipids in the 
RPE, which creates a diffusion barrier that slows the delivery of nutrients, such as vitamin 
A, to rods. In visual transduction, the delivery of vitamin A metabolite 11-cis-retinal is 
needed to combine with the protein opsin to form the visual pigment rhodopsin. Impaired 
delivery would slow the rate of rhodopsin regeneration and require longer time for dark 
adaptation. Longer time for dark adaptation in persons with low MPOD has been observed 
in two small observational studies (144, 173).
Future directions and challenges—The current body of observational evidence 
suggests that higher levels of MP, a marker for L and Z throughout the visual system, are 
Mares
Page 10
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 associated with optical and physiological effects that improve several aspects of vision. In 
some cases, the degree to which tissue concentrations of MP are specifically responsible for 
these effects is not clear. Although MP is entirely composed of dietary xanthophylls and 
metabolites, higher MPOD levels are related to having healthy diets and phenotypes in 
general (122), which might also contribute to retinal integrity. Consistent with this idea, 
higher scores on the Healthy Eating Index–2005 were associated with higher MPOD, even 
after adjusting for L and Z intake (124).
Results of several short-term supplementation studies with one or more xanthophyll 
carotenoids suggest specific benefits of L and Z; greater increases in MPOD levels have 
been related to greater improvements in visual acuity and contrast sensitivity (see Table 1). 
The interpretation of these currently available data is complicated by the small sample sizes, 
especially given the variability among people in the ability to enhance MP with increasing L 
and Z intake over short periods of time. Additional data from well-powered intervention 
studies are needed to determine the levels and formulations that are required for optimal 
benefit in the short term and whether these are modified by phenotypes and genotypes that 
influence their accumulation in the eye and brain.
Long-term influences of better L and Z status, which include both direct optical effects and a 
reduction in risk for aging and age-related diseases, can be better captured in long-term 
prospective observational studies. Several are under way; eventual pooling of data from 
available cohorts will further enable well-powered investigations of the degree to which 
phenotypes and genotypes modify L and Z levels needed in diet or supplements for optimal 
benefit over a wide range of intake levels.
Lutein and Zeaxanthin Status in Relation to Disease
Age-related macular degeneration—Strong evidence indicates that L and Z protect 
against the development of AMD, the leading cause of blindness in persons over 40 years of 
age in the United States (47, 55). AMD is a progressive condition of vision loss that 
develops as a result of a complex interplay of multiple dietary, environmental, and genetic 
factors that influence oxidative stress, inflammation, and light damage (76). In early and 
intermediate stages, rod function declines, which reduces the ability to see contrasts in dim 
light and adapt to moving from well-lit to poorly lit areas (for a recent discussion, see 141). 
Advanced AMD is associated with the loss of sharp acuity or vision in the center of the 
visual field (such as that needed to view a person's face straight on). It is also associated with 
loss of the ability to perceive fine detail, making it difficult for individuals with advanced 
AMD to read newspapers and pill bottles. For individuals with neovascular/exudative 
(“wet”) AMD, new blood vessels grow and bleed and fluid accumulates, which can cause 
further limits in vision. At this time, treatment options for AMD are limited, not without risk 
(168), and costly (169).
The strong biological plausibility for a protective influence of L and Z on AMD 
development and progression has been recently reviewed (18, 183). In the fovea, MP is 
particularly concentrated in the photoreceptor axon layer (27, 171, 172), where it can absorb 
40% to 90% of short-wavelength light (95) that could otherwise damage the retina (10, 24). 
Throughout the retina, L and Z might also protect against AMD by their demonstrated 
Mares
Page 11
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ability to lower oxidative stress (91, 103, 162) and inflammation (25, 80, 162). In addition to 
retinal effects, supplementation with L has been demonstrated to lower circulating levels of a 
rate-limiting enzyme of the alternative complement activation pathway that may play an 
important role in inflammatory response and the development of AMD (16, 178).
A large body of epidemiological evidence supports a protective influence of higher L and Z 
in the diet or blood on risk for advanced AMD (for a recent review, see 121; for newly 
published results, see 191). However, associations between L and Z in serum or diet and 
earlier stages of AMD are more challenging to study and are sometimes, but not always, 
observed. One reason for a failure to find consistent protective associations of L and Z intake 
to AMD could be variability in the proportions of people who readily accumulate MP in 
response to supplementation (discussed in section titled Influences on Accumulation in 
Retinal Tissues). Measuring MP levels directly, rather than relying on intake levels as the 
predictor, reduces the opportunity for masking associations between L and Z status and 
AMD. Previous evidence from cross-sectional studies supports the possibility that higher 
MPOD is related to lower risk for AMD (13, 21, 34), but only in younger subjects with 
stable diets in the CAREDS cohort (99) and not in some other samples (17, 51, 82, 137). In 
the only prospective study of the relation of MPOD to risk of AMD in 450 persons, a 
protective trend was observed (86). Larger prospective studies are needed to better assess the 
temporal relationship between MPOD and AMD. These are under way in several large study 
samples.
A second line of evidence in support of a protective role of L and Z status on early AMD 
risk includes evidence that many of the conditions that are associated with low MPOD are 
also risk factors for AMD (89). These include not only low levels of L and Z in the diet and 
serum, but also smoking, indicators of metabolic syndrome (i.e., obesity, diabetes, and 
hypertension), and more recently, common variants in genes related to MPOD and/or serum 
L and Z (126) that predicted the odds for having early/intermediate AMD (130). Of these, 
the genetic evidence is particularly supportive of a protective association, having the 
advantage of being unconfounded by lifestyle factors and reflective of carotenoid status over 
a person's lifetime rather than only a few years or decades. A protective role of L and Z may 
be limited to, or more pronounced, in people with high genetic risk for AMD. This is 
suggested by results of significant interactions between L and Z intake and genotype in 
AMD risk in previous prospective cohort studies [the Rotterdam Study (75) and a pooled 
analysis of the Rotterdam and Blue Mountain Eye studies (186)]. A similar trend for 
reduction in genetic risk for AMD among individuals with high L and Z intake was observed 
in the CAREDS cohort (127). The lowest rates of AMD have been reported in persons 
consuming 5 to 6 mg/day (118, 131, 165, 191). However, diets high in L and Z are also high 
in other carotenoids, which may contribute to risk lowering (191). The levels needed to 
lower AMD risk may be higher in people who have phenotypes and genotypes associated 
with low absorption, low HDL cholesterol levels, and/or low uptake or retention in the 
retina.
A small number of studies have evaluated the impact of supplementation with L and/or Z on 
the progression of AMD over three to five years. L and Z supplements alone did not 
influence AMD progression over three years (2), but L and Z supplements in combination 
Mares
Page 12
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with other antioxidant supplements did (12). Results of primary analyses in the AREDS2 (1) 
trial suggested that including 10 mg L and 2 mg Z in high-dose antioxidant supplements did 
not lower progression to advanced AMD, but secondary analyses (41) indicated a modestly 
lower five-year risk of progression in participants who began the study with low levels of 
these (and likely other) carotenoids in their diets or when the antioxidant supplements did 
not contain beta-carotene. Risk lowering was greater when restricting analyses to persons 
with earlier stages of the disease (eyes with bilateral large drusen at baseline), but risk 
lowering was not observed in relation to the five-year loss of photoreceptors and RPE 
(geographic atrophy) (41).
In summary, L and Z intakes of 5 to 6 mg/day are associated with lowering the risk of 
developing AMD, and supplemental intakes at 12 mg/day (in the absence of beta-carotene 
but in the presence of other antioxidants) slowed AMD progression in people who already 
had intermediate AMD. However, it is not clear whether intakes above these levels would 
have additional benefit and are without other adverse consequences over decades. It is also 
not known whether beneficial and safe levels might differ in certain segments of the 
population. The benefit of other carotenoids in slowing AMD, and the impact of all 
carotenoids on preventing early stages of AMD, is also unclear. Thus, a prudent approach 
until further data are available may be a public health strategy aimed at increasing the 
consumption of lutein-rich vegetables and fruits, moderately increasing egg consumption in 
people without AMD, and promoting the daily use of antioxidant supplements containing 12 
mg L and Z in people with intermediate AMD.
Cataract—Cataract, the leading cause of blindness worldwide (154), results from 
opacification of the lens of the eye. This opacification diffuses and ultimately blocks light 
from entering the eye. The lens with a cataract can be replaced with a synthetic lens, but this 
surgery is not often available in developing countries. In developed countries, such as the 
United States, cataract surgery is common (47) and costly, although the cost per surgery has 
declined in the past decade. In addition, severe complications develop in 1% to 2% of 
surgeries. Therefore, preventing cataract could have a significant economic and health 
impact. It is well known that oxidative stress contributes to cataract development and that L 
and Z are the only two carotenoids, and two of the many exogenous antioxidants, that 
protect against the development of lens opacities and their severe form, cataract (for a recent 
review and discussion, see 119, 123, 183). Results of experiments in cultured cells (42, 56) 
and rats (6) demonstrate that these carotenoids reduce the oxidative stress and damage to the 
lens that lead to cataract development.
A large body of evidence from longitudinal observational studies (110, 114) supports a 
protective association of L and Z in diet and/or serum with the subsequent prevalence or 
incidence of cataract (except in well-nourished samples; 59, 81), particularly for opacities in 
the nuclear (central) region of the lens, where opacities develop slowly over a lifetime. 
However, the degree to which these associations reflect the specific effect of L and Z status 
in cataract development, independent from other components of fruit- and vegetable-rich 
diets, is difficult to isolate in observational studies. This is because it is difficult to 
adequately adjust for the intake of all antioxidants in foods that are consumed over the long 
period of time during which cataracts develop and that might confound the association of L 
Mares
Page 13
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and Z intake to cataract. In one large multisite clinical trial, adding L and Z to other 
antioxidant supplements did not slow progression to cataract surgery over five years, except 
in secondary analyses in the participants with the lowest levels of L and Z from foods (1). 
This result suggests the possibility that L and Z may indeed independently decrease risk for 
cataract, and if so, the levels of L and Z required for optimum protection might be easily 
achieved in well-nourished populations. Conducting additional clinical trials that are large 
enough to further evaluate the independent protective effect of L and Z would be costly, 
given the fact that cataracts develop over many years. However, adding cataract outcomes to 
existing intervention trials of L and Z and conducting pooled analyses across trials would 
provide an opportunity to gain additional insight. Results of pooled long-term prospective 
studies across strata of populations with varying levels of confounding influences might also 
contribute additional data to evaluate the degree to which L and Z intake or status 
contributes to cataract protection.
In summary, the body of evidence from different study types suggests that L and Z are likely 
to be two dietary components that protect against nuclear cataract, but if this is the case, the 
level needed to protect against lens opacity development is likely to be in the range of 0.5 to 
1 mg/day, which is below the average intake in American adults (1.7 mg/day) (180). 
Assuring that all subgroups of the population achieve this minimal intake of L and Z might 
substantially lower the visual burden of cataracts and the risks and expense associated with 
cataract surgery, on a population level. It has been estimated that slowing cataract 
development by only 10 years would cut the need for cataract surgery in half (93).
Glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy—An early body of research suggests that L and Z 
might help prevent the development and progression of glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy, 
which are more common in people with diabetes. Diabetes is associated with lower MPOD 
(122, 163) and could increase the risk of low retinal response to dietary xanthophylls in 
individuals at risk for these conditions (as previously discussed).
Glaucoma is a group of conditions that cause optic neuropathy and the degeneration of the 
retinal ganglion cells and their axons, leading to reduced visual sensitivity, particularly in the 
peripheral field of vision. It is a long-term, chronic disease with no cure and is the leading 
cause of irreversible blindness in the world because many people continue to have 
progressive, severe vision loss despite treatment to lower eye pressure (149). Modifiable risk 
factors for glaucoma are less studied than those for cataract and AMD.
Current evidence in animals and humans suggests that pathogenic mechanisms underlying 
glaucoma include oxidative stress (for a review, see 177), which xanthophyll carotenoids are 
well known to protect against. Recently, L was observed to suppress damage to the retinal 
ganglion cells in rats (198). Damage to retinal ganglion cells occurs in glaucoma through 
hypoxia, oxidative stress, and inflammation. Also, L and Z present in the ciliary body (19), 
which produces aqueous humor, might protect against damage to the trabecular meshwork, 
lowering risk for high intraocular pressure (IOP), which is a well-known risk factor for 
glaucoma. This possibility has not been studied.
Mares
Page 14
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Higher dietary intake of fruits and vegetables rich in carotenoids (46, 58) has been 
associated with lower glaucoma occurrence in two observational studies, but two other 
studies did not find an association (85, 150). Interindividual variability in the absorption and 
retinal capture of L and Z is high and may explain the lack of associations with dietary 
intake. In particular, diabetes or other aspects of metabolic syndrome associated with low 
MPOD (see section titled Influences on Accumulation in Retinal Tissues) was more 
common in people with glaucoma in a large sample representative of the general US 
population (199).
A small body of evidence from experiments in rodents and human observational studies 
suggests a role for xanthophylls in protecting against diabetic retinopathy (for a recent 
review, see 61). Diabetic retinopathy is the most common acquired cause of blindness in 
individuals of working age (47). The growth in obesity rates and life span will increase the 
magnitude of the problem worldwide (200). Hyperglycemia can lead to damage of the 
retinal microvasculature, indicative of diabetic retinopathy, through a number of pathways 
that involve oxidative stress and inflammation (for a review, see 61).
In diabetic mice, dietary intake of Z (90) or a Z- and L-rich food (wolfberry) (176) mitigated 
retinal abnormalities, attenuated mitochondrial stress (195), and upregulated the expression 
of genes for proteins that play roles in the uptake of L and Z into the gut and retina (i.e., 
SCARB1), binding in the retina (i.e., GSTP1), and protection against mitochondrial damage 
as a result of oxidative stress (i.e., BCO2). Data from human epidemiological studies and 
clinical trials are limited and conflicting (123). In a small placebo-controlled, randomized 
trial, L was one of several antioxidants that prevented progression of diabetic retinopathy 
over five years (57).
In summary, clinical, epidemiological, and animal studies suggest the possibility that better 
L and Z intake could lower risk for glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy, but data are limited. 
Prospective epidemiological study results are needed to estimate the influence of L and Z 
status on the incidence and progression of diabetic retinopathy and glaucoma. Also, 
randomized controlled trials are needed to determine whether L and Z, specifically, lower 
the progression of these conditions. This research would be most efficiently accomplished 
by adding glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy outcomes to existing observational studies and 
clinical trials.
Retinopathy of prematurity—Xanthophyll carotenoids might prevent retinopathy of 
prematurity (ROP), a retinal neovascularization that leads to blindness in children born 
prematurely (for a recent review, see 61). In ROP, hypoxic damage to the retina occurs as a 
result of suppression of growth factors needed to complete the development of the retinal 
vasculature (which supplies the inner retina) and leads to an increased metabolic demand 
after birth, causing the growth of abnormal blood vessels in the vitreous. Recent small trials 
in human neonates indicate that carotenoid supplementation lowers oxidative stress (145) 
and inflammatory markers (158). A meta-analysis of four randomized controlled trials of L 
supplementation in premature infants found a 26% reduction in severe ROP (61). Another 
study (117) observed a lower risk of ROP among very-low-birth-weight infants who 
received human milk, which contains L and Z (but also many other components lacking in 
Mares
Page 15
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 infant formulas). In summary, the biological plausibility that L lowers the risk of ROP in 
preterm infants is high, but additional larger trials need to examine this possibility with 
higher power and determine the dose of L needed for optimal effects and safety when human 
milk cannot be provided.
Retinitis pigmentosa—Retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a group of largely inherited genetic 
disorders of rod and cone photoreceptors, is the leading cause of inherited blindness in the 
developed world (23). A loss of night vision early in the disorder is followed by a loss of 
vision in the rod-dominated peripheral field of vision and eventually in the cone-rich center. 
The high level of nonresponse (50%) to L supplementation (4) might be secondary to loss of 
retinal tissue (160). L supplementation alone (10 mg/day for 12 weeks followed by 30 
mg/day for 12 weeks) in 34 people improved the visual field in one randomized controlled 
crossover study (8), but 20 mg L supplementation did not improve central vision in another 
small study of patients with RP and Usher syndrome (4). In a larger and longer randomized 
controlled trial, L (12 mg/d) added to vitamin A supplements modestly slowed visual field 
loss over four years among nonsmoking adults with retinitis pigmentosa. It has been 
suggested that adding omega-3 fatty acids to L and vitamin A might additionally improve 
central vision (183).
Summary—Poor status for L and/or Z is associated with age-related cataract and a wide 
range of inherited and acquired diseases of the retina from early to late life. Supplementation 
with these xanthophylls often improves visual outcomes. However, results are inconsistent,, 
and levels that are necessary and safe over the long term, are poorly understood. 
Supplementation with other nutrients or antioxidants may improve visual outcomes, possibly 
by mechanisms that also increase the ability to retain retinal xanthophylls.
Levels in the Diet, Serum, and Supplements
Diet
The first national estimates of dietary L and Z levels in US adults came from food records 
reported in the 1986 Continuing Survey of Food Intake in Individuals. Results indicated that 
the average intake of L and Z in adults 19 to 50 years of age was 1.3 mg/day. Subsequently, 
mean intake levels in adults reported in the National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (NHANES) have been similar, whether estimated from responses to food frequency 
questionnaires (118) or, more recently, one-day diet recall data. Mean intake levels estimated 
in the 2011–2012 NHANES were 1.7 mg/day in adults age 20 and older and 0.8 mg/day in 
children ages 2 to 19 (180). Levels of L and Z intake in some South Pacific study samples 
are higher (101) and reached 25 mg/day in one study in Fiji (100).
The major food contributors to intake in the United States have changed somewhat over the 
past 25 years. The size and composition of populations sampled, increased completeness of 
food composition databases, and trends of intake over this time likely all contribute to these 
changes. In 1988, the major contributors were spinach; collard, mustard, or turnip greens; 
and broccoli (44). These major contributors were followed by corn, green beans, and peas. 
These foods accounted for about half of L and Z intake, and more minor amounts came 
mostly from other vegetables. In comparison, in 2003–2004, when improved food 
Mares
Page 16
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 composition databases for L and Z separately were available, the major contributors (>50%) 
of L were leafy green vegetables, corn tortillas, eggs, orange juice, and broccoli, and major 
contributors of Z were corn tortillas, eggs, and orange juice.
Serum
Serum L/Z concentrations averaged 13 μg/dl in Americans over age 6 in two separate 
NHANES cycles (2001–2002 and 2005–2006) (40), ranging from 6 to 30/31 μg/dl in the 
fifth and ninety-fifth percentiles, respectively. Population groups at risk for lower serum L/Z 
status included teens, whites, females, smokers, people who are abdominally obese, and 
those who are less physically active.
Supplements
L and Z supplementation for eye health has become increasingly common since supplements 
containing them entered the market in the late 1990s. The use of supplements for eye health 
in general is increasing (50). Data from adults 20 years or older from the 2007–2010 
NHANES indicated 4% used supplements for eye health, but for Americans over age 60, the 
prevalence was more than twice that level (9). Two recent trends are likely to increase 
intakes of L and Z supplements. First, the American Academy of Ophthalmology recently 
recommended that persons with intermediate or advanced AMD be treated with a high-dose 
antioxidant supplement that contains L and Z; this recommendation was made on the basis 
of the previously discussed AREDS2 results (41). Moreover, individuals who have a family 
history of AMD might choose to supplement with similar formulations (even though there is 
currently no evidence that L and Z supplementation has prevented AMD). Second, 
techniques to assess the density of retinal carotenoids are being commercialized for use in 
optometric and ophthalmological practices, which may lead to identification of people in 
middle age with low MP levels and increased propensity of individuals with low levels to 
take supplements. In 2014, L and Z were ingredients in most eye supplements; L and Z 
levels in multivitamins were 0.25 mg, whereas doses in other supplements ranged from 
approximately 5 mg/day to 50 mg L/day and 10 mg Z/day (62).
Levels associated with benefit and risks
At this time, there is no consensus or recommendation for levels of L and Z intake that are 
safe and beneficial. However, intake for individuals who follow the fruit and vegetable 
intake recommendations of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans would be approximately 5 
mg L and Z per day. Whereas the lowest AMD risk has been demonstrated in persons with L 
and Z intakes of 5 to 6 mg per day, the levels needed to slow cataracts (if future results 
confirm suspected protective effects) may be much lower. Results of short-term clinical trials 
of L and Z supplements in relation to specific visual functions are inconsistent, and evidence 
is insufficient to determine the level of intake required to attain maximal visual performance. 
Also, there is a need to develop consensus about which visual functions are optimal for 
persons of specific ages and for daily activities requiring vision. Recommendations might 
also be established based on levels of L and Z needed to increase MP levels in trials. 
However, intake levels needed to increase MP in short-term studies may be higher than 
intake levels that increase MP over a longer time period. Current evidence suggests that 
levels of intake needed by individuals might differ, depending on their ability to absorb L 
Mares
Page 17
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and Z, deliver them to the eye, and stabilize them within the eye; these are influenced by 
both genetic and metabolic factors. Strategies to increase ocular levels of MP might include 
more than increasing intake; they might include getting more physical activity, eating diets 
rich in fruits and vegetables, and not smoking. These lifestyle changes might enhance lutein 
and zeaxanthin status in the blood and retina by modifying metabolic phenotype. This 
remains to be tested.
Data are insufficient to evaluate whether there are long-term risks of high L and/or Z intake 
from supplements because L and Z supplement use prior to the past five years has been 
uncommon. Clinical trials are not powered to evaluate adverse events and high L and Z 
supplement use. Continued monitoring in observational studies is needed.
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Ryleigh White for literature research and to Courtney Blomme for critical editing that contributed 
to this review. This work was supported by National Eye Institute grants EY013018, EY016886, and EY025292 and 
by an unrestricted grant to the University of Wisconsin Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences from the 
Research to Prevent Blindness.
Literature Cited
1. Age-Related Eye Disease Study Investig. Lutein + zeaxanthin and omega-3 fatty acids for age-
related macular degeneration: the Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA. 2013; 309:2005–15. [PubMed: 23644932] 
2. Akuffo KO, Nolan JM, Howard AN, Moran R, Stack J, et al. Sustained supplementation and 
monitored response with differing carotenoid formulations in early age-related macular 
degeneration. Eye (Lond). 2015; 29:902–12. [PubMed: 25976647] 
3. Aleman TS, Cideciyan AV, Windsor EA, Schwartz SB, Swider M, et al. Macular pigment and lutein 
supplementation in ABCA4-associated retinal degenerations. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007; 
48:1319–29. [PubMed: 17325179] 
4. Aleman TS, Duncan JL, Bieber ML, de Castro E, Marks DA, et al. Macular pigment and lutein 
supplementation in retinitis pigmentosa and Usher syndrome. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2001; 
42:1873–81. [PubMed: 11431456] 
5. Amengual J, Lobo GP, Golczak M, Li HN, Klimova T, et al. A mitochondrial enzyme degrades 
carotenoids and protects against oxidative stress. FASEB J. 2011; 25:948–59. [PubMed: 21106934] 
6. Arnal E, Miranda M, Almansa I, Muriach M, Barcia JM, et al. Lutein prevents cataract development 
and progression in diabetic rats. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2009; 247:115–20. [PubMed: 
18766362] 
7. Babino D, Palczewski G, Widjaja-Adhi MA, Kiser PD, Golczak M, von Lintig J. Characterization of 
the role of beta-carotene 9,10-dioxygenase in macular pigment metabolism. J Biol Chem. 2015; 
290:24844–57. [PubMed: 26307071] 
8. Bahrami H, Melia M, Dagnelie G. Lutein supplementation in retinitis pigmentosa: PC-based vision 
assessment in a randomized double-masked placebo-controlled clinical trial [NCT00029289]. BMC 
Ophthalmol. 2006; 6:23. [PubMed: 16759390] 
9. Bailey RL, Gahche JJ, Miller PE, Thomas PR, Dwyer JT. Why US adults use dietary supplements. 
JAMA Intern Med. 2013; 173:355–61. [PubMed: 23381623] 
10. Barker FM 2nd, Snodderly DM, Johnson EJ, Schalch W, Koepcke W, et al. Nutritional 
manipulation of primate retinas, V: effects of lutein, zeaxanthin, and n-3 fatty acids on retinal 
sensitivity to blue-light-induced damage. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011; 52:3934–42. 
[PubMed: 21245404] 
11. Bartlett HE, Eperjesi F. A randomised controlled trial investigating the effect of lutein and 
antioxidant dietary supplementation on visual function in healthy eyes. Clin Nutr. 2008; 27:218–
27. [PubMed: 18294739] 
Mares
Page 18
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 12. Beatty S, Chakravarthy U, Nolan JM, Muldrew KA, Woodside JV, et al. Secondary outcomes in a 
clinical trial of carotenoids with coantioxidants versus placebo in early age-related macular 
degeneration. Ophthalmology. 2013; 120:600–6. [PubMed: 23218821] 
13. Beatty S, Murray IJ, Henson DB, Carden D, Koh H, Boulton ME. Macular pigment and risk for 
age-related macular degeneration in subjects from a Northern European population. Investig 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2001; 42:439–46. [PubMed: 11157880] 
14. Beirne RO. The macular pigment optical density spatial profile and increasing age. Graefes Arch 
Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2013; 252:383–88. [PubMed: 24081317] 
15. Berendschot TT, Goldbohm RA, Klopping WA, Van de Kraats J, Van Norel J, Van Norren D. 
Influence of lutein supplementation on macular pigment, assessed with two objective techniques. 
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000; 41:3322–26. [PubMed: 11006220] 
16. Berendschot TTJM, Tian Y, Murray I, Makridaki M. Lutein supplementation leads to a decreased 
level of circulating complement factors. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013; 54:4124. Abstr. 
17. Berendschot TT, Willemse-Assink JJ, Bastiaanse M, de Jong PT, van Norren D. Macular pigment 
and melaninin age-related maculopathy in a general population. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 
2002; 43:1928–32. [PubMed: 12037001] 
18. Bernstein P, Li B, Vachali P, Goruspudi A, Shyam R, et al. Lutein, zeaxanthin, and meso-
zeaxanthin: the basic and clinical science underlying carotenoid-based nutritional interventions 
against ocular disease. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2016; 50:34–66. [PubMed: 26541886] 
19. Bernstein PS, Khachik F, Carvalho LS, Muir GJ, Zhao DY, Katz NB. Identification and 
quantitation of carotenoids and their metabolites in the tissues of the human eye. Exp Eye Res. 
2001; 72:215–23. [PubMed: 11180970] 
20. Bernstein PS, Sharifzadeh M, Liu A, Ermakov I, Nelson K, et al. Blue-light reflectance imaging of 
macular pigment in infants and children. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013; 54:4034–40. 
[PubMed: 23652486] 
21. Bernstein PS, Zhao DY, Wintch SW, Ermakov IV, McClane RW, Gellermann W. Resonance Raman 
measurement of macular carotenoids in normal subjects and in age-related macular degeneration 
patients. Ophthalmology. 2002; 109:1780–87. [PubMed: 12359594] 
22. Bettler J, Zimmer JP, Neuringer M, DeRusso PA. Serum lutein concentrations in healthy term 
infants fed human milk or infant formula with lutein. Eur J Nutr. 2010; 49:45–51. [PubMed: 
19672550] 
23. Bhatti MT. Retinitis pigmentosa, pigmentary retinopathies, and neurologic diseases. Curr Neurol 
Neurosci Rep. 2006; 6:403–13. [PubMed: 16928351] 
24. Bian Q, Gao S, Zhou J, Qin J, Taylor A, et al. Lutein and zeaxanthin supplementation reduces 
photooxidative damage and modulates the expression of inflammation-related genes in retinal 
pigment epithelial cells. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012; 53:1298–307. [PubMed: 22732187] 
25. Bian Q, Qin T, Ren Z, Wu D, Shang F. Lutein or zeaxanthin supplementation suppresses 
inflammatory responses in retinal pigment epithelial cells and macrophages. Adv Exp Med Biol. 
2012; 723:43–50. [PubMed: 22183314] 
26. Bone RA, Brener B, Gibert JC. Macular pigment, photopigments, and melanin: distributions in 
young subjects determined by four-wavelength reflectometry. Vis Res. 2007; 47:3259–68. 
[PubMed: 17937965] 
27. Bone RA, Landrum JT. Macular pigment in Henle fiber membranes: a model for Haidinger's 
brushes. Vis Res. 1984; 24:103–8. [PubMed: 6546825] 
28. Bone RA, Landrum JT, Cao Y, Howard AN, Alvarez-Calderon F. Macular pigment response to a 
supplement containing meso-zeaxanthin, lutein and zeaxanthin. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2007; 4:12. 
[PubMed: 17498306] 
29. Bone RA, Landrum JT, Dixon Z, Chen Y, Llerena CM. Lutein and zeaxanthin in the eyes, serum 
and diet of human subjects. Exp Eye Res. 2000; 71:239–45. [PubMed: 10973733] 
30. Bone RA, Landrum JT, Fernandez L, Tarsis SL. Analysis of the macular pigment by HPLC: retinal 
distribution and age study. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1988; 29:843–49. [PubMed: 3372161] 
31. Bone RA, Landrum JT, Friedes LM, Gomez CM, Kilburn MD, et al. Distribution of lutein and 
zeaxanthin stereoisomers in the human retina. Exp Eye Res. 1997; 64:211–18. [PubMed: 9176055] 
Mares
Page 19
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 32. Bone RA, Landrum JT, Guerra LH, Ruiz CA. Lutein and zeaxanthin dietary supplements raise 
macular pigment density and serum concentrations of these carotenoids in humans. J Nutr. 2003; 
133:992–98. [PubMed: 12672909] 
33. Bone RA, Landrum JT, Hime GW, Cains A, Zamor J. Stereochemistry of the human macular 
carotenoids. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1993; 34:2033–40. [PubMed: 8491553] 
34. Bone RA, Landrum JT, Mayne ST, Gomez CM, Tibor SE, Twaroska EE. Macular pigment in donor 
eyes with and without AMD: a case-control study. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2001; 42:235–40. 
[PubMed: 11133874] 
35. Borel P. Genetic variations involved in interindividual variability in carotenoid status. Mol Nutr 
Food Res. 2012; 56:228–40. [PubMed: 21957063] 
36. Borel P, Desmarchelier C, Nowicki M, Bott R, Morange S, Lesavre N. Interindividual variability of 
lutein bioavailability in healthy men: characterization, genetic variants involved, and relation with 
fasting plasma lutein concentration. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014; 100:168–75. [PubMed: 24808487] 
37. Bovier ER, Renzi LM, Hammond BR. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study on the effects of 
lutein and zeaxanthin on neural processing speed and efficiency. PLOS ONE. 2014; 9:e108178. 
[PubMed: 25251377] 
38. Brown MJ, Ferruzzi MG, Nguyen ML, Cooper DA, Eldridge AL, et al. Carotenoid bioavailability 
is higher from salads ingested with full-fat than with fat-reduced salad dressings as measured with 
electrochemical detection. Am J Clin Nutr. 2004; 80:396–403. [PubMed: 15277161] 
39. Canfield LM, Clandinin MT, Davies DP, Fernandez MC, Jackson J, et al. Multinational study of 
major breast milk carotenoids of healthy mothers. Eur J Nutr. 2003; 42:133–41. [PubMed: 
12811470] 
40. Cent. Dis. Control Prev. Second national report on biochemical indicators of diet and nutrition in 
the US population 2012. Atlanta, GA: Natl. Cent. Environ. Health; 2012. http://www.cdc.gov/
nutritionreport
41. Chew EY, Clemons TE, Sangiovanni JP, Danis RP, Ferris FL 3rd, et al. Secondary analyses of the 
effects of lutein/zeaxanthin on age-related macular degeneration progression: AREDS2 Report No. 
3. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2013; 132:142–49.
42. Chitchumroonchokchai C, Bomser JA, Glamm JE, Failla ML. Xanthophylls and alpha-tocopherol 
decrease UVB-induced lipid peroxidation and stress signaling in human lens epithelial cells. J 
Nutr. 2004; 134:3225–32. [PubMed: 15570017] 
43. Chous AP, Richer SP, Gerson JD, Kowluru RA. The Diabetes Visual Function Supplement Study 
(DiVFuSS). Br J Ophthalmol. 2016; 100:227–34. [PubMed: 26089210] 
44. Chug-Ahuja JK, Holden JM, Forman MR, Mangels AR, Beecher GR, Lanza E. The development 
and application of a carotenoid database for fruits, vegetables, and selected multicomponent foods. 
J Am Diet Assoc. 1993; 93:318–23. [PubMed: 8440830] 
45. Chung HY, Rasmussen HM, Johnson EJ. Lutein bioavailability is higher from lutein-enriched eggs 
than from supplements and spinach in men. J Nutr. 2004; 134:1887–93. [PubMed: 15284371] 
46. Coleman AL, Stone KL, Kodjebacheva G, Yu F, Pedula KL, et al. Glaucoma risk and the 
consumption of fruits and vegetables among older women in the study of osteoporotic fractures. 
Am J Ophthalmol. 2008; 145:1081–89. [PubMed: 18355790] 
47. Congdon N, O'Colmain B, Klaver CC, Klein R, Munoz B, et al. Causes and prevalence of visual 
impairment among adults in the United States. Arch Ophthalmol. 2004; 122:477–85. [PubMed: 
15078664] 
48. Craft NE, Haitema TB, Garnett KM, Fitch KA, Dorey CK. Carotenoid, tocopherol, and retinol 
concentrations in elderly human brain. J Nutr Health Aging. 2004; 8:156–62. [PubMed: 
15129301] 
49. Dawczynski J, Jentsch S, Schweitzer D, Hammer M, Lang GE, Strobel J. Long term effects of 
lutein, zeaxanthin and omega-3-LCPUFAs supplementation on optical density of macular pigment 
in AMD patients: the LUTEGA study. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2013; 251:2711–23. 
[PubMed: 23695657] 
50. Dickinson A, Blatman J, El-Dash N, Franco JC. Consumer usage and reasons for using dietary 
supplements: report of a series of surveys. J Am Coll Nutr. 2014; 33:176–82. [PubMed: 24724775] 
Mares
Page 20
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 51. Dietzel M, Zeimer M, Heimes B, Claes B, Pauleikhoff D, Hense HW. Determinants of macular 
pigment optical density and its relation to age-related maculopathy: results from the Muenster 
Aging and Retina Study (MARS). Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011; 52:3452–57. [PubMed: 
21296816] 
52. Duncan DD, Munoz B, West SK. Assessment of ocular exposure to visible light for population 
studies. Dev Ophthalmol. 2002; 35:76–92. [PubMed: 12061281] 
53. Ekici F, Loh R, Waisbourd M, Sun Y, Martinez P, et al. Relationships between measures of the 
ability to perform vision-related activities, vision-related quality of life, and clinical findings in 
patients with glaucoma. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015; 133:1377–85. [PubMed: 26425961] 
54. Ferrucci L, Perry JR, Matteini A, Perola M, Tanaka T, et al. Common variation in the beta-carotene 
15,15′-monooxygenase 1 gene affects circulating levels of carotenoids: a genome-wide association 
study. Am J Hum Genet. 2009; 84:123–33. [PubMed: 19185284] 
55. Friedman DS, O'Colmain BJ, Munoz B, Tomany SC, McCarty C, et al. Prevalence of age-related 
macular degeneration in the United States. Arch Ophthalmol. 2004; 122:564–72. [PubMed: 
15078675] 
56. Gao S, Qin T, Liu Z, Caceres MA, Ronchi CF, et al. Lutein and zeaxanthin supplementation 
reduces H2O2-induced oxidative damage in human lens epithelial cells. Mol Vis. 2011; 17:3180–
90. [PubMed: 22194644] 
57. Garcia-Medina JJ, Pinazo-Duran MD, Garcia-Medina M, Zanon-Moreno V, Pons-Vazquez S. A 5-
year follow-up of antioxidant supplementation in type 2 diabetic retinopathy. Eur J Ophthalmol. 
2011; 21:637–43. [PubMed: 21218388] 
58. Giaconi JA, Yu F, Stone KL, Pedula KL, Ensrud KE, et al. The association of consumption of 
fruits/vegetables with decreased risk of glaucoma among older African-American women in the 
study of osteoporotic fractures. Am J Ophthalmol. 2012; 154:635–44. [PubMed: 22818906] 
59. Glaser TS, Doss LE, Shih G, Nigam D, Sperduto RD, et al. The association of dietary lutein plus 
zeaxanthin and B vitamins with cataracts in the Age-Related Eye Disease Study: AREDS Report 
No. 37. Ophthalmology. 2015; 122:1471–79. [PubMed: 25972257] 
60. Goltz, SR., Ferruzzi, MG. Carotenoid bioavailability: influence of dietary lipid and fiber. In: 
Tanumihardjo, S., editor. Carotenoids and Human Health. New York: Humana; 2013. p. 111-28.
61. Gong X, Rubin LP. Role of macular xanthophylls in prevention of common neovascular 
retinopathies: retinopathy of prematurity and diabetic retinopathy. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2015; 
572:40–48. [PubMed: 25701588] 
62. Grover AK, Samson SE. Antioxidants and vision health: facts and fiction. Mol Cell Biochem. 
2014; 388:173–83. [PubMed: 24311110] 
63. Gruber M, Chappell R, Millen A, LaRowe T, Moeller SM, et al. Correlates of serum lutein + 
zeaxanthin: findings from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. J Nutr. 
2004; 134:2387–94. [PubMed: 15333733] 
64. Hammond BR Jr. Possible role for dietary lutein and zeaxanthin in visual development. Nutr Rev. 
2008; 66:695–702. [PubMed: 19019038] 
65. Hammond BR Jr, Elliott J. Multiple influences of xanthophylls within the visual system. 
2013:147–70. See Ref, 98. 
66. Hammond BR Jr, Fletcher LM, Elliott JG. Glare disability, photostress recovery, and chromatic 
contrast: relation to macular pigment and serum lutein and zeaxanthin. Investig Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci. 2013; 54:476–81. [PubMed: 23211814] 
67. Hammond BR Jr, Fletcher LM, Roos F, Wittwer J, Schalch W. A double-blind, placebo-controlled 
study on the effects of lutein and zeaxanthin on photostress recovery, glare disability, and 
chromatic contrast. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014; 55:8583–89. [PubMed: 25468896] 
68. Hammond BR Jr, Johnson EJ, Russell RM, Krinsky NI, Yeum KJ, et al. Dietary modification of 
human macular pigment density. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1997; 38:1795–801. [PubMed: 
9286268] 
69. Hammond BR Jr, Wooten BR. CFF thresholds: relation to macular pigment optical density. 
Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 2005; 25:315–19. [PubMed: 15953116] 
70. Hammond BR Jr, Wooten BR, Snodderly DM. Individual variations in the spatial profile of human 
macular pigment. J Opt Soc Am A Opt Image Sci Vis. 1997; 14:1187–96. [PubMed: 9168592] 
Mares
Page 21
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 71. Hammond CJ, Liew SM, Van Kuijk FJ, Beatty S, Nolan JM, et al. The heritability of macular 
response to supplemental lutein and zeaxanthin: a classical twin study. Investig Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci. 2012; 53:4963–68. [PubMed: 22700713] 
72. Henriksen BS, Chan G, Hoffman RO, Sharifzadeh M, Ermakov IV, et al. Interrelationships 
between maternal carotenoid status and newborn infant macular pigment optical density and 
carotenoid status. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013; 54:5568–78. [PubMed: 23838770] 
73. Herron KL, McGrane MM, Waters D, Lofgren IE, Clark RM, et al. The ABCG5 polymorphism 
contributes to individual responses to dietary cholesterol and carotenoids in eggs. J Nutr. 2006; 
136:1161–65. [PubMed: 16614398] 
74. Hessel S, Eichinger A, Isken A, Amengual J, Hunzelmann S, et al. CMO1 deficiency abolishes 
vitamin A production from beta-carotene and alters lipid metabolism in mice. J Biol Chem. 2007; 
282:33553–61. [PubMed: 17855355] 
75. Ho L, van Leeuwen R, Witteman JC, Van Duijn CM, Uitterlinden AG, et al. Reducing the genetic 
risk of age-related macular degeneration with dietary antioxidants, zinc, and omega-3 fatty acids: 
the Rotterdam Study. Arch Ophthalmol. 2011; 129:758–66. [PubMed: 21670343] 
76. Hollyfield JG. Age-related macular degeneration: the molecular link between oxidative damage, 
tissue-specific inflammation and outer retinal disease: the Proctor Lecture. Investig Ophthalmol 
Vis Sci. 2010; 51:1275–81.
77. Hu BJ, Hu YN, Lin S, Ma WJ, Li XR. Application of lutein and zeaxanthin in nonproliferative 
diabetic retinopathy. Int J Ophthalmol. 2011; 4:303–6. [PubMed: 22553667] 
78. Huang YM, Dou HL, Huang FF, Xu XR, Zou ZY, Lin XM. Effect of supplemental lutein and 
zeaxanthin on serum, macular pigmentation, and visual performance in patients with early age-
related macular degeneration. BioMed Res Int. 2015; 2015:564738. [PubMed: 25815324] 
79. Iakovleva M, Panova I, Fel'dman T, Zak P, Tatikolov A, et al. Detection of carotenoids in the 
vitreous body of the human eye during prenatal development. Ontogenez. 2007; 38:380–85. 
[PubMed: 18038656] 
80. Izumi-Nagai K, Nagai N, Ohgami K, Satofuka S, Ozawa Y, et al. Macular pigment lutein is 
antiinflammatory in preventing choroidal neovascularization. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
2007; 27:2555–62. [PubMed: 17932319] 
81. Jacques PF, Chylack LT Jr, Hankinson SE, Khu PM, Rogers G, et al. Long-term nutrient intake and 
early age-related nuclear lens opacities. Arch Ophthalmol. 2001; 119:1009–19. [PubMed: 
11448323] 
82. Jahn C, Wustemeyer H, Brinkmann C, Trautmann S, Moosner A, Wolf S. Macular pigment density 
in age-related maculopathy. Graefe's Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2005; 243:222–27. [PubMed: 
15806375] 
83. Johnson EJ. Role of lutein and zeaxanthin in visual and cognitive function throughout the lifespan. 
Nutr Rev. 2014; 72:605–12. [PubMed: 25109868] 
84. Johnson EJ, Hammond BR, Yeum KJ, Qin J, Wang XD, et al. Relation among serum and tissue 
concentrations of lutein and zeaxanthin and macular pigment density. Am J Clin Nutr. 2000; 
71:1555–62. [PubMed: 10837298] 
85. Kang JH, Pasquale LR, Willett W, Rosner B, Egan KM, et al. Antioxidant intake and primary 
open-angle glaucoma: a prospective study. Am J Epidemiol. 2003; 158:337–46. [PubMed: 
12915499] 
86. Kanis MJ, Berendschot TT, Van Norren D. Influence of macular pigment and melanin on incident 
early AMD in a white population. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2007; 245:767–73. 
[PubMed: 17119995] 
87. Kelly ER, Plat J, Haenen GR, Kijlstra A, Berendschot TT. The effect of modified eggs and an egg-
yolk based beverage on serum lutein and zeaxanthin concentrations and macular pigment optical 
density: results from a randomized trial. PLOS ONE. 2014; 9:e92659. [PubMed: 24675775] 
88. Koh HH, Murray IJ, Nolan D, Carden D, Feather J, Beatty S. Plasma and macular responses to 
lutein supplement in subjects with and without age-related maculopathy: a pilot study. Exp Eye 
Res. 2004; 79:21–27. [PubMed: 15183097] 
89. Koo E, Neuringer M, SanGiovanni JP. Macular xanthophylls, lipoprotein-related genes, and age-
related macular degeneration. Am J Clin Nutr. 2014; 100(Suppl. 1):336–46S.
Mares
Page 22
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 90. Kowluru RA, Menon B, Gierhart DL. Beneficial effect of zeaxanthin on retinal metabolic 
abnormalities in diabetic rats. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008; 49:1645–51. [PubMed: 
18385086] 
91. Krinsky NI, Johnson EJ. Carotenoid actions and their relation to health and disease. Mol Aspects 
Med. 2005; 26:459–516. [PubMed: 16309738] 
92. Krinsky NI, Landrum JT, Bone RA. Biologic mechanisms of the protective role of lutein and 
zeaxanthin in the eye. Annu Rev Nutr. 2003; 23:171–201. [PubMed: 12626691] 
93. Kupfer, C. Bowman lecture. Trans Ophthalmol Soc. Vol. 104. UK: 1985. The conquest of cataract: 
a global challenge; p. 1-10.
94. Kvansakul J, Rodriguez-Carmona M, Edgar D, Barker F, Kopcke W, et al. Supplementation with 
the carotenoids lutein or zeaxanthin improves human visual performance. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 
2006; 26:362–71. [PubMed: 16792735] 
95. Landrum, JT., Bone, RA. Mechanistic evidence for eye diseases and carotenoids. In: Krinsky, 
NI.Mayne, ST., Sies, H., editors. Carotenoids in Health and Disease. New York: Marcel Dekker; 
2004. p. 445-72.
96. Landrum JT, Bone RA, Joa H, Kilburn MD, Moore LL, Sprague KE. A one year study of the 
macular pigment: the effect of 140 days of a lutein supplement. Exp Eye Res. 1997; 65:57–62. 
[PubMed: 9237865] 
97. Landrum JT, Bone RA, Neuringer M, Cao Y. Macular pigment from discovery to function. 2013:1–
22. See Ref. 98. 
98. Landrum, JT., Nolan, JM., editors. Carotenoids and Retinal Disease. Boca Raton, FL: CRC; 2013. 
99. LaRowe TL, Mares JA, Snodderly DM, Klein ML, Wooten BR, Chappell R. Macular pigment 
density and age-related maculopathy in the Carotenoids in Age-Related Eye Disease Study. An 
ancillary study of the Women's Health Initiative Ophthalmology. 2008; 115:876–83.e1. [PubMed: 
17868874] 
100. Le Marchand L, Hankin JH, Bach F, Kolonel LN, Wilkens LR, et al. An ecological study of diet 
and lung cancer in the South Pacific. Int J Cancer. 1995; 63:18–23. [PubMed: 7558446] 
101. Lee HS, Cho YH, Park J, Shin HR, Sung MK. Dietary intake of phytonutrients in relation to fruit 
and vegetable consumption in Korea. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2013; 113:1194–99. [PubMed: 
23830325] 
102. Li B, Vachali PP, Gorusupudi A, Shen Z, Sharifzadeh H, et al. Inactivity of human |3, |3-
carotene-9/,10/-dioxygenase (BCO2) underlies retinal accumulation of the human macular 
carotenoid pigment. PNAS. 2014; 111:10173–78. [PubMed: 24982131] 
103. Li S, Lo A. Lutein protects RGC-5 cells against hypoxia and oxidative stress. Int J Mol Sci. 2010; 
11:2109–17. [PubMed: 20559505] 
104. Lietz, G. Host factors that affect carotenoid metabolism. In: Tanumihardjo, SA., editor. 
Carotenoids and Human Health. New York: Springer; 2013. p. 129-40.
105. Lietz G, Mulokozi G, Henry JC, Tomkins AM. Xanthophyll and hydrocarbon carotenoid patterns 
differ in plasma and breast milk of women supplemented with red palm oil during pregnancy and 
lactation. J Nutr. 2006; 136:1821–27. [PubMed: 16772443] 
106. Lipkie TE, Banavara D, Shah B, Morrow AL, McMahon RJ, et al. Caco-2 accumulation of lutein 
is greater from human milk than from infant formula despite similar bioaccessibility. Mol Nutr 
Food Res. 2014; 58:2014–22. [PubMed: 24975441] 
107. Lipkie TE, Morrow AL, Jouni ZE, McMahon RJ, Ferruzzi MG. Longitudinal survey of 
carotenoids in human milk from urban cohorts in China, Mexico, and the USA. PLOS ONE. 
2015; 10:e0127729. [PubMed: 26061885] 
108. Liu CL, Huang YS, Hosokawa M, Miyashita K, Hu ML. Inhibition of proliferation of a hepatoma 
cell line by fucoxanthin in relation to cell cycle arrest and enhanced gap junctional intercellular 
communication. Chem Biol Interact. 2009; 182:165–72. [PubMed: 19737546] 
109. Liu R, Wang T, Zhang B, Qin L, Wu C, et al. Lutein and zeaxanthin supplementation and 
association with visual function in age-related macular degeneration. Investig Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci. 2015; 56:252–58.
110. Liu XH, Yu RB, Liu R, Hao ZX, Han CC, et al. Association between lutein and zeaxanthin status 
and the risk of cataract: a meta-analysis. Nutrients. 2014; 6:452–65. [PubMed: 24451312] 
Mares
Page 23
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 111. Liu Z, Meyers K, Johnson E, Snodderly D, Tinker L, et al. Exposure to lutein in infancy via breast 
milk and later life macular pigment optical density. Investig Ophthal Vis Sci. 2015; 56:192.
112. Lobo GP, Amengual J, Li HN, Golczak M, Bonet ML, et al. β,β-carotene decreases peroxisome 
proliferator receptor gamma activity and reduces lipid storage capacity of adipocytes in a β,β-
carotene oxygenase 1-dependent manner. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:27891–99. [PubMed: 
20573961] 
113. Loughman J, Nolan JM, Howard AN, Connolly E, Meagher K, Beatty S. The impact of macular 
pigment augmentation on visual performance using different carotenoid formulations. Investig 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012; 53:7871–80. [PubMed: 23132800] 
114. Ma L, Hao ZX, Liu RR, Yu RB, Shi Q, Pan JP. A dose-response meta-analysis of dietary lutein 
and zeaxanthin intake in relation to risk of age-related cataract. Graefes Arch Clin Exp 
Ophthalmol. 2014; 252:63–70. [PubMed: 24150707] 
115. Ma L, Lin XM, Zou ZY, Xu XR, Li Y, Xu R. A 12-week lutein supplementation improves visual 
function in Chinese people with long-term computer display light exposure. Br J Nutr. 2009; 
102:186–90. [PubMed: 19586568] 
116. Ma L, Yan SF, Huang YM, Lu XR, Qian F, et al. Effect of lutein and zeaxanthin on macular 
pigment and visual function in patients with early age-related macular degeneration. 
Ophthalmology. 2012; 119:2290–97. [PubMed: 22858124] 
117. Manzoni P, Stolfi I, Pedicino R, Vagnarelli F, Mosca F, et al. Human milk feeding prevents 
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) in preterm VLBW neonates. Early Hum Dev. 2013; 89(Suppl. 
1):S64–68. [PubMed: 23809355] 
118. Mares-Perlman JA, Fisher AI, Klein R, Palta M, Block G, et al. Lutein and zeaxanthin in the diet 
and serum and their relation to age-related maculopathy in the third National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey. Am J Epidemiol. 2001; 153:424–32. [PubMed: 11226974] 
119. Mares J. Food antioxidants to prevent cataract. JAMA. 2015; 313:1048–49. [PubMed: 25756441] 
120. Mares J, Meyers K, Liu Z, Gehrs K, Iyengar S, et al. Joint phenotypic and genotypic predictors of 
macular pigment optical density. Investig Ophthal Vis Sci. 2015; 56:1082. Abstr. 
121. Mares JA. Relationships of lutein and zeaxanthin to age-related macular degeneration: epidemio-
logical evidence. 2013:63–74. See Ref. 98. 
122. Mares JA, LaRowe TL, Snodderly DM, Moeller SM, Gruber MJ, et al. Predictors of optical 
density of lutein and zeaxanthin in retinas of older women in the Carotenoids in Age-Related Eye 
Disease Study, an ancillary study of the Women's Health Initiative. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006; 
84:1107–22. [PubMed: 17093164] 
123. Mares, JA., Millen, AE., Meyers, K. Diet and supplements and the prevention and treatment of 
eye diseases. In: Coulston, AM.Boushey, CJ., Ferruzzi, M., editors. Nutrition in the Prevention 
and Treatment of Disease. San Diego, CA: Elsevier; 2012. p. 341-72.
124. Mares JA, Voland RP, Sondel SA, Millen AE, Larowe T, et al. Healthy lifestyles related to 
subsequent prevalence of age-related macular degeneration. Arch Ophthalmol. 2011; 129:470–
80. [PubMed: 21149749] 
125. McCorkle S, Raine L, Hammond B, Renzi-Hammond L, Hillman C, Khan N. Reliability of 
heterochromatic flicker photometry in measuring macular pigment optical density among 
preadolescent children. Foods. 2015; 4:594–604. [PubMed: 28231224] 
126. Meyers KJ, Johnson EJ, Bernstein PS, Iyengar SK, Engelman CD, et al. Genetic determinants of 
macular pigments in women of the Carotenoids in Age-Related Eye Disease Study. Investig 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013; 54:2333–45. [PubMed: 23404124] 
127. Meyers KJ, Liu Z, Millen AE, Iyengar SK, Blodi BA, et al. Joint associations of diet, lifestyle, 
and genes with age-related macular degeneration. Ophthalmology. 2015; 122:2286–94. [PubMed: 
26354764] 
128. Meyers KJ, Liu Z, Wallace R, Tinker L, Engelman C, et al. Correlates of metabolic syndrome are 
associated with low macular pigment despite moderate to high intakes of macular carotenoids. 
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014; 55:6009. Abstr. 
129. Meyers KJ, Liu Z, Wang S, Klein M, Wallace RT, et al. Phenotypic and genotypic predictors of 
low retinal response to diets high in lutein. Investig Ophthal Vis Sci. 2015; 56:1083. Abstr. 
Mares
Page 24
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 130. Meyers KJ, Mares JA, Igo RP Jr, Truitt B, Liu Z, et al. Genetic evidence for role of carotenoids in 
age-related macular degeneration in the Carotenoids in Age-Related Eye Disease Study 
(CAREDS). Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014; 55:587–99. [PubMed: 24346170] 
131. Moeller SM, Parekh N, Tinker L, Ritenbaugh C, Blodi B, et al. Associations between 
intermediate age-related macular degeneration and lutein and zeaxanthin in the Carotenoids in 
Age-Related Eye Disease Study (CAREDS): ancillary study of the Women's Health Initiative. 
Arch Ophthalmol. 2006; 124:1151–62. [PubMed: 16908818] 
132. Mukai M, Hayashi Y, Kitadate Y, Shigenobu S, Arita K, Kobayashi S. MAMO, a maternal BTB/
POZ-Zn-finger protein enriched in germline progenitors, is required for the production of 
functional eggs in Drosophila. Mech Dev. 2007; 124:570–83. [PubMed: 17600690] 
133. Murray IJ, Makridaki M, van der Veen RL, Carden D, Parry NR, Berendschot TT. Lutein 
supplementation over a one-year period in early AMD might have a mild beneficial effect on 
visual acuity: the CLEAR study. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013; 54:1781–88. [PubMed: 
23385792] 
134. Neuringer M, Sandstrom MM, Johnson EJ, Snodderly DM. Nutritional manipulation of primate 
retinas, I: effects of lutein or zeaxanthin supplements on serum and macular pigment in 
xanthophyll-free rhesus monkeys. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004; 45:3234–43. [PubMed: 
15326146] 
135. Nolan JM, Loughman J, Akkali MC, Stack J, Scanlon G, et al. The impact of macular pigment 
augmentation on visual performance in normal subjects: COMPASS. Vis Res. 2011; 51:459–69. 
[PubMed: 21237188] 
136. Nolan JM, Stack J, Mellerio J, Godhinio M, O'Donovan O, et al. Monthly consistency of macular 
pigment optical density and serum concentrations of lutein and zeaxanthin. Curr Eye Res. 2006; 
31:199–213. [PubMed: 16500771] 
137. Obana A, Hiramitsu T, Gohto Y, Ohira A, Mizuno S, et al. Macular carotenoid levels of normal 
subjects and age-related maculopathy patients in a Japanese population. Ophthalmology. 2008; 
115:147–57. [PubMed: 18166409] 
138. Obana A, Tanito M, Gohto Y, Okazaki S, Gellermann W, Bernstein PS. Changes in macular 
pigment optical density and serum lutein concentration in Japanese subjects taking two different 
lutein supplements. PLOS ONE. 2015; 10:e0139257. [PubMed: 26451726] 
139. Olmedilla B, Granado F, Blanco I, Vaquero M. Lutein, but not alpha-tocopherol, supplementation 
improves visual function in patients with age-related cataracts: a 2-y double-blind, placebo-
controlled pilot study. Nutrition. 2003; 19:21–24. [PubMed: 12507634] 
140. Owsley C. Aging and vision. Vis Res. 2011; 51:1610–22. [PubMed: 20974168] 
141. Owsley C. Comparison of visual function in older eyes in the earliest stages of age-related 
macular degeneration to those in normal macular health. Curr Eye Res. 2016; 41:266–72. 
[PubMed: 25802989] 
142. Owsley C, Huisingh C, Jackson GR, Curcio CA, Szalai AJ, et al. Associations between abnormal 
rod-mediated dark adaptation and health and functioning in older adults with normal macular 
health. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014; 55:4776–89. [PubMed: 24854857] 
143. Palczewski G, Amengual J, Hoppel CL, von Lintig J. Evidence for compartmentalization of 
mammalian carotenoid metabolism. FASEB J. 2014; 28:4457–69. [PubMed: 25002123] 
144. Patryas L, Parry NR, Carden D, Aslam T, Murray IJ. The association between dark adaptation and 
macular pigment optical density in healthy subjects. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2014; 
252:657–63. [PubMed: 24413682] 
145. Perrone S, Longini M, Marzocchi B, Picardi A, Bellieni CV, et al. Effects of lutein on oxidative 
stress in the term newborn: a pilot study. Neonatology. 2010; 97:36–40. [PubMed: 19590244] 
146. Picone S, Ritieni A, Fabiano A, Troise AD, Graziani G, et al. Arterial cord blood lutein levels in 
preterm and term healthy newborns are sex and gestational age dependent. Clin Biochem. 2012; 
45:1558–63. [PubMed: 22885018] 
147. Piermarocchi S, Saviano S, Parisi V, Tedeschi M, Panozzo G, et al. Carotenoids in Age-Related 
Maculopathy Italian Study (CARMIS): two-year results of a randomized study. Eur J 
Ophthalmol. 2012; 22:216–25. [PubMed: 22009916] 
Mares
Page 25
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 148. Provis JM, Penfold PL, Cornish EE, Sandercoe TM, Madigan MC. Anatomy and development of 
the macula: specialisation and the vulnerability to macular degeneration. Clin Exp Optom. 2005; 
88:269–81. [PubMed: 16255686] 
149. Quigley HA. Number of people with glaucoma worldwide. Br J Ophthalmol. 1996; 80:389–93. 
[PubMed: 8695555] 
150. Ramdas WD, Wolfs RC, Kiefte-de Jong JC, Hofman A, de Jong PT, et al. Nutrient intake and risk 
of open-angle glaucoma: the Rotterdam Study. Eur J Epidemiol. 2012; 27:385–93. [PubMed: 
22461101] 
151. Rapp LM, Maple SS, Choi JH. Lutein and zeaxanthin concentrations in rod outer segment 
membranes from perifoveal and peripheral human retina. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2000; 
41:1200–9. [PubMed: 10752961] 
152. Renzi LM, Hammond BR Jr. The effect of macular pigment on heterochromatic luminance 
contrast. Exp Eye Res. 2010; 91:896–900. [PubMed: 20883691] 
153. Renzi LM, Hammond BR Jr. The relation between the macular carotenoids, lutein and 
zeaxanthin, and temporal vision. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt. 2010; 30:351–57. [PubMed: 
20492542] 
154. Resnikoff S, Pascolini D, Etya'aale D, Kocur I, Pararajasegaram R, et al. Global data on visual 
impairment in the year 2002. Bull World Health Organ. 2004; 82:844–51. [PubMed: 15640920] 
155. Richer S, Stiles W, Statkute L, Pulido J, Frankowski J, et al. Double-masked, placebo-controlled, 
randomized trial of lutein and antioxidant supplementation in the intervention of atrophic age-
related macular degeneration: the Veterans LAST study (Lutein Antioxidant Supplementation 
Trial). Optometry. 2004; 75:216–30. [PubMed: 15117055] 
156. Richer SP, Stiles W, Graham-Hoffman K, Levin M, Ruskin D, et al. Randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study of zeaxanthin and visual function in patients with atrophic age-related 
macular degeneration: the Zeaxanthin and Visual Function study (ZVF) FDA IND #78, 973. 
Optometry. 2011; 82:667–80.e6. [PubMed: 22027699] 
157. Rubin GS, Roche KB, Prasada-Rao P, Fried LP. Visual impairment and disability in older adults. 
Optom Vis Sci. 1994; 71:750–60. [PubMed: 7898882] 
158. Rubin LP, Chan GM, Barrett-Reis BM, Fulton AB, Hansen RM, et al. Effect of carotenoid 
supplementation on plasma carotenoids, inflammation and visual development in preterm infants. 
J Perinatol. 2012; 32:418–24. [PubMed: 21760585] 
159. Sabour-Pickett S, Beatty S, Connolly E, Loughman J, Stack J, et al. Supplementation with three 
different macular carotenoid formulations in patients with early age-related macular 
degeneration. Retina. 2014; 34:1757–66. [PubMed: 24887490] 
160. Sandberg MA, Johnson EJ, Berson EL. The relationship of macular pigment optical density to 
serum lutein in retinitis pigmentosa. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010; 51:1086–91. [PubMed: 
19797209] 
161. SanGiovanni JP, Neuringer M. The putative role of lutein and zeaxanthin as protective agents 
against age-related macular degeneration: promise of molecular genetics for guiding mechanistic 
and translational research in the field. Am J Clin Nutr. 2012; 96:1223–33s.
162. Sasaki M, Ozawa Y, Kurihara T, Noda K, Imamura Y, et al. Neuroprotective effect of 
anantioxidant, lutein, during retinal inflammation. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009; 50:1433–
39. [PubMed: 18997089] 
163. Scanlon G, Connell P, Ratzlaff M, Foerg B, McCartney D, et al. Macular pigment optical density 
is lower in type 2 diabetes, compared with type 1 diabetes and normal controls. Retina. 2015; 
35:1808–16. [PubMed: 25932554] 
164. Schalch W, Cohn W, Barker FM, Kopcke W, Mellerio J, et al. Xanthophyll accumulation in the 
human retina during supplementation with lutein or zeaxanthin—the LUXEA (LUtein 
Xanthophyll Eye Accumulation) study. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2007; 458:128–35. [PubMed: 
17084803] 
165. Seddon JM, Ajani UA, Sperduto RD, Hiller R, Blair N, et al. Dietary carotenoids, vitamins A, C, 
and E, and advanced age-related macular degeneration. JAMA. 1994; 272:1413–20. [PubMed: 
7933422] 
Mares
Page 26
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 166. Shmarakov, IO., Yuen, JJ., Blaner, WS. Carotenoid metabolism and enzymology. In: 
Tanumihardjo, SA., editor. Carotenoids and Human Health. New York: Humana; 2013. p. 29-56.
167. Sies H, Stahl W. Carotenoids and intercellular communication via gap junctions. Int J Vitam Nutr 
Res. 1997; 67:364–67. [PubMed: 9350479] 
168. Singh RS, Kim JE. Ocular hypertension following intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth 
factor agents. Drugs Aging. 2012; 29:949–56. [PubMed: 23179897] 
169. Smiddy WE. Relative cost of a line of vision in age-related macular degeneration. 
Ophthalmology. 2007; 114:847–54. [PubMed: 17306878] 
170. Snodderly DM. Evidence for protection against age-related macular degeneration by carotenoids 
and antioxidant vitamins. Am J Clin Nutr. 1995; 62:1448–61S.
171. Snodderly DM, Auran JD, Delori FC. The macular pigment. II Spatial distribution in primate 
retinas. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1984; 25:674–85. [PubMed: 6724837] 
172. Snodderly DM, Brown PK, Delori FC, Auran JD. The macular pigment. I Absorbance spectra, 
localization, and discrimination from other yellow pigments in primate retinas. Investig 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1984; 25:660–73. [PubMed: 6724836] 
173. Stringham JM, Garcia PV, Smith PA, Hiers PL, McLin LN, et al. Macular pigment and visual 
performance in low-light conditions. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015; 56:2459–68. [PubMed: 
25783608] 
174. Stringham JM, Garcia PV, Smith PA, McLin LN, Foutch BK. Macular pigment and visual 
performance in glare: benefits for photostress recovery, disability glare, and visual discomfort. 
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011; 52:7406–15. [PubMed: 21296819] 
175. Stringham JM, Snodderly DM. Enhancing performance while avoiding damage: a contribution of 
macular pigment. Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013; 54:6298–306. [PubMed: 23982840] 
176. Tang L, Zhang Y, Jiang Y, Willard L, Ortiz E, et al. Dietary wolfberry ameliorates retinal structure 
abnormalities in db/db mice at the early stage of diabetes. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2011; 
236:1051–63. [PubMed: 21750018] 
177. Tezel G. Oxidative stress in glaucomatous neurodegeneration: mechanisms and consequences. 
Prog Retin Eye Res. 2006; 25:490–513. [PubMed: 16962364] 
178. Tian Y, Kijlstra A, Webers CA, Berendschot TT. Lutein and factor D: two intriguing players in the 
field of age-related macular degeneration. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2015; 572:49–53. [PubMed: 
25637656] 
179. Trieschmann M, Beatty S, Nolan JM, Hense HW, Heimes B, et al. Changes in macular pigment 
optical density and serum concentrations of its constituent carotenoids following supplemental 
lutein and zeaxanthin: the LUNA study. Exp Eye Res. 2007; 84:718–28. [PubMed: 17306793] 
180. U.S. Dep. Agric., Agric. Res. Serv. What We Eat in America, NHANES 011–2012. Washington, 
DC: USDA ARS; 2014. http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=13793
181. van der Made SM, Kelly ER, Berendschot TT, Kijlstra A, Lutjohann D, Plat J. Consuming a 
buttermilk drink containing lutein-enriched egg yolk daily for 1 year increased plasma lutein but 
did not affect serum lipid or lipoprotein concentrations in adults with early signs of age-related 
macular degeneration. J Nutr. 2014; 144:1370–77. [PubMed: 24991045] 
182. Vishwanathan R, Goodrow-Kotyla EF, Wooten BR, Wilson TA, Nicolosi RJ. Consumption of 2 
and 4 egg yolks/d for 5 wk increases macular pigment concentrations in older adults with low 
macular pigment taking cholesterol-lowering statins. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009; 90:1272–79. 
[PubMed: 19759170] 
183. Vishwanathan, R., Johnson, EJ. Lutein and zeaxanthin and eye disease. In: Tanumihardjo, SA., 
editor. Carotenoids in Human Health. New York: Springer Sci; 2014. p. 215-35.
184. Vishwanathan R, Neuringer M, Snodderly DM, Schalch W, Johnson EJ. Macular lutein and 
zeaxanthin are related to brain lutein and zeaxanthin in primates. Nutr Neurosci. 2013; 16:21–29. 
[PubMed: 22780947] 
185. Vishwanathan R, Schalch W, Johnson EJ. Macular pigment carotenoids in the retina and occipital 
cortex are related in humans. Nutr Neurosci. 2016; 19:95–101. [PubMed: 25752849] 
186. Wang JJ, Buitendijk GH, Rochtchina E, Lee KE, Klein BE, et al. Genetic susceptibility, dietary 
antioxidants, and long-term incidence of age-related macular degeneration in two populations. 
Ophthalmology. 2014; 121:667–75. [PubMed: 24290803] 
Mares
Page 27
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 187. Weigert G, Kaya S, Pemp B, Sacu S, Lasta M, et al. Effects of lutein supplementation on macular 
pigment optical density and visual acuity in patients with age-related macular degeneration. 
Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011; 52:8174–78. [PubMed: 21873668] 
188. Widjaja-Adhi MA, Lobo GP, Golczak M, Von Lintig J. A genetic dissection of intestinal fat-
soluble vitamin and carotenoid absorption. Hum Mol Genet. 2015; 24:3206–19. [PubMed: 
25701869] 
189. Widomska J, Subczynski WK. Why has nature chosen lutein and zeaxanthin to protect the retina? 
J Clin Exp Ophthalmol. 2014; 5:326. [PubMed: 24883226] 
190. Wooten B, Hammond B. Macular pigment: influences on visual acuity and visibility. Prog Retin 
Eye Res. 2002; 21:225–40. [PubMed: 12062535] 
191. Wu J, Cho E, Willett WC, Sastry SM, Schaumberg DA. Intakes of lutein, zeaxanthin, and other 
carotenoids and age-related macular degeneration during 2 decades of prospective follow-up. 
JAMA Ophthalmol. 2015; 133:1415–24. [PubMed: 26447482] 
192. Yao Y, Qiu QH, Wu XW, Cai ZY, Xu S, Liang XQ. Lutein supplementation improves visual 
performance in Chinese drivers: 1-year randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. 
Nutrition. 2013; 29:958–64. [PubMed: 23360692] 
193. Yeum KJ, Shang FM, Schalch WM, Russell RM, Taylor A. Fat-soluble nutrient concentrations in 
different layers of human cataractous lens. Curr Eye Res. 1999; 19:502–5. [PubMed: 10550792] 
194. Yonova-Doing E, Hysi PG, Venturini C, Williams KM, Nag A, et al. Candidate gene study of 
macular response to supplemental lutein and zeaxanthin. Exp Eye Res. 2013; 115:172–77. 
[PubMed: 23891863] 
195. Yu H, Wark L, Ji H, Willard L, Jaing Y, et al. Dietary wolfberry upregulates carotenoid metabolic 
genes and enhances mitochondrial biogenesis in the retina of db/db diabetic mice. Mol Nutr Food 
Res. 2013; 57:1158–69. [PubMed: 23505020] 
196. Yuodelis C, Hendrickson A. A qualitative and quantitative analysis of the human fovea during 
development. Vis Res. 1986; 26:847–55. [PubMed: 3750868] 
197. Zaripheh S, Erdman JW Jr. Factors that influence the bioavailability of xanthophylls. J Nutr. 
2002; 132:531–34S.
198. Zhang C, Wang Z, Zhao J, Li Q, Huang C, et al. Neuroprotective effect of lutein on nmda-induced 
retinal ganglion cell injury in rat retina. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2015; doi: 10.1007/
s10571-015-0231-5
199. Zhao D, Cho J, Kim MH, Friedman D, Guallar E. Diabetes, glucose metabolism, and glaucoma: 
the 2005–2008 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. PLOS ONE. 2014; 
9:e112460. [PubMed: 25393836] 
200. Zheng Y, He M, Congdon N. The worldwide epidemic of diabetic retinopathy. Indian J Ophthal-
mol. 2012; 60:428–31.
201. Zimmer JP, Hammond BR Jr. Possible influences of lutein and zeaxanthin on the developing 
retina. Clin Ophthalmol. 2007; 1:25–35. [PubMed: 19668463] 
Mares
Page 28
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Summary Points
1.
L and Z appear to play specific roles in optimal visual performance in health 
and disease and in lowering risk for common causes of visual impairment.
2.
Well-powered clinical trials and long-term prospective studies are needed to 
determine optimal levels associated with aspects of vision that impact daily 
function. In addition, supplementation levels should be evaluated for adverse 
events, if any, related to the long-term intake of these carotenoids in 
supplements.
3.
Individuals who have lower blood and retinal responses to the intake of these 
carotenoids might require higher intakes of lutein and zeaxanthin or longer 
periods of time to accumulate optimal levels of macular pigment.
4.
A critical need exists for data to establish guidelines for the safe and adequate 
intake of L and Z in pregnant and lactating women and infants.
Mares
Page 29
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Image of the human eye.
Mares
Page 30
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Cross-section of a primate retina, in the macula, photographed in either white or blue light, 
indicating macular pigment (composed of lutein, zeaxanthin, and meso-zeaxanthin) in 
retinal layers and its absorption of blue light from macular pigment. Figure adapted with 
permission from the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition and D. Max Snodderly (170).
Mares
Page 31
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
The concentration of macular pigment (MP) in human eyes and ratio of lutein (L) to 
zeaxanthin (Z) in relation to distance from the center of the fovea within the macula. Figure 
courtesy of John Landrum and Richard Bone, as published in Carotenoids and Retinal 
Disease, CRC Press (98). Adapted with permission.
Mares
Page 32
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Distribution of proteins affecting or affected by macular xanthophylls in primate retina. Full 
names for genes are available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene. Superscripts on gene 
symbols refer to reference numbers of immunolocalization studies containing micrographs 
in Reference 161. Abbreviations: Am, amacrine cell; B, bipolar cell; BrM, Bruch's 
membrane; C, cone photoreceptors; CC, retinal choroid layer; DA, displaced amacrine cell; 
ELM, external limiting membrane; G, ganglion cell; GCL, ganglion cell layer; H, horizontal 
cell; ILM, inner limiting membrane; INL, inner nuclear layer; IPL, inner plexiform layer 
(interneurons); M, Muller cell; NFL, nerve fiber layer; ONL, outer nuclear layer; OPL, outer 
plexiform layer; PRIS, photoreceptor inner segment; PROS, photoreceptor outer segment; R, 
rod photoreceptor; RPEa, retinal pigment epithelium apical area; RPEb, retinal pigment 
epithelium basal area. ∗Retinal layers with macular xanthophyll concentrations. Schematic 
created by D. Fisher and adapted with permission from the American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition (161) and John Paul SanGiovanni.
Mares
Page 33
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Phenotypes and genotypes associated with macular pigment optical density in the 
Carotenoids in Age-Related Eye Disease Study (120, 126, 128, 129). The evidence suggests 
that the indicated aspects of diet, metabolism, and genotype might influence the absorption 
and transport of lutein and zeaxanthin in the blood (left and center boxes) and that the 
indicated genotypes and activities of the proteins these genes encode (right box) might 
influence their uptake and/or stabilization in the retina.
Mares
Page 34
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mares
Page 35
Table 1
Summary of studies (2004–2015; including more than 50 subjects) investigating the relationships among macular pigment optical density, 
supplementation with lutein, zeaxanthin, and/or meso-zeaxanthin, and visual performance
Cross-sectional observational studies
Study author(s) and year 
(reference)
Sample
Measure of 
lutein/
zeaxanthin 
status
Vision outcome
Result
Beirne 2013 (14)
73 subjects (ages 20–71)
MPOD
Foveal acuity
MPOD was not significantly related to foveal acuity
Hammond et al. 2013 (66)
150 healthy young subjects (mean 
age 22)
MPOD
GD, photostress recovery, 
chromatic contrast
Higher MPOD was significantly correlated with improved GD, 
photostress recovery, and chromatic contrast
Renzi & Hammond 2010 
(152)
50 healthy elderly subjects (mean 
age 72)
28 healthy young subjects (mean 
age 23)
MPOD
Luminance contrast
Higher MPOD levels were significantly correlated with a greater 
luminance contrast
Renzi & Hammond 2010 
(153)
70 subjects, full-temporal function 
outcome (ages 15–84)
354 subjects for CFF outcome 
(ages 16–92)
MPOD
CFF, TCSF
MPOD was positively correlated with TCSF in the center but not the 
parafovea. It also positively correlated with CFF
Randomized trials
Study 
author(s) and 
year 
(reference)
Sample
Intervention
Intervention influence 
on L/Z status
Duration
Vision outcome
Outcomes associated withsupplementation
Chous et al. 
2016 (43)
67 type 1 and type 
2 diabetes patients 
(mean age 56)
1
L and Z plus 
antioxidants
2
Placebo
Increased mean MPOD
6 months
CS, color discrimination
Better visual performance was observed for all 
measures in the supplemented group
Huang et al. 
2015 (78)
112 early-AMD 
patients (ages 61–
78)
1
l0 mg L
2
20 mg L
3
l0 mg L, l0 mg Z
4
Placebo
Increased mean MPOD 
and serum L/Z
2 years
VA, CS, photostress
CS significantly improved with supplementation; 
intervention 2 had the most improvement. No 
significant changes in photostress recovery or VA 
were observed
Akuffo et al. 
2015 (2)
47 early-AMD 
patients (mean age 
66)
1
20 m gL, 0.86 mg 
Z
2
10 mg L, 2 mg Z, 
l0 mg MZ
Increased mean MPOD 
except in intervention 1 
at the location of 1.75° 
from the foveal center
3 years
VA, CSAMD progression
CS significantly improved at certain spatial 
frequencies in all interventions. No improvements 
in VA or AMD progression were observed
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mares
Page 36
Randomized trials
Study 
author(s) and 
year 
(reference)
Sample
Intervention
Intervention influence 
on L/Z status
Duration
Vision outcome
Outcomes associated withsupplementation
3
3 mg L, 2 mg Z, 
17 mg MZ
Hammond et 
al. 2014 (67)
115 healthy 
college students 
(ages 18–40)
1
10 mg L, 2 mg Z
2
Placebo
Increased mean MPOD 
and serum L/Z
1 year
Photostress recovery, 
chromatic contrast, GD
Photostress recovery and chromatic contrast were 
improved but GD was not
Bovier et al. 
2014 (37)
92 healdiy young 
subjects (ages 18–
32)
1
20 mg Z
2
26 mg Z, 8 mg L, 
190 mg omega-3 
fatty acid
3
Placebo
Increased MPOD
4 months
CFF thresholds, visual 
motor reaction time, 
visual processing speed
Increased CFF thresholds, visual motor reaction 
times, and visual processing speeds were observed 
for groups that received any supplement
Sabour-Pickett 
et al. 2014 
(159)
52 early-AMD 
patients (mean age 
66)
1
20 mg L, 2 mg Z
2
10 mg MZ, 10 mg 
L, 2 mg Z
3
17 mg MZ, 3 mg 
L, 2 mg Z
Increased mean MPOD 
at all locations in 
interventions 2 and 3 but 
only at 1.75° in group 1
1 year
CS
CS improved at all spatial frequencies in 
intervention 3 and in low spatial frequencies in 
interventions 1 and 2
Age-Related 
Eye Disease 
Study Investig. 
2013 (1)
4,203 participants 
(ages 50-85)
1
10 mg L, 2 mg Z
2
Omega-3s
3
L/Z with 
omega-3s
4
Placebo
ND
5 years
VA more than 15 letters
No improvements were observed for VA of 15 
letters or more
Yao et al. 2013 
(192)
120 drivers (ages 
25–47)
1
20 mgL
2
Placebo
Increased mean MPOD 
and increased serum L
1 year
VA, CS, GD
No significant improvements in VA were observed, 
but CS and GD in supplemented group increased 
significantly. Improved scores on the NEI-VFQ 
were also observed for the supplemented group
Ma et al. 2012 
(116)
108 AMD patients 
(ages 50-79)
1
l0 mg L
2
20mg L
3
10 mg L plus l0 
mg Z
4
Placebo
Increased mean MPOD
48 weeks
BCVA, CS
Improvements in MPOD were positively correlated 
with improvements in VA and CS at 3, 6, and 12 
cycles
Weigert et al. 
2011 (187)
126 patients (ages 
50–90)
1
20 mg L for 3 
months, 10 mg L 
Increased mean MPOD
6 months
VA
Despite no significant improvement in VA, MPOD 
increases were related to improvements in VA
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mares
Page 37
Randomized trials
Study 
author(s) and 
year 
(reference)
Sample
Intervention
Intervention influence 
on L/Z status
Duration
Vision outcome
Outcomes associated withsupplementation
for additional 3 
months
2
Placebo
Piermarocchi 
et al. 2012 
(147)
145 patients (ages 
55–80)
1
10 mg L, 1 mg Z 
with other 
antioxidants
2
Placebo
ND
2 years
VA, CS, NEI-VFQ
VA was stabilized, and improvements in CS and 
NEI-VFQ score were observed
Nolan etal. 
2011 (135)
121 healthy 
subjects (ages 18–
41)
1
12 mg L, 1 mg Z
2
Placebo
Increased mean MPOD 
and increased serum L/Z
1 year
VA, CS, GD, photostress
No significant improvement of visual performance 
despite increased MPOD levels
Dawczynski et 
al. 2013 (49)
172 patients with 
early, 
intermediate, and 
advanced AMD 
(ages 50–95)
1
10 mg L, 1 mg Z, 
and other 
antioxidants, 
either once (dose 
1) or twice (dose 
2) daily
2
Placebo
Increased mean MPOD
1 year
VA
VA was improved (mean 2 letters for dose 1 and 
1.4 letters for dose 2)
Beatty et al. 
2013 (12)
433 patients with 
early AMD in 
both eyes or in one 
eye accompanied 
by advanced AMD 
in the fellow eye 
(ages 50–85)
1
12mgL, 0.6 mg Z, 
with other 
antioxidants
2
Placebo
Increased serum L/Z
3 years
VA, CS, AMD 
progression
VA improved in the supplemented group and 
progression along AMD severity scale was lower. 
No significant improvements in CS were observed
Richer et al. 
2011 (156)
60 patients with 
atrophic AMD 
(mean age 75)
1
8 mg Z
2
8 mg Z, 8 mg L
3
9 mg L
Increased mean MPOD 
at 1°
1 year
VA, GD, CS
High-contrast VA improved in intervention 1. 
Low-contrast VA, CS, and GD improved in 
intervention 3
Hu et al. 2011 
(77)
67 patients with 
nonproliferative 
diabetic 
retinopathy (ages 
42–76)
1
6 mg L, 0.5 mg Z
2
Placebo
Increased serum L/Z
3 months
VA, CS, macular edema 
(foveal thickness)
VA and CS improved, and macular edema was 
reduced in supplemented group
Abbreviations: AMD, age-related macular degeneration; BCVA, best-corrected visual acuity; CFF, critical flicker frequency; CS, contrast sensitivity; GD, glare disability; L, lutein; MPOD, macular pigment 
optical density; MZ, meso-zeaxanthin; ND, MPOD or serum L/Z were not determined; NEI-VFQ, National Eye Institute Vision Function Questionnaire; TCSF, temporal contrast sensitivity function; VA, 
visual acuity; Z, zeaxanthin.
Annu Rev Nutr. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 September 25.
