 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 2 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
Introduction
The increasingly frequent diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder 
(ASD) is based on deficits in social communication and interac-
tion together with restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior (1). 
Although the core features of ASD are behavioral, gastrointestinal 
(GI) disturbances, particularly constipation, are 4-fold more com-
mon in ASD (2). Platelet serotonin (5-HT), moreover, which is pri-
marily GI-derived (3), is increased in about one-third of patients 
with ASD (4, 5). Platelets do not synthesize 5-HT (6) but utilize the 
5-HT transporter (SERT, encoded by Slc6a4) (7) to take it up (8) as 
they circulate through the gut. Multiple hyperactive coding vari-
ants of SERT have been found in subjects with ASD (9–11). Knock-
in mice expressing the most common of these, SERT Ala56 (12), 
display hyperserotonemia, increased 5-HT clearance, and hyper-
sensitivity of central 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors, as well as repet-
itive behaviors and deficits of socialization that are reminiscent 
of ASD (13). The phenotype of SERT Ala56 mice suggests that the 
constitutively elevated activity of SERT in these animals interferes 
with the 5-HT signaling required for normal brain development 
and later function (14–16).
Neither 5-HT nor SERT is exclusive to the CNS. The bulk of 
5-HT in the body is found in the intestine, where it is a multifunc-
tional signaling molecule during fetal and adult life (17). Changes 
in SERT-mediated 5-HT clearance, therefore, could contribute 
to GI and other peripheral comorbidities that accompany ASD. 
Enteric actions of 5-HT, like those in the brain, are terminated 
by SERT (18–20). In the bowel, moreover, enterocytes, as well 
as serotonergic neurons, express SERT (18, 19, 21). SERT uptake 
into enterocytes and subsequent intracellular catabolism are also 
important in restricting the spread of mucosal 5-HT to, or desensi-
tization of, aberrant targets.
Two 5-HT depots exist in the gut, each with its own biosyn-
thetic enzyme (22, 23). A large tryptophan hydroxylase 1–depen-
dent (TPH1-dependent) 5-HT pool exists in mucosal enterochro-
maffin (EC) cells and, in rats and mice, mast cells, whereas a 
smaller TPH2-dependent pool exists in the serotonergic neu-
rons of the enteric nervous system (ENS). Both pools regulate GI 
motility (22, 24). EC cell 5-HT stimulates extrinsic sensory nerves 
(25, 26), which transmit signals of noxious stimuli (27), discom-
fort, and pain to the CNS. 5-HT also stimulates intrinsic primary 
afferent neurons, which recruit the ENS to mediate peristaltic (24, 
 
28–30) and secretory reflexes (31). Enteric neuronal 5-HT func-
tions not only as a neurotransmitter but also as a growth factor, 
stimulating 5-HT4 receptors that promote neurogenesis during 
development and adult life (22, 32). Neuronal 5-HT also regulates 
crypt epithelial cell proliferation (33).
The current study was undertaken to test the hypothesis that 
SERT Ala56 hyperactivity drives structural and functional GI def-
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is an increasingly common behavioral condition that frequently presents with 
gastrointestinal (GI) disturbances. It is not clear, however, how gut dysfunction relates to core ASD features. Multiple, rare 
hyperfunctional coding variants of the serotonin (5-HT) transporter (SERT, encoded by SLC6A4) have been identified in 
ASD. Expression of the most common SERT variant (Ala56) in mice increases 5-HT clearance and causes ASD-like behaviors. 
Here, we demonstrated that Ala56-expressing mice display GI defects that resemble those seen in mice lacking neuronal 
5-HT. These defects included enteric nervous system hypoplasia, slow GI transit, diminished peristaltic reflex activity, and 
proliferation of crypt epithelial cells. An opposite phenotype was seen in SERT-deficient mice and in progeny of WT dams 
given the SERT antagonist fluoxetine. The reciprocal phenotypes that resulted from increased or decreased SERT activity 
support the idea that 5-HT signaling regulates enteric neuronal development and can, when disturbed, cause long-lasting 
abnormalities of GI function. Administration of a 5-HT4 agonist to Ala56 mice during development prevented Ala56-
associated GI perturbations, suggesting that excessive SERT activity leads to inadequate 5-HT4–mediated neurogenesis. 
We propose that deficient 5-HT signaling during development may contribute to GI and behavioral features of ASD. The 
consequences of therapies targeting SERT during pregnancy warrant further evaluation.
Serotonin transporter variant drives preventable 
gastrointestinal abnormalities in development  
and function
Kara Gross Margolis,1 Zhishan Li,2 Korey Stevanovic,1 Virginia Saurman,1 Narek Israelyan,1,3 George M. Anderson,4 Isaac Snyder,1 
Jeremy Veenstra-VanderWeele,5 Randy D. Blakely,6 and Michael D. Gershon2
1Department of Pediatrics, 2Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, and 3Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.  
4Child Study Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. 5Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons/New York Psychiatric Institute,  
New York, New York, USA. 6Departments of Pharmacology and Psychiatry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: September 28, 2015; Accepted: March 3, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2016;126(6):2221–2235. doi:10.1172/JCI84877.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 2 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
thus appeared to be selectively affected. In SERT Ala56 mice, sub-
mucosal TH-expressing (Figure 1B; also compare K with L) and 
CGRP-expressing neurons (Figure 1C; also compare M with N) 
were each deficient, not only in absolute terms but as a proportion 
of total neurons (Figure 1D). In contrast, TH-expressing (Figure 2B; 
also compare P with Q) and CGRP-expressing neurons (Figure 2C; 
also compare L with M) were overly abundant in the submucosal 
plexus of SERTKO animals, again as a proportion of total neurons 
(Figure 2D). Submucosal TH-expressing (Figure 3B; also compare 
P with S) and CGRP-expressing neurons (Figure 3C; also compare 
Q with T) were similarly hyperplastic in fluoxetine-treated mice, 
once more not only absolutely but also as a proportion of total 
neurons (Figure 3D). Similarly, SERT Ala56 mice were deficient 
in GABA-expressing neurons in the myenteric plexus of the ileum 
(Figure 1G; also compare S with T) and colon (Figure 1H; also com-
pare U with V), whereas GABA-expressing neurons were overly 
abundant in both SERTKO (Figure 2, F and G; also compare N 
and R with O and S) and fluoxetine-treated mice (Figure 3, G and 
H; also compare K with N). Expression of SERT Ala56 thus leads 
to a hypoplastic ENS with selective impairment of development/
survival of late-born neurons, the development of which is also 
5-HT–promoted (22). In contrast, in SERTKO mice and in ani-
mals subjected to developmental fluoxetine exposure, the ENS is 
hyperplastic and the development/survival of those neurons that 
are impaired in SERT Ala56 mice is selectively enhanced.
The placenta has recently been found to be a transient source 
of 5-HT in early embryos that is able to influence CNS develop-
ment prior to the endogenous synthesis of 5-HT in central sero-
tonergic neurons (38). The presence of 5-HT in early embryos thus 
makes it possible for the hyperfunctional SERT Ala56 mutation to 
decrease enteric neurogenesis even before 5-HT is synthesized 
in the fetal gut. In fact, the density of serotonergic neurons in the 
SERT Ala56 intestine was only 36.3% ± 5.6% (P < 0.01; n = 6) of 
that found in the intestines of WT littermates (see Supplemental 
Figure 4, A and B; supplemental material available online with 
this article; doi:10.1172/JCI84877DS1). In contrast, the density of 
serotonergic neurons in the intestines of fluoxetine-treated mice 
was significantly greater than that of untreated control animals 
(Figure 3, F, J, and M). The numbers of serotonergic neurons in 
SERTKO mice could not accurately be determined, because the 
content of the marker for these neurons, 5-HT, is reduced (due 
to lack of reuptake) in neurons of SERTKO animals. Serotonergic 
neurites, however, were readily visible, and appeared to ramify 
more extensively in SERTKO than in either G56A or WT gut (Sup-
plemental Figure 4, C and D).
Because of the ENS hyperplasia in SERTKO and fluoxetine- 
treated mice, transverse sections of the bowel were examined to 
determine whether neurons might be located ectopically in the 
mucosa or within smooth muscle coats, as occurs in mice lack-
ing Hox11l1, which also display ENS hyperplasia (39). No ectopic 
neurons were found either in SERTKO or in fluoxetine-treated 
mice (not shown), suggesting that 5-HT affects neuronal devel-
opment/survival but not the migration of neural precursors or 
patterns of gangliogenesis.
The SERT Ala56 mutation leads to slow GI transit and impair-
ment of the peristaltic reflexes. Experiments were carried out to 
determine whether the long-lasting ENS hypoplasia associated 
icits due to altered 5-HT signaling that can be prevented through 
mechanism-guided interventions. We assessed the structure and 
function of the gut in SERT Ala56 animals, comparing results with 
those obtained in mice either lacking SERT or treated from gesta-
tion to weaning with the selective 5-HT reuptake inhibitor fluox-
etine. We detected significant, reciprocal abnormalities in these 
models related to enteric neuronal development, regulation of GI 
motility, and mucosal growth. Transcription of both Tph isoforms 
was also abnormal. The SERT Ala56–associated deficits were 
prevented if the animals were treated during development with 
a 5-HT4 agonist, prucalopride (34). Our findings reveal that adult 
bowel function is exquisitely sensitive to SERT activity during 
ontogeny, and they confirm that 5-HT signaling is critical for the 
formation of the ENS. Therapies that perturb SERT activity dur-
ing development, therefore, may have long-term consequences 
for bowel function. Observations also suggest that defective 5-HT 
signaling could provide a common mechanism contributing to 
peripheral and central defects in ASD.
Results
Numbers of enteric neurons are inversely related to SERT activity dur-
ing development. 5-HT promotes enteric neuronal development (22, 
32); therefore, we tested the hypothesis that SERT hyperactivity in 
SERT Ala56 mice would impede enteric neurogenesis (Figure 1). 
Parallel comparative experiments were carried out with Slc6a4–/– 
(herein referred to as SERTKO) animals (Figure 2) and mice 
exposed to the SERT antagonist fluoxetine from E1 to P21 (Figure 
3). Total numbers of enteric neurons and subsets were identified 
immunocytochemically and quantified in whole mounts of laminar 
preparations dissected from the gut wall of mice at 6–8 weeks of 
age. Neuronal numbers were quantified as a function of ganglionic 
area, which is a parameter that is relatively resistant to stretching 
of the tissue (35). SERT Ala56 and SERTKO mice were compared 
with WT littermates. Fluoxetine-treated mice were compared 
with untreated control animals. Because serotonergic neurons 
are born early and 5-HT enhances development of late-born neu-
rons expressing tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) (dopaminergic neu-
rons), γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and calcitonin gene–related 
peptide (CGRP) (22, 36, 37), these phenotypes were chosen for 
study. GABA-expressing neurons were quantified in the myenteric 
plexus where they are located, whereas TH- and CGRP-express-
ing neurons were quantified in the submucosal plexus where most 
are found. Total enteric neurons were significantly less abundant 
in SERT Ala56 than in WT mice (Figure 1). This difference was 
observed in both the submucosal (Figure 1A; also compare I with J) 
and the myenteric plexus of the ileum (Figure 1E; also compare O 
with P) and colon (Figure 1F; also compare Q with R). In contrast, 
in SERTKO mice, total neurons were significantly more abundant 
in both the submucosal (Figure 2A; also compare H with I) and the 
myenteric plexus (Figure 2E; also compare J with K) of the small 
intestines than in WT animals. The bowel of fluoxetine-treated 
mice was similar to that of SERTKO animals; again, more neurons 
were found in both the submucosal (Figure 3A; also compare O 
with R) and the myenteric plexus (Figure 3E; also compare I with L) 
of the fluoxetine-treated than the control mice.
Late-born neuronal phenotypes were more sensitive to the 
level of SERT activity during development than total neurons and 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 2 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
Figure 1. Numbers of total and late-born enteric neurons are lower in SERT Ala56 than in WT mice. n = 6–7/group. (A–D) Submucosal plexus, small 
intestine: (A) Total neurons. (B) Dopaminergic neurons (TH-immunoreactive). (C) CGRP-immunoreactive neurons. (D) Dopaminergic and CGRP-expressing 
neurons as a proportion of total neurons. (E–H) Myenteric plexus: (E) Total neurons, small intestine. (F) Total neurons, colon. (G) GABAergic neurons, small 
intestine. (H) GABAergic neurons, colon. (I and J) Submucosal HuC/D-immunoreactive neurons (blue): I shows WT; J shows SERT Ala56. (K and L) Submu-
cosal TH-immunoreactive neurons (red): K shows WT; L shows SERT Ala56. (M and N) Submucosal CGRP-immunoreactive neurons (green): M shows WT;  
N shows SERT Ala56. (O and P) Myenteric HuC/D-immunoreactive neurons, small intestine (green): O shows WT; P shows SERT Ala56. (Q and R) Myenteric 
HuC/D-immunoreactive neurons, colon (green): Q shows WT; R shows SERT Ala56. (S and T) Myenteric GABA-immunoreactive neurons, small intestine 
(blue): S shows WT; T shows SERT Ala56. (U and V) Myenteric GABA-immunoreactive neurons, colon (blue): U shows WT; V shows SERT Ala56. Scale bars 
in N (applies to I–N), R (applies to O–R), and V (applies to S–V): 30 μm. Hu-C/D, pan-neuronal marker.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 2 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
were also investigated in vitro to determine whether changes 
in intestinal transit in SERT Ala56 mice are due to a defect that 
is intrinsic to the ENS. The extrinsic innervation of the gut is 
severed in isolated preparations, and the intrinsic circuits of the 
ENS mediate CMMCs (40).
with the SERT Ala56 mutation is reflected in GI motility. Mice 
were examined at 6–8 weeks of age. Measurements were made 
in vivo of total GI transit time, gastric emptying, small intes-
tinal transit (SIT), and propulsive colorectal motility. Colonic 
migrating motor complexes (CMMCs; peristaltic reflexes) 
Figure 2. Numbers of total and late-born enteric neurons are greater in SERTKO than in WT mice. n = 6. (A–D) Submucosal plexus, small intestine: (A) 
Total neurons. (B) Dopaminergic neurons (TH-immunoreactive). (C) CGRP-immunoreactive neurons. (D) Dopaminergic and CGRP-expressing neurons as a 
proportion of total neurons. (E–G) Myenteric plexus: (E) Total neurons, small intestine. (F) GABAergic neurons, small intestine. (G) GABAergic neurons as 
a proportion of total neurons. (H and I) Submucosal ANNA-1–immunoreactive neurons (blue): H shows WT; I shows SERTKO. (J and K) Myenteric ANNA-1–
immunoreactive neurons (green; red in background is due to GABA immunoreactivity): J shows WT; K shows SERTKO. (L and M) Submucosal CGRP- 
immunoreactive neurons (red [arrow]). The blue is due to ANNA-1 immunoreactivity in nerve cell bodies; note that CGRP-immunoreactive cells contain 
coincident ANNA-1 immunoreactivity. The green fibers are immunostained with Abs to TH. L shows WT; M shows SERTKO. (N and O) Myenteric GABA- 
immunoreactive neurons (red [arrows]): N shows WT; O shows SERTKO. (P and Q) Submucosal TH-immunoreactive neurons (green [arrows]). The blue is 
due to ANNA-1 immunoreactivity in nerve cell bodies; note that TH-immunoreactive cells contain coincident ANNA-1 immunoreactivity. The red fibers that 
are also visible are immunostained with Abs to CGRP. P shows WT; Q shows SERTKO. (R and S) Myenteric plexus doubly immunostained to reveal GABA 
(red [arrows]) and ANNA-1 (green) immunoreactivities. Note that all GABA-immunoreactive cell bodies, but none of the fiber tracts, display coincident 
ANNA-1 immunoreactivity. R shows WT; S shows SERTKO. These are the same fields illustrated in N and O, but the merged image is shown to display 
GABA and ANNA-1 immunoreactivities simultaneously. Scale bars: 50 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 2 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
SERT Ala56 mice. SIT was significantly slower in SERT Ala56 than 
in WT mice after the injection of exogenous 5-HT (Figure 4D), con-
sistent with the hypothesis that the SERT Ala56 is hyperactive and 
reduces enteric effects even of exogenous 5-HT in vivo.
Intraluminal pressure was raised in isolated preparations of 
colon to initiate CMMCs, preparations were video-imaged, and 
spatiotemporal maps of contractile activity patterns were con-
structed (Figure 4, E and F). Analysis of these maps revealed that 
CMMC frequency (Figure 4G; P < 0.0001), velocity (Figure 4H; 
Total GI transit time in SERT Ala56 mice was significantly lon-
ger than that of WT animals (Figure 4A; P < 0.01); however, the rate 
of gastric emptying (Figure 4B) and SIT (not illustrated) in SERT 
Ala56 and WT animals did not differ significantly. In contrast to 
the stomach and SIT, propulsive colorectal motility was signifi-
cantly slower in SERT Ala56 than in WT mice (Figure 2C; P < 0.01). 
Exogenous 5-HT administration increases motility in the small 
intestine of humans and lower animals (41, 42). We therefore com-
pared SIT after exogenous 5-HT injection (1.0 mg/kg) in WT and 
Figure 3. Numbers of total and late-born enteric 
neurons are greater in mice exposed to fluoxe-
tine during development than in control mice 
exposed identically during development to 
vehicle. n = 6. (A–D) Submucosal plexus, small 
intestine: (A) Total neurons. (B) TH-immu-
noreactive neurons. (C) CGRP-immunoreactive 
neurons. (D) TH- and CGRP-expressing neurons 
as a proportion of total neurons. (E–H) Myenteric 
plexus: (E) Total neurons, small intestine. (F) 
5-HT–immunoreactive neurons. (G) GABAergic 
neurons. (H) Serotonergic and GABAergic neurons 
as a proportion of total neurons. (I–K) Myenteric 
plexus (MP) of fluoxetine-treated mice. (I) Total 
neurons (ANNA-1–immunoreactive; blue). (J) 5-HT–
immunoreactive neurons (red). (K) GABAergic 
neurons (green). (L–N) Myenteric plexus, control 
mice. (L) Total neurons (ANNA-1–immunoreactive; 
blue). (M) 5-HT–immunoreactive neurons (red). 
(N) GABAergic neurons (green). (O–Q) Submucosal 
plexus (SmP), fluoxetine-treated mice. (O) Total 
neurons (ANNA-1–immunoreactive; blue). (P) 
TH-immunoreactive neurons (red). (Q) GABAergic 
neurons (green). (R–T) Submucosal plexus, control 
mice. (R) Total neurons (ANNA-1–immunoreac-
tive; blue). (S) TH-immunoreactive neurons (red). 
(T) GABAergic neurons (green). Scale bar for all 
myenteric images (I–N): 50 μm. Scale bar for all 
submucosal images (O–T): 25 μm.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 2 6
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
P < 0.01), and length of propagation (Figure 4I; P < 0.001) were 
all significantly lower in SERT Ala56 than in WT mice. These 
observations suggest that the ENS hypoplasia of SERT Ala56 mice 
impairs generation and conduction of peristaltic reflexes.
GI motility was analyzed in SERTKO mice and in animals given 
fluoxetine during development to compare the effects of the SERT 
Ala56–associated ENS hypoplasia with those of ENS hyperplasia. 
In vivo measurements of GI motility in SERTKO mice, however, 
are complicated by the desensitization of 5-HT receptors that has 
been found to occur spontaneously in these animals (18). Diarrhea 
and constipation thus alternate in individual SERTKO mice. In 
contrast to SERT Ala56 animals, total GI transit time (Figure 5A) in 
SERTKO mice was not significantly different from that of WT ani-
mals, although gastric emptying was also not significantly different 
(Figure 5B). Surprisingly, as in SERT Ala56 mice, SIT (Figure 5C) 
and propulsive colorectal motility (Figure 5D) were significantly 
slower in SERTKO than in WT mice. Parameters of in vivo GI tran-
sit in mice exposed to fluoxetine during development, moreover, 
slowed even more than they did in SERTKO animals. Total intes-
tinal transit time in fluoxetine-treated animals was significantly 
increased (Figure 6A), SIT was significantly slower (Figure 6B), 
and the time required to eject beads from the rectum was signifi-
cantly greater (Figure 6C) than in vehicle-treated control mice.
We tested the idea that the unexpectedly slow transit in 
SERTKO and fluoxetine-treated mice was due to enhanced sym-
pathetic input from the CNS. This possibility is plausible because 
SERTKO mice are highly vulnerable to stress (43) and sympathetic 
stimulation, which slows GI transit, might result from the stress 
of measuring GI motility. We thus reinvestigated GI transit after 
chemical sympathectomy with 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) 
and also analyzed ENS-dependent CMMCs in isolated colon, 
which lacks a functional sympathetic innervation. Although sym-
pathectomy accelerated transit, GI transit time and gastric empty-
ing were not significantly different in WT and SERTKO mice (Fig-
ure 5, A and B). Sympathectomy, however, normalized SIT (Figure 
5C) and propulsive colorectal motility (Figure 5D) in SERTKO 
mice. Similarly, sympathectomy eliminated the slowing of all mea-
sures of in vivo motility in fluoxetine-treated mice without affect-
ing any of these parameters in matched control animals (Figure 6, 
A–C). These observations suggest that sympathetic slowing of GI 
Figure 4. Intestinal motility is abnormally slow in SERT Ala56 mice. Intestinal motility was abnormally slow in SERT Ala56 mice (n = 30–36/group; 2 
trials). (A) Total GI transit time (GIT) measured in vivo. (B) Gastric emptying. (C) Time to eject a bead from the rectum (colonic motility). (D) Small intestinal 
transit after a bolus injection of 5-HT. (E and F) WT (E) and SERT Ala56 (F) mice. Typical spatiotemporal maps showing CMMCs (arrows) in isolated prepa-
rations of colon (n = 3–4 per group). The ordinate represents time, and the abscissa represents oral-to-anal distance. The width of the gut (mm), indicative 
of contractions, was pseudocolored. (G) CMMC frequency. (H) CMMC velocity. (I) CMMC length of propagation. Student’s unpaired t test was used to com-
pare groups. For the box-and-whisker plot, the boxes represent the first and third quartiles, the whiskers are 95% confidence interval, and the lines within 
the boxes are median values.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 2 7
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
transit occurs and that both the deletion of SERT and its inhibition 
during development increase sympathetic input to the intestine. 
Analyses of the ENS-dependent CMMC in isolated preparations 
of colon from WT (Figure 5E), SERTKO (Figure 5F), control (Fig-
ure 6D), and fluoxetine-treated mice (Figure 6E) supported these 
ideas. CMMC frequency (Figure 5G) and velocity (Figure 5H) in 
SERTKO were not slower than in WT mice, although the propa-
gation length (Figure 5I) of CMMCs was significantly shorter. 
In isolated preparations of colon from mice that were exposed 
to fluoxetine during development, moreover, CMMC frequency 
(Figure 6F), velocity (Figure 6G), and propagation length (Figure 
6H) were all significantly greater than in those from control ani-
Figure 5. Sympathetic hyperactivity slows intestinal motility in SERTKO mice. Sympathetic hyperactivity slowed intestinal motility in SERTKO mice  
(n = 6–9/group for in vivo motility, 2 trials, and 12/group for peristalsis). (A) GIT measured in vivo. Total GI transit in WT and SERTKO mice was not sig-
nificantly different. 6-OHDA accelerated transit in both. (B) Gastric emptying. SERTKO and WT mice were not significantly different. (C) Small intestinal 
transit. Transit was significantly slower in SERTKO than in WT mice. 6-OHDA did not affect transit in WT mice but eliminated slow transit in SERTKO 
mice. (D) Colonic motility. More time was required for bead ejection in SERTKO than in WT mice. 6-OHDA did not affect motility in WT mice but eliminated 
slow bead ejection in SERTKO animals. (E and F) WT (E) and SERT Ala56 (F). Typical spatiotemporal maps showing CMMCs in isolated colon as in Figure 4. 
(G) CMMC frequency. (H) CMMC velocity. (I) CMMC length of propagation. Student’s unpaired t test and 1-way ANOVA were used, respectively, to compare 
single and multiple means. For the box-and-whisker plot, the boxes represent the first and third quartiles, the whiskers are 95% confidence interval, and 
the lines within the boxes are median values.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 2 8
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
with the SERT Ala56 mutation. 5-HT4 agonists increase enteric 
neurogenesis, and postnatal enteric neurogenesis is deficient in 
5-HT4 KO (Htr4–/–) mice (32). If SERT Ala56 hyperactivity were 
to impede enteric neurogenesis by diminishing 5-HT availability 
at 5-HT4 receptors, an exogenously supplied 5-HT4 agonist that 
is not a substrate for SERT ought to countermand the defect. We 
tested this hypothesis by administering the 5-HT4 agonist prucalo-
pride (15 mg/kg), which was given orally to dams from gestation 
through weaning. Offspring were then allowed to mature without 
further treatment. Treatment with prucalopride was found to pre-
vent the hypoplasia that occurs in total neurons (ANNA-1–immu-
noreactive) of SERT Ala56 mice in both the submucosal (Figure 
7A) and the myenteric plexus (Figure 7D). Prucalopride treatment 
also prevented the SERT Ala56–associated deficiencies of the sub-
mucosal late-born submucosal dopaminergic (TH-immunoreac-
tive; Figure 7B) and CGRP-immunoreactive neurons (Figure 7C) 
as well as the SERT Ala56–associated deficiency of the myenteric 
late-born GABA-immunoreactive neurons (Figure 7E). Prucalo-
mals. These observations suggest that ENS hyperplasia in mice 
exposed during development to fluoxetine is associated with 
facilitated generation, conduction, and propagation of peristaltic 
reflexes, which is the opposite of the effect of the ENS hypoplasia 
occurring in SERT Ala56 mice. Conceivably, the effects of SERT 
inhibition during development and SERT knockout are different 
because SERT is functional at the time that CMMCs are analyzed 
in fluoxetine-treated but not in SERTKO animals. SERT may be 
required during the generation of CMMCs to inactivate 5-HT, 
which participates in peristaltic reflex mediation (44). Spontane-
ous receptor desensitization in SERTKO mice (18) may also inter-
fere with CMMCs. In contrast, chemical sympathectomy prevents 
slow in vivo transit in both SERTKO and fluoxetine-treated mice, 
suggesting that enhanced sympathetic input to the bowel occurs 
in each and thus is probably due to a developmental disturbance 
of sympathetic control in the CNS.
Administration of a 5-HT4 agonist during development rescues 
mice from the abnormalities of the ENS and GI motility associated 
Figure 6. Chemical sympathectomy prevents in vivo slow intestinal transit of fluoxetine-treated mice. Chemical sympathectomy prevented in vivo slow 
intestinal transit in fluoxetine-treated mice (n = 8–13/group for in vivo motility assays, 2 trials; 4/group for peristalsis). Control and fluoxetine-treated 
animals were treated, respectively, with vehicle or 6-OHDA. Mice were examined within 2 weeks after the last injection. Data are from 4 mice of each type. 
(A) Total GIT. Fluoxetine treatment caused slow GIT. 6-OHDA corrected the defect in fluoxetine-treated mice but did not alter total GIT in control mice. 
(B) Small intestinal transit (SIT). Fluoxetine-treatment caused slow SIT. 6-OHDA corrected the deficit in fluoxetine-treated mice but did not affect SIT in 
control animals. (C) Colonic motility. Fluoxetine treatment increased the bead ejection time. 6-OHDA corrected the deficit in fluoxetine-treated mice but 
did not significantly alter ejection time in control animals. §P < 0.05; *P < 0.001; †P was NS. (D and E) WT (D) and fluoxetine-treated (E) mice. Typical spa-
tiotemporal maps showing CMMCs in isolated colon. (F) CMMC frequency. (G) CMMC velocity. (H) CMMC length of propagation. Student’s unpaired t test 
and 1-way ANOVA were used, respectively, to compare single and multiple means. For the box-and-whisker plot, the boxes represent the first and third 
quartiles, the whiskers are 95% confidence interval, and the lines within the boxes are median values.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 2 9
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
The SERT Ala56 mutation decreases crypt epithelial cell prolifer-
ation, stunts growth of villi, and decreases mucosal permeability. The 
ENS, and specifically 5-HT, have been linked to mucosal mainte-
nance (33); myenteric serotonergic neurons innervate submucosal 
cholinergic neurons that regulate proliferation of transit-amplify-
ing cells. As a result, the cell proliferation index, crypt depth, and 
villus height are all greater in SERTKO than in WT mice. Neuronal, 
rather than mucosal, 5-HT mediates these effects; SERTKO and 
double knockout SERTKO/TPH1KO (Slc6a4–/– Tph1–/–) mice are 
equivalent, but enhanced mucosal growth does not occur in dou-
ble knockout SERTKO/TPH2KO (Slc6a4–/– Tph2–/–) animals. We 
therefore compared villus height, crypt depth, and proliferation 
in SERT Ala56, SERTKO, and fluoxetine-treated mice (Figure 8  
and Supplemental Figure 3). 
Small intestinal villus height (Figure 8A) and crypt depth (Fig-
ure 8B) were both significantly less in SERT Ala56 mice than in 
WT littermates (Supplemental Figure 3, A and B). In contrast, in 
fluoxetine-treated mice, small intestinal villus height (Figure 8C) 
pride rescue of neuronal numbers was accompanied by elimina-
tion of the SERT Ala56–associated slowing of total GI transit time 
(Figure 7F) and of colonic motility (Figure 7G). The prucalopride-
mediated rescue of in vivo motility was also manifest in a rescue 
of CMMCs measured in vitro; prucalopride treatment prevented 
the SERT Ala56–associated decreases in CMMC frequency (Fig-
ure 7H), velocity (Figure 7I), and length of propagation (Figure 7J). 
These in vitro observations suggest that prucalopride rescue is an 
intrinsic property of the ENS and is not mediated through altered 
CNS control of the gut. Interestingly, administration of prucalo-
pride to WT mice during development led to a decrease in num-
bers of GABAergic neurons (Figure 7E) and a decrease in CMMC 
frequency (Figure 7H) that were not seen when SERT Ala56 pups 
were exposed to prucalopride. These observations are consistent 
with the possibility that excessive stimulation of 5-HT4 receptors, 
as might occur when prucalopride adds to endogenously released 
5-HT, can lead to receptor desensitization or, alternatively, to 
overstimulation and neurotoxicity.
Figure 7. Prucalopride treatment during devel-
opment rescues SERT Ala56 mice from ENS 
hypoplasia and associated abnormalities of GI 
motility. Treatment with prucalopride during 
development rescued SERT Ala56 mice from 
ENS hypoplasia (n = 3–4/group) and associated 
abnormalities of GI motility (n = 14–36/group 
for in vivo motility studies, 2 trials; 3–4/group 
for peristalsis). (A–C) Submucosal plexus. (A) 
Total neurons. Fewer neurons were found in 
SERT Ala56 than in WT mice. Prucalopride 
did not affect the number of neurons in WT 
animals but eliminated hypoplasia in SERT 
Ala56 mice. (B) TH-immunoreactive neurons. 
Prucalopride prevented the deficiency in SERT 
Ala56 mice. (C) CGRP-immunoreactive neu-
rons. Prucalopride prevented the deficiency in 
SERT Ala56 mice. (D and E) Myenteric plexus. 
Total neurons (D) and GABAergic neurons (E) 
were fewer in SERT Ala56 mice than in WT 
mice. Numbers of total and GABAergic neurons 
were normalized by prucalopride administra-
tion to SERT Ala56 mice. (F) Total GIT was 
longer in SERT Ala56 mice than in WT mice. 
Prucalopride eliminated slow transit in SERT 
Ala56 mice but did not affect total GIT when 
given similarly to WT mice. (G) Colonic motility 
was significantly longer in SERT Ala56 than in 
WT mice. Prucaloparide eliminated this defect 
in SERT Ala56 animals but did not significantly 
affect colonic motility when given to WT mice. 
(H–J) CMMCs in isolated colon. Frequency (H), 
velocity (I), and conduction length (J) were all 
lower in SERT Ala56 mice than in WT mice. 
Prucalopride eliminated each of these defects 
when given to SERT Ala56 mice but did not 
significantly alter CMMC parameters when 
given to WT animals. Student’s unpaired t test 
and 1-way ANOVA were used, respectively, to 
compare single and multiple means. For the 
box-and-whisker plot, the boxes represent the 
first and third quartiles, the whiskers are 95% 
confidence interval, and the lines within the 
boxes are median values.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 3 0
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
immunoreactive cells per small intestinal crypt (26.1 ± 0.7, n = 30 
 
crypts) of SERT Ala56 mice was significantly less than that of WT 
mice (45.0 ± 4.2, n = 31 crypts; P < 0.001; Supplemental Figure 
3, C and D). Similarly, in the colon, the mean number of Ki67- 
immunoreactive cells per crypt (21.4 ± 0.5, n = 112 crypts) of SERT 
Ala56 mice was significantly less than that of WT mice (30.5 ± 0.5, 
n = 28 crypts; P < 0.001). Crypt epithelial cells have previously 
been shown to proliferate more rapidly in SERTKO than in WT 
mice (33). Interestingly, proliferation in the intestinal crypts of 
fluoxetine-treated mice was similar to that previously observed in 
SERTKO animals and opposite to that of SERT Ala56 mice (Sup-
plemental Figure 3, G–J). The mean number of Ki67-immunore-
active cells per small intestinal crypt (22.3 ± 0.3, n = 78 crypts) 
of fluoxetine-treated mice was significantly greater than that of 
and crypt depth (Figure 8D) were all significantly greater than 
those of WT littermates (Supplemental Figure 3, E and F). As 
previously reported (33), in SERTKO mice, small intestinal villus 
height (142% ± 6% WT; n = 90 sections from 6 mice) and crypt 
depth (128% ± 3% WT; n = 90 sections from 6 mice) were signifi-
cantly larger than in WT littermates. Similar results were obtained 
in measurements of colonic crypt depth, which was significantly 
shorter than WT in G56A mice (Figure 8E) but significantly larger 
than that of controls in fluoxetine-treated mice (Figure 8F) and 
larger than WT in SERTKO animals (Figure 8G). 
Immunostaining of proliferating cells in crypts with Abs to 
Ki67 was used to verify whether altered proliferation of tran-
sit-amplifying cells was responsible for the differences observed 
in villus height and crypt depth. The mean number of Ki67- 
Figure 8. Effects of the SERT Ala56 
mutation on mucosal growth and  
permeability. Effects of the SERT  
Ala56 mutation on mucosal growth  
(n = 6) and permeability (12–20/group, 
2 trials) were reciprocal to those seen in 
SERTKO and fluoxetine-treated mice  
(n = 4/group). (A, B, and E) Comparisons 
of SERT Ala56 mice with WT mice. (A) 
Villus height (small intestine). (B) Crypt 
depth (small intestine). (E) Crypt depth 
(colon). (G) Comparison of SERTKO with 
WT mice. (G) Crypt depth (colon). (C, D, 
and F) Comparisons of fluoxetine-treated 
mice with control mice. (C) Villus height 
(small intestine). (D) Crypt depth (small 
intestine). (F) Crypt depth (colon). (H–J) 
Macromolecular permeability compared 
in SERT Ala56 (H), SERTKO (I), and 
fluoxetine-treated mice (J). Although 
macromolecular permeability in SERT 
Ala56 mice was significantly lower than 
that in WT animals (H), permeability was 
increased at both 2 and 5 hours after 
gavage of fluorescent dextran in SERTKO 
and fluoxetine-treated mice. Student’s 
unpaired t test was used to compare 
groups. For the box-and-whisker plot, the 
boxes represent the first and third quar-
tiles, the whiskers are 95% confidence 
interval, and the lines within the boxes 
are median values.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 3 1
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
when animals were analyzed. Despite changes in abundance of 
transcripts encoding TPH1 and the density of EC cells, no signifi-
cant change was seen in the concentration of 5-HT in the gut of 
either SERT Ala56 or fluoxetine-treated mice (data not shown). 
Secretion or intracellular metabolism of 5-HT, which were not 
measured, may thus balance changes in biosynthesis and uptake.
Discussion
SERT Ala56 is the most common of the rare hyperactive SERT vari-
ants that are overtransmitted to children with ASD (10, 11). SERT 
Ala56 mice exhibit hyperserotonemia and behaviors that align 
broadly with the core diagnostic features of ASD (12, 13, 45). These 
traits support the use of SERT Ala56 mice as a model for analyzing 
potential contributions of 5-HT signaling abnormalities to ASD. 
Both hyperserotonemia (4, 5) and GI dysfunction (2) are commonly 
seen in ASD. Because platelets derive their 5-HT from the gut (3) 
and 5-HT is an important multifunctional GI signaling molecule 
(17), we postulated that SERT hyperactivity would not only cause 
hyperserotonemia but also perturb GI structure and function in 
SERT Ala56 mice. Abnormal 5-HT signaling, moreover, impacts 
both CNS (38, 46–48) and ENS (22) development. We thus tested 
the hypothesis that ENS formation and ENS-dependent functions 
are perturbed in SERT Ala56 mice because of the reduction of 
endogenous 5-HT availability (13). To do so, we comprehensively 
analyzed SERT Ala56 mice and, for comparison, SERTKO and 
fluoxetine-treated animals, to provide, respectively, mice in which 
SERT is nonfunctional or is inhibited only during ontogeny. These 
studies of altered SERT activity also provided unique insights into 
roles of 5-HT signaling in enteric physiology and pathophysiology.
The ENS was strikingly hypoplastic in SERT Ala56 mice. 
Numbers of neurons were reduced in both plexuses of small and 
large intestines, and neurons generated after serotonergic neu-
rons during ontogeny (expressing TH, CGRP, or GABA) were 
more deficient than ENS neurons in general. In contrast, the 
ENS of SERTKO and fluoxetine-treated animals was hyperplas-
tic, and the late-born neurons that were deficient in SERT Ala56 
mice were especially abundant in these animals. The similarity 
between SERTKO and fluoxetine-treated mice suggests that the 
developmental period is a critical time for SERT function in neu-
rogenesis. These observations are consistent with the ideas that 
defective 5-HT signaling due to the increased 5-HT clearance of 
SERT Ala56 mice interferes with enteric neurogenesis, whereas 
potentiated serotonergic signaling due to the absence of SERT or 
its inhibition during development enhances neurogenesis. The 
sensitivity of late-born neurons to SERT activity is consistent with 
the ideas that serotonergic neurons, which are early-born, regulate 
enteric neurogenesis and thus help sculpt the ENS. These obser-
vations confirm that 5-HT is an ENS growth factor (22, 49) and 
that serotonergic signaling is essential for normal neurogenesis 
(22, 32). The data are also consistent with the hypothesis that a 
defect common to the ENS and CNS could be responsible in ASD 
for comorbid GI disturbances.
Motility of the SERT Ala56 bowel was impaired both in vivo 
(slowed GI transit time and colonic transit) and in vitro (decreased 
velocity, frequency, and length of conduction of CMMCs). 
Because CMMCs, which are ENS-dependent, were defective 
in isolated preparations of SERT Ala56 bowel, the motor abnor-
control animals (14.7 ± 00.3, n = 31 crypts; P < 0.001). Similarly, 
in the colon, the mean number of Ki67-immunoreactive cells per 
crypt (12.5 ± 0.3, n = 80 crypts) of fluoxetine-treated mice was 
significantly greater than that of control mice (9.1 ± 0.2, n = 74 
crypts; P < 0.001). These observations support the hypothesis 
that mucosal growth is stunted in SERT Ala56 mice because SERT 
regulation of 5-HT signaling is important for epithelial prolifer-
ation and mucosal maintenance. The effects of SERT inhibition 
during development, moreover, are remarkably persistent, since 
the fluoxetine-treated animals were given at least 6 weeks after 
fluoxetine withdrawal for SERT activity to recover.
Macromolecular permeability was investigated to determine 
how the alterations in mucosal maintenance observed in SERT 
Ala56, SERTKO, and fluoxetine-treated mice affected the integ-
rity of mucosal barrier function. Permeability to FITC-dextran in 
SERT Ala56 mice was found to be significantly less than that of 
WT animals (Figure 8H). In contrast, permeability of the mucosa 
of SERTKO (Figure 8I) and fluoxetine-treated mice (Figure 8J) 
was more than that of WT animals. Electron microscopic analysis 
after i.v. injection of HRP failed to reveal a loss of tight junctional 
integrity in any of the mice tested (Supplemental Figure 1).
Transcription of Tph1 and Tph2 is abnormal when SERT activ-
ity is altered in developing bowel. Experiments were carried out to 
determine whether the hyperactive SERT of SERT Ala56 mice or 
its absence in SERTKO animals altered transcription of Tph1 and/
or Tph2. Results with SERTKO mice were compared with those 
obtained with fluoxetine-treated animals to distinguish long-last-
ing developmental effects from the acute consequences of the 
absence of SERT. In the intestines of SERT Ala56 mice, transcripts 
encoding TPH1 and TPH2 were each significantly more abundant 
than in those of WT animals (Supplemental Figure 2A). Interest-
ingly, the relative density of EC cells and that of the entire ente-
roendocrine (EE) cell class were also significantly greater in SERT 
Ala56 than in WT mice (Supplemental Figure 2B). Because the 
majority of enteric TPH1 is located in EC cells, the high level of 
transcripts encoding Tph1 in SERT Ala56 mice is consistent with 
the greater abundance of EC cells in SERT Ala56 animals. In 
contrast, in the small and large intestines of SERTKO mice, tran-
scripts encoding TPH1 and TPH2 were each significantly less 
abundant than in those of WT mice (Supplemental Figure 2C). 
Consistently, the relative density of EC cells and that of the entire 
EE cell class were also significantly lower in SERTKO than in WT 
mice (Supplemental Figure 2D). The effects of the SERT Ala56 
mutation and SERTKO on transcription of Tph1 and Tph2, as well 
as on the relative abundance of EC and total EE cells, were thus 
the reverse of one another. In mice given fluoxetine throughout 
development, transcripts encoding TPH1 were significantly more 
abundant than in WT animals; however, no significant difference 
could be detected between fluoxetine-treated and control mice in 
transcripts encoding TPH2 (Supplemental Figure 2E). The signifi-
cant decreases relative to WT in the EC and total EE cell density 
of fluoxetine-treated mice (Supplemental Figure 2, E and F) were 
similar to those observed in SERTKO animals. It is possible that 
the abundance of transcripts encoding TPH2 was depressed in 
SERTKO mice but not in fluoxetine-treated animals because the 
effect requires an ongoing deficiency of 5-HT inactivation. SERT 
was presumably not inhibited 6 weeks after fluoxetine withdrawal 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 3 2
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
the hypoplastic mucosae of SERT Ala56 mice and greatest in the 
hyperplastic mucosae of SERTKO and fluoxetine-treated mice.
The SERT Ala56 mutation increased the GI expression of each 
of the 5-HT biosynthetic enzymes TPH1 and TPH2. These obser-
vations are consistent with the idea that the decreased availabil-
ity of 5-HT in the SERT Ala56 bowel triggers a feedback increase 
in 5-HT biosynthetic capacity in both EC cells (TPH1) and neu-
rons (TPH2). We also found that EC cells were more abundant 
in SERT Ala56 mice than in WT animals, which may account for 
the increased abundance of transcripts encoding TPH1. Feed-
back through 5-HT availability, however, may not account for the 
increase seen in total EE cells in SERT Ala56 animals, because the 
EE population includes cells that do not produce 5-HT. The dimin-
ished mucosal growth that occurs in SERT Ala56 animals may 
thus lead to an increase in the proportion of cells that differenti-
ate along a neurogenin 3–dependent pathway and acquire an EE 
phenotype (52). In SERTKO mice, transcripts encoding TPH1 and 
TPH2 were each less abundant than in WT animals and the den-
sities of both EC and total EE cells were decreased, a phenotype 
opposite to that seen in SERT Ala56 animals. These observations 
are consistent both with a feedback decrease in 5-HT biosynthesis 
due to enhanced 5-HT bioavailability in the absence of SERT and 
with a diminished acquisition of the EE phenotype when mucosal 
growth speeds up. The decrease in transcripts encoding TPH1 was 
mimicked in fluoxetine-treated mice, as was the decreased den-
sity of EC and total EE cells. Fluoxetine-treated mice, however, 
did not exhibit the decrease in abundance of transcripts encoding 
TPH2 that was seen in SERTKO animals; therefore, reduced TPH2 
expression probably reflects the ongoing enhanced 5-HT bioavail-
ability associated with SERT deletion. The mucosal effects of 
fluoxetine treatment, on the other hand, outlasted the period of 
acute SERT inhibition and are likely to be due to the rearranged 
ENS in these animals.
The GI impact of developmental administration of a SERT 
inhibitor persisted into adult life, long after the inhibitor was 
withdrawn. Depression occurs in up to 23% of pregnant women, 
and SERT inhibition is a common feature of most antidepressants 
used to treat it (15). Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) 
use during pregnancy has been linked to a 2-fold increase in con-
genital defects (53). Children exposed to SSRIs or tricyclic antide-
pressants in utero were found to be 10-fold more likely to require 
laxatives for constipation, which is consistent with the idea that 
antenatal SERT inhibition disturbs ENS development and leads to 
persistent defects in GI motility (54). The ENS contributes to many 
GI disorders in adults, including irritable bowel syndrome (55) 
and inflammatory bowel disease (23, 56). Given the importance of 
5-HT signaling to ENS development and the long-lasting effects of 
fluoxetine treatment on sympathetic output, further investigation 
is probably warranted of the administration to pregnant or lactat-
ing women of antidepressants that affect SERT or 5-HT function.
ASD is severe in its prevalence, impact, and costs to society. 
Symptoms, more than etiology, define the syndrome; neverthe-
less, peripheral abnormalities, such as GI dysfunction (2), also 
occur. The complexity of the genetic contributions to ASD (57) 
encourages efforts to identify biomarkers, such as hyperserotone-
mia (4, 5), for convergent pathways to account for the pathophys-
iology. Because platelets acquire their 5-HT from the GI tract (3), 
mality is an intrinsic property of the ENS. This consideration is 
important because a global defect in SERT affects the CNS and 
well as the ENS. In both SERTKO and fluoxetine-treated mice, 
for example, the absence or inhibition of SERT during develop-
ment was found to enhance sympathetic activity, which slowed 
GI motility in vivo. Both the ENS hypoplasia of SERT Ala56 mice 
and the hyperplasia seen in SERTKO and fluoxetine-treated ani-
mals thus have functional consequences.
Two subtypes of 5-HT receptor have been linked to 5-HT–pro-
moted enteric neurogenesis, 5-HT2B (49) and 5-HT4 (32). Agonists 
of each promote enteric neurogenesis; moreover, postnatal enteric 
neurogenesis is defective when 5-HT4 receptors are deleted (32). 
To test the hypothesis that 5-HT4 receptors are critical in medi-
ating the enteric neurodevelopmental actions of 5-HT, we deter-
mined whether a 5-HT4 agonist, prucalopride (34), prevents the 
development of the SERT Ala56 ENS phenotype. Because pruca-
lopride is not a substrate for SERT, its signaling should not be ter-
minated prematurely, like that of 5-HT, by an overly active SERT. 
Prucalopride did, in fact, overcome the SERT Ala56 abnormal-
ity, preventing the ENS hypoplasia, deficiencies of late-develop-
ing neurons, the slowing of GI transit in vivo, and the defects in 
CMMCs that occur in vitro. Systemic agonist administration to 
dams precludes an absolute conclusion that the actions of prucalo-
pride derive from direct stimulation of enteric neurogenesis in off-
spring, though this seems likely and is consistent with the known 
receptor contributions to developing enteric neurons. Regardless, 
the striking ability of prucalopride to prevent SERT Ala56–associ-
ated ENS neuronal hypoplasia and its consequences supports the 
idea that SERT and 5-HT4 receptors play important roles in 5-HT–
promoted neurogenesis and also supports the overall hypothe-
sis that the defects seen in SERT Ala56 mice are, in fact, due to 
the premature clearance of endogenous 5-HT by the hyperactive 
SERT variant these animals express.
SERT has previously been shown to play a critical role in 
regulating the proliferation of crypt epithelial cells and mucosal 
maintenance (33). Serotonergic neurons, however, are restricted 
to the myenteric plexus and do not directly innervate the mucosa 
(50, 51); instead, myenteric serotonergic neurons innervate sub-
mucosal cholinergic neurons that provide a muscarinic input to 
the mucosa, which in turn stimulates epithelial proliferation and 
the growth of villi and crypts (33). Genetic deletion of SERT thus 
enhances the action of 5-HT at submucosal synapses, which indi-
rectly increases villus height, crypt depth, and crypt epithelial 
proliferation. Conversely, the enhanced 5-HT clearance of SERT 
Ala56 mice leads to a reduction in villus height and crypt depth and 
causes the proliferation of crypt epithelium to be abnormally slow. 
The enhanced mucosal growth observed in fluoxetine-treated 
mice, which resembled that seen in SERTKO animals, reveals that 
a critical period exists for SERT’s contribution to mucosal growth. 
SERT inhibition has long-term consequences even when, as in 
fluoxetine-treated mice, it is restricted to development. We pro-
pose that ENS hypoplasia due to enhanced SERT activity during 
development impairs mucosal maintenance during later life and 
suggest that mucosal maintenance is sustained by ongoing neu-
ronal 5-HT signaling. It is also interesting that mucosal permeabil-
ity to macromolecules appeared to be a direct function of mucosal 
growth. For example, macromolecular permeability was lowest in 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 3 3
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
GI motility. Colonic motility was measured as the time required to 
expel a 3 mm glass bead inserted 2 cm into the rectum (69). Total GI 
transit time was estimated as the time required for a nonabsorbable 
dye (carmine red) to appear in stool after its gavage into the stomach 
(70). Gastric emptying and small bowel transit were evaluated follow-
ing the gavage of rhodamine B dextran in methylcellulose. The gut was 
removed 15 minutes after gavage, and the percentage of dye remain-
ing in the stomach as well as the geometric center of the rhodamine B 
dextran in the intestine was determined (71). Video imaging was used 
to analyze CMMCs in isolated colon (72, 73). Internal pressure was 
raised to initiate CMMCs, and spatiotemporal maps of colon diame-
ter as a function of time were constructed. CMMC frequency, velocity, 
and length of conduction were measured (74, 75). See Supplemental 
Methods for further details.
Quantitation of transcripts. Methods used to extract RNA, reverse- 
transcribe it to DNA, and quantify transcript abundance with real-time 
PCR have been described previously (22, 23) and are detailed in Supple-
mental Methods. Transcript expression was normalized to that of glyc-
eraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gapdh).
In vivo permeability. The absorption of FITC-dextran (4.4 kDa; 
22 mg/ml in PBS; Sigma-Aldrich) was evaluated by measurement of 
its concentration in blood (fluorescence at 520 nm) after gavage (76). 
Submandibular puncture was used to obtain blood (100 μl) 2 and 
 
5 hours after the administration of FITC-dextran.
Statistics. Student’s unpaired t test and 1-way ANOVA were used, 
respectively, to compare single and multiple means. A P value of less 
than 0.05 was considered significant.
Study approval. Animal studies were approved by the IACUC of 
Columbia University Medical Center.
Author contributions
KGM designed and conducted the studies, analyzed data, and 
wrote the manuscript. ZL, KS, VS, and NI conducted experiments 
and acquired data. GMA conducted experiments and acquired 
and analyzed data. IS acquired data. JV-V created and provided the 
Ala56 mice, conducted experiments, and analyzed data. RDB cre-
ated and provided the Ala56 mice, conducted experiments, ana-
lyzed data, and critically reviewed the manuscript. MDG designed 
the studies, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH grants NS15547, DK093786, 
and MH096972, the Einhorn Charitable Trust, and the Autism 
Research Institute.
Address correspondence to: Kara Gross Margolis, Morgan Stanley 
Children’s Hospital, Columbia University College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gas-
troenterology, 620 West 168th Street, New York, New York 10032, 
USA. Phone: 212.305.5903; E-mail: kjg2133@cumc.columbia.edu.
the ASD-associated increase in platelet 5-HT links GI dysfunction 
to ASD. The gene encoding SERT (SLC6A4) has been associated 
with both platelet 5-HT content and susceptibility to ASD (58–61). 
The abnormalities of GI function that we have characterized in 
SERT Ala56 mice are also similar to those that occur at high fre-
quency in ASD (2, 62). Our observations thus support the idea that 
a defect in 5-HT–sensitive neurogenic pathways could be a com-
mon feature, describing a novel ASD subtype defined by “reverse 
phenotyping” (63), in which behavioral and enteric abnormalities 
due to abnormal serotonergic signaling underlie the condition. A 
prospective human study will be needed to confirm this sugges-
tion. Interestingly, the 5-HT4 receptor, which prucalopride rescue 
suggests is insufficiently stimulated in SERT Ala56 mice, also 
promotes hippocampal neurogenesis and has been postulated to 
underlie the neurogenesis induced by SSRIs (64). Prucalopride 
and other 5-HT4 agonists were developed for treating chronic con-
stipation and constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome 
(34). Whether 5-HT4 agonists might also be helpful therapeutic 
agents for ASD requires further study.
Methods
Animals. C57BL/6 mice were used for studies of Slc6a4 deletion 
(SERTKO) and inhibition during development with fluoxetine. Fluox-
etine (7.5 mg/kg/d) was administered to pregnant dams from E1 (the 
time a mucous plug was detected) through weaning at P21. Animals 
were tested at 6–8 weeks of age. SERT Ala56 mice were generated on a 
129S6 background (12). Experiments were carried out with confirmed 
homozygous WT and SERT Ala56 littermates. The selective 5-HT4 
agonist prucalopride (15 mg/kg; Shire Pharmaceuticals) was given to 
dams daily by gavage. Prucalopride was begun at E1 and was continued 
until P21. Control dams received autoclaved water, also by gavage. The 
E1–P21 period covers most of enteric neurogenesis (37). The effects of 
prucalopride were determined 3–5 weeks after cessation of therapy, 
ensuring that prucalopride itself was no longer present in the animals.
Immunocytochemistry. The immunoreactivities of the neuronal 
 
marker ANNA-1 (65–68) as well as tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), γ-amino-
butyric acid (GABA), 5-HT, and calcitonin gene–related peptide (CGRP) 
were located to quantify the abundance of total, dopaminergic, 
GABAergic, 5-HT–expressing, and CGRP-expressing enteric neurons. 
Myenteric and submucosal plexuses were examined in whole mounts of 
laminar preparations of the gut wall. Methods used have been described 
previously (22, 23) and are detailed in Supplemental Methods.
Images were obtained with a cooled CCD camera and analyzed 
with computer assistance (Volocity 6.0 software, Improvision/Perkin-
Elmer Life and Analytical Sciences). To count the numbers of labeled 
cells, a computer-controlled motorized stage was used to scan and 
collect images with a ×20 objective covering the entirety of a 10-mm2 
area. Collected images were computer-processed (Volocity 6.0 soft-
ware) to estimate numbers of immunoreactive cells of each type (cells 
per square millimeter of ganglionic area).
 1. Posar A, Resca F, Visconti P. Autism according to 
diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disor-
ders 5(th) edition: the need for further improve-
ments. J Pediatr Neurosci. 2015;10(2):146–148.
 2. McElhanon BO, McCracken C, Karpen S, Sharp 
WG. Gastrointestinal symptoms in autism 
spectrum disorder: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics. 
2014;133(5):872–883.
 3. Matondo RB, et al. Deletion of the seroto-
nin transporter in rats disturbs serotonin 
homeostasis without impairing liver regener-
ation. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 
2009;296(4):G963–G968.
 4. Mulder EJ, et al. Platelet serotonin levels in 
pervasive developmental disorders and men-
tal retardation: diagnostic group differences, 
within-group distribution, and behavioral 
correlates. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 3 4
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
2004;43(4):491–499.
 5. Ritvo ER, Yuwiler A, Geller E, Ornitz EM, Saeger 
K, Plotkin S. Increased blood serotonin and plate-
lets in early infantile autism. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
1970;23(6):566–572.
 6. Morrissey JJ, Walker MN, Lovenberg W. The 
absence of tryptophan hydroxylase activ-
ity in blood platelets. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 
1977;154(4):496–499.
 
7. Lesch KP, Wolozin BL, Murphy DL, Riederer P. 
Primary structure of the human platelet serotonin 
(5-HT) uptake site: Identity with the brain 5-HT 
transporter. J Neurochem. 1993;60(6):2319–2322.
 8. Hughes FB, Brodie BB. The mechanism of seroto-
nin and catecholamine uptake by platelets.  
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1959;127:96–102.
 9. Prasad HC, et al. Human serotonin trans-
porter variants display altered sensitivity to 
protein kinase G and p38 mitogen-activated 
protein kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2005;102(32):11545–11550.
 10. Sutcliffe JS, et al. Allelic heterogeneity at the 
serotonin transporter locus (SLC6A4) confers 
susceptibility to autism and rigid-compulsive 
behaviors. Am J Hum Genet. 2005;77(2):265–279.
 11. Prasad HC, Steiner JA, Sutcliffe JS, Blakely RD. 
Enhanced activity of human serotonin transporter 
variants associated with autism. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci. 2009;364(1514):163–173.
 12. Veenstra-Vanderweele J, et al. Modeling rare gene 
variation to gain insight into the oldest biomarker 
in autism: construction of the serotonin trans-
porter Gly56Ala knock-in mouse. J Neurodev 
Disord. 2009;1(2):158–171.
 13. Veenstra-VanderWeele J, et al. Autism gene 
variant causes hyperserotonemia, serotonin 
receptor hypersensitivity, social impairment 
and repetitive behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2012;109(14):5469–5474.
 14. Gaspar P, Cases O, Maroteaux L. The devel-
opmental role of serotonin: news from 
mouse molecular genetics. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2003;4(12):1002–1012.
 15. Kepser LJ, Homberg JR. The neurodevelopmental 
effects of serotonin: a behavioural perspective. 
Behav Brain Res. 2015;277:3–13.
 16. Liu C, Maejima T, Wyler SC, Casadesus G, 
Herlitze S, Deneris ES. Pet-1 is required across 
different stages of life to regulate serotonergic 
function. Nat Neurosci. 2010;13(10):1190–1198.
 17. Gershon MD. 5-Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) 
in the gastrointestinal tract. Curr Opin Endocrinol 
Diabetes Obes. 2013;20(1):14–21.
 18. Chen JJ, et al. Maintenance of serotonin in the 
intestinal mucosa and ganglia of mice that lack the 
high affinity serotonin transporter (SERT): abnor-
mal intestinal motility and the expression of cation 
transporters. J Neurosci. 2001;21(16):6348–6361.
 19. Wade PR, Chen J, Jaffe B, Kassem IS, Blakely 
RD, Gershon MD. Localization and function of a 
5-HT transporter in crypt epithelia of the gastro-
intestinal tract. J Neurosci. 1996;16(7):2352–2364.
 20. Blakely RD, et al. Cloning and expression of a 
functional serotonin transporter from rat brain. 
Nature. 1991;354(6348):66–70.
 21. Chen JX, Pan H, Rothman TP, Wade PR, 
Gershon MD. Guinea pig 5-HT transporter: 
cloning, expression, distribution and function 
in intestinal sensory reception. Am J Physiol. 
1998;275(3 pt 1):G433–G448.
 22. Li Z, et al. Essential roles of enteric neuronal 
serotonin in gastrointestinal motility and the 
development/survival of enteric dopaminergic 
neurons. J Neurosci. 2011;31(24):8998–9009.
 23. Margolis KG, et al. Pharmacological reduc-
tion of mucosal but not neuronal serotonin 
opposes inflammation in mouse intestine. Gut. 
2014;63(6):928–937.
 24. Heredia DJ, Gershon MD, Koh SD, Corrigan 
RD, Okamoto T, Smith TK. Important role of 
mucosal serotonin in colonic propulsion and 
peristaltic reflexes: in vitro analyses in mice 
lacking tryptophan hydroxylase 1. J Physiol. 
2013;591(23):5939–5957.
 25. Hillsley K, Grundy D. Sensitivity to 5-hydroxy-
tryptamine in different afferent subpopulations 
within mesenteric nerves supplying the rat jeju-
num. J Physiol. 1998;509(pt 3):717–727.
 26. Blackshaw LA, Grundy D. Effects of 5-hydroxy-
tryptamine on discharge of vagal mucosal affer-
ent fibres from the upper gastrointestinal tract of 
the ferret. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1993;45(1):41–50.
 27. Lang IM. Noxious stimulation of emesis. Dig Dis 
Sci. 1999;44(8 suppl):58S–63S.
 28. Pan H, Gershon MD. Activation of intrinsic afferent 
pathways in submucosal ganglia of the guinea pig 
small intestine. J Neurosci. 2000;20(9):3295–3309.
 29. Bertrand PP, Kunze WAA, Furness JB, Bornstein 
JC. The terminals of myenteric intrinsic primary 
afferent neurons of the guinea pig ileum are 
excited by 5-HT acting at 5-HT3 receptors. Neu-
roscience. 2000;101(2):459–469.
 30. Bülbring E, Crema A. The release of 5-hydroxy-
tryptamine in relation to pressure exerted on the 
intestinal mucosa. J Physiol. 1959;146(1):18–28.
 31. Cooke HJ, Christofi FL. Enteric regulation of 
mucosal secretion. In: Johnson LR, ed. Physiology 
of the Gastrointestinal Tract. 4th ed. New York, 
New York, USA: Academic Press; 2006:737–762.
 32. Liu MT, Kuan YH, Wang J, Hen R, Gershon MD. 
5-HT4 receptor-mediated neuroprotection and 
neurogenesis in the enteric nervous system of 
adult mice. J Neurosci. 2009;29(31):9683–9699.
 33. Gross ER, Gershon MD, Margolis KG, Gertsberg 
ZV, Cowles RA. Neuronal serotonin regulates 
growth of the intestinal mucosa in mice.  
Gastroenterology. 2012;143(2):408–417.
 34. Briejer MR, et al. The in vitro pharmacological 
profile of prucalopride, a novel enterokinetic 
compound. Eur J Pharmacol. 2001;423(1):71–83.
 35. Karaosmanoglu T, Aygun B, Wade PR, Gershon 
MD. Regional differences in the number of 
neurons in the myenteric plexus of the guinea 
pig small intestine and colon: an evaluation 
of markers used to count neurons. Anat Rec. 
1996;244(4):470–480.
 36. Chalazonitis A, et al. Bone morphogenetic pro-
tein regulation of enteric neuronal phenotypic 
diversity: relationship to timing of cell cycle exit. 
J Comp Neurol. 2008;509(5):474–492.
 37. Pham TD, Gershon MD, Rothman TP. Time of 
origin of neurons in the murine enteric nervous 
system. J Comp Neurol. 1991;314(4):789–798.
 38. Bonnin A, et al. A transient placental source 
of serotonin for the fetal forebrain. Nature. 
2011;472(7343):347–350.
 39. Yamataka A, et al. Intestinal neuronal dysplasia-
like pathology in Ncx/Hox11L. J Pediatr Surg. 
2001;36(8):1293–1296.
 40. Spencer NJ, Bywater RA, Taylor GS. Evidence 
that myoelectric complexes in the isolated mouse 
colon may not be of myogenic origin. Neurosci 
Lett. 1998;250(3):153–156.
 41. Misiewicz JJ, Waller SL, Eisner M. Motor 
responses of human gastrointestinal tract to 
5-hydroxytryptamine in vivo and in vitro. Gut. 
1966;7(3):208–216.
 42. Oosterbosch L, von der Ohe M, Valdovinos MA, 
Kost LJ, Phillips SF, Camilleri M. Effects of sero-
tonin on rat ileocolonic transit and fluid transfer 
in vivo: possible mechanisms of action. Gut. 
1993;34(6):794–798.
 43. Adamec R, Burton P, Blundell J, Murphy DL, 
Holmes A. Vulnerability to mild predator stress 
in serotonin transporter knockout mice. Behav 
Brain Res. 2006;170(1):126–140.
 44. Smith TK, Gershon MD. CrossTalk proposal: 
5-HT is necessary for peristalsis. J Physiol. 
2015;593(15):3225–3227.
 45. Kerr TM, et al. Genetic background modulates 
phenotypes of serotonin transporter Ala56 
knock-in mice. Mol Autism. 2013;4(1):35.
 46. Kawasaki H. Spatio-temporal regulation of the 
formation of the somatosensory system. Dev 
Growth Differ. 2015;57(3):193–199.
 47. Chen X, Ye R, Gargus JJ, Blakely RD, Dobrenis 
K, Sze JY. Disruption of transient serotonin accu-
mulation by non-serotonin-producing neurons 
impairs cortical map development [published 
online ahead of print January 14, 2015]. Cell Rep. 
doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2014.12.033.
 48. Deneris ES. Molecular genetics of mouse sero-
tonin neurons across the lifespan. Neuroscience. 
2011;197:17–27.
 49. Fiorica-Howells E, Maroteaux L, Gershon MD. 
Serotonin and the 5-HT(2B) receptor in the 
development of enteric neurons. J Neurosci. 
2000;20(1):294–305.
 50. Furness JB, Costa M. Neurons with 5-hydroxytryp-
tamine-like immunoreactivity in the enteric ner-
vous system: Their projections in the guinea pig 
small intestine. Neuroscience. 1982;7(2):341–350.
 51. Qu ZD, Thacker M, Castelucci P, Bagyanszki M, 
Epstein ML, Furness JB. Immunohistochemical 
analysis of neuron types in the mouse small 
intestine. Cell Tissue Res. 2008;334(2):147–161.
 52. Clevers H. The intestinal crypt, a prototype stem 
cell compartment. Cell. 2013;154(2):274–284.
 53. Wogelius P, et al. Maternal use of selective seroto-
nin reuptake inhibitors and risk of congenital mal-
formations. Epidemiology. 2006;17(6):701–704.
 54. Nijenhuis CM, ter Horst PG, van Rein N, Wilffert 
B, de Jong-van den Berg LT. Disturbed devel-
opment of the enteric nervous system after in 
utero exposure of selective serotonin re-uptake 
inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2012;73(1):126–134.
 55. Gershon MD. Nerves, reflexes, and the enteric 
nervous system: pathogenesis of the irrita-
ble bowel syndrome. J Clin Gastroenterol. 
2005;39(5 suppl 3):S184–S193.
 56. Margolis KG, et al. Enteric neuronal density con-
tributes to the severity of intestinal inflamma-
tion. Gastroenterology. 2011;141(2):588–598.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R e s e a R c h  a R t i c l e
2 2 3 5
jci.org   Volume 126   Number 6   June 2016
 57. Persico AM, Napolioni V. Autism genetics. Behav 
Brain Res. 2013;251:95–112.
 58. Devlin B, et al. Autism and the serotonin trans-
porter: the long and short of it. Mol Psychiatry. 
2005;10(12):1110–1116.
 59. Huang CH, Santangelo SL. Autism and serotonin 
transporter gene polymorphisms: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Am J Med Genet B Neu-
ropsychiatr Genet. 2008;147B(6):903–913.
 60. Kistner-Griffin E, Brune CW, Davis LK, Sutcliffe 
JS, Cox NJ, Cook EH Jr. Parent-of-origin effects 
of the serotonin transporter gene associated with 
autism. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 
2011;156(2):139–144.
 61. Veenstra-VanderWeele J, et al. Transmission 
disequilibrium studies of the serotonin 5-HT2A 
receptor gene (HTR2A) in autism. Am J Med 
Genet. 2002;114(3):277–283.
 62. Hsiao EY. Gastrointestinal issues in autism 
spectrum disorder. Harv Rev Psychiatry. 
2014;22(2):104–111.
 63. Schulze TG, McMahon FJ. Defining the phe-
notype in human genetic studies: forward 
genetics and reverse phenotyping. Hum Hered. 
2004;58(3–4):131–138.
 64. Imoto Y, et al. Role of the 5-HT4 receptor in 
chronic fluoxetine treatment-induced neuro-
genic activity and granule cell dematuration in 
the dentate gyrus. Mol Brain. 2015;8:29.
 65. King PH, Redden D, Palmgren JS, Nabors LB, 
Lennon VA. Hu antigen specificities of ANNA-I 
autoantibodies in paraneoplastic neurological 
disease. J Autoimmun. 1999;13(4):435–443.
 66. Lennon VA. The case for a descriptive generic 
nomenclature: clarification of immunostaining 
criteria for PCA-1, ANNA-1, and ANNA-2 autoan-
tibodies. Neurology. 1994;44(12):2412–2415.
 67. Chu G, Wilson PC, Carter CD, Lennon VA, Rob-
erts-Thomson IC. Intestinal pseudo-obstruction, 
type 1 anti-neuronal nuclear antibodies and 
small-cell carcinoma of the lung. J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 1993;8(6):604–606.
 68. Chalk CH, Lennon VA, Stevens JC, Windebank 
AJ. Seronegativity for type 1 antineuronal nuclear 
antibodies (‘anti-Hu’) in subacute sensory neu-
ronopathy patients without cancer. Neurology. 
1993;43(11):2209–2211.
 69. Li ZS, Schmauss C, Cuenca A, Ratcliffe E, Ger-
shon MD. Physiological modulation of intestinal 
motility by enteric dopaminergic neurons and 
the D2 receptor: analysis of dopamine receptor 
expression, location, development, and function 
in wild-type and knock-out mice. J Neurosci. 
2006;26(10):2798–2807.
 70. Kimball ES, Palmer JM, D’Andrea MR, Hornby PJ, 
Wade PR. Acute colitis induction by oil of mustard 
results in later development of an IBS-like acceler-
ated upper GI transit in mice. Am J Physiol Gastro-
intest Liver Physiol. 2005;288(6):G1266–G1273.
 71. Miller MS, Galligan JJ, Burks TF. Accurate mea-
surement of intestinal transit in the rat. J Pharma-
col Methods. 1981;6(3):211–217.
 72. Roberts RR, Bornstein JC, Bergner AJ, Young HM. 
Disturbances of colonic motility in mouse models 
of Hirschsprung’s disease. Am J Physiol Gastroin-
test Liver Physiol. 2008;294(4):G996–G1008.
 73. Roberts RR, Murphy JF, Young HM, Bornstein 
JC. Development of colonic motility in the 
neonatal mouse-studies using spatiotemporal 
maps. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 
2007;292(3):G930–G938.
 74. Gwynne RM, Thomas EA, Goh SM, Sjovall H, 
Bornstein JC. Segmentation induced by intralu-
minal fatty acid in isolated guinea-pig duodenum 
and jejunum. J Physiol. 2004;556(pt 2):557–569.
 75. Welch MG, Margolis KG, Li Z, Gershon MD. 
Oxytocin regulates gastrointestinal motility, 
inflammation, macromolecular permeability, and 
mucosal maintenance in mice. Am J Physiol Gas-
trointest Liver Physiol. 2014;307(8):G848–G862.
 76. Chaniotou Z, et al. Corticotropin-releasing 
factor regulates TLR4 expression in the colon 
and protects mice from colitis. Gastroenterology. 
2010;139(6):2083–2092.
