 Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e691
ABSTRACT: Cardiac arrest occurs at a higher rate in children with 
heart disease than in healthy children. Pediatric basic life support 
and advanced life support guidelines focus on delivering high-
quality resuscitation in children with normal hearts. The complexity 
and variability in pediatric heart disease pose unique challenges 
during resuscitation. A writing group appointed by the American 
Heart Association reviewed the literature addressing resuscitation in 
children with heart disease. MEDLINE and Google Scholar databases 
were searched from 1966 to 2015, cross-referencing pediatric heart 
disease with pertinent resuscitation search terms. The American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association classification of 
recommendations and levels of evidence for practice guidelines were 
used. The recommendations in this statement concur with the critical 
components of the 2015 American Heart Association pediatric basic 
life support and pediatric advanced life support guidelines and are 
meant to serve as a resuscitation supplement. This statement is meant 
for caregivers of children with heart disease in the prehospital and in-
hospital settings. Understanding the anatomy and physiology of the 
high-risk pediatric cardiac population will promote early recognition and 
treatment of decompensation to prevent cardiac arrest, increase survival 
from cardiac arrest by providing high-quality resuscitations, and improve 
outcomes with postresuscitation care.
Bradley S. Marino, MD, MPP
, 
MSCE, FAHA, Co-Chair
Sarah Tabbutt, MD, PhD
Graeme MacLaren, MBBS, FAHA
Mary Fran Hazinski, MSN, RN, 
FAHA
Ian Adatia, MBChB
Dianne L. Atkins, MD, FAHA
Paul A. Checchia, MD
Allan DeCaen, MD
Ericka L. Fink, MD, MS, FAHA
George M. Hoffman, MD
John L. Jefferies, MD, MPH, 
FAHA
Monica Kleinman, MD
Catherine D. Krawczeski, MD, 
FAHA
Daniel J. Licht, MD
Duncan Macrae, MD
Chitra Ravishankar, MD
Ricardo A. Samson, MD
Ravi R. Thiagarajan, MBBS, MPH
Rune Toms, MD
James Tweddell, MD, FAHA
Peter C. Laussen, MBBS,  
Co-Chair
On behalf of the American 
Heart Association Congenital 
Cardiac Defects Committee of 
the Council on Cardiovascular 
Disease in the Young; Council 
on Clinical Cardiology; Council 
on Cardiovascular and Stroke 
Nursing; Council on Cardio-
vascular Surgery and Anesthe-
sia; and Emergency Cardiovas-
cular Care Committee
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation in Infants 
and Children With Cardiac Disease
A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
© 2018 American Heart Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements 
◼ arrhythmias ◼ cardiopulmonary 
arrest ◼ cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
◼ cardiopulmonary resuscitation/
methods ◼ extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation ◼ heart defects, congenital 
◼ heart defects, congenital/surgery
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Circulation
http://circ.ahajournals.org
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e692
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
T
he American Heart Association (AHA) has pub-
lished guidelines for pediatric basic life support 
since 19801 and for pediatric advanced life sup-
port (PALS) since 1986.2 These guidelines have been 
based on research involving both animals and infants, 
children, and adult human subjects and provide rec-
ommendations for resuscitation of infants and chil-
dren with structurally normal hearts. The most recent 
guidelines update, published in 2015,3,4 focused on the 
quality of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), with an 
emphasis on minimizing interruptions in chest compres-
sions, providing adequate rate and depth of compres-
sions, and avoiding excessive ventilation.3–5 Although 
this emphasis is also recommended in infants and chil-
dren with heart disease, there are additional important 
considerations. This scientific statement is important for 
3 reasons specific to this unique population: (1) The fre-
quency of cardiac arrest is higher in infants and children 
with congenital heart disease (CHD), and the pathogen-
esis of these events can differ from infants and children 
without heart disease; (2) congenital heart defects have 
a wide variety of hemodynamic and physiological influ-
ences on cardiac output, and the specific cardiorespira-
tory interactions and response to resuscitation can be 
quite variable; and (3) the response of the neonate and 
the postoperative patient with complex CHD to phar-
macological intervention can differ from the response 
of infants and children without heart disease.
There is a wide spectrum of cardiac disease in infants 
and children. Cardiac disease in infants and children is 
primarily congenital but can be acquired. In many cir-
cumstances, the heart defects are surgically corrected 
or palliated, but blood flow pathways are not normal. 
Patients can carry the burden of residual lesions or de-
velop new problems over time, with an increased risk 
of cardiac arrest. This population commonly develops 
myocardial dysfunction, arrhythmia, and unbalanced 
pulmonary and systemic circulation. Specific drugs and 
the indications for administration and dosing can differ 
for infants and children with heart disease. In addition, 
there are many variations of CHD, and the underlying 
physiological substrates can have a significant impact 
on systemic perfusion and pulmonary blood flow (PBF). 
An example unique to the spectrum of CHD is the pa-
tient with a single ventricle. These patients typically 
undergo a series of surgical procedures culminating 
in a unique functional palliation, the modified Fontan 
operation, in which the systemic venous return is con-
nected directly to the pulmonary circulation and there 
is no pulmonary ventricle.
The anatomic and physiological substrates of con-
genital heart defects can limit the effectiveness of con-
ventional CPR. At best, CPR is inefficient, with compres-
sions providing only ≈10% to 30% of normal blood 
flow to the heart and 30% to 40% of normal blood 
flow to the brain.6 The inherent inefficiency associated 
with CPR can be further exacerbated in the patient with 
CHD, in which the underlying anatomy limits effective 
PBF, systemic blood flow (SBF), and cerebral perfusion. 
Given these issues, survival after cardiac arrest can be 
low in infants and children with cardiac disease. To im-
prove resuscitation outcomes, a strong emphasis must 
be placed on the prearrest phase to prevent cardiac 
arrest and on the arrest phase to provide high-quality 
CPR. Use of extracorporeal life support (ECLS) to sup-
port failed conventional CPR (ie, extracorporeal cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation [ECPR]) in highly specialized 
environments has allowed the resuscitation of some 
patients who would otherwise have died and could be 
particularly useful for patients in whom the conditions 
causing arrest are thought to be potentially reversible 
(eg, after cardiac surgery) or could be used as a bridge 
to other therapy, such as heart transplantation.7,8
The purpose of this consensus statement is to high-
light the unique aspects of cardiac resuscitation in chil-
dren with congenital and acquired heart disease and to 
provide evidence-based recommendations for modify-
ing resuscitation for this high-risk patient population to 
improve survival. The management of specific phases of 
cardiac arrest (prearrest, arrest, and postarrest stabiliza-
tion) is examined, along with gaps in knowledge that 
highlight future directions for research relevant to the 
pediatric cardiac population.
The contributors to this scientific statement were 
selected on the basis of their expertise in disciplines re-
lated to the management of children with congenital 
and acquired heart disease. The writing group for this 
statement was selected and organized according to the 
conflict-of-interest management policy of the AHA.
The writing group performed MEDLINE database 
searches of English-language articles from 1966 to 
2015, cross-referencing congenital and acquired heart 
disease with pertinent MESH search terms, as follows: 
acute cardiac tamponade; acute kidney injury; adoles-
cent; adult; amiodarone; aortic valve insufficiency/sur-
gery; aortic valve stenosis/congenital; aortic valve steno-
sis/surgery; aortic valve stenosis/therapy; arrhythmias, 
cardiac; atropine; bicarbonates; biomarkers; calcium; 
cardiac arrest; cardiac catheterization; cardiac output, 
low; cardiac surgical procedures; cardiac tamponade; 
cardiac tamponade/surgery; cardiopulmonary arrest; 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation; cardiopulmonary re-
suscitation/statistics and numerical data; cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation/methods; catheterization, central ve-
nous; catheterization, peripheral; child; clinical alarms; 
death, sudden, cardiac; diagnosis; echocardiography; 
echocardiography/methods; echocardiography/mortal-
ity; echocardiography/utilization; electrocardiogram; 
epinephrine; extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; 
ethics; Fontan procedure; heart arrest; heart arrest/
etiology; heart arrest/prevention and control; heart ar-
rest/surgery; heart arrest/therapy; heart defects, con-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e693
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
genital; heart defects, congenital/classification; heart 
defects, congenital/complications; heart defects, con-
genital/diagnosis; heart defects, congenital/etiology; 
heart defects, congenital/genetics; heart defects, con-
genital/mortality; heart defects, congenital/pathology; 
heart defects, congenital/physiology; heart defects, 
congenital/physiopathology; heart defects, congenital/
prevention and control; heart defects, congenital/sur-
gery; heart defects, congenital/therapy; heart diseases; 
heart failure; hospital rapid response team; hospitals, 
pediatric; hypertension, pulmonary; hyperthermia; 
hypothermia; hypoplastic left heart syndrome; infant, 
newborn; infusions, intraosseous; intensive care units, 
neonatal; intensive care units, pediatrics; ischemia; 
isoproterenol; kidney injury; kidney; lidocaine; medi-
cal response team; mitral valve insufficiency/surgery; 
natriuretic peptide, brain; neonatology; nitric oxide; 
Norwood procedures; out-of-hospital cardiac arrest; 
patient transfer; pediatric early warning system; pe-
diatrics; pericardial effusion; pericardial tamponade; 
pericardiocentesis; pericardiectomy; pharmaceutical 
preparations; phenylephrine; pneumothorax; post-
pericardiotomy syndrome; pulsus paradoxus; qual-
ity; quality improvement; quality of life; radiography, 
thoracic; resuscitation; resuscitation orders; scimitar 
syndrome/surgery; signs and symptoms; sodium bi-
carbonate; spectroscopy, near-infrared; sudden death; 
therapy; transportation of patients; treatment; treat-
ment outcome; vasopressin; ventricular dysfunction, 
left; ventricular dysfunction, right. 
The reference lists of identified articles were also 
searched. Published abstracts from major pediatric 
scientific meetings in 2014 and 2015 were also re-
viewed. Classification of recommendations and levels 
of evidence were assigned to each recommendation 
using the 2009 American College of Cardiology/AHA 
guidelines grading schema (Table 1).9 This classification 
system combines an objective description of the types 
of published studies supporting each recommendation 
and the strength of expert consensus. Statements gen-
erated from literature review were drafted by each sec-
tion’s writing group and presented to the entire writing 
group for editing and ultimate incorporation into this 
document.
CURRENT EPIDEMIOLOGY AND 
SURVIVAL
It is estimated that 16 
000 children in the United States 
experience an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest each year.10 
An estimated 5800 experience an in-hospital cardiac 
arrest each year.11,12 Hospitalized children with cardio-
vascular disease are at increased risk for cardiac arrest.13 
Cardiac arrest requiring resuscitation occurs in ≈7 per 
1000 hospitalizations of children with cardiovascular 
disease, a rate >10-fold higher than that observed in 
children hospitalized without cardiovascular disease.13 
The frequency of cardiac arrest is also reported to be 
higher in dedicated cardiac intensive care units (ICUs) 
(4% to 6% of admissions) than in medical-surgical pe-
diatric ICUs (2% to 4% of admissions).3,4,14–16
Since 2005, there have been substantial efforts 
to improve the quality of all CPR, including that pro-
vided to children.6,15,16 On the basis of data from the 
AHA’s Get With The Guidelines–Resuscitation Regis-
try (GWTG-R), formerly the AHA National Registry of 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation, the risk-adjusted rates 
of survival in children with an in-hospital cardiac ar-
rest have improved nearly 3-fold over a decade (from 
14.3% to 43.4% over the period 2000 to 2009).17 
In that same registry, survival to hospital discharge of 
pediatric surgical cardiac patients was higher (37%) 
than that reported for pediatric medical cardiac (28%) 
or noncardiac (23%) patients.5 In the Kids’ In-hospital 
Database (KIDS), survival after cardiac arrest was also 
higher among pediatric surgical cardiac patients (52%) 
than among pediatric medical cardiac patients (43%)13; 
however, children with single-ventricle disease had a 
lower survival rate (35%) than did children with other 
forms of cardiovascular disease (45%).13 Possible ex-
planations for the differences in survival relate to the 
specific causes of arrest, the availability of specialized 
invasive monitoring, and access to interventions and 
management subsequent to the arrest.
MANAGEMENT OF THE CRITICAL 
PATIENT WITH CONGENITAL OR 
ACQUIRED HEART DISEASE
The purpose of this section of the statement is to high-
light anatomic and physiological aspects of specific 
high-risk cardiac lesions or cardiac diseases that impact 
prearrest stabilization and resuscitation. Each section 
on a specific cardiac lesion is concluded with a section 
on unique challenges in CPR and gaps in knowledge.
Single-Ventricle Lesions
Surgical and Resuscitation Overview
Children with single-ventricle CHD typically undergo a 
series of staged operations. The aim of the first palliative 
procedure, typically performed during the neonatal pe-
riod, is to create unobstructed systemic blood flow, cre-
ate an effective atrial communication to allow for atrial 
level mixing, and to regulate PBF to prevent overcircu-
lation and decrease the volume load on the systemic 
ventricle prior to future staged procedures. For patients 
with hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), the stage 
1 Norwood palliation typically involves 3 key steps: (1) 
reconstruction of the aorta and systemic outflow; (2) 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e694
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
atrial septectomy to ensure removal of any restriction to 
pulmonary venous return; and (3) creation of a source 
of PBF via either a systemic-to-pulmonary shunt (modi-
fied Blalock-Taussig shunt [MBTS]) or a right ventricle 
(RV)–to–pulmonary artery shunt (RVPAS). Depending 
on patient and anatomic characteristics, other options 
to regulate PBF might include placement of a pulmo-
nary artery band across the main pulmonary artery or 
bilateral pulmonary bands to limit PBF, placement of a 
systemic-to–pulmonary artery shunt, and placement of 
a stent across the ductus arteriosus.
During the second stage of palliation, a bidirection-
al Glenn procedure or hemi-Fontan operation is per-
formed to create a superior cavopulmonary anastomo-
sis (CPA). The superior CPA is typically performed at 3 
to 6 months of age and involves the anastomosis of 
the superior vena cava (SVC) to the pulmonary artery. 
After creation of the superior CPA, PBF is dependent 
on the SVC flow, the transpulmonary pressure gradi-
ent, and vascular resistance within arterial vascular beds 
(both cerebral and pulmonary). The third palliative op-
eration, known as the modified Fontan procedure, is 
typically performed at 2 to 4 years of age. After Fontan 
completion, all systemic venous return is baffled directly 
to the pulmonary circulation, and the single (systemic) 
ventricle preload is dependent on passive flow across 
Table 1. Applying Classification of Recommendations and Level of Evidence
A recommendation with Level of Evidence B or C does not imply that the recommendation is weak. Many important clinical questions addressed in the 
guidelines do not lend themselves to clinical trials. Although randomized trials are unavailable, there may be a very clear clinical consensus that a particular test or 
therapy is useful or effective.
*Data available from clinical trials or registries about the usefulness/efficacy in different subpopulations such as sex, age, history of diabetes mellitus, history of 
prior myocardial infarction, history of heart failure, and prior aspirin use.
†For comparative effectiveness recommendations (Class I and IIa; Level of Evidence A and B only), studies that support the use of comparator verbs should 
involve direct comparisons of the treatments or strategies being evaluated.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e695
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
the pulmonary vascular bed without the benefit of a 
pulmonary ventricle.
Specific anatomy and cardiopulmonary interactions 
have a significant impact on resuscitation of the child with 
single-ventricle anatomy. Table 2 delineates various resus-
citation profiles for the structurally normal heart and the 
unique single-ventricle palliated states. The circulation is 
described, and the impact of chest compressions, chest 
recoil, and positive-pressure ventilation is discussed.
Single-Ventricle Palliation: Perioperative 
Management
Risk Factors for Cardiac Arrest and Death
The following factors have been identified as contributing 
to early death in the neonate or infant with single ven-
tricle: (1) anatomic diagnosis of HLHS, total anomalous 
pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC), and pulmonary 
atresia with intact ventricular septum with RV-dependent 
coronary circulation; (2) decreased ventricular function; 
(3) hemodynamically significant semilunar or atrio-
ventricular valve insufficiency; and (4) comorbidities 
 
including prematurity and genetic syndrome.18–21
Neonates with single-ventricle physiology have an 
increased risk of cardiac arrest as the result of (1) in-
creased myocardial work as a consequence of volume 
overload, (2) imbalances in relative systemic and PBF, 
and (3) potential shunt occlusion.3,4,22–24 The risk of car-
diac arrest remains high until the superior CPA is creat-
ed.25–27 For patients with HLHS, the frequency of in-hos-
pital cardiac arrest after stage 1 Norwood palliation is 
lower after placement of an RVPAS than after creation 
of an MBTS,26–29 although interestingly, there is no dif-
ference in hospital mortality relative to shunt type.20,29,30 
The risk of death between hospital discharge from the 
stage 1 Norwood palliation and the second-stage su-
perior CPA (ie, interstage mortality) is also lower if an 
RVPAS is placed rather than an MBTS.20,26,31 The Single 
Ventricle Reconstruction Trial reported a 12-month 
31% incidence of death or transplantation after stage 1 
Norwood for HLHS,26 with most serious adverse events 
occurring between 30 days after the stage 1 palliation 
and the time of the superior CPA procedure. As a result, 
the interstage period before the superior CPA can be 
characterized as a prearrest state that requires active 
monitoring and intervention to improve survival.23
Assessment of Systemic Oxygen Balance
Organ dysfunction, reversible and irreversible injury, 
and mortality can occur secondary to reduced systemic 
oxygen delivery (Do2). Abnormalities in systemic oxygen 
balance can be detected through monitoring of the 
systemic venous oxygen saturation (Svo2) and the ar-
teriovenous oxygen content or saturation difference 
(AVo2D).32 Monitoring devices to detect low systemic Do2 
and guide intervention can be invasive, such as indwell-
ing SVC oximetric catheters,19,33–35 or noninvasive multi-
site near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS).36–43 With arterial 
pulse oximetry and quasi-mixed venous NIRS, continu-
ous, noninvasive measurement of the dynamic ratio of 
PBF to SBF (Qp:Qs) can be estimated, cardiac output can 
be estimated, and interventions can be targeted. These 
measurements can be confirmed periodically with mea-
sured systemic arterial O2 saturation and an Svo2 sample 
from the SVC18,33,34 or (less preferably) the inferior vena 
cava (IVC).44 Although O2 saturation in the IVC has been 
correlated with adverse events in the postoperative pe-
Table 2. Resuscitation Profiles for the Structurally Normal Heart and Those That Have Undergone Single-Ventricle 
Palliation
Physiology
Circulation Description
Circulation of Blood
Chest 
Compressions
Chest Recoil
Positive-Pressure Ventilation
Structurally 
normal heart
Two-ventricle series 
circulation without heart 
disease
Systemic veins – lungs – 
pulmonary veins – body
1.  
RV compression 
results in PBF
2.  
LV compression 
results in SBF
Increases the transthoracic 
gradient from the systemic 
veins to the RA, increasing 
RV filling
Decreases the transthoracic 
gradient from the systemic 
veins to the RA, decreasing RV 
filling
Stage 1 
Norwood 
or shunted 
physiology
Single-ventricle parallel 
circulation with shunt-
dependent PBF
Systemic veins – single 
ventricle – lungs (via 
shunt) or body
Single-ventricle 
compression results 
in PBF (shunt ± PVR) 
and SBF (SVR)
Increases filling to the 
preload-dependent single 
ventricle
Decreases filling to the preload-
dependent single ventricle
Bidirectional 
Glenn and 
hemi-Fontan
Single-ventricle parallel 
circulation with PBF 
dependent on multiple 
arteriolar vascular beds
IVC – single ventricle 
– body/brain – SVC – 
lungs – pulmonary veins 
– body
Single-ventricle 
compression results 
in SBF
1.  
Predominantly fills the RA 
from the IVC
2.  
SVC flow dependent 
on cerebral vascular 
resistance and PVR
Decreases filling to the single 
ventricle by impeding SVC flow 
and IVC filling
Fontan
Single-ventricle series 
circulation
Systemic veins – lungs – 
pulmonary veins – body
Single-ventricle 
compression results 
in SBF
1.  
Predominantly fills the PAs 
with IVC blood flow (PVR)
2.  
SVC flow dependent on 
cerebral vascular resistance 
and PVR
Decreases filling to the single 
ventricle by impeding both SVC 
and IVC flow
IVC indicates inferior vena cava; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; PBF, pulmonary blood flow; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; RA, right atrium; RV, 
right ventricle; SBF, systemic blood flow; SVC, superior vena cava; and SVR, systemic vascular resistance.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e696
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
riod after stage 1 Norwood,44 O2 saturation in the SVC is 
thought to be a better surrogate for the true mixed Svo2.
In patients with obligate left-to-right atrial shunt-
ing, blood sampled from the systemic atrium can have 
a saturation that is very close to the systemic arterial 
saturation, so the SVC saturation is most representative 
of systemic Svo2. Given that pulmonary venous satura-
tion is not typically measured, the calculation of Qp:Qs 
based on the arterial and Svo2 saturation from the SVC 
requires an assumption of the pulmonary venous O2 
saturation. If there is concurrent pulmonary venous de-
saturation from intrapulmonary shunt or low supple-
mentary O2, there will be an overestimation of the pul-
monary venous O2 saturation and underestimation of 
the Qp:Qs.45 Notwithstanding the issues related to an 
assumed pulmonary venous O2 saturation, the use of 
systemic arterial O2 saturation and Svo2 to guide acute 
pharmacological interventions during high-risk periods 
is associated with improved outcomes.19,35,46–48
NIRS provides a noninvasive measurement of region-
al oxygen economy (ie, balance between Do2 and con-
sumption). NIRS monitoring is suitable for longer-term 
use or during periods of possible hemodynamic insta-
bility (eg, agitation, fever, intercurrent illness, infection, 
dehydration, new or worsening ventricular dysfunction, 
new or worsening moderate or greater neoaortic insuf-
ficiency or atrioventricular valve regurgitation) to help 
quantify and trend early acute hemodynamic instabil-
ity and to monitor response to therapy, ideally avoiding 
deterioration and cardiac arrest.33,35,49
Although both Svo2 and NIRS monitoring fulfill criteria 
for potential goal-directed measures in high-risk patient 
populations, there is variation in their application.23,43,50–52 
Because disorders that start with low cardiac output, high 
Qp:Qs, or low Qp:Qs will ultimately result in inadequate 
Do2, the antecedent cause of arrest might not be obvious 
once arrest has ensued. Physiological information from 
the prearrest state is useful for diagnosing pathogenesis 
and reversible causes of arrest and can guide resuscita-
tion in the arrest and postarrest states.
Pathogenesis, Recognition, and Treatment  
of Hemodynamic Compromise
Assessment of Cardiac Output. Inadequate acute 
and chronic systemic Do2 results in organ dysfunction, 
ischemic injury, or both. To achieve normal Do2 in the 
presence of parallel pulmonary and systemic circula-
tions, the single ventricle needs to produce at least 
twice normal cardiac output, and as a result, it has lim-
ited ability to further increase cardiac output and Do2 in 
response to increased oxygen demand.
A reduction in cardiac output increases the AVo2D. 
The presence of intracardiac mixing and reduced PBF 
also contributes to a reduction in arterial oxygen con-
tent and reduced Do2 and therefore a higher risk of 
anaerobic metabolism.18 The risk of inadequate cardiac 
output is increased in the early postoperative period 
and during periods of increased oxygen demand, such 
as from agitation, fever, inflammation, and pain. Post-
operative ischemia-reperfusion injury and mural edema 
can reduce diastolic and systolic function and stroke 
volume, resulting in heart rate and preload dependence 
and risk of rapid deterioration.
Inadequate cardiac output can be detected by close 
observation of trends and changes in continuously 
measured hemodynamic variables (eg, invasive systemic 
arterial and central venous pressures [CVPs], heart rate), 
physical examination, and specific laboratory tests. Lab-
oratory data that can reveal inadequate cardiac output 
include direct or estimated measurements of Svo2, arte-
rial blood gas analysis, and serum lactate assessment. 
The ECG can document the presence of ischemia or 
arrhythmias that can cause or result from low cardiac 
output. Echocardiography can elucidate systolic and 
diastolic function, residual anatomic lesions, and peri-
cardial fluid.
Both physical findings and detection of residual le-
sions can enable early intervention to prevent or treat 
low cardiac output. The strength of palpable peripheral 
pulses, however, can be a misleading physical finding 
in patients who have aortic runoff through the MBTS, 
because pulses can remain palpable even when cardiac 
output is compromised. In addition, high sympathetic 
tone will usually preserve systolic blood pressure despite 
a fall in cardiac output, systemic perfusion, and Do2 to 
the tissues. An inadequate coronary perfusion pressure 
caused by a high atrial filling pressure and low aortic 
diastolic blood pressure can result in myocardial isch-
emia that can rapidly progress to cardiac arrest unless 
it is recognized promptly and treated effectively.3,4,22,24 It 
is critical to identify residual surgical lesions, most im-
portantly arch obstruction or a restrictive atrial septum, 
or new hemodynamically significant systemic atrioven-
tricular or neoaortic valve insufficiency. ECLS should be 
considered for patients in a low cardiac output state 
that is unresponsive to medical management. Hemo-
dynamic compromise in a shunt-dependent physiology 
can typically be reversed with inotropic support, pre-
load modification, mechanical ventilation and sedation/
analgesia, manipulation of systemic vascular resistance 
(SVR) and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), and an-
ticoagulation if shunt obstruction is suspected.
Balancing SBF and PBF. When the balance of the 
patient’s PBF and SBF is maintained through a patent 
ductus arteriosus, aortopulmonary shunt, or direct com-
munication between the aorta and pulmonary artery 
(eg, aortopulmonary window, truncus arteriosus), varia-
tions in SVR and PVR directly impact Qp:Qs. The circu-
latory balance is highly dynamic and can vary widely 
when the infant is awake and active, during illness, and 
with acute anatomic or hemodynamic changes.53
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e697
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Pulmonary overcirculation, defined as a high Qp:Qs, 
can result from either high SVR or low PVR. Typically, 
there is an initial widening of the systemic pulse pres-
sure and high arterial saturation, with a later reduction 
in arterial saturation resulting from worsening systemic 
venous desaturation.33,46 The initial symptoms of a high 
Qp:Qs include tachypnea and tachycardia. The tachy-
pnea results from increased pulmonary interstitial ede-
ma and poor lung compliance associated with elevated 
pulmonary venous pressure. The tachycardia represents 
an attempt to increase cardiac output to meet systemic 
oxygen requirements. Signs and symptoms of shock 
develop once a critical reduction of SBF is present.54 
The development of a prearrest state can be herald-
ed by lactic acidosis, renal insufficiency, gut ischemia 
and feeding intolerance, or ECG changes consistent 
with coronary ischemia.23,24 The risk of high Qp:Qs is 
increased in patients with a large shunt size relative to 
body weight. In the vulnerable patient, any increase in 
SVR can cause rapid deterioration from a state of ade-
quate circulatory balance to one of extreme pulmonary 
overcirculation and shock. In these patients, high SVR 
will in turn cause increased Qp:Qs, and the resulting fall 
in SBF causes further sympathetic activation in a harm-
ful feedback loop.46,54,55
Manipulation of PVR. If the shunt is inadequately 
restrictive, maneuvers to increase PVR by manipulat-
ing ventilation and gas exchange might not be well 
tolerated and could contribute to further deterioration 
and even cardiac arrest. In the period before single-
ventricle palliation, cautious use of a hypoxic inspired 
gas mixture or inspired carbon dioxide with controlled 
hypoventilation can reduce Qp:Qs56–59; however, a 
hypoxic inspired gas mixture does not improve Do2.59 
Although the addition of inspired carbon dioxide with 
controlled hypoventilation can increase PVR, narrow 
the AVo2D, and increase cerebral oxygen saturation and 
Do2,60 this intervention is not commonly recommended 
and should only be used as a temporizing measure until 
surgical intervention can create regulated PBF. Simple 
hypoventilation can also increase the PVR but can be 
associated with unwanted atelectasis or respiratory 
acidosis.56,58
The effects of manipulation of PVR are less important 
when an appropriately restrictive shunt is in place. In 
patients with a restrictive shunt, supplementary oxygen 
administration generally increases Do2 and maintains 
AVo2D, and the absence of supplementary oxygen may 
be associated with pulmonary venous desaturation.45
Manipulation of SVR. Reducing SVR can favorably 
modify a high Qp:Qs state, improving cardiac out-
put and Do2.61 A reduction in SVR will also have the 
benefit of reducing myocardial wall stress and oxy-
gen demand.61,62 Although SVR is not routinely mea-
sured, it can be calculated using the Fick principal and 
measurement of oxygen consumption. The ideal SVR 
indexed to body surface area has not been determined 
for infants with single ventricle and will be influenced 
by other patient-specific variables, including ventricular 
function, atrioventricular valve function, PVR, and the 
geometry of the shunt.
After the stage 1 Norwood palliation, systemic vaso-
dilators such as phosphodiesterase inhibitors (milrinone, 
enoximone) and α-adrenergic blockers (phenoxybenza-
mine, phentolamine) are associated with both reduced 
Qp:Qs and increased Svo2. The risk of cardiac arrest or 
prearrest instability appears to be reduced by periop-
erative strategies that include α-adrenergic blockade 
or phosphodiesterase inhibition. Although α-blockade 
is used in some centers for initial single-ventricle pal-
liation, controlled trials are lacking.63,64 For interstage 
afterload reduction, there appears to be no benefit 
from routine use of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitor enalapril.64
The risk of high Qp:Qs is present with both the 
RVPAS and the MBTS.65 If the patient with deteriorating 
SBF caused by a large or inadequately restrictive shunt 
is not responsive to medical management, consider 
emergent shunt revision or stabilization with ECLS. Dis-
tal arch obstruction will mimic elevated SVR by increas-
ing Qp:Qs, especially in those patients with an MBTS; 
even mild arch obstruction can be clinically important 
and warrants consideration for intervention.
Recognition and Management of Shunt Obstruction. 
There are 3 principal reasons for a lower than expected 
systemic arterial oxygen saturation after the stage 1 
Norwood palliation: (1) inadequate PBF; (2) intrapul-
monary shunting and pulmonary venous desaturation; 
and (3) low mixed Svo2 from a low cardiac output state, 
decreased oxygen-carrying capacity from anemia, or 
increased oxygen consumption. Inadequate PBF can 
result from pulmonary artery hypertension (PAH); how-
ever, it occurs more often as a result of inadequate 
shunt perfusion pressure or mechanical obstruction of 
the shunt or from pulmonary venous hypertension sec-
ondary to pulmonary vein stenosis or restrictive atrial 
communication.29,52
The constellation of low systemic oxygen satura-
tion that is not responsive to an increase in inspired 
oxygen with preserved SBF and unchanged AVo2D 
(initially) should raise concern for shunt obstruction. 
Additionally, patients receiving mechanical ventilation 
may demonstrate a fall in end-tidal CO2 (ETco2) with an 
increase in the arterial partial pressure of carbon diox-
ide (Paco2).66–70 The estimation of Qp:Qs using systemic 
arterial oxygen saturation and Svo2 (or Svo2 estimation 
with NIRS) can add to the physiological evaluation. Dur-
ing the interstage period, the risk of shunt thrombosis 
can be higher with an MBTS than with an RVPAS.29,71,72 
However, in patients with HLHS after stage 1 Norwood 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e698
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
palliation, the need for an unplanned shunt interven-
tion is higher with the RVPAS.28
Prophylactic anticoagulation strategies include hepa-
rin therapy early after shunt placement, with a transi-
tion to aspirin when enteral medications are tolerated.23 
In a multicenter observational study, aspirin reduced the 
risk of shunt thrombosis and death during the first year 
after placement.71 In a multicenter randomized clinical 
trial in patients with shunted single-ventricle physiol-
ogy, a majority of whom were receiving aspirin therapy, 
the addition of clopidogrel did not reduce the incidence 
of shunt thrombosis.73
Treatment of acute shunt obstruction can include 
the following: (1) administration of increased inspired 
oxygen to maximize alveolar oxygenation; (2) admin-
istration of vasoactive agents to maximize shunt per-
fusion pressure (eg, phenylephrine, norepinephrine, 
epinephrine); (3) anticoagulation with heparin (50–100 
U/kg bolus) to prevent clot propagation22,24; (4) shunt 
intervention by catheterization or surgery; and (5) sta-
bilization with ECLS. In patients with shunt obstruc-
tion, maneuvers to decrease PVR (eg, oxygen, inhaled 
nitric oxide [iNO]) will provide little benefit and could 
delay the diagnosis of the actual problem. Reduction 
in oxygen consumption can be accomplished through 
sedation and neuromuscular blockade, avoidance of 
hyperthermia, the insertion of an advanced airway, and 
mechanical ventilation at low mean airway pressure.70 
In the early postoperative period, it may be useful to 
emergently open the sternum to rule out tamponade 
and to inspect the aortopulmonary or RVPAS. If the 
shunt obstruction produces persistent and profound ar-
terial hypoxemia, myocardial performance will deterio-
rate rapidly. The outcome of ECPR in the circumstance 
of acute shunt obstruction is favorable, provided it is 
undertaken promptly.7,29,74–77
Systemic Illness and the Interstage Period. Other 
noncardiac causes of arrest or prearrest in patients with 
shunted physiology include dehydration, infection, and 
anemia. Each of these contributes to inadequate Do2 
by a different mechanism, but the end result will be 
shock, with regional or systemic ischemia and end-
organ injury.33,35,52,78–80 Because many physiological 
threats can initiate the low systemic perfusion and high 
SVR feedback loop, early recognition, evaluation, and 
intervention are important.24 Careful routine medical 
assessment is needed, with special attention to hydra-
tion, nutrition, and identification of signs of infection. 
Specific laboratory evaluation of hemoglobin concen-
tration, electrolyte balance, and concentration of brain 
natriuretic peptide, as well as echocardiography, is also 
important and should be performed judiciously.81 The 
hemoglobin is typically maintained in the 13 to 15 g/dL 
range, although no trials of transfusion strategy exist 
in this patient population.47,80,82 For newborns with 
HLHS, the reported incidence of interstage (ie, between 
discharge after stage 1 Norwood and admission for 
superior CPA) mortality is often as high as the hospital 
mortality after stage 1 Norwood palliation, particularly 
if the infant was palliated with an MBTS. (See Home 
Monitoring in the section on Location-Specific Arrest 
Prevention and Response Measures.)
Unique Challenges in CPR
Data from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital 
Heart Surgery Database (STS-CHSD) from 2007 through 
2012 document a 12.7% incidence (350 of 2757) of 
cardiac arrest among patients undergoing stage 1 Nor-
wood palliation.83 Once the patient with shunted sin-
gle-ventricle physiology develops cardiac arrest, it will 
be challenging to restore spontaneous circulation. In 
fact, in the STS-CHSD registry, 62.3% of patients who 
developed postoperative cardiac arrest after stage 1 
Norwood palliation died compared with a mortality rate 
of 12.5% among those patients who did not develop 
postoperative cardiac arrest.83
It is difficult to obtain effective PBF during resuscita-
tion because PBF is shunt dependent and will likely be 
affected by the relationship between PVR and either the 
aortic relaxation (diastolic) pressure (for MBTS) or the 
SVR (for MBTS and the RVPAS). During CPR in patients 
with normal cardiac anatomy, compressions generate 
only ≈10% to 30% of normal blood flow to the heart 
and 30% to 40% of normal blood flow to the brain.6 In 
patients with single-ventricle shunted physiology, sys-
temic output (Qs) is even lower, because there is loss of 
potential SBF to the lungs given the parallel circulation 
(Table 2). As a result, SBF often has low oxygen content 
and in the presence of reduced coronary perfusion will 
result in persistent and likely severe coronary ischemia. 
Prolonged CPR in the shunt-dependent single-ventricle 
patient will be associated with hypoxemia, systemic 
ischemia, and significant end-organ injury, particularly 
neurological injury.
When cardiac arrest develops, providers should be-
gin conventional high-quality CPR. The AHA recom-
mends that compressions be performed on the sternum 
just below the intermammary line in infants and on the 
lower half of the sternum in children.84 However, data 
regarding the need to modify this position in infants 
and children with single ventricle (or any congenital 
heart defect) are limited. A recent Korean single-center 
case series of 185 patients (median age 0.5–12.5 years) 
with single ventricle (73 before creation of the supe-
rior CPA, 61 after superior CPA, and 51 after Fontan 
procedure) found that in all patients, the largest cross-
sectional area of the systemic ventricle (assessed by 
computed tomography [CT] scan) was under the lower 
quarter (ie, bottom 25%) of the sternum.85 More data 
such as these are needed. If the patient with single-
ventricle arrests in the ICU and has indwelling monitor-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e699
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ing catheters, it is reasonable for providers to monitor 
arterial and central venous pressures and pressure trac-
ings and modify compression technique as needed to 
optimize blood pressure and coronary perfusion pres-
sure generated during compressions.86
Because of the limitations to conventional CPR de-
scribed above, it is important to consider additional 
management within the first minutes of the resuscita-
tion. These include urgent opening of the sternum (in 
the immediate postoperative period), treatment of ar-
rhythmias or use of external pacing if indicated, treat-
ment of possible shunt thrombosis, and early activation 
of the ECLS team, if available in the institution. Longer-
duration in-hospital CPR efforts that include ECPR can 
be successful, but prolonged out-of-hospital resuscita-
tion efforts are generally unsuccessful.74,87
Gaps in Knowledge
Management of newborns with single-ventricle physi-
ology after stage 1 Norwood palliation or shunt place-
ment is based on reported institutional practices. Data 
from the Single Ventricle Reconstruction Trial,63 national 
database extractions,88,89 and clinical program surveys 
about single-ventricle care90 demonstrate considerable 
variation in practice among centers. Of concern, few 
modifiable risk factors related to the perioperative criti-
cal care management of patients with single-ventricle 
physiology that could contribute to cardiac arrest have 
been identified. To improve outcomes, it is essential 
to reduce practice variability through benchmarking 
and sharing of physiological, management, and out-
come data. Additional studies are needed to determine 
whether modifications in chest compression technique 
are needed in patients with single ventricles.
Recommendations: Single-Ventricle 
Palliation Perioperative Management
1. In the mechanically ventilated preoperative 
neonate with pulmonary overcirculation 
and symptomatic low systemic cardiac out-
put and Do2, inspired carbon dioxide can be 
beneficial to provide a short-term increase in 
cardiac output (Class IIa; Level of Evidence 
C). Hyperventilation and hyperoxygenation 
may be potentially harmful in this circum-
stance (Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence C).
2. Direct (SVC catheter) or indirect (NIRS) mon-
itoring can be beneficial to follow AVo2D 
and to direct management in the critically 
ill neonate after stage 1 Norwood pallia-
tion or shunt placement (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
3. In the patient with an appropriately restric-
tive shunt, manipulation of PVR may have lit-
tle effect, whereas lowering SVR and use of 
oxygen as needed can be useful to increase 
systemic Do2 (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
4. In the situation of known or suspected shunt 
obstruction, it is reasonable to administer 
oxygen, vasoactive agents to increase shunt 
perfusion pressure, and heparin (50–100 U/
kg bolus) while preparing for catheter-based 
or surgical intervention (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Superior CPA and Fontan
In the prearrest phase with low cardiac output or re-
spiratory failure, strategies to improve venous return 
to the superior CPA will increase PBF. In particular, 
strategies to increase relative cerebral blood flow and 
minimize intrathoracic pressure have been success-
ful. Although spontaneous ventilation is preferable to 
augment PBF and stroke volume in the superior CPA 
or Fontan physiology, judicious mechanical ventilation 
is usually well tolerated in circumstances of respiratory 
failure or low cardiac output. Positive-pressure venti-
lation has the benefit of reducing afterload and wall 
stress to the systemic ventricle for the patient with 
significant myocardial dysfunction or atrioventricular 
valve insufficiency; however, it does so at the expense 
of compromising PBF and ventricular preload. Optimum 
titration of inotropic support, afterload reduction, and 
positive-pressure ventilation are challenging and must 
be tailored to each individual patient.
After the superior CPA and Fontan operations, the 
relationship between mean CVP or superior CPA/Fon-
tan pressure and left atrial (LA) pressure often identi-
fies potential causes of low cardiac output syndrome 
(LCOS). Low CVP and LA pressures are consistent with 
hypovolemia. High CVP and low LA pressure (increased 
transpulmonary gradient) can result from reactive pul-
monary vasoconstriction or fixed pulmonary vascu-
lar disease, pulmonary artery hypoplasia or stenosis, 
or pulmonary venous obstruction. High CVP and LA 
pressure are associated with ventricular dysfunction, 
hemodynamically significant atrioventricular valve re-
gurgitation, systemic atrioventricular valve stenosis, 
ventricular outflow tract obstruction, or arrhythmia or 
loss of atrioventricular synchrony. The transpulmonary 
pressure gradient (the difference between the mean 
PA pressure [CPA or Fontan pressure] and the mean 
LA pressure) is an important determinant of PBF and 
systemic ventricular preload. Appropriate strategies of 
mechanical ventilation are critical, because PBF occurs 
predominantly during exhalation, when the intratho-
racic pressure is at its lowest. It is important to rule out 
anatomic factors that limit effective PBF (deoxygenated 
blood through into the pulmonary capillary bed), in-
cluding stenosis of the pulmonary arteries, large veno-
venous collateral vessels from the SVC to the pulmo-
nary veins or to the systemic venous return via the IVC 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e700
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
or azygous systems (only in the superior CPA), pulmo-
nary arteriovenous malformations, and in the case of 
the fenestrated Fontan operation, a large right-to-left 
shunt across the fenestration.
Management of Ventilation
Physiological studies argue against use of hyperventila-
tion in single-ventricle patients with superior CPA, and 
complementary studies support the use of maintaining 
high Paco2 using hypoventilation (Table 3).91–94 A low 
Paco2 or alkalosis can be detrimental, and after the su-
perior CPA, hypoxemia can be reversed by using a high-
er Paco2.91 Similar to the 2-ventricle heart, hypoventila-
tion and acidosis after the modified Fontan operation 
in the single-ventricle patient can lead to a low cardiac 
output state.
Hypoventilation and mild hypercapnia improve 
systemic oxygenation and Do2 and reduce oxygen 
consumption and arterial lactate in patients after cre-
ation of a superior CPA.92,95 The cerebral CO2 feed-
back loop dominates over the pulmonary feedback 
loop when they are in direct competition with one 
another.93 Carbon dioxide plays a significant role in 
flow distribution in this cerebral-pulmonary arteriolar 
hierarchy, whereas O2 has little impact. An increase 
in Paco2 improves cerebral Do2. By decreasing cere-
bral vascular resistance, hypoventilation-induced hy-
percarbia increases cerebral blood flow, SVC blood 
flow, and pulmonary blood flow. This can be a useful 
clinical strategy in patients with superior CPA who have 
hypoxemia resulting from limited PBF early in the post-
operative period.
Alternatively, hyperventilation lowers arterial partial 
pressure of carbon dioxide, thereby increasing cere-
bral vascular resistance and lowering cerebral blood 
flow, SVC blood flow, and pulmonary blood flow in 
patients with superior CPA.58,96 Hyperventilation signifi-
cantly impairs systemic oxygenation after the superior 
CPA, despite a decrease in transpulmonary gradient.98 
Hyperventilation causes a decrease in cerebral blood 
flow velocity and in cerebral oxygenation.58 Therefore, 
normoventilation or mild hypoventilation preserves 
cerebral oxygenation in patients with superior CPA. 
Although not studied in patients with superior CPA, 
it might be beneficial to use a mechanical ventilation 
strategy of higher tidal volume and lower ventilation 
Table 3. Effect of Respiratory Manipulations on Circulatory Parameters at Different Stages of Palliation of 
Children With Univentricular Physiology56,58–60,91–96
Stage and 
Respiratory Strategy 
(Alveolar Gas)
Sao2
Svo2
Qp/Qs
TPG
AVo2D
Vo2
Lactate
CBF
rSo2C
rSo2S
0
 Hypocapnic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hyperoxic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hypercapnic56,59
↑
↑
↓
 
↓
 
 
 
↑
 
 Hypoxic56,59
↓
↓
↓
 
↔
 
 
 
↔
 
1
 Hypocapnic97
↔
↔
 
 
↔
 
 
 
 
 
 Hyperoxic97
↑
↑
 
 
↔
 
 
 
 
 
 Hypercapnic60,94
↔
↔↑
↔
 
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
↓
 Hypoxic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
 Hypocapnic58
↓
 
 
 
↔
 
 
 
↓
 
 Hyperoxic93
↑
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hypercapnic58,91–94
↑↑
 
↔
↑
↓
↓
↓
↑
↑
 
 Hypoxic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Measured parameters in multiple studies are shown. Stage 0: Uncorrected/unpalliated ductal-dependent parallel pulmonary and systemic circulations. 
Maintenance of ductal patency is necessary for systemic perfusion, and prostaglandin E1 is indicated. No human experimental data exist for measures such as 
hyperoxic or hypocapnic alveolar gas strategies that tend to reduce pulmonary vascular resistance, and such strategies should generally be avoided without 
significant monitoring of systemic oxygen delivery. The greatest improvement in systemic oxygenation occurs with induction of hypercapnic ventilation. Stage 1:  
After surgical palliation of parallel circulation with relief of arch obstruction and limitation of pulmonary blood flow with a systemic-to–pulmonary artery 
shunt. Hypercapnia can improve cerebral more than systemic oxygen delivery. Stage 2: After superior cavopulmonary anastomosis. The cerebral and pulmonary 
circulations are in series, and hypercapnia can improve systemic arterial oxygen saturation and systemic oxygen delivery by increasing cerebral blood flow, superior 
vena cava flow, and therefore pulmonary blood flow. Stage 3: After superior and inferior cavopulmonary anastomoses (post-Fontan). No systematic data exist for 
alveolar gas manipulation. See references for details.
AVo2D indicates arteriovenous oxygen saturation difference; CBF, cerebral blood flow; lactate, lactate or metabolic acid change; Qp/Qs, pulmonary/systemic 
blood flow ratio; rSo2C, cerebral oxygen saturation by near-infrared spectroscopy; rSo2S, somatic oxygen saturation by near-infrared spectroscopy; SaO2, arterial 
oxygen saturation; Svo2, systemic venous saturation; TPG, transpulmonary pressure gradient; Vo2, oxygen consumption.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e701
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
rate while aiming for the lowest possible mean airway 
pressure.
In patients with Fontan physiology, negative-pressure 
 
ventilation has been shown to improve stroke volume 
and cardiac output by augmenting PBF without an in-
crease in heart rate99,100; however, the use of negative-
pressure ventilation might not be practical for many 
centers. Current research involving the combination of 
intermittent positive-pressure ventilation in conjunc-
tion with a device that generates a negative intratho-
racic pressure during the expiratory phase could allow 
for augmentation of PBF, stroke volume, and cardiac 
output in these populations.101 In a small case series 
after superior CPA or tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) repair, 
airway pressure release ventilation was shown to in-
crease PBF at a comparable mean airway pressure but 
did not improve Do2.102
Unique Challenges in CPR
Survival from cardiac arrest in a patient with superior 
CPA or Fontan physiology is low. In the STS-CHSD regis-
try, 0.9% of patients (17 of 1923) undergoing a Fontan 
correction developed postoperative cardiac arrest, and 
41.2% of these patients died.83 To optimize survival, it 
is important to recognize the physiological differences 
between patients with superior CPA and those with a 
Fontan, as well as the special considerations each re-
quires during CPR (Table 2). As noted above, during 
CPR in patients with normal cardiac anatomy, cardiac 
output is thought to be approximately one-third that 
of normal.6 In patients with either a superior CPA or 
a Fontan, chest compressions create SBF but minimal 
PBF. This reduction in PBF limits oxygenation and pre-
load to the systemic ventricle, thereby further reducing 
cardiac output.
Cardiac output in patients with superior CPA can 
be further limited in the presence of atrioventricular or 
semilunar valve regurgitation. An additional important 
consideration is the elevation in SVC and cerebral ve-
nous pressure that occurs during chest compressions 
in patients with a superior CPA, which will limit cere-
bral blood flow and increase the risk for neurological 
injury.103
In the patient with a bidirectional Glenn/hemi-Fon-
tan, chest recoil produces flow through the superior 
CPA and lungs, as well as from the IVC into the sys-
temic venous atrium, providing important preload to 
the single ventricle for the next compression. In con-
trast, chest recoil in Fontan physiology results in filling 
of the total cavopulmonary connection from the SVC 
and IVC.
Gaps in Knowledge
Publications describing inotropic and ventilatory man-
agement of the patient with superior CPA or Fontan 
physiology with respiratory or cardiac failure are limited 
to case reports and case series. Patient heterogeneity 
relative to hemodynamic and cardiorespiratory interac-
tions challenges the practicality of prospective trials.
Recommendations: Superior CPA  
and Fontan
1. For patients with a superior CPA or Fontan 
physiology, ventilatory strategies such as 
spontaneous or negative-pressure ventila-
tion can be useful to increase cardiac output 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. For patients with a superior CPA and severe 
hypoxemia in a prearrest state, ventilatory 
strategies that target a mild respiratory aci-
dosis and a minimum mean airway pressure 
without atelectasis can be useful to increase 
cerebral and systemic arterial oxygenation 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
3. If the patient with a superior CPA develops 
cardiac arrest, the survival is poor, and risk 
for end-organ injury is increased. As a result, 
it is important for providers to recognize and 
intervene when prearrest low cardiac output 
and impaired Do2 develop (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Right-Sided Heart Disease
Patients undergoing reconstruction of the RV outflow 
tract (eg, TOF, double-outlet RV TOF type, truncus arteri-
osus) are at risk for both systolic and diastolic RV dysfunc-
tion. The risk is determined by the age of the patient, the 
degree of volume or pressure overload imposed on the 
RV, the duration the RV has been exposed to abnormal 
loading conditions, and residual or additional postopera-
tive lesions. The following physiological and anatomic 
factors are associated with an increased risk of postoper-
ative RV systolic or diastolic dysfunction: (1) preoperative 
RV hypertrophy with an RV that functions at systemic 
(or suprasystemic) pressures and decompresses through 
a ventricular septal defect (VSD); (2) an operative pro-
cedure that includes VSD closure and RV outflow tract 
reconstruction; (3) postoperative pulmonary valve insuf-
ficiency with acute RV volume loading (particularly if the 
RV is hypertrophied); and (4) RV dysfunction from resec-
tion of muscular obstruction (especially if the moderator 
band is damaged or excised) or ventriculotomy with or 
without insertion of an RV-to–pulmonary artery conduit. 
These acute changes in anatomy and physiology result 
in a heart that is predisposed to various degrees of RV 
systolic and diastolic dysfunction.
The RV with systolic and diastolic dysfunction is ex-
quisitely dependent on sinus rhythm for the atrial contri-
bution to ventricular filling to maintain cardiac output. 
Such an RV is intolerant of positive-pressure ventila-
tion with high mean airway pressures.99,104–110 Residual 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e702
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
VSDs, proximal or distal RV outflow tract or pulmonary 
artery obstruction, increased PVR, moderate or greater 
pulmonary insufficiency or tricuspid valve regurgitation, 
and left ventricular (LV) dysfunction are poorly tolerated 
and compound postoperative LCOS. An understanding 
of these issues will be helpful in the mitigation of post-
operative LCOS and during postoperative resuscitation.
Intraoperative Assessment
The intraoperative acquisition of key hemodynamic data 
is helpful to rule out residual VSD or outflow tract ob-
struction before conclusion of the surgical procedure. 
Helpful intraoperative evaluations include the presence 
or absence of a step-up in oxygen saturation from SVC 
to pulmonary artery, RV and pulmonary artery pressure 
(PAP) measurements, and the results of a postoperative 
transesophageal echocardiogram.111–116 Intraoperative 
estimation of Qp:Qs can be derived by dividing the oxy-
gen saturation difference across the systemic capillary 
bed (systemic arterial oxygen saturation−mixed Svo2 
[SVC or right atrial saturation]) by the oxygen saturation 
difference across the pulmonary capillary bed (pulmo-
nary venous or LA saturation−pulmonary artery satura-
tion). A Qp:Qs >2:1 suggests the presence of a residual 
shunt that is likely to be hemodynamically significant. 
The usual source of the residual left-to-right shunt is in-
complete closure of the VSD or additional undiagnosed 
muscular VSDs.112,117,118
Increased RV pressure can be caused by the follow-
ing: (1) distal pulmonary artery obstruction (congenital 
or related to residual ductal tissue encircling the left 
pulmonary artery); (2) suboptimal surgical reconstruc-
tion of the proximal pulmonary artery anastomoses 
with the conduit; (3) residual subvalvar, valvar, or su-
pravalvar stenosis; and (4) elevated PVR. Postoperative 
transesophageal echocardiography might not dem-
onstrate discrete stenosis of the left pulmonary artery 
and underestimates valve regurgitation, especially if the 
systemic pressure is low. However, the Doppler peak 
instantaneous gradient will overestimate the peak-to-
peak pressure gradient in long-segment stenosis. Tricus-
pid valve regurgitation in the presence of RV dysfunc-
tion with pulmonary insufficiency is tolerated poorly 
and can be caused by inclusion of the septal leaflet in 
the VSD patch.
Postoperative Course
Restrictive RV Physiology
Postoperative restrictive RV physiology is character-
ized by Doppler demonstration of persistent antegrade 
diastolic blood flow into the pulmonary artery in late 
diastole at the time of atrial contraction.119 After TOF 
repair, ventricular diastolic dysfunction is thought to be 
associated with intraoperative myocardial injury and 
postoperative oxidant stress.119 In the most severe cas-
es, the RV acts as a passive conduit between the right 
atrium and pulmonary artery. There is often an elevated 
RV end-diastolic pressure and RV hypertrophy. Diastolic 
RV dysfunction is characterized by impaired relaxation 
and filling.120
A stiff, poorly compliant, and hypertrophied RV is as-
sociated with an elevated ventricular end-diastolic pres-
sure and systemic venous hypertension. Reduced RV 
preload reduces RV stroke volume and therefore LV pre-
load and cardiac output. RV and LV interdependence 
and the effect on septal position affects LV compliance 
and function, further contributing to impaired stroke 
volume.121 Such a clinical scenario might be particu-
larly evident after neonatal and infant RV outflow re-
construction and ventriculotomy, such as after truncus 
arteriosus or TOF repair. Hemodynamically significant 
residual defects, including residual VSD, outflow tract 
obstruction, or dysrhythmias will exacerbate RV failure 
and the low cardiac output state.
Atrial Shunt
In the presence of right-sided heart diastolic dysfunction 
or RV systolic failure, an atrial septal defect that allows 
right-to-left shunting can be helpful to preserve LV pre-
load and decrease RV wall stress and systemic venous 
hypertension. This has been studied primarily in patients 
with idiopathic PAH.122,123 Simple calculations demon-
strate that preservation of LV preload with shunted sys-
temic venous blood will improve systemic Do2 even if 
there is systemic arterial desaturation. However, it is dif-
ficult to judge the size of the atrial communication, and 
on occasion, severe hypoxemia requires reoperation to 
close or reduce the size of the atrial defect.
Tissue Edema and Tamponade
During the postoperative period after reconstruction 
of the RV outflow tract, fluid is progressively given to 
maintain RV preload, and thereby LV preload, to pre-
vent systemic hypotension.124 Over time, the increase 
in blood pressure and mixed Svo2 in response to fluid 
administration diminishes, the patient becomes edema-
tous, and further fluid administration is counterproduc-
tive. The capillary leak and third-space accumulation of 
fluid can reflect direct endothelial injury as a result of 
the inflammatory response to bypass, but after RV out-
flow reconstruction, it can also be caused by elevated 
RV end-diastolic pressure and CVP
.125–128 Both capillary 
leak and an elevated CVP result in fluid collection in the 
peritoneal and pleural cavities and tissue edema despite 
relative intravascular volume depletion and inadequate 
RV preload. This phase of capillary leak typically will re-
solve over the subsequent 1 to 2 postoperative days; 
however, it is extremely important to rule out residual 
anatomic defects.
The RV is also susceptible to compression from tissue 
edema in the mediastinum, resulting in so-called tissue 
tamponade, which further restricts filling. If there is risk 
of tamponade physiology, it can be useful to leave the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e703
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
sternum open or reopen the sternum if signs or symp-
toms of tamponade develop during the early postop-
erative period.129–133
Fluid accumulation in the lungs or pleural spaces will 
result in higher ventilator pressures further impairing 
RV filling and cardiac output. Pleural fluid evacuation 
is usually helpful. Abdominal compression from ascites 
impairs IVC flow. Prophylactic placement prior to sur-
gery or early consideration of placement after surgery 
of a peritoneal drain can be helpful.134–136
Mechanical Ventilation and Cardiopulmonary 
Interactions
Mechanical ventilation can have a significant impact 
on RV afterload and the amount of pulmonary regur-
gitation.137 Both hypoinflation and hyperinflation of the 
lung will increase afterload of the RV and can reduce 
preload to the LV, with a resultant fall in cardiac output. 
There is also the potential for worsening pulmonary re-
gurgitation if PVR increases. In addition, RV ischemia 
can develop from increased wall stress and increased 
RV myocardial oxygen demand.
There is evidence that positive-pressure ventilation is 
harmful and negative-pressure ventilation is beneficial 
in right-sided heart diastolic dysfunction. Spontaneous 
ventilation and negative-pressure ventilation improve 
cardiac output and renal function.99,138,139 There is re-
ported benefit to airway pressure release ventilation.102 
Positive-pressure ventilation with the lowest mean air-
way pressure and early postoperative extubation can be 
advantageous, although in a patient with an LCOS, this 
must be balanced against the potential detrimental ef-
fects of increased work of breathing and loss of airway 
control.
Cardiac Rhythm and Pacing
Right atrial contraction associated with sinus rhythm 
can make an important contribution to RV filling and 
cardiac output in patients with right-sided heart dys-
function.109,110 Atrial arrhythmias, especially if associated 
with atrioventricular dissociation (eg, junctional ectopic 
tachycardia [JET]) can be poorly tolerated. These arrhyth-
mias must be diagnosed promptly, and if hemodynami-
cally significant, treated with measures including mild 
hypothermia, minimization of catecholamine use, mini-
mization of O2 demand, administration of amiodarone 
or procainamide, and cardiac pacing.140,141 After recon-
struction of the RV outflow tract, right bundle-branch 
block and ventricular dyssynchrony are common and 
can be exacerbated by RV pacing. Biventricular pacing 
can improve cardiac output in children with postopera-
tive right- or left-sided heart dysfunction.142–144
Pharmacological Management of Right-Sided Heart 
Dysfunction
When a patient develops postoperative right-sided heart 
dysfunction, inotropic and vasoactive agents must be 
carefully selected and titrated.120 Coronary blood flow 
to the RV occurs during both systole and diastole in 
the normal heart but can be reduced when the RV is 
hypertrophied and end-diastolic pressure is elevated. 
As a result, when oxygen demand is increased, such 
as with tachycardia and elevated wall stress, the RV is 
at risk for ischemia.145 Low-dose epinephrine infusion 
is an adjunctive therapy for systolic dysfunction of the 
RV; however, catecholamines can cause tachycardia 
and increase oxygen demand and wall stress, thereby 
worsening RV diastolic dysfunction.120 Systemic vaso-
constrictors, especially vasopressin146,147 and norepi-
nephrine,146,147 can be useful to support mean arterial 
pressure, reducing the need for fluid administration; 
they will also maintain coronary perfusion pressure and 
potentially improve ventricular interactions. If there is 
pulmonary vasoconstriction, iNO can be a useful thera-
py in RV failure.148,149
Unique Challenges in CPR
Cardiac output during CPR can be very limited in pa-
tients who have undergone reconstruction of the RV 
outflow tract. The recommendations for high-quality 
CPR should be followed; however, filling of the RV 
during chest recoil can be limited if the RV has restric-
tive physiology with diastolic dysfunction. Additional 
fluid should be administered to augment intravascu-
lar volume. Pulmonary regurgitation can be worsened 
by chest compressions, resulting in decreased PBF, LV 
preload, and cardiac output. Coronary perfusion and 
blood flow to a hypertrophied RV can be limited during 
chest compressions, and it is important to minimize the 
time to first administration of epinephrine. The risk for 
hemodynamically significant supraventricular arrhyth-
mia (ie, supraventricular tachycardia [SVT]) or JET) is 
high, and these arrhythmias should be viewed as prear-
rest states and must be identified and treated promptly. 
Chest compressions can compress and obstruct the re-
constructed RV outflow tract. Thus, if CPR is needed in 
the immediate postoperative period, it may be neces-
sary to open the chest as quickly as possible to enable 
open-chest cardiac massage.
Gaps in Knowledge
Evidence to support management of the patient with 
right-sided hemodynamic compromise after congenital 
heart surgery is limited to case reports and a few case 
series; more research is needed.
Recommendations: Right-Sided Heart 
Disease
1. In patients with postoperative RV systolic 
and/or diastolic dysfunction, an atrial shunt 
can be helpful to increase systemic cardiac 
output and systemic Do2, despite systemic 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e704
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
oxygen desaturation (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
2. In postoperative patients with restrictive RV 
physiology or tamponade physiology, an 
open sternum can be useful to improve hemo-
dynamics (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
PAH is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in chil-
dren with congenital and acquired heart disease. Much 
of the data regarding the incidence of PAH after pediat-
ric cardiothoracic surgery and the risk of, therapies for, 
and outcomes after pulmonary hypertensive crises are 
from single-center case series. The disease is difficult 
to study because of the heterogeneity of the pediatric 
population and the small number of patients seen at 
each center. The Pediatric Pulmonary Hypertension Net-
work Informatics Registry (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier 
No. NCT02249923) has been established to better un-
derstand disease processes and facilitate treatment. In 
the interim, efforts to standardize definitions and treat-
ment led to the 2015 publication of the first Pediatric 
Pulmonary Hypertension Guidelines from the AHA and 
the American Thoracic Society.150 Recommendations 
contained herein are consistent with those guidelines.
Pulmonary hypertension occurs in 2% to 5%151 of 
pediatric patients after cardiac surgery, and 0.7%152 to 
5%151 of all cardiovascular surgical patients experience 
postoperative pulmonary hypertensive crises, with the 
highest reported risk among patients with atrioventric-
ular septal defects, truncus arteriosus, TAPVC, transpo-
sition of the great arteries (TGA), and VSD.151,153 In a 
case series from Sweden, the incidence of pulmonary 
hypertensive crises was higher after atrioventricular 
septal defect repair (14%) and in patients with trisomy 
21 (10%).152 In other case series,154,155 up to 20% of 
high-risk pediatric cardiac surgical patients had postop-
erative pulmonary hypertension. Postoperative pulmo-
nary hypertension prolongs ICU stay and time to extu-
bation,154,155 and the in-hospital mortality rate among 
patients who have pulmonary hypertensive crises might 
be as high as 20%.151,152,156 Even when patients with 
pulmonary hypertension do not experience a postop-
erative pulmonary hypertensive crisis, they still have a 
higher mortality risk during the first 12 months after 
surgery, accounting for up to 8% of late deaths after 
cardiac surgery.152,157,158
Pulmonary Hypertensive Crises
Pulmonary hypertensive crises are acute and poten-
tially lethal increases in PAP and PVR that cause acute 
right-sided heart failure accompanied by tricuspid 
regurgitation, systemic hypotension, myocardial isch-
emia, and even cardiac arrest. They can be triggered 
by a variety of stimuli, including pain, anxiety, tracheal 
suctioning, hypoxia, and acidosis.159–165 Pulmonary 
hypertensive crises have been described and studied 
most frequently when they occur after cardiac sur-
gery,159–166 but they can also accompany modulation 
or withdrawal of pulmonary hypertension–specific 
therapy.164,167–171 Pulmonary hypertensive crises can be 
precipitated outside of the perioperative period by in-
tercurrent illness, lung injury, or infection166,172–174 or 
by noncardiac interventions.166,175–177 If pulmonary hy-
pertensive crises are incompletely treated initially, they 
recur, and subsequent crises can be more severe and 
prolonged.153,159,160
Histological examination of the lung vasculature in 
patients who experience fatal pulmonary hypertensive 
crises usually reveals reversible changes. There is medial 
hypertrophy with abnormal peripheral extension of mus-
cle into normally nonmuscularized arteries.159 The his-
tological examination of lung tissue obtained from pa-
tients who have had pulmonary hypertensive crises after 
repair of TAPVC can show not only the vascular changes 
described above but also lymphangiectasia.178–180
Clinical and hemodynamic findings associated with 
postoperative pulmonary hypertensive crises include an 
abrupt increase in PAP (ratio of PAP to systemic artery 
pressure >0.75), followed by increased right atrial and 
RV end-diastolic pressures and CVP
, decreased systemic 
and mixed Svo2, decreased systemic arterial pressure 
(by >20%), and decreased cardiac output. Broncho-
constriction or increased airway resistance can also be 
noted.150 Intraoperatively placed pulmonary artery cath-
eters can be useful to confirm diagnosis and evaluate 
management after cardiac surgery. There is great vari-
ability in the use of these catheters. It is difficult to pre-
dict which patients at risk for pulmonary hypertension 
and pulmonary hypertension crises will benefit from a 
pulmonary artery catheter, which alters the risk-benefit 
ratio associated with the use of these catheters.
Management Plan for Patients at Risk for 
Pulmonary Hypertensive Crisis
Patients with PAH require a comprehensive plan of care 
that includes meticulous care to prevent episodes of 
pulmonary hypertensive crises.181 This plan must also in-
clude a plan for postoperative hemodynamic monitor-
ing and the recommended sequence of interventions to 
be initiated in response to development of pulmonary 
hypertensive crises.
Palliative right-sided heart and pulmonary artery de-
compression procedures (such as an atrial septostomy 
and placement of Potts shunt) can significantly reduce 
the risk of pulmonary hypertensive crises and prolong 
survival in idiopathic PAH.122,123,182–185 It is important to 
optimize the size of the atrial shunt to avoid a large 
right-to-left shunt and profound hypoxemia and cya-
nosis. Atrial septostomy, performed at a center with 
experience in treatment of pulmonary hypertension, 
is recommended for patients with RV failure, recurrent 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e705
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
syncope, or pulmonary hypertensive crises that persist 
despite optimized medical management.
Treatment of pulmonary hypertension and preven-
tion of pulmonary hypertensive crises include provi-
sion of adequate analgesia, sedation, and the use of 
muscle relaxants; avoidance of hypoxia and acidosis; 
administration of inhaled pulmonary vasodilators; and 
use of oral and systemic vasodilators. Pulmonary vaso-
dilators must be weaned carefully; if the child devel-
ops a pulmonary hypertensive crisis during weaning, 
administration of the previously successful dose of the 
drug should be resumed. During a crisis, administration 
of systemic vasoconstrictors can also be considered to 
maintain coronary perfusion of the RV.
Adequate Analgesia, Sedation, and Use of Muscle 
Relaxants
The association of pulmonary hypertensive crises with 
sympathetic stimulation has been documented.159,160 
Neonates undergoing cardiac surgery demonstrate 
high levels of sympathetic stress hormones that are 
attenuated with administration of high-dose fentanyl 
analgesia.186,187 For pediatric cardiovascular surgical pa-
tients who are at risk for pulmonary hypertensive crises, 
provision of adequate opiates, sedatives, and muscle 
relaxants is recommended.150 In general, continuous 
infusion of the synthetic opioid fentanyl with the use 
of muscle relaxants is beneficial for early postoperative 
care of high-risk patients. It can be beneficial to supple-
ment baseline analgesic drugs with additional doses 
before high-risk procedures such as suctioning of the 
endotracheal tube.150
Avoidance of Hypoxia and Acidosis
There is considerable evidence that hypoxia and acido-
sis are each powerful pulmonary vasoconstrictors.188–191 
As a result, the care of the child with pulmonary hyper-
tension who is at risk for pulmonary hypertensive crisis 
requires meticulous respiratory management and moni-
toring to avoid and promptly treat hypoxia and acidosis.
Alkalosis is as potent a vasodilator as iNO. During 
pulmonary hypertensive crises, oxygen administration 
and induction of alkalosis through hyperventilation or 
alkali administration are recommended while pulmo-
nary-specific vasodilators are administered.150 However, 
alkalosis can have detrimental sequelae, whether it is 
induced by hyperventilation or by alkali administra-
tion.188 Hyperventilation can induce lung injury, and 
the response to sodium bicarbonate administration can 
be only transient. In addition, sodium bicarbonate can 
decrease cardiac output and cerebral blood flow and 
increase CVP and SVR.150
Inhaled Pulmonary Vasodilators
iNO163,190,192–202 and prostacyclin (PGI2)194,196,203 are cur-
rently available inhaled pulmonary vasodilators that can 
be used to prevent and treat pulmonary hypertensive 
crises in patients with pulmonary hypertension. In one 
prospective, randomized controlled trial of 124 children 
after cardiac surgery for large VSDs or atrioventricular 
septal defects, iNO treatment reduced the frequency of 
pulmonary hypertensive crises and shortened the time 
to extubation.164 In a retrospective review from 1984 to 
1994 of 294 patients with atrioventricular septal defect 
repair and severe postoperative pulmonary hyperten-
sion, iNO administration was associated with reduced 
mortality.204 Inhaled PGI2 has been shown to transiently 
produce pulmonary vasodilation and improve oxygen-
ation, but the alkalinity of the drug can irritate airways, 
and precise dosing can be complicated by drug loss in 
the nebulization circuit.150,205 Inhaled iNO or PGI2 should 
be used in the initial therapy for pulmonary hyperten-
sive crises and right-sided heart failure.
To minimize the side effects from intravenous vaso-
dilator drugs, there has been great interest in delivering 
drugs such as milrinone, nitroglycerin, and PGI2 through 
inhalation.153,196,206 In one randomized controlled trial of 
35 children with acyanotic heart disease and pulmo-
nary hypertension, both inhaled milrinone and iNO pro-
duced a fall in systolic pressure, diastolic pressure, and 
mean PAPs and PVR.206 These inhaled drugs could offer 
an alternative to intravenous routes of administration, 
but experience with them is limited.
Systemic Vasodilators
The intravenous vasodilators PGI2 and nifedipine have 
been used to decrease PVR, predominantly during acute 
vasoreactivity testing with continuous systemic and PAP 
monitoring.207–209 However, there is no intravenous va-
sodilator that has a discrete and specific effect on the 
pulmonary circulation, so the use of these agents must 
be balanced against the potential risk of complications, 
many of which result from the systemic arterial effects. 
In adults, a fall in SVR and hypotension, particularly in 
patients with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension and 
Eisenmenger syndrome,162,181,210 can contribute to an in-
creased right-to-left shunt, progressive hypoxemia, and 
even cardiac arrest. Such a fall in SVR might occur in 
children with dehydration or those receiving procedural 
sedation. In children and adults, worsening hypoxemia 
can also result from the inhibition of hypoxic pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction with an increase in intrapulmo-
nary shunting.211,212
The intravenous vasodilators recommended for use 
in children for the treatment of PAH include drugs that 
have a predominant effect on the β-adrenergic recep-
tors (eg, isoproterenol), phosphodiesterase inhibitors 
(eg, milrinone [type 3 inhibition] and sildenafil [type 
5 inhibition]), eicosanoids (eg, prostaglandin E1 [PGE1] 
and PGI2 and the PGI2 analogue treprostinil [remodu-
lin]), and other drugs that increase intracellular cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate (eg, nitroglycerin).150 Intra-
venous sildenafil infusions can decrease time to extuba-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e706
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
tion and length of ICU stay156 and can be effective in 
children with decreased gut perfusion or ischemia with 
poor enteral drug absorption.213 However, the effect of 
intravenous sildenafil during cardiac arrest related to 
pulmonary hypertension is unknown. For further infor-
mation on the use of systemic vasodilators, the reader is 
referred to the 2015 guidelines on pediatric pulmonary 
hypertension published by the AHA and the American 
Thoracic Society.150
Oral Vasodilators
Oral vasodilator drugs administered to pediatric patients 
with pulmonary hypertension include the phosphodi-
esterase type 5 inhibitor (eg, sildenafil)150,214,215 and an 
endothelin receptor antagonist150 (eg, bosentan). In pe-
diatric studies including children with CHD, sildenafil 
has been shown to improve peak oxygen consumption 
and functional class and reduce mean PAP and PVR. 
Sildenafil has been used effectively during withdrawal 
of iNO and in children with postoperative PAH,216 but its 
pulmonary vasodilator effects must be balanced against 
the consequences of increased intrapulmonary shunt. 
Sildenafil can be administered either as a 1-time dose 
to prevent rebound or repeatedly every 6 to 8 hours 
to treat ongoing PAH. In a multicenter, double-blind, 
randomized, placebo-controlled trial of bosentan ver-
sus placebo in 54 patients with class III Eisenmenger 
syndrome, bosentan was associated with a significant 
fall in PVR index and mean PAP without a fall in SVR.217
Calcium channel blockers (amlodipine, diltiazem, 
and nifedipine) can be used to treat the relatively stable 
patient with pediatric arterial hypertension; however, 
these drugs can cause a decrease in cardiac output and 
a significant drop in systolic blood pressure.150 As a re-
sult, calcium channel blockers are recommended only 
for those patients who are noted to have a reactive pul-
monary vascular bed (as assessed by acute vasoreactiv-
ity testing) and who are older than 1 year of age.180
Rebound Pulmonary Hypertension
Rebound pulmonary hypertension occurs in approxi-
mately one-third of patients whose iNO is being weaned. 
Rebound pulmonary hypertension can be managed ef-
fectively with the use of intravenous sildenafil or (when 
the patient is stable) oral sildenafil.170,171 Intravenous 
sildenafil can cause systemic hypotension.150
Systemic Vasoconstrictors
During pulmonary hypertensive crises, the RV fails, and 
the increased RV afterload produces increased myocar-
dial oxygen demand at the same time that the coro-
nary perfusion pressure and coronary blood flow are 
decreased. As a result, the RV can become ischemic, 
worsening right-sided heart failure. The elevated PVR 
and RV failure lead to a fall in PBF and left-sided heart 
filling, with a resultant fall in cardiac output. Volume re-
placement is needed. In addition, inotropic agents can 
be administered to improve RV function, and vasopres-
sors can be administered to treat systemic hypotension 
and improve coronary artery perfusion pressure. There 
are animal data that suggest that vasopressin can in-
crease SVR without causing a similar increase in PVR218; 
however, in vivo studies of the pulmonary vascular re-
sponse to vasopressin in adults have yielded inconsis-
tent results.219 A prospective pilot study of phenyleph-
rine, arginine vasopressin, and epinephrine in pediatric 
patients with pulmonary hypertension showed an in-
crease in aortic pressure with all drugs, although only 
vasopressin resulted in a consistent decrease in the ra-
tio of PVR to SVR.220 Mechanical cardiopulmonary sup-
port should be considered in cases of right-sided heart 
failure refractory to inotropes and vasoconstrictors (see 
Mechanical Support section).
Unique Challenges in CPR
When adult patients with PAH develop cardiac arrest, 
conventional resuscitation with CPR and medications 
is rarely effective, with a 6% reported survival rate.221 
Similar to adults, children with PAH can develop sud-
den cardiac arrest.157,221–224 The cardiac arrest can be 
triggered by arrhythmia, pulmonary hemorrhage, left 
main coronary compression by the pulmonary artery, 
pulmonary artery dissection or embolus, spontaneous 
PAH crisis, or dose reduction or withdrawal of a pul-
monary artery vasodilator. The ultimate cause of the 
cardiac arrest is usually acute RV decompensation in a 
patient with little reserve.
Once cardiac arrest develops in a child with PAH, 
chest compressions and resuscitation drugs might be 
ineffective in generating PBF, LV filling, and cardiac out-
put. It is extremely important to search for and treat 
possible reversible causes of increased PVR, including 
inadvertent interruption in targeted pulmonary hyper-
tension drugs, hypercarbia, hypoxia, arrhythmia, car-
diac tamponade, or drug toxicity. There is no evidence 
that alkali administration improves outcome, and there 
is evidence that excessive ventilation during resuscita-
tion is harmful222; positive-pressure ventilation will de-
crease systemic venous return, RV filling, and cardiac 
output generated during chest compressions.
If high-quality CPR remains ineffective despite pro-
vision of pulmonary hypertension–specific therapy, in-
cluding pulmonary vasodilators, rapid consideration 
of ECLS might offer the best chance of survival, either 
as a bridge to heart/lung transplantation or to permit 
recovery from the inciting factor.223,225–227 Survival has 
been reported using conventional ECLS or ECLS with a 
pumpless lung assist device.228–231
Reports of cardiac arrest during cardiac catheteriza-
tion of children with PAH suggest that use of specific 
pulmonary vasodilators can be beneficial when deliv-
ered with careful hemodynamic monitoring.175,176 Once 
cardiac arrest has occurred, outcomes can be improved 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e707
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
in the presence of an anatomic right-to-left shunt that 
permits LV preload to be maintained without PBF. We 
identified no studies reporting the outcome of CPR 
after cardiac arrest in children with Eisenmenger syn-
drome or after postoperative cardiac arrest in children 
with PAH.
Intravenously administered PGI2 could have a role 
in resuscitation of children with PAH, but there is no 
evidence to support this. Abrupt cessation of pulmo-
nary hypertension–targeted therapies can result in re-
bound pulmonary hypertension and cardiac arrest (see 
Rebound Pulmonary Hypertension section). Therefore, 
it is always prudent to determine whether impediment 
to drug delivery is the cause of hemodynamic deteriora-
tion, especially in patients receiving chronic infusions of 
PGI2 or analogues. This requires rapid assessment and 
correction of problems with the central venous cath-
eter, the subcutaneous site, or the drug-infusion system 
(including tubing and pump).
The poor outcome after cardiac arrest in patients 
with PAH reinforces the need for a preventative ap-
proach for high-risk patients (ie, those with established 
Eisenmenger syndrome, RV dysfunction, suprasystemic 
PAPs, and tricuspid and pulmonary valve regurgitation). 
Given the risk for cardiac arrest in these patients, ad-
mission to the ICU should be considered during any in-
tercurrent illness or when the child is undergoing non-
cardiac or other procedures.
Gaps in Knowledge
Much of our understanding of the management of 
pulmonary hypertension has emerged from the adult 
population, with very limited pediatric data available. A 
data registry for pediatric patients with PAH will allow 
for critically needed clinical and translational research 
and quality improvement science that will better inform 
our clinical care for this high-risk population.
Recommendations: Pulmonary Arterial 
Hypertension
1. Atrial septostomy is recommended for 
patients with RV failure, recurrent syncope, 
or pulmonary hypertensive crises that persist 
despite optimized medical management but 
should ideally be performed in an experi-
enced pulmonary hypertension center (Class 
I; Level of Evidence B).
2. For pediatric patients who are at high risk 
for pulmonary hypertensive crises, provision 
of adequate opiates, sedatives, and muscle 
relaxants is recommended to minimize risk 
of pulmonary hypertensive crises (Class I; 
Level of Evidence B).
3. The postoperative care of the child with 
pulmonary hypertension at high risk for 
pulmonary hypertensive crises requires care-
ful respiratory management and monitoring 
to avoid hypoxia and acidosis (Class I; Level 
of Evidence B).
4. For the initial treatment of pulmonary 
hypertensive crises, oxygen administration 
and induction of alkalosis through hyper-
ventilation or alkali administration can be 
useful while pulmonary-specific vasodila-
tors are administered (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
5. iNO or PGI2 should be used as the initial ther-
apy to treat pulmonary hypertensive crises or 
acute right-sided heart failure secondary to 
increased PVR (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
6. Sildenafil should be prescribed to prevent 
rebound pulmonary hypertension in patients 
who are at risk for or demonstrate hemody-
namic instability or symptomatic PAH during 
weaning or discontinuation of the iNO dose 
(Class I; Level of Evidence B).
7. In patients with pulmonary hypertensive cri-
ses, inotropic/vasopressor therapy should be 
used to avoid RV ischemia caused by systemic 
hypotension (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
8. ECLS can be useful in cases of refractory pul-
monary hypertensive crises (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence B).
9. It is reasonable to undertake early postop-
erative investigation to assess the operative 
result and identify additional or undetected 
lesions in patients with hemodynamically 
significant postoperative pulmonary hyper-
tension (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Left-Sided Heart Disease
Severe Mitral Valve Stenosis and Mitral 
Regurgitation
Severe Mitral Valve Stenosis
Severe mitral stenosis results in elevated LA pressure, 
pulmonary venous hypertension, and PAH. Although 
the PAH can be reversible after relief of the steno-
sis, the pulmonary vascular bed can be quite labile in 
the immediate postoperative period after mitral valve 
surgery. This reactivity is exacerbated by preoperative 
pulmonary edema and the inflammation caused by 
cardiopulmonary bypass, both of which affect pul-
monary function and can further increase PVR. After 
relief of mitral stenosis, prophylactic administration 
of a pulmonary vasodilator such as iNO or a nonspe-
cific vasodilator such as intravenous milrinone can be 
useful during the immediate postoperative period to 
minimize pulmonary vascular reactivity and pulmonary 
hypertensive crises.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e708
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
The LV can also be less compliant postoperatively 
than preoperatively, and higher filling pressure might 
be required in the immediate postoperative period to 
maintain adequate cardiac output. Volume resuscita-
tion should be given cautiously, with attempts to avoid 
a rapid elevation of LA pressure, acute development of 
pulmonary edema, and the precipitation of a pulmo-
nary hypertensive crisis.
Mitral stenosis in isolation is uncommon. Children 
with mitral stenosis typically have multiple levels of 
left-sided outflow tract obstruction, with possible LV 
hypoplasia and endocardial fibroelastosis.232 As a re-
sult, in many instances after mitral valve repair, the LV 
end-diastolic pressure remains elevated, even in the ab-
sence of a mitral valve gradient. Mechanical ventilation 
strategies to improve pulmonary compliance and oxy-
genation, such as use of higher positive end-expiratory 
pressure, can reduce PVR and improve cardiac output, 
but excessive positive end-expiratory pressure can im-
pede systemic and pulmonary venous return, resulting 
in a fall in cardiac output.
Severe Mitral Valve Regurgitation
Severe mitral regurgitation produces LA and LV volume 
overload, causing progressive LV dilation, dilation of the 
mitral valve annulus, and progressive LV dysfunction.233 
Long-standing mitral regurgitation can result in LA hy-
pertension and elevated PVR.
Postoperative LCOS can occur after mitral valvu-
loplasty or replacement, particularly in patients with 
preoperative ventricular dysfunction and higher LV 
end-systolic dimension.234,235 Other factors that can 
contribute to LCOS after mitral valvuloplasty or replace-
ment include myocardial reperfusion injury after pro-
longed cross-clamp time, postoperative complications 
such as arrhythmias and complete heart block, coro-
nary artery obstruction or injury during valve replace-
ment, and increased pulmonary vascular reactivity. In a 
study of >100 children undergoing mitral valve repair 
or replacement predominantly for mitral regurgitation, 
the mortality rate was nearly 10%, and 10% required 
mechanical circulatory support in the immediate post-
operative period.236
In the immediate postoperative period after mitral 
valve repair or replacement, patients require close mon-
itoring of cardiac output. If LA pressure is measured 
directly with an LA catheter, the catheter and tubing 
must be carefully maintained and scrutinized to avoid 
any air emboli. Afterload reduction with intravenous 
milrinone237 and inotropic support is typical for at least 
24 hours after surgery, and the duration of intravenous 
afterload reduction should be extended in the setting 
of preoperative or persistent postoperative ventricular 
dysfunction. For patients with severe postoperative LV 
dysfunction after mitral valve repair or replacement, ex-
tubation can be deferred until the LV function improves 
and the LV is deemed able to tolerate the increase in 
afterload that will result from loss of positive-pressure 
ventilation.
If LCOS persists despite escalation of inotropic sup-
port, early initiation of ECLS should be considered. 
ECLS is currently used primarily as a bridge to recovery, 
but in rare cases it can be considered as a bridge to 
placement of a long-term LV assist device (LVAD). Mitral 
valve replacement with a prosthetic valve is a relative 
contraindication for LVAD placement and entails tech-
nical modifications.238
Unique Challenges in CPR
In the presence of severe mitral stenosis or regurgita-
tion, elevated LA pressure and PVR limit effective PBF 
and ultimately the systemic cardiac output generated 
by chest compressions. In severe mitral stenosis, cardiac 
output generated by chest compressions is further lim-
ited by restriction of flow of pulmonary venous return 
across the mitral valve and decreased filling of the LV. 
In severe mitral regurgitation, cardiac output generated 
by chest compressions is further limited by the regur-
gitant blood flow from the LV across the mitral valve. 
If high-quality CPR remains ineffective, early consider-
ation of ECLS might offer the best chance of survival.
Critical Aortic Valve Stenosis and Severe Aortic 
Valve Regurgitation
Critical Aortic Valve Stenosis
Newborns with critical aortic stenosis have a fixed eleva-
tion in LV afterload and will present with either a hyper-
trophied or dilated LV with decreased contractility. If LV 
hypertrophy is inadequate, wall stress increases and LV 
ejection fraction falls. LV endocardial fibroelastosis can 
be present and suggests subendocardial ischemia. Ad-
ditional anatomic features that can affect cardiac out-
put include abnormalities in the mitral valve, subaortic 
stenosis, and in some cases aortic arch obstruction (eg, 
coarctation of the aorta). An elevated LV end-diastolic 
pressure can result in high LA pressure and pulmonary 
edema. In newborn infants with critical aortic stenosis, 
PGE1 infusion is required to keep the ductus arteriosus 
open, enabling a pulmonary-to-aortic shunt that will 
support systemic perfusion. In addition, these infants 
often benefit from inotropic support to maintain ad-
equate cardiac output before intervention.
Percutaneous aortic balloon valvuloplasty is associ-
ated with low mortality and is the preferred approach 
in most centers.239 Surgical aortic valvotomy can be 
performed with similar results.240,241 Relief of aortic ste-
nosis without significant aortic regurgitation can result 
in a dramatic improvement in contractility and cardiac 
output if LV function is preserved. However, both per-
cutaneous and surgical interventions are associated 
with higher mortality in the presence of preexisting LV 
dysfunction.239,241,242 In newborns with critical aortic ste-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e709
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
nosis, the presence of endocardial fibroelastosis is an-
other risk factor for early mortality and poor long-term 
outcome.243
After percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty in the neo-
nate, the PGE1 infusion is discontinued. Inotropic sup-
port or afterload reduction might be needed in the 
immediate postintervention period to support cardiac 
output. Serial echocardiography with Doppler color 
flow is used to assess the magnitude and direction of 
shunting through the ductus arteriosus, LV function, 
and the degree of aortic stenosis and regurgitation to 
determine the need for and duration of inotropic sup-
port (eg, epinephrine) or afterload reduction (eg, mil-
rinone).237 If LV function is poor, LA hypertension can 
persist, which leads to pulmonary venous and arterial 
hypertension and further compromise of pulmonary 
function and cardiac output.
It can be difficult to assess the adequacy of left-sided 
heart structures in patients with critical aortic stenosis. 
If LCOS persists despite adequate relief of aortic ste-
nosis, the LV or mitral valve could be structurally and 
functionally inadequate to support a biventricular cir-
culation. In such patients, it is important to consider 
early conversion to a univentricular strategy; such a 
conversion can be beneficial if performed before the 
onset of irreversible end-organ dysfunction.243,244 When 
the neonate with critical aortic stenosis has LV failure, 
severe mitral regurgitation, and a restrictive atrial sep-
tum, a balloon aortic valvuloplasty or a surgical aortic 
valvotomy and hybrid procedure245 can be beneficial to 
reduce LA hypertension and increase PBF. This hybrid 
procedure could include a balloon atrial septostomy or 
septectomy, bilateral pulmonary artery banding, and 
maintenance of ductal patency with stenting or PGE1 
infusion. These procedures convert the patient to a 
palliated single-ventricle physiology in the short term 
without precluding later conversion to a biventricular 
circulation.242,246
Severe Aortic Valve Regurgitation
Aortic regurgitation creates a volume load for the LV 
that is similar to that resulting from mitral regurgita-
tion. The volume load causes progressive LV dilation, 
concentric and eccentric hypertrophy, remodeling, and 
eventually LV dysfunction. Development of acute severe 
aortic regurgitation (eg, after balloon valvuloplasty for 
congenital aortic stenosis or with bacterial endocardi-
tis) is not well tolerated and can cause coronary insuf-
ficiency, myocardial ischemia, and rapid progression of 
LV dilation and dysfunction.
Chronic aortic regurgitation represents a condition 
of increased volume load and afterload. As the disease 
progresses, the preload reserve and LV function decline. 
The risk of postoperative dysfunction increases in the 
presence of preoperative symptoms, LV dysfunction, 
and increased LV volume, particularly LV end-systolic 
volume.247–250 Postoperative management principles are 
similar to those outlined in the section on Severe Mitral 
Valve Regurgitation and include the use of vasodilator 
agents such as milrinone237 to reduce afterload and im-
prove cardiac output.
Unique Challenges in CPR
Resuscitation from cardiac arrest in the presence of sig-
nificant aortic valve disease presents several challenges. 
In aortic stenosis, the stroke volume and cardiac output 
generated during chest compressions are reduced be-
cause flow across the aortic valve is obstructed. In ad-
dition, if the LV is hypertrophied and poorly compliant, 
limited LV filling will further compromise stroke volume 
and cardiac output. Chest compressions must gener-
ate sufficient aortic root pressure to support adequate 
coronary perfusion to the hypertrophied myocardium.
In aortic regurgitation, the stroke volume and car-
diac output generated during chest compressions are 
limited by the regurgitant flow across the aortic valve 
back into the LV. As a result, coronary perfusion pres-
sure and cardiac output can be compromised.
Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Connection
In TAPVC, both systemic and pulmonary venous blood 
return to the right atrium; this results in right atrial dila-
tion and RV dilation and hypertrophy. The LA and the 
LV are usually adequate but small relative to the RV.
Obstruction to pulmonary venous return results in 
pulmonary venous congestion and interstitial edema, 
which impairs gas exchange and increases PVR and PAP
. 
This in turn increases RV afterload, causing RV systolic 
dysfunction and worsening of RV compliance. Neo-
nates with obstructed TAPVC can present in extremis 
immediately after birth with a combination of respira-
tory failure, pulmonary hypertension, and circulatory 
collapse; preoperative ECLS is occasionally indicated to 
support Do2.251–253
Surgical repair for neonates with TAPVC and bi-
ventricular physiology can be accomplished with low 
mortality.254 In the postoperative period, the chronically 
underfilled LV can have poor compliance,255 requiring 
higher filling pressures to maintain adequate stroke vol-
ume. Milrinone is often helpful to reduce systemic af-
terload and improve LV lusitropy and LV function.237,253 
Inadequate LV filling can be exacerbated by the pres-
ence of pulmonary hypertension. iNO can be useful and 
has improved the postoperative care and outcome of 
neonates with TAPVC.198 If respiratory failure was pres-
ent preoperatively (eg, in obstructed TAPVC), it can 
be further exacerbated after cardiopulmonary bypass. 
Postoperative respiratory insufficiency and pulmonary 
hypertension require use of positive end-expiratory 
pressure to improve alveolar oxygenation. In addition, 
the standard therapies for treatment of PAH are recom-
mended, including maintenance of adequate oxygen-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e710
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ation, avoidance of acidosis and hypoxia, and provision 
of sedation, analgesia and neuromuscular blockade.253
If pulmonary hypertension persists, it is imperative 
to rule out residual pulmonary venous obstruction by 
echocardiography and cardiac catheterization, if neces-
sary. ECLS may occasionally be needed for short-term 
support.254
Unique Challenges in CPR
High-quality CPR and resuscitation drugs may be inef-
fective in generating PBF, LV filling, and cardiac out-
put in infants who have poor LV diastolic function and 
pulmonary hypertension after correction of TAPVC. It 
is extremely important to search for and treat possible 
reversible causes of increased PVR, including inadver-
tent interruption in targeted pulmonary hypertension 
drugs, hypercarbia, hypoxia, acidosis, arrhythmia, or 
cardiac tamponade. If high-quality CPR remains inef-
fective despite provision of pulmonary hypertension–
specific therapy including iNO, 100% oxygen, and 
establishment of adequate ventilation, ECLS can be 
beneficial.
Gaps in Knowledge
The evidence supporting recommendations for the care 
of infants and children with mitral and aortic valve dis-
ease is largely extrapolated from adult data, with very 
limited evidence derived from infants and children.
Recommendations: Left-Sided Heart 
Disease and TAPVC
1. Given the increased risk of LCOS after repair 
or replacement of a significantly regurgitant 
mitral valve, positive-pressure ventilation 
and vasodilator agents such as milrinone can 
be useful to provide afterload reduction and 
improve cardiac output (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
2. Persistence of LCOS despite adequate relief 
of critical aortic stenosis should prompt 
assessment of adequacy of left-sided struc-
tures to support a biventricular circulation 
(Class I; Level of Evidence B). Conversion to 
a univentricular strategy can be beneficial 
before the onset of irreversible end-organ 
dysfunction (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
3. Given the increased risk of LCOS after repair 
or replacement of a significantly insufficient 
aortic valve, vasodilator agents such as mil-
rinone can be useful to provide afterload 
reduction and improve cardiac output (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
4. iNO can be useful for newborns with 
obstructed TAPVC who demonstrate postop-
erative pulmonary hypertension after surgi-
cal repair (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Cardiomyopathy and Myocarditis
Cardiomyopathy
The therapies used to treat LCOS and prevent cardio-
pulmonary arrest in patients with cardiomyopathy are 
determined by the cardiomyopathy phenotype. The 
distinct cardiomyopathy phenotypes include (1) dilated 
cardiomyopathy, (2) hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, (3) 
restrictive cardiomyopathy, (4) LV noncompaction, and 
(5) arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy.256
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy is the most common pheno-
type encountered clinically in both children and adults. 
Careful electrocardiographic monitoring is indicated 
to assess for atrial or ventricular tachyarrhythmias that 
could be causing the cardiomyopathy and to assess for 
frequent ectopy or nonsustained arrhythmias, because 
these can be harbingers of myocardial irritability or isch-
emia/infarction and can indicate worsening clinical sta-
tus. Invasive and noninvasive hemodynamic monitoring 
can also offer important information to assist in detec-
tion and management of prearrest deterioration.
Afterload reduction is an important clinical goal in 
the setting of dilated cardiomyopathy but must not oc-
cur at the expense of end-organ perfusion or coronary/
myocardial perfusion. Invasive arterial monitoring pro-
vides continuous data to enable better titration of ther-
apy to optimize blood pressure and arterial blood gases. 
Correction of electrolyte disturbances and avoidance of 
acidosis are important to maintain cardiac function and 
avoid worsening ischemia or arrhythmias. Invasive mea-
surement of CVP or PAP provides additional informa-
tion regarding ventricular preload, diastolic pressures, 
and cardiac output to aid the titration of therapies and 
to optimize cardiac function. Ongoing, frequent as-
sessment is required to identify trends in clinical status 
and need for escalation of care. The potential positive 
effects of inotropic support must be weighed care-
fully against the potential negative effects of tachyar-
rhythmias and increased myocardial oxygen demand 
and afterload. There are no data to support the use 
of β-blocking drugs or angiotensin-converting enzyme 
inhibitors in the management of acute heart failure in 
the prearrest phase; however, recommendations for 
their use in stable and chronic heart failure have been 
described.257 Consideration of inotropic therapy should 
prompt a discussion of possible use of ECLS. If ECLS or 
LVAD support is not available on site, any worsening in 
the child’s clinical status should trigger consideration of 
referral to a pediatric cardiovascular tertiary care center 
with mechanical support capability.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
The management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is di-
rected at controlling heart rate and optimizing preload. 
An elevated heart rate will increase myocardial oxygen 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e711
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
demand, which can create or worsen myocardial isch-
emia and increase the risk of life-threatening arrhyth-
mias. Any reduction in preload could lead to worsening 
outflow gradients and could also exacerbate ischemia. 
In addition, a reduction in preload can decrease cardiac 
output and compromise end-organ perfusion and func-
tion.
Inotropes should be used with caution in patients 
with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Ongoing ischemia 
or recalcitrant arrhythmias should prompt consideration 
of ECLS, but the approach might require modification 
given anatomic constraints of the hypertrophied ventri-
cle. In the later stages of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
fibrotic burden from persistent ischemia can result in a 
dilated cardiomyopathy phenotype, for which manage-
ment principles are outlined in the Dilated Cardiomy-
opathy section.
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy, although a rare phenotype, 
requires treatment with careful attention to electro-
cardiographic changes and monitoring for evidence of 
myocardial ischemia such as symptoms of chest pain 
and syncope.258 These patients present with biventricu-
lar diastolic dysfunction resulting in pulmonary edema, 
elevated PVR, myocardial ischemia, and worsening sys-
tolic function. As such, the role of inotropes is limited. 
Blood pressure is optimized through maintenance of 
adequate diastolic pressures to ensure adequate coro-
nary perfusion in the setting of elevated LV end-diastol-
ic pressures. Patients with restrictive cardiomyopathy, 
and some subsets of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, can 
be prone to bradyarrhythmias and asystole, requiring 
pacing to avoid cardiovascular collapse.259
ECLS should be considered early in the patient’s clini-
cal course, because patients with restrictive cardiomy-
opathy can deteriorate quickly or arrest suddenly with 
little opportunity for preventative measures.258,260 In a 
Pediatric Cardiomyopathy Registry study, the median 
time from diagnosis to death for those patients who 
died without transplantation was 0.3 months.260 ECLS 
for restrictive cardiomyopathy requires an individualized 
approach that can be limited by anatomic constraints 
and the presence of pulmonary hypertension.
LV Noncompaction
LV noncompaction can be associated with other con-
comitant cardiomyopathy phenotypes, including di-
lated, hypertrophic, and restrictive cardiomyopathy.261 
Management is typically focused on the associated car-
diomyopathy phenotype, which can change over the 
course of the disease.262,263 Particular attention should 
be given to assessment of LV systolic function and mon-
itoring for ectopy and ventricular arrhythmias, because 
these appear to be strong predictors of outcome.264
ECLS strategies are largely dependent on the associ-
ated phenotype. As with other cardiomyopathy pheno-
types, LV noncompaction is often associated with met-
abolic diseases and syndromes that may affect other 
organ systems and device management.260,261,265
Arrhythmogenic RV Cardiomyopathy
The development of the arrhythmogenic RV cardio-
myopathy phenotype is exceedingly rare in pediatric 
populations, and management strategies can be found 
elsewhere.266
Myocarditis
Outcomes of infants and children with suspected or 
confirmed myocarditis can be optimized by early clini-
cal diagnosis and prompt intervention, including early 
consideration of ICU monitoring and therapy. Fulmi-
nant myocarditis can result in decreased cardiac out-
put with end-organ compromise, conduction system 
disease including complete heart block, and persis-
tent supraventricular or ventricular arrhythmias, all of 
which can ultimately result in cardiac arrest.267 Sudden 
onset of heart block and multifocal ventricular ectopy 
should be considered as a prearrest state in a patient 
with fulminant myocarditis. Treatment with external or 
intracardiac pacing or antiarrhythmic drugs might not 
be successful, and early transfer to a center for ECLS is 
recommended.268,269
Appropriate treatment of myocarditis can include 
mechanical ventilation, diuretic drugs for volume over-
load, afterload reduction, antiarrhythmic drugs or car-
dioversion for significant arrhythmias, defibrillation for 
ventricular fibrillation (VF)/pulseless ventricular tachy-
cardia (VT), pacing for advanced heart block, and ino-
tropes for poor perfusion. Inotropes must be titrated 
with caution, using the lowest possible effective doses, 
because these drugs can promote arrhythmias and in-
crease myocardial oxygen consumption.267
ECLS offers unique opportunities in the clinical man-
agement of myocarditis but must be considered in a 
timely fashion. For patients who have worsening clini-
cal status or incessant ventricular arrhythmias, ECLS can 
be lifesaving and can help avoid cardiac arrest. ECLS 
also offers an opportunity to wean inotropic support 
and assist myocardial recovery or serve as a bridge to 
cardiac transplantation. The use of ECLS and the use 
of temporary or more durable ventricular assist devices 
(VADs) have improved outcomes of myocarditis, with a 
high possibility of partial or complete recovery of sys-
tolic function in the setting of acute fulminant myocar-
ditis.268
Unique Challenges in CPR
Once the child with cardiomyopathy or myocarditis de-
velops cardiac arrest, the outcome is poor.268,270 Patients 
with dilated cardiomyopathy have extremely poor ven-
tricular function at baseline, and the dramatic reduction 
in coronary blood flow and myocardial perfusion that 
occurs with cardiac arrest further worsens an already 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e712
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
fragile myocardial oxygen supply and demand balance, 
which makes the likelihood of return of spontaneous 
circulation (ROSC) low. Patients with hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy require high ventricular filling pressures to 
generate adequate stroke volume and cardiac output. 
In addition, delivery of blood flow from the epicardium 
through the hypertrophied myocardium to the endo-
cardium is very dependent on an adequate coronary 
perfusion pressure and perfusion time. During CPR 
in the patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, it is 
difficult to maintain a sufficiently high ventricular fill-
ing pressure and coronary perfusion pressure to sup-
port effective cardiac output and myocardial perfusion. 
Causes of cardiac arrest in patients with myocarditis in-
clude tachyarrhythmias, conduction abnormalities, and 
severe ventricular dysfunction, often refractory to CPR, 
defibrillation, and vasopressors. Therefore, for patients 
with cardiomyopathy and myocarditis, care providers 
must focus on arrest prevention.
Early ECLS can prevent arrest and enable survival 
after cardiac arrest, so early consideration is essen-
tial.268,270 Mechanical ventilation might be necessary in 
the patient with cardiomyopathy or myocarditis who 
presents with severe LCOS and pulmonary edema. It 
is important to recognize that this is a prearrest state. 
The negative inotropic effects of drugs used to induce 
loss of consciousness, as well as the fall in preload af-
ter the loss of spontaneous ventilation and the start of 
positive-pressure ventilation, can culminate in cardiac 
arrest. Careful preparation and anticipation are essen-
tial so that if intubation is necessary, it is performed 
under controlled conditions, with immediate availability 
of ECLS, if possible. Such planning might include early 
transfer to a center that can provide ECLS.
Gaps in Knowledge
Much of the literature addressing arrest prevention 
and resuscitation of children with cardiomyopathy is 
extracted from adult experience and single-center ex-
perience. Acute fulminate myocarditis is inadequately 
studied because it is an uncommon disease, and there 
is no national myocarditis registry to enable creation of 
adequate data sets for analysis.
Recommendations: Cardiomyopathy  
and Myocarditis
1. Given the high risk of cardiac arrest in chil-
dren with acute myocarditis who demon-
strate high-risk ECG changes (arrhythmias, 
heart block, ST-segment changes) and/or low 
cardiac output, early consideration of trans-
fer for ICU monitoring and therapy is recom-
mended (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. For children with cardiomyopathy or myo-
carditis and refractory low cardiac output, 
prearrest use of ECLS can be beneficial to 
provide end-organ support and prevent car-
diac arrest (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
3. Given the challenges to successful resuscita-
tion of children with cardiomyopathy and 
myocarditis, once cardiac arrest occurs, early 
consideration of ECLS can be beneficial (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Arrhythmias
Cardiac arrhythmias are generally less likely to cause 
hemodynamic compromise in children than in adults; 
however, in the setting of CHD with abnormalities in 
anatomy, physiology, or hemodynamics, cardiac ar-
rhythmias can be the primary cause of cardiac arrest, 
can contribute to the development of cardiac arrest, 
or can result from cardiac arrest in children. Given that 
specific effective therapies are available to treat ar-
rhythmias, prompt recognition and treatment of life-
threatening arrhythmias are essential components of 
pediatric cardiac arrest prevention and cardiac resus-
citation.
Supraventricular Tachycardia
Definitions and Mechanisms
SVT is the most common tachyarrhythmia in children,271 
constituting ≈95% of all tachyarrhythmias of child-
hood.272 The most common types of SVT are atrioven-
tricular reciprocating tachycardia (bypass tract mediat-
ed) and atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia.273 
These tachyarrhythmias are called atrioventricular node 
dependent because the atrioventricular node forms 
part of the reentrant circuit. One mechanism of atrio-
ventricular reciprocating tachycardia is orthodromic, in 
which the conduction proceeds antegrade down the 
atrioventricular node to the ventricle and retrograde 
conduction occurs from the ventricle through the ac-
cessory atrioventricular connection (bypass tract) to the 
atrium in a circular movement; this results in a narrow 
QRS tachycardia. Another mechanism of atrioventricu-
lar reciprocating tachycardia is antidromic, in which 
conduction proceeds antegrade down the accessory 
pathway to the ventricle and retrograde conduction oc-
curs through the atrioventricular node to the atrium; 
this results in a wide QRS tachycardia.273 Atrioventricu-
lar nodal reentrant tachycardia involves the presence of 
dual atrioventricular nodal pathways (often referred to 
as fast and slow pathways), with a reentrant circuit de-
veloping between the two.
SVT is characteristically a narrow QRS tachycardia (ie, 
the QRS configuration is similar to the patient’s intrinsic 
QRS) with little beat-to-beat variability. Heart rates in 
infants are generally >220 beats per minute and >180 
beats per minute in children.3,4,274 P waves are often dif-
ficult to identify because they are obscured by the T 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e713
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
wave and, if present, will be negative (ie, retrograde) in 
leads II, III, and aVF.
Atrioventricular node–independent atrial tachycar-
dias including atrial flutter, intra-atrial reentrant tachy-
cardia, ectopic atrial tachycardia, and atrial fibrillation 
can be termed atrioventricular node–independent 
tachyarrhythmias because the atrioventricular node 
does not form part of the arrhythmia circuit. Atrial flut-
ter involves a reentrant circuit confined to the atria. In 
typical atrial flutter, the reentry circuit originates near 
the tricuspid valve annulus. The atrial rate often ex-
ceeds 250 beats per minute, which results in a classic 
sawtooth pattern of the P waves. Intra-atrial reentrant 
tachycardia, commonly seen after modified Fontan 
completion, originates from atrial tissue and might not 
have a classic sawtooth pattern. After surgery for CHD, 
cardiac surgical incisions can create zones of slow con-
duction within the atria, which can then become the 
basis for a reentrant circuit, often referred to as intra-
atrial reentrant tachycardia.275
In ectopic atrial tachycardia, disordered automaticity 
causes an atrial focus (or foci) to depolarize at a faster 
rate than the sinoatrial (sinoatrial node). The P-wave 
morphology differs from that of the sinus P wave, indi-
cating an origin distinct from the sinoatrial node. Mul-
tifocal atrial tachycardia is characterized by at least 3 
different P-wave morphologies. Atrial rates range from 
near normal for ectopic atrial tachycardia to >300 beats 
per minute for multifocal atrial tachycardia. Atrioven-
tricular conduction is usually 1:1 but can be variable at 
higher atrial rates.
Atrioventricular node–independent SVT can have a 
regular or irregular ventricular rate depending on the 
variability of atrioventricular conduction. P waves can 
be obvious or indistinct but will differ from those pres-
ent with a sinus rhythm; the morphology of the P wave 
is determined by the origin of the atrial arrhythmia.
Clinical Implications of SVT in Children With Cardiac 
Disease
With the exception of the early postoperative period 
or in the presence of myocardial dysfunction, most in-
fants are able to tolerate SVT without hemodynamic 
compromise; however, prolonged episodes of SVT can 
cause deterioration of cardiac function, and infants can 
present with or develop congestive heart failure or car-
diovascular collapse.276 Older children might complain 
of palpitations, chest discomfort, lightheadedness, or 
dizziness. Children with underlying CHD or myocardial 
dysfunction can have a variable presentation depend-
ing on the rate of ventricular response and degree of 
ventricular dysfunction. They often demonstrate signs 
and symptoms of poor perfusion. The combination of 
an atrioventricular node–independent tachycardia with 
antegrade accessory pathway conduction can result in 
rapid atrioventricular conduction and hemodynamic 
collapse. In children with CHD and myocardial dysfunc-
tion or severe atrioventricular valve or semilunar valve 
insufficiency, SVT can cause poor ventricular diastolic 
filling, reduced cardiac output, and even cardiac arrest.
Junctional Ectopic Tachycardia
JET is an automatic rhythm that originates from the 
atrioventricular node or high in the His-Purkinje system 
and gives rise to a narrow QRS complex similar to that 
of sinus rhythm. It is most commonly observed in the 
early postoperative period, when patients are most vul-
nerable to hemodynamic instability. Postoperative JET 
occurs in ≈14% of infants277 and 6% to 8% of children 
after CHD surgery.278,279 The highest incidence (20%–
26%) of JET after surgery occurs for TOF, aortic arch/
VSD repair, d-TGA with VSD, and atrioventricular septal 
defect repair, as well as after procedures with longer 
aortic cross-clamp times.277,279,280
Although JET is usually self-limited, it can cause 
significant hemodynamic instability. JET is effectively 
treated with atrial overdrive pacing (or dual-chamber 
pacing if heart block is present). Adjunctive therapies 
to treat JET include limiting the use of inotropic agents, 
ensuring adequate sedation and analgesia, and tem-
perature reduction (hypothermia). These therapies can 
eliminate JET or slow it sufficiently to facilitate atrial 
overdrive pacing.280,281 Procainamide has been effective 
in treating JET in single-center case series.280,282 Amio-
darone was successful in treating JET in a multicenter, 
randomized, prospective dose-response study, but ad-
verse events (including dose-related hypotension, bra-
dycardia, and atrioventricular block) were common.283
VT and VF
VT produces rapid, wide QRS complexes that differ 
from the patient’s intrinsic QRS complexes. VT can be 
monomorphic (uniform QRS complexes) or polymor-
phic (differing QRS complexes). A specific type of poly-
morphic VT is torsade de pointes (“turning of points”), 
in which the QRS complexes gradually change phase 
from positive to negative polarity. Monomorphic VT can 
produce a pulse if the rate of the VT is not too rapid. 
Although polymorphic VT can initially produce a pulse, 
it typically deteriorates very rapidly to pulseless VT or 
VF. VF is marked by coarse or fine disorganized, chaotic 
electrical activity with no discernible QRS complexes 
and no pulses.
VF and pulseless VT are shockable cardiac arrest 
rhythms. Pulseless VT is uncommon in children and 
is grouped with VF because it soon degenerates into 
VF.284,285 VF/pulseless VT are less common terminal 
rhythms during cardiac arrest in children than in adults, 
occurring in 5% to 18% of pediatric out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrests and up to 27% of pediatric in-hospital 
cardiac arrests.286–294 The incidence of VF/pulseless VT 
as a terminal arrest rhythm increases with age and has 
a cardiac origin in 21% to 74% of reported cases.291–299 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e714
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Survival from VF/pulseless VT ranges from 0% to 30% 
and is typically associated with good neurological out-
come when it is the initial arrest rhythm.288,292,293 In a 
study from the GWTG-R Registry of CPR involving 1005 
children who experienced in-hospital cardiac arrest, 
27% had documented VF/pulseless VT during the ar-
rest; initial VF/pulseless VT was present in 10%; and 
subsequent VF/pulseless VT occurred in 15% (in 2% 
of the patients, the timing of the VF/pulseless VT was 
not noted). Among children who experienced initial VF/
pulseless VT, 35% survived to hospital discharge com-
pared with 11% of those who experienced subsequent 
VF/pulseless VT. Survival in those who had subsequent 
VF/pulseless VT was also substantially worse than in 
those who had no VF/pulseless VT at all during their 
arrest. Subsequent VF or pulseless VT likely occurs as a 
reperfusion arrhythmia in the course of resuscitative ef-
forts. Possible explanations for the lower survival include 
delayed diagnosis of VF/pulseless VT during resuscita-
tion or severity of the underlying myocardial condition. 
Although the CPR interventions were similar, adminis-
tration of sodium bicarbonate, epinephrine, atropine, 
vasopressin, calcium, and antiarrhythmic agents and 
use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) 
were higher in the subsequent VF/pulseless VT group.293
Long-QT Syndrome
Long-QT syndrome (LQTS) is a disorder of prolonged 
cardiac repolarization associated with ventricular ar-
rhythmia and an increased risk of syncope and sudden 
death throughout childhood and young adulthood. 
The syndrome results from genetic defects in cardiac 
ion channel function, causing QT-interval prolongation 
and increased risk of the torsade de pointes–type of 
polymorphic VT.295,296 Classification is based on genetic 
analyses of distinct ion channel mutations, which ac-
count for ≈70% of LQTS case.295
Specific triggers of torsade de pointes include ex-
ercise, swimming, startle response, loud noises, emo-
tional lability, and bradycardia during sleep.296,297 
Molecular analysis of victims of sudden infant death 
syndrome has implicated LQTS as a potential cause of 
some deaths.298
Drug-induced prolongation of the QT interval led to 
the description of acquired LQTS.299 The pathophysiol-
ogy of acquired LQTS is believed to be similar to con-
genital LQTS.
Treatment of Arrhythmias
Vagal Maneuvers and Pharmacological Interventions
Vagal maneuvers are noninvasive, nonpharmacologi-
cal techniques to convert SVT to sinus rhythm through 
slowing of atrioventricular nodal conduction. Valsalva 
maneuver, ice to the face, and carotid sinus massage 
have varying degrees of success and minimal adverse 
effects.300,301
Adenosine is the drug of choice for atrioventricu-
lar node–dependent SVT that occurs from a reentrant 
mechanism.302,303 Adenosine slows conduction through 
the atrioventricular node, terminating the SVT. Because 
adenosine has a short duration of action, the tachyar-
rhythmia can recur, and repeat doses may be needed. 
Administration of adenosine should not delay direct 
current cardioversion for tachyarrhythmia resulting in 
hemodynamic instability. Adenosine will not effectively 
terminate atrioventricular node–independent tachycar-
dias, such as atrial flutter, ectopic atrial tachycardia, or 
atrial fibrillation; however, its use in these arrhythmias 
can have diagnostic value in slowing atrioventricular 
conduction so that in the presence of atrioventricular 
block, the type of atrial activity is identifiable on ECG.302
Esmolol is an ultrashort-acting agent with specific 
β1-adrenergic antagonism that has also been shown to 
be an effective treatment for SVT in children.304,305 Pro-
pranolol is a longer-acting nonspecific β-blocker that 
in addition to termination of the SVT can also prevent 
recurrence. However, bradycardia, hypotension, and 
hypoglycemia are side effects.306,307
Procainamide and amiodarone are effective for treat-
ing various types of SVTs in children.280,283,308–322 These 
agents both prolong the QT interval and should not be 
used concurrently without expert consultation from a 
cardiologist because they could precipitate the torsade 
de pointes–type VT. Verapamil should not be used in 
infants because it has caused shock and cardiac arrest 
in this population.323,324 A small, prospective, nonran-
domized trial showed that dexmedetomidine reduced 
the incidence of tachyarrhythmia after congenital heart 
surgery in infants and children282; additional supportive 
data are needed.
Wide QRS complex tachycardia warrants special 
mention. In the absence of an underlying bundle-
branch block, wide QRS complex tachycardia represents 
1 of 4 arrhythmias: VT, orthodromic SVT with aberrant 
QRS conduction, antidromic SVT, or atrial arrhythmia 
with antegrade accessory pathway conduction. In one 
series describing children with wide QRS tachycardia, 
20% were found to have VT, whereas 80% had vari-
able mechanisms of SVT as the cause.325 In another 
study, orthodromic SVT with aberrant QRS conduc-
tion was reported to occur in up to 10% of cases of 
wide QRS complex tachycardia in children.326 Adenos-
ine should not be administered for wide QRS complex 
tachycardia unless it is clear that the underlying rhythm 
is not atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter with associated 
antegrade accessory pathway conduction. Blocking of 
the atrioventricular node in this setting can result in 
rapid atrioventricular conduction and likely hemody-
namic collapse. Expert consultation should be obtained 
before administration of adenosine as a diagnostic and 
potentially therapeutic intervention for stable patients 
who have wide QRS complex tachycardia.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e715
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Unstable wide QRS complex tachycardia should be 
assumed to be ventricular in origin, and prompt cardio-
version (if pulses are present) or defibrillation (if pulses 
are absent) is indicated (see Cardioversion and Defibril-
lation During Resuscitation). For incessant or unstable 
ventricular arrhythmias (VF or pulseless VT), amiodarone 
can be considered, although careful monitoring for hy-
potension and other adverse effects is required.3,283,327 
On the basis of the 2015 AHA PALS guidelines update, 
lidocaine may also be considered for the treatment of 
VF or pulseless VT.3
β-Blockers and implantable cardioverter-defibrilla-
tors are the mainstays of therapy for LQTS. Advances 
in the past 2 decades have facilitated gene-directed 
therapy.328
Breakthrough or refractory episodes of torsade de 
pointes have been described and should be treated ac-
cording to AHA/PALS guidelines,3,329,330 with infusion 
of magnesium sulfate and avoidance of antiarrhyth-
mic drugs such as amiodarone and procainamide that 
prolong the QT interval. Increasing the heart rate, thus 
shortening the QT interval, is standard therapy for criti-
cally ill patients with breakthrough or refractory torsade 
de pointes and VF in the setting of LQTS. This can be 
accomplished with temporary pacing or isoproterenol 
infusion.299
Pacing
After surgical repair or palliation of CHD, temporary 
epicardial pacing wires are typically inserted. Recom-
mendations regarding pacing in the postoperative set-
ting are empirical rather than evidence based. Pacing 
is routinely used in critical but nonemergent situations 
to improve cardiac output. Overdrive burst pacing can 
terminate reentrant atrial and VTs. Other indications for 
atrial pacing include sinus node dysfunction and over-
drive pacing for JET.
The major indication for dual-chamber or ventricu-
lar pacing is complete heart block. Biventricular pacing 
has been examined as a means of improving ventricular 
dysfunction via cardiac resynchronization.144,331 If pac-
ing is effective, there will be an improvement in cardiac 
output, as assessed by improved perfusion and blood 
pressure, fall in serum lactate, and rise in mixed Svo2 
or NIRS.
The 2015 AHA Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Re-
suscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care3,4 rec-
ommendations regarding pacing during resuscitation 
in children are also empirical. Pacing wires, if present, 
should be used for pacing patients with sinus brady-
cardia or complete heart block. For symptomatic bra-
dycardia unresponsive to oxygen and adequate airway 
and ventilation, transcutaneous cardiac pacing is of 
potential benefit for patients with intrinsic sinus node 
dysfunction or complete heart block, especially if asso-
ciated with congenital or acquired heart disease.
Transcutaneous pacing may have a potential role 
in the management of the following332: (1) sinus node 
dysfunction with bradycardia after cardioversion for 
atrial tachyarrhythmia; (2) complete heart block with 
development of significant bradycardia during general 
anesthesia for a surgical procedure; (3) patients with 
permanent pacemakers who are at risk for developing 
significant bradycardia during pacemaker reprogram-
ming or replacement; and (4) patients who develop a 
drug-induced bradycardia.
Cardioversion and Defibrillation
Please refer to the Cardioversion and Defibrillation 
 
During Resuscitation section.
Gaps in Knowledge
Little information is available regarding the optimal 
drugs and doses for treatment of pediatric arrhyth-
mias. In addition, although there are data on the use 
of multisite pacing for cardiac resynchronization in the 
postoperative setting, the longer-term benefit is un-
known.
Recommendations: Arrhythmias
1. Adenosine is an effective therapy for ortho-
dromic (narrow QRS complex) reentrant SVT 
(Class I; Level of Evidence B).
2. Adenosine administration can be useful as 
a diagnostic tool but may not be effective 
to convert wide-complex SVT, ectopic atrial 
tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, and atrial flut-
ter (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
3. Amiodarone and procainamide can be effec-
tive therapies for JET, although side effects 
are common (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
4. Postoperative JET is effectively treated with 
atrial overdrive pacing (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B). Adjunctive therapies that can 
be useful to treat JET include careful titration 
to limit the use of inotropic agents, ensuring 
adequate sedation and analgesia, treatment 
of fever, and, as tolerated, temperature 
reduction (hypothermia). These therapies 
may eliminate JET or slow it sufficiently to 
facilitate atrial overdrive pacing (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence B).
5. Amiodarone or lidocaine can be considered 
for postoperative VF and pulseless VT (Class 
IIb; Level of Evidence C).
6. Neither amiodarone nor procainamide should 
be administered in patients with known or 
suspected LQTS without expert consultation 
(Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence C).
7. Temporary epicardial pacing can be effec-
tive for postoperative patients in low car-
diac output with sinus node dysfunction, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e716
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
JET, or complete heart block (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
8. For postoperative patients who develop 
symptomatic complete heart block, epicar-
dial pacing is recommended (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C). When pacing wires are not pres-
ent, transvenous or short-term transcutane-
ous pacing can be beneficial (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
Age-Dependent Factors Influencing CPR 
in the Neonate and Infant
An understanding of late fetal and early neonatal myo-
cardial, pulmonary, and brain developmental physiolo-
gy is helpful to tailor resuscitation therapies in the neo-
natal and infant population. During the late fetal and 
early neonatal period, cell division is the major cause of 
the increase in myocardial mass. This cell division largely 
ceases by the second month of life; any further increase 
in ventricular mass is related to hypertrophy.333,334 During 
the neonatal and infant period, myocyte and myocardi-
al organization and development of the contractile ap-
paratus and extracellular matrix result in increased ven-
tricular compliance and contractility.335,336 The heart of 
the premature infant has smaller myocardial mass and a 
thinner LV free wall relative to that of the older infant or 
child, which results in limited ability to increase stroke 
volume.333 After birth, LV work increases significantly as 
separation from the placenta increases SVR. As a result, 
LV muscle mass increases and LV filling pressure rises, 
which increases LV stroke volume. At the same time, 
RV work decreases as PVR falls, and RV stroke volume, 
PBF, and LV preload increase.337 These changes produce 
a gradual increase in systemic cardiac output and Do2 
during infancy and childhood. Although neonates can 
modestly increase stroke volume in response to volume 
administration, the Frank-Starling relationship between 
filling pressure and stroke volume seemingly exerts a 
greater effect on ventricular function with increasing 
postnatal age. For these reasons, neonates and young 
infants are very dependent on adequate heart rate to 
maintain and increase cardiac output, an important 
consideration during all phases of resuscitation.
The neonatal cardiovascular system functions with 
high levels of endogenous catecholamines and is more 
dependent on sympathetic stimulation than the adult 
heart. Inotropic agents can further increase cardiac 
output in the sick neonate, although response to cat-
echolamines will be modified by conditions that pro-
duce upregulation or downregulation of adrenergic 
receptors.338,339 The junctional sarcoplasmic reticulum 
is the region of the sarcoplasmic reticulum closest to 
the sarcolemma and is the most important structure in 
controlling cytosolic calcium concentration in the myo-
cardium during contraction. The number of junctional 
sarcoplasmic reticula increases during late gestation 
and neonatal life, which, over time, increases the inot-
ropy that can be modulated by cytosolic calcium.340 This 
maturation process influences any measures targeting 
increasing intracellular calcium as a means to improve 
contractility.340 As a result, calcium administration to the 
neonate or infant with low cardiac output can be ben-
eficial to increase both heart rate and contractility.341,342 
Similarly, administration of calcium channel blockers to 
the neonate can compromise myocardial performance.
The fetal and neonatal myocardium appears to be 
more resistant to hypoxemia than adult myocardium.343 
The neonatal heart can work almost as effectively af-
ter the reversal of a significant hypoxic-ischemic event 
as before the ischemic event, whereas the function of 
the adult heart usually becomes significantly depressed 
after a hypoxic-ischemic insult.343,344 This increased re-
silience of the neonatal myocardium to hypoxemia is 
beneficial during the surgical repair, recovery, and re-
suscitation of newborns with CHD.
Congenital heart lesions are often classified as criti-
cal if they are dependent on blood flow through the 
ductus arteriosus to support either PBF or SBF. PVR in 
the fetus is greater than SVR. PVR normally decreases to 
one-half systemic arterial pressure in the first 24 hours 
of life and further falls to normal levels by ≈2 weeks af-
ter birth.345 The postnatal decline in PVR can be slower 
in neonates with CHD because of the presence of el-
evated PAP
, LA or pulmonary venous pressure, or left-
to-right shunting. Once PVR falls, signs and symptoms 
of congestive heart failure can develop secondary to in-
creasing left-to-right shunting. In very premature new-
borns with CHD, the PVR can be low at birth, leading 
to a very large Qp:Qs and poor systemic cardiac output, 
which can be difficult to manage. Any conditions that 
cause a fall in PVR (eg, administration of supplementary 
oxygen, creation of respiratory alkalosis) can result in 
significant pulmonary overcirculation and inadequate 
systemic cardiac output and Do2.346 To improve systemic 
cardiac output and Do2 and reduce the risk of cardiac 
arrest, it can be necessary to increase PVR to modify the 
unfavorable Qp:Qs ratio. (See Balancing SBF and PBF in 
the section on Single-Ventricle Lesions.)
The capacity of organs to sustain perfusion in low 
cardiac output states is determined by their capacity for 
autoregulation; the neonatal heart, brain, and kidneys 
are efficient at autoregulation and can maintain blood 
flow over a wide range of perfusion pressures. Skin and 
muscles have poor autoregulatory capabilities, and de-
creased skin perfusion is characteristically an early vis-
ible marker for decreased systemic cardiac output in in-
fants. Anaerobic metabolism is used when organ blood 
flow and Do2 decrease below a critical level (the an-
aerobic threshold), causing accumulation of lactic acid 
and impairment of organ function. Through adrenergic 
stimulation, which increases heart rate, SVR, and the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e717
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
redistribution of blood flow, neonates and pediatric pa-
tients can initially maintain SVR, systolic blood pressure, 
and organ perfusion despite a fall in cardiac output. 
Blunting of this neurohumoral response in critically ill 
children (eg, with administration of sedation) can pro-
duce circulatory collapse; therefore, sedatives and anal-
gesic drugs should be given with caution, especially in 
the unstable neonate with CHD.
Data suggest that brain maturation and develop-
ment are impaired in neonates with complex CHD.347–349 
The delays in development arise from failures in brain 
oxygen and nutrient delivery unique to certain forms 
of CHD, with examples of deficient content (dextro-
TGA)350 or abnormalities in blood flow (HLHS).351,352
Brain and heart development occur simultaneously 
in the fetus with CHD. Early morphogenetic programs 
in each organ share common genetic pathways.353–355 
Brain development occurs across a more protracted 
time course, with striking brain growth and activity-
dependent formation and refinement of connections in 
the third trimester.356
Delayed fetal brain maturation and development in 
utero appears to begin in the third trimester of gesta-
tion and is consistent with postnatal data demonstrat-
ing smaller head circumferences and structurally im-
mature brains in term gestation neonates with CHD, 
particularly in those with HLHS, compared with normal 
term neonates.357 Delays in cellular maturation contrib-
ute to the gross structural immaturity of the brain. The 
maturation of oligodendrocytes has been closely asso-
ciated with an increased risk for hypoxic and oxidative 
injury to the white matter that is often seen in neo-
nates with complex CHD both before and after cardiac 
surgery.358,359 Brain immaturity is also a risk factor for 
periventricular leukomalacia in these neonates.347 Un-
derstanding cerebral blood flow regulation during fetal 
development, the transitional circulation, intraoperative 
perfusion strategies, and postoperative recovery will be 
central to neuroprotective studies in the future.360
To minimize the risk of brain injury in the neonate 
or infant with CHD, every effort must be made to opti-
mize systemic Do2 during the perioperative period. Use 
of therapeutic induced hypothermia has been reported 
to improve functional survival in neonates after birth-
related hypoxic-ischemic insult,361 but there are no data 
to support this treatment after delivery, after cardiac ar-
rest, or after cardiac surgery. The neonatal brain has 
significant potential for regeneration, and the extent of 
neurological injury related to cardiac arrest can be dif-
ficult to determine in the post–cardiac arrest phase.362 
Intraventricular hemorrhage can occur in sick neonates 
secondary to rupture of immature vessels in and around 
the germinal matrix. Intraventricular hemorrhage has 
very little predictive value for neurodevelopmental out-
comes and should not be used as a deterrent to con-
tinue resuscitative efforts and optimization of care.363 
The neonatal periventricular white matter is sensitive 
to inflammation that can be triggered by cardiopul-
monary bypass or ECMO. This effect seems less pro-
nounced in more mature (>36 weeks’ gestational age) 
neonates.347,364
Gaps in Knowledge
Little is known about the optimal timing of and the po-
tential limits to interventions in premature infants, small 
for gestational age neonates, or full-term neonates 
with CHD. Even less is known about the effects of re-
suscitative strategies on premature or underdeveloped 
lungs and relatively immature brains. Cardioprotective 
and neuroprotective therapies in the perioperative pe-
riod continue to be investigated.
Recommendations: Age-Dependent 
Factors Influencing CPR
1. Newborns with ductal-dependent systemic 
circulation are at risk for pulmonary over-
circulation and inadequate systemic perfu-
sion and Do2. In the neonate with pulmonary 
overcirculation, minimizing exposure to sup-
plementary oxygen and minimizing hyper-
ventilation can be beneficial to maintain 
adequate systemic perfusion and Do2 (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. Calcium administration to the neonate or 
infant with low cardiac output can be con-
sidered to increase both heart rate and con-
tractility (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
3. Calcium channel blockers should be used 
with caution in newborns (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
PHARMACOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS
Dosing and Delivery
Drug doses should be based on ideal body weight, 
which can be estimated from length (using a length-
based tape) if needed.3,4 Subsequent doses can be 
titrated to effect but should not exceed adult doses. 
Effective medication delivery requires circulation, 
which can be delayed in the prearrest phase or re-
quire chest compressions if there is inadequate native 
cardiac output.
Central venous access, if already present, is the pre-
ferred route of medication delivery for the unstable pa-
tient and during resuscitation.3,4 During cardiac arrest, 
if central venous access is not present or readily estab-
lished, peripheral venous access is acceptable if it can 
be placed rapidly. If peripheral intravenous access is not 
already present and cannot be achieved immediately, 
intraosseous access should be established. The current 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e718
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ease and sophistication of intraosseous devices makes 
intraosseous access a reliable route for drug delivery and 
minimizes the need for the (less reliable) endotracheal 
route of drug administration. Peripheral intravenous ad-
ministration of vasoactive medication and electrolytes 
can result in significant damage at the site and to distal 
extremities if the medications infiltrate the tissue.
Anesthetic and Analgesic Agents
The provision of sedation and analgesia in the child with 
congenital or acquired heart disease often requires a 
modified approach based on the impact of various medi-
cations on ventricular preload, ventricular function, and 
arteriolar resistance in the pulmonary and systemic vas-
cular beds.365 During the prearrest phase, patients often 
require sedation and analgesia during escalating care for 
low cardiac output or for associated procedures. In the 
setting of effective CPR and semiconsciousness, the pa-
tient may require sedation and analgesia. The choice and 
dosing of medications should minimize hypotension.
Dexmedetomidine
Dexmedetomidine is an α2-receptor agonist. It provides 
effective sedation and mild analgesia without respiratory 
depression.366 Retrospective reviews noted a significant 
decrease in heart rate early during dexmedetomidine 
infusion in infants and children after cardiac surgery, 
including heart transplantation.367–369 In 2 small case se-
ries of children during electrophysiological testing, dex-
medetomidine caused a mild but significant decrease 
in sinus370,371 and atrioventricular node function,371 with 
neonates and infants demonstrating a more significant 
decrease in heart rate. Although clinically significant 
bradycardia was not reported, the effect of dexmedeto-
midine on heart rate can be more pronounced in chil-
dren at high risk for postoperative heart block or those 
receiving other drugs (eg, β-blockers or antiarrhythmic 
drugs) that can produce bradycardia. Rebound tachy-
cardia and an increase in mean arterial pressure have 
been reported.367,370,371 Inotropic scores are reportedly 
lower with dexmedetomidine after heart surgery.367–369
Dexmedetomidine has additional benefits as an 
antiarrhythmic drug (see Arrhythmias). The terminal 
elimination half-life of dexmedetomidine in adults is ≈2 
hours, whereas it is 3.2 hours in term neonates and 7.6 
hours in preterm neonates.372 Elimination is prolonged 
by hepatic dysfunction.
The combined benefit of sedation without respira-
tory depression, reduction in inotropic requirements, 
and antiarrhythmic effects makes dexmedetomidine an 
appealing therapy for sedation after congenital heart 
surgery. Caution is needed for patients with heart rate–
dependent cardiac output and those at risk for symp-
tomatic bradycardia or heart block, unless pacing wires 
are present.
Etomidate
Etomidate is a nonbarbiturate hypnotic drug with a rap-
id onset and short half-life. It has minimal hemodynam-
ic effects. It reversibly inhibits 11-β-hydroxylase, caus-
ing adrenal suppression, which has been reported after 
even a single dose.373 Etomidate can be used for the 
stable patient who requires a short procedure or rapid 
sequence intubation, but in 2010, the AHA PALS guide-
lines noted that etomidate should not be used routinely 
in pediatric patients with evidence of septic shock,4 cit-
ing reports of adrenal suppression and higher mortality 
rates after use of the drug in this population.374
Fentanyl
Fentanyl is a synthetic opioid that provides effective an-
algesia with minimal hemodynamic effects. Bolus dos-
ing to the naive infant can cause chest wall rigidity.375
Ketamine
Ketamine causes dissociation between the cortex and the 
limbic system, providing sedation, analgesia, and amne-
sia while maintaining respiratory drive and hemodynam-
ics. Ketamine is thought to be an ideal drug for use in 
children with heart disease because it provides central 
cardiovascular stimulation and inhibits the reuptake of 
catecholamines, typically resulting in mild to moder-
ate increases in blood pressure, heart rate, and cardiac 
output. It can have direct negative inotropic properties 
and should be titrated cautiously in patients with very 
poor ventricular function.376 Because it can increase myo-
cardial oxygen demand, it should be used cautiously in 
patients with severe heart failure and risk of myocardial 
ischemia.377 The incidence of agitation during recovery in 
children is reported at 8%, with increasing incidence with 
older age and higher dose.378,379 Prospective trials failed 
to show significant relief of the agitation with adjunctive 
low-dose midazolam.379,380 Although there is little down-
side to use of supplementary low-dose midazolam in the 
hemodynamically stable patient, it should be used cau-
tiously in the child with cardiovascular instability.
Propofol
Propofol is a rapid-onset, short-acting hypnotic agent 
that allows rapid recovery of level of consciousness af-
ter administration is stopped. It can cause hypotension 
and a decrease in cardiac output, cardiac index, and 
stroke volume index through direct myocardial depres-
sion and vasodilation; it should be used with extreme 
caution in the setting of hypotension and compromised 
cardiac function. In addition, propofol can inhibit mi-
tochondrial function because it acts as an uncoupling 
agent in oxidative phosphorylation, so it should not be 
used in children with mitochondrial disease.381 Propofol 
is not approved in children for prolonged sedation after 
cardiac surgery or in the critical care unit because of 
the hemodynamic complications and risk for propofol-
infusion syndrome.382
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e719
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Midazolam
Midazolam is a short-acting benzodiazepine used for 
sedation and as an anticonvulsant. It causes respiratory 
depression and hypotension at higher doses. It should 
be used with extreme caution in patients with poor ven-
tricular function and elevated ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure because it can compromise cardiac output and 
coronary perfusion.
Antiarrhythmic Drugs
For additional information regarding arrhythmias, see 
Arrhythmias.
Adenosine
Adenosine receptors function through cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate and stimulating myocardial intracellu-
lar cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Adenosine causes 
a decrease in heart rate, coronary artery vasodilation, 
and cardiac and smooth muscle relaxation. Adenosine 
is effective in treating reentrant atrial arrhythmias when 
the circuit includes the atrioventricular node. Adenosine 
can be diagnostic but not therapeutic for atrial flutter 
or fibrillation. Unwanted effects of adenosine include 
transient ventricular asystole, coronary vasodilation, 
atrial fibrillation, and bronchospasm. Caution should 
be used when administering adenosine to patients with 
coronary artery disease or asthma.
In the absence of an antegrade accessory pathway 
or significant underlying cardiac dysfunction, it is un-
usual for SVT to result in cardiovascular collapse. In this 
rare event, rapid conversion with either atrial overdrive 
pacing or electric cardioversion is the first line of ther-
apy. Neither adenosine nor cardioversion is helpful for 
ectopic atrial tachycardia. In patients with an irregular 
wide-complex tachycardia, an underlying rhythm of 
atrial fibrillation with an antegrade accessory pathway 
should be considered. Blocking of the atrioventricular 
node with adenosine can result in unprotected conduc-
tion down the accessory pathway and hemodynamic 
collapse. For this reason, it is important to define the ar-
rhythmia, if possible, before adenosine administration.
Adenosine induces bradycardia, which can be quite 
pronounced at higher doses or with central venous 
administration. Either temporary pacing wires or trans-
thoracic pacing should be available. Particular caution 
should be used for patients with potentially at-risk coro-
nary perfusion (eg, coronary artery disease, Kawasaki 
disease, or cardiomyopathy, or in the early postoperative 
period after the arterial switch operation or stage 1 Nor-
wood palliation). For postoperative patients with tem-
porary atrial epicardial pacing wires, rapid atrial pacing 
should be considered before adenosine, because atrial 
pacing has less potential for unwanted side effects.
In the denervated posttransplantation heart, both 
the sinus and atrioventricular nodes are 3 to 5 times 
more sensitive to adenosine. As a result, in patients af-
ter cardiac transplantation, one-fifth to one-third the 
usual recommended adenosine dose is administered.383
Amiodarone
Amiodarone is a class III antiarrhythmic drug, with ad-
ditional class I, II, and IV properties (affecting potas-
sium, sodium, and calcium channels). Two adult studies 
showed that amiodarone improved survival to hospital 
admission (but not survival to hospital discharge) when 
amiodarone was administered for VF/pulseless VT.34,385 
These trials cannot be extrapolated to pediatric resusci-
tation, because the mechanism of VF in children rarely 
includes the focal myocardial ischemia that occurs in 
adults with coronary artery disease. However, myocar-
dial ischemia leading to VF can occur in pediatrics, with 
possible scenarios including postoperative coronary sur-
gery, Kawasaki disease, and air embolism. Amiodarone 
is recommended for the treatment of VF/pulseless VT,3 
when used in conjunction with attempted defibrillation 
and conventional resuscitation maneuvers to improve 
coronary perfusion pressure; however, only limited data 
from an in-hospital registry support its use in pediatric 
cardiac arrest.386 An important exception is the pediatric 
patient with known LQTS or a primary pulseless VT/VF 
arrest in which LQTS should be suspected; in this set-
ting, amiodarone is contraindicated.387
One prospective, randomized, double-blind, dose-
response trial evaluated the safety and efficacy of ami-
odarone in children after cardiac surgery.283 This study 
showed that amiodarone is an effective first-line medi-
cal therapy for postoperative JET; however, side effects 
of amiodarone are significant, including hypotension 
(36%), bradycardia (20%), and atrioventricular block 
(15%).283 Slower postoperative JET can be addressed 
initially with atrial (or atrioventricular) overdrive pacing, 
reduction of the doses of administered catecholamines, 
and temperature control (treating fever and using hy-
pothermia as tolerated). Although underpowered (only 
4 children with ventricular arrhythmias were included), 
this study did not demonstrate efficacy of intravenous 
amiodarone in the treatment of polymorphic VT or VF.283
In the setting of acute myocarditis, amiodarone 
should be used with extreme caution. The significant 
ST-segment abnormalities seen in this setting should 
not be misinterpreted as VT. Amiodarone will likely re-
sult in worsening hemodynamics, and ECLS should be 
available before administration. In the setting of LQTS, 
amiodarone can precipitate torsade de pointes and 
should be not be used without expert consultation.387
Lidocaine
Lidocaine is a class IB antiarrhythmic drug that func-
tions as a sodium channel blocker.283,385 As a result, lido-
caine remains a useful therapy for VF/pulseless VT after 
neonatal and infant heart surgery. In a recent review of 
GWTG-R Registry data comparing outcomes associated 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e720
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
with amiodarone and lidocaine in the treatment of pe-
diatric patients with VF/pulseless VT in-hospital cardiac 
arrest, lidocaine (versus no lidocaine) was associated 
with an increase in likelihood of ROSC.386 These same 
registry data did not show an association between li-
docaine or amiodarone use and survival to hospital 
discharge.3 For patients with LQTS or other channelop-
athies, lidocaine can be safely delivered, whereas amio-
darone can precipitate torsade de pointes.387
Dexmedetomidine
Dexmedetomidine is an α2-receptor agonist, initially in-
troduced as a sedative. In pediatric patients with SVT, 
dexmedetomidine has been shown to decrease sinus 
and atrioventricular node function while maintaining 
blood pressure.371 In a prospective, nonrandomized 
study of pediatric postoperative patients after surgery 
for CHD, dexmedetomidine was associated with a sig-
nificant reduction in arrhythmias, including VT, JET, and 
SVT, without a significant increase in heart block.282
Esmolol
Esmolol is a cardioselective β1-antagonist with a short 
half-life304 and minimal side effects.388 Esmolol can de-
crease the rate and occasionally suppress ectopic atrial 
tachycardia. Refractory or recurrent reentrant SVT can 
be slowed and converted (often in conjunction with 
rapid atrial pacing, adenosine, or electric cardioversion).
Procainamide
Procainamide is a class Ia antiarrhythmic that blocks so-
dium channels and prolongs QRS duration. It is most 
commonly used for atrial tachyarrhythmias and JET.280 
Serum levels should be monitored to avoid toxicity, and 
it depresses myocardial function.280 In a single-center 
case series of 37 pediatric patients, procainamide was 
more effective than amiodarone for treatment of recur-
ring SVT, with a lower incidence of adverse effects.389 
Procainamide should not be used in children with LQTS 
without expert consultation.
Verapamil
Verapamil is a class IV antiarrhythmic drug that func-
tions as a calcium channel blocker. It can be used for 
SVT in older children but should not be used in infants 
<1 year of age and should be particularly avoided in 
neonates, because they have limited intracellular cal-
cium stores.3,4 In patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White 
syndrome, verapamil can facilitate conduction through 
the accessory pathway, resulting in hemodynamic col-
lapse or VF in the setting of associated atrial fibrillation 
or flutter.390
Electrolytes and Minerals
Electrolyte and mineral imbalances can cause arrhyth-
mias and attenuate the effectiveness of cardioversion, 
defibrillation, and pacing.
Calcium
Calcium is a potent inotrope in neonates and infants 
because they have limited intracellular calcium stores. 
Administration of calcium can be associated with im-
proved myocardial function, as demonstrated by im-
proved blood pressure and echocardiographic evidence 
of improved systolic function.341,342 Calcium can also 
be effective in other patients with limited intracellular 
calcium stores, such as those receiving blood products 
containing citrate-phosphate dextran preservative (see 
Age-Dependent Factors Influencing CPR in the Neonate 
and Infant).
Calcium can be administered as calcium chloride or 
calcium gluconate, with little evidence that either is su-
perior. The 2010 AHA PALS guidelines3,4 note that cal-
cium chloride may be preferred because it results in a 
greater increase in ionized calcium during therapy than 
calcium gluconate. However, calcium gluconate has 
lower osmolality and is recommended if the drug must 
be administered through a peripheral intravenous cath-
eter or to a neonate.
Once an arrest has occurred, however, the role of 
calcium is less clear. Two recent articles reported an 
association between calcium use during in-hospital 
pediatric CPR and risk of mortality.391,392 Both were 
retrospective reviews, 1 single-center (n=19)392 and 1 
multicenter (n=1477)391 study that found that patients 
receiving calcium were significantly less stable and were 
more likely to be in an ICU, receiving mechanical ven-
tilation support and vasoactive infusions. Factors not 
included in either analysis were prearrest serum ionized 
calcium concentration, the hemodynamic response to 
calcium administration, the dose of calcium, and the 
point during the arrest when calcium was administered. 
During cardiac arrest, calcium administration is not rec-
ommended in the absence of documented ionized hy-
pocalcemia, hypermagnesemia, or hyperkalemia, and it 
can be harmful by increasing intracellular calcium after 
myocardial reperfusion.
Magnesium
Magnesium is helpful for treatment of torsade de point 
or when hypomagnesemia is present. Other than hy-
potension, there is little downside to administration of 
magnesium.
Potassium
Administration of potassium is rarely indicated during 
resuscitation, because metabolic acidosis is associated 
with intravascular shift of potassium and a rise in serum 
potassium concentration. However, potassium adminis-
tration may be required to treat hypokalemia associated 
with arrhythmias.
Sodium Bicarbonate
Early animal studies showed improved myocardial per-
formance in the absence of acidosis. Significant meta-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e721
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
bolic acidosis can result in myocardial dysfunction and 
pacemaker noncapture. In addition, sodium bicarbon-
ate is a reasonable therapy for hyperkalemia in the 
presence of acidosis. Alkalosis is a potent pulmonary 
vasodilator, and sodium bicarbonate is a useful therapy 
during pulmonary hypertensive crises while specific pul-
monary vasodilators are being prepared.188
In a retrospective, multicenter cohort study of pe-
diatric patients who had out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, 
the use of sodium bicarbonate was associated with 
worse survival.393 The routine use of sodium bicarbon-
ate during cardiac arrest is not recommended in the 
2010 PALS guidelines.3,4
Other Drugs
Furosemide
Furosemide has limited use in the prearrest phase and 
likely no use during CPR. For patients with a perfusing 
rhythm but a dilated heart with poor function and vol-
ume overload, furosemide can help reduce myocardial 
stretch and avoid cardiac arrest.
Heparin
Heparin should be part of the first line of therapy for a 
patient with decompensation secondary to known or 
presumed aortopulmonary shunt occlusion. A heparin 
dose of 50 to 100 U/kg is appropriate,394 depending on 
the clinical situation.
Heparin (100 U/kg) is usually administered to pa-
tients immediately before ECLS cannulation.395 The 
dose can be modified in patients at high risk for bleed-
ing, with known or anticipated coagulation abnormal-
ities, or with heparin-bonded circuits, as well as for 
venovenous ECLS.394
Inhaled Medications
Nitric Oxide
iNO is a selective pulmonary vasodilator that results in 
smooth muscle relaxation and vasodilation.201 iNO has 
been well demonstrated to attenuate pulmonary hyper-
tension of the neonate.396 iNO is a first-line therapy for 
postoperative pulmonary hypertension.397 In the acute 
setting, there is little downside to a therapeutic trial of 
iNO unless the patient has pulmonary venous obstruc-
tion, mitral stenosis, or dilated cardiomyopathy. In pa-
tients with elevated pulmonary venous pressure, iNO 
will increase PBF and venous return, which, in the face 
of fixed obstruction or a dilated heart with elevated fill-
ing pressure, can worsen pulmonary edema and result 
in clinical deterioration.
Oxygen
Supplementary oxygen administration is generally help-
ful for treatment of the patient in prearrest and arrest, 
although caution should be used when administering 
high concentrations of oxygen to premature infants 
or to anyone with an unrestrictive aorta-to-pulmonary 
connection (eg, patent ductus arteriosus, aortopulmo-
nary window, truncus arteriosus), because it can cause 
pulmonary vasodilation with increased Qp:Qs, compro-
mising SBF. It is unknown whether hyperoxia is detri-
mental in the post–cardiac arrest phase, and the 2015 
PALS guideline update recommendation is that once 
the patient is stable in the post–cardiac arrest period, 
it can be reasonable for providers to target normox-
emia3,398 (see Pulmonary Management in the section on 
Post–Cardiac Arrest Stabilization).
Administration of oxygen, with close monitoring, 
can be beneficial in the setting of apnea or lung dis-
ease, while preparing for endotracheal intubation, and 
before and after suctioning of the endotracheal tube. A 
past concern that oxygen was harmful to neonates af-
ter the stage 1 Norwood palliation more likely reflected 
the negative effects of oxygen in the setting of an in-
appropriately large systemic-to-pulmonary shunt. In pa-
tients with an appropriately sized shunt after the stage 
1 Norwood palliation, oxygen administration has been 
shown to improve systemic Do2 without compromising 
SBF (as determined by unchanged AVo2D).94
Muscle Relaxants and Neuromuscular 
Blockade
In the prearrest phase, patients requiring endotracheal 
intubation will likely require administration of a muscle 
relaxant. When the child is in shock or has severe heart 
failure, administration of muscle relaxants and loss of 
spontaneous ventilation can precipitate decompensa-
tion, so providers must be prepared to support airway, 
oxygenation, and ventilation, as well as cardiac output 
and systemic perfusion. Administration of neuromuscu-
lar blockers will prevent motor responses to pain and 
will mask signs of seizures. The patient’s level of con-
sciousness will then have to be assessed by vital sign 
responses to stimulation, voice, or painful stimuli.
Steroids
The relationship between serum cortisol levels and post-
operative hemodynamics after congenital heart surgery 
is not well understood.399,400 Although administration of 
stress doses of hydrocortisone are reported to improve 
systolic blood pressure and reduce inotropic score,400–402 
a survival benefit has not been demonstrated. Hydro-
cortisone is typically used for neonates and infants with 
volume-resistant hypotension requiring escalating ino-
tropic support. Short-term stress dosing of hydrocor-
tisone is preferred because of the risk for healthcare-
acquired infection and delayed wound healing.403,404 
Single-center studies of preoperative and intraoperative 
methylprednisolone for neonatal and infant congenital 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e722
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
heart surgery showed reduction in inflammatory medi-
ators and postoperative morbidity405,406; however, these 
findings were not supported in a multicenter database 
analysis.407
Atropine
Atropine is a parasympathetic agent. Functioning as an 
acetylcholine antagonist, atropine augments atrioven-
tricular node conduction and sinus node automaticity. 
Atropine is effective for vagally mediated bradycardia 
and can sometimes be helpful in the setting of complete 
heart block. Atropine can be considered for premedica-
tion of patients who are unlikely to tolerate bradycar-
dia, (eg, such as can occur with the administration of 
succinylcholine and during laryngoscopy). There is little 
evidence that atropine is beneficial in the treatment of 
cardiac arrest, but it has been demonstrated to be ef-
fective in adults in the prearrest phase for symptomatic 
bradycardia or atrioventricular block.408 Atropine is less 
arrhythmogenic than epinephrine. It will cause pupil di-
lation, which can complicate neurological assessment.
Although a minimum dose of 0.1 mg for patients 
weighing <5 kg was recommended in pre-2015 AHA 
PALS guidelines,3,4 the 2015 ILCOR (International Liai-
son Committee on Resuscitation) evidence evaluation 
process398 and 2015 AHA PALS guideline update3 re-
ported no evidence to support a minimum prophylactic 
atropine dose during emergency intubation409; lower 
doses may be appropriate.410
Vasoactive Agents
Dobutamine
Dobutamine is primarily a β1-adrenergic agonist with 
weak β2 and α1 activity. It can be used for patients 
with LCOS with dilated cardiomyopathy or after car-
diac transplantation. A recent European survey re-
ported <20% of pediatric cardiac surgical centers 
routinely used dobutamine for LCOS after pediatric 
heart surgery.411
Dopamine
Dopamine is a sympathomimetic amine that directly 
stimulates β1 and α1 and dopaminergic receptors. In 
addition, dopamine is a norepinephrine precursor, so 
dopamine administration increases norepinephrine 
release. It functions as an inotrope and chronotrope 
at lower doses and as a vasoconstrictor at higher 
doses. It has widespread use for LCOS after pediatric 
heart surgery,411 including after stage 1 Norwood pal-
liation.90 In a small case series of 13 neonates after 
stage 1 Norwood palliation, dopamine administration 
was associated with an increase in oxygen consump-
tion412 presumed to be secondary to the increase in 
heart rate.
Epinephrine
Epinephrine is a β-agonist at lower doses and an α-
agonist at higher doses. It is an effective inotrope and 
chronotrope and at higher doses is a vasoconstrictor. 
However, epinephrine also increases myocardial oxygen 
consumption and in bolus doses causes vasoconstric-
tion that can limit blood flow to end organs. Epineph-
rine administration can trigger arrhythmias and even VF 
in an irritable myocardium.
A prearrest small dose of epinephrine can be used in 
treatment of hypotension or persistent bradycardia with 
a pulse in the patient with an at-risk myocardium to 
prevent cardiac arrest and allow time to treat an acute 
reversible problem (eg, draining of pericardial effusion, 
sternal opening, revascularization of a shunt) or to initi-
ate ECLS without requiring ECPR. Doses in this scenario 
should be administered via central venous catheter or 
intraosseous catheter and titrated to effect based on 
the patient’s response, with a reasonable starting dose 
of 1 μg/kg (ie, one-tenth the standard resuscitation 
dose for pulseless cardiac arrest or symptomatic bra-
dycardia).
A pediatric prospective, randomized, double-blind, 
controlled trial comparing high-dose (0.1 mg/kg) versus 
standard dose (0.01 mg/kg) epinephrine for in-hospital 
cardiac arrest demonstrated that high-dose epineph-
rine was associated with worse 24-hour survival.413 
Epinephrine produces undesirable dose-related effects, 
such as increased myocardial oxygen consumption, so 
the goal of therapy is use of the lowest effective dose. If 
epinephrine does not produce improved hemodynamic 
function and the patient is thought to be an ECLS can-
didate, then the focus of the resuscitation should be 
the delivery of high-quality CPR and rapid activation of 
ECLS, rather than the administration of repetitive doses 
of epinephrine.
In some patients, epinephrine administration can 
contribute to ventricular ectopy or fibrillation.14 Such 
patients may include those who required a prolonged 
aortic cross-clamp time, preoperative patients with 
truncus arteriosus, patients with pulmonary atresia with 
intact ventricular septum and RV-dependent coronary 
circulation, patients with LQTS, patients with catechol-
aminergic polymorphic VT, and those with acute fulmi-
nant myocarditis. In these situations, if heart function 
is poor, consider using a lower dose of epinephrine or 
administering phenylephrine if heart function is reason-
able but hypotension is present.
Isoproterenol
Isoproterenol is a β-adrenergic agonist with no α-
adrenergic activity. It functions as an inotrope, chro-
notrope, and vasodilator. Isoproterenol can increase 
the ventricular escape rate in patients with complete 
heart block.414 In addition, it is helpful to maintain 
heart rate and decrease afterload after cardiac trans-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e723
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
plantation. Isoproterenol is also helpful for patients 
with β-blocker overdose. It can maintain heart rate 
and suppress torsade in patients with LQTS. At a low 
dose, isoproterenol will increase the heart rate, as 
well as LV preload, without compromising systemic dia-
stolic pressure.
Levosimendan
Levosimendan increases the sensitivity of myocardial 
troponin c to calcium, functioning as an inotrope. In ad-
dition, it acts on adenosine triphosphate–sensitive po-
tassium channels, resulting in vasodilation. Levosimen-
dan is an effective therapy for decompensated heart 
failure,415 and it has been shown to improve LCOS after 
pediatric heart surgery.416 In a randomized pilot study, 
levosimendan and milrinone were found to have similar 
effects on cardiac index after pediatric heart surgery, 
although the effects of the 2 drugs followed different 
time courses417 (see Low Cardiac Output Syndrome).
Milrinone
Milrinone is a type III phosphodiesterase inhibitor that 
increases myocardial and vascular smooth muscle 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate, causing increased 
intracellular calcium and smooth muscle relaxation, 
which results in increased contractility and afterload 
reduction. In a placebo-controlled, multicenter trial 
of children with CHD undergoing 2-ventricle repair, a 
high-dose regimen of prophylactic milrinone admin-
istration reduced the incidence of LCOS after heart 
surgery.237
Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine is a potent β1- and α-agonist with only 
minor β2 effects. It can augment coronary blood flow 
by increasing systemic diastolic pressure at the expense 
of increased systemic afterload. Norepinephrine is help-
ful for treatment of LCOS with low SVR.418
Phenylephrine
Phenylephrine is an α1-agonist with very little β effect. It 
causes arterial vasoconstriction, increasing blood pres-
sure with the potential for reflex bradycardia. Phenyl-
ephrine is an important therapy for hypercyanotic spells 
in patients with unrepaired TOF.419 It is useful for treat-
ment of low SVR caused by vasodilator medications, 
labile vascular tone (eg, vasculopathy), or sepsis. Phen-
ylephrine maintains arterial diastolic pressure and coro-
nary perfusion pressure; both are important for patients 
at risk for myocardial ischemia.
Terlipressin and Vasopressin
Vasopressin causes peripheral vasoconstriction without 
a direct cardiac effect because it acts on vasopressin 
receptors in blood vessels. The theoretical advantage of 
using vasopressin (relative to epinephrine) is that it can 
increase SVR and blood pressure and improve coronary 
perfusion pressure without increasing the contractile 
state or the heart rate, which independently increase 
myocardial workload or oxygen consumption. Increas-
ing doses of vasopressin will result in increasing blood 
pressure and afterload, which at higher doses will in-
crease myocardial work. In adult studies of prehospital 
cardiac arrest, vasopressin did not improve survival over 
epinephrine. Although in the past, vasopressin was in-
cluded in the advanced cardiac life support algorithm 
for treatment of shock-refractory VF or pulseless VT,420 
it is no longer included in the advanced cardiac life sup-
port recommendation, because the combination of epi-
nephrine plus vasopressin offers no advantage over the 
use of epinephrine alone.421,422 The pediatric experience 
with the use of vasopressin in cardiac arrest is limited to 
small case series.422
There are data supporting the use of a vasoconstric-
tor in the setting of persistent hypotension after pedi-
atric heart surgery. A prospective observational study 
noted significant variability in plasma arginine vasopres-
sin levels after surgery for CHD, but low levels were 
not found to be associated with poor hemodynamics 
or inotropic score.423 However, several case series have 
shown improved hemodynamics and decreased inotro-
pic score with administration of terlipressin424 or vaso-
pressin in the setting of extreme LCOS or vasodilatory 
shock after surgery for CHD.425
Guiding Therapy
Recommended initial doses of drugs commonly used 
in the treatment of LCOS and cardiac arrest are listed 
in Table 4. Monitoring of heart rate and rhythm, blood 
pressure, pulse pressure, oxygen saturation, CVP
, ETco2 
pressure, and Svo2 (or NIRS), as well as blood gas and 
electrolyte analysis, is needed when the child is un-
stable. Therapy and subsequent drug doses must be 
individualized and adjusted for each patient. If no im-
provement is noted in the clinical status of the patient, 
further administration of the same medication must be 
viewed with caution, and additional contributing fac-
tors that cause decompensation must be considered 
and investigated.
Gaps in Knowledge
The US Food and Drug Administration Modernization 
Act (1997) established economic incentives to phar-
maceutical companies by providing an additional 6 
months of marketing exclusivity in return for approved 
sponsor-performed pediatric trials. Nonetheless, in the 
pediatric cardiac care unit, nearly 40% of the medica-
tions used in a pediatric critical care are used for pur-
poses not approved by the US Food and Drug Admin-
istration for inclusion in the drug labeling (ie, they are 
off-label uses).426 Thus, safety and efficacy of pediatric 
medication administration is generally based on clini-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e724
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Table 4. Pharmacology: Typical Doses and Indications
Medication
Dose
Indications
Cautions/Precautions
Adenosine
Initial dose: 100 μg/kg (0.1 mg/kg; 
maximum single dose: 6 mg) rapid IV push; 
second dose can be double the first dose 
(ie, give 200 μg/kg [0.2 mg/kg] for second 
dose, maximum 12 mg)
Atrioventricular node–
dependent SVT
Adenosine will not effectively terminate 
atrioventricular node–independent 
tachycardias, such as atrial flutter, ectopic 
atrial tachycardia, or atrial fibrillation
Should not be administered for wide 
QRS complex tachycardia unless it is clear 
that the underlying rhythm is not atrial 
fibrillation or atrial flutter with associated 
antegrade accessory pathway conduction
Expert consultation should be obtained 
before administration of adenosine as 
a diagnostic and potentially therapeutic 
intervention for stable patients who have 
wide QRS complex tachycardia
Amiodarone
For VF/pulseless VT, in absence of known 
or suspected long-QT syndrome:
Initial dose: 5.0 mg/kg IV/IO bolus
Maximum single dose: 300 mg; can 
repeat to a total of 3 doses
Total: 15 mg/kg per 24 h; in 
adolescents, maximum 2.2 g per 24 h
For perfusing atrial or ventricular 
arrhythmias:
Give loading dose of 5 mg/kg over 
30–60 min*
Maximum single dose: 300 mg; can 
repeat to a maximum of 3 doses
Total: 15 mg/kg per 24 h; in 
adolescents, maximum 2.2 g/24 h
If patient hemodynamically unstable or 
receiving other medications that lower 
heart rate, consider lower dose and slower 
infusion
Shock-refractory cardiac arrest 
(VF/pulseless VT); atrial and 
ventricular arrhythmias; JET
Use lower dose and/or slower infusion if 
patient is hemodynamically unstable or 
receiving other medications that lower 
heart rate; can cause hypotension; can 
prolong QT interval:
1.  
Obtain expert consultation before 
administering, if known or suspected 
long-QT syndrome.
2.  
Routine administration in combination 
with procainamide or digoxin is 
not recommended without expert 
consultation
Atropine
For symptomatic bradycardia: 20 μg/kg 
(0.02 mg/kg); minimum single dose:  
0.5 mg; maximum single dose: 500 μg 
(0.5 mg)
For emergent preintubation bradycardia 
prophylaxis: 20 μg/kg (0.02 mg/kg)
Intubation: No minimum dose; maximum 
single dose 500 μg (0.5 mg)
Vagal-mediated bradycardia; 
primary atrioventricular 
block; emergent intubation 
bradycardia prophylaxis
Loss of constrictive pupillary reflex to light
Calcium chloride (10%=100 
mg/mL=27.2 mg/mL elemental 
calcium)
10–20 mg/kg; maximum single dose: 2g
Hypocalcemia
Precipitates with sodium bicarbonate; rapid 
IV administration can cause hypotension, 
bradycardia, or asystole (particularly if 
patient is receiving digoxin)
Calcium gluconate (10%=100 
mg/mL= 9 mg/mL elemental 
calcium)
50–100 mg/kg; maximum single dose: 3g
Hypocalcemia
Precipitates with sodium bicarbonate; rapid 
IV administration can cause hypotension, 
bradycardia, or asystole (particularly if 
patient is receiving digoxin)
Dexmedetomidine
0.5–1 μg/kg bolus; infusion 0.25–1 
μg·kg−1·h−1; titrate to effect
For sedation and mild analgesia
If at risk for heart block or symptomatic 
bradycardia, pacing capability should 
be available; can cause hypotension or 
bradycardia
Dobutamine
2–20 μg·kg−1·min−1
Myocardial systolic dysfunction 
(ie, as inotrope and/or 
vasodilator)
Titrate to effect; can produce hypotension 
or tachyarrhythmias
Dopamine
2–20 μg·kg−1·min−1; if ≥20 μg·kg−1·min−1 
is required, consider using an alternative 
adrenergic agent
Systolic dysfunction; 
postoperative LCOS
Titrate to effect; can produce 
vasoconstriction and hypertension or 
tachyarrhythmias; increases myocardial 
oxygen consumption
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e725
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Epinephrine
For pulseless cardiac arrest: Bolus: 10 μg/
kg (0.01 mg/kg, or 0.1 mL/kg of 0.1 mg/
mL) concentration during cardiac arrest; 
maximum dose: 1 mg
For symptomatic bradycardia: Bolus: 10 μg/
kg (0.01 mg/kg, or 0.1 mL/kg of 0.1 mg/
mL) concentration; maximum dose: 1 mg
For treatment of hypotension or persistent 
bradycardia with a pulse in the patient  
with an at-risk myocardium†: Give low 
dose via central administration 1 μg/kg  
(0.001 mg/kg); continuous infusion: 0.01–
0.2 μg·kg−1·min−1
Cardiac arrest; symptomatic 
bradycardia; systolic 
dysfunction; postoperative 
LCOS
Significant vasoconstriction at higher 
doses; increases myocardial oxygen 
consumption
Esmolol
Bolus: 100–500 μg/kg (0.1–0.5 mg/kg) over 
1–2 min
Infusion: 50–500 μg·kg−1·min−1
SVT; hypertension
Can cause bradycardia, hypotension, and/
or hypoglycemia
Etomidate
Bolus: 0.2–0.4 mg/kg, over 30–60 s; 
maximum dose: 20 mg
Procedural sedation
Can cause apnea and adrenal suppression
Fentanyl
Bolus: 1–5 μg/kg
Continuous infusion for neonates and 
young infants: 0.5–5 μg·kg−1·h−1
Continuous infusion for older infants and 
children: 1–3 μg·kg−1·min−1
Analgesia
Can cause apnea and chest wall rigidity in 
the naive patient
Furosemide
1 mg/kg; starting dose of up to 10 mg to 
naïve patient
Diuresis
Can cause hypokalemia, hypochloremic 
metabolic acidosis, or hypotension if 
preload dependent
Heparin
Presumed shunt occlusion: 50–100 U/kg; 
anticoagulation before ECLS cannulation: 
100 U/kg
Presumed shunt occlusion; 
ECLS cannulation
Can cause bleeding
Hydrocortisone
1–2 mg/kg; maximum dose: 100 mg
LCOS not responsive to 
inotropic agents
Can cause hyperglycemia and/or 
hypokalemia
Isoproterenol
0.05–2 μg·kg−1·min−1
Post–cardiac transplantation; 
long QT with torsade des pointes; 
primary atrioventricular block
Can cause hypotension, tachycardia, and 
increased myocardial oxygen consumption
Ketamine
0.5–2 mg/kg
Procedural sedation
Can cause apnea and increased respiratory 
secretions; myocardial depressant at high 
doses
Levosimendan
Bolus: 12 μg/kg; infusion: 0.1 μg·kg−1·min−1
LCOS
 
Lidocaine
Bolus: 1 mg/kg, may repeat
Infusion: 20–50 μg·kg−1·min−1 (repeat bolus 
dose if infusion initiated >15 min after 
initial bolus dose)
VF/pulseless VT cardiac arrest; 
ventricular arrhythmias
Monitor QTc and lidocaine levels;
can cause seizures at high levels
Magnesium sulfate
Pulseless VT with torsade des pointes; 
bolus: 25–50 mg/kg; maximum dose: 2 g
VT with pulses: 25–50 mg/kg over  
10–20 min; maximum dose: 2 g
VF/pulseless VT arrest with 
torsade des pointes;
hypomagnesemia
Can cause hypotension with rapid 
administration
Midazolam
0.05–0.2 mg/kg
Sedation
Can cause apnea or hypotension
Milrinone
Bolus: 50 μg/kg, administered over  
10–60 min
Maintenance infusion: 0.25–1.0 
μg·kg−1·min−1
LCOS
Hypotension
Nitric oxide
Up to 40 ppm
Increased pulmonary vascular 
reactivity; pulmonary 
hypertension ± crisis
Methemoglobinemia
Norepinephrine
Infusion: 0.025–0.3 μg·kg−1·min−1
LCOS with low SVR; clinically 
significant vasodilation
Vasoconstriction; increases myocardial 
oxygen consumption
Oxygen
Fio2 = 21%– 100%
Alveolar desaturation
Pulmonary overcirculation with 
unrestrictive aortopulmonary shunt
Table 4. Continued
Medication
Dose
Indications
Cautions/Precautions
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e726
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
cal experience, and many more data about pediatric 
drugs are needed.
Recommendations: Pharmacological 
Interventions
1. For prearrest intubation of the airway: (a) 
Ketamine can be used to induce acute seda-
tion and loss of consciousness and support 
hemodynamics (Class IIa; Level of Evidence 
C). (b) Etomidate may also be used to induce 
acute sedation and loss of consciousness with 
minimal hemodynamic impact; however, 
etomidate is potentially harmful in the set-
ting of septic shock because of the increased 
risk of adrenal insufficiency (Class III: Harm; 
Level of Evidence B). (c) Dexmedetomidine 
can be useful for procedures with the 
intention to avoid respiratory depression 
or for patients with arrhythmia requiring 
sedation (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B). (d) 
Sedative drugs are potentially harmful for 
patients with severe ventricular dysfunction 
or LCOS and should be used with appropri-
ate monitoring and the personnel available 
to initiate resuscitation, if needed (Class III: 
Harm; Level of Evidence C).
2. Adenosine is not useful to treat ectopic atrial 
tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, or atrial flut-
ter (Class III: No Benefit; Level of Evidence B). 
Adenosine can be life-threatening for atrial 
fibrillation with an antegrade accessory 
pathway (Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence 
B). In postoperative patients with temporary 
atrial epicardial pacing wires, rapid atrial 
pacing has fewer side effects than adenosine 
Phenylephrine
Bolus: 5–20 μg/kg; (0.005–0.020 mg/kg)
Infusion: 0.1–0.5 μg·kg−1·min−1
Cyanotic spell in unrepaired 
tetralogy of Fallot; symptomatic 
hypotension because of 
low SVR; shunt obstruction; 
coronary hypoperfusion
Can cause vasoconstriction or hypertension
Propofol
Bolus: 1–3 mg/kg
Infusion: 50–100 μg·kg−1·min−1
Sedation, amnesia
Hypotension; contraindicated in children 
with mitochondrial disease and not 
approved in children for prolonged sedation
Procainamide
Bolus: 15 mg/kg over 30–60 min; 
maximum dose: 100 mg
Infusion: 20–60 μg·kg−1·min−1
JET; SVT; atrial fibrillation
Monitor ECG and procainamide and NAPA 
levels; can prolong QT interval:
 1.  
Obtain expert consultation before 
administering, if known or suspected 
long QT;
 2.  
Routine administration in combination 
with amiodarone is not recommended 
without expert  consultation
Prostaglandin E1
To establish ductal patency: 0.05–0.1 
μg·kg−1·min−1, IV/IO infusion
To maintain ductal patency: 0.01–0.05 to 
0.01 to 0.02 μg·kg−1·min−1 IV/IO infusion
Maintain patency of ductus 
arteriosus
Apnea; fever and hypotension
Sodium bicarbonate
Bolus: 1–2 mEq/kg slow IV push; dose 
adjusted to severity of base deficit; use 
4.2% (0.5 mEq/L) concentration for 
neonates
Metabolic acidosis
Precipitates with calcium
Vasopressin
Infusion: 0.0005–0.01 U·kg−1·min−1
LCOS with low SVR; 
vasodilatory shock; diabetes 
insipidus
Hypertension and increased afterload;  
fluid retention
Verapamil
Bolus: 0.1–0.2 mg/kg
Do not administer to infants <12 mo of 
age without expert consultation
SVT
Hypotension; have calcium available; not 
to be administered to infants (can cause 
apnea, bradycardia and hypotension); 
avoid in patients with WPW
ECLS indicates extracorporeal life support; Fio2, fractional inspired oxygen; IO, intraosseus; IV, intravenous; JET, junctional ectopic tachycardia; LCOS, low cardiac 
output syndrome; NAPA, N-acetylprocainamide; SVR, systemic vascular resistance; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular 
tachycardia; and WPW, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.
*The time range for administration of the loading dose of amiodarone for the child with a perfusing rhythm is slightly longer (ie, 30–60 minutes) than the 
pediatric advanced life support (PALS) 2015 recommended time for administration (ie, 20–60 minutes). The reason for this slight difference is that the child with 
cardiac disease is likely to be or is at risk for hemodynamic compromise.
†For treatment of hypotension or persistent bradycardia with a pulse in the patient with an at-risk myocardium, give low dose via central administration 1 μg/kg 
(0.001 mg/kg), which is one-tenth the standard recommended resuscitation dose for symptomatic bradycardia in PALS 2015.
Table 4. Continued
Medication
Dose
Indications
Cautions/Precautions
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e727
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
and can be effective as the preferred initial 
therapy for reentrant SVT (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C). A reduced dose (one-fifth to 
one-third) of adenosine should be admin-
istered 
to 
post–cardiac 
transplantation 
patients (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
3. Verapamil is not recommended for the treat-
ment of SVT in neonates and infants <1 year 
of age without expert consultation because 
it may cause harm (Class III: Harm; Level of 
Evidence C).
4. During cardiac arrest, calcium administration 
is not recommended in the absence of docu-
mented ionized hypocalcemia, hypermagne-
semia, or hyperkalemia and can be harmful 
(Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence B).
5. Given that severe metabolic acidosis can lead 
to pacemaker noncapture, sodium bicarbon-
ate can be useful to facilitate pacemaker 
function (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
6. During cardiac arrest, the routine use of 
sodium bicarbonate administration is not rec-
ommended (Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence 
B). Sodium bicarbonate administration is 
reasonable during special situations such as 
severe metabolic acidosis with myocardial 
dysfunction or pacemaker noncapture and 
hyperkalemic cardiac arrest (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
7. Hydrocortisone may be considered to treat 
the patient with hypotension unresponsive 
to vasoactive therapy or volume resuscita-
tion (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
8. Atropine administration may be reason-
able as a premedication in specific emer-
gency situations where there is a high risk 
of bradycardia (ie, such as may occur during 
emergency intubation) (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C). A typical dose is 20 μg/kg, with 
a maximum dose of 500 μg (per the 2015 
PALS guidelines update, there is no longer a 
minimum dose of 100 μg when atropine is 
given for emergency intubation) (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C).
9. During CPR, it is reasonable to give 10 μg/kg 
(0.01 mg/kg, or 0.1 mL/kg of the 0.1 mg/mL 
concentration) of intravenous epinephrine 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
10. For treatment of hypotension or persistent 
bradycardia with a pulse in the patient with 
an at-risk myocardium, it is reasonable to 
titrate a smaller prearrest dose of epineph-
rine (eg, 1 μg/kg [0.001 mg/kg]) to achieve 
a desired hemodynamic effect and reduce 
the risk for ventricular arrhythmias (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence C).
11. Phenylephrine can be an effective therapy for 
hypercyanotic spells in patients with unre-
paired TOF (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
PHASES OF CARDIAC ARREST
Prearrest Phase
Principles of Intubation, Airway Management, 
and Respiratory Support
Children with congenital or acquired cardiac disease 
often require respiratory support. Indications for ad-
vanced airway management include respiratory fail-
ure, cardiac failure, and the need for procedural seda-
tion and analgesia (depending on the sedation and 
analgesia agents used and doses given). Importantly 
for the child with systemic ventricular dysfunction or 
systemic valvar insufficiency, positive-pressure venti-
lation can provide a form of ventricular support by 
reducing systemic ventricular afterload and work of 
breathing.
Children with cardiac disease have an increased in-
cidence of extracardiac anomalies or concomitant syn-
dromes that can include airway anomalies.427 Prepa-
ration for intubation should include consideration of 
conditions that could lead to a difficult airway (eg, 
macroglossia [trisomy 21], tracheal stenosis or tracheo-
malacia [VACTERL Association], and cleft palate [velo-
cardiofacial syndrome]).428–431
The goals of airway management include mainte-
nance or improvement of Do2, reduction in oxygen 
consumption, and control of minute ventilation and 
carbon dioxide elimination. Adverse events during air-
way management occur more frequently in patients 
with cardiac disease or comorbidity, especially single-
ventricle patients.432,433 Therefore, a complete under-
standing of the patient’s cardiac and airway anatomy, 
current cardiac function and valvar insufficiency, pres-
ence of tamponade physiology, and predisposition 
for arrhythmia, as well as knowledge of the child’s 
sedation/analgesia and airway history, is imperative 
when planning for an airway intervention. For some 
patients, a resuscitation plan may be required before 
placement or removal of an airway. Noninvasive venti-
lation techniques, with a lower associated risk profile, 
can at times be an effective alternative to tracheal in-
tubation and ventilation.434
Both the desired and undesired consequences of 
intubation can be ascribed to 3 unavoidable effects of 
initiation of assisted ventilation and airway instrumen-
tation. First, the transition from spontaneous ventila-
tion, with net negative (relative to the atmosphere) 
high-amplitude swings in pleural and intrathoracic pres-
sure, to positive-pressure ventilation is associated with 
both increased CVP and decreased venous return. Sec-
ond, the effects of the pharmacological agents used 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e728
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
during intubation on myocardial performance and vas-
cular tone can only be partially anticipated, and there 
can be significant individual and condition-dependent 
variability. Third, the combination of pharmacology, 
stimulation during instrumentation, and subsequent 
altered lung expansion and gas exchange impacts 
autonomic tone and circulating catecholamines and 
can cause (unintended) deterioration of myocardial 
performance or development of myocardial ischemia. 
Because the rapid superimposition of reduced venous 
return, impaired contractility, and reduction in vascu-
lar tone has the potential to significantly reduce car-
diac output, the clinician should consider the need for 
preventative or prophylactic administration of vaso-
active agents in addition to ECLS standby. Low car-
diac output leads to a delay in onset of administered 
drugs. Impatience and readministration can lead to 
unwanted side effects of the accumulated dose. He-
modynamic collapse usually develops several minutes 
after airway manipulation has occurred, because the 
combined effects of sedation, analgesia, and the drop 
in intrinsic catecholamines can markedly compromise 
coronary perfusion.
Administration of pharmacological agents (see Phar-
macological Interventions) should be undertaken with 
anticipation of both the intended and undesired effects 
and the likely response of the individual patient. Bra-
dycardia associated with succinylcholine administration 
or vagal stimulation can result in decreased arterial dia-
stolic pressure, decreased coronary perfusion pressure, 
myocardial ischemia, and cardiac arrest. Prevention of 
bradycardia can be achieved with anticipatory admin-
istration of atropine or glycopyrrolate,3,409,435,436 but the 
onset of these drugs is delayed once bradycardia en-
sues.437 Furthermore, cardiac output might not be in-
creased by anticholinergic drugs if hypoxia is present 
or bradycardia persists.438 Low-dose epinephrine (1 μg/
kg) should be available for treatment of hypotension 
or persistent bradycardia with a pulse in the patient 
with an at-risk myocardium.338 Combinations of sed-
ative-hypnotic and analgesic medications can be used 
to control arousal responses, pain, and agitation (see 
Pharmacological Interventions).
When the use of neuromuscular blockade is consid-
ered, indications for and effects of the drugs should 
be clarified before use. In addition, neuromuscular 
blockade must be undertaken with appropriate moni-
toring and a backup plan for support of the airway 
and ventilation. Although the use of neuromuscular 
blockers with sedation/analgesia generally creates 
better conditions for intubation, their administration 
is occasionally followed by a “can’t intubate, can’t 
ventilate” crisis, so the healthcare team must have a 
plan in place.
Succinylcholine can transiently increase oxygen con-
sumption, carries risks of hyperkalemia and malignant 
hyperthermia in susceptible children, and has a long 
enough duration of action that in the event of failure 
to ventilate, return of spontaneous ventilation will not 
reliably occur before hypoxic injury. Nondepolarizing 
muscle relaxants might be a safer alternative, because 
they have fewer adverse effects, produce excellent in-
tubating conditions,439 and can be reversed within 3 
minutes if necessary.440
Neuromuscular blockade alone does not prevent 
nonshivering thermogenesis in neonates, whereas opi-
oids and inhaled anesthetic agents do.441,442 Reduction 
in muscle work is ensured by neuromuscular blockade 
(with appropriate sedative and analgesic drugs), but ef-
fects on whole-body oxygen consumption depend on 
the patient’s condition.443
Endotracheal intubation can be performed with ei-
ther cuffed or uncuffed tracheal tubes.444 An appropri-
ately sized uncuffed or a cuffed endotracheal tube is 
necessary to minimize air leak and resultant inadequate 
positive-pressure ventilation during resuscitation. Posi-
tion of the endotracheal tube should be confirmed by 
direct ETco2 waveform capnography combined with 
clinical assessment, including auscultation and as-
sessment of chest expansion. If continuous waveform 
capnography is not available, a litmus exhaled carbon 
dioxide indicator can be used, with clinical assessment 
to confirm tracheal tube placement. Success of tra-
cheal intubation via direct laryngoscopy is increased 
with proper positioning of the child to align the oral, 
pharyngeal, and laryngeal axes to create a direct line of 
sight from the child’s mouth to the vocal chords/glottic 
opening, and with the use of appropriately sized laryn-
goscope blades and tubes. The use of video laryngos-
copy has a theoretical advantage, but its use has not 
been shown to increase success.445 For patients with 
known or suspected difficult airways, expert consulta-
tion and reference to algorithms should be sought,446 
although pediatric-specific algorithms have not been 
validated.447
Because of the rapid changes in arterial oxygenation, 
systemic and pulmonary resistances, cardiac output, 
and metabolism that accompany airway management, 
continuous monitoring should include, when possible, 
continuous waveform display of ETco2,448 pulse oxim-
etry, Svo2 (using the oxygen saturation in the SVC as 
a surrogate for a true mixed venous sample),
449,450 and 
multisite NIRS.43 These variables will complement the 
clinical assessment of airway, ventilation, and perfusion.
The continuous presence of exhaled carbon dioxide 
during ventilation requires alveolar ventilation, PBF 
and SBF, and metabolism. As a result, monitoring of 
the ETco2 provides information about gas exchange 
from airway to mitochondria. The end-expiratory and 
arterial carbon dioxide gradient is increased with both 
dead space and shunt451 and is increased proportion-
ally to the degree of desaturation in children with 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e729
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
CHD.69,452,453 In children with no intracardiac or great 
vessel shunt, changes in ETco2 can be a direct indi-
cation of changes in PBF and herald hemodynamic 
compromise.66,68–70
When positive-pressure ventilation is provided, the 
airway pressures used and the blood gas values to be 
targeted must be individualized for each patient on the 
basis of the child’s cardiac lesion and hemodynamic sta-
tus. Airway pressures in infants and children with car-
diac disease should be titrated judiciously in the setting 
of parenchymal lung disease. In children with complete 
mixing or single-ventricle physiology, higher airway 
pressures can be beneficial to restrict PBF. Alternatively, 
lower airway pressures can be desirable for patients 
with RV systolic and diastolic dysfunction. No matter 
what the underlying cardiovascular physiology is, it is 
important to remember that high airway pressures will 
reduce systemic venous return and PBF in a 2-ventricle 
heart or will reduce total cardiac output in the child with 
complete mixing or single-ventricle physiology. Inadver-
tent hyperventilation or hyperoxygenation in the child 
with complete mixing or single-ventricle physiology can 
result in an unbalanced parallel circulation with pulmo-
nary overcirculation, reduced SBF, and inadequate Do2 
to the tissues.
Although positive-pressure ventilation can provide 
afterload reduction to the systemic ventricle and in-
crease cardiac output, it can also impede systemic and 
pulmonary venous return. Increases in intrathoracic 
pressure will initially recruit lung volume, minimizing 
PVR, thereby reducing the afterload on the pulmonary 
ventricle. However, if the lungs are overinflated, PVR 
will increase, leading to an increase in afterload on the 
pulmonary ventricle and a reduction in PBF. In the set-
ting of pulmonary hypertension, positive-pressure ven-
tilation has the potential to reduce preload to the pul-
monary ventricle, increase intrathoracic pressures and 
PVR to critical levels, and severely compromise PBF and 
overall cardiac output. When systolic function is dimin-
ished in the child who has no pulmonary ventricle (eg, 
after a superior cavopulmonary connection or modified 
Fontan operation), positive-pressure ventilation can im-
prove cardiac output but can compromise PBF by in-
creasing intrathoracic pressure.
Recommendations: Principles of 
Intubation, Airway Management, and 
Respiratory Support
1. Patients with CHD have an increased inci-
dence of associated airway anomalies. 
In-depth understanding of the underlying 
heart disease and potential associated air-
way anomalies can be useful before airway 
manipulation (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. Risks of anesthetic and sedative agents, 
airway manipulation, and positive-pres-
sure ventilation associated with intuba-
tion in hemodynamically marginal cardiac 
patients can result in cardiac arrest. Before 
attempted intubation, providers should dis-
cuss strategies to maintain hemodynamics 
and a resuscitation plan (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
Transport of the Critical Cardiac Patient
The regionalization of pediatric cardiac care has neces-
sitated the transport of critically ill infants and children 
with heart disease over significant distances. Transport 
of these high-risk infants and children is associated with 
potential morbidity and mortality. The goal of prenatal 
screening is to identify neonates with significant CHD 
and facilitate antenatal maternal transport rather than 
postnatal transport of the critically ill newborn. How-
ever, high-risk neonates are not always identified pre-
natally or even at the time of birth. In addition, older 
infants and children will continue to present with symp-
tomatic heart disease. As a result, interfacility transport 
of critically ill infants and children will continue to be 
necessary.454
Transported critically ill neonates with CHD are at 
risk for development of hypothermia, hypoglycemia, 
hypoxia, and acidosis during transport.448,455 Although 
prospective studies are lacking, large single-center456 
and multicenter457 registry studies have shown that 
the transport of infants and children with complex dis-
ease (including those with critical cardiac disease) is ac-
complished with lower patient morbidity and mortality 
when performed by specialized neonatal and pediat-
ric critical care transport teams, staffed by personnel 
accustomed to the prevention of complications in the 
transport setting.
Pretransport Stabilization
The newborn with critical CHD can present in a variety 
of settings, from the delivery room to a community hos-
pital emergency department. The most common initial 
symptoms are cyanosis caused by reduction in ductal-
dependent PBF, transposition physiology, complete 
mixing/single-ventricle physiology, or shock caused by 
reduction of ductal-dependent SBF. Pretransport stabili-
zation includes supportive care for respiratory or cardiac 
failure, in addition to specific therapies to maintain duc-
tal patency (ie, PGE1 infusion), treat arrhythmias, and 
correct metabolic derangements.
Parallel Circulations
Newborns with a patent ductus arteriosus or systemic-
to–pulmonary artery shunt have parallel (as opposed to 
in-series) circulations. Changes in PVR or SVR in these 
patients can cause the pulmonary and systemic circu-
lations to become unbalanced and in the extreme can 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e730
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
cause either severe hypoxemia from insufficient PBF or 
pulmonary overcirculation with inadequate SBF and Do2 
to the tissues (see sections on Age-Dependent Factors In-
fluencing CPR in the Neonate and Infant and Single-Ven-
tricle Palliation: Perioperative Management). Newborns 
with unrepaired TGA also have an anatomic parallel 
circulation. If mixing of systemic and pulmonary venous 
blood is inadequate (ie, with a restrictive foramen ovale), 
the infant will be profoundly cyanotic and hypoxemic, 
requiring a balloon atrial septostomy. Newborns with 
obstructed TAPVC require urgent surgical intervention, 
and respiratory and cardiac support is typically provided 
preoperatively.
Airway Management
Some infants and children with cardiac disease will 
benefit from assisted ventilation during transport (see 
Intubation and Airway Management). The major indica-
tion for the placement of an advanced airway before 
transport is cardiorespiratory failure that is present or 
likely to develop before arrival at the receiving facility. In 
this setting, it is essential to adequately secure the ad-
vanced airway before patient transport, because reintu-
bation during transport will be difficult. A single-center 
retrospective case series describing the pretransport and 
transport management of infants receiving PGE1 infu-
sion for CHD noted that elective intubation for trans-
port significantly increased the odds of a major trans-
port complication.458 The risks of prophylactic intubation 
before the transport of otherwise stable infants on PGE1 
must be weighed carefully against possible benefits.
Respiratory Management of the Critically Ill Infant or 
Child With Cardiac Disease During Transport
To provide optimal transport of the child with cardiac 
disease, close monitoring of the child’s Paco2 and ETco2 
and the titration of fractional inspired oxygen (Fio2) to 
target optimal patient systemic oxygen saturation and 
SBF and PBF are recommended. This will require special-
ized equipment, including oxygen blenders, capnom-
etry, and point-of-care blood gas analysis. Discrepancies 
can develop between the ETco2 and the arterial Paco2 
in the setting of limited PBF with intracardiac shunt and 
low cardiac output.
Prostaglandin E1
Neonates presenting with ductal-dependent SBF or PBF 
are treated with intravenous PGE1 to maintain patency 
of the ductus arteriosus. Complications associated with 
PGE1 use include apnea, fever, and hypotension.459 The 
risk of apnea might indicate the need for insertion of 
an advanced airway before transport, but the poten-
tial benefits of intubation must be weighed against the 
risk of sedation, positive-pressure ventilation, and po-
tential airway complications. Patient complications are 
documented in ≈42% of neonatal transports.458 In one 
recent series, apnea or hypoventilation developed in 
5% of newborns receiving PGE1 during transport, and 
elective intubation was independently associated with 
adverse events.458 In addition, preoperative intubation 
(including elective intubation for transport) in new-
borns with HLHS has been shown to be a risk factor for 
postoperative morbidity.29 Because side effects of PGE1 
are typically dose dependent, lower doses of prosta-
glandin have been recommended if the ductus appears 
to be open based on echocardiographic evaluation and 
clinical assessment.460,461 The use of lower doses of PGE1 
(<0.015 μg·kg−1·min−1) was associated with a lower in-
cidence of apnea during transport.462 In that report, 2 
(2.6%) of the 78 infants transported with PGE1 infusion 
and without endotracheal intubation developed apnea 
in transit, and both were receiving PGE1 >0.015 μg·kg−1
·min−1.462 In addition to using lower doses of PGE1, min-
imizing the concurrent use of respiratory depressants 
(eg, narcotic drugs and midazolam) during transport 
reduces the likelihood of apnea with PGE1.
Inotropic and Metabolic Support
In addition to restoring and maintaining ductal patency, 
supportive care of the newborn with critical CHD in-
cludes support of myocardial function. Correction of 
hypoxemia and acidosis will typically improve cardiac 
output. For significant myocardial dysfunction, inotro-
pic infusions are typically used. The use of sodium bicar-
bonate for severe metabolic acidosis can be appropri-
ate while the underlying issue with SBF and Do2 is also 
addressed. Correction of hypocalcemia and hypoglyce-
mia can also improve myocardial function, because the 
neonatal myocardium is sensitive to insufficient calcium 
and glucose stores. Such supportive care is consistent 
with the AHA 2010 PALS guidelines.3,4 (See Low Car-
diac Output Syndrome.)
ECLS and Interfacility Transport
ECLS is used for management of cardiac or respiratory 
failure. The need for ECLS is one indication for interfa-
cility transfer. Transport of the ECLS candidate carries 
significant risk of deterioration and adverse events, be-
cause most patients will already be dependent on high 
levels of mechanical ventilation and pharmacological 
support. Given the high risk associated with transport, 
selected institutions have developed mobile ECLS ser-
vices with the capability of performing cannulation at 
the referring hospital and transporting the cannulated 
patient. Several single-institution case series have de-
scribed this practice and reported outcomes.463–465
Considerations for Transport to Catheterization 
Laboratory or Operating Room
Patients with shock or hypoxemia refractory to maxi-
mal medical support may be candidates for emergency 
procedures such as catheter-based balloon/blade sep-
tostomy, surgical creation of a shunt, repair of TAPVC, 
or initiation of ECLS. The optimal location for life-saving 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e731
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
interventions will vary with the institution, personnel, 
and patient condition, but individual patients might 
benefit from direct transport from the referring hospi-
tal to the optimal site for definitive intervention, such 
as the catheterization laboratory or operating room. A 
well-orchestrated team approach for support, diagno-
sis, and intervention is required regardless of location.
Gaps in Knowledge
The benefits of centralized care for high-risk infants and 
children with heart disease have been demonstrated. 
Incorporation of the risks and costs of transport to ter-
tiary centers has not been well evaluated.
Recommendations: Transport of the 
Critical Cardiac Patient
1. PGE1 should be initiated for newborns with 
suspected ductal-dependent CHD (Class I; 
Level of Evidence B).
2. For neonates with prenatal diagnosis of 
CHD with ductal-dependent circulations 
and those postnatally diagnosed with echo-
cardiographic documentation of adequate 
ductal patency, low-dose PGE1 infusion 
(0.01–0.02 μg·kg−1·min−1) can be effective to 
maintain ductal patency while minimizing 
risk of apnea and avoiding the need for intu-
bation (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Low Cardiac Output Syndrome
Children with congenital or acquired heart disease 
are at increased risk for cardiac arrest and early mor-
tality. Ideally, prevention of cardiac arrest requires 
patient stratification to match the level of risk with 
the intensity of monitoring and therapy. There are 
no universally accepted risk models for patients with 
congenital or acquired heart disease, but it is gen-
erally acknowledged that high-risk patients include 
those with uncorrected CHD requiring mechanical 
ventilation, continuous infusion of PGE1, or vasoac-
tive infusions; postoperative cardiac surgery patients; 
and those patients with severe myocardial dysfunc-
tion (myocarditis or cardiomyopathy), pulmonary hy-
pertension, and pulmonary vascular disease or life-
threatening arrhythmias.
ICU monitoring often includes continuous moni-
toring of ECG, blood pressure, CVP
, and pulse oxim-
etry.466–470 In addition, capnography is used either 
continuously or intermittently with either nasal can-
nula or mechanical ventilation. ECG and hemodynamic 
monitoring, combined with careful clinical assessment, 
should allow immediate identification of life-threat-
ening arrhythmias, LCOS, bleeding, and tamponade. 
Cardiac output, perfusion, and Do2 can be indirectly 
assessed by physical examination, evaluation of central 
versus peripheral temperature gradient, NIRS, AVo2D, 
and lactate.471 (See Precautions in the ICU section under 
the Location-Specific Arrest Prevention and Response 
Measures heading.)
LCOS can occur after complex cardiac surgery and 
can be caused by endothelial dysfunction, activation of 
the inflammatory cascades, myocardial stunning from 
intraoperative ischemia and reperfusion injury, changes 
in loading conditions, and residual lesions or palliated 
physiology with continued parallel circulation or cya-
nosis.237,278,472,473 LCOS and subsequent cardiac arrest 
can be prevented by strategies that lower oxygen con-
sumption and minimize anaerobic metabolism. These 
include strategies such as sedation and analgesia with 
neuromuscular blockade and hypothermia to diminish 
oxygen consumption,61 as well as an open sternum in 
neonates and infants during the postoperative period 
to limit development of tamponade physiology.474
Mechanical ventilation strategies have been tailored 
to ameliorate the physiological impairment of specific 
cardiac pathology. For example, providers can facilitate 
spontaneous breathing or early extubation after repair 
of “right-sided” lesions such as TOF (see Right-Sided 
Heart Disease) or for patients with single ventricle who 
are undergoing superior CPA or Fontan procedures (see 
Superior CPA and Fontan) to increase pulmonary blood 
flow.475–478 Medical gas therapy includes the use of in-
spired carbon dioxide to promote pulmonary vasocon-
striction or cerebral vasodilatation among patients with 
parallel circulation or use of iNO to induce pulmonary 
vasodilation.95,479,480
Drug therapy is marked by a high degree of inter-
institutional variability, with no universally accepted 
strategy.411,481,482 Therapy includes the use of prophylac-
tic inotropic support and augmentation of support for 
worsening cardiac output. Commonly used classes of 
drugs include phosphodiesterase inhibitors, catechol-
amines, and nitric oxide donors/generators (nitroprus-
side and nitroglycerin), as well as pure vasoconstrictors 
such as norepinephrine, vasopressin, or phenylephrine.
The Prophylactic use of Milrinone After Cardiac Op-
erations in Pediatrics (PRIMACORP) study demonstrated 
a 64% relative risk reduction in LCOS in children with 
CHD undergoing 2-ventricle repair who were prophy-
lactically treated with a high-dose regimen of milri-
none (75 μg/kg bolus followed by 0.75 μg·kg−1·min−1 
for 24–36 hours).237,278 A low-dose regimen (25 μg/kg 
bolus followed by 0.25 μg·kg−1·min−1 for 24–36 hours) 
was not beneficial in reducing LCOS. A limitation of this 
study was that the diagnosis of LCOS was based on 
clinical judgment rather than objective evidence of di-
minished systemic Do2.
Levosimendan sensitizes myocardial troponin C to 
calcium and increases inotropy. Intracellular calcium is 
not increased, so diastolic properties are maintained. 
Levosimendan also results in systemic, pulmonary, and 
coronary vasodilation through adenosine triphosphate–
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e732
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
dependent potassium channels, and favorable impact 
on myocardial oxygen consumption has been report-
ed.416,483 In 2 randomized controlled trials, levosimen-
dan administration lowered myocardial oxygen con-
sumption, improved cardiac output, or both.417,484,485 
Levosimendan is not available in the United States.
In the absence of residual anatomic lesions or coro-
nary insufficiency, postoperative LCOS often resolves. In 
adult studies, preemptive goal-directed hemodynamic 
management, including administration of catechol-
amines, improved outcome.486,487 There is no consensus 
regarding the threshold of catecholamine and vasoactive 
infusions that should trigger the initiation of mechanical 
circulatory support for postoperative LCOS. However, sta-
bilizing a patient with ECLS allows reduction of inotropic 
support and can prevent cardiac arrest. For patients with 
heart failure awaiting transplantation, portable VADs are 
often used if heart failure worsens (as demonstrated by 
the need for escalating inotropic or vasodilator support, 
mechanical ventilation, or worsening renal function). 
Both ECLS and VAD therapy are best used for LCOS be-
fore cardiac arrest in appropriate patients.
Hypotension in the postoperative cardiac patient 
might not be from LCOS but from vasodilatory shock. 
These hypotensive patients have low SVR with normal or 
increased cardiac output. They are typically warm, with 
strong pulses, brisk capillary refill, and no evidence of aci-
dosis. Therapy for these patients includes vasoconstrictors 
and hydrocortisone (see Endocrine Management section 
under the Pharmacological Interventions heading). Their 
hypotension is typically catecholamine resistant, and fluid 
resuscitation is minimally effective.
Gaps in Knowledge
Although LCOS is well described after heart surgery in 
infants, therapy is variable and is based on the child’s 
condition and the congenital heart lesion present. This 
heterogeneity creates challenges for prospective tri-
als to evaluate the efficacy of specific management or 
pharmaceutical therapies.
Recommendations: Low Cardiac Output 
Syndrome
1. Milrinone is effective to decrease LCOS in 
infants after surgery for CHD (Class I; Level 
of Evidence B).
2. Levosimendan can be useful to decrease 
LCOS after surgery for CHD (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence B).
Location-Specific Arrest Prevention and Response 
Measures
Precautions in the ICU
It can be very challenging to reestablish spontaneous 
circulation after cardiac arrest in children with heart 
disease. Data from the STS-CHSD from 2000 through 
2009 revealed an overall mortality rate after postopera-
tive cardiac arrest of 49.4%, ranging from 15.1% to 
62.3%, varying by age and complexity of the heart dis-
ease, compared with a 2.8% mortality rate in children 
who did not experience cardiac arrest after surgery.83 In 
the AHA GWTG-R Registry, children who experienced 
cardiac arrest after cardiac surgery had an in-hospital 
mortality rate of 63% (ie, only 37% survival to hospi-
tal discharge), and those with medical cardiac disease 
had an in-hospital mortality rate of 72% (ie, only 28% 
survival to hospital discharge).5 Thus, measures to avoid 
cardiac arrest are of utmost importance.
Prevention of cardiac arrest in an intensive care set-
ting requires optimal staffing with experienced person-
nel, appropriate monitoring, and an index of suspicion 
for underlying complications.14 Improving outcomes for 
patients at risk for arrest requires not only preventive 
strategies but also the capabilities to intervene with ap-
propriate goals across the continuum of conditions from 
prearrest to postresuscitation intensive care.488 In the 
STS-CHSD, the incidence of cardiac arrest was no lower 
among high-volume surgical centers (ie, >350 cases per 
year) than among low-volume surgical centers (ie, <150 
cases per year), but survival was higher among the high-
volume centers. This information supports the growing 
recognition that high-volume centers might be more suc-
cessful at “rescuing” patients once complications occur.83
Staffing. Staffing considerations include provider level 
of experience, nurse to patient ratios, presence of unit-
designated specialists, and level of physician coverage. 
In a recent survey, 50% of reported centers perform-
ing congenital heart surgery had a dedicated cardiac 
ICU,489 although such units have not yet documented 
improved outcomes.490 Descriptive studies have docu-
mented associations between lower patient to nurse 
ratios and increased nursing level of experience with 
improved outcomes in pediatric cardiac ICUs491 and 
improved resuscitation outcomes with more experi-
enced bedside nurses.492
In-hospital versus out-of-hospital attending physi-
cian coverage varies across cardiovascular surgical cen-
ters. Any differences between in-hospital versus out-of-
hospital attending physician coverage can be blunted 
if the physician is able to monitor many hemodynamic 
variables and review digital images of x-rays and scans 
off-site. In a retrospective case series, the presence of 
an attending physician at the bedside at a tertiary train-
ing program was not associated with increased resusci-
tation success; however, arrests on weekend days were 
associated with worse outcome.492 Multi-institutional 
nursing survey data demonstrated significant improve-
ment in hospital survival after pediatric heart surgery 
when an experienced critical care nurse provided the 
patient care.493 Similarly, nursing survey data linked to 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e733
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
STS data revealed that higher levels of nursing educa-
tion and experience were significantly associated with 
fewer complications.494
Monitoring.
Brain Natriuretic Peptide. The concentration of brain 
natriuretic peptide is monitored clinically in adults to 
trend heart failure severity and predict death.495 Serum 
brain natriuretic peptide can also be used to determine 
the impact on the myocardium of acute events such as 
endotracheal extubation,496 weaning of inotropic sup-
port, and recovery during mechanical circulatory sup-
port.497 In some patient populations, such as neonates 
after the stage 1 Norwood palliation, trends in post-
operative brain natriuretic peptide levels are predictive 
of outcome.498 Although brain natriuretic peptide con-
centration alone does not predict an impending cardiac 
arrest, an acute increase or upward trend can suggest 
the need to alter management, such as increasing ino-
tropic support or initiating mechanical ventilation or 
mechanical circulatory support, as appropriate.
Lactate. Lactate accumulates from anaerobic metabo-
lism when there is inadequate SBF and Do2 to the 
tissues. An elevated serum lactate has prognostic sig-
nificance when the serum lactate rises in the presence of 
a larger base deficit and metabolic acidosis.499 In 2 case 
series, survival among children with elevated serum lac-
tate after cardiovascular surgery was lower than survival 
among children in whom the serum lactate was not ele-
vated.500,501 However, the reported absolute levels and 
the rate of rise of lactate502 that predicted poor outcome, 
including cardiac arrest or need for ECLS, varied among 
the reported studies. In single-institution case series, a 
pattern of rising lactate, worsening metabolic acidosis, 
and longer time that the lactate remained elevated have 
been associated with a higher risk of adverse outcomes, 
including the need for ECLS and cardiac arrest.503,504
Mixed Svo2. Despite the use of critical postoperative 
monitoring, identification of subtle decreases in sys-
temic Do2 or early LCOS is difficult. The mixed Svo2 can 
be used to assess for changes in systemic Do2, oxygen 
consumption, or both. A true mixed venous oxygen 
sample can only be obtained in the pulmonary artery 
in patients with a structurally normal heart with no 
left-to-right intracardiac shunts. Saturation of systemic 
venous blood, sampled preferably from the SVC33,505,506 
or, alternatively, the IVC, can be used as a surrogate for 
the mixed Svo2.44 Monitoring of the Svo2 can be accom-
plished with periodic sampling or use of a continuous 
monitor.18,19,21,35,47,507
The Svo2 reflects the balance between Do2 and oxy-
gen utilization (ie, oxygen supply-demand ratio).33 An 
increase in the Svo2 can reflect improvement in systemic 
Do2, a reduction in oxygen consumption, or both. Con-
tinuous Svo2 monitoring, as part of a bundle of goal-di-
rected therapy, has been shown in a randomized clinical 
trial of pediatric patients with sepsis to improve sur-
vival.508,509 The Svo2 can be used as a target biomarker 
for intervention to optimize systemic Do2 and improve 
outcome.34,94
AVo2D, the difference between the systemic arterial 
oxygen saturation and Svo2, is a function of cardiac out-
put, oxygen carrying capacity, and oxygen consump-
tion. In patients with arterial oxygen desaturation, the 
AVo2D can help distinguish intracardiac mixing, com-
promised alveolar oxygenation, and low cardiac output. 
When oxygen carrying capacity and cardiac output are 
adequate, the Svo2 will be ≈25% to 30% lower than 
the Sao2, indicating that systemic Do2 is adequate. A 
larger AVo2D (ie, >30% difference between the Svo2 
and the Sao2) indicates a fall in cardiac output and Do2 
to the tissues, with resulting increase in tissue oxygen 
extraction.
A low Svo2 after the stage 1 Norwood palliation is 
predictive of worsening outcome, including worse neu-
rodevelopmental performance49 and need for ECLS.35 
Increasing AVo2D reflects worsening Do2 or increased 
oxygen consumption (or both), and the Svo2 and AVo2D 
provide gauges of the need for and efficacy of thera-
pies such as inotropic and vasoactive agents, sedation/
analgesia and neuromuscular blockade, mechanical 
ventilation, and temperature control. An increasing 
AVo2D in the face of maximum medical management 
can be an indication for ECLS to avoid cardiac arrest. 
For additional information, please see Assessment of 
Systemic Oxygen Balance.
Near-Infrared Spectroscopy. NIRS provides a noninva-
sive continuous estimation of venous-weighted oxygen 
saturation in different regions of the body. Typically, 
2 probes are used to provide cerebral and somatic 
(splanchnic, renal) estimates of oxygenation, reflecting 
circulations with intense flow-metabolism coupling and 
sympathetic controls, respectively.36 The value recorded 
from the somatic site is typically higher than that 
recorded from the head. With development of shock, 
there is a shift of blood flow from the splanchnic and 
somatic circulations to preserve cerebral blood flow. 
This physiological response to shock is reflected in the 
NIRS data by a drop in somatic oxygen saturation com-
pared with the cerebral values.
NIRS technology is less invasive than direct Svo2 
measurement, and it can be used in non-ICU set-
tings and during dynamic conditions, allowing assess-
ment of venous oxygen status during physiological 
or hemodynamic stress.510–513 In combination with 
pulse oximetry, a noninvasive estimate of AVo2D is 
possible. With noninvasive estimates of arterial and 
venous saturation, changes in complex cardiovascu-
lar physiology can be decoded, including changes in 
shunt magnitude and direction and the distribution 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e734
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
of cardiac output.36,78 Although controversy remains 
as to the predictive value of NIRS to direct clinical 
care,43,51,514 it has been shown to correlate with serum 
lactate40 and Svo2.38,515,516 Prolonged cerebral NIRS de-
saturation after cardiopulmonary bypass is associated 
with worse neurological outcome in single-ventricle 
patients.48,517,518 Low renal/somatic NIRS is associated 
with renal dysfunction,519,520 metabolic acidosis,38,44 
and a range of poor outcomes, including need for 
CPR and ECLS.47,51,78 Although more evidence exists 
for the clinical utility of NIRS than is available for most 
other monitoring devices, its use is not universal.23 
However, consensus assessment supports its use as 
safe and effective.43
Arterial Blood Gas, Point-of-Care Testing. Rapid arte-
rial blood gas analysis is important for patients with 
marginal hemodynamic status and those with acute 
changes in clinical status. Current bedside point-of-
care testing systems can provide immediate, reliable 
arterial blood gas analysis and electrolyte, lactate, and 
hemoglobin concentrations.521,522 Although intuitive, 
there are no data showing that more rapid availabil-
ity of laboratory results is associated with improved 
outcomes.
On-Unit Chest Radiograph. On-unit chest radiography 
 
has become a current standard of care. It includes rapid 
technician response, immediate viewing of the radio-
graph, and wireless radiologist interpretation. This 
immediate access to interpreted radiographs is impor-
tant for the care of the patient with acute or rapidly 
worsening cardiorespiratory function and can be very 
valuable to confirm appropriate device placement and 
to assess for abnormal fluid or air collections.
On-Unit Echocardiography. Echocardiography is invaluable 
 
in the pediatric and neonatal intensive care settings.523 
In addition to evaluation of CHD, echocardiography 
enables evaluation of systolic and diastolic function, 
estimation of PAP
, evaluation of volume status and val-
var insufficiency, and assessment for pericardial fluid or 
clot. Targeted echocardiography performed by noncar-
diologists in the ICU and emergency department can 
be useful to evaluate hemodynamic status, but in the 
presence of underlying cardiac pathology, input from 
a pediatric cardiologist is strongly recommended.524,525
Echocardiography for emergent or urgent use re-
quires on-unit equipment and acquisition and interpre-
tation of images. Anticipation of patient deterioration 
and close patient monitoring can transition an emer-
gent echocardiogram to an urgent echocardiogram. Im-
portant reasons to perform an urgent echocardiogram 
include the need to evaluate ductal patency, residual 
postoperative lesions, ventricular function, valvar insuf-
ficiency, PAP estimate, effusions (pericardial or pleural), 
and atrial septal position after ECLS cannulation. Accu-
rate identification of the pathogenesis of hemodynamic 
compromise can guide management to avoid clinical 
deterioration.526
Rapid-Deployment ECLS. Rapid-deployment ECLS can 
be used to prevent cardiac arrest when a patient’s 
clinical condition continues to worsen despite maximal 
medical therapy. Rapid deployment is also used to pro-
vide ECPR if cardiac arrest does develop. Small-volume 
circuits require only saline prime, whereas larger-volume 
circuits require blood prime. With the exception of iso-
lated hypoxemia, venoarterial ECLS is usually required. 
(See ECLS and ECPR section under the Mechanical 
Support heading.)
ECLS has been shown to be useful in supporting pa-
tients with complex CHD and respiratory failure caused 
by viral respiratory infections and cardiac dysfunction 
related to arrhythmias.527–530 Such support can prevent 
deterioration to cardiac arrest.
Detection and Management of Complications 
After Cardiac Surgery.
Pericardial Tamponade. Pericardial effusions occur com-
monly after cardiac surgery, either early because of 
residual bleeding or as a complication of transthoracic 
intracardiac line displacement, or later because of 
postpericardiotomy syndrome. Pericardial effusions can 
be benign or hemodynamically significant, and their 
hemodynamic significance is not always related to the 
size of the effusion or presence of atrial or RV diastolic 
collapse. Classic signs of cardiac tamponade include 
tachycardia, hypotension, and pulsus paradoxus; 
however, such classic signs can be absent or difficult to 
detect in the presence of LCOS. The sensitivity of the 
echocardiographic right atrial and RV diastolic collapse 
is variable531; however, even moderate effusions can add 
to the instability of a patient with already compromised 
hemodynamics (eg, myocardial dysfunction, arrhythmia, 
single-ventricle physiology). Access to emergent inter-
preted imaging for pericardial effusion is important. This 
can be in the form of on-unit echocardiogram or ultra-
sound. In the postoperative patient, pericardial tam-
ponade can also occur with the accumulation of clot, 
which is more difficult to interpret by echocardiogram 
than fluid but should be suspected in the presence of 
tamponade physiology. Tamponade physiology, even in 
the absence of pericardial fluid by echocardiogram, war-
rants sternal reopening or exploration.
Provision of positive-pressure ventilation and pro-
cedural sedation and analgesia for pericardiocentesis 
can precipitate cardiac arrest, particularly in neonates 
and infants. Positive-pressure ventilation reduces pre-
load to the RV, further contributing to the tamponade 
physiology; as a result, it should be administered with 
knowledge of its potential downside. Ketamine is of-
ten preferred because it has a minimal effect on blood 
pressure532 and allows patients to continue to breathe 
spontaneously. Neurohumoral mechanisms that main-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e735
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
tain contractility and SVR can be reduced by all sedative-
hypnotic medications,533 and anticipatory administration 
of fluid to increase preload and epinephrine to increase 
circulating catecholamine can be helpful to prevent or 
treat deterioration in circulatory function during seda-
tion and respiratory support.3,4,534
Arrhythmias. Arrhythmia can be an undetected cause 
of refractory low cardiac output. If not identified and 
treated, chronic arrhythmia can result in myocardial 
dysfunction. Arrhythmias that can continue undetected 
include ectopic atrial tachycardia and atrial flutter (fixed 
heart rate of 150 to 160 beats per minute if 2:1 block). 
For further detail, see section on Arrhythmias.
Low Cardiac Output Syndrome. LCOS is predictable 
after surgery for CHD,472 particularly in neonates, but it 
can also occur in the setting of progressive heart failure. 
Goal-directed treatment including assessment of mixed 
Svo2 can guide intervention and improve end-organ 
function and clinical outcome.35 It is important to rule 
out residual anatomic lesions or coronary insufficiency 
as the cause of postoperative LCOS. (See section on 
Low Cardiac Output Syndrome).
Pulmonary and Airway Complications. Inadequate ven-
tilation and oxygenation can be caused by parenchy-
mal lung disease, mainstem intubation, pneumothorax, 
hemothorax, chylothorax, or significant pleural effu-
sion. If untreated, particularly in neonates with com-
promised myocardial function, inadequate oxygenation 
and ventilation can lead to bradycardia and cardiac 
arrest. On-unit chest radiograph with immediate view-
ing is optimal, and arterial blood gas analysis will com-
plement bedside assessment of airway and ventilation.
In neonates and infants, paralysis of the diaphragm 
from inadvertent phrenic nerve injury during cardiac sur-
gery can prevent weaning from positive-pressure venti-
lation. Although eventual recovery of function should 
be anticipated, intervention with surgical plication of 
the diaphragm might be needed to facilitate successful 
extubation. Injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve and 
paresis of a vocal cord can compromise the ability to 
protect the airway and clear pulmonary secretions.
Pulmonary Hypertension. Pulmonary hypertensive 
crises arise from an acute increase in PVR and PAPs 
resulting in RV distension and dysfunction, which com-
promises LV filling and contractility and systemic car-
diac output. Pulmonary hypertensive crises are difficult 
to reverse; thus, it is critical to prevent such crises in 
at-risk patients.
For patients with known PAH, it is important to 
understand the underlying RV function; presence or 
absence of an atrial, ventricular, or aortic level shunt; 
and known reactivity to oxygen or iNO. In addition to 
common triggers of hypoxia and acidosis, postopera-
tive pulmonary hypertensive crises can be associated 
with inflammation (eg, lung injury, surgical trauma, 
post cardiopulmonary bypass), and they can also be 
triggered by fever, infection, pain, anxiety, tracheal 
suctioning, dehydration, or rebound when reducing 
or discontinuing pulmonary vasodilators. Preemptive 
treatment with iNO, sedation/analgesia, and neuro-
muscular blockade may be indicated for some high-
risk PAH patients.
The goals of therapy to reduce the risk of pulmonary 
hypertensive crises include reducing triggering stimuli 
(ie, avoid and correct hypoxia and acidosis); administer-
ing sedation, analgesia, and neuromuscular blockade 
and minimizing stimulation and pain; and reducing RV 
afterload through the administration of inhaled pulmo-
nary vasodilators (eg, nitric oxide). Although acute hy-
perventilation is effective in lowering PVR,535 use of iNO 
is as effective as hyperventilation without its potentially 
undesirable systemic effects, including detrimental ef-
fects on cerebral blood flow.188 During a crisis, admin-
istration of systemic vasoconstrictors can also be con-
sidered. For further information, see Pulmonary Arterial 
Hypertension.
Precautions in the Step-Down Unit/Ward
Cardiac patients are typically transferred from the ICU 
when it is determined that they have reached a point 
of stability where they are less likely to have acute he-
modynamic or respiratory compromise or cardiac arrest. 
No universally accepted criteria are available to deter-
mine when a patient is ready to move from the ICU to a 
step-down unit or ward. Routine postoperative patient 
criteria might include recovery from postoperative myo-
cardial dysfunction (as evidenced by adequate perfusion 
after discontinuation of inotropic support), effective 
airway and ventilation without an oral or nasotracheal 
tube, and a stable cardiac rhythm. The interinstitutional 
strategies for management of cardiac patients in the 
nonintensive care environment are highly variable and 
determined by local expertise, healthcare provider ex-
perience, and other factors such as the hospital physical 
structure and bed space availability.
Monitoring on the step-down unit/ward is gener-
ally noninvasive and might include routine vital signs 
(measurement of temperature, heart rate, respiratory 
rate, and noninvasive blood pressure), as well as pulse 
oximetry and continuous ECG monitoring. Patients 
transferred to the step-down unit/ward should be con-
sidered sufficiently low-risk so that these strategies can 
reliably identify perturbations in cardiopulmonary sta-
tus. An early warning score designed specifically for 
and validated in hospitalized children with heart disease 
is now available.536
Home Monitoring
Although discharge from the hospital typically occurs 
when patients are at low risk for cardiac and respira-
tory events and have an established nutrition regimen, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e736
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
some patients with CHD, especially infants with single-
ventricle anatomy and shunt-dependent PBF, remain at 
risk for acute deterioration as a result of the intrinsic 
inefficiencies of the parallel circulation. For newborns 
after the stage 1 Norwood palliation, the reported in-
cidence of interstage mortality (ie, death between dis-
charge after the stage 1 Norwood and admission for 
superior CPA) is often as high as the hospital mortality 
after the stage 1 Norwood palliation itself, particularly 
if the infant was palliated with an MBTS.20,26
Relatively minor illnesses can result in elevation of 
SVR or hypovolemia with an increase in Qp:Qs and de-
creased systemic perfusion and Do2 to the tissues. In 
addition, there is the potential for a decrease in PBF 
attributable to neointimal proliferation in the systemic-
to–pulmonary artery shunt or increased somatic growth 
rendering the shunt relatively smaller and physiologi-
cally insufficient.
In single-center studies, close monitoring of patients, 
particularly those with HLHS, in the home setting has 
been associated with reduced mortality before creation 
of the superior CPA.537–541 These programs provided 
families with the following supplies and guidance: (1) 
pulse oximeter to monitor Sao2 and identify worsening 
cyanosis (this might identify a shunt problem) or in-
creased saturations (which might identify an early state 
of increased SVR); (2) a scale to determine daily weights 
to identify problems with growth, as well as evidence of 
acute dehydration; (3) a mechanism to record dietary in-
take; and (4) guidelines regarding contacting the referral 
center when vital signs are outside strict parameters. In 
these programs, patients not meeting guidelines were 
generally evaluated within 24 hours. In addition, par-
ents were typically contacted weekly to review data. To 
further assess the impact of home monitoring on single-
ventricle HLHS interstage mortality, the multicenter Na-
tional Pediatric Cardiology Quality Improvement Collab-
orative (NPC-QIC) adopted a home monitoring quality 
improvement project involving 52 pediatric cardiac sur-
gical centers and 1163 interstage infants between 2008 
and 2014. Assessment of baseline interstage monitoring 
of HLHS infants performed at the participating NPC-QIC 
sites revealed significant variation nationally.542 The key 
drivers that were deemed necessary to achieve a reduc-
tion in interstage mortality included engaging the par-
ents, improving care transitions at stage 1 Norwood dis-
charge, optimizing growth, and improving coordination 
among the care team and families.11 Multiple change 
strategies or activities in these areas were recommended 
for centers participating in the collaborative, including 
caregiver preparation during the Norwood hospitaliza-
tion; providing caregivers with a red flag action plan; 
establishing collaboration between the family, primary 
physician, cardiologist, and other team members; activi-
ties related to assessment and optimization of feeding 
and weight gain; standardization of assessments and 
action plans at clinic visits; and home monitoring during 
the interstage period of oxygen saturation and weight 
gain. Cumulative aggregate mortality between 2008 
and May 2013 in NPC-QIC centers was 9.5%, lower 
than published previously in single-center studies.11 
From June 2013 to August 2014, cumulative aggregate 
mortality was 5.3%, a relative reduction of 44%.11
Although a recent study543 analyzing NPC-QIC data 
from 2008 to 2012 did not find any association be-
tween home oxygen saturation or weight monitoring 
with either mortality or readmission, these data should 
be assessed with the following notable caveats. The 
analysis did not examine trends over time. Using sta-
tistical process control methodology, examination of 
interstage mortality rates over time within the NPC-QIC 
revealed no change in mortality rates initially (during 
the time period of the study by Oster et al544) but trends 
toward decreasing mortality within the collaborative 
more recently, beginning in 2013.11 Additionally, home 
monitoring was just 1 component of the overall efforts 
supported by the NPC-QIC (and individual institutions 
that have adopted these methods) and was intertwined 
with numerous other activities related to engaging 
families and the care team, as well as coordination and 
standardization of care. In addition, the group with no 
home monitoring (36 patients in the group with no 
oxygen saturation monitoring) was very small, which 
limited the study’s power and raised issues regarding 
generalizability, because this group reflected outcomes 
at no more than a handful of centers.
Gaps in Knowledge:
The existing published data regarding standard monitor-
ing and staffing in the pediatric ICU are limited to surveys. 
Criteria to enable comparisons among units are difficult to 
establish because there is significant interinstitutional prac-
tice pattern variation. Similarly, limited quantitative data 
exists pertaining to pediatric cardiac ICU complications.
Children with complex CHD, particularly neonates, 
have a high risk of early and late postoperative mor-
bidity and mortality. Evidence-based best practices to 
avoid and successfully manage these events have not 
yet been identified.
Recommendations: Location-Specific 
Arrest Prevention and Response 
Measures
1. Increased nursing experience can be effective 
to improve outcomes for pediatric patients 
after congenital heart surgery (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence B).
2. Rapid access to or in-unit blood gas, radio-
graph, echocardiogram, and ECLS can be 
beneficial to optimize patient outcome (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e737
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
3. Use of a home monitoring program (daily 
oxygen saturations, daily weights, diet 
record, and close communication with dis-
charging facility) to manage neonates and 
infants after the stage 1 Norwood palliation 
for HLHS during the interstage period may 
be considered to reduce interstage morbidity 
and mortality (Class IIb; Level of Evidence B).
Cardiac Arrest Phase
Onset
Pediatric cardiac arrest in general is most often asphyx-
ial/ischemic rather than arrhythmic, and it is typically 
associated with progression of shock or respiratory fail-
ure.3,4,292 In a review of in-hospital cardiac arrest from 
the GWTG-R Registry, ≈60% of the children with car-
diac arrest were already receiving mechanical ventila-
tion and nearly 40% were receiving vasopressors at the 
time of arrest.292 Data from the same registry revealed 
that nearly all cardiac surgical patients who had cardiac 
arrest had continuous ECG monitoring and vascular ac-
cess in place at the time of arrest, 74% were receiving 
mechanical ventilation, and 60% were receiving vaso-
active infusions.5
Cardiac arrest is 10 times more likely among children 
with CHD compared to critically ill children with noncardi-
ac medical or surgical problems.5,14,145 In the most recent 
data from the AHA GWTG-R Registry from 2000 to 2008, 
precipitating factors of cardiac arrest included hypoten-
sion or hypoperfusion (eg, LCOS or vasodilatory shock),5 
arrhythmias, and acute respiratory insufficiency. If low 
cardiac output is refractory to maximal medical manage-
ment, institution of ECLS should be considered before 
cardiac arrest occurs. Unless cardiac arrest is precipitated 
by a sudden arrhythmia, inadequate Do2 is likely to be 
present even before the arrest, adding to the ischemic 
insult of the arrest itself. Management of these children 
focuses on support of airway, ventilation, and perfusion 
to prevent the arrest.
When cardiac arrest develops, immediate provision 
of high-quality CPR is required. Simultaneously, pro-
viders must search for reversible or treatable causes of 
arrest, such as LCOS, cardiac tamponade, closure of a 
ductus arteriosus, acute pulmonary hypertensive crisis, 
or acute occlusion of a systemic-to–pulmonary artery 
shunt or a conduit. If modification of medications (eg, 
vasoactive drugs, prostaglandins), inspired oxygen con-
centration, iNO, or mechanical ventilation support pre-
ceded the arrest, providers must evaluate the effect of 
the modification on cardiac output.4
Bradycardia often precedes pediatric cardiac arrest 
and is typically caused by hypoxia or hypotension. The 
heart rate threshold for initiation of chest compression 
varies with the clinical scenario and the child’s baseline 
heart rate. For the monitored child with bradycardia 
and pulses, the decision to initiate chest compressions 
requires consideration of blood pressure, heart rate, 
and timely access to medications, as well as consider-
ation of the risk (in the early postoperative period) of 
compressions. For the seriously ill child, a heart rate of 
<60 beats per minute with signs of poor perfusion de-
spite adequate ventilation with oxygen is a reasonable 
threshold indication for initiation of chest compressions 
(with ventilation). Initiation of chest compressions with 
ventilation before development of cardiac arrest might 
explain the better survival (40.7%) reported from the 
National Registry of CPR among 1353 children who re-
ceived CPR for in-hospital bradycardia with pulses and 
poor perfusion compared with the 24.5% survival rate 
among 1489 children who received CPR only after de-
velopment of asystole/pulseless electrical activity cardiac 
arrest.292,545 The combination of chest compressions with 
the patient’s intrinsic cardiac output can maintain critical 
blood flow and assist delivery of life-saving medications.
The most common terminal rhythm in pediatric car-
diac arrest is brady-asystole,292 and asystole and pulse-
less electrical activity were the most common terminal 
rhythms in children with both surgical and medical car-
diac disease.5 Prompt initiation of high-quality CPR with 
administration of oxygen is essential to restore effective 
Do2 and limit the ischemic insult.
In the GWTG-R Registry, children with surgical or 
medical cardiac disease were much more likely than 
children with no cardiac disease to demonstrate VF or 
pulseless VT as a terminal rhythm of cardiac arrest.5 VF 
or pulseless VT (see Arrhythmias section) should raise 
suspicion of myocardial ischemia, or in the specific ex-
ample of torsade de pointes, should raise suspicion of 
LQTS, either congenital or acquired. In such patients, 
prompt recognition of the degenerating rhythm and 
provision of high-quality CPR with rapid defibrillation 
are of utmost importance.292,293 (See Cardioversion and 
Defibrillation During Resuscitation.)
Gaps in Knowledge
Cardiac arrest in children with cardiac disease can be 
somewhat categorized by situation, although the pri-
mary cause of the arrest may be unknown. More data 
are needed regarding specific alterations (if any) that 
may be necessary in basic or advanced life support to 
improve survival of pediatric patients with CHD, open 
sternum, long QT, fulminant myocarditis, pulmonary 
hypertension, arrhythmia, and postoperative complica-
tions, particularly LCOS and respiratory insufficiency.
Recommendations: Cardiac Arrest  
Phase – Onset
1. For children with asystole or pulseless electri-
cal activity, prompt initiation of high-quality 
CPR is essential, and providers must search 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e738
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
for and treat any reversible causes (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C).
2. For children with VF or pulseless VT, high-
quality CPR and prompt defibrillation are 
indicated (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Cardiac Arrest and CPR
CPR provided to a patient with a structurally normal 
heart delivers ≈10% to 30% of normal blood flow to 
the heart and 30% to 40% of normal blood flow to 
the brain.6,546,547 As a result, high-quality CPR is vital to 
the success of any resuscitation attempt,6 to maintain 
blood flow and Do2. There are no data to support modi-
fication of the AHA-recommended pediatric CPR skills 
for children with CHD, although unique aspects of the 
child’s anatomy and condition in the early postopera-
tive period (eg, open sternum, fresh sutures lines, an-
terior conduit) could compromise the effectiveness of 
chest compressions. Appropriate rescuer hand position 
is critical to create blood flow during compressions. In 
addition, the components of high-quality CPR recom-
mended by the AHA are also required to optimize blood 
flow: adequate compression rate, adequate compres-
sion depth, allowing full chest recoil after each com-
pression, minimizing interruptions in compressions, and 
avoiding excessive ventilation.84
The 2-finger compression technique is used for the 
single rescuer of the newborn or infant; the 2 fin-
gers compress the lower third of the sternum in the 
newborn and just below the intermammary line in 
the infant.546,548 The preferred compression technique 
for 2-rescuer CPR for newborns and infants is the 
2-thumb, encircling hands technique, with thumbs 
together compressing the lower third of the sternum 
and the fingers encircling the infant’s thorax. This 
compression technique provides better coronary ar-
tery perfusion pressure and results in improved depth 
of compression, and it can generate higher aortic sys-
tolic and diastolic pressures than the 2-finger tech-
nique.549,550 For children, rescuers should use the heel 
of 1 or 2 hands to compress over the lower half of the 
sternum, avoiding the xyphoid.546
A compression rate of at least 100 per minute was 
recommended in the 2010 AHA pediatric basic life sup-
port guidelines.546 A recent study of adult out-of-hospi-
tal resuscitation suggested that the optimum compres-
sion rate might be 100 to 120 per minute,551 and this 
range of compression rate has been endorsed in the 
2013 AHA “Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Quality” 
article6 and recommended in the 2015 pediatric basic 
life support guidelines update.84 There is no evidence 
to identify an optimum compression rate for infants 
and children, but in the absence of direct information, 
a compression rate of 100 to 120 per minute is reason-
able for infants and children.
Compressions are thought to generate blood flow 
during resuscitation by compressing the heart between 
the sternum and vertebral column (so-called cardiac 
pump mechanism) and by creating intrathoracic-to-
extrathoracic pressure gradients (the so-called thoracic 
pump mechanism); both mechanisms have been dem-
onstrated during CPR using echocardiography in adult 
patients,552–554 although comparable pediatric clinical 
data have not been published.
Recommendations for chest compression depth and 
technique vary with the size of the infant and child. 
All compressions in infants and children (beyond the 
newborn period) should be to a depth of at least one-
third the depth of the chest. This depth of compres-
sion will correspond to a depth of ≈1.5 inches (4 cm) 
in infants beyond the newborn period and ≈2 inches 
(5 cm) in children.546,555 Once the child has signs of pu-
berty, the adult compression depth of at least 2 inches 
(5 cm) but no more than 2.4 inches (6 cm) can be used. 
It is important to allow for full chest recoil after each 
compression, so the heart can refill with blood.556,557 
Incomplete recoil occurs when the rescuer leans on 
the chest and fails to allow the chest to reexpand af-
ter each compression. Leaning is more likely if the res-
cuer is fatigued and can be minimized by lifting the 
fingers or hand(s) between compressions. Inadequate 
recoil maintains high intrathoracic and right atrial pres-
sure, so it will reduce coronary perfusion pressure (aor-
tic end-diastolic pressure minus right atrial pressure), 
blood flow through the heart, venous return to the 
heart, and blood flow generated by the next com-
pression. Although there are no human data linking 
inadequate recoil with reduced survival, in data from 
a piglet model,558 a pediatric model,559 and hemody-
namic studies,556 inadequate recoil reduced coronary 
and cerebral perfusion pressure, cardiac output/index, 
and LV myocardial blood flow.
Minimizing interruptions to compressions is vital to 
a successful resuscitation.557,560 Strategies to minimize 
interruptions include using the recommended compres-
sion to ventilation ratio (15 to 2 for infants and children 
with ≥2 rescuers when no advanced airway is in place, 
and once an advanced airway is in place, continuous 
chest compressions with asynchronous breaths at a rate 
of 10 breaths per minute) and minimizing interruptions 
for airway placement, rhythm checks, shocks, and ECLS 
cannulation.6 The 2013 AHA CPR quality statement rec-
ommends compressions be performed at a minimum 
of 60% with a target of 80% of the total resuscitation 
time for patients of all ages.6
Excessive ventilation during resuscitation can be 
harmful and should be avoided. Positive-pressure ven-
tilation increases intrathoracic pressure and impedes 
venous return. During CPR with an advanced airway 
in place, as noted above, compressions are delivered 
continuously at a rate of 100 to 120 per minute, and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e739
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
ventilation is delivered asynchronously (with an attempt 
to deliver breaths between compressions) at a rate of 
10 breaths per minute (or 1 breath every 6 seconds).
Special Considerations for the Delivery Room
There are important differences between priorities for 
resuscitation of premature newborns with lung disease 
and priorities for resuscitation of newborns with CHD. 
For the newborn with the structurally normal heart, the 
most common reason for resuscitation is respiratory fail-
ure, so establishment of an adequate airway and ven-
tilation with oxygen are priorities. In the unlikely event 
that compressions are required, a total of 90 compres-
sions and 30 breaths (120 events) are delivered each 
minute, ensuring adequate balance of cardiac output 
and ventilation.548
For the newborn with a prenatal diagnosis of CHD, 
resuscitation in the delivery room is planned to target 
immediate problems created by the heart lesion. Le-
sions likely to cause inadequate oxygenation and venti-
lation include severe forms of TOF with absent pulmo-
nary valve, and Ebstein anomaly of the tricuspid valve. 
Patients with mitral atresia and an intact atrial septum 
will present with immediate hemodynamic instability. 
Patients with TGA and an intact atrial septum will be 
profoundly cyanotic and hypoxemic. The latter 2 le-
sions will require transcatheter or surgical intervention 
for stabilization; in the absence of a prenatal diagno-
sis and preplanned intervention, survival is poor. New-
borns with obstructed TAPVC or TGA with restrictive 
atrial septum will likely require mechanical ventilation 
and hemodynamic support, rapid diagnosis (if not al-
ready known), and prompt intervention but are unlikely 
to require CPR. In general, newborns with a prenatal 
diagnosis of ductal-dependent heart disease will be 
stable in the delivery room with initiation of low-dose 
PGE1 infusion (0.01 μg·kg−1·min−1).
Special Considerations for the Immediate  
Postoperative Patient
The vast majority of patients after cardiac surgery will 
have an arterial and a CVP catheter with continuous 
waveform display that will enable immediate assess-
ment of the effectiveness of compressions and any 
need for modifications in resuscitation techniques or 
therapies. Use of hemodynamic monitoring to opti-
mize resuscitation technique enables estimation of 
coronary perfusion pressure (aortic relaxation/diastolic 
pressure−right atrial pressure/CVP)86 and tailoring of 
type of compression, location, and depth to optimize 
coronary perfusion pressure.
Both the cardiac pump and thoracic pump mecha-
nisms can be compromised in the patient with CHD. 
The cardiac pump mechanism can be compromised by 
the presence of an anterior conduit through decreased 
direct compression of the RV body. In the setting of se-
vere valvar insufficiency, there can be decreased PBF or 
SBF with each chest compression. PBF can be limited in 
the presence of an MBTS or during a pulmonary hyper-
tensive crisis.
It is important to develop a resuscitation strategy for 
each postoperative patient before an arrest occurs. This 
strategy includes optimal hand position for chest com-
pressions and planned cannulation site for ECLS. Al-
though major thoracic and myocardial injuries are rare 
in CPR-treated pediatric and adult patients, occurring in 
3% and 7% of those undergoing CPR, respectively, the 
immediate postoperative period after sternotomy and 
cardiotomy in the pediatric patient may carry greater 
risk. Although there are no data assessing the absolute 
risk from direct chest compressions after pediatric car-
diac surgery, teams resuscitating children with cardiac 
disease should note the potential risk of myocardial or 
thoracic injury, bleeding, or dehiscence of intracardiac 
repairs.561,562 In patients with an open sternum, exter-
nal chest compressions are generally less effective than 
open-chest cardiac massage.
Although open-chest (direct) cardiac massage is fre-
quently performed in infants and children with open 
sternums, there are no data on which to base recom-
mendations regarding technique. Direct cardiac mas-
sage should ideally be undertaken with oversight of 
the surgical team. A sterile field must be maintained. 
Compressions of the ventricle or ventricles should avoid 
suture lines and be gentle to avoid unnecessary direct 
damage to the myocardium. An arterial pressure moni-
tor will document the effectiveness of compressions 
during open-chest massage.86
Monitoring During CPR
The child’s arterial pressure waveform provides useful 
feedback about the adequacy of compressions and 
chest recoil. The waveform not only provides the sys-
tolic (compression) and diastolic (relaxation) pressures, 
but the width of the waveform enables assessment 
of the stroke volume. In a study of adult patients dur-
ing CPR, a coronary perfusion pressure of at least 15 
mm 
Hg was required for ROSC, and survival increased if 
the coronary perfusion pressure was >20 mm 
Hg.563 In 
adults, the 2013 CPR quality statement6 recommends 
maintaining the aortic diastolic pressure (between com-
pressions) above 25 mm 
Hg and targeting a coronary 
perfusion pressure >20 mm 
Hg. There is insufficient evi-
dence to recommend coronary perfusion pressure goals 
for infants and children, although expert consensus is 
that it is reasonable to attempt to maintain the coro-
nary perfusion pressure above 20 mm 
Hg.6 Early data 
in adults have shown that higher saturations by NIRS 
monitoring during CPR are associated with increased 
likelihood of ROSC.564,565
In patients with a structurally normal heart, con-
tinuous waveform capnography monitoring of ETco2 
can provide useful information about PBF and hence 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e740
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
the effectiveness of chest compressions. In these pa-
tients, if the ETco2 remains low (eg, ≤10–15 mm 
Hg), it 
is reasonable for providers to attempt to optimize CPR 
technique to improve the ETco2. In patients with shunt-
dependent PBF or significant pulmonary insufficiency, 
ETco2 might underestimate systemic cardiac output, so 
establishment of target threshold ETco2 is challenging. 
There are insufficient data to use the ETco2 as a prog-
nostic indicator in infants and children.4
Cardioversion and Defibrillation During Resuscitation
Children with CHD frequently require cardioversion for 
acute treatment of arrhythmias, most commonly atrial 
flutter or atrial fibrillation. They might also require defi-
brillation for treatment of VF or pulseless VT. Cardiover-
sion or defibrillation can be performed on patients with 
internal pacemakers and patients on ECLS.
Sedation for Cardioversion. In the prearrest setting, 
adequate sedation and analgesia can be achieved with 
short-acting intravenous agents. Because the child with 
CHD may be more sensitive to the vasodilatory effects 
of these drugs, dose adjustment may be required. 
Performing cardioversion with the assistance of anes-
thesiologist or intensivist results in the safest experience 
for the child; however, when cardiovascular collapse is 
present or imminent, cardioversion can be performed 
without sedation or analgesia.
Pad Position and Size. The general techniques for car-
dioversion and defibrillation in children with CHD do not 
differ from general recommendations for these procedures 
in infants and children without CHD.4 Handheld paddles 
or self-adhesive pads can be used. Anterior-posterior or 
anterior-lateral pad position may be appropriate; provid-
ers should follow the defibrillator manufacturer’s recom-
mendations. If the child has dextrocardia, defibrillator 
pads should be placed over the right side of the chest 
to keep the heart between the defibrillation pads. If the 
child’s chest is small, placing the pads in the anterior pos-
terior position will prevent overlap. No difference in car-
dioversion success has been reported with various pad 
positions.415 For patients with an open sternum, paddle 
and pad positions may need to be modified, or internal 
paddles can be used under sterile conditions.
Energy Doses for Cardioversion and Defibrillation. 
Rapid direct-current cardioversion or defibrillation is 
indicated for tachyarrhythmia (eg, cardioversion for 
atrial flutter or atrial fibrillation; defibrillation for VF 
or pulseless VT) that results in hemodynamic instability 
(eg, hypotension, acutely altered mental status, signs 
of shock). The energy must be delivered to the myo-
cardium, and placement of the pads may need to be 
modified in special circumstances, such as for patients 
with an implanted pacemaker or dextrocardia. For 
cardioversion of SVT or VT/wide-complex tachycardia 
with a pulse, an initial energy dose of 0.5 to 1 J/kg 
can be effective. This low-dose shock is delivered in 
a synchronized mode to avoid precipitating VF. If the 
initial cardioversion dose is not effective, the dose is 
increased to 2 J/kg and again delivered in a synchro-
nized mode.
For VF/pulseless VT, an initial dose of 2 to 4 J/kg is 
acceptable, although for ease of teaching, a dose of 2 
J/kg can be considered. For subsequent doses, it is rea-
sonable to use 4 J/kg, and higher doses can be consid-
ered, although the dose should not exceed 10 J/kg.3,4 
In the setting of an open sternum and internal paddles, 
the adult dose for defibrillation is 10 to 20 J,415,566 and 
0.6 to 0.7 J/kg in children.
Integration of Attempted Defibrillation With 
CPR. Analysis of CPR process recordings from 815 
adult out-of-hospital resuscitations in the Resuscitation 
Outcomes Consortium cardiac arrest registry docu-
mented a strong relationship between short preshock 
and perishock pauses and shock success, including 
survival to hospital discharge. The preshock pause is 
the interval between the last chest compression and 
shock delivery. The perishock pause is the sum of the 
preshock pause and the interval between shock deliv-
ery and the next (postshock) chest compression. Adult 
patients with preshock pauses of 20 seconds or lon-
ger and those with perishock pauses of 40 seconds or 
longer were approximately half as likely to survive to 
hospital discharge as patients who had shorter pauses. 
Survival fell by ≈18% for every 5-second increase in pre-
shock pause and by ≈14% for every 5-second increase 
in perishock pause.567 Shortening these pauses by even 
5 seconds was associated with substantial improve-
ment in survival. Although this study has not been rep-
licated in pediatric patients, it is likely that the effect 
of prolonged pauses in compressions is detrimental 
to survival in children. In animal models, VF increases 
myocardial oxygen consumption by 70%.568 Animals 
allowed to fibrillate for 10 minutes were more likely 
to have ROSC if they received CPR (with or without 
epinephrine) before defibrillation compared with those 
who received an immediate shock.569 CPR increased the 
amplitude of fibrillation and was associated with more 
successful defibrillation. In the fibrillating heart, CPR 
improves myocardial creatine phosphate levels, reflect-
ing an improved cardiac energy state.568 The improved 
amplitude of fibrillation during CPR is likely related to 
an improved cardiac energy state, in part attributable 
to improved myocardial Do2; the improved energy state 
just before shock delivery is likely to improve shock 
success. To minimize preshock and perishock pauses, 
the resuscitation team must carefully integrate high-
quality CPR and shock delivery. This requires practice, 
and analysis of these pauses should be part of the 
monitoring of resuscitation quality and postresuscita-
tion debriefing.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e741
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Pacing
Several clinical trials have examined the role of transcu-
taneous cardiac pacing for out-of-hospital resuscitation 
for children and adults with bradycardia/asystole. Sher-
bino et al570 reviewed the experience of 34 of these tri-
als in a meta-analysis of the literature. To date, no study 
has shown improved outcomes of cardiac arrest in re-
sponse to pacing332,571–580; however, no study specifically 
examined pacing in the resuscitation of patients with 
CHD. For patients with a perfusing rhythm and symp-
tomatic heart block or sinus node dysfunction, pacing 
is indicated (see Arrhythmias section).
Intubation and Airway Management
During the early postoperative period, an advanced air-
way is often in place. If the child in cardiac arrest has no 
invasive airway in place, the decision to intubate and 
the timing of intubation must be considered carefully. 
Initially, effective ventilation can be accomplished with 
bag and mask. For a patient with difficult mask venti-
lation, placement of an oral airway, placement of the 
endotracheal tube in the nasopharyngeal space with a 
closed mouth, or placement of a laryngeal mask airway 
can permit assisted ventilation and oxygenation with-
out tracheal intubation. Placement of a gastric tube to 
decompress the stomach should be considered both to 
facilitate ventilation and to reduce the risk of regurgita-
tion, and the tube can be left in place during laryngos-
copy.581 If effective oxygenation and ventilation cannot 
be achieved, insertion of an advanced airway is indi-
cated. Endotracheal intubation in infants and children 
requires special training and ongoing experience, and 
special expertise is required for intubation during CPR to 
minimize interruptions in chest compressions (see Prin-
ciples of Intubation, Airway Management, and Respira-
tory Support). In children with no intracardiac or great 
vessel shunt, changes in ETco2 during CPR can be a di-
rect indication of changes in PBF and cardiac output.66–70
Vascular Access
There are no published data to suggest that the AHA 
PALS vascular access guidelines should be modified for 
children with heart disease who require resuscitation. 
Administration of resuscitation drugs through an in-
dwelling central venous catheter is preferred if one is 
in place. If vascular access is not in place at the time 
of arrest, the AHA PALS 2010 guidelines recommend 
the use of intraosseous or peripheral venous access (if 
it can be placed rapidly) for the initial route of vascular 
access during resuscitation.3,4 The intraosseous route 
of administration has been shown to be safe, rapidly 
achievable, and comparable to administration of medi-
cations using an intravenous route.
Placement of central venous access is not generally 
recommended as the initial vascular access for admin-
istration of medications during resuscitation, unless 
experienced providers are readily available to place 
the catheter quickly and with minimal complications. 
Central venous access can be helpful for hemodynamic 
monitoring and administration of vasoactive medica-
tions. A long central venous catheter can contribute to 
increased resistance to rapid fluid or drug administra-
tion. Children with heart disease, especially those with 
CHD, can have occlusion of central veins and arteries 
from prior procedures, or they may have anomalies of 
the central venous system, including bilateral SVC. In-
formation about occluded vessels must be documented 
so it is readily available to the resuscitation team to pre-
vent delay in obtaining vascular access. Current ease 
and sophistication of intraosseous access provides ex-
cellent vascular access and minimizes the need for en-
dotracheal drug delivery.3,4
Pharmacological Therapy
For patients receiving CPR in the hospital, age and size, 
anatomy, and physiology are known even if the imme-
diate cause of the arrest is uncertain. Effective medica-
tion delivery requires cardiac output (blood flow) and 
delivery near the central arteries or veins. During cardi-
ac arrest, circulation is created by high-quality CPR, and 
high-quality chest compressions are necessary to circu-
late any drugs administered. Medication administration 
can be distant from the site of effect (eg, with peripheral 
intravenous or intraosseous catheters) or at the site of 
effect (eg, central venous or intracardiac catheters). To 
date, there have been no published studies to establish 
the optimal timing and doses of resuscitation drugs in 
any pediatric population. As a result, providers should 
follow the AHA PALS CPR and Emergency Cardiac Care 
algorithms relative to drug administration and dosing.
For shock-refractory VF/pulseless VT, intravenous 
epinephrine can be administered (0.01 mg/kg, or 0.1 
mL of the 0.1 mg/mL concentration; maximum 1 mg) 
every 3 to 5 minutes.3,4 For recurrent VF/pulseless VT in 
the absence of LQTS, either amiodarone (5 mg/kg IV/IO 
bolus up to a maximum dose of 15 mg/kg) or lidocaine 
(1 mg/kg) can be administered. The recommendations 
for the use of amiodarone are extrapolated from adult 
studies of prehospital VF/pulseless VT cardiac arrest that 
showed increased survival to hospital admission but 
not to hospital discharge384,385,568 and a report of the 
use of amiodarone in the treatment of life-threatening 
(but nonarrest) ventricular arrhythmias in children.312 In 
a multivariate analysis of data from the GWTG-R Reg-
istry, among pediatric patients with in-hospital cardiac 
arrest associated with VF/pulseless VT, use of lidocaine 
was associated with increased ROSC and 24-hour 
survival, whereas amiodarone was not. Neither drug 
was associated with improved survival to hospital dis-
charge.385,386,582 On the basis of these reports, lidocaine 
can be considered in the setting of VF/pulseless VT in 
children with congenital or acquired heart disease.3,398 
(See Arrhythmias section.)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e742
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Gaps in Knowledge
There are few published data regarding effective CPR 
techniques in the patient with CHD, and even less in-
formation about CPR in the immediate postoperative 
period. Should CPR be unsuccessful, strategies for ECLS 
are currently institutionally developed and take into ac-
count the availability of the surgical and ECMO teams. 
In addition, the impact of hemodynamic monitoring on 
outcomes from CPR in infants and children with CHD is 
not well documented.
Variability in patient habitus and pad/paddle posi-
tions and contact, as well as variability in underlying 
cardiac anatomy and function among pediatric patients 
who develop cardiac arrest, creates challenges in de-
termining optimal energy doses for cardioversion and 
defibrillation. The data regarding management and 
outcome of VF/pulseless VT arrests in adults with coro-
nary artery disease cannot be applied directly to infants 
and children with CHD. Research regarding the man-
agement of pediatric postoperative VF/pulseless VT is 
needed.
There are few data regarding indications for pacing 
during CPR in children with cardiac disease. In addi-
tion, there is no published evidence to modify the PALS 
recommendations regarding priorities for inserting an 
advanced airway or establishing vascular access in pa-
tients with congenital and acquired heart disease who 
do not have these devices in place when cardiac arrest 
develops.
Recommendations: Cardiac Arrest  
Phase – CPR
1. In general, AHA recommendations for pedi-
atric CPR skills can be effective for children 
with CHD (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. If hemodynamic monitoring (particularly 
arterial and CVP monitoring) is in place dur-
ing CPR, it is reasonable to use these values 
to modify and optimize CPR technique (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
3. Conventional high-quality CPR (closed chest 
compressions and positive-pressure ventila-
tion) must be provided when the child with 
CHD develops cardiopulmonary arrest, but 
CPR may be less effective in the presence of 
single-ventricle physiology (shunt, superior 
CPA, or Fontan), severe valvar insufficiency, 
or pulmonary hypertensive crisis. Until there 
is sufficient evidence to support specific 
alternative recommendations for CPR tech-
nique to improve survival in these popula-
tions, it is reasonable to use the conventional 
CPR technique (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
4. It is reasonable to consider deployment of 
ECLS before cardiac arrest and in the early 
minutes of resuscitation (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
5. Arterial blood pressure and ETco2 should be 
monitored when possible to provide feed-
back regarding quality of chest compression 
technique and other aspects of resuscitation 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
6. For cardioversion of SVT or VT with pulses, 
an initial dose of 0.5 to 1 J/kg is recom-
mended. Subsequent doses of 2 J/kg may be 
used (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
7. For defibrillation for VF/pulseless VT, an ini-
tial dose of 2 to 4 J/kg is reasonable (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence C). For subsequent shocks, 
a dose of 4 J/kg is reasonable, and higher 
doses may be considered, although they 
should not exceed 10 J/kg (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
8. For defibrillation for VF/pulseless VT in the 
setting of an open sternum and internal pad-
dles, the dose is 0.6 to 0.7 J/kg in children 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
9. The resuscitation team should integrate 
high-quality CPR and shock delivery to mini-
mize pauses in CPR associated with defibril-
lation (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
10. For patients who develop bradycardia dur-
ing CPR, there is no evidence that pacing will 
improve ROSC. Pacing may be considered 
but should not interrupt chest compressions. 
Appropriate sensing is important to avoid 
inducing VF (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
11. Central venous access, if available, is the 
recommended route of vascular access for 
medication administration and potential 
hemodynamic monitoring (Class 1; Level of 
Evidence C).
12. In the absence of central venous access, 
vascular access via peripheral intravenous 
catheter can be useful for administration of 
medications if it can be established rapidly 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
13. Intraosseous access is rapid, safe, effective, 
and useful as the initial route of vascular 
access in pediatric cardiac arrest (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C).
Mechanical Support
ECLS and ECPR
ECLS (also known as ECMO) is increasingly used in 
adults and children for treatment of in-hospital cardiac 
arrest refractory to initial high-quality CPR.75,76,583–586 
When ECLS is deployed during cardiac arrest, it is re-
ferred to as ECPR. In observational studies with pro-
pensity analyses of adult patients in refractory cardiac 
arrest, the use of ECPR has been shown to improve 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e743
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
both survival and favorable neurological outcomes587 
compared with conventional CPR. Similarly, in a pedi-
atric analysis from the AHA GWTG-R Registry, the use 
of ECPR was associated with higher acute resuscitation 
survival but lower postresuscitation survival than con-
ventional CPR. In addition, the use of ECPR was not 
associated with overall survival to discharge.17
Until recently, data regarding the association be-
tween ECPR and survival of children with heart disease 
after cardiac arrest was limited to case series.588 How-
ever, in a multivariate analysis of factors associated with 
survival from cardiac arrest among children with both 
medical and surgical heart disease, the AHA GWTG-R 
Registry data demonstrated improved survival with the 
use of ECPR.5 A recent study from the GWTG-R showed 
that for children with in-hospital CPR of ≥10 minutes’ 
duration, ECPR was associated with improved survival 
to hospital discharge and survival with favorable neu-
rological outcome compared with conventional CPR.589
For children with heart disease, ECPR is most com-
monly used to support those who have cardiac arrest 
in the postoperative period after congenital heart sur-
gery8,75,590–593 and less commonly in the setting of ac-
quired heart disease (eg, acute fulminant myocarditis, 
cardiomyopathy, or refractory arrhythmias). No differenc-
es in survival between unoperated versus postoperative 
patients or between single versus 2-ventricle congenital 
heart defects have been observed.8,591 In some observa-
tional studies, infants and children with acute fulminant 
myocarditis resuscitated with ECLS after cardiac arrest 
have been shown to have good outcomes.269,270,594
Prearrest Factors. Prearrest factors that predict mortal-
ity in children supported with ECLS have been evaluated 
in many observational studies.8,586,591,593 The severity of 
prearrest metabolic acidosis based on arterial blood pH 
and lactic acidosis has been shown to be associated with 
both mortality and neurological injury; however, the tim-
ing of laboratory measurements (prearrest versus imme-
diate postarrest) varies considerably in these studies.
Duration of CPR Before ECLS. Prolonged duration 
of CPR before ECLS can increase the risk of mortality 
and neurological injury in ECPR patients8,75,586,588,595,596; 
however, the duration of CPR has not consistently been 
shown to be a risk factor for mortality and cannot be 
used exclusively to guide patient selection for ECPR. 
Survival with good neurological outcome has been 
documented in some patients receiving >60 minutes of 
CPR before ECLS deployment.75
ECPR Deployment Location. ECPR is currently deployed 
 
in many areas of the hospital, with locations varying 
widely based on institutional policies. Common areas 
for provision of ECLS include ICUs, emergency depart-
ments, inpatient wards, and operating rooms.8,597,598 
One study showed improved survival for patients placed 
on ECPR in the catheterization laboratory and ICU 
compared with other areas.8 ECPR outcomes can be 
improved by restricting ECLS cannulation to areas 
where equipment required for ECLS deployment dur-
ing cardiac arrest can be accessed easily and person-
nel skilled at providing high-quality CPR and managing 
ECLS are readily available.
There is some evidence that centers with higher 
ECPR volumes achieve better survival than low-volume 
centers. Several studies have demonstrated that mortal-
ity is lower in pediatric cardiac ECLS patients treated in 
higher-volume centers (>15–22 patients per year).599–601 
As a result, it is reasonable to refer complex patients at 
high risk of cardiac arrest to centers with established, 
high-volume ECPR programs.
The use of ECPR for out-of-hospital cardiac arrest in 
adults was associated with better survival with favor-
able neurological outcomes at 6 months in one study 
(11.2% versus 2.6%, P=0.001)602; however, the pro-
portion of witnessed arrests was high (>90%), and by-
stander CPR was performed in >70% of cases. Survival 
rates were higher in those with VT/VF than in those 
with nonshockable rhythms.602 Many more data are re-
quired before the indications for and utility of ECMO 
can be determined in patients who have an out-of-hos-
pital arrest and arrive at the hospital still receiving CPR. 
Extreme caution must be exercised before extrapolating 
these data and deploying ECPR for out-of-hospital car-
diac arrest to children, because the causes are usually 
different.
Vessels Used for ECLS Cannulation. ECLS cannu-
lation strategies for use during CPR based on cardiac 
anatomy are shown in Table 5. Venous sites commonly 
used for ECLS cannulation include the internal jugular 
vein, femoral vein, and right atrium. Common arterial 
cannulation sites include the carotid artery, femoral 
artery, and ascending aorta. In children cannulated for 
ECLS after recent cardiac surgery, the right atrium and 
aorta are commonly used, because these sites can be 
accessed rapidly through the sternotomy incision. One 
study showed that use of neck vessels for ECLS cannula-
tion was associated with better survival,591 a result that 
can be explained by fewer interruptions in CPR when 
the neck veins are used. However, another analysis of 
the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization (ELSO) 
Registry did find an association between increased 
neurological complications and carotid artery cannu-
lation.603 Although there is no published information 
regarding femoral vessel cannulation and ECPR out-
comes, it is possible that femoral vessel cannulation for 
ECPR in older children might also require fewer inter-
ruptions of CPR, resulting in better outcomes.
ECLS Circuitry and Management. ECLS circuit com-
ponents such as the pump, tubing, and oxygenator vary 
widely among ECLS centers, but there is no information 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e744
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
as to whether these components influence outcomes 
for ECPR patients. Most centers use crystalloid primed 
circuits for ECPR deployment. One study has shown 
that the use of blood prime increased mortality in ECPR 
patients.8 Generally, heparin 100 U/kg is administered 
at the time of ECLS cannulation. ECLS circuit manage-
ment strategies are affected by the patients’ underlying 
disease and vary among ECLS centers.394
ECLS Team and Training issues. ECPR teams should 
be readily available for deployment at the discretion 
of the institution. The composition of the ECPR team 
varies by institution, and there is no evidence to sug-
gest that the type of ECPR team available influences 
survival. Pediatric ECPR teams should include special-
ists to manage resuscitation, to cannulate, and to prime 
and deploy ECLS. Seamless teamwork and communica-
tion is essential for successful and safe ECLS deploy-
ment. ECLS team training using medical simulation can 
help maintain teamwork and the procedural expertise 
required for safe ECPR deployment. In one preinterven-
tion and postintervention study at a single institution, 
ECLS simulation training resulted in subjective reports 
of smoother team coordination and significant reduc-
tion in median time to deployment (from 51 to 40 min-
utes) during actual pediatric ECPR.604
ECLS Complications and Outcomes. Complications 
related to ECLS often limit survival in children.8,584 
Neurological complications are common after ECPR and 
occur in at least 20% of ECPR patients.605 Neurological 
complications can result from prearrest illness, the qual-
ity of CPR provided before and during ECLS deployment, 
or as a complication of ECLS itself. As noted above, an 
analysis of multicenter data from the ELSO database 
documented an association of decreased mortality 
with cannulation of the right carotid artery compared 
with aortic cannulation591; however, another analysis 
of the ELSO Registry did find an association between 
increased neurological complications and carotid artery 
cannulation.603 There is no published evidence to sup-
port or refute the effectiveness of therapeutic hypo-
thermia after ECPR.
Survival after ECPR is higher in children with cardiac 
disease than in those with noncardiac disease.188,584 Hos-
pital survival from ECLS in the cardiac ICU is reported 
at 34% to 45%,7,188,606,607 with in-hospital survival from 
ECPR being 33% to 79%, although transplantation 
may be required for survival.7,8,75,76,588,606,608 Although 
duration of CPR before ECLS has not consistently been 
shown to be associated with greater hospital mortal-
ity,8,76 the rapidity with which ECLS can be deployed 
could impact neurological outcomes.
Mechanical Support of Single-Ventricle CHD After 
Cardiac Arrest
After Stage 1 Norwood Palliation. Although ECLS 
 
is rarely necessary for preoperative stabilization in 
infants with single-ventricle heart disease,609 it is 
increasingly being used to support children with sin-
gle-ventricle CHD after palliative surgery.607 The use of 
ECLS after stage 1 Norwood palliation is reported at 
10% to 15%.30,74 The Single Ventricle Reconstruction 
Trial reported the incidence of cardiac arrest during 
the postoperative stage 1 Norwood palliation hos-
pitalization at 13%, and it was more likely to occur 
in those with an MBTS.26,29 Because of the difficulty 
attaining ROSC after cardiac arrest, half of these stage 
1 Norwood patients required ECPR.29
In the Single Ventricle Reconstruction Trial, the need 
for ECLS was independent of the type of shunt.26,29 
From 2000 to 2009, 738 neonates in the ELSO Registry 
were supported with ECLS after stage 1 Norwood pallia-
Table 5. Cannulation Strategies for ECPR*
Physiology
Peripheral Cannulation
Central Cannulation
Comments
Venous
Arterial
Venous
Arterial
Biventricular circulation
Internal jugular or 
femoral
Common carotid or 
femoral
Systemic venous atrium
Aorta
Left atrial decompression  
may be required
Single ventricle or 
shunted physiology
Internal jugular
Common carotid
Systemic venous or 
common atrium
Aorta
Shunt restriction may be required; 
for carotid cannulation with an 
MBTS, cannula position can result in 
shunt overcirculation or occlusion
Superior cavopulmonary 
anastomosis
Internal jugular and/or 
femoral
Common carotid
SVC and/or systemic 
venous or common 
atrium
Aorta
Additional venous cannula  
may be required
Fontan
Internal jugular and/or 
femoral
Common carotid or 
femoral
Fontan baffle
Aorta
Additional venous cannula may be 
required; pulmonary venous atrial 
drainage may be required
ECPR indicates extracorporeal life support to support failed cardiopulmonary resuscitation; MBTS, modified Blalock-Taussig shunt; and SVC, superior vena cava.
*General principles for efficient use of extracorporeal life support (ECLS) to support cardiopulmonary resuscitation include the following: (1) Venoarterial ECLS 
should be used in all cases. (2) Knowledge of venous anatomy and previously occluded vessels is critical for successful and timely deployment of ECLS. (3) Central 
(transthoracic) cannulation may be considered in patients who have undergone a recent sternotomy. (4) Peripheral (percutaneous) cannulation may be preferred 
for patients without recent sternotomy. (5) ECLS cannulas should be large enough to provide complete cardiac output (cardiac index >2.5 L·min−1·per m−2). If 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation flow is limited by inadequate venous drainage, secondary drainage sites should be considered.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e745
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
tion,610 with a survival rate of 31%. Other single-center 
and multicenter studies have reported survival rates of 
30% to 50%.74,607,611 The presence of acute shunt occlu-
sion or hypoxemia in patients requiring ECLS has been 
associated with better survival to discharge, whereas 
failure to separate from cardiopulmonary bypass at the 
end of a surgical procedure or the use of ECLS within 
24 hours of stage 1 Norwood palliation has been associ-
ated with worse outcome.74,77,610 Not unexpectedly, lon-
ger duration of support has been associated with poor 
survival; the ELSO Registry reported no survivors after 10 
days of ECLS (2000–2009).29,610 Survival from ECLS after 
stage 1 Norwood palliation at a median of 33 months 
is 25% to 30%, with no difference found between pa-
tients requiring ECPR versus conventional CPR.29 Longer-
term survival of 13% to 20% has been reported at 3 
to 5 years.74,612 Fourteen-month neurodevelopmental 
evaluation of patients undergoing the stage 1 Nor-
wood palliation in the Single Ventricle Reconstruction 
Trial found the use of ECLS to be a risk factor for lower 
mental developmental index scores on univariate analy-
sis but not by multivariate analysis.613 Similar follow-up 
in the Infant Single Ventricle Trial found the use of ECLS 
after neonatal palliative surgery predicted lower mental 
developmental index scores.64,614
Worse outcomes have been reported after ECLS for 
the hybrid procedure for HLHS. In a retrospective analy-
sis of data from the ELSO Registry, 44 patients were 
supported with ECLS after the hybrid procedure, and 
only 16% survived to hospital discharge.615
Superior CPA and Fontan. When the patient with 
superior CPA develops cardiac arrest, elevated SVC 
pressure combined with low systemic blood pressure 
puts these patients at high risk for neurological injury.527 
Given the high risk of neurological injury, it may be rea-
sonable to consider deployment of ECLS early in the 
attempted resuscitation in patients with a superior CPA.
The use of ECLS after superior CPA and the Fontan 
completion poses unique anatomic, technical, and physi-
ological challenges, but published experience is limited. In 
a single-center case series of patients receiving ECPR, 7 of 
14 patients with Fontan physiology survived to discharge, 
with 36% alive at 36-month follow-up compared with 
survival of only 1 of 7 patients with superior CPA; the 
lone survivor was noted to have significant neurological 
disability.527 ECPR in patients with superior CPA is associ-
ated with poor survival and neurological outcome as the 
result of a combination of high CVP and high intrathorac-
ic pressure, which impedes venous return, oxygenation, 
and cardiac output during resuscitation.103 Prompt and 
effective decompression of the SVC can minimize neu-
rological injury.
In a retrospective analysis of data from the ELSO Reg-
istry, 230 patients were supported with ECLS after the 
Fontan operation; one-third of these patients received 
ECPR. Eighty-one of the 230 patients (35%) survived to 
hospital discharge.616 A higher percentage of nonsur-
vivors (34% versus 21%) had pre-ECLS cardiac arrest. 
Factors independently associated with higher mortality 
included surgical bleeding, neurological complications, 
and renal failure.
In another retrospective analysis of data from the ELSO 
Registry,103 103 patients were supported with ECLS after 
the superior CPA, with 42 (41%) surviving to hospital dis-
charge. Twenty-three percent of the patients had docu-
mented neurological complications, including seizure, ce-
rebral hemorrhage, or embolic stroke. Survival was similar 
whether or not CPR was required during the hospital 
admission. Factors independently associated with higher 
mortality included longer duration of support, combined 
cardiopulmonary indication for ECLS, and renal failure.103
Gaps in Knowledge
Long-term, functional, and neurodevelopmental out-
comes for ECPR survivors are not known. The influence 
of prearrest severity of illness and comorbid conditions 
on outcomes for ECPR is poorly characterized. There 
are no data regarding quality of CPR in ECPR recipients 
and its association with ECPR outcomes. The effects of 
ECPR location, equipment, personnel, and center char-
acteristics on outcome have not been reported. The 
benefits of neuroprotective strategies during ECPR have 
not been well characterized.
Evidence for the use of mechanical support in pa-
tients with single-ventricle physiology is based on single 
institutional reports, the ELSO Registry, and the Single 
Ventricle Reconstruction Trial. Little information exists 
on the conduct of ECLS in single-ventricle patients, in-
cluding shunt management during ECLS after stage 1 
Norwood palliation and choice of ECLS cannulation site 
for support in patients with superior CPA and Fontan 
There are limited data on long-term neurodevelopmen-
tal outcome and quality of life in survivors of ECLS after 
stage 1 Norwood palliation. Data are needed regarding 
indications for use, devices most appropriate for patient 
subgroups, and outcomes of therapies.
Recommendations: Mechanical Support
1. ECLS may be considered in patients with 
severe metabolic acidosis before cardiac 
arrest (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. If cardiac arrest develops in the child with 
heart disease and there is no prompt ROSC, it 
is reasonable to initiate ECPR (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
3. In institutions with the requisite resources, 
equipment, and infrastructure, ECPR can 
be effective to improve survival in chil-
dren with heart disease (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e746
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
4. ECPR can be most effectively deployed in 
locations with rapid access to ECLS equip-
ment, skilled ECLS personnel, and adequate 
space to accommodate a large team (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
5. ECLS after stage 1 Norwood palliation can 
be useful to treat low systemic Do2 (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence C).
6. ECPR may be considered to treat cardiac 
arrest after stage 1 Norwood palliation, 
including in those who have shunt thrombo-
sis (Class IIb; Level of Evidence B).
7. ECLS in patients with superior CPA or Fontan 
circulation can be considered to treat low 
Do2 from reversible causes or as a bridge to 
a VAD or surgical revision (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence B).
8. ECPR may be considered in patients with 
superior CPA or Fontan circulation (Class 
IIb; Level of Evidence C); however, prearrest 
use of ECLS in patients with superior CPA 
or Fontan physiology may be reasonable, 
because neurological outcomes from ECPR 
are poor (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Special Considerations
Impact of Resuscitation Location
In-hospital pediatric cardiac arrests occur most fre-
quently in ICUs. Patients with cardiac arrest requiring 
CPR in monitored environments have higher survival 
than those who experience arrest outside ICUs.617 No 
studies have directly assessed the impact of location 
on resuscitation outcomes in patients with CHD. From 
the GWTG-R Registry, 24-hour survival rates from 677 
pediatric in-hospital cardiac arrests occurring in various 
hospital locations were as follows: ICU, 54%; inpatient 
ward, 52%; emergency department, 26%; operating 
room or recovery room, 26%; interventional or diag-
nostic suites, 35%; and other (eg, ambulatory), 43%. 
Although this study did not separate survival by arrest 
location for patients with cardiac disease, patients hav-
ing a medical cardiac diagnosis had lower 24-hour sur-
vival rates than those having a surgical cardiac diagnosis 
(47% versus 59%; P<0.05).618 In a more recent GWTG-
R Registry multivariate analysis comparing outcomes 
of cardiac arrest in children with medical and surgical 
cardiac disease to those of children without cardiac dis-
ease, cardiac arrest in the emergency department rath-
er than the ICU was associated with decreased survival 
among children in the medical cardiac group.5 There 
are insufficient data to support transporting patients 
during active CPR into a monitored environment such 
as an ICU to improve survival.
Cardiac arrest associated with VF or pulseless VT 
was examined in another study from the GWTG-R 
Registry.619 In the vast majority of patients (76%), VF 
or pulseless VT occurred in ICUs (including operating 
rooms and postanesthesia care units). Other loca-
tions where VF/pulseless VT occurred less frequently 
included inpatient wards (10%), emergency depart-
ment (10%), and inpatient-monitored units (3%). 
Patients with cardiac diagnoses constituted 57% of 
those experiencing VF/pulseless VT (medical cardiac 
patients 22% and surgical cardiac patients 35%). Of 
patients with non-VF/VT cardiac arrest, there were rel-
atively fewer patients having cardiac diagnoses (32%) 
compared with patients with noncardiac diagnoses 
(68%). Cardiac arrests associated with VT/pulseless 
VT are more likely to occur in patients with cardiac 
diagnoses.
Personnel and ICU factors have been shown to influ-
ence survival from cardiac arrest, with an increased risk 
of unsuccessful resuscitation after cardiac arrest on a 
weekend and when the primary nurse had <1 year of 
experience in pediatric cardiac intensive care.492
Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory. Cardiac arrest 
in the cardiac catheterization laboratory is relatively 
uncommon. In one report from the United Kingdom, 
the incidence of cardiac arrest was 0.5% (22 of 4454 
patients) with 4 ensuing deaths (0.01% mortality 
rate among all catheterized patients; 19% mortality 
rate among those with cardiac arrest) over a 9-year 
period.619 Another study from Canada reported 14 car-
diac arrests in 11 
073 pediatric catheterizations (0.1%) 
that resulted in 8 deaths (0.07% mortality rate among 
all catheterized patients, but 57% rate mortality among 
those with cardiac arrest) over a 13-year period. A sin-
gle US center report estimated the incidence of cardiac 
arrest in children undergoing cardiac catheterization to 
be 0.96 per 100 procedures.620
More recently, multicenter surveys and registries 
have reported more widespread experience. In Japan, 
a survey of 82 institutions found a 0.6% incidence of 
major complications, including death.621 A US registry 
involving 6 large pediatric cardiology centers reported 
a mortality rate of 0.3% (11 of 3385 children) dur-
ing cardiac catheterization.622 Risk factors for major 
complications during cardiac catheterization, includ-
ing cardiac arrest and death, in all studies included 
specific patient characteristics, younger age (ie, neo-
nates), anesthesia provider, and recent postoperative 
status.619,623
Cardiac Operating Room. In a single-center study, 
the reported incidence of cardiac arrest in the cardiac 
operating room was 0.79%.432 This incidence is low 
compared with the occurrence of cardiac arrest in 
other locations. Cardiac arrest in children undergoing 
cardiac surgery can be related to anesthesia or to the 
procedure itself and is most common in neonates and 
infants.432
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e747
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Gaps in Knowledge
There are limited reported data on outcomes based on 
location of cannulation for mechanical support in pa-
tients with CHD.
Recommendations: Impact of 
Resuscitation Location
1. The vast majority of cardiac arrests should 
occur in ICUs. A cardiac arrest occurring on a 
ward service or in a nonacute area of the hos-
pital should prompt investigation to deter-
mine whether the child’s deterioration was 
unrecognized and to identify and initiate the 
appropriate education to reduce the risk of 
future events (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Training and Continuous Quality Improvement
Multiple studies have documented poor performance 
of CPR in the hospital setting and decay of provider 
skills soon after CPR training.624 Recent studies have 
shown that brief (as short as 4 minutes) refresher 
or booster training can improve CPR manikin skill 
performance.625–627 “Just-in-time” simulation at the 
bedside in the ICU serves to heighten awareness of 
providers for patients at risk of cardiac arrest.628 It is 
important to determine whether such improvement 
in skill performance leads to improved survival after 
cardiac arrest.
After any attempted resuscitation, providers should 
debrief team performance to identify areas for improve-
ment. Devices such as defibrillators or accelerometers 
that record important aspects of CPR quality, includ-
ing chest compression frequency and depth, compres-
sion fraction, and ventilation rate and volume, can be 
helpful during resuscitation training, during the resus-
citation attempt itself, and later in the debriefing and 
quality improvement process.629–631 In data from the 
GWTG-R Registry, self-reported errors during resuscita-
tion of adults, such as delay in recognition of arrest, 
delay in shock delivery, delay in airway insertion, intu-
bation failure, and failure to promptly start and con-
tinue compressions of adequate rate, were associated 
with lower survival.632 The use of medical simulation, 
video recordings, and other visual feedback devices 
have been shown in randomized trials to improve the 
quality of CPR in children.633,634 ECLS programs incor-
porating simulation training have been associated with 
faster cannulation times,635 improved trainee satisfac-
tion,636 enhanced provider knowledge,637 and better 
team performance. In one preintervention and postint-
ervention study at a single institution, ECLS simulation 
training resulted in subjective reports of smoother team 
coordination and significant reduction in median time 
to deployment (from 51 to 40 minutes) during actual 
pediatric ECPR.604
Gaps in Knowledge
CPR quality is essential to maximize patient survival 
from cardiac arrest, yet there are few data to guide 
quality improvement efforts. The optimal retraining in-
terval and the types of retraining needed to maintain 
CPR skills have not been established, but it is clear that 
providers must practice skills much more frequently 
than once per year to optimize CPR quality and team 
performance and to increase survival from cardiac ar-
rest. Although CPR prompt devices can improve skill 
performance during training, their usefulness during 
actual resuscitation attempts and their effect on resus-
citation outcomes (particularly survival to hospital dis-
charge) have not yet been established.
Recommendations: Training and 
Continuous Quality Improvement
1. Adequate training, an ongoing system to 
maintain skill competence, monitoring of 
skills during resuscitation, postresuscitation 
debriefing, and careful identification and 
targeting of areas where improvement is 
needed can be useful to maximize the like-
lihood of successful resuscitation (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence C).
2. Monitoring performance and documenting 
improvement can be useful to resuscitation 
systems attempting to improve their resusci-
tation quality (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
3. Using medical simulation to train clinicians in 
both conventional CPR and ECPR can be ben-
eficial (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
POST–CARDIAC ARREST 
STABILIZATION
Most research in resuscitation science has concentrat-
ed on improving the rate of successful ROSC; howev-
er, the original 1966 consensus statement on CPR by 
the National Academy of Sciences–National Research 
Council’s Ad Hoc Committee on Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation outlined the ABCDs of resuscitation as 
follows: A for airway; B, breathing; C, circulation; and 
D, definitive therapy.638 Definitive therapy includes 
the management of pathologies that result from car-
diac arrest, which has become known as postarrest syn-
drome.639–641 The 4 components of post–cardiac arrest 
syndrome are myocardial dysfunction, brain injury, sys-
temic ischemia/reperfusion response, and persistent 
precipitating pathology.
The high mortality of patients who initially achieve 
ROSC after cardiac arrest can often be attributed to 
failure of organ systems that have endured a period of 
ischemia, as well as the damage caused by the postisch-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e748
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
emic inflammatory response. The response to the ar-
rest ischemia can be exacerbated by the very therapies 
instituted for resuscitation. For example, post–cardiac 
arrest myocardial dysfunction can be worsened by epi-
nephrine use during resuscitation or by inotropic thera-
pies aimed at maintaining renal perfusion. In addition, 
potential reperfusion brain injury can be made worse by 
therapies aimed at myocardial support.413,642,643
Myocardial Management
Myocardial Dysfunction
Myocardial dysfunction develops after cardiac arrest 
and contributes to mortality.644 This dysfunction is re-
sponsive to therapies and is potentially exacerbated by 
therapies; it is, in some cases, reversible.645–649 Myocar-
dial dysfunction can be more detrimental to the child 
with CHD, because the child has limited prearrest re-
serve. Systolic and diastolic myocardial dysfunction is 
progressive in the first hour that follows ROSC.644 In 
young children, this dysfunction can be correlated to 
myocyte injury and typically reverses over 24 hours.645,650
Major contributors to post–cardiac arrest myocardial 
dysfunction include myocardial ischemia-reperfusion 
injury and the therapies, particularly vasopressors, used 
during CPR. Vasopressor agents are administered dur-
ing CPR to improve coronary perfusion pressure and 
therefore myocardial blood flow. Restoration of coro-
nary perfusion is the single overriding determinant of 
the success of cardiac resuscitation efforts.651 However, 
epinephrine leads to high afterload and increased myo-
cardial oxygen consumption in the initial post–cardiac 
arrest phase at the time when the myocardium is most 
vulnerable to increased oxygen demands and imbal-
ance of oxygen supply versus delivery.413,652 This concern 
for increasing myocardial work at a time of myocardial 
vulnerability has led to the evaluation of alternative va-
soactive agents such as vasopressin and other agents in 
resuscitation.653,654
Myocardial Support
Hemodynamic instability is common after cardiac ar-
rest, and pharmacological support is often needed. No 
individual drug or combination of drugs has been dem-
onstrated to be superior in the postarrest phase. Inotro-
pes and vasopressors should be considered if cardiovas-
cular function remains inadequate after establishment 
of adequate preload. Vasoactive drugs must be titrated 
to achieve adequate cardiac output and systemic and 
coronary perfusion. This can require a balance of ino-
tropic agents that will increase cardiac output as well 
as oxygen demand and vasodilators that reduce after-
load and decrease myocyte oxygen consumption, while 
avoiding hypotension that will compromise coronary 
perfusion. The choice of inotrope or vasopressor can 
be guided by blood pressure, heart rate, echocardio-
graphic indices, and surrogate measures of Do2 such as 
AVo2D, lactate clearance, and urine output. Mechani-
cal circulatory support and heart transplantation can be 
considered for patients who do not achieve myocardial 
recovery.8,608
Hemodynamic Monitoring
Recommended hemodynamic monitoring in the post–
cardiac arrest patient is similar to that used for the 
care of any child with critical cardiac disease and in-
cludes continuous monitoring of heart rate and blood 
pressure (systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pres-
sure) and evaluation of arterial and central Svo2 and 
serum lactate. However, the precise hemodynamic 
goals are unclear. The optimal mean arterial pres-
sure for post–cardiac arrest patients has not been de-
fined.640 Although particular attention may need to be 
paid to afterload during management of post–cardiac 
arrest myocardial dysfunction, the optimal mean arte-
rial pressure is likely to be influenced by the duration 
of cardiac arrest, with higher mean arterial pressures 
benefitting cerebral perfusion.655
Monitoring of Svo2 is a useful tool to evaluate the 
adequacy of oxygen transport balance.449 Svo2 moni-
toring can serve as an early indicator of a persistent 
postarrest LCOS. A single lactate measurement after 
resuscitation from cardiac arrest will most likely be el-
evated and is of limited monitoring or prognostic value. 
However, trending of the serum lactate will provide an 
important indication of the child’s response to therapy; 
lactate clearance has been associated with outcome in 
patients after cardiac arrest.656 Finally, monitoring tro-
ponin peak and clearance has also been associated with 
outcome after adult cardiac arrest.650
Ventricular Assist Devices
The use of an LVAD, a right VAD, or a biventricular 
VAD in the management of infants and children has 
increased recently secondary to wider device availability 
and a broader understanding of the potential role of 
these devices in the setting of myocardial dysfunction 
and heart failure. Many centers have historically used 
ECLS as a bridge to cardiac transplantation; however, 
ECLS has limitations regarding the duration of sup-
port and potentially unfavorable effects on transplant 
outcomes. The use of VADs offers different strategies, 
which can be of significant benefit to postarrest survi-
vors. These include bridge to transplantation, bridge to 
recovery, and rarely in pediatrics, destination therapy.657 
Bridge to transplantation remains the most common 
use of VAD therapy and should be considered in pa-
tients who are clinically deteriorating despite maximal 
medical and surgical management.
The use of VAD support in children can be further 
complicated by anatomic constraints in the setting of 
CHD, which may necessitate individualized implanta-
tion strategies and postoperative management.658 No 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e749
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
universally accepted pediatric indications exist for VAD 
implantation, although the International Society for 
Heart and Lung Transplantation has recently published 
clinical guidelines.257 Pediatric VAD placement can be 
considered in patients requiring high-dose inotropes 
after cardiac arrest, those with persistent arrhyth-
mias, or those with persistent myocardial dysfunction 
on ECLS. The Figure delineates mechanical circulatory 
support strategies in rapidly deteriorating children with 
heart disease.
Bridge to transplantation is the most common VAD 
implant strategy in pediatric centers. There are a va-
riety of flow profiles available for current devices, in-
cluding pulsatile flow and continuous flow devices. 
The most widely used device in children is the Berlin 
EXCOR device, which is a pulsatile paracorporeal VAD 
that can provide left, right, or biventricular support.238 
The recent Berlin EXCOR study comparing survival in 
2 cohorts, patients <0.7 m2 and patients >0.7 m2 to 
<1.5 m2, to historical ECLS results found that survival 
rates to transplantation were much higher in those sup-
ported with VAD.660 Both cohorts experienced signifi-
cant morbidity, however, with the majority of patients 
experiencing significant bleeding, infection, stroke, or 
hypertension. On the basis of the improved survival to 
transplantation, the Berlin EXCOR device was granted 
US Food and Drug Administration approval in 2011.
For patients with adequate lung function not requir-
ing a membrane oxygenator, a VAD can be used as 
a bridge to transplantation regardless of patient size. 
Adult devices can be used in adolescent patients. The 
HeartMate II LVAD (Thoratec, Inc., Pleasanton, CA) is 
an axial continuous flow device currently approved for 
bridge to transplantation. This device is increasingly 
used in children, with a reported rate of 6-month sur-
vival to transplantation, ongoing support, or recovery 
of 95%.661 The HeartMate II has also been successfully 
used as a bridge to transplantation in the failing Fon-
tan circulation.662 The HeartWare LVAD (HeartWare Inc., 
Framingham, MA) is a newer-generation centrifugal 
device also approved for bridge to transplantation in 
the United States. Successful use of the HeartWare de-
vice has been reported in pediatric patients with dilated 
cardiomyopathy and in palliated CHD with successful 
bridge to cardiac transplantation.663,664
Consideration of temporary VAD support should 
be given to patients who have a potentially revers-
ible condition such as myocarditis or transplant rejec-
tion. In addition, temporary VAD support can be used 
in clinical situations such as patients with infection or 
cerebrovascular injury that may preclude permanent 
VAD placement or consideration of heart transplanta-
tion, until the patient’s candidacy can be established or 
ruled out. Temporary support can be provided centrally 
or percutaneously based on anatomy, size, and type of 
support needed. Potential recovery of myocardial func-
tion should be assessed periodically during VAD sup-
port, and decannulation should be considered at the 
earliest period when functional viability is thought to 
be established.
For those patients with biventricular heart failure, 
support might be possible with either biventricular VAD 
Acute Heart Failure
Cardiac Arrest with CPR
Unstable Circulation 
VA ECLS
Respiratory Failure
No Respiratory Failure
VA ECLS
VA ECLS
Or
Temporary VAD
Temporary VAD
Or
Durable VAD
Cardiac Arrest 
Imminent
Cardiac Arrest         
Not imminent
Figure. Mechanical circulatory support device strategy in rapidly deteriorating children with heart  
disease.4,8,35,81,144,271–276,283,298,302,303,312,325–327,331,386,650,659  
Choice of ventricular assist device (VAD) depends on patient size and need for left ventricular or biventricular support. Exam-
ples of temporary VADs include centrifugal pump extracorporeal life support (ECLS) without oxygenator, Impella, and Tandem 
Heart. Examples of durable VADs include Berlin Heart EXCOR, Thoratec paracorporeal VAD, HeartMate, HeartWare, and total 
artificial heart/SynCardia. CPR indicates cardiopulmonary resuscitation; and VA ECLS, venoarterial ECLS.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e750
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
support or a total artificial heart. However, although 
reports of successful use exist, size constraints greatly 
limit the use of these devices in children.660,665
Gaps in Knowledge
There are few data available that specifically relate to 
the support of the pediatric myocardium after resus-
citation. There are no universally accepted indications 
for pediatric VAD implantation. There are no universally 
accepted strategies for anticoagulation to minimize the 
risk of stroke during VAD therapy. Individual centers 
typically follow local protocols or the recommendations 
of the VAD manufacturer.
Recommendations: Post–Cardiac Arrest 
Stabilization – Myocardial Management
1. Vasoactive drugs can be beneficial to augment 
coronary perfusion pressure during myocardial 
recovery but may also contribute to myocardial 
oxygen consumption and post–cardiac arrest 
myocardial dysfunction. Therefore, careful 
titration of vasoactive drugs can be beneficial 
to minimize post–cardiac arrest myocardial dys-
function (Class IIa, Level of Evidence C).
2. Post–cardiac arrest hemodynamic monitor-
ing should include continuous monitoring of 
heart rate and rhythm; systolic, diastolic and 
mean arterial pressure; arterial and venous 
oxygen saturations; and serum lactate clear-
ance (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
3. Mechanical circulatory support may be 
considered for some patients who do not 
achieve ROSC and adequate perfusion (Class 
IIb, Level of Evidence C).
4. In survivors of cardiac arrest who require 
mechanical circulatory support while await-
ing cardiac transplantation, the use of VAD 
can be more effective than ECLS (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence B).
Pulmonary Management
Provision of effective oxygenation and ventilation via a 
bag-mask or through an advanced airway is imperative 
during resuscitation. Many patients undergo establish-
ment of an advanced airway with placement of an en-
dotracheal tube; however, positive-pressure ventilation 
can have both helpful and harmful effects on postarrest 
cardiopulmonary and cerebral physiology.
Pulmonary Dysfunction
Pulmonary dysfunction is common after cardiac arrest. 
This dysfunction can result from pulmonary edema sec-
ondary to postischemic diastolic dysfunction, aspiration, 
neurological impairment of respiratory dynamics, or 
ischemia-reperfusion injury to the lung parenchyma.666 
Each of these potential pulmonary morbidities must be 
treated effectively to achieve long-term survival after 
resuscitation.
Respiratory Support
The optimal ventilatory management strategy, includ-
ing the optimal supplementary oxygen to provide dur-
ing post–cardiac arrest care, has not been established. 
Existing guidelines recommend the use of 100% oxy-
gen during CPR in infants (not including newborns in 
the delivery room) and children; however, it is not clear 
how long this high oxygen concentration should be 
administered after ROSC. Harmful effects of hyperoxia 
have been documented; animal data suggest that hy-
peroxia increases direct neurological injury during the 
post–cardiac arrest time period.667,668 An adult random-
ized prospective clinical trial comparing the use of 30% 
to 100% oxygen found no difference in serial mark-
ers of acute brain injury and survival to hospital dis-
charge.669 Three small pediatric case series670–672 failed 
to show either benefit or harm from post-ROSC nor-
moxemia or hyperoxemia, whereas a larger pediatric 
case series673 did show higher survival among children 
with post-ROSC normoxemia (Pao2 60–300 mm Hg) 
than those with post-ROSC hyperoxemia. However, 
the timing of the evaluation of oxygen saturation and 
arterial oxygen tension during the post–cardiac arrest 
care varied between and even within the studies.670–673 
These data led to the 2015 PALS guideline update rec-
ommendation that once the patient is stable in the 
post–cardiac arrest period, it may be reasonable for 
providers to target normoxemia.3,398 Ideally, inspired 
oxygen is titrated to a value appropriate to the specific 
patient condition.
Ventilation strategies during post–cardiac arrest care 
can potentially have a greater impact on outcome than 
strategies to support oxygenation, because the arte-
rial carbon dioxide tension affects cerebrovascular re-
activity.674–677 Hyperventilation is undesirable because it 
reduces cerebral blood flow and can have other detri-
mental effects during resuscitation. Excessive ventilation 
(rate or volume) during and immediately after CPR can 
lead to increased intrathoracic pressure and gas trap-
ping, as well as reduced venous return and cardiac out-
put. One small observational study from the Pediatric 
Emergency Care Medicine Applied Research Network 
of both pediatric in-hospital and out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest patients demonstrated no association between 
hypercapnia (Paco2 >50 mm 
Hg) or hypocapnia (Paco2 
<30 mm 
Hg) and survival to hospital discharge.670 How-
ever, in an observational study from the Pediatric Cardi-
ac Arrest Study Network of pediatric in-hospital cardiac 
arrest, hypercapnia (Paco2 ≥50 mm 
Hg) was associated 
with worse survival to hospital discharge.672 Because 
many infants who experience cardiac arrest have co-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e751
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
morbidities that may include chronic lung disease, the 
AHA 2015 PALS guideline update suggested titration 
of post–cardiac arrest ventilation support to target a 
Paco2 that is appropriate to the individual child’s condi-
tion while limiting exposure to severe hypercapnia or 
hypocapnia.3
Respiratory Monitoring
Respiratory monitoring during post–cardiac arrest care 
should follow standard ICU practice for any critically ill 
patient. Chest radiographs should be reviewed at an 
appropriate frequency to assess lung fields and detect 
hyperexpansion that could lead to decreased venous 
return, as outlined above. Similarly, monitoring of arte-
rial blood gases and systemic oxygen saturations should 
be aimed at maintaining normocarbia (or a Paco2 ap-
propriate for the patient) and avoiding hypoxemia and 
hyperoxia.
Gaps in Knowledge
There are no prospective data in children regarding op-
timal oxygenation or ventilation support during post–
cardiac arrest care. Developmental differences in lung 
physiology after cardiac arrest in children have not been 
studied.
Recommendations: Post–Cardiac Arrest 
Stabilization – Pulmonary Management
1. It is reasonable to target normal oxygen 
saturation without hyperoxia after resusci-
tation from pediatric cardiac arrest; oxygen 
administration may need to be modified in 
newborns or based on the underlying heart 
defect (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. It is reasonable to target normocapnia or 
a Paco2 appropriate for each patient after 
resuscitation from pediatric cardiac arrest 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Neurological Assessment and 
Management
Brain ischemia and injury develop when the cellular de-
mand for oxygen is not met by Do2. Do2 is proportional 
to cerebral blood flow and systemic oxygen saturations. 
Do2 falls when respiratory insufficiency results in poor 
arterial oxygen saturation, when low cardiac output 
leads to inadequate cerebral blood flow, or when car-
diac arrest leads to global ischemia. There is no clinical, 
laboratory, or neurological test administered in the first 
few days after cardiac arrest that accurately predicts 
neurological outcome in children who have survived 
cardiac arrest. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
with other clinical, laboratory, and neurological tests 
can be considered to assist in neuroprognostication.
Brain Imaging
For those patients who undergo post–cardiac arrest 
brain imaging, head CT is often the first neuroimag-
ing test performed early after ROSC. It may show cere-
bral swelling with effacement of the sulci, widespread 
loss of grey-white differentiation, or low density in the 
basal ganglia or in the watershed regions. The “reversal 
sign,” with low density in the cerebral hemispheres and 
relatively higher densities in the basal ganglia, is not un-
common on head CT.678 All these patterns are associat-
ed with poor prognosis, but a normal CT scan does not 
guarantee a good outcome.679 A recent retrospective 
analysis of 78 pediatric patients (<18 years of age) with 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest for any reason and a head 
CT performed 1 to 6 hours after ROSC found that loss 
of grey-white differentiation, sulcal effacement, basilar 
cistern effacement, and reversal sign on head CT per-
formed early after resuscitation were associated with 
mortality and unfavorable neurological outcome.680
For neonates and infants with open anterior fonta-
nels, the first imaging modality can be a head ultra-
sound, which is portable and requires no ionizing ra-
diation. Head ultrasound offers a limited view of brain 
anatomy but can quickly aid in the diagnosis of prob-
lems that require emergent attention, such as intracra-
nial hemorrhage and hydrocephalus. Transcranial Dop-
pler ultrasonography, used to measure cerebral blood 
flow velocities and pulsatility index, can be performed 
in conjunction with head ultrasound. Like head ultra-
sound, transcranial Doppler is a noninvasive bedside 
procedure; however, continuous transcranial Doppler 
measurements in small infants can be limited by heat 
deposition.681 Transcranial Doppler studies have been 
used to monitor metabolic coupling and vascular re-
activity in comatose adults after cardiac arrest.682 Fur-
thermore, transcranial Doppler is capable of measuring 
the macroscopic cerebral hyperemic reperfusion caused 
by the increase of the cerebral perfusion pressure and 
deterioration of cerebral autoregulation after ROSC.683 
After ROSC, the presence of a closing pressure, or pres-
sure at which brain vessels collapse and cerebral blood 
flow ceases, is a grim prognostic finding in adults after 
cardiac arrest.684
Brain MRI can be used in survivors of cardiac arrest to 
assess the extent of brain injury and in combination with 
clinical examination and other factors to assist in deter-
mining prognosis for neurological recovery. Patterns of 
injury have been detailed and used in studies to help 
understand cognitive and motor prognosis. Patterns of 
injury are not specific for the mechanism of arrest (re-
spiratory versus cardiac), because the injury results from 
metabolic failure in the most metabolically active areas 
of the brain. With hypoxic-ischemic arrest, the areas of 
the brain most commonly affected are the deep grey 
nuclei (putamen and globus pallidus), the occipital lobe 
(visual cortex), and the central sulcus (sensory motor 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e752
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
strip). In one retrospective case series685 of pediatric sub-
jects undergoing brain MRI after surviving cardiac arrest, 
patients with diffusion-weighted imaging abnormalities 
in the basal ganglia and brain lobes had increased risk 
for poor outcome (Glasgow outcome score <4). During 
sudden cardiac arrest, the precipitous fall in cerebral per-
fusion pressure is often associated with watershed isch-
emia between the major vascular territories of the brain. 
Watershed injury can be seen in isolation or in combina-
tion with the hypoxic-ischemic injuries described above. 
Infants with CHD, particularly those requiring surgery 
during the neonatal period, have an increased incidence 
of native (20%–40%) and postoperative (60%–73%) 
brain injury including white matter injury, stroke, and 
intraparenchymal hemorrhage.348,358,517
Neurological Monitoring
Major goals of post–cardiac arrest care are mitigat-
ing the extension of the primary ischemic brain injury 
and prevention of secondary brain injury. Intensive 
care monitoring is focused on calculation of Do2 and 
consumption, which may or may not be reflective of 
cerebral hemodynamics and metabolism. Clinical neu-
rological examination is often hindered by the use of 
medications (sedatives, analgesics, and paralytics) or 
limited by the patient’s age (eg, in the infant). Medical 
devices to monitor brain function and cerebral blood 
flow are needed both for goal-directed therapy and to 
enable prediction of outcome.
Electroencephalography
Electroencephalography has been used to identify sei-
zures that may not be clinically apparent. Identifying 
and treating seizures in post–cardiac arrest patients can 
reduce cerebral metabolic demand and mitigate sec-
ondary injury. However, seizures can be a symptom (as 
opposed to the cause) of the degree of injury that is 
already present.686–688
A prospective consecutive series of 19 pediatric, 
postarrest, intensive care patients monitored with con-
tinuous electroencephalography689 demonstrated that 
electrographic seizures occurred in 47% (9 of 19), and 
32% (6 of 19) developed status epilepticus. More im-
portantly, the majority of the seizures were subclinical 
and undetected by the bedside caregivers. Other retro-
spective studies have documented a similar high inci-
dence of nonconvulsive seizures.690–696 Clinical studies 
are consistent with the hypothesis that continuous elec-
trographic discharges, even without clinical seizures, 
can be harmful. The presence of nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus has been associated with mortality of 51% 
to 57% in adults.697,698
A recent practice parameter addressing outcome 
prediction in adults after cardiac arrest described sev-
eral electroencephalography features that were useful 
for prognosis.699 Myoclonic status epilepticus on the 
first day best predicted unfavorable outcome, whereas 
diffuse voltage suppression <20 μV, burst suppression, 
and generalized periodic complexes were strongly but 
not invariably associated with poor outcome. Several 
classification systems that group electroencephalogra-
phy features into predictive categories have been devel-
oped in adults700–702 and children.703,704 Caution must be 
taken when interpreting these data, because it could be 
that the more critically ill children had the worst electro-
encephalography and hence the worst outcome.
Near-Infrared Spectroscopy
Unlike pulse oximetry, NIRS measurements made in 
cerebral tissues reflect a weighted average of venule 
(≈75%) and arteriole (≈25%) blood saturations705 in 
very metabolically active tissue. Meticulously performed 
animal studies have demonstrated that an ischemic 
threshold can be measured in piglets,706 although for 
obvious ethical reasons, such studies not been repli-
cated in humans. In a porcine model of infant cardiac 
arrest, NIRS monitoring was used to detect the lower 
limit of cerebral hemodynamic autoregulation.707
NIRS offers bedside availability and the promise of 
a noninvasive view of cerebral oxygenation. Commer-
cially available instruments are not capable of quantita-
tive measurements of hemoglobin concentrations, are 
sensitive to ambient light, and suffer from poor repro-
ducibility. Although NIRS technology does monitor in 
vivo tissue oxygen saturations and is increasingly used 
in pediatric ICUs, there is a paucity of data linking it to 
positive neurological outcomes.
Several studies have used NIRS to investigate risk 
for perioperative brain injury in infants with complex 
CHD48,347,517; however, the results have been contra-
dictory. Two studies in infants after stage 1 Norwood 
palliation found that cerebral oxygen saturations be-
low 45% were predictive of structural brain injury and 
worse neurodevelopmental outcome,48,517 whereas a 
third study of neonates with single-ventricle and 2-ven-
tricle complex CHD showed no association between 
NIRS saturations <45% and any measure of any post-
operative MRI brain injury.347 After stage 1 Norwood 
palliation, sustained NIRS <45% has been shown to be 
related to low visual-motor integration, and sustained 
NIRS <55% has been shown to be associated with low-
er neurodevelopmental index scores at 4 to 5 years of 
age.48 Despite these conflicting results, some advocate 
the use of neuroprotective protocols, driven by NIRS 
measures, for managing intraoperative and postopera-
tive patients with severe forms of CHD.347
Neurological Resuscitation
Resuscitation from cardiac arrest does not end after 
ROSC. Post–cardiac arrest care has significant potential 
to prevent the early mortality caused by hemodynamic 
instability and prevent secondary injury at the cellular 
level. The objectives of resuscitation include optimiza-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e753
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
tion of cardiopulmonary function and systemic perfu-
sion, identification of the precipitating causes of the 
arrest, institution of measures to prevent recurrence of 
cardiac arrest, administration of therapies that might 
facilitate long-term survival, and above all, protection 
of cognitive and neurological function.
Hyperoxia
The pediatric basic and advanced life support section 
of the 2015 International Consensus on Cardiopul-
monary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascu-
lar Care Science With Treatment Recommendations 
suggested that rescuers measure Pao2 after ROSC 
and target a value appropriate to the specific patient 
condition. In the absence of specific patient data, this 
consensus statement suggests that rescuers target 
normoxemia after ROSC.398 The Iberoamerican Pedi-
atric Cardiac Arrest Study Network, in a prospective 
multicenter study, concluded that there was no impact 
of hyperoxia on mortality but did not address neuro-
logical outcomes.671,672 Two meta-analyses (the first in 
2004, with an update in 2010) noted an association 
between hyperoxia in the resuscitation of neonates 
and an increased risk of death (relative risk, 0.69; 
95% confidence interval, 0.54–0.88), with a trend 
toward increased risk for hypoxic-ischemic encepha-
lopathy.708,709 No studies exist for infants outside of the 
newborn period.
Hypercapnia
Carbon dioxide is a potent cerebral vasodilator and thus 
a potential therapeutic tool to increase Do2 to the brain 
after ROSC. Although the Iberoamerican study showed 
that both hypercapnia and hypocapnia were associ-
ated with increased mortality,672 there are not sufficient 
data to determine whether manipulation of cerebral 
blood flow can affect outcome after circulatory arrest. 
As noted previously, the AHA 2015 PALS guideline up-
date suggested titration of post–cardiac arrest ventila-
tion support to target a Paco2 that is appropriate to the 
individual child’s condition while limiting exposure to 
severe hypercapnia or hypocapnia.3
Targeted Temperature Management
Importance of Controlling Fever
Fever (>38°C) on the first day after reperfusion from 
cardiac arrest in children is a common consequence 
of the postresuscitation syndrome and can be detri-
mental to outcomes.641,710,711 Of the 547 children who 
experienced in-hospital cardiac arrest in the GWTG-R 
Registry, children with persistent fever in the first 24 
hours postarrest had more unfavorable neurological 
outcomes than children without persistent fever.712,713 
Additionally, in a subset of newborns with birth asphyx-
ia (with or without associated cardiac arrest) from the 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Develop-
ment Neonatal Research Network, the odds of death or 
disability increased by 3.6-fold for each 1°C increase in 
mean temperature.713 This association persisted at the 
6- to 7-year follow-up of noncooled infants with birth 
asphyxia: the likelihood of death, IQ <70, or cerebral 
palsy was much higher among newborns who dem-
onstrated elevated temperature in the first postnatal 
days.714
Consideration of Therapeutic Hypothermia After 
Pediatric Cardiac Arrest
Initial randomized clinical trials showed that therapeutic 
hypothermia (32°C to 34°C) can improve neurological 
outcome in some adults after witnessed out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrest attributable to ventricular arrhythmia715,716 
and in encephalopathic asphyxiated newborns.362,717 
However, a recent adult randomized controlled trial of 
targeted temperature management showed no differ-
ence in neurological outcomes and survival in adults 
with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest when temperature 
was controlled at 33°C versus 36°C.
In 2015, the results of the THAPCA trial (Therapeu-
tic Hypothermia After Out-of-Hospital Pediatric Cardiac 
Arrest) were published. This trial enrolled infants and 
children <18 years of age (median age 2 years) who re-
mained comatose at 6 hours after ROSC. Patients were 
randomized to therapy with hypothermia (32°C–34°C 
for 72 hours with 16-hour rewarming and 32 hours 
of normothermia) versus therapeutic normothermia 
(temperature actively maintained at 36°C–37.5°C for 5 
days). Significant differences between the 2 treatment 
groups included a higher incidence of hypokalemia and 
thrombocytopenia in the hypothermia group and more 
frequent renal replacement therapy in the normother-
mia group. There was no significant difference in 1-year 
developmental testing or survival.718 Results from the 
cohort with in-hospital cardiac arrest are pending. In 
their review of the THAPCA trial results, the pediatric 
task force of the International Liaison Committee on 
Resuscitation (the group responsible for the scientific 
consensus that supports the AHA PALS guidelines) 
noted that the study was underpowered to demon-
strate improvement in survival with good neurological 
outcome and also noted that the Kaplan-Meier survival 
curves in the appendix of the published study showed a 
trend toward better outcomes at the lower (hypother-
mia) temperature range,398 which suggests that thera-
peutic hypothermia might improve outcome in some 
patients. The protocols chosen for the THAPCA trial 
represent 2 potential protocols for targeted tempera-
ture management.
Two observational studies found that therapeutic hy-
pothermia tended to be applied in the sickest children 
after resuscitation with a wide range of target tem-
peratures and durations used in the absence of a pro-
tocol.719,720 In one case series, >75% of study subjects 
had recent cardiac surgery, and 70% of those children 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e754
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
had a cardiac pathogenesis that led to their arrest; hy-
pothermia did not lead to improved outcomes in these 
patients.
Recommendations for Targeted Temperature 
Management
On the basis of available evidence, the AHA 2015 
PALS guidelines update recommended continuous 
measurement of temperature in the first 5 days af-
ter ROSC after any cardiac arrest, with aggressive 
treatment of fever (temperature 38°C or higher). 
In addition, the guidelines update noted that it is 
reasonable for infants and children who remain co-
matose after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest to either 
maintain 5 days of continuous normothermia (36°C 
to 37.5°C) or 2 days of initial continuous hypother-
mia (32°C to 34°C) followed by 3 days of continu-
ous normothermia (36°C to 37.5°C). For infants and 
children who remain comatose after in-hospital car-
diac arrest, there was insufficient evidence (pending 
publication of results from the multi-institutional 
study) to recommend cooling versus maintenance of 
normothermia.3
There are no data to guide the mechanism of hy-
pothermia induction or rewarming details or the best 
mechanism to treat fever. In the 2010 PALS guide-
lines, the AHA recommended avoidance of rewarm-
ing from 32°C to 34°C faster than 0.5°C every 2 
hours unless the patient requires rapid rewarming for 
clinical reasons.4
Methods to control fever include the use of a cool-
ing blanket, ice packs, cold saline infusion, tepid 
baths, and ECLS circuit.721,722 Pharmacological inter-
ventions are unproven in the pediatric population, but 
acetaminophen can be helpful to prevent fever after 
ischemia.723,724
When determining the best route for targeted tem-
perature management, providers should carefully con-
sider the known and potential risks of hypothermia in 
children with CHD, particularly its effects on hemody-
namics.725,726 Hypothermia characteristically decreases 
the heart rate, increases contractility, and increases 
SVR. Tachycardia, hypotension, and decreased SVR 
typically develop during rewarming. Overall cardiac 
output is unevenly affected by hypothermia in in-
fants.727,728 Therapeutic hypothermia appears to have 
variable effects on PVR, with some researchers report-
ing no effects and some case reports suggesting an 
exacerbation of pulmonary hypertension during re-
warming.729,730 Sarkar et al731 reported no difference 
in pulmonary hypertension between hypothermic and 
normothermic groups whether using whole body or 
focal head cooling, and Shankaran et al726 reported no 
differences in nitric oxide use or ECLS in asphyxiated 
babies with proven pulmonary hypertension who un-
derwent hypothermia.
Hypothermia can prolong the PR and corrected QT 
intervals732; however, hypothermia has been applied 
successfully in patients with congenital QT syndrome 
and cardiac arrest.733 Significant hypothermia is asso-
ciated with increased risk of atrial and ventricular ar-
rhythmias, but there is no evidence in the neonatal or 
adult randomized controlled trials that hypothermia 
(32°C–34°C) subjects had more clinically significant 
arrhythmias than normothermia subjects (aside from 
sinus bradycardia).726,734,735 Additionally, in pediatric car-
diac arrest, children who were treated with hypother-
mia had fewer rearrests.719 To reduce the incidence of 
arrhythmia during therapeutic hypothermia, it can be 
helpful to provide adequate sedation and analgesia to 
lessen endogenous catecholamine release, to promptly 
treat acidosis and electrolyte disturbances, and to avoid 
medications that could exacerbate or prolong the QT 
interval.
Gaps in Knowledge
Prospective studies of the validity of specific MRI find-
ings on predicting future neuromotor or cognitive defi-
cits are lacking in pediatrics. Because a large proportion 
of seizures after cardiac arrest are electrographic only 
(not clinically apparent), there is a demonstrated need 
to perform continuous electroencephalography to de-
tect seizures. Although the presence of seizures after 
cardiac arrest has been associated with increased risk of 
death, it is unclear whether detecting and treating the 
seizures with anticonvulsant agents actually improves 
neurocognitive outcomes. Possible unintended conse-
quences of anticonvulsant therapy include sedation and 
lowering of blood pressure.
Commercially available NIRS instruments calculate 
relative cerebral oxygen saturations without identifying 
whether oxygen metabolism or Do2 are limiting factors. 
As such, NIRS thresholds may have limited value. Pro-
spective studies of cerebral oxygen saturation trends 
after cardiac arrest are needed.
Vital questions to be answered regarding the use 
of targeted temperature management in infants and 
children after in-hospital cardiac arrest include opti-
mal target temperature and duration of control (hy-
pothermia versus normothermia). In addition, more 
information will be needed to determine the optimal 
method of targeted temperature management for 
children with heart disease who experience in-hospi-
tal cardiac arrest.
Recommendations: Post–Cardiac Arrest 
Stabilization – Neurological Assessment 
and Management
1. There is no clinical, laboratory, or neurologi-
cal test that accurately predicts neurologi-
cal outcome in children who have survived 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e755
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
cardiac arrest. Brain MRI with other clinical, 
laboratory, and neurological tests may be 
considered to assist in neuroprognostication 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. The use of head CT or ultrasound may be 
considered in the child or infant after car-
diac arrest to assess for cerebral edema, 
impending herniation syndromes, or intra-
cranial hemorrhage (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Brain MRI can be useful to diagnose acute 
brain injury that results from cardiac arrest; 
however, children with CHD may have preex-
isting white matter changes and other neu-
roanatomic abnormalities (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
4. After cardiac arrest, continuous electroen-
cephalography monitoring may be help-
ful to identify clinically occult seizures and 
status epilepticus in children who have an 
unreliable neurological examination or 
who remain comatose (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
5. Seizure detection and management can 
be considered to prevent secondary brain 
insult after cardiac arrest (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
6. After resuscitation from pediatric cardiac 
arrest, the use of NIRS to assess and manage 
cerebral Do2 may be considered (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence B).
7. After resuscitation from pediatric cardiac 
arrest, oxygen administration tailored to tar-
get the “appropriate” oxygen saturation for 
the individual patient can be beneficial (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence B).
8. It is important to avoid hyperoxia in new-
borns or excessive arterial oxygen saturation 
in patients at risk for pulmonary overcircu-
lation (Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence B). 
(For further information, see Single-Ventricle 
Lesions.)
9. After resuscitation from pediatric cardiac 
arrest, it is reasonable to target normocapnia 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
10. After resuscitation from pediatric cardiac 
arrest, continuous core temperature moni-
toring is recommended (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
11. After resuscitation from pediatric cardiac 
arrest, management strategies to prevent 
and treat hyperthermia are recommended 
for all patients to minimize secondary neu-
rological injury (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
12. For 
neuroprotection 
for 
children 
who 
remain comatose after resuscitation from 
out-of-hospital 
pediatric 
cardiac 
arrest, 
targeted temperature management with 
either strict maintenance of normothermia 
(36°C–37.5°C) for 5 days or 2 days of hypo-
thermia (32°C–34°C) followed by 3 days of 
normothermia (36°C–37.5°C) is reasonable 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Acute Kidney Injury Management
Organ dysfunction is common after resuscitation 
from cardiac arrest, and the kidney is very suscep-
tible to ischemic injury. Although the impact and 
prognosis of acute kidney injury (AKI) have been 
well described in other forms of ischemia, such as 
cardiopulmonary bypass, and in other critical illness-
es, such as sepsis, the incidence and outcome of AKI 
after cardiac arrest have not been well described. 
In a recent series of 311 adults who survived out-
of-hospital cardiac arrest, more than one-third had 
some degree of postresuscitation renal dysfunc-
tion.736 In other critical illnesses, AKI has been in-
dependently associated with worse short- and 
long-term outcomes, including higher mortality. As 
a result, measures to prevent or attenuate AKI will 
likely be beneficial.
The diagnosis of AKI has been made difficult by 
a lack of a “gold standard” diagnostic test. The 
serum creatinine concentration is influenced by a 
number of factors, including fluid status and nutri-
tional state, and is unreliable in the acute setting. 
Additionally, the reported incidence of AKI has var-
ied greatly in the absence of a standard consensus 
definition. These challenges led to the proposed 
RIFLE criteria.737 The RIFLE consensus definition is a 
mnemonic for 3 levels of severity (risk, injury, and 
failure) and 2 outcomes (loss and end-stage kidney 
disease). These criteria have been validated in criti-
cally ill adults and children. In 2012, to further refine 
AKI definition and achieve consistent terminology, 
KDIGO (Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes) 
created guidelines for the evaluation and manage-
ment of AKI, including a definition and classification 
of AKI. AKI diagnosis with the KDIGO guidelines can 
be made by oliguria or creatinine elevation criteria. 
Importantly, the KDIGO definition of AKI was not 
modified for pediatric patients. More recently, novel 
serum and urine biomarkers have been discovered 
and validated for the early diagnosis of AKI.738 The 
theoretical advantage of using these biomarkers is 
the opportunity for very early diagnosis of AKI, be-
fore irreversible damage has occurred. This could en-
able attenuation of the injury or improved recovery 
via therapeutic intervention.
Despite multiple studies of and guidelines for 
management of AKI, there are no evidence-based 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e756
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
recommendations for prevention and treatment of 
ischemic AKI. Current management involves sup-
portive care, including optimizing hemodynamics to 
maintain renal perfusion, with careful balancing of 
fluid status to optimize intravascular volume without 
fluid overload, and avoiding nephrotoxins (including 
medications).739 In studies of AKI in other critical ill-
nesses, the use of sodium bicarbonate and N-acet-
ylcysteine for emergency procedures using contrast 
media and the judicious use of hemofiltration740 have 
been beneficial, but these have not been specifically 
evaluated after cardiac arrest. Similarly, although the 
use of renal replacement therapy for the prevention 
or early treatment of fluid overload has reduced mor-
tality in other forms of AKI,741 the frequency of use 
and ideal timing for renal replacement therapy in the 
post–cardiac arrest care of children with heart dis-
ease has not been studied.
The response of the kidney to therapeutic hypo-
thermia after cardiac arrest is unclear. A retrospective 
review of asphyxiated newborns treated with thera-
peutic hypothermia suggested a lower incidence of 
AKI than in historical reports.742 In a systematic re-
view of adult trials, however, therapeutic hypother-
mia was not associated with a reduced incidence of 
AKI or reduced need for dialysis after cardiac arrest. 
However, different definitions and rates of AKI, dif-
ferences in mortality rates, and uncertainty about 
the optimal target cooling temperature confound 
conclusions.743
Our understanding of AKI after cardiac arrest is in-
complete. Predictive factors and diagnosis and treat-
ment of AKI have been limited by a suboptimal diag-
nostic definition. Although progress has been made in 
standardization of nomenclature, the availability of bio-
markers for more rapid and definitive diagnosis should 
facilitate studies addressing the epidemiology and po-
tential therapies of AKI after cardiac arrest. In addition, 
the inclusion of AKI as an outcome in therapeutic stud-
ies after cardiac arrest should provide additional infor-
mation.
Gaps in Knowledge
The diagnosis of AKI is limited by a suboptimal diagnos-
tic standard. In addition, no proven therapies for treat-
ment of ischemic AKI have been established.
Recommendations: Post–Cardiac Arrest 
Stabilization – AKI Management
1. Supportive care can be useful after ischemic 
AKI, including optimizing cardiac output, 
maintaining adequate renal perfusion pres-
sure, optimizing fluid balance while avoiding 
fluid overload, and limiting use of nephrotox-
ins (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Endocrine Management
Glycemic Control
Both hypoglycemia744 and hyperglycemia745 are associ-
ated with poor outcome in critically ill children. Van den 
Berghe and colleagues746,747 reported that controlling 
blood glucose in stress hyperglycemia to within normal 
limits in critically ill adult patients improved survival and 
reduced complications compared with patients allocat-
ed to standard care at higher glucose levels; however, 
other trials in critically ill adults, including a large inter-
national multicenter study,748 failed to clearly demon-
strate improved outcomes with tight glucose control, 
so the role of glycemic control in adult critical care re-
mains hotly debated.749
There are few data available on which to base 
guidelines for the management of glucose after car-
diac arrest in children. In a single-center retrospective 
cohort study of 378 consecutive pediatric cardiovas-
cular surgical patients,750 longer duration of hyper-
glycemia (defined as hours with serum glucose >126 
mg/dL) was associated with longer postoperative 
hospitalization. In the 72 hours after surgery, average 
glucose <110 mg/dL or >143 mg/dL and minimum 
glucose ≤75 mg/dL or peak glucose level ≥250 mg/
dL were all associated with a greater adjusted odds of 
reaching the composite morbidity-mortality endpoint 
(eg, mortality, nosocomial infection, cardiovascular 
failure requiring ECMO, acute renal failure requiring 
dialysis, hepatic dysfunction, or new central nervous 
system injury). The authors concluded that in children 
undergoing complex congenital heart surgery, the 
optimal postoperative glucose range may be 110 to 
126 mg/dL. Although there was a high incidence of 
hypoglycemia, a subsequent follow-up study of neu-
rocognitive outcomes found no important differences 
between children who were hypoglycemic and those 
who were not.751 Tight glucose control in children af-
ter cardiac surgery was not associated with reduced 
mortality but with reduced postoperative troponin 
levels and heart-type fatty acid protein and reduced 
blood lactate concentrations.751 Two large random-
ized controlled trials have addressed glucose control 
after pediatric cardiac surgery. Agus et al752 demon-
strated that tight glucose control did not significantly 
change mortality, length of stay, infection rate, or 
other measures of organ failure in nearly 1000 chil-
dren. In a series of nearly 1400 children in the United 
Kingdom (60% were postoperative), Macrae et al753 
found no difference in the number of days alive and 
free from mechanical ventilation at 30 days after ran-
domization between those with and without tight 
glycemic control. Episodes of severe hypoglycemia 
(≤36 mg/dL) occurred in a higher proportion of those 
in the tight glucose control group that of those re-
ceiving conventional management.753 However, hos-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e757
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
pital discharge occurred significantly earlier in those 
patients with tight glucose control in the noncardiac 
surgical cohort.753
All of these studies differed in design, with markedly 
different patterns in the use of insulin. Further studies 
of glucose control and insulin administration regimens 
in children will be required before definitive recommen-
dations can be made concerning the utility of glucose 
control algorithms in children, including those after car-
diac arrest.
Several animal studies, but no clinical studies in chil-
dren, have shown poorer outcomes when glucose is 
given after or during cardiac arrest. There is also evi-
dence in studies of neonatal hypoxia-ischemia of an as-
sociation between hypoglycemia and subsequent brain 
injury.754–757 Tight glucose control has been shown to 
increase global glucose uptake and to increase cerebral 
metabolic crisis after traumatic brain injury,758 although 
the associated mechanisms are unclear. A further re-
cent report concluded that hypoglycemia aggravates 
critical illness–induced neurocognitive dysfunction to a 
significant extent.753,759
Detection and Management of Adrenal 
Insufficiency
There are insufficient data regarding the incidence of 
adrenal insufficiency after cardiac arrest in children 
with heart disease to accurately assess the scope of 
the problem or to make firm treatment recommenda-
tions. Several studies have shown that relative adrenal 
insufficiency is common after out-of-hospital cardiac 
arrest in adults and is associated with worse out-
comes, including higher mortality.760–765 It is uncertain 
whether the administration of hydrocortisone or oth-
er forms of corticosteroid is beneficial in this group. 
A recent randomized controlled adult trial compared 
survival after conventional cardiac arrest manage-
ment to the administration of vasopressin and a 
single dose of methylprednisolone during the arrest, 
followed by a course of hydrocortisone.766 Higher 
rates of both ROSC and survival-to-hospital-discharge 
with favorable neurological outcome were seen in the 
 
treatment arm.766
There are several reasons for caution in extrapolat-
ing adult data to children, one of which concerns the 
definition of hypoadrenalism. The use of corticotro-
phin stimulation tests and the use of arbitrary levels 
of total or free cortisol to define hypoadrenalism have 
not been validated in children with low cardiac output 
in the pediatric cardiac ICU.400,767 No consistent rela-
tionship between total or free cortisol levels and he-
modynamic status has been observed in children with 
heart disease after cardiopulmonary bypass,399,768,769 
and an accurate and reliable definition of hypoad-
renalism in children with cardiac disease has not yet 
been established.
Steroid administration has been associated with 
short-term hemodynamic benefits for children in vari-
ous shock states, including LCOS after cardiac surgery. 
Observed benefits included an increase in mean arterial 
pressure and a decrease in both heart rate and inotrope 
requirements.401,402,767 The adverse effects from cortico-
steroid administration are well established. Cumulative 
corticosteroid dosing in children with heart disease un-
dergoing surgery has been associated with increased 
risk of postoperative infection and prolonged hospital-
ization.403,404
The uncertain long-term benefits and potential 
harm associated with corticosteroid use prohibits their 
routine administration after cardiac arrest in children 
with heart disease. However, in patients with estab-
lished risk factors for hypoadrenalism or in patients 
with catecholamine-resistant shock, it is reasonable to 
use low-dose hydrocortisone (2–4 mg·kg−1·d−1) or an 
equivalent and assess the impact on short-term hemo-
dynamic status.
Gaps in Knowledge
To date, trials of tight glycemic control in children have 
focused mainly on levels of glycemia. Although they 
differ to some extent in target glucose control limits, 
these studies differed significantly in insulin adminis-
tration regimens. It is not known whether different 
insulin administration regimens might have led to dif-
ferent results. Future studies should therefore focus on 
the roles of both glucose and insulin on the outcome 
and investigate whether there are identifiable sub-
groups of cardiac patients, including those requiring 
CPR, who might predictably benefit from glucose con-
trol or insulin treatment. The potential mechanisms by 
which hyperglycemia may adversely influence clinical 
outcomes in critically ill children are incompletely un-
derstood.
No consistent definition of hypoadrenalism has 
been validated in children with heart disease. The 
incidence of hypoadrenalism after cardiac arrest in 
these patients is unknown. It is unclear what, if any, 
are the indications for corticosteroid administration 
in children with heart disease, either during or after 
cardiac arrest.
Recommendations: Post–Cardiac Arrest 
Stabilization – Endocrine Management
1. After CPR in children with heart disease, 
hypoglycemia is harmful and should be 
avoided (Class III: Harm; Level of Evidence B).
2. The administration of low-dose hydrocorti-
sone to children with heart disease may be 
considered in postarrest, catecholamine-resis-
tant shock (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e758
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
MEDICAL-LEGAL AND ETHICAL 
CONSIDERATIONS
Ethical decision making during the resuscitation of neo-
nates, infant, children, and adults with CHD must be 
based on clear communication and a sound physician-
nurse-patient-family relationship, as well as knowledge 
of ethical principles (including beneficence, nonmalefi-
cence, and autonomy), justice, and an understanding 
of current standards of care for patients with CHD. 
Guidelines for healthcare providers who are faced with 
ethical and legal considerations during acute resuscita-
tion have been provided in the 2010 AHA Guidelines 
for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency 
Cardiovascular Care770 and in the 2015 AHA Guidelines 
Update for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emer-
gency Cardiovascular Care.771
On the basis of the Born Alive Infant Protection Act, 
any newborn infant believed to be alive, no matter 
how severe the underlying disease or pathology, has 
the right to be assessed by a healthcare provider for vi-
ability.772 The decision to not initiate resuscitative mea-
sures and cardiac interventions is based on life-limiting 
comorbidities rather than the CHD alone. Patients with 
most forms of CHD, including HLHS, have a reasonable 
likelihood of survival. Therefore, an independent deci-
sion by a clinician to not resuscitate and not initiate car-
diac intervention based on CHD alone is not considered 
to be standard of care.773,774 Furthermore, based on the 
Baby Doe rulings, decisions on whether to initiate care, 
continue intensive care management, or resuscitate 
cannot be based solely on the perceived future quality 
of life or judgment made by clinicians.775,776 Initiation or 
termination of intensive care management or a resus-
citation event should be based on futility of care. If the 
medical condition is considered futile (in that no medi-
cal or surgical management will prevent the infant from 
having an inevitable death, or the chance of survival is 
extremely low and the burden of care and potential for 
suffering is high), redirection of care should be sought. 
Note that “futility of care” in any given case may not 
be easy to define. Clinicians and parents might assess 
the parameters that determine futility differently, and 
they may disagree whether futility has been reached. 
Parents/guardians and families may see burden of care 
quite differently, which may modify the overall assess-
ment of futility parameters. If after resuscitation, dis-
cussions between parents/guardians for the child and 
the care team relative to futility and possible termina-
tion of care are at an impasse, an ethics consultation 
can be helpful.
Patients with CHD are often critically ill, and inva-
sive life-sustaining therapies, including CPR and ECLS, 
might be necessary to achieve good outcomes. Timely 
multidisciplinary evaluation of the individual patient 
that considers all interventional and medical options 
is expected before a decision about futility of care 
 
is made.
Once futility of care is present, the “do no harm” 
principle (nonmaleficence) becomes relevant, because 
the clinician is then providing treatment that would 
merely prolong dying and/or not be effective in ame-
liorating or correcting all the infant’s life-threatening 
conditions.
As noted at the beginning of this consensus state-
ment, there are considerable pathophysiological con-
siderations in patients with CHD that alter the effective-
ness of resuscitation in the event of a cardiac arrest. The 
AHA PALS recommendations were developed for infants 
and children with normal cardiac anatomy. It is impor-
tant to emphasize that any such recommendations are 
guidelines, based on the best available evidence at the 
time, and they will continue to be revised. They are not 
to be viewed as hard rules. There are specific circum-
stances in which such recommendations will need to be 
modified, such as patients with single-ventricle physiol-
ogy. More important, the effectiveness of resuscitation 
must always be monitored, and the technique (includ-
ing the rate of chest compressions, the specific drugs 
used, and the use of ECLS) must be modified according 
to the known underlying pathophysiology and patient 
response. Therefore, clinicians are not vulnerable to 
legal penalty if they deviate from the PALS guidelines 
as written. Nevertheless, it is very important that man-
agers or leaders of resuscitation events explain to the 
team the rationale for modification of techniques and 
priorities during resuscitation and that this information 
be clearly documented in the subsequent debriefing 
and notes describing the event.
Gaps in Knowledge
There appears to be considerable variation in counsel-
ing practices among professionals regarding infants 
with CHD. Future work is needed to establish the ex-
pectation of regular multidisciplinary ethical discussions 
as part of standard of care for patients with CHD. The 
more data available to establish best practices, the bet-
ter the cardiovascular team can evaluate their outcomes 
and make recommendations to families.
Recommendations: Medical-Legal and 
Ethical Considerations
1. Discussions with families and patients with 
CHD about treatment options, outcomes, 
and “futility of care” should be multidis-
ciplinary and occur when possible before 
acute resuscitation events (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
2. Team debriefing and documentation of 
resuscitation efforts should be recorded 
accurately (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e759
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
SUMMARY
Pediatric patients with congenital and acquired heart 
disease pose unique challenges in the periarrest peri-
od. The risk of cardiac arrest is increased as a result of 
potential imbalance between SBF and PBF, altered ven-
tricular volume and pressure loads, systolic and diastolic 
ventricular dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, valvar 
stenosis and insufficiency, and other alterations in he-
modynamics. These perturbations can evolve rapidly, 
producing an inadequate balance between oxygen sup-
ply and demand, resulting in cardiac arrest. An under-
standing of the evolving physiology is critical to prevent 
cardiac arrest in this high-risk population. Thus, close 
invasive and noninvasive monitoring and anticipatory 
care, including a low threshold for transfer to intensive 
care, cardiology/intensive care consultation, or hospital 
readmission, are important to avoid hemodynamic in-
stability and to prevent cardiac arrest.
Once cardiac arrest occurs, it is appropriate to initi-
ate standard resuscitation measures, but these could 
be unsuccessful because the child’s underlying physi-
ology can limit effective cardiac output and Do2 dur-
ing chest compressions. As a result, clinicians must 
individualize resuscitation strategies in light of each 
patient’s cardiovascular anatomy and physiology. Early 
consideration of other interventions, including ECPR, 
can be lifesaving.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or po-
tential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or 
a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. 
Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete and 
submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be 
perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart Association Science 
Advisory and Coordinating Committee on March 15, 2017, and the Ameri-
can Heart Association Executive Committee on April 17, 2017. A copy of the 
document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using ei-
ther “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. 
To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@
wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as 
follows: Marino BS, Tabbutt S, MacLaren G, Hazinski MF, Adatia I, Atkins DL, 
Checchia PA, DeCaen A, Fink EL, Hoffman GM, Jefferies JL, Kleinman M, Kraw-
czeski CD, Licht DJ, Macrae D, Ravishankar C, Samson RA, Thiagarajan RR, 
Toms R, Tweddell J, Laussen PC; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Congenital Heart Defects Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Dis-
ease in the Young; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascular 
and Stroke Nursing; Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; and 
Emergency Cardiovascular Care Committee. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
in infants and children with cardiac disease: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000524.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA 
Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guide-
lines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/
or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express per-
mission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permis-
sion are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright- 
Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright 
Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Disclosures
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speaker’s 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Bradley S. 
Marino
Ann & Robert H.  
Lurie Children’s 
Hospital of Chicago, 
Pediatrics
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Peter C. 
Laussen
Hospital for Sick 
Children, Critical Care 
Medicine, Toronto 
(Canada)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Ian Adatia
University of Alberta 
Pediatrics, Edmonton 
(Canada)
Actelion†; NHLBI†; 
Mallinckrodt 
Pharmaceuticals†
None
None
None
None
Eli Lilly*
None
Dianne L. 
Atkins
University of Iowa, 
Pediatrics
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Paul A. 
Checchia
Texas Children’s 
Hospital, Pediatrics
NIH*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Allan DeCaen
University of Alberta, 
Pediatrics, Edmonton 
(Canada)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Ericka L. Fink
Children’s Hospital  
of Pittsburgh of  
UPMC, Critical Care  
Medicine
PCORI†; NIH†
None
None
None
None
None
None
(Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e760
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Mary Fran 
Hazinski
Vanderbilt University, 
School of Nursing
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
George M. 
Hoffman
Children’s Hospital  
of Wisconsin,  
Anesthesia
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
John L. 
Jefferies
Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical 
Center, Pediatrics
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Monica 
Kleinman
Children’s Hospital, 
Boston, Pediatrics
Progeria Research 
Foundation†; NEAR-
4-KIDS AHRQ*; 
Mooney Family 
Foundation†; NIH-
NHLBI RO1 Thiamine 
in Resuscitation*
None
Westchester 
Medical 
Center*
None
None
American 
Heart 
Association*
Children’s 
Hospital 
Anesthesia 
Foundation†
Catherine D. 
Krawczeski
Lucile Packard 
Children’s Hospital 
Stanford
None
None
None
None
None
None
Stanford 
University†
Daniel J. Licht
The Children’s Hospital 
of Philadelphia, 
Pediatrics
NIH*
None
None
None
None
None
None
Graeme 
MacLaren
National University 
Hospital (Singapore)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Duncan 
Macrae
Royal Brompton and 
Harefield Hospitals, 
London(United 
Kingdom)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Chitra 
Ravishankar
Children’s Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Pediatrics
None
None
None
None
None
Danone 
Medical 
Nutrition 
Trading*
None
Ricardo A. 
Samson
Children’s Heart 
Center-Nevada
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Sarah Tabbutt
University of 
California, San 
Francisco, Pediatrics
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Ravi R. 
Thiagarajan
Children’s Hospital, 
Pediatrics
None
Co-Chair of 
Extracorporeal 
Life Support 
Organization 
and Registry*
None
None
None
Bristol-Myers 
Squibb*; 
Pfizer*; rEVO 
Biologics*
None
Rune Toms
University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, 
Pediatrics
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
James 
Tweddell
Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical 
Center, Surgery
None
None
None
Finley Law Firm, 
PC, Des Moines, 
IA*; Dickie, 
McCarney & 
Chilcote, PC, 
Pittsburgh, PA*
None
CorMatrix*
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on 
the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if 
(a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the 
voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than 
“significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speaker’s 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e761
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
REFERENCES
 1. Standards and guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and 
emergency cardiac care (ECC) [published correction appears in JAMA. 
1981;246:920]. JAMA. 1980;244:453–509.
 2. Standards and guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) and 
Emergency Cardiac Care (ECC) [published correction appears in JAMA. 
1986;256:1727]. JAMA. 1986;255:2905–89.
 3. de Caen AR, Berg MD, Chameides L, Gooden CK, Hickey RW, Scott HF, 
Sutton RM, Tijssen JA, Topjian A, van der Jagt ÉW, Schexnayder SM, Sam-
son RA. Part 12: pediatric advanced life support: 2015 American Heart As-
sociation guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emer-
gency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2015;132(suppl 2):S526–S542. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000266.
 4. Kleinman ME, Chameides L, Schexnayder SM, Samson RA, Hazinski MF, 
Atkins DL, Berg MD, de Caen AR, Fink EL, Freid EB, Hickey RW, Marino BS, 
Nadkarni VM, Proctor LT, Qureshi FA, Sartorelli K, Topjian A, van der Jagt 
EW, Zaritsky AL. Part 14: pediatric advanced life support: 2010 American 
Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emer-
gency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2010;122(suppl 3):S876–S908. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.971101.
 5. Ortmann L, Prodhan P
, Gossett J, Schexnayder S, Berg R, Nadkarni V, 
Bhutta A; for the American Heart Association’s Get With the Guide-
lines–Resuscitation Investigators. Outcomes after in-hospital cardi-
ac arrest in children with cardiac disease: a report from Get With the 
Guidelines–Resuscitation. 
Circulation. 
2011;124:2329–2337. 
doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.013466.
 6. Meaney PA, Bobrow BJ, Mancini ME, Christenson J, de Caen AR, Bhanji F, 
Abella BS, Kleinman ME, Edelson DP
, Berg RA, Aufderheide TP
, Menon V, 
Leary M; on behalf of the CPR Quality Summit Investigators, the American 
Heart Association Emergency Cardiovascular Care Committee, and the 
Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, Perioperative and Resuscita-
tion. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation quality: improving cardiac resuscita-
tion outcomes both inside and outside the hospital: a consensus state-
ment from the American Heart Association [published corrections appear 
in Circulation. 2013;128:e120 and Circulation. 2013;128:e408]. Circula-
tion. 2013;128:417–435. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31829d8654.
 7. Joffe AR, Lequier L, Robertson CM. Pediatric outcomes after extracorpore-
al membrane oxygenation for cardiac disease and for cardiac arrest: a re-
view. ASAIO J. 2012;58:297–310. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0b013e31825a21ff.
 8. Kane DA, Thiagarajan RR, Wypij D, Scheurer MA, Fynn-Thompson F, 
Emani S, del Nido PJ, Betit P
, Laussen PC. Rapid-response extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation to support cardiopulmonary resuscitation in chil-
dren with cardiac disease. Circulation. 2010;122(suppl):S241–S248. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.928390.
 9. Kushner FG, Hand M, Smith SC Jr, King SB 3rd, Anderson JL, Antman EM, 
Bailey SR, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, Casey DE Jr, Green LA, Hochman JS, 
Jacobs AK, Krumholz HM, Morrison DA, Ornato JP
, Pearle DL, Peterson 
ED, Sloan MA, Whitlow PL, Williams DO. 2009 Focused updates: ACC/
AHA guidelines for the management of patients with ST-elevation myo-
cardial infarction (updating the 2004 guideline and 2007 focused update) 
and ACC/AHA/SCAI guidelines on percutaneous coronary intervention 
(updating the 2005 guideline and 2007 focused update): a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines [published correction appears in Circula-
tion. 2010;121:e257]. Circulation. 2009;120:2271–306.
 10. Topjian AA, Nadkarni VM, Berg RA. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in chil-
dren. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2009;15:203–208.
 11. Anderson JB, Beekman RH 3rd, Kugler JD, Rosenthal GL, Jenkins KJ, 
Klitzner TS, Martin GR, Neish SR, Brown DW, Mangeot C, King E, Peterson 
LE, Provost L, Lannon C; for the National Pediatric Cardiology Quality Im-
provement Collaborative. Improvement in Interstage survival in a national 
pediatric cardiology learning network. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 
2015;8:428–436. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.115.001956.
 12. Knudson JD, Neish SR, Cabrera AG, Lowry AW, Shamszad P
, Morales DL, 
Graves DE, Williams EA, Rossano JW. Prevalence and outcomes of pediat-
ric in-hospital cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the United States: an anal-
ysis of the Kids’ Inpatient Database. Crit Care Med. 2012;40:2940–2944. 
doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31825feb3f.
 13. Lowry AW, Knudson JD, Cabrera AG, Graves DE, Morales DL, Rossano 
JW. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in hospitalized children with cardio-
vascular disease: estimated prevalence and outcomes from the Kids’ 
Inpatient Database. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2013;14:248–255. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3182713329.
 14. Peddy SB, Hazinski MF, Laussen PC, Thiagarajan RR, Hoffman GM, Nad-
karni V, Tabbutt S. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation: special considerations 
for infants and children with cardiac disease. Cardiol Young. 2007;17(sup-
pl 2):116–126. doi: 10.1017/S1047951107001229.
 15. Kleinman ME, de Caen AR, Chameides L, Atkins DL, Berg RA, Berg MD, 
Bhanji F, Biarent D, Bingham R, Coovadia AH, Hazinski MF, Hickey RW, 
Nadkarni VM, Reis AG, Rodriguez-Nunez A, Tibballs J, Zaritsky AL, Zide-
man D; Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life Support Chapter Collaborators. 
Pediatric basic and advanced life support: 2010 International consensus 
on cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care 
science with treatment recommendations. Pediatrics. 2010;126:e1261–
e1318. doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-2972A.
 16. Topjian AA, Berg RA, Nadkarni VM. Pediatric cardiopulmonary resus-
citation: advances in science, techniques, and outcomes. Pediatrics. 
2008;122:1086–1098. doi: 10.1542/peds.2007-3313.
 17. Girotra S, Spertus JA, Li Y, Berg RA, Nadkarni VM, Chan PS; for the Ameri-
can Heart Association Get With the Guidelines–Resuscitation Investiga-
tors. Survival trends in pediatric in-hospital cardiac arrests: an analysis 
from Get With the Guidelines-Resuscitation. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Out-
comes. 2013;6:42–49. doi: 10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.112.967968.
 18. Tweddell JS, Hoffman GM, Fedderly RT, Ghanayem NS, Kampine JM, 
Berger S, Mussatto KA, Litwin SB. Patients at risk for low systemic oxygen 
delivery after the Norwood procedure. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69:1893–
1899.
 19. Tweddell JS, Hoffman GM, Mussatto KA, Fedderly RT, Berger S, Jaquiss 
RD, Ghanayem NS, Frisbee SJ, Litwin SB. Improved survival of patients 
undergoing palliation of hypoplastic left heart syndrome: lessons learned 
from 115 consecutive patients. Circulation. 2002;106(suppl 1):I82–I89.
 20. Tabbutt S, Dominguez TE, Ravishankar C, Marino BS, Gruber PJ, Wer-
novsky G, Gaynor JW, Nicolson SC, Spray TL. Outcomes after the stage 
I reconstruction comparing the right ventricular to pulmonary artery 
conduit with the modified Blalock Taussig shunt. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2005;80:1582–90. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2005.04.046.
 21. Tweddell JS, Hoffman GM. Postoperative management in patients with 
complex congenital heart disease. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr 
Card Surg Annu. 2002;5:187–205. doi: 10.1053/pcsu.2002.31499.
 22. Tibby S, Hoffman G. Worksheet for Evidence-Based Review of Science for 
Emergency Cardiac Care: Resuscitation of the Patient With Single Ven-
tricle. Worksheet No. Peds-059b. International Liaison Committee on Re-
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’ 
Bureau/
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
John M. Costello
Ann & Robert H. Lurie 
Children’s Hospital of Chicago
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Thomas J. Kulik
Boston Children’s Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Steven M. 
Schwartz
The Hospital for Sick Children 
(Canada)
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the Disclosure 
Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives $10 
000 or more 
during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns 
$10 
000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e762
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
suscitation. 2010. http://circ.ahajournals.org/sites/default/files/additional-
assets/pdfs/Peds-059.pdf. Accessed March 23, 2013.
 23. Feinstein JA, Benson DW, Dubin AM, Cohen MS, Maxey DM, Mahle WT, 
Pahl E, Villafañe J, Bhatt AB, Peng LF, Johnson BA, Marsden AL, Daniels CJ, 
Rudd NA, Caldarone CA, Mussatto KA, Morales DL, Ivy DD, Gaynor JW, 
Tweddell JS, Deal BJ, Furck AK, Rosenthal GL, Ohye RG, Ghanayem NS, 
Cheatham JP
, Tworetzky W, Martin GR. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: 
current considerations and expectations [published correction appears in J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:544]. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59(suppl):S1–42. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.09.022.
 24. Marino BS, Tibby SM, Hoffman GM. Resuscitation of the patient with the 
functionally univentricular heart. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2013;9:148–157.
 25. Ghanayem NS, Tweddell JS, Hoffman GM, Mussatto K, Jaquiss RD. Op-
timal timing of the second stage of palliation for hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome facilitated through home monitoring, and the results of early 
cavopulmonary anastomosis. Cardiol Young. 2006;16(suppl 1):61–66. 
doi: 10.1017/S1047951105002349.
 26. Ohye RG, Sleeper LA, Mahony L, Newburger JW, Pearson GD, Lu M, Gold-
berg CS, Tabbutt S, Frommelt PC, Ghanayem NS, Laussen PC, Rhodes 
JF, Lewis AB, Mital S, Ravishankar C, Williams IA, Dunbar-Masterson C, 
Atz AM, Colan S, Minich LL, Pizarro C, Kanter KR, Jaggers J, Jacobs JP
, 
Krawczeski CD, Pike N, McCrindle BW, Virzi L, Gaynor JW; Pediatric Heart 
Network Investigators. Comparison of shunt types in the Norwood proce-
dure for single-ventricle lesions. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1980–1992. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa0912461.
 27. Graham EM, Forbus GA, Bradley SM, Shirali GS, Atz AM. Incidence and 
outcome of cardiopulmonary resuscitation in patients with shunted single 
ventricle: advantage of right ventricle to pulmonary artery shunt. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2006;131:e7–e8. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2005.12.028.
 28. Ohye RG, Schonbeck JV, Eghtesady P
, Laussen PC, Pizarro C, Shrader P
, 
Frank DU, Graham EM, Hill KD, Jacobs JP
, Kanter KR, Kirsh JA, Lambert 
LM, Lewis AB, Ravishankar C, Tweddell JS, Williams IA, Pearson GD; Pe-
diatric Heart Network Investigators. Cause, timing, and location of death 
in the Single Ventricle Reconstruction trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2012;144:907–914. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.04.028.
 29. Tabbutt S, Ghanayem N, Ravishankar C, Sleeper LA, Cooper DS, Frank 
DU, Lu M, Pizarro C, Frommelt P
, Goldberg CS, Graham EM, Krawczeski 
CD, Lai WW, Lewis A, Kirsh JA, Mahony L, Ohye RG, Simsic J, Lodge 
AJ, Spurrier E, Stylianou M, Laussen P; Pediatric Heart Network Investiga-
tors. Risk factors for hospital morbidity and mortality after the Norwood 
procedure: a report from the Pediatric Heart Network Single Ventricle 
Reconstruction trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144:882–895. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.05.019.
 30. Cua CL, Thiagarajan RR, Gauvreau K, Lai L, Costello JM, Wessel DL, Del 
Nido PJ, Mayer JE Jr, Newburger JW, Laussen PC. Early postoperative out-
comes in a series of infants with hypoplastic left heart syndrome undergo-
ing stage I palliation operation with either modified Blalock-Taussig shunt 
or right ventricle to pulmonary artery conduit. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2006;7:238–244. doi: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000201003.38320.63.
 31. Ghanayem NS, Allen KR, Tabbutt S, Atz AM, Clabby ML, Cooper DS, 
Eghtesady P
, Frommelt PC, Gruber PJ, Hill KD, Kaltman JR, Laussen PC, 
Lewis AB, Lurito KJ, Minich LL, Ohye RG, Schonbeck JV, Schwartz SM, 
Singh RK, Goldberg CS; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Interstage 
mortality after the Norwood procedure: results of the multicenter Single 
Ventricle Reconstruction trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144:896–
906. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.05.020.
 32. Rixen D, Siegel JH. Bench-to-bedside review: oxygen debt and its meta-
bolic correlates as quantifiers of the severity of hemorrhagic and post-
traumatic shock. Crit Care. 2005;9:441–453. doi: 10.1186/cc3526.
 33. Hoffman GM, Ghanayem NS, Kampine JM, Berger S, Mussatto KA, Litwin 
SB, Tweddell JS. Venous saturation and the anaerobic threshold in neo-
nates after the Norwood procedure for hypoplastic left heart syndrome. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;70:1515–1520.
 34. Bradley SM, Atz AM. Postoperative management: the role of mixed ve-
nous oxygen saturation monitoring. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr 
Card Surg Annu. 2005;8:22–27.
 35. Tweddell JS, Ghanayem NS, Mussatto KA, Mitchell ME, Lamers LJ, Musa NL, 
Berger S, Litwin SB, Hoffman GM. Mixed venous oxygen saturation moni-
toring after stage 1 palliation for hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Ann Tho-
rac Surg. 2007;84:1301–1310. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2007.05.047.
 36. Hoffman GM, Ghanayem NS, Tweddell JS. Noninvasive assessment of 
cardiac output. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc SurgPediatr Card Surg Annu. 
2005;8:12–21.
 37. Tortoriello TA, Stayer SA, Mott AR, McKenzie ED, Fraser CD, Andropou-
los DB, Chang AC. A noninvasive estimation of mixed venous oxygen 
saturation using near-infrared spectroscopy by cerebral oximetry in pedi-
atric cardiac surgery patients. Paediatr Anaesth. 2005;15:495–503. doi: 
10.1111/j.1460-9592.2005.01488.x.
 38. Kaufman J, Almodovar MC, Zuk J, Friesen RH. Correlation of abdominal 
site near-infrared spectroscopy with gastric tonometry in infants following 
surgery for congenital heart disease. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2008;9:62–
68. doi: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000298640.47574.DA.
 39. Ranucci M, Isgrò G, De la Torre T, Romitti F, Conti D, Carlucci C. Near-
infrared spectroscopy correlates with continuous superior vena cava ox-
ygen saturation in pediatric cardiac surgery patients. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2008;18:1163–1169. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9592.2008.02783.x.
 40. Chakravarti SB, Mittnacht AJ, Katz JC, Nguyen K, Joashi U, Srivastava S. 
Multisite near-infrared spectroscopy predicts elevated blood lactate level in 
children after cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2009;23:663–
667. doi: 10.1053/j.jvca.2009.03.014.
 41. Johnson BA, Hoffman GM, Tweddell JS, Cava JR, Basir M, Mitchell ME, 
Scanlon MC, Mussatto KA, Ghanayem NS. Near-infrared spectroscopy in 
neonates before palliation of hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2009;87:571–577. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2008.10.043.
 42. Bernal NP
, Hoffman GM, Ghanayem NS, Arca MJ. Cerebral and so-
matic near-infrared spectroscopy in normal newborns. J Pediatr Surg. 
2010;45:1306–1310. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2010.02.110.
 43. Ghanayem NS, Wernovsky G, Hoffman GM. Near-infrared spectrosco-
py as a hemodynamic monitor in critical illness. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2011;12(suppl):S27–S32. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e318221173a.
 44. Dabal RJ, Rhodes LA, Borasino S, Law MA, Robert SM, Alten JA. 
Inferior vena cava oxygen saturation monitoring after the Nor-
wood 
procedure. 
Ann 
Thorac 
Surg. 
2013;95:2114–2120. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2013.01.076.
 45. Taeed R, Schwartz SM, Pearl JM, Raake JL, Beekman RH 3rd, Manning PB, 
Nelson DP
. Unrecognized pulmonary venous desaturation early after Nor-
wood palliation confounds Gp:Gs assessment and compromises oxygen 
delivery. Circulation. 2001;103:2699–2704.
 46. Tweddell JS, Hoffman GM, Fedderly RT, Berger S, Thomas JP Jr, Ghanayem 
NS, Kessel MW, Litwin SB. Phenoxybenzamine improves systemic oxygen 
delivery after the Norwood procedure. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999;67:161–
167.
 47. Ghanayem NS, Hoffman GM, Mussatto KA, Frommelt MA, Cava 
JR, Mitchell ME, Tweddell JS. Perioperative monitoring in high-
risk infants after stage 1 palliation of univentricular congenital 
heart disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;140:857–863. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2010.05.002.
 48. Hoffman GM, Brosig CL, Mussatto KA, Tweddell JS, Ghanayem NS. Periop-
erative cerebral oxygen saturation in neonates with hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome and childhood neurodevelopmental outcome. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2013;146:1153–1164. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.12.060.
 49. Hoffman GM, Mussatto KA, Brosig CL, Ghanayem NS, Musa N, Fed-
derly RT, Jaquiss RD, Tweddell JS. Systemic venous oxygen satura-
tion after the Norwood procedure and childhood neurodevelopmen-
tal outcome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;130:1094–1100. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2005.06.029.
 50. Hirsch JC, Charpie JR, Ohye RG, Gurney JG. Near infrared spectroscopy 
(NIRS) should not be standard of care for postoperative management. Se-
min Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2010;13:51–54. doi: 
10.1053/j.pcsu.2010.01.005.
 51. Tweddell JS, Ghanayem NS, Hoffman GM. Pro: NIRS is “standard of care” 
for postoperative management. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr 
Card Surg Annu. 2010;13:44–50. doi: 10.1053/j.pcsu.2010.02.008.
 52. Lowry AW. Resuscitation and perioperative management of the high-
risk single ventricle patient: first-stage palliation. Congenit Heart Dis. 
2012;7:466–478. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0803.2012.00710.x.
 53. Migliavacca F, Pennati G, Dubini G, Fumero R, Pietrabissa R, Urcelay G, 
Bove EL, Hsia TY, de Leval MR. Modeling of the Norwood circulation: ef-
fects of shunt size, vascular resistances, and heart rate. Am J Physiol Heart 
Circ Physiol. 2001;280:H2076–H2086.
 54. Hoffman GM, Tweddell JS, Ghanayem NS, Mussatto KA, Stuth EA, Jaquis 
RD, Berger S. Alteration of the critical arteriovenous oxygen saturation re-
lationship by sustained afterload reduction after the Norwood procedure. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004;127:738–745. doi: 10.1016/S0022.
 55. Wright GE, Crowley DC, Charpie JR, Ohye RG, Bove EL, Kulik TJ. High sys-
temic vascular resistance and sudden cardiovascular collapse in recovering 
Norwood patients. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77:48–52.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e763
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 56. Ramamoorthy C, Tabbutt S, Kurth CD, Steven JM, Montenegro LM, 
Durning S, Wernovsky G, Gaynor JW, Spray TL, Nicolson SC. Effects of 
inspired hypoxic and hypercapnic gas mixtures on cerebral oxygen satu-
ration in neonates with univentricular heart defects. Anesthesiology. 
2002;96:283–288.
 57. Jobes DR, Nicolson SC, Steven JM, Miller M, Jacobs ML, Norwood WI 
Jr. Carbon dioxide prevents pulmonary overcirculation in hypoplastic left 
heart syndrome. Ann Thorac Surg. 1992;54:150–151.
 58. Mott AR, Alomrani A, Tortoriello TA, Perles Z, East DL, Stayer SA. 
Changes in cerebral saturation profile in response to mechanical 
ventilation alterations in infants with bidirectional superior cavopul-
monary connection. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2006;7:346–350. doi: 
10.1097/01.PCC.0000224949.25692.87.
 59. Tabbutt S, Ramamoorthy C, Montenegro LM, Durning SM, Kurth CD, 
Steven JM, Godinez RI, Spray TL, Wernovsky G, Nicolson SC. Impact of 
inspired gas mixtures on preoperative infants with hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome during controlled ventilation. Circulation. 2001;104(suppl 
1):I159–I164.
 60. Li J, Zhang G, Holtby H, Bissonnette B, Wang G, Redington AN, Van Ars-
dell GS. Carbon dioxide–a complex gas in a complex circulation: its effects 
on systemic hemodynamics and oxygen transport, cerebral, and splanch-
nic circulation in neonates after the Norwood procedure. J Thorac Cardio-
vasc Surg. 2008;136:1207–1214. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.02.096.
 61. Li J, Zhang G, McCrindle BW, Holtby H, Humpl T, Cai S, Caldarone CA, 
Redington AN, Van Arsdell GS. Profiles of hemodynamics and oxygen 
transport derived by using continuous measured oxygen consumption 
after the Norwood procedure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2007;133:441–
448. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2006.09.033.
 62. Bove EL, Migliavacca F, de Leval MR, Balossino R, Pennati G, Lloyd TR, 
Khambadkone S, Hsia TY, Dubini G. Use of mathematic modeling to 
compare and predict hemodynamic effects of the modified Blalock-
Taussig and right ventricle-pulmonary artery shunts for hypoplastic left 
heart syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;136:312–320.e2. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2007.04.078.
 63. Pasquali SK, Ohye RG, Lu M, Kaltman J, Caldarone CA, Pizarro C, Dunbar-
Masterson C, Gaynor JW, Jacobs JP
, Kaza AK, Newburger J, Rhodes JF, 
Scheurer M, Silver E, Sleeper LA, Tabbutt S, Tweddell J, Uzark K, Wells 
W, Mahle WT, Pearson GD; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Varia-
tion in perioperative care across centers for infants undergoing the Nor-
wood procedure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144:915–921. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.05.021.
 64. Hsu DT, Zak V, Mahony L, Sleeper LA, Atz AM, Levine JC, Barker PC, 
Ravishankar C, McCrindle BW, Williams RV, Altmann K, Ghanayem NS, 
Margossian R, Chung WK, Border WL, Pearson GD, Stylianou MP
, Mital 
S; for the Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Enalapril in infants with 
single ventricle: results of a multicenter randomized trial. Circulation. 
2010;122:333–340. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.927988.
 65. Ghanayem NS, Jaquiss RD, Cava JR, Frommelt PC, Mussatto KA, Hoff-
man GM, Tweddell JS. Right ventricle-to-pulmonary artery conduit versus 
Blalock-Taussig shunt: a hemodynamic comparison. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2006;82:1603–9; 
discussion 
1609. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2006.05.103.
 66. Fletcher R, Niklason L, Drefeldt B. Gas exchange during controlled ven-
tilation in children with normal and abnormal pulmonary circulation: 
a study using the single breath test for carbon dioxide. Anesth Analg. 
1986;65:645–652.
 67. Fletcher R. End-tidal carbon dioxide as a noninvasive monitor of cir-
culatory status during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Crit Care Med. 
1989;17:970–971.
 68. Fletcher R, Malmkvist G, Lührs C, Mori N, Drefeldt B, Brauer K, Jons-
son B. Isocapnic high frequency jet ventilation: dead space depends on 
frequency, inspiratory time and entrainment. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 
1991;35:153–158.
 69. Short JA, Paris ST, Booker PD, Fletcher R. Arterial to end-tidal carbon di-
oxide tension difference in children with congenital heart disease. Br J 
Anaesth. 2001;86:349–353.
 70. Tugrul M, Camci E, Sungur Z, Pembeci K. The value of end-tidal carbon 
dioxide monitoring during systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt insertion in 
cyanotic children. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2004;18:152–155.
 71. Li JS, Yow E, Berezny KY, Rhodes JF, Bokesch PM, Charpie JR, Forbus GA, 
Mahony L, Boshkov L, Lambert V, Bonnet D, Michel-Behnke I, Graham 
TP
, Takahashi M, Jaggers J, Califf RM, Rakhit A, Fontecave S, Sanders 
SP
. Clinical outcomes of palliative surgery including a systemic-to-pul-
monary artery shunt in infants with cyanotic congenital heart disease: 
does aspirin make a difference? Circulation. 2007;116:293–297. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.652172.
 72. Dirks V, Prêtre R, Knirsch W, Valsangiacomo Buechel ER, Seifert B, Schwei-
ger M, Hübler M, Dave H. Modified Blalock Taussig shunt: a not-so-simple 
palliative procedure. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;44:1096–1102. doi: 
10.1093/ejcts/ezt172.
 73. Wessel DL, Berger F, Li JS, Dähnert I, Rakhit A, Fontecave S, Newburger 
JW; CLARINET Investigators. Clopidogrel in infants with systemic-to-
pulmonary-artery shunts. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:2377–2384. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1114588.
 74. Ravishankar C, Dominguez TE, Kreutzer J, Wernovsky G, Marino BS, Godi-
nez R, Priestley MA, Gruber PJ, Gaynor WJ, Nicolson SC, Spray TL, Tabbutt 
S. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation after stage I reconstruction for 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2006;7:319–323. 
doi: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000227109.82323.CE.
 75. Raymond TT, Cunnyngham CB, Thompson MT, Thomas JA, Dalton HJ, 
Nadkarni VM; American Heart Association National Registry of CPR In-
vestigators. Outcomes among neonates, infants, and children after 
extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation for refractory inhospital 
pediatric cardiac arrest: a report from the National Registry of Cardio-
pulmonary Resuscitation. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2010;11:362–371. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181c0141b.
 76. Wolf MJ, Kanter KR, Kirshbom PM, Kogon BE, Wagoner SF. Extracorporeal 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation for pediatric cardiac patients. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2012;94:874–879. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.04.040.
 77. Allan CK, Thiagarajan RR, del Nido PJ, Roth SJ, Almodovar MC, Laussen 
PC. Indication for initiation of mechanical circulatory support impacts 
survival of infants with shunted single-ventricle circulation supported 
with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2007;133:660–667. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2006.11.013.
 78. Hoffman GM, Tweddell JS. Regional blood flow monitoring in the periop-
erative period. In: Kleinman CS, Seri I. Hemodynamincs and Cardiology: 
Neonatology Questions and Controversies. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 
2012:473–487.
 79. Mahle WT, Spray TL, Wernovsky G, Gaynor JW, Clark BJ 3rd. Survival after 
reconstructive surgery for hypoplastic left heart syndrome: a 15-year ex-
perience from a single institution. Circulation. 2000;102(suppl 3):III136–
III141.
 80. Li J, Zhang G, Holtby HM, McCrindle BW, Cai S, Humpl T, Caldarone CA, 
Williams WG, Redington AN, Van Arsdell GS. Inclusion of oxygen con-
sumption improves the accuracy of arterial and venous oxygen saturation 
interpretation after the Norwood procedure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2006;131:1099–1107. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2005.10.057.
 81. Hehir DA, Dominguez TE, Ballweg JA, Ravishankar C, Marino BS, Bird GL, 
Nicolson SC, Spray TL, Gaynor JW, Tabbutt S. Risk factors for interstage 
death after stage 1 reconstruction of hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
and variants. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;136:94–99, 99.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2007.12.012.
 82. Lacroix J, Demaret P
, Tucci M. Red blood cell transfusion: decision making 
in pediatric intensive care units. Semin Perinatol. 2012;36:225–231. doi: 
10.1053/j.semperi.2012.04.002.
 83. Gupta P
, Jacobs JP
, Pasquali SK, Hill KD, Gaynor JW, O’Brien SM, He M, 
Sheng S, Schexnayder SM, Berg RA, Nadkarni VM, Imamura M, Jacobs 
ML. Epidemiology and outcomes after in-hospital cardiac arrest after 
pediatric cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014;98:2138–2143. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.06.103.
 84. Atkins DL, Berger S, Duff JP
, Gonzales JC, Hunt EA, Joyner BL, Meaney PA, 
Niles DE, Samson RA, Schexnayder SM. Part 11: pediatric basic life support 
and cardiopulmonary resuscitation quality: 2015 American Heart Associa-
tion guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency 
cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2015;132(suppl 2):S519–S525. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000265.
 85. Park JB, Song IK, Lee JH, Kim EH, Kim HS, Kim JT. Optimal chest com-
pression position for patients with a single ventricle during cardiopul-
monary resuscitation. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2016;17:303–306. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0000000000000658.
 86. Sutton RM, Friess SH, Maltese MR, Naim MY, Bratinov G, Weiland TR, Ga-
ruccio M, Bhalala U, Nadkarni VM, Becker LB, Berg RA. Hemodynamic-di-
rected cardiopulmonary resuscitation during in-hospital cardiac arrest. Re-
suscitation. 2014;85:983–986. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2014.04.015.
 87. Berens RJ, Cassidy LD, Matchey J, Campbell D, Colpaert KD, Welch T, Law-
son M, Peterson C, O’Flynn J, Dearth M, Tieves KS. Probability of survival 
based on etiology of cardiopulmonary arrest in pediatric patients. Paediatr 
Anaesth. 2011;21:834–840. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9592.2010.03479.x.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e764
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 88. Welke KF, Diggs BS, Karamlou T. Chance, bias, and confounding: threats 
to valid measurement of quality in the context of pediatric cardiac surgery. 
Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2010;13:79–83. 
doi: 10.1053/j.pcsu.2010.01.003.
 89. Welke KF, Karamlou T, Ungerleider RM, Diggs BS. Mortality rate is 
not a valid indicator of quality differences between pediatric car-
diac surgical programs. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010;89:139–144. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2009.08.058.
 90. Wernovsky G, Ghanayem N, Ohye RG, Bacha EA, Jacobs JP
, Gaynor 
JW, Tabbutt S. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: consensus and con-
troversies in 2007. Cardiol Young. 2007;17(suppl 2):75–86. doi: 
10.1017/S1047951107001187.
 91. Hoskote A, Li J, Hickey C, Erickson S, Van Arsdell G, Stephens D, Holtby 
H, Bohn D, Adatia I. The effects of carbon dioxide on oxygenation and 
systemic, cerebral, and pulmonary vascular hemodynamics after the 
bidirectional superior cavopulmonary anastomosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2004;44:1501–1509. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2004.06.061.
 92. Li J, Hoskote A, Hickey C, Stephens D, Bohn D, Holtby H, Van Arsdell G, 
Redington AN, Adatia I. Effect of carbon dioxide on systemic oxygen-
ation, oxygen consumption, and blood lactate levels after bidirectional 
superior cavopulmonary anastomosis. Crit Care Med. 2005;33:984–989.
 93. Fogel MA, Durning S, Wernovsky G, Pollock AN, Gaynor JW, Nicolson S. 
Brain versus lung: hierarchy of feedback loops in single-ventricle patients 
with superior cavopulmonary connection. Circulation. 2004;110(suppl 
1):II147–II152. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000138346.34596.99.
 94. Bradley SM, Atz AM, Simsic JM. Redefining the impact of oxygen and 
hyperventilation after the Norwood procedure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2004;127:473–480. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2003.09.028.
 95. Bradley SM, Simsic JM, Atz AM. Hemodynamic effects of inspired 
carbon dioxide after the Norwood procedure. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2001;72:2088–2093.
 96. Bradley SM, Simsic JM, Mulvihill DM. Hypoventilation improves oxygen-
ation after bidirectional superior cavopulmonary connection. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;126:1033–1039. doi: 10.1016/S0022.
 97. Bradley SM, Simsic JM, Mulvihill DM. Hyperventilation impairs oxygen-
ation after bidirectional superior cavopulmonary connection. Circulation. 
1998;98(suppl):II372–II376.
 98. Furck AK, Hansen JH, Uebing A, Scheewe J, Jung O, Kramer HH. The 
impact of afterload reduction on the early postoperative course af-
ter the Norwood operation: a 12-year single-centre experience. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2010;37:289–295. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2009.07.051.
 99. Shekerdemian LS, Shore DF, Lincoln C, Bush A, Redington AN. Negative-
pressure ventilation improves cardiac output after right heart surgery. 
Circulation. 1996;94(suppl):II49–II55.
 100. Shekerdemian LS, Bush A, Shore DF, Lincoln C, Redington AN. 
Cardiopulmonary interactions after Fontan operations: augmenta-
tion of cardiac output using negative pressure ventilation. Circulation. 
1997;96:3934–3942.
 101. Metzger A, Matsuura T, McKnite S, Marino BS, Nadkarni VM, 
Yannopoulos D. Intrathoracic pressure regulation improves 24-hour 
survival in a pediatric porcine model of hemorrhagic shock. Pediatr Res. 
2011;70:267–271. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e3182275232.
 102. Walsh MA, Merat M, La Rotta G, Joshi P
, Joshi V, Tran T, Jarvis S, 
Caldarone CA, Van Arsdell GS, Redington AN, Kavanagh BP
. Airway 
pressure release ventilation improves pulmonary blood flow in in-
fants after cardiac surgery. Crit Care Med. 2011;39:2599–2604. doi: 
10.1097/CCM.0b013e318228297a.
 103. Jolley M, Thiagarajan RR, Barrett CS, Salvin JW, Cooper DS, Rycus PT, 
Teele SA. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in patients undergo-
ing superior cavopulmonary anastomosis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2014;148:1512–1518. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.04.028.
 104. Cullen S, Shore D, Redington A. Characterization of right ventricular 
diastolic performance after complete repair of tetralogy of Fallot: re-
strictive physiology predicts slow postoperative recovery. Circulation. 
1995;91:1782–1789.
 105. Gatzoulis MA, Clark AL, Cullen S, Newman CG, Redington AN. Right 
ventricular diastolic function 15 to 35 years after repair of tetralogy 
of Fallot: restrictive physiology predicts superior exercise performance. 
Circulation. 1995;91:1775–1781.
 106. Norgård G, Gatzoulis MA, Moraes F, Lincoln C, Shore DF, Shinebourne 
EA, Redington AN. Relationship between type of outflow tract re-
pair and postoperative right ventricular diastolic physiology in te-
tralogy of Fallot: implications for long-term outcome. Circulation. 
1996;94:3276–3280.
 107. Penny DJ, Hayek Z, Redington AN. The effects of positive and negative 
extrathoracic pressure ventilation on pulmonary blood flow after the to-
tal cavopulmonary shunt procedure. Int J Cardiol. 1991;30:128–130.
 108. Redington A, Penny D, Rigby M, Hayes A. Antegrade diastolic pulmonary 
arterial flow as a marker of right ventricular restriction after complete 
repair of pulmonary atresia with intact septum and critical pulmonary 
valvar stenosis. Cardiol Young. 1992;2:383–386.
 109. Guyton AC, Lindsey AW, Gilluly JJ. The limits of right ventricular compen-
sation following acute increase in pulmonary circulatory resistance. Circ 
Res. 1954;2:326–332.
 110. Guyton RA, Andrews MJ, Hickey PR, Michaelis LL, Morrow AG. The con-
tribution of atrial contraction to right heart function before and after 
right ventriculotomy: experimental and clinical observations. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 1976;71:1–10.
 111. Ayres NA, Miller-Hance W, Fyfe DA, Stevenson JG, Sahn DJ, Young LT, 
Minich LL, Kimball TR, Geva T, Smith FC, Rychik J; Pediatric Council 
of the American Society of the Echocardiography. Indications and 
guidelines for performance of transesophageal echocardiography in 
the patient with pediatric acquired or congenital heart disease: report 
from the task force of the Pediatric Council of the American Society 
of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2005;18:91–98. doi: 
10.1016/j.echo.2004.11.004.
 112. Lang P
, Chipman CW, Siden H, Williams RG, Norwood WI, Castaneda 
AR. Early assessment of hemodynamic status after repair of tetralogy of 
Fallot: a comparison of 24 hour (intensive care unit) and 1 year postop-
erative data in 98 patients. Am J Cardiol. 1982;50:795–799.
 113. Ritter SB. Transesophageal real-time echocardiography in infants and chil-
dren with congenital heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991;18:569–580.
 114. Smallhorn JF. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography in con-
genital heart disease. Echocardiography. 2002;19:709–723.
 115. Stümper O, Sutherland GR, Geuskens R, Roelandt JR, Bos E, Hess J. 
Transesophageal echocardiography in evaluation and management after 
a Fontan procedure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991;17:1152–1160.
 116. Wolfe LT, Rossi A, Ritter SB. Transesophageal echocardiography in infants 
and children: use and importance in the cardiac intensive care unit. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr. 1993;6(pt 1):286–289.
 117. Preminger TJ, Sanders SP
, van der Velde ME, Castañeda AR, Lock JE. 
“Intramural” residual interventricular defects after repair of conotruncal 
malformations. Circulation. 1994;89:236–242.
 118. Belli E, Houyel L, Serraf A, Lacour-Gayet F, Petit J, Planché C. Transaortic 
closure of residual intramural ventricular septal defect. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2000;69:1496–1498.
 119. Chaturvedi RR, Shore DF, Lincoln C, Mumby S, Kemp M, Brierly J, 
Petros A, Gutteridge JM, Hooper J, Redington AN. Acute right ven-
tricular restrictive physiology after repair of tetralogy of Fallot: as-
sociation with myocardial injury and oxidative stress. Circulation. 
1999;100:1540–1547.
 120. Apitz C, Latus H, Binder W, Uebing A, Seeger A, Bretschneider C, 
Sieverding L, Hofbeck M. Impact of restrictive physiology on intrinsic 
diastolic right ventricular function and lusitropy in children and adoles-
cents after repair of tetralogy of Fallot. Heart. 2010;96:1837–1841. doi: 
10.1136/hrt.2010.203190.
 121. Santamore WP
, Dell’Italia LJ. Ventricular interdependence: significant 
left ventricular contributions to right ventricular systolic function. Prog 
Cardiovasc Dis. 1998;40:289–308.
 122. Kerstein D, Levy PS, Hsu DT, Hordof AJ, Gersony WM, Barst RJ. Blade 
balloon atrial septostomy in patients with severe primary pulmonary hy-
pertension. Circulation. 1995;91:2028–2035.
 123. Sandoval J, Gaspar J, Pulido T, Bautista E, Martínez-Guerra ML, Zeballos 
M, Palomar A, Gómez A. Graded balloon dilation atrial septostomy in 
severe primary pulmonary hypertension: a therapeutic alternative for 
patients nonresponsive to vasodilator treatment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1998;32:297–304.
 124. Burrows FA, Williams WG, Teoh KH, Wood AE, Burns J, Edmonds J, 
Barker GA, Trusler GA, Weisel RD. Myocardial performance after repair 
of congenital cardiac defects in infants and children: response to volume 
loading. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1988;96:548–556.
 125. Butler J, Rocker GM, Westaby S. Inflammatory response to cardiopulmo-
nary bypass. Ann Thorac Surg. 1993;55:552–559.
 126. Moat NE, Shore DF, Evans TW. Organ dysfunction and cardiopulmonary 
bypass: the role of complement and complement regulatory proteins. Eur 
J Cardiothorac Surg. 1993;7:563–573.
 127. Seghaye MC, Duchateau J, Grabitz RG, Faymonville ML, Messmer 
BJ, Buro-Rathsmann K, von Bernuth G. Complement activation 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e765
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
during cardiopulmonary bypass in infants and children: relation to 
postoperative multiple system organ failure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1993;106:978–987.
 128. Seghaye MC, Grabitz RG, Duchateau J, Busse S, Däbritz S, Koch D, 
Alzen G, Hörnchen H, Messmer BJ, Von Bernuth G. Inflammatory re-
action and capillary leak syndrome related to cardiopulmonary bypass 
in neonates undergoing cardiac operations. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1996;112:687–697.
 129. Burch M, Lincoln C, Carter N, Smith A. Acute sternal opening after 
cardiac surgery in children: effect on plasma atrial natriuretic peptide. J 
Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 1991;32:246–249.
 130. Lincoln C, Gibson D, Kay P
, Shore D. Delayed sternal closure in neonate. 
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1990;100:928.
 131. McElhinney DB, Reddy VM, Parry AJ, Johnson L, Fineman JR, Hanley FL. 
Management and outcomes of delayed sternal closure after cardiac sur-
gery in neonates and infants. Crit Care Med. 2000;28:1180–1184.
 132. Iyer RS, Jacobs JP
, de Leval MR, Stark J, Elliott MJ. Outcomes after delayed 
sternal closure in pediatric heart operations: a 10-year experience. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 1997;63:489–491.
 133. Tabbutt S, Duncan BW, McLaughlin D, Wessel DL, Jonas RA, Laussen 
PC. Delayed sternal closure after cardiac operations in a pediat-
ric population. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1997;113:886–893. doi: 
10.1016/S0022-5223(97)70261-7.
 134. Baden HP
, Morray JP
. Drainage of tense ascites in children after cardiac 
surgery. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 1995;9:720–721.
 135. Bokesch PM, Kapural MB, Mossad EB, Cavaglia M, Appachi E, 
Drummond-Webb JJ, Mee RB. Do peritoneal catheters remove pro-in-
flammatory cytokines after cardiopulmonary bypass in neonates? Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2000;70:639–643.
 136. Stromberg D, Fraser CD Jr, Sorof JM, Drescher K, Feltes TF. Peritoneal 
dialysis: an adjunct to pediatric postcardiotomy fluid management. Tex 
Heart Inst J. 1997;24:269–277.
 137. Chaturvedi RR, Redington AN. Pulmonary regurgitation in congenital 
heart disease. Heart. 2007;93:880–889. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2005.075234.
 138. Shekerdemian LS, Bush A, Lincoln C, Shore DF, Petros AJ, Redington 
AN. Cardiopulmonary interactions in healthy children and children after 
simple cardiac surgery: the effects of positive and negative pressure ven-
tilation. Heart. 1997;78:587–593.
 139. Shekerdemian LS, Bush A, Shore DF, Lincoln C, Redington AN. 
Cardiorespiratory responses to negative pressure ventilation after tetral-
ogy of Fallot repair: a hemodynamic tool for patients with a low-output 
state. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33:549–555.
 140. Mildh L, Hiippala A, Rautiainen P
, Pettilä V, Sairanen H, Happonen JM. 
Junctional ectopic tachycardia after surgery for congenital heart dis-
ease: incidence, risk factors and outcome. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2011;39:75–80. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2010.04.002.
 141. Raja P
, Hawker RE, Chaikitpinyo A, Cooper SG, Lau KC, Nunn GR, Cartmill 
TB, Sholler GF. Amiodarone management of junctional ectopic tachycar-
dia after cardiac surgery in children. Br Heart J. 1994;72:261–265.
 142. Janousek J, Vojtovic P
, Hucín B, Tláskal T, Gebauer RA, Gebauer R, 
Matejka T, Marek J, Reich O. Resynchronization pacing is a useful adjunct 
to the management of acute heart failure after surgery for congenital 
heart defects. Am J Cardiol. 2001;88:145–152.
 143. Kirsh JA, Stephenson EA, Redington AN. Recovery of left ventricular systol-
ic function after biventricular resynchronization pacing in a child with re-
paired tetralogy of Fallot and severe biventricular dysfunction. Circulation. 
2006;113:e691–e692. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.580126.
 144. Zimmerman FJ, Starr JP
, Koenig PR, Smith P
, Hijazi ZM, Bacha EA. Acute 
hemodynamic benefit of multisite ventricular pacing after congenital 
heart surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003;75:1775–1780.
 145. Vlahakes GJ, Turley K, Hoffman JI. The pathophysiology of failure in acute 
right ventricular hypertension: hemodynamic and biochemical correla-
tions. Circulation. 1981;63:87–95.
 146. Mastropietro CW, Davalos MC, Seshadri S, Walters HL 3rd, Delius 
RE. Clinical response to arginine vasopressin therapy after pae-
diatric cardiac surgery. Cardiol Young. 2013;23:387–393. doi: 
10.1017/S1047951112000996.
 147. Shekerdemian L. Perioperative manipulation of the circulation in chil-
dren with congenital heart disease. Heart. 2009;95:1286–1296. doi: 
10.1136/hrt.2005.069237.
 148. Beghetti M, Morris K, Cox P, Bohn D, Adatia I. Inhaled nitric oxide 
differentiates pulmonary vasospasm from vascular obstruction after 
surgery for congenital heart disease. Intensive Care Med. 1999;25: 
1126–1130.
 149. Adatia I, Atz AM, Jonas RA, Wessel DL. Diagnostic use of inhaled ni-
tric oxide after neonatal cardiac operations. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1996;112:1403–1405. doi: 10.1016/S0022-5223(96)70166-6.
 150. Abman SH, Hansmann G, Archer SL, Ivy DD, Adatia I, Chung WK, Hanna 
BD, Rosenzweig EB, Raj JU, Cornfield D, Stenmark KR, Steinhorn R, 
Thébaud B, Fineman JR, Kuehne T, Feinstein JA, Friedberg MK, Earing M, 
Barst RJ, Keller RL, Kinsella JP
, Mullen M, Deterding R, Kulik T, Mallory G, 
Humpl T, Wessel DL; on behalf of the American Heart Association Council 
on Cardiopulmonary, Critical Care, Perioperative and Resuscitation; 
Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the 
Young; Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention; Council 
on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; and the American Thoracic 
Society. Pediatric pulmonary hypertension: guidelines from the American 
Heart Association and American Thoracic Society [published correction 
appears in Circulation. 2016;133:e368]. Circulation. 2015;132:2037–
2099. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000329.
 151. Bando K, Turrentine MW, Sharp TG, Sekine Y, Aufiero TX, Sun K, 
Sekine E, Brown JW. Pulmonary hypertension after operations for 
congenital heart disease: analysis of risk factors and management. J 
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;112:1600–1607. doi: 10.1016/S0022- 
5223(96)70019-3.
 152. Lindberg L, Olsson AK, Jögi P
, Jonmarker C. How common is severe pul-
monary hypertension after pediatric cardiac surgery? J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2002;123:1155–1163.
 153. Loukanov T, Bucsenez D, Springer W, Sebening C, Rauch H, Roesch E, 
Karck M, Gorenflo M. Comparison of inhaled nitric oxide with aerosol-
ized iloprost for treatment of pulmonary hypertension in children after 
cardiopulmonary bypass surgery. Clin Res Cardiol. 2011;100:595–602. 
doi: 10.1007/s00392-011-0284-5.
 154. Brown KL, Ridout DA, Goldman AP
, Hoskote A, Penny DJ. Risk 
factors for long intensive care unit stay after cardiopulmo-
nary bypass in children. Crit Care Med. 2003;31:28–33. doi: 
10.1097/01.CCM.0000046068.19048.86.
 155. Schulze-Neick I, Li J, Penny DJ, Redington AN. Pulmonary vascular re-
sistance after cardiopulmonary bypass in infants: effect on postop-
erative recovery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;121:1033–1039. doi: 
10.1067/mtc.2001.113747.
 156. Fraisse A, Butrous G, Taylor MB, Oakes M, Dilleen M, Wessel DL. 
Intravenous sildenafil for postoperative pulmonary hypertension in chil-
dren with congenital heart disease. Intensive Care Med. 2011;37:502–
509. doi: 10.1007/s00134-010-2065-4.
 157. Sanatani S, Wilson G, Smith CR, Hamilton RM, Williams WG, Adatia I. 
Sudden unexpected death in children with heart disease. Congenit Heart 
Dis. 2006;1:89–97. doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0803.2006.00014.x.
 158. Ma M, Gauvreau K, Allan CK, Mayer JE Jr, Jenkins KJ. Causes of death 
after congenital heart surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007;83:1438–1445. 
doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2006.10.073.
 159. Hopkins RA, Bull C, Haworth SG, de Leval MR, Stark J. Pulmonary hy-
pertensive crises following surgery for congenital heart defects in young 
children. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1991;5:628–634.
 160. Wheller J, George BL, Mulder DG, Jarmakani JM. Diagnosis and man-
agement of postoperative pulmonary hypertensive crisis. Circulation. 
1979;60:1640–1644.
 161. del Nido PJ, Williams WG, Villamater J, Benson LN, Coles JG, Bohn D and 
Trusler GA. Changes in pericardial surface pressure during pulmonary 
hypertensive crises after cardiac surgery. Circulation. 1987;76:III93-III96.
 162. Lincoln CR, Rigby ML, Mercanti C, Al-Fagih M, Joseph MC, Miller GA, 
Shinebourne EA. Surgical risk factors in total anomalous pulmonary ve-
nous connection. Am J Cardiol. 1988;61:608–611.
 163. Matsumoto M, Naitoh H, Higashi T, Kurasako T, Takatori M, Tada K, Ohba 
O. Risk factors for pulmonary hypertensive crisis (PHC) following VSD 
repair in infants [in Japanese]. Masui. 1995;44:1208–1212.
 164. Miller OI, Tang SF, Keech A, Pigott NB, Beller E, Celermajer DS. Inhaled 
nitric oxide and prevention of pulmonary hypertension after congenital 
heart surgery: a randomised double-blind study. Lancet. 2000;356:1464–
1469. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(00)02869-5.
 165. Schindler MB, Bohn DJ, Bryan AC, Cutz E, Rabinovitch M. Increased 
respiratory system resistance and bronchial smooth muscle hyper-
trophy in children with acute postoperative pulmonary hyperten-
sion. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1995;152(pt 1):1347–1352. doi: 
10.1164/ajrccm.152.4.7551393.
 166. van Loon RL, Roofthooft MT, Hillege HL, ten Harkel AD, van 
Osch-Gevers M, Delhaas T, Kapusta L, Strengers JL, Rammeloo 
L, 
Clur 
SA, 
Mulder 
BJ, 
Berger 
RM. 
Pediatric 
pulmonary 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e766
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
hypertension in the Netherlands: epidemiology and characterization dur-
ing the period 1991 to 2005. Circulation. 2011;124:1755–1764. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.969584.
 167. Atz AM, Adatia I, Wessel DL. Rebound pulmonary hypertension after 
inhalation of nitric oxide. Ann Thorac Surg. 1996;62:1759–1764.
 168. Lavoie A, Hall JB, Olson DM, Wylam ME. Life-threatening effects of discon-
tinuing inhaled nitric oxide in severe respiratory failure. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 1996;153(pt 1):1985–1987. doi: 10.1164/ajrccm.153.6.8665066.
 169. Miller OI, Tang SF, Keech A, Celermajer DS. Rebound pulmonary hyperten-
sion on withdrawal from inhaled nitric oxide. Lancet. 1995;346:51–52.
 170. Namachivayam P
, Theilen U, Butt WW, Cooper SM, Penny DJ, 
Shekerdemian LS. Sildenafil prevents rebound pulmonary hypertension 
after withdrawal of nitric oxide in children. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2006;174:1042–1047. doi: 10.1164/rccm.200605-694OC.
 171. Humpl T, Reyes JT, Erickson S, Armano R, Holtby H, Adatia I. Sildenafil ther-
apy for neonatal and childhood pulmonary hypertensive vascular disease. 
Cardiol Young. 2011;21:187–193. doi: 10.1017/S1047951110001745.
 172. Abman SH, Griebel JL, Parker DK, Schmidt JM, Swanton D, Kinsella JP
. 
Acute effects of inhaled nitric oxide in children with severe hypoxemic 
respiratory failure. J Pediatr. 1994;124:881–888.
 173. Bull TM, Clark B, McFann K, Moss M; National Institutes of Health/
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ARDS Network. Pulmonary 
vascular dysfunction is associated with poor outcomes in patients with 
acute lung injury. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010;182:1123–1128. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201002-0250OC.
 174. Katz R, Pollack M, Spady D. Cardiopulmonary abnormalities in severe 
acute respiratory failure. J Pediatr. 1984;104:357–364.
 175. Carmosino MJ, Friesen RH, Doran A, Ivy DD. Perioperative complications 
in children with pulmonary hypertension undergoing noncardiac sur-
gery or cardiac catheterization. Anesth Analg. 2007;104:521–527. doi: 
10.1213/01.ane.0000255732.16057.1c.
 176. Taylor CJ, Derrick G, McEwan A, Haworth SG, Sury MR. Risk of cardiac 
catheterization under anaesthesia in children with pulmonary hyperten-
sion. Br J Anaesth. 2007;98:657–661. doi: 10.1093/bja/aem059.
 177. van der Griend BF, Lister NA, McKenzie IM, Martin N, Ragg PG, Sheppard 
SJ, Davidson AJ. Postoperative mortality in children after 101,885 anes-
thetics at a tertiary pediatric hospital. Anesth Analg. 2011;112:1440–
1447. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e318213be52.
 178. Haworth SG, Reid L. Structural study of pulmonary circulation and of 
heart in total anomalous pulmonary venous return in early infancy. Br 
Heart J. 1977;39:80–92.
 179. Yamaki S, Tsunemoto M, Shimada M, Ishizawa R, Endo M, Nakayama S, 
Hata M, Mohri H. Quantitative analysis of pulmonary vascular disease in 
total anomalous pulmonary venous connection in sixty infants. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 1992;104:728–735.
 180. Yung D, Widlitz AC, Rosenzweig EB, Kerstein D, Maislin G, Barst RJ. Outcomes 
in children with idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension. Circulation. 
2004;110:660–665. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000138104.83366.E9.
 181. Dimopoulos K, Inuzuka R, Goletto S, Giannakoulas G, Swan L, Wort SJ, 
Gatzoulis MA. Improved survival among patients with Eisenmenger syn-
drome receiving advanced therapy for pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Circulation. 2010;121:20–25. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.883876.
 182. Baruteau AE, Serraf A, Lévy M, Petit J, Bonnet D, Jais X, Vouhé P
, 
Simonneau G, Belli E, Humbert M. Potts shunt in children with idiopathic 
pulmonary arterial hypertension: long-term results. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2012;94:817–824. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.03.099.
 183. Latus H, Apitz C, Schmidt D, Jux C, Mueller M, Bauer J, Akintuerk H, 
Schneider M, Schranz D. Potts shunt and atrial septostomy in pulmo-
nary hypertension caused by left ventricular disease. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2013;96:317–319. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.10.069.
 184. Rozkovec A, Montanes P
, Oakley CM. Factors that influence the outcome 
of primary pulmonary hypertension. Br Heart J. 1986;55:449–458.
 185. Hopkins WE, Waggoner AD. Severe pulmonary hypertension without 
right ventricular failure: the unique hearts of patients with Eisenmenger 
syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:34–38.
 186. Anand KJ, Hansen DD, Hickey PR. Hormonal-metabolic stress re-
sponses in neonates undergoing cardiac surgery. Anesthesiology. 
1990;73:661–670.
 187. Anand KJ, Sippell WG, Aynsley-Green A. Randomised trial of fentanyl 
anaesthesia in preterm babies undergoing surgery: effects on the stress 
response. Lancet. 1987;1:243–248.
 188. Morris K, Beghetti M, Petros A, Adatia I, Bohn D. Comparison of hy-
perventilation and inhaled nitric oxide for pulmonary hypertension after 
repair of congenital heart disease. Crit Care Med. 2000;28:2974–2978.
 189. Nair J, Lakshminrusimha S. Update on PPHN: mechanisms and treat-
ment. Semin Perinatol. 2014;38:78–91. doi: 10.1053/j.semperi.2013. 
11.004.
 190. Atsumi N, Gomi S, Kanemoto S, Mihara W, Shigeta O, Terada Y, Jikuya 
T, Sakakibara Y, Mitsui T, Ninomiya H. Management of postoperative 
pulmonary hypertensive crisis in children: indication and usefulness of 
inhaled nitric oxide therapy as a pulmonary vasodilator [in Japanese]. 
Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1996;44:2123–2129.
 191. Moudgil R, Michelakis ED, Archer SL. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstric-
tion. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2005;98:390–403.
 192. Goldman AP
, Delius RE, Deanfield JE, de Leval MR, Sigston PE, Macrae DJ. 
Nitric oxide might reduce the need for extracorporeal support in children 
with critical postoperative pulmonary hypertension. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1996;62:750–755.
 193. Murthy KS, Rao SG, Prakash KS, Punnoose A, Benjamin N, Bharati AS, 
Singh RK, Cherian KM. Inhaled nitric oxide as therapy for pulmonary 
hypertension in postoperative cases of congenital heart defects. Indian 
Heart J. 1996;48:695–698.
 194. Turanlahti MI, Laitinen PO, Sarna SJ, Pesonen E. Nitric oxide, oxygen, 
and prostacyclin in children with pulmonary hypertension. Heart. 
1998;79:169–174.
 195. Journois D, Pouard P
, Mauriat P
, Malhère T, Vouhé P
, Safran D. Inhaled 
nitric oxide as a therapy for pulmonary hypertension after operations 
for congenital heart defects. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1994;107: 
1129–1135.
 196. Khan TA, Schnickel G, Ross D, Bastani S, Laks H, Esmailian F, Marelli 
D, Beygui R, Shemin R, Watson L, Vartapetian I, Ardehali A. A pro-
spective, randomized, crossover pilot study of inhaled nitric oxide 
versus inhaled prostacyclin in heart transplant and lung transplant 
recipients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;138:1417–1424. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2009.04.063.
 197. Berner M, Beghetti M, Ricou B, Rouge JC, Prêtre R, Friedli B. Relief of 
severe pulmonary hypertension after closure of a large ventricular 
septal defect using low dose inhaled nitric oxide. Intensive Care Med. 
1993;19:75–77.
 198. Atz AM, Wessel DL. Inhaled nitric oxide in the neonate with cardiac dis-
ease. Semin Perinatol. 1997;21:441–455.
 199. Atz AM, Munoz RA, Adatia I, Wessel DL. Diagnostic and therapeutic 
uses of inhaled nitric oxide in neonatal Ebstein’s anomaly. Am J Cardiol. 
2003;91:906–908.
 200. Adatia I, Lillehei C, Arnold JH, Thompson JE, Palazzo R, Fackler 
JC, Wessel DL. Inhaled nitric oxide in the treatment of postopera-
tive graft dysfunction after lung transplantation. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1994;57:1311–1318.
 201. Wessel DL, Adatia I, Giglia TM, Thompson JE, Kulik TJ. Use of inhaled 
nitric oxide and acetylcholine in the evaluation of pulmonary hyperten-
sion and endothelial function after cardiopulmonary bypass. Circulation. 
1993;88(pt 1):2128–2138.
 202. Wessel DL, Adatia I. Clinical applications of inhaled nitric oxide in children 
with pulmonary hypertension. Adv Pharmacol. 1995;34:475–504.
 203. Limsuwan A, Wanitkul S, Khosithset A, Attanavanich S, Samankatiwat 
P
. Aerosolized iloprost for postoperative pulmonary hypertensive crisis in 
children with congenital heart disease. Int J Cardiol. 2008;129:333–338. 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.08.084.
 204. Journois D, Baufreton C, Mauriat P
, Pouard P
, Vouhé P
, Safran D. Effects 
of inhaled nitric oxide administration on early postoperative mortality in 
patients operated for correction of atrioventricular canal defects. Chest. 
2005;128:3537–3544. doi: 10.1378/chest.128.5.3537.
 205. Kelly LK, Porta NF, Goodman DM, Carroll CL, Steinhorn RH. Inhaled 
prostacyclin for term infants with persistent pulmonary hypertension 
refractory to inhaled nitric oxide. J Pediatr. 2002;141:830–832. doi: 
10.1067/mpd.2002.129849.
 206. Singh R, Choudhury M, Saxena A, Kapoor PM, Juneja R, Kiran U. Inhaled 
nitroglycerin versus inhaled milrinone in children with congenital heart 
disease suffering from pulmonary artery hypertension. J Cardiothorac 
Vasc Anesth. 2010;24:797–801. doi: 10.1053/j.jvca.2009.10.024.
 207. Li F, Xia W, Yuan S, Sun R. Acute inhibition of Rho-kinase attenuates pul-
monary hypertension in patients with congenital heart disease. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2009;30:363–366. doi: 10.1007/s00246-008-9315-z.
 208. Neutze JM, Ishikawa T, Clarkson PM, Calder AL, Barratt-Boyes BG, 
Kerr AR. Assessment and follow-up of patients with ventricular sep-
tal defect and elevated pulmonary vascular resistance. Am J Cardiol. 
1989;63:327–331.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e767
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 209. Weesner KM. Hemodynamic effects of prostaglandin E1 in patients with 
congenital heart disease and pulmonary hypertension. Cathet Cardiovasc 
Diagn. 1991;24:10–15.
 210. Packer M. Vasodilator therapy for primary pulmonary hypertension: limi-
tations and hazards. Ann Intern Med. 1985;103:258–270.
 211. Stocker C, Penny DJ, Brizard CP
, Cochrane AD, Soto R, Shekerdemian 
LS. Intravenous sildenafil and inhaled nitric oxide: a randomised trial in 
infants after cardiac surgery. Intensive Care Med. 2003;29:1996–2003. 
doi: 10.1007/s00134-003-2016-4.
 212. Zapol WM, Snider MT. Pulmonary hypertension in severe acute 
respiratory 
failure. 
N 
Engl 
J 
Med. 
1977;296:476–480. 
doi: 
10.1056/NEJM197703032960903.
 213. Lammers AE, Haworth SG, Pierce CM. Intravenous sildenafil as an effec-
tive treatment of pulmonary hypertensive crises during acute intestinal mal-
absorption [published correction appears in Cardiol Young. 2006;16:328]. 
Cardiol Young. 2006;16:84–86. doi: 10.1017/S1047951105002155.
 214. Michelakis E, Tymchak W, Lien D, Webster L, Hashimoto K, Archer S. Oral 
sildenafil is an effective and specific pulmonary vasodilator in patients 
with pulmonary arterial hypertension: comparison with inhaled nitric ox-
ide. Circulation. 2002;105:2398–2403.
 215. Barst RJ, Ivy DD, Gaitan G, Szatmari A, Rudzinski A, Garcia AE, Sastry 
BK, Pulido T, Layton GR, Serdarevic-Pehar M, Wessel DL. A randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study of oral sildenafil 
citrate in treatment-naive children with pulmonary arterial hyperten-
sion. Circulation. 2012;125:324–334. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
110.016667.
 216. Raja SG, Danton MD, MacArthur KJ, Pollock JC. Effects of escalating 
doses of sildenafil on hemodynamics and gas exchange in children with 
pulmonary hypertension and congenital cardiac defects. J Cardiothorac 
Vasc Anesth. 2007;21:203–207. doi: 10.1053/j.jvca.2006.02.010.
 217. Galiè N, Beghetti M, Gatzoulis MA, Granton J, Berger RM, Lauer A, 
Chiossi E, Landzberg M; for the Bosentan Randomized Trial of Endothelin 
Antagonist Therapy-5 (BREATHE-5) Investigators. Bosentan therapy in 
patients with Eisenmenger syndrome: a multicenter, double-blind, ran-
domized, placebo-controlled study. Circulation. 2006;114:48–54. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.630715.
 218. Smith AM, Elliot CM, Kiely DG, Channer KS. The role of vasopres-
sin in cardiorespiratory arrest and pulmonary hypertension. QJM. 
2006;99:127–133. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcl009.
 219. Currigan DA, Hughes RJ, Wright CE, Angus JA, Soeding PF. 
Vasoconstrictor responses to vasopressor agents in human pulmonary 
and radial arteries: an in vitro study. Anesthesiology. 2014;121:930–936. 
doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000000430.
 220. Siehr SL, Feinstein JA, Yang W, Peng LF, Ogawa MT, Ramamoorthy C. 
Hemodynamic effects of phenylephrine, vasopressin, and epinephrine in 
children with pulmonary hypertension: a pilot study. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med. 2016;17:428–437. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000000716.
 221. Hoeper MM, Galié N, Murali S, Olschewski H, Rubenfire M, Robbins IM, 
Farber HW, McLaughlin V, Shapiro S, Pepke-Zaba J, Winkler J, Ewert R, 
Opitz C, Westerkamp V, Vachiéry JL, Torbicki A, Behr J, Barst RJ. Outcome 
after cardiopulmonary resuscitation in patients with pulmonary arteri-
al hypertension. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002;165:341–344. doi: 
10.1164/ajrccm.165.3.200109-0130c.
 222. Aufderheide TP
, Lurie KG. Death by hyperventilation: a common and 
life-threatening problem during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Crit Care 
Med. 2004;32(suppl):S345–S351.
 223. King R, Esmail M, Mahon S, Dingley J, Dwyer S. Use of nitric oxide for de-
compensated right ventricular failure and circulatory shock after cardiac 
arrest. Br J Anaesth. 2000;85:628–631.
 224. Rubin LJ. Primary pulmonary hypertension. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:111–
117. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199701093360207.
 225. Myles PS, Hall JL, Berry CB, Esmore DS. Primary pulmonary hypertension: 
prolonged cardiac arrest and successful resuscitation following induction 
of anesthesia for heart-lung transplantation. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 
1994;8:678–681.
 226. Haas NA, Schulze-Neick I, Lange PE. Intratracheal prostacyclin for resus-
citation in primary pulmonary hypertension. Lancet. 1995;346:643.
 227. Passarani S, Vignati G, Einaudi A. Eisenmenger syndrome: a case of sur-
vival after ventricular tachycardia due to inferior myocardial infarction in 
a 48-year-old patient with congenital large ventricular septal defect. Can 
J Cardiol. 2004;20:822–824.
 228. Arpesella G, Loforte A, Mikus E, Mikus PM. Extracorporeal membrane ox-
ygenation for primary allograft failure. Transplant Proc. 2008;40:3596–
3597. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2008.06.079.
 229. Dhillon R, Pearson GA, Firmin RK, Chan KC, Leanage R. Extracorporeal 
membrane oxygenation and the treatment of critical pulmonary hy-
pertension in congenital heart disease. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
1995;9:553–556.
 230. Liu KS, Tsai FC, Huang YK, Wu MY, Chang YS, Chu JJ, Lin PJ. 
Extracorporeal life support: a simple and effective weapon for postcar-
diotomy right ventricular failure. Artif Organs. 2009;33:504–508. doi: 
10.1111/j.1525-1594.2009.00734.x.
 231. Strueber M, Hoeper MM, Fischer S, Cypel M, Warnecke G, Gottlieb J, 
Pierre A, Welte T, Haverich A, Simon AR, Keshavjee S. Bridge to thoracic 
organ transplantation in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension 
using a pumpless lung assist device. Am J Transplant. 2009;9:853–857. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-6143.2009.02549.x.
 232. Marino BS, Kruge LE, Cho CJ, Tomlinson RS, Shera D, Weinberg PM, Gaynor 
JW, Rychik J. Parachute mitral valve: morphologic descriptors, associated 
lesions, and outcomes after biventricular repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2009;137:385–393.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.09.016.
 233. Carabello BA. The current therapy for mitral regurgitation. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2008;52:319–326. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2008.02.084.
 234. Choudhary SK, Talwar S, Dubey B, Chopra A, Saxena A, Kumar AS. Mitral 
valve repair in a predominantly rheumatic population: long-term results. 
Tex Heart Inst J. 2001;28:8–15.
 235. Lee JY, Noh CI, Bae EJ, Yun YS, Lee JR, Kim YJ. Preoperative left ventricular 
end systolic dimension as a predictor of postoperative ventricular dysfunc-
tion in children with mitral regurgitation. Heart. 2003;89:1243–1244.
 236. Gillespie MJ, Marino BS, Cohen MS, Korteweg AE, Henket M, Gaynor 
JW, Spray TL, Tabbutt S, Wernovsky G. Risk factors for adverse outcomes 
after surgery on the systemic atrioventricular valve in 109 children. 
Cardiol Young. 2006;16(suppl 3):35–42.
 237. Hoffman TM, Wernovsky G, Atz AM, Kulik TJ, Nelson DP
, Chang AC, 
Bailey JM, Akbary A, Kocsis JF, Kaczmarek R, Spray TL, Wessel DL. Efficacy 
and safety of milrinone in preventing low cardiac output syndrome in 
infants and children after corrective surgery for congenital heart disease. 
Circulation. 2003;107:996–1002.
 238. Morales DLS, Almond CSD, Jaquiss RDB, Rosenthal DN, Naftel DC, 
Massicotte MP
, Humpl T, Turrentine MW, Tweddell JS, Cohen GA, 
Kroslowitz R, Devaney EJ, Canter CE, Fynn-Thompson F, Reinhartz O, 
Imamura M, Ghanayem NS, Buchholz H, Furness S, Mazor R, Gandhi 
SK, Fraser CD Jr. Bridging children of all sizes to cardiac transplantation: 
the initial multicenter North American experience with the Berlin Heart 
EXCOR ventricular assist device. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011;30:1–8. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2010.08.033.
 239. Petit CJ, Ing FF, Mattamal R, Pignatelli RH, Mullins CE, Justino H. 
Diminished left ventricular function is associated with poor mid-term out-
comes in neonates after balloon aortic valvuloplasty. Catheter Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2012;80:1190–1199. doi: 10.1002/ccd.23500.
 240. Hraška V, Sinzobahamvya N, Haun C, Photiadis J, Arenz C, Schneider 
M, Asfour B. The long-term outcome of open valvotomy for critical aor-
tic stenosis in neonates. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94:1519–1526. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.03.056.
 241. Agnoletti G, Raisky O, Boudjemline Y, Ou P
, Bonnet D, Sidi D, Vouhé 
P
. Neonatal surgical aortic commissurotomy: predictors of outcome 
and long-term results. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;82:1585–1592. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2006.05.049.
 242. Hammel JM, Duncan KF, Danford DA, Kutty S. Two-stage biven-
tricular rehabilitation for critical aortic stenosis with severe left ven-
tricular dysfunction. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;43:143–148. doi: 
10.1093/ejcts/ezs197.
 243. Hickey EJ, Caldarone CA, Blackstone EH, Williams WG, Yeh T Jr, Pizarro 
C, Lofland G, Tchervenkov CI, Pigula F, McCrindle BW; Congenital 
Heart Surgeons’ Society. Biventricular strategies for neonatal criti-
cal aortic stenosis: high mortality associated with early reinterven-
tion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144:409–417, 417.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2011.09.076.
 244. Alsoufi B, Karamlou T, McCrindle BW, Caldarone CA. Management op-
tions in neonates and infants with critical left ventricular outflow tract 
obstruction [published correction appears in Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2007;32:558]. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2007;31:1013–1021. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejcts.2007.03.015.
 245. Misumi Y, Hoashi T, Kagisaki K, Yazaki S, Kitano M, Kurosaki K, Shiraishi 
I, Ichikawa H. The importance of hybrid stage I palliation for neonates 
with critical aortic stenosis and reduced left ventricular function. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2015;36:726–731. doi: 10.1007/s00246-014-1074-4.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e768
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 246. Brown SC, Boshoff D, Eyskens B, Gewillig M. Hybrid approach as bridge 
to biventricular repair in a neonate with critical aortic stenosis and bor-
derline left ventricle. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2009;35:1080–1082. doi: 
10.1016/j.ejcts.2009.02.012.
 247. Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Chatterjee K, de Leon AC Jr, Faxon DP
, 
Freed MD, Gaasch WH, Lytle BW, Nishimura RA, O’Gara PT, O’Rourke 
RA, Otto CM, Shah PM, Shanewise JS. 2008 Focused update incorpo-
rated into the ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of pa-
tients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines 
(Writing Committee to Revise the 1998 Guidelines for the Management 
of Patients With Valvular Heart Disease): endorsed by the Society of 
Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography 
and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 
2008;118:e523–e661. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.190748.
 248. Gentles TL, French JK, Zeng I, Milsom PF, Finucane AK, Wilson NJ. 
Normalized end-systolic volume and pre-load reserve predict ven-
tricular dysfunction following surgery for aortic regurgitation indepen-
dent of body size. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;5:626–633. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmg.2011.12.021.
 249. Tafreshi RI, Shahmohammadi A, Davari PN. Predictors of left ventricular 
performance after valve replacement in children and adolescents with 
chronic aortic regurgitation. Pediatr Cardiol. 2005;26:331–337. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-005-8645-3.
 250. Buddhe S, Du W, Walters HL 3rd, Delius R, Pettersen MD. Predictors of left 
ventricular remodeling after aortic valve replacement in pediatric patients 
with isolated aortic regurgitation. Congenit Heart Dis. 2013;8:167–173. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0803.2012.00703.x.
 251. Ishino K, Alexi-Meskishvili V, Hetzer R. Preoperative extracorporeal mem-
brane oxygenation in newborns with total anomalous pulmonary venous 
connection. Cardiovasc Surg. 1999;7:473–475.
 252. Brown KL, Miles F, Sullivan ID, Hoskote A, Verhulst L, Ridout DA, 
Goldman AP
. Outcome in neonates with congenital heart disease re-
ferred for respiratory extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Acta 
Paediatr. 2005;94:1280–1284.
 253. Kanter KR. Surgical repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous connec-
tion. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2006:40–4.
 254. Hancock Friesen CL, Zurakowski D, Thiagarajan RR, Forbess JM, del Nido 
PJ, Mayer JE, Jonas RA. Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection: 
an analysis of current management strategies in a single institution. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2005;79:596–606. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2004.07.005.
 255. Marcondes LD, Galati JC, Jones BO, Konstantinov IE, d’Udekem Y, Brizard 
CP
, Cheung MM. Abnormal left ventricular diastolic function at late fol-
low-up after repair of total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage: the 
impact of altered ventricular loading in utero. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2014;148:238–244. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.08.045.
 256. Maron BJ, Towbin JA, Thiene G, Antzelevitch C, Corrado D, 
Arnett D, Moss AJ, Seidman CE, Young JB. Contemporary defi-
nitions and classification of the cardiomyopathies: an American 
Heart Association Scientific Statement from the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology, Heart Failure and Transplantation Committee; Quality 
of Care and Outcomes Research and Functional Genomics and 
Translational Biology Interdisciplinary Working Groups; and Council on 
Epidemiology and Prevention. Circulation. 2006;113:1807–1816. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.174287.
 257. Kirk R, Dipchand AI, Rosenthal DN, Addonizio L, Burch M, Chrisant M, 
Dubin A, Everitt M, Gajarski R, Mertens L, Miyamoto S, Morales D, Pahl E, 
Shaddy R, Towbin J, Weintraub R. The International Society for Heart and 
Lung Transplantation guidelines for the management of pediatric heart 
failure: executive summary [published correction appears in J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2014;42:1104]. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014;33:888–909. 
doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2014.06.002.
 258. Rivenes SM, Kearney DL, Smith EO, Towbin JA, Denfield SW. Sudden 
death and cardiovascular collapse in children with restrictive cardiomy-
opathy. Circulation. 2000;102:876–882.
 259. Walsh MA, Grenier MA, Jefferies JL, Towbin JA, Lorts A, Czosek 
RJ. Conduction abnormalities in pediatric patients with restric-
tive 
cardiomyopathy. 
Circ 
Heart 
Fail. 
2012;5:267–273. 
doi: 
10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.964395.
 260. Webber SA, Lipshultz SE, Sleeper LA, Lu M, Wilkinson JD, Addonizio 
LJ, Canter CE, Colan SD, Everitt MD, Jefferies JL, Kantor PF, Lamour JM, 
Margossian R, Pahl E, Rusconi PG, Towbin JA; Pediatric Cardiomyopathy 
Registry Investigators. Outcomes of restrictive cardiomyopathy in child-
hood and the influence of phenotype: a report from the Pediatric 
Cardiomyopathy Registry. Circulation. 2012;126:1237–1244. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.104638.
 261. Towbin JA. Left ventricular noncompaction: a new form of heart failure. 
Heart Fail Clin. 2010;6:453–469. doi: 10.1016/j.hfc.2010.06.005.
 262. Pignatelli RH, McMahon CJ, Dreyer WJ, Denfield SW, Price J, Belmont JW, 
Craigen WJ, Wu J, El Said H, Bezold LI, Clunie S, Fernbach S, Bowles NE, 
Towbin JA. Clinical characterization of left ventricular noncompaction 
in children: a relatively common form of cardiomyopathy. Circulation. 
2003;108:2672–2678. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000100664.10777.B8.
 263. Hanke SP
, Gardner AB, Lombardi JP
, Manning PB, Nelson DP
, Towbin JA, 
Jefferies JL, Lorts A. Left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyopathy in 
Barth syndrome: an example of an undulating cardiac phenotype neces-
sitating mechanical circulatory support as a bridge to transplantation. 
Pediatr Cardiol. 2012;33:1430–1434. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0258-z.
 264. Brescia ST, Rossano JW, Pignatelli R, Jefferies JL, Price JF, Decker 
JA, Denfield SW, Dreyer WJ, Smith O, Towbin JA, Kim JJ. Mortality 
and sudden death in pediatric left ventricular noncompaction in 
a tertiary referral center. Circulation. 2013;127:2202–2208. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.002511.
 265. Jefferies JL, Towbin JA. Dilated cardiomyopathy. Lancet. 2010;375:752–
762. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(09)62023-7.
 266. James CA, Calkins H. Update on arrhythmogenic right ventricular dys-
plasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVD/C). Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 
2013;15:476–487. doi: 10.1007/s11936-013-0251-8.
 267. Miyake CY, Teele SA, Chen L, Motonaga KS, Dubin AM, Balasubramanian 
S, Balise RR, Rosenthal DN, Alexander ME, Walsh EP
, Mah DY. In-
hospital arrhythmia development and outcomes in pediatric pa-
tients with acute myocarditis. Am J Cardiol. 2014;113:535–540. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjcard.2013.10.021.
 268. Wilmot I, Morales DL, Price JF, Rossano JW, Kim JJ, Decker JA, McGarry 
MC, Denfield SW, Dreyer WJ, Towbin JA, Jefferies JL. Effectiveness 
of mechanical circulatory support in children with acute fulmi-
nant and persistent myocarditis. J Card Fail. 2011;17:487–494. doi: 
10.1016/j.cardfail.2011.02.008.
 269. Teele SA, Allan CK, Laussen PC, Newburger JW, Gauvreau K, Thiagarajan 
RR. Management and outcomes in pediatric patients presenting with 
acute fulminant myocarditis. J Pediatr. 2011;158:638–643.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.10.015.
 270. Rajagopal SK, Almond CS, Laussen PC, Rycus PT, Wypij D, Thiagarajan 
RR. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for the support of in-
fants, children, and young adults with acute myocarditis: a review of 
the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization registry. Crit Care Med. 
2010;38:382–387. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181bc8293.
 271. Van Hare G. Supraventricular tachycardia. In: Clinical Pediatric 
Arrhythmia. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1999:97–120.
 272. Ludomirsky A, Garson A Jr. Supraventricular tachycardia. In: Gillette 
PC, Garson A Jr. Pediatric Arrhythmias: Electrophysiology and Pacing. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1990:380–426.
 273. Ganz LI, Friedman PL. Supraventricular tachycardia. N Engl J Med. 
1995;332:162–173. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199501193320307.
 274. Fisher DJ, Gross DM, Garson A Jr. Rapid sinus tachycardia: differen-
tiation from supraventricular tachycardia. Am J Dis Child. 1983;137: 
164–166.
 275. Lesh MD, Kalman JM, Saxon LA, Dorostkar PC. Electrophysiology of “in-
cisional” reentrant atrial tachycardia complicating surgery for congenital 
heart disease. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1997;20(pt 2):2107–2111.
 276. Gikonyo BM, Dunnigan A, Benson DW Jr. Cardiovascular collapse 
in infants: association with paroxysmal atrial tachycardia. Pediatrics. 
1985;76:922–926.
 277. Zampi JD, Hirsch JC, Gurney JG, Donohue JE, Yu S, LaPage MJ, Hanauer 
DA, Charpie JR. Junctional ectopic tachycardia after infant heart surgery: 
incidence and outcomes. Pediatr Cardiol. 2012;33:1362–1369. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-012-0348-y.
 278. Hoffman TM, Bush DM, Wernovsky G, Cohen MI, Wieand TS, Gaynor 
JW, Spray TL, Rhodes LA. Postoperative junctional ectopic tachycardia 
in children: incidence, risk factors, and treatment. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2002;74:1607–1611.
 279. Batra AS, Chun DS, Johnson TR, Maldonado EM, Kashyap BA, Maiers J, 
Lindblade CL, Rodefeld M, Brown JW, Hubbard JE. A prospective analysis 
of the incidence and risk factors associated with junctional ectopic tachy-
cardia following surgery for congenital heart disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2006;27:51–55. doi: 10.1007/s00246-005-0992-6.
 280. Walsh EP
, Saul JP
, Sholler GF, Triedman JK, Jonas RA, Mayer JE, Wessel 
DL. Evaluation of a staged treatment protocol for rapid automatic 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e769
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
junctional tachycardia after operation for congenital heart disease. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 1997;29:1046–1053.
 281. Pfammatter JP
, Paul T, Ziemer G, Kallfelz HC. Successful manage-
ment of junctional tachycardia by hypothermia after cardiac op-
erations in infants. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995;60:556–560. doi: 
10.1016/0003-4975(95)00425-K.
 282. Chrysostomou C, Sanchez-de-Toledo J, Wearden P
, Jooste EH, 
Lichtenstein SE, Callahan PM, Suresh T, O’Malley E, Shiderly D, Haney 
J, Yoshida M, Orr R, Munoz R, Morell VO. Perioperative use of dexme-
detomidine is associated with decreased incidence of ventricular and su-
praventricular tachyarrhythmias after congenital cardiac operations. Ann 
Thorac Surg. 2011;92:964–972. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.04.099.
 283. Saul JP
, Scott WA, Brown S, Marantz P
, Acevedo V, Etheridge SP
, Perry 
JC, Triedman JK, Burriss SW, Cargo P
, Graepel J, Koskelo EK, Wang R; for 
the Intravenous Amiodarone Pediatric Investigators. Intravenous amioda-
rone for incessant tachyarrhythmias in children: a randomized, double-
blind, antiarrhythmic drug trial. Circulation. 2005;112:3470–3477. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.105.534149.
 284. Jacobs I, Nadkarni V, Bahr J, Berg RA, Billi JE, Bossaert L, Cassan P
, 
Coovadia A, D'Este K, Finn J, Halperin H, Handley A, Herlitz J, Hickey R, 
Idris A, Kloeck W, Larkin GL, Mancini ME, Mason P
, Mears G, Monsieurs 
K, Montgomery W, Morley P
, Nichol G, Nolan J, Okada K, Perlman J, 
Shuster M, Steen PA, Sterz F, Tibballs J, Timerman S, Truitt T, Zideman D; 
ILCOR Task Force on Cardiac Arrest and Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
Outcomes. Cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation outcome 
reports: update and simplification of the Utstein templates for resuscita-
tion registries: a statement for healthcare professionals from a task force 
of the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (American Heart 
Association, European Resuscitation Council, Australian Resuscitation 
Council, New Zealand Resuscitation Council, Heart and Stroke 
Foundation of Canada, InterAmerican Heart Foundation, Resuscitation 
Councils of Southern Africa). Circulation. 2004;110:3385–3397. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000147236.85306.15.
 285. Panidis IP
, Morganroth J. Sudden death in hospitalized patients: cardiac 
rhythm disturbances detected by ambulatory electrocardiographic moni-
toring. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1983;2:798–805.
 286. Young KD, Gausche-Hill M, McClung CD, Lewis RJ. A prospective, pop-
ulation-based study of the epidemiology and outcome of out-of-hospital 
pediatric cardiopulmonary arrest. Pediatrics. 2004;114:157–164.
 287. Hickey RW, Cohen DM, Strausbaugh S, Dietrich AM. Pediatric pa-
tients requiring CPR in the prehospital setting. Ann Emerg Med. 
1995;25:495–501.
 288. Mogayzel C, Quan L, Graves JR, Tiedeman D, Fahrenbruch C, Herndon P
. 
Out-of-hospital ventricular fibrillation in children and adolescents: causes 
and outcomes. Ann Emerg Med. 1995;25:484–491.
 289. Herlitz J, Engdahl J, Svensson L, Young M, Angquist KA, Holmberg 
S. Characteristics and outcome among children suffering from out of 
hospital cardiac arrest in Sweden. Resuscitation. 2005;64:37–40. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2004.06.019.
 290. Smith B, Rea T, Eisenberg M. Ventricular fibrillation in pediatric cardiac 
arrest. Acad Emerg Med. 2006;13:525–529.
 291. Donoghue AJ, Nadkarni V, Berg RA, Osmond MH, Wells G, Nesbitt 
L, Stiell IG; CanAm Pediatric Cardiac Arrest Investigators. Out-of-
hospital pediatric cardiac arrest: an epidemiologic review and assess-
ment of current knowledge. Ann Emerg Med. 2005;46:512–522. doi: 
10.1016/j.annemergmed.2005.05.028.
 292. Nadkarni VM, Larkin GL, Peberdy MA, Carey SM, Kaye W, Mancini ME, 
Nichol G, Lane-Truitt T, Potts J, Ornato JP
, Berg RA; National Registry of 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Investigators. First documented rhythm 
and clinical outcome from in-hospital cardiac arrest among children and 
adults. JAMA. 2006;295:50–57. doi: 10.1001/jama.295.1.50.
 293. Samson RA, Nadkarni VM, Meaney PA, Carey SM, Berg MD, Berg RA; 
American Heart Association National Registry of CPR Investigators. 
Outcomes of in-hospital ventricular fibrillation in children. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:2328–2339. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa052917.
 294. Reis AG, Nadkarni V, Perondi MB, Grisi S, Berg RA. A prospective inves-
tigation into the epidemiology of in-hospital pediatric cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation using the international Utstein reporting style. Pediatrics. 
2002;109:200–209.
 295. Chiang CE, Roden DM. The long QT syndromes: genetic basis and clinical 
implications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:1–12.
 296. Schwartz PJ. The congenital long QT syndromes from genotype to 
phenotype: clinical implications. J Intern Med. 2006;259:39–47. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2796.2005.01583.x.
 297. Ali RH, Zareba W, Moss AJ, Schwartz PJ, Benhorin J, Vincent GM, Locati 
EH, Priori S, Napolitano C, Towbin JA, Hall WJ, Robinson JL, Andrews ML, 
Zhang L, Timothy K, Medina A. Clinical and genetic variables associated 
with acute arousal and nonarousal-related cardiac events among subjects 
with long QT syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2000;85:457–461.
 298. Arnestad M, Crotti L, Rognum TO, Insolia R, Pedrazzini M, Ferrandi 
C, Vege A, Wang DW, Rhodes TE, George AL Jr, Schwartz PJ. 
Prevalence of long-QT syndrome gene variants in sudden in-
fant 
death 
syndrome. 
Circulation. 
2007;115:361–367. 
doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.658021.
 299. Roden DM. Acquired long QT syndromes and the risk of proarrhythmia. 
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2000;11:938–940.
 300. Wen ZC, Chen SA, Tai CT, Chiang CE, Chiou CW, Chang MS. 
Electrophysiological mechanisms and determinants of vagal maneuvers 
for termination of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. Circulation. 
1998;98:2716–2723.
 301. Sreeram N, Wren C. Supraventricular tachycardia in infants: response to 
initial treatment. Arch Dis Child. 1990;65:127–129.
 302. Overholt ED, Rheuban KS, Gutgesell HP
, Lerman BB, DiMarco JP
. 
Usefulness of adenosine for arrhythmias in infants and children. Am J 
Cardiol. 1988;61:336–340.
 303. Losek JD, Endom E, Dietrich A, Stewart G, Zempsky W, Smith K. Adenosine 
and pediatric supraventricular tachycardia in the emergency department: 
multicenter study and review. Ann Emerg Med. 1999;33:185–191.
 304. Adamson PC, Rhodes LA, Saul JP
, Dick M 2nd, Epstein MR, Moate P
, 
Boston R, Schreiner MS. The pharmacokinetics of esmolol in pe-
diatric subjects with supraventricular arrhythmias. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2006;27:420–427. doi: 10.1007/s00246-006-1162-1.
 305. Trippel DL, Wiest DB, Gillette PC. Cardiovascular and antiarrhythmic ef-
fects of esmolol in children. J Pediatr. 1991;119(pt 1):142–147.
 306. Artman M, Grayson M, Boerth RC. Propranolol in children: safety-toxicity. 
Pediatrics. 1982;70:30–31.
 307. Yabek SM, Berman W Jr, Dillon T. Electrophysiologic effects of proprano-
lol on sinus node function in children. Am Heart J. 1982;104:612–616.
 308. Burri S, Hug MI, Bauersfeld U. Efficacy and safety of intravenous amioda-
rone for incessant tachycardias in infants. Eur J Pediatr. 2003;162:880–
884. doi: 10.1007/s00431-003-1302-z.
 309. Celiker A, Ceviz N, Ozme S. Effectiveness and safety of intravenous amio-
darone in drug-resistant tachyarrhythmias of children. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 
1998;40:567–572.
 310. Figa FH, Gow RM, Hamilton RM, Freedom RM. Clinical efficacy and 
safety of intravenous amiodarone in infants and children. Am J Cardiol. 
1994;74:573–577.
 311. Laird WP
, Snyder CS, Kertesz NJ, Friedman RA, Miller D, Fenrich AL. 
Use of intravenous amiodarone for postoperative junctional ecto-
pic tachycardia in children. Pediatr Cardiol. 2003;24:133–137. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-002-0276-3.
 312. Perry JC, Knilans TK, Marlow D, Denfield SW, Fenrich AL, Friedman RA. 
Intravenous amiodarone for life-threatening tachyarrhythmias in children 
and young adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;22:95–98.
 313. Soult JA, Muñoz M, Lopez JD, Romero A, Santos J, Tovaruela A. Efficacy 
and safety of intravenous amiodarone for short-term treatment of 
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia in children. Pediatr Cardiol. 
1995;16:16–19. doi: 10.1007/BF02310328.
 314. Mandel WJ, Laks MM, Obayashi K, Hayakawa H, Daley W. The Wolff-
Parkinson-White syndrome: pharmacologic effects of procaine amide. 
Am Heart J. 1975;90:744–754.
 315. Bauernfeind RA, Swiryn S, Petropoulos AT, Coelho A, Gallastegui J, Rosen 
KM. Concordance and discordance of drug responses in atrioventricular 
reentrant tachycardia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1983;2:345–350.
 316. Benson DW Jr, Dunnigan A, Green TP
, Benditt DG, Schneider SP
. Periodic 
procainamide for paroxysmal tachycardia. Circulation. 1985;72:147–152.
 317. Komatsu C, Ishinaga T, Tateishi O, Tokuhisa Y, Yoshimura S. Effects of 
four antiarrhythmic drugs on the induction and termination of paroxys-
mal supraventricular tachycardia. Jpn Circ J. 1986;50:961–972.
 318. Boahene KA, Klein GJ, Yee R, Sharma AD, Fujimura O. Termination of 
acute atrial fibrillation in the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome by pro-
cainamide and propafenone: importance of atrial fibrillatory cycle length. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1990;16:1408–1414.
 319. Rhodes LA, Walsh EP
, Saul JP
. Conversion of atrial flutter in pediatric pa-
tients by transesophageal atrial pacing: a safe, effective, minimally inva-
sive procedure. Am Heart J. 1995;130:323–327.
 320. Gandhi SK, Bromberg BI, Mallory GB, Huddleston CB. Atrial flutter: a 
newly recognized complication of pediatric lung transplantation. J 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e770
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996;112:984–991. doi: 10.1016/S0022- 
5223(96)70099-5.
 321. Mandapati R, Byrum CJ, Kavey RE, Smith FC, Kveselis DA, Hannan WP
, 
Brandt B 3rd, Gaum WE. Procainamide for rate control of postsurgical 
junctional tachycardia. Pediatr Cardiol. 2000;21:123–128.
 322. Wang JN, Wu JM, Tsai YC, Lin CS. Ectopic atrial tachycardia in children. J 
Formos Med Assoc. 2000;99:766–770.
 323. Epstein ML, Kiel EA, Victorica BE. Cardiac decompensation following 
verapamil therapy in infants with supraventricular tachycardia. Pediatrics. 
1985;75:737–740.
 324. Kirk CR, Gibbs JL, Thomas R, Radley-Smith R, Qureshi SA. Cardiovascular 
collapse after verapamil in supraventricular tachycardia. Arch Dis Child. 
1987;62:1265–1266.
 325. Benson DW Jr, Smith WM, Dunnigan A, Sterba R, Gallagher JJ. 
Mechanisms of regular, wide QRS tachycardia in infants and children. 
Am J Cardiol. 1982;49:1778–1788.
 326. Kugler JD, Danford DA. Management of infants, children, and ado-
lescents with paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. J Pediatr. 
1996;129:324–338.
 327. Perry JC, Fenrich AL, Hulse JE, Triedman JK, Friedman RA, Lamberti 
JJ. Pediatric use of intravenous amiodarone: efficacy and safety in 
critically ill patients from a multicenter protocol. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1996;27:1246–1250.
 328. Schwartz PJ, Ackerman MJ. The long QT syndrome: a transatlantic clini-
cal approach to diagnosis and therapy. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:3109–3116. 
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht089.
 329. Moss AJ, Zareba W, Hall WJ, Schwartz PJ, Crampton RS, Benhorin J, 
Vincent GM, Locati EH, Priori SG, Napolitano C, Medina A, Zhang L, 
Robinson JL, Timothy K, Towbin JA, Andrews ML. Effectiveness and 
limitations of beta-blocker therapy in congenital long-QT syndrome. 
Circulation. 2000;101:616–623.
 330. Homme JH, White RD, Ackerman MJ. Management of ventricular fi-
brillation or unstable ventricular tachycardia in patients with congeni-
tal long-QT syndrome: a suggested modification to ACLS guidelines. 
Resuscitation. 2003;59:111–115.
 331. Bacha EA, Zimmerman FJ, Mor-Avi V, Weinert L, Starr JP
, Sugeng L, Lang 
RM. Ventricular resynchronization by multisite pacing improves myocardi-
al performance in the postoperative single-ventricle patient. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2004;78:1678–1683. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2004.04.065.
 332. Béland MJ, Hesslein PS, Finlay CD, Faerron-Angel JE, Williams WG, Rowe 
RD. Noninvasive transcutaneous cardiac pacing in children. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol. 1987;10:1262–1270.
 333. Kiserud T, Acharya G. The fetal circulation. Prenat Diagn. 2004;24:1049–
1059. doi: 10.1002/pd.1062.
 334. Clyman RI. Ductus arteriosus: current theories of prenatal and postnatal 
regulation. Semin Perinatol. 1987;11:64–71.
 335. Legato MJ. Cellular mechanisms of normal growth in the mammalian 
heart, II: a quantitative and qualitative comparison between the right and 
left ventricular myocytes in the dog from birth to five months of age. Circ 
Res. 1979;44:263–279.
 336. Colan SD, Parness IA, Spevak PJ, Sanders SP
. Developmental modulation 
of myocardial mechanics: age- and growth-related alterations in after-
load and contractility. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19:619–629.
 337. Thornburg KL, Morton MJ. Filling and arterial pressures as determinants 
of left ventricular stroke volume in fetal lambs. Am J Physiol. 1986;251(pt 
2):H961–H968.
 338. Zaritsky A, Chernow B. Use of catecholamines in pediatrics. J Pediatr. 
1984;105:341–350.
 339. Rozé JC, Tohier C, Maingueneau C, Lefèvre M, Mouzard A. Response to 
dobutamine and dopamine in the hypotensive very preterm infant. Arch 
Dis Child. 1993;69(1 Spec No):59–63.
 340. Fabiato A. Calcium-induced release of calcium from the cardiac sarco-
plasmic reticulum. Am J Physiol. 1983;245:C1–14.
 341. Mirro R, Brown DR. Parenteral calcium treatment shortens the left ven-
tricular systolic time intervals of hypocalcemic neonates. Pediatr Res. 
1984;18:71–73.
 342. Venkataraman PS, Wilson DA, Sheldon RE, Rao R, Parker MK. Effect 
of hypocalcemia on cardiac function in very-low-birth-weight pre-
term neonates: studies of blood ionized calcium, echocardiogra-
phy, and cardiac effect of intravenous calcium therapy. Pediatrics. 
1985;76:543–550.
 343. Jarmakani JM, Nakazawa M, Nagatomo T, Langer GA. Effect of hypoxia 
on mechanical function in the neonatal mammalian heart. Am J Physiol. 
1978;235:H469–H474.
 344. Bove EL, Stammers AH. Recovery of left ventricular function after hypo-
thermic global ischemia: age-related differences in the isolated working 
rabbit heart. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1986;91:115–122.
 345. Daly DM. Interactions between respiration and circulation. In: Cerniack 
NS, Widdicombe JG, eds. Handbook of Physiology: The Respiratory 
System (Vol 2). Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society; 1986: 
529–594.
 346. Leung MP
, Chau KT, Hui PW, Tam AY, Chan FL, Lai CL, Yeung CY. 
Necrotizing enterocolitis in neonates with symptomatic congenital heart 
disease. J Pediatr. 1988;113:1044–1046.
 347. Andropoulos DB, Hunter JV, Nelson DP
, Stayer SA, Stark AR, McKenzie 
ED, Heinle JS, Graves DE, Fraser CD Jr. Brain immaturity is associated 
with brain injury before and after neonatal cardiac surgery with high-
flow bypass and cerebral oxygenation monitoring. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2010;139:543–556. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2009.08.022.
 348. Miller SP
, McQuillen PS, Hamrick S, Xu D, Glidden DV, Charlton N, Karl 
T, Azakie A, Ferriero DM, Barkovich AJ, Vigneron DB. Abnormal brain 
development in newborns with congenital heart disease. N Engl J Med. 
2007;357:1928–1938. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa067393.
 349. Licht DJ, Shera DM, Clancy RR, Wernovsky G, Montenegro LM, Nicolson 
SC, Zimmerman RA, Spray TL, Gaynor JW, Vossough A. Brain matura-
tion is delayed in infants with complex congenital heart defects. J Thorac 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;137:529–536. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.10.025.
 350. Rudolph AM. Aortopulmonary transposition in the fetus: speculation 
on pathophysiology and therapy. Pediatr Res. 2007;61:375–380. doi: 
10.1203/pdr.0b013e318030d5b9.
 351. Donofrio MT, Bremer YA, Schieken RM, Gennings C, Morton LD, 
Eidem BW, Cetta F, Falkensammer CB, Huhta JC, Kleinman CS. 
Autoregulation of cerebral blood flow in fetuses with congenital heart 
disease: the brain sparing effect. Pediatr Cardiol. 2003;24:436–443. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-002-0404-0.
 352. Kaltman JR, Di H, Tian Z, Rychik J. Impact of congenital heart disease 
on cerebrovascular blood flow dynamics in the fetus. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol. 2005;25:32–36. doi: 10.1002/uog.1785.
 353. Srivastava D. Making or breaking the heart: from lineage deter-
mination 
to 
morphogenesis. 
Cell. 
2006;126:1037–1048. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2006.09.003.
 354. Francis F, Meyer G, Fallet-Bianco C, Moreno S, Kappeler C, Socorro 
AC, Tuy FP
, Beldjord C, Chelly J. Human disorders of cortical develop-
ment: from past to present. Eur J Neurosci. 2006;23:877–893. doi: 
10.1111/j.1460-9568.2006.04649.x.
 355. Hoch RV, Rubenstein JL, Pleasure S. Genes and signaling events that es-
tablish regional patterning of the mammalian forebrain. Semin Cell Dev 
Biol. 2009;20:378–386. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2009.02.005.
 356. Kostovic I, Vasung L. Insights from in vitro fetal magnetic resonance im-
aging of cerebral development. Semin Perinatol. 2009;33:220–233. doi: 
10.1053/j.semperi.2009.04.003.
 357. Shillingford AJ, Ittenbach RF, Marino BS, Rychik J, Clancy RR, Spray TL, 
Gaynor JW, Wernovsky G. Aortic morphometry and microcephaly in hy-
poplastic left heart syndrome. Cardiol Young. 2007;17:189–195. doi: 
10.1017/S1047951107000248.
 358. Mahle WT, Tavani F, Zimmerman RA, Nicolson SC, Galli KK, Gaynor JW, 
Clancy RR, Montenegro LM, Spray TL, Chiavacci RM, Wernovsky G, Kurth 
CD. An MRI study of neurological injury before and after congenital heart 
surgery. Circulation. 2002;106(suppl 1):I109–I114.
 359. McQuillen PS, Barkovich AJ, Hamrick SE, Perez M, Ward P, Glidden 
DV, Azakie A, Karl T, Miller SP. Temporal and anatomic risk pro-
file of brain injury with neonatal repair of congenital heart defects. 
Stroke. 2007;38(suppl):736–741. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000247941. 
41234.90.
 360. McQuillen PS, Goff DA, Licht DJ. Effects of congenital heart disease 
on brain development. Prog Pediatr Cardiol. 2010;29:79–85. doi: 
10.1016/j.ppedcard.2010.06.011.
 361. Tagin MA, Woolcott CG, Vincer MJ, Whyte RK, Stinson DA. Hypothermia 
for neonatal hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy: an updated systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2012;166:558–
566. doi: 10.1001/archpediatrics.2011.1772.
 362. Shankaran S, Laptook AR, Ehrenkranz RA, Tyson JE, McDonald SA, 
Donovan EF, Fanaroff AA, Poole WK, Wright LL, Higgins RD, Finer NN, 
Carlo WA, Duara S, Oh W, Cotten CM, Stevenson DK, Stoll BJ, Lemons 
JA, Guillet R, Jobe AH; National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development Neonatal Research Network. Whole-body hypothermia 
for neonates with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. N Engl J Med. 
2005;353:1574–1584. doi: 10.1056/NEJMcps050929.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e771
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 363. Broitman E, Ambalavanan N, Higgins RD, Vohr BR, Das A, Bhaskar B, 
Murray K, Hintz SR, Carlo WA; National Institute of Child Health and 
Human Development Neonatal Research Network. Clinical data predict 
neurodevelopmental outcome better than head ultrasound in extreme-
ly low birth weight infants. J Pediatr. 2007;151:500–5, 505.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.04.013.
 364. Beca J, Gunn JK, Coleman L, Hope A, Reed PW, Hunt RW, Finucane 
K, Brizard C, Dance B, Shekerdemian LS. New white matter brain in-
jury after infant heart surgery is associated with diagnostic group and 
the use of circulatory arrest. Circulation. 2013;127:971–979. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.001089.
 365. Diaz LK, Jones L. Sedating the child with congenital heart disease. 
Anesthesiol Clin. 2009;27:301–319. doi: 10.1016/j.anclin.2009.05.003.
 366. Naguib AN, Tobias JD, Hall MW, Cismowski MJ, Miao Y, Barry N, Preston 
T, Galantowicz M, Hoffman TM. The role of different anesthetic tech-
niques in altering the stress response during cardiac surgery in children: 
a prospective, double-blinded, and randomized study. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med. 2013;14:481–490. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e31828a742c.
 367. Gupta P
, Whiteside W, Sabati A, Tesoro TM, Gossett JM, Tobias JD, Roth 
SJ. Safety and efficacy of prolonged dexmedetomidine use in critically ill 
children with heart disease. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2012;13:660–666. 
doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e318253c7f1.
 368. Lam F, Bhutta AT, Tobias JD, Gossett JM, Morales L, Gupta P
. 
Hemodynamic effects of dexmedetomidine in critically ill neonates and 
infants with heart disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2012;33:1069–1077. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-012-0227-6.
 369. Lam F, Ransom C, Gossett JM, Kelkhoff A, Seib PM, Schmitz ML, Bryant 
JC, Frazier EA, Gupta P
. Safety and efficacy of dexmedetomidine in 
children with heart failure. Pediatr Cardiol. 2013;34:835–841. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-012-0546-7.
 370. Chrysostomou C, Komarlu R, Lichtenstein S, Shiderly D, Arora G, Orr R, 
Wearden PD, Morell VO, Munoz R, Jooste EH. Electrocardiographic effects 
of dexmedetomidine in patients with congenital heart disease. Intensive 
Care Med. 2010;36:836–842. doi: 10.1007/s00134-010-1782-z.
 371. Hammer GB, Drover DR, Cao H, Jackson E, Williams GD, Ramamoorthy 
C, Van Hare GF, Niksch A, Dubin AM. The effects of dexmedetomidine 
on cardiac electrophysiology in children. Anesth Analg. 2008;106:79–83. 
doi: 10.1213/01.ane.0000297421.92857.4e.
 372. Chrysostomou C, Schulman SR, Herrera Castellanos M, Cofer BE, Mitra 
S, da Rocha MG, Wisemandle WA, Gramlich L. A phase II/III, multi-
center, safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetic study of dexmedetomidine 
in preterm and term neonates. J Pediatr. 2014;164:276–282.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.10.002.
 373. Du Y, Chen YJ, He B, Wang YW. The effects of single-dose etomidate ver-
sus propofol on cortisol levels in pediatric patients undergoing urologic 
surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Anesth Analg. 2015;121:1580–
1585. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000000981.
 374. van den Heuvel I, Wurmb TE, Böttiger BW, Bernhard M. Pros and cons 
of etomidate: more discussion than evidence? Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 
2013;26:404–408. doi: 10.1097/ACO.0b013e328362a84c.
 375. Dewhirst E, Naguib A, Tobias JD. Chest wall rigidity in two infants after 
low-dose fentanyl administration. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2012;28:465–
468. doi: 10.1097/PEC.0b013e3182535a2a.
 376. Bovill JG. Intravenous anesthesia for the patient with left ventricular 
dysfunction. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2006;10:43–48. doi: 
10.1177/108925320601000108.
 377. Green SM, Krauss B. Clinical practice guideline for emergency depart-
ment ketamine dissociative sedation in children. Ann Emerg Med. 
2004;44:460–471. doi: 10.1016/S0196064404006365.
 378. Green SM, Roback MG, Krauss B, Brown L, McGlone RG, Agrawal D, 
McKee M, Weiss M, Pitetti RD, Hostetler MA, Wathen JE, Treston G, 
Garcia Pena BM, Gerber AC, Losek JD, Emergency Department Ketamine 
Meta-Analysis Study Group. Predictors of airway and respiratory adverse 
events with ketamine sedation in the emergency department: an indi-
vidual-patient data meta-analysis of 8,282 children. Ann Emerg Med. 
2009;54:158–168.e4. doi: 10.1016/.annemergmed.2008.12.011.
 379. Wathen JE, Roback MG, Mackenzie T, Bothner JP
. Does midazolam al-
ter the clinical effects of intravenous ketamine sedation in children? A 
double-blind, randomized, controlled, emergency department trial. Ann 
Emerg Med. 2000;36:579–588. doi: 10.1067/mem.2000.111131.
 380. Sherwin TS, Green SM, Khan A, Chapman DS, Dannenberg B. Does ad-
junctive midazolam reduce recovery agitation after ketamine sedation for 
pediatric procedures? A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial. Ann Emerg Med. 2000;35:229–238.
 381. Chidambaran V, Costandi A, D’Mello A. Propofol: a review of its role in 
pediatric anesthesia and sedation. CNS Drugs. 2015;29:543–563. doi: 
10.1007/s40263-015-0259-6.
 382. Srinivasan M, Turmelle M, Depalma LM, Mao J, Carlson DW. Procedural 
sedation for diagnostic imaging in children by pediatric hospitalists us-
ing propofol: analysis of the nature, frequency, and predictors of ad-
verse events and interventions. J Pediatr. 2012;160:801–806.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.11.003.
 383. Ellenbogen KA, Thames MD, DiMarco JP
, Sheehan H, Lerman BB. 
Electrophysiological effects of adenosine in the transplanted human 
heart: evidence of supersensitivity. Circulation. 1990;81:821–828.
 384. Kudenchuk PJ, Cobb LA, Copass MK, Cummins RO, Doherty AM, 
Fahrenbruch CE, Hallstrom AP
, Murray WA, Olsufka M, Walsh T. 
Amiodarone for resuscitation after out-of-hospital cardiac arrest 
due to ventricular fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:871–878. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM199909163411203.
 385. Dorian P
, Cass D, Schwartz B, Cooper R, Gelaznikas R, Barr A. Amiodarone 
as compared with lidocaine for shock-resistant ventricular fibrillation 
[published correction appears in N Engl J Med 2002;347:955]. N Engl J 
Med. 2002;346:884–890. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa013029.
 386. Valdes SO, Donoghue AJ, Hoyme DB, Hammond R, Berg MD, Berg 
RA, Samson RA; American Heart Association Get With The Guidelines-
Resuscitation Investigators. Outcomes associated with amiodarone and 
lidocaine in the treatment of in-hospital pediatric cardiac arrest with 
pulseless ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation. Resuscitation. 
2014;85:381–386. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2013.12.008.
 387. Fishberger SB, Hannan RL, Welch EM, Rossi AF. Amiodarone for pediatric 
resuscitation: a word of caution. Pediatr Cardiol. 2009;30:1006–1008. 
doi: 10.1007/s00246-009-9470-x.
 388. Tabbutt S, Nicolson SC, Adamson PC, Zhang X, Hoffman ML, Wells W, 
Backer CL, McGowan FX, Tweddell JS, Bokesch P
, Schreiner M. The safe-
ty, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of esmolol for blood pressure control 
immediately after repair of coarctation of the aorta in infants and chil-
dren: a multicenter, double-blind, randomized trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2008;136:321–328. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2007.09.086.
 389. Chang PM, Silka MJ, Moromisato DY, Bar-Cohen Y. Amiodarone 
versus procainamide for the acute treatment of recurrent supraven-
tricular tachycardia in pediatric patients. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 
2010;3:134–140. doi: 10.1161/CIRCEP
.109.901629.
 390. McGovern B, Garan H, Ruskin JN. Precipitation of cardiac arrest by vera-
pamil in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. Ann Intern 
Med. 1986;104:791–794.
 391. Srinivasan V, Morris MC, Helfaer MA, Berg RA, Nadkarni VM; American 
Heart Association National Registry of CPR Investigators. Calcium use 
during in-hospital pediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a report 
from the National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. Pediatrics. 
2008;121:e1144–e1151. doi: 10.1542/peds.2007-1555.
 392. de Mos N, van Litsenburg RR, McCrindle B, Bohn DJ, Parshuram CS. 
Pediatric in-intensive-care-unit cardiac arrest: incidence, survival, 
and predictive factors. Crit Care Med. 2006;34:1209–1215. doi: 
10.1097/01.CCM.0000208440.66756.C2.
 393. Moler FW, Donaldson AE, Meert K, Brilli RJ, Nadkarni V, Shaffner DH, 
Schleien CL, Clark RS, Dalton HJ, Statler K, Tieves KS, Hackbarth R, 
Pretzlaff R, van der Jagt EW, Pineda J, Hernan L, Dean JM; Pediatric 
Emergency Care Applied Research Network. Multicenter cohort study 
of out-of-hospital pediatric cardiac arrest. Crit Care Med. 2011;39:141–
149. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181fa3c17.
 394. Giglia TM, Massicotte MP
, Tweddell JS, Barst RJ, Bauman M, Erickson 
CC, Feltes TF, Foster E, Hinoki K, Ichord RN, Kreutzer J, McCrindle 
BW, Newburger JW, Tabbutt S, Todd JL, Webb CL; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Congenital Heart Defects Committee 
of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, Council on 
Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Epidemiology and 
Prevention, and Stroke Council. Prevention and treatment of throm-
bosis in pediatric and congenital heart disease: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association [published correction appears in 
Circulation. 2014;129:e23]. Circulation. 2013;128:2622–2703. doi: 
10.1161/01.cir.0000436140.77832.7a.
 395. Kessel AD, Kline M, Zinger M, McLaughlin D, Silver P
, Sweberg TM. The 
impact and statistical analysis of a multifaceted anticoagulation strategy 
in children supported on ECMO: performance and pitfalls. J Intensive 
Care Med. 2017;32:59–67. doi: 10.1177/0885066615601977.
 396. Field D, Elbourne D, Hardy P
, Fenton AC, Ahluwalia J, Halliday HL, 
Subhedar N, Heinonen K, Aikio O, Grieve R, Truesdale A, Tomlin K, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e772
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Normand C, Stocks J; INNOVO Trial Collaborating Group. Neonatal ven-
tilation with inhaled nitric oxide vs. ventilatory support without inhaled 
nitric oxide for infants with severe respiratory failure born at or near 
term: the INNOVO multicentre randomised controlled trial. Neonatology. 
2007;91:73–82. doi: 10.1159/000097123.
 397. Taylor MB, Laussen PC. Fundamentals of management of acute 
postoperative pulmonary hypertension. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2010;11(suppl):S27–S29. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181c769a4.
 398. de Caen AR, Maconochie IK, Aickin R, Atkins DL, Biarent D, Guerguerian 
AM, Kleinman ME, Kloeck DA, Meaney PA, Nadkarni VM, Ng KC, 
Nuthall G, Reis AG, Shimizu N, Tibballs J, Veliz Pintos R; on behalf of the 
Pediatric Basic Life Support and Pediatric Advanced Life Support Chapter 
Collaborators. Part 6: pediatric basic life support and pediatric ad-
vanced life support: 2015 International Consensus on Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Science With 
Treatment 
Recommendations 
[published 
correction 
appears 
in 
Circulation. 2016;134:e121]. Circulation. 2015;132(suppl 1):S177–S203. 
doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000275.
 399. Mackie AS, Gauvreau K, Booth KL, Newburger JW, Laussen PC, Roth 
SJ. Hemodynamic correlates of serum cortisol in neonates after car-
diopulmonary bypass. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011;12:297–303. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181f36929.
 400. Verweij EJ, Hogenbirk K, Roest AA, van Brempt R, Hazekamp MG, de 
Jonge E. Serum cortisol concentration with exploratory cut-off values do 
not predict the effects of hydrocortisone administration in children with 
low cardiac output after cardiac surgery. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 
2012;15:685–689. doi: 10.1093/icvts/ivs292.
 401. Shore S, Nelson DP
, Pearl JM, Manning PB, Wong H, Shanley TP
, Keyser 
T, Schwartz SM. Usefulness of corticosteroid therapy in decreasing epi-
nephrine requirements in critically ill infants with congenital heart dis-
ease. Am J Cardiol. 2001;88:591–594.
 402. Suominen PK, Dickerson HA, Moffett BS, Ranta SO, Mott AR, Price JF, 
Heinle JS, McKenzie ED, Fraser CDJ, Chang AC. Hemodynamic effects 
of rescue protocol hydrocortisone in neonates with low cardiac output 
syndrome after cardiac surgery. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2005;6:655-659 
10.1097/01.PCC.0000185487.69215.29.
 403. Pasquali SK, Hall M, Li JS, Peterson ED, Jaggers J, Lodge AJ, Marino 
BS, Goodman DM, Shah SS. Corticosteroids and outcome in children 
undergoing congenital heart surgery: analysis of the Pediatric Health 
Information Systems Database. Circulation. 2010;122:2123–2130. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.948737
 404. Mastropietro CW, Barrett R, Davalos MC, Zidan M, Valentine KM, 
Delius RE, Walters HL 3rd. Cumulative corticosteroid exposure and in-
fection risk after complex pediatric cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2013;95:2133–2139. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2013.02.026.
 405. Schroeder VA, Pearl JM, Schwartz SM, Shanley TP
, Manning PB, 
Nelson DP
. Combined steroid treatment for congenital heart sur-
gery improves oxygen delivery and reduces postbypass inflamma-
tory mediator expression. Circulation. 2003;107:2823–2828. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000070955.55636.25.
 406. Clarizia NA, Manlhiot C, Schwartz SM, Sivarajan VB, Maratta R, Holtby 
HM, Gruenwald CE, Caldarone CA, Van Arsdell GS, McCrindle BW. 
Improved outcomes associated with intraoperative steroid use in high-
risk pediatric cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;91:1222–1227. 
doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2010.11.005.
 407. Pasquali SK, Li JS, He X, Jacobs ML, O’Brien SM, Hall M, Jaquiss RD, 
Welke KF, Peterson ED, Shah SS, Gaynor JW, Jacobs JP
. Perioperative 
methylprednisolone and outcome in neonates undergoing heart surgery. 
Pediatrics. 2012;129:e385-e391. doi: 10.1542/peds.2011-2034
 408. Brady WJ, Swart G, DeBehnke DJ, Ma OJ, Aufderheide TP
. The efficacy of 
atropine in the treatment of hemodynamically unstable bradycardia and 
atrioventricular block: prehospital and emergency department consider-
ations. Resuscitation. 1999;41:47–55.
 409. Jones P
, Peters MJ, Pinto da Costa N, Kurth T, Alberti C, Kessous K, Lode 
N, Dauger S. Atropine for critical care intubation in a cohort of 264 chil-
dren and reduced mortality unrelated to effects on bradycardia. PLoS 
One. 2013;8:e57478. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057478.
 410. Barrington KJ. The myth of a minimum dose for atropine. Pediatrics. 
2011;127:783–4. doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-1475.
 411. Vogt W, Läer S. Drug use patterns for the prevention of paediatric low 
cardiac output syndrome in Europe. Intensive Care Med. 2011;37:1390–
1391. doi: 10.1007/s00134-011-2266-5.
 412. Li J, Zhang G, Holtby H, Humpl T, Caldarone CA, Van Arsdell GS, 
Redington AN. Adverse effects of dopamine on systemic hemodynamic 
status and oxygen transport in neonates after the Norwood procedure. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:1859–1864. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2006.07.038.
 413. Perondi MB, Reis AG, Paiva EF, Nadkarni VM, Berg RA. A comparison of 
high-dose and standard-dose epinephrine in children with cardiac arrest. 
N Engl J Med. 2004;350:1722–1730. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa032440.
 414. Fukushige J, Takahashi N, Igarashi H, Nakayama H, Inoue K, Hijii T. 
Perinatal management of congenital complete atrioventricular block: re-
port of nine cases. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 1998;40:337–340.
 415. Tibballs J, Carter B, Kiraly NJ, Ragg P
, Clifford M. External and internal bi-
phasic direct current shock doses for pediatric ventricular fibrillation and 
pulseless ventricular tachycardia. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011;12:14–20. 
doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181dbb4fc.
 416. Egan JR, Clarke AJ, Williams S, Cole AD, Ayer J, Jacobe S, Chard 
RB, Winlaw DS. Levosimendan for low cardiac output: a pediatric 
experience. J Intensive Care Med. 2006;21:183–187. doi: 10.1177/ 
0885066606287039.
 417. Lechner E, Hofer A, Leitner-Peneder G, Freynschlag R, Mair R, Weinzettel 
R, Rehak P
, Gombotz H. Levosimendan versus milrinone in neonates and 
infants after corrective open-heart surgery: a pilot study. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med. 2012;13:542–548. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3182455571.
 418. Vogt W, Läer S. Treatment for paediatric low cardiac output syndrome: 
results from the European EuLoCOS-Paed survey. Arch Dis Child. 
2011;96:1180–1186. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2011-300370.
 419. Tanaka K, Kitahata H, Kawahito S, Nozaki J, Tomiyama Y, Oshita S. 
Phenylephrine increases pulmonary blood flow in children with tetralogy 
of Fallot. Can J Anaesth. 2003;50:926–929. doi: 10.1007/BF03018741.
 420. Neumar RW, Otto CW, Link MS, Kronick SL, Shuster M, Callaway CW, 
Kudenchuk PJ, Ornato JP
, McNally B, Silvers SM, Passman RS, White 
RD, Hess EP
, Tang W, Davis D, Sinz E, Morrison LJ. Part 8: adult ad-
vanced cardiovascular life support: 2010 American Heart Association 
guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency car-
diovascular care. Circulation. 2010;122(suppl 3):S729–S767. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.970988.
 421. Link MS, Berkow LC, Kudenchuk PJ, Halperin HR, Hess EP, Moitra 
VK, Neumar RW, O’Neil BJ, Paxton JH, Silvers SM, White RD, 
Yannopoulos D, Donnino MW. Part 7: adult advanced cardio-
vascular life support: 2015 American Heart Association guide-
lines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency 
cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2015;132(suppl 2):S444–S464. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000261.
 422. Duncan JM, Meaney P
, Simpson P
, Berg RA, Nadkarni V, Schexnayder S; 
National Registry of CPR Investigators. Vasopressin for in-hospital pedi-
atric cardiac arrest: results from the American Heart Association National 
Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2009;10:191–195. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e31819a36f2.
 423. Mastropietro CW, Rossi NF, Clark JA, Chen H, Walters H 3rd, Delius R, 
Lieh-Lai M, Sarnaik AP
. Relative deficiency of arginine vasopressin in chil-
dren after cardiopulmonary bypass. Crit Care Med. 2010;38:2052–2058. 
doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181eed91d.
 424. Matok I, Rubinshtein M, Levy A, Vardi A, Leibovitch L, Mishali D, Barzilay 
Z, Paret G. Terlipressin for children with extremely low cardiac output 
after open heart surgery. Ann Pharmacother. 2009;43:423–429. doi: 
10.1345/aph.1L199.
 425. Alten JA, Borasino S, Toms R, Law MA, Moellinger A, Dabal RJ. Early 
initiation of arginine vasopressin infusion in neonates after com-
plex cardiac surgery. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2012;13:300–304. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e31822f1753.
 426. Maltz LA, Klugman D, Spaeder MC, Wessel DL. Off-label drug use in a sin-
gle-center pediatric cardiac intensive care unit. World J Pediatr Congenit 
Heart Surg. 2013;4:262–266. doi: 10.1177/2150135113481042.
 427. Rosa RC, Rosa RF, Zen PR, Paskulin GA. Congenital heart defects and 
extracardiac malformations [article in English, Portuguese]. Rev Paul 
Pediatr. 2013;31:243–251.
 428. Kazim R, Quaegebeur JM, Sun LS. The association of tracheal anomalies 
and tetralogy of Fallot. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 1996;10:589–592.
 429. Kazim R, Berdon WE, Montoya CH, Quaegebeur JM, Sun LS. 
Tracheobronchial anomalies in children with congenital cardiac disease. J 
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 1998;12:553–555.
 430. Akpek EA, Mutlu H, Kayhan Z. Difficult intubation in pediatric cardiac 
anesthesia. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2004;18:610–612.
 431. Pfammatter JP
, Casaulta C, Pavlovic M, Berdat PA, Frey U, Carrel T. 
Important excess morbidity due to upper airway anomalies in the periop-
erative course in infant cardiac surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:1008–
1012. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2005.09.015.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e773
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 432. Odegard KC, DiNardo JA, Kussman BD, Shukla A, Harrington J, Casta 
A, McGowan FX Jr, Hickey PR, Bacha EA, Thiagarajan RR, Laussen PC. 
The frequency of anesthesia-related cardiac arrests in patients with 
congenital heart disease undergoing cardiac surgery. Anesth Analg. 
2007;105:335–343. doi: 10.1213/01.ane.0000268498.68620.39.
 433. Ramamoorthy C, Haberkern CM, Bhananker SM, Domino KB, Posner 
KL, Campos JS, Morray JP
. Anesthesia-related cardiac arrest in chil-
dren with heart disease: data from the Pediatric Perioperative Cardiac 
Arrest (POCA) registry. Anesth Analg. 2010;110:1376–1382. doi: 
10.1213/ANE.0b013e3181c9f927.
 434. Gupta P
, Kuperstock JE, Hashmi S, Arnolde V, Gossett JM, Prodhan P
, 
Venkataraman S, Roth SJ. Efficacy and predictors of success of non-
invasive ventilation for prevention of extubation failure in critically ill 
children with heart disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2013;34:964–977. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-012-0590-3.
 435. Green DW, Bristow AS, Fisher M. Comparison of i.v. glycopyrrolate 
and atropine in the prevention of bradycardia and arrhythmias fol-
lowing repeated doses of suxamethonium in children. Br J Anaesth. 
1984;56:981–985.
 436. Shaw CA, Kelleher AA, Gill CP
, Murdoch LJ, Stables RH, Black AE. 
Comparison of the incidence of complications at induction and emer-
gence in infants receiving oral atropine vs no premedication. Br J 
Anaesth. 2000;84:174–178.
 437. Zimmerman G, Steward DJ. Bradycardia delays the onset of action of 
intravenous atropine in infants. Anesthesiology. 1986;65:320–322.
 438. Jones P
, Dauger S, Peters MJ. Bradycardia during critical care intubation: 
mechanisms, significance and atropine. Arch Dis Child. 2012;97:139–
144. doi: 10.1136/adc.2010.210518.
 439. Marsch SC, Steiner L, Bucher E, Pargger H, Schumann M, Aebi T, Hunziker 
PR, Siegemund M. Succinylcholine versus rocuronium for rapid sequence 
intubation in intensive care: a prospective, randomized controlled trial. 
Crit Care. 2011;15:R199. doi: 10.1186/cc10367.
 440. Chambers D, Paulden M, Paton F, Heirs M, Duffy S, Hunter JM, Sculpher 
M, Woolacott N. Sugammadex for reversal of neuromuscular block after 
rapid sequence intubation: a systematic review and economic assess-
ment. Br J Anaesth. 2010;105:568–575. doi: 10.1093/bja/aeq270.
 441. Albanese CT, Nour BM, Rowe MI. Anesthesia blocks nonshivering ther-
mogenesis in the neonatal rabbit. J Pediatr Surg. 1994;29:983–986.
 442. Plattner O, Semsroth M, Sessler DI, Papousek A, Klasen C, Wagner O. 
Lack of nonshivering thermogenesis in infants anesthetized with fentanyl 
and propofol. Anesthesiology. 1997;86:772–777.
 443. Palmisano BW, Fisher DM, Willis M, Gregory GA, Ebert PA. The effect 
of paralysis on oxygen consumption in normoxic children after cardiac 
surgery. Anesthesiology. 1984;61:518–522.
 444. Weiss M, Dullenkopf A, Fischer JE, Keller C, Gerber AC; European 
Paediatric Endotracheal Intubation Study Group. Prospective ran-
domized controlled multi-centre trial of cuffed or uncuffed endotra-
cheal tubes in small children. Br J Anaesth. 2009;103:867–873. doi: 
10.1093/bja/aep290.
 445. Fonte M, Oulego-Erroz I, Nadkarni L, Sánchez-Santos L, Iglesias-
Vásquez A, Rodríguez-Núñez A. A randomized comparison of the 
GlideScope videolaryngoscope to the standard laryngoscopy for 
intubation by pediatric residents in simulated easy and difficult in-
fant airway scenarios. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2011;27:398–402. doi: 
10.1097/PEC.0b013e318217b550.
 446. Apfelbaum JL, Hagberg CA, Caplan RA, Blitt CD, Connis RT, Nickinovich 
DG, Hagberg CA, Caplan RA, Benumof JL, Berry FA, Blitt CD, Bode 
RH, Cheney FW, Connis RT, Guidry OF, Nickinovich DG, Ovassapian A; 
American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Management of 
the Difficult Airway. Practice guidelines for management of the difficult 
airway: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Task Force on Management of the Difficult Airway. Anesthesiology. 
2013;118:251–270. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e31827773b2.
 447. Sunder RA, Haile DT, Farrell PT, Sharma A. Pediatric airway management: 
current practices and future directions. Paediatr Anaesth. 2012;22:1008–
1015. doi: 10.1111/pan.12013.
 448. Hellström-Westas L, Hanséus K, Jögi P
, Lundström NR, Svenningsen N. 
Long-distance transports of newborn infants with congenital heart dis-
ease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2001;22:380–384. doi: 10.1007/s002460010254.
 449. Bronicki RA. Venous oximetry and the assessment of oxygen trans-
port balance. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011;12(suppl):S21–S26. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3182211667.
 450. Checchia PA, Bronicki RA. The Pediatric Cardiac Intensive Care Society 
evidence-based review and consensus statement on monitoring of 
hemodynamics and oxygen transport balance. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2011;12(suppl):S1. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e318220e64f.
 451. Fletcher R, Jonson B, Cumming G, Brew J. The concept of deadspace 
with special reference to the single breath test for carbon dioxide. Br J 
Anaesth. 1981;53:77–88.
 452. Burrows FA. Physiologic dead space, venous admixture, and the arterial 
to end-tidal carbon dioxide difference in infants and children undergoing 
cardiac surgery. Anesthesiology. 1989;70:219–225.
 453. Fletcher R. Relationship between alveolar deadspace and arterial oxy-
genation in children with congenital cardiac disease. Br J Anaesth. 
1989;62:168–176.
 454. Benjamin JT, Romp RL, Carlo WA, Schelonka RL. Identification of 
serious congenital heart disease in neonates after initial hospital 
discharge. Congenit Heart Dis. 2007;2:327–331. doi: 10.1111/j.1747- 
0803.2007.00120.x.
 455. Yeager SB, Horbar JD, Greco KM, Duff J, Thiagarajan RR, Laussen PC. 
Pretransport and posttransport characteristics and outcomes of neo-
nates who were admitted to a cardiac intensive care unit. Pediatrics. 
2006;118:1070–1077. doi: 10.1542/peds.2006-0719.
 456. Orr RA, Felmet KA, Han Y, McCloskey KA, Dragotta MA, Bills DM, 
Kuch BA, Watson RS. Pediatric specialized transport teams are as-
sociated with improved outcomes. Pediatrics. 2009;124:40–48. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2008-0515.
 457. Ramnarayan P
, Thiru K, Parslow RC, Harrison DA, Draper ES, Rowan 
KM. Effect of specialist retrieval teams on outcomes in children ad-
mitted to paediatric intensive care units in England and Wales: 
a retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 2010;376:698–704. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61113-0.
 458. Meckler GD, Lowe C. To intubate or not to intubate? Transporting 
infants on prostaglandin E1. Pediatrics. 2009;123:e25–e30. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2008-0641.
 459. Lewis AB, Freed MD, Heymann MA, Roehl SL, Kensey RC. Side effects 
of therapy with prostaglandin E1 in infants with critical congenital heart 
disease. Circulation. 1981;64:893–898.
 460. Singh GK, Fong LV, Salmon AP
, Keeton BR. Study of low dosage prosta-
glandin: usages and complications. Eur Heart J. 1994;15:377–381.
 461. Kramer HH, Sommer M, Rammos S, Krogmann O. Evaluation of low dose 
prostaglandin E1 treatment for ductus dependent congenital heart dis-
ease. Eur J Pediatr. 1995;154:700–707.
 462. Browning Carmo KA, Barr P
, West M, Hopper NW, White JP
, Badawi 
N. Transporting newborn infants with suspected duct dependent con-
genital heart disease on low-dose prostaglandin E1 without routine 
mechanical ventilation. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2007;92: 
F117–F119.
 463. Cabrera AG, Prodhan P
, Cleves MA, Fiser RT, Schmitz M, Fontenot E, 
McKamie W, Chipman C, Jaquiss RD, Imamura M. Interhospital trans-
port of children requiring extracorporeal membrane oxygenation sup-
port for cardiac dysfunction. Congenit Heart Dis. 2011;6:202–208. doi: 
10.1111/j.1747-0803.2011.00506.x.
 464. Clement KC, Fiser RT, Fiser WP
, Chipman CW, Taylor BJ, Heulitt MJ, 
Moss M, Fasules JW, Faulkner SC, Imamura M, Fontenot EE, Jaquiss RD. 
Single-institution experience with interhospital extracorporeal mem-
brane oxygenation transport: a descriptive study. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2010;11:509–513. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181c515ca.
 465. Coppola CP
, Tyree M, Larry K, DiGeronimo R. A 22-year experience in 
global transport extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. J Pediatr Surg. 
2008;43:46–52. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2007.09.021.
 466. Drew BJ, Califf RM, Funk M, Kaufman ES, Krucoff MW, Laks MM, 
Macfarlane PW, Sommargren C, Swiryn S, Van Hare GF. Practice 
standards for electrocardiographic monitoring in hospital set-
tings: an American Heart Association scientific statement from 
the Councils on Cardiovascular Nursing, Clinical Cardiology, and 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young: endorsed by the International 
Society of Computerized Electrocardiology and the American 
Association of Critical-Care Nurses [published correction appears in 
Circulation. 2005;111:378]. Circulation. 2004;110:2721–2746. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000145144.56673.59.
 467. American Society of Anesthesiologists. Standards, guidelines, state-
ments and other documents. 2013. http://www.asahq.org/quality-and- 
practice-management/standards-and-guidelines. Accessed April 23, 2013.
 468. Sivarajan VB, Bohn D. Monitoring of standard hemodynamic parame-
ters: heart rate, systemic blood pressure, atrial pressure, pulse oximetry, 
and end-tidal CO2. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011;12(suppl):S2–S11. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e318220e7ea.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e774
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 469. Young D, Griffiths J. Clinical trials of monitoring in anaesthesia, critical 
care and acute ward care: a review. Br J Anaesth. 2006;97:39–45. doi: 
10.1093/bja/ael107.
 470. Reich DL, Kahn RA, Mittnacht AJ, Leibowitz AB, Stone ME, Eisenkraft 
JB, eds. Monitoring in Anesthesia and Perioperative Care. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press; 2011.
 471. Tibby SM, Hatherill M, Marsh MJ, Murdoch IA. Clinicians’ abilities to es-
timate cardiac index in ventilated children and infants. Arch Dis Child. 
1997;77:516–518.
 472. Wernovsky G, Wypij D, Jonas RA, Mayer JE Jr, Hanley FL, Hickey PR, Walsh 
AZ, Chang AC, Castañeda AR, Newburger JW, Wessel DL. Postoperative 
course and hemodynamic profile after the arterial switch operation in 
neonates and infants: a comparison of low-flow cardiopulmonary bypass 
and circulatory arrest. Circulation. 1995;92:2226–2235.
 473. Stocker CF, Shekerdemian LS, Nørgaard MA, Brizard CP
, Mynard 
JP
, Horton SB, Penny DJ. Mechanisms of a reduced cardiac out-
put and the effects of milrinone and levosimendan in a model of in-
fant cardiopulmonary bypass. Crit Care Med. 2007;35:252–259. doi: 
10.1097/01.CCM.0000251123.70632.4E.
 474. Ziemer G, Karck M, Müller H, Luhmer I. Staged chest closure in pediatric 
cardiac surgery preventing typical and atypical cardiac tamponade. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 1992;6:91–95.
 475. Bronicki RA, Herrera M, Mink R, Domico M, Tucker D, Chang AC, Anas 
NG. Hemodynamics and cerebral oxygenation following repair of tetral-
ogy of Fallot: the effects of converting from positive pressure ventilation 
to spontaneous breathing. Congenit Heart Dis. 2010;5:416–421. doi: 
10.1111/j.1747-0803.2010.00445.x.
 476. Shekerdemian LS, Schulze-Neick I, Redington AN, Bush A, Penny DJ. 
Negative pressure ventilation as haemodynamic rescue following surgery 
for congenital heart disease. Intensive Care Med. 2000;26:93–96.
 477. Morales DLS, Carberry KE, Heinle JS, McKenzie ED, Fraser CD Jr, Diaz 
LK. Extubation in the operating room after Fontan’s procedure: effect 
on practice and outcomes. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008;86:576–582. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2008.02.010.
 478. Lofland GK. The enhancement of hemodynamic performance in Fontan 
circulation using pain free spontaneous ventilation. Eur J Cardiothorac 
Surg. 2001;20:114–119.
 479. Mora GA, Pizarro C, Jacobs ML, Norwood WI. Experimental model of 
single ventricle: influence of carbon dioxide on pulmonary vascular dy-
namics. Circulation. 1994;90(pt 2):II43–II46.
 480. Checchia PA, Bronicki RA, Goldstein B. Review of inhaled nitric oxide in 
the pediatric cardiac surgery setting. Pediatr Cardiol. 2012;33:493–505. 
doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0172-4.
 481. Vogt W, Läer S. Prevention for pediatric low cardiac output syndrome: 
results from the European survey EuLoCOS-Paed. Paediatr Anaesth. 
2011;21:1176–1184. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9592.2011.03683.x.
 482. Van Saet A, De Wildt SN. Prevention of low cardiac output syndrome in 
children: where is the evidence? Paediatr Anaesth. 2011;21:1173–1175. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9592.2011.03700.x.
 483. Osthaus WA, Boethig D, Winterhalter M, Huber D, Goerler H, Sasse 
M, Sümpelmann R. First experiences with intraoperative levosimen-
dan in pediatric cardiac surgery. Eur J Pediatr. 2009;168:735–740. doi: 
10.1007/s00431-008-0834-7.
 484. Momeni M, Rubay J, Matta A, Rennotte MT, Veyckemans F, 
Poncelet AJ, Clement de Clety S, Anslot C, Joomye R, Detaille T. 
Levosimendan in congenital cardiac surgery: a randomized, double-
blind clinical trial. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2011;25:419–424. doi: 
10.1053/j.jvca.2010.07.004.
 485. Ricci Z, Garisto C, Favia I, Vitale V, Di Chiara L, Cogo PE. Levosimendan in-
fusion in newborns after corrective surgery for congenital heart disease: 
randomized controlled trial. Intensive Care Med. 2012;38:1198–1204. 
doi: 10.1007/s00134-012-2564-6.
 486. Hamilton MA, Cecconi M, Rhodes A. A systematic review and meta-anal-
ysis on the use of preemptive hemodynamic intervention to improve post-
operative outcomes in moderate and high-risk surgical patients. Anesth 
Analg. 2011;112:1392–1402. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e3181eeaae5.
 487. Aya HD, Cecconi M, Hamilton M, Rhodes A. Goal-directed therapy in 
cardiac surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth. 
2013;110:510–517. doi: 10.1093/bja/aet020.
 488. Morrison LJ, Neumar RW, Zimmerman JL, Link MS, Newby LK, 
McMullan PW Jr, Hoek TV, Halverson CC, Doering L, Peberdy MA, 
Edelson DP; on behalf of the American Heart Association Emergency 
Cardiovascular Care Committee, Council on Cardiopulmonary, Critical 
Care, Perioperative and Resuscitation, Council on Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on Peripheral 
Vascular Disease. Strategies for improving survival after in-hospital car-
diac arrest in the United States: 2013 consensus recommendations: a 
consensus statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2013;127:1538–1563. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31828b2770.
 489. Burstein DS, Rossi AF, Jacobs JP
, Checchia PA, Wernovsky G, Li JS, 
Pasquali SK. Variation in models of care delivery for children undergoing 
congenital heart surgery in the United States. World J Pediatr Congenit 
Heart Surg. 2010;1:8–14. doi: 10.1177/2150135109360915.
 490. Burstein DS, Jacobs JP
, Li JS, Sheng S, O’Brien SM, Rossi AF, Checchia 
PA, Wernovsky G, Welke KF, Peterson ED, Jacobs ML, Pasquali SK. Care 
models and associated outcomes in congenital heart surgery. Pediatrics. 
2011;127:e1482-e1489. doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-2796.
 491. Hickey PA, Gauvreau K, Tong E, Schiffer NP
, Connor JA. Pediatric cardio-
vascular critical care in the United States: nursing and organizational char-
acteristics. Am J Crit Care. 2012;21:242–250. doi: 10.4037/ajcc2012853.
 492. Gaies MG, Clarke NS, Donohue JE, Gurney JG, Charpie JR, Hirsch JC. 
Personnel and unit factors impacting outcome after cardiac arrest in a 
dedicated pediatric cardiac intensive care unit. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2012;13:583–588. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e318238b272.
 493. Hickey PA, Gauvreau K, Curley MA, Connor JA. The effect of critical 
care nursing and organizational characteristics on pediatric cardiac sur-
gery mortality in the United States. J Nurs Adm. 2013;43:637–644. doi: 
10.1097/NNA.0000000000000005.
 494. Hickey PA, Pasquali SK, Gaynor JW, He X, Hill KD, Connor JA, Gauvreau 
K, Jacobs ML, Jacobs JP
, Hirsch-Romano JC. Critical care nursing’s impact 
on pediatric patient outcomes. Ann Thorac Surg. 2016;102:1375–1380. 
doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.03.019.
 495. Usuku H, Nakayama M, Sumida H, Yamamuro M, Izumiya Y, Suzuki S, 
Kusuhara K, Ueno H, Sugiyama S, Yoshimura M, Ogawa H. Pump failure 
death and sudden cardiac death in patients with cardiac dysfunction: a 
search for prognostic predictive factors: a long-term follow-up study. J 
Cardiol. 2010;55:55–64. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2009.08.005.
 496. Lara TM, Hajjar LA, de Almeida JP, Fukushima JT, Barbas CS, Rodrigues 
AR, Nozawa E, Feltrim MI, Almeida E, Coimbra V, Osawa E, Ianotti 
RdM, Leme AC, Jatene FB, Auler-Jr JO, Galas FR. High levels of 
B-type natriuretic peptide predict weaning failure from mechanical 
ventilation in adult patients after cardiac surgery. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 
2013;68:33–38.
 497. Huang SC, Wu ET, Ko WJ, Lai LP
, Hsu J, Chang CI, Chiu IS, Wang 
SS, Wu MH, Lin FY, Chen YS. Clinical implication of blood lev-
els of B-type natriuretic peptide in pediatric patients on mechani-
cal circulatory support. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:2267–2272. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2005.12.061.
 498. Amirnovin R, Keller RL, Herrera C, Hsu JH, Datar S, Karl TR, Adatia I, 
Oishi P
, Fineman JR. B-type natriuretic peptide levels predict out-
comes in infants undergoing cardiac surgery in a lesion-dependent 
fashion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013;145:1279–1287. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.07.067.
 499. Balasubramanyan N, Havens PL, Hoffman GM. Unmeasured anions iden-
tified by the Fencl-Stewart method predict mortality better than base 
excess, anion gap, and lactate in patients in the pediatric intensive care 
unit. Crit Care Med. 1999;27:1577–1581.
 500. Cheung PY, Chui N, Joffe AR, Rebeyka IM, Robertson CM; Western 
Canadian Complex Pediatric Therapies Project, Follow-up Group. 
Postoperative lactate concentrations predict the outcome of infants 
aged 6 weeks or less after intracardiac surgery: a cohort follow-up 
to 18 months. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;130:837–843. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2005.04.029.
 501. Molina Hazan V, Gonen Y, Vardi A, Keidan I, Mishali D, Rubinshtein 
M, Yakov Y, Paret G. Blood lactate levels differ significantly between 
surviving and nonsurviving patients within the same Risk-Adjusted 
Classification for Congenital Heart Surgery (RACHS-1) group af-
ter pediatric cardiac surgery. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010;31:952–960. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-010-9724-7.
 502. Charpie JR, Dekeon MK, Goldberg CS, Mosca RS, Bove EL, Kulik TJ. Serial 
blood lactate measurements predict early outcome after neonatal repair 
or palliation for complex congenital heart disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 2000;120:73–80. doi: 10.1067/mtc.2000.106838.
 503. Hannan RL, Ybarra MA, White JA, Ojito JW, Rossi AF, Burke RP
. Patterns 
of lactate values after congenital heart surgery and timing of car-
diopulmonary support. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005;80:1468–1473. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2005.04.050.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e775
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 504. Kalyanaraman M, DeCampli WM, Campbell AI, Bhalala U, Harmon 
TG, Sandiford P
, McMahon CK, Shore S, Yeh TS. Serial blood lac-
tate levels as a predictor of mortality in children after cardiopulmo-
nary bypass surgery. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2008;9:285–288. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e31816c6f31.
 505. Thayssen P
, Klarholt E. Relation between caval and pulmonary artery oxy-
gen saturation in children. Br Heart J. 1980;43:574–578.
 506. Dueck MH, Klimek M, Appenrodt S, Weigand C, Boerner U. Trends but 
not individual values of central venous oxygen saturation agree with 
mixed venous oxygen saturation during varying hemodynamic condi-
tions. Anesthesiology. 2005;103:249–257.
 507. Rossi AF, Sommer RJ, Lotvin A, Gross RP
, Steinberg LG, Kipel G, Golinko 
RJ, Griepp RB. Usefulness of intermittent monitoring of mixed venous 
oxygen saturation after stage I palliation for hypoplastic left heart syn-
drome. Am J Cardiol. 1994;73:1118–1123.
 508. Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, Ressler J, Muzzin A, Knoblich B, Peterson 
E, Tomlanovich M; Early Goal-Directed Therapy Collaborative Group. Early 
goal-directed therapy in the treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. 
N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1368–1377. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa010307.
 509. Oliveira C, Oliveira DF, Gottschald AC, Moura JG, Costa G, Ventura 
A, Fernandes J, Vaz FC, Carcillo J, Rivers E, Troster E. ACCM/PALS 
haemodynamic support guidelines for paediatric septic shock: an 
outcomes comparison with and without monitoring central venous 
oxygen saturation. Intensive Care Med. 2008;34:1065–1075. doi: 
10.1007/s00134-008-1085-9
 510. Rao RP
, Danduran MJ, Frommelt PC, Ghanayem NS, Berger S, Simpson 
PM, Yan K, Hoffman GM. Measurement of regional tissue bed venous 
weighted oximetric trends during exercise by near infrared spectroscopy. 
Pediatr Cardiol. 2009;30:465–471. doi: 10.1007/s00246-009-9393-6.
 511. Rao RP
, Danduran MJ, Hoffman GM, Ghanayem NS, Berger S, Frommelt 
PC. Cerebral hemodynamics in the presence of decreased systemic 
venous compliance in patients with Fontan physiology may limit an-
aerobic exercise capacity. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010;31:208–214. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-009-9585-0.
 512. Danduran MJ, Dixon JE, Rao RP
. Near infrared spectroscopy describes phys-
iologic payback associated with excess postexercise oxygen consumption 
in healthy controls and children with complex congenital heart disease. 
Pediatr Cardiol. 2012;33:95–102. doi: 10.1007/s00246-011-0097-3.
 513. Rao RP
, Danduran MJ, Loomba RS, Dixon JE, Hoffman GM. Near-infrared 
spectroscopic monitoring during cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
detects anaerobic threshold. Pediatr Cardiol. 2012;33:791–796. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-012-0217-8.
 514. Bhalala US, Nishisaki A, McQueen D, Bird GL, Morrison WE, Nadkarni 
VM, Nathan M, Starr JP
. Change in regional (somatic) near-infrared spec-
troscopy is not a useful indicator of clinically detectable low cardiac out-
put in children after surgery for congenital heart defects. Pediatr Crit 
Care Med. 2012;13:529–534. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3182389531.
 515. Li J, Van Arsdell GS, Zhang G, Cai S, Humpl T, Caldarone CA, Holtby 
H, Redington AN. Assessment of the relationship between cerebral and 
splanchnic oxygen saturations measured by near-infrared spectroscopy 
and direct measurements of systemic haemodynamic variables and oxy-
gen transport after the Norwood procedure. Heart. 2006;92:1678–1685. 
doi: 10.1136/hrt.2005.087270.
 516. McQuillen PS, Nishimoto MS, Bottrell CL, Fineman LD, Hamrick SE, 
Glidden DV, Azakie A, Adatia I, Miller SP
. Regional and central venous 
oxygen saturation monitoring following pediatric cardiac surgery: con-
cordance and association with clinical variables. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2007;8:154–160. doi: 10.1097/01.PCC.0000257101.37171.BE.
 517. Dent CL, Spaeth JP
, Jones BV, Schwartz SM, Glauser TA, Hallinan 
B, Pearl JM, Khoury PR, Kurth CD. Brain magnetic resonance imag-
ing abnormalities after the Norwood procedure using regional cere-
bral perfusion. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;130:1523–1530. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2005.07.051.
 518. Kussman BD, Wypij D, Laussen PC, Soul JS, Bellinger DC, DiNardo JA, 
Robertson R, Pigula FA, Jonas RA, Newburger JW. Relationship of in-
traoperative cerebral oxygen saturation to neurodevelopmental out-
come and brain magnetic resonance imaging at 1 year of age in infants 
undergoing biventricular repair. Circulation. 2010;122:245–254. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.902338.
 519. Ortmann LA, Fontenot EE, Seib PM, Eble BK, Brown R, Bhutta AT. Use 
of near-infrared spectroscopy for estimation of renal oxygenation in 
children with heart disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2011;32:748–753. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-011-9960-5.
 520. Owens GE, King K, Gurney JG, Charpie JR. Low renal oximetry corre-
lates with acute kidney injury after infant cardiac surgery. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2011;32:183–188. doi: 10.1007/s00246-010-9839-x.
 521. Papadea C, Foster J, Grant S, Ballard SA, Cate JC 4th, Southgate WM, 
Purohit DM. Evaluation of the i-STAT Portable Clinical Analyzer for point-
of-care blood testing in the intensive care units of a university children’s 
hospital. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2002;32:231–243.
 522. Karon BS, Scott R, Burritt MF, Santrach PJ. Comparison of lactate values 
between point-of-care and central laboratory analyzers. Am J Clin Pathol. 
2007;128:168–171. doi: 10.1309/HBQEFDPH34MKK5GP
.
 523. Klugman D, Berger JT. Echocardiography as a hemodynamic monitor in 
critically ill children. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011;12(suppl):S50–S54. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3182211c17.
 524. Longjohn M, Wan J, Joshi V, Pershad J. Point-of-care echocardiography 
by pediatric emergency physicians. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2011;27:693–
696. doi: 10.1097/PEC.0b013e318226c7c7.
 525. Mertens L, Seri I, Marek J, Arlettaz R, Barker P
, McNamara P
, Moon-
Grady AJ, Coon PD, Noori S, Simpson J, Lai WW; Writing Group of 
the American Society of Echocardiography; European Association of 
Echocardiography; Association for European Pediatric Cardiologists. 
Targeted neonatal echocardiography in the neonatal intensive care 
unit: practice guidelines and recommendations for training. J Am Soc 
Echocardiogr. 2011;24:1057–1078. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2011.07.014.
 526. Sehgal A, McNamara PJ. Does point-of-care functional echocardiography 
enhance cardiovascular care in the NICU? J Perinatol. 2008;28:729–735. 
doi: 10.1038/jp.2008.100.
 527. Booth KL, Roth SJ, Thiagarajan RR, Almodovar MC, del Nido PJ, Laussen 
PC. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support of the Fontan and 
bidirectional Glenn circulations. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004;77:1341–1348. 
doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2003.09.042.
 528. Gandhi NN, Hartman ME, Williford WL, Peters MA, Cheifetz IM, 
Turner DA. Successful use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
for pH1N1-induced refractory hypoxemia in a child with hypoplastic 
left heart syndrome. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011;12:e398–e401. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181fe3189.
 529. Chang YH, Kim H, Sung SC, Lee HD. Temporary fenestration using ve-
noatrial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation after the Fontan opera-
tion. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;93:2068–2069. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur. 
2011.11.020.
 530. Nielsen JC, Seiden HS, Nguyen K, Vlahakis SA, Ravishankar C. 
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for pneumonitis after a Glenn pal-
liation. Perfusion. 2002;17:457–458. doi: 10.1191/0267659102pf616cr.
 531. Guntheroth WG. Sensitivity and specificity of echocardiographic 
evidence of tamponade: implications for ventricular interdepen-
dence and pulsus paradoxus. Pediatr Cardiol. 2007;28:358–362. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-005-0807-9.
 532. Berman W Jr, Fripp RR, Rubler M, Alderete L. Hemodynamic effects of 
ketamine in children undergoing cardiac catheterization. Pediatr Cardiol. 
1990;11:72–76. doi: 10.1007/BF02239565.
 533. Hart BB, Stanford GG, Ziegler MG, Lake CR, Chernow B. Catecholamines: 
study of interspecies variation. Crit Care Med. 1989;17:1203–1222.
 534. Fisher DG, Schwartz PH, Davis AL. Pharmacokinetics of exogenous epi-
nephrine in critically ill children. Crit Care Med. 1993;21:111–117.
 535. Morray JP
, Lynn AM, Mansfield PB. Effect of pH and PCO2 on pulmo-
nary and systemic hemodynamics after surgery in children with con-
genital heart disease and pulmonary hypertension. J Pediatr. 1988;113: 
474–479.
 536. McLellan MC, Gauvreau K, Connor JA. Validation of the Cardiac 
Children’s Hospital Early Warning Score: an early warning scoring tool to 
prevent cardiopulmonary arrests in children with heart disease. Congenit 
Heart Dis. 2014;9:194–202. doi: 10.1111/chd.12132.
 537. Furck AK, Uebing A, Hansen JH, Scheewe J, Jung O, Fischer G, 
Rickers C, Holland-Letz T, Kramer HH. Outcome of the Norwood op-
eration in patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome: a 12-year 
single-center survey. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010;139:359–365. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2009.07.063.
 538. Ghanayem NS, Hoffman GM, Mussatto KA, Cava JR, Frommelt PC, Rudd 
NA, Steltzer MM, Bevandic SM, Frisbee SS, Jaquiss RD, Litwin SB, Tweddell 
JS. Home surveillance program prevents interstage mortality after the 
Norwood procedure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2003;126:1367–1377.
 539. Siehr SL, Norris JK, Bushnell JA, Ramamoorthy C, Reddy VM, Hanley 
FL, Wright GE. Home monitoring program reduces interstage mortal-
ity after the modified Norwood procedure. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2014;147:718–23.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.04.006.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e776
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 540. Petit CJ, Fraser CD, Mattamal R, Slesnick TC, Cephus CE, Ocampo 
EC. The impact of a dedicated single-ventricle home-monitoring 
program on interstage somatic growth, interstage attrition, and 
1-year survival. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;142:1358–1366. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2011.04.043.
 541. Hansen JH, Furck AK, Petko C, Buchholz-Berdau R, Voges I, Scheewe J, 
Rickers C, Kramer HH. Use of surveillance criteria reduces interstage mortal-
ity after the Norwood operation for hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Eur J 
Cardiothorac Surg. 2012;41:1013–1018. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezr190.
 542. Schidlow DN, Anderson JB, Klitzner TS, Beekman RH 3rd, Jenkins 
KJ, Kugler JD, Martin GR, Neish SR, Rosenthal GL, Lannon C; JCCHD 
National Pediatric Cardiology Quality Improvement Collaborative. 
Variation in interstage outpatient care after the Norwood procedure: 
a report from the Joint Council on Congenital Heart Disease National 
Quality Improvement Collaborative. Congenit Heart Dis. 2011;6:98–107. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1747-0803.2011.00509.x.
 543. Pasquali 
SK. 
Reexamining 
interstage 
home 
monitoring 
after 
the 
Norwood 
operation. 
Circulation. 
2015;132:475–478. 
doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.017682.
 544. Oster 
ME, 
Ehrlich 
A, 
King 
E, 
Petit 
CJ, 
Clabby 
M, 
Smith 
S, 
Glanville 
M, 
Anderson 
J, Darbie L, Beekman RH 3rd. Association of interstage home monitoring 
with mortality, readmissions, and weight gain: a multicenter study from 
the National Pediatric Cardiology Quality Improvement Collaborative. 
Circulation. 2015;132:502–508. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
114.014107.
 545. Donoghue A, Berg RA, Hazinski MF, Praestgaard AH, Roberts K, Nadkarni 
VM; American Heart Association National Registry of CPR Investigators. 
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation for bradycardia with poor perfusion 
versus pulseless cardiac arrest. Pediatrics. 2009;124:1541–1548. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2009-0727.
 546. Berg MD, Schexnayder SM, Chameides L, Terry M, Donoghue A, Hickey 
RW, Berg RA, Sutton RM, Hazinski MF. Part 13: pediatric basic life support: 
2010 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resus-
citation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2010;122(suppl 
3):S862–S875. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.971085.
 547. Fitzgerald KR, Babbs CF, Frissora HA, Davis RW, Silver DI. Cardiac output 
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation at various compression rates and 
durations. Am J Physiol. 1981;241:H442–H448.
 548. Kattwinkel J, Perlman JM, Aziz K, Colby C, Fairchild K, Gallagher J, 
Hazinski MF, Halamek LP
, Kumar P
, Little G, McGowan JE, Nightengale 
B, Ramirez MM, Ringer S, Simon WM, Weiner GM, Wyckoff M, 
Zaichkin J. Part 15: neonatal resuscitation: 2010 American Heart 
Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emer-
gency cardiovascular care [published correction appears in Circulation. 
2011;124:e406]. Circulation. 2010;122(suppl 3):S909–S919. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.971119.
 549. Dorfsman ML, Menegazzi JJ, Wadas RJ, Auble TE. Two-thumb vs. two-
finger chest compression in an infant model of prolonged cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation. Acad Emerg Med. 2000;7:1077–1082.
 550. Whitelaw CC, Slywka B, Goldsmith LJ. Comparison of a two-finger ver-
sus two-thumb method for chest compressions by healthcare providers 
in an infant mechanical model. Resuscitation. 2000;43:213–216.
 551. Idris AH, Guffey D, Aufderheide TP
, Brown S, Morrison LJ, Nichols P
, Powell 
J, Daya M, Bigham BL, Atkins DL, Berg R, Davis D, Stiell I, Sopko G, Nichol 
G; Resuscitation Outcomes Consortium (ROC) Investigators. Relationship 
between chest compression rates and outcomes from cardiac arrest. 
Circulation. 2012;125:3004–3012. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
111.059535.
 552. Kim H, Hwang SO, Lee CC, Lee KH, Kim JY, Yoo BS, Lee SH, Yoon JH, 
Choe KH, Singer AJ. Direction of blood flow from the left ventricle 
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation in humans: its implications for 
mechanism of blood flow. Am Heart J. 2008;156:1222.e1–1222.e7. doi: 
10.1016/j.ahj.2008.09.003.
 553. Haas T, Voelckel WG, Wenzel V, Antretter H, Dessl A, Lindner KH. 
Revisiting the cardiac versus thoracic pump mechanism during cardiopul-
monary resuscitation. Resuscitation. 2003;58:113–116.
 554. Higano ST, Oh JK, Ewy GA, Seward JB. The mechanism of blood flow 
during closed chest cardiac massage in humans: transesophageal echo-
cardiographic observations. Mayo Clin Proc. 1990;65:1432–1440.
 555. Sutton RM, Niles D, Nysaether J, Arbogast KB, Nishisaki A, Maltese MR, 
Bishnoi R, Helfaer MA, Nadkarni V, Donoghue A. Pediatric CPR qual-
ity monitoring: analysis of thoracic anthropometric data. Resuscitation. 
2009;80:1137–1141. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2009.06.031.
 556. Niles DE, Sutton RM, Nadkarni VM, Glatz A, Zuercher M, Maltese MR, 
Eilevstjønn J, Abella BS, Becker LB, Berg RA. Prevalence and hemodynamic 
effects of leaning during CPR. Resuscitation. 2011;82(suppl 2):S23–S26. 
doi: 10.1016/S0300-9572(11)70147-2.
 557. Sutton RM, Maltese MR, Niles D, French B, Nishisaki A, Arbogast KB, 
Donoghue A, Berg RA, Helfaer MA, Nadkarni V. Quantitative analysis 
of chest compression interruptions during in-hospital resuscitation of 
older children and adolescents. Resuscitation. 2009;80:1259–1263. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2009.08.009.
 558. Zuercher M, Hilwig RW, Ranger-Moore J, Nysaether J, Nadkarni VM, 
Berg MD, Kern KB, Sutton R, Berg RA. Leaning during chest com-
pressions impairs cardiac output and left ventricular myocardial blood 
flow in piglet cardiac arrest. Crit Care Med. 2010;38:1141–1146. doi: 
10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181ce1fe2.
 559. Sutton RM, Niles D, Nysaether J, Stavland M, Thomas M, Ferry S, Bishnoi R, 
Litman R, Allen J, Srinivasan V
, Berg RA, Nadkarni VM. Effect of residual lean-
ing force on intrathoracic pressure during mechanical ventilation in children. 
Resuscitation. 2010;81:857–860. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2010.03.015.
 560. Kern KB, Hilwig RW, Berg RA, Sanders AB, Ewy GA. Importance of 
continuous chest compressions during cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion: improved outcome during a simulated single lay-rescuer scenario. 
Circulation. 2002;105:645–649.
 561. Miller AC, Rosati SF, Suffredini AF, Schrump DS. A systematic review 
and pooled analysis of CPR-associated cardiovascular and thoracic in-
juries. Resuscitation. 2014;85:724–731. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation. 
2014.01.028.
 562. Bush CM, Jones JS, Cohle SD, Johnson H. Pediatric injuries from cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation. Ann Emerg Med. 1996;28:40–44.
 563. Paradis NA, Martin GB, Rivers EP
, Goetting MG, Appleton TJ, Feingold 
M, Nowak RM. Coronary perfusion pressure and the return of spon-
taneous circulation in human cardiopulmonary resuscitation. JAMA. 
1990;263:1106–1113.
 564. Asim K, Gokhan E, Ozlem B, Ozcan Y, Deniz O, Kamil K, Murat Z, Aydın C, 
Selman Y. Near infrared spectrophotometry (cerebral oximetry) in predict-
ing the return of spontaneous circulation in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. 
Am J Emerg Med. 2014;32:14–17. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2013.09.010.
 565. Ahn A, Nasir A, Malik H, D’Orazi F, Parnia S. A pilot study examining the 
role of regional cerebral oxygen saturation monitoring as a marker of re-
turn of spontaneous circulation in shockable (VF/VT) and non-shockable 
(PEA/Asystole) causes of cardiac arrest. Resuscitation. 2013;84:1713–
1716. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2013.07.026.
 566. Kerber RE, Carter J, Klein S, Grayzel J, Kennedy J. Open chest defibril-
lation during cardiac surgery: energy and current requirement. Am J 
Cardiol. 1980;46:393–396.
 567. Cheskes S, Schmicker RH, Christenson J, Salcido DD, Rea T, Powell J, 
Edelson DP
, Sell R, May S, Menegazzi JJ, Van Ottingham L, Olsufka 
M, Pennington S, Simonini J, Berg RA, Stiell I, Idris A, Bigham B, 
Morrison L; Resuscitation Outcomes Consortium (ROC) Investigators. 
Perishock pause: an independent predictor of survival from out-of-
hospital shockable cardiac arrest. Circulation. 2011;124:58–66. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.010736.
 568. Hoogendijk MG, Schumacher CA, Belterman CN, Boukens BJ, Berdowski 
J, de Bakker JM, Koster RW, Coronel R. Ventricular fibrillation ham-
pers the restoration of creatine-phosphate levels during simulated 
cardiopulmonary resuscitations. Europace. 2012;14:1518–1523. doi: 
10.1093/europace/eus078.
 569. Berg RA, Hilwig RW, Kern KB, Ewy GA. Precountershock cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation improves ventricular fibrillation median frequency and 
myocardial readiness for successful defibrillation from prolonged ventric-
ular fibrillation: a randomized, controlled swine study. Ann Emerg Med. 
2002;40:563–570.
 570. Sherbino J, Verbeek PR, MacDonald RD, Sawadsky BV, McDonald 
AC, Morrison LJ. Prehospital transcutaneous cardiac pacing for symp-
tomatic bradycardia or bradyasystolic cardiac arrest: a systematic re-
view. Resuscitation. 2006;70:193–200. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation. 
2005.11.019.
 571. Quan L, Graves JR, Kinder DR, Horan S, Cummins RO. Transcutaneous 
cardiac pacing in the treatment of out-of-hospital pediatric cardiac ar-
rests. Ann Emerg Med. 1992;21:905–909.
 572. White JD. Transthoracic pacing in cardiac asystole. Am J Emerg Med. 
1983;1:264–266.
 573. Ornato JP
, Carveth WL, Windle JR. Pacemaker insertion for prehospital 
bradyasystolic cardiac arrest. Ann Emerg Med. 1984;13:101–103.
 574. Niemann JT, Adomian GE, Garner D, Rosborough JP
. Endocardial and trans-
cutaneous cardiac pacing, calcium chloride, and epinephrine in postcounter-
shock asystole and bradycardias. Crit Care Med. 1985;13:699–704.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e777
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 575. Dalsey WC, Syverud SA, Hedges JR. Emergency department use of trans-
cutaneous pacing for cardiac arrests. Crit Care Med. 1985;13:399–401.
 576. Knowlton AA, Falk RH. External cardiac pacing during in-hospital cardiac 
arrest. Am J Cardiol. 1986;57:1295–1298.
 577. Hedges JR, Syverud SA, Dalsey WC, Feero S, Easter R, Shultz B. 
Prehospital trial of emergency transcutaneous cardiac pacing. Circulation. 
1987;76:1337–1343.
 578. Barthell E, Troiano P
, Olson D, Stueven HA, Hendley G. Prehospital ex-
ternal cardiac pacing: a prospective, controlled clinical trial. Ann Emerg 
Med. 1988;17:1221–1226.
 579. Cummins RO, Graves JR, Larsen MP
, Hallstrom AP
, Hearne TR, Ciliberti 
J, Nicola RM, Horan S. Out-of-hospital transcutaneous pacing by emer-
gency medical technicians in patients with asystolic cardiac arrest. N Engl 
J Med. 1993;328:1377–1382. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199305133281903.
 580. Ornato JP
, Peberdy MA. The mystery of bradyasystole during cardiac ar-
rest. Ann Emerg Med. 1996;27:576–587.
 581. Salem MR, Khorasani A, Saatee S, Crystal GJ, El-Orbany M. Gastric tubes 
and airway management in patients at risk of aspiration: history, current 
concepts, and proposal of an algorithm. Anesth Analg. 2014;118:569–
579. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e3182917f11.
 582. Marill KA, Greenberg GM, Kay D, Nelson BK. Analysis of the treatment of 
spontaneous sustained stable ventricular tachycardia. Acad Emerg Med. 
1997;4:1122–1128.
 583. Chen YS, Lin JW, Yu HY, Ko WJ, Jerng JS, Chang WT, Chen WJ, 
Huang SC, Chi NH, Wang CH, Chen LC, Tsai PR, Wang SS, Hwang 
JJ, Lin FY. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation with assisted extra-
corporeal 
life-support 
versus 
conventional 
cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation in adults with in-hospital cardiac arrest: an observa-
tional study and propensity analysis. Lancet. 2008;372:554–561. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60958-7.
 584. Thiagarajan RR, Laussen PC, Rycus PT, Bartlett RH, Bratton SL. 
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation to aid cardiopulmonary resusci-
tation in infants and children. Circulation. 2007;116:1693–1700. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.680678.
 585. Thiagarajan RR, Brogan TV, Scheurer MA, Laussen PC, Rycus PT, Bratton 
SL. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation to support cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation in adults. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;87:778–785. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2008.12.079.
 586. Huang SC, Wu ET, Chen YS, Chang CI, Chiu IS, Wang SS, Lin FY, Ko 
WJ. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation rescue for cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation in pediatric patients. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:1607–1613. 
doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e318170b82b.
 587. Shin TG, Jo IJ, Sim MS, Song YB, Yang JH, Hahn JY, Choi SH, Gwon HC, 
Jeon ES, Sung K, Lee YT, Choi JH. Two-year survival and neurological 
outcome of in-hospital cardiac arrest patients rescued by extracorporeal 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:3424–3430. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.04.183.
 588. Morris MC, Wernovsky G, Nadkarni VM. Survival outcomes after extra-
corporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation instituted during active chest 
compressions following refractory in-hospital pediatric cardiac arrest. 
Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2004;5:440–446.
 589. Lasa JJ, Rogers RS, Localio R, Shults J, Raymond T, Gaies M, Thiagarajan 
R, Laussen PC, Kilbaugh T, Berg RA, Nadkarni V, Topjian A. Extracorporeal 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (E-CPR) during pediatric in-hospital car-
diopulmonary arrest is associated with improved survival to discharge: a 
report from the American Heart Association’s Get With The Guidelines-
Resuscitation (GWTG-R) registry. Circulation. 2016;133:165–176. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.016082.
 590. Dalton HJ, Siewers RD, Fuhrman BP
, Del Nido P
, Thompson AE, Shaver 
MG, Dowhy M. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for cardiac 
rescue in children with severe myocardial dysfunction. Crit Care Med. 
1993;21:1020–1028.
 591. Chan T, Thiagarajan RR, Frank D, Bratton SL. Survival after extracor-
poreal cardiopulmonary resuscitation in infants and children with 
heart disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;136:984–992. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.03.007.
 592. del Nido PJ, Dalton HJ, Thompson AE, Siewers RD. Extracorporeal mem-
brane oxygenator rescue in children during cardiac arrest after cardiac 
surgery. Circulation. 1992;86(suppl):II300–II304.
 593. Alsoufi B, Al-Radi OO, Nazer RI, Gruenwald C, Foreman C, Williams 
WG, Coles JG, Caldarone CA, Bohn DG, Van Arsdell GS. Survival out-
comes after rescue extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation in pe-
diatric patients with refractory cardiac arrest. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2007;134:952–959.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2007.05.054.
 594. Duncan BW, Bohn DJ, Atz AM, French JW, Laussen PC, Wessel DL. 
Mechanical circulatory support for the treatment of children with acute 
fulminant myocarditis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001;122:440–448. 
doi: 10.1067/mtc.2001.115243.
 595. Sivarajan VB, Best D, Brizard CP
, Shekerdemian LS, d’Udekem Y, Butt W. 
Duration of resuscitation prior to rescue extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation impacts outcome in children with heart disease. Intensive Care 
Med. 2011;37:853–860. doi: 10.1007/s00134-011-2168-6.
 596. Tajik M, Cardarelli MG. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation after 
cardiac arrest in children: what do we know? Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2008;33:409–417. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2007.12.018.
 597. Allan CK, Thiagarajan RR, Armsby LR, del Nido PJ, Laussen PC. 
Emergent use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation during pediat-
ric cardiac catheterization. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2006;7:212–219. doi: 
10.1097/01.PCC.0000200964.88206.B0.
 598. Posner JC, Osterhoudt KC, Mollen CJ, Jacobstein CR, Nicolson SC, 
Gaynor JW. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation as a resuscitative 
measure in the pediatric emergency department. Pediatr Emerg Care. 
2000;16:413–415.
 599. Jen HC, Shew SB. Hospital readmissions and survival after non-
neonatal pediatric ECMO. Pediatrics. 2010;125:1217–1223. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2009-0696.
 600. Karamlou T, Vafaeezadeh M, Parrish AM, Cohen GA, Welke KF, Permut 
L, McMullan DM. Increased extracorporeal membrane oxygenation cen-
ter case volume is associated with improved extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation survival among pediatric patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2013;145:470–475. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.11.037.
 601. Freeman CL, Bennett TD, Casper TC, Larsen GY, Hubbard A, Wilkes 
J, Bratton SL. Pediatric and neonatal extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation: does center volume impact mortality? Crit Care Med. 
2014;42:512–519. doi: 10.1097/01.ccm.0000435674.83682.96.
 602. Sakamoto T, Morimura N, Nagao K, Asai Y, Yokota H, Nara S, Hase 
M, Tahara Y, Atsumi T; SAVE-J Study Group. Extracorporeal car-
diopulmonary 
resuscitation 
versus 
conventional 
cardiopulmo-
nary resuscitation in adults with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest: a 
prospective observational study. Resuscitation. 2014;85:762–768. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2014.01.031.
 603. Teele SA, Salvin JW, Barrett CS, Rycus PT, Fynn-Thompson F, Laussen PC, 
Thiagarajan RR. The association of carotid artery cannulation and neuro-
logic injury in pediatric patients supported with venoarterial extracorpo-
real membrane oxygenation. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2014;15:355–361. 
doi: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000000103.
 604. Su L, Spaeder MC, Jones MB, Sinha P
, Nath DS, Jain PN, Berger JT, 
Williams L, Shankar V. Implementation of an extracorporeal cardiopul-
monary resuscitation simulation program reduces extracorporeal cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation times in real patients. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2014;15:856–860. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000000234.
 605. Barrett CS, Bratton SL, Salvin JW, Laussen PC, Rycus PT, Thiagarajan 
RR. Neurological injury after extracorporeal membrane oxygenation use 
to aid pediatric cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2009;10:445–451. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e318198bd85.
 606. Morris MC, Ittenbach RF, Godinez RI, Portnoy JD, Tabbutt S, Hanna BD, 
Hoffman TM, Gaynor JW, Connelly JT, Helfaer MA, Spray TL, Wernovsky 
G. Risk factors for mortality in 137 pediatric cardiac intensive care unit 
patients managed with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Crit Care 
Med. 2004;32:1061–1069.
 607. Hintz SR, Benitz WE, Colby CE, Sheehan AM, Rycus P
, Van Meurs KP; 
ELSO Registry. Utilization and outcomes of neonatal cardiac extracorpo-
real life support: 1996-2000. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2005;6:33–38. doi: 
10.1097/01.PCC.0000149135.95884.65.
 608. Duncan BW, Ibrahim AE, Hraska V, del Nido PJ, Laussen PC, Wessel 
DL, Mayer JE Jr, Bower LK, Jonas RA. Use of rapid-deployment extra-
corporeal membrane oxygenation for the resuscitation of pediatric pa-
tients with heart disease after cardiac arrest. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
1998;116:305–311.
 609. Bautista-Hernandez V, Thiagarajan RR, Fynn-Thompson F, Rajagopal 
SK, Nento DE, Yarlagadda V, Teele SA, Allan CK, Emani SM, Laussen 
PC, Pigula FA, Bacha EA. Preoperative extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation as a bridge to cardiac surgery in children with con-
genital heart disease. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009;88:1306–1311. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2009.06.074.
 610. Sherwin ED, Gauvreau K, Scheurer MA, Rycus PT, Salvin JW, Almodovar 
MC, Fynn-Thompson F, Thiagarajan RR. Extracorporeal membrane oxy-
genation after stage 1 palliation for hypoplastic left heart syndrome. J 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e778
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;144:1337–1343. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs. 
2012.03.035
 611. Hoskote A, Bohn D, Gruenwald C, Edgell D, Cai S, Adatia I, Van Arsdell 
G. Extracorporeal life support after staged palliation of a functional single 
ventricle: subsequent morbidity and survival. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2006;131:1114–1121. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2005.11.035.
 612. Debrunner MG, Porayette P
, Breinholt JP 3rd, Turrentine MW, Cordes 
TM. Midterm survival of infants requiring postoperative extracorpo-
real membrane oxygenation after Norwood palliation. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2013;34:570–575. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0499-x.
 613. Newburger JW, Sleeper LA, Bellinger DC, Goldberg CS, Tabbutt S, Lu M, 
Mussatto KA, Williams IA, Gustafson KE, Mital S, Pike N, Sood E, Mahle 
WT, Cooper DS, Dunbar-Masterson C, Krawczeski CD, Lewis A, Menon 
SC, Pemberton VL, Ravishankar C, Atz TW, Ohye RG, Gaynor JW; for the 
Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Early developmental outcome in 
children with hypoplastic left heart syndrome and related anomalies: the 
Single Ventricle Reconstruction Trial. Circulation. 2012;125:2081–2091. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.064113.
 614. Ravishankar C, Zak V, Williams IA, Bellinger DC, Gaynor JW, Ghanayem 
NS, Krawczeski CD, Licht DJ, Mahony L, Newburger JW, Pemberton VL, 
Williams RV, Sananes R, Cook AL, Atz T, Khaikin S, Hsu DT; Pediatric Heart 
Network Investigators. Association of impaired linear growth and worse 
neurodevelopmental outcome in infants with single ventricle physiology: 
a report from the Pediatric Heart Network Infant Single Ventricle Trial. J 
Pediatr. 2013;162:250–256.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2012.07.048.
 615. Roeleveld PP
, Wilde Rd, Hazekamp M, Rycus PT, Thiagarajan RR. 
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in single ventricle lesions pal-
liated via the hybrid approach. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 
2014;5:393–397. doi: 10.1177/2150135114526420.
 616. Rood KL, Teele SA, Barrett CS, Salvin JW, Rycus PT, Fynn-Thompson 
F, Laussen PC, Thiagarajan RR. Extracorporeal membrane oxygen-
ation support after the Fontan operation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2011;142:504–510. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2010.11.050.
 617. Berg RA, Sutton RM, Holubkov R, Nicholson CE, Dean JM, Harrison R, 
Heidemann S, Meert K, Newth C, Moler F, Pollack M, Dalton H, Doctor 
A, Wessel D, Berger J, Shanley T, Carcillo J, Nadkarni VM; Eunice Kennedy 
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 
Collaborative Pediatric Critical Care Research Network and for the American 
Heart Association’s Get With the Guidelines-Resuscitation (formerly the 
National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation) Investigators. Ratio of 
PICU versus ward cardiopulmonary resuscitation events is increasing. Crit 
Care Med. 2013;41:2292–2297. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31828cf0c0.
 618. Donoghue AJ, Nadkarni VM, Elliott M, Durbin D; American Heart 
Association National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
Investigators. Effect of hospital characteristics on outcomes from pedi-
atric cardiopulmonary resuscitation: a report from the National Registry 
of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. Pediatrics. 2006;118:995–1001. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2006-0453.
 619. Bennett D, Marcus R, Stokes M. Incidents and complications during pedi-
atric cardiac catheterization. Paediatr Anaesth. 2005;15:1083–1088. doi: 
10.1111/j.1460-9592.2005.01677.x.
 620. Odegard KC, Bergersen L, Thiagarajan RR, Clark L, Shukla A, Wypij 
D, Laussen PC. The frequency of cardiac arrests in patients with con-
genital heart disease undergoing cardiac catheterization. Anesth Analg. 
2014;118:175–182.
 621. Mori Y, Nakazawa M, Yagihara T. Complications of pediatric cardiac cath-
eterization and system of catheterization laboratories minimizing compli-
cations–a Japanese multicenter survey. J Cardiol. 2010;56:183–188. doi: 
10.1016/j.jjcc.2010.05.001.
 622. Bergersen L, Marshall A, Gauvreau K, Beekman R, Hirsch R, Foerster S, 
Balzer D, Vincent J, Hellenbrand W, Holzer R, Cheatham J, Moore J, Lock 
J, Jenkins K. Adverse event rates in congenital cardiac catheterization: a 
multi-center experience. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2010;75:389–400. 
doi: 10.1002/ccd.22266.
 623. Mehta R, Lee KJ, Chaturvedi R, Benson L. Complications of pediatric 
cardiac catheterization: a review in the current era. Catheter Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2008;72:278–285. doi: 10.1002/ccd.21580.
 624. Bhanji F, Donoghue AJ, Wolff MS, Flores GE, Halamek LP
, Berman JM, 
Sinz EH, Cheng A. Part 14: education: 2015 American Heart Association 
guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency 
cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2015;132(suppl 2):S561–S573. doi: 
10.1161/CIR.0000000000000268.
 625. Sutton RM, Nadkarni V, Abella BS. “Putting it all together” to improve 
resuscitation quality. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2012;30:105–122. doi: 
10.1016/j.emc.2011.09.001.
 626. Sutton RM, Niles D, Meaney PA, Aplenc R, French B, Abella BS, Lengetti 
EL, Berg RA, Helfaer MA, Nadkarni V. Low-dose, high-frequency CPR 
training improves skill retention of in-hospital pediatric providers. 
Pediatrics. 2011;128:e145–e151. doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-2105.
 627. Sutton RM, Niles D, Meaney PA, Aplenc R, French B, Abella BS, Lengetti 
EL, Berg RA, Helfaer MA, Nadkarni V. “Booster” training: evaluation of 
instructor-led bedside cardiopulmonary resuscitation skill training and 
automated corrective feedback to improve cardiopulmonary resuscita-
tion compliance of pediatric basic life support providers during simu-
lated cardiac arrest. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2011;12:e116–e121. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181e91271.
 628. Olivieri LJ, Su L, Hynes CF, Krieger A, Alfares FA, Ramakrishnan K, 
Zurakowski D, Marshall MB, Kim PC, Jonas RA, Nath DS. “Just-in-time” 
simulation training using 3-D printed cardiac models after congenital car-
diac surgery. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 2016;7:164–168. doi: 
10.1177/2150135115623961.
 629. Sutton RM, French B, Niles DE, Donoghue A, Topjian AA, Nishisaki A, 
Leffelman J, Wolfe H, Berg RA, Nadkarni VM, Meaney PA. 2010 American 
Heart Association recommended compression depths during pediat-
ric in-hospital resuscitations are associated with survival. Resuscitation. 
2014;85:1179–1184. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2014.05.007.
 630. Sutton RM, Niles D, French B, Maltese MR, Leffelman J, Eilevstjønn J, 
Wolfe H, Nishisaki A, Meaney PA, Berg RA, Nadkarni VM. First quantita-
tive analysis of cardiopulmonary resuscitation quality during in-hospital 
cardiac arrests of young children. Resuscitation. 2014;85:70–74. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2013.08.014.
 631. Sutton RM, French B, Nishisaki A, Niles DE, Maltese MR, Boyle L, 
Stavland M, Eilevstjønn J, Arbogast KB, Berg RA, Nadkarni VM. 
American Heart Association cardiopulmonary resuscitation qual-
ity targets are associated with improved arterial blood pressure dur-
ing pediatric cardiac arrest. Resuscitation. 2013;84:168–172. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2012.08.335.
 632. Ornato JP
, Peberdy MA, Reid RD, Feeser VR, Dhindsa HS; NRCPR 
Investigators. Impact of resuscitation system errors on survival 
from in-hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation. 2012;83:63–69. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2011.09.009.
 633. Cheng A, Brown LL, Duff JP
, Davidson J, Overly F, Tofil NM, Peterson 
DT, White ML, Bhanji F, Bank I, Gottesman R, Adler M, Zhong J, Grant 
V, Grant DJ, Sudikoff SN, Marohn K, Charnovich A, Hunt EA, Kessler 
DO, Wong H, Robertson N, Lin Y, Doan Q, Duval-Arnould JM, Nadkarni 
VM; International Network for Simulation-Based Pediatric Innovation, 
Research, & Education (INSPIRE) CPR Investigators. Improving cardiopul-
monary resuscitation with a CPR feedback device and refresher simu-
lations (CPR CARES Study): a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr. 
2015;169:137–144. doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2014.2616.
 634. Kurosawa H, Ikeyama T, Achuff P
, Perkel M, Watson C, Monachino A, 
Remy D, Deutsch E, Buchanan N, Anderson J, Berg RA, Nadkarni VM, 
Nishisaki A. A randomized, controlled trial of in situ pediatric advanced 
life support recertification (“pediatric advanced life support reconstruct-
ed”) compared with standard pediatric advanced life support recertifica-
tion for ICU frontline providers. Crit Care Med. 2014;42:610–618. doi: 
10.1097/CCM.0000000000000024.
 635. Allan CK, Pigula F, Bacha EA, Emani S, Fynn-Thompson F, Thiagarajan RR, 
Imprescia A, Hayes G, Weinstock P
. An extracorporeal membrane oxygen-
ation cannulation curriculum featuring a novel integrated skills trainer 
leads to improved performance among pediatric cardiac surgery trainees. 
Simul Healthc. 2013;8:221–228. doi: 10.1097/SIH.0b013e31828b4179.
 636. Burkhart HM, Riley JB, Lynch JJ, Suri RM, Greason KL, Joyce LD, 
Nuttall GA, Stulak J, Schaff HV, Dearani JA. Simulation-based post-
cardiotomy extracorporeal membrane oxygenation crisis training for 
thoracic surgery residents. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95:901–906. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.12.015.
 637. Sanchez-Glanville C, Brindle ME, Spence T, Blackwood J, Drews T, 
Menzies S, Lopushinsky SR. Evaluating the introduction of extracor-
poreal life support technology to a tertiary-care pediatric institution: 
smoothing the learning curve through interprofessional simulation 
training. J Pediatr Surg. 2015;50:798–804. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg. 
2015.02.037.
 638. Ad Hoc Committee on Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation. Cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation: statement by the Ad Hoc Committee on Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation of the Division of Medical Sciences, National Academy of 
Sciences–National Research Council. JAMA. 1966;198:372–379. doi: 
10.1001/jama.1966.03110170084023.
 639. Negovsky VA, Gurvitch AM. Post-resuscitation disease: a new nosological 
entity: its reality and significance. Resuscitation. 1995;30:23–27.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e779
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 640. Neumar RW, Nolan JP
, Adrie C, Aibiki M, Berg RA, Böttiger BW, 
Callaway C, Clark RS, Geocadin RG, Jauch EC, Kern KB, Laurent I, 
Longstreth WT Jr, Merchant RM, Morley P
, Morrison LJ, Nadkarni V, 
Peberdy MA, Rivers EP
, Rodriguez-Nunez A, Sellke FW, Spaulding C, 
Sunde K, Vanden Hoek T. Post-cardiac arrest syndrome: epidemiol-
ogy, pathophysiology, treatment, and prognostication: a consensus 
statement from the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation 
(American Heart Association, Australian and New Zealand Council 
on Resuscitation, European Resuscitation Council, Heart and Stroke 
Foundation of Canada, InterAmerican Heart Foundation, Resuscitation 
Council of Asia, and the Resuscitation Council of Southern Africa); the 
American Heart Association Emergency Cardiovascular Care Committee; 
the Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; the Council on 
Cardiopulmonary, Perioperative, and Critical Care; the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; and the Stroke Council. Circulation. 2008;118:2452–2483. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.190652.
 641. Nolan JP
, Neumar RW, Adrie C, Aibiki M, Berg RA, Böttiger BW, 
Callaway C, Clark RS, Geocadin RG, Jauch EC, Kern KB, Laurent I, 
Longstreth WT, Merchant RM, Morley P
, Morrison LJ, Nadkarni V, 
Peberdy MA, Rivers EP
, Rodriguez-Nunez A, Sellke FW, Spaulding C, 
Sunde K, Hoek TV. Post-cardiac arrest syndrome: epidemiology, patho-
physiology, treatment, and prognostication: a scientific statement from 
the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation; the American 
Heart Association Emergency Cardiovascular Care Committee; the 
Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; the Council on 
Cardiopulmonary, Perioperative, and Critical Care; the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; the Council on Stroke. Resuscitation. 2008;79:350–379. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2008.09.017.
 642. Hagihara A, Hasegawa M, Abe T, Nagata T, Wakata Y, Miyazaki 
S. Prehospital epinephrine use and survival among patients with 
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. JAMA. 2012;307:1161–1168. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2012.294.
 643. Tang W, Weil MH, Sun S, Noc M, Yang L, Gazmuri RJ. Epinephrine 
increases the severity of postresuscitation myocardial dysfunction. 
Circulation. 1995;92:3089–3093.
 644. Kern KB. Postresuscitation myocardial dysfunction. Cardiol Clin. 
2002;20:89–101.
 645. Hildebrand CA, Hartmann AG, Arcinue EL, Gomez RJ, Bing RJ. Cardiac per-
formance in pediatric near-drowning. Crit Care Med. 1988;16:331–335.
 646. Jones AE, Shapiro NI, Kilgannon JH, Trzeciak S; Emergency Medicine 
Shock 
Research 
Network 
(EMSHOCKNET) 
Investigators. 
Goal-
directed hemodynamic optimization in the post-cardiac arrest syn-
drome: a systematic review. Resuscitation. 2008;77:26–29. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2007.10.021.
 647. Karanjia N, Geocadin RG. Post-cardiac arrest syndrome: update on brain 
injury management and prognostication. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 
2011;13:191–203. doi: 10.1007/s11940-011-0112-2.
 648. Kern KB, Hilwig RW, Berg RA, Rhee KH, Sanders AB, Otto CW, Ewy GA. 
Postresuscitation left ventricular systolic and diastolic dysfunction: treat-
ment with dobutamine. Circulation. 1997;95:2610–2613.
 649. Kilgannon JH, Roberts BW, Reihl LR, Chansky ME, Jones AE, 
Dellinger RP
, Parrillo JE, Trzeciak S. Early arterial hypotension is com-
mon in the post-cardiac arrest syndrome and associated with in-
creased in-hospital mortality. Resuscitation. 2008;79:410–416. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2008.07.019.
 650. Checchia PA, Sehra R, Moynihan J, Daher N, Tang W, Weil MH. 
Myocardial injury in children following resuscitation after cardiac arrest. 
Resuscitation. 2003;57:131–137.
 651. Cobb LA, Fahrenbruch CE, Walsh TR, Copass MK, Olsufka M, Breskin 
M, Hallstrom AP
. Influence of cardiopulmonary resuscitation prior to de-
fibrillation in patients with out-of-hospital ventricular fibrillation. JAMA. 
1999;281:1182–1188.
 652. Lister G, Pérez Fontán JJ. Can resuscitation jeopardize survival? N Engl J 
Med. 2004;350:1708–1709. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp048055.
 653. Lindner KH, Dirks B, Strohmenger HU, Prengel AW, Lindner IM, Lurie KG. 
Randomised comparison of epinephrine and vasopressin in patients with 
out-of-hospital ventricular fibrillation. Lancet. 1997;349:535–537. doi: 
10.1016/S0140-6736(97)80087-6.
 654. Pellis T, Weil MH, Tang W, Sun S, Xie J, Song L, Checchia P
. Evidence 
favoring the use of an alpha2-selective vasopressor agent for car-
diopulmonary resuscitation. Circulation. 2003;108:2716–2721. doi: 
10.1161/01.CIR.0000096489.40209.DD.
 655. Shaffner DH, Eleff SM, Brambrink AM, Sugimoto H, Izuta M, Koehler 
RC, Traystman RJ. Effect of arrest time and cerebral perfusion pressure 
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation on cerebral blood flow, metabo-
lism, adenosine triphosphate recovery, and pH in dogs. Crit Care Med. 
1999;27:1335–1342.
 656. Donnino MW, Miller J, Goyal N, Loomba M, Sankey SS, Dolcourt B, 
Sherwin R, Otero R, Wira C. Effective lactate clearance is associated 
with improved outcome in post-cardiac arrest patients. Resuscitation. 
2007;75:229–234. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2007.03.021.
 657. Jefferies JL, Morales DL. Mechanical circulatory support in children: 
bridge to transplant versus recovery. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2012;9:236–
243. doi: 10.1007/s11897-012-0103-y.
 658. Mackling T, Shah T, Dimas V, Guleserian K, Sharma M, Forbess J, Ardura 
M, Gross-Toalson J, Lee Y, Journeycake J, Barnes A. Management of 
single-ventricle patients with Berlin Heart EXCOR Ventricular Assist 
Device: single-center experience. Artif Organs. 2012;36:555–559. doi: 
10.1111/j.1525-1594.2011.01403.x.
 659. Warnes CA, Williams RG, Bashore TM, Child JS, Connolly HM, 
Dearani JA, del Nido P
, Fasules JW, Graham TP Jr, Hijazi ZM, Hunt SA, 
King ME, Landzberg MJ, Miner PD, Radford MJ, Walsh EP
, Webb GD. 
ACC/AHA 2008 guidelines for the management of adults with con-
genital heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (writ-
ing committee to develop guidelines on the management of adults 
with congenital heart disease). Circulation. 2008;118:e714–e833. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.190690.
 660. Fraser CD Jr, Jaquiss RD, Rosenthal DN, Humpl T, Canter CE, Blackstone 
EH, Naftel DC, Ichord RN, Bomgaars L, Tweddell JS, Massicotte MP
, 
Turrentine MW, Cohen GA, Devaney EJ, Pearce FB, Carberry KE, 
Kroslowitz R, Almond CS; Berlin Heart Study Investigators. Prospective 
trial of a pediatric ventricular assist device. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:532–
541. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1014164.
 661. Cabrera AG, Sundareswaran K, Samayoa AX, Farrar DJ, Frazier OH, 
Morales DLS. 338 Outcomes of pediatric patients supported by the 
Heartmate II LVAD in the USA. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2012;31(suppl)
:S120. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2012.01.347.
 662. Morales DL, Adachi I, Heinle JS, Fraser CD Jr. A new era: use of an in-
tracorporeal systemic ventricular assist device to support a patient with 
a failing Fontan circulation. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2011;142:e138–
e140. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2011.05.018.
 663. Miera O, Potapov EV, Redlin M, Stepanenko A, Berger F, Hetzer 
R, Hübler M. First experiences with the HeartWare ventricular as-
sist system in children. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011;91:1256–1260. doi: 
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2010.12.013.
 664. Crews KA, Kaiser SL, Walczak RJ, Jaquiss RD, Lodge AJ. Bridge to trans-
plant with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation followed by HeartWare 
ventricular assist device in a child. Ann Thorac Surg. 2013;95:1780–
1782. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.09.088.
 665. Copeland JG, Copeland H, Gustafson M, Mineburg N, Covington D, 
Smith RG, Friedman M. Experience with more than 100 total artificial 
heart implants. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012;143:727–734. doi: 
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2011.12.002.
 666. Wang S, Wu JY, Guo ZJ, Li CS. Effect of rescue breathing during cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation on lung function after restoration of spontane-
ous circulation in a porcine model of prolonged cardiac arrest. Crit Care 
Med. 2013;41:102–110. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e318265792b.
 667. Richards EM, Rosenthal RE, Kristian T, Fiskum G. Postischemic hyperoxia 
reduces hippocampal pyruvate dehydrogenase activity. Free Radic Biol 
Med. 2006;40:1960–1970. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.01.022.
 668. Zwemer CF, Whitesall SE, D’Alecy LG. Cardiopulmonary-cerebral re-
suscitation with 100% oxygen exacerbates neurological dysfunction 
following nine minutes of normothermic cardiac arrest in dogs [pub-
lished correction appears in Resuscitation. 1994;27:267]. Resuscitation. 
1994;27:159–170.
 669. Kuisma M, Boyd J, Voipio V, Alaspää A, Roine RO, Rosenberg P
. Comparison 
 
of 30 and the 100% inspired oxygen concentrations during early post-
resuscitation period: a randomised controlled pilot study. Resuscitation. 
2006;69:199–206. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2005.08.010.
 670. Bennett KS, Clark AE, Meert KL, Topjian AA, Schleien CL, Shaffner 
DH, Dean JM, Moler FW; Pediatric Emergency Care Medicine Applied 
Research Network. Early oxygenation and ventilation measurements af-
ter pediatric cardiac arrest: lack of association with outcome. Crit Care 
Med. 2013;41:1534–1542. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e318287f54c.
 671. Guerra-Wallace MM, Casey FL 3rd, Bell MJ, Fink EL, Hickey RW. Hyperoxia 
and hypoxia in children resuscitated from cardiac arrest. Pediatr Crit Care 
Med. 2013;14:e143–e148. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3182720440.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e780
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 672. Del Castillo J, López-Herce J, Matamoros M, Cañadas S, Rodriguez-
Calvo A, Cechetti C, Rodriguez-Núñez A, Alvarez AC; Iberoamerican 
Pediatric Cardiac Arrest Study Network RIBEPCI. Hyperoxia, hypocap-
nia and hypercapnia as outcome factors after cardiac arrest in chil-
dren. Resuscitation. 2012;83:1456–1461. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation. 
2012.07.019.
 673. Ferguson LP
, Durward A, Tibby SM. Relationship between arte-
rial partial oxygen pressure after resuscitation from cardiac ar-
rest and mortality in children. Circulation. 2012;126:335–342. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.085100.
 674. Sundgreen C, Larsen FS, Herzog TM, Knudsen GM, Boesgaard S, 
Aldershvile J. Autoregulation of cerebral blood flow in patients resusci-
tated from cardiac arrest. Stroke. 2001;32:128–132.
 675. Beckstead JE, Tweed WA, Lee J, MacKeen WL. Cerebral blood flow and 
metabolism in man following cardiac arrest. Stroke. 1978;9:569–573.
 676. Buunk G, van der Hoeven JG, Meinders AE. Cerebrovascular reactiv-
ity in comatose patients resuscitated from a cardiac arrest. Stroke. 
1997;28:1569–1573.
 677. Roine RO, Launes J, Nikkinen P
, Lindroth L, Kaste M. Regional cerebral 
blood flow after human cardiac arrest: a hexamethylpropyleneamine ox-
ime single photon emission computed tomographic study. Arch Neurol. 
1991;48:625–629.
 678. Han BK, Towbin RB, De Courten-Myers G, McLaurin RL, Ball WS 
Jr. Reversal sign on CT: effect of anoxic/ischemic cerebral in-
jury in children. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1990;154:361–368. doi: 
10.2214/ajr.154.2.2105031.
 679. Tardieu M, Devictor D, Wood C, Navelet Y, Pariente D, Huault G, Landrieu 
P
. Prognostic factors in cerebral hypoxic-ischemias in infants less than a 
year old [in French]. Arch Fr Pediatr. 1987;44:833–838.
 680. Starling RM, Shekdar K, Licht D, Nadkarni VM, Berg RA, Topjian AA. 
Early head CT findings are associated with outcomes after pediatric out-
of-hospital cardiac arrest. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2015;16:542–548. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0000000000000404.
 681. Nelson TR, Fowlkes JB, Abramowicz JS, Church CC. Ultrasound bio-
safety considerations for the practicing sonographer and sonologist. J 
Ultrasound Med. 2009;28:139–150.
 682. Bisschops LL, Hoedemaekers CW, Simons KS, van der Hoeven JG. 
Preserved metabolic coupling and cerebrovascular reactivity during mild 
hypothermia after cardiac arrest. Crit Care Med. 2010;38:1542–1547. 
doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181e2cc1e.
 683. Astudillo R, van der Linden J, Ekroth R, Wesslén O, Hallhagen S, Scallan 
M, Shore D, Lincoln C. Absent diastolic cerebral blood flow velocity after 
circulatory arrest but not after low flow in infants. Ann Thorac Surg. 
1993;56:515–519.
 684. Doepp Connolly F, Reitemeier J, Storm C, Hasper D, Schreiber SJ. 
Duplex sonography of cerebral blood flow after cardiac arrest: a pro-
spective observational study. Resuscitation. 2014;85:516–521. doi: 
10.1016/j.resuscitation.2013.12.021.
 685. Fink EL, Panigrahy A, Clark RS, Fitz CR, Landsittel D, Kochanek PM, 
Zuccoli G. Regional brain injury on conventional and diffusion weighted 
MRI is associated with outcome after pediatric cardiac arrest. Neurocrit 
Care. 2013;19:31–40. doi: 10.1007/s12028-012-9706-0.
 686. Shellhaas RA, Chang T, Tsuchida T, Scher MS, Riviello JJ, Abend 
NS, Nguyen S, Wusthoff CJ, Clancy RR. The American Clinical 
Neurophysiology Society’s guideline on continuous electroencephalogra-
phy monitoring in neonates. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2011;28:611–617. doi: 
10.1097/WNP
.0b013e31823e96d7.
 687. van Rooij LG, Toet MC, van Huffelen AC, Groenendaal F, Laan W, Zecic 
A, de Haan T, van Straaten IL, Vrancken S, van Wezel G, van der Sluijs 
J, Ter Horst H, Gavilanes D, Laroche S, Naulaers G, de Vries LS. Effect 
of treatment of subclinical neonatal seizures detected with aEEG: 
randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2010;125:e358–e366. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2009-0136.
 688. Abend NS, Dlugos DJ, Clancy RR. A review of long-term EEG monitoring 
in critically ill children with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, congenital 
heart disease, ECMO, and stroke. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2013;30:134–142. 
doi: 10.1097/WNP
.0b013e3182872af9.
 689. Abend NS, Topjian A, Ichord R, Herman ST, Helfaer M, Donnelly M, 
Nadkarni V, Dlugos DJ, Clancy RR. Electroencephalographic moni-
toring during hypothermia after pediatric cardiac arrest. Neurology. 
2009;72:1931–1940. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181a82687.
 690. Williams K, Jarrar R, Buchhalter J. Continuous video-EEG monitoring 
in pediatric intensive care units. Epilepsia. 2011;52:1130–1136. doi: 
10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03070.x.
 691. Hosain SA, Solomon GE, Kobylarz EJ. Electroencephalographic patterns 
in unresponsive pediatric patients. Pediatr Neurol. 2005;32:162–165. 
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2004.09.008.
 692. Jette N, Claassen J, Emerson RG, Hirsch LJ. Frequency and predictors 
of nonconvulsive seizures during continuous electroencephalographic 
monitoring in critically ill children. Arch Neurol. 2006;63:1750–1755. 
doi: 10.1001/archneur.63.12.1750.
 693. Abend NS, Dlugos DJ. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus in a pedi-
atric intensive care unit. Pediatr Neurol. 2007;37:165–170. doi: 
10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2007.05.012.
 694. Alehan FK, Morton LD, Pellock JM. Utility of electroencephalography in 
the pediatric emergency department. J Child Neurol. 2001;16:484–487. 
doi: 10.1177/088307380101600704.
 695. Tay SK, Hirsch LJ, Leary L, Jette N, Wittman J, Akman CI. Nonconvulsive 
status epilepticus in children: clinical and EEG characteristics. Epilepsia. 
2006;47:1504–1509. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2006.00623.x.
 696. Saengpattrachai M, Sharma R, Hunjan A, Shroff M, Ochi A, Otsubo H, 
Cortez MA, Carter Snead O 3rd. Nonconvulsive seizures in the pediatric 
intensive care unit: etiology, EEG, and brain imaging findings. Epilepsia. 
2006;47:1510–1518. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2006.00624.x.
 697. DeLorenzo RJ, Waterhouse EJ, Towne AR, Boggs JG, Ko D, DeLorenzo 
GA, Brown A, Garnett L. Persistent nonconvulsive status epilepticus after 
the control of convulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsia. 1998;39:833–840.
 698. Jaitly R, Sgro JA, Towne AR, Ko D, DeLorenzo RJ. Prognostic value of 
EEG monitoring after status epilepticus: a prospective adult study. J Clin 
Neurophysiol. 1997;14:326–334.
 699. Wijdicks EF, Hijdra A, Young GB, Bassetti CL, Wiebe S; Quality Standards 
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Practice param-
eter: prediction of outcome in comatose survivors after cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (an evidence-based review): report of the Quality Standards 
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. Neurology. 
2006;67:203–210. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000227183.21314.cd.
 700. Roest A, van Bets B, Jorens PG, Baar I, Weyler J, Mercelis R. The prognos-
tic value of the EEG in postanoxic coma. Neurocrit Care. 2009;10:318–
325. doi: 10.1007/s12028-008-9178-4.
 701. Synek VM. Prognostically important EEG coma patterns in diffuse an-
oxic and traumatic encephalopathies in adults. J Clin Neurophysiol. 
1988;5:161–174.
 702. Young GB, McLachlan RS, Kreeft JH, Demelo JD. An electroencephalo-
graphic classification for coma. Can J Neurol Sci. 1997;24:320–325.
 703. Nishisaki A, Sullivan J 3rd, Steger B, Bayer CR, Dlugos D, Lin R, Ichord R, 
Helfaer MA, Nadkarni V. Retrospective analysis of the prognostic value of 
electroencephalography patterns obtained in pediatric in-hospital cardiac 
arrest survivors during three years. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2007;8:10–17. 
doi: 10.1097/01.pcc.0000256621.63135.4b.
 704. Kessler SK, Topjian AA, Gutierrez-Colina AM, Ichord RN, Donnelly M, 
Nadkarni VM, Berg RA, Dlugos DJ, Clancy RR, Abend NS. Short-term 
outcome prediction by electroencephalographic features in children 
treated with therapeutic hypothermia after cardiac arrest. Neurocrit 
Care. 2011;14:37–43. doi: 10.1007/s12028-010-9450-2.
 705. Watzman HM, Kurth CD, Montenegro LM, Rome J, Steven JM, Nicolson 
SC. Arterial and venous contributions to near-infrared cerebral oximetry. 
Anesthesiology. 2000;93:947–953.
 706. Kurth CD, Levy WJ, McCann J. Near-infrared spectroscopy cerebral oxygen 
saturation thresholds for hypoxia-ischemia in piglets. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab. 2002;22:335–341. doi: 10.1097/00004647-200203000-00011.
 707. Lee JK, Yang ZJ, Wang B, Larson AC, Jamrogowicz JL, Kulikowicz E, Kibler 
KK, Mytar JO, Carter EL, Burman HT, Brady KM, Smielewski P
, Czosnyka 
M, Koehler RC, Shaffner DH. Noninvasive autoregulation monitoring in 
a swine model of pediatric cardiac arrest. Anesth Analg. 2012;114:825–
836. doi: 10.1213/ANE.0b013e31824762d5.
 708. Saugstad OD, Ramji S, Soll RF, Vento M. Resuscitation of newborn infants 
with 21% or 100% oxygen: an updated systematic review and meta-
analysis. Neonatology. 2008;94:176–182. doi: 10.1159/000143397.
 709. Davis PG, Tan A, O’Donnell CP
, Schulze A. Resuscitation of newborn in-
fants with 100% oxygen or air: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet. 2004;364:1329–1333. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17189-4.
 710. Jaskiewicz JA, McCarthy CA, Richardson AC, White KC, Fisher DJ, Dagan 
R, Powell KR; Febrile Infant Collaborative Study Group. Febrile infants 
at low risk for serious bacterial infection: an appraisal of the Rochester 
criteria and implications for management. Pediatrics. 1994;94:390–396.
 711. Hickey RW, Kochanek PM, Ferimer H, Graham SH, Safar P
. Hypothermia 
and hyperthermia in children after resuscitation from cardiac arrest. 
Pediatrics. 2000;106(pt 1):118–122.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524 
May 29, 2018
e781
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 712. Bembea MM, Nadkarni VM, Diener-West M, Venugopal V, Carey 
SM, Berg RA, Hunt EA; American Heart Association National Registry 
of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Investigators. Temperature pat-
terns in the early postresuscitation period after pediatric inhospi-
tal cardiac arrest. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2010;11:723–730. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181dde659.
 713. Laptook A, Tyson J, Shankaran S, McDonald S, Ehrenkranz R, Fanaroff 
A, Donovan E, Goldberg R, O’Shea TM, Higgins RD, Poole WK; National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development Neonatal Research 
Network. Elevated temperature after hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy: 
risk factor for adverse outcomes. Pediatrics. 2008;122:491–499. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2007-1673.
 714. Laptook AR, McDonald SA, Shankaran S, Stephens BE, Vohr BR, Guillet 
R, Higgins RD, Das A; Extended Hypothermia Follow-up Subcommittee 
of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 
Neonatal Research Network. Elevated temperature and 6- to 7-year out-
come of neonatal encephalopathy. Ann Neurol. 2013;73:520–528. doi: 
10.1002/ana.23843.
 715. Bernard SA, Gray TW, Buist MD, Jones BM, Silvester W, Gutteridge G, 
Smith K. Treatment of comatose survivors of out-of-hospital cardiac ar-
rest with induced hypothermia. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:557–563. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa003289.
 716. The Hypothermia After Cardiac Arrest Study Group. Mild therapeutic 
hypothermia to improve the neurologic outcome after cardiac arrest 
[published correction appears in N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1756]. N Engl J 
Med. 2002;346:549–556.
 717. Gluckman PD, Wyatt JS, Azzopardi D, Ballard R, Edwards AD, Ferriero 
DM, Polin RA, Robertson CM, Thoresen M, Whitelaw A, Gunn AJ. 
Selective head cooling with mild systemic hypothermia after neonatal en-
cephalopathy: multicentre randomised trial. Lancet. 2005;365:663–670. 
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)17946-X.
 718. Moler FW, Silverstein FS, Holubkov R, Slomine BS, Christensen JR, 
Nadkarni VM, Meert KL, Clark AE, Browning B, Pemberton VL, Page 
K, Shankaran S, Hutchison JS, Newth CJ, Bennett KS, Berger JT, 
Topjian A, Pineda JA, Koch JD, Schleien CL, Dalton HJ, Ofori-Amanfo 
G, Goodman DM, Fink EL, McQuillen P, Zimmerman JJ, Thomas NJ, 
van der Jagt EW, Porter MB, Meyer MT, Harrison R, Pham N, Schwarz 
AJ, Nowak JE, Alten J, Wheeler DS, Bhalala US, Lidsky K, Lloyd E, 
Mathur M, Shah S, Wu T, Theodorou AA, Sanders RC Jr, Dean JM; 
THAPCA Trial Investigators. Therapeutic hypothermia after out-of-
hospital cardiac arrest in children. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1898–
1908. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1411480.
 719. Fink EL, Clark RS, Kochanek PM, Bell MJ, Watson RS. A tertiary 
care center’s experience with therapeutic hypothermia after pe-
diatric cardiac arrest. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2010;11:66–74. doi: 
10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181c58237.
 720. Doherty DR, Parshuram CS, Gaboury I, Hoskote A, Lacroix J, Tucci M, 
Joffe A, Choong K, Farrell R, Bohn DJ, Hutchison JS; Canadian Critical 
Care Trials Group. Hypothermia therapy after pediatric cardiac arrest. 
Circulation. 2009;119:1492–1500. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
108.791384.
 721. Fink EL, Kochanek PM, Clark RS, Bell MJ. How I cool children 
in 
neurocritical 
care. 
Neurocrit 
Care. 
2010;12:414–420. 
doi: 
10.1007/s12028-010-9334-5.
 722. Topjian A, Dominguez T, Boyce J, Ichord R, MA H and Nadkarni V. Surface 
cooling induced therapeutic hypothermia following pediatric cardiac ar-
rest. Circulation. 2007;116(suppl):II_945.
 723. Kasner SE, Wein T, Piriyawat P
, Villar-Cordova CE, Chalela JA, Krieger 
DW, Morgenstern LB, Kimmel SE, Grotta JC. Acetaminophen for alter-
ing body temperature in acute stroke: a randomized clinical trial. Stroke. 
2002;33:130–134.
 724. Koennecke HC, Leistner S. Prophylactic antipyretic treatment with 
acetaminophen in acute ischemic stroke: a pilot study. Neurology. 
2001;57:2301–2303.
 725. Polderman KH. Application of therapeutic hypothermia in the inten-
sive care unit: opportunities and pitfalls of a promising treatment mo-
dality, part 2: practical aspects and side effects. Intensive Care Med. 
2004;30:757–769.
 726. Shankaran S, Pappas A, Laptook AR, McDonald SA, Ehrenkranz RA, 
Tyson JE, Walsh M, Goldberg RN, Higgins RD, Das A; NICHD Neonatal 
Research Network. Outcomes of safety and effectiveness in a multicenter 
randomized, controlled trial of whole-body hypothermia for neonatal 
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. Pediatrics. 2008;122:e791–e798. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2008-0456.
 727. Thoresen M, Whitelaw A. Cardiovascular changes during mild therapeu-
tic hypothermia and rewarming in infants with hypoxic-ischemic enceph-
alopathy. Pediatrics. 2000;106(pt 1):92–99.
 728. Gebauer CM, Knuepfer M, Robel-Tillig E, Pulzer F, Vogtmann C. 
Hemodynamics among neonates with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopa-
thy during whole-body hypothermia and passive rewarming. Pediatrics. 
2006;117:843–850. doi: 10.1542/peds.2004-1587.
 729. Buratti S, Lampugnani E, Tuo P
, Moscatelli A. Congenital diaphrag-
matic hernia repair during whole body hypothermia for neonatal hy-
poxic ischemic encephalopathy. J Perinatol. 2012;32:981–984. doi: 
10.1038/jp.2012.29.
 730. Shah SK, Khan AM, Cox CS Jr. Pulmonary hypertensive crisis requiring 
ECMO associated with re-warming from whole body hypothermia for hy-
poxic ischemic encephalopathy: clinical observations from a case series. 
Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2010;20:205–206. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1241872.
 731. Sarkar S, Barks JD, Bhagat I, Dechert R, Donn SM. Pulmonary dysfunc-
tion and therapeutic hypothermia in asphyxiated newborns: whole body 
versus selective head cooling. Am J Perinatol. 2009;26:265–270. doi: 
10.1055/s-0028-1103154.
 732. Lebiedz P, Meiners J, Samol A, Wasmer K, Reinecke H, Waltenberger 
J, Eckardt L. Electrocardiographic changes during therapeutic hypo-
thermia. Resuscitation. 2012;83:602–606. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation. 
2011.11.016.
 733. Aktas MK, Aguila A. Successful therapeutic hypothermia in patients 
with congenital long QT syndrome. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 
2011;16:100–103. doi: 10.1111/j.1542-474X.2010.00400.x.
 734. Gunn AJ, Gluckman PD, Gunn TR. Selective head cooling in newborn 
infants after perinatal asphyxia: a safety study. Pediatrics. 1998;102(pt 
1):885–892.
 735. Tiainen M, Parikka HJ, Mäkijärvi MA, Takkunen OS, Sarna SJ, Roine 
RO. Arrhythmias and heart rate variability during and after therapeutic 
hypothermia for cardiac arrest. Crit Care Med. 2009;37:403–409. doi: 
10.1097/CCM.0b013e31819572c4.
 736. Yanta J, Guyette FX, Doshi AA, Callaway CW, Rittenberger JC; Post 
Cardiac Arrest Service. Renal dysfunction is common following resuscita-
tion from out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. Resuscitation. 2013;84:1371–
1374. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2013.03.037.
 737. Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum J, Mehta R, Palevsky P; Acute Dialysis Quality 
Initiative Workgroup. Acute renal failure: definition, outcome measures, 
animal models, fluid therapy and information technology needs: the 
Second International Consensus Conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality 
Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care. 2004;8:R204–R212.
 738. Krawczeski CD, Goldstein SL, Woo JG, Wang Y, Piyaphanee N, Ma 
Q, Bennett M, Devarajan P
. Temporal relationship and predictive 
value of urinary acute kidney injury biomarkers after pediatric car-
diopulmonary bypass. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:2301–2309. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2011.08.017.
 739. Brienza N, Giglio MT, Dalfino L. Protocoled resuscitation and the preven-
tion of acute kidney injury. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2012;18:613–622. doi: 
10.1097/MCC.0b013e32835944d6.
 740. Joannidis M, Druml W, Forni LG, Groeneveld AB, Honore P
, Oudemans-
van Straaten HM, Ronco C, Schetz MR, Woittiez AJ; Critical Care 
Nephrology Working Group of the European Society of Intensive Care 
Medicine. Prevention of acute kidney injury and protection of re-
nal function in the intensive care unit: expert opinion of the Working 
Group for Nephrology, ESICM [published correction appears in Intensive 
Care Med. 2010;36:727]. Intensive Care Med. 2010;36:392–411. doi: 
10.1007/s00134-009-1678-y.
 741. Goldstein SL, Currier H, Graf JM, Cosio CC, Brewer ED, Sachdeva R. 
Outcome in children receiving continuous venovenous hemofiltration. 
Pediatrics. 2001;107:1309–1312.
 742. Selewski DT, Jordan BK, Askenazi DJ, Dechert RE, Sarkar S. Acute kidney 
injury in asphyxiated newborns treated with therapeutic hypothermia. J 
Pediatr. 2013;162:725–729.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2012.10.002.
 743. Susantitaphong P
, Alfayez M, Cohen-Bucay A, Balk EM, Jaber BL. 
Therapeutic hypothermia and prevention of acute kidney injury: a meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials. Resuscitation. 2012;83:159–
167. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2011.09.023.
 744. Losek JD. Hypoglycemia and the ABC’S (sugar) of pediatric resuscitation. 
Ann Emerg Med. 2000;35:43–46.
 745. Srinivasan V, Spinella PC, Drott HR, Roth CL, Helfaer MA, Nadkarni V. 
Association of timing, duration, and intensity of hyperglycemia with in-
tensive care unit mortality in critically ill children. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2004;5:329–336.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Marino et al 
CPR in Infants and Children With Cardiac Disease
May 29, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:e691–e782. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000524
e782
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
 746. Van den Berghe G, Wouters P
, Weekers F, Verwaest C, Bruyninckx F, 
Schetz M, Vlasselaers D, Ferdinande P
, Lauwers P
, Bouillon R. Intensive in-
sulin therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1359–1367. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa011300.
 747. Van den Berghe G, Wilmer A, Hermans G, Meersseman W, Wouters PJ, 
Milants I, Van Wijngaerden E, Bobbaers H, Bouillon R. Intensive insu-
lin therapy in the medical ICU. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:449–461. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa052521.
 748. The NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators. Intensive versus conventional glu-
cose control in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:1283–1297. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810625.
 749. Marik PE, Preiser JC. Toward understanding tight glycemic control in the 
ICU: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Chest. 2010;137:544–551. 
doi: 10.1378/chest.09-1737.
 750. Polito A, Thiagarajan RR, Laussen PC, Gauvreau K, Agus MS, Scheurer 
MA, Pigula FA, Costello JM. Association between intraoperative and 
early postoperative glucose levels and adverse outcomes after com-
plex congenital heart surgery. Circulation. 2008;118:2235–2242. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.804286.
 751. Mesotten D, Gielen M, Sterken C, Claessens K, Hermans G, Vlasselaers 
D, Lemiere J, Lagae L, Gewillig M, Eyskens B, Vanhorebeek I, Wouters 
PJ, Van den Berghe G. Neurocognitive development of children 4 
years after critical illness and treatment with tight glucose control: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2012;308:1641–1650. doi: 
10.1001/jama.2012.12424.
 752. Agus MS, Steil GM, Wypij D, Costello JM, Laussen PC, Langer M, 
Alexander JL, Scoppettuolo LA, Pigula FA, Charpie JR, Ohye RG, Gaies 
MG; SPECS Study Investigators. Tight glycemic control versus standard 
care after pediatric cardiac surgery. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1208–1219. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1206044.
 753. Macrae D, Grieve R, Allen E, Sadique Z, Morris K, Pappachan J, Parslow R, 
Tasker RC, Elbourne D; CHiP Investigators. A randomized trial of hyper-
glycemic control in pediatric intensive care [published correction appears 
in N Engl J Med. 2014;370:1469]. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:107–118. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1302564.
 754. Vannucci RC, Vannucci SJ. Hypoglycemic brain injury. Semin Neonatol. 
2001;6:147–155. doi: 10.1053/siny.2001.0044.
 755. Salhab WA, Wyckoff MH, Laptook AR, Perlman JM. Initial hypoglyce-
mia and neonatal brain injury in term infants with severe fetal acidemia. 
Pediatrics. 2004;114:361–366.
 756. Yanpeng L, Greisen G. Analysis of the risk of brain damage in asphyxi-
ated infants. J Perinat Med. 1996;24:581–589.
 757. Mir NA, Faquih AM, Legnain M. Perinatal risk factors in birth asphyxia: 
relationship of obstetric and neonatal complications to neonatal mortal-
ity in 16,365 consecutive live births. Asia Oceania J Obstet Gynaecol. 
1989;15:351–357.
 758. Vespa P
, McArthur DL, Stein N, Huang SC, Shao W, Filippou M, 
Etchepare M, Glenn T, Hovda DA. Tight glycemic control increas-
es metabolic distress in traumatic brain injury: a randomized con-
trolled within-subjects trial. Crit Care Med. 2012;40:1923–1929. doi: 
10.1097/CCM.0b013e31824e0fcc.
 759. Duning T, van den Heuvel I, Dickmann A, Volkert T, Wempe C, Reinholz 
J, Lohmann H, Freise H, Ellger B. Hypoglycemia aggravates critical illness-
induced neurocognitive dysfunction. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:639–644. 
doi: 10.2337/dc09-1740.
 760. Hékimian G, Baugnon T, Thuong M, Monchi M, Dabbane H, Jaby D, 
Rhaoui A, Laurent I, Moret G, Fraisse F, Adrie C. Cortisol levels and 
adrenal reserve after successful cardiac arrest resuscitation. Shock. 
2004;22:116–119.
 761. Pene F, Hyvernat H, Mallet V, Cariou A, Carli P
, Spaulding C, Dugue 
MA, Mira JP
. Prognostic value of relative adrenal insufficiency after out-
of-hospital cardiac arrest. Intensive Care Med. 2005;31:627–633. doi: 
10.1007/s00134-005-2603-7.
 762. Kim JJ, Lim YS, Shin JH, Yang HJ, Kim JK, Hyun SY, Rhoo I, Hwang SY, Lee 
G. Relative adrenal insufficiency after cardiac arrest: impact on postresus-
citation disease outcome. Am J Emerg Med. 2006;24:684–688. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajem.2006.02.017.
 763. Miller JB, Donnino MW, Rogan M, Goyal N. Relative adrenal insuffi-
ciency in post-cardiac arrest shock is under-recognized. Resuscitation. 
2008;76:221–225. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2007.07.034.
 764. de Jong MF, Beishuizen A, de Jong MJ, Girbes AR, Groeneveld AB. The 
pituitary-adrenal axis is activated more in non-survivors than in survivors 
of cardiac arrest, irrespective of therapeutic hypothermia. Resuscitation. 
2008;78:281–288. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2008.03.227.
 765. Kim JJ, Hyun SY, Hwang SY, Jung YB, Shin JH, Lim YS, Cho JS, Yang HJ, 
Lee G. Hormonal responses upon return of spontaneous circulation after 
cardiac arrest: a retrospective cohort study. Crit Care. 2011;15:R53. doi: 
10.1186/cc10019.
 766. Mentzelopoulos SD, Malachias S, Chamos C, Konstantopoulos D, 
Ntaidou T, Papastylianou A, Kolliantzaki I, Theodoridi M, Ischaki H, 
Makris D, Zakynthinos E, Zintzaras E, Sourlas S, Aloizos S, Zakynthinos 
SG. Vasopressin, steroids, and epinephrine and neurologically favorable 
survival after in-hospital cardiac arrest: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 
2013;310:270–279. doi: 10.1001/jama.2013.7832.
 767. Millar KJ, Thiagarajan RR, Laussen PC. Glucocorticoid therapy for hypo-
tension in the cardiac intensive care unit. Pediatr Cardiol. 2007;28:176–
182. doi: 10.1007/s00246-006-0053-9.
 768. Plumpton KR, Anderson BJ, Beca J. Thyroid hormone and corti-
sol concentrations after congenital heart surgery in infants younger 
than 3 months of age. Intensive Care Med. 2010;36:321–328. doi: 
10.1007/s00134-009-1648-4.
 769. Wald EL, Preze E, Eickhoff JC, Backer CL. The effect of cardiopulmonary 
bypass on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in children. Pediatr Crit 
Care Med. 2011;12:190–196. doi: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181f36d17.
 770. Morrison LJ, Kierzek G, Diekema DS, Sayre MR, Silvers SM, Idris 
AH, Mancini ME. Part 3: ethics: 2010 American Heart Association 
guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency car-
diovascular care. Circulation. 2010;122(suppl 3):S665–S675. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.970905.
 771. Mancini ME, Diekema DS, Hoadley TA, Kadlec KD, Leveille MH, McGowan 
JE, Munkwitz MM, Panchal AR, Sayre MR, Sinz EH. Part 3: ethical is-
sues: 2015 American Heart Association guidelines update for cardiopul-
monary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 
2015;132(suppl 2):S383–S396. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000254.
 772. Boyle D, Carlo WA, Goldsmith J, Halamek L, Perlman J, Wiswell TE, 
Kattwinkel J, Engle W, Gonzalez JL, Singhal N, Nightengale B, Myers 
T; American Academy of Pediatrics Neonatal Resuscitation Program 
Steering Committee. Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2001, Public 
Law No. 107-207. Pediatrics. 2003;111:680–681.
 773. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Bioethics. Ethics and the 
care of critically ill infants and children. Pediatrics. 1996;98:149–152.
 774. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Bioethics. Guidelines on 
foregoing life-sustaining medical treatment. Pediatrics. 1994;93:532–536.
 775. Nondiscrimination on the basis of handicap: procedures and guidelines 
relating to health care for handicapped infants: HHS: final rules. Fed 
Regist. 1984;49:1622–1654.
 776. Kopelman LM. Are the 21-year-old Baby Doe rules misunderstood or mis-
taken? Pediatrics. 2005;115:797–802. doi: 10.1542/peds.2004-2326.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
