 ARTHRITIS & RHEUMATOLOGY
Vol. 68, No. 12, December 2016, pp 2878–2888
DOI 10.1002/art.39785
V
C 2016, American College of Rheumatology
Suppression of Inflammatory Arthritis by Human Gut-Derived
Prevotella histicola in Humanized Mice
Eric V. Marietta, Joseph A. Murray, David H. Luckey, Patricio R. Jeraldo, Abhinav Lamba,
Robin Patel, Harvinder S. Luthra, Ashutosh Mangalam, and Veena Taneja
Objective. The gut microbiome regulates host im-
mune homeostasis. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is associated
with intestinal dysbiosis. This study was undertaken to test
the ability of a human gut-derived commensal to modulate
immune response and treat arthritis in a humanized mouse
model.
Methods. We isolated a commensal bacterium, Pre-
votella histicola, that is native to the human gut and has
systemic immune effects when administered enterally.
Arthritis-susceptible HLA–DQ8 mice were immunized with
type II collagen and treated with P histicola. Disease inci-
dence, onset, and severity were monitored. Changes in gut
epithelial proteins and immune response as well as systemic
cellular and humoral immune responses were studied in
treated mice.
Results. When treated with P histicola in prophy-
lactic or therapeutic protocols, DQ8 mice exhibited sig-
nificantly decreased incidence and severity of arthritis
compared to controls. The microbial mucosal modula-
tion of arthritis was dependent on regulation by CD1031
dendritic cells and myeloid suppressors (CD11b1Gr-11
cells) and by generation of Treg cells (CD41CD251
FoxP31) in the gut, resulting in suppression of antigen-
specific Th17 responses and increased transcription of
interleukin-10. Treatment with P histicola led to reduced
intestinal permeability by increasing expression of enzymes
that produce antimicrobial peptides as well as tight junction
proteins (zonula occludens 1 and occludin). However, the
innate immune response via Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4)
and TLR-9 was not affected in treated mice.
Conclusion. Our results demonstrate that enteral
exposure to P histicola suppresses arthritis via mucosal reg-
ulation. P histicola is a unique commensal that can be
explored as a novel therapy for RA and may have few or no
side effects.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflamma-
tory joint disease caused by both genetic and environmental
factors (1). Among the known genetic factors, the strongest
association is with the presence of certain alleles of HLA
class II molecules (2). Using transgenic mice expressing
RA-associated HLA–DR4/DQ8 genes, we have developed
a humanized model of inflammatory arthritis that shares
similarities with human disease in sex bias, autoantibody
profile, and phenotype (3). Our recent data suggest that the
gut microbial composition of naive *0401 and *0402 mice
shares similarities with the human mucosal microbiome (4),
and the *0401 genotype may be associated with a dysbiosis
of the gut microbiome. Major histocompatibility complex
polymorphism has been shown to impact gut flora in
humans and mice (5–7). Studies in patients with RA have
shown dysbiosis, with one study showing decreased Bacte-
roides, Porphyromonas, and Prevotella species compared
to healthy controls (8,9). How certain commensals suppress
T cell proliferation is not well understood; further studies
are needed to more precisely determine their effects on the
immune response in inflammatory diseases.
Supported by the Department of Defense (Congressionally
Directed Medical Research Programs grant W81XWH-10-1-0257) and
the NIH (National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
Diseases grant AR-30752 to Dr. Taneja).
Eric V. Marietta, PhD, Joseph A. Murray, MD, David H. Luckey,
BS, Patricio R. Jeraldo, PhD, Abhinav Lamba, Robin Patel, MD, Harvinder
S. Luthra, MD, Ashutosh Mangalam, PhD (current address: University of
Iowa, Iowa City), Veena Taneja, PhD: Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
Drs. Marietta, Murray, Mangalam, and Taneja are named
inventors on a patent for the technology used in this study. Dr. Patel has
received grants from nanoMR, BioFire, CheckPoint, Curetis, 3M, Merck,
Hutchison Biofilm Medical Solutions, Accelerate Diagnostics, Allergan
(Pfizer), and The Medicines Company and has received consulting fees
from Curetis, Roche, St. Jude, Thermo Fisher Scientific, and Diaxonhit
(less than $10,000 each); she holds a patent on Bordetella pertussis/paraper-
tussis polymerase chain reaction with royalties paid by TIB, a patent on a
device/method for sonication with royalties paid by Samsung to Mayo
Clinic, and a patent on an antibiofilm substance.
Address correspondence to Veena Taneja, PhD, Department
of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905.
E-mail: taneja.veena@mayo.edu.
Submitted for publication March 14, 2016; accepted in
revised form June 7, 2016.
2878
 We have isolated a gram-negative anaerobe com-
mensal bacterium, Prevotella histicola, native to oral, naso-
pharyngeal, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary mucosal
surfaces. P histicola is a recently discovered species with tax-
onomic similarity to Prevotella melanogenica and Prevotella
veroalis. While commensals like Bifidobacterium species
and some species of Prevotella have been studied for their
impact on the immune system, there are no published
reports on the biologic effects of P histicola.
Our studies suggest that P histicola has immu-
nomodulating properties and suppresses inflammatory
cytokines. We tested whether orally administered
P histicola can modulate the immune response in the gut
and whether that can be translated systemically to control
arthritis in DQ8 mice. Our data suggest that oral feeding
of P histicola in a therapeutic protocol (after induction
of arthritis) to DQ8-transgenic mice leads to resistance
to disease development and limits the disease severity.
P histicola alone did not lead to any enteric or other
pathology in transgenic mice. These studies provide
experimental support for the exploration of commensals
as treatment options for systemic diseases, including RA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Isolation and identification of Prevotella species. Biopsy
specimens of the proximal small bowel were obtained from human
subjects, and bacterial cultures were grown on LKV agar plates for
isolation of individual colonies. Isolates were cultured on sheep
blood agar plates and incubated anaerobically for 2 days at 358C.
Bacterial genomic DNA was extracted using a QIAamp DNA
Mini kit (Qiagen). Real-time, rapid-cycle LightCycler polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) with SYBR Green I detection (Roche
Applied Science) was used to amplify 527 bp of the 16S ribosomal
RNA (16S rRNA) gene. Universal bacterial 16S rRNA gene prim-
ers were used (Microseq 500 16S rRNA gene PCR kit). PCR
cycling was followed by postamplification melting curve analysis to
verify the amplicon before sequencing. Sequencing was performed
with a BigDye Terminator v1.1 Taq kit and an ABI 3730xl DNA
Sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Bidirectional sequence data
were aligned using Sequencher (Gene Codes). The generated con-
sensus sequences were compared to those of the NCBI GenBank
database. Identity $99% between the query sequence and the
GenBank database with a difference of .0.4% between species
was used for identification at the species level.
Transgenic mice.
Transgenic mice were generated as
described previously (10). All mice used lacked endogenous class
II molecules (AEo) and expressed DQB1*0302/DQA1*0301
(DQ8.AEo) on a B6/129 background. Mice of both sexes (8–12
weeks of age) were used in this study and were bred and main-
tained in the pathogen-free Immunogenetics Mouse Colony at the
Mayo Clinic in accordance with the Institutional Animal Use and
Care Committee guidelines. All of the experiments included
transgene-negative littermates as controls and were carried out
with the approval of the Animal Use and Care Committee.
Induction and evaluation of collagen-induced arthritis
(CIA). CIA was induced by immunization with type II collagen
(CII) (100 mg of CII emulsified 1:1 with Freund’s complete
adjuvant [CFA]) as previously described (10). Mice were moni-
tored for the onset and progression of CIA, and each paw was
scored on a scale of 0–3, where 0 5 no swelling, 15 1 or 2 swollen
digits, 25 $2 swollen digits, and 35 swollen paw. The mean
arthritis score was determined using arthritic animals only. Mice
were divided into 2 groups for reproducibility. Histopathologic
analysis of representative paws from each group was performed to
determine arthritis induction. DBA/1 mice were immunized with
CII, and paw thickness was measured with calipers before and
after induction of arthritis to determine arthritis severity.
Treatment with commensal bacterium.
Organisms
(P histicola and P melanogenica) were stored at 2708C in skim
milk, inoculated onto an Anaerobe Laked Sheep Blood Agar
with Kanamycin and Vancomycin (Becton Dickson), incubated
anaerobically in an anaerobic jar with an AnaeroPack system
(Mitsubishi Gas Chemical America), and incubated at 378C for
2–3 days. The bacterium was then swabbed into 10 ml of tryptic
soy broth and anaerobically incubated for 2 days prior to inocula-
tion. The identity of the organisms was verified by PCR.
Transgenic mice were then orally gavaged on alternate
days with 1 3 109 live bacteria suspended in 100 ml of tryptic soy
broth (anaerobic) bacterial culture. The dose was chosen based on
the fact that a higher dose did not provide any additional benefit.
For the preventive protocol, bacteria were administered beginning
10 days prior to immunization with CII and continued for 6 weeks
after immunization. For the therapeutic protocol, mice were treated
beginning 2 weeks after CIA induction and for 6 weeks thereafter.
Control sham gavage consisted of administering 100 ml of bacterial
media alone. DBA/1 mice were treated 7 days after immunization.
Prevotella did not colonize the gut (results not shown).
Isolation of lamina propria cells. Intestinal tissue was
cut longitudinally using a scalpel blade, and washed 6 times
using CMF solution (88% 13 Hanks’ balanced salt solution,
10% HEPES/bicarbonate buffer, and 2% fetal bovine serum).
A 1-hour collagenase digestion using complete RPMI-10/
collagenase (1.33 mg/ml) solution released lymphocytes from
the intestinal tissue. This mixture was passed through a nylon
filter, centrifuged, and the pellet containing the lamina propria
cells was suspended in complete RPMI-10 with gentamicin.
Intestinal permeability. All transgenic mice were main-
tained on a standard diet. Changes in intestinal permeability were
determined using 4-kd fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–labeled
dextran. Mice were deprived of food for 3 hours and then gavaged
with FITC-labeled dextran (0.6 mg/gm body weight). Three hours
later, mice were bled and serum was collected. Immunofluor-
escence of FITC was determined at 490 nm excitation and 525 nm
emission. Gut permeability was tested in age- and sex-matched
treated and control mice 8 weeks after induction of arthritis.
Staining for tight junction proteins. Various parts of the
mouse gut, the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, and colon, were frozen
at the termination of the experiments and tested for the expression
of the tight junction proteins zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1) and
occludin by immunofluorescence using purified anti–ZO-1 (Life
Technologies), Alexa Fluor 594–conjugated anti-occludin (Life
Technologies), and FITC-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson
ImmunoResearch). Caco-2 cells (3 3 105) were cultured on 22 3
22–mm coverslips in 6-well tissue culture plates at 378C in a humid-
ified 5% CO2 incubator until the cultures were confluent mono-
layers. They were then incubated with or without P histicola (100
ml of 1 3 108 colony-forming units/ml) for 4 hours, fixed with 10%
formaldehyde, and evaluated for ZO-1 and occludin expression.
SUPPRESSION OF INFLAMMATORY ARTHRITIS BY PREVOTELLA HISTICOLA
2879
 Reverse transcriptase–PCR for cytokine and chemokine
expression. RNA was extracted from cells using RNeasy columns
(Qiagen), and complementary DNA (cDNA) was prepared using
RNase H reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) and cDNA generated
by standard methods. The expression level of each gene was quan-
tified using the threshold cycle (Ct) method normalized for actin, a
housekeeping gene. Affymetrix mouse PAMM073 microarrays
were used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Data were
analyzed using the online resources of the manufacturer.
Collagen-specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Mice were bled after CII immunization before and after
treatment with P histicola. Titers of serum IgG antibodies against
CII were measured by standard ELISA and are expressed as opti-
cal density.
T cell proliferation assay. For the T cell proliferation
assay, mice were immunized with 200 mg of CII emulsified 1:1 in
CFA (Difco) intradermally at the base of the tail, and proliferation
was measured as previously described (10). For some experiments,
CD41 cells (5 3 106) sorted from the lymph nodes of CII-primed
mice that were treated with P histicola or media alone were cul-
tured in vitro in the presence or absence of the antigen and
CD11c1 dendritic cells (DCs) (5 3 105) harvested from mouse
spleens. A stimulation index of $2 was considered to be a positive
response. Responses to CpG (1 mg/ml) and lipopolysaccharide
(LPS; 5 mg/ml) were tested in mice that received P histicola
treatment for 10 days prior to CII immunization and in mice that
were given P histicola 10 days after immunization and treated for 2
weeks every alternate day. Mice in the in vivo protocol (preventive
or therapeutic protocol) were also tested for responses to LPS and
CpG.
Flow cytometric analysis. The expression of DQ in trans-
genic mice was analyzed by flow cytometry using IVD12 (anti-
DQ) monoclonal antibody. Conjugated antibodies to CD3, CD4,
CD11c, CD19, CD25, GITR, Gr-1, and B220 (BD Biosciences)
were also used. All experiments were done with cells pooled from
2 mice per strain and repeated 2–3 times. Intracellular staining for
FoxP3 and interleukin-10 (IL-10) was performed using specific
antibodies according to the recommendations of the manufacturer
(eBioscience). Phycoerythrin–conjugated rat IgG2a (eBioscience)
was used as the isotype control for FoxP3 staining. The CellQuest
program (Becton Dickinson) was used for analysis.
Cytokines.
Cytokine levels were measured using a Bio-
Plex protein array system with a mouse cytokine 23-plex panel
according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and were analyzed with
Bio-Plex manager 2.0 software (Bio-Rad). Some cytokines were also
testedby capture ELISAusing commercial kits (BDBiosciences).
Statistical analysis.
The difference in the incidence of
arthritis between groups was analyzed using a chi-square test. Anti-
body levels, onset of arthritis, mean scores for arthritic mice, and var-
ious cells were compared using Student’s nonparametric t-test.
Figure 1. Modulation of systemic immune response in DQ8.AEo mice treated orally with Prevotella histicola. Serum levels of cytokines and chemokines were
measured in nonarthritic (naive) DQ8-transgenic mice gavaged with bacterial media alone (sham treatment), P histicola, or Prevotella melanogenica every other day
for 2 weeks. Bars show the mean6 SD (n5 5–7 mice per group). * 5 P, 0.05 versus sham-treated mice. IL-125 interleukin-12; KC5 keratinocyte chemoattrac-
tant; TNF5 tumor necrosis factor; MIP-1a 5 macrophage inflammatory protein 1a; MCP-15 monocyte chemotactic protein 1; GM-CSF5 granulocyte–
macrophagecolony-stimulatingfactor.
2880
MARIETTA ET AL
 RESULTS
Modulation of immune response by gut-derived
P histicola. P histicola and P melanogenica isolated from
the duodenum of an individual human subject were cul-
tured and tested for pathogenic properties. Following treat-
ment, none of the mice had weight loss of .5% of original
weight. None of the mice developed any gut pathology, vil-
lous atrophy, or crypt hyperplasia. Mice gavaged with P
histicola showed significantly reduced IL-2, IL-17, and
tumor necrosis factor levels, and increased IL-4 and IL-10
levels compared to control mice gavaged with bacterial
media alone (sham) (Figure 1). Granulocyte–macrophage
colony-stimulating factor and monocyte chemotactic pro-
tein 1 (MCP-1), proinflammatory chemokines involved in
various autoimmune diseases, were also suppressed in P
histicola–treated mice, demonstrating a probiotic effect of
P histicola isolate in the DQ8 mice. On the other hand,
mice gavaged with P melanogenica did not show any signif-
icant changes in cytokine levels but did show reduced mac-
rophage inflammatory protein 1b and MCP-1 levels
compared to sham-treated controls.
P histicola suppresses arthritis in susceptible DQ8
mice by modulating cellular and humoral responses. P
histicola was tested for treating CIA in DQ8 mice. HLA–
Figure 2. Oral treatment with Prevotella histicola protects against collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in DQ8 mice. P histicola was administered to DQ8 mice in
a therapeutic protocol (after immunization with type II collagen [CII]) (CII1 P histicola; n5 21) or as a prophylactic measure (before immunization with CII)
(P histicola1 CII; n5 12). Prevotella melanogenica was administered as a species control for the therapeutic protocol (CII1 P melan; n5 10). Other controls
consisted of oral gavage with P histicola without CII immunization (P histicola; n5 12) and CII immunization with gavage of bacterial culture media alone
(CII1 media; n5 18). A, Incidence of arthritis and arthritis severity score in the experimental groups. P, 0.05, CII1 media–treated mice versus P histicola–
treated mice. Values for the arthritis severity score are the mean. B, Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the small intestine in a representative mouse from each
of the 3 treatment groups (n5 3 mice per group). Images on the left are higher-magnification views (3 60) of the boxed areas in the images on the bottom right
(3 10); images on the bottom right are higher-magnification views of the boxed areas in the images on the top right (3 5). C, Levels of serum anti-CII (IgG)
antibodies before and after administration of P histicola to mice in the therapeutic protocol. D, T cell proliferative response to CII in vitro at the termination of
the experiment at 12 weeks, determined using splenocytes from mice with CIA and those without CIA. In C and D, bars show the mean6 SD. Numbers above
or below horizontal lines are P values.
SUPPRESSION OF INFLAMMATORY ARTHRITIS BY PREVOTELLA HISTICOLA
2881
 DQ8 mice were immunized with CII and gavaged with
P histicola before immunization (prophylactic), P histicola
after the development of arthritis (therapeutic), or media.
Mice gavaged with P histicola without CII immunization
were used as controls (Figure 2). Both the prophylactic
(P histicola1 CII) and therapeutic (CII1 P histicola) proto-
cols resulted in significantly lower incidences of arthritis
compared to sham control treatment (P , 0.05). Mice
treated with P histicola developed milder arthritis with
delayed onset compared to sham-treated controls. However,
P melanogenica did not provide any protection against CIA.
No inflammation in the small intestine or colon of P histicola–
treated mice was observed, while only mild shortening of villi
with mild infiltration occurred with P melanogenica treatment
(Figure 2B).
We next determined if treatment with P histicola
modulates the antigen-specific systemic immune response,
thereby resulting in protection against CIA. Sera obtained
Figure 3. Modulation of immune response in an antigen-specific manner in mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) treated with Prevotella histicola
(P hist). A and B, In vitro proliferative response of splenocytes harvested from DQ8 mice to CpG and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (A) and type II collagen (CII)
(B). Mice were treated according to a prophylactic protocol (P hist1 CII), a therapeutic protocol (CII1 P hist), immunized with CII alone, treated with
P histicola alone, or left untreated (naive). C, Serum cytokine levels in DQ8-transgenic mice with CIA treated with culture media (sham treatment) or with
P histicola in a therapeutic protocol (P hist). Bars show the mean6 SD (n5 4 mice per group). Numbers above or below horizontal lines are P values.
IFNg 5 interferon-g; G-CSF5 granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (see Figure 1 for other definitions).
2882
MARIETTA ET AL
 before and after treatment were tested for the presence of anti-
CII antibodies in mice used in the therapeutic protocol. Mice
treatedwithPhisticolashowedasignificantreductioninanti-CII
antibody levels. In addition, the antigen-specific T cell response
waslowerin treatedmicewith arthritisandtreatedmice without
arthritiscomparedtoarthriticcontrols(Figures2CandD).
Changes in the systemic, but not the innate,
immune response in mice treated with P histicola. Treating
mice with immunomodulatory agents is known to cause
suppression of innate responses, leading to infections (11).
We assessed whether treatment with P histicola modulates
the innate immune responses in an in vivo model by cultur-
ing splenocytes with LPS or CpG. Although immunized
and treated mice generated a higher response than non-
arthritic
mice,
administration
of
P
histicola
did
not
significantly change the response to CpG or LPS (Figure 3A).
A near-significant decrease in the antigen-specific T cell
response to CII was observed in treated mice, suggesting
that P histicola suppresses CIA by changing the systemic
immune response rather than causing immune suppression
(Figure 3B). Treated mice showed significantly lower levels of
serum IL-17 as well as the regulatory cytokines IL-9, IL-13,
and IL-12(p40) compared to sham-treated mice (Figure 3C).
Modulation of immune response in the gut in
mice treated with P histicola. We next evaluated whether
P histicola treatment affects the mucosal immune system
Figure 4. Antiinflammatory effects of Prevotella histicola treatment on the mouse intestinal immune system. A–D, Fold change in cytokine transcript levels in
DQ8 mice with CIA (mice immunized with CII and treated with bacterial media alone [sham treatment] and mice immunized with CII and treated with
P histicola in a therapeutic protocol) and nonarthritic DQ8 mice treated with P histicola, as compared to the control group (untreated mice with CIA), in the duo-
denum (A), jejunum (B), ileum (C), and colon (D) (n5 3 mice per group). E, Absolute numbers of Treg cells (CD41CD251FoxP31) producing interleukin-10
(IL-10) in the spleens of mice immunized with CII and treated with P histicola or bacterial media alone. Bars show the mean6 SD. F and G, Fluorescence-
activated cell sorting (FACS) histogram of regulatory dendritic cells (CD11c1CD1031) in lamina propria cells (F) and splenocytes (G). A FACS histogram of
CD41GITR1 Treg cells in the spleens of CII-immunized and treated or sham-treated mice is also shown. Results are representative of 3–4 mice per group.
GM-CSF5 granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor; HPRT5 hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase; KC5 keratinocyte chemoattrac-
tant; MIP-15 macrophage inflammatory protein 1; MCP-15 monocyte chemotactic protein 1; RORgt5 retinoic acid receptor–related orphan nuclear recep-
tor gt; TGFb 5 transforming growth factor b; TNFa 5 tumor necrosis factor a; TSLP5 thymic stromal lymphopoietin (see Figure 3 for other definitions).
SUPPRESSION OF INFLAMMATORY ARTHRITIS BY PREVOTELLA HISTICOLA
2883
 locally in the gut in vivo by determining mRNA transcripts
for various cytokines from all parts of the gut (Figure 4).
P histicola–treated mice as well as sham-treated mice did
not show significant changes in cytokine expression in the
ileum. In the jejunum and colon of P histicola–treated mice,
most cytokines were suppressed. P histicola–treated mice
without arthritis showed much higher IL-10 and lower trans-
forming growth factor b levels compared to controls. The
duodenum had high expression of most cytokines in both
groups. Heatmaps of intestinally derived mRNA transcripts
of the Th17 regulatory network revealed that P histicola
treatment led to changes in cytokine expression; arthritic
control and treated mice showed similarities compared to
nonarthritic treated mice (data not shown).
We further compared the effect of treatment on the
duodenum, jejunum, ileum, and colon in the treated
(arthritic or nonarthritic) and control groups. Figures 4A–D
show data with 5-fold or more difference in cytokine tran-
script expression between the groups. P histicola–treated
mice showed suppression of all cytokines in the jejunum
(except IL-10) and colon compared to the duodenum
(Figures 4B and D). Cytokines in P histicola–treated non-
arthritic mice showed .5-fold reductions compared to
controls in IL-17 and other proinflammatory cytokines, with
Figure 5. Lower antigen-specific T cell responses in CD41 cells from Prevotella histicola (P hist)–treated mice compared to controls. A, In vitro T cell
response to type II collagen (CII) in splenic CD41 cells from DQ8 mice immunized with CII and gavaged with bacterial media alone (sham treatment) and
DQ8 mice immunized with CII and gavaged with P histicola, cultured with CD11c1 cells (dendritic cells [DCs]) from the same mouse or a control mouse in a
crisscross manner (DCs from P histicola–treated mice were cultured with CD41 cells from sham-treated and P histicola–treated mice. Similarly, DCs from
sham-treated mice were cultured with CD41 cells from P histicola–treated and sham-treated mice). B, Interleukin-17 (IL-17) production in supernatants
from the culture described in A. C, Numbers of regulatory DCs (CD11c1CD1031) and myeloid suppressor cells (CD11b1Gr-11) in splenocytes from
sham-treated and P histicola–treated mice (n5 4 mice per group). D, Gut permeability, determined using fluorescein isothiocyanate–labeled dextran, in
nonarthritic (naive) mice (n5 12), CII-immunized mice treated with P histicola (n5 12), and CII-immunized mice treated with bacterial media alone (sham;
n5 8). E, Expression of zonula occludens 1 in intestinal sections from DQ8 mice with CIA treated with bacterial media alone (control) and DQ8 mice with
CIA treated with P histicola. F, Expression of occludin in DQ8 mice with CIA (A), DQ8 mice with CIA treated with P histicola (B), and naive mice treated
with P histicola (C). The mean florescence intensity (MFI) of expression is shown. Bars in A, B, C, D, and F show the mean6 SD. Numbers below horizontal
lines are P values. Original magnification 3 10 in E and 3 60 in F.
2884
MARIETTA ET AL
 an increase in IL-10 levels (Figures 4B–D). Interestingly, the
major difference between P histicola–treated arthritic and
nonarthritic mice was the increase in the levels of cytokines
in the duodenum and decrease in the ileum along with an
increase in the regulatory cytokines, IL-10 and FoxP3, in the
jejunum and colon of the latter (data not shown).
Treatment with P histicola generates Treg cells
via DCs and modulates antigen presentation. Next we
determined if P histicola treatment modulates arthritis via
IL-10–producing Treg cells in the gut and systemically.
Treated mice showed a consistent, although nonsignifi-
cant, increase in the total number of splenic CD41 Treg
cells and IL-10–producing Treg cells compared to control
mice even though the CD41 cell numbers were similar
(Figure 4E). CD1031 intestinal DCs maintain a tolerant
state in the intestine by inducing Treg cell differentiation
(12). Mice treated with P histicola had increased numbers
of
CD103-expressing
DCs
in
the
lamina
propria
(P , 0.05) (Figure 4F). Increased numbers of CD11c1
CD1031 cells were also observed in the splenocytes of
Figure 6. Prevotella histicola treatment suppresses arthritis by increasing expression of tight junction protein. A, Arthritis severity, determined by
paw thickness, in sham-treated and P histicola–treated DBA/1 mice. Arthritis was induced in DBA/1 mice by immunization with type II collagen
(CII), and mice were treated with bacterial media alone (sham) or P histicola 7 days after immunization and monitored for arthritis. From day
30 on, a significant difference in arthritis severity (indicated by the asterisk) was observed between treated and control mice. Values are the
mean (n 5 10 mice per group). B, Increased expression of zonula occludens 1 (left) and occludin (right) in Caco-2 cells treated with P histicola
compared to control cells in media alone. The middle panels show merged images. Original magnification 3 63. C, Fold change in expression of
mRNA transcripts for cytokines in P histicola–treated Caco-2 cells compared to Caco-2 cells in media alone. Bars show the mean 6 SD. IL-
17RB 5 interleukin-17 receptor B; B2M 5 b2-microglobulin. D, Average nucleotide identity plot comparing whole-genome average nucleotide
identity as calculated using the windowed blast method and maximum. E, Likelihood phylogenetic tree of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene of all of
the available different genomes and the P histicola isolate from the present study. Bar indicates expected substitutions per site; values are boot-
strap confidence values.
SUPPRESSION OF INFLAMMATORY ARTHRITIS BY PREVOTELLA HISTICOLA
2885
 treated mice (P , 0.05) (Figure 4G), which suggests that
these DCs could have migrated from the intestine.
Splenic DCs from treated mice modulated the in
vitro T cell response when sorted CD41 cells from the
treated and control mice were cultured in a crisscross man-
ner in the presence or absence of CII (Figure 5A). Antigen
presentation by DCs from P histicola–treated mice showed
a significantly lower response, and CD41 cells produced
undetectable levels of IL-17 (Figures 5A and B), suggesting
that both DCs and Treg cells may be involved in modula-
tion of the antigen-specific response. These data are consis-
tent with the increased numbers of CD1031 DCs and Treg
cells, and altered cytokine profile in the gut and periphery
(Figure 4). P histicola–treated mice showed an increase in
absolute numbers of both CD1031 DCs and myeloid
CD11b1Gr-11 cells, suggested to be suppressors (13,14)
(Figure 5C), although the differences were significant only
in percentages and not absolute numbers.
Decreased gut permeability in mice treated
with P histicola. Arthritis-susceptible humanized mice
have enhanced gut permeability (4). Comparison of gut
permeability in naive, P histicola–treated, and sham-
treated control mice showed that P histicola–treated
mice had a significantly lower gut permeability compared
to controls (P 5 0.02) (Figure 5D). Also, P histicola–treated
mice showed an increase in the expression of tight junction
protein ZO-1 in the colon, ileum, and jejunum as compared
to sham-treated control mice (Figure 5E). P histicola–
treated arthritic and nonarthritic mice had much higher
expression of the tight junction protein occludin compared
to sham-treated mice (Figure 5F), suggesting that P histicola
regulates tight junction proteins.
Suppression of arthritis in P histicola–treated DBA/1
mice. To confirm our findings, we also tested P histicola
therapy in a commonly used mouse model of arthritis,
DBA/1 mice. All CII-immunized mice developed arthritis.
However, mice treated with P histicola 7 days after immu-
nization developed significantly milder disease compared
to control mice that received sham treatment (Figure 6A),
suggesting that amelioration of arthritis by this commensal
is not genotype specific.
Increased expression of ZO-1 by epithelial cells
treated with P histicola. We next determined the effect of
P histicola on human-derived epithelial Caco-2 cells by
measuring the expression of various chemokine and cyto-
kine transcripts (Figure 6). Treatment with P histicola
increased ZO-1 and occludin expression in Caco-2 cells as
compared to media control, though the difference was not
significant (Figure 6B). P histicola–treated epithelial cells
showed an increase in mRNA transcripts for IL-17 receptor
B (IL-17RB), a receptor not associated with production of
proinflammatory IL-17A, which is required for production
of Th1 cytokine (Figure 6C). However, the most significant
increase was observed for the expression of GAPDH, while
no difference was observed for ACTB (data not shown).
P histicola is novel and differs from P copri. A recent
study showed an expansion of P copri in patients with new-
onset RA (9). We used whole-genome average nucleotide
identity to compare differences between the sequences
from various known P histicola strains and P copri with the
P histicola isolate used in this study. As shown in Figure 6D,
the P histicola isolate used in this study is very different from
P copri, with only 69% average nucleotide identity. The pre-
viously available P histicola strains, JCM_15637_JCVI,
JCM_15637_UT, and F0411, and the isolate used here have
97% average nucleotide identity. We assembled and gener-
ated a Maximum Likelihood phylogenetic tree of the 16S
ribosomal RNA gene of all the different genomes tested,
which suggested that the P histicola isolate used in this study
is novel. Comparison of the functional open-reading frames
between the 2 species showed very low identity in genes
when tested by BLASTp (Figure 6E).
DISCUSSION
Recent studies have highlighted the impact of dys-
biosis in the gut microbiome on systemic inflammatory dis-
eases, including RA in humans and a transgenic mouse
model of arthritis (4,9,15,16). Interestingly, while one study
showed an association with Prevotella species, another
showed a lack of Prevotella (Bacteroidetes phylum) in fecal
samples, suggesting that various species of Prevotella might
have different effects on arthritis (8,9). A comparison with
P copri, a disease-associated species, suggested that the
P histicola isolate used in this study and other P histicola
strains differ from P copri. Moreover, we isolated P histicola
from the duodenum while other studies used stool samples;
commensals isolated from different sites may have different
functions.
In transgenic mice, dysbiosis of the gut microbiome is
associated with proinflammatory conditions locally, implicat-
ing a bottom-up approach (driven by the gut microbiome),
such that the adaptive immune system may be modulated by
the gut immune system (4). Studies in germ-free and specific
pathogen–free mice suggesting that disruptions to gut micro-
biota can modulate the systemic phenotype further support
this contention (17). A role of gut-residing bacteria in the
causation of arthritis was shown in germ-free mice, where
a single species could promote expansion of intestinal
Th17 cells, resulting in the development of arthritis (17,18).
Further studies showed that inflammatory microbiota-driven
signals favor maintenance and proliferation of autoimmune
CD41 T cells (19). Those studies strongly highlight the con-
cept that the gut microbiota play a role in the causation of
arthritis, thereby suggesting that commensals can be used for
modulating immune responses locally and systemically.
2886
MARIETTA ET AL
 We took advantage of the HLA-transgenic mouse
model to test if a gut-derived commensal, which is observed
in lower numbers in arthritis-susceptible transgenic mice
and human RA (4,8), can be used for treating CIA as a pre-
clinical model for RA. Our hypothesis was that it would
modulate dysbiosis and result in immune homeostasis in
the gut that can be translated systemically for modulating
disease outcome. Our additional data with P melanogenica,
which belongs to the Bacteroidetes phyla and was also iso-
lated from duodenal biopsy samples from patients with
celiac disease, suggest that not all Prevotella species may
be suppressive. In arthritis-susceptible HLA–DQ8 mice, P
histicola treatment led to resistance to disease development
and limited the severity of the disease without causing any
pathology, while P melanogenica did not have this effect.
We believe that these studies are relevant to humans, since
the effect of the treatment can be studied in vivo under nor-
mal physiologic conditions, and since the DQ8-restricted
effector arm of the immune response is similar to human
disease with regard to phenotype and autoantibody profile
(3,10,20,21).
The major drawback of the available biologic drugs
used for treating RA is that they suppress the immune
response such that an individual’s capability to fight infec-
tion is undermined. Our data indicate that treatment with
P histicola does not lead to the suppression of innate
responses via CpG, sequences found in bacterial and viral
genomes that bind to Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR-9), and via
LPS, a ligand for TLR-4. However, studies evaluating
whether mice treated with P histicola are at risk of develop-
ing infectious diseases are needed.
Commensal bacteria and probiotics have been
shown to exert their antiinflammatory effect through pro-
duction of IL-10, and the Th2 cytokines IL-25, IL-33, or thy-
mic stromal lymphopoietin, as well as via induction of
regulatory cells (22–29). There are several putative mecha-
nisms by which luminally applied microbiome therapy
could affect inflammation distal from the gut: regulatory
cytokines produced by Treg cells or suppressive DCs in the
gut may travel to the target organ, there may be an expan-
sion of regulatory cells that traffic to the site of inflamma-
tion, and gut permeability may change. Our data suggested
that all 3 of these mechanisms could be occurring in mice
treated with P histicola. A comparison of various parts of
the gut demonstrated that treatment with P histicola led to
suppression of cytokines in the jejunum, colon, and ileum,
although the duodenum showed increased expression in
comparison to controls, suggesting that P histicola may con-
trol immune response differently in various parts of the gut.
This change in expression of cytokines was associated
with an increase in lamina propria Treg cells, CD1031 DCs,
and CD11c1F4/801 cells, the latter having been shown to
produce IL-10 and induce differentiation of T cells into Treg
cells in the lamina propria (30). Suppressive DCs can
stimulate CD41 T cells and reestablish the Th1:Th2 ratio at
a “normal” level (31). Our data demonstrated that P histicola
has a potent modulatory effect upon the systemic production
of inflammatory cytokines. IL-13 and IL-17 are involved in
the pathogenesis of RA and CIA in humanized mice
(10,32,33), and it is likely that P histicola suppresses CIA by
modulating the immune response to inflammatory cytokines,
since both of these cytokines were produced at levels lower
than in controls in an in vivo model. An increase in IL-10 lev-
els and Treg cells in lamina propria and spleen do support
this notion and further provide one of the mechanisms by
which P histicola modulates the arthritis phenotype.
Arthritis and the nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs used to treat RA are associated with increased gut
permeability (34,35). The observations of lowered gut per-
meability and increased expression of ZO-1 in treated com-
pared to control mice as well as in epithelial cells suggest
that P histicola protects by preserving gut epithelium integ-
rity in the context of inflammation. Further, P histicola–
mediated increases in the expression of GAPDH and IL-
17RB in epithelial cells may be involved in protection
against inflammation. Recently, GAPDH-derived antimi-
crobial peptides have been identified (36,37). IL-17RB is a
cytokine receptor that does not bind IL-17A, known to be
involved in RA, and is not associated with RA pathogenesis
but rather leads to a Th2 response (38,39). Recent work has
suggested that a transient increase in colonic permeability in
the presence of normal commensal organisms may provide
protection against subsequent colitis, again suggesting the
importance of commensal organisms in immune homeosta-
sis and a beneficial or antiinflammatory response in the con-
text of an inflammatory stimulus.
The hygiene hypothesis suggests that a reduced bac-
terial burden has led to an increase in autoimmunity. How-
ever, the colon, which is replete with large quantities of
bacteria, is less likely to be affected by this hygiene than the
upper gastrointestinal tract, which is the first portal of entry
of foreign bacteria and bacterial products. Administering
commensals to exact an effect on systemic immune
responses through their interaction with the small intestine
may be more germane for modifying systemic autoimmune
responses and could provide an experimental framework to
explain how the increase in environmental hygiene could
result in an increase in autoimmune diseases. Our data sug-
gest that P histicola has potent probiotic properties, at least
in this mouse model, and should be explored further for its
beneficial effects for treating inflammation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Chella David for providing transgenic
mice and for helpful suggestions in this study and Dr. Susan
Barton for help in isolating, and Melissa J. Karau for help in
culturing, Prevotella histicola.
SUPPRESSION OF INFLAMMATORY ARTHRITIS BY PREVOTELLA HISTICOLA
2887
 AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors were involved in drafting the article or revising it criti-
cally for important intellectual content, and all authors approved the final
version to be published. Dr. Taneja had full access to all of the data in the
study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy
of the data analysis.
Study conception and design. Murray, Patel, Luthra, Mangalam, Taneja.
Acquisition of data. Marietta, Luckey, Lamba.
Analysis and interpretation of data. Marietta, Murray, Jeraldo, Taneja.
REFERENCES
1. Klareskog L, Padyukov L, Lorentzen J, Alfredsson L. Mechanisms of
disease: genetic susceptibility and environmental triggers in the develop-
ment of rheumatoid arthritis. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol 2006;2:425–33.
2. Gregersen PK, Silver J, Winchester RJ. The shared epitope hypothe-
sis: an approach to understanding the molecular genetics of suscepti-
bility to rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 1987;30:1205–13.
3. Behrens M, Trejo T, Luthra H, Griffiths M, David CS, Taneja V.
Mechanism by which HLA-DR4 regulates sex-bias of arthritis in
humanized mice. J Autoimmun 2010;35:1–9.
4. Gomez A, Luckey D, Yeoman CJ, Marietta EV, Berg Miller ME,
Murray JA, et al. Loss of sex and age driven differences in the gut
microbiome characterize arthritis-susceptible 0401 mice but not
arthritis-resistant 0402 mice. PLoS One 2012;7:e36095.
5. Toivanen P, Vaahtovuo J, Eerola E. Influence of major histocompati-
bility complex on bacterial composition of fecal flora. Infect Immun
2001;69:2372–7.
6. Vaahtovuo J, Toivanen P, Eerola E. Bacterial composition of murine
fecal microflora is indigenous and genetically guided. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol 2003;44:131–6.
7. DePalmaG,CapillaA,NadalI,NovaE,PozoT,VareaV,etal.Interplay
between human leukocyte antigen genes and the microbial colonization
processofthenewbornintestine.CurrIssuesMolBiol2010;12:1–10.
8. Vaahtovuo J, Munukka E, Korkeamaki M, Luukkainen R, Toivanen
P. Fecal microbiota in early rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 2008;
35:1500–5.
9. Scher JU, Sczesnak A, Longman RS, Segata N, Ubeda C, Bielski C,
et al. Expansion of intestinal Prevotella copri correlates with enhanced
susceptibility to arthritis. Elife 2013;2:e01202.
10. Taneja V, Behrens M, Mangalam A, Griffiths MM, Luthra HS, David
CS. New humanized HLA–DR4–transgenic mice that mimic the sex
bias of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum 2007;56:69–78.
11. Winthrop KL. Risk and prevention of tuberculosis and other serious
opportunistic infections associated with the inhibition of tumor necro-
sis factor. Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol 2006;2:602–10.
12. Jaensson E, Uronen-Hansson H, Pabst O, Eksteen B, Tian J, Coombes
JL, et al. Small intestinal CD1031 dendritic cells display unique func-
tional properties that are conserved between mice and humans. J Exp
Med 2008;205:2139–49.
13. Marigo I, Dolcetti L, Serafini P, Zanovello P, Bronte V. Tumor-
induced tolerance and immune suppression by myeloid derived sup-
pressor cells. Immunol Rev 2008;222:162–79.
14. Del Rio ML, Bernhardt G, Rodriguez-Barbosa JI, Forster R. Develop-
ment and functional specialization of CD1031 dendritic cells.
Immunol Rev 2010;234:268–81.
15. Hakansson A, Molin G. Gut microbiota and inflammation. Nutrients
2011;3:637–82.
16. Vaahtovuo J, Munukka E, Korkeamaki M, Luukkainen R, Toivanen
P. Fecal microbiota in early rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 2008;
35:1500–5.
17. Wu HJ, Ivanov, II, Darce J, Hattori K, Shima T, Umesaki Y, et al.
Gut-residing segmented filamentous bacteria drive autoimmune
arthritis via T helper 17 cells. Immunity 2010;32:815–27.
18. Ivanov II, Atarashi K, Manel N, Brodie EL, Shima T, Karaoz U, et al.
Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria.
Cell 2009;139:485–98.
19. Chappert P, Bouladoux N, Naik S, Schwartz RH. Specific gut com-
mensal flora locally alters T cell tuning to endogenous ligands. Immu-
nity 2013;38:1198–210.
20. Taneja V, Taneja N, Behrens M, Griffiths MM, Luthra HS, David CS.
Requirement for CD28 may not be absolute for collagen-induced
arthritis: study with HLA-DQ8 transgenic mice. J Immunol 2005;174:
1118–25.
21. Taneja V, Taneja N, Paisansinsup T, Behrens M, Griffiths M, Luthra
H, et al. CD4 and CD8 T cells in susceptibility/protection to collagen-
induced arthritis in HLA-DQ8-transgenic mice: implications for rheu-
matoid arthritis. J Immunol 2002;168:5867–75.
22. Liu YJ, Soumelis V, Watanabe N, Ito T, Wang YH, Malefyt Rde W,
et al. TSLP: an epithelial cell cytokine that regulates T cell differentia-
tion by conditioning dendritic cell maturation. Annu Rev Immunol
2007;25:193–219.
23. Moore KW, de Waal Malefyt R, Coffman RL, O’Garra A. Interleukin-10
andtheinterleukin-10receptor.AnnuRevImmunol2001;19:683–765.
24. Saenz SA, Taylor BC, Artis D. Welcome to the neighborhood: epithe-
lial cell-derived cytokines license innate and adaptive immune
responses at mucosal sites. Immunol Rev 2008;226:172–90.
25. Braat H, van den Brande J, van Tol E, Hommes D, Peppelenbosch M,
van Deventer S. Lactobacillus rhamnosus induces peripheral hypo-
responsiveness in stimulated CD41 T cells via modulation of dendritic
cell function. Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:1618–25.
26. Pessi T, Isolauri E, Sutas Y, Kankaanranta H, Moilanen E, Hurme M.
Suppression of T-cell activation by Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG-
degraded bovine casein. Int Immunopharmacol 2001;1:211–8.
27. Pessi T, Sutas Y, Saxelin M, Kallioinen H, Isolauri E. Antiproliferative
effects of homogenates derived from five strains of candidate probiotic
bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 1999;65:4725–8.
28. Schultz M, Linde HJ, Lehn N, Zimmermann K, Grossmann J, Falk
W, et al. Immunomodulatory consequences of oral administration of
Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain GG in healthy volunteers. J Dairy Res
2003;70:165–73.
29. Konieczna P, Groeger D, Ziegler M, Frei R, Ferstl R, Shanahan F,
et al. Bifidobacterium infantis 35624 administration induces Foxp3 T
regulatory cells in human peripheral blood: potential role for myeloid
and plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Gut 2012;61:354–66.
30. Denning TL, Wang YC, Patel SR, Williams IR, Pulendran B. Lamina
propria macrophages and dendritic cells differentially induce regula-
tory and interleukin 17-producing T cell responses. Nat Immunol
2007;8:1086–94.
31. Surana NK, Kasper DL. The yin yang of bacterial polysaccharides:
lessons learned from B. fragilis PSA. Immunol Rev 2012;245:13–26.
32. Hitchon CA, Alex P, Erdile LB, Frank MB, Dozmorov I, Tang Y,
et al. A distinct multicytokine profile is associated with anti-cyclical cit-
rullinated peptide antibodies in patients with early untreated inflam-
matory arthritis. J Rheumatol 2004;31:2336–46.
33. Chabaud M, Lubberts E, Joosten L, van Den Berg W, Miossec P. IL-
17 derived from juxta-articular bone and synovium contributes to joint
degradation in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res 2001;3:168–77.
34. Bjarnason I, Takeuchi K. Intestinal permeability in the pathogenesis of
NSAID-induced enteropathy. J Gastroenterol 2009;44 Suppl 19:23–9.
35. Edwards CJ. Commensal gut bacteria and the etiopathogenesis
of rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol 2008;35:1477–14797.
36. Branco P, Francisco D, Chambon C, Hebraud M, Arneborg N,
Almeida MG, et al. Identification of novel GAPDH-derived antimicro-
bial peptides secreted by Saccharomyces cerevisiae and involved in wine
microbial interactions. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2014;98:843–53.
37. Seo JK, Lee MJ, Go HJ, Kim YJ, Park NG. Antimicrobial function of
the GAPDH-related antimicrobial peptide in the skin of skipjack
tuna, Katsuwonus pelamis. Fish Shellfish Immunol 2014;36:571–81.
38. Hwang SY, Kim HY. Expression of IL-17 homologs and their receptors
in the synovial cells of rheumatoid arthritis patients. Mol Cells 2005;19:
180–4.
39. Petersen BC, Budelsky AL, Baptist AP, Schaller MA, Lukacs NW.
Interleukin-25 induces type 2 cytokine production in a steroid-
resistant interleukin-17RB1 myeloid population that exacerbates
asthmatic pathology. Nat Med 2012;18:751–8.
2888
MARIETTA ET AL
