 Context-specific inhibition of translation by ribosomal
antibiotics targeting the peptidyl transferase center
James Marksa,1, Krishna Kannana,1,2, Emily J. Roncasea,3, Dorota Klepackia, Amira Kefia, Cédric Orellea,4,
Nora Vázquez-Laslopa,5, and Alexander S. Mankina,5
aCenter for Biomolecular Sciences, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60607
Edited by Peter B. Moore, Yale University, New Haven, CT, and approved September 2, 2016 (received for review August 5, 2016)
The first broad-spectrum antibiotic chloramphenicol and one of the
newest clinically important antibacterials, linezolid, inhibit protein
synthesis by targeting the peptidyl transferase center of the bacterial
ribosome. Because antibiotic binding should prevent the placement of
aminoacyl-tRNA in the catalytic site, it is commonly assumed that these
drugs are universal inhibitors of peptidyl transfer and should readily
block the formation of every peptide bond. However, our in vitro
experiments showed that chloramphenicol and linezolid stall ribo-
somes at specific mRNA locations. Treatment of bacterial cells with
high concentrations of these antibiotics leads to preferential arrest of
translation at defined sites, resulting in redistribution of the ribosomes
on mRNA. Antibiotic-mediated inhibition of protein synthesis is most
efficient when the nascent peptide in the ribosome carries an alanine
residue and, to a lesser extent, serine or threonine in its penultimate
position. In contrast, the inhibitory action of the drugs is counteracted
by glycine when it is either at the nascent-chain C terminus or at the
incoming aminoacyl-tRNA. The context-specific action of chloramphen-
icol illuminates the operation of the mechanism of inducible resistance
that relies on programmed drug-induced translation arrest. In addition,
our findings expose the functional interplay between the nascent
chain and the peptidyl transferase center.
ribosome | antibiotics | protein synthesis | nascent peptide | oxazolidinones
T
he key chemical reaction catalyzed by the ribosome is peptide
bond formation. This reaction occurs in the peptidyl trans-
ferase center (PTC) where the transfer of the nascent peptide from
the P-site–bound peptidyl-tRNA (pept-tRNA) to the A-site–bound
aminoacyl tRNA (aa-tRNA) leads to elongation of the growing
protein chain by one amino acid at each round of translation
(reviewed in ref. 1). Although the peptidyl transfer reaction is
potentially assisted by the chemical environment of the PTC
(2–4), the main contribution of the ribosome to peptide bond
formation is entropic, as the major acceleration of the reaction
stems from the proper orientation of the donor and acceptor
substrates within the catalytic center (5–7).
The PTC is a primary target for antibiotics that inhibit protein
synthesis (see ref. 8 for review), such as chloramphenicol (CHL), one
of the first broad-spectrum antibacterials in clinical use (9). CHL binds
to the PTC A site, preventing proper placement of the aminoacyl
moiety of aa-tRNA (Fig. 1) (10–12). Because the key interactions
with the ribosome in the A site are shared by all aa-tRNAs, CHL
is viewed as a universal inhibitor of peptide bond formation (reviewed
in ref. 13). However, this commonly accepted model of CHL action
fails to explain several experimental observations such as the differ-
ential inhibition of translation of specific mRNA templates (14, 15)
or only partial inhibition of puromycin-mediated release of na-
scent chains in polysomes even at saturating CHL concentrations
(16). The perceived ability of CHL to indiscriminately inhibit formation
of any peptide bond also conflicts with its role as an inducer of re-
sistance genes. Activation of a number of CHL resistance genes
relies on the antibiotic-promoted arrest of translation at a specific
codon within the regulatory leader ORF (reviewed in ref. 17). Thus,
to activate the expression of the resistance locus in response to the
antibiotic assault, the ribosome should be able to progress through
several leader ORF codons to reach the site of the programmed
translation arrest. How the ribosome can polymerize a segment of
the leader peptide, if CHL indiscriminately inhibits formation of any
peptide bond, remained unclear.
Although CHL is one of the oldest known antibiotics, linezolid
(LZD) belongs to one of the newest classes of clinically important
PTC-targeting protein synthesis inhibitors, the oxazolidinones (Fig. 1).
Genetic, biochemical, and crystallographic evidence showed that LZD
binds in the PTC A site, at a location overlapping with the CHL binding
pocket. Similar to CHL, LZD directly clashes with the placement
of the aminoacyl moiety of the aa-tRNA, suggesting that the drug
should indiscriminately inhibit peptidyl transfer reaction (Fig. 1)
(18–21). It remained unexplained, however, why LZD, which readily
interfered with in vivo protein synthesis or cell-free translation (22),
failed to inhibit peptide bond formation between fMet-tRNA and
puromycin (18, 23).
Because of the accumulating biochemical evidence that contra-
dicted the conventional view of the mode of action of CHL and
LZD, we questioned whether these antibiotics universally block the
formation of every peptide bond during protein synthesis. Here, we
show that CHL and LZD do not act as global inhibitors of peptide
bond formation, but rather block translation at specific locations
within the mRNA in a context-specific manner. Furthermore, we
Significance
Chloramphenicol and linezolid interfere with translation by
targeting the ribosomal catalytic center and are viewed as
universal inhibitors of peptide bond formation. We show
that, contrary to this view, the activity of these antibiotics
critically depends on the nature of specific amino acids of the
nascent chain carried by the ribosome and by the identity of the
residue entering the A site. These findings indicate that the na-
scent protein modulates the properties of the ribosomal catalytic
center and affects binding of its ligands. Understanding the
principles of context specificity of ribosomal drugs may help
develop better antibiotics.
Author contributions: J.M., K.K., N.V.-L., and A.S.M. designed research; J.M., K.K., E.J.R., D.K.,
and C.O. performed research; J.M., K.K., A.K., C.O., N.V.-L., and A.S.M. analyzed data;
and J.M., N.V.-L., and A.S.M. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: The research in the laboratory was supported by, among
other sources, grants from the pharmaceutical companies Melinta Therapeutics and
Cempra Pharmaceuticals.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: The data reported in this paper have been deposited in the Gene Ex-
pression Omnibus (GEO) database, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo (accession no. GSE86536).
1J.M. and K.K. contributed equally to this work.
2Present address: Synthetic Genomics, Inc., La Jolla, CA 92037.
3Present address: Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Re-
search Institute, La Jolla, CA 92307.
4Present address: Institut de Biologie et Chimie des Protéines, UMR5086 CNRS/Université
Lyon 1, 7 passage du Vercors, 69367 Lyon, France.
5To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: shura@uic.edu or nvazquez@uic.
edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1613055113/-/DCSupplemental.
12150–12155
|
PNAS
|
October 25, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 43
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613055113
 present evidence that the specificity of action of these drugs is
defined by the nature of the penultimate residue of the nascent
peptide as well as by the amino acid residues directly participating
in peptide bond formation. Our findings unveiled an important
functional influence of the nascent peptide on the properties of
the PTC and expand the concept of the context-specific action of
ribosomal antibiotics.
Results
Toeprinting Analysis Reveals Site Specificity of CHL and LZD Action.
To assess the mode of action of CHL and LZD in vitro, we used
toeprinting analysis, which determines the position of the antibiotic-
stalled ribosome on an mRNA (24, 25). If, as alleged, CHL and
LZD act as global inhibitors of the PTC catalytic function, pre-
incubation of the ribosome with these antibiotics should prevent the
formation of the very first peptide bond. However, consistent with our
previous observations (25), even at very high concentrations of CHL or
LZD, ribosomes were not arrested at the initiator codon of any of the
tested mRNA templates (Fig. S1A). Instead, translation progressed
through few codons until the ribosome was stalled, with varying effi-
ciency, at specific downstream sites. In an attempt to understand the
requirement for the preferential action of CHL and LZD at specific
mRNA locations, we aligned the encoded protein sequences leading
up to the experimentally identified sites of CHL- or LZD-induced
arrest and examined the nature of the P- or A-site amino acids directly
participating in peptide bond formation (Fig. S1B). Nonetheless, no
clear conservation of the donor or acceptor residues was immediately
obvious. We realized that, to search for the motifs conducive to the
action of CHL and LZD, we needed to operate with a broader array
of sites of the preferred action of these drugs. Therefore, we used
ribosome profiling, which allows analyzing the mode of action of
protein synthesis inhibitors at the genome-wide level (26–29).
Identity of the Penultimate Residue of the Nascent Peptide Is Critical
for the Action of CHL and LZD. The ribosome-profiling experiments
were carried out with the Escherichia coli strain BWDK, a descendant
of the WT E. coli K-12 strain, where the absence of the tolC gene (a
key component of the multidrug efflux pump) renders the cells hy-
persusceptible to antibiotics. Exponentially growing cells were exposed
to a 100-fold excess over the minimal inhibitory concentration of CHL
or LZD for 2.5 min, a time period sufficient to reach maximum
inhibition of translation (Fig. S2). The ribosome-protected mRNA
fragments were then prepared, sequenced, and mapped to the ge-
nome using established procedures (30, 31). Treatment with any of
the two inhibitors caused a modest redistribution of ribosome density
along the genes relative to the untreated control (Fig. S3). Thus, it
became evident that exposure to the antibiotic does not immediately
“freeze” translation. Instead, ribosomes can still polymerize a few
peptide bonds before pausing at particular codons. This observation
is consistent with our in vitro toeprinting results, which showed that
CHL and LZD stall translation at a number of specific locations
within the protein-coding sequences (Fig. S1).
We identified the preferential sites of antibiotic action by com-
puting changes in ribosome occupancy at ∼60,000 individual codons
between the antibiotic-treated and untreated cells and ranking all of
the analyzed codons by the magnitude of the change (Fig. 2) (see SI
Materials and Methods for detail). For each antibiotic, we then se-
lected the top 1,000 codons, where the strongest drug-induced
translation arrest was observed. Within these sites, we searched for a
specific sequence signature among amino acids encoded within the
nine codons preceding the arrest site (positions −1 to −9), the arrest
codon (position 0), which occupies the P site of the stalled ribosome,
and the following codon (position +1), corresponding to the A-site
codon (Fig. 2). Remarkably, the preferential CHL arrest sites
showed significant enrichment in Ala (38.1%) and, to a lesser extent,
of Ser (14.8%) or Thr (6.3%) codons, in the −1 position compared
with the expected random occurrence of these residues (15.2%,
7.8%, and 5.5%, respectively) (Fig. 2A and Fig. S4). The sites of
LZD-induced arrest exhibited an even stronger preference for Ala
codons (69.9%) in the same position (Fig. 2B and Fig. S4). Although
Ala and Thr can be defined by four codons each and Ser is defined
by six codons, no preference for any specific Ala, Ser, or Thr codon
at the sites of arrest was apparent. This lack of codon bias argues
that the specificity of antibiotic action is defined by the nature of the
encoded amino acids rather than the mRNA sequence or tRNA
structure. The occurrence of Ala, Ser, or Thr in the penultimate
peptide position strongly correlated with the drug-induced transla-
tion stalling throughout the entire range of the analyzed locations,
and their presence progressively decreased toward the end of the
spectrum where codons with the least pronounced ribosome stalling
were grouped (Fig. S5A). Furthermore, when all of the ∼60,000
analyzed sites were grouped into 20 bins, according to the nature of
the nascent-chain penultimate residue, the sites with Ala, Ser, or Thr
in position (−1) showed a significant increase of the cumulative ri-
bosome occupancy across all of the analyzed codons (Fig. S5B). All
of these data strongly argue that presence of Ala (and, to some
degree, Thr or Ser) as the penultimate amino acid in the nascent
chain stimulates the inhibitory action of CHL and LZD.
To further examine the influence of the sequence context on drug-
induced arrest, we selected a well-defined model system appealingly
suited for cell-free translation experiments (32). According to the
ribosome-profiling data, the drug-induced ribosome stalling at the Leu5
codon of the hns gene represents one of the 10 strongest arrest sites
common for both CHL and LZD (Fig. 3A). Drug-induced ribosome
stalling at the hns Leu5 codon was readily reproduced in vitro in the
toeprinting assay (Fig. 3B). By comparing the fraction of the ribosomes
arrested at the Leu5 codon with those that bypassed the site of drug-
induced translation stalling, we compared the efficiency of translation
inhibition for the H-NS mutants containing every possible amino acid
substitutions of Ala4 (Fig. 3 C and D). The results of the in vitro ex-
periments confirmed that the presence of Ala in the penultimate po-
sition of the H-NS N-terminal pentapeptide significantly enhanced the
action of CHL and LZD. Replacing Ala4 with any other amino acid
greatly reduced the efficiency of drug-induced ribosome stalling. Fur-
thermore, in agreement with the profiling data (Fig. S4), Ser and, in the
case of LZD, also Thr at position −1 were more conducive to the
antibiotic action than any other substitution of Ala4 (Fig. 3 C and D).
Having verified the importance of the penultimate peptide residue
in the mechanism of LZD and CHL action, we reexamined the
collection of the arrest sites identified by toeprinting in our initial
experiments (Fig. S1B). Consistent with the trend observed in vivo,
Fig. 1.
The binding site of CHL and LZD in the peptidyl transferase center of
the 50S ribosomal subunit. (Top) The chemical structures of CHL and LZD.
(Bottom) When bound to the large ribosomal subunit in the PTC A site, the
molecules of CHL (orange) and LZD (blue) would sterically clash with the
aminoacyl moiety of the aminoacyl-tRNA (yellow). P-site–bound peptidyl-
tRNA esterified with the nascent peptide chain is purple. The images were
prepared based on the structures with the Protein Data Bank ID codes 4V7T,
3DLL, and 3J5L (10, 20, 46).
Marks et al.
PNAS
|
October 25, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 43
|
12151
BIOCHEMISTRY
 more than 80% of the drug-induced arrests detected in those ex-
periments occurred when the penultimate amino acid of the nascent
peptide was Ala, Ser, or Thr (marked by arrowheads in Fig. S1B).
Collectively, the results of the genome-wide analysis and of the
in vitro testing converge on the key stimulatory role of Ala, Ser, or Thr
in the penultimate position of the nascent peptide in the mechanism of
action of the PTC-targeting antibiotics CHL and LZD.
CHL and LZD Poorly Inhibit Peptide Bond Formation When Glycine
Residues Are Involved. The codons with the maximally increased ri-
bosomal occupancy in drug-treated cells represent the sites where
antibiotic action is most pronounced (red frames in Fig. 2). Conversely,
the codons whose occupancy significantly decreases in the presence of
the drug are those where the antibiotic fails to hinder peptide bond
formation. Despite the presence of the inhibitor, the ribosomes pro-
ceed with translation, traversing these codons until they encounter the
nearest “strong” arrest location. In contrast to our finding for the top
arrest sites, the analysis of the 1,000 codons characterized by the most
dramatic decrease in ribosome occupancy in the drug-treated cells
(green frames in Fig. 2) did not show a dramatic bias in favor of any
particular amino acid in the position (−1) of the peptide. Instead, it
revealed a strong prevalence for the presence of glycine residues in
either the P site (position 0) or the A site (position +1) of the trans-
lating ribosome. These data suggest that the peptidyl transfer reaction
involving a Gly residue either as a donor or as an acceptor is poorly
inhibited by CHL or LZD.
The occurrence of Gly codons in either the P or A sites negatively
correlated with the efficiency of drug-inflicted stalling throughout the
entire range of analyzed sites (Fig. S5A). Consistently, the presence of
glycine codons in the P or A sites correlated with the most pronounced
decrease of the cumulative ribosomal density at the corresponding
codons in antibiotic-treated cells (Fig. S5B). These findings derived
from the ribosome-profiling analysis were in keeping with the results
of the subsequent in vitro testing with the hns gene: presence of a Gly
residue in the P or the A site made the action of CHL or LZD in-
efficient (Fig. 3 D and E).
Thus, we concluded that the amino acid sequence context is
capable of either stimulating or counteracting the inhibition of
peptide bond formation by CHL and LZD.
Induction of CHL Resistance Genes Relies on the Stimulatory Effect of
the Penultimate Residue of the Nascent Chain on Drug Action. Our
newly gained understanding of the site specificity of CHL action
prompted us to reevaluate the mechanism of inducible CHL re-
sistance. We analyzed CHL-dependent programmed translation ar-
rest at the leader ORFs of two resistance genes, catA86 (originated in
Gram-positive bacteria) and cmlA (common to Gram-negative spe-
cies) (33) (Fig. 4A). Toeprinting analysis showed that, in the presence
of the antibiotic, translation driven by E. coli ribosomes stalls when
the fifth codon of catA86L or the eighth codon of the cmlAL ORF
enter the ribosomal P site (Fig. 4 B and C). The same stalling site was
observed when translation of cat86AL was catalyzed by ribosomes
isolated from Gram-positive Bacillus subtilis (Fig. S6A). These results
are in line with the conclusions of the previous genetic testing, which
suggested that the N-terminal pentapeptide MVKTD of Cat86AL or the
octapeptide MSTSKNAD of CmlAL are synthesized in the presence of
CHL (33, 34). Remarkably, translation arrest at the leader ORFs occurs
when the nascent chain carries in the penultimate positions amino acid
residues conducive to CHL action: Ala (in the case of CmlAL) or Thr
(Cat86AL) (Fig. 4 B and C). Thus, the mechanism of induction of CHL
resistance simply exploits the site specificity rules that have emerged from
the profiling and toeprinting analyses. In agreement with this assertion, in
the alanine-scanning mutagenesis experiment carried out with cat86AL
and cmlAL, we observed the appearance of new ribosome stalling sites
consistently occurring at the codon subsequent to the engineered Ala
mutation (asterisks in Fig. 4 D and E). In addition, replacement
of Thr4 of the wt Cat86AL with Ala significantly enhanced CHL-
mediated stalling at the “native site” (compare lanes MVKTDK and
MVKADK in Fig. 4D), corroborating our conclusion that an Ala
residue in the penultimate peptide position is the most stimulatory
for drug activity.
Codons 2–4 of the cmlAL ORF specify Ser and Thr, which are
expected to moderately stimulate CHL action (Fig. 3 and Fig. S4).
Curiously, however, translation of the ORF in the presence of the
antibiotic proceeds fairly efficiently until the eighth codon (large
black triangle in Fig. 4C), with only a moderate arrest at the codon
5 (small black triangle in Fig. 4C). One possible explanation is that
efficient CHL-induced stalling requires the nascent chain to reach
a certain length. Indeed, sequential 5′-terminal truncations of the
cmlAL or cat86AL ORFs diminished the efficiency of drug-induced
arrest at the native site when the nascent chain became shorter
than 4 (Cat86AL) or 5 (CmlAL) aa long (Fig. 4 F and G).
Although the regulatory ORFs of the CHL resistance genes have
been evolutionarily selected to respond specifically to the presence
of natural CHL, the similarity in the context specificity of action of
CHL and LZD suggested that the latter, a synthetic antibiotic, could
Fig. 2.
Context specificity of the action of CHL and LZD in vivo. (A and B) Ranking of genomic sites according to the relative fold difference in the ribosome
occupancy in cells treated with CHL (A) or LZD (B) vs. the untreated control. The higher relative fold difference values (left side of the spectrum, colored in red)
correspond to the sites of more pronounced inhibition of translation by the antibiotics. The low fold difference values (right side of the spectrum, shown in
green) represent the sites where antibiotics were least efficient. The magnified panels at the Bottom show the pLogo analysis of amino acid bias within the
top 1,000 (red frame) and bottom 1,000 (green frame) sites of action of CHL or LZD. The 10 C-terminal residues of the nascent chains (marked as 0 to −9 of
pept-tRNA) and the incoming amino acids (marked as +1, aa-tRNA) in these sites are indicated in the cartoons. The y axes of the pLogo panels correspond to
the odds of the binomial probability (in logarithmic scale) of occurrence of specific amino acids at the defined positions (47).
12152
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613055113
Marks et al.
 also act as an inducer. Indeed, LZD and even the newest oxazolidi-
none antibiotic, tedizolid, were able to stimulate ribosome stalling at
the fifth codon of cat86AL or the eighth codon of cmlAL, although
less efficiently than CHL (Fig. S6). Thus, synthetic oxazolidinones
likely would be able to induce the natural CHL resistance genes.
Discussion
We have presented evidence that antibiotics CHL and LZD, belonging
to two different classes of ribosomal PTC inhibitors, do not actively block
formation of every peptide bond, but instead interfere with translation in
a context-specific manner. The nature of the two C-terminal nascent
peptide residues as well as of the A-site acceptor strongly influence the
ability of these drugs to inhibit peptidyl transfer. The presence of Ala,
and to a lesser extent of Ser and Thr, in the penultimate position of the
peptide stimulates the action of the drugs. In contrast, Gly in the P or A
sites of the PTC strongly counteracts the antibiotics’ inhibitory effect.
Our findings reveal the most extreme manifestation of the de-
pendency of CHL or LZD action on the nature of the PTC donor
and acceptor substrates. It is very likely that the action of these
antibiotics is affected by a more extended context. Thus, despite a
strong preference for the presence of Ala at position (−1) in the
sites of the strongest arrest, this amino acid can be found in the
penultimate peptide position throughout the entire spectrum of
∼60,000 codons that were analyzed in the CHL and LZD samples
(Fig. S5A). Of note, the positive effect of Ala (−1) on CHL-
dependent stalling at the fifth codon of the hns gene seems to be
alleviated by the Leu5 to Ala mutation (Fig. 3D), an effect that was
not observed at other examined sites. Therefore, the context in
which Ala (−1) appears affects the strength of the drug-dependent
translation arrest. For example, the stimulatory effect of Ala (−1)
upon CHL or LZD action can be completely negated when Gly is
present at the peptide’s C terminus (Fig. S7A), whereas C-terminal
Asp seems to additionally boost the effect of penultimate Ala, Ser,
or Thr on CHL-dependent translation arrest (Fig. S7E). A more
comprehensive analysis of the cumulative changes in codon-specific
ribosome occupancy showed that both the stimulatory effect of Ala
(−1) and the counteracting influence of Gly (0) and Gly (+1) may be
modulated by the identity of the other amino acid residues in these
three positions (Fig. S7 A–D).
Because CHL has been traditionally viewed as a universal in-
hibitor of peptide bond formation, it has been used to “freeze” the
ribosomes on mRNA in some profiling experiments (30, 35), an
approach challenged by several studies where trends similar to the
ones we presented here were noted (29, 31, 36, 37). We show that
exposure of the cells to high concentrations of CHL (or LZD) does
not in fact freeze the ribosomes on mRNA, but allows them to re-
distribute from the sites less favorable for the drug-dependent arrest to
the downstream strong-arrest codons. This effect, for example, can be
readily observed near the sites of translation initiation. A peak of ri-
bosome density is prominent at the start codons of many genes in the
untreated cells (30) and can be visualized by the metagene analysis
(Fig. S8, gray plot). In the CHL- or LZD-treated cells, the relative
overall start codon occupancy is dramatically decreased, indicative of
poor ability of LZD or CHL to inhibit the first peptide bond forma-
tion and the resulting redistribution of the ribosomes from the trans-
lation initiation site to the downstream codons (Fig. S8, blue and
orange plots). This observation is in line with the results of toeprinting
experiments where both antibiotics failed to arrest translation at the
start codon (Fig. 3 and Fig. S1). Altogether, our results strongly argue
against the use of CHL in the ribosome-profiling experiments if pre-
cise position of the ribosomes on mRNA is being analyzed.
Our finding that CHL and LZD act at the defined locations
within the gene extends the concept of context-specific action of
ribosome-targeting inhibitors (32). Macrolides, which bind to the
nascent peptide exit tunnel, arrest translation at a limited number
of codons within the ORF also depending on the nature of the
nascent peptide and of the incoming amino acid (27, 28, 32, 38).
The context requirements for macrolides, however, are principally
different from those for the PTC-targeting antibiotics. The loca-
tions where LZD or CHL would arrest translation are defined
Fig. 3.
Amino acid residues of the PTC donor and acceptor substrates in-
fluence antibiotic action. (A) Changes in the ribosome occupancy of the first
codons of the hns gene in cells treated with CHL or LZD compared with that
in the untreated cell culture. (B) In vitro toeprinting analysis of CHL- or LZD-
induced ribosome stalling close to the 5′-end of the hns gene. The control
antibiotic thiostrepton (Ths) was used to arrest translation at the start codon
(black circle). The prominent CHL- and LZD-induced arrest site at the Leu5
codon of the gene is indicated by a black arrowhead. Due to the presence of
the Ile-tRNA synthetase inhibitor mupirocin in all of the samples, the ribo-
somes that were not arrested by CHL or LZD at the hns Leu5 codon, were
“caught” at the following Lys6 codon (open arrowhead). A- and G-specific
sequencing lanes are indicated. The sequence of the first nine codons of the
hns gene and the encoded amino acids are indicated on the side of the gel.
(C–E) The effect of mutagenizing (C) the Ala4 (position −1), (D) Leu5 (po-
sition 0), or (E) Lys6 (position +1) codons of hns on CHL- or LZD-induced
translation arrest. The cartoons showing the PTC region of the CHL- or LZD-
stalled ribosomal complexes highlight the mutagenized amino acid residue
(filled spheres) in each set. The efficiency of antibiotic-mediated arrest
(“relative arrest”) was calculated by comparing the fraction of arrested ri-
bosomes at codon 5 (estimated from the intensity of the CHL- or LZD-specific
toeprint bands) with the fraction of ribosomes trapped at codon 6 (calcu-
lated from the intensity of the mupirocin-specific toeprint bands) during the
translation of the WT or mutant hns templates (see B for reference). For the
templates where the specified codon was replaced with an Ile codon, the Ile7
codon was mutated to Thr and borrelidin (and inhibitor of Thr-RS) was used
instead of mupirocin. The bars representing H-NS mutants with Ala, Ser, or
Thr in the penultimate peptide position are highlighted in red; those cor-
responding to the mutants with Gly in the P or A sites are highlighted in
green. The error bars show deviation from the mean in two independent
experiments.
Marks et al.
PNAS
|
October 25, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 43
|
12153
BIOCHEMISTRY
 primarily by individual amino acids, but the sites of macrolide ac-
tion are delineated by short amino acid sequences (27, 28). As a
result, PTC inhibitors halt translation at multiple locations along
the gene, whereas macrolides arrest ribosome only at a limited num-
ber of codons within the ORF, and synthesis of the proteins lacking
the “problematic” sequences may not be inhibited at all (32, 39). For
this reason, cells treated with excess of macrolide antibiotics continue
to synthesize a limited subset of polypeptides (32), whereas protein
translation in cells exposed to CHL or LZD is essentially abolished
(Fig. S2). Nevertheless, our data suggest that CHL and LZD should
be viewed as “poor” inhibitors of peptide bond formation even within
the preferred context. At high drugs concentration, translation is only
transiently paused at specific codons,, leading to the appearance of a
number of “arrest bands” in toeprinting gels, rather than at a unique
stalling site (Fig. S1A and Fig. 3B).
Similar to the inducible macrolide resistance genes, induction of
CHL resistance requires programmed ribosome stalling within the
leader ORFs (40). Our findings revealed the principles of antibiotic-
induced site-specific arrest of translation of the regulatory ORFs of
two model CHL resistance genes. Translation of the cmlAL ORF is
stalled by CHL after Ala, the amino acid most conducive to antibiotic
action, appears in the penultimate position of the nascent peptide
(Fig. 4C). Furthermore, synthesis of the CmlAL peptide is halted
within the sequence ADK, one of the best motifs for CHL-dependent
arrest (Fig. S7E). Arrest of translation of the Cat86AL leader peptide
occurs within a similar context, except that Ala is replaced with Thr,
another amino acid conducive to CHL action (Fig. 4C and Fig. S7E).
Thus, programmed ribosome stalling responsible for induction of
CHL resistance simply exploits the sequence context most favorable
for the action of this antibiotic. Although the cmlA and catA86 re-
sistance genes come from evolutionarily distant bacterial species, the
sites of CHL-induced ribosome stalling within the leader ORFs of
these genes conform to the contexts that we identified when ex-
ploring the CHL and LZD action in E. coli. Therefore, we believe
that the uncovered trends in the specificity of LZD and CHL action
are universal, rather than strain or species specific.
We still lack the understanding of the mechanistic principles of
context specificity of CHL and LZD action. Crystallographic re-
constructions have uncovered how these drugs bind to the PTC of
the vacant bacterial ribosome (10–12, 19, 20). However, the gained
structural and functional implications are likely incomplete or possibly
even misleading because our data clearly show that the key aspects of
the drug binding and action must critically depend on the properties of
the peptidyl nascent chain and the aminoacyl-acceptor. The effects
of the PTC substrates could be direct, involving immediate interac-
tions between the key amino acid residues and the drug, or indirect,
when the properties of the drug-binding pocket are allosterically af-
fected by the ribosomal ligands.
The context-specific action of the PTC inhibitors reflects the
functional interplay between the nascent chain and the PTC, which has
been demonstrated in a range of ribosomal functions: from programmed
translation arrest, to termination and recoding (reviewed in ref. 41). Our
previous studies (32) and the findings presented here strongly suggest
that many antibiotics that directly or indirectly influence peptide bond
formation, translocation of the substrates through the PTC, or egress of
the nascent protein chain will be influenced by the sequence context.
Improving our understanding of these principles will pave the way for
the knowledge-based discovery of better protein synthesis inhibitors.
Materials and Methods
Ribosome Profiling. Ribosome profiling was carried out using the antibiotic
hypersusceptible E. coli strain BWDK, a derivative of the strain BW25113
with inactivated tolC gene [F−, DE(araD-araB)567, lacZ4787(del)::rrnB-3, λ−,
rph-1, DE(rhaD-rhaB)568, hsdR514, tolC] (32). The overnight culture grown
in LB medium was diluted 100-fold into three conical baffled 1-L flasks with
100 mL of LB supplemented with 0.2% glucose and grown with vigorous
shaking at 37 °C. When the culture density reached OD600 of ∼0.5, CHL or
LZD were added to a final concentration of 100 or 800 μg/mL (100-fold
minimum inhibitory concentration) and incubation continued for 2.5 min.
The control culture did not receive a drug treatment. Cells were harvested by
Fig. 4.
CHL-induced arrest at the leader ORFs of inducible resistance genes.
(A) The general organization of inducible CHL resistance genes. In the absence of
antibiotic, the leader ORF is constitutively translated, but the expression of the
resistance cistron is attenuated because its ribosome-binding site (RBS) is seques-
tered in the mRNA secondary structure. In the presence of CHL, translation of the
leader ORF is arrested at a specific internal codon. Ribosome stalling mediates
rearrangement of the mRNA structure resulting in activation of expression of the
resistance gene. (B and C) CHL-induced translation arrest at the fifth codon of the
cat86A leader ORF (B) or the eighth codon of the cmlA leader ORF (C). The control
antibiotic thiostrepton (Ths) stalls translation at the start codon (black circle). A
black triangle indicates the toeprint band representing CHL-induced programmed
translation arrest. The gray triangle points to the band produced by ribosomes
stalled before the “hungry” Ile codon [because of the presence in the reaction of
mupirocin (Mpn), an Ile-tRNA synthetase inhibitor]. The band produced by ribo-
somes paused during termination of the cmlAL translation is marked with an
open circle. (D and E) Alanine-scanning mutagenesis of the cat86AL (D) or cmlAL
(E) alters the location of CHL-mediated translation arrest. As in B and C, the
translation initiation site is marked by a circle, the site of the programmed CHL-
induced arrest is shown by a black triangle, and the “Mpn band” is indicated by a
gray triangle. The new sites of arrest, which appear due to the presence of new
Ala residues in the mutant ORFs, are marked by the asterisks on the gel and are
indicated by the open triangles. (F and G) N-terminal truncations of the cat86AL
(F) or cmlAL (G) and their impact on the efficiency of CHL-induced translation
arrest. The start codon, CHL band, and mupirocin band are indicated by a circle,
black triangle, and gray triangle, respectively.
12154
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1613055113
Marks et al.
 rapid filtration, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and processed for ribosome pro-
filing as described (30). The library for Illumina sequencing was prepared
using RNA fragments ranging in size between 28 and 42 nt. Analysis of ri-
bosome profiling was carried out using the GALAXY pipeline (28, 42). The
first position of the P-site codon was assigned at 15 nt away from the 3′-end
of the read (37). Details of analysis of the ribosome-profiling data are pre-
sented in SI Materials and Methods.
Generation of Templates for in Vitro Translation and Toeprinting Analysis.
Preparation of DNA templates for toeprinting is described in SI Materials
and Methods, and the primers used are listed in Table S1. Toeprinting re-
actions were carried out in 5 μL of PURExpress transcription–translation
system (New England Biolabs) as previously described (43, 44). The final
concentrations of LZD, CHL, mupirocin, borrelidin, or thiostrepton in the
reactions were 50 μM, unless otherwise indicated. Gels were quantified
using ImageJ (45), and relative stalling efficiency was calculated using the
following equation:
Relative stalling efficiency =
Ab − Bd
ðAb − BdÞ + ðCc − BdÞ,
where Ab is the intensity of the band representing CHL- or LZD-dependent
stalling, Cc is the intensity of the band representing ribosome stalling at the
downstream “catch” codon, and Bd is the background.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Joseph Dang for carrying out early exper-
iments, Jiyoung Lee for the invaluable assistance with bioinformatics analysis,
Yury Polikanov for fruitful discussions and help with preparation of Fig. 1, and
Alejandro Mankin for proofreading the manuscript. This work was supported
by National Institutes of Health Grant AI125518.
1. Beringer M, Rodnina MV (2007) The ribosomal peptidyl transferase. Mol Cell 26(3):
311–321.
2. Weinger JS, Parnell KM, Dorner S, Green R, Strobel SA (2004) Substrate-assisted ca-
talysis of peptide bond formation by the ribosome. Nat Struct Mol Biol 11(11):
1101–1106.
3. Erlacher MD, et al. (2005) Chemical engineering of the peptidyl transferase center
reveals an important role of the 2′-hydroxyl group of A2451. Nucleic Acids Res 33(5):
1618–1627.
4. Polikanov YS, Steitz TA, Innis CA (2014) A proton wire to couple aminoacyl-tRNA
accommodation and peptide-bond formation on the ribosome. Nat Struct Mol Biol
21(9):787–793.
5. Polacek N, Gaynor M, Yassin A, Mankin AS (2001) Ribosomal peptidyl transferase can
withstand mutations at the putative catalytic nucleotide. Nature 411(6836):498–501.
6. Youngman EM, Brunelle JL, Kochaniak AB, Green R (2004) The active site of the ri-
bosome is composed of two layers of conserved nucleotides with distinct roles in
peptide bond formation and peptide release. Cell 117(5):589–599.
7. Sievers A, Beringer M, Rodnina MV, Wolfenden R (2004) The ribosome as an entropy
trap. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 101(21):7897–7901.
8. Wilson DN (2009) The A-Z of bacterial translation inhibitors. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol
44(6):393–433.
9. Pestka S (1975) Chloramphenicol. Antibiotics: Mechanism of Action of Antimicrobial
and Antitumor Agents, eds Corcoran JW, Hahn FE (Springer, Berlin), Vol III, pp
370–395.
10. Dunkle JA, Xiong L, Mankin AS, Cate JH (2010) Structures of the Escherichia coli ri-
bosome with antibiotics bound near the peptidyl transferase center explain spectra of
drug action. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(40):17152–17157.
11. Bulkley D, Innis CA, Blaha G, Steitz TA (2010) Revisiting the structures of several
antibiotics bound to the bacterial ribosome. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107(40):
17158–17163.
12. Schlünzen F, et al. (2001) Structural basis for the interaction of antibiotics with the
peptidyl transferase centre in eubacteria. Nature 413(6858):814–821.
13. Wilson DN (2011) On the specificity of antibiotics targeting the large ribosomal
subunit. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1241:1–16.
14. Kucan Z, Lipmann F (1964) Differences in chloramphenicol sensitivity of cell-free
amino acid polymerization systems. J Biol Chem 239(2):516–520.
15. Vazquez D (1966) Antibiotics affecting chloramphenicol uptake by bacteria. Their
effect on amino acid incorporation in a cell-free system. Biochim Biophys Acta 114(2):
289–295.
16. Cannon M (1968) The puromycin reaction and its inhibition by chloramphenicol. Eur J
Biochem 7(1):137–145.
17. Lovett PS (1990) Translational attenuation as the regulator of inducible cat genes.
J Bacteriol 172(1):1–6.
18. Kloss P, Xiong L, Shinabarger DL, Mankin AS (1999) Resistance mutations in 23 S rRNA
identify the site of action of the protein synthesis inhibitor linezolid in the ribosomal
peptidyl transferase center. J Mol Biol 294(1):93–101.
19. Leach KL, et al. (2007) The site of action of oxazolidinone antibiotics in living bacteria
and in human mitochondria. Mol Cell 26(3):393–402.
20. Wilson DN, et al. (2008) The oxazolidinone antibiotics perturb the ribosomal peptidyl-
transferase center and effect tRNA positioning. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105(36):
13339–13344.
21. Ippolito JA, et al. (2008) Crystal structure of the oxazolidinone antibiotic linezolid
bound to the 50S ribosomal subunit. J Med Chem 51(12):3353–3356.
22. Shinabarger DL, et al. (1997) Mechanism of action of oxazolidinones: Effects of
linezolid and eperezolid on translation reactions. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
41(10):2132–2136.
23. Lin AH, Murray RW, Vidmar TJ, Marotti KR (1997) The oxazolidinone eperezolid binds
to the 50S ribosomal subunit and competes with binding of chloramphenicol and
lincomycin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 41(10):2127–2131.
24. Hartz D, McPheeters DS, Traut R, Gold L (1988) Extension inhibition analysis of
translation initiation complexes. Methods Enzymol 164:419–425.
25. Orelle C, et al. (2013) Tools for characterizing bacterial protein synthesis inhibitors.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 57(12):5994–6004.
26. Ingolia NT, Ghaemmaghami S, Newman JR, Weissman JS (2009) Genome-wide anal-
ysis in vivo of translation with nucleotide resolution using ribosome profiling. Science
324(5924):218–223.
27. Davis AR, Gohara DW, Yap MN (2014) Sequence selectivity of macrolide-induced
translational attenuation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(43):15379–15384.
28. Kannan K, et al. (2014) The general mode of translation inhibition by macrolide
antibiotics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111(45):15958–15963.
29. Nakahigashi K, et al. (2016) Comprehensive identification of translation start sites by
tetracycline-inhibited ribosome profiling. DNA Res 23(3):193–201.
30. Oh E, et al. (2011) Selective ribosome profiling reveals the cotranslational chaperone
action of trigger factor in vivo. Cell 147(6):1295–1308.
31. Becker AH, Oh E, Weissman JS, Kramer G, Bukau B (2013) Selective ribosome profiling
as a tool for studying the interaction of chaperones and targeting factors with na-
scent polypeptide chains and ribosomes. Nat Protoc 8(11):2212–2239.
32. Kannan K, Vázquez-Laslop N, Mankin AS (2012) Selective protein synthesis by ribo-
somes with a drug-obstructed exit tunnel. Cell 151(3):508–520.
33. Lovett PS (1996) Translation attenuation regulation of chloramphenicol resistance in
bacteria—a review. Gene 179(1):157–162.
34. Alexieva Z, Duvall EJ, Ambulos NP, Jr, Kim UJ, Lovett PS (1988) Chloramphenicol in-
duction of cat-86 requires ribosome stalling at a specific site in the leader. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 85(9):3057–3061.
35. Li GW, Oh E, Weissman JS (2012) The anti-Shine-Dalgarno sequence drives trans-
lational pausing and codon choice in bacteria. Nature 484(7395):538–541.
36. Nakahigashi K, et al. (2014) Effect of codon adaptation on codon-level and gene-level
translation efficiency in vivo. BMC Genomics 15:1115.
37. Mohammad F, Woolstenhulme CJ, Green R, Buskirk AR (2016) Clarifying the trans-
lational pausing landscape in bacteria by ribosome profiling. Cell Rep 14(4):686–694.
38. Sothiselvam S, et al. (2016) Binding of macrolide antibiotics leads to ribosomal se-
lection against specific substrates based on their charge and size. Cell Rep 16(7):
1789–1799.
39. Starosta AL, et al. (2010) Interplay between the ribosomal tunnel, nascent chain, and
macrolides influences drug inhibition. Chem Biol 17(5):504–514.
40. Lovett PS (1994) Nascent peptide regulation of translation. J Bacteriol 176(21):
6415–6417.
41. Ito K, Chiba S (2013) Arrest peptides: Cis-acting modulators of translation. Annu Rev
Biochem 82:171–202.
42. Afgan E, et al. (2016) The Galaxy platform for accessible, reproducible and collabo-
rative biomedical analyses: 2016 update. Nucleic Acids Res 44(W1):W3–W10.
43. Vazquez-Laslop N, Thum C, Mankin AS (2008) Molecular mechanism of drug-
dependent ribosome stalling. Mol Cell 30(2):190–202.
44. Orelle C, et al. (2013) Identifying the targets of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase inhibitors
by primer extension inhibition. Nucleic Acids Res 41(14):e144.
45. Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW (2012) NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image
analysis. Nat Methods 9(7):671–675.
46. Arenz S, et al. (2014) Molecular basis for erythromycin-dependent ribosome stalling
during translation of the ErmBL leader peptide. Nat Commun 5:3501.
47. O’Shea JP, et al. (2013) pLogo: A probabilistic approach to visualizing sequence
motifs. Nat Methods 10(12):1211–1212.
Marks et al.
PNAS
|
October 25, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 43
|
12155
BIOCHEMISTRY
