 Review Article
Complications in obstetric anaesthesia
L. Maronge1 and D. Bogod2
1 Specialist Registrar, Anaesthesia
2 Consultant Anaesthetist, Nottingham University Hospitals Trust, Nottingham, UK
Summary
‘Obstetric anaesthesia is a litigious area of medical practice – patient expectations are high, and many of the inter-
ventions undertaken by anaesthetists are performed urgently or emergently, frequently out of hours. The complica-
tions that occur during obstetric practice are not unique to this area of anaesthesia, but some of the physiological
and anatomical changes that take place during pregnancy can affect the frequency with which these happen. In this
narrative review, we hope to cover a few of the more common complications in obstetric anaesthesia, as well as
some of the more severe, yet less frequently occurring problems.
.................................................................................................................................................................
Correspondence to: L. Maronge
Email: lizziemaronge@yahoo.co.uk
Accepted: 1 September 2017
Keywords: caesarean section; complications; epidural anaesthesia; gastric function; pregnancy; spinal anaesthesia
Post-dural puncture headache
Headaches affect up to 40% of women in the postnatal
period [1]. These headaches can be due to a variety of
causes, including the following conditions: post-dural
puncture headache; pre-eclampsia; migraines; subdural
haematoma; meningitis; cerebral venous sinus thrombo-
sis; and subarachnoid haemorrhage [2]. Accidental dural
puncture occurs in around 1:100 epidurals sited during
labour, the majority of whom will go on to develop
post-dural puncture headache (PDPH) [3]. The inci-
dence following spinal anaesthesia depends on the size
and design of the needle tip, but with modern fine nee-
dles, it is around 1:500 in the obstetric population [4].
Post-dural puncture headache is identified by its
postural nature, which can be severe enough to render
the patient bedridden. The cause of the headache is
thought to be due to loss in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
volume, resulting in cerebral hypotension, adenosine
activation and subsequent dilatation of cerebral vessels
to increase cerebral blood flow, thus resulting in a
headache [5, 6]. The leak of CSF is greater when the
patient is standing or sitting, and as such, the symp-
toms may be relieved by lying down. These headaches
normally develop within the first 72 h, but can be
delayed for up to 14 days after the dural breach, or
may rarely occur immediately. A patient with PDPH
may also complain of neck stiffness, photophobia,
hearing loss and tinnitus. Loss of CSF volume can
cause downward traction on the cranial nerves, and
this can result in a sixth nerve palsy. Post-dural punc-
ture headaches can be classified as mild, moderate and
severe. Treatment depends on which category the
patient falls into.
1
Mild PDPH: no restriction on daily activities; no
associated symptoms and responds well to non-
opioid analgesia.
2
Moderate PDPH: bedridden for most of the day;
may have associated symptoms, requires opiate
analgesia.
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
61
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 61–66
doi:10.1111/anae.14141
 3
Severe
PDPH:
completely
bedridden;
associated
symptoms present and no response to conservative
management.
Unintentional dural puncture may be witnessed at
the time of insertion of an epidural. If this occurs, the
majority of centres recommend immediately inserting
a spinal catheter using the same Touhy needle. This is
left in situ, clearly labelled as an intrathecal catheter,
for 24 h. This technique has been shown to reduce the
incidence of PDPH from 66% to 51% and reduce the
need for epidural blood patch from 59% to 33% [4]. It
is probable that the intrathecal catheter plugs the hole,
thereby reducing CSF leak, and that the presence of a
foreign body induces an inflammatory response which
aids healing of the dural puncture.
Management of PDPH can be divided into conser-
vative treatment, pharmacological management and an
epidural
blood
patch.
Conservative
management
involves hydration, bed rest and simple analgesics to
allow the dural puncture to heal. Pharmacological
methods used to control post-dural puncture symp-
toms have been shown to have limited efficacy in
treatment of PDPH. Therapies include caffeine, 5-HT3
agonists, adrenocorticotrophin hormone and epidural
saline, but, currently, there is no evidence for their
use.
An epidural blood patch is the gold standard for
treatment of severe PDPH. An epidural blood patch is
thought to seal the dural puncture site, preventing fur-
ther CSF leakage, which allows intracranial pressure to
rise, thus alleviating symptoms. The success rate of
epidural blood patching after 24 h is between 70% and
90% [7]. Prophylactic patching in advance of a PDPH
developing has not been shown to be beneficial [8].
Epidural blood patching is performed using full aseptic
technique. An epidural puncture should be performed
at or one space below the original site, and then 10–
30 ml of the patient’s own blood should be injected
into the epidural space. Injection should stop if radicu-
lar pain occurs. Epidural blood patches have risks
including: failure; backache; repeat dural tap; nerve
damage; meningitis; abscess; and cranial nerve palsies.
There are contra-indications to blood patches, which
include: systemic fever and infection; local infection at
the injection site; coagulopathy; and patient refusal.
Nerve injury
Nerve injuries are common in pregnant women – up
to 1:100 women report some form of neurological
injury in the postpartum period, the majority of which
are due to pregnancy and labour rather than any
anaesthetic
cause
[9].
However,
central
neuraxial
blockade used either as analgesia during labour or as
an anaesthetic to facilitate delivery carries a risk of
causing nerve injury. These are most commonly tran-
sient, but the 3rd National Audit Project, a large
multi-centre study into complications as a result of
anaesthesia, quotes the risk of a permanent injury
from an obstetric regional anaesthetic technique as
0.2-1.2:100,000 [10].
Nerve injuries due to regional anaesthetic tech-
niques can be the result of any of three issues: direct
trauma to the nerve; chemical injury; or a compressive
injury.
Direct trauma to the nerve occurs at the time of
insertion of the central neuraxial block, either due to
needles, catheters or the fluid injected. This direct
trauma causes a transient
neuritis,
which
usually
resolves within three months to one year. These inju-
ries may present with paraesthesia, loss of sensation
and weakness in muscles in the distribution of the
affected nerve [11].
Compressive injuries that cause damage to the
spinal cord and subsequent ischaemia are rare, but can
be caused by spinal haematomas or epidural abscesses.
The greatest risk factor for developing a haematoma is
the presence of coagulopathy, either due to pathologi-
cal processes or induced by medications such as low-
molecular-weight heparins [12]. The use of such medi-
cations in modern obstetric practice is increasing, and
anaesthetists must therefore be vigilant to ensure an
adequate time interval between anticoagulant dose and
undertaking regional anaesthetic techniques. Similar
caution must also be paid to the timing of epidural
catheter removal, as 50% of haematomas develop at
this time [13]. Compressive injuries can be reversible,
if identified early and treated by surgical decompres-
sion, but if diagnosis and subsequent management
occurs late, there can be severe and irreversible nerve
damage and this can lead to paralysis below the lesion.
Any non-resolving motor block following an epidural
or progressive block should initially be managed as a
62
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 61–66
Maronge and Bogod | Complications in obstetric anaesthesia
 compressive injury, and an urgent MRI scan arranged
to confirm or exclude the diagnosis.
Chemical injuries such as adhesive arachnoiditis
and septic meningitis are very rare, but highlight the
need for fastidious attention to sterility and drug use.
Arachnoiditis causes collagen to develop between the
nerve roots and the pia-arachnoid, eventually resulting
in ischaemia and atrophy [14]. A variety of chemicals
have been implicated in causing adhesive arachnoiditis
– the most recent accounts implicate chlorhexidine,
once again showing the need for attention to detail
during these techniques [15].
Nerve injury in obstetric patients is associated with
a high rate of litigation, as these women often had no
neurological deficit before becoming pregnant. It is
important for anaesthetists to explain risks in terms
that the women can understand and to clearly docu-
ment any neurological symptoms present during the
pregnancy, before initiating any form of epidural for
spinal anaesthesia.
Inadequate block for caesarean section
Over 90% of caesarean sections are now carried out
under regional anaesthesia, undoubtedly contributing
to the dramatic improvement in anaesthetic-related
maternal mortality over the last 30 years [16]. How-
ever, pain during caesarean section is now the most
common successful negligence claim against anaes-
thetists [17]. It is recognised that some patients will
feel pain during a caesarean section due to the need to
block high thoracic dermatomes. Consequently, the
Royal College of Anaesthetists has set an audit stan-
dard that fewer than 1% of patients undergoing an
elective section should feel pain and fewer than 1%
should require conversion to general anaesthesia. Due
to the time constraints of a category-one caesarean sec-
tion, the audit standards in this group are less strin-
gent, with a standard that fewer than 20% of patients
should feel pain, and fewer than 15% require conver-
sion to general anaesthesia [18].
The need for supplemental intra-operative analge-
sia varies depending on the type of regional blockade
performed. After a ‘single-shot’ spinal anaesthetic, the
Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association (OAA) suggest a
figure of 1:20, whereas for an epidural top-up, it is 1:7
patients. A more significant risk of an inadequate
block is the need to convert from a regional anaes-
thetic to general anaesthesia. This occurs 1:50 times
for spinals and 1:20 for epidurals. However, 1:10
epidurals sited in labour will not be working ade-
quately to provide successful anaesthesia for caesarean
section. In these cases, an alternative anaesthetic tech-
nique should be used before surgery. Spinal anaesthe-
sia is most commonly used.
The assessment of block height and quality pre-
operatively is very subjective, and techniques can vary.
Surveys of anaesthetists have shown a variation in
modality of assessment and the height of the block
aimed for [19] – the loss of cold or light touch sensation
is most commonly used. The most frequently quoted
block height that anaesthetists aim for before caesarean
section is bilateral loss of cold sensation below T4, and/
or bilateral block to light touch to T5 [20]. If this is not
initially achieved, then more time may be needed for the
block to spread. Positioning may allow the local anaes-
thetic to spread more cranially, so many anaesthetists
will tilt the bed head down slightly. If this does not work
or time does not allow, then alternative measures should
be taken, potentially a general anaesthetic or a second
regional technique.
Communication is key during obstetric procedures
carried out under regional anaesthesia. The anaesthetic
provided will not take away all sensation, and there
are times during a caesarean where the sensations
experienced may be uncomfortable. Often these points
are predictable, such as the pull before uterine incision,
the high abdominal push to deliver the baby and
swabbing the peritoneal gutters before closing the
abdomen. The anaesthetist should make the mother
aware when these events are about to happen. How-
ever, if the mother feels genuine pain or is too uncom-
fortable to continue, then alternative analgesia should
be offered, including nitrous oxide or a short-acting
intravenous opioid such as alfentanil. If an opioid is
administered pre-delivery, the neonatal team must be
informed, as these drugs can cross the placenta and
cause respiratory depression in the newborn.
Above all, it is important to believe women when
they complain of pain during surgery. Supplements
including general anaesthesia should be offered early,
and the offer should be repeated if initially turned
down. In particular, general anaesthesia should not be
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
63
Maronge and Bogod | Complications in obstetric anaesthesia
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 61–66
 denied for fear of sedating the neonate, no matter how
close to delivery.
Accidental awareness under general
anaesthesia
Accidental awareness under general anaesthesia occurs
when a patient experiences a period of recalled con-
sciousness at a time when they think they should be
under the influence of general anaesthesia; it is nearly
always associated with the use of neuromuscular block-
ers, preventing the patient from alerting those caring
for them. The overall awareness rate for all types of
surgery is 1:19,000 [21].
Awareness is more common in patients having
obstetric procedures under a general anaesthetic. The
5th National Audit Project (NAP5) carried out by the
Royal
College
of
Anaesthetists
over
a
period
of
one year found that the incidence of awareness in
obstetric patients for all procedures was 1:1200, but for
caesarean sections, it was 1:670 [21].
There are multiple factors that are considered to
increase the risk of accidental awareness in this patient
population. The physiological changes of pregnancy
can mask signs of inadequate depth of anaesthesia.
The increase in cardiac output associated with preg-
nancy means that intravenous induction agents have a
shorter onset and offset time, but that volatile agents
take longer to exert their effects. This means that the
gap between offset of the intravenous induction agent
and adequate depth of pure volatile anaesthesia, partic-
ularly if there has been a delay in tracheal intubation,
is a potential time for awareness. Woman having
obstetric procedures are likely to be very anxious but,
because of concerns for the baby, receive no premedi-
cation, opioid analgesia or sedative agents before
induction. Category-one caesarean sections require sur-
gery to begin as soon after tracheal intubation as is
safe for the mother – this may mean that there might
not be enough time to build a sufficiently high effect-
site volatile agent concentration to ensure uncon-
sciousness. Obesity is a risk factor for awareness, and
the obstetric population includes significant numbers
of obese patients [22]. A single ampoule of suxametho-
nium is frequently used to provide neuromuscular
blockade during rapid sequence induction but, because
of patient size and the increased volume of distribution
in pregnancy, this may often be inadequate, making
tracheal intubation more difficult and time-consuming;
this further increases the risk of awareness [23].
The majority of general anaesthetics in the preg-
nant population take place out of hours as an emer-
gency, and the anaesthetist is likely to be junior. The
stressful nature of the situation may affect performance
and be a further factor in the incidence of awareness
[24].
Accidental awareness under a general anaesthetic
has greater and longer lasting implications for patients
than previously thought. The 5th National Audit Pro-
ject found that, in obstetric patients who had been
subject to accidental awareness, at least 21% reported
new psychological morbidity – most commonly a new
anxiety state or nightmares [21].
Failed tracheal intubation
Many trainee anaesthetists would admit that one of
their biggest fears is failed tracheal intubation in an
obstetric patient. This is probably because the risks of
a failed intubation rate in an obstetric patient is con-
siderably higher than that of the general population,
1:300 vs. 1:1000–2000 [25]. The time pressures of
obstetric procedures requiring general anaesthesia add
to the stress levels, as does the fact that over recent
years the use of general anaesthesia in obstetrics has
become less and less common; as a result, junior
anaesthetists may never have seen one before they
have to carry out their first solo obstetric general
anaesthetic.
The failed tracheal intubation rate may be higher
in pregnant women for a number of reasons. In addi-
tion to the stress relating to the time-critical nature of
the procedure, which may degrade performance [23],
anatomical changes occur which can make tracheal
intubation more challenging. The larynx can become
oedematous, particularly in pre-eclampsia, and this can
make it difficult to gain a view of the vocal cords or to
pass a tracheal tube. Breast size increases during preg-
nancy, and this, when combined with cricoid pressure,
can obstruct the laryngoscope handle during insertion
into the mouth. Some anaesthetists choose to use a
stubby handled laryngoscope or a polio blade for this
reason. Physiological changes also increase the risks
associated
with
failed
intubation.
In
pregnancy,
64
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 61–66
Maronge and Bogod | Complications in obstetric anaesthesia
 functional residual capacity is reduced and cardiac out-
put is increased, and this means that these women
desaturate more quickly than non-pregnant patients
[26]. The gravid uterus can press on the inferior vena
cava, reducing venous return and dropping cardiac
output when the mother lies supine. To prevent this,
obstetric patients are anaesthetised with a left lateral
tilt on the bed. This can alter the view at laryngoscopy
but can also mean that cricoid pressure, if applied in a
direction that does not take account of the tilt, can
make intubation almost impossible.
The incidence of obesity in pregnancy is increas-
ing. Obesity carries its own risks of difficult intubation,
which are in addition to the ones relating to pregnancy
[22]. These patients should be carefully positioned pre-
operatively to maximise the chances of successful tra-
cheal intubation. There are specific positioning devices
such as the Oxford Help Pillow to aid this [25].
In 2015, the Difficult Airway Society released new
guidelines for failed tracheal intubation including, for
the first time, guidance relating to the obstetric patient.
These focus on careful pre-induction planning, includ-
ing the role of waking the patient up if intubation fails.
The use of modern airway adjuncts, including video-
laryngoscopes and second-generation supraglottic air-
way devices, is also explored in these guidelines [26].
Aspiration
Aspiration of gastric contents by obstetric patients has
been a recognised risk for many years. It was first
described by Mendelson in 1946, when he reported on
women having an operative delivery in New York with
an anaesthetic of nitrous oxide and ether. These
women did not have their tracheas intubated and
0.15% aspirated. Mendelson went on to describe the
complications that these women suffered, including
two who died from airway obstruction due to solid
material. The women who aspirated fluid developed a
triad of symptoms, dyspnoea, cyanosis and tachycar-
dia, now known as Mendelson’s syndrome [27]. Preg-
nant women are at increased risk of aspiration, due to
both hormonal and physical changes that occur during
pregnancy and labour. These include: increased intra-
gastric pressure due to the gravid uterus; a reduction
in the lower oesophageal sphincter tone as an effect of
increased
progesterone
levels;
and
delayed
gastric
emptying during labour. The delay in gastric emptying
may also be exacerbated by the use of opioid analgesia
during labour.
Animal studies have shown that aspiration of as
little as 25 ml of acid with a pH of 2.5 can cause sev-
ere pulmonary complications. Human gastric pH is
often as low as pH 2, and in studies, up to 50% of
fasted patients have a residual gastric volume of
25 ml. This suggests that unfasted obstetric patients
will have a lower pH and greater volume, putting
them at high risk of severe complications if aspiration
does occur. Consideration must be given to preven-
tion of aspiration, but also to altering the pH of gas-
tric
fluid,
so
that
if
aspiration
does
occur
the
subsequent complications will not be as severe. Rapid
sequence induction of anaesthesia aims to reduce the
risk of aspiration, and although it is a practice that is
often debated, it is still recommended by the Difficult
Airway Society for all obstetric procedures requiring
general anaesthesia. Antacid prophylaxis, most com-
monly ranitidine, is given either orally or intra-
venously to increase the pH of the gastric contents.
This aims to minimise pulmonary damage, should
aspiration occur [28].
It is as important to consider the risk of aspiration
at tracheal extubation as well as intubation. Patients’
tracheas should be extubated when they are fully
awake and airway reflexes have returned. The use of a
nasogastric tube for aspiration of gastric contents
should be considered. When waking from the proce-
dure, women should be in a head-up or left lateral
position to reduce the risk of regurgitated gastric con-
tents being aspirated into the lungs [25].
Summary
This review discusses complications that may occur
when performing anaesthesia for an obstetric patient.
These complications span the spectrum from minor,
transient problems through to permanent, life-altering
injuries. The physiological changes of pregnancy, as
well as increasing levels of obesity in pregnant women,
make some of these complications more likely in this
setting. We highlight the need for vigilance and fastidi-
ous attention to detail, both while undertaking anaes-
thesia and providing analgesia to parturients. Women
should be believed when they describe either pain or
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
65
Maronge and Bogod | Complications in obstetric anaesthesia
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 61–66
 symptoms that may be consistent with a suspected
iatrogenic injury. Early, appropriate steps need to be
taken to ensure that complications are detected and
treated.
Acknowledgements
No conflicts of interest.
References
1. Goldszmidt E, Kern R, Chaput A, Macarthur A. The inci-
dence and etiology of postpartum headaches: a prospec-
tive cohort study. Canadian Journal of Anesthesia 2005;
52: 971–7.
2. Stella CL, Jodicke CD, How HY, Harkness UF, Sibai BM. Postpar-
tum headache: is your work-up complete? American Journal
of Obstetrics and Gynecology 2007; 196: 318.
3. Choi PT, Galinski SE, Takeuchi L, Lucas S, Tamayo C, Jadad AR.
PDPH is a common complication of neuraxial blockade in par-
turients: a meta-analysis of obstetrical studies. Canadian Jour-
nal of Anesthesia 2003; 50: 460–9.
4. Van de Velde M, Schepers R, Berends N, Vandermeersch E, De
Buck F. Ten years of experience with accidental dural puncture
and post-dural puncture headache in a tertiary obstetric
anaesthesia department. International Journal of Obstetric
Anesthesia 2008; 17: 329–35.
5. Turnbull DK, Shepherd DB. Post-dural puncture headache:
pathogenesis, prevention and treatment. British Journal of
Anaesthesia 2003; 91: 718–29.
6. Grant R, Condon B, Hart I, Teasdale GM. Changes in intracra-
nial CSF volume after lumbar puncture and their relationship
to post-LP headache. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and
Psychiatry 1991; 54: 440–2.
7. Abouleish E, Vega S, Blendinger I, Tio TO. Long-term follow-up
of epidural blood patch. Anesthesia and Analgesia 1975; 54:
459–63.
8. Agerson AN, Scavone B. Prophylactic epidural blood patch
after unintentional dural puncture for the prevention of post-
dural puncture headache in parturients. Anesthesia and Anal-
gesia 2012; 115: 133–6.
9. Loo CC, Dahlgren G, Irestedt L. Neurological complications in
obstetric regional anaesthesia. International Journal of Obstet-
ric Anesthesia 2000; 9: 99–124.
10. Cook TM, Counsell D, Wildsmith Ja W, Royal College of Anaes-
thetists Third National Audit Project. Major complications of
central neuraxial block: report on the Third National Audit
Project of the Royal College of Anaesthetists. British Journal
of Anaesthesia 2009; 102: 179–90.
11. Wong CA. Neurologic deficits and labor analgesia. Regional
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine 2004; 29: 341–51.
12. Moen V, Dahlgren N, Irestedt L. Severe neurological complica-
tions after central neuraxial blockades in Sweden 1990-1999.
Anesthesiology 2004; 101: 950–9.
13. Boyce H, Plaat F. Post-natal neurological problems. Continuing
EducationinAnaesthesiaCriticalCareandPain2013;13:63–6.
14. Burton CV. Lumbosacral arachnoiditis. Spine 1978; 3: 24–30.
15. Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland,
Obstetric Anaesthetists’ Association null, Regional Anaesthesia
UK, et al. Safety guideline: skin antisepsis for central neurax-
ial blockade. Anaesthesia 2014; 69: 1279–86.
16. National Obstetric Database. Monitoring of adverse outcomes
at caesarean section. http://www.oaa-anaes.ac.uk/assets/
_managed/cms/files/NOAD%20REPORTS/National%20Obste
tric%20Anaesthesia%20Data%20for%202012%20final.pdf
(accessed 21/05/2017).
17. Bogod D. Pain during caesarean section. British Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology 2016; 123: 753.
18. Royal College of Anaesthetists. Raising the Standard: a com-
pendium of audit recipes, 3rd Edition. 2012. https://www.rc
oa.ac.uk/system/files/CSQ-ARB2012-SEC8.pdf (accessed 21/
05/2017).
19. Husain T, Liu YM, Fernando R, Nagaratnam V, Sodhi M, Tamil-
selvan P
, Venkatesh S, England A, Columbe M. How UK obste-
tric anaesthetists assess neuraxial anaesthesia for caesarean
delivery: National surveys of practice conducted in 2004 and
2010 International Journal of Obstetric. Anaesthesia 2013;
22: 298302.
20. Hoyle J, Yentis SM. Assessing the height of block for cae-
sarean section over the past three decades: trends from the
literature. Anaesthesia 2015; 70: 421–8.
21. Pandit JJ, Andrade J, Bogod DG, et al. 5th National Audit Pro-
ject (NAP5) on accidental awareness during general anaes-
thesia: summary of main findings and risk factors. British
Journal of Anaesthesia 2014; 113: 549–59.
22. Helsehurst N, Ells LJ, Simpson H, Batterham A, Wilkinson J,
Summerbell CD. Trends in maternity obesity incidence, rates,
demographic predictors and health inequalities in 38,821
women over a 15 year period. British Journal of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology 2007; 114: 187–94.
23. Brien KO, Conlon C. Failed intubation in obstetrics. Anaesthe-
sia and Intensive Care Medicine 2013; 14: 315–9.
24. Paech MJ, Scott KL, Clavisi O, Chua S, McDonnell N, ANZCA Trials
Group. A prospective study of awareness and recall associated
with general anaesthesia for caesarean section. International
Journal of Obstetric Anesthesia 2008; 17: 298–303.
25. Rucklidge M, Hinton C. Difficult and failed intubation in
obstetrics. Continuing Education in Anaesthesia Critical Care
and Pain 2012; 12: 86–91.
26. Guidelines for the management of difficult and failed tracheal
intubation in obstetrics – 2015 Difficult Airway Society. 2015.
https://www.das.uk.com/guidelines/obstetric_airway_guideli
nes_2015 (accessed 25/05/2017).
27. Mendelson CL. The aspiration of stomach contents into the
lungs during obstetric anesthesia. Anesthesiology 1946; 7:
694–5.
28. Rout CC, Rocke DA, Gouws E. Intravenous ranitidine reduces the
risk of acid aspiration of gastric contents at emergency cesarean
section.AnesthesiaandAnalgesia1993;76:156–61.
66
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 61–66
Maronge and Bogod | Complications in obstetric anaesthesia
