  
. . . Published ahead of Print 
 
 
 
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise® Published ahead of Print contains articles in unedited 
manuscript form that have been peer reviewed and accepted for publication. This manuscript will undergo 
copyediting, page composition, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. 
Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered that could affect the content. 
 
Copyright © 2016 American College of Sports Medicine 
Enhanced Endurance Performance by Periodization of CHO Intake: 
“Sleep Low” Strategy 
 
 
Laurie-Anne Marquet1,2, Jeanick Brisswalter1,2, Julien Louis1 , Eve Tiollier1, 
Louise M. Burke3,4,  John A. Hawley4,5, and Christophe Hausswirth1 
 
1French National Institute of Sport, Expertise and Performance (INSEP), Laboratory of 
Sport, Expertise and Performance, Paris, France; 2University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis, 
Laboratory of Human Motricity, Education, Sport and Health, Nice, France; 3Sports 
Nutrition, Australian Institute of Sport (AIS), Belconnen, Australia; 4Mary MacKillop 
Institute for Health Research, Centre for Exercise and Nutrition, Australian Catholic 
University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; 5Research Institute for Sport and Exercise 
Sciences, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, United Kingdom 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accepted for Publication: 30 October 2015 
ACCEPTED
  
Enhanced Endurance Performance by Periodization of CHO Intake: 
“Sleep Low” Strategy 
 
Laurie-Anne Marquet1,2, Jeanick Brisswalter1,2, Julien Louis1, Eve Tiollier1, 
Louise M. Burke3,4, John A. Hawley4,5, and Christophe Hausswirth1 
 
1French National Institute of Sport, Expertise and Performance (INSEP), Laboratory of Sport, 
Expertise and Performance, Paris, France; 2University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis, Laboratory of 
Human Motricity, Education, Sport and Health, Nice, France; 3Sports Nutrition, Australian 
Institute of Sport (AIS), Belconnen, Australia; 4Mary MacKillop Institute for Health Research, 
Centre for Exercise and Nutrition, Australian Catholic University, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia; 5Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Sciences, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Liverpool, United Kingdom 
 
Corresponding author: 
Christophe Hausswirth, PhD 
French National Institute of Sport, Expertise and Performance 
Laboratory of Sport, Expertise and Performance 
11, avenue du Tremblay 
75012 Paris, FRANCE 
Email: christophe.hausswirth@insep.fr 
Tel : +33 1 41 74 43 85 
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, Publish Ahead of Print
DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000823
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Fax : +33 1 41 74 45 35 
 
The authors report no conflict of interest. The results of the present study do not constitute 
endorsement by the American College of Sports Medicine. The French National Institute of 
Sports (INSEP) receives sponsorship funding from Gatorade France, manufacturer of sport foods 
which supply ingredients discussed in this paper.  
 
Running head: Manipulation of CHO availability  
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 ABSTRACT 
Purpose: We investigated the effect of a chronic dietary periodization strategy on endurance 
performance in trained athletes. Methods: 21 triathletes ( 
 O2max: 58.7 ± 5.7 mL·min-1·kg-1) were 
divided into 2 groups: a “sleep-low” (SL, n = 11) and a control group (CON, n = 10) consumed 
the same daily carbohydrate (CHO) intake (6 g·kg-1·d-1) but with different timing over the day to 
manipulate CHO availability before and after training sessions. The “sleep low” strategy 
consisted of a 3-week training/diet intervention comprising three blocks of diet/exercise 
manipulations: 1) “train-high” interval training sessions (HIT) in the evening with high-CHO 
availability; 2) overnight CHO restriction (“sleeping-low”), and 3) “train-low” sessions with low 
endogenous and exogenous CHO availability. The CON group followed the same training 
program but with high CHO availability throughout training sessions (no CHO restriction 
overnight, training sessions with exogenous CHO provision). Results: There was a significant 
improvement in delta efficiency during submaximal cycling for SL versus CON (CON: +1.4 ± 
9.3 %, SL: +11 ± 15 %, P<0.05). SL also improved supra-maximal cycling to exhaustion at 
150% of peak aerobic power (CON: +1.63 ± 12.4 %, SL: +12.5 ± 19.0 %; P = 0.06) and 10 km 
running performance (CON: -0.10 ± 2.03 %, SL: -2.9 ± 2.15 %; P < 0.05). Fat mass was 
decreased in SL (CON: -2.6 ± 7.4; SL: -8.5 ± 7.4 %PRE, P < 0.01), but not lean mass (CON: -
0.22 ± 1.0; SL: -0.16 ± 1.7 %PRE). Conclusion: Short-term periodization of dietary CHO 
availability around selected training sessions promoted significant improvements in submaximal 
cycling economy, as well as supra-maximal cycling capacity and 10 km running time in trained 
endurance athletes. Key words: Dietary manipulation, carbohydrates, triathletes, exercise-
nutrient interactions  
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 INTRODUCTION 
 
The increasing sophistication of our knowledge of the interactions between nutrition and 
exercise has opened up new possibilities for the preparation of athletes for competition 
performance (18). A novel concept in the preparation of athletes for endurance events involves 
the integration of two approaches with seemingly opposing objectives: 1) promoting the 
nutritional environment (i.e., high carbohydrate availability) before and during prolonged/high-
intensity exercise to optimize performance via optimal fuel availability (35), and 2) creating an 
intracellular environment in skeletal muscle in which training responses and adaptations are 
enhanced via the restriction of carbohydrate (CHO), so called “training low”. It is now well 
recognized that muscle energy status exerts profound effects on resting fuel metabolism and 
patterns of fuel utilization during exercise as well as acute regulatory processes underlying gene 
expression and cell signaling. As such, these nutrient-exercise interactions have the potential to 
activate or inhibit many biochemical pathways (signaling proteins, gene expression, transcription 
rate of several genes, enzymes activity) with putative roles in training adaptation (3, 16, 18, 21, 
22, 40). 
 
Previous studies using a variety of such “train-low” strategies to allow some workouts to 
be undertaken with either low muscle glycogen levels and/or low exogenous CHO availability 
have reported robust up-regulation of selected markers of training adaptation (increased whole 
body fat oxidation, increased activities of oxidative enzymes) compared with training with 
normalized glycogen stores and high CHO availability (5, 22, 29, 32, 38, 40). However, despite 
evidence of changes in molecular and cellular markers, it has proved difficult to demonstrate a 
concomitant enhancement in sports performance. Part of the reason for this „disconnect‟ between 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 „mechanistic‟ and performance outcomes, is that the dietary-training strategies that successfully 
augment markers of training adaptation simultaneously reduce the intensity at which athletes can 
train during key high intensity interval training (HIT) sessions (22, 40). As such, it is important 
that attempts to manipulate CHO availability and promote training adaptation be periodized such 
that the goals of various components of the training program are not compromised. In this 
regard, a recent investigation by Lane and colleagues (24) has examined a unique manipulation 
of nutrient-exercise interaction: withholding feeding after an intense evening training session, 
and subsequently sleeping with low-CHO availability. They examined the effect of this strategy 
on acute skeletal muscle and whole-body responses to a bout of prolonged steady-state cycling 
the following morning (i.e.,” train-high, sleep low”) and showed an upregulation of several 
markers of lipid metabolism, but little change in cellular pathways involved in skeletal muscle 
mitochondrial biogenesis. However, there was evidence for small, but significant shifts in DNA 
methylation that corresponded with inverse changes in transcription for metabolically adaptive 
genes (24). Furthermore, Bartlett and al. (5) reported that the exercise-induced increase in p53 
phosphorylation is greater when subjects perform high-intensity interval running in conditions of 
reduced CHO availability, compared to when they commence the same exercise with normal or 
elevated CHO availability. Whether these early adaptive responses involving epigenetic 
modification (i.e., diet-exercise interactions) underpin chronic training-induced adaptations 
and/or result in enhanced athletic performance has not been investigated.  
 
Accordingly, we determined the effects of a chronic (3 weeks) “train-high, sleep-low 
intervention in trained triathletes on selected metabolic and performance outcomes. The 
periodization strategy integrated three diet-exercise manipulations within a real-world training 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 program: high-intensity training with high-CHO availability aimed at maximizing adaptation and 
performance; overnight CHO restriction (low-CHO availability) to prolong the signaling 
response after exercise (17, 34); and a prolonged, submaximal training session commenced with 
low-CHO availability to promote lipid metabolism. We hypothesized that compared to a control 
condition in which all training sessions were undertaken with high CHO availability, chronic 
dietary periodization would enhance endurance performance. 
 
METHODS 
Subjects 
 
Twenty-one endurance-trained male triathletes volunteered to participate in this study. 
All subjects had been competing for > 2 years and were training a minimum of 10 hours per 
week (Table 1). Subjects were given medical clearance for participation in the study by a 
cardiologist, and were not taking any prescribed medication during the study. The experimental 
design was approved by the local Ethics Committee (Paris IDF VI, France), and the protocol was 
performed in line with the Declaration of Helsinki. After comprehensive verbal and written 
explanations of the study and its aims, all subjects gave their written informed consent for 
participation. 
 
Study Overview 
 
The study used a parallel group design, with the subject cohort being randomly divided 
into two groups who undertook the same endurance training program for 3 consecutive weeks. 
Only the timing of dietary CHO intake differed between the groups. One group (n=11) 
implemented a “sleep low” strategy for manipulating CHO availability (high-intensity workout 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 with high-CHO availability followed by a CHO-restricted recovery plus an overnight fast; then a 
prolonged submaximal workout the following morning commenced with low-CHO availability) 
into the training schedule, while the control group (n= 10) maintained regular CHO intake over 
the day and undertook each training session with normal/high CHO availability. Selected whole-
body measures and a variety of performance tests were undertaken before, during and in the 3 
days after completion of the training program (Figure 1). 
 
Training protocol 
 
After preliminary testing sessions for the determination of physiological and 
anthropometric measures, all subjects commenced a 6-week supervised training program, 
divided into two 3-week phases (3 weeks of baseline and 3 weeks of training/diet intervention). 
During the first 3 weeks (Baseline), subjects completed their usual training regimen (10-15 h·wk-
1: 40% running, 35% cycling, 25% swimming). The aim of this first training block was to assess 
subjects‟ compliance to the study demands and ensure they all attained similar baseline fitness 
measures before study commencement. During the second 3 weeks (training/diet intervention) 
subjects of both groups completed the same standardized training program (Table 2), but with 
two different nutritional protocols (described in detail subsequently). The training program 
consisted of six sessions over four consecutive days, including high intensity training (HIT) 
sessions in the afternoon and low intensity training (LIT) sessions the next morning. The training 
intensity was individually prescribed according to each individual's maximal aerobic power 
(MAP). LIT sessions consisted in 60 min cycling at 65% MAP (218.8 ± 20.4 W - 95% CI: 227.5 
and 210.7), while HIT sessions consisted alternatively in 8 x 5 min cycling at 85% MAP (286 ± 
26.7 W- 95% CI: 297.5 and 274.7) or 6x5 min running at their individual 10 km intensity with 1 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 min recovery between sets (37). The HIT protocol has previously been reported to utilize ~50% 
of starting muscle glycogen stores in well trained subjects who commence the sessions with 
normal glycogen levels (37). Furthermore, it has previously been shown that HIT protocols 
rapidly activate signaling pathways with putative roles in the regulation of mitochondrial 
biogenesis (4), while HIT training is an integral part of an endurance athletes training repertoire 
(4). One LIT session per day was prescribed for the other days of the week for a total training 
volume of 10-15 h. Subjects performed all training sessions using their own equipment with 
monitoring (activity, duration, intensity, rate of perceived exertion), heart rate was also recorded. 
 
Nutritional protocol 
 
Before commencing the modified training/diet program, participants were randomly 
assigned to either a “sleep low” group (SL, n=11) or control (CON, n=10). All subjects received 
standardized dietary instructions depending on the dietary group to which they were assigned 
and instructed to follow prescribed menus that consisted of the same total food intake, with 
different timing of intake to ensure a divergent periodization over each day according to the 
allocated dietary treatment. Total daily CHO intake was similar for both SL and CON groups (~6 
g·kg BM-1·d-1), but intake was allocated differently over the day to achieve high or low CHO 
availability before/after the various training sessions (Table 2). Specifically, over 4 consecutive 
days in each week in which the training-diet intervention was implemented, the “sleep low” 
group was deprived of CHO intake from the period immediately after the HIT to completion of 
the LIT session. In addition, CHO was not consumed during HIT and LIT sessions. The evening 
meal for SL was CHO-free and the LIT sessions the following morning were performed after an 
overnight fast. Once the LIT session was completed, subjects then refueled with high quantities 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 of CHO-rich foods and drinks until the next HIT session. For the CON group, CHO availability 
was maintained throughout the recovery period and during each training session; a 6% CHO-
electrolyte drink (Gatorade Performance Series®, Pepsico, USA) was consumed during training 
sessions and each meal included CHO-rich foods. To preserve muscle protein synthesis, both 
groups consumed a high protein sugar-free drink (High Protein 15 g per 20 mL, UHS Bruno, 
France) just prior going to bed.  
 
The subjects completed a food diary throughout the last week of the baseline and 
throughout training/diet intervention and were instructed to provide details of the quantity, type 
and preparation of foods (food weights, pictures of dishes, details of fats and oils added in 
cooking or as dressings). The diaries were analyzed by the same scientist using the Nutrilog 2.31 
software (Nutrilog SAS, Marans, France).  
 
Exercise Tests 
Pre-trial  
 O2max  
 
On their first visit to the lab, subjects underwent an incremental cycling test at a self-
selected cadence, previously described by Hawley and Noakes (20), on an electronically braked 
cycle ergometer (Excalibur Sport, Lode®, Groningen, The Netherlands). Saddle and handlebar 
heights were set to match the usual positions used by participants, and these were standardized 
between sessions. The cycle ergometer was equipped with individual racing pedals and toe clips, 
allowing participants to wear their own shoes. Subjects warmed-up for 6 min at 100 W then 
power output was increased by 25 W each successive 2 min until volitional exhaustion. 
Participants wore a face mask covering their mouth and nose to collect breath (Hans Rudolph, 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Kansas City, MO, USA). During the test, oxygen uptake ( 
 O2), carbon dioxide uptake ( 
 CO2), 
minute ventilation ( 
    and the respiratory exchange ratio (RER) were continuously recorded 
and monitored as breath by breath values (Quark, Cosmed®, Rome, Italy). The gas and flow 
analyzers were calibrated prior to each test using ambient air, known-concentration gas and a 3 L 
syringe.  
 O2max was determined based on the highest 30-s average value. MAP (W) was 
calculated as MAP = W completed + 25 x (t/120) where W is the last completed workload and t 
is the number of seconds in the last workload (20). 
 
Performance tests 
We investigated changes in endurance performance using three different successive 
exercise tests (15min rest between): subjects underwent two laboratory tests and one field-based 
protocol in the fed state. All tests were undertaken before the baseline training period to allow 
familiarization by subjects. These tests were then repeated immediately before (PRE) and after 
(POST) the training/diet intervention. Measurements collected during each exercise test included 
respiratory gas exchange, HR, ratings of perception of effort (RPE) and blood lactate 
concentrations. Whole body rates of CHO and fat oxidation (in g·min-1) were calculated from 
 
 O2 and  
 CO2 values measured during the submaximal cycling test. The last minute of the 
intensity of interest and nonprotein RER values were used according to the following equations 
(23): 
 
CHO oxidation = 4.210 
 CO2- 2.962 
 O2 
Fat oxidation = 1.695 
 O2– 1.701  
 CO2 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Submaximal test 
The first laboratory test was a cycling test at a self-selected cadence to assess cycling 
efficiency (submaximal test). The test started with 6 min at 100 W followed by a 6-min stage at 
70% of MAP. Efficiency represents a ratio between mechanical work during cycling and the 
energy expenditure (EE). We calculated it using delta efficiency that represents the incremental 
ratio measured between two stable states (here 100W and 70% of MAP). DE is often considered 
as a better cycling performance indicator and a valid estimate of muscular efficiency (10). 
       
                     
                              × 100 
EE (kcal·min-1) was obtained from the rate of oxygen uptake, using the equations developed by 
Brouwer (7) and based on thermal equivalent of O2 for non protein RER.  
EE was calculated as follow: 
                                
    
    
 
 
 
Supramaximal test 
The second laboratory test was a supramaximal cycling test designed to last ~60-70 
seconds. This test commenced at a submaximal work rate (3 min at 2 W·kg-1). During this time 
subjects progressively increased their pedal cadence to 120 rev·min-1, then the work rate was 
instantaneously increased to 150% of MAP (26). Subjects were instructed to pedal as strongly 
and as long as possible at this intensity and the test ended when cadence fell below 70 rev·min-1. 
Care was taken to ensure that all subjects performed the tests in similar conditions, without 
standing up on the pedals and with strong verbal encouragement. 
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Simulation of triathlon race 
The third test was a field-based protocol, designed to simulate the final leg of a triathlon 
race. The test commenced with 40 min cycling at 70% of MAP on a bicycle ergometer (6) at a 
self-selected cadence, immediately followed by a 10 km simulated running race. The 40-min 
cycling period was divided into three parts lasted 15 min, 15 min and 10 min, respectively, at 
70% of MAP and separated by 45-s of active recovery at 100 W. During these short active 
recovery periods, the face mask was quickly released and cleaned, while subjects were provided 
with a drink bottle to allow hydration as in a race setting. Immediately after the cycling exercise, 
the subjects moved to a 340 m indoor running track and began a 10 km time-trial (TT). During 
the TT, subjects wore a HR monitor whose screen was hidden by a piece of masking tape to 
avoid any influence in performance. The lap time was continuously recorded by a researcher 
presents on the track. During the run, they were allowed to drink, when they wanted, a CHO-rich 
drink (45 g CHO per liter, Gatorade Performance Series®-Endurance Formula) as per current 
sports nutrition guidelines for competition performance. No significant difference was observed 
for the quantity of CHO ingested between both tests (P=0.62) and between groups (respectively 
for SL group; PRE vs. POST: 14.7 ± 7.21 g vs. 15.3 ± 6.43 g; P=0.47 and for CON group PRE 
vs. POST: 18.0 ± 15.5 g vs. 15.1 ± 11.3 g; P=0.50). 
 
Body composition 
Before and after the training/diet intervention period, measurement of whole body 
composition was undertaken on all subjects using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (Lunar 
IDXA, General Electric, Madison, USA). All measurements were taken early in the morning and 
in a fasted state (30) . 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Blood parameters 
 
Blood samples (5 mL) were collected from participants following an overnight fast on 
five occasions (before and after training/diet intervention, and before the last training session of 
each week). Samples were taken from a superficial forearm vein using standard venipuncture 
techniques and collected into EDTA tubes (Greiner Bio-one; Frickenhausen, Germany) for 
immediate processing. 
 
 
Blood samples were centrifuged at 3,000 rev·min-1 for 10 min at +4 °C to separate 
plasma from red blood cells. The plasma samples were then divided into 1500 μL aliquots and 
stored in Eppendorf tubes at -80 °C until analysis. To avoid inter-assay variations, all blood 
samples were analyzed in a single batch at the end of the study. Epinephrine and norepinephrine 
concentrations were determined in plasma by enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay with 
commercially available high sensitivity ELISA kits (Demeditec Diagnostics GmbH, Kiel, 
Germany). All blood samples were analyzed in duplicate at the appropriate wavelength on a 
spectrophotometer Dynex MRXe (Magellan Biosciences, Chelmsford, MA, USA). Calibration 
curves were obtained for the standards using a non-linear regression for curve fitting. 
 
Statistical analysis 
All statistical analyses were conducted using Statistica 7.1 software (StatSoft). All data 
are expressed as mean ± SD. Data distribution was first checked using a Shapiro-Wilk normality 
test. Data which were not normally distributed were log-transformed (RPE values during 
submaximal test). A repeated-measures analysis of variance was used to calculate the effect of 
the dietary strategy (SL vs CON) and the period (PRE and POST) on performance, blood 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 parameters and body composition. When a significant effect was found, post hoc tests were 
performed using Newman–Keuls procedures. Effect sizes were, calculated using partial eta 
squared (
2
P
 ) values. Values of 0.1, 0.3 and over 0.5 were respectively considered as small, 
medium and large effect (12). For all tests, the significance level was set at P < 0.05. 
 
RESULTS 
Dietary intervention 
The analysis of food records over the training/diet intervention period revealed that 
participants adhered to the prescribed dietary protocols and achieved a similar total CHO intake 
over a day. However, as intended, there was a different pattern of intake according to their group 
allocation. The SL group reported an average intake of 5.44 ± 1.2 g·kg-1·d-1 CHO (breakfast: 1.8 
± 0.66 g·kg-1 ; lunch: 2.2 ± 0.83 g·kg-1; snack: 1.8 ± 0.80 g·kg-1; dinner: 0.0 ± 0.1 g·kg-1), 1.57 ± 
0.28 g·kg-1·d-1 protein (PRO) and 1.05 ±0.19 g·kg-1·d-1 FAT while the CON group consumed 
5.65 ± 0.99 g·kg-1·d-1 CHO, 1.61 ± 0.22 g·kg-1·d-1 PRO and 1.02 ± 0.16 g·kg-1·d-1 FAT. Total 
energy intake during the intervention was similar between groups and over time. The SL group 
reported a mean daily intake of 2530 ± 660 kcal·d-1 during the baseline and 2685 ± 500 kcal·d-1 
during the training/diet intervention period, while the intake of the CON group was reported as 
2715 ± 645 kcal·d-1 and 2835 ± 505 kcal·d-1 during baseline and training/diet intervention 
periods, respectively. There was a similar change in reported macronutrient intake between 
baseline (usual dietary habits) and the training/diet intervention period (prescribed menus) for 
each group. Mean CHO intake significantly increased in the intervention period compared with 
the baseline (+26.5% and +24.9%, P < 0.01, for SL and CON groups, respectively), this was 
associated with an increase in protein intake (+16.1% and +19.2%, P < 0.01, for SL and CON 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 groups respectively). In both groups, there was a reduction in reported intake of fat during the 
training/diet intervention period compared with baseline (-13.1% and -16.4%, P < 0.01, for SL 
and CON groups, respectively). Dietary data are presented in table format in the supplementary 
content [see Table, Supplemental Digital Content 1, Total energy and macronutrient intake for 
SL and CON groups before starting the training program (BASELINE) and during the 
training/diet intervention (TRAINING) (mean ± SD), http://links.lww.com/MSS/A628]. 
 
Performance tests 
Simulated triathlon race: 10 km running performance. There was a significant main 
effect of dietary group for 10 km running performance with all SL subjects improving their 
running time (PRE: 40:23 ± 03:22 min:s; POST: 39:10 ± 03:02 min:s) (Figure 2). This equates 
to a mean improvement of ~3% (-2.9 ± 2.1%, P < 0.01, d=0.38). No change was observed for 
CON (PRE: 41:26 ± 02:13 min:s; POST: 41:24 ± 02:43 min:s; change = -0.10 ± 2.7 %, NS). 
 
Supramaximal test. SL increased supramaximal cycling time to exhaustion (PRE: 52.7 ± 
13.8 s; POST: 57.8 ± 6.4 s; change = +12.5 ± 19%; P= 0.062, d=0.41) with no difference for 
CON (PRE: 57.8 ± 6.4 s; POST: 58.8 ± 10.7 s; change = +1.63 ± 12.4, NS). 
 
Perceived exertion scores 
Perceived exertion scores for various testing sessions are summarized in Table 3. A 
decrease in RPE was observed for SL group during tests performed at a fixed intensity 
(submaximal and cycling test).  
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Submaximal test. A significant interaction effect (strategy x period, P < 0.05, d=0.28) was 
recorded for the RPE values. A significant decrease in mean RPE values was recorded only in 
the SL group between PRE and POST tests (SL group: -5.9 ± 6.5 %, P<0.05, d= 0.72 vs. CON 
group: + 0.7 ± 3.9 %, NS). 
 
Simulated triathlon race: cycling test. A significant effect of interaction (strategy x 
period, P < 0.01, d=0.42) was recorded for the RPE values at the end of the cycling test. A 
significant decrease in mean RPE values was recorded only in the SL group between PRE and 
POST tests (SL group: -9.2 ± 8.7 %, P < 0.05, d= 1.0 vs. CON group: +2.9 ± 5.9 %, d= 0.24). 
 
Perceived exertion during training. RPE values recorded during all LIT training sessions 
(performed in a fasted state for the SL group) performed during the training intervention were 
significantly higher in the SL group when compared with CON group (respectively for SL and 
CON group: 14.3 ± 0.29 vs. 12.7 ± 0.43, P < 0.05, d= 4.36). 
 
Physiological parameters 
The results of the submaximal test are presented in Table 4. There was a significant 
improvement in DE values for the SL group (P<0.05, d=0.48) and a decrease in HR (P = 0.058, 
d=0.45). Furthermore, in this group CHO oxidation was significantly decreased (P < 0.001, 
d=0.66). There was a significant effect of time for RER values with a decrease between PRE and 
POST tests (P < 0.05) but with no difference between groups. 
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Blood parameters 
Plasma epinephrine concentration increased during the training/diet intervention period 
(blood collection performed the morning after an overnight fast, before the last prescribed 
training session of the week) compared to baseline values (78.5 ± 29.3 pg·mL-1) for SL 
(respectively for W2 and W3, 94.4 ± 41.8 pg·mL-1, d=0.44; and 94.7 ± 37.5 pg·mL-1, d=0.48) 
(Table 5) but not CON (baseline: 56.7 ± 30.0 pg·mL-1, W1: 49.6 ± 25.0 pg·mL-1, W2: 41.8 ± 
23.1 pg·mL-1, W3: 44.3 ± 18.3 pg·mL-1). 
 
Body composition 
There was a significant decrease in body mass (BM) in the SL group over the training 
block (PRE: 70.6 ± 5.0 kg vs. POST: 69.6 ± 5.0 kg, P < 0.001, d=0.19). This was the result of a 
significant loss of fat mass in the SL group over this period (PRE: 9.70 ± 4.08 kg vs. POST: 8.86 
± 3.8 kg P < 0.01, d=0.22). No changes were detected in the CON group over the course of 
training (BM: PRE: 72.8 ± 3.9 kg vs. POST: 72.4 ± 4.1kg; Fat mass: PRE: 8.9 ± 2.3 kg vs. 
POST: 8.6 ± 2.4 kg). No difference in fat free mass was observed for both groups after training 
period. Body composition data are presented in table format in the supplementary content [see 
Table, Supplemental Digital Content 2, Body composition before and after the training program 
for SL and CON group (mean ± SD), http://links.lww.com/MSS/A629]. 
 
DISCUSSION 
We investigated the effects of a chronic dietary periodization strategy in endurance-
trained triathletes who undertook a strenuous three-week training block. We “clamped” energy 
intake for both SL and CON groups so that self-reported total energy intakes (~2700 kcal.d-1) 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 and macronutrient composition were similar (6 g·kg-1·d-1 CHO, 1.6 g·kg-1·d-1 PRO and 1.0 g·kg-
1·d-1 FAT), but altered the timing of nutrient intake so that CHO availability was different for 
selected training sessions. The main findings were that: (1) 10 km running performance was 
improved when athletes periodized their CHO intake and slept and performed selected training 
sessions with low-CHO availability; (2) submaximal cycling efficiency was enhanced and 
ratings of perceived exertion were lower during constant exercise after this “sleep-low” strategy, 
and (3) body mass and body fat mass were reduced in response to altering the timing of CHO 
intake during the 3-week training block. 
 
 
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to report a robust improvement in 
athletic endurance performance in response to a chronic training regimen in endurance-trained 
athletes after integrating workouts with low CHO availability. Our periodized diet-exercise 
protocol used three different types of dietary CHO manipulation to specifically alter the 
availability of this substrate before, during and/or after targeted training sessions. The 
combination of high intensity training with high CHO availability, low CHO availability post-
exercise (i.e., sleeping low), and low intensity training with low CHO availability was designed 
to integrate the potential benefits of three different training/nutrition responses on whole-body 
and performance outcomes. Specifically these were: nutritional support for high intensity 
workouts, a prolonged period of potentially elevated post-exercise signaling responses, and an 
enhanced metabolic stimulus to prolonged submaximal training, respectively. Each of these 
diet/exercise strategies has been individually identified as beneficial for competitive athletes, and 
their integration into a periodized training program has previously been proposed (9) and 
practiced by elite athletes (35, 36). However, the novel aspect of the current study is that we 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 successfully implemented these exercise-dietary strategies in trained athletes in association with 
both lab- and field-based measures of performance. Hence, a major finding was a clear and 
robust improvement of 10 km running performance after implementation of a “sleep-low” 
strategy: every subject in the SL group showed an enhanced performance in 10-km race time 
(average improvement: 73 ± 20 s), whereas no improvement was recorded for the CON group. 
 
Our dietary periodization strategy also enhanced the capacity for high-intensity exercise 
lasting 60-70 sec in endurance-trained subjects. This improvement is similar in magnitude to that 
previously reported by Lindsay et al. (26) who implemented a HIT training program in well-
trained cyclists (6 sessions undertaken within a 28 d training block). HIT is well known to 
rapidly improve endurance performance and fatigue resistance, even for well-trained athletes 
(14, 26). Our study provides evidence, however, that periodizing CHO availability around these 
training sessions is an important determinant of the performance results. Although both groups in 
our investigation followed the same training program, incorporating 9 HIT sessions over 3 
weeks, the timing of CHO availability around the specific training sessions were associated with 
a difference in performance outcomes. Furthermore, in relation to the previous studies of “train 
low” strategies in trained individuals which have failed to find superior performance outcomes 
(i.e. greater than the control group), we note that their protocols exposed the HIT rather than 
accompanying low intensity sessions to low CHO availability (22, 29); this choice reduced the 
intensity of work that could be achieved in these key workouts and potentially counteracted the 
benefits of the session (metabolic adaptations and performance improvement) (4).  
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Only two studies have reported an enhanced improvement in performance tasks following 
“train low” strategies in comparison to a traditional training diet with sustained high CHO 
availability; however, issues with the test protocols or the training status of the subjects have 
made it difficult to extrapolate the results of these investigations to the preparation of 
competitive athletes. Hansen et al. (16) reported a greater increase (19.7 ± 2.4 min vs. 11.9 ± 1.3 
min) in time to exhaustion of a unilateral isokinetic “leg kicking” protocol after a 10-week 
training program in the leg which undertook 50% of sessions with lowered glycogen (2-a-day 
training program with the second session commenced after depleting glycogen via the first 
session) compared to the leg which undertook the same training with opportunity for daily 
glycogen restoration. However, the subjects in that study were previously untrained individuals 
who undertook a training protocol in which exercise intensity for both legs was clamped. More 
recently, Cochran et al. (11) studied the chronic (2 weeks) effect of lower-CHO availability 
between two HIT sessions undertaken in a single day on whole-body exercise performance 
(cycling time-trial and repeated-sprints test). Active adults were provided with either a CHO-rich 
or CHO-restricted meal during the 3 h recovery between the two training sessions on each of 6 
days during the study period. The training-induced improvement of the mean power output 
during a 250-kJ time trial performance was greater (P = 0.02) in the group that undertook the 
second session with reduced CHO availability (pre: 211 ± 66 W, post: 244 ± 75 W) compared 
with the group that refueled prior to that session (pre: 203 ± 53 W, post: 219 ± 60 W). By 
contrast, there was no difference between groups in the improvement in a repeated sprints test (5 
x 15 s all out sprints). It should be noted that subjects in that study were not trained, and the HIT 
sessions were undertaken at a constant power. 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 To date, studies that have investigated different train-low strategies in trained populations 
(22, 40) have failed to detect enhancements in performance beyond those attained by training 
with the more traditional dietary support of high-CHO availability. Despite strong evidence of 
enhanced metabolic capacity at cellular (increased levels of key enzymes: β-hydroxyacyl-coA-
dehydrogenase and citrate synthase) and whole body levels (increased fat oxidation at 
submaximal work intensities) after various “train low” strategies, it appears that these adaptive 
markers do not always translate into superior performance (3). This highlights that sports 
performance is multi-factorial and can be enhanced by a variety of training inputs and 
physiological/neurological/psychological adaptations. Since previous studies have observed a 
reduction in power outputs and work during high-intensity workouts (22, 40) normally 
associated with a real-world training program, it is likely that a compromise in one aspect of 
athletic preparation could counteract the benefits achieved in another and compromise the overall 
outcome (22, 40). 
 
The current study included several novel features to address the multiple goals in the 
preparation of competitive athletes. We focused on the recruitment of endurance-trained 
triathletes for whom an enhancement of performance is incremental and challenging to achieve. 
Second, we included a 3-week baseline phase to harmonize the training programs and fitness 
levels of the athletes as well as to familiarize them with the training and performance protocols. 
Finally, we periodized CHO availability in the training program according to the goals of 
different training sessions to balance the divergent nutritional approaches to high quality training 
and enhanced adaptive response. We believe that this approach was a key element which 
underpinned the outcomes of the investigation: even though all participants had been adhering to 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 a high training load for many years, those who undertook the periodized CHO support were able 
to achieve a substantial improvement in their performance level after only 3 weeks. We include a 
high protein sugar-free drink as part of the „train-high, sleep-low‟ regimen ingested before 
subjects went to bed. The ingestion of proteins following an exercise bout increases skeletal 
muscle protein synthesis, and has been described to support muscle repair and remodeling (1, 
28). Thus the ingestion of high-quality protein during recovery may also have maximized 
training adaptations by promoting the synthesis of mitochondrial proteins or metabolic enzymes 
(31). These conditions may have all played some part in the enhanced training adaptations and 
improved performance. 
 
The clear performance improvements observed in this study were accompanied by 
significant reductions in the physiological and perceived loads during submaximal testing 
sessions performed at fixed intensities. Cycling efficiency was improved and HR values 
decreased only in the SL group, indicating a decrease in the relative energy cost of a given 
exercise intensity. A decrease in the energy cost of cycling has previously been shown to 
improve the performance of a running protocol undertaken immediately after the cycling bout 
(39). These findings may, in part, explain the enhanced 10 km running performance we observed 
after athletes had undertaken a bout of prior cycling exercise. 
 
Interventions that influence an individuals‟ perception of effort are known to affect 
endurance performance (27). The RPE values for morning training sessions undertaken by our 
subjects were higher for the SL group, who performed these sessions in a fasted state, compared 
to the CON group. However, perceived exertion during performance tests at a fixed intensity 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 with high CHO availability were lower for the SL group compared to no changes were detected 
in the CON group. We cannot exclude the possibility that our novel exercise-dietary protocol 
induced a placebo effect among subjects (15). Indeed, there is growing body of evidence of the 
impact of the participant‟s beliefs and expectations on performance outcomes (15, 27). 
 
The observed improvements in endurance performance were accompanied by a small but 
significant changes in body composition after 3 weeks of the training/diet intervention. Indeed, 
body mass decreased (by ~1 kg) only in the SL group, with this outcome being mainly attributed 
to a 1.1% decrease in fat mass. The small but non-significant difference in energy intake between 
groups does not appear sufficient to account for these observations, although we acknowledge 
the limitations of self-reported dietary data. Indeed, the apparent energy intake of the group was 
less than might be expected for athletes undertaking the current training program and remaining 
in energy balance. However, the propensity to under-reporting energy intake via food diaries is 
well-known, especially in athletic populations (8), and there is no reason to suspect that this 
would occur more prominently in one group of our subjects than the other. Another explanation 
for the leaner body composition in the SL group could be increased lipid oxidation (13), as 
inferred by the reduction in RER values during the submaximal cycling test. This decrease in 
body mass may have contributed to the faster running performance. Indeed, running economy, an 
important determinant of endurance running performance, is negatively correlated with body 
mass (2). Our periodization of CHO availability and the inclusion of high-intensity training may 
be an effective method to alter body composition and thus improve endurance performance 
during the weeks preceding competitions. It should be noted that both elements seem important, 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 since the implementation of the HIT sessions alone (as undertaken by the CON group) did not 
result in a body composition change. 
 
A potential limitation of our study design was that we focused on a real-world 
intervention and measures of athletic performance. As such, we did not have the opportunity to 
undertake the invasive techniques needed to explore some of the mechanisms that may have 
contributed to the observed performance outcomes (i.e., muscle biopsies, tracer techniques to 
determine substrate turnover and oxidation). Nevertheless, a companion study that utilized 
essentially the same exercise-nutrient strategy (24) attempted to examine some of the possible 
cellular and molecular aspects related to the „train-high, sleep-low‟ protocol. The variations in 
CHO availability integrated into our dietary periodization protocol were chosen to achieve 
different metabolic and training goals. First, the HIT sessions were undertaken with high CHO 
availability to facilitate the highest attainable power outputs and running/cycling intensities and 
gain the associated neural, metabolic and biomechanical adaptations (4). The subsequent 
withholding of CHO for a prolonged period after the HIT training sessions (“sleep low”) may 
have further contributed to the observed performance increase by extending the duration of the 
exercise-stimulated enhancement of transcriptional activation of specific genes involved in 
mitochondrial biogenesis and muscle fuel utilization that underpin the adaptation to training (33, 
34). Finally, increased catecholamine activity is observed and is also known to enhance 
metabolic adaptation via mechanisms including an increase in the expression of the 
transcriptional co-activator PGC-1α(25). The final element of the dietary periodization protocol 
involved the completion of a steady-state bout of exercise with low CHO availability (overnight 
fasting, reduced muscle glycogen stores and absence of CHO intake during the session). Each of 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 these elements has been shown to amplify the training response with mechanisms including 
enhanced activation of key cell signaling kinases (e.g. AMPK, p38MAPK), transcription factors 
(e.g. p53, PPARδ) and transcriptional co-activators (e.g. PGC-1α), leading to a co-ordinated up-
regulation of both the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. All theses adaptations lead to an up-
regulation of the lipid metabolism as observed in other studies with a higher lipid oxidation and 
higher resting glycogen content (5, 16, 24, 40), improving performance in long duration 
exercises. 
 
In conclusion, this study is the first to report a robust improvement in a „real world‟ test 
of endurance performance after 3 weeks of a program involving periodization of CHO 
availability (high-intensity training with high CHO availability, recovery with low CHO 
availability and low intensity training with reduced muscle glycogen and in a fasted state) in 
endurance-trained triathletes. The enhancement in performance observed after our dietary 
periodization protocol (“train high, sleep low”) was not seen in a control group of athletes who 
undertook the same training regimen but with a more traditional approach to nutrition (i.e., high-
CHO availability around training sessions). The manipulation of the timing of CHO intake in 
relation to exercise isolates periods of the training program according to their different priorities 
of performance or adaptation. These results reinforce the growing evidence that CHO availability 
is a potent mediator in the adaptive response to endurance training (5, 19, 32) and that 
periodizing it within the training program to include both sessions with high fuel-support to 
promote high quality/high intensity training and sessions/recovery promoting enhanced 
metabolic adaptation can lead to a superior training outcome. A limitation of our study design 
was that the involvement of endurance-trained individuals and the focus on real-world 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 interventions and measurement of performance reduced the opportunity to undertake the invasive 
techniques often needed to explore potential mechanisms for the observed outcomes. 
Accordingly future studies are needed to better understand the mechanisms underlying changes 
in performance with “train-low” protocols, as well as to determine the applicability of this 
approach to training in already well-trained athletes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors report no conflict of interest. The results of the present study do not constitute 
endorsement by the American College of Sports Medicine. 
 
Conflicts of Interest and Source of Funding 
The French National Institute of Sports (INSEP) receives sponsorship funding from Gatorade 
France, manufacturer of sport foods which supply ingredients discussed in this paper.  
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 REFERENCES 
1.  
Aguirre N, van Loon LJC, Baar K. The role of amino acids in skeletal muscle adaptation to 
exercise. Nestle Nutr Inst Workshop Ser 2013;76:85–102. 
2.  
Anderson T. Biomechanics and running economy. Sports Med 1996;22(2):76–89. 
3.  
Bartlett JD, Hawley JA, Morton JP. Carbohydrate availability and exercise training 
adaptation: Too much of a good thing? Eur J Sport Sci 2014;1–10. 
4.  
Bartlett JD, Joo CH, Jeong T-S, et al. Matched work high-intensity interval and continuous 
running induce similar increases in PGC-1α mRNA, AMPK, p38, and p53 phosphorylation 
in human skeletal muscle. Journal of Applied Physiology 2012;112(7):1135–43. 
5.  
Bartlett JD, Louhelainen J, Iqbal Z, et al. Reduced carbohydrate availability enhances 
exercise-induced p53 signaling in human skeletal muscle: implications for mitochondrial 
biogenesis. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 2013;304(6):R450–8. 
6.  
Bernard T, Hausswirth C, Le Meur Y, Bignet F, Dorel S, Brisswalter J. Distribution of 
power output during the cycling stage of a Triathlon World Cup. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
2009;41(6):1296–302. 
7.  
Brouwer E. On simple formulae for calculating the heat expenditure and the quantities of 
carbohydrate and fat oxidized in metabolism of men and animals, from gaseous exchange 
(Oxygen intake and carbonic acid output) and urine-N. Acta Physiol Pharmacol Neerl 
1957;6:795–802. 
8.  
Burke LM, Cox GR, Culmmings NK, Desbrow B. Guidelines for daily carbohydrate intake: 
do athletes achieve them? Sports Med 2001;31(4):267–99. 
9.  
Burke LM, Hawley JA, Wong SHS, Jeukendrup AE. Carbohydrates for training and 
competition. J Sports Sci 2011;29 Suppl 1:S17–27. 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 10.  Castronovo AM, Conforto S, Schmid M, Bibbo D, D‟Alessio T. How to assess performance 
in cycling: the multivariate nature of influencing factors and related indicators. Front. 
Physiol 2013;4:116. 
11.  Cochran AJ, Myslik F, MacInnis MJ, et al. Manipulating Carbohydrate Availability 
Between Twice-Daily Sessions of High-Intensity Interval Training Over 2 Weeks Improves 
Time-Trial Performance. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2015;25(5):463–70. 
12.  Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale (N.J.), Etats-Unis: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (LEA); 1988.567 
13.  Coyle EF, Jeukendrup AE, Wagenmakers AJ, Saris WH. Fatty acid oxidation is directly 
regulated by carbohydrate metabolism during exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 1997;273(2 Pt 
1):E268–75. 
14.  Gibala MJ, Little JP, Macdonald MJ, Hawley JA. Physiological adaptations to low-volume, 
high-intensity interval training in health and disease. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 2012;590(Pt 
5):1077–84. 
15.  Halson SL, Martin DT. Lying to win-placebos and sport science. Int J Sports Physiol 
Perform 2013;8(6):597–9. 
16.  Hansen AK, Fischer CP, Plomgaard P, Andersen JL, Saltin B, Pedersen BK. Skeletal 
muscle adaptation: training twice every second day vs. training once daily. J. Appl. Physiol. 
2005;98(1):93–9. 
17.  Hawley JA. Nutritional strategies to modulate the adaptive response to endurance training. 
Nestle Nutr Inst Workshop Ser 2013;75:1–14. 
18.  Hawley JA, Burke LM, Phillips SM, Spriet LL. Nutritional modulation of training-induced 
skeletal muscle adaptations. J. Appl. Physiol. 2011;110(3):834–45. 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 19.  Hawley JA, Morton JP. Ramping up the signal: promoting endurance training adaptation in 
skeletal 
muscle 
by 
nutritional 
manipulation. 
Clin. 
Exp. 
Pharmacol. 
Physiol. 
2014;41(8):608–13. 
20.  Hawley JA, Noakes TD. Peak power output predicts maximal oxygen uptake and 
performance time in trained cyclists. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 1992;65(1):79–83. 
21.  Hawley JA, Tipton KD, Millard-Stafford ML. Promoting training adaptations through 
nutritional interventions. J Sports Sci 2006;24(7):709–21. 
22.  Hulston CJ, Venables MC, Mann CH, et al. Training with low muscle glycogen enhances 
fat metabolism in well-trained cyclists. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2010;42(11):2046–55. 
23.  Jeukendrup AE, Wallis GA. Measurement of substrate oxidation during exercise by means 
of gas exchange measurements. Int J Sports Med 2005;26 Suppl 1:S28–37. 
24.  Lane SC, Camera DM, Lassiter DG, et al. Effects of sleeping with reduced carbohydrate 
availability on acute training responses. J. Appl. Physiol. 2015;jap.00857.2014. 
25.  Liang H, Ward WF. PGC-1α: a key regulator of energy metabolism. Advances in 
physiology education 2006;30(4):145–51. 
26.  Lindsay FH, Hawley JA, Myburgh KH, Schomer HH, Noakes TD, Dennis SC. Improved 
athletic performance in highly trained cyclists after interval training. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
1996;28(11):1427–34. 
27.  McCormick A, Meijen C, Marcora S. Psychological Determinants of Whole-Body 
Endurance Performance. Sports Med 2015;45(7):997–1015. 
28.  Moore DR, Camera DM, Areta JL, Hawley JA. Beyond muscle hypertrophy: why dietary 
protein is important for endurance athletes. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2014;39(9):987–97. 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 29.  Morton JP, Croft L, Bartlett JD, et al. Reduced carbohydrate availability does not modulate 
training-induced heat shock protein adaptations but does upregulate oxidative enzyme 
activity in human skeletal muscle. J. Appl. Physiol. 2009;106(5):1513–21. 
30.  Nana A, Slater GJ, Hopkins WG, et al. Importance of Standardized DXA Protocol for 
Assessing Physique Changes in Athletes. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. In Press 
31.  Phillips SM. Dietary protein requirements and adaptive advantages in athletes. Br. J. Nutr. 
2012;108 Suppl 2:S158–67. 
32.  Pilegaard H, Keller C, Steensberg A, et al. Influence of pre-exercise muscle glycogen 
content on exercise-induced transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes. J. Physiol. 
(Lond.) 2002;541(Pt 1):261–71. 
33.  Pilegaard H, Ordway GA, Saltin B, Neufer PD. Transcriptional regulation of gene 
expression in human skeletal muscle during recovery from exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 2000;279(4):E806–14. 
34.  Pilegaard H, Osada T, Andersen LT, Helge JW, Saltin B, Neufer PD. Substrate availability 
and transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes in human skeletal muscle during recovery 
from exercise. Metab. Clin. Exp. 2005;54(8):1048–55. 
35.  Stellingwerff T. Contemporary nutrition approaches to optimize elite marathon 
performance. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 2013;8(5):573–8. 
36.  Stellingwerf T. Case study: Nutrition and training periodization in three elite marathon 
runners. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab 2012;22(5):392–400. 
37.  Stepto NK, Martin DT, Fallon KE, Hawley JA. Metabolic demands of intense aerobic 
interval training in competitive cyclists. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2001;33(2):303–10. 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 38.  VanProeyen K, Szlufcik K, Nielens H, Ramaekers M, Hespel P. Beneficial metabolic 
adaptations due to endurance exercise training in the fasted state. J. Appl. Physiol. 
2011;110(1):236–45. 
39.  Vercruyssen F, Brisswalter J, Hausswirth C, Bernard T, Bernard O, Vallier J-M. Influence 
of cycling cadence on subsequent running performance in triathletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 
2002;34(3):530–6. 
40.  Yeo WK, Paton CD, Garnham AP, Burke LM, Carey AL, Hawley JA. Skeletal muscle 
adaptation and performance responses to once a day versus twice every second day 
endurance training regimens. J. Appl. Physiol. 2008;105(5):1462–70. 
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 FIGURE CAPTIONS 
Figure 1- Diagram of the experimental protocol 
 
Figure 2- 10 km running performance before (PRE) and after (POST) 3 weeks of training with 
periodized CHO availability (SL group) vs. training with maintained CHO availability (CON 
group). Individual changes (dashed lines) and group mean (continuous lines). *: P < 0.05 
compared to PRE SL values. 
 
SUPPLEMENTAL DIGITAL CONTENT  
Supplementary Digital Content 1 – Total energy and macronutrient intake for SL and CON 
groups before starting the training program (BASELINE) and during the training/diet 
intervention (TRAINING) (mean ± SD). 
 
Supplementary Digital Content 2 - Body composition before and after the training program for 
SL and CON group (mean ± SD). 
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
  
 
Figure 1 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
  
 
Figure 2 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Table 1- Characteristics of subjects in the SL and CON groups (mean ± SD). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAP: maximal aerobic power 
 
 
  
Sleep Low 
group (SL) 
(n=11) 
Control group 
(CON) 
(n=10) 
Age (yr) 
32.0 ± 4.2 
29.3 ± 5.2 
Height (m) 
1.78 ± 0.04 
1.81 ± 0.05 
Body mass (kg) 
70.6 ± 5.0 
72.8 ± 3,9 
VO2 max (ml.min-1.kg-1) 
60.1 ± 6.8 
60.2 ± 4.5 
MAP (W) 
325 ± 33 
349 ± 25 
Hours of training (h.wk-1) 
12:38 ± 02:10 
11:00 ± 02:07 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Table 2- Sample weekly protocol for training and CHO intake (g·kg-1) to achieve different CHO availability around training sessions 
 
D1 
D2 and D3 
D4 
D5 to D7 
 
 
Diet SL 
Train 
Diet CON 
Diet SL 
Train 
Diet CON 
Diet SL 
Train 
Diet CON 
 
 
Before 
10 am 
Breakfast 
(2 g) 
 
Breakfast 
(2 g) 
 
 
Breakfast 
(2 g) 
 
 
Breakfast 
(2 g) 
 
 
 
 
Free LIT : 1 
session per 
day 
 
Water during 
training 
 
 
 
 
Usual diet 
 
 
LIT 
 
Sports Drink 
(0.5 g) 
LIT 
 
Sports 
Drink  
(0.5 g) 
Breakfast+ 
Sports Drink 
(2.5 g) 
 
 
Breakfast + 
Sports Drink 
(2.5 g) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Usual diet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Usual diet 
Midday 
Lunch 
(2 g) 
Lunch 
(2 g) 
Lunch+Sport 
Drink (2.5 g) 
Lunch 
(2 g) 
 
 
 
 
 
Snack  
(2 g) 
Snack (2 g) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After 
5 pm 
HIT 
 
Sports drink 
(0.5 g) 
HIT 
D2 
D3 
Sports drink 
(0.5 g) 
 
Snack (1 g) 
 
Snack (1 g) 
 
 
Dinner 
(No CHO) 
Dinner 
(1g) 
Dinner 
(No CHO) 
Dinner 
(1g) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prot Drink 
(No CHO) 
ProtDrink 
(No CHO) 
ProtDrink 
(No CHO) 
ProtDrink 
(No CHO) 
Total content of meals and snacks for day are identical for the Sleep Low and the Control, but the CHO content (g·kg-1) is spread as indicated.  
HIT, high intensity training sessions,  cycling: 8x 5 min @ 85% of MAP + 1 min recovery, running: 6 x 5 min @ 10 km triathlon speed + 1 
min recovery; LIT, Low intensity training session,  cycling: 1h, 65% of MAP 
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Table 3-RPE values (Rating Perceived Exertion) for the different performance tests before 
and after the training program for SL and CON group (mean ± SD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
End of a triathlon race 
  
  
submaximal test 
  supramaximal test 
  
cycling test 
  10km running test 
SL group 
PRE 
16.3 ± 1.4 
 
17.8 ± 1.0 
 
15.82 ± 1.3 
 
17.4 ± 1.5 
POST 
15.3 ± 1.4 * 
 
17.7 ± 1.3  
 
14.40 ± 1.5 * 
 
17.6 ± 1.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CON 
group 
PRE 
15.5 ± 1.0 
 
17.6 ± 1.1 
 
15.8 ± 1.2 
 
16.8 ± 1.9 
POST 
15.6 ± 1.0 
  
17.2 ± 1.6 
  
16.1 ± 1.4 
  
16.6 ± 1.4 
 
*: P < 0.05 as compared to PRE values 
  
  
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Table 4- Physiological parameters recorded during the submaximal cycling test performed 
before and after the training program for SL and CON groups (mean ± SD) 
VO2: oxygen uptake; RER: respiratory exchange ratio; *: P < 0.05 as compared to PRE 
values. 
 
 
 
 
PRE 
 
POST 
 
 
100 W 
70% MAP 
 
100 W 
70% MAP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heart Rate  
(bpm) 
SL 112.8 ± 10.1 
157.7 ± 9.4 
 
110.4 ± 9.4  
153.7 ± 11.0  
CON 
112.9 ± 9.9 
155.8 ± 8.7 
 
110.0 ±8.5  
154.2 ± 7.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VO2  
(mL.min-1.kg-1) 
SL 
26.7 ± 2.2 
47.4 ± 4.8 
 
27.7 ± 2.7  
46.7 ± 4.9 
CON 
26.5 ± 1.6 
47.8 ± 4.3 
 
26.5 ± 2.8 
47.9 ± 5.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RER values 
SL 
0.86 ± 0.03 
0.94 ± 0.03 
 
0.84 ± 0.04  
0.91 ± 0.03  
 
CON 
0.85 ± 0.06 
0.94 ± 0.03 
 
0.85 ± 0.04 
0.91 ± 0.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHO oxidation (g.min-1) 
SL 
1.21 ± 0.27 
3.24 ± 0.62 
 
1.07 ± 0.29 
2.89 ± 0.42 * 
CON 
1.21 ± 0.46 
3.39 ± 0.53 
 
1.16 ± 0.30 
3.13 ± 0.71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fat oxidation  
(g.min-1) 
SL 
0.44 ± 0.11 
0.34 ± 0.18 
 
0.53 ± 0.14 
0.46 ± 0.14 
CON 
0.46 ± 0.19 
0.35 ± 0.19 
 
0.47 ± 0.16 
0.45 ± 0.32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blood lactate  
(mmol.L-1) 
SL 
1.8 ± 0.7 
4.8 ± 2.1 
 
2.3 ± 1.4 
4.2 ± 2.3 
CON 
2.2 ± 0.9 
5.0 ± 1.6 
 
2.0 ± 1.1 
4.2 ± 1.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70% - 100W 
 
70% - 100W 
Delta Efficiency  
(DE-%) 
SL 
 
26.5 ± 4.5 
 
29.6 ± 8.0 * 
CON 
 
26.3 ± 2.5 
 
26.5 ± 2.4 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Supplementary Digital Content 1 – Total energy and macronutrient intake for SL and CON groups 
before starting the training program (BASELINE) and during the training/diet intervention 
(TRAINING) (mean ± SD). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Total energy 
intake  
 
(kcal.d-1) 
Carbohydrate 
intake  
 
(g.kg-1.d-1) 
Lipid  
intake 
 
(g.kg-1.d-1) 
Protein  
intake 
 
(g.kg-1.d-1) 
SL group 
BASELINE 
2530 ± 660 
4.44 ± 1.3 
1.33 ± 0.49 
1.39 ± 0.28 
 
TRAINING 
2685 ± 500 
5.44 ± 1.2 * 
1.05 ± 0.19 * 
1.57 ± 0.28 * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CON group 
BASELINE 
2715 ± 645 
4.79 ± 1.12 
1.32  ± 0.43 
1.44 ± 0.37 
  
TRAINING 
2835 ± 505 
5.65 ± 0.99 * 
1.02 ± 0.16 * 
1.61 ± 0.22 * 
 
 
*: P < 0.05 as compared to PRE values 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 Supplementary Digital Content 2 - Body composition before and after the training program for 
SL and CON group (mean ± SD). 
  
  
Body mass 
(kg) 
Fat Free mass 
(kg) 
Fat mass  
(kg) 
SL group 
PRE 
70.57 ±5.02 
57.86 ± 29.1 
 9.70 ± 4.08 
POST 69.6 ± 4.97 * 
57.76 ± 27.3 
8.86 ± 3.78 * 
 
 
 
 
 
CON group 
PRE  72.79 ± 3.94 
60.82 ± 45.3 
8.86 ± 2.26 
POST 
72.42 ± 4.13 
60.68 ± 45.3 
8.63 ± 2.36 
 
*: P < 0.05 as compared to PRE values 
 
 
ACCEPTED
Copyright © 2016 by the American College of Sports Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
