 Bulletin ofthe WorldHealth Organization, 61(3): 383-394 (1983)
© World Health Organization 1983
Antimicrobial resistance*
WHO SCIENTIFIC WORKING GROUP
The development of antimicrobial drugs, and particularly of antibiotics, has
played a considerable role in substantially reducing the morbidity and mortality rates
ofmany infectious diseases. However, thefact that bacteria can develop resistance to
antibiotics has produced a situation where antimicrobial agents are losing their
effectiveness because of the spread and persistence of drug-resistant organisms. To
combat this, more and more antibiotics with increased therapeutic and prophylactic
action will need to be developed.
This article is concerned with antibiotic resistance in bacteria which are patho-
genic to man and animals. The historical background is given, as well as some infor-
mation on the present situation and trends ofantibiotic resistance to certain bacteria
in different parts of the world. Considerable concern is raised over the use of anti-
biotics in man and animals. It is stated that antibiotic resistance in human pathogens
is widely attributed to the "misuse" of antibioticsfor treatment and prophylaxis in
man and to the administration of antibiotics to animals for a variety of purposes
(growth promotion, prophylaxis, or therapy), leading to the accumulation of resist-
ant bacteria in their flora. Factors favouring the development of resistance are
discussed.
Constant exposure of the bacterial flora in man and animals to antibioticsa has favoured
the selection of antibiotic-resistant organisms and their wide dissemination in the human
population, and the transfer of resistance genes between bacterial strains has widened the
range of resistant organisms. This exposure is due to the use of antibiotics in human and
veterinary medicine for the treatment or prevention of infections, in animal husbandry for
the promotion of growth, and in various other ways for disease control in agriculture. The
use of antibiotics in fields other than human medicine has been reviewed in previous WHO
publications (1-3), and various proposals were made to limit the impact on bacteria
pathogenic for man. It was accepted in these reports that the administration of antibiotics
to the human population was a major cause for the accumulation of resistant bacteria, but
measures to limit this usage were not discussed in detail.
The Scientific Working Group therefore concentrated its attention on the use of anti-
biotics
in human medicine, and
(1) considered what types of antibiotic use were
inappropriate, (2) provided general guidelines for the appropriate use of antibiotics, and
(3) suggested measures to improve the quality of antibiotic treatment. The Group also
reviewed briefly the operation of restrictions on the use of antibiotics in animal husbandry
and veterinary medicine and suggested improvements in their clinical use in animals.b
* Requests for reprints should be addressed to: Chief, Bacterial and Venereal Infections, Division of Communicable Diseases,
World Health Organization, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland.
' This article is based on part of the report of the WHO Scientific Working Group on Antimicrobial Resistance, which met in
Geneva from 23 to 27 November 1981. The remainder of this report appears as a Memorandum on pages 423-433. The
participants at this meeting are listed on page 392. A French translation of this article will appear in a later issue of the Bulletin.
a This term is used to include both antibiotics and synthetic chemicals with a similar selective antibacterial activity.
b The present article describes the historical background and present situation of antibiotic resistance in bacteria pathogenic
to man, and the use and misuse of antibiotics in man and animals. The remaining topics from the Scientific Working Group's
report appear in the Memorandum on pages 423-433.
4293
-383-
 WHO SCIENTIFIC WORKING GROUP
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE IN BACTERIA PATHOGENIC FOR MAN
Historical background
The first clinically serious consequence of antibiotic resistance to attract considerable
attention was the wide dissemination in hospitals of strains of Staphylococcus aureus that
were resistant to penicillin by virtue of their ability to form an antibiotic-destroying
enzyme, penicillinase-(j3-lactamase), and subsequently acquired resistance to several other
chemically unrelated antibiotics. Some but by no means all of these other resistances were
also mediated by the production of antibiotic-destroying enzymes. From the early 1950s
onwards, these so-called "multiple-antibiotic resistant" staphylococci became endemically
established in most hospitals throughout the world and were for some years the main cause
of hospital-acquired septic infection. Many of the genetic determinants for resistance
in these strains of S. aureus were extrachromosomal pieces of DNA, called plasmids
(R factors), most of which carried the code for resistance to only one antibiotic or group
of related antibiotics; multiple-antibiotic resistance had thus arisen as a result of several
genetic events. The wide dissemination of multiple-antibiotic resistant strains was due to
their spread from patient to patient in populations exposed to several of the antibiotics to
which these strains were resistant.
In the early 1950s it was also observed (4) that certain Gram-negative organisms, notably
strains of Klebsiella, Proteus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa that were naturally insuscep-
tible to currently available antibiotics, were assuming a greater importance as causes of
septic infections in hospitals. This process continued into the 1960s, by which time a
number of other Gram-negative organisms-some of them derived from the natural
environment-had been added to the list of important "hospital" pathogens, and the
established Gram-negative pathogens were acquiring additional resistances to more
recently introduced antibiotics. Resistance in Gram-negative organisms differed from that
in S. aureus in that (1) it was in many cases determined by resistance (R) plasmids that
coded for resistance to several unrelated antibiotics which could be easily transferred as a
single genetic event between bacterial strains, and (2) the R plasmids were transferable not
only between members of a single species but also between members of many genera of
Gram-negative bacilli and cocci.
As a result of these changes, by the early 1970s the Gram-negative bacilli replaced
S. aureus as the most important cause of hospital-acquired septic infections and, at least in
a number of developed countries, widespread endemic prevalences of multiple-antibiotic
resistant strains of S. aureus became uncommon (5).
The serious clinical consequences of antibiotic resistance appeared considerably later in
the general population. Penicillin resistance in S. aureus, which had become common in
hospital-acquired strains by 1950, did not reach a similar frequency in the outside popu-
lation for another ten years or more; and, apart from some spread of exceptionally virulent
hospital strains in the years 1955-60, multiple-antibiotic resistant strains have seldom been
very prevalent in the general population. Multiple-antibiotic resistant strains of group-A
streptococci became very common in some countries in the 1960s, but the clinical
significance was limited by their continued sensitivity to penicillin.
A more serious situation developed when antibiotic resistance became a common cause
of treatment failure in diarrhoeal and enteric diseases. Plasmid-determined transferable
resistance was detected with increasing frequency among shigellae and salmonellae during
the 1960s, and a few years later there were widespread epidemics of severe bacillary
dysentery and of typhoid fever caused by strains that were resistant to several antibiotics
(3), including the agents of choice for the treatment of these infections. In 1974, a plasmid-
determined ,B-lactamase (TEM 1), identical with that found in many enterobacteria,
384
 ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
appeared in Haemophilus influenzae (6-8). In 1976 plasmid-borne, enzyme-mediated
chloramphenicol resistance in H.influenzae was discovered (9) and the emergence of
multiple-resistant strains carrying resistance to ampicillin, chloramphenicol and tetra-
cycline (antibiotics of first choice for the treatment of infections) has been reported more
recently (10, 11).
For most of the organisms so far discussed, the number of carriers greatly exceeds the
number of clinical infections, so that exposure of the whole population to antibiotics might
be expected to favour the development of resistance. With tubercle bacilli, and until
recently gonococci, the situation has been different: clinically infected persons are the main
source of the organism, and high case-finding rates and the elimination of treatment
failures thus assume exceptional importance in controlling resistance. The resistance of
gonococci to penicillin increased slowly over many years, but treatment failure could be
prevented by suitably increased doses of penicillin. This resistance was chromosomal and
non-enzymic; in 1976, however, plasmids determining the production of the TEM
1
,-lactamase appeared in gonococci (12-15), which then exhibited total resistance to
penicillin. (For reviews of the development of resistance in gonococci, see references
16-18).
The present situation
The Working Group reviewed the prevalence of antibiotic resistance in man since the last
WHO report on this subject (3). In this report it was noted that information about the
distribution of such prevalence was patchy, being particularly deficient in the developing
countries and often difficult to interpret because the methods used for testing the
susceptibility to antibiotics were often not standardized. The present Working Group,
after studying the information now available, concluded that, although the frequency
of resistance in individual pathogens and the patterns of multiple resistance varied
considerably between countries and often in different parts of the same country, the
situation had in a number of respects worsened in the last few years.
In most developed countries, endemic hospital infection caused by multiple-antibiotic
resistant strains of S. aureus continued to present less urgent problems than infections with
certain Gram-negative bacilli. There was, however, recent evidence from Australia, the
United Kingdom, and the USA of an increasing number of local outbreaks of infection
caused by staphylococcal strains with a very broad spectrum of resistance to antibiotics,
including meticillin and the aminoglycosides (19-24). Some reports from developing
countries also indicate that strains of S. aureus resistant to locally available antibiotics are
still a major cause of serious infections in hospitals.
The Working Group noted that there had been a further dissemination of strains of
gonococci and of H. influenzae that possessed the TEM 1 ,B-lactamase, and that an addi-
tional type of,3-lactamase had been reported in H. influenzae (25), that multiple-antibiotic
resistant strains of the latter organism had been found (26, 27), and that H. influenzae
type b resistant to both ampicillin and chloramphenicol caused an outbreak of meningitis
with three deaths in an orphanage in Thailand (28). Clinical failure in the ampicillin
treatment of meningitis (caused by H. influenzae) has now been reported with considerable
frequency. In recent years, penicillinase-forming gonococci have shown considerable
spread worldwide (29-31), and several different ,-lactamase plasmids have been identified
among them (32). A penicillinase-producing gonococcus with a high level of resistance to
spectinomycin has been described (33, 34), but such strains appear to be still uncommon.
Decreased susceptibility to the newer cephalosporins has also been described (35). Peni-
cillin-resistant strains of pneumococci had become locally prevalent in South Africa (36),
where they caused treatment failure and the death of infants. This resistance was non-
385
 WHO SCIENTIFIC WORKING GROUP
enzymatic and chromosomally determined, and was often accompanied by resistance to
other antibiotics, including chloramphenicol and tetracycline. Pneumococci with clinically
significant levels of penicillin resistance were also common in Papua New Guinea (37) and
had been found occasionally elsewhere. Antibiotic resistance in Bacteroides had been on
the increase for some years, and a transferable R factor for clindamycin had now been
reported (38). Until quite recently cholera vibrios with R factors coding for multiple-
antibiotic resistance were seen infrequently. Extensive epidemics of cholera have now been
reported from the United Republic of Tanzania (39) and Bangladesh (40), in which an
initially sensitive strain became predominantly resistant within a few months; the R factors
responsible for this indicated resistance to several antibiotics, including tetracycline, the
current drug of first choice for treatment.
Clinically significant resistances may be mediated by antibiotic-inactivating enzymes or
by other resistance mechanisms; and they may be determined genetically on a plasmid or on
the chromosome. Multiple-antibiotic resistance may be specified by a single plasmid or by a
number of distinct resistance genes, some on plasmids and others on the chromosome.
Evidence continues to accumulate of the genetic adaptability of many of the R plasmids
(41). They may be self-transferable or may be accompanied by other plasmids that
mobilize them for transfer. Many of them can move as distinct genetic elements called
"transposons" from a plasmid to the chromosome, or to a phage. This permits modifi-
cation of the pattern of resistance conferred, and the bringing together of resistance deter-
minants and transfer mechanisms appropriate for a fresh host bacterium. Transposition
may also lead to the association on the same plasmid of resistance determinants and genes
for colonization, toxin production and other so-called "virulence factors".
When an infection is treated with an antibiotic to which the causal agent is initially
susceptible, resistance may appear as a result of the transfer of an R plasmid or its trans-
posable resistance determinant from another organism in the patient's flora (42).
Numerous instances have been reported in which an R plasmid, after being introduced into
a hospital in one Gram-negative organism, is subsequently transferred to another strain of
the same or a different species, which then spreads extensively among the patients.
Preliminary evidence from surveillance data presented to the Working Group indicated
that serious consequences of antibiotic resistance were no longer confined to urban
hospitals but were being encountered increasingly in the general population. It also showed
a greater prevalence in developing countries of resistance to easily available antibiotics,
such as ampicillin, tetracycline, chloramphenicol and sulfonamides, than is known to
occur in developed countries. Surveys of ,3-lactamases in enterobacteria from developing
countries revealed a correspondingly greater variety of types, and of instances of multiple
f3-lactamases in the same isolate. Patients in developing countries were thus in a situation in
which only the cheaper antibiotics were available to them and these agents were becoming
progressively less effective. In the absence of local laboratory support and of up-to-date
information about the prevalence of resistance, the choice of an appropriate antibiotic was
becoming a gamble against worsening odds. It was clear that the uncontrolled importation
of the expensive "new" antibiotics now available in developed countries, even if econ-
omically feasible, would cause only a temporary improvement in the situation.
Consequences of widespread antibiotic resistance
Antibiotic resistance limits the therapeutic efficacy of antibiotics against pathogens that
are initially resistant to them or that acquire a transferable resistance from another
organism in the patient's flora during treatment.
Widespread use of antibiotics encourages the overgrowth of other resistant bacteria in
the flora of the treated patient. This process ("superinfection") may have important
386
 ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
clinical consequences, especially in hospital patients, many of whom have an increased
susceptibility to infection by organisms that seldom invade healthy persons. In such
patients these organisms are frequently responsible for respiratory or septicaemic compli-
cations that may be a greater hazard than the infection for which antibiotic treatment was
given.
Wide spectra of antibiotic resistance in prevalent bacteria seriously limit the possibility
of controlling the further spread of resistant organisms by the selective use of anti-
biotics.
THE USE OF ANTIBIOTICS IN MAN
Antibiotic resistance in human pathogens is widely attributed to the misuse of antibiotics
for treatment or prophylaxis in man. Before making proposals for the more rational use of
antibiotics, the Working Group considered the nature and extent of this misuse.
Social pressures favouring the excessive or inappropriate use of antibiotics
The decision to use an antibiotic may be influenced by social pressures that outweigh the
medical indications (43). When antibiotics are available on the open market, the attitude of
the patient and his family is decisive. The desire to do the best for the patient in a situation
of fear and anxiety, coupled with public ignorance about the efficacy of antibiotics in
particular diseases, encourages unnecessary and sometimes damaging treatment. Poor
choice of antibiotics is encouraged by the bewildering multiplicity of names under which
they are marketed, by the promotion in developing countries of antibiotics that are
obsolete or in other ways inappropriate (44), notably unjustified fixed combinations of
drugs, and by misleading advertising material.
Even when the physician is the only or the preferred source of antibiotics, he may find it
difficult to resist pressure from the patient or the family. He is also motivated to do the best
for the patient; unless he has a good knowledge of the management of microbial infections,
of antibiotic action, and of the current local state of susceptibility of pathogens to
antibiotics, he may be tempted to give unnecessary treatment. He may feel that even if an
antibiotic is unlikely to do good it will do no harm, or he may attempt to ensure the efficacy
of treatment by giving larger doses or more prolonged treatment than is necessary. For
similar reasons he may employ broad-spectrum agents or antibiotic combinations as a
routine to cover the possibility of infection by unusual organisms. All of these practices will
be particularly difficult to resist if laboratory and other diagnostic support are not
available.
The misuse of antibiotics
In hospital practice
Recent surveys in North America and the United Kingdom indicate that about one-
quarter of all patients receive one or more courses of antibiotic while in hospital (45-51),
though the rates vary somewhat between hospitals and even more between hospital
departments. In the United Kingdom, some 20o of all patients in general hospitals on any
one day are receiving antibiotics; about one-third of all antibiotic courses are given for
prophylaxis (50). A similar situation exists in many other advanced countries.
387
 WHO SCIENTIFIC WORKING GROUP
Several workers have claimed that the administration of antibiotics was irrational or
inappropriate in a considerable proportion of patients, variously estimated at 38-660/o
(45-47, 51-53). In a retrospective Canadian survey in 1976 (46), only 41% of all courses of
antibiotics were considered to be "rational", 3807
were "irrational", and 22Do were
"questionable".
Antibiotic treatment. Antibiotic therapy is inappropriate if it is unnecessary, or if the
agent is unsuitable or given in the wrong dosage. This may be attributable in varying
degrees to (1) poor clinical decision-taking, (2) absence of or failure to make use of
laboratory support, (3) ignorance of the types of bacteria most likely to cause particular
infections, (4) inadequate information about the current susceptibility of the suspected
causal agent to antibiotics, and (5) ignorance about the pharmacokinetic properties of
particular antibiotics.
An example of the analysis of antibiotic use for treatment is shown in an investigation
carried out in a London hospital which had a well run laboratory service. Antibiotic use
was monitored at the time of administration by an independent team of experts; it was
concluded (51) that in this hospital the most frequent form of therapeutic misuse was the
giving of unnecessary courses of antibiotics. The most common reasons for antibiotiz
treatment were infections or suspected infections of the lower respiratory tract (39%) and
of the urinary tract (20%o). Reconsideration of the clinical, bacteriological and radiological
findings led to the conclusion that there was no significant evidence of pneumonia in 401%
of the patients treated for this disease. Nearly 40%o of all patients aged more than 80 year~
who were admitted to the hospital received antibiotics for "chest infection". In patients
given antibiotics for suspected infection of the urinary tract, no justification could be
found for the treatment in 49%o. Irrational treatment occurred by (1) giving an antibiotic,
or failing to stop treatment, when the initial urine specimen showed no evidence of bacteri-
uria (33%o), and (2) treating bacteriuria in the absence of relevant symptoms in patients on
continuous catheterization or when the only evidence of infection was a "significant"
number of bacteria reported in a single routine midstream urine specimen (16%). There
was thus very considerable overuse of antibiotics attributable to poor clinical decision-
taking, notably inadequate diagnostic criteria for infection and uncritical interpretation of
chest X-ray films and laboratory reports. In this hospital the choice of antibiotics for
infections confirmed by laboratory examination was in general good, but there was
disturbing evidence that, in the absence of a significant laboratory report, physicians had
little idea of the most likely microbial cause of an infection and its probable susceptibility
to antibiotics, and so they often gave inappropriate treatment.
Antibiotic prophylaxis. The widespread use of antibiotics prophylactically has un-
doubtedly contributed greatly to the spread of resistant organisms in hospitals. On the
other hand, antibiotic prophylaxis significantly reduces the risk of infection after certain
types of surgical operation, notably those of the intestinal or urogenital tract (54), and itE
use in these circumstances must be considered justifiable. Misuse can be defined as using
prophylaxis when there is no clear evidence that this will prevent serious clinical infection,
or using a prophylactic regimen that unnecessarily favours the selection of resistant
organisms. Guidelines for the appropriate prophylactic use of antibiotics are given in the
Annex of the second part of this report, which is published as a Memorandum (see
pages 432-433).
In primary health care
There is little quantitative information about antibiotic-prescribing habits in primary
health care. What is available comes from the developed countries and suggests consider-
388
 ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
able misuse in the treatment of mild upper-respiratory-tract infections, febrile episodes,
and diarrhoea. In one survey in the USA (55), nearly 60Vo of physicians used antibiotics to
treat the common cold. Until quite recently, considerable quantities of chloramphenicol
continued to be used mainly by older physicians and in rural areas for the treatment of
infections of the upper respiratory tract, despite repeated official condemnation of the
practice (56, 57). Tetracycline was also widely used for respiratory-tract infections in
children (58). There has been considerable overuse of tetracycline in the United Kingdom
for many years; treatment of patients with relapses of chronic bronchitis using this drug,
which is now believed to be ineffective in such cases, accounted for much of this abuse.
There are now few common diseases in non-tropical areas in which tetracycline is the drug
of first choice (59), but it continues to be widely used in general practice in the United
Kingdom. This wide use of tetracycline has been identified as the main cause for the preva-
lence of tetracycline-resistant strains of Escherichia coli, many of which were also ampi-
cillin resistant, in the faeces of members of the general population in Bristol (60).
The use of antibiotics to treat suspected infections of the urinary tract in women is
certainly excessive. Treatment is commonly given to all women with frequency and dysuria
despite the fact that no more than one-half of them have significant bacteriuria. The
evidence that very short courses of antibiotic are as effective as longer courses in uncompli-
cated urinary-tract infection (61-63) appears to have had little impact so far in primary
health care.
In highly affluent countries there has recently been a tendency to use new high-cost
proprietary agents, such as oral cephalosporins and derivatives of ampicillin, though these
are seldom more effective than cheaper alternatives.
Evidence from developing countries that was presented to the Working Group indicated
that the total consumption of antibiotics was often enormous, but there was little precise
information about the purposes for which they had been given. In most such countries,
antibiotics are freely available on the open market and are often taken without medical
advice. The unexpected finding of widespread trimethoprim resistance in E. coli strains in
Mexico is a probable consequence of uncontrolled use (64). Chloramphenicol is widely
used in developing countries for the treatment of diarrhoea, which is often attributed to
typhoid fever without bacteriological evidence.
The prophylactic use of antibiotics on individual patients outside hospital does not
appear to make a material contribution to total antibiotic usage, and complications
attributable to the development of resistant organisms in such patients are infrequent.
Mass prophylaxis with narrow-spectrum agents such as penicillin, e.g., for the control of
group-A streptococcal infection in institutions, though not always very effective, appears
to have had few untoward consequences. On the other hand, mass prophylaxis with broad-
spectrum antibiotics, e.g., tetracycline, for the control of diarrhoeal diseases is likely to
contribute materially to the spread of resistant strains.
ANTIBIOTIC USAGE IN ANIMALS
It is well recognized that the administration of antibiotics to animals for any purpose
(growth promotion, prophylaxis, or therapy) leads to the accumulation of resistant
bacteria in their flora. Antibiotics have been used for all these purposes for many years and
it is difficult to separate the contribution made by each one to the pool of resistant
organisms in animals. The danger of this pool is due to: (1) antibiotic-resistant pathogens
common to animals and man may reach man by cross-infection, and (2) antibiotic-
resistant, non-pathogenic organisms in an animal may be passed to and colonize man,
389
 WHO SCIENTIFIC WORKING GROUP
thereby carrying R plasmids into the human environment. These R plasmids may sub-
sequently be transferred to human pathogens or to indigenous flora in the human body.
Antibiotic-resistant animal pathogens
Not all animal pathogens cause disease in man. For instance, pathogenic animal
staphylococci (in cattle, poultry and dogs) are mainly distinct from those found in man.
Antibiotic-resistant strains which occur in animals, e.g., in staphylococcal mastitis of
cows, do not therefore present a problem to man. In contrast, many of the enteric Gram-
negative organisms (e.g., Salmonella species and some strains of Campylobacter) infect
man as well as animals. The larger proportion of salmonella infections in man are derived
from eating contaminated meat and therefore, indirectly, from animal sources. Wherever
strains of antibiotic-resistant salmonellae arise in animals, they eventually reach man
(65-67).
The frequency of antibiotic resistance in various salmonella serotypes varies from
country to country. A survey of isolates in the United Kingdom from 1958 to 1979 (68)
revealed that, while resistance to sulfonamides and streptomycin occurred in up to 50Vo of
isolates, multiple-resistance was rarely experienced in most serotypes. Where this did arise,
it occurred almost exclusively in one serotype, namely Salmonella typhimurium, and then
only in a few phage types. In the 1960s multiple resistance was experienced in S. typhi-
murium phage type 29 (69) and, since 1977, principally in phage types 193 and 204 (66, 70).
Available evidence indicates that the selection of these multiple-resistant phage types was
due to the use of antibiotics for treatment rather than for growth promotion. Since
epidemics by multiple-resistant strains have been relatively few, it may be deduced that the
circumstances precipitating the genetic events leading to multiple resistance must have been
rare in the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, once selected, these strains spread rapidly over a
wide area as a result of transport of infected calves, which occurs frequently in the calf
industry, and human infections then follow.
Higher levels of antibiotic resistance have been experienced in the USA. A survey of
animal salmonellae in north-eastern USA (71) revealed that the majority of S. typhi-
murium, S. saint-paul, and S. heidelberg were resistant to three or more antibiotics,
including ampicillin, kanamycin and tetracycline, in addition to sulfonamides and strepto-
mycin. Several authors (65) attribute this resistance, at least in part, to the continuing
widespread use of antibiotics as feed additives, and this may be a significant cause since
antibiotics are often used in the USA at levels considerably higher than those recommended
under EEC (European Economic Community) legislation for growth promotion.
The level of multiple resistance of salmonellae in the Netherlands falls between those
experienced in the United Kingdom and the USA. Multiple resistance is found in a wider
range of serotypes than in the United Kingdom, including S. dublin and S.panama, in
addition to S. typhimurium. After a ban on the use of tetracycline in animal feeds in 1974,
the incidence of tetracycline resistance in S. typhimurium of porcine origin dropped from
about 9007o in 1974 to 34%
in 1980. The incidence of resistance in human strains
concurrently decreased from about 80%7o in 1974 to 250% in 1980. These changes suggest
strongly that, in the Netherlands, the use of tetracycline for growth promotion in animals
played a part in the emergence of drug-resistant salmonellae in pigs and their subsequent
transfer to humans (72-74).
Thus it is clear that marked differences in antibiotic resistance in salmonellae have been
experienced in different countries, which may reflect differences in the use of antibiotics,
methods of animal husbandry, density of animal populations, and local topographical
factors.
390
 ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
Antibiotic resistance in the normal gut flora of animals
The antibiotic resistance status of the normal gut flora of domestic animals is somewhat
different. The oral administration of antibiotics, which is the common route for therapy,
prophylaxis and growth promotion, invariably favours the selection of resistant strains,
particularly from among the Enterobacteriaceae and other Gram-negative bacilli, which
then become predominant.
Evidence is now available confirming that these resistant strains reach man via the food
chain. The most definitive work has been done with E. coli. The highest incidences of
antibiotic-resistant E. coli are found in calves (75), pigs (76) and poultry (77) species in
situations where
antibiotics have been widely
used. Under commercial
slaughter
conditions, contamination of carcasses on the slaughter line regularly occurs with strains of
E. coli of the same 0-serotypes and antibiotic-resistance patterns as those found in the gut
of the animals being slaughtered (77-79). These strains are present in human food through
such meat and meat products (77), subsequently colonize the gut of man (80) and may be
detected among the dominant gut flora for up to 10 days. No evidence has been presented
so far to indicate that antibiotic-resistant E. coli of animal origin can cause clinical disease
in man, such as urinary tract infections, but they obviously form a rich source of R
plasmids that are potentially transferable to a range of Gram-negative bacilli, pathogenic
for man, which may be present in the gut.
The use of antibiotics to prevent food spoilage, which was once a common practice, is
now much less widespread because the high frequency of antibiotic resistance in contami-
nating organisms limits its efficacy. It is probably no longer an important consideration.
Antibiotic usage for growth promotion
The Working Group noted that an earlier WHO report (1) had recommended that no
antibiotic that was of therapeutic value in man, or showed cross-resistance with such an
antibiotic, should be used for animal growth promotion. It is now felt that the implement-
ation of this policy would have only a limited effect on the prevalence of resistant bacteria,
unless the use of the same antibiotic for prophylaxis and treatment in animals was also
restricted.
Prophylactic and therapeutic use of antibiotics
It is not practicable to distinguish between the prophylactic and the therapeutic use of
antibiotics in current veterinary practice because antibiotics are usually given not only to
sick animals but also to their healthy contacts. While recognizing the value of antibiotics
for the treatment of bacterial diseases in animals, the Working Group was of the opinion
that governments and professional bodies should exert greater control over the circum-
stances in which certain agents are administered to animals (see second part of this report,
page 430).
*
*
*
391
 WHO SCIENTIFIC WORKING GROUP
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
Members
J. F. Acar, Service de Microbiologie medicale, Hopital Saint-Joseph, Paris, France
J. Fleurette, Laboratoire de Bacteriologie-Virologie, Faculte de Medecine Alexis Carrel,
Lyon, France
Hu Zhen, Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China
E. H. Kampelmacher, Rijksinstituut voor de Volksgezondheid, Bilthoven, Netherlands
C. M. Kunin, Department of Medicine, University Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA
J. Kupersztoch, Departmento de Genetica, Centro da Investigacion y de Estudios, Mexico
City, Mexico
S. B. Levy, Departments of Medicine and of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
I. Lind, Neisseria Department, Statens Seruminstitut, Copenhagen, Denmark
A. H. Linton, Department of Microbiology, University of Bristol Medical School, Bristol,
England (Rapporteur)
A.
Manten,
Chemotherapy
Laboratory,
Rijksinstituut
voor de Volksgezondheid,
Bilthoven, Netherlands
D. G. Montefiore, Department of Medical Microbiology, University College Hospital,
Ibadan, Nigeria
R. L. Nichols, Department of Microbiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA
T. F. O'Brien, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
M. T. Parker, formerly at the Cross-Infection Reference Laboratory, Central Public
Health Laboratory, London, England (Chairman)
V. I. Pokrovski, Central Institute of Epidemiology, Moscow, USSR
K. B. Sharma, Department of Microbiology, Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi,
India (Rapporteur)
E. A. Vedmina, Central Institute of Advanced Medical Training, Moscow, USSR
F. Vymola, Research Unit on Bacterial Resistance to Antibiotics, Reference Laboratory
for the Control of Chemotherapy, Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Prague,
Czechoslovakia
Observers
B. Gedek, Institut fur Medizinische Mikrobiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat,
Munich, Federal Republic of Germany
WHO Secretariat
G. M. Antal, Bacterial and Venereal Infections, Division of Communicable Diseases
G. Y. Causse, Bacterial and Venereal Infections, Division of Communicable Diseases
(Secretary)
J. F. Dunne, Pharmaceuticals, Division of Diagnostic, Therapeutic and Rehabilitative
Technology
L. Houang, Health Laboratory Technology, Division of Diagnostic, Therapeutic and
Rehabilitative Technology
T. Kereselidze, Bacterial and Venereal Infections, Division of Communicable Diseases
Z. Matyas, Veterinary Public Health, Division of Communicable Diseases
A. H. W. Wahba, Development of Comprehensive Health Services, WHO Regional
Office for Europe, Copenhagen
392
 ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
393
REFERENCES
1. WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. The public health aspects ofantibiotics infeedstuffs. Report
on a Working Group, Bremen, 1-5 October 1973. Copenhagen, WHO Regional Office for
Europe, 1974.
2. WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION. Public health aspects of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the
environment. Report on a Consultation meeting, Brussels, 9-12 December 1975. Copenhagen,
WHO Regional Office for Europe, 1976.
3. WHO Technical Report Series, No. 624, 1978 (Surveillance for the prevention and control of
health hazards due to antibiotic-resistant enterobacteria: report of a WHO meeting).
4. MCGOWAN, J. E. ET AL. J. infect. dis., 132: 316 (1975).
5. PARKER, M. T. ET AL. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 236: 466 (1974).
6. ELWELL, L. P. ET AL. Infection and immunity, 12: 404 (1975).
7. DE GRAAFF, J. ET AL. J. bacteriol., 126: 439 (1976).
8. THOMAS, W. J. ET AL. Lancet, 1: 313 (1974).
9. MANTEN, A. ET AL. Lancet, 1: 702 (1976).
10. STUY, J. H. J. bacteriol., 139: 520 (1979).
11. AZEMUN, P. ET AL. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 20: 168 (1981).
12. ELWELL, L. P. ET AL. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 11: 528 (1977).
13. Sox, T. E. ET AL. J. bacteriol., 138: 510 (1979).
14. PHILLIPS, I. Lancet, 2: 656 (1976).
15. ASHFORD, W. A. ET AL. Lancet, 2: 657 (1976).
16. WILLCOX, R. R. Brit. j. vener. dis., 46: 217 (1970).
17. REYN, A. Asian j. infect. dis., 1: 1 (1977).
18. WHO Technical Report
Series, No. 616,
1978 (Neisseria gonorrhoeae and gonococcal
infections: report of a WHO Scientific Group).
19. MCGOWAN, J. E. ET AL. J. infect. dis., 140: 864 (1979).
20. GRAHAM, D. R. ET AL. J. pediatr., 97: 972 (1980).
21. PRICE, E. H. ET AL. J. hosp. infect., 1: 221 (1980).
22. KING, K. ET AL. Lancet, 2: 698 (1981).
23. HONE, R. ET AL. J. hosp. infect., 2: 119 (1981).
24. SHANSON, D. J. hosp. infect., 2: 119 (1981).
25. RUBIN, L. G. ET AL. Lancet, 2: 1008 (1981).
26.
ROTIMI, V. 0. & TURK, D. C. J. antimicrob. chemother., 8: 187 (1981).
27. KENNY, J. F. ET AL. Pediatrics, 66: 14 (1980).
28. SIMASATHIEN, S. ET AL. Lancet, 2: 1214 (1980).
29.
JAFFE, H. W. ET AL. J. infect. dis., 144: 191 (1981).
30. JOHNSTON, N. A. ET AL. Lancet, 1: 263 (1981).
31. VAN EMBDEN, J. D. A. ET AL. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 18: 789 (1980).
32. ANSINK-SCHIPPER, M. C. ET AL. Lancet, 1: 445 (1982).
33. ASHFORD, W. A. ET AL. Lancet, 2: 1035 (1981).
34.
Editorial note. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 30: 221 (1981).
35. DE Hoop, D. ET AL. Sex. transm. dis., 9: 200 (1982).
36. JACOBS, M. R. ET AL. New Engl. j. med., 299: 735 (1978).
37. GRATTEN, M. ET AL. Lancet, 2: 192 (1980).
38. TALLY, F. P. ETAL. J. infect. dis., 139: 83 (1979).
39. MHALU, F. S. ET AL. Lancet, 1: 345 (1979).
40. THRELLFALL, E. Y. ET AL. Lancet, 1: 1247 (1980).
41. LEVY, S. B. ET AL. (ed.), Molecular biology, pathogenicity and ecology of bacterial plasmids.
New York, Plenum Press, 1981
42. DATTA, N. ET AL. Lancet, 1: 1181 (1981).
43. KUNIN, C. A. Ann. intern. med., 89 (No. 5, pt 2): 802 (1978).
44. GUSTAFFSON, L. L. & WIDE, K. Lancet, 1: 31 (1981).
45. MCGOWAN, J. E. & FINLAND, M. J. infect. dis., 129: 421 (1974).
46. ACHONG, M. R. ET AL. Lancet, 2: 118 (1977).
47. CASTLE, M. ET AL. J. Am. Med. Ass., 237: 2819 (1977).
 394
WHO SCIENTIFIC WORKING GROUP
48. PERRY, T. L. & GUYATT, G. M. Can. Med. Ass. J., 116: 253 (1977).
49. CARRUTHERS, M. M. & GRANT, K. Hlth lab. sci., 15: 44 (1978).
50. SHAPIRO, M. ET AL. New Englandj. med., 301: 351 (1979).
51. Moss, F. ET AL. Lancet, 2: 349, 407, 461 (1981).
52. ROBERTS, A. W. & VISCONTI, J. A. Am. j. hosp. pharm., 29: 828 (1972).
53. SIMMONS, H. E. & STOLLEY, P. D. J. Am. Med. Ass., 227: 1023 (1974).
54. KEIGHLEY, M. R. B. & BURDON, D. W. Antimicrobial prophylaxis in surgery.
Tunbridge Wells, Pitman Medical, 1973.
55. STOLLEY, P. D. ET AL. Ann. intern. med., 76: 537 (1972).
56. BECKER, M. H. ETAL. J. med. educ., 47: 118 (1972).
57. RAY, W. A. ET AL. Ann. intern. med., 84: 266 (1976).
58. RAY, W. A. ET AL. J. Am. Med. Ass., 237: 2069 (1977).
59. CHOPRA, I. ET AL. J. antimicrob. chemother., 8: 5 (1981).
60. RICHMOND, M. H. & LINTON, K. B. J. antimicrob. chemother., 6: 33 (1980).
61. GRUNEBERG, R. N. & BRUMFITT, W. Brit. med. j., 3: 679 (1967).
62. BAILEY, R. R. & ABBOTT, G. D. Nephrology, 18: 316 (1977).
63. BAILEY, R. R. & BLAKE, E. New Z. med. j., 92: 285 (1980).
64. MURRAY, B. E. ET AL. New Engl. j. med., 306: 130 (1982).
65. LYONS, R. W. ET AL. J. Am. Med. Ass., 243: 546 (1980).
66. ROWE, B. ET AL. Veterinary record, 105: 468 (1979).
67. RYDER, R. W. ET AL. J. infect. dis., 142: 485 (1980).
68. LINTON, A. H. Veterinary record, 108: 328 (1981).
69. ANDERSON, E. S. Brit. med. j., 3: 333 (1968).
70. THRELFALL, E. J. ET AL. Veterinary record, 103: 438 (1978).
71. NEU, H. C. ET AL. J. infect. dis., 132: 617 (1975).
72. MANTEN, A. ET AL. Bull. Wld Hith Org., 45: 85 (1971).
73. VAN LEEUWEN, W. J. ET AL. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 16: 237 (1979).
74. VAN LEEUWEN, W. J. ET AL. Antonie van Leeuwenhoekj. microbiol. serol., 48: 85 (1982).
75. HOWE, K. & LINTON, A. H. J. appl. bact., 40: 317 (1976).
76. LINTON, A. H. Veterinary record, 100: 354 (1977).
77. LINTON, A. H. ET AL. J. appl. bact., 42: 365 (1977).
78. HOWE, K. ETAL. J. appl. bact., 41: 37 (1976).
79. LINTON, A. H. ET AL. J. appl. bact., 42: 89 (1977).
80. LINTON, A. H. ET AL. J. appl. bact., 43: 465 (1977).
