 The adaptive immune system restrains Alzheimer’s
disease pathogenesis by modulating microglial function
Samuel E. Marsha,b, Edsel M. Abuda,b,1, Anita Lakatosc,1, Alborz Karimzadehb,d, Stephen T. Yeungc,2, Hayk Davtyane,
Gianna M. Fotea,b, Lydia Lauc, Jason G. Weingerd,3, Thomas E. Laneb,c,d,4, Matthew A. Inlayb,d, Wayne W. Poonc,
and Mathew Blurton-Jonesa,b,c,5
aDepartment of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697; bSue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Research Center, University of
California, Irvine, CA 92697; cInstitute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697; dDepartment of
Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697; and eDepartment of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Molecular
Medicine, Huntington Beach, CA 92647
Edited by Bruce S. McEwen, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, and approved January 19, 2016 (received for review December 24, 2015)
The innate immune system is strongly implicated in the pathogen-
esis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In contrast, the role of adaptive
immunity in AD remains largely unknown. However, numerous clin-
ical trials are testing vaccination strategies for AD, suggesting that T
and B cells play a pivotal role in this disease. To test the hypothesis
that adaptive immunity influences AD pathogenesis, we generated
an immune-deficient AD mouse model that lacks T, B, and natural
killer (NK) cells. The resulting “Rag-5xfAD” mice exhibit a greater
than twofold increase in β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology. Gene expression
analysis of the brain implicates altered innate and adaptive immune
pathways, including changes in cytokine/chemokine signaling and
decreased Ig-mediated processes. Neuroinflammation is also greatly
exacerbated in Rag-5xfAD mice as indicated by a shift in microglial
phenotype, increased cytokine production, and reduced phagocytic
capacity. In contrast, immune-intact 5xfAD mice exhibit elevated
levels of nonamyloid reactive IgGs in association with microglia,
and treatment of Rag-5xfAD mice or microglial cells with preim-
mune IgG enhances Aβ clearance. Last, we performed bone marrow
transplantation studies in Rag-5xfAD mice, revealing that replace-
ment of these missing adaptive immune populations can dramati-
cally reduce AD pathology. Taken together, these data strongly
suggest that adaptive immune cell populations play an important
role in restraining AD pathology. In contrast, depletion of B cells and
their appropriate activation by T cells leads to a loss of adaptive–
innate immunity cross talk and accelerated disease progression.
Alzheimer’s | amyloid | inflammation | microglia | IgG
A
lzheimer’s disease (AD) is the leading cause of age-related
neurodegeneration, affecting over 5.2 million people in the
United States alone (1). Pathologically, AD is characterized by two
hallmark protein aggregates, amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and neurofi-
brillary tangles, that are accompanied by neuroinflammation, in-
cluding microgliosis, elevated cytokine production, and activation of
complement pathways (2–5). Initially, microglia respond to and
surround plaques, degrading Aβ by phagocytosis (for review, see
refs. 6–8). However, chronic activation of these cells shift microglia
to a more proinflammatory and less phagocytic state (9, 10). Al-
though much of the data implicating microglia in AD has come
from neuropathological investigation, recent genome-wide associ-
ation studies have provided the first genetic evidence (to our
knowledge) linking microglia dysfunction to AD, with the discovery
of risk polymorphisms in several immune system genes: CR1,
TREM2, CD33, HLA-DRB5, MS4A6A, and ABCA7 (8, 11–15).
In contrast to the field’s increasing understanding of the role of
innate immunity in AD, comparatively little is known about whether
the adaptive immune system might also influence AD. Those studies
that have examined these peripheral populations have largely fo-
cused on questions about their potential as biomarkers or their role
in active Aβ immunization (3, 16). However, the adaptive and innate
immune systems rarely function independently of each other, and
thus cross talk between peripheral and central immunity such as
cytokine and chemokine signaling likely plays an important albeit
understudied role in AD. In support of this notion, two recent
studies demonstrated profound effects of peripherally derived neu-
trophils and T-regulatory cells (Tregs) on AD pathogenesis (17, 18).
Despite this exciting recent progress, many of the mechanisms and
actions of other peripheral immune cell populations in AD remain
unknown, and thus a great a deal of additional study is needed.
Here, we show that the adaptive immune system plays an im-
portant role in limiting amyloid pathology in AD, by generating and
examining a novel immune-deficient transgenic model of AD. The
resulting “Rag-5xfAD” mice, which lack an adaptive immune re-
sponse, exhibit dramatically increased Aβ plaque load, despite al-
ready being a very aggressive model of amyloidosis. Gene ontology
(GO) analysis revealed significant alterations in cytokine/chemokine
signaling and microglial associated pathways that were validated at
the protein level. Furthermore, peripherally derived nonamyloid
reactive immunoglobulin G (IgG) appears to enter the brain and
enhance microglial phagocytosis of Aβ in immune-intact mice,
Significance
Neuroinflammation and activation of innate immunity are path-
ological hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In contrast, very
few studies have examined the impact of the adaptive immune
system in AD pathogenesis. Here, we find that genetic ablation
of peripheral immune cell populations significantly accelerates
amyloid pathogenesis, worsens neuroinflammation, and alters
microglial activation state. Critically, it appears that loss of IgG-
producing B cells impairs microglial phagocytosis, thereby exac-
erbating amyloid deposition. Conversely, replacement of IgGs via
direct injection or bone marrow transplantation reverses these
effects and reduces Aβ pathology. Together, these results high-
light the importance of the adaptive immune system and its in-
teractions with microglia in the pathogenesis of AD.
Author contributions: S.E.M., E.M.A., A.L., A.K., H.D., J.G.W., T.E.L., M.A.I., W.W.P., and M.B.-J.
designed research; S.E.M., E.M.A., A.L., A.K., S.T.Y., H.D., G.M.F., L.L., J.G.W., W.W.P., and
M.B.-J. performed research; S.E.M., E.M.A., A.L., A.K., S.T.Y., H.D., G.M.F., J.G.W., T.E.L., M.A.I.,
W.W.P., and M.B.-J. analyzed data; and S.E.M., E.M.A., W.W.P., and M.B.-J. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: The data reported in this paper have been deposited in the Gene Ex-
pression Omnibus (GEO) database, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo (accession no. GSE77574).
1E.M.A. and A.L. contributed equally to this work.
2Present address: Department of Immunology, University of Connecticut School of Med-
icine, Farmington, CT 06030.
3Present address: Neurocentria, Inc., Fremont, CA 94538.
4Present address: Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City, UT 84112.
5To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: mblurton@uci.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1525466113/-/DCSupplemental.
E1316–E1325
|
PNAS
|
Published online February 16, 2016
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1525466113
 whereas the loss of this protective mechanism in immune-deficient
Rag-5xfAD mice appears to accelerate AD progression. Con-
versely, replacement of IgGs by either direct injection or bone
marrow transplantation reduces Aβ pathology in Rag-5xfAD mice.
Taken together, these studies suggest that alterations in peripheral
immune function such as those that occur with age, comorbid dis-
eases, or genetic variation could dramatically affect the develop-
ment and progression of AD.
Results
Generation of an Immune-Deficient AD Mouse Model. To examine
the impact of the adaptive immune system on AD pathogenesis, we
backcrossed a well-established AD transgenic line, 5xfAD mice
(19), onto a Rag2−/−/Il2rγ−/− double-knockout background, creating
mice that lacked T cells, B cells, and natural killer (NK) cells. Al-
though NK cells are typically considered part of the innate immune
system, recent studies suggest they also play important roles in
adaptive immunity (20). In the process of generating these immune-
deficient Rag-5xfAD and “Rag-WT” littermates, we also produced
strain-matched equivalent immune-competent AD transgenic and
wild-type mice termed “WT-5xfAD” and “WT-WT,” respectively
(Fig. S1). Although the parental 5xfAD mice are maintained on a
purebred C57Bl6 strain, the Rag2−/−/Il2rγ−/− line is maintained as a
C57Bl6/Bl10 hybrid. To verify that the resulting lines exhibited
equivalent genetic backgrounds, we therefore examined tail DNA
using a 384 mouse SNP array (Charles River Laboratories), which
revealed equivalent mixtures of Bl6 and Bl10 alleles in each group.
To confirm that the resulting Rag-5xfAD and Rag-WT mice
lacked B, T, and NK cells, flow cytometry was performed on
splenocytes extracted from 6-mo-old mice. Analysis confirmed
that all immune-deficient animals, regardless of AD transgene
expression, lacked B cells, CD4 and CD8 T cells, as well as NK
cells and NK T cells (Fig. S1 B–E). Given the large role of in-
flammation in the pathogenesis of AD, we also examined whether
immune-competent animals exhibited altered proportions of these
immune cells. Analysis of splenocytes by flow cytometry found that
percentages of B, CD8 T, NK, and NK-T cells were all unchanged
with 5xfAD transgene expression. However, there was a small but
significant difference in the percentages of CD4 T cells between
the WT-WT and WT-5xfAD animals (Fig. S1 B–E).
Aβ Levels Are Dramatically Increased in Rag-5xfAD Mice. To de-
termine whether deletion of these peripheral immune cell pop-
ulations influences AD pathogenesis, we performed a highly
sensitive multiplex ELISA to quantify soluble and insoluble
levels of Aβ within the brain. Surprisingly, and despite the use of
an aggressive model of amyloidosis, we found that all Aβ species
examined (Aβ38, 40, 42) were elevated nearly twofold in Rag-
5xfAD vs. WT-5xfAD half-brains (Fig. 1 A and B). Additionally,
immunohistochemistry was performed and plaque volume cal-
culated from confocal z-stack images using IMARIS image
analysis software (Fig. 1 C and D). Analysis of the dentate gyrus
of the hippocampus, one of the most plaque-dense areas in the
5xfAD model, revealed that Rag-5xfAD mice exhibited a highly
significant (P < 0.001), nearly fourfold increase in total plaque
volume in this region (Fig. 1E). Quantification of small-, me-
dium-, and large-sized plaques also revealed that Rag-5xfAD
animals exhibit 2.5- to 3-fold increases in the number of plaques
of each size compared with WT-5xfAD (P < 0.05; Fig. 1F).
Increased Aβ Load Is Not a Result of Increased APP Expression or Aβ
Production. Given the substantial increase in Aβ observed in Rag-
5xfAD mice, we next sought to determine whether these findings
arose from increased Aβ production or decreased clearance. Al-
though autosomal-dominant AD is characterized primarily by
mutations that increase production of Aβ or Aβ42/40 ratio (21,
22), recent studies demonstrate that sporadic AD patients pri-
marily accumulate Aβ as a result of impaired clearance (23–25).
However, the 5xfAD model, as with most AD transgenic animals,
includes familial AD mutations, and thus increased Aβ production
could potentially underlie the observed changes in amyloid load.
We therefore examined the protein levels of human amyloid
precursor protein (APP) and Presenilin-1 (PS-1) by Western blot.
Although Rag-5xfAD and WT-5xfAD mice exhibited the expected
transgene-mediated increases in APP and PS-1 vs. wild-type con-
trols, no differences in APP and PS-1 expression were detected
between Rag-5xfAD and WT-5xfAD groups (Fig. S2 A–C). Fur-
thermore, quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis of APP processing
genes found no significant changes in expression of hAPP,
hPSEN1, Adam10, Adam17, Bace1, and Bace2 between WT-
5xfAD and Rag-5xfAD (Fig. S2D). Thus, it appears that the ob-
served elevations in plaque load in Rag-5xfAD are not due to
increased APP production and/or processing, but rather likely
mediated via altered Aβ clearance.
GO Analysis Implicates Disrupted Cross Talk Between Adaptive and
Innate Immunity. Next, we used microarrays and functional genomic
analysis to provide an unbiased assessment of the pathways that are
altered in immune-deficient vs. immune-intact AD and wild-type
mice. Whole-brain mRNA from all four groups was compared using
Affymetrix Mouse Transcriptome 1.0 array, revealing 2,552 signifi-
cantly altered genes between Rag-5xfAD and WT-5xfAD groups
Fig. 1.
Aβ is significantly elevated in immune-incompetent Rag-5xfAD mice.
(A and B) Aβ multiplex ELISA reveals significant elevations in all three Aβ species
in both soluble and insoluble brain lysates from Rag-5xfAD vs. WT-5xfAD. Rep-
resentative confocal images of Aβ40/42-immunoreactive plaques within the
dentate gyrus demonstrates a similar robust change in plaque load between WT-
5xfAD (C) and Rag-5xfAD mice (D). (E) IMARIS-based 3D quantification of Aβ
confirms ELISA and immunohistochemical (IHC) findings, demonstrating a more
than fourfold increase in dentate gyrus plaque volume in Rag-5xfAD mice
(green) vs. WT-5xfAD mice (blue). (F) Stratification of dentate plaque numbers by
size likewise reveals significant elevations in Rag-5xfAD mice. Data are repre-
sented as mean ± SEM. ANOVA, P < 0.05, and Fisher’s protected least-significant
difference (PLSD) post hoc, §P < 0.01, #P < 0.001; n ≥ 8 mice/group.
Marsh et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 16, 2016
|
E1317
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
 (Fig. 2 A and B). Interestingly, the great majority of these changes
reflected decreased expression (green) of many T-cell– and B-cell–
associated transcripts in Rag-5xfAD vs. WT-5xfAD mice (Fig. 2B),
supporting the notion that these peripheral populations can be found
within the brain. In contrast, many of the up-regulated genes (red) in
Rag-5xfAD mice consisted of chemokine and cytokine signaling
factors involved in recruitment of peripheral cells as well as altered
microglial-enriched transcripts. Next, GO analysis was used to
identify potential biological or signaling mechanisms that were sig-
nificantly altered between Rag-5xfAD and WT-5xfAD brains. This
analysis further implicated both adaptive and innate immunity as
changes in GO terms such as cytokine activity, Ig binding, and
antigen-receptor–mediated signaling were highly significant (Fig.2C).
To determine whether changes affected microglia function and
whether microglial-associated transcripts were specifically altered,
we also performed hierarchical cluster analysis of microglial-
enriched genes and compared these results to neuronally enriched
mRNAs (Fig. 2 D and E), as identified from a recently published
online RNA-seq database (26). As shown, Rag-5xfAD microglial
gene expression clusters very well together but completely separate
from WT-5xfAD mice. In addition, Rag-5xfAD mice exhibit pro-
found increases (red) in the great majority of microglial transcripts
Fig. 2.
Gene expression and ontology analysis reveal significant alterations in both adaptive and innate immunity and microglial-enriched genes.
(A) Affymetrix gene expression analysis revealed 2,552 significantly altered genes between Rag-5xfAD (light green) and WT-5xfAD (dark green) groups. In
contrast, only 553 genes were different between WT-5xfAD and WT-WT (dark blue) groups. Thus, the combination of AD transgenes and immune deficiency
leads to a profound alteration in gene expression within the brain, well beyond that produced by AD pathology alone. (B) Hierarchical cluster analysis of
these 2,552 differentially expressed genes confirmed that each genotype could be grouped together based on similar gene expression profiles (red, up-
regulated; green, down-regulated). (C) Next, gene ontology (GO) enrichment was performed, identifying numerous examples of significantly altered
pathways involving adaptive or innate immunity as well as antigen presentation and Ig binding. (D and E) Based on the GO analysis, we further examined
subsets of microglial-enriched (D) or neuronal-enriched (E) genes (26) via unsupervised hierarchical clustering. This analysis again further implicated innate
immune system disruption as the Rag-5xfAD and WT-5xfAD groups clustered very well via microglial-specific genes, but not via neuronal genes. In contrast,
WT-WT (dark blue) and Rag-WT (light blue) groups did not cluster well together for either microglial or neuronal transcripts. P < 0.05 was defined as the
cutoff to identify the statistical significance of enrichment analyses in C.
E1318
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1525466113
Marsh et al.
 (Fig. 2D), far beyond that observed in WT-5xfAD mice compared
with the WT-WT group. Interestingly, no significant changes are
detected between WT-WT and Rag-WT microglial genes (Dataset
S1) and these groups fail to separate by hierarchical clustering (Fig.
2D), suggesting that the impact of the adaptive immune system
on microglial gene expression occurs primarily in response to AD
pathology rather than an inherent developmental difference. In
contrast to the interactions between AD pathology and immune
deficiency on microglia gene expression, neuronal genes showed far
greater variability as Rag5xfAD and WT-5xfAD groups failed to
cluster together (Fig. 2E). Thus, changes in neuronal expression are
far more variable and less systemic than the observed microglial al-
terations. Together, these analyses prompted us to further examine
the role of microglia dysfunction in Rag-induced exacerbation of
AD pathology.
Microglial Activation and Phagocytosis Is Altered in Rag-5xfAD
Animals. Given that our genomic analysis strongly implicated
microglial dysfunction, we next sought to determine whether al-
terations in microglial number or morphology could explain the
increased Aβ. To quantify microglial number and to model the
branching of microglial processes, immunohistochemical and
IMARIS-based 3D analysis of Iba1+ microglia was performed
(Fig. 3 A–D). Upon activation by reactive stimuli, microglial typ-
ically become more amoeboid with shorter and less complex
processes that can be accurately quantified via unbiased IMARIS
3D rendering (7). Confocal Z stacks were captured from the
dentate gyrus by a blinded observer, and then microglial number,
process length, and branching were assessed. As expected, we
found that WT-5xfAD mice exhibited substantial increases in
microglial cell number vs. WT-WT mice and a corresponding
reduction in microglial branching and process length, indicative of
activated phenotype (Fig. 3 E–G). However, we also found that
Rag-5xfAD mice exhibited an additional significant increase in
microglial number and decreases in branching and process length
vs. WT-5xfAD mice, suggesting that Rag-5xfAD microglia may be
further or differentially activated relative to WT-5xfAD mice (Fig.
3 E–G). Interestingly, we also found that Rag-WT microglia had
on average slightly longer processes and a small increase in
branching vs. WT-WT microglia (Fig. 3 F and G). Thus, it appears
that the loss of B, T, and NK cells can subtly modulate the phe-
notype of microglia within the brain in the absence of pathology.
Given the observed changes in microglial number and mor-
phology in Rag-5xfAD mice, we reasoned that other alterations in
microglial function likely occur. We therefore used a multiplex
ELISA-based assay [Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) proinflam-
matory panel 1] to measured protein levels of several important
cytokines within the brain. For each of these cytokines, we found
no differences between WT-WT and Rag-WT mice (Fig. 3 H–L).
In contrast, several key proinflammatory cytokines produced by
microglia including interleukin 1β (IL-1β), interleukin 6 (IL-6),
and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) were significantly elevated in
WT-5xfAD animals compared with WT-WT mice. Furthermore,
these same cytokines were even further elevated as much as
twofold in Rag-5xfAD mice compared with WT-5xfAD (Fig. 3 H–
J). Although levels of interferon-gamma (IFNγ) were significantly
Fig. 3.
Microglia morphology and brain cytokine profile are significantly altered in Rag-5xfAD mice. (A–D) Representative images of microglia (Iba1+) in the
dentate gyrus of WT-WT, WT-5xfAD, Rag-WT, and Rag-5xfAD mice. (E–G) Automated analysis using IMARIS software illustrates that microglial number, total
process length/microglia, and number of process branches/microglia are significantly altered by lack of adaptive immune system and AD pathology. (H–J)
Results from MSD proinflammatory multiplex array reveal that Rag-5xfAD mice exhibit significant elevations in proinflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, and
TNFα within the brain vs. WT-5xfAD mice. (K) However, IFNγ levels are unchanged from basal WT levels in Rag-5xfAD mice due to lack of IFNγ-producing T
cells. (L) Levels of the antiinflammatory cytokine IL-10 are unchanged regardless of immune or transgene status. Data are represented as mean ± SEM.
ANOVA, P < 0.05, and Fisher’s PLSD post hoc, *P < 0.05, §P < 0.01, #P < 0.001; n ≥ 8 animals/group.
Marsh et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 16, 2016
|
E1319
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
 increased in WT-5xfAD animals compared with WT-WT, no
change was observed in Rag-5xfAD animals from basal Rag-WT
levels, consistent with a lack of T-cell–derived IFNγ that would be
expected in Rag mice (Fig. 3K). In addition to traditional proin-
flammatory cytokines, two recent studies demonstrated that
the antiinflammatory cytokine interleukin 10 (IL-10) negatively
regulates amyloid pathology (27, 28). We therefore also examined
levels of IL-10 in all four groups. However, our analysis revealed no
differences in IL-10 between Rag-5xfAD and WT-5xfAD (Fig. 3L),
and thus, IL-10 is likely not responsible for the observed differences
in Aβ in this model.
As microglial gene expression, morphology, and cytokine pro-
duction were different in Rag-5xfAD mice, we wondered whether
microglial phagocytosis of Aβ might also be altered. We therefore
used high-power confocal z-stack imaging with IMARIS software
colocalization, surface reconstruction, and volumetric quantification
to analyze Aβ phagocytosis (28–30). Using this approach, we quan-
tified the proportion of Aβ localized to microglial phagolysosomes
and detected a nearly 39.6% decrease in phagocytic efficiency
(P = 0.016) in Rag-5xfAD microglia vs. WT-5xfAD microglia (Fig. 4).
Elevated Levels of IgG Are Found in Association with Microglia in WT-
5xfAD Mice. While examining immunolabeling with various mouse
monoclonal antibodies in WT-5xfAD mice, we observed an un-
expected but consistent pattern of microglial labeling. We hypothe-
sized the labeling could be endogenous mouse Ig within the brain.
We therefore used an anti-mouse f(ab′)2 fluorescently labeled sec-
ondary antibody to determine whether endogenous mouse IgG
might be present within the WT-5xfAD brain. Indeed, we found
significant immunolabeling of mouse IgG in association with Iba1+
microglia in WT-5xfAD brains (Fig. 5 A–C). In contrast, IgG la-
beling was greatly diminished in WT-WT mice (Fig. 5 E–G) and
absent in Rag-5xfAD and Rag-WT mice (Fig. 5 E–O). Further ex-
amination of endogenous IgG labeling also revealed a high degree of
labeling in the choroid plexus of both WT-WT and WT-5xfAD mice
(Fig. 5 D and H). Although the choroid plexus can often exhibit
nonspecific immunoreactivity, the specificity of this IgG labeling was
confirmed by the absence of staining in the Rag-WT and Rag-5xfAD
mice (Fig. 5 L and P). To further examine the differences in IgG
levels between WT-5xfAD and WT-WT brains, we measured total
mouse IgG within the brain and plasma by ELISA. Confirming our
histological findings, we detected a significant 50% increase in IgG
levels in the brains of WT-5xfAD vs. WT-WT mice (Fig. 6A).
However, this difference was not due to an increase in peripheral
IgG levels, as plasma IgG measurements revealed no differences
between WT-WT and WT-5xfAD mice (Fig. 6B).
The observed increase in WT-5xfAD brain IgGs could be me-
diated by a breakdown in the blood–brain barrier (BBB), as recent
studies have shown that the BBB can become disrupted in AD (31,
32). To determine whether this was the case, we used an Evans
Blue permeability assay to assess BBB integrity (33) in all four
genotypes. Interestingly, this experiment revealed no alterations in
BBB permeability (Fig. S3 A and B); thus, IgG accumulates in the
brains of WT-5xfAD by an alternative mechanism that currently
remains unclear.
Fig. 4.
Microglial phagocytosis is impaired in Rag-5xfAD mice. (A and F) Representative immunohistochemical images of microglia (Iba1), Aβ (82E1), and
microglial phagolysosomes (CD68). (B–E and G–J) Three-dimensional reconstruction of microglia (blue; Iba1), Aβ (red; 82E1), phagolysosomes inside microglia
(green; colocalization of CD68 and Iba1), and amyloid within phagolysosomes (white; colocalization of 82E1 and microglial phagolysosomes). (K) Calculation
of the Aβ internalization ratio (Aβ within phagolysosomes, normalized to microglia number and total Aβ within the field) revealed a 39.6% decrease in Aβ
internalization in Rag-5xfAD microglia compared with WT-5xfAD. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. Student’s t test, P < 0.05; n > 8 animals/genotype.
Fig. 5.
Elevated levels of IgG are found in association with microglia in WT-
5xfAD mice. (A–C) Representative immunohistochemical images showing that
mouse IgG (red) is observed in close association with microglial membranes
(green) in the brains of WT-5xfAD mice but not in WT-WT, Rag-WT, or Rag-5xfAD
mice (E–G, I–K, and M–O). (D and H) The choroid plexus of WT-5xfAD and WT-WT
both exhibit high levels of IgG. The specificity of the IgG labeling of choroid plexus
is confirmed by the lack of labeling in Rag-5xfAD and Rag-WT mice (L and P).
E1320
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1525466113
Marsh et al.
 WT-5xfAD Mice Lack Aβ-Specific B Cells and Anti-Aβ IgGs. To de-
termine whether these endogenous IgGs were directed against
Aβ, we collected sera from WT-WT, WT-5xfAD, and Rag-
5xfAD mice and measured anti-Aβ antibody titers using a well-
validated ELISA (34, 35). Despite testing extremely undiluted
samples of sera, we found no differences between WT-WT and
WT-5xfAD in levels of anti-Aβ IgG antibodies (Fig. 6E). In
contrast, highly diluted samples taken from positive control mice
that had been actively immunized against Aβ (red bar) exhibited a
robust signal in this assay (Fig. 6E). Thus, neither WT-WT nor WT-
5xfAD mice exhibit induction of anti-Aβ antibodies. To further
confirm these results, we used a sensitive ELISpot assay to quantify
numbers of anti-Aβ IgG producing B cells within the spleen. Using
Rag-5xfAD mice that lack B cells as a negative control and mice
actively immunized with Aβ peptide as a positive control, we de-
tected no differences in anti-Aβ IgG producing B cells between WT-
WT and WT-5xfAD splenocytes (Fig. 6C). As the immune response
to a brain-localized antigen would be expected to be increased within
the cervical lymph nodes, we next repeated this assay using cells
extracted from the deep and superficial cervical lymph nodes.
Analysis again revealed no differences between WT-WT and WT-
5xfAD mice (Fig. 6D). We also performed an assay to determine
whether WT-5xfAD mice exhibited a specific T-cell response to Aβ
as indicated by IFNγ production following Aβ exposure. Similar to
the B-cell ELISpot, this assay again revealed no differences in the
reactivity of T cells to Aβ between genotypes (Fig. 6F). Last, further
examination of brain IgG localization by high-magnification confocal
microscopy confirmed that WT-5xfAD IgGs do not directly associate
with amyloid plaques (Fig. 6 G–J) and instead colocalize with Iba1+
microglia, again suggesting that these brain-localized anti-
bodies are not Aβ specific.
Preimmune Mouse IgG Induces Microglial Phagocytosis of Aβ. To
further confirm the importance of brain-localized IgG in restraining
Aβ pathology, we used Image Streamer flow cytometry to accu-
rately quantify the effects of preimmune IgGs, purified from the
sera of wild-type unimmunized mice, on microglial Aβ phagocytosis.
Unlike standard flow cytometry, the Amnis Image Streamer system
captures 256 fluorescent and phase-contrast images of cells as they
pass through the system. On-board computer algorithms then cal-
culate whether a given fluorescent signal is localized within the cell
as opposed to being stuck to the outside membrane (Fig. 7A). Using
this system, we examined whether the presence of preimmune
mouse IgG could induce the phagocytosis of fibrillar fluorescently
labeled Aβ by BV2 microglial cells. Cells were cultured in serum-
free media and treated overnight with or without IL-1β to further
mimic the proinflammatory state of the AD brain. Ten hours later,
cells were exposed to fluorescently labeled fibrillized Aβ with or
without preimmune IgGs for 1 h and then examined using the
Image Streamer system. Interestingly, whereas relatively few cells
phagocytosed Aβ following treatment with PBS/PBS, treatment
with preimmune IgG induced a sixfold increase in the number of
cells with internalized Aβ (Fig. 7 A–C). Furthermore, of those cells
that did actively phagocytose Aβ, ones treated with IgG showed a
twofold increase in the amount of Aβ phagocytosed as measured by
mean fluorescence intensity within the cell (Fig. 7D). IL-1β/PBS
pretreatment did not significantly change the amount of phagocy-
tosis compared with PBS/PBS treatment. However, combined
treatment of IL-1β/IgG significantly reduced the number of cells that
phagocytosed Aβ vs. IgG alone, but slightly increased the amount of
Aβ within those cells (Fig. 7 C–E), consistent with the known effects
of IL-1β on microglial activation state and phagocytosis (36).
IgG Induces Aβ Phagocytosis via a Src/Syk/PI3K Signal Transduction
Pathway. Next, we performed an additional in vitro experiment to
determine the mechanism by which preimmune IgG activates
phagocytic machinery to enhance Aβ clearance. IgG binding to Fc
receptors can activate a signal transduction cascade that leads to
membrane remodeling, actin reorganization, and the formation of a
phagasome (reviewed in ref. 37). In macrophages and monocytes,
this signaling pathway is initiated via phosphorylation of immu-
noreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) by enzymes of
the Src tyrosine-kinase family and the subsequent docking and ac-
tivation of spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk). This in turn activates
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and other downstream sig-
naling pathways to induce phagosome formation. To determine
whether IgG treatment of BV2 microglial cells activates this same
canonical pathway, we pretreated BV2 cells with inhibitors of Src/
Syk or PI3K and then exposed them to fluorescent Aβ and IgG for
30 min. Cells were then washed and fixed, and fluorescent Aβ in-
Fig. 6.
WT-5xfAD mice exhibit increased total brain
IgG but no Aβ-specific antibodies or Aβ-reactive B/T
cells. (A) ELISA of soluble brain lysates confirms that
WT-5xfAD mice exhibit significantly more brain IgG
(∼150%) compared with WT-WT mice. Unsurprisingly,
no levels of IgG are observed in Rag-WT or Rag-5xfAD
mice. (B) Despite the increase in brain IgG, no differ-
ences are observed between levels of peripheral IgG in
plasma detected using the same ELISA. (C–F) Several
assays demonstrate a lack of specific Aβ-reactive cells
or anti-Aβ antibodies in WT-5xfAD compared with WT-
WT. (C) ELISpot assay of splenocytes demonstrates
background levels of Aβ-binding B cells within the
spleen of WT-WT and WT-5xfAD mice; n = 5 animals/
group. However, positive control mice receiving an
active Aβ immunogen exhibit a very strong anti-Aβ
B-cell response. (D and F) Analysis of lymphocytes
isolated from the cervical lymph nodes (pooled deep
and superficial) again find no difference in number of
reactive cells between WT-WT and WT-5xfAD mice
and that overall numbers of reactive cells are less than
observed in splenocytes samples; n = 10 animals/
group. (E) ELISA of sera collected from WT-WT, WT-
5xfAD, and Rag-5xfAD mice demonstrates that equiv-
alent background levels of Aβ-binding antibodies are
detected in both WT-WT and WT-5xfAD mice, well
below levels detected in mice receiving active Aβ im-
munization. (G–J) High-magnification confocal images further demonstrate a lack of IgG labeling of Aβ plaques, whereas surrounding Iba1+ microglial processes
colabel with IgG. All data are represented as mean ± SEM. ANOVA, P < 0.05, and Fisher’s PLSD post hoc, #P < 0.001.
Marsh et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 16, 2016
|
E1321
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
 ternalization was imaged and quantified by a blinded observer. As
before, we again found that treatment with preimmune IgGs dra-
matically increases Aβ phagocytosis (Fig. S4). In contrast, pre-
treatment with a selective inhibitor of Src and Syk tyrosine kinases
[3,4-methylenedioxy-β-nitrostyrene (MNS)] or the PI3K inhibitor
wortmannin, completely abrogated Aβ phagocytosis (Fig. S4).
Thus, it appears that IgG-induced uptake of Aβ by microglial
cells involves activation of Src/Syk/PI3K phagocytosis signal
transduction pathways.
Preimmune Mouse IgG Reduces Aβ Plaque Load in Vivo. Consistent
with our in vitro analysis, previous studies have demonstrated that
injection of preimmune IgG into the brain of a different transgenic
AD model can promote Aβ clearance (38). To determine whether
a similar approach can reduce Aβ in a mouse model that lacks B,
T, and NK cells, we replicated this design by stereotactically
injecting preimmune IgG (2 μL of 1 mg/mL) into one hippocampus
and PBS into the contralateral hippocampus of Rag-5xfAD mice.
Seven days later, mice were killed, and amyloid burden was
assessed, revealing a significant reduction in Aβ plaque volume by
50.9% (P = 0.01) on the IgG-injected side (Fig. S5 A–C). Further
subanalysis demonstrated that IgG delivery also significantly re-
duced the number of large plaques (P = 0.01; Fig. S5D).
Bone Marrow Adoptive Transfer Reduces Aβ Pathology in Rag-5xfAD
Mice. To determine whether replacing the missing adaptive im-
mune cell populations in the periphery could also reverse the ef-
fects of immune deficiency on AD pathology, adoptive transfer of
whole bone marrow was performed. At 2 mo of age, Rag-5xfAD
mice received an injection of either 500,000 whole bone marrow
cells from age- and sex-matched immune-intact WT-5xfAD mice
or an equivalent injection of vehicle into the retroorbital venous
sinus. Mice were allowed to age normally for 4 mo, and then brains
were processed for analysis. Successful engraftment was confirmed
by flow-cytometric analysis of splenocytes at the time of killing (Fig.
S6 A and B). Next, using both biochemical and histological end-
points, we assessed the impact of bone marrow transplantation
on Aβ pathology. Immunohistochemical analysis of hippocampal
amyloid burden revealed a significant 47.4% reduction in plaque
volume in mice that received bone marrow transplants (P < 0.05;
Fig. 8 A–C). Subanalysis of plaque load demonstrated that numbers
of both medium and large plaques were significantly reduced with
bone marrow transplantation (P < 0.05) and numbers of small pla-
ques were almost significantly decreased (P = 0.056) (Fig. 8D). To
confirm our immunohistochemical analysis, we followed up with
ELISA measurement of Aβ and detected a significant reduction in
Aβ40 and nearly a significant reduction in Aβ38 (P = 0.058) (Fig.
8E). To determine whether endogenous mouse IgG was present in
the brain following bone marrow engraftment, we also examined
mouse IgG levels by ELISA and immunohistochemistry. These
analyses confirmed that replacement of peripheral immune cells
could elevate levels of IgG within the brain (Fig. 8F) and likewise led
to the characteristic colabeling of microglia with endogenous mouse
IgG (Fig. 8 G–N). Taken together, these data strongly implicate
adaptive immunity, the production of IgGs, and cross talk between
peripheral and central immune systems as being critical for regulating
and restraining the development of AD pathology.
Discussion
Although the role of the brain’s innate immune cells, microglia, in
AD has been extensively examined, the influence of peripheral
immune cell populations in this disease has been underexplored. In
the current study, we sought to address this by creating a novel
immune-deficient model of AD. The resulting Rag-5xfAD mice
lack B, T, and NK cells and develop aggressive AD-like neuropa-
thology. Most interestingly, we find that deletion of these periph-
eral immune populations leads to a greater than twofold increase
in amyloid burden. Similar to sporadic AD patients, our data reveal
that the increase in pathology is not driven by altered Aβ pro-
duction, but likely via impaired clearance (23–25). To better un-
derstand precisely how Aβ clearance is decreased in Rag-5xfAD
mice, we used unbiased GO analysis, which implicated microglia
function and changes in both adaptive and innate immunity.
The detection of IgGs within the brains of immune-intact AD
transgenics suggested that antibody-mediated clearance mechanisms
may be involved. Interestingly, we find that, although immune-intact
5xfAD mice exhibit IgGs within their brain, these antibodies and the
B cells that produce them are not specific for Aβ. Rather, our data
reveal that non–Aβ-specific antibodies can significantly enhance the
phagocytosis of Aβ fibrils by activating Src/Syk/PI3K phagocytic
signaling pathways. Furthermore, delivery of IgG to Rag-5xfAD
Fig. 7.
Preimmune IgG is sufficient to induce robust Aβ phagocytosis. (A) Representative bright-field, and fluorescent images from Amnis Imagestreamer
flow cytometry of fibrillar Aβ phagocytosis within BV2 microglial cells. (B) Raw data from phagocytosis flow cytometry demonstrating the gating of cells with
internalized fluorescent fAβ (boxed regions). (C) Analysis of live BV2 cells with internalized Aβ demonstrates that addition of preimmune IgG induces a nearly
sixfold increase in the percentage of cells that have phagocytosed Aβ. (D) Histogram of intensity of fluorescent Aβ only within cells that have internalized Aβ.
(E) Amount of Aβ internalized within phagocytic cells illustrates that pretreatment with IgG increases the amount of amyloid internalized by over twofold on
average. Interestingly, pretreatment of cells with IL-1β significantly reduces the number of phagocytic cells, but increases the amount of Aβ they engulf. Data
are represented as mean ± SEM. ANOVA, P < 0.05, and Fisher’s PLSD post hoc, *P < 0.05, §P < 0.01, #P < 0.001; n = 6 wells/group.
E1322
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1525466113
Marsh et al.
 mice by either direct stereotactic injection or peripherally via bone
marrow transplantation leads to a corresponding decrease in Aβ.
Previous reports have implicated a role for non–Aβ-specific an-
tibodies in Aβ clearance. For example, Gammagard, a formulation
of human immunoglobulins, has been tested in both AD models
and patients (39, 40). In mouse models, these studies have shown
that IgGs can reduce Aβ levels especially when directly injected into
the brain (38, 41), and our own data have confirmed these findings.
However, despite promising phase II results, a phase III clinical trial
of Gammagard in mild-to-moderate AD patients failed to improve
cognition. However, Gammagard did significantly reduce Aβ levels
and slow cognitive decline in a preplanned subgroup analysis of
patients carrying the ApoE4 risk allele (39, 40). Further support for
the potential influence of peripheral IgG in the clearance of Aβ
pathology has recently been suggested by a group that used trans-
cranial focused ultrasound to transiently open the BBB. Following
ultrasound, this group observed a significant reduction in amyloid
pathology, which they suggested might be due to increased in-
filtration of endogenous IgG into the brain (42, 43).
Although the lack of cognitive improvement in the Gammagard
trials is discouraging, there is a growing consensus that AD will
likely have to be tackled during the prodromal phase with primary
or secondary prevention trials, as even Aβ-targeting antibodies
have failed to improve cognition in phase III trials (44, 45). It is
therefore quite possible that Gammagard or other IgG formula-
tions, perhaps combined with transient permeabilization of the
BBB through focused ultrasound, might provide increased benefit
if tested in prodromal AD.
One disease that dramatically affects the adaptive immune sys-
tem is HIV/AIDS. Before the advent of antiretroviral therapies,
dementia was a common cause of morbidity in HIV, affecting up to
50% of patients (46). Furthermore, Aβ accumulation within the
brain and changes in cerebrospinal fluid Aβ levels that mimic AD
are observed in these patients and correlate well with cognitive
dysfunction (47, 48). Although HIV primarily targets CD4 T-helper
populations, these cells play a critical role in the induction of Ig class
switching by B cells and the maturation of B cells into IgG-pro-
ducing plasma cells (49). It is therefore interesting to speculate that,
as in our immune-deficient AD mouse model, immunodeficiency in
humans might likewise impair the clearance of Aβ from the brain.
An important question is how the current data fit with a recent
study examining the effects of Tregs on AD pathogenesis (17).
Tregs normally serve to suppress the systemic immune system
and protect against autoimmune disease (50). However, in AD
mouse models, it appears that this immunosuppressive activity
may be detrimental, impairing the ability of the adaptive immune
system to respond to and restrain Aβ pathology. When Tregs are
depleted for example, Aβ pathology decreased dramatically,
whereas compounds that promote Treg differentiation and func-
tion exacerbate pathology (17). In comparison, Rag-5xfAD mice
lack not only Tregs but also many other components of the
adaptive immune system including CD4 and CD8 T cells, B cells,
and plasma cells. These other components are many of the target
cells that Tregs serve to restrain; thus, deletion of all of these
populations in Rag-5xfAD mice produces an effect that is very
similar to the effect produced by promoting Treg function. It
therefore appears that the current study and this recent report on
Tregs support a similar conclusion about the importance of pe-
ripheral leukocyte populations in restraining AD pathology.
It is important to acknowledge some potential caveats regarding
the interpretation of the current study. Perhaps the most important
is that the Rag-5xfAD mice may exhibit some inherent develop-
mental differences in microglial function. However, no changes in
microglial number, cytokine levels, and gene expression profiles
between WT-WT and Rag-WT mice were observed. Only a small
but significant difference in microglial morphology between these
Fig. 8.
Bone marrow transplantation reduces am-
yloid in Rag-5xfAD mice. (A and B) Representative
immunohistochemical images demonstrate a signif-
icant reduction in amyloid burden in the dentate
gyrus of animals receiving bone marrow (B) com-
pared with those receiving vehicle injections (A).
(C and D) IMARIS-based 3D quantification of Aβ
confirms a reduction in both total Aβ volume and the
numbers of medium and small plaques (P < 0.05).
The number of small plaques trended lower in bone
marrow-treated animals (P = 0.056). (E) Multiplex
ELISA confirmed the IHC findings as Aβ40 was sig-
nificantly reduced, and Aβ38 and Aβ42 trended
down as well. (F) ELISA analysis of brain IgG levels
demonstrated elevated levels in mice receiving bone
marrow, although not quite at the same levels as
WT-5xfAD mice. (G–N) Importantly, bone marrow-
treated Rag-5xfAD mice also exhibit similar and ex-
tensive immunohistochemical labeling of microglia
with IgG, as described above in WT-5xfAD mice (Fig.
5). Unsurprisingly, this labeling was absent in mice
receiving vehicle injections. Data are represented as
mean ± SEM. ANOVA, P < 0.05, and Fisher’s PLSD post
hoc, *P < 0.05, §P < 0.01; N, 4–5 per group.
Marsh et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 16, 2016
|
E1323
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
 two groups exists (Figs. 2D and 3 F and G, and Dataset S1). To-
gether, these data suggest that, if any potential developmental ef-
fects of adaptive immune system ablation on microglial function are
present, they are subtle and only manifest in an environment ne-
cessitating adaptive–innate immunity cross talk such as in response
to a robust insult such as Aβ accumulation.
Another interesting question that remains is precisely how IgG
levels become elevated in WT-5xfAD brains. Only 0.1% of circulating
IgGs reach the brain in wild-type mice by passive diffusion (51,
52). Because no apparent increase in BBB permeability was de-
tected in 5xfAD mice, other routes for IgG entry may be impor-
tant. Recent evidence has implicated the choroid plexus as a
gateway for immune signals reaching the brain (53, 54), and in
support of this hypothesis, high levels of IgG were present within
the choroid plexus of immune-intact mice. Emerging evidence
implicates choroid plexus dysfunction in AD (55, 56). Thus, it is
possible that the choroid plexus regulates the influx of IgG into
the brain. Alternatively, increased association with microglial Fc
receptors or decreased clearance of IgGs from the brain might
also play a role in the observed IgG elevations (57, 58).
Taken together, our data reveal a significant and previously
unidentified role for the adaptive immune system in AD patho-
genesis. Not only does the loss of B, T, and NK cells
substantially accelerate amyloid pathogenesis, but it also exac-
erbates the neuroinflammatory phenotype of microglia while
decreasing phagocytic activity. One mechanism by which these
peripheral cell populations exert their effect is through the pro-
duction of IgGs. Our data confirm that IgG alone is sufficient to
increase phagocytosis in vitro and that delivery of IgG directly to
the brains of Rag-5xfAD mice or into circulation via adoptive
transfer can induce plaque clearance. Our study therefore adds to
a growing area of research that highlights the importance of the
peripheral immune system in CNS function and AD (17, 18), and
demonstrates the need to better understand how these peripheral
cell populations act in concert with microglia to influence the CNS
in both normal and diseased conditions.
Materials and Methods
Animals. All animal procedures were performed in strict accordance to the
guidelines of the National Institutes of Health and University of California In-
stitutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The Rag-5xfAD immune-deficient
AD mouse model was created by backcrossing 5xFAD transgenic mice onto a
Rag2/il2rγ double-knockout background. Briefly, 5xfAD mice (MMRRC strain:
034848-JAX) express two cointegrated and coinherited transgenes (APP and PS-
1). The APP transgene includes three familial AD mutations (Swedish, Florida,
London), and the PS-1 transgene includes two mutations (M146L and L286V) (19).
Purebred C57Bl6 5xfAD mice were crossed with Rag2/il2rγ double-knockout mice
(Taconic; 4111) (59), followed by repeated littermate crosses from each genera-
tion (Fig. S1A), to create mice that are heterozygous for the APP/PS-1 transgenes
and lack both copies of the Rag2 and Il2rγ genes (Il2rγ −/y in males). We also
simultaneously generated strain-matched immune-deficient mice wild type for
the AD transgenes hereafter referred to as Rag-WT, as well as strain-matched
immune-competent AD and WT mice referred to as WT-5xfAD and WT-WT, re-
spectively. Sex- and age-matched mice were used, and all animals were group
housed on a 12-h/12-h light/dark cycle with access to food and water ad libitum.
Immunohistochemistry. Fluorescent immunohistochemical analysis followed
previously described established protocols (60). Primary antibodies used for
immunohistochemical analysis included the following: Iba1 (Wako), Iba1
(Abcam), CD68 (Abcam), Aβ40 (Life Technologies), Aβ42 (Life Technologies),
82E1 (IBL America), GFAP (Millipore), f(ab′)2 fragment of goat anti-mouse
IgG directly conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 or 555 (Life Technologies). Sec-
tions were incubated in primary antibodies overnight followed by detection
with appropriate Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibody (Life Tech-
nologies) and coverslipped using Fluoromount-G with or without DAPI
(Southern Biotech). Fibrillar amyloid was visualized using Amylo-Glo (Bio-
sensis) diluted 1:100 in 0.01 M PBS (61).
Confocal Microscopy and Quantitative Analysis. Immunofluorescent sections
were visualized, and images were captured using an Olympus FX1200 confocal
microscope. Aβ plaques were quantified using the Surfaces function followed by
volume analysis in IMARIS software (Bitplane). IMARIS-based quantification of
microglial number, morphology, and Aβ phagocytosis followed previously de-
scribed methods using the Colocalization and Surfaces functions (28–30, 33). To
calculate Aβ internalization ratio, the volume of Aβ within CD68+ phagolysosomes
was normalized to microglia number and total Aβ volume within the field. All
images were captured and analyzed by a blind observer using coded slides.
Affymetrix Transcriptome Array. mRNA was extracted from frozen half-brains
using RNA Plus Universal Mini Kit (Qiagen), and sample purity and concen-
tration were verified by Bioanalyzer (Agilent). Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse
Transcriptome 1.0 arrays were then used to collect global transcriptional
profiles in 16 samples (4 per group) by the University of California, Irvine (UCI)
Genomics High-Throughput Facility. Background correction and normalization
of raw data were conducted via robust multiarray analysis algorithm imple-
mented in Bioconductor package “oligo 1.32.” All samples passed quality
control analysis. Additionally, array features were filtered with Bioconductor
packages “genefilter 1.50” and “mta10sttranscriptcluster.db 8.3.1” for Entrez
IDs resulting in ∼24,600 genes for further analysis.
Unsupervised Hierarchical Clustering, Functional Enrichment, and GO. Un-
supervised hierarchical clustering (R packages flashClust 1.01-2 and gplots
2.17) were performed on subsets of genes that have previously been shown
to be enriched in microglia or neurons (26). Differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) were determined between all contrasts of genotypes, and multiple
testing was done with Benjamini–Hochberg method to obtain the cor-
responding jlogFCj and P value implemented in Bioconductor package
“limma 3.24.25.” Genes with adjusted P value of <0.01 were used for
constructing Venn diagram (JMP Pro-11.2 software) and GO analyses.
Bioconductor packages “topGO 20.2,” “GO.db 3.1.2,” and “gage 2.18”
were used to perform GO enrichment for the DEGs found significant in
Rag5xfAD vs. WT5xfAD contrast. P < 0.05 was defined as the cutoff to
identify the statistical significance of enrichment analyses.
IgG and B-Cell/T-Cell Reactivity by ELISA and ELISPOT. Blood was collected from
retroorbital sinus, and titers of anti-Aβ antibodies in mouse sera were de-
termined by ELISA as previously described (34, 35). Spleens, deep cervical
lymph nodes (DCLNs), and superficial cervical lymph nodes (SCLNs) were
collected, and antibody-forming B cells specific to Aβ were detected in
splenocytes and pooled DCLN/SCLN lymphocytes by ELISPOT (Mabtech).
Splenocytes or lymphocytes were incubated for 24 h in 96-well plates coated
with Aβ peptide, and the assay was performed following manufacturer’s
protocol (Mabtech). Sera and splenocytes were also collected from mice
immunized with Aβ as a positive control (34, 35). Analysis of IFNγ production
by T cells was performed in DCLN/SCLN lymphocytes by ELISpot assay (BD
Biosciences). Cultures of lymph node cells were restimulated in vitro with
soluble Aβ (10 μg/mL) for 20 h. The numbers of spot-forming cells per 106
lymph node cells stimulated with Aβ were then counted.
In Vitro Phagocytosis Assay. Phagocytosis was assessed following previous
methods with some modifications (36, 62). First, BV2 cells (63) (3.0 × 105
cells per well) were exposed to either proinflammatory cytokine IL-1β (20
ng/mL; Thermo Fisher Scientific) or 0.1% BSA in PBS for 10–12 h. After IL-1β
or PBS preexposure, the cells were changed to serum-free DMEM and then
exposed to fAβ1–42 (10 μg/mL) with murine IgG (0.5 mg/mL; Jackson
ImmunoResearch Laboratories) or PBS for 1 h at 37 °C. Next, the cells were
washed three times with prewarmed PBS to remove unassociated fAβ1–42.
Cold PBS was added to wells, and the cells were collected, centrifuged
(5 min, 600 × g), washed in PBS, and suspended in flow cytometer buffer
(PBS with 0.1% BSA and 0.5 mM EDTA) and placed on ice. BV2 cells were in-
cubated with rat anti-CD16/32 Fc receptor block (2 mg/mL; BD Biosciences) for
5 min at 4 °C. Cells were then stained with anti–CD45-APC clone 30-F11
(Tonbo Biosciences) at 1:200 in flow cytometer buffer. Samples were then
analyzed using Amnis Imagestreamerx Mark II Imaging Flow Cytometer
(Millipore). fAβ1–42 phagocytosis was analyzed using the IDEAS software
onboard Internalization Wizard algorithm. Figures represent single cells that
internalized fAβ1–42 from each group (n = 6) with mean and SE reported.
Bone Marrow Adoptive Transfer. Age- and sex-matched immune intact 5xfAD
mice served as donors for bone marrow adoptive transfer. Donor mice were
killed by CO2 asphyxiation, femurs were removed, and whole bone mar-
row was harvested by flushing the marrow contents with PBS. Marrow was
then treated with ammonium chloride–potassium buffer to lyse red blood
cells, filtered through a 70-μm nylon mesh, and cell numbers were counted
by hemocytometer. Each recipient (n = 4–5 females/group) was anes-
thetized with isoflurane before receiving 500,000 live cells in 100 μL or
E1324
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1525466113
Marsh et al.
 equivalent volume of PBS via retroorbital injection. To confirm engraft-
ment, at the time of killing, splenocytes were collected and analyzed for
the presence of B, T, and NK cells by flow cytometry as described in SI
Materials and Methods.
SI Materials and Methods. Detailed descriptions of all other standard exper-
imental procedures, including tissue processing, flow cytometry, Western
blot, ELISA, Evans Blue assay, qPCR, cell culture, Aβ preparation, phagocytosis
inhibition, intracranial IgG injection, and statistical analysis, can be found in
SI Materials and Methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank the University of California, Irvine Genomics
High-Throughput Facility for performing the Mouse Transcriptome 1.0 Array.
Special thanks to Andy Agazaryan and Joy Davis for assistance with establish-
ment of the Rag-5xfAD model. We also thank the Institute for Immunology and
Drs. Eric Pearlman and Jennifer Atwood for assistance with Amnis Image
streamer, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease for
contributing the C57BL/6J × C57BL/10SgSnAi)-(KO) γc-(KO)Rag2 mice to Taconic.
Thanks also to Laura McIntyre and Dr. Craig Walsh for assistance in isolation of
cervical lymph nodes. This work was supported by NIH Grant RF1AG048099 (to
M.B.-J.), Alzheimer’s Association Grant BFG-14-317000 (to M.B.-J.), NIH Grant
P50 AG016573 (to W.W.P. and M.B.-J.), NIA Grant T32 AG00096-30 (to S.E.M.),
and NINDS Grant T32 NS082174-01 (to S.E.M.).
1. Alzheimer’s Association (2014) 2014 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers
Dement 10(2):e47–e92.
2. McAlpine FE, Tansey MG (2008) Neuroinflammation and tumor necrosis factor sig-
naling in the pathophysiology of Alzheimer’s disease. J Inflamm Res 1:29–39.
3. Maier M, et al. (2008) Complement C3 deficiency leads to accelerated amyloid beta
plaque deposition and neurodegeneration and modulation of the microglia/macrophage
phenotype in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice. J Neurosci 28(25):6333–6341.
4. Wyss-Coray T, Rogers J (2012) Inflammation in Alzheimer disease—a brief review of
the basic science and clinical literature. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2(1):a006346.
5. Guillot-Sestier MV, Town T (2013) Innate immunity in Alzheimer’s disease: A complex
affair. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 12(5):593–607.
6. Lee CY, Landreth GE (2010) The role of microglia in amyloid clearance from the AD
brain. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 117(8):949–960.
7. Mosher KI, Wyss-Coray T (2014) Microglial dysfunction in brain aging and Alzheimer’s
disease. Biochem Pharmacol 88(4):594–604.
8. Heneka MT, et al. (2015) Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet Neurol
14(4):388–405.
9. Hickman SE, Allison EK, El Khoury J (2008) Microglial dysfunction and defective beta-am-
yloid clearance pathways in aging Alzheimer’s disease mice. J Neurosci 28(33):8354–8360.
10. Krabbe G, et al. (2013) Functional impairment of microglia coincides with beta-
amyloid deposition in mice with Alzheimer-like pathology. PLoS One 8(4):e60921.
11. Bradshaw EM, et al.; Alzheimer Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (2013) CD33 Alzheimer’s
disease locus: Altered monocyte function and amyloid biology. Nat Neurosci 16(7):848–850.
12. Griciuc A, et al. (2013) Alzheimer’s disease risk gene CD33 inhibits microglial uptake of
amyloid beta. Neuron 78(4):631–643.
13. Guerreiro R, et al.; Alzheimer Genetic Analysis Group (2013) TREM2 variants in Alz-
heimer’s disease. N Engl J Med 368(2):117–127.
14. Jay TR, et al. (2015) TREM2 deficiency eliminates TREM2+ inflammatory macrophages and
ameliorates pathology in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. J Exp Med 212(3):287–295.
15. Wang Y, et al. (2015) TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the microglial response in an
Alzheimer’s disease model. Cell 160(6):1061–1071.
16. Pellicanò M, et al. (2012) Immune profiling of Alzheimer patients. J Neuroimmunol
242(1-2):52–59.
17. Baruch K, et al. (2015) Breaking immune tolerance by targeting Foxp3(+) regulatory T
cells mitigates Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Nat Commun 6:7967.
18. Zenaro E, et al. (2015) Neutrophils promote Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology and
cognitive decline via LFA-1 integrin. Nat Med 21(8):880–886.
19. Oakley H, et al. (2006) Intraneuronal beta-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration,
and neuron loss in transgenic mice with five familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations:
Potential factors in amyloid plaque formation. J Neurosci 26(40):10129–10140.
20. Dranoff G (2004) Cytokines in cancer pathogenesis and cancer therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer 4(1):11–22.
21. Reiman EM, et al. (2012) Brain imaging and fluid biomarker analysis in young adults
at genetic risk for autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease in the presenilin 1 E280A
kindred: A case-control study. Lancet Neurol 11(12):1048–1056.
22. Potter R, et al. (2013) Increased in vivo amyloid-β42 production, exchange, and loss in
presenilin mutation carriers. Sci Transl Med 5(189):189ra77.
23. Mawuenyega KG, et al. (2010) Decreased clearance of CNS beta-amyloid in Alz-
heimer’s disease. Science 330(6012):1774.
24. Wildsmith KR, Holley M, Savage JC, Skerrett R, Landreth GE (2013) Evidence for im-
paired amyloid β clearance in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther 5(4):33.
25. Tarasoff-Conway JM, et al. (2015) Clearance systems in the brain—implications for
Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurol 11(8):457–470.
26. Zhang Y, et al. (2014) An RNA-sequencing transcriptome and splicing database of
glia, neurons, and vascular cells of the cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 34(36):11929–11947.
27. Chakrabarty P, et al. (2015) IL-10 alters immunoproteostasis in APP mice, increasing
plaque burden and worsening cognitive behavior. Neuron 85(3):519–533.
28. Guillot-Sestier MV, et al. (2015) Il10 deficiency rebalances innate immunity to miti-
gate Alzheimer-like pathology. Neuron 85(3):534–548.
29. Guillot-Sestier MV, Doty KR, Town T (2015) Innate immunity fights Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Trends Neurosci 38(11):674–681.
30. Leinenga G, Götz J (2015) Scanning ultrasound removes amyloid-β and restores
memory in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Sci Transl Med 7(278):278ra33.
31. Deane R, et al. (2008) apoE isoform-specific disruption of amyloid beta peptide
clearance from mouse brain. J Clin Invest 118(12):4002–4013.
32. Zlokovic BV (2013) Cerebrovascular effects of apolipoprotein E: Implications for Alzheimer
disease. JAMA Neurol 70(4):440–444.
33. Elmore MR, et al. (2014) Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor signaling is necessary
for microglia viability, unmasking a microglia progenitor cell in the adult brain.
Neuron 82(2):380–397.
34. Davtyan H, et al. (2010) DNA prime-protein boost increased the titer, avidity and
persistence of anti-Abeta antibodies in wild-type mice. Gene Ther 17(2):261–271.
35. Davtyan H, Petrushina I, Ghochikyan A (2014) Immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s dis-
ease: DNA- and protein-based epitope vaccines. Methods Mol Biol 1143:259–281.
36. Koenigsknecht-Talboo J, Landreth GE (2005) Microglial phagocytosis induced by fi-
brillar beta-amyloid and IgGs are differentially regulated by proinflammatory cyto-
kines. J Neurosci 25(36):8240–8249.
37. García-García E, Rosales C (2002) Signal transduction during Fc receptor-mediated
phagocytosis. J Leukoc Biol 72(6):1092–1108.
38. Sudduth TL, Greenstein A, Wilcock DM (2013) Intracranial injection of Gammagard, a
human IVIg, modulates the inflammatory response of the brain and lowers Aβ in APP/PS1
mice along a different time course than anti-Aβ antibodies. J Neurosci 33(23):9684–9692.
39. Knight EM, Gandy S (2014) Immunomodulation and AD—down but not out. J Clin
Immunol 34(Suppl 1):S70–S73.
40. Relkin N (2014) Clinical trials of intravenous immunoglobulin for Alzheimer’s disease.
J Clin Immunol 34(Suppl 1):S74–S79.
41. Counts SE, et al. (2014) Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment exerts antiox-
idant and neuropreservatory effects in preclinical models of Alzheimer’s disease.
J Clin Immunol 34(Suppl 1):S80–S85.
42. Jordão JF, et al. (2013) Amyloid-β plaque reduction, endogenous antibody delivery and
glial activation by brain-targeted, transcranial focused ultrasound. Exp Neurol 248:16–29.
43. Burgess A, et al. (2014) Alzheimer disease in a mouse model: MR imaging-guided
focused ultrasound targeted to the hippocampus opens the blood-brain barrier and
improves pathologic abnormalities and behavior. Radiology 273(3):736–745.
44. Carrillo MC, et al. (2013) Can we prevent Alzheimer’s disease? Secondary “prevention”
trials in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement 9(2):123–131.e1.
45. Liu E, et al.; Bapineuzumab 301 and 302 Clinical Trial Investigators (2015) Amyloid-β
11C-PiB-PET imaging results from 2 randomized bapineuzumab phase 3 AD trials.
Neurology 85(8):692–700.
46. Ances BM, Ellis RJ (2007) Dementia and neurocognitive disorders due to HIV-1 in-
fection. Semin Neurol 27(1):86–92.
47. Brew BJ, Pemberton L, Blennow K, Wallin A, Hagberg L (2005) CSF amyloid beta42
and tau levels correlate with AIDS dementia complex. Neurology 65(9):1490–1492.
48. Soontornniyomkij V, et al. (2012) Cerebral β-amyloid deposition predicts HIV-associ-
ated neurocognitive disorders in APOE e4 carriers. AIDS 26(18):2327–2335.
49. Xu W, Banchereau J (2014) The antigen presenting cells instruct plasma cell differ-
entiation. Front Immunol 4:504.
50. Sakaguchi S, Yamaguchi T, Nomura T, Ono M (2008) Regulatory T cells and immune
tolerance. Cell 133(5):775–787.
51. Poduslo JF, Curran GL, Berg CT (1994) Macromolecular permeability across the blood–
nerve and blood–brain barriers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91(12):5705–5709.
52. Fuller JP, Stavenhagen JB, Teeling JL (2014) New roles for Fc receptors in neuro-
degeneration-the impact on immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s disease. Front Neurosci 8:235.
53. Ransohoff RM, Engelhardt B (2012) The anatomical and cellular basis of immune
surveillance in the central nervous system. Nat Rev Immunol 12(9):623–635.
54. Schwartz M, Baruch K (2014) The resolution of neuroinflammation in neuro-
degeneration: Leukocyte recruitment via the choroid plexus. EMBO J 33(1):7–22.
55. Baruch K, et al. (2014) Aging. Aging-induced type I interferon response at the choroid
plexus negatively affects brain function. Science 346(6205):89–93.
56. Bergen AA, Kaing S, Ten Brink JB, Gorgels TG, Janssen SF; Netherlands Brain Bank
(2015) Gene expression and functional annotation of human choroid plexus epithe-
lium failure in Alzheimer’s disease. BMC Genomics 16(1):956.
57. Schlachetzki F, Zhu C, Pardridge WM (2002) Expression of the neonatal Fc receptor
(FcRn) at the blood-brain barrier. J Neurochem 81(1):203–206.
58. Deane R, et al. (2005) IgG-assisted age-dependent clearance of Alzheimer’s amyloid beta
peptide by the blood-brain barrier neonatal Fc receptor. J Neurosci 25(50):11495–11503.
59. Cao X, et al. (1995) Defective lymphoid development in mice lacking expression of the
common cytokine receptor gamma chain. Immunity 2(3):223–238.
60. Blurton-Jones M, et al. (2009) Neural stem cells improve cognition via BDNF in a
transgenic model of Alzheimer disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106(32):13594–13599.
61. Schmued L, et al. (2012) Introducing Amylo-Glo, a novel fluorescent amyloid specific
histochemical tracer especially suited for multiple labeling and large scale quantifi-
cation studies. J Neurosci Methods 209(1):120–126.
62. Webster SD, et al. (2001) Antibody-mediated phagocytosis of the amyloid beta-peptide in
microglia is differentially modulated by C1q. J Immunol 166(12):7496–7503.
63. Blasi E, Barluzzi R, Bocchini V, Mazzolla R, Bistoni F (1990) Immortalization of murine
microglial cells by a v-raf/v-myc carrying retrovirus. J Neuroimmunol 27(2-3):229–237.
Marsh et al.
PNAS
|
Published online February 16, 2016
|
E1325
NEUROSCIENCE
PNAS PLUS
