 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 5 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
Introduction
Chronic pain is a major human health problem affecting almost 
one-quarter of the population at any one time (1–3). Chronic pain 
is difficult to manage, treatment options are limited and associ-
ated with unwanted side effects, and the identification of novel 
pharmacotherapeutic targets remains challenging. Recently, the 
EGFR has received attention for its therapeutic potential against 
pain. EGFR inhibition is the first-line treatment for non–small 
cell lung cancer, and there have been a number of case reports 
suggesting that EGFR inhibition provides rapid relief of cancer 
pain (4–8). Cancer patients administered EGFR inhibitors report 
a significant reduction in pain scores and an overall improve-
ment in quality of life independent of the effect on tumor pro-
gression and size (6).
The EGFR is a member of the ErbB family of tyrosine kinase 
receptors (9) that regulate cellular growth, survival, proliferation, 
and differentiation of fibroblasts and hepatocytes (10, 11). Sever-
al ligands can bind to and activate EGFR, including EGF, TGF-α, 
heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HB‑EGF), amphiregulin, 
betacellulin, and epiregulin (EREG) (9). The downstream effects 
of EGFR are mediated by a number of important signaling path-
ways, including MAPK (8) and PI3K/AKT/mTOR — which are 
known to regulate pain (12–14). EGFR has been shown to affect 
receptors important for pain processing, including opioid receptors 
(15), β-adrenergic receptors (16), cannabinoid type 1 (CB1), and 
transient receptor potential cation channel, subfamily V, member 
1 (TRPV1) receptors (17). However, none of these previous reports 
examined these interactions using behavioral or cellular models 
specifically relevant to pain processing. Here, our primary goal was 
to understand the EGFR pathway’s role and mechanism of action 
in pain processing.
We investigated the role of the EGFR and its ligands in nocicep-
tion using murine behavioral and ex vivo studies to identify mecha-
nistic targets for EGFR signaling in pain that may be generalizable 
across pain conditions. Specifically, we demonstrate herein that 
inhibition of the tyrosine kinase site of the EGFR, using both exper-
imental and clinically available compounds, is analgesic against a 
The EGFR belongs to the well-studied ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases. EGFR is activated by numerous endogenous 
ligands that promote cellular growth, proliferation, and tissue regeneration. In the present study, we have demonstrated a 
role for EGFR and its natural ligand, epiregulin (EREG), in pain processing. We show that inhibition of EGFR with clinically 
available compounds strongly reduced nocifensive behavior in mouse models of inflammatory and chronic pain. EREG-
mediated activation of EGFR enhanced nociception through a mechanism involving the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway and matrix 
metalloproteinase-9. Moreover, EREG application potentiated capsaicin-induced calcium influx in a subset of sensory neurons. 
Both the EGFR and EREG genes displayed a genetic association with the development of chronic pain in several clinical cohorts 
of temporomandibular disorder. Thus, EGFR and EREG may be suitable therapeutic targets for persistent pain conditions.
Epiregulin and EGFR interactions are involved  
in pain processing
Loren J. Martin,1,2 Shad B. Smith,3 Arkady Khoutorsky,4 Claire A. Magnussen,5 Alexander Samoshkin,6 Robert E. Sorge,1  
Chulmin Cho,2 Noosha Yosefpour,5 Sivaani Sivaselvachandran,2 Sarasa Tohyama,2 Tiffany Cole,7 Thang M. Khuong,7 Ellen Mir,3 
Dustin G. Gibson,3 Jeffrey S. Wieskopf,1 Susana G. Sotocinal,1 Jean Sebastien Austin,1 Carolina B. Meloto,6 Joseph H. Gitt,3  
Christos Gkogkas,4 Nahum Sonenberg,4 Joel D. Greenspan,8 Roger B. Fillingim,9 Richard Ohrbach,10 Gary D. Slade,11 Charles Knott,12 
Ronald Dubner,8 Andrea G. Nackley,3 Alfredo Ribeiro-da-Silva,5 G. Gregory Neely,7 William Maixner,3 Dmitri V. Zaykin,13  
Jeffrey S. Mogil,1 and Luda Diatchenko6
1Department of Psychology and Alan Edwards Centre for Research on Pain, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 2Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, Ontario, 
Canada. 3Center for Neurosensory Disorders, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA. 4Department of Biochemistry and Alan Edwards Centre for Research on Pain, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 5Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics and Alan Edwards Centre for Research on Pain, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 6Department of Anesthesia, Faculty 
of Dentistry and Alan Edwards Centre for Research on Pain, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 7Charles Perkins Centre and School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia. 8Department of Neural and Pain Sciences and Brotman Facial Pain Center, University of Maryland Dental School, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 9Department of Community Dentistry and 
Behavioral Science, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA. 10Department of Oral Diagnostic Services, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA. 11Department of Dental Ecology, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA. 12Battelle Memorial Institute, Durham, North Carolina, USA. 13National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, NIH, Research Triangle Park,  
North Carolina, USA.
Authorship note: L.J. Martin and S.B. Smith contributed equally to this work. J.S Mogil 
and L. Diatchenko contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: S.B. Smith, R.B. Fillingim, G.D. Slade, and J.S. Mogil are consultants 
and equity stock holders, and William Maixner and Luda Diatchenko are cofounders and 
equity stock holders in Algynomics, a company providing research services in personalized 
pain medication and diagnostics.
Submitted: March 2, 2016; Accepted: June 27, 2017.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(9):3353–3366. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI87406.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 5 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
that involves TRPV1, the PI3K/AKT/mTOR/4E‑BP1 signaling path-
way, and MMP‑9, a molecule known to be involved in inflammation 
and the early stages of chronic pain (18).
Results
Modulation of EGFR affects pain sensitivity in mice. To assess the 
effect of EGFR inhibition on pain in mice, we tested 1 preclinical 
variety of tonic and chronic pain modalities in the mouse. The genes 
coding for both EGFR and EREG demonstrate genetic association 
with a human chronic pain syndrome, temporomandibular disorder 
(TMD), and genetic inhibition of EGFR modulates pain behavior 
in both mice and Drosophila. Finally, we show that stimulation of 
EGFR, by its ligand EREG, specifically, activates dorsal root gangli-
on (DRG) neurons, producing pain behaviors through a mechanism 
Figure 1. EGFR antagonists produce analgesia and EREG produces hyperalgesia in the mouse. (A) No sedation or ataxia (2-way ANOVA, drug × repeated 
measures: F12,80 = 0.5, P = 0.88) produced by high doses of EGFR antagonists. Symbols represent mean ± SEM for latency to fall off rotarod at each time 
point; n = 6–8/drug. (B) No effect of EGFR antagonists on acute thermal pain measured using the radiant heat paw-withdrawal test (2-way ANOVA, drug 
× repeated measures: F3,19 = 2.3, P = 0.10). Bars represent mean ± SEM for latency to withdraw from a noxious thermal stimulus before (baseline) and 30 min-
utes after injection; n = 5–6/drug. (C) No effect of EGFR antagonists on acute mechanical sensation using the von Frey test (2-way ANOVA, drug × repeated 
measures: F3,19 = 0.3, P = 0.80). Bars represent mean ± SEM for hind paw withdrawal threshold (g) before (baseline) and 30 minutes after injection; n = 5–6/
drug. (D) EGFR antagonists produce analgesia during the formalin test in both the early (0–10 minutes; 1-way ANOVA, F3,29 = 7.2, P = 0.001) and late (10–60 
minutes; 1-way ANOVA, F3,29 = 15.9, P < 0.001) phases. Bars represent mean ± SEM for percentage of samples featuring licking/biting behavior; n = 7–9/
drug. (E) Dose-dependent analgesia from EGFR antagonists and morphine on the late-phase formalin test; symbols represent mean ± SEM for percentage 
of samples featuring licking/biting behavior; n = 6–8/drug/dose. See Supplemental Table 1 for half-maximal analgesic doses and 95% confidence intervals. 
(F) EGFR antagonists reverse thermal hypersensitivity induced by carrageenan (2-way ANOVA, drug × repeated measures: F9,57 = 2.8, P = 0.01). Symbols 
represent mean ± SEM for latency to withdraw from a noxious thermal stimulus before carrageenan (Pre-BL), 3 hours after carrageenan (0), and 20–60 min-
utes after drug administration; n = 5–6/drug. (G) EGFR antagonists dose-dependently reverse mechanical allodynia induced by CFA (3 days after injection). 
Symbols represent mean ± SEM for percentage of maximum possible antiallodynia (i.e., reversal back to baseline withdrawal thresholds at all post-drug 
time points; see Methods); n = 5–6/drug/dose. (H) EGFR antagonists dose-dependently reverse mechanical allodynia induced by SNI (7 days after surgery). 
Symbols as in G; n = 5–6/drug/dose. See Supplemental Table 2 for half-maximal analgesic doses and 95% confidence intervals relevant to graphs in G and H. 
(I) AG 1478 reverses mechanical allodynia induced by CCI (14 days after surgery); n = 6/drug (2-way ANOVA, drug × repeated measures: F4,40 = 2.6, P = 0.02). 
*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001 compared with vehicle (0) group by Dunnett’s case-comparison post hoc test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 5 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
longer-lasting inflammatory and neuropathic injuries. Higher doses 
were required, but all drugs produced complete and dose-dependent 
reversal of allodynia in a CFA model of inflammatory pain (Figure 
1G). Similarly, all drugs produced complete and dose-dependent 
reversal of allodynia in the spared nerve injury (SNI) model of 
neuropathic pain (Figure 1H). Half-maximal analgesic doses and 
confidence intervals for the EGFR inhibitors for CFA and SNI are 
presented in Supplemental Table 2. In a separate experiment, we 
used the chronic constriction injury (CCI) model of chronic pain to 
provide generalizability across neuropathic assays. Similar to results 
using SNI, EGFR inhibition produced robust antiallodynia using 
CCI (Figure 1I).
Activation of EGFR by EREG, but not other EGFR ligands, pro-
motes nociception. In order to determine whether EGFR activation 
is sufficient to increase nociception, we screened a number of 
EGFR ligands for their ability to promote nocifensive behaviors 
in the formalin test. We found that late-phase formalin-induced 
nocifensive behaviors were enhanced in a dose-dependent man-
ner with intrathecal (i.t.) injections of EREG, but none of the other 
tested EGFR ligands, including betacellulin, TGF-α, amphiregulin, 
or EGF (Figure 2A). EREG produced a robust and dose-dependent 
increase in licking behavior that was indistinguishable from that 
(tyrphostin AG 1478; hereinafter, AG 1478; 10 mg/kg) and 2 clinically 
available (50 mg/kg gefitinib and 75 mg/kg lapatinib) EGFR 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in a battery of algesiometric assays. Doses 
were chosen based on prior in vivo efficacy against stress-induced 
necrotic lesions in the heart (AG 1478) and in chemoprevention of 
lung cancer (gefitinib) or breast cancer (lapatinib) in mice (19–21). 
We first confirmed that none of the drugs, delivered systemically 
and at very high doses (AG 1478, 100 mg/kg; gefitinib, 300 mg/
kg; lapatinib, 300 mg/kg), produced significant ataxia over a 
1-hour testing period on the rotarod (Figure 1A). These drugs did 
not affect acute noxious thermal (Figure 1B) or mechanical (Figure 
1C) sensitivity. In contrast, in the formalin test, EGFR inhibitors 
produced robust inhibition of tonic inflammatory pain (Figure 1D) 
without affecting edema (not shown). Compilation of full dose-
response curves revealed dose-dependent analgesia only in the late 
or tonic phase (Figure 1E), with efficacy and potencies comparable 
to those of morphine (see Supplemental Table 1; supplemental 
material available online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/
JCI87406DS1). Further, EGFR inhibition completely reversed the 
thermal hypersensitivity produced by an inflammatory mediator, 
λ-carrageenan, at 20 to 40 minutes after injection (Figure 1F). 
Finally, we examined mechanical hypersensitivity (allodynia) after 
Figure 2. Spinally administered EREG, but not other EGFR ligands, produces hypersensitivity. (A) Significant and dose-dependent hypersensitivity from 
EREG (2-way ANOVA, F3,26 = 6.8, P = 0.002), but not betacellulin, amphiregulin, EGF, or TGF-α (all P values are greater than 0.50) in the late phase (10–60 
minutes) of the formalin test. Symbols represent mean ± SEM for percentage of samples featuring licking/biting behavior; n = 6–8/drug/dose. EREG enhance-
ment of formalin-induced licking was equivalent to that of NGF; 2-way ANOVA, F3,22 = 10.9, P < 0.001. (B) EREG (10 ng, i.t.) increases nocifensive behavior when 
coadministered with intraplantar injections of the TRPV1 agonist capsaicin (2-tailed t test, t10 = 3.4, P = 0.01), but not the TRPA1 agonist mustard oil (2-tailed 
t test, t13 = 0.34, P = 0.70). Bars represent mean ± SEM for duration of licking behavior over 10 minutes after injection; n = 6-8/algogen/drug. (C) The TRPV1 
antagonist AMG 9810 (30 mg/kg, i.p.), but not the TRPA1 antagonist HC-030031 (30 mg/kg, i.p.), blocks EREG-induced hyperalgesia during the formalin test 
(2-way ANOVA, drug × antagonist interaction: F2,38 = 7.2, P = 0.002). Bars as in graph A; n = 7-8/group. (D) EREG (10 ng) increases thermal sensitivity by itself 
(2-tailed paired t test, t10 = 2.6, P = 0.03). Bars represent mean ± SEM for latency to withdraw from a noxious thermal stimulus before (baseline) and 30 min-
utes after injection; n = 6/drug. (E) EREG (10 ng) increases mechanical sensitivity by itself (2-tailed paired t test, t10 = 2.2, P = 0.05). Bars represent mean ± SEM 
for hind paw–withdrawal threshold (g) before (baseline) and 30 minutes after injection; n = 6/drug. (F) ΔEGFR mutants have higher baseline pain sensitivity to 
formalin than WT (vehicle groups), but no longer respond to EREG (10 ng, i.t.). Bars as in graph E; n = 7–8/genotype/drug. For all panels, *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; 
***P < 0.001 compared with vehicle (0) by Dunnett’s case-comparison post hoc test or t test as indicated. #P < 0.01 compared with other genotype (in F) by 
Dunnett’s case-comparison post hoc test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 5 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
dependent on the EGFR and not 
TrkA (Supplemental Figure 1).
EGFR gene mutant effects in mice 
and Drosophila. In order to confirm 
the efficacy of EREG in promoting 
pain hypersensitivity, we tested 
a partial loss-of-function EGFR 
mutant mouse for EREG-induced 
hypersensitivity. The EGFRvIII/
ΔEGFR mutant mouse has a 
large deletion of the extracellular 
domain that renders EGFR consti-
tutively active, but with no ability to 
bind extracellular ligands (22). The 
homozygous mutation is embry-
onically lethal, and thus we tested 
ΔEGFR heterozygotes for EREG-
induced pain sensitivity during 
the formalin test. Basal formalin-
induced licking behavior of ΔEGFR 
heterozygotes was increased, but 
EREG no longer produced hyper-
sensitivity during the formalin test 
(Figure 2F). The increased formalin 
sensitivity of ΔEGFR heterozygotes 
was likely due to constitutive activ-
ity of the EGFR. Since further acti-
vation by ligand binding is reduced 
in this mutant, EREG would not be 
expected to increase pain behavior 
any further. In addition, we used 
genetic knockdown and somatic 
Drosophila mutants to confirm that 
EGFR acts via sensory neurons to 
mediate nociception in response to 
a 46°C probe (Supplemental Figure 
2). Larvae with Egfr knocked down 
in peripheral ppk+ nociceptor neu-
rons exhibited impaired thermal nociception (Supplemental Figure 
2, A–C), and conversely, reintroduction of intact Egfr specifically in 
ppk+ sensory neurons was sufficient to rescue nociception in whole 
body Egfr somatic mutant animals (Supplemental Figure 2, D–F). 
Together, these data establish that the EGFR system is a conserved 
component of the nociception apparatus, regulating peripheral 
nociceptor function in vivo.
EREG and EGFR genetic loci are associated with the risk of devel-
opment of a chronic pain condition. Since our studies in mice indi-
cate a robust role for EREG and EGFR in mediating pain, we next 
searched for evidence that EGFR contributes to pain in a human 
clinical population. Three human cohorts of a common chronic 
pain condition, TMD, were assessed in 4 case-control association 
analyses (Supplemental Table 3) on a panel of 358 pain-relevant 
candidate genes. In the first analysis, designed to minimize exper-
imental variance, we contrasted 127 female TMD cases of mixed 
European descent from the Orofacial Pain: Prospective Evalua-
tion and Risk Assessment (OPPERA) (23) cohort against a subset 
of 231 demographically matched “super-controls,” who reported 
produced by nerve growth factor (NGF), known for its prominent 
role in pain processing (Figure 2A). Next, we assessed whether 
EREG enhanced pain behaviors induced by capsaicin or mustard 
oil, 2 potent algogens known to activate TRPV1 and TRPA1, respec-
tively. We found that i.t. delivery of EREG potentiated nocifensive 
behavior from intraplantar capsaicin, but not mustard oil (Figure 
2B). In addition, the TRPV1 antagonist AMG 9810 (30 mg/kg; 
i.p.), but not the TRPA1 antagonist HC‑030031 (30 mg/kg; i.p.), 
blocked the hyperalgesic effect of EREG in the late phase of the 
formalin test (Figure 2C). Spinal delivery of EREG produced both 
thermal (Figure 2D) and mechanical (Figure 2E) pain hypersen-
sitivity in the absence of injury. EREG’s hyperalgesic effects dur-
ing the formalin test were independent of other tyrosine receptor 
kinases, as K252a (an inhibitor of TrkA, TrkB, and TrkC) failed to 
block EREG-induced hypersensitivity (Supplemental Figure 1). 
Furthermore, administration of AG 1478 blocked the hyperalgesic 
effects of EREG during the formalin test, but did not reverse the 
hyperalgesia produced by i.t. injections of NGF, a potent activa-
tor of TrkA, confirming that EREG-mediated hypersensitivity is 
Figure 3. Genetic association of EREG and EGFR with TMD pain. Genetic association of EREG (A) and EGFR (B) 
SNPs with chronic TMD pain in OPPERA cases vs. super controls (SC), OPPERA cases vs. controls (all), TMD case-
control cohort, and pre-OPPERA cohorts (see Methods). Manhattan plots and corresponding gene loci are shown 
where position of tested SNPs is given relative to gene structure. Nonsynonymous (red), synonymous (green), 
promoter region (gray), and 3′ intragenic region (blue) SNPs are indicated. The pattern of association within the 
EREG gene locus was identical in all cohorts. The pattern of association for the EGFR gene locus revealed some 
differences between cohorts; however, the 5′ and 3′ ends of the gene consistently showed association with 
elevated TMD risk. The EGFR SNPs showing association in independent SNP tests (marked in bold) were used for 
haplotype analysis (see Supplemental Table 5). (C) Forest plot depicting odds ratios (OR; with 95% confidence 
intervals) for minor allele T of rs1563826 in 4 human chronic pain cohorts. (D) Association of EREG mRNA level 
with EREG rs1563826 in the TMD case-control cohort measured by quantitative RT-PCR. Bars represent mean ± 
SEM for EREG expression in leukocytes expressed in arbitrary units relative to GAPDH (see Methods). One-way 
ANOVA revealed a significant difference among genotypes; F2,247 = 3.7, P = 0.03. *P < 0.05; the A/A versus T/T 
comparison was P = 0.053, likely due to the small number of T/T homozygotes. (E) Following actD treatment, the 
rate of mRNA degradation was significantly lower for cells expressing WT (G allele) EREG mRNA compared with 
those the minor A allele of rs2367707 (2-tailed paired t test, t4 = 2.8, P = 0.05). Symbols represent mean ± SEM 
for percentage of mRNA expression compared with time 0; n = 3/genotype.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 5 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
Figure 4. EREG and EGFR are upregulated in chronic pain states, and EREG increases activation of medium-small DRG sensory neurons. (A) EREG in the 
blood is upregulated by CFA and SNI, but not formalin (F3,38 = 10.0, P < 0.001), as measured by ELISA. Bars represent mean ± SEM for protein levels (pg/ml); 
n = 9–10 biological replicates/group. One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s case-comparison post hoc test. *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001 compared with control 
group. (B) EGFR (green) is abundantly found in all DRG sensory neurons. Scale bar: 50 μm. (C) The cellular distribution of EGFR is equal among different cell 
sizes that exhibit either high or low EGFR staining. n = 3 mice. (D) Top: representative Western blots showing p-EGFR and β-actin in the DRG before (BL) (left 
band) and 3 days or 7 days after CFA or SNI, respectively (right band). Bottom: quantification of Western blot data (n = 5 biological replicates/condition) after 
normalization to β-actin and compared with baseline values. *P < 0.05 compared with 1.0 by 1-tailed t test (CFA: t4 = 2.5, P = 0.03; SNI: t4 = 3.3, P = 0.02). (E) 
Representative calcium traces of neurons responsive to multiple capsaicin (500 nM, 15 seconds for every 4 minutes) pulses and treated either with vehicle 
(HBSS, left panel) or EREG (200 ng/ml, right panel) for 6 minutes before 3 challenging pulses of capsaicin were applied. The ratio of Ca2+ peak heights (b/a) 
before and after exposure to EREG or vehicle was calculated as a measure of signal enhancement. (F) Collected b/a ratio values obtained from experiments in 
E. White bars show ratios obtained without exposure to EREG (ncell = 60, nexp = 9). The distribution was well fitted by a Gaussian function with mean of 0.76, SD 
of 0.12, and upper 95% 2-tailed confidence limit of 1.05 (arrow). Green bars show ratios following 6 minutes exposure to EREG (200 ng/ml; ncell = 101, nexp = 13). 
Following EREG exposure, 40.79% of ratios exceeded the 95% confidence limit, and the mean ± SEM of these ratio values was 1.25 ± 0.03. (G) Neurons treated 
with EREG were separated into 2 groups: those in which sensitization was (ncell = 40) or was not (ncell = 61) observed in the first exposure following EREG addi-
tion. Data presented as mean ± SEM, n = 40–61/group, from a total of 9/13 experiments for vehicle/EREG. ***P < 0.001, unpaired Student’s t test. (H) The 
proportion of neurons sensitized in the presence of EREG based on b/a ratio values greater than 2 SD above the mean of the vehicle group.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 5 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
absolutely no procedural pain at exam. Of the genes screened, 
EREG (rs1563826, odds ratio = 0.4, P = 2.0 × 10-4) (Figure 3A) and 
EGFR (rs1140475, odds ratio = 2.6, P = 2.2 × 10-4) (Figure 3B) dem-
onstrated the highest association with the development of TMD. 
In addition, the majority of SNPs deviating from the QQ plot were 
located in either EREG or EGFR loci (Supplemental Figure 3A). 
Formal pathway analysis identified the EGFR signaling pathway 
as significantly associated with TMD (P = 0.0013; Supplemental 
Table 4). Nominally significant (P < 0.05) associations were also 
observed for EREG and EGFR in the full OPPERA cohort, in which 
TMD cases were contrasted with all 731 enrolled TMD-free con-
trols (Figure 3, A and B). We replicated these association results 
in 2 independent cohorts of females of mixed European descent, 
including 1 case-control study of 200 TMD cases and 198 controls 
(TMD case-control cohort) (24) and another prospective study of 
186 initially pain-free subjects in which 15 developed TMD over a 
3-year follow-up period (pre-OPPERA cohort) (25). These analy-
ses identified several additional SNPs with either significant or 
borderline associations (Figure 3, A and B). Whereas the pattern 
of association within the EREG gene locus was identical in all 4 
cohorts (Figure 3A), with SNP rs1563826 showing the strongest 
association with TMD, the pattern of association for EGFR dif-
fered between cohorts (Figure 3B). To explain the discrepancies 
in single SNP results between cohorts, the EGFR gene locus was 
subjected to haplotype analysis that produced convergent results 
(Supplemental Figure 3B and Supplemental Table 5).
Total RNA isolated from blood leukocytes was collected from 
participants in the TMD case-control study. Relatively high expres-
sion levels of EREG (but not EGFR) in leukocytes allowed us to 
measure EREG mRNA using quantitative PCR (qPCR) in all sub-
Figure 5. EREG/EGFR increases pain through a PI3K/AKT→mTOR→4E-BP1→eIF4F complex→MMP-9 signaling pathway. (A) The signaling pathway 
investigated, with major proteins indicated in black and blocking drugs or mutants shown in red. (B) Treatment with wortmannin (5 μg, i.t.) blocks 
EREG-induced increases in late-phase formalin-induced pain behavior (drug × drug: F1,23 = 4.7, P = 0.04). (C) Low doses of rapamycin (5 mg/kg) and CCI 779 
(1 mg/kg) block EREG effects without affecting formalin-induced pain per se (rapamycin, drug × drug: F1,27 = 3.6, P = 0.04; CCI 779 drug × drug: F1,28 = 4.2,  
P = 0.03); higher doses (10 mg/kg) are analgesic (main effects: rapamycin, F1,28 = 22.9, P < 0.001; CCI 779, F1,28 = 30.2, P < 0.001). (D) No effect on EREG 
increases in formalin-induced pain behavior in SGK1/2 (Rps6kb1/Rps6kb2) double-null mutant mice (Rps6kb1/2–/–; main effect of drug: F1,18 = 25.8,  
P < 0.001). (E) Lack of EREG effects in 4E-BP1 (Eif4ebp1–/–) null mutant mice (genotype × drug: F1,33 = 7.1, P = 0.01). (F) Treatment with 4EGI-1 (25 μg, i.t.) 
blocks EREG effects (drug × drug: F1,20 = 7.6, P = 0.01). (G) Treatment with TIMP-1 (4 pmol, i.t.) blocks EREG effects (drug × drug: F1,30 = 5.6, P = 0.02). (H) 
Lack of EREG effects in MMP-9 null mutants (Mmp9–/–; genotype × drug: F1,20 = 16.1, P = 0.001). In all experiments, EREG was injected at 10 ng i.t. Bars in 
all graphs represent mean ± SEM for percentage of samples featuring licking/biting behavior; n = 6–8/drug/dose and n = 6–12/drug/genotype (dependent 
on breeding success). Two-way ANOVA for all panels followed by t test compared with EREG vehicle. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001, compared with 
wortmannin, rapamycin, CCI 779, 4EGI-1, or TIMP-1 vehicle, or +/+ genotype. #P < 0.05; ##P < 0.01; ###P < 0.001, compared with rapamycin/CCI 779 vehicle. 
†P < 0.05 compared with vehicle/vehicle group.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 5 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
jects and evaluate its association with EREG genotypes. The minor 
allele T of SNP rs1563826, which showed the strongest association 
with decreased odds of TMD (Figure 3C), was also associated with 
lower EREG mRNA levels (Figure 3D), suggesting that higher levels 
of EREG contribute to hyperalgesic states in patients.
We then assessed the EREG gene locus for functional SNPs 
potentially responsible for transcript regulation. No SNPs with 
minor allele frequency of more than 5% are reported within 5 
kB upstream of the EREG promoter. However, the synonymous 
rs2367707 SNP within the EREG coding region was found to be in 
close-to-perfect linkage disequilibrium with rs1563826 and with 
an almost identical P value for TMD risk (Figure 3A). To exam-
ine the effect of rs2367707 allelic variants on transcript levels, we 
transfected HEK293 cells with expression constructs that carried 
allelic variants of rs2367707. In line with the genetic effect of the 
EREG haplotype on endogenous mRNA levels, the minor A allelic 
variant of EREG showed significantly lower transcript stability 
than the major G allelic variant (Figure 3E). The association of 
EGFR and EREG with chronic pain in a clinical cohort is an impor-
tant translational complement to our mouse data and supports 
the potential value of targeting EGFR for chronic noncancer pain 
management in humans.
EREG levels and EGFR phosphorylation are upregulated in 
mouse models of chronic pain. The finding of increased EREG 
mRNA levels in leukocytes of TMD patients (Figure 3D) prompt-
ed us to investigate whether chronic pain states in mice are asso-
ciated with increased levels of EREG in the blood. CFA and SNI 
(but not formalin) produced a massive upregulation of EREG, as 
assessed by ELISA (Figure 4A). To study the site of EREG action, 
we investigated the distribution of EGFR in DRGs and spinal 
cord. EGFR was nonhomogeneously expressed by all DRG neu-
rons within the cytoplasm of individual DRG cells, and neuronal 
Figure 6. EREG and formalin induce phosphorylation of AKT and 4EBP-1 and increase the expression of MMP-9 in lumbar DRG tissue. EREG (10 ng, i.t.) 
or 5% formalin (20 μl, intraplantar) was injected and lumbar DRG tissue harvested 40 minutes later. Rapamycin was injected 20 minutes before EREG or 
formalin to mimic behavioral experiment parameters. (A) Representative Western blots showing the phosphorylated and total protein abundance for AKT, 
4E-BP1, and S6. The total amount of MMP-9 is also presented. Quantification (phosphorylated/total) for the percentage of fold increase (compared with 
the control condition) in phosphorylated AKT, 4E-BP1, and S6 is presented in panels B–D along with the quantification for total MMP-9 (E). Bars represent 
mean ± SEM for relative change in protein expression. (B) EREG significantly increases the phosphorylation of AKT in DRG tissue. (C) Both formalin and 
EREG increase the phosphorylation of 4E-BP-1, and the increases are blocked by rapamycin. (D) The phosphorylation of S6 is significantly elevated relative 
to control tissue by EREG treatment, an increase blocked by rapamycin. (E) Formalin and EREG significantly increase MMP-9 expression, and these 
increases are blocked by rapamycin. Sample sizes in all groups are n = 4–6. One-way ANOVA for all panels followed by Dunnett’s case-comparison post hoc 
test. ***P < 0.001 compared with control tissue. †P < 0.05 decrease compared with EREG or formalin alone group. #P < 0.05 increase compared with EREG 
or formalin alone group.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 6 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
protein 1 (4E‑BP1). Mutant mice lacking expression of both S6K1 
and S6K2 (S6K1/2 double knockout) showed completely intact 
EREG-induced hypersensitivity (Figure 5D), whereas 4E‑BP1– 
deficient mice displayed no EREG-induced hypersensitivity (Figure 
5E). 4E‑BP1 represses the formation of the eukaryotic translation 
initiation factor 4F (eIF4F) complex, which is a critical regulator of 
cap-dependent translation. An inhibitor of eIF4F complex, 4EGI‑1, 
blocked EREG-induced hypersensitivity (Figure 5F), further sup-
porting the role of mTOR/4E‑BP1/eIF4F in pain. To determine 
whether EREG hypersensitivity was mediated in part by ERK sig-
naling, we used the MEK1/MEK2 inhibitor PD98059 (30). A low 
concentration of PD98059 did not block EREG-induced hypersen-
sitivity on either the formalin test or the von Frey test (Supplemental 
Figure 5), suggesting that EREG does not potentiate pain behavior 
through enhanced ERK signaling. Since enhanced eIF4F complex 
formation has been shown to increase endogenous MMP‑9 in blood 
(31), we used tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP‑1), an 
endogenous blocker of MMP‑9, and Mmp9–/– mice to study whether 
MMP‑9 signaling is important for EREG-induced pain hypersensi-
tivity. TIMP‑1 prevented (Figure 5G, also see Supplemental Figure 
6A) and Mmp9–/– mice did not display EREG-induced hypersensi-
tivity (Figure 5H). We further tested the importance of MMP‑9 for 
EGFR pain signaling by confirming that the analgesic efficacy of 
gefitinib in the formalin test was abolished in Mmp9–/– mice (Supple-
mental Figure 6B).
To further study the role of mTOR and MMP‑9 in EGFR-
mediated pain, we examined the phosphorylation of mTOR path-
way components in DRG lysates. Formalin treatment alone did 
not significantly increase the phosphorylation of AKT (p-AKT), 
but EREG increased p-AKT in DRG tissue relative to control 
(Figure 6, A and B). Congruent with our behavioral data, both 
formalin and EREG increased the phosphorylation of 4E‑BP1 (p- 
4E‑BP1) in DRG tissue, and cotreatment with rapamycin prevented 
this increase (Figure 6, A and C). Further, p-S6 was significantly 
increased with EREG treatment, and again, cotreatment with 
rapamycin prevented the increases (Figure 6, A and D). Finally, 
MMP‑9 protein levels were increased in DRG tissue after formalin 
or EREG injection, and this increase was blocked with rapamycin 
inhibition of mTOR (Figure 6, A and E).
To determine whether the increase in MMP‑9 protein levels 
following EREG treatment was the result of increased Mmp9 
mRNA translation, DRG extracts were fractionated on sucrose 
density gradients and the distribution of Mmp9 mRNA across 
these gradients was determined by qPCR analysis. In DRG 
extracts, Mmp9 mRNA shifted to the heavy polysome fractions 
after EREG injection, indicative of enhanced translation 
(Supplemental Figure 7). Rapamycin blocked this shift, indicating 
that in the DRG, EREG stimulates Mmp9 mRNA translation in an 
mTOR-dependent manner. Taken together, our results support a 
key role for mTOR, the eIF4F translational initiation complex, and 
MMP‑9 signaling in EGFR-mediated pain behavior.
Discussion
Although there are indications from the clinical literature that 
EGFR inhibition may have analgesic properties (5, 6, 8), this 
possibility has not heretofore been examined systematically. Here, 
we used a broad range of techniques and analyses to demonstrate 
size did not affect EGFR expression levels (Figure 4, B and C). In 
the spinal cord, EGFR expression was very low and was not found 
on neurons (Supplemental Figure 4). Immunostaining of EREG 
was not possible due to lack of appropriate antibodies. Based 
on our findings of increased EREG levels in CFA and SNI, we 
hypothesized that the activity of the EGFR should be increased in 
these conditions. To this end, we measured the phosphorylation 
of EGFR (on Tyr1068), which is reflective of EGFR activation, in 
lysates prepared from mouse DRG. EGFR phosphorylation was 
significantly increased following CFA and SNI (Figure 4D), con-
sistent with the hypothesis that chronic inflammatory and neuro-
pathic injury–induced increases in EREG levels enhances EGFR 
phosphorylation. Since EREG potentiated capsaicin-dependent 
nocifensive behavior, we next measured whether EREG (200 
ng/ml) potentiates TRPV1-dependent calcium transients when 
capsaicin is applied onto cultured DRG neurons (Figure 4E). 
EREG caused a sensitization of the response to capsaicin, which 
was large in some neurons (>2 SD above the mean of vehicle-
treated cells) and absent in others (Figure 4, F and G). The vari-
ability in the degree of sensitization is likely to reflect the vari-
able expression of the EGFR in the population of DRG neurons 
(see Figure 4C). In those neurons where sensitization occurred, 
the calcium peak ratio before and after (b/a) drug administration 
was significantly enhanced by application of EREG (vehicle, 0.76 
± 0.01; EREG, 1.25 ± 0.03, mean ± SEM, P < 0.001, Figure 4G). 
Accordingly, based on the 2 SD criterion, sensitization occurred 
in 40.79% of neurons (Figure 4H), but we estimate that approxi-
mately 3.23% of these neurons represent false positive because 
this is the percentage of vehicle-treated neurons with b/a ratios 
greater than 2 SD above the mean. Thus, we estimate that 
approximately 37% of DRG neurons in culture were sensitized 
by EREG — a proportion similar to that exhibited by NGF (26).
EREG pain hypersensitivity is mediated by a signal transduc-
tion pathway involving mTOR, translational regulation, and MMP-9. 
Since our preclinical and clinical data indicated a critical role of 
EREG (but not other EGFR ligands) and EGFR in pain process-
ing, we sought to determine the intracellular machinery by which 
EREG-mediated EGFR activation increases pain. EGFR signaling 
has previously been shown to increase the activity of mTOR (27), 
a master regulator of mRNA translation (28, 29). Therefore, we 
hypothesized that mTOR is a downstream effector of EGFR with 
respect to pain. We investigated the contribution of mTOR signal-
ing to EREG-induced hypersensitivity by screening nocifensive 
behaviors during the formalin test and disrupting elements of the 
mTOR signal transduction pathway, either with pharmacological 
inhibitors or, where available, using null mutants (See Figure 5A 
for an overview of the pathway). Pretreatment with wortmannin, 
a covalent inhibitor of PI3K, completely abolished EREG-induced 
hypersensitivity without affecting formalin-induced pain behavior 
per se (Figure 5B). Next, we tested 2 inhibitors of mTOR, rapamy-
cin and CCI 779. At higher doses, these drugs produced analgesia 
during the formalin test, as has been reported previously (28, 29). 
However, at lower doses, both drugs prevented EREG-induced 
hypersensitivity without affecting formalin-induced pain behav-
ior per se (Figure 5C). mTOR regulates mRNA translation via 2 
downstream effectors: ribosomal protein S6 kinases (S6Ks) and 
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E–binding (eIF4E-binding) 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 6 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
with data showing that EREG does not activate ERK in DRG neurons 
(32). Further, our data indicate that the phosphorylation of 4E‑BP1 
increases the translation of MMP‑9, and pharmacological or genetic 
reduction of MMP‑9 activity renders EREG and EGFR antagonists 
ineffective against inflammatory pain. Together, our results indicate 
that EREG upregulation in the blood may activate EGFRs on DRG 
neurons to induce hypersensitivity through transactivation of TRPV1 
and the mTOR signaling pathway, which increases MMP‑9 transla-
tion. It is likely that EREG originates from a cellular source within 
the blood, as we found elevated levels of EREG following CFA and 
SNI, which parallel EREG mRNA expression levels in TMD patients.
In summary, we find that clinically available small molecule 
EGFR inhibitors targeting the tyrosine kinase site of the EGFR recep-
tor, including gefitinib and lapatinib, are effective analgesics in mice 
for inflammatory and neuropathic pain. These drugs are routinely 
given to non–small cell lung cancer patients (37, 38) to inhibit tumor 
growth, but have not been systematically studied for their role in pain 
management. Since we find that EREG is the primary endogenous 
activator of EGFR-related pain hypersensitivity, our data suggest 
that an effective treatment strategy may be the selective inhibition 
of EREG over other endogenous EGFR ligands. Directly targeting 
EREG may result in a reduced side-effect profile when compared 
with currently available EGFR-inhibition strategies.
Methods
Study design
Animals were randomized to drug condition using within-cage ran-
domization, and all behavioral experiments were performed by an 
experimenter blinded to drug conditions. As we had no a priori expec-
tation of effect sizes, power analyses were not used to calculate sample 
sizes. Instead, we adhered to standard practices in the field (39). In 
many cases, sample sizes were dictated by breeding success. Statisti-
cal outliers were defined via Studentized residuals of more than 3 and 
excluded before analyses were run.
Rodent subjects
Most experiments were performed on naive, adult (7–12 weeks of age) 
outbred CD‑1 (ICR:Crl) mice of both sexes, bred in-house (J.S. Mogil 
and L.J. Martin laboratories) from breeders obtained from Charles 
River Laboratories. Heterozygote breeding pairs for mutant mice con-
taining a large deletion of the extracellular domain of the EGFR recep-
tor (EGFRvIII/ΔEGFR) were obtained from the laboratory of David 
Threadgill (North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, 
USA) on a C57BL/6 background. We only tested heterozygote EGFR-
vIII/ΔEGFR mice because the homozygotes are neonatally lethal. 
Null mutant mice for 4E‑BP1 (Eif4ebp–/–; C57BL/6 background) and 
p70 S6K 1/2 double-knockout mice (Rps6kb1/Rps6kb2–/–; mixed 129Sv 
× C57BL/6 background) and their associated WT were generated and 
bred in one of our laboratories (N. Sonenberg). The latter mutants 
were provided by G. Thomas (University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, 
Ohio, USA). Mice lacking the MMP‑9 gene (Mmp9–/–) were purchased 
from The Jackson Laboratory on an FVB/NJ background and com-
pared with WT mice of that strain. No overt behavioral abnormalities 
were noted in any of the mutant mouse strains. All mice were housed 
with their same-sex littermates (2 to 4 animals per cage) in standard 
shoebox cages, maintained in a temperature-controlled (20 ± 1°C) 
that (a) EGFR inhibition is analgesic and activation of the EGFR 
by EREG enhances pain; (b) EREG and EGFR display a genetic 
association with the development of chronic pain in clinical 
cohorts of TMD; and (c) EREG increases pain behavior and 
signaling through a mechanism that involves TRPV1 and mTOR/
eIF4F
/MMP‑9–dependent signaling in the DRG.
We find that the EGFR is expressed by all DRG sensory neu-
rons (Figure 4, B and C) and show that EREG potentiates capsaicin- 
induced calcium influx, suggesting that functional EREG recep-
tors are present in DRG neurons (Figure 4, E–H). In addition, we 
provide compelling evidence that EREG increases pain sensitivity 
through EGFRs, whereas other EGFR ligands do not appear to play 
a role. This is consistent with prior observations that EGF or the 
heparin-bound EGF do not increase sensitivity to painful stimuli 
(32). EGF-like growth factors, including EREG, stimulate a vari-
ety of biological responses, and it is thought that ligand-induced 
homo- and heterodimerization can account for the majority of 
this diversity (33, 34). For instance, EREG is known to bind to and 
phosphorylate heterodimers of EGFR and ERBB4, but other EGF 
ligands (i.e., EGF and amphiregulin) only activate EGFR homodi-
mers (35, 36). We suspect that an associated membrane protein, 
such as ERBB4, is involved in EREG-induced hypersensitivity, but 
this currently remains unclear.
Our human data further support a role of EREG in pain, as 
we found that EREG was associated with TMD development and 
upregulated in the blood of the patients. Moreover, our genetic 
association results revealed a strong effect of genetic polymor-
phism in the EREG‑EGFR system, distinguishing those with chron-
ic pain from controls. The observed association among TMD risk, 
EREG mRNA level, and transcript stability suggests that rs2367707 
may be the functional SNP in humans. The fact that the TMD pro-
tective allele is associated with lower mRNA expression is congru-
ent with our rodent findings. The EGFR SNPs tested in this study 
are probably only markers of the true effect-producing variants, 
but both 5′- and 3′-located SNPs within the EGFR locus showed 
association signals, suggesting both expression differences and 
transcript stability, respectively, may alter TMD risk. Thus, our 
results suggest that targeting EGFR and EREG for pain therapies 
may be an effective strategy. Importantly, since EGFR inhibition is 
associated with adverse side effects — folliculitis, hair loss and skin 
rash — inhibition of EREG may constitute an improved therapeutic 
option for pain management.
At the cellular level, the effects of EREG on EGFR involve 
TRPV1, as EREG potentiates capsaicin-evoked calcium responses of 
sensory neurons, and blockade of TRPV1 attenuated EREG hyperal-
gesia in the formalin assay. TRPV1 has been shown to induce EGFR 
transactivation in a model of epithelial wound healing, leading to 
PI3K/AKT stimulation (17). This is in line with our current findings 
showing disruption of PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling with specific 
inhibitors of the AKT/mTOR pathway blocking, and 4E‑BP1 null 
mice lacking, EREG-induced hypersensitivity. In the DRG, EREG or 
formalin increased the phosphorylation of both S6 and 4E‑BP1, the 
2 main downstream targets of mTOR. However, since S6K1/2 null 
mutant mice had intact EREG-induced hypersensitivity, we con-
clude that S6K is not necessary for EREG-stimulated pain behavior. 
In addition, our results indicate that EREG-induced pain behavior 
is not mediated by ERK signaling, an observation that is consistent 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 6 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
above, before and 3 hours after carrageenan injection. All drugs were 
injected immediately following the test for carrageenan hypersen-
sitivity at the 3-hour time point, and post-drug measurements were 
taken at 20, 40, and 60 minutes.
CFA. CFA (50%; Sigma-Aldrich) was injected s.c. in a volume 
of 20 μl into the left plantar hind paw using a 100-μl microsyringe 
with a 30-gauge needle. Mice were tested for mechanical sensitivity 
of both hind paws using the von Frey test as described above, before 
and 3 days after CFA injection. All drugs were injected immediately 
following the 3-day post-CFA test, and post-drug measurements 
were taken at 20, 40, 60, and 90 minutes. Percentage of maximal 
possible anti-allodynia (i.e., reversal of allodynia back to preinjec-
tion baseline values at all post-drug time points) was calculated 
using the trapezoidal method.
Spared nerve and chronic constriction injury. SNI and CCI, 2 
experimental nerve injury procedures designed to produce neuropathic 
pain, were performed under isoflurane/oxygen anesthesia as described 
previously (42, 43). Mice were tested for mechanical sensitivity before 
and after surgery using the von Frey test as described above, except 
that the “spared” sural region was targeted for SNI and the mid- 
plantar surface was targeted for CCI by applying the fibers to the hind 
paw. All drugs were injected immediately following the test for SNI- 
or CCI-induced mechanical allodynia 7 or 14 days following surgery, 
respectively, and post-drug measurements were taken at 20, 40, 60, 
and 90 minutes. Percentage of maximal possible anti-allodynia (i.e., 
reversal of allodynia back to presurgery baseline values at all post-
drug time points) was calculated using the trapezoidal method.
Capsaicin and mustard oil. Mice were allowed to habituate to an 
observation chamber (see formalin test above) for 15 minutes. Mice 
then received a s.c. injection of capsaicin (2.5 μg; Sigma-Aldrich) or 
mustard oil (5%; Sigma-Aldrich) into the plantar left hind paw (20 μl) 
and were digitally videotaped for 10 minutes. Video files were later 
scored for the total duration of licking/biting of the injected paw.
Drugs
AG 1478, gefitinib, lapatinib, rapamycin, CCI 779, and wortmannin were 
purchased from LC Laboratories and dissolved in 30% polyethylene 
glycol, except for wortmannin, which was dissolved in 10% DMSO. 
EREG, EGF, betacellulin, amphiregulin, TGF-α, NGF, AMG 9810, 
K252a, PD 98059, and TIMP‑1 were purchased from R&D Systems 
and were dissolved in sterile saline, except K252a and PD 98059, which 
were dissolved in 20% DMSO. Capsaicin, mustard oil and HC 030031 
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 4EGI‑1 was purchased from Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology Inc. and dissolved in 20% DMSO. Morphine sulfate 
was obtained from Health Canada and dissolved in saline. Drugs were 
administered either i.p. (10 ml/kg volume) or i.t. (5 μl volume) (44).
Enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay
Mice received no treatment, formalin injection, CFA injection, or SNI 
surgery and were euthanized 60 minutes (formalin), 3 days (CFA), or 
7 days (SNI) later. Trunk blood was collected into EDTA-coated Vacu-
tainer tubes/heparinized syringes. Blood was centrifuged at 15,000 g 
for 15 minutes at 4°C to isolate plasma from other blood components. 
Plasma was aliquoted into tubes, frozen with liquid nitrogen, and 
stored at –80 °C. Plasma samples were then thawed on ice and EREG 
measured in duplicate using an ELISA kit from Abcam according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions.
environment (14-hour light/10-hour dark cycle), and fed (Harlan 
Teklad 8604) and watered ad libitum. Mice were assigned to experi-
mental conditions in a randomized fashion within-cage.
Behavioral assays
Subjects were habituated to the testing environment for at least 15 
minutes in every assay before testing commenced.
Rotarod test. Drug effects on motor coordination were tested using 
an accelerating rotarod treadmill (Acceler Rota-Rod 7650, Ugo Basile) 
for mice. Mice were placed on the rotarod, which accelerated from 4 to 
40 rpm over a period of 5 minutes, and the time spent on the rotating 
drum was recorded for each mouse. On the test day, 1 preinjection 
baseline trial (drug-free) was performed before the animals were 
treated with either saline, AG 1478 (100 mg/kg), gefitinib (300 mg/
kg), or lapatinib (300 mg/kg). Performance was indicated by the 
latency to fall from the rotarod at 15–60 minutes after injection.
Radiant heat paw-withdrawal test. Mice were placed on a 3/16-inch–
thick glass floor within small Plexiglas cubicles (9 × 5 × 5 cm high), and 
a focused high-intensity projector lamp beam was shone from below 
onto the midplantar surface of the hind paw (40). The commercial 
device (IITC model 336) was set to 20% active intensity. Latency to 
withdraw from the stimulus was measured to the nearest 0.1 second. 
Baseline measurements consisted of testing both hind paws twice on 
3 separate occasions separated by at least 30 minutes. Following drug 
injection, both hind paws were only tested once at the indicated time.
von Frey test. The up-down method of Dixon (41) was used. Mice 
were placed on a perforated metal floor (with 5-mm diameter holes 
placed 7 mm apart) within small Plexiglas cubicles as described above, 
and a set of 8 calibrated von Frey fibers (Stoelting Touch Test Sensory 
Evaluator Kit no. 2 to no. 9; ranging from ~0.015 g to ~1.3 g of force) 
were applied to the plantar surface of the hind paw until the fibers 
bowed and then held for 3 seconds. The threshold force required to 
elicit withdrawal of the paw (median 50% withdrawal) was deter-
mined twice on each hind paw (and averaged) for all baseline mea-
surements, with sequential measurements separated by at least 20 
minutes. For experiments in which a drug was injected, 1 measure-
ment per hind paw was taken at the indicated time point.
Formalin test. Mice were placed on a tabletop within Plexiglas cyl-
inders (30 cm high; 30 cm diameter) and allowed to habituate. Then, 
20 μl of 5% formalin was injected s.c. into the plantar surface of the 
left hind paw using a 100-μl microsyringe with a 30-gauge needle. 
Mice were then returned to the cylinders and left undisturbed for 60 
minutes, with behaviors recorded using digital video. Videos were later 
coded offline, where the first 10 seconds of every minute were moni-
tored for the presence of licking/biting (positive sample) of the left 
hind paw for a total of 60 observations. The early phase was defined as 
the percentage of positive samples during the first 0–10 minutes after 
injection of formalin, the late phase as the percentage of positive sam-
ples during the period 10–60 minutes after injection. For the drug stud-
ies, EGFR, TRPV1, TRPA1, and mTOR inhibitors were injected 20 min-
utes before formalin and TIMP‑1 was injected 1 hour before formalin. 
EGFR ligands and NGF were injected immediately before formalin.
Carrageenan. Carrageenan (2%, 20 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) was 
suspended by sonication in saline and injected s.c. in a volume of 20 
μl into the left plantar hind paw using a 100-μl microsyringe with a 
30-gauge needle. Mice were tested for thermal sensitivity of both 
hind paws using the radiant heat paw-withdrawal test as described 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 6 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
of the corresponding total protein. The antibodies and dilutions for the 
Western blots used in these studies were as follows: 4E‑BP1 (1:1000, 
catalog 9644, Cell Signaling Technology), P‑4E‑BP1 (Thr37/46) 
(1:1000, catalog 2855, Cell Signaling Technology), AKT (1:1000, cata-
log 4685, Cell Signaling Technology), p-AKT (Ser473) (1:1000, cata-
log 9271, Cell Signaling Technology), EGFR (1:1000, catalog sc-03, 
Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), p-EGFR (1:1000, catalog 3777, Cell 
Signaling Technology), MMP‑9 (1:1000, catalog AB19016, Chemi-
con), S6 (1:1000, catalog sc-74459, Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.), 
p-S6 (Ser240/244) (1:1000, catalog 2215, Cell Signaling Technology), 
and β-actin (1:5000, catalog A5441, Sigma-Aldrich).
Calcium imaging
Mouse lumbar DRG neurons (L3–L5; at least n = 4 mice per condition) 
were harvested and cultured as previously described (45). Briefly, 
DRGs were isolated, transferred into HBSS, and enzyme-digested 
by incubation with papain and collagenase type II (Worthington Bio-
chemical Corp.). Dissociated neurons were plated on glass coverslips 
coated with poly-d-lysine and laminin and maintained at 37°C at 5% 
CO2/95% air in F12 media (Life Technologies) with 10% FBS. After 
2–6 hours, dissociated neurons on coverslips were loaded with 1 μM of 
the cell-permeable calcium-sensitive dye Fura-2, AM (Life Technolo-
gies) for 30 minutes and washed with HBSS before use. The protocol 
for the experiment is shown in Figure 4E and was selected to avoid spu-
rious differences in calcium dye loading and indicator measurements 
(26). Coverslips were placed in a chamber containing HBSS at room 
temperature (20–22°C). Following baseline recording, 25 mM KCl was 
applied for 15 seconds, followed by capsaicin (500 nM in HBSS) appli-
cation for 15 seconds every 4 minutes, as previously described (26). 
HBSS (vehicle, 60 cells, 9 different experiments) or EREG (200 ng/
ml, 101 cells, 13 different experiments) was applied for 6 minutes after 
the fourth, fifth, or sixth application of capsaicin, when the response 
had largely stabilized. After the incubation, 3 more pulses of capsaicin 
were applied and the ratio of the Ca2+ increases before and after expo-
sure to EREG or HBSS was calculated as an index of enhancement 
(b/a ratio). In order to determine the degree of sensitization and the 
proportion of neurons sensitized by EREG, the variability of the cal-
cium signal (b/a ratio) in vehicle-treated neurons was examined and 
an index of sensitization was calculated as the percentage of neurons 
where the ratio exceeded 2 SD above the mean for vehicle-treated 
neurons (Figure 4F, values to the right of the arrow). The b/a ratio was 
normally distributed with a mean of 0.76, SD 0.12 (Figure 4F). The 
mean percentage of false positives with ratios above 1.05 (2 SD above 
the mean) was 3.22%. Fluorescence was detected by a Zeiss Observer 
Ratio Z1 microscope at 340 nm and 380 nm excitation wavelengths 
and analyzed with ZEN Black software (Zeiss).
Quantitative real-time PCR
DRGs (L3–L4) were isolated and subjected to RNA extraction using 
TRIzol (Invitrogen). Reverse transcription was performed using a 
SuperScript III Reverse-Transcriptase Kit and Random Hexamers 
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. qPCRs 
were carried out in a CFX96‑PCR system using iQ Sybr Green Super-
mix RT (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The 
following primers were used: Mmp9 (forward) GATCCCCAGAGCGT-
CATTC, Mmp9 (reverse) CCACCTTGTTCACCTCATTTTG; Gapdh 
(forward) TCCATGACAACTTTGGCATTG, and Gapdh (reverse) 
Immunohistochemistry
Naive mice were deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital (60 
mg/kg) and perfused transcardially through the left cardiac ventricle 
with 100 ml of perfusion buffer, followed by 250 ml of 4% paraformal-
dehyde (PFA) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB), pH 7.4, at room tempera-
ture for 15 minutes. Subsequently, the spinal column was removed and 
post-fixed in the same fixative for 24 hours at 4°C. Spinal cord lumbar 
segments L3 and L4 and DRGs at the same levels were extracted and 
cryoprotected with 30% sucrose in 0.1 M PB. Tissue was embedded in 
an optimum cutting temperature medium (Tissue Tek OCT; Sakura), 
and 16-μm and 50-μm transverse DRG and spinal cord sections, respec-
tively, were cut at –20°C on a Leica CM3050 S cryostat. DRG sections 
were placed directly on gelatin-subbed slides. and spinal cord sections 
were collected as free-floating sections in PBS. The staining protocols 
for slides and free-floating tissue were similar. Sections were rinsed 3 
times with PBS, with 0.2% Triton X‑100 (PBS‑T) for 10 minutes, and 
preincubated with 10% normal goat serum (NGS) for 1 hour. To assess 
the colocalization between EGFR and markers of primary afferent neu-
ronal populations, sections were incubated overnight at 4°C in 5% NGS 
with either (a) anti-EGFR raised in rabbit (1:50, Santa Cruz Biotechnol-
ogy Inc., catalog SC‑03, lot F1512) or (b) anti-EGFR and anti-NeuN 
raised in mouse (1:5000, Millipore, catalog MAB377, lot 2062313). 
To assess the specificity of the EGFR antibody, the diluted antibody 
(1:50) was preincubated with the EGFR-blocking peptide (1:5, Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology Inc., catalog SC‑03p, lot E2109) overnight at 4°C 
in PBS before adding it to the tissue. The next day, tissue was washed 
3 times with PBS‑T for 10 minutes, incubated in Alexa Fluor 488 anti-
rabbit (1:800, Invitrogen, catalog A11034, lot 870976), Alexa Fluor 
594 anti–guinea pig (1:800, Invitrogen, catalog A11076, lot 714263), or 
Alexa Fluor 568 anti-mouse goat secondary antibodies (1:800, Invit-
rogen, catalog A11031, lot 822389) in the dark for 2 hours and washed 
2 times with PBS‑T and 1 time with PBS. Free-floating sections were 
mounted on slides. All slides were coverslipped with Aqua-Poly/Mount 
(Polysciences). Sections were examined using a Zeiss LSM 510 confo-
cal scanning laser microscope, equipped with argon and helium-neon 
lasers using a multi-track approach.
Western blots
Tissue extracts for Western blotting were prepared in ice-cold homog-
enization buffer containing the following: 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 
150 mM NaCl; 1 mM EDTA; 1% Triton X‑100; 5 mM NaF; 1.5 mM 
Na3VO4; and protease inhibitor cocktail (complete, EDTA-free, Roche 
Applied Science). For measuring MMP‑9, DRGs were removed from 
animals that were perfused transcardially with PBS. Following cen-
trifugation at 12,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C, the supernatant protein 
concentration was measured and equal protein quantities were boiled 
for 5 minutes in sample buffer and separated by SDS‑PAGE. Follow-
ing electrophoresis, proteins were transferred to 0.2-mm nitrocellu-
lose membranes. Membranes were blocked in 5% dry milk powder 
in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1% Tween-20 (TBS‑T) for 1 hour 
prior to overnight incubation with primary antibody. The membranes 
were then washed, incubated for 1 hour with HRP-conjugated second-
ary antibody, washed again, treated with Enhanced Chemilumines-
cence reagent (PerkinElmer), and exposed to autoradiography films 
(Denville Scientific Inc.). All signals were obtained in the linear range 
for each antibody, and densitometric analyses were performed with 
ImageJ (NIH). Each phosphoprotein was normalized to the expression 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 6 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
Genetic association
Genetic analysis of the OPPERA cohort was described previously (51). 
Genotyping was performed on DNA extracted from whole blood, using 
the Pain Research Panel (Algynomics Inc.). The Pain Research Panel 
is a microarray platform that assesses 3,295 SNP markers representing 
358 genes of potential relevance to pain, inflammation, and/or mood 
and affect as well as 160 ancestry informative markers used to adjust 
for population stratification. Duplicate study samples and HapMap 
reference DNA were genotyped to confirm accuracy and reliability of 
genotyping, and quality filters were imposed for call rates of more than 
95%, reliability of more than 99%, minor allele frequency of more than 
1%, and adherence to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The overall call 
rate was 99.7%, with 2,924 SNPs passing quality filters. Genotyping 
of the pre-OPPERA cohort was performed separately on the Pain 
Research Panel using DNA from whole blood after amplification.
PLINK v.1.07 (Broad Institute) software (52) was used to per-
form case-control association tests by logistic regression, assuming 
a codominant inheritance model. All tests on the OPPERA cohort 
controlled for recruitment site, and tests that included subjects not of 
mixed European descent were also adjusted for race using the first 2 
eigenvectors of a principal components analysis (PCA) on the geno-
type matrix (53).
After initial association tests performed in OPPERA identified EREG 
and EGFR, 5 SNPs from EREG and 25 SNPs from EGFR were extracted 
from the full SNP panel. Haplotype blocks were identified in each gene 
using Haploview v.4.2 (54), and tag SNPs were selected to cover haplotypic 
variation in EREG (rs2367707, rs7687621, rs1542466) and EGFR (5′ 
region: rs759171, rs4947963; 3′ region: rs1140475, rs2740762, rs845552). 
Haplotype testing was performed in the R statistical environment using 
logistic regression. Omnibus tests were used to detect differences in 
TMD odds between any major haplotype groups, and post hoc tests were 
performed contrasting individual haplotypes against all others in order to 
characterize their effects. Combined P values for haplotype analysis were 
calculated using the optimally weighted Z test (55).
To explore cellular mechanisms underlying the associations, we 
applied bioinformatic pathway analysis (based on Pathway Studio, 
Elsevier) to identify signaling networks implicated by the association 
results in the discovery cohort. The multiple testing–adjusted signifi-
cance threshold was determined to be 0.002 for the 5% level, as deter-
mined through permutation (56).
Human mRNA studies
Leukocytes were obtained from 6 ml heparinized venous blood from 
human subjects. Briefly, whole blood was diluted in endotoxin-free 
RPMI 1640 medium and centrifuged through Ficoll/Histopaque 1077 
(Sigma-Aldrich), and the buffy coat cells were washed 5 times with 
sterile isotonic saline. Total RNA was isolated with TRIzol Reagent 
(Life Technologies), and RT‑PCR was performed with the SABiosci-
ence Custom PCR Array System. The cDNAs from all participants 
were normalized to GAPDH through dilution to the concentration at 
which GAPDH gave an equal signal in RT‑PCR reactions.
Human cDNA amplified from study participants with the major 
EREG haplotype was cloned into pCDNA3 vectors under a CMV pro-
moter to generate a WT expression EREG plasmid (gift from Oskar 
Laur, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA). Briefly, an expres-
sion plasmid with the minor allele at rs2367707 was generated by 
site-directed mutagenesis. Expression plasmids were transiently 
CAGTCTTCTGGGTGGCAGTGA. Analyses were carried out in trip-
licate, and the Mmp9 signal was normalized to Gapdh.
Polysomal profile analysis
Lumbar DRGs (L3–L5; pooled from at least n = 10 mice per condition) 
were isolated and placed in ice-cold HEPES‑KOH HBSS (pH 7.4) con-
taining 100 μg/ml cyclohexamide. HBSS was replaced with the ice-cold 
hypotonic lysis buffer (46) containing protease (cOmplete EDTA-free, 
Roche Products) and RNase inhibitors (Rnasin, Promega), and the tis-
sue was subjected to brief homogenization using a glass homogenizer. 
The homogenated material was spun at 18,000 g for 2 minutes at 4°C, 
and the supernatant was loaded on a 10%–50% w/w sucrose gradi-
ent in 20 mM HEPES‑KOH, pH 7.6, 100 mM KCl, and 5 mM MgCl2, 
and centrifuged at 35,000 g for 2.5 hours at 4°C in an Optima L‑80 XP 
Ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter) using an SW40Ti rotor. Polysome 
analysis was performed by measuring the OD at 254 nm using ISCO 
fractionators (Teledyne ISCO), as described previously (46). qPCR 
analysis was performed as previously described (47). Sucrose gradient 
fractions were subjected to RNA extraction using TRIzol (Invitrogen). 
Reverse transcription was performed using a SuperScript III Reverse-
Transcriptase Kit (Invitrogen) and Random Hexamers (Invitrogen) 
according to the manufacturers’ instructions. qPCRs were carried out 
in a CFX96 (Bio-Rad) RT‑PCR system using iQ SYBR Green Supermix 
(Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions using the fol-
lowing primers: Mmp9 (forward) GATCCCCAGAGCGTCATTC and 
Mmp9 (reverse) CCACCTTGTTCACCTCATTTTG). For all experi-
ments, n = 4 (technical replicates); results are presented in arbitrary 
units as relative amounts using serial dilutions of DRG or spinal RNA 
as qPCR concentration standards.
Human subjects and phenotyping
Genotype and phenotype data from the OPPERA case-control study 
are available at the Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP 
phs000762.v1.p1). The OPPERA cohort was recruited and phenotyped 
as detailed previously (48, 49) and is described briefly here. Volunteers 
were recruited at 4 US study sites. Cases (n = 127) had examiner-verified 
TMD at enrollment; controls (n = 731) were individuals who reported no 
significant history of TMD symptoms. Classification of TMD was based 
on the Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC) for Temporomandibular Dis-
order (50). To increase genetic homogeneity of the cohorts, only subjects 
of mixed European descent were analyzed in this study; results from 
the full cohort were extremely similar. An additional subgroup of super 
controls (n = 231 mixed European descent) was classified post hoc as 
TMD-free controls who experienced no tenderness during palpation of 
8 masticatory muscles and 2 temporomandibular joints. Their genotypes 
were contrasted with 129 TMD patients of mixed European descent.
The TMD case-control cohort (24) included 200 TMD cases and 
198 controls, using recruitment protocols and diagnostic criteria simi-
lar to those used in OPPERA, with the exception that enrollment was 
open to non-Hispanic females of mixed European descent ages 18 to 
45 and cases were recruited through a tertiary care pain clinic rather 
than from the general population.
The pre-OPPERA cohort (25) included n = 186 initially pain-free 
females of mixed European descent, ages 18–34, of which 15 devel-
oped RDC-verified TMD over the course of the 3 year follow-up. Mea-
sures of sensitivity to a multitude of pain-evoking stimuli were also 
collected in all 3 cohorts (24, 25, 48, 49).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 6 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
reviewed and approved by Institutional Review Boards at each of the 
4 study sites and at the data coordinating center: University at Buffalo, 
University of Maryland, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
University of Florida, and the Battelle Memorial Institute. All partici-
pants verbally agreed to a screening interview done by telephone and 
provided informed, signed consent for all other study procedures.
Author contributions
JSM and LD conceived of the initial project with input from LJM 
and SBS. LJM and JSM designed the majority of the animal experi-
ments. LJM, SBS, AK, CAM, AS, RES, CC, NY, SS, ST, TC, TMK, 
EM, DGG, JSW, SGS, and JSA performed research. SBS and LD 
performed the bioinformatics analysis on the OPPERA data set. 
LJM, SBS, AK, CAM, CBM, AS, JHG, AGN, ARDS, GGN, DVZ, 
JSM, and LD analyzed the data. JDG, RBF, RO, GDS, CK, RD, WM, 
and LD provided clinical data. CG, NS, AGN, ARDS, and GGN 
oversaw portions of this project. LJM, SBS, JSM, and LD wrote the 
paper with input from all authors.  
Acknowledgments
The authors would like thank Oskar Laur for creating EREG-
expressing constructs at the Custom Cloning Core Facility, Emory 
University. This research was supported by the Canadian Institutes 
for Health Research (CIHR) (NS, ARDS, and JSM), the NIH (JDG, 
RBF, RO, GDS, CK, RD, WM, and LD), the Australian National 
Health and Medical Research Council (TC, TMK, GGN), and the 
Louise and Alan Edwards Foundation (JSM). LJM was supported by 
postdoctoral fellowships from CIHR and the Canadian Pain Society.
Address correspondence to: Jeffrey S. Mogil, Department of Psy-
chology, McGill University, 1205 Dr. Penfield Avenue, Montreal, 
Quebec H3A 1B1, Canada. Phone: 514.398.6085; Email: jeffrey.
mogil@mcgill.ca. Or to: Luda Diatchenko, Department of Anes-
thesia Research, McGill University, 740 Dr. Penfield Avenue, 
Montreal, Quebec H3A 0G1, Canada. Phone: 514.398.2878; 
Email: luda.diatchenko@mcgill.ca.
AGN and WM’s present address is: Department of Anesthesiol-
ogy, Center for Translational Pain Medicine, Duke University, 
Durham, North Carolina, USA.
transfected into HEK293 cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Tech-
nologies) in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. 
The time course of mRNA degradation was measured after actinomy-
cin D (actD) (Sigma-Aldrich) treatment. Thirty-six hours after trans-
fection of EREG plasmids, cells were treated with actD (10 μg/ml) 
and collected at 0, 2, 4, or 6 hours after treatment. Total RNA was iso-
lated after each time point using TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies). 
The isolated RNA was treated with RNase Free–DNase I (Promega) 
and reverse transcribed using a SuperScript III Reverse-Transcriptase 
Kit (Invitrogen) and Random Hexamers (Invitrogen) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. qRT‑PCRs were carried out in a CFX96 
(Bio-Rad) RT‑PCR system using iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNAs of EREG and 
the housekeeping gene GAPDH were amplified using forward and 
reverse PCR primers (GGCTATTGTTTGCATGGACAG and CAC-
GGTCAAAGCCACATATTC, for EREG; and CTTTGGTATCGTG-
GAAGGACTC and GTAGAGGCAGGGATGATGTTC, for GAPDH). 
Two independent experiments were conducted in triplicate. Data 
were normalized to GAPDH.
Drosophila studies
For further details, see Supplemental Methods.
Statistics
Data were analyzed by 2-tailed Student’s t test (unless otherwise indicat-
ed) or 1-way or 2-way ANOVA (or Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA by ranks), fol-
lowed where appropriate by Tukey’s honest significant difference (HSD) 
post hoc test or Dunnett’s case-comparison post hoc test. A P value of less 
than 0.05 was considered significant. Four data points were excluded 
based on their identification as statistical outliers (Studentized residuals 
> 3). Analgesic doses needed to reduce pain by 50% (AD50s) and associ-
ated 95% confidence intervals were calculated using the FlashCalc 40.1 
macro (M.H. Ossipov, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, USA).
Study approval
Mice were maintained in the animal facilities of McGill University and 
the University of Toronto, Mississauga. All mouse experiments were 
approved and performed in accordance with the guidelines of relevant 
local animal care and use committees according to the Canadian 
Council on Animal Care (CCAC) guidelines. The OPPERA study was 
 1. Elliott AM, Smith BH, Penny KI, Smith WC, Cham-
bers WA. The epidemiology of chronic pain in the 
community. Lancet. 1999;354(9186):1248–1252.
 2. Gereau RW, et al. A pain research agenda for the 
21st century. J Pain. 2014;15(12):1203–1214.
 3. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Advanc-
ing Pain Research, Care, Education. Relieving Pain 
in America: A Blueprint for Transforming Preven-
tion, Care, Education, and Research. Washington, 
D.C.: National Academies Press; 2011.
 4. Erschbamer M, Pernold K, Olson L. Inhibiting 
epidermal growth factor receptor improves struc-
tural, locomotor, sensory, and bladder recovery 
from experimental spinal cord injury. J Neurosci. 
2007;27(24):6428–6435.
 5. Kersten C, Cameron MG, Laird B, Mjåland S.  
Epidermal growth factor receptor-inhibition 
(EGFR‑I) in the treatment of neuropathic pain.  
Br J Anaesth. 2015;115(5):761–767.
 6. Kersten C, Cameron MG. Cetuximab alleviates 
neuropathic pain despite tumour progression. 
BMJ Case Rep. 2012;2012:bcr1220115374.
 
7. Moryl N, Obbens EA, Ozigbo OH, Kris MG. Analge-
sic effect of gefitinib in the treatment of non-small 
cell lung cancer. J Support Oncol. 2006;4(3):111.
 8. Kersten C, Cameron MG, Laird B, Mjåland S.  
Epidermal growth factor receptor-inhibition 
(EGFR‑I) in the treatment of neuropathic pain.  
Br J Anaesth. 2015;115(5):761–767.
 9. Citri A, Yarden Y. EGF‑ERBB signalling: 
towards the systems level. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 
2006;7(7):505–516.
 10. Pastore S, Mascia F, Mariani V, Girolomoni G. 
The epidermal growth factor receptor system in 
skin repair and inflammation. J Invest Dermatol. 
2008;128(6):1365–1374.
 11. Shirakata Y, et al. Epiregulin, a novel member of 
the epidermal growth factor family, is an auto-
crine growth factor in normal human keratino-
cytes. J Biol Chem. 2000;275(8):5748–5753.
 12. Kaganoi J, et al. STAT1 activation-induced apop-
tosis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells 
in vivo. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;14(4):1405–1415.
 13. Zhang Y, et al. Antitumor activity of taspine 
by modulating the EGFR signaling pathway 
of Erk1/2 and Akt in vitro in vivo. Planta Med. 
2011;77(16):1774–1781.
 14. Wells A, Gupta K, Chang P, Swindle S, Glading 
A, Shiraha H. Epidermal growth factor receptor-
mediated motility in fibroblasts. Microsc Res Tech. 
1998;43(5):395–411.
 15. Chen Y, Long H, Wu Z, Jiang X, Ma L. EGF 
transregulates opioid receptors through EGFR-
mediated GRK2 phosphorylation activation. Mol 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
3 3 6 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 9   September 2017
Biol Cell. 2008;19(7):2973–2983.
 16. Liu X, et al. Epidermal growth factor-induced 
esophageal cancer cell proliferation requires 
transactivation of beta-adrenoceptors. J Pharma-
col Exp Ther. 2008;326(1):69–75.
 17. Yang H, Wang Z, Capó-Aponte JE, Zhang F, 
Pan Z, Reinach PS. Epidermal growth factor 
receptor transactivation by the cannabinoid 
receptor (CB1) and transient receptor poten-
tial vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) induces differential 
responses in corneal epithelial cells. Exp Eye 
Res. 2010;91(3):462–471.
 18. Kawasaki Y, et al. Distinct roles of matrix 
metalloproteases in the early- and late-phase 
development of neuropathic pain. Nat Med. 
2008;14(3):331–336.
 19. Pareja M, Sánchez O, Lorita J, Soley M, Ramírez 
I. Activated epidermal growth factor receptor 
(ErbB1) protects the heart against stress-induced 
injury in mice. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp 
Physiol. 2003;285(2):R455–R462.
 20. Keith RL, Karoor V, Mozer AB, Hudish TM, Le 
M, Miller YE. Chemoprevention of murine lung 
cancer by gefitinib in combination with prosta-
cyclin synthase overexpression. Lung Cancer. 
2010;70(1):37–42.
 21. Konecny GE, et al. Activity of the dual kinase 
inhibitor lapatinib (GW572016) against HER-
2-overexpressing trastuzumab-treated breast 
cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2006;66(3):1630–1639.
 22. Lee TC, Threadgill DW. Generation and vali-
dation of mice carrying a conditional allele of 
the epidermal growth factor receptor. Genesis. 
2009;47(2):85–92.
 23. Maixner W, et al. Orofacial pain prospective eval-
uation and risk assessment study--the OPPERA 
study. J Pain. 2011;12(11 Suppl):T4–11.e1.
 24. Slade GD, et al. Cytokine biomarkers and chronic 
pain: association of genes, transcription, and 
circulating proteins with temporomandibular 
disorders and widespread palpation tenderness. 
Pain. 2011;152(12):2802–2812.
 25. Diatchenko L, Nackley AG, Tchivileva IE, 
Shabalina SA, Maixner W. Genetic architec-
ture of human pain perception. Trends Genet. 
2007;23(12):605–613.
 26. Bonnington JK, McNaughton PA. Signalling 
pathways involved in the sensitisation of mouse 
nociceptive neurones by nerve growth factor.  
J Physiol (Lond). 2003;551(Pt 2):433–446.
 27. Cao C, et al. Galpha(i1) and Galpha(i3) are 
required for epidermal growth factor-mediated 
activation of the Akt-mTORC1 pathway. Sci Sig-
nal. 2009;2(68):ra17.
 28. Obara I, et al. Systemic inhibition of the mam-
malian target of rapamycin (mTOR) path-
way reduces neuropathic pain in mice. Pain. 
2011;152(11):2582–2595.
 29. Xu Q, et al. Spinal phosphinositide 3-kinase-
Akt-mammalian target of rapamycin signaling 
cascades in inflammation-induced hyperalgesia. 
J Neurosci. 2011;31(6):2113–2124.
 30. Obata K, et al. Role of mitogen-activated protein 
kinase activation in injured and intact primary 
afferent neurons for mechanical and heat hyper-
sensitivity after spinal nerve ligation. J Neurosci. 
2004;24(45):10211–10222.
 31. Murooka TT, Rahbar R, Platanias LC, Fish EN. 
CCL5-mediated T-cell chemotaxis involves 
the initiation of mRNA translation through 
mTOR/4E‑BP1. Blood. 2008;111(10):4892–4901.
 32. Andres C, Meyer S, Dina OA, Levine JD, Hucho 
T. Quantitative automated microscopy (QuAM) 
elucidates growth factor specific signalling in 
pain sensitization. Mol Pain. 2010;6:98.
 33. Heldin CH. Dimerization of cell surface receptors 
in signal transduction. Cell. 1995;80(2):213–223.
 34. Weiss A, Schlessinger J. Switching signals 
on or off by receptor dimerization. Cell. 
1998;94(3):277–280.
 35. Riese DJ, Komurasaki T, Plowman GD, Stern 
DF. Activation of ErbB4 by the bifunctional 
epidermal growth factor family hormone 
epiregulin is regulated by ErbB2. J Biol Chem. 
1998;273(18):11288–11294.
 36. Shelly M, et al. Epiregulin is a potent pan-
ErbB ligand that preferentially activates het-
erodimeric receptor complexes. J Biol Chem. 
1998;273(17):10496–10505.
 37. Kurtze I, Sonnemann J, Beck JF. KRAS-mutated 
non-small cell lung cancer cells are responsive to 
either co-treatment with erlotinib or gefitinib and 
histone deacetylase inhibitors or single treatment 
with lapatinib. Oncol Rep. 2011;25(4):1021–1029.
 38. Lu PH, Kuo TC, Chang KC, Chang CH, Chu 
CY. Gefitinib-induced epidermal growth factor 
receptor-independent keratinocyte apoptosis is 
mediated by the JNK activation pathway.  
Br J Dermatol. 2011;164(1):38–46.
 39. Mogil JS, et al. Screening for pain phenotypes: 
analysis of three congenic mouse strains on 
a battery of nine nociceptive assays. Pain. 
2006;126(1‑3):24–34.
 40. Hargreaves K, Dubner R, Brown F, Flores C, Joris 
J. A new and sensitive method for measuring 
thermal nociception in cutaneous hyperalgesia. 
Pain. 1988;32(1):77–88.
 41. Chaplan SR, Bach FW, Pogrel JW, Chung JM, 
Yaksh TL. Quantitative assessment of tactile 
allodynia in the rat paw. J Neurosci Methods. 
1994;53:55–63.
 42. Decosterd I, Woolf CJ. Spared nerve injury: an 
animal model of persistent peripheral neuro-
pathic pain. Pain. 2000;87(2):149–158.
 43. Bennett GJ, Xie YK. A peripheral mononeuropathy 
in rat that produces disorders of pain sensation 
like those seen in man. Pain. 1988;33(1):87–107.
 44. Hylden JL, Wilcox GL. Intrathecal morphine 
in mice: a new technique. Eur J Pharmacol. 
1980;67(2‑3):313–316.
 45. Malin SA, Davis BM, Molliver DC. Production of 
dissociated sensory neuron cultures and consid-
erations for their use in studying neuronal func-
tion and plasticity. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(1):152–160.
 46. Mamane Y, et al. Epigenetic activation of a subset 
of mRNAs by eIF4E explains its effects on cell 
proliferation. PLoS One. 2007;2(2):e242.
 47. Parsyan A, et al. The helicase protein DHX29 
promotes translation initiation, cell prolifera-
tion, tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2009;106(52):22217–22222.
 48. Slade GD, et al. Study methods, recruitment, 
sociodemographic findings, and demographic 
representativeness in the OPPERA study. J Pain. 
2011;12(11 Suppl):T12–T26.
 49. Ohrbach R, et al. Clinical findings and pain 
symptoms as potential risk factors for chronic 
TMD: descriptive data and empirically identified 
domains from the OPPERA case-control study.  
J Pain. 2011;12(11 Suppl):T27–T45.
 50. Dworkin SF, LeResche L. Research diagnostic cri-
teria for temporomandibular disorders: review, 
criteria, examinations and specifications, cri-
tique. J Craniomandib Disord. 1992;6(4):301–355.
 51. Smith SB, et al. Potential genetic risk factors for 
chronic TMD: genetic associations from the 
OPPERA case control study. J Pain. 2011;12(11 
Suppl):T92–101.
 52. Purcell S, et al. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome 
association and population-based linkage analy-
ses. Am J Hum Genet. 2007;81(3):559–575.
 53. Price AL, Patterson NJ, Plenge RM, Weinblatt 
ME, Shadick NA, Reich D. Principal compo-
nents analysis corrects for stratification in 
genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet. 
2006;38(8):904–909.
 54. Barrett JC, F ry B, Maller J, Daly MJ. Haploview: 
analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype 
maps. Bioinformatics. 2005;21(2):263–265.
 55. Zaykin DV. Optimally weighted Z test is a pow-
erful method for combining probabilities in 
meta-analysis. J Evol Biol. 2011;24(8):1836–1841.
 56. Slade GD, et al. Facial pain with localized and 
widespread manifestations: separate pathways of 
vulnerability. Pain. 2013;154(11):2335–2343.
