 Original Research
Major health service transformation
and the public voice: conflict, challenge
or complicity?
Graham P Martin1, Pam Carter2 and Mike Dent3
Abstract
Objectives: Calls for major reconfigurations of health services have been accompanied by recommendations that wide
ranging stakeholders be involved. In particular, patients and the wider public are seen as critical contributors as both
funders and beneficiaries of public health care. But public involvement is fraught with challenges, and little research has
focused on involvement in the health service transformation initiatives. This paper examines the design and function of
public involvement in reconfiguration of health services within the English NHS.
Methods: Qualitative data including interviews, observation and documents were collected in two health service
‘transformation’ programmes; interviews include involved public and professional participants. Data were analysed
using parallel deductive and inductive approaches.
Results: Public involvement in the programmes was extensive but its terms of reference, and the individuals involved,
were restricted by policy pressures and programme objectives. The degree to which participants descriptively or
substantively represented the wider public was limited; participants sought to ‘speak for’ this public but their views
on what was ‘acceptable’ and likely to influence decision-making led them to constrain their contributions.
Conclusions: Public involvement in two major service reconfiguration programmes in England was seen as important
and functional, and could not be characterized as tokenistic. Yet involvement in these programmes fell short of normative
ideals, and could inadvertently reduce, rather than enlarge, public influence on health service reconfiguration decisions.
Keywords
health service transformation, patient and public involvement, representativeness
Introduction
Demographic, clinical and social shifts are putting pres-
sure on health systems in Europe and elsewhere,
prompting calls for the reconfiguration of the delivery
and organization of health services.1,2 Change can
cause controversy, however, especially where there is
strong scepticism about the motives behind proposed
reforms.3,4 In response, policy development and imple-
mentation are increasingly moving from ‘top-down’
models towards approaches that seek to involve a
wide range of stakeholders.2,5 Stakeholders include
not just clinical and managerial staff within health
care organizations, but also patients and the wider
public, who are increasingly seen to offer a legitimate
contribution to service reconfiguration,2,6 and who can
derail unpopular changes.3
In England, the pressure for change has increased
with
an
increasingly
constrained
budget
for
the
National Health Service (NHS) alongside growing
demand. Ongoing reform efforts are focusing on a
shift of services from the hospital into the community.7
However, the pace of change has been criticized,8 argu-
ably hampered by the complex, pluralistic nature of
health care organization in England that is character-
ized by both competition and interdependency between
a
host
of
provider
bodies.9,10
Recently,
NHS
1Professor, Health Organisation and Policy, Department of Health
Sciences, University of Leicester, UK
2Honorary Fellow, Department of Health Sciences, University of
Leicester, UK
3Visiting Professor, Department of Management, University of Leicester,
UK
Corresponding author:
Graham P Martin, Department of Health Sciences, University of
Leicester, Centre for Medicine, University Road, Leicester LE1 7RH, UK.
Email: gpm7@le.ac.uk
Journal of Health Services Research &
Policy
2018, Vol. 23(1) 28–35
! The Author(s) 2017
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1355819617728530
journals.sagepub.com/home/hsr
 organizations have been required to collaborate more
closely
to
produce
regional
‘Sustainability
and
Transformation
Plans’
(STPs)
that
incorporate
system-wide changes to ‘deliver the right care, in the
right place, with optimal value’.11
The involvement of patients and the public in major
reconfigurations of health services is enshrined in legal
frameworks and policy guidance, nationally12,13 and
internationally.2 Extensive public involvement is per-
ceived to be ‘a key issue for achieving successful
system
transformation’,2
and
according
to
NHS
England, the national public body leading the NHS in
England,12 ‘the best proposals [for service change] are
characterised
by
early
and
on-going
engagement
through all stages of the process, where communities
are involved as partners in actively developing pro-
posals’. Yet, initiatives for service change have consist-
ently been criticized for failing to account appropriately
for public opinion and public involvement, which are
often characterized by secrecy around politically sensi-
tive changes,14 and by a focus on securing support for a
predetermined vision over engaging the public in
system redesign.15 In England, inadequate community
and stakeholder engagement has been among the most
common reasons for reconfiguration proposals to be
referred to the health ministry,16 especially where
plans were perceived as financially driven.13
These tensions are also highlighted in the wider aca-
demic literature on public involvement. ‘The public’ is a
heterogeneous entity comprising multiple, sometimes
conflicting, interest groups, with for example ‘the
public’ in their role as taxpayers and service users
likely to have different wants and expectations from
service reform.17–19 Arguments for public involvement
are variously premised on its potential technocratic
benefits and on a democratic, normative rationale,
but these arguments too may be conflicting.20–22
Consequently, forms of public involvement that satisfy
all expectations are elusive. Approaches are often criti-
cized for failing to include the breadth of publics,23,24
for prioritizing public participants that are more easily
accessible,22,24 or for involving the public in a tokenistic
or superficial manner.25,26
There have been few systematic examinations of
public involvement in major service change. Studies
in England have focused on the dynamics of public
opposition to (rather than involvement in) service
reconfigurations such as hospital mergers and clos-
ures4,27–29 or have highlighted the role of public
involvement but without examining it in detail.15,30
In this paper, we draw on data from two case studies
of involvement in major service reconfiguration in
England to contribute to better understanding of (i)
the drivers behind the approaches taken to public
involvement in health service reconfiguration; and (ii)
the consequences for the form taken by involvement,
and its ability to both provide active input and fulfil
legal requirements.
Methods
Our analysis draws on a study of public involvement in
the development of regional plans for service reconfig-
uration in the NHS. This included qualitative data col-
lection between November 2015 and September 2016 in
two English regions where NHS organizations were
working together towards system-wide health service
reconfiguration.
We
label
these
programmes
‘Transforming Care in Weffolk’ and ‘Care Closer to
Home in Esshire’ (both labels are pseudonyms). The
selection of programmes is best described as a conveni-
ence sample: access was secured through connections
with key stakeholders made in the course of the early
stages of the study. The intended objectives of the two
cases
exemplified
those
being
pursued
across
England,7,11 and each involved a wide range of NHS
commissioning
and
provider
organizations,
local
authorities and other stakeholders.
Data collection included interviews about the pro-
gramme and its public involvement processes with key
stakeholders including programme staff and involved
members of the public, observation of involvement
meetings and documents including strategy and plan-
ning documents and minutes of meetings we could not
attend. In both sites, staff were predominantly admin-
istrative and managerial by background, including
designated public engagement officers, senior pro-
gramme officials and communications managers. Data
collection was more extensive in Weffolk, where the
programme was more advanced; accordingly, our ana-
lysis drew primarily from this case study, using data
from Esshire’s programme to corroborate or question
findings from Weffolk. In total, we conducted inter-
views with 55 participants (32 in Weffolk; 23 in
Esshire) and observed 14 meetings (9 in Weffolk; 5 in
Esshire).
Our approach to analysis combined inductive and
deductive approaches.31 Deductively, we developed
an initial coding framework from the literature on
public
involvement;
inductively,
we
supplemented
this with new codes based on unanticipated themes
found in the data. We modified, developed and
amalgamated codes as we read and re-read data
sources. Coding was accompanied by ongoing dis-
cussion among the authors. GPM drafted an inte-
grated
analysis
of
the
findings,
which
was
developed and agreed by all authors. Due to limita-
tions of space, we rely on interview excerpts to illus-
trate our findings, although our analysis drew on the
entire dataset.
Martin et al.
29
 Findings
We focus first on the programmes’ priorities and the
way these permeated expectations around the scope of
public involvement in the development of their plans.
Then we consider the involvement process, particularly
how the perceived purpose of involvement influenced
the selection of participants and the roles they under-
took. Finally, we examine the nature of the contribu-
tion offered by participants, and their relationship with
the wider public.
Due to the sensitivity of the subject and some of the
data, we refer to interviewees only as ‘professional par-
ticipants’ (including all staff) and ‘public participants’
(involved patients and members of the public, not
employed by health care organizations).
The transformation context
In both programmes, stakeholders who were involved
closely with the transformation plans expressed a
strong sense of urgency, driven by both the policy dis-
course that framed change as crucial to sustain the
NHS,7 and more proximate pressures from national
authorities
to
move
plans
towards
approval.
Development of plans for reconfiguration had to
follow a stepwise process detailed in national guid-
ance.12 Plans would ultimately be subject to a formal
public consultation, but to reach this stage, national
guidance required assurance that the plans passed the
government’s four tests for reconfiguration, including
evidence of ‘strong public and patient involvement’.13
The risk of delay in approval, or of later legal chal-
lenge to the process, was prominent in interviews with
professional participants. Public involvement was given
sustained, senior level attention, even if for them the
case for change seemed clear:
We have to go through the gateway process [mandatory
review] and all this clinical review stuff, and we have to
tick the box to say that we are going to go through a
lengthy consultation about everything, even though to
everybody sat round the board who has looked at the
data, the issue is clear as the nose on your face: this is
what you should do. (Professional 3)
Accordingly, the programmes undertook a wide range
of public facing activities, including not only active
public involvement processes but also broader commu-
nications and engagement events.
Simultaneously,
however,
there
was
a
sense
that this same policy context made thoroughgoing
public involvement more challenging. Perhaps influ-
enced by the sense of urgency conveyed by politicians,
think
tanks
and
national
leaders,
professional
participants felt that large parts of the programmes
were not up for debate: if local NHS provision was
to remain sustainable, change of this nature was
compulsory27:
If all clinical evidence points to us doing something,
and we have got public and patient involvement, and
even if every single person says, ‘No, we don’t think
that’s a good idea’, but clinically, it is the only safe
option, we are going to do that. You cannot veto
that. (Professional 9)
For professional participants, therefore, whatever the
guidance recommended,13 it was far from evident that
all aspects of plans should be subject to public involve-
ment, or that involvement should stretch throughout
the proposal development process:
I understand the argument for people getting involved
at an early stage, but for me there is a stage before that.
There has to be a time where clinicians can safely dis-
cuss what the options are without causing alarm to
people because a lot will be discounted. [. . .] We don’t
want to alarm people. We don’t want to set hares run-
ning. We want to be able to talk because these are what
we think are sensible options. (Professional 2)
The weight of expectation about what the plans would
deliver, then, meant professional participants were alert
to the need to demonstrably involve the public in
developing proposals, but also created doubts about
exactly what should and should not be exposed to
public scrutiny and input, reflecting tensions in the
wider public involvement literature.18,23,26 These dri-
vers also manifested in the way public participants
were recruited for the process.
Populating involvement: challenges
of representativeness
The imperative for involvement meant that professional
participants worked hard to ensure that it was included
in all clinical aspects of their programmes, but this was
easier in some areas than others. Direct experience of
and interest in the issues covered was seen as desirable,
but not always easy to obtain, especially given the
pressing timescales:
Practically, people don’t have that amount of time and
we can’t find people because there’s not anyone inter-
ested in volunteering for some obscure condition that
not very many people have. [. . .] There’s a lot of people
that have got an interest in cancer, but there’s far less
people that have got an interest in nephrology. For
example. (Professional 10)
30
Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 23(1)
 Involvement leads sought to recruit participants who
combined interest in the area with enthusiasm and rele-
vant skills:
Basically, what we asked for were two or three key
things. One was around why they wanted to join the
group, just wanting to know what their motivation
round joining the group was. ‘What could they bring
to the group?’ was the other question that we posed.
And what’s their interest around this? How could they
contribute? (Professional 11)
The result was public involvement groups populated pri-
marily with individuals who had experience of such work
in the past, recruited through networks or a ‘tap on the
shoulder’ from a professional or fellow public partici-
pant who knew they could be relied on to contribute.23,24
The following route into the groups typified the descrip-
tions given by the public participants in our sample:
I was invited by a friend who’s on the Healthwatch
board [consumer champion body] if I would be inter-
ested in going on a committee. [. . .] There were a set of
workstreams offered. I had musculoskeletal problems.
[. . .] It was something where I felt I did have some of
my own knowledge, and obviously, because of that, I
knew people who also had musculoskeletal problems,
and I felt I could represent them as a voice. (Public 23)
I have been involved with health starting as a non-execu-
tive director of a primary care trust. Going back to
around about to the year 2000 onwards. [. . . I] was
very active with [patient and public involvement] and
then more recently there have been formal opportunities
through Transforming Care [in Weffolk]. (Public 7)
Professional participants expressed some concern at
this preponderance of helpful but familiar faces:
‘semi-professional patient voices who end up on differ-
ent committees’ (Professional 5). Some public partici-
pants, too, noted that their profile looked rather
different from the wider public. They felt they could
struggle to provide input that they felt would reflect
the views of the wider public:
It’s mainly white, retired people. And, you know, I fit in
a younger age bracket, but not by much. (Public 24)
There is an interesting debate to be had about how any
of us fulfilling these roles really are genuinely represent-
ing the ordinary patient in the street. I think we take
our life’s experiences and the contacts that we have to
input our best guestimate of how the typical person in
the street might view something. But hand on heart, I
think it’s quite difficult for all of us to be able to point
to a constituency that’s helped us arrive at the decision
we’ve had. (Public 18)
Representativeness, both descriptive (the degree to
which
the
demographic
characteristics
of
those
involved reflected those of the wider public) and
formal (the connection and accountability from public
participants to the wider public),20 was thus problem-
atic. Moreover, the involvement process itself added
further challenge to any sense of accountability to a
wider constituency. Much of the activity of the pub-
lic involvement groups was bound by rules of confiden-
tiality, preventing professionals from discussing it with
those outside the process ahead of formal consultation:
It’s things that we can’t, I can’t, talk about because it’s
not out in the public domain yet, and it’s all still being
worked on and NHS England are looking at it as well.
So the Transforming Care, it all has to go through
NHS England and be approved by them before we
can go out to consult. (Professional 7)
The public that came to be involved in the transform-
ation programmes thus had limited representative legit-
imacy, at least if judged in terms of descriptive or
formal representativeness.20
Involvement’s function: voicing or mediating public
opinion?
Notwithstanding such challenges, public participants
sought to make helpful contributions to the pro-
grammes, drawing on their own knowledge and pre-
senting questions and comments that they felt wider
members of the public would put forward. In particu-
lar, given the focus of the programmes on spatially
reorganizing care, they were keen to ensure that the
proposed changes did not disadvantage particular geo-
graphical areas of the large, diverse counties of Weffolk
and Esshire:
[Care Closer to Home in Esshire] is about preventing
people from going into hospital, really. It’s a very good
idea, but you’ve got to have the staff that are properly
trained and qualified. And enough of them to carry out
this care in the community. (Public 11)
[The commissioners were saying,] ‘Look, if we move x
out of here, where will it go and what hospitals will we
close?’ It was real tough stuff which they’ve got to think
about, and I was able to give, ‘Well what if you do this,
what if somebody from north Weffolk is trying to get to
central Weffich, fine, but have they tried to get to south
Weffich and they’ve got to catch a bus, how do they do
that?’ (Public 19)
Martin et al.
31
 By public participants’ own account, they saw their role
as helping to ensure that the transformation plans
worked for the breadth of the potential patient popu-
lation. They did not, however, see it as within their
remit to question the principles underlying the pro-
grammes, or their overarching direction of travel.
Indeed, they were largely supportive of what they
acknowledged was a controversial set of changes, and
they acknowledged that this meant their views could be
at odds with those of much of the wider public17:
Financially, we can’t stay as we are so and we’ve got
this opportunity to tap into a package of money for
health that will help us achieve some short-term finan-
cial savings probably. But, in the longer term—I’m
trying not to be too cynical—I think it is going to
give services closer to home, closer to where people
need them, and giving people more flexibility and acces-
sibility. (Public 15)
The hard decisions are things like closing or changing
the remit of a major part of Weffolk Teaching
Hospitals, moving an awful lot of care out in the com-
munity, against a tide of public opinion which is very
largely that they’d rather just go to the big hospital,
even though it’s far more expensive and not sustain-
able. [. . .] One of the hardest things is going to be to
get the public to accept that you don’t get to a big
hospital all the time. (Public 16)
This view, of course, was not shared by all the public.
In both areas, campaign groups affiliated to national
movements such as Keep Our NHS Public32 challenged
the notion that programmes such as Transforming Care
and Care Closer to Home were clinically desirable and
financially viable. But membership of such groups and
of the official public involvement forums rarely over-
lapped, as the sole individual who belonged to both
groups in Weffolk noted:
As soon as I joined, went on the PPI, it was as though
there was an assumption that everybody there agreed
with Transforming Care, and I was the only person not
coming from that point of view, for reasons that you
know: I’m in a campaign against privatising the health
service. (Public 4)
Moreover, even as they expressed what they saw as the
most pressing concerns for the wider public, public par-
ticipants actively filtered these views. They distin-
guished
between
what
they
considered
the
more
reasonable perspectives of the public, and the views of
those with particular sectional interests, or who were
attached
to
what
participants
saw
as
outmoded
approaches to health care provision:
There’ll be a lot of sceptical members of the public who,
‘Well this is going to be trying to save money’. It isn’t
about saving money; it’s about making efficiencies and
making money work better. And it’s getting that across
to the public. [. . .] There was a very small group, I call
them saboteurs really, got involved in [the proposed
closure of a community hospital. . . .] When it was
explained to them why the hospital had to close, most
of them understood; a few didn’t like it. (Public 19)
I think most people are always ready to engage and I
think that is our first option. Somehow, I don’t know if
some people still believe we are best off with the
banner-waving brigade and stand outside; I think that
we are past that now, I think most people appreciate
that we have got to have a mature discussion. (Public 7)
Accordingly, public participants came to occupy some-
thing of a mediating role. They made judgements about
what aspects of public feeling they fed into the pro-
grammes, on the basis of their (perceived) reasonable-
ness and potential to be heard, which depended in part
on their alignment with the wider direction of travel of
the service reconfigurations:
NHS England has now a patient and public involve-
ment strategy but it’s all words, unless the clinicians
and the managers are convinced that the voice is valu-
able. And the voice is only going to be valuable if it’s an
informed voice. There’s nothing worse than somebody
just talking about their own experience or the experi-
ence of their neighbour next door endlessly. Instead of
saying what are the fundamental issues, instead of
thinking and understanding that you can’t have a gen-
eral hospital in every small town. (Public 16)
The participants’ mediating function also worked in the
other direction, helping to ensure that plans were commu-
nicated to the wider public in a manner likely to smooth
rather than stir the public’s concerns. This role was wel-
comed and cultivated by professional participants:
If you’re going to do something, close a hospital, for
example, it’s on the cards, and that’s where we are
now, how do you manage the rumours pre-consultation?
My plea has been, ‘How can you put forward a good
story?’ You shouldn’t say, ‘We’re going to do this and
we’re going to close a hospital’; you should start with,
‘Oh, you are going to have this new service, with a new
outpatients’ and something like that, and put the good
before the bad. And I’ve said to them, ‘You have to
work on how you manage the rumour’. (Public 9)
We have got one person already, Philip who sat on the
committee for this, so he’s already got that in-depth
32
Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 23(1)
 knowledge, and it’s amazing to see him in meetings.
[. . .] Because [the public] expect us to say things, and
very often they won’t believe us. Whereas if it’s
a patient who’s been involved saying, ‘Well, actually,
this is how the process has worked and this is what
people have told us’, then it works quite well. So
what we’re trying to do is create six or seven more
Philips to help us! (Professional 6)
Public involvement in the programmes thus took on a
functional, appreciated, but very particular role, and
one that explicitly filtered the ‘public input’ they
received.
Discussion and conclusion
This analysis illustrates how financial and policy pres-
sure for urgent changes to the configuration of services,
combined with the policy imperative to involve the
public appears to hasten a very particular realization
of public involvement. We examined two programmes
in England that sought to develop major service recon-
figuration plans. The programmes included substantial
public involvement activity and dedicated considerable
resources to support it. But professional participants
expressed concern about involving the public in all
aspects of reconfiguration, arguing for the legitimacy
of processes that took place in private, or at least
under strict conditions of confidentiality. Practice,
then, diverged from policy rhetoric that seems to
encourage public involvement throughout the pro-
cess.12,13 Public involvement in practice included a
rather narrow section of the public, and one which
saw its role as contributing in a relatively constrained
way to the transformation plans’ realization, rather
than co-creating them or critically scrutinizing them,
let alone opposing them.
This finding is in line with other recent studies of
public involvement in health service development in
England,23,24 but it is particularly problematic in the
context of major change for two reasons. First, from
a policy point of view, the realization of public involve-
ment appears to differ substantially from prescriptions
that stress the importance of involving the public in a
thoroughgoing manner, with detailed input into all
aspects of reconfiguration.12 The urgency of change
appears to undermine such involvement, meaning that
its benefit is lost, and potentially increasing the risk of
later resistance from a public that does not feel engaged
(or indeed from opponents to plans who search for an
opportunity for legal challenge). Second, the approach
to involvement taken falls far short of, and even risks
militating against, normative ideals that see public
involvement as a democratic process, as a means of
enhancing
democratic
influence
and
local
accountability.21,22,25,33 Achieving such ideals in prac-
tice is also fraught with difficulty, not least because of
the challenges of constructing a representative mandate
between those involved and the wider public in the
absence of a formal electoral relationship.20,23 Our ana-
lysis further shows that representativeness is also chal-
lenged by an approach to recruitment of public
participants that draws on established networks, result-
ing in a demographically narrow group. In addition,
concerns about confidentiality prevent this narrow
group of public participants from developing a substan-
tive relationship with the wider public. Those involved
sought to speak on behalf of the wider public, but fil-
tered their views, and included only those that they felt
would be acceptable and thus influential, while oppos-
ing views were omitted.
Our analysis highlights that public participants per-
formed their role in good faith, and professional staff
appreciated the ability of those participants to translate
plans for the wider public and provide input on what
that wider public might think. But this role was perhaps
best characterized as a proto-professional,24,34 techno-
cratic one in which participants were valued for their
mediating ability rather than because they could speak
as members of the public. They were valued as ‘experts
in laity’19 rather than as public representatives. These
were hybrid roles in which public participants at least
partly embraced a managerial mindset and managerial
preoccupations, similar to the process of hybridization
that
has
been
described
for
clinical
managers.35
Regardless of the value of this role, or the good faith
in which it was enacted, this is quite distinct from the
active involvement of the public as normally construed.
Our observations further add to the evidence reported
elsewhere about the tension between the ‘expert’ and
‘lay’ contributions that are simultaneously demanded
of public participants.19,22 In this context, the notion
of ‘public involvement’ could thus conceal a process
whereby the views of some publics are actually actively
eliminated from the process.
A key implication of our findings, therefore, is that
those responsible for public involvement in large-scale
transformation efforts should consider not only what
they can do to maximize opportunities for involvement,
but also whether some approaches inadvertently work
against active and inclusive involvement beyond a
small, selective group. As Stewart puts it, where
policy entreats staff to involve ‘the public’, it should
be clearer whether this means simply creating an oppor-
tunity for all affected to take part (knowing full well
that the vast majority will not), or actually going out
and ensuring that the views of the affected (however
defined) are heard.36
Practitioners too, and indeed public participants
themselves, should be conscious that well meaning,
Martin et al.
33
 functional, valuable approaches to public involvement
may also have downsides that counteract the very goals
that drive it in the first place.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the participants in this study for their time
and candour, to our PPI group for their advice throughout
the study and to two anonymous peer reviewers who com-
mented on an earlier version of this manuscript. The views
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial sup-
port for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article: This research was funded by the National Institute for
Health Research (NIHR) Collaboration for Leadership in
Applied
Health
Research
and
Care
East
Midlands
(CLAHRC EM).
References
1. McKee M, Healy J, Edwards N, et al. Pressures for
change. In: McKee M and Healy J (eds) Hospitals in a
changing Europe. Buckingham: Open University Press,
2002.
2. World Health Organization. Health system transform-
ation. Copenhagen: WHO, 2016.
3. Fulop N, Six P and Spurgeon P. Processes of change in
the reconfiguration of hospital services: the role of stake-
holder involvement. In: McKee L, Ferlie E and Hyde P
(eds) Organizing and reorganizing. Basingstoke: Palgrave,
2008.
4. Moon G and Brown T. Closing Barts: community and
resistance in contemporary UK hospital policy. Env Plan
D Soc Space 2001; 19: 43–59.
5. Best A, Greenhalgh T, Lewis S, et al. Large-system trans-
formation in health care: a realist review. Milbank Q
2012; 90: 421–456.
6. Bunt L and Harris M. The human factor. London:
NESTA, 2009.
7. NHS
England.
Five
year
forward
view.
London:
Department of Health, 2014.
8. House of Commons Health Committee. Public expend-
iture on health and social care. London: The Stationery
Office, 2014.
9. Sheaff R and Allen P. Provider plurality and supply-side
reform.
In:
Exworthy
M
and
Mannion
R
(eds)
Dismantling the NHS? Bristol: Policy Press, 2016.
10. Martin GP and Carter P. Patient and public involvement
in the new NHS: choice, voice, and the pursuit of legit-
imacy. In: Bevir M and Waring J (eds) Decentred health
policy. London: Routledge, 2017.
11. NHS England, NHS Improvement. NHS operational
planning and contracting guidance. Leeds: Department of
Health, 2016.
12. NHS England. Planning and delivering service changes for
patients. Leeds: Department of Health, 2013.
13. NHS England. Planning, assuring and delivering service
change for patients. London: Department of Health,
2015.
14. Alderwick H, Dunn P, McKenna H, et al. Sustainability
and transformation plans in the NHS. London: King’s
Fund, 2016.
15. Turner S, Ramsay A, Perry C, et al. Lessons for major
system change: centralization of stroke services in two
metropolitan areas of England. J Health Serv Res Pol
2016; 21: 156–165.
16. Independent
Reconfiguration
Panel.
Learning
from
reviews. London: IRP, 2010.
17. Lomas J. Reluctant rationers: public input into health
care priorities. J Health Serv Res Pol 1997; 2: 103–111.
18. Litva A, Coast J, Donovan J, et al. ‘The public is too
subjective’: public involvement at different levels of
health-care decision making. Soc Sci Med 2002; 54:
1825–1837.
19. Martin GP. ‘Ordinary people only’: knowledge, represen-
tativeness, and the publics of public participation in
healthcare. Sociol Health Illn 2008; 30: 35–54.
20. Pitkin HF. The concept of representation. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1967.
21. Martin GP. Public and user participation in public service
delivery: tensions in policy and practice. Sociol Compass
2009; 3: 310–326.
22. Ives J, Damery S and Redwood S. PPI, paradoxes and
Plato: who’s sailing the ship? J Med Ethics 2013; 39:
181–185.
23. Martin GP. Representativeness, legitimacy and power in
public involvement in health-care management. Soc Sci
Med 2008; 67: 1757–1765.
24. El Enany N, Currie G and Lockett A. A paradox in
healthcare service development: professionalization of
service users. Soc Sci Med 2013; 80: 24–30.
25. Arnstein SR. A ladder of citizen participation. J Am Inst
Plann 1969; 35: 216–224.
26. Harrison S and Mort M. Which champions, which
people? Public and user involvement in health care as a
technology of legitimation. Soc Policy Adm 1998; 32:
60–70.
27. Jones L and Exworthy M. Framing in policy processes:
a case study from hospital planning in the National
Health Service in England. Soc Sci Med 2015; 124:
196–204.
28. Barratt H, Harrison DA, Fulop NJ, et al. Factors that
influence the way communities respond to proposals for
major changes to local emergency services: a qualitative
study. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0120766.
29. Fulop N, Walters R, Six P, et al. Implementing changes
to hospital services: factors influencing the process and
‘results’ of reconfiguration. Health Policy 2012; 104:
128–135.
30. Greenhalgh T, Humphrey C, Hughes J, et al. How do you
modernize a health service? A realist evaluation of whole-
34
Journal of Health Services Research & Policy 23(1)
 scale transformation in London. Milbank Q 2009; 87:
391–416.
31. Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory. London:
SAGE, 2007.
32. Welcome to keep our NHS public, www.keepournhspub
lic.com (accessed 5 January 2017). .
33. Dent M and Pahor M. Patient involvement in Europe – a
comparative framework. J Health Organ Manag 2015; 29:
546–555.
34. de Swaan A. In care of the state. Cambridge: Polity Press,
1988.
35. Waring J. Restratification, hybridity and professional
elites: questions of power, identity and relational contin-
gency at the points of ‘professional–organisational inter-
section’. Sociol Compass 2014; 8: 688–704.
36. Stewart E. Publics and their health systems. Basingstoke:
Palgrave, 2016.
Martin et al.
35
