 Spinal Cord (2018) 56:308–321
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41393-017-0017-3
ARTICLE
Evidence-based scientific exercise guidelines for adults with spinal
cord injury: an update and a new guideline
Kathleen A. Martin Ginis
1,2
● Jan W. van der Scheer3
● Amy E. Latimer-Cheung4
● Andy Barrow5
● Chris Bourne6
●
Peter Carruthers7
● Marco Bernardi8
● David S. Ditor9
● Sonja Gaudet10
● Sonja de Groot11
● Keith C. Hayes12
●
Audrey L. Hicks13
● Christof A. Leicht3
● Jan Lexell14
● Steven Macaluso15
● Patricia J. Manns16
●
Christopher B. McBride10
● Vanessa K. Noonan17
● Pierre Pomerleau18
● James H. Rimmer19
● Robert B. Shaw1
●
Brett Smith20
● Karen M. Smith3
● John D. Steeves2
● Dot Tussler21
● Christopher R. West1
● Dalton L. Wolfe22
●
Victoria L. Goosey-Tolfrey2
Received: 6 May 2017 / Revised: 14 September 2017 / Accepted: 20 September 2017 / Published online: 25 October 2017
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is published with open access
Abstract
Objectives To describe the process and outcomes of using a new evidence base to develop scientific guidelines that specify
the type and minimum dose of exercise necessary to improve fitness and cardiometabolic health in adults with spinal cord
injury (SCI).
Setting International.
Methods Using Appraisal of Guidelines, Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II reporting criteria, steps included (a)
determining the guidelines’ scope; (b) conducting a systematic review of relevant literature; (c) holding three consensus
panel meetings (European, Canadian and International) to formulate the guidelines; (d) obtaining stakeholder feedback; and
(e) process evaluation by an AGREE II consultant. Stakeholders were actively involved in steps (c) and (d).
Results For cardiorespiratory fitness and muscle strength benefits, adults with a SCI should engage in at least 20 min of
moderate to vigorous intensity aerobic exercise 2 times per week AND 3 sets of strength exercises for each major
functioning muscle group, at a moderate to vigorous intensity, 2 times per week (strong recommendation). For cardiome-
tabolic health benefits, adults with a SCI are suggested to engage in at least 30 min of moderate to vigorous intensity aerobic
exercise 3 times per week (conditional recommendation).
Conclusions Through a systematic, rigorous, and participatory process involving international scientists and stakeholders, a
new exercise guideline was formulated for cardiometabolic health benefits. A previously published SCI guideline was
endorsed for achieving fitness benefits. These guidelines represent an important step toward international harmonization of
exercise guidelines for adults with SCI, and a foundation for developing exercise policies and programs for people with SCI
around the world.
Introduction
Physical activity (PA) guidelines are systematically devel-
oped, evidence-based statements that provide age- and
ability-specific information on the course of action required
to maintain or enhance performance, fitness, or health [1].
Over the past decade, national and international agencies
have developed and disseminated PA guidelines for the
general population [2–5], derived from systematic reviews
of dose–response evidence regarding the amount of PA
required to reduce morbidity or mortality rates (e.g., ref.
[3,6]).
The
World
Health
Organization
(WHO),
for
instance, recommends at least 150 min/week of moderate-
intensity aerobic activity (or 75 min/week of vigorous-
intensity
aerobic
activity),
plus
muscle-strengthening
activities twice per week [3].
However, the WHO and other national public health PA
guidelines were
not
specifically
tailored
to
the
SCI
* Kathleen A. Martin Ginis
kathleen_martin.ginis@ubc.ca
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41393-017-0017-3) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:
 population. Indeed, the WHO guideline is presented with
the caveat: “These recommendations can be applied to
adults with disabilities. However they may need to be
adjusted for each individual based on their exercise capacity
and specific health risks or limitations” [3]. Furthermore,
rigorous clinical practice guidelines should be formulated
by taking into consideration the benefits, risks, values, and
preferences of the people who will use the guideline[7, 8].
Not only were studies of people with SCI essentially
excluded from the systematic reviews underpinning public
health PA guidelines (e.g., ref. [6]), but the potential risks of
SCI-specific adverse events (e.g., upper-body over-use
injuries [9], skin breakdown [10], autonomic dysreflexia
[11], over-heating [12]) were not considered in relation to
performing the 150 min/week guideline. Likewise, no con-
sideration was given to the feasibility of the guideline in the
SCI population. Because people with SCI face tremendous
physical, psychosocial and environmental barriers to PA
[13,14], they are less active and more physically decondi-
tioned than both the general population and individuals with
many other types of disabilities [15, 16]. These issues,
coupled with ‘overwhelming evidence’ that people living
with disability can achieve health benefits from activity
levels well below the 150 min/week threshold [17], high-
light the need to re-consider the appropriateness of pro-
moting the 150 min/week guideline in the SCI population
[18].
In 2011, a Canadian team developed evidence-based,
SCI-specific PA guidelines [19], using the same transparent,
rigorous and systematic process used to formulate WHO
and national PA guidelines [2–5]. This process followed the
Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation
(AGREE) II criteria [8], considered the gold-standard for
developing and reporting clinical practice guidelines [7, 20].
The team produced the following guideline: “For important
fitness benefits, adults with a spinal cord injury should
engage in at least 20 min of moderate to vigorous intensity
aerobic activity two times per week, and strength training
exercises two times per week” [19]. This guideline has been
translated into over a dozen languages, distributed and
adopted
internationally,
and
proven
efficacious
for
improving fitness in adults with SCI [21]. A limitation,
however, is that it does not specifically address cardiome-
tabolic health, which encompasses measures of body com-
position (e.g., fat mass, lean body mass)[22, 23] and risk
factors for cardiovascular disease (e.g., blood lipids and
cardiac vascular structure/function) [24–26]. A lack of high-
quality research evidence regarding the effects of PA on
health outcomes precluded the formulation of a cardiome-
tabolic health guideline in 2011 [19]. Because cardiometa-
bolic diseases are among the leading causes of death in
adults with SCI [27], guidelines that address cardiometa-
bolic health would be extremely valuable.
A recent systematic review provided a synthesis and
appraisal of research testing the effects of exercise inter-
ventions on fitness and health outcomes in adults with SCI
[28]. The authors reported moderate-to-high confidence in
the evidence showing exercise can improve fitness and
cardiometabolic health outcomes in adults with chronic
SCI. Furthermore, they reported low-to-moderate con-
fidence in the evidence supporting specific exercise pre-
scriptions (i.e., the exercise type and the ‘dose’ of exercise
given to participants, consisting of exercise frequency,
intensity
and
duration)
[29]
leading
to
significant
improvements in these outcomes. The evidence was insuf-
ficient
to
derive
dose–response
relationships
between
exercise and fitness and cardiometabolic health outcomes
28]. However, it seems that since the 2011 guideline
development process, sufficient evidence has accumulated
to underpin the formulation of exercise guidelines that
specify the type and minimum dose of exercise necessary to
improve cardiometabolic health in adults with chronic SCI.
Clinical practice guidelines should be kept up-to-date with
current evidence [8]. Accordingly, the purpose of this paper
is to describe the process and outcomes of using the new
evidence base [28], along with AGREE II reporting criteria
[20], to develop scientific guidelines that specify the type
and minimum dose of exercise necessary to improve fitness
and cardiometabolic health in adults with SCI.
Methods
Project overview
The project leadership team consisted of four researchers
with expertize in PA and SCI (KAMG, JWvdS, AEL-C,
VG-T) and developing PA guidelines (KAMG and AEL-C).
The team established the project objective as to develop
scientific guidelines that specify the type and minimum
dose of exercise necessary to improve fitness and cardio-
metabolic health in adults with SCI. The focus on ‘exercise’
(i.e., planned, structured, and repetitive PA that is performed
to maintain or improve fitness) [30] rather than ‘PA’ (i.e.,
any bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles requir-
ing energy expenditure) [30] reflected the contents of the
new evidence base/systematic review [28]. Although the
new review was designed to capture all forms of PA inter-
ventions (e.g., sport, lifestyle activity, exercise), 99% of the
studies involved structured exercise interventions [28].
The process, and its reporting in this manuscript, were
guided by the AGREE II Instrument [8] and AGREE
reporting checklist [20] which specify 23 items, across six
domains (scope and purpose; stakeholder involvement;
rigor of development; clarity of presentation; applicability;
editorial independence), to report when formulating a
Sci exercise guidelines
309
 clinical practice guideline. Steps involved: (a) determining
the scope of the guidelines; (b) conducting a systematic
review of relevant literature; (c) holding three consensus
panel meetings (European, Canadian, International) to for-
mulate the guidelines; (d) obtaining stakeholder feedback;
and (e) a process audit by an AGREE II consultant. Sta-
keholders (e.g., people living with SCI, health care provi-
ders, service provider organizations) were actively involved
in steps (c) and (d).
Systematic review
The guideline’s evidence base was provided by a systematic
review that synthesized and appraised research testing the
effects of exercise interventions on fitness (cardiorespiratory
fitness, power output and/or muscle strength), cardiometa-
bolic health (body composition and/or cardiovascular risk
factors), and bone health outcomes among adults with SCI
[28]. Two leadership team members (JWvdS, KAMG) led
the review and a third (VG-T) was a co-author. The review
was undertaken in collaboration with the Spinal Cord Injury
Research Evidence (SCIRE) project (https://scireproject.
com).
The review is fully described by Van der Scheer et al
[28]. In brief, included studies: employed exercise inter-
ventions for a period ≥ 2 weeks; involved adults with acute
or chronic SCI; and measured fitness, cardiometabolic
health and/or bone health outcomes. No exclusion criteria
were set for type of exercise intervention, participant age,
cause or characteristics of SCI, baseline PA level, or
comorbid conditions. All study designs except case studies
were included. Each study was rated for its level of evi-
dence (Levels 1–4) based on strength of the study design
and cut-off scores on quality checklists (i.e., the Phy-
siotherapy Evidence Database Scale and a modified Downs
and Black scale) [28, 31].
Evidence
was considered separately for
acute ( ≤
12 months post-injury) and chronic SCI. First, evidence was
synthesized and appraised (using Grading of Recommen-
dations,
Assessment,
Development,
and
Evaluation
[GRADE]) [7, 32] regarding the overall effects of exercise
on each reviewed outcome (Table 1). Second, evidence was
synthesized and appraised for the effects of specific exercise
prescriptions on each outcome (Table 2), but only for those
types of exercise used in at least two Level 1 or 2 studies.
Using this information, the review authors drafted a set of
guideline recommendations that captured the type of exer-
cise and range of specific exercise frequencies, intensities
and durations yielding significant improvements in each
outcome. Because two high-quality studies are considered
the minimum for developing clinical practice guidelines,
guideline recommendations could not be drafted for exer-
cise types (e.g., functional electrical stimulation [FES])
with < 2 Level 1 or 2 studies available [33]. Finally,
reported adverse event data were summarized [27].
Consensus panel meetings
To maximize international stakeholders’ involvement and
bolster confidence in the rigor and scrutiny of the guideline
development process, three separate, 1-day consensus panel
meetings were held to review the evidence and formulate
the guidelines. The first meeting was held on June 21, 2016
at Loughborough University, UK. European scientists with
expertize in SCI and PA were invited to participate, along
with clinicians and two SCI consumers (i.e., adults living
with SCI). The meeting was observed by a post-doctoral
fellow and a knowledge translation specialist who took
notes. The second meeting was on October 24, 2016, in
Toronto, Canada. Canadian scientists with expertize in SCI
and PA were invited to participate, along with clinicians,
representatives of community organizations, and one SCI
consumer (a second consumer withdrew the night before the
meeting). A research coordinator observed the meeting and
took notes. The third meeting occurred on November 23,
2016 in Kelowna, Canada. The purpose of this International
meeting was to create consensus across the European and
Canadian meetings. A scientific representative from both
previous meetings attended, along with two scientists and a
clinician-scientist who developed SCI PA guidelines in their
home countries (Australia, Sweden, United States), two SCI
consumers, and representatives from national and interna-
tional SCI organizations. The meeting was observed by a
doctoral student/clinician and a graduate student who took
notes. A full list of panel members is presented in online
Supplement 1.
KAMG chaired the European and International meetings
and AEL-C chaired the Canadian meeting. Both chairs are
Table 1 GRADE confidence ratings for the evidence presented in the
systematic review [28] regarding the effects of exercise on each of the
reviewed outcomes for adults with acute SCI or chronic SCI
Outcome
Acute
SCI (any
adult)
Chronic
SCI (any
adult)
Chronic SCI
(young and middle-
aged adults)
Fitness
Cardiorespiratory fitness Very low Moderate
High
Power output
Very low Moderate
High
Muscle strength
Very low Moderate
High
Cardiometabolic health
Body composition
Very low Moderate
High
Cardiovascular risk
Very low Moderate
High
Bone health
Very low Very low
Very low
GRADE grading of recommendations, assessment, development, and
evaluation [7,32], SCI spinal cord injury
310
K. A. Martin Ginis et al.
 SCI and PA scientists, with extensive expertize in AGREE
II and PA guideline development processes, and have
chaired and attended numerous PA guideline panels. Prior
to the meeting, the European panel received drafts of the
systematic review evidence tables only, as a complete draft
of the systematic review paper was not yet available. The
Canadian and International panels received a complete draft
of the systematic review paper [28]. To minimize potential
bias, the Canadian panel was not informed of the European
panel meeting results. The International panel received a 12-
page document summarizing the processes and outcomes
from the European and Canadian meetings. This informa-
tion facilitated an iterative process whereby the Interna-
tional panel could build on the discussions and consensus of
the European and Canadian panels, leading to a final con-
sensus decision.
Meeting agendas (Supplement 2) were structured to
ensure discussion of issues required to meet AGREE II
reporting criteria [20]. To start each meeting, panelists were
asked to declare any conflicts of interest. Next, JWvdS
presented an overview of the systematic review methods
and
results,
and
answered
questions
regarding
these
elements.
To assist in formulating the guidelines, as a starting
point, the European and Canadian panelists were presented
with the guideline recommendations from the systematic
review [28]. The recommendations were the types and the
range of effective exercise durations, frequencies, and
intensities (Table 2). The panel was tasked with formulating
guidelines that reflected the minimum dose of exercise
required to achieve benefits. At the International meeting,
the starting point was the guidelines that emerged from the
European and Canadian panel meetings. Evidence for acute
and chronic SCI was considered separately and discussed
until panels achieved consensus on a set of guidelines. The
panel then graded the strength of these guidelines using
GRADE [34,35], taking into account potential health ben-
efits and risks of following the guidelines.
To be consistent with how PA guidelines are presented to
the general population, the Canadian and International
panels developed a scientific preamble (Fig. 1). The Eur-
opean panel did not have time to complete this task. The
scientific preamble clearly describes the scope and purpose
of the guidelines (i.e., the objective, outcomes covered, and
the population to whom the guidelines apply). The Cana-
dian panel used the preamble from the 2011 SCI PA
guidelines [19] as a starting point, and the International
panel started with the preamble developed by the Canadian
panel. Consistent with AGREE II [8], the Canadian and
International panels also discussed barriers and facilitators
to implementing the guidelines. These discussions did not
influence the content of the guidelines, but were intended
to
highlight
challenges
and
opportunities
for
their
dissemination.
Table 2 GRADE confidence ratings [10, 24] for the evidence used to formulate the guideline recommendations [28] (i.e., the range of exercise
durations, frequencies and intensities associated with significant improvements in an outcome)
Combined upper-body aerobic plus strength
exercisea
Upper-body aerobic exercise onlyb
Outcome [3]
Adults of any age
with chronic SCI
and AIS A-D
Young and middle-aged
adults with chronic SCI
and AIS A-D
Adults of any age
with chronic SCI
and AIS A-D
Young and middle-aged
adults with chronic SCI
and AIS A-B
Young and middle-aged
adults with chronic SCI
and AIS C-D
Fitness
Cardiorespiratory fitness Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Low
Power output
Low
Moderate
Insufficient
evidence
Insufficient evidence
Insufficient evidence
Muscle strength
Low
Moderate
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Cardiometabolic health
Body composition
Insufficient
evidence
Insufficient evidence
Low
Moderate
Low
Cardiovascular risk
Insufficient
evidence
Insufficient evidence
Low
Moderate
Low
AIS American spinal injury association impairment scale, GRADE grading of recommendations, assessment, development, and evaluation [7,32],
SCI spinal cord injury
aGuideline recommendation from the systematic review: 2–3 sessions per week of moderate to vigorous intensity upper-body aerobic exercise for
20–30 min (cardiorespiratory fitness) or 20–40 min (power output and muscle strength) combined with upper-body strength exercise (3 sets of 10
repetitions, at 50–80% 1RM for all large muscle groups). See Table 3 and table e-10 of the systematic review for more details [28]
bGuideline recommendation from the systematic review: 3–5 sessions per week of moderate to vigorous intensity upper-body aerobic exercise for
20–44 min (cardiorespiratory fitness) or 30–44 min (muscle strength, body composition and cardiovascular risk). See Table 4 and table e-11 of
the systematic review for more details [28]
Sci exercise guidelines
311
 Stakeholder involvement
Stakeholders played a critical role in developing the
guidelines. Fifteen stakeholders representing SCI con-
sumers and other stakeholder groups (e.g., SCI community
service providers, health care providers, exercise profes-
sionals) participated in the expert panels (Supplement 1). In
addition, KAMG led a workshop at the 2016 ISCoS meeting
to present an overview of the guideline project, along with the
evidence and guideline recommendations from the systematic
review [28]. Workshop participants were invited to provide
feedback on the guideline development process through a
survey (N = 30 responded; Table 3). After the International
panel meeting, a survey about the guidelines was circulated to
gain additional stakeholder feedback from SCI consumers
(N = 45) and SCI clinicians (N = 13) who previously agreed
to be contacted (Table 4). All survey protocols were reviewed
and approved by the Okanagan Research Ethics Board at the
University of British Columbia (Canada).
AGREE II evaluation
An AGREE II expert formally audited and evaluated the
guideline development process. She was provided with the
systematic review [28], and this manuscript, and completed
the audit using the AGREE II Online Guideline Appraisal
Tool (http://www.agreetrust.org).
Results
Systematic review
The review is fully described by Van der Scheer et al [28].
In brief, 211 studies met the inclusion criteria. For the body
of evidence for acute SCI (22 studies), GRADE confidence
ratings were very low for the effects of exercise on each
outcome (Table 1). The lack of sufficient high-quality stu-
dies prohibited drafting a guideline recommendation for the
use of exercise to improve any of the outcomes in adults
with acute SCI. For the body of evidence for chronic SCI
(189 studies), GRADE confidence ratings were moderate
for evidence showing exercise can improve each reviewed
outcome except bone health (Table 1). The only limitation
of the evidence was indirectness: adults aged > 65 y were
virtually absent from the reviewed studies. Thus, for young
and middle-aged adults it was concluded that there is high
confidence in the evidence showing exercise can improve
all of the reviewed outcomes except bone health.
Regarding specific exercise prescriptions, there was
sufficient high-quality evidence to draft guideline recom-
mendations for two types of exercises: (1) combined upper-
body aerobic plus strength exercise; and (2) upper-body
aerobic exercise only (see Table 2). The first recommen-
dation (2–3 sessions per week of moderate to vigorous
intensity upper-body aerobic exercise for 20–30 min com-
bined with upper-body strength exercise [3 sets of 10
repetitions, at 50–80% 1RM for all large muscle groups])
applied to all three fitness outcomes and was supported by
evidence that included young and middle-aged adults with
chronic SCI with A, B, C and D injuries on the American
spinal injury association impairment scale (AIS). Low
GRADE confidence ratings were established given impre-
cision and indirectness, caused by the absence of adults
aged > 65 y. However, there was moderate confidence in the
evidence showing this exercise prescription can yield sig-
nificant improvements in fitness of young and middle-aged
adults with chronic SCI.
The second, aerobic-only guideline recommendation
(3–5 sessions per week of moderate to vigorous intensity
upper-body aerobic exercise for 20–44 min [to improve
cardiorespiratory fitness] or 30–44 min [to improve muscle
strength, body composition and cardiovascular risk]) was
applicable to two of the three fitness outcomes and both
cardiometabolic health outcomes. It was supported by evi-
dence including young and middle-aged adults with chronic
SCI and AIS A and B. Low GRADE confidence ratings
were established given imprecision and indirectness, caused
by the absence of adults aged > 65 y and/or adults with AIS
C or D. However, there was moderate confidence in the
evidence showing this exercise prescription can yield sig-
nificant improvements in fitness of young and middle-aged
adults with chronic SCI and AIS A-B. A summary of the
GRADE evaluation of the evidence for each guideline
recommendation is presented in Table 2.
The limited adverse event data for upper-body aerobic
and/or strength exercise (derived from 5 studies involving
99 participants) suggested adverse events were rare, except
for occasional incidence of musculoskeletal pain.
Meetings
This section documents the final consensus decisions
achieved at the International panel meeting.
Scope and purpose of the guidelines
Overall objective of the guidelines. To specify the type and
minimum dose of exercise necessary to improve fitness and
cardiometabolic health in adults with SCI.
Questions covered by the guidelines. Based on the best
available scientific evidence from studies involving adults
with SCI, what is the type of exercise, and the minimum
frequency, intensity, and durations (FITT principle) of
exercise, needed to elicit fitness and cardiometabolic health
312
K. A. Martin Ginis et al.
 benefits for adults with SCI? The guidelines are positioned
as scientific guidelines meaning that they are wholly
evidence-based and have not undergone knowledge trans-
lation or patient-public-involvement (PPI) processes [36,37]
to refine language or presentation for non-scientific audi-
ences. Nevertheless, the guidelines are meant to be applic-
able to exercise performed in rehabilitation settings, fitness
centers, and people’s homes.
Population to whom the guidelines are meant to apply. The
guidelines are meant to apply to adults with SCI who are not
active above and beyond daily activities. Given the char-
acteristics of study participants included in the evidence of
the systematic review, the guidelines apply to men and
women aged 18–64 years with chronic SCI ( > 12 months
post-onset), neurological level C3 or lower, injured from
traumatic or non-traumatic causes. The guidelines may also
be appropriate for individuals with a SCI < 12 months post-
onset, aged 65 years or older, and people with comorbid
conditions; however, given the lack of research involving
these groups, such individuals should consult a health care
provider prior to beginning an exercise program.
Target users of the guidelines. The intended guideline
audience consists of scientists; people living with SCI, their
families, attendant care and health care providers (e.g.,
physicians, physiotherapists, occupational therapists and
recreation therapists); qualified exercise professionals (e.g.,
certified personal trainers); exercise physiologists/kinesiol-
ogists working in academic, health care or community set-
tings; and organizations that provide information and
services to people with SCI. The guideline may be used
to
design
exercise
studies
and
programs,
to
inform
standards of care, and to inform policies to promote fitness
and health.
The guidelines and the preamble
The panel agreed unanimously that (a) there was sufficient
quality evidence to formulate exercise guidelines for adults
Fig. 1 The guideline preamble
Sci exercise guidelines
313
 with chronic SCI, but not acute SCI, and (b) evidence was
sufficient to formulate guidelines to improve fitness and
cardiometabolic health, but not bone health, of adults with
chronic SCI. The panel decided to develop separate
guidelines for improving fitness and for improving cardio-
metabolic health outcomes. The panel’s reasoning reflected
the evidence overview in Table 2. Specifically, evidence for
the combined upper-body aerobic plus strength-exercise
prescription supports improvements in all three fitness
outcomes across AIS A-D, but it does not support
improvements in the cardiometabolic health outcomes. In
contrast, evidence for the upper-body aerobic-exercise only
prescription does support the cardiometabolic health out-
comes, but only for AIS A-C (to improve body composi-
tion)
and
AIS
A-B
(to
reduce
cardiovascular
risk).
Furthermore, the aerobic-only prescription has support for
improving just two out of the three fitness outcomes—car-
diorespiratory fitness and muscle strength—and for cardi-
orespiratory fitness, the evidence is limited to AIS A-B.
Given the limitations of the evidence for each prescription,
the panel reasoned that combining evidence for the fitness
and cardiometabolic outcomes into a single guideline would
bring down the overall strength of the guideline with regard
to improving the fitness outcomes. Furthermore, the panel
felt it was important to create scientific guidelines that were
clearly linked to the empirical evidence; to do so separate
guidelines for fitness and cardiometabolic health outcomes
were required.
When formulating the guidelines, the panel decided to
collapse the outcomes of cardiorespiratory fitness and
power output under the label of ‘cardiorespiratory fitness’
because of the strong association between important mea-
sures representing both outcomes, such as peak oxygen
uptake and peak power output during a maximal graded
exercise test [38]. The panel agreed with the systematic
review [28] authors’ use of the term ‘cardiometabolic
health’, which reflected measures of body composition and
cardiovascular risk factors.
The guidelines are presented in Fig. 2. To improve car-
diorespiratory fitness and muscle strength, the guideline is:
20 min of moderate to vigorous intensity aerobic exercise 2
times per week AND 3 sets of strength exercises for each
major functioning muscle group, at a moderate to vigorous
intensity, 2 times per week. This guideline reflects the
minimum frequency, intensity, and duration of exercise
involving combined upper-body aerobic plus strength
exercise yielding significant improvements in fitness out-
comes. To improve cardiometabolic health, the guideline is
30 min of moderate to vigorous intensity aerobic exercise 3
times per week. This guideline reflects the minimum fre-
quency, intensity, and duration of upper-body aerobic
exercise that has been shown to significantly improve the
cardiometabolic health outcomes.
The panel then graded the strength of both guidelines
[34, 35]. The panel voted 11-1 in favor of endorsing the
fitness guideline with a “strong recommendation”. Of note,
apart from some minor differences to enhance clarity, the
exercise guideline to improve fitness is the same as the 2011
SCI PA guidelines [19]
The exercise guideline to improve cardiometabolic health
is a new guideline. There was unanimous agreement that
this is not a “strong recommendation.” The panel voted 11-
1 in favor of endorsing it as a “conditional recommenda-
tion” given concerns about limited generalizability, and
uncertainty as to whether exercise performed at the
recommended level can lead to ‘optimal’ cardiometabolic
health or merely induce statistically significant improve-
ments in the types of measures being used as indicators of
cardiometabolic health in the research literature (e.g., lipid
profiles, inflammatory markers, fat mass) [39].
Table 3 Survey feedback from participants who attended the 2016 ISCoS SCI physical activity guideline workshop
Question
N
% disagree or
strongly disagree
% neither agree
nor disagree
% agree or
strongly
agree
Mean SD
Physical activity guidelines for people with SCI should be based on evidence
from studies of people with SCI
30 10
3.3
86.7
4.27
1.23
Physical activity guidelines for people with SCI should be developed with
the same rigor as pharmaceutical and other clinical practice guidelines
30 16.7
6.7
76.7
4.03
1.27
Physical activity guidelines for people with SCI should be based on the
MINIMUM amount of activity needed to achieve health and fitness benefits
30 13.4
20.0
66.7
3.83
1.21
I intend to use the SCI physical activity guidelines in my clinical practice.
22 9.1
9.1
81.8
4.18
1.22
In my country, it is feasible to put SCI physical activity guidelines into
practice
26 0.0
23.1
76.9
3.96
.66
It is important that SCI physical activity guidelines are consistent across
countries
26 3.8
7.7
88.4
4.38
.80
Responses were made on 5-point scales (1 = strongly disagree; 5 = strongly agree). N fluctuates because some participants declined to respond to
some questions
314
K. A. Martin Ginis et al.
 Following the International meeting and peer review,
KAMG and JWvdS made minor textual edits to the pre-
amble and guidelines, leading to the final versions (Figs. 1
and 2). The fitness guideline stipulates adults with a SCI
“should engage” in the recommended exercise prescription,
whereas the cardiometabolic health guideline stipulates that
adults with a SCI “are suggested to engage” in the recom-
mended exercise prescription. Language for the cardiome-
tabolic health guideline was changed from “should engage”
to “are suggested to engage” after the panel meeting. These
differences in language reflect differences in the strength of
the recommendations [35]. All 29 panelists read a draft of
this paper, including the final version of the preamble and
guidelines; 28 approved the guidelines through an email
voting procedure. One panelist declined to endorse the
guidelines.
Updating procedure
Panelists agreed that the guidelines should be reviewed and
updated at least every five years. The update could be
aligned with the 2–3 years timeline for updating SCIRE.
The panel recommended updates include an assessment of
the quality and quantity of evidence and follow a protocol
that aligns with AGREE-II.
Stakeholder feedback
Thirty ISCOS workshop participants (87% women) from 14
countries completed the survey. Participants were rehabili-
tation specialists (57%), medical doctors (20%), scientists
(10%), SCI consumers (3%) and others (10%). High levels of
agreement with survey items (see Table 3) were interpreted
as strong endorsement of the guideline development process.
Mean item responses from SCI consumers and clinicians
on the guideline survey (Table 4) were above the scale
midpoint (i.e., > 4) except for the item assessing confidence
that people with tetraplegia can meet the cardiometabolic
health guideline. Scores for the fitness guideline tended to
be higher than for the health guideline on items pertaining
to appropriateness, confidence in achieving, and utility of
the guidelines. The health guideline tended to have higher
scores on items pertaining to clarity of instructions. These
data will help to inform translation of these scientific
guidelines into guidelines for use in clinical and community
settings [36].
AGREE II evaluation
The guidelines received an overall quality score of 7 out of
7 and were recommended for use. Ratings for each domain,
Table 4 Stakeholder evaluations of the guidelines
SCI consumers
SCI clinicians
Questions
Fitness
guideline
CM health
guideline
Fitness
guideline
CM health
guideline
N
M (SD)
n
M (SD)
N
M (SD)
n
M (SD)
Is the guideline appropriate for all individuals with SCI?
44 4.59 (2.03) 44 4.41 (1.70) 13 4.54 (1.94) 13 4.77 (1.69)
Is the guideline realistic if the person is motivated and has all resources
necessary?
45 5.87 (1.38) 45 5.51 (1.41) 13 6.31 (0.95) 13 5.92 (1.12)
Does the guideline reflect the amount, type, and intensity of PA that people
with SCI are likely to do?
45 4.53 (1.71) 45 4.11 (1.92) 12 4.25 (1.49) 13 4.46 (1.39)
How confident are you that you can meet this guideline?
45 5.29 (2.00) 44 4.55 (1.90)
How confident are you that people with paraplegia can meet this guideline? 43 5.16 (1.85) 44 4.98 (1.85) 13 5.92 (.86)
13 5.00 (1.41)
How confident are you that people with tetraplegia can meet this guideline? 38 4.03 (1.75) 36 3.83 (1.65) 13 4.38 (1.66) 13 3.69 (1.55)
Does the guideline provide useful information for people with SCI?
45 5.53 (1.47) 45 5.18 (1.57) 13 5.54 (1.71) 13 5.62 (1.33)
Does the guideline provide useful information for health care providers and
fitness professionals?
45 5.38 (1.70) 42 5.07 (1.60) 13 5.92 (1.61) 13 5.85 (1.41)
Does the guideline provide clear instructions about how much PA should be
done in a week?
45 5.49 (1.95) 45 5.60 (1.54) 13 5.62 (1.81) 13 5.62 (1.61)
Does the guideline provide clear instructions about the intensity level of PA? 45 5.13 (1.85) 45 5.22 (1.74) 13 4.77 (2.09) 13 4.77 (1.64)
Does the guideline provide clear instructions about how much PA should be
done in one session?
45 4.44 (2.05) 45 5.29 (1.70) 13 4.92 (1.75) 13 5.62 (1.26)
If you are a health care provider or fitness professional, would you use this in
your practice?
13 6.08 (1.55) 11 6.00 (1.41)
Note. All Items were rated on a 7-point scale with higher scores indicating more positive ratings. N fluctuates because some participants declined
to respond to some questions
CM cardiometabolic, PA physical activity
Sci exercise guidelines
315
 areas for improvement, and subsequent minor modifications
to this document, are presented in Supplement 3.
Discussion
Through
this
international
project,
scientific
exercise
guidelines were developed for adults with SCI using a new
evidence base [28] and AGREE II reporting criteria [20].
The guidelines were developed in partnership with key
stakeholders using a rigorous, systematic, participatory
process, that followed the gold-standard approach for for-
mulating clinical practice guidelines [7,8,20]. Two guide-
lines were formulated: (1) a guideline stipulating that to
improve cardiorespiratory fitness and muscle strength,
adults with SCI should engage in at least 20 min of mod-
erate to vigorous intensity aerobic exercise 2 times per
week, and three sets of strength exercises for each major
functioning muscle group, at a moderate-vigorous intensity,
2 times per week. This guideline affirms the 2011 SCI PA
guidelines [19] and has been updated to align with the
evidence base by referring to ‘exercise’ rather than ‘PA’;
and (2) a new guideline, which states that for cardiometa-
bolic health benefits, adults with SCI are suggested to
engage in at least 30 min of moderate to vigorous intensity
aerobic exercise 3 times per week. The panel considered the
fitness guideline to be a strong recommendation and the
cardiometabolic health
guideline
to
be
a conditional
recommendation [35]
Importantly, both guidelines advise a lower frequency
and duration of aerobic exercise than the amount recom-
mended for the general population (150 min/week) [2–5].
This difference reflects the use of the minimal effective dose
of exercise provided by SCI-specific evidence, instead of
the optimal dosage of PA derived from the able-bodied
evidence underpinning PA guidelines for the general
population (e.g., [6]). The lower frequency and duration
also reflects that people with SCI are less active and more
physically deconditioned than most able-bodied adults [15,
16]. As such, people with SCI can experience improve-
ments in fitness and indices of cardiometabolic health from
relatively small doses of exercise, similar to what has been
found in apparently healthy but inactive individuals, people
living with chronic disease, and people living with other
disabilities [17]. This body of evidence from non-SCI
populations also indicates that the same exercise prescrip-
tion can lead to different responses in people with differing
baseline PA, fitness, or health levels [17]. Given insufficient
SCI-specific evidence [17], it is not clear how such baseline
differences influence fitness and cardiometabolic responses
to the SCI guidelines. Furthermore, regardless of baseline
fitness and activity levels, physiological, autonomic and
hormonal responses to exercise can differ between people
with and without SCI, particularly in those with higher-level
Fig. 2 Scientific exercise
guidelines for adults with spinal
cord injury. Details on how
“moderate to vigorous intensity”
was defined/quantified in the
studies used to formulate the
guideline can be found in tables
e-10 and e-11 available at:
http://www.neurology.org/
content/early/2017/07/21/WNL.
0000000000004224/suppl/DC1
316
K. A. Martin Ginis et al.
 lesions [40]. These points attest to the importance of using
SCI-specific evidence to develop SCI-specific exercise
guidelines [18].
Applicability
The panel identified numerous intrapersonal, interpersonal,
community, institutional and policy-level barriers and some
facilitators to applying the guidelines. Most of these factors
have been previously identified and reviewed in the SCI
research literature (e.g., lack of accessible exercise equip-
ment and venues, costs of memberships and equipment,
lack of transportation) [13, 14]. However, the panel also
identified barriers and facilitators unique to these guidelines.
One potential barrier is that specifying different guidelines
for improving fitness and cardiometabolic health might
create confusion (i.e., people may not be sure which
guideline to follow), as might having guidelines that differ
from what is promoted for the general population. A second
possible barrier is that the term ‘exercise’ (as opposed to
‘physical activity’) in the guideline may constrain thinking
about types of activities that people with SCI can participate
in. A third concern was that the importance of improving
one’s fitness might be overshadowed by launching a new
cardiometabolic health guideline. The panel deliberated
these concerns extensively and concluded that efforts to
resolve these issues (e.g., attempting to combine the two
guidelines) would require deviation from the scientific
evidence. In order to maintain the scientific integrity of the
guideline development process, the panel emphasized the
distinction between scientific exercise guidelines versus
clinical and community practice guidelines. The present
guidelines are rigorously linked to an underlying evidence
base and have not been reworded or simplified for end-
users. The panel acknowledged that a comprehensive,
community-engaged strategy is needed for translating the
scientific guidelines into clinical and community practice
guidelines [36] that can be easily understood by SCI con-
sumers and the people who support them.
Several facilitators were also raised. First, because the
SCI exercise guidelines are derived from SCI-specific evi-
dence, the SCI population may be more accepting of these
guidelines than of the WHO guidelines which were not
developed with consideration of people with SCI. Second,
with two guidelines to work with, fitness professionals and
clinicians can now better tailor exercise programs to indi-
vidual needs, values, and preferences. Third, an evidence-
based exercise guideline to promote cardiometabolic health
could increase awareness of the need for exercise programs
and services for people with SCI, which could help with
obtaining funding for such services through health care
systems
and
insurance.
And
finally,
panel
members
emphasized the value of engaging key stakeholders in the
guideline development process as these individuals and
groups
could
‘champion’
guideline
promotion
and
implementation.
The panel identified several practical implications asso-
ciated with releasing the exercise guidelines. First, with two
different guidelines for fitness and cardiometabolic health,
adults with SCI and their health care providers may need
education on why and how the guidelines differ. Second,
addition of a 3 times/week guideline for cardiometabolic
health may demand additional time and resources of SCI
exercise programs currently operating to meet the existing
SCI guidelines [19] for twice-weekly exercise. Supports
may be needed to help people complete some or all exercise
sessions at home (e.g., information on how to exercise at
home, where to acquire home-based exercise equipment).
This implication may be particularly applicable to adults
with tetraplegia. Stakeholder evaluations indicated lower
confidence in this group’s ability to meet the guidelines
versus adults with paraplegia (Table 4). Likewise, supports
are needed to sustain adherence to the guidelines; for
instance, through ongoing physical activity counseling
whereby informational and behavioral strategies are pro-
vided to support SCI consumers in their long-term efforts to
be active [41]. Third, there may be financial costs involved
for people with SCI adhering to the guidelines (e.g.,
transportation to exercise facilities). Cost-savings analyses
can support insurance providers in making decisions about
coverage for such costs (e.g., an analysis of the reduction of
medical costs for treating cardiometabolic disease when an
adult with SCI adheres to the guidelines). Fourth, educa-
tional resources may need to be developed to remove
existing informational barriers for fitness and health provi-
ders, making exercise programs and facilities more inclu-
sive for adults with SCI [13]. Finally, funding is required
for guideline dissemination, as well as monitoring and
auditing impact and uptake. The panel identified some
potential funders for these activities and for multicenter
trials assessing the impact of adherence to the guidelines on
fitness, health and other life domains.
Dissemination and implementation
The scientific exercise guidelines will be disseminated to
the scientific community through publications in peer-
reviewed scientific journals and presentations at local,
national and international conferences and meetings. The
guidelines must undergo a rigorous and systematic con-
sumer engagement/patient-public involvement (PPI) [36,37]
before widespread dissemination. This process will involve
engaging with SCI consumers and other key stakeholder
groups (see “Target users of the guidelines”) to determine
how to optimally present/message the scientific guidelines
to these groups, and the types of informational resources
Sci exercise guidelines
317
 needed to facilitate guideline uptake and implementation
(e.g., resources that explain the concept of exercise inten-
sity, or provide sample workout plans for implementing
both exercise guidelines into a single workout plan). Our
preliminary survey of SCI consumers and SCI clinicians can
help inform this process (Table 4), which is already
underway in Canada and the UK. Subsequent papers will be
published detailing these activities in order to provide a
template for groups in other countries to undertake their
own consumer-engagement/PPI processes to make the
guidelines relevant to local contexts [36]
Panel members emphasized that processes to make the
guidelines relevant to particular environments or settings
must not alter the scientific integrity of the guidelines.
Specifically, changes cannot be made to the exercise dose or
to the population targeted by the guidelines. Any additions
to the guidelines must be based on SCI research evidence
and must be reported according to AGREE II reporting
criteria [8, 20]. Supplementary information can be provided
on the types of exercise equipment (e.g., hand bikes, free
weights) available in a particular setting that can be used to
achieve the guidelines, but the recommended type of
exercise (e.g., upper-body aerobic exercise) cannot be
changed. The panel also recommended forward- and back-
translations of the guidelines into other languages, and
engagement of local experts in SCI and exercise to ensure
translations adequately capture the guidelines.
The panels generated long lists of national (e.g., Multi-
disciplinary Association for SCI Professionals [MASCIP],
National Center on Health, Physical Activity, and Disability
[NCHPAD], Spinal Cord Injury Canada) and international
(e.g., Exercise is Medicine™ Global Health Initiative,
ISCoS) partner organizations through which the guidelines
can be disseminated after undergoing a consumer engage-
ment/PPI process [36, 37]. Through these channels, the
guidelines will reach consumers and health care practi-
tioners.
Examples
of
dissemination
strategies
include
webinars, brief summaries of this manuscript and the sup-
porting systematic review for organizational newsletters and
bulletins, and brief online videos to explain the guidelines
and provide ideas for implementation in various settings.
Monitoring/auditing criteria [surveillance]
To measure guideline dissemination, the panel recom-
mended using the number of downloads and citations of this
paper, and the number of downloads and hits on social
media when the guidelines are disseminated through the
channels described above. The panel considered monitoring
exercise and other forms of PA among adults with SCI to be
important for providing benchmarks and assessing the
impact of the guidelines. An operational definition for
benchmarks could be the percentage of an SCI population in
an area meeting the guidelines [42], which is expected to be
relatively stable in the absence of PA interventions [43].
Although population-based baseline estimates of PA in
adults with SCI have been undertaken in some regions [44–
46], and are underway in some European countries [47], to
the panel’s knowledge, PA is not being monitored in people
with SCI on a national or international level. Possibilities
for nationwide PA surveys need to be explored in other
countries, or at least possibilities for tracking PA in cohorts
of adults with SCI (e.g., patients who are part of registries,
Paralympic athletes).
Future research
Through their examination and discussions of the scientific
evidence, members of all three expert panels identified
numerous gaps in the literature that currently limit knowl-
edge and guideline development regarding the use of
exercise and other forms of PA to improve health and well-
being in people with SCI. Some of these gaps have been
previously identified and described in the systematic review
[28]. Importantly, the need for high-quality, controlled
studies regarding the effects of FES and ambulation exer-
cise received considerable deliberation among the expert
panels. These clinically popular exercise types could not be
included in the guidelines, because there were less than two
high-quality studies regarding the effects of FES or ambu-
lation on an outcome [28] (i.e., insufficient evidence to
underpin a clinical practice guideline [33]). Additional
research questions and gaps identified by the panels can be
found in Supplement 4, and for example allude to the need
for research on long-term adherence to the guidelines, if/
what progression in the exercise prescriptions are needed to
continue to derive benefits, and on SCI-specific mechanisms
related to exercise and cardiometabolic health. The panel
recommended writing a paper on the most important
research questions regarding PA for people with SCI.
Before doing this, additional key stages required are
checking of existing research priorities, interim prioritiza-
tion and a meeting with stakeholders to reach final con-
sensus on the top research priorities [48].
Summary
This paper has described the process used to develop evi-
dence-based, scientific guidelines that specify the type and
minimum dose of exercise necessary to improve fitness and
cardiometabolic health in adults with SCI. The guidelines
were developed using transparent and rigorous steps that
align with international best-practices for developing clin-
ical practice guidelines. Through this process, a new sci-
entific guideline was formulated regarding the type and
minimum
dose
of
exercise
for
the
achievement
of
318
K. A. Martin Ginis et al.
 cardiometabolic health benefits. In addition, using new
evidence, the 2011 SCI PA guidelines were updated and
endorsed as the minimum dose of exercise required to
achieve fitness benefits. Consumer engagement/patient-
public involvement (PPI) [36,37], processes must now be
undertaken to translate the scientific guidelines into com-
munity and clinical practice guidelines. These scientific
guidelines represent an important step toward the interna-
tional harmonization of exercise guidelines for adults with
SCI, and a foundation for developing exercise policies and
programs for people living with SCI around the world.
Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the contributions
during the panel meetings of Dr Kristen Clements (NCSEM, Lough-
borough University, UK), Adrienne Sinden (MSc; Canadian Disability
Participation Project) and Kendra Todd (BSc; University of British
Columbia, Canada).
Funding The guideline development project was funded by a grant
from the Rick Hansen Institute. The European consensus panel
meeting was funded by grants from Loughborough University and the
UK Higher Education Institute. The Canadian panel meeting was
supported through contributions of meeting space by the Ontario
Neurotrauma Foundation.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, and provide a link to the
Creative Commons license. You do not have permission under this
license to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it.
The images or other third party material in this article are included in
the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a
credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s
Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy
of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
References
1. Tremblay MS, Shephard RJ, Brawley LR. Research that informs
Canada’s physical activity guides: an introduction. Can J Public
Health. 2007;98(Suppl 2):S1–8.
2. ODPHP. Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee
Report, 2008 [last accessed 22 Aug 2017]. https://health.gov/pa
guidelines/report/.
3. WHO. Global recommendations on physical activity for health,
2010
[last
accessed
22
Aug
2017].
http://www.who.int/
dietphysicalactivity/factsheet_recommendations/en/.
4. UK CMO. Start active, stay active: report on physical activity in
the UK, 2011 [last accessed 22 Aug 2017]. http://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/start-active-stay-active-a-report-on-
physical-activity-from-the-four-home-countries-chief-medical-
officers.
5. Tremblay MS, Warburton DE, Janssen I, Paterson DH, Latimer
AE, Rhodes RE, et al. New Canadian physical activity guidelines.
Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2011;36:36–46.
6. Warburton DE, Charlesworth S, Ivey A, Nettlefold L, Bredin SS.
A systematic review of the evidence for Canada’s physical activity
guidelines for adults. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2010;7:39.
7. WHO. Handbook for guideline development, 2014 [last accessed
22 Aug 2017]. http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/en/m/abstract/
Js22083en/.
8. Brouwers MC, Kho ME, Browman GP, Burgers JS, Cluzeau F,
Feder G, et al. AGREE II: advancing guideline development,
reporting and evaluation in health care. CMAJ. 2010;182,
E839–E842.
9. Requejo PS, Mulroy SJ, Haubert LL, Newsam CJ, Gronley JK,
Perry J, et al. Evidence-based strategies to preserve shoulder
function in manual wheelchair users with spinal cord injury. Top
Spinal Cord Inj Rehabil. 2008;13:86–119.
10. Byrne DW, Salzberg CA. Major risk factors for pressure ulcers in
the spinal cord disabled: a literature review. Spinal Cord.
1996;34:255–63.
11. Krassioukov A, Biering-Sorensen F, Donovan W, Kennelly M,
Kirshblum S, Krogh K, et al. International standards to document
remaining autonomic function after spinal cord injury. J Spinal
Cord Med. 2012;35:201–10.
12. Griggs KE, Price MJ, Goosey-Tolfrey VL. Cooling athletes with a
spinal cord injury. Sports Med. 2015;45:9–21.
13. Martin Ginis KA, Ma JK, Latimer-Cheung AE, Rimmer JH. A
systematic review of review articles addressing factors related to
physical activity participation among children and adults with
physical disabilities. Health Psychol Rev. 2016;10:478–94.
14. Fekete, C. Rauch, A. Correlates and determinants of physical
activity in persons with spinal cord injury: a review using the
international classification of functioning, disability and health as
reference framework. Disabil Health J. 2012;5:140–50.
15. Haisma JA, van der Woude LH, Stam HJ, Bergen MP, Sluis TA,
Bussmann JB. Physical capacity in wheelchair-dependent persons
with a spinal cord injury: a critical review of the literature. Spinal
Cord. 2006;44:642–52.
16. van den Berg-Emons RJ, Bussmann JB, Stam HJ. Accelerometry-
based activity spectrum in persons with chronic physical condi-
tions. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2010;91:1856–61.
17. Warburton DE, Bredin SS. Reflections on physical activity and
health:
what
should
we
recommend?
Can
J
Cardiol.
2016;32:495–504.
18. Martin Ginis KA. Letter to the editor. J Sci Med Sport.
2016;19:604.
19. Martin Ginis KA, Hicks AL, Latimer AE, Warburton DE, Bourne
C, Ditor DS, et al. The development of evidence-informed phy-
sical activity guidelines for adults with spinal cord injury. Spinal
Cord. 2011;49:1088–96.
20. Brouwers MC, Kerkvliet K, Spithoff K. The AGREE reporting
checklist: a tool to improve reporting of clinical practice guide-
lines. BMJ. 2016;352:i1152.
21. Pelletier CA, Totosy de Zepetnek JO, MacDonald MJ, Hicks AL.
A 16-week randomized controlled trial evaluating the physical
activity guidelines for adults with spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord.
2015;53:363–67.
22. Hicks AL, et al. The effects of exercise training on physical
capacity, strength, body composition and functional performance
among adults with spinal cord injury: a systematic review. Spinal
Cord. 2011;49:1103–27.
23. Goosey-Tolfrey VL, Sutton L. Body composition in chronic dis-
ease and disability. In: Stewart AD, Sutton L, (eds). Body com-
position in sport, exercise and health. New York, NY: Routledge;
2012. p. 166–86.
Sci exercise guidelines
319
 24. SCIRE. SCIRE rehabiliation evidence: cardiovascular health and
exercise 2014 [cited 16 Jan 2017]. https://scireproject.com/evidence/
rehabilitation-evidence/cardiovascular-health-and-exercise/.
25. Zhang Y, Guan Z, Reader B, Shawler T, Mandrekar-Colucci S,
Huang K, et al. Autonomic dysreflexia causes chronic immune
suppression
after
spinal
cord
injury.
J
Neurosci.
2013;33:12970–981.
26. Neefkes-Zonneveld CR, Bakkum AJ, Bishop NC, van Tulder
MW, Janssen TW. Effect of long-term physical activity and acute
exercise on markers of systemic inflammation in persons with
chronic spinal cord injury: a systematic review. Arch Phys Med
Rehabil. 2015;96:30–42.
27. Garshick, E., Kelley, A., Cohen, SA., Garrison, A., Tun, CG.,
Gagnon, D. et al. A prospective assessment of mortality in chronic
spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord. 2005;43:408–16.
28. van der Scheer JW, Martin Ginis KA, Goosey-Tolfrey VL, Hicks
AL, Ditor DS, West CA et al. Effects of exercise on fitness and
health of adults with spinal cord injury: a systematic review.
Neurology (e-pub ahead of print 21 July 2017; doi:10.1212/WNL.
0000000000004224).
29. ACSM. ACSM’s guidelines for exercise testing and prescription.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013.
30. Caspersen CJ, Powell KE, Christenson GM. Physical activity,
exercise, and physical fitness: definitions and distinctions for
health-related research. Public Health Rep. 1985;100:126–31.
31. Eng JJ, Teasell R, Miller WC, Wolfe DL, Townson AF, Aubut
JA, et al. Spinal cord injury rehabilitation evidence: methods of
the SCIRE systematic review. Top Spinal Cord Inj Rehabil.
2007;13:1–10.
32. Balshem H, Helfand M, Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Kunz R,
Brozek J, et al. GRADE guidelines: 3. Rating the quality of evi-
dence. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64:401–06.
33. Petitti DB, Teutsch SM, Barton MB, Sawaya GF, Ockene JK,
DeWitt T. Update on the methods of the U.S. preventive services
task
force:
insufficient
evidence.
Ann
Intern
Med.
2009;150:199–205.
34. Andrews JC, Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Pottie K, Meerpohl JJ,
Coello PA, et al. GRADE guidelines: 15. Going from evidence to
recommendation-determinants of a recommendation’s direction
and strength. J Clin Epidemiol. 2013;66:726–35.
35. Andrews, J., Guyatt, G., Oxman, AD., Alderson, P., Dahm, P. &
Falck-Ytter, Y. et al. GRADE guidelines: 14. Going from evi-
dence to recommendations: the significance and presentation of
recommendations. J Clin Epidemiol. 2013;66:719–25.
36. Harrison MB, Legare F, Graham ID, Fervers B. Adapting clinical
practice guidelines to local context and assessing barriers to their
use. CMAJ. 2010;182:E78–E84.
37. Straus SE, Tetroe J, Graham ID. Knowledge translation in health
care: moving from evidence to practice. Chichester, UK: Black-
well Publishing Ltd; 2009.
38. de Groot S, Adriaansen JJ, Tepper M, Snoek GJ, van der Woude
LH, Post MW. Metabolic syndrome in people with a long-
standing spinal cord injury: associations with physical activity and
capacity. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2016;41:1190–96.
39. Groah SL, Nash MS, Ward EA, Libin A, Mendez AJ, Burns P,
et al. Cardiometabolic risk in community-dwelling persons with
chronic
spinal
cord
injury.
J
Cardiopulm
Rehabil
Prev.
2011;31:73–80.
40. Janssen TW, Hopman MT. Spinal cord injury. In:Skinner JS, (ed).
Exercise testing and exercise prescription for special cases: theo-
retical basis and clinical applications. Baltimore (MD): Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins; 2005. p. 203–19.
41. Tomasone JR, Arbour-Nicitopoulos KP, Latimer-Cheung AE,
Martin Ginis KA. The relationship between the implementation
and effectiveness of a nationwide physical activity telephone
counseling service for adults with spinal cord injury. Disabil
Rehabil. (e-pub ahead of print 28 December 2016; doi:10.1080/
09638288.2016.1261415).
42. Rocchi M, Routhier F, Latimer-Cheung AE, Martin Ginis KA,
Noreau L, Sweet SN. Are adults with spinal cord injury meeting
the spinal cord injury-specific physical activity guidelines? A look
at
a
sample
from
a
Canadian
province.
Spinal
Cord.
2017;55:454–59.
43. Sweet SN, Martin Ginis KA, Latimer-Cheung AE. Examining
physical activity trajectories for people with spinal cord injury.
Health Psychol. 2012;31:728–32.
44. Martin Ginis KA, Latimer AE, Buchholz AC, Bray SR, Craven
BC, Hayes KC, et al. Establishing evidence-based physical
activity guidelines: methods for the Study of Health and Activity
in People with Spinal Cord Injury (SHAPE SCI). Spinal Cord.
2008;46:216–21.
45. de Groot S, Dallmeijer AJ, Post MW, van Asbeck FW, Nene AV,
Angenot EL, et al. Demographics of the Dutch multicenter pro-
spective cohort study ‘Restoration of mobility in spinal cord injury
rehabilitation’. Spinal Cord. 2006;44:668–75.
46. Post MW, Brinkhof MW, von Elm E, Boldt C, Brach M, Fekete
C. et al. Design of the Swiss spinal cord injury cohort study. Am J
Phys Med Rehabil. 2011;90(11Suppl 2):S5–16.
47. Gross-Hemmi MH, Post MW, Ehrmann C, Fekete C, Hasnan N,
Middleton JW, et al. Study protocol of the international spinal
cord injury (InSCI) community survey. Am J Phys Med Rehabil.
2017;96(2Suppl 1):S23–34.
48. van Middendorp JJ, Allison HC, Ahuja S, Bracher D, Dyson C,
Fairbank J, et al. Top ten research priorities for spinal cord injury:
the methodology and results of a British priority setting partner-
ship. Spinal Cord. 2016;54:341–46.
Affiliations
Kathleen A. Martin Ginis
1,2
● Jan W. van der Scheer3
● Amy E. Latimer-Cheung4
● Andy Barrow5
● Chris Bourne6
●
Peter Carruthers7
● Marco Bernardi8
● David S. Ditor9
● Sonja Gaudet10
● Sonja de Groot11
● Keith C. Hayes12
●
Audrey L. Hicks13
● Christof A. Leicht3
● Jan Lexell14
● Steven Macaluso15
● Patricia J. Manns16
●
Christopher B. McBride10
● Vanessa K. Noonan17
● Pierre Pomerleau18
● James H. Rimmer19
● Robert B. Shaw1
●
Brett Smith20
● Karen M. Smith3
● John D. Steeves2
● Dot Tussler21
● Christopher R. West1
● Dalton L. Wolfe22
●
Victoria L. Goosey-Tolfrey2
1
University of British Columbia, Kelowna, Canada
2
ICORD, Vancouver, Canada
3
Loughborough University, Loughborough, UK
4
Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada
320
K. A. Martin Ginis et al.
 5
Paralympian and Inspirational Speaker, London, UK
6
Spinal Cord Injury Ontario, Ottawa, Canada
7
Bromakin Wheelchairs, Loughborough, UK
8
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
9
Brock University, St. Catharines, Canada
10
Spinal Cord Injury British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada
11
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
12
Ontario Neurotrauma Foundation, Toronto, Canada
13
McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
14
Lund University, Lund, Sweden
15
Western University, London, Canada
16
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
17
Rick Hansen Institute, Vancouver, Canada
18
Institut de Réadaptation en Déficience Physique de Québec,
Ville de Québec, Canada
19
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama, USA
20
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
21
National Spinal Injuries Centre, Stoke Mandeville Hospital,
Aylesbury, UK
22
Parkwood Institute, Lawson Health Research Institute,
London, Canada
Sci exercise guidelines
321
