  
 
Journal of Informetrics, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 819-841, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2018.06.012 
 
✉     Alberto Martín-Martín 
        albertomartin@ugr.es 
 
 This accepted manuscript is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. 
 
Evidence of Open Access of scientific 
publications in Google Scholar: a large-
scale analysis 
 
Alberto Martín-Martín1, Rodrigo Costas2,3, Thed van Leeuwen2, 
Emilio Delgado López-Cózar1 
 
Version 1.4 
July 24, 2018 
 
Abstract 
This article uses Google Scholar (GS) as a source of data to analyse Open Access (OA) levels 
across all countries and fields of research. All articles and reviews with a DOI and published 
in 2009 or 2014 and covered by the three main citation indexes in the Web of Science 
(2,269,022 documents) were selected for study. The links to freely available versions of these 
documents displayed in GS were collected. To differentiate between more reliable 
(sustainable and legal) forms of access and less reliable ones, the data extracted from GS 
was combined with information available in DOAJ, CrossRef, OpenDOAR, and ROAR. This 
allowed us to distinguish the percentage of documents in our sample that are made OA by the 
publisher (23.1%, including Gold, Hybrid, Delayed, and Bronze OA) from those available as 
Green OA (17.6%), and those available from other sources (40.6%, mainly due to 
ResearchGate). The data shows an overall free availability of 54.6%, with important 
differences at the country and subject category levels. The data extracted from GS yielded 
very similar results to those found by other studies that analysed similar samples of 
documents, but employed different methods to find evidence of OA, thus suggesting a relative 
consistency among methods. 
 
 
Keywords: Academic Publishers, Academic search engines, Academic social networks, 
Creative Commons, CrossRef, Google Scholar, Institutional repositories, Open Access, Open 
research metadata, ResearchGate, self-archiving 
                                                
 
1 Facultad de Comunicación y Documentación, Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain. 
2 CWTS, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
3 DST-NRF Centre of Excellence in Scientometrics and Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, 
Stellenbosch University, South Africa. 
 2 
 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Beginnings of the Open Access movement 
The widespread adoption of web technologies removed most of the physical impediments for 
accessing scientific information (Harnad, 2001). Since then, the issue of Open Access 
(henceforth referred to as OA) to the scholarly literature has been hotly debated by all sorts of 
actors in the academic community, including researchers, publishers, funding institutions, 
librarians, and policy makers. Many of these discussions revolved around the ways in which 
the system of scholarly communication should change, taking advantage of this new virtual 
environment to become more effective and efficient and thus hopefully solve problems like the 
affordability and accessibility to scientific information that afflict many research institutions. 
 
One of the first crystallizations of these intentions to change the scholarly communication 
system was the Budapest Open Access Initiative (Chan et al., 2002) (BOAI). This was the first 
time the term “Open Access” was used, although the practices described in that document 
had already been taking place in some scientific communities long before that date. The BOAI 
defined OA to the literature as:  
 
“free availability on the public internet, permitting any users to read, download, copy, distribute, 
print, search, or link to the full texts of these articles, crawl them for indexing, pass them as 
data to software, or use them for any other lawful purpose, without financial, legal, or technical 
barriers other than those inseparable from gaining access to the internet itself. The only 
constraint on reproduction and distribution, and the only role for copyright in this domain, 
should be to give authors control over the integrity of their work and the right to be properly 
acknowledged and cited”.  
 
Additionally, the BOAI also described the two main ways to realise the goal of OA: by self-
archiving documents in public archives (which later came to be known as Green OA), or by 
publishing in OA journals (later dubbed as Gold OA). Poynder (2018) provides a historic 
overview of OA since the BOAI declaration. 
 
Since the original BOAI declaration was first published, the discussion has continued and the 
panorama of scholarly publishing and OA has greatly changed. All actors have had to adapt 
in some way to the new reality. In addition, the Web gave rise to new types of academic 
platforms, which further complicated the issue of access to scientific information by expanding 
the access points to scientific content (e.g. Google Scholar, ResearchGate, etc.). Some of 
these new platforms were quickly adopted by the scientific community and have already 
become an important part of the system. These platforms will be discussed later on.  
1.2. Reactions of academic institutions, funders and publishers 
to OA 
In the beginnings of the OA movement, a great emphasis was put on the importance of authors 
self-archiving their own publications on public repositories (Harnad, 2001). Many research 
institutions, which saw in self-archiving a potential solution to the journal affordability problem 
 3 
 
(the problem of selecting which journals to subscribe to, when economic resources are 
limited), put systems in place to allow researchers to self-archive and make public their 
research. These institutional repositories are under the direct control of the institution, and are 
usually managed by the libraries. Additionally, other subject-specific repositories were 
launched. Apart from arXiv4, the physics repository created in 1991 in Cornell University, many 
other repositories are now available to researchers. ROAR5 (Registry of Open Access 
Repositories) and OpenDOAR6 (Directory of Open Access Repositories) provide an 
exhaustive list of these institutional and subject based OA repositories. More recently, there 
has been an explosion in the growth of the so-called preprint servers, largely enabled by the 
infrastructure developed by the Open Science Framework7, a project launched by the Center 
for Open Science, which is a non-profit organization founded in 2013 to "increase the 
openness, integrity, and reproducibility of scientific research" (Mellor, 2016, para. 6). These 
servers are designed to share manuscripts that still have not gone through a process of peer 
review, although they usually welcome accepted manuscripts as well. 
 
One of the notions that has served to justify the need of OA is that money from public 
institutions to fund research was not realizing its true potential, because most publicly-funded 
research ended up behind publishers’ paywalls, and other researchers who could make use 
of that research had no access to it. For these reasons, many funding institutions, 
governments, and policy makers started to issue OA mandates to force researchers who use 
their funding to make their results OA. Among these we can find the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) in the USA, the Research Councils in the United Kingdom, or the European 
Research Council. In 2016, the European Union announced its resolve to make all scientific 
publications based on publicly-funded research freely accessible by 2020 (Enserink, 2016). 
ROARMAP8 (Registry of Open Access Repository Mandates and Policies) provides an 
exhaustive database of OA mandates issued by all kinds of organizations worldwide. 
 
Largely because of these mandates, most publishers adapted their business models, which 
previously relied almost exclusively on journal subscriptions paid by academic institutions, to 
business models compatible with the OA requirements mandated by funders: 
● Gold OA journals publish all their articles as OA. Their revenue usually comes from 
charging Article Processing Charges (APC) to authors instead of charging subscription 
fees to academic libraries. There is much controversy concerning the price of these 
APCs, which range from a few hundreds of dollars, to over $5,000 per article. There 
are also Gold OA journals that do not charge APCs to authors, and instead absorb 
publishing costs in other ways (like via member subscriptions fees in the cases of 
academic societies that also publish journals). These are sometimes called Diamond 
OA or Platinum OA journals (Fuchs & Sandoval, 2013; Haschak, 2007). 
● Hybrid OA journals maintain the subscription model, but give authors the choice to 
make their article OA, also by paying an APC (Prosser, 2003; Walker, 1998). This 
model has also been controversial, because in addition to charging APCs to authors 
to make the articles OA, they still charge libraries ever-increasing subscription costs 
                                                
 
4 https://arxiv.org/ 
5 http://roar.eprints.org/ 
6 http://www.opendoar.org/ 
7 https://osf.io/ 
8 http://roarmap.eprints.org/ 
 4 
 
for access to the entire collection of articles published by the journals. This 
phenomenon has been dubbed “double-dipping”, because publishers seem to be 
charging twice for the same content. Some publishers, like Elsevier, claim that Hybrid 
OA articles are excluded when calculating subscription costs9, while other publishers 
compensate institutions “for the extra money they are putting into the system through 
payment of APCs” (Kingsley, 2017, para. 3) by means of the so-called “offset 
agreements”, which can take many forms. Lawson (2018) reports on the offset 
agreements made with publishers by the organization JISC Collections, which works 
on behalf of UK academic libraries. 
● Delayed OA journals are subscription journals that convert their articles to OA once a 
specific amount of time has passed after publication. Laakso and Björk (2013) 
analyzed a sample of 111,312 articles published in 492 journals and found that 77.8% 
of them were available from the publisher website twelve months after publication. The 
percentage reached 85.4% 24 months after publication. 
● Gratis Access Journals (Suber, 2008a, 2008b): journals that make their articles free-
to-read, but don’t extend other rights to users (such as reuse or distribution) apart from 
the right to read. The publisher retains the copyright of these articles. This type of 
access is also referred to as “public access”, especially by the publishing industry 
(Crotty, 2017). Sometimes publishers intend to maintain access to these documents 
free indefinitely, but sometimes access is only free for a specific period of time 
(promotional access). Therefore, this type should not be conflated with Gold, Hybrid, 
or Delayed OA. 
 
The costs of subscriptions and APCs are continually increasing (Tickell et al., 2017). This fact 
has led a number of institutions and governments to re-negotiate the so-called Big Deals (flat 
rates to access large numbers of journals published by a single publisher) so that they also 
include flat rates or considerable discounts for the APCs of the articles their researchers 
publish (Elsevier, 2015). In other cases, governments have refused to pay the increasing costs 
that large commercial publishers demanded. This was the case with Germany and the 
publisher Elsevier. A coalition of German institutions (grouped under the name project DEAL10) 
decided not to renew their license to Elsevier content at the end of 2016. Elsevier subsequently 
stopped allowing them to access its content, but decided to restore access shortly after, “in 
good faith” while negotiations lasted. By June 2018 an agreement had still not been reached. 
After Germany, other countries have followed suit: in March 2018, the Couperin consortia in 
France decided to not to renew their agreement with Springer-Nature, and in May 2018 the 
Bibsam Consortium in Sweden decided not to renew their agreement with Elsevier (Else, 
2018). 
 
Most journal publishers also offer alternative sharing policies for the articles that they do not 
publish as OA. The freedom these policies give to researchers to self-archive their content 
greatly varies by publisher and by specific journal. These policies often include embargo 
periods that prohibit authors to share their research on public repositories for a period of time 
after publication (from less than a year, to over two years). Despite initiatives like 
                                                
 
9 https://www.elsevier.com/about/our-business/policies/pricing#dipping 
10 https://www.projekt-deal.de/about-deal/ 
 5 
 
Sherpa/Romeo11 or the publisher-backed How Can I Share It12, which try to aggregate and 
standardise publisher’s sharing policies, it is difficult to keep track of them because they 
change over time, usually to become more restrictive regarding how, where, and when self-
archiving is permitted (Gadd & Troll Covey, 2016; Kingsley, 2013).  These policies are often 
arbitrary and complicated, for example allowing to share an article immediately upon 
publication from the author’s personal website, but imposing an embargo to share the same 
article from an institutional repository (Bolick, 2017; Tickell et al., 2017). 
1.3. New players in the system 
Other types of platforms, different from repositories and publishers but also with a large impact 
in the free availability of scholarly literature, have been launched since the BOAI declaration. 
In 2007 the academic search engine CiteSeerX13 (based on an even earlier version called 
CiteSeer) was launched by Pennsylvania State University. In 2008, the academic social 
networks ResearchGate14 and Academia.edu15 were launched. In 2015, the search engine 
Semantic Scholar16, developed by the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, was launched, 
focusing mostly on the areas of Computer Science, and recently also Biomedicine. All these 
platforms share the characteristic that they host copies of the full texts of scholarly documents 
(automatically harvested from other sources or uploaded by users themselves) and make 
them available to their users, thus becoming another source from which readers can access 
scientific information. 
 
Academic social networks (ASN) in particular have attracted a lot of attention because of how 
quickly users have taken to sharing their work on them (Björk, 2016). Borrego (2017) found 
that researchers from 13 Spanish universities used ResearchGate much more frequently to 
upload and share their research than the repositories available at their institutions. Martín-
Martín, Orduna-Malea, Ayllón, and Delgado López-Cózar (2014; 2016), and Jamali and 
Navabi (2015) studied the free accessibility to a sample of documents covered by Google 
Scholar. Both studies found that ResearchGate was the source that provided the highest 
number of freely available full texts. However, full text documents in ASNs are uploaded by 
researchers themselves and, unlike OA repositories, these platforms do not carry out any kind 
of checks to guarantee copyright compliance. This resulted in a large portion of documents 
being accessible from ASN in violation of their copyright. Jamali (2017) found that 51.3% of 
the non-OA documents in a sample of 500 random documents were available from 
ResearchGate in violation of their copyright. 
 
Moreover, despite some similarities, academic social networks engage in practices that clearly 
set them apart from OA repositories. The ongoing dispute between publishers and 
ResearchGate  (Coalition for Responsible Sharing, 2017a, 2017b, 2017c) is unequivocal proof 
of the instability of these platforms as sources of full texts. A related issue is that in 
ResearchGate users are allowed to delete full texts of documents they have uploaded, even 
                                                
 
11 http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo 
12 http://www.howcanishareit.com/ 
13 http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu 
14 https://www.researchgate.net 
15 http://www.academia.edu 
16 https://www.semanticscholar.org 
 6 
 
in the cases when the platform generates a DOI for the document (through their collaboration 
with DataCite17). This entirely differs from the policies of repositories such as arXiv or socArxiv, 
where the academic record is always maintained (authors cannot delete files but retain the 
right to issue a retraction notice if they feel a document they deposited should no longer be 
used). Full texts uploaded by a user to ResearchGate are also deleted if the user deletes 
his/her account in the platform. Academia.edu also engages in practices that make it different 
from repositories. This academic social network requires users to log in to their platform to 
access full texts. However, perhaps because this contravenes Google Scholar’s indexing 
policies18, they left open a back door so that users coming from a Google Scholar search19 
would be allowed to access full texts without the need to log in. Presumably, they did this to 
avoid being dropped as a source by Google Scholar, a large source of web traffic given its 
huge user-base. These cases raise the need to distinguish between merely uploading a 
document to the Internet (to ResearchGate, Academia.edu or to any privately managed 
personal website) and depositing or archiving a document in a repository, which usually 
provides more guarantees as to the long-term preservation of the documents that they host. 
 
There is another player who is currently having a major influence in the accessibility to 
scholarly literature: Sci-Hub. This website was launched in 2011 by a graduate student called 
Alexandra Elbakyan, and it illegally provides access to over 60 million research articles. 
Elbakyan developed a system that automatically accesses publisher websites using 
credentials donated by users who work at institutions with access to paywalled journal articles. 
There are reports, however, that claim that some of these credentials might have been stolen 
rather than donated (Bohannon, 2016). The system then copies the full texts of articles to the 
Library Genesis database (LibGen), which is the platform that hosts the articles that in turn 
are provided to the users. The kind of copyright-infringing access that Sci-Hub provides is 
sometimes called Robin Hood OA, Rogue OA, and Black OA (Archambault et al., 2014; Björk, 
2017; Green, 2017). Despite the efforts made by large commercial publishers like Elsevier to 
shut down Sci-Hub’s operations, the website remained functional at the time of this writing, 
providing access to the vast majority of recently-published paywalled articles (Himmelstein et 
al., 2018) and virtually providing access to all scientific publications worldwide. 
1.4. Current landscape of free availability of scientific 
information 
To summarise the scenario described above, Figure 1 provides a representation of the main 
paths by which a journal article may become freely available on the Web. 
 
                                                
 
17 https://www.datacite.org/ 
18 https://scholar.google.com/intl/en/scholar/inclusion.html#content 
19 Technically speaking, users who accessed Academia.edu with the Referer HTML request header 
“https://scholar.google.com” 
 7 
 
Figure 1. Model of free availability of academic journal articles: Where are freely available journal articles hosted? 
 
 
The figure divides articles in two different spaces: the space in which articles are not free-to-
read (to the left of the paywall) and the space in which articles are free-to-read (to the right of 
the paywall). 
 
Articles published in Gold OA journals (regardless of whether they charge APCs or not), and 
articles published in OA in Hybrid journals are immediately made OA, hence their placement 
in the free-to-read section of Figure 1. 
 
Articles that are initially not free-to-read (published in toll access journals) may become free-
to-read in several ways (represented by lines going from the toll access journals box to the 
free-to-read space in Figure 1): 
 By breaching the paywall, generating copyright-infringing availability (represented in the 
figure with a red continuous line and red asterisks). This is the case of Sci-hub, which 
cannot really be considered as a sustainable form of OA (van Leeuwen, Meijer, Yegros-
Yegros, & Costas, 2017). 
 Via self-archiving, when the journal allows it (represented by a line from the toll access 
journals box to the free-to-read space). Self-archiving mostly takes place in repositories, 
academic social networks, and personal websites. Repositories (both institutional or 
subject-specific) usually check for copyright compliance when articles are submitted. In 
personal websites and academic social networks, however, no such checks are made. 
Therefore, these venues might also contain articles in violation of their copyright (Jamali, 
2017). This is represented with red asterisks in Figure 1. There is also a line from Gold 
and Hybrid OA journals to the self-archiving section, because OA articles can always be 
self-archived. 
 Delayed OA, which is practiced by some journals (also represented by a line from the 
toll access journals box to the free-to-read section). 
 
 8 
 
Once articles are free-to-read in any of the ways described above, they may be distributed 
(legally or not) to any other part of the Web at large. For example, some platforms, like the 
academic search engines CiteSeerX and Semantic Scholar harvest the full texts of articles 
available in other sources, and provide a copy from their own servers. 
 
Lastly, apart from being freely available, documents must also be discoverable in order to be 
used. There are several services that address the discoverability problem, like the academic 
search engines BASE20 and Google Scholar, or the browser extension Unpaywall21. Google 
Scholar and Unpaywall are described in more detail in the following section. Coverage of freely 
available documents varies by platform. Google Scholar, the focus of this article, serves as a 
gateway for all types of sources described in Figure 1, with the exception of Sci-Hub. 
1.5. Quantification of OA levels 
In a scenario like the one described above, it is not surprising that the question of how much 
of the scholarly literature is openly accessible (or at least freely available) has attracted much 
attention, because many agents of the scholarly community are interested in its answer. 
Funders are interested in the degree to which their OA mandates are being obeyed. Libraries 
need to decide how to best use their acquisitions budget (whether to renew, renegotiate, or 
cancel license agreements with publishers). Publishers routinely monitor how the documents 
they publish are shared on the Web in order to protect their business. Countries, for their part, 
want to know how much of the scientific literature published by its researchers is openly 
accessible. Researchers may also be interested in the proportion of their publications that is 
openly accessible, especially if this is an issue that is taken into account in the performance 
evaluations to which they are subjected in their country. 
 
Numerous studies have analyzed the levels of OA for different samples of documents, 
presenting results at various levels of aggregation (publication year, subject areas, countries 
of authors’ affiliations, OA types...). Methods to ascertain levels of OA include using data 
collected by custom crawlers (1science database, Unpaywall data) and carrying out searches 
in diverse search engines (BASE, Google, Google Scholar...). Table 1 contains information on 
the sample of documents analyzed, source of OA evidence used, and OA levels found by 
studies that used a source of OA evidence other than Google Scholar. 
 
                                                
 
20 https://www.base-search.net/ 
21 http://unpaywall.org/ 
 9 
 
Table 1.Studies that analyse OA levels using sources of OA evidence other than Google Scholar 
Study 
Sample of documents
OA evidence
OA levels 
Source 
Field 
Pub. 
Year 
Doc 
types 
Size 
Source 
Date of data 
collection 
Levels of 
aggregation 
Methodological 
Observations 
Björk et al., 
2010 
Scopus 
(random) 
All 
fields 
2008 
Articles 
1,837 
Searches on Google 
2009/10 
Subject areas, OA types 
 
20.4% freely accessible (8.5% 
from publisher) 
Gargouri, 
Larivière, 
Gingras, Carr, & 
Harnad, 2012 
Web of 
Science 
(random) 
11 
fields 
1998-
2006 
Articles 
110,212 
Custom crawler (no details 
given) 
2009 
Publication year, subject 
areas, OA types 
 
20% freely accessible (average of 
entire period) 
= 
14 
fields 
2005-
2010 
= 
107,052 
= 
2011 
= 
 
24% freely accessible (average of 
entire period). 21.4% as Green 
OA, 2.4% as Gold OA 
Archambault et 
al., 2014 
Scopus 
(random) 
All 
fields 
1996-
2013 
Articles 
~ 245,000 
Custom crawler: Scielo, 
PubMed Central, 
ResearchGate, CiteSeerX, 
publisher websites, arXiv, 
repositories in ROAR and 
OpenDOAR 
2013/04, 
2014/04 
OA types 
Calibration factor 
(1.146) applied to 
account for limited 
recall of custom 
crawler 
Over 50% of articles published 
2007-2012 were freely available in 
2014 
Scopus 
(random) 
22 
fields 
2008-
2013 
Articles 
~ 1 million 
= 
2014/04 
Subject areas, countries 
(ERA) 
= 
Top OA field (2011-2013): General 
Science & Technology (90%) 
Top OA countries (2008-2013): 
Netherlands, Croatia, Estonia, and 
Portugal (>70%) 
van Leeuwen et 
al., 2017 
Web of 
Science 
(all 
records) 
All 
fields 
2009-
2014 
All types 
Not declared 
DOAJ, ROAD, CrossRef, 
PubMed Central, 
OpenAIRE 
2017 
Publication year, 
OA evidence source, 
countries 
 
Almost 30% of articles were OA. 
Top countries: Netherlands (37%), 
Sweden, Ireland, and UK (34%) 
Smith et al., 
2017 
PubMed 
(selected 
subject 
heading) 
Global 
Health 
2010-
2014 
Articles 
3,366 
PubMed, manual searches 
on Google 
2016 
OA types 
 
29.2% OA from publisher, 27.2% 
Green OA, 1.3% OA from other 
sources. Total OA: ~ 58% 
Science-Metrix 
Inc., 2018 
Web of 
Science 
(all 
records) 
All 
fields 
2006-
2015 
Not 
declared 
Not declared 
1science database: 
scholarly material indexed 
in over 180,000 websites 
2016/07-09 
Publication year, 
countries, Subject areas, 
OA types 
Calibration factor 
(1.2) applied. 
PubMed Central 
considered Gold 
OA; ResearchGate 
considered Green 
OA 
Pub. Year 2006: 50%, pub. year 
2011: 60% 
Top countries 2014: Brazil (74%), 
Netherlands (68%) 
Top fields: Health Sciences (59%) 
Piwowar et al., 
2018 
CrossRef 
(random) 
All 
fields 
All 
years 
Articles 
100,000 
Unpaywall data 
2017/05 
Publication year, 
publisher, OA types 
ResearchGate not 
included in 
Unpaywall 
27.9% are OA; 44.7% for pub. 
year 2015 
Web of 
Science 
(random) 
All 
fields 
2009-
2015 
Articles 
and 
reviews 
100,000 
Unpaywall data 
2017/05 
Subject areas, OA types 
= 
36.1% are OA 
Unpaywall 
use logs 
All 
fields 
All 
years 
All types 
100,000 
Unpaywall data 
2017/06/05-11 
OA types 
= 
47% of documents accessed by 
users via Unpaywall are OA 
Bosman & 
Kramer, 2018 
Web of 
Science 
(all 
records) 
All 
fields 
2010-
2017 
Articles 
and 
reviews 
12.3 million 
Unpaywall data integrated 
in Web of Science 
2017/12/20 – 
2018/01/05 
Publication year, Subject 
areas, languages, 
countries, institutions, 
funders 
ResearchGate not 
included. Preprints 
not included 
Almost 30% OA for pub. year 
2016 
 10 
 
1.5.1 Google Scholar as a source of OA evidence 
 
Google Scholar has become one of the most widely used tools for researchers to search 
scientific information (Bosman & Kramer, 2016; Mussell & Croft, 2013; Nicholas et al., 2017; 
Van Noorden, 2014a). By automatically parsing the entire academic web instead of indexing 
only some specific sources, Google Scholar’s coverage is much more extensive than the 
coverage of any other multidisciplinary commercial databases like Web of Science and 
Scopus. Although there are not official figures on the size of its document base, it was 
estimated in approximately 170 million records in 2014 (Orduna-Malea, Ayllón, Martín-Martín, 
& Delgado López-Cózar, 2015). Recently, Google Scholar’s chief engineer, Anurag Acharya, 
has declared that the size of its document base is “larger than the estimates that are out there” 
(Rogers, 2017). 
 
An important feature of Google Scholar is that it usually provides links to freely available 
versions of the documents displayed in its results page, also when the document is not openly 
accessible from the publisher website. Unfortunately, despite the wealth of information 
available in Google Scholar, the platform does not provide a way to easily extract and analyse 
its data (something like an open API), reportedly because the agreements that Google Scholar 
had to reach with publishers to access their content preclude this (Van Noorden, 2014b).  
Perhaps because of this limitation, all OA-related studies based on Google Scholar data either 
used very small samples of documents, mostly focusing on specific case studies, or the 
samples of documents they analyzed were not random because the selection of documents 
relied on searches in the platform, and Google Scholar is known to rank documents primarily, 
although not only, on descending order of citations (Martin-Martin, Orduna-Malea, Harzing, & 
Delgado López-Cózar, 2017). Moreover, most of these studies only analyzed the links to freely 
accessible full texts that are displayed beside the primary version of the document in Google 
Scholar, but not the links available in the secondary versions (see Figure 2). Table 2 contains 
information on the sample of documents analyzed, source of OA evidence used, and OA levels 
found by studies that used Google Scholar as a source of OA evidence. 
 
These studies all pointed to the value of Google Scholar as a source of free availability of 
scientific literature, but were limited in scope and thematically. Thus, it is still missing in the 
literature a relatively large-scale study of the free availability of scientific publications that can 
be identified through Google Scholar. This paper aims at filling this gap.
 11 
 
Table 2. Studies that analyse OA levels using Google Scholar as a source of OA evidence 
Study 
Sample of documents
OA evidence
OA levels 
Source 
Field 
Pub. 
Year 
Doc 
types 
Size 
Source 
Date of 
data 
collection 
Levels of 
aggregation 
Christianson, 
2007 
Journals in CSA’s 
Ecology Abs. and 
JCR: Ecology 
(random) 
Ecology 
1945-
2005 
Articles 
840 
Google Scholar 
2005/03 
Only total figure 
9% of the articles were freely accessible from Google 
Scholar 
Norris, 
Oppenheim, & 
Rowland, 2008 
Web of Science 
(selected journals) 
Ecology, Appl. 
Math., Sociology, 
Economics 
2003 
Articles 
4,633 
OAIster, 
OpenDOAR, 
Google, Google 
Scholar 
Not declared 
Subject area 
Economics: 65%; Appl. Math.: 59%; Ecology: 53%; 
Sociology: 21%. Overall OA: 49%  
Pitol & De 
Groote, 2014 
Web of Science 
(organization 
search) 
Psychology, 
Chemistry, 
Electrical 
Engineering, Earth 
Sciences 
2006-
2011 
Articles 
982 
Google Scholar 
Not declared 
OA version 
provider, OA 
type 
70% of documents were freely accessible in some form 
Khabsa & Giles, 
2014 
Microsoft 
Academic Search 
(random sample) 
All fields 
All 
years 
Not 
specified 
1,500 
(100x15) 
Google Scholar 
2013/01 
Subject areas 
Top OA categories: Computer Science (50%), 
Multidisciplinary (43%), Economics & Business (42%). 
Overall OA: 24% 
Jamali & 
Nabavi, 2015 
Google Scholar 
(topic search) 
All fields 
2004-
2014 
All except 
citations 
and 
patents 
8,310 
Google Scholar 
2014/04 
Subject areas, 
OA types 
Top OA category: Life Sciences (66.9%). Lowest OA 
category: Health Sciences (59.7%). Overall OA: 57.3% 
Laakso & 
Lindman, 2016 
Scopus 
(selected journals) 
Information 
Systems 
2010-
2014 
Articles 
1,515 
Google, Google 
Scholar 
2015/02 
Journal, OA 
types 
60% of the articles were freely accessible from Google 
Scholar 
Martín-Martín et 
al., 2016 
Google Scholar 
(pub. year search) 
All fields 
1950-
2013 
All types 
64,000 
Google Scholar 
2014/05 
Publication year 
40% of documents were freely accessible for the whole 
period. Over 66% considering only pub. years 2000-
2009 
Teplitzky, 2017 
Pangaea 
(topic search) 
Earth Sciences 
2010, 
2015 
All types 
744+482
= 1,226 
Google Scholar 
2016/05 
OA types 
75% of documents in pub. year 2010, and 72% in pub. 
year 2015 
Abad-García, 
González-
Teruel, & 
González-
Llinares, 2018 
Web of Science 
(funding search) 
Health 
2012-
2014 
Articles 
762 
OpenAIRE, BASE, 
Recolecta, Google 
Scholar 
Not declared 
Only total figures 
46.3% of the documents were freely available from some 
source. Recall of Google was 93.5% 
Mikki, Ruwehy, 
Gjesdal, & 
Zygmuntowska, 
2018 
Web of Science 
(topic search) 
Climate and 
ancient societies 
All 
years 
All types 
639 
Google Scholar 
Not declared 
Publication 
years 
74% of the documents were freely accessible 
Laakso & 
Polonioli, 2018 
Publication lists of 
ethics researchers 
Ethics 
2010-
2015 
Articles 
1,682 
Google Scholar 
2017 
Publication 
years, OA types 
56% of the documents were freely accessible 
 12 
 
1.6. Research questions 
This paper mainly intends to ascertain the suitability of the data available in Google Scholar 
to gauge the levels of adoption of OA in scientific journal articles, across all subject categories 
and countries, thus overcoming the limitations related to sample selection and sample size of 
the previous OA-related studies that used this source of data. Specifically, this article aims to 
answer the following questions: 
RQ1. How much of the recently published scientific literature is freely available according 
to the data available in Google Scholar, by year of publication, subject categories, 
and country of affiliation of the authors? 
RQ2. How much is openly accessible in a sustainable and legal way, and what proportion 
is freely available but does not meet these criteria? 
RQ3. What is the distribution of freely available documents by web domains? 
2. Methods 
The three main citation indexes of the Web of Science Core Collection (Science Citation Index 
Expanded [SCIE], Social Sciences Citation Index [SSCI], and Arts & Humanities Citations 
Index [A&HCI]) were used to select the sample of documents analysed in this study. All 
documents with a DOI indexed in either the SCIE, SSCI, or the A&HCI, and published in 2009 
or 2014 were selected on the 19th of May, 2016. The rationale behind choosing these two 
years was that we wanted to analyse a large sample of documents from various publication 
years, but we also wanted to keep the sample manageable because of the difficulty of 
extracting data from Google Scholar. At the time of data collection, 2014 was the most recent 
year in which most articles scheduled to become OA after an embargo (Delayed OA) had 
already become OA. The data from articles published in 2009 would give us information on 
the trend. 
 
The records of these documents were extracted from the local version of the Web of Science 
database available at the Centre for Science and Technology Studies (CWTS) in Leiden 
University. A total of 2,610,305 records were extracted, 1,080,199 from 2009, and 1,530,106 
from 2014. We decided to use this source (as opposed to the CrossRef registry) because it 
would later enable us to carry out detailed analyses of the data, with breakdowns by subject 
categories, country affiliations, publication years, and journals. 
 
It is worth noting that the number of Web of Science documents in these two years (2009 and 
2014) at the time of writing this article had increased from 2,610,305 to 2,893,175. This could 
have been caused by backwards indexing of new documents, or by the addition of DOIs to 
records that previously did not contain one in the Web of Science database. 
 
Each of these documents was searched on Google Scholar, using a non-documented method 
to search documents by their DOI. Example of query for the document with DOI 
“10.1010/j.jmmm.2013.09.059”: 
 
https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?doi=10.1010/j.jmmm.2013.09.059 
 
 13 
 
Given that Google Scholar does not provide an API to query its database, a custom Python 
script was developed to carry out a query for each of the DOIs in our sample and scrape the 
data from the results page. Queries were distributed across a pool of different IP addresses 
to minimise the amount of CAPTCHAs (Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell 
Computers and Humans Apart) that Google Scholar requests users to solve from time to time. 
However, this approach did not entirely suppress the appearance of CAPTCHAs, which were 
solved manually when the system requested them. Additionally, when it was detected that 
Google Scholar provided a link to a freely accessible full text of a document, the link to the 
secondary versions of the same document was also followed through, in order to extract all 
the additional links to freely accessible full texts of the document that Google Scholar might 
have found (Figure 2). Searches were carried out off-campus to avoid retrieving links to full 
texts that are only accessible through library subscriptions. The process of extracting the data 
from Google Scholar was very time-consuming, taking over three months (from the end of May 
to the end of August of 2016) to collect data for the 2,610,305 selected documents. 
 
Figure 2. Example of primary and secondary versions of an article in Google Scholar 
 
 
Using the search strategy described above, Google Scholar retrieved results for 99.3% of the 
documents searched. The system did not retrieve any results for 0.7% of the DOIs searched. 
However, this does not necessarily mean that these documents were not covered by Google 
Scholar. These documents might have been covered by Google Scholar without a DOI, and 
therefore they might have been found using other search strategies, for example, searching 
by the title of the document. However, we did not try other search strategies, as we considered 
the results could not be overly affected by these missing documents. 
 
 14 
 
A test was also carried out to assess the accuracy of the results retrieved from Google Scholar. 
That is, whether or not we had actually retrieved data about the documents we were looking 
for. In order to do this, we compared the bibliographic information available from Web of 
Science, with the data extracted from Google Scholar. The match was considered successful 
if at least one of the following criteria were met: 
● Similarity of document titles in the two sources of data (based on the Levenshtein 
distance of the two strings of text) was equal or greater than 0.8 (similarity is 1 when 
the titles are exactly the same, and 0 when they are completely different). 
● Similarity of document titles was between 0.6 and 0.8 AND the documents shared the 
same first author AND the same publication year. 
● Same first author and same publication year, and title of document in Google Scholar 
was not in English. In some cases when the journal publishes in a language other than 
English, the title provided by Google Scholar is the original title, whereas in Web of 
Science, the title of the document is always displayed in English (even when the 
document itself is not written in English). In these cases the title similarity was very 
low, and using it resulted in a significant number of false negatives. 
 
Based on these criteria, we classified as good matches 96% of the documents in our sample 
(2.51 million documents). The proportion of good matches was slightly higher if we only 
considered documents of the type “article” or “review” (97.6%). Therefore, we decided to 
analyze only the articles and reviews in our sample that we had considered as good matches, 
a total of 2,269,022 documents. 
 
Google Scholar does not provide any information on the type of source that is providing free 
access to the full text of a document. For this reason, we combined information from a variety 
of sources in order to provide more detailed information about the type of free access that 
Google Scholar had been able to detect. We classified each full text link in one of the following 
categories: 
● Publisher: when the full text is hosted on a publisher website, or on journal aggregators 
such as JSTOR or SciELO. Data from the oaDOI dataset from 18 August 2017, DOAJ 
(Directory of Open Access Journals), and the Ulrich’s Directory of Journals was used 
to create a list of websites where journal publishers make their articles available. 
● Repository: when the full text is hosted in a repository, as defined by the Registry of 
Open Access Repositories (ROAR), and the Directory of Open Access Repositories 
(openDOAR). 
● Research Institutions: when the full text is hosted in the web domain of a research 
institution (universities, research centers, institutes), excluding the website of the 
institutional repository. That is to say, this category mostly contains personal websites 
of individual researchers, research groups, departments, etc. inside an academic 
domain. In order to determine which domains belonged to academic institutions, a list 
of academic domains was also extracted from openDOAR. 
● Academic Social Networks: in this category we only classified the full texts available 
from ResearchGate and Academia.edu. 
● Harvesters: websites that copy full texts from other sources and make them available 
from their own servers. In this category we classified full texts hosted in the search 
engines CiteSeerX and Semantic Scholar, and the British CORE service. 
● Non-categorized: any website that could not be classified in the previous categories. 
 
 15 
 
After combining the information from the sources described above, there were still thousands 
of web domains that had not been classified. Therefore, we decided to manually check the 
hosts with a higher number of occurrences in our sample that still had not been categorised. 
Specifically, we checked the domains in which Google Scholar had found 100 or more full 
texts of documents in our sample, and the hosts that Google Scholar more frequently selected 
as the primary full text version (because these hosts would likely be publishers, as declared 
in Google Scholar’s publisher guidelines22). Thus, approximately 1,000 hosts were classified 
after visiting the website and checking it manually. The rest of the web domains that had not 
been classified were considered as “non-categorized”. The specific categorisation of hosts 
used in this study is available in the complementary material to this article23. 
 
In this article we make a distinction between Freely Available (FA) documents, and OA 
documents. We consider that all documents for which Google Scholar provided a link to a FA 
version of the document, regardless of the legality under which they were shared and their 
sustainability over time, are FA. When FA documents meet certain additional criteria 
(described below) they were also considered OA. 
 
Unfortunately, there is no clear consensus regarding the minimum rights that any user should 
have in order to be able to consider a document OA. Some definitions, like the one declared 
by the BOAI or the Open Definition24 are clear in that mere right to access the document free 
of charge is not enough to consider a document OA. They consider it necessary that the 
license extends other rights to all users, like redistribution, modification, or application for any 
lawful purpose. The reality, however, is that in many cases documents are made FA under 
licenses that fail to meet one or several of these criteria. For example, there are Creative 
Commons licenses that include Non-Commercial and/or Non-derivatives clauses, thus limiting 
the ways in which a document can be reused. The Elsevier user license25 (the license under 
which Elsevier makes FA after an embargo period articles published in journals included in its 
Open Archive26) prohibits redistribution of the documents and reuse for commercial purposes. 
Moreover, there is a large portion of articles that publishers make available free of charge, 
without extending any other rights to users other than access. This is usually called “public 
access” in the publishing industry (Crotty, 2017). These issues have led some researchers to 
think in terms of degrees of openness, instead of considering OA a binary quality (Chen & 
Olijhoek, 2016). 
 
Apart from the conceptual issues, there are also practical limitations for classifying documents 
as OA. In many cases, especially when we are talking about Green OA, there is no license 
attached to the document, or it is attached in a way that cannot be easily detected by 
automated systems. Fortunately, publishers are increasingly taking to sending license 
information to CrossRef (which makes these data openly accessible) or they display it as 
metadata in their own websites. 
 
                                                
 
22 https://scholar.google.com/intl/en/scholar/publishers.html#policies 
23 https://osf.io/fsujy/ 
24 http://opendefinition.org/ 
25 https://www.elsevier.com/open-access/userlicense/1.0 
26 https://www.elsevier.com/about/open-science/open-access/open-archive 
 16 
 
For the reasons described above, in this article we use a more inclusive definition of OA than 
the one declared by the BOAI or the Open Definition, and we instead set our focus on 
sustainability and legality. Specifically, this article considers the following types of OA: 
 
Gold OA: when the journal that published the article was listed in DOAJ. 
 
Hybrid OA: when the journal was not listed in DOAJ but an OA license was recorded 
in the metadata available in CrossRef, and the Open license came into effect at the 
same time the article was published (OA immediately upon publication). We 
considered as OA licenses all Creative Commons licenses, the Elsevier OA user 
license, and other OA licenses registered in CrossRef by publishers like the ASPB27, 
ACS28, and IEEE29. Our operational definition of “OA immediately upon publication” 
was that the value recorded in the delay-in-days field of the License element available 
in the CrossRef metadata (defined as the “[n]umber of days between the publication 
date of the work and the start date of this license”30), should be less than 30 (one 
month). We decided to set this limit instead of delay-in-days = 0 because we noticed 
that for some articles published as OA, the Open license came into effect a few days 
after publication, and we considered that these articles should also be classified as 
“OA immediately upon publication”. 
 
Delayed OA: when the journal was not listed in DOAJ but an Open Access license was 
recorded in the metadata available in CrossRef, and the Open license came into effect 
more than 30 days after the publication of the article. 
 
Bronze OA: when the full text is FA from the publisher, but the journal is not listed in 
DOAJ and no OA license could be found. This category includes gratis / public access 
from the publisher (free to read but the publisher retains copyright), but might also 
contain masked Hybrid or Delayed OA (when the publishers fail to disclose an OA 
license in machine-readable form), and possibly even some masked Gold OA (if a full 
OA journal is not listed in DOAJ and the publisher does not discloses an OA license). 
 
Green OA: the documents that are FA from institutional or subject-based repositories, 
as listed in ROAR and OpenDOAR. 
 
All the documents that were available from sources other than the publisher website and 
repositories (such as websites of research institutions excluding the repository, academic 
social networks, harvesters, and the rest) were only considered as FA, and not OA. We took 
this conservative measure because we wanted to make a distinction between more legally 
sound and sustainable sources (publishers and repositories) which are more likely to be 
copyright-compliant and usually implement long-term preservation plans for the documents 
they host, and less stable sources (personal websites, academic social networks…) where 
any document (regardless of its copyright status) can be uploaded and deleted at any time. 
 
Lastly, Google Scholar does not provide data on the publication stage of the freely accessible 
versions that it finds: that is, whether the free version is a preprint (before peer-review), an 
author’s accepted manuscript (after peer-review, but before typesetting), or the journal’s 
version of record (final published article). Although this is an interesting aspect of OA 
                                                
 
27 https://aspb.org 
28 https://pubs.acs.org 
29 https://www.ieee.org 
30 https://github.com/CrossRef/rest-api-doc/blob/master/api_format.md 
 17 
 
publishing, identifying the type of version would have required accessing the full text of each 
individual article, and so it falls outside the scope of this study. 
 
Data was processed and analyzed using the R programming language. The percentages of 
OA documents were computed by publication year, subject category, country of affiliation 
(considering all co-authors), and journal. The data used in this study is openly available 
(Martín-Martín, Costas, van Leeuwen, & Delgado López-Cózar, 2018). This will facilitate the 
creation of custom analyses that focus on the research done in specific countries, specific 
fields, specific journals, etc. 
3. Results 
3.1. General overview 
 
Google Scholar provided links to FA full texts for 54.7% of our sample of documents (Figure 
3). If we break down the results by year of publication, documents published in 2014 show a 
slightly higher percentage of FA documents (55.8%) than documents published in 2009 (53%), 
even though the number of documents published in 2014 (1,331,795) was larger than the 
number of documents published in 2009 (937,227), and the fact that at the time of data 
collection documents from 2014 had had considerably less time to be made freely available 
on the Web than documents from 2009. 
 
Figure 3. Overall OA and FA levels found in Google Scholar, by year of publication and both years combined 
 
 
If we consider the two years under study (Figure 3), we can see that 23.1% of the documents 
are FA from publisher websites (Gold + Hybrid + Delayed + Bronze). It is worth noting that 
most of the documents available from publishers are Bronze OA, which are usually made 
accessible under very restrictive reuse terms. However, it seems like Gold and Hybrid are 
gaining importance, judging by the increment from 3.3% to 10.1% from 2009 to 2014 of Gold 
OA, and from 0.5% to 1.5% for Hybrid OA. Bronze OA decreased from 14.1% to 12.6%, and 
Delayed OA decreased as well (from 2% in 2009 to 1.1% in 2014). 
 
Figure 3 displays OA provided by the publisher (Gold, Hybrid, Delayed, Bronze), Green OA, 
and FA from other sources. However, in the cases where a document is available from several 
 18 
 
types of sources, publisher-provided OA is given preference over Green OA and FA from other 
sources. In a similar manner, Green OA versions are given preference over FA from other 
sources. Therefore, Figure 3 does not display the total percentages of Green OA and FA from 
other sources. These are displayed in Figure 4. 
 
The proportion of documents available as Green OA (repositories) was higher in the 
publication year 2014 (18.9%) than in 2009 (15.7%), as displayed in Figure 4. However, the 
number of documents that were available from repositories and not from the publisher 
(displayed in Figure 3) was slightly higher in the publication year 2009 (11.3%) than in 2014 
(10.5%). 
 
Figure 4. Total percentage of Green OA and FA found in Google Scholar, by year of publication and both years 
combined 
 
 
Apart from publisher websites and repositories, there is a large fraction of documents that are 
available from other sources (mainly the academic social network ResearchGate, but also 
personal websites, and harvesters). Google Scholar found that 43.5% of the documents in the 
sample published in 2009 were available from other sources (Figure 4). This percentage was 
lower in the publication year 2014 (38.6%). Nevertheless, in both years this percentage is 
larger than the sum of what all publishers and repositories together provided. Moreover, a 
considerable portion of these documents are FA only from these other sources (that is, these 
documents are not openly accessible from the publisher or from repositories). This figure 
remains relatively stable in the two publication years (21.8% in 2009, and 20% in 2014), as 
can be observed in Figure 3. 
 
The predominance of sources other than publishers and repositories can also be observed if 
we take a look at the number of freely available documents by website (Table 3). By far, the 
source that provided more freely available full texts was the academic social network 
ResearchGate, which by itself provided access to 32.6% of the documents in our sample 
(738,573). If we compare this figure to the percentage of documents provided as OA by 
publishers available in Figure 3 (23.1%, approx. 525,000 documents), we see that 
ResearchGate provided access to more documents in our sample than all publishers together. 
Moreover, 32.7% of the documents available from ResearchGate (over 240,000) were not 
freely available from any other source. 
 19 
 
 
Table 3 also shows how often Google Scholar displays links from each host as the primary full 
text links. This is interesting because the primary link is likely to be the link that most Google 
Scholar users click to access the full text of an article. Again, ResearchGate is first in the rank, 
followed by Pubmed Central (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and arXiv. However it is worth noting that 
some hosts that provided many FA documents (europepmc.org, academia.edu, 
citeseerx.ist.psu.edu) are rarely selected by Google Scholar as the primary full text links (only 
in 10.3%, 14.1%, and 9.3% of the cases, respectively), meaning that the documents these 
platforms provide are also available from other platforms which are placed higher in Google 
Scholar’s host precedence rules. Regarding these precedence rules, the data in Table 3 
shows that Google Scholar does indeed tend to select the publisher version as the primary 
version whenever it is an option (as stated in its indexing policies). Most publisher websites 
are selected as the primary full text version in over 90% of the cases. The exceptions seem to 
be Springer and BioMed Central, which are only selected as the primary version in about 45% 
of the cases. Lastly, it appears that Google Scholar chooses the arXiv repository even over 
most publishers, as this repository is selected as the primary source of full text in 99.9% of the 
cases. This means that when an article is openly accessible from arXiv, Google Scholar 
always chooses the arXiv version as the primary full text version, presumably even when the 
article is also openly accessible from the publisher. 
 
Table 3. Top 20 websites according to the number of FA full texts they host. 
Host 
Type 
# of FA 
documents
% as only 
FA provider 
# of FA as 
primary version 
% as primary
version 
www.researchgate.net 
Social network 
738,573 
32.7 
323,372 
43.8 
europepmc.org 
Repository 
177,930 
5.1 
18,312 
10.3 
www.academia.edu 
Social network 
168,485 
4.2 
23,681 
14.1 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov 
Repository 
165,403 
1.8 
74,109 
44.8 
citeseerx.ist.psu.edu 
Harvester 
120,378 
1.8 
11,203 
9.3 
arxiv.org 
Repository 
72,862 
25.0 
72,753 
99.9 
onlinelibrary.wiley.com 
Publisher 
49,887 
32.8 
47,712 
95.6 
www.sciencedirect.com 
Publisher 
47,356 
26.1 
43,825 
92.5 
pdfs.semanticscholar.org 
Harvester 
38,164 
1.0 
2,790 
7.3 
journals.plos.org 
Publisher 
37,984 
12.5 
37,380 
98.4 
link.springer.com 
Publisher 
35,295 
6.2 
15,335 
43.4 
www.biomedcentral.com Publisher 
27,400 
2.1 
12,328 
45.0 
www.nature.com 
Publisher 
23,726 
26.1 
21,699 
91.5 
downloads.hindawi.com 
Publisher 
18,566 
38.8 
18,565 
100.0 
core.ac.uk 
Harvester 
15,344 
1.4 
769 
5.0 
pubmedcentralcanada.ca 
Repository 
14,286 
1.0 
461 
3.2 
hal.archives‐ouvertes.fr 
Repository 
11,293 
10.7 
5,530 
49.0 
www.mdpi.com 
Publisher 
11,084 
12.9 
11,083 
100.0 
www.infona.pl 
Repository 
10,060 
41.4 
6,132 
61.0 
www.tandfonline.com 
Publisher 
8,973 
61.2 
8,730 
97.3 
 20 
 
3.2. Analysis by disciplines 
We mapped the original WoS subject categories to more general classification schemes:  one 
containing 7 broad subject areas, and the other containing 35 scientific disciplines. The 
schemes were introduced by Tijssen et al. (2010), and the specific correspondence with WoS 
categories is available in the complementary materials. 
 
There is a high inter-area variability, ranging from 60% overall availability in the Medical and 
Life Sciences, to 32.3% overall availability in Law, Arts, and Humanities (Figure 5). 
Multidisciplinary journals achieve a 93.6% overall availability, which is natural if we consider 
that this category includes Gold OA multidisciplinary mega-journals such as PLOS ONE. 
 
Figure 5. OA and Free Availability levels found in Google Scholar, by broad subject areas. 
 
 
If we descend to the level of disciplines (Figure 6) we can see that Bronze OA is usually the 
predominant type in which publishers provide OA. In 28 out of the 35 disciplines shown in 
Figure 6, the percentage of Bronze OA is higher than the sum of Gold, Hybrid, and Delayed 
OA. Bronze OA is especially important in Basic Life Sciences, Biomedical Sciences, and 
Clinical Medicine. 
 
 21 
 
Figure 6. OA and Free Availability levels found in Google Scholar, by scientific discipline 
 
 
Figure 6 also shows the percentage of articles in Green OA that are not openly accessible 
from the publisher: Green OA (only)31. In 19 out of the 35 disciplines, the number of documents 
that are accessible only through Green OA was higher than the sum of Gold, Hybrid, Delayed, 
and Bronze OA. The disciplines with a larger share of documents in the Green OA (only) 
category are Astronomy and Astrophysics (56.2%), and Mathematics (21.1%). 
 
If we consider FA only (the cases when documents were only available from sources other 
than publishers and repositories), Figure 6 shows that this is the most frequent type of 
availability in most disciplines. In 23 out of the 35 disciplines, FA (only) achieves higher 
percentages than Gold, Hybrid, Delayed, Bronze, and Green combined. In four of these 
disciplines (Management and Planning, Political Science and Public Administration, Energy 
Science and Technology, and Civil Engineering and Construction), more than two thirds of the 
documents that were FA in some form, were only available from sources other than the 
publisher or repositories. 
 
Lastly, it is worth noting that there is a large degree of intra-discipline variability as well. Figure 
A2 in the complementary materials32 displays the correspondence between the 35 disciplines 
in Figure 6, and the subject categories used by the Web of Science. This figure shows that in 
                                                
 
31 Total percentages of Green OA by subject categories (including the cases when the article is also 
openly accessible from the publisher) are available from the complementary materials and in the web 
application. 
32 https://osf.io/fsujy/ 
 22 
 
many cases there are important differences among the categories of a discipline, regarding 
not only the overall free availability of documents, but also the types of availability. If we take 
Clinical Medicine (56.9% overall free availability), for example, the subject categories with the 
highest overall availability are Tropical Medicine (85.9%), and Andrology (84.7%). Both 
categories also present high levels of  OA provided by the publisher (over 70%). Dermatology, 
however, presents a completely different behavior: only 37% of the documents are freely 
available in some way, and the most common type of availability is FA from other sources 
(14.5%). 
3.3. Analysis by countries of affiliation 
Table 4 displays OA and FA levels of countries with an output equal or higher than 1% of the 
total, considering only documents published in 2014 (the most recent year in our sample). The 
affiliation of all co-authors of the articles were considered (each article was considered once 
for each different country of affiliation). It distinguishes between OA provided by the publisher, 
OA from repositories (when OA from publisher is not available), and FA from any other sources 
(when OA from publisher or from repositories is not available). A green background in one of 
the cells of the table indicates that the value in that cell is higher than the World value (visible 
in the first row below the headers). A red background indicates a value lower than the World 
value. Higher color intensity indicates a higher distance relative to the World value. The last 
column (% OA + FA) highlights the top three countries with a higher overall availability (in 
green) and the top three countries with a lower overall availability (in red). 
 
 
 
 23 
 
Table 4. OA and Free Availability (FA) levels for documents published in 2014 by researchers in countries with 
high output (>1% of the total) 
Country 
Documents 
% OA from 
publisher 
% OA from 
repositories*
% OA Total
% FA other 
sources† 
% OA + FA†
World 
1,331,795 
25.3 
10.5 
35.8 
20.0 
55.7 
USA 
360,889 
29.1 
18.2 
47.3 
18.9 
66.2 
Peoples R China 
231,162 
22.9 
4.3 
27.2 
18.7 
46.0 
Germany 
96,265 
28.6 
13.4 
42.0 
19.2 
61.3 
England 
89,996 
35.0 
15.9 
50.9 
17.3 
68.3 
Japan 
71,587 
26.6 
9.9 
36.5 
13.4 
49.9 
France 
66,648 
26.5 
17.4 
43.9 
23.5 
67.4 
Canada 
60,342 
28.1 
10.5 
38.6 
23.1 
61.7 
Italy 
58,397 
26.2 
11.9 
38.1 
25.6 
63.7 
Australia 
53,822 
26.2 
10.5 
36.7 
24.9 
61.7 
Spain 
51,586 
25.3 
13.9 
39.2 
24.7 
63.9 
South Korea 
51,036 
26.2 
5.4 
31.6 
17.9 
49.5 
India 
50,468 
15.7 
7.4 
23.1 
25.6 
48.7 
Netherlands 
36,228 
33.7 
14.2 
47.9 
22.9 
70.8 
Brazil 
34,517 
37.0 
8.8 
45.8 
25.8 
71.6 
Russia 
28,108 
10.6 
9.7 
20.3 
23.9 
44.3 
Switzerland 
26,580 
33.8 
14.9 
48.7 
21.8 
70.5 
Taiwan 
25,492 
27.3 
8.4 
35.7 
17.5 
53.2 
Sweden 
24,286 
35.3 
14.9 
50.2 
19.2 
69.4 
Iran 
23,387 
14.5 
4.1 
18.6 
26.4 
45.0 
Turkey 
21,516 
22.8 
5.8 
28.6 
23.9 
52.5 
Poland 
20,496 
33.4 
9.6 
43.0 
20.7 
63.8 
Belgium 
19,809 
29.5 
15.7 
45.2 
24.2 
69.4 
Denmark 
15,853 
34.9 
12.4 
47.3 
20.2 
67.5 
Scotland 
13,813 
38.3 
18.3 
56.6 
16.4 
73.0 
Austria 
13,514 
34.9 
12.2 
47.1 
19.3 
66.4 
 
* Accessible from repository but not from publisher 
† Only available from other sources 
 
All countries in Table 4 present higher percentages of OA from publishers than of OA only 
from repositories. 18 out of the 25 high output countries displayed in Table 4 present OA levels 
(sum of OA from publisher and OA from repositories) that are higher than the World level 
(35.8%). 13 of these countries are in Europe. The other five are the USA, Japan, Canada, 
Australia, and Brazil. The countries with the highest percentages of OA come very close to or 
slightly surpass 50% of the total amount of documents published by researchers in that country 
(United Kingdom, Sweden, Switzerland, Netherlands, USA, Denmark, Austria). All these 
countries present percentages of OA from publishers and from repositories that are higher 
than the average world percentages. Japan, Brazil, and Poland also have higher than average 
OA levels, with the particularity that most of their OA is available from publishers, and their 
 24 
 
percentage of OA from repositories is lower than the World level. The opposite, however, does 
not occur: there are no countries in Table 4 with a lower than average percentage of OA from 
publishers that manage to achieve a higher than average total percentage of OA thanks to OA 
from repositories. 
 
7 out of the 25 high output countries displayed in Table 4 present OA levels that are lower 
than the World level (35.8%). Chief among them is China, with only 27.2% of its documents 
accessible either from the publisher or from repositories, even though it is the second country 
in terms of output (231,162 articles and reviews published in 2014). The other six countries 
are also located in Asia (South Korea, India, Russia, Taiwan, Iran, and Turkey). 
 
At the world level, 20% of the documents are only freely available through sources other than 
publishers and repositories. At the country level there is some variation: from the 13.4% 
percent of documents written by Japanese researchers that are only available from these other 
sources, to the cases of Italy, India, Brazil, and Iran, where the percentage is slightly over 
25%. 
 
If we consider overall availability (the sum of OA and FA only), the countries with a higher 
percentage of availability are Brazil (71.6%), the Netherlands (70.8%), and Switzerland 
(70.5%). Scotland deserves a special mention, because if considered separately from the rest 
of the United Kingdom (which is the way the Web of Science presents authors’ affiliations), it 
achieves 73% overall free availability. The United Kingdom as a whole presents a slightly 
lower percentage (68.7%). In the lowest positions of the rank we can find China (46%), Iran 
(45%), and Russia (44.3%). 
 
Table A1, available in the complementary materials33, extends Table 4, displaying the same 
information for 40 additional countries, those with an output larger than 0.1% and lower than 
1% of the World total. The countries with a higher overall availability in this output tier are 
Kenya (1,504 documents, 80.6% overall availability), Chile (5,812 documents, 76% overall 
availability), and Norway (11,601 documents, 67.9% overall availability), and the countries 
with a lower overall availability are Tunisia (3,008 documents, 50.3% overall availability), 
Ukraine (4,397 documents, 49.1% overall availability), and Algeria (2,139 documents, 43.1% 
overall availability). 
4. Discussion 
4.1. Limitations and further lines of study 
The analysis carried out in this study suffers from a number of limitations. These are related 
either to the sample selection, to the data available in Google Scholar, to the categorisation of 
OA / FA of the documents in the sample, or to the replicability of the study. 
 
The first limitation of this article related to sample selection is that it only analyses scientific 
journal articles and reviews published in journals indexed in Clarivate Analytics’ SCIE, SSCI, 
and A&HCI. These three citation indexes are known to have limited coverage of journals in 
                                                
 
33 https://osf.io/fsujy/ 
 25 
 
the Social Sciences, Arts, and Humanities (SSAH), and to suffer from a bias towards English-
language journals (Mongeon & Paul-Hus, 2016; Van Leeuwen, Moed, Tijssen, Visser, & Van 
Raan, 2001). Therefore, results might have been different if more articles published in journals 
in the SSAH that are not covered by these indexes, and/or more articles from journals that 
publish in languages other than English had been included in the sample. Furthermore, this 
study focuses on the OA levels of articles and reviews, and not on the OA levels of other 
document types such as books, conference papers, or scientific reports. Further studies could 
focus on the free availability of these other document typologies, which Google Scholar also 
covers.  
 
An additional limitation is that this article only considers articles and reviews for which a DOI 
was available in Clarivate Analytics’ citation indexes at the time of data collection. Documents 
without a DOI, or documents for which a DOI had been minted but was not recorded in these 
databases at the time of data collection, have not been considered in this study. 
 
Regarding the data extracted from in Google Scholar, this study has the following limitations: 
1. This study only analyses OA evidence in Google Scholar of documents published in 
2009 and 2014 at a specific moment in time: summer of 2016. Therefore, no 
extrapolation should be made regarding OA levels of other publication years. 
Furthermore, OA levels of documents published in 2009 and 2014 might have changed 
by the time of this writing, caused by OA backfilling: documents that have become OA 
after we collected the data, either because the publisher practices Delayed OA, or 
because authors have self-archived their articles. It also may be the case that some 
documents that were available when we collected the data are no longer available. 
The dispute between the Coalition for Responsible Sharing and ResearchGate, in 
which ResearchGate was forced to remove from public view a significant number of 
articles that infringed copyright, may have affected the current levels of free availability 
of the documents in our sample. Additionally, some documents hosted in other 
unstable sources, such as personal websites, may have also been removed. 
2. In some cases, Google Scholar failed to recognize that an article was freely available 
from a source that the search engine indexes. In practice, this takes the form of a 
record in which no FA link is provided to the right of the main bibliographic information 
(see Figure 2), but if users would follow the link available in the title of the document, 
they would find that the article is in fact freely available. Our study only considers the 
links that Google Scholar provides to the right of the bibliographic information, and 
therefore, our results undercount free availability in these cases. We are aware that 
some journals (for example, some Gold OA journals published by Frontiers, and also 
eLife) were affected by this problem. We have also noticed that Google Scholar has 
fixed these errors for the most part, and at the time of this writing, FA links are correctly 
displayed to the right of the bibliographic information of the articles published in the 
aforementioned journals. 
3. In some cases, Google Scholar is not able to successfully merge all the different 
versions of an article that can be found on the Web (Martín-Martín et al., 2014; Orduna-
Malea, Martín-Martín, & Delgado López-Cózar, 2017), and as a result, two or more 
entries might exist in Google Scholar for documents that are actually the same. This 
might happen for a number of reasons, but is more frequent in journals that publish 
several versions of the same document (i.e. versions in several languages), and also 
for journals that, even though they publish only in one language, create versions of the 
 26 
 
article metadata in several languages. In these cases, Google Scholar’s algorithms to 
detect duplicate documents usually fail. For our study this means that in some cases, 
the record we retrieved from Google Scholar might be one that does not provide a link 
to a freely available version, even though other entries of the same document in 
Google Scholar might contain such links. Therefore, our study undercounts free 
availability in these cases as well. One journal in our sample that is affected by this 
problem is Revista Espanola de Documentacion Cientifica, a Gold OA journal for which 
our data shows FA links in only 56% of the documents it published in 2009 and 2014. 
 
Regarding the categorization of documents as OA / FA, and its specific subtypes (Gold OA, 
Hybrid OA, Delayed OA, Bronze OA, and Green OA, as well as FA only from sources other 
than the publisher and repositories), there are several limitations that should be taken into 
account.  
1. We considered as Gold OA only the articles published in journals included in the 
Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ). There are, however, journals that adhere 
to the Gold OA model that are not included in this directory, like, for example, some 
journals owned by the Korean Association of Medical Journal Editors (Korean Journal 
of Radiology, and Korean Journal of Physiology & Pharmacology, for example). 
Because our study relies on DOAJ, it suffers from this limitation, and articles published 
in these journals are miscategorized either as Hybrid OA (when an Open License could 
be found) or as Bronze OA (if the journal does not deposit license information in 
CrossRef) Therefore, our study might be overestimating Hybrid and Bronze OA in 
detriment of Gold OA. Nevertheless, the error introduced by this issue in our calculation 
of Hybrid OA is estimated to be fairly small, as the total sum of articles in journals 
where more than 70% of the articles have been categorized as Hybrid OA (those that 
could be affected by this problem) is only 9,211 (0.4% of the sample). 
2. The license information provided by CrossRef is incomplete. We found that for 
approximately 85,000 out of 163,000 articles classified as Gold OA (because the 
journal where they are published is listed in DOAJ), no open license was reported via 
CrossRef, suggesting that a large number of journals still do not deposit license 
information in CrossRef. If the proportion of Hybrid or Delayed OA journals that do not 
deposit license information in CrossRef is any similar, our results would be affected in 
that some Gold, Hybrid, and/or Delayed OA articles would have been erroneously 
classified as Bronze OA. Therefore, further analyses are needed to ascertain the 
specific composition of the Bronze OA category. It may turn out that Bronze OA is only 
a mix of Gratis Access provided by the publishers, and Gold, Hybrid or Delayed OA in 
journals that do not declare licenses in a easily identifiable way. In that case, the term 
“Bronze OA” will stop being necessary once these practical limitations are overcome. 
3. Regarding Green OA, in this article we make the assumption that documents available 
from repositories are sustainable and legal. This might not be true in some cases, and 
therefore a more in-depth study of the sustainability and legality of subject and 
institutional repositories all over the world would be helpful to advance our knowledge 
of OA. 
4. This study does not differentiate between the various versions of the articles that may 
have been made available on the Web: preprints that still have not gone through peer-
review, authors’ accepted manuscripts, and the publisher’s version of record. Further 
studies are needed to detect the extent to which preprints are prevalent in specific 
subject areas, and whether this could affect the quality and validity of research that 
 27 
 
cites preprints, rather than accepted manuscripts or the publisher’s version of record, 
which have been vetted by peer-review panels. 
 
Lastly, perhaps one of the most important limitations of this study is that it is not easily 
replicable because of the limitations on data extraction imposed by Google Scholar. Extracting 
a large amount of data from this source is still only possible if one is willing to commit an 
inordinate amount of time to the task (three months, in our case). However, the goal of this 
study was not to describe a replicable method to analyze OA levels using Google Scholar, but 
to find out whether the data available in Google Scholar could in fact be useful for this purpose. 
If it turns out that the data is useful, a request could be made to Google Scholar to reconsider 
making their data (at least to the parts related to the free availability of documents) more open 
for reuse. Repositories have traditionally been in favor of interoperability (as proven by the 
OAI-PMH initiative), and publishers are slowly but steadily making article metadata more open 
through platforms like CrossRef and also thanks to initiatives like I4OC34 (Initiative for Open 
Citations), so it is not clear who, if anyone, would be against opening these data nowadays. 
Of course, this would implicate a change of direction for a platform that has traditionally been 
quite reluctant to provide its data in bulk. It is possible that the Google Scholar team prefers 
to spend its efforts in the same problem they have been trying to solve up to now: connecting 
users with the academic documents they need to help them solve important problems. 
Nevertheless, as worthy as that goal is, it is also beyond doubt that these data would be of 
great interest to all actors in the scientific community, and might also be able to save duplicated 
efforts to other OA-related initiatives. 
 
Despite the limitations described above, this study analyses the largest sample of data 
extracted from Google Scholar to date, and by combining these data with the data available 
in other sources such as DOAJ, CrossRef, OpenDOAR, and ROAR, it offers insights into all 
the variants of OA (Gold, Hybrid, Delayed, Bronze, Green). It also provides information on the 
free availability of documents from other sources (FA), thus providing a holistic, large-scale, 
and detailed depiction of the status of OA of scientific publications across all scientific fields 
and countries. 
4.2. Comparison of results with similar studies 
The report recently published by Science-Metrix (2018), and the studies published by Piwowar 
et al. (2018), Bosman & Kramer (2018), and van Leeuwen et al. (2017) are perhaps the ones 
that offer more opportunities for comparison with this study. This is because they all extracted 
samples of documents from the Web of Science. Moreover, they all analysed documents from 
2009 and 2014 (among other publication years). In the case of Science-Metrix’s report, they 
declare to have carried out their data collection in the third quarter of 2016, roughly the same 
months in which we carried out our own data collection. The two studies based on Unpaywall 
as well as van Leeuwen’s study used data extracted more recently (2017), and thus 
differences between our study and theirs may be attributable at least in part to the backfilling 
that has occurred between the time of our data collection and theirs. 
 
Science-Metrix reports 55% overall free availability both in 2009 and 2014. These results are 
very similar to ours (53.1% and 55.8% in 2009 and 2014, respectively). Their percentages on 
                                                
 
34 https://i4oc.org/ 
 28 
 
OA provided by the publisher are also very similar to ours: 20.2% in 2009, and 23.3% in 2014 
in the Science-Metrix report, while our study shows 19.9% in 2009 and 25.3% in 2014 (Figure 
3). The figures on Green OA differ in the two studies. The Science-Metrix report finds 33.3% 
and 31.5% of Green OA in 2009 and 2014, whereas our study only finds 15.7% and 18.9% in 
these years (Figure 4). The reason of this difference is probably that the Science-Metrix report 
considered documents available from ResearchGate as Green OA, and our study does not. 
However, our study shows that 34.5% and 31.2% of the documents in 2009 and 2014, 
respectively, are available from ResearchGate (which we label as FA only), which matches 
the results found by Science-Metrix. 
 
As regards the results at the country level, the country tables available in the Science-Metrix 
report offer strikingly similar results to the ones displayed in Table 4, although the percentages 
in our study are roughly 3 points higher for each country than in the Science-Metrix report 
(except in the case of Brazil, which has a higher percentage in the Science-Metrix report). The 
case of Brazil reveals other possible differences between Science-Metrix’s approach, and 
ours, because they declare that SciELO is almost tied to ResearchGate in the number of freely 
accessible documents they offer, whereas our data shows that ResearchGate offers over 
24,000 documents published by Brazilian researchers, and SciELO only 6,000. 
 
As for the results at the level of subject areas, their results also agree with our study in that 
the areas with a higher percentage of free availability are the Health and Natural Sciences 
(over 50%), followed by Applied and the Social Sciences (between 40% and 50%), and lastly, 
the Arts & Humanities, with lower percentages (less than 40%). 
 
Lastly, it is worth noting that the Science-Metrix study applies a calibration factor of 1.2 to the 
counts of freely available documents found by the 1science database, because the recall of 
this source is considered to be low. Therefore, although the results in this study closely match 
the results in the Science-Metrix study (at least at the levels of countries and broad subject 
categories), Google Scholar seems to have a better recall than the 1science database, 
because no calibration factor was applied in this case. 
 
As stated in the literature review, the study by Piwowar et al. (2018) used three different 
samples, and one of them was a sample of documents covered by the Web of Science. 
Although their paper only reports the percentage of overall availability for documents in this 
sample (36.1%), the supplemental data they released alongside the paper (Piwowar et al., 
2017) provides the necessary data to calculate OA percentages by year and type of OA in 
their WoS sample. Their data shows that 33.1% of the documents published in 2009, and 
37.4% of the documents published in 2014 in their sample of WoS documents were freely 
accessible in some way according to Unpaywall. These results are very similar to ours (31,2% 
in 2009 and 35.8% in 2014), if we disregard the percentage of documents that we considered 
FA only (available only from sources other than publishers and repositories), which their study 
does not analyze. The slightly higher percentage in their study might be caused by slightly 
better coverage of OA sources in the Unpaywall system than in Google Scholar, but might 
also be explained by sampling issues (they use a sample, rather than the entire collection of 
documents), by small methodological differences regarding OA labelling (our study does not 
consider as Green OA documents hosted in personal or department websites inside academic 
domains, while theirs does), or by the fact that their study analyses data extracted in 2017, 
and therefore OA levels might have increased because of backfilling since the data in our 
 29 
 
study was collected (summer of 2016). In any case, the specific percentages of the different 
types of OA in the two studies are remarkably similar, as can be observed in Table 5. 
 
Table 5. Comparison of OA levels found by Google Scholar in this study, and by Piwowar et al. (2018) using 
Unpaywall data 
 
2009 
2014 
 
Google Scholar 
Unpaywall
Google Scholar 
Unpaywall 
% Gold 
3.3 
3.1 
10.1 
9.4 
% Hybrid 
0.5 
3.4 
1.5 
5.2 
% Delayed 
2 
‐ 
1.1 
‐ 
% Bronze 
14.1 
14.7 
12.6 
11.6 
% Green (only) 
11.3 
11.9 
10.5 
11.2 
% Total OA 
31.2 
33.1 
35.8 
37.4 
 
Bosman & Kramer (2018) analysed the data from Unpaywall that the Web of Science has 
integrated into its system. They found an overall 28% of OA for documents published in 2014 
(Kramer & Bosman, 2018). However, the Web of Science only provides OA information when 
the version that is FA is the author accepted manuscript (AAM), or the publisher’s version of 
record (VOR). Therefore, this suggests that almost 10% of the documents covered by 
Unpaywall (and probably also Google Scholar, given the similarities found above) are 
preprints, that is, manuscripts that still have not gone through peer-review. 
 
The results of this study show significantly higher percentages of OA (up to 15 points higher) 
than those found by van Leeuwen et al. (2017). That study reports overall OA levels of roughly 
21% in 2009 and 27% in 2014. These differences may be explained by the more restricted 
approach of van Leeuwen’s method, focused on OA sources related with the idea of legality 
and sustainability such as OpenAIRE, DOAJ, PubMed Central, etc., and with a strong focus 
on Gold and Green OA; while Google Scholar, Unpaywall and Science Metrix identify also 
Hybrid, Delayed and particularly Bronze OA. Considering together the Gold and Green OA 
shares in 2014 in this study (10.1%+10.5%) we come up with a closer value to the 27% 
observed in van Leeuwen’s study, thus suggesting the relative consistency among methods, 
but also highlighting the role that Hybrid, Delayed and Bronze OA (together with FA only) play 
in the overall consideration of what is OA. 
 
Lastly, the results from this study somewhat differ from those found by Jamali & Navabi (2015), 
who carried out a series of subject queries in Google Scholar to analyze OA levels in 277 
minor subject categories extracted from Scopus. They found approximately 60% of free 
availability for documents published between 2004 and 2014 in all areas of research (Life, 
Physical, Social, and Health Sciences). This differs from our study, where we found 
significantly less free availability in the Social Sciences and Applied Sciences, than in the 
Natural and Health Sciences. The difference might be explained at least in part by the fact 
they only analyzed the first ten hits of each query, and Google Scholar is known to rank 
documents in a search based primarily on the number of citations that the documents have 
received (Martin-Martin et al., 2017). Highly cited documents might have different patterns of 
behavior regarding OA availability than a randomly selected sample of documents. Moreover, 
their study was not limited to documents covered by the Web of Science, which might also 
have influenced the results. 
 30 
 
5. Conclusions 
5.1. Answers to research questions 
RQ1. How much of the recently published scientific literature is freely available according to 
the data available in Google Scholar, by year of publication, subject categories, and country 
of affiliation of the authors? 
 
Google Scholar provided links to freely available versions of documents indexed in the Web 
of Science and published in 2009 or 2014 in approximately 54.6% of the cases. The 
percentage is slightly lower for documents published in 2009 (53%) than for documents 
published in 2014 (55.8%). However, there are important differences at the subject level and 
at the country level. 
 
Categories related to the Natural and Health sciences achieve the highest percentages of free 
availability (Basic Life Sciences: 67.5%; Biomedical Sciences: 62.5%). Categories related to 
the Social Sciences, excepting Psychology (57.8%) and Economics & Business (55.2%) reach 
lower percentages (Sociology and Anthropology: 40.7%; Social and Behavioral Sciences, 
Interdisciplinary: 45.4%; Educational Sciences: 40%). Categories in the Arts and Humanities 
achieve the lowest percentages (Language and Linguistics: 39.4%; Creative Arts, Culture, and 
Music: 20.9%; Literature: 14.2%). 
 
At the country level the percentages range from approximately 70% overall availability (Brazil, 
the Netherlands, Switzerland) to approximately 45% (China, Iran, and Russia), if we consider 
the top 25 countries with a higher output. 
 
These results are remarkably similar to the ones found in other recent large-scale studies that 
analyse similar datasets but use different mechanisms to find evidence of OA (Piwowar et al., 
2018; Science-Metrix Inc., 2018; van Leeuwen et al., 2017). 
 
RQ2. How much is openly accessible in a sustainable and legal way, and what proportion is 
freely available but does not meet these criteria? 
 
We consider that sustainability and legality in OA is important from a policy perspective. For 
this reason in this study we made a distinction between what we considered reasonably 
sustainable and legal sources (publishers and repositories), and sources that did not meet 
these criteria (academic social networks, personal websites, harvesters, and other websites).  
 
Considering the two publication years under study (2009 and 2014), only 33.9% of the 
documents are openly accessible from sustainable and legal sources. This percentage is 
formed by the sum of all forms of OA provided by the publisher (Gold, Hybrid, Delayed, and 
Bronze: 23.1%), and OA provided by repositories that is not also available from the publisher 
(Green only: 10.8%). Bronze OA is the most common form of OA provided by the publishers. 
13.2% of all documents in our sample were available as Bronze OA, while the combination of 
Gold, Hybrid, and Delayed only made up for 10.1% of the total number of documents. In the 
Bronze variety of OA, no Open License is available, and publishers usually extend very few 
rights to the user apart from free access. Therefore, Bronze OA articles cannot be redistributed 
 31 
 
or reused by anyone without explicit permission from the publisher, thus introducing a legal 
restriction in the OA consideration of Bronze OA publications. 
 
As for Green OA, 17.6% of the documents in our sample were available from repositories 
according to Google Scholar. 
 
Using Google Scholar as source of data made it possible to detect that 40.6% of the 
documents in our sample are freely available from sources that are not considered to meet 
the criteria of sustainability and legality. This means that more documents are freely available 
in unsustainable sources and/or in violation of their copyright, than through sustainable and 
legal ways. In addition to that, 20.7% (of all the documents in our sample) are only freely 
available from these other sources. 
 
RQ3. What is the distribution of freely available documents by web domains? 
 
As other studies had previously hinted (Jamali & Nabavi, 2015; Martín-Martín et al., 2014), the 
main source of freely available documents according to Google Scholar is, by far, the 
academic social network ResearchGate, which provided free access to 32.6% of all the 
documents in our sample (almost the same amount as all publishers and repositories put 
together). ResearchGate has a strong presence in Google Scholar, demonstrated by the fact 
that Google Scholar selects the ResearchGate version of an article as the primary version 
(see Figure 2) in 43.8% of the cases. 
 
After ResearchGate, among the first places of the rank of websites that provided more freely 
available documents we can find the repositories PubMed Central and arXiv, the academic 
social network Academia.edu, harvesters like CiteSeerX and Semantic Scholar. After those, 
we find the largest commercial publishers (Wiley, Elsevier, PloS, Springer-Nature, BioMed 
Central, Hindawi, MDPI, and Taylor & Francis). In the majority of the cases when there is a 
freely accessible version of a document from the publisher, Google Scholar selects that 
version as the primary version. 
5.2. Final remarks 
From the answers to the research questions posed by this study, some general remarks can 
be drawn about the current status of OA to scientific publications: 
 
The data available in Google Scholar, combined with the data available in other open 
resources such as CrossRef, DOAJ, OpenDOAR, and ROAR, can provide a faithful 
representation of OA levels of scientific publications. The results obtained with Google Scholar 
are similar to other existing approaches of OA identification (e.g. Unpaywall, Science Metrix 
or van Leeuwen’s) thus suggesting some degree of agreement among the different 
approaches depending on how OA and FA are defined. However, as long as the data available 
in Google Scholar is not made available to the scientific community, Google Scholar cannot 
be considered a viable option to analyze OA levels on a regular basis. That said, the fact that 
Google Scholar, currently the most widely used academic search engine, is able to direct 
users to freely available versions of documents even when they are not freely accessible from 
the publisher or from repositories, is something that should not be ignored if one is to truly 
 32 
 
understand how scientific information is being accessed throughout the world nowadays. 
Unpaywall can be seen as a strong alternative to find only legal sources of OA, although future 
research should focus on how the concurrence of several methods could help to depict the 
most exhaustive landscape of multiple and diverse forms of OA (and FA). 
 
Regarding the prevalence of the different variants of OA, this study confirms that most of the 
documents that publishers make freely accessible (e.g. Bronze OA) do not specify a clear OA-
compatible license. Although this category might contain some masked Gold, Hybrid, or 
Delayed OA because of practical limitations (see section 4.1 above), it is likely that most of 
the documents categorised as Bronze OA were intended to be released by the publishers as 
Gratis Access. If this is the case, it would mean that continued free access over time to a large 
fraction of documents is entirely dependent on the publishers. This is a precarious situation, 
because even if publishers’ original intention is to maintain Gratis Access status in perpetuity, 
as sole copyright holders nothing could stop them if they decided to revoke that status in the 
future. Moreover, in the best-case scenario (where Gratis Access status is maintained over 
time), the rights extended to users in these cases are very limited (for example, no 
redistribution and/or limited or no reuse rights), far from what the BOAI initially envisioned. 
This situation calls for a discussion among all stakeholders regarding the minimum 
requirements for OA status in scientific articles. But, even if an agreement is not reached, 
policy makers and funders should still strive to be clear in their OA mandates about the specific 
accessibility criteria that the outputs of research done with their funds should meet. 
 
As for the OA levels at the country level, this study shows that even though many high-output 
European countries have OA levels that are above the world average, most of them are still 
far from complete OA adoption. This means that the goal of reaching 100% OA of scientific 
publications by 2020 proposed by the European Union in 2016 (Enserink, 2016) is probably 
unrealistic for most EU countries. 
 
As other studies previously found (Borrego, 2016), the results of this study suggest that even 
with the current limitations that publishers impose on self-archiving (Gadd & Troll Covey, 2016; 
Tickell et al., 2017), there is much room for the growth of Green OA, because most publishers 
do not set limitations for archiving preprints, and some allow the archiving of author’s accepted 
manuscripts at least in some types of websites with no embargo. However, the reality is that 
many authors still do not do this. What’s more, this study confirms that when authors self-
archive their documents, they vastly prefer ResearchGate over repositories. ResearchGate 
has succeeded in convincing researchers from all fields and all over the world to upload 
massive amounts of documents to its platform, something that institutional repositories have 
not managed to do. This matches the findings by Borrego (2017) for a sample of Spanish 
universities. There are several reasons that may have motivated this: the added-value 
services that ResearchGate provides (e.g. automatically updating the profiles of researchers, 
the easiness to upload publications, detailed impact and usage indicators that allow the 
‘quantification of the self’ (Hammarfelt, de Rijcke, & Rushforth, 2016; Orduna-Malea, Martín-
Martín, & Delgado López-Cózar, 2016), etc.), the prominence with which documents hosted 
in ResearchGate are displayed in Google Scholar (which might have served as a way to 
introduce users to the platform), the lack of awareness by researchers of the existence of 
repositories at their institutions, ignorance on how to use them, usability problems, the 
increasing barriers to self-archiving imposed by publishers (by which, unlike ResearchGate, 
repositories usually abide), as well as the lack of academic incentives for scholars to self-
 33 
 
archive their work, in opposition to the “immediate feedback and gratification” provided by 
these academic networks (Hammarfelt et al., 2016). Whatever the reasons, this presents a 
problem for the advancement of a sustainable and legal system of OA and Open Science in 
general, because researchers are dedicating their efforts to feeding a proprietary platform that 
does not make its data available to the scientific community and which may disappear the 
moment it is not considered profitable. 
 
Lastly, this study confirms that article metadata that contains license information is still not 
readily available for many articles, making it difficult to categorize the various variants of OA 
accurately. The appearance of the term “Bronze OA” (Piwowar et al., 2018), which is likely a 
mix of different variants of publisher-provided OA (Gratis, Gold, Hybrid, Delayed) that cannot 
be correctly identified because of the lack of license metadata, is a testament of this. CrossRef, 
currently the largest open source of license information at the article level, strongly 
recommends publishers to deposit license information, but they are not required to fill this field 
when they deposit metadata about an article. The system would benefit from the 
implementation of a standard metadata scheme that defines the specific rights that the license 
of an article extends to users. This should include the cases of Gratis Access provided by the 
publishers. This would be a way for publishers to declare their commitment to provide 
sustainable free access to these articles. In the cases of non-OA documents, self-archiving 
policies should also be recorded at the article level in machine-readable form, specifying how 
(under which license), when (specific date for the end of embargo period), where (in what kind 
of websites), and in what form (preprint, author’s accepted manuscript, or version of record) 
an article can be self-archived. Among other things, this would allow funders and policy 
makers to check whether a published article meets the terms of a specific OA mandate, and 
it would allow institutional repositories to monitor the status of the documents published by its 
researchers more efficiently, and to automate the public release of these documents from the 
repository under the conditions specified by the license of each article. 
 
In fact, the system suggested above would provide the same functionality as the automated 
system that the International Association of Scientific, Technical and Medical Publishers 
(STM) offered to implement in a letter they sent to ResearchGate (STM, 2017). This letter was 
an attempt to make the social network agree to check for copyright compliance when users 
upload documents to the platform. However, according to an undated STM announcement, 
ResearchGate rejected this offer (STM, n.d.), forcing  publishers to continue issuing takedown 
notices when they detect that documents are made freely available in violation of their 
copyright (Coalition for Responsible Sharing, 2017b). As far as we know, the system has not 
been mentioned in public again after this exchange, despite its potential usefulness for 
repository managers all over the world, who, unlike ResearchGate, are usually willing to 
comply with copyright during the process of deposit. 
Acknowledgements 
Alberto Martín-Martín enjoys a four-year doctoral fellowship (FPU2013/05863) granted by the 
Ministerio de Educación, Cultura, y Deportes (Spain). Funding from the South African DST-
NRF Centre of Excellence in Scientometrics and Science, Technology and Innovation Policy 
(SciSTIP) is also acknowledged. Two anonymous reviewers are also acknowledged for their 
helpful comments. 
 34 
 
References 
Abad-García, M.-F., González-Teruel, A., & González-Llinares, J. (2018). Effectiveness of 
OpenAIRE, BASE, Recolecta, and Google Scholar at finding spanish articles in 
repositories. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 69(4), 
619–622. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23975 
Archambault, É., Amyot, D., Deschamps, P., Nicol, A., Provencher, F., Rebout, L., & 
Roberge, G. (2014). Proportion of Open Access papers published in peer-reviewed 
journals at the European and world levels: 1996-2013. Retrieved from http://science-
metrix.com/en/publications/reports/proportion-of-open-access-papers-published-in-
peer-reviewed-journals-at-the 
Björk, B.-C. (2016). The open access movement at a crossroad: Are the big publishers and 
academic social media taking over? Learned Publishing, 29(2), 131–134. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/leap.1021 
Björk, B.-C. (2017). Gold, green, and black open access. Learned Publishing, 30(2), 173–
175. https://doi.org/10.1002/leap.1096 
Björk, B.-C., Welling, P., Laakso, M., Majlender, P., Hedlund, T., & Guðnason, G. (2010). 
Open Access to the Scientific Journal Literature: Situation 2009. PLoS ONE, 5(6), 
e11273. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0011273 
Bohannon, J. (2016, April 28). Who’s downloading pirated papers? Everyone. Science. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf5664 
Bolick, J. (2017). Exploiting Elsevier’s Creative Commons License Requirement to Subvert 
Embargo. Poster Session Presented at the Kraemer Copyright Conference. Retrieved 
from http://hdl.handle.net/1808/24107 
Borrego, Á. (2016). Measuring compliance with a Spanish Government open access 
mandate. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 67(4), 
757–764. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23422 
Borrego, Á. (2017). Institutional repositories versus ResearchGate: The depositing habits of 
Spanish researchers. Learned Publishing, 30(3), 185–192. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/leap.1099 
Bosman, J., & Kramer, B. (2016). Innovations in scholarly communication - data of the global 
2015-2016 survey. https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.49583 
Bosman, J., & Kramer, B. (2018). Open access levels: a quantitative exploration using Web 
of Science and oaDOI data. https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.3520v1 
Chan, L., Cuplinskas, D., Eisen, M., Friend, F., Genova, Y., Guédon, J.-C., … Velterop, J. 
Budapest Open Access Initiative (2002). Retrieved from 
http://www.budapestopenaccessinitiative.org/read 
Chen, X., & Olijhoek, T. (2016). Measuring the Degrees of Openness of Scholarly Journals 
with the Open Access Spectrum (OAS) Evaluation Tool. Serials Review, 42(2), 108–
115. https://doi.org/10.1080/00987913.2016.1182672 
Christianson, M. (2007). Ecology Articles in Google Scholar: Levels of Access to Articles in 
Core Journals. Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship. 
https://doi.org/10.5062/F4MS3QPD 
Coalition for Responsible Sharing. (2017a). Coalition for Responsible Sharing issues take 
down notices to ResearchGate to address remaining violations. Retrieved from 
http://www.responsiblesharing.org/2017-10-18-coalition-for-responsible-sharing-issues-
take-down-notices-to-researchgate-to-address-remaining-violations/ 
Coalition for Responsible Sharing. (2017b). Publishers and societies take action against 
ResearchGate’s copyright infringements. Retrieved from 
http://www.responsiblesharing.org/coalition-statement/ 
Coalition for Responsible Sharing. (2017c). ResearchGate Removed Significant Number of 
Copyrighted Articles. Retrieved from http://www.responsiblesharing.org/2017-10-10-
ResearchGate-removed-articles/ 
Crotty, D. (2017). Study Suggests Publisher Public Access Outpacing Open Access; Gold 
 35 
 
OA Decreases Citation Performance [Blog Post]. Retrieved from 
https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2017/10/04/study-suggests-publisher-public-access-
outpacing-open-access-gold-oa-decreases-citation-performance/ 
Else, H. (2018, May 17). Europe’s open-access drive escalates as university stand-offs 
spread. Nature, pp. 479–480. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-018-05191-0 
Elsevier. (2015). Dutch Universities and Elsevier Reach Agreement in Principle on Open 
Access and Subscription [Press release]. Retrieved from 
https://www.elsevier.com/about/press-releases/corporate/dutch-universities-and-
elsevier-reach-agreement-in-principle-on-open-access-and-subscription 
Enserink, M. (2016, May 27). In dramatic statement, European leaders call for ‘immediate’ 
open access to all scientific papers by 2020. Science. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aag0577 
Fuchs, C., & Sandoval, M. (2013). The Diamond Model of Open Access Publishing: Unions 
and the Publishing World Need to Take Non-Commercial, Non-Profit Open Access 
Serious. TripleC: Communication, Capitalism & Critique. Open Access Journal for a 
Global Sustainable Information Society, 11(2), 428–443. Retrieved from 
https://www.triple-c.at/index.php/tripleC/article/view/502 
Gadd, E., & Troll Covey, D. (2016). What does ‘green’ open access mean? Tracking twelve 
years of changes to journal publisher self-archiving policies. Journal of Librarianship 
and Information Science. https://doi.org/10.1177/0961000616657406 
Gargouri, Y., Larivière, V., Gingras, Y., Carr, L., & Harnad, S. (2012). Green and Gold Open 
Access Percentages and Growth, by Discipline. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1206.3664 
Green, T. (2017). We’ve failed: Pirate black open access is trumping green and gold and we 
must change our approach. Learned Publishing, 30(4), 325–329. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/leap.1116 
Hammarfelt, B., de Rijcke, S., & Rushforth, A. D. (2016). Quantified academic selves: the 
gamification of research through social networking services. Information Research, 
21(2). Retrieved from http://www.informationr.net/ir/21-2/SM1.html 
Harnad, S. (2001). The self-archiving initiative. Nature, 410(6832), 1024–1025. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/35074210 
Haschak, P. G. (2007). The “platinum route” to open access: a case study of E-JASL: The 
Electronic Journal of Academic and Special Librarianship. Information Research, 12(4). 
Retrieved from http://www.informationr.net/ir/12-4/paper321.html 
Himmelstein, D. S., Rodriguez Romero, A., Levernier, J. G., Munro, T. A., McLaughlin, S. R., 
Greshake Tzovaras, B., & Greene, C. S. (2018). Sci-Hub provides access to nearly all 
scholarly literature. ELife, 7. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32822 
Jamali, H. R. (2017). Copyright compliance and infringement in ResearchGate full-text 
journal articles. Scientometrics, 112(1), 241–254. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-017-
2291-4 
Jamali, H. R., & Nabavi, M. (2015). Open access and sources of full-text articles in Google 
Scholar in different subject fields. Scientometrics, 105(3), 1635–1651. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-015-1642-2 
Khabsa, M., & Giles, C. L. (2014). The number of scholarly documents on the public web. 
PloS One, 9(5), e93949. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0093949 
Kingsley, D. (2013). Walking in quicksand – keeping up with copyright agreements [Blog 
Post]. Retrieved from https://aoasg.org.au/2013/05/23/walking-in-quicksand-keeping-
up-with-copyright-agreements/ 
Kingsley, D. (2017). Whose money is it anyway? Managing offset agreements [Blog Post]. 
Retrieved from https://unlockingresearch-blog.lib.cam.ac.uk/?p=1458 
Kramer, B., & Bosman, J. (2018, January 9). Data from: Open access levels: a quantitative 
exploration using Web of Science and oaDOI data. 
https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.1143707 
Laakso, M., & Björk, B.-C. (2013). Delayed open access: An overlooked high-impact 
category of openly available scientific literature. Journal of the American Society for 
 36 
 
Information Science and Technology, 64(7), 1323–1329. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.22856 
Laakso, M., & Lindman, J. (2016). Journal copyright restrictions and actual open access 
availability: a study of articles published in eight top information systems journals 
(2010–2014). Scientometrics, 109(2), 1167–1189. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-016-
2078-z 
Laakso, M., & Polonioli, A. (2018). Open access in ethics research: an analysis of open 
access availability and author self-archiving behaviour in light of journal copyright 
restrictions. Scientometrics, 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-018-2751-5 
Lawson, S. (2018). Report on offset agreements: evaluating current Jisc Collections deals. 
Year 2 – evaluating 2016 deals. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/10760/31711 
Martín-Martín, A., Costas, R., van Leeuwen, T., & Delgado López-Cózar, E. (2018). Dataset: 
sources of free full text found by Google Scholar for documents in Web of Science 
published in 2009 and 2014 (raw and aggregated). 
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/FSUJY 
Martín-Martín, A., Orduña-Malea, E., Ayllón, J. M., & Delgado-López-Cózar, E. (2014). Does 
Google Scholar contain all highly cited documents (1950-2013)? (EC3 Working Papers 
No. 19). Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.8464 
Martín-Martín, A., Orduna-Malea, E., Ayllón, J. M., & Delgado López-Cózar, E. (2016). A 
two-sided academic landscape: snapshot of highly-cited documents in Google Scholar 
(1950-2013). Revista Española de Documentacion Cientifica, 39(4), e149. 
https://doi.org/10.3989/redc.2016.4.1405 
Martin-Martin, A., Orduna-Malea, E., Harzing, A.-W., & Delgado López-Cózar, E. (2017). 
Can we use Google Scholar to identify highly-cited documents? Journal of Informetrics, 
11(1), 152–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2016.11.008 
Mellor, D. (2016). Rewarding Transparent and Reproducible Scholarship. In 8th Conference 
on Open Access Scholarly Publishing. Retrieved from https://osf.io/6wsc2/wiki/home/ 
Mikki, S., Ruwehy, H. A. Al, Gjesdal, Ø. L., & Zygmuntowska, M. (2018). Filter bubbles in 
interdisciplinary research: a case study on climate and society. Library Hi Tech, LHT-
03-2017-0052. https://doi.org/10.1108/LHT-03-2017-0052 
Mongeon, P., & Paul-Hus, A. (2016). The journal coverage of Web of Science and Scopus: a 
comparative analysis. Scientometrics, 106(1), 213–228. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-
015-1765-5 
Mussell, J., & Croft, R. (2013). Discovery Layers and the Distance Student: Online Search 
Habits of Students. Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance Learning, 7(1–
2), 18–39. https://doi.org/10.1080/1533290X.2012.705561 
Nicholas, D., Boukacem-Zeghmouri, C., Rodríguez-Bravo, B., Xu, J., Watkinson, A., Abrizah, 
A., … Świgoń, M. (2017). Where and how early career researchers find scholarly 
information. Learned Publishing, 30(1), 19–29. https://doi.org/10.1002/leap.1087 
Norris, M., Oppenheim, C., & Rowland, F. (2008). The citation advantage of open-access 
articles. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
59(12), 1963–1972. https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.20898 
Orduna-Malea, E., Ayllón, J. M., Martín-Martín, A., & Delgado López-Cózar, E. (2015). 
Methods for estimating the size of Google Scholar. Scientometrics, 104(3), 931–949. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-015-1614-6 
Orduna-Malea, E., Martín-Martín, A., & Delgado López-Cózar, E. (2016). Metrics in 
academic profiles: a new addictive game for researchers? Revista Espanola de Salud 
Publica, 90, e1–e5. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27653216 
Orduna-Malea, E., Martín-Martín, A., & Delgado López-Cózar, E. (2017). Google Scholar as 
a source for scholarly evaluation: a bibliographic review of database errors. Revista 
Española de Documentación Científica, 40(4), e185. 
https://doi.org/10.3989/redc.2017.4.1500 
Pitol, S. P., & De Groote, S. L. (2014). Google Scholar versions: do more versions of an 
article mean greater impact? Library Hi Tech, 32(4), 594–611. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/LHT-05-2014-0039 
 37 
 
Piwowar, H., Priem, J., Larivière, V., Alperin, J. P., Matthias, L., Norlander, B., … Haustein, 
S. (2017, August 1). Data from: The State of OA: A large-scale analysis of the 
prevalence and impact of Open Access articles. 
https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.837902 
Piwowar, H., Priem, J., Larivière, V., Alperin, J. P., Matthias, L., Norlander, B., … Haustein, 
S. (2018). The state of OA: a large-scale analysis of the prevalence and impact of Open 
Access articles. PeerJ, 6, e4375. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.4375 
Poynder, R. (2018). Preface. In U. Herb & J. Schöpfel (Eds.), Open Divide? Critical Studies 
on Open Access. Sacramento, CA: Litwin Books, LLC. Retrieved from 
https://poynder.blogspot.com.es/2018/01/preface-open-divide.html 
Prosser, D. C. (2003). From here to there: a proposed mechanism for transforming journals 
from closed to open access. Learned Publishing, 16(3), 163–166. 
https://doi.org/10.1087/095315103322110923 
Rogers, A. (2017, March 12). It’s gonna get a lot easier to break science journal paywalls. 
Wired. Retrieved from https://www.wired.com/story/its-gonna-get-a-lot-easier-to-break-
science-journal-paywalls/ 
Science-Metrix Inc. (2018). Open access availability of scientific publications. Retrieved from 
http://www.science-metrix.com/en/oa-report 
Smith, E., Haustein, S., Mongeon, P., Shu, F., Ridde, V., & Larivière, V. (2017). Knowledge 
sharing in global health research – the impact, uptake and cost of open access to 
scholarly literature. Health Research Policy and Systems, 15(1), 73. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12961-017-0235-3 
STM. (n.d.). STM publishers and ResearchGate. Retrieved from http://www.stm-
assoc.org/stm-publishers-researchgate/stm-and-researchgate/ 
STM. (2017). STM proposal – RG platform to become consistent with usage and access 
rights for article sharing. Retrieved from 
https://www.elsevier.com/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/509068/STM_letter_ResearchGat
e.20170916.pdf 
Suber, P. (2008a, April 29). Strong and weak OA. Retrieved from 
http://legacy.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/2008/04/strong-and-weak-oa.html 
Suber, P. (2008b, August 2). Gratis and libre open access. SPARC Open Access 
Newsletter. Retrieved from https://sparcopen.org/our-work/gratis-and-libre-open-
access/ 
Teplitzky, S. (2017). Open Data, [Open] Access: Linking Data Sharing and Article Sharing in 
the Earth Sciences. Journal of Librarianship and Scholarly Communication, 5(General 
Issue), eP2150. https://doi.org/10.7710/2162-3309.2150 
Tickell, A., Jubb, M., Plume, A., Oeben, S., Brammer, L., Johnson, R., … Pinfield, S. (2017). 
Monitoring the Transition To Open. Retrieved from 
http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/policy-and-analysis/reports/Pages/monitoring-transition-
open-access-2017.aspx 
Tijssen, R., Nederhof, A., van Leeuwen, T., Hollanders, H., Kanerva, M., & van den Berg, P. 
(2010). Wetenschaps- en Technologie- Indicatoren 2010. Retrieved from 
http://nowt.merit.unu.edu/docs/NOWT-WTI_2010.pdf 
van Leeuwen, T., Meijer, I., Yegros-Yegros, A., & Costas, R. (2017). Developing indicators 
on Open Access by combining evidence from diverse data sources. In STI 2017. Open 
indicators: innovation, participation and actor-based STI Indicators. Retrieved from 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.02827 
van Leeuwen, T. N., Moed, H. F., Tijssen, R. J. W., Visser, M. S., & Van Raan, A. F. J. 
(2001). Language biases in the coverage of the Science Citation Index and its 
consequences for international comparisons of national research performance. 
Scientometrics, 51(1), 335–346. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010549719484 
Van Noorden, R. (2014a). Online collaboration: Scientists and the social network. Nature, 
512(7513), 126–129. https://doi.org/10.1038/512126a 
Van Noorden, R. (2014b, November 7). Google Scholar pioneer on search engine’s future. 
Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature.2014.16269 
 38 
 
Walker, T. J. (1998). Free Internet Access to Traditional Journals. American Scientist, 86(5), 
463–471. https://doi.org/10.2307/27857100 
 
