 ORIGINAL ARTICLE
The dark side of the red ape: male-mediated lethal female
competition in Bornean orangutans
Anna M. Marzec1 & Julia A. Kunz1 & Sonja Falkner1 & Sri Suci Utami Atmoko2 &
Shauhin E. Alavi3 & Alysse M. Moldawer3 & Erin R. Vogel3 & Caroline Schuppli1 &
Carel P. van Schaik1 & Maria A. van Noordwijk1
Received: 4 September 2015 /Revised: 15 December 2015 /Accepted: 20 December 2015
# Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2016
Abstract Female Bornean orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus
wurmbii) are mainly solitary and philopatric, leading to adult
female relatives sharing adjacent and overlapping home
ranges. Females tend to be intolerant of unrelated females,
with whom they also may have overlapping home ranges.
However, fights that lead to injuries are extremely rare and
lethal aggression had never been observed. Here, we report the
first case of lethal female-female aggression during over 26,
000 h of focal data collected on adult females at Tuanan,
Central Kalimantan: A young female, who had recently lost
her infant, attacked an old resident female. The interaction’s
unique feature was that the attacking female was supported by
an unflanged male, who had been in consort with her during
the week preceding the attack and was responsible for the
lethal injuries to the victim. The victim received protection
from a flanged male who was probably attracted to the noise
generated by the fight. We conclude that even in a species in
which coercion is frequently observed in male-female interac-
tions, female leverage over males can coax males into provid-
ing services, such as coalitionary support.
Keywords Orangutan . Lethal aggression . Coalitionary
attack . Female-female competition . Male support
Introduction
Aggression serves ultimately to gain access to limiting re-
sources (Wilson 1975). Although aggression among pri-
mates is frequent, lethal attacks are very rare. Young in-
fants are the most likely victims of such attacks in many
primate species (van Schaik 2000), whereas weaned indi-
viduals are far less likely to be a target of lethal aggression.
Among adults, escalated dyadic fights can turn lethal, as
when males attempt to take over a group controlled by
another male (e.g., Wich and Sterck 2007), but in the ma-
jority of lethal attacks on mature conspecifics, the aggres-
sors attack together and outnumber the victims. Indeed,
such joint coalitionary attacks have been reported in chim-
panzees (Pan troglodytes: Mitani et al. 2010; Wilson et al.
2014), red colobus (Procolobus badius: Starin 1994), ca-
puchin monkeys (Cebus spp.: Miller 1998; Gros-Louis
et al. 2003; Scarry and Tujague 2012), muriquis
(Brachyteles arachnoides: Talebi et al. 2009), and spider
Communicated by R. Noë
Significance statement In this paper, we report the first observed case of
female-female lethal aggression in orangutans. This case was extraordi-
nary because the attacking young female recruited the help of a male, who
caused the injuries that eventually killed the old, resident female. The old
female that was attacked subsequently received protection from a male.
The males were thus in effect acting as hired guns. The effective recruit-
ment of males into conflicts between females is novel and unique among
apes. It shows an unsuspected degree of leverage of sexually attractive
females over unrelated males and can coax males into providing services,
such as coalitionary support, in a species otherwise better known for their
sexual coercion by males.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s00265-015-2053-3) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users.
* Anna M. Marzec
anna.marzec@aim.uzh.ch
1
Anthropological Institute and Museum, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland
2
Universitas Nasional Jakarta, Jl. Sawo Manila, Jakarta 12520,
Indonesia
3
Department of Anthropology, Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, 32 Bishop Street, Biological Science Bldg, Room 307, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901-1414, USA
Behav Ecol Sociobiol
DOI 10.1007/s00265-015-2053-3
 monkeys (Ateles geoffroyi: Campbell 2006; Valero et al.
2006). In most cases, mature victims were killed by
same-sex coalitions, and most victims were males. In the
best-studied cases, involving chimpanzees, attackers great-
ly outnumber victims and favor unprovoked, Bsurprise^
aggression. Both tactics serve to reduce individual risk
through use of an imbalance of power (Wrangham 1999;
Wrangham and Glowacki 2012). A major feature of these
joint coalitional killings is that the attackers ignore victim’s
signals of submission and seem to be focused on inflicting
wounds rather than just chasing the opponent away from
the resource (e.g., food or mate).
Here, we report a case of lethal aggression in Bornean
orangutans that deviates from this typical pattern of joint
coalitionary attacks. Instead, males joined ongoing female-
female agonistic interactions. Even though males sometimes
join or interfere in such interactions in other primates (e.g.,
Gouzoules 1980; Seyfarth 1978), these cases have so far never
been reported to result in the death of a female victim. Here,
two males were involved: one provided active support for the
aggressor and the other protected the victim.
Female Bornean orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii)
are philopatric, whereas males disperse from their natal range
(Morrogh-Bernard et al. 2011; Arora et al. 2012; van
Noordwijk et al. 2012). Female home ranges are relatively
small (around 300 ha in Tuanan, Central Kalimantan) and
stable over time (Wartmann et al. 2010). Maternally related
females (mothers, daughters, half-sisters and their offspring,
which know each other since birth) tend to have adjacent and
overlapping ranges and form social clusters (Arora et al. 2012;
van Noordwijk et al. 2012), as in Sumatran orangutans
(Pongo abelii: Singleton and van Schaik 2002). Related fe-
males spend more time in association and are more tolerant
towards each other than to unrelated females with similar
home range overlap (van Noordwijk et al. 2012).
Nonetheless, home ranges, as well as core areas (>50 % use)
of related and unrelated females (here defined as females
descended from different maternal grandmothers), may over-
lap to a similar degree in Tuanan (Wartmann et al. 2010; van
Noordwijk et al. 2012), in apparent contrast to some other
Bornean sites (Knott et al. 2008, 2010).
Although between-matriline intolerance resulted in a few
observed cases of female-inflicted non-lethal injuries in
Sumatran orangutans (SSUA unpublished data), only six
female-female attacks with physical contact have been ob-
served in Tuanan in 11 years of study. In one of these, both
the aggressor and the victim of the encounter described here
were involved. However, none of these six attacks resulted in
visible injuries (current study: Table A Supplement). Given
the modest intensity of aggression and low incidence of
wounding when a female attacks another female independent-
ly, support by a male, with their much longer canines, may
strongly increase the severity of injuries.
Methods
The lethal attack took place at Tuanan (2° 15′ South, 114° 44′
East), which is situated in the Mawas Reserve, Central
Kalimantan, Indonesia. The research area consists of 750 ha
of peat-swamp forest, previously subjected to commercial se-
lective logging in the 1990s and recovering since then. The
orangutans live at a density of approximately 4.5 individuals
per square kilometer (van Schaik et al. 2005), which is among
the highest in Borneo (Husson et al. 2009). All resident indi-
vidual orangutans in Tuanan are habituated.
Orangutans are followed during nest-to-nest follows,
whenever possible for a maximum of ten consecutive days,
using focal animal sampling following standardized protocols
(cf. van Schaik 1999; http://www.aim.uzh.ch/research/
orangutannetwork/sfm.html). It was not possible to record
data blind because our study involved focal animals in the
field. Observers frequently conduct inter-observer reliability
tests. This population has been intensively studied since 2003,
and most of the individuals, especially the resident females
and their offspring, have been observed since this time.
Their relatedness, social relationships, and ranging patterns
are already largely known (Arora et al. 2012; van Noordwijk
et al. 2012; Ashbury 2013). By the time of the attack on July
13, 2014, over 26,000 h of focal data had been collected on
adult females.
The participants
Four adult individuals, two females and two males, as well as
one immature male were involved in the attacks reported here
(Table 1). Kondor, the attacker, is a young female who was
known since 2003 when she was estimated to be around 4–
5 years old and still nursed by her mother. She gave birth to
her first infant in February 2012, but it died 6–9 weeks before
the attack. In the 2 weeks before the attack, Kondor was reg-
ularly seen in association with various flanged and unflanged
males. Just before the attack, she had been followed for seven
consecutive days, during the last five of which she was in a
consortship with unflanged male Ekko.
Sidony, the victim, was an adult, resident female ranging in
the southeastern part of the study area. To our knowledge,
unlike most other females in the study population, Sidony’s
home range did not overlap with those of adult female mater-
nal relatives. She had at least two daughters: the younger,
adolescent one had not yet settled in her own range, while
the older one, born around 1997, has not been seen with cer-
tainty since early 2006. Despite her advanced age, Sidony had
a healthy 4-year-old son at the time of the attack. She spent
little time in association with her unrelated female neighbors
(0.3 % of her 768 h of focal time up to the attack, compared to
almost 2 % on average for females with maternally related
neighbors (see also Fig. 1)), despite their overlapping home
Behav Ecol Sociobiol
 ranges (van Noordwijk et al. 2012). Only two previous en-
counters between Sidony and Kondor were witnessed, and
these occurred when Kondor was still an adolescent. During
one of these encounters in 2009, Sidony chased, hit, and bit
Kondor, who was repeatedly approaching Sidony’s ca. 7-year-
old daughter, whereas Kondor persisted in her attempts to
approach. Thus, the two females had already a history of ag-
gressive interactions.
Ekko has been regularly recorded throughout the study area
since 2003, and by 2014, he was larger in body size than all
known females and dominant over all other regularly seen
unflanged males. Moreover, changes in his facial features as
well as behavior suggest that he was already in the process of
growing flanges (by August 2015, he had fully developed
flanges) (cf. Dunkel et al. 2013; Marty et al. 2015). Over the
years, Ekko was often observed in association with resident
females (during 31.5 % of 534 h of focal follow hours on Ekko
since 2003), including Sidony.
The final participant, flanged male Guapo, was first
seen in the area in 2007 and again in 2012. Since then,
he was recorded only rarely (on average twice a year).
However, Guapo has sired two offspring with females
ranging at the periphery of the study area before the start
of observations in 2003. Neither Guapo nor Ekko sired
any of Sidony’s known offspring, and the mature partici-
pants in the attack were not related (M. Krützen, pers.
comm.; see also Arora et al. 2012).
Results
We distinguish two phases of the encounter: before and after
the arrival of the flanged male. Figure 2 provides a timeline of
the attack (see also Table B in the supplementary material for a
detailed description of the encounter).
Phase I: coalitionary attack
During a focal follow of the female Kondor and the unflanged
male Ekko, who were in association, they encountered (de-
fined as an approach within 50 m) Sidony and Sony in the core
area of Sidony’s home range. Initially, Kondor and Ekko
approached to within 10 m and Sidony did not retreat right
away. After about 10 min, Ekko sexually inspected Sidony but
returned to Kondor to mate with her, whereas Sidony started
to move away. Kondor then interrupted her mating with Ekko,
approached Sidony, and physically attacked her. Immediately,
Ekko joined Kondor in the attack, which continued for 33 min
(see Fig. 2) with two brief interruptions. During the first fight,
Kondor and Ekko took turns attacking Sidony for 12 min.
When one was involved in physical aggression, the other
Table 1
Participants of the attack
Individual
Class
Age
Knowna since
Role in the attack
Sidony
Adult female with infant
>35
2007
Target of the aggression; suffered fatal injuries; protected
her infant and tried to escape multiple times, but did not
actively defend herself
Sony
Male dependent immature
4.5
Born March 2010
Sidony’s son; not the target of the attack; not injured; after
Guapo arrived also involved in protecting his mother
(only against Kondor)
Kondor
Young female
ca. 15
2003
Main aggressor: initiated, sustained and prolonged the
aggression; inflicted a number of injuries
Ekko
Unflanged male
>25
2003
Aggressor: supported Kondor; inflicted a number of major
and life-threatening injuries
Guapo
Flanged male
>35
2007
BDefender^: protected the victim in an active, but
non-aggressive way; his intervention kept Ekko at bay
and reduced the physical aggression directed at the
victim by Kondor
a Reliably recognized and subject to focal follows when found
0
20
40
60
80
100
alone
males
fem/adol
% focal days w/ association
Kondor
Juni
Desy
Jinak
Sidony
N=43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N=58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N=31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N=59 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N=20 
 
Fig. 1 Comparison of the % of nest-to-nest follow days that a female
with a 0–3-year-old infant was not in association with any other indepen-
dently traveling individual, with a male (unflanged or flanged) or with
another female (with or without offspring) or adolescent. Females are in
order of known parity: Kondor with 1 infant (died), Desy and Juni with 2,
and Jinak and Sidony with more. Note on the same day a female can be in
association with males and females. Kondor vs Juni days with female
association χ2 = 4.58, df = 1, P = 0.03
Behav Ecol Sociobiol
 watched and blocked the victim’s escape, leaving no more
than 45 s pause in between. In addition, on two occasions,
Kondor and Ekko simultaneously attacked the victim. The
attack therefore was coalitionary, continuous, and coordinat-
ed. Two subsequent attacks took place, lasting 9 and 7 min,
respectively. All attack sessions were initiated by Kondor, but
Ekko inflicted the most serious injuries and was most effective
in denying Sidony the chance to escape.
Phase II: intervention
The dynamics of the fight changed when the flanged male
Guapo arrived, from likely >100 m away, because Ekko
retreated from the fight location (>10 but still <50 m distance).
Guapo briefly chased Ekko and then mated with Sidony, while
Kondor continued to harass her and even bit Sidony in her
foot. Whenever Kondor attacked Sidony, Sidony would
scream, which prompted Guapo to approach and either move
towards Kondor, position himself between the females, or
move away together with Sidony. Whereas 85 % of the attacks
were physical in phase I, only 2 % were physical in phase II,
after Guapo’s arrival (Table 2). Moreover, all remaining
attacks in phase II were by Kondor alone. Sidony sustained
major injuries in phase I but only minor scratches and bites in
phase II. This confirms that Ekko caused the most serious
injuries and that Guapo was effective in protecting Sidony
against additional damaging attacks.
About 45 min after the last attack (Fig. 2), Sidony began
building a nest, while all other participants were feeding. All
individuals made a nest within 50 m of each other, with Guapo
in between Sidony and Kondor whereas Ekko’s nest was far-
ther away.
Subsequent events
On the morning of day 2, Kondor left her nest and immedi-
ately approached Sidony, but Guapo intervened instantly and
mated with the victim. Ekko left the association in the morn-
ing. Kondor kept trying to attack Sidony, but Guapo inter-
vened every time and interrupted physical contact between
the females. Kondor left Sidony (>50 m) at the end of the
day and was followed by Guapo. Both Sidony and Sony fre-
quently groomed and licked her wounds.
Fig. 2 Diagram of the aggression
Table 2 Result of flanged male
intervention
Before intervention
After intervention
Duration of aggression
33 min
61 min
Total time of physical aggression
28 min
1 min 20 s
Aggressors
Ekko, Kondor
Kondor
Type of attack
Continuous, coordinated, and coalitionary
Brief, single attacks
Type of injuries
Serious wounds resulting from bites on
arms and legs; bites and scratches on the
back and head
Minor bite wounds on hands
and feet
Prevented and interrupted attacks
None
All
Unsuccessful attacks
None
Many
Behav Ecol Sociobiol
 On day 3, Kondor came back to Sidony twice and tried to
attack, but Guapo followed Kondor and intervened. All of his
interventions were non-aggressive, as on previous occasions.
Kondor eventually left, followed by Guapo. Guapo was not
observed to mate with Kondor that or any other day following
the attack.
On day 5, Ekko came back alone to the location of the
attack, where Sidony was still present, since she had not
moved. Ekko did not attack her. On day 6, Ekko revisited
the location of the attack again and watched Sidony for
30 min from a distance of 15 m. He did not approach her
nor was he aggressive towards her.
On day 10, Sidony’s offspring Sony left and nested alone
over 100 m away from his mother and did not approach within
50 m for the subsequent days. Sidony was last seen alive on
day 12. She was found dead on the ground on day 16. The
stage of decomposition suggested she died one or at most
2 days before she was found, about 2 weeks after the attack.
Sidony’s infant Sony has been seen since the attack and was
observed in March and April 2015 in association with his ado-
lescent sister, indicating he had survived without his mother. He
was around 4.5 years old at the time of her death and not yet
weaned, whereas so far the youngest known immature to be
completely weaned in Tuanan was 5.5–6 years (van Noordwijk
et al. 2013). Kondor has frequently been seen throughout the
study area since the attack. She showed clear sign of pregnancy
(and a human pregnancy test was positive) in November 2014
and gave birth in early April 2015. Therefore, she conceived
around the time of the attack or shortly afterwards and within
only 2–3 months after losing her first offspring.
Discussion
Lethal aggression among adult primates is rare. Individual
attacks that turn lethal are most likely in territorial species
(Palombit 1993), but orangutans are not territorial, and aggres-
sion among males is far more likely to escalate than that
among females (Table A Supplement). Male-male fights in
orangutans are always dyadic and are known to lead to facial
scars, missing fingers and toes, and even death (Knott 1998;
Dunkel et al. 2013). In group-living species, dyadic conflicts,
although much more common, are much less likely to have
lethal outcomes than conflicts involving same-sex coalitions,
suggesting that the greater imbalance of power produced by
the numerical asymmetries is a key factor.
The orangutan case reported here in which a female was the
victim does not comfortably fit the pattern of joint coalitional
killings seen in other primates. The attack involved between-
sex coalitions, with males providing agonistic support to the
females: one supporting the aggressor and other protecting the
victim. This is quite unexpected, as wild orangutan males and
females have never been reported to form coalitions before.
Moreover, in this population, females spend little time in as-
sociation (Fig. 1) with males, except during a few months
prior to conception (Mitra Setia et al. 2009), i.e., once per
ca. 7 years. Although captive studies report male interventions
in female conflicts, these were peaceful and tended to termi-
nate aggression (Edwards and Snowdon 1980; Zucker 1987),
whereas in another study the interventions in female-female
agonism were by a female or a juvenile male (Tajima and
Kurotori 2010). There are no reported cases of male interven-
tion in female conflicts from the studies on wild orangutan
populations. In fact, in Tuanan, only one other male interven-
tion in a between-female conflict has been observed so far (B.
Spillmann pers. comm.). Nonetheless, because females
attacking alone are not known to severely injure other females,
the explanation for the lethal outcome of the attack should be
sought in its mixed-sex nature and imbalance of power during
the first phase of the attack.
Fundamentally, the observed polyadic interaction is an ex-
pression of female-female competition as the aggression was
initiated, prolonged, and maintained by Kondor against
Sidony. Indeed, Kondor continued with physical harassment
even after the departure of her male coalition partner, while
her partner, Ekko, was not aggressive towards Sidony during a
subsequent encounter a few days after the attack, once Kondor
was no longer in association with Ekko.
Previous observations at Tuanan showed that female-
female competition over range use is intense. Adult female
Bornean orangutans are not territorial, i.e., they do not have
an Bexclusive use^ area that is defended. Instead, they estab-
lish overlapping home ranges, where mothers spend much of
their time alone and only in the company of their own
(semi-)dependent offspring. Thus, within their overlapping
ranges, females mostly do avoid close encounters especially
across matrilines (van Noordwijk et al. 2012). In 2002–2003,
an adult female (Sumi) with dependent offspring (Susi) lost
her habitat due to logging, mining, and fires. Over a period of
several years, she shifted her range into the study area where
she had no maternal relatives (Arora et al. 2012). Sumi
avoided close encounters by remaining very quiet and upon
discovery descended to the ground and moved away as incon-
spicuously as possible (cf. Ashbury et al. 2015). Even though
the resident females chased her whenever they discovered her,
Sumi always immediately fled and physical fights were never
observed. Sumi eventually died in August 2006 as a result of
the attack by a clouded leopard (SSUA unpublished data).
In the current case, the female-female interaction escalated
between two residents in different phases of their lives, one
old and one early in her reproductive career. Kondor, a young
member of the largest local matriline, had recently lost her first
infant. In general, adolescent females start to explore beyond
their natal home range but settle where they least encountered
other females, including their own mother, before the birth of
their first offspring (Ashbury 2013). However, after the birth
Behav Ecol Sociobiol
 of her first infant, Kondor still ranged over a larger area than
all other known females in similar reproductive state (AM et
al. unpublished data). In addition, compared to other mothers
with offspring under 3 years old during the same period (July
2010–July 2014), Kondor spent fewer days alone and she
associated on many more days with other females and adoles-
cents (Fig. 1). While social play is the major positive social
interaction during associations of orangutan mother-offspring
dyads (van Noordwijk et al. 2012), Kondor’s high association
rate was not due to more frequent social play with associates
by Kondor and/or her offspring compared to other mother-
offspring dyads (Kunz 2015). On the other hand, there is no
evidence that Kondor was more often agonistically displaced
by other females. Nevertheless, the high encounter frequency
does suggest that Kondor was experiencing increased pressure
from the other resident females and adolescents (mostly her
known maternal relatives).
Infant mortality in wild orangutans is reported to be much
lower than that in other great apes (Wich et al. 2009). In the
Tuanan population, Kondor’s infant is the first to have died in
1084 infant observation months (including all pre-weaned
known offspring) or a rate of 0.011 deaths/infant-year. Even
though the circumstances of the loss of her infant remain un-
clear (it seemed healthy at last sighting), it is likely that
Kondor’s particular condition contributed to her unusual, ag-
gressive behavior. Her consortship with a long-known partner
may have contributed to her confidence to fiercely attack the
female she had occasionally encountered before and was
chased and hit by on at least one occasion when Kondor had
just started to roam without her mother in 2009.
Without the involvement of Ekko, it is unlikely that Sidony
would have incurred such severe wounds, and the fight would
probably have ended within the first 7 min (see Table B
Supplement), during one of the breaks in which Sidony started
to move away. Ekko’s active participation in the attack on
Sidony can be interpreted as his investment in the consortship
with Kondor. It should be noted that at no time did Ekko
attempt to copulate with the victim (he had inspected her
briefly before the attack and shown no further interest), and
we can therefore reject the interpretation that his injuring
Sidony represented extreme force during a forced mating at-
tempt (which have also never been reported to lead to injury).
The observation that Ekko did not attack or try to mate with
Sidony a few days later when he was on his own supports this
argument. Thus, Ekko’s participation in the lethal aggression
was not due to a mating conflict with Sidony but instead
elicited by the presence and actions of the consorted female.
Ekko and Kondor were ranging together for 5 days before
the attack. It is likely that to maintain this association and to
increase his chances to sire Kondor’s next offspring, which
was conceived around that time, Ekko supported her during
the attack. Benefits from maintaining a tolerant association
with a female may include more cooperative mating
opportunities, in contrast to coerced matings more often seen
during short associations (Dunkel et al. 2013). Therefore,
Ekko’s behavior can be explained as his investment in main-
taining the association with Kondor. By supporting her and
showing his fighting abilities, he could influence her choice to
willingly maintain her consortship with him.
Young females are known to use sexual proceptivity as a
Bsexual passport^ (e.g., Goodall 1986). By attracting males
and associating with them, a young female gains safety to
move throughout an area outside her natal range without being
at risk of potential aggression from unfamiliar resident fe-
males (Ashbury 2013).
In the attack reported here, Guapo intervened in the conflict
and separated the aggressors and the victim multiple times over
a period of 3 days. Guapo’s intervention included threatening
the unflanged male, which is nothing unusual as many male
agonistic interactions start in the presence of a female (Utami
Atmoko et al. 2009). Guapo also approached the female aggres-
sor, positioning himself between the two females separating
them and Bguarding^ the victim, again something not very un-
usual (e.g., Edwards and Snowdon 1980). None of the actions
against Kondor involved aggression on his part, but each either
terminated the aggression or prevented physical contact between
her and Sidony. A male’s interest in securing his access to mul-
tiple females may explain Guapo’s effort in protecting one fe-
male, with whom he may have had a long-term relationship
without attacking the other, young one. Nevertheless, perhaps
surprisingly, Guapo was not seen to mate with Kondor during or
after the attack, nor did he remain in consortship with her after
Guapo and Kondor left Sidony together on the third day.
Conclusion
Male-female coalitions have not been described for wild orang-
utans and must therefore be extremely rare. The most plausible
interpretation of the lethal attack here is that males in consort
with a female must not only show great tolerance, as when
females take food from them (van Noordwijk and van Schaik
2009), but can also be recruited to support them in their com-
petition with other females, including participation in attacks.
This suggests that fertile females have great leverage (Lewis
2002) over males, if only because they can end the association
by attracting other males, and thus can elicit male services on
her behalf, in the form of food sharing or agonistic support.
This is all the more remarkable because of the huge sexual
dimorphism and high potential for sexual coercion in orangu-
tans, as reflected by the high proportion of matings that are
forced (Fox 2002), especially on Borneo (Knott et al. 2010).
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the Indonesian Insti-
tute of Science (LIPI), the Indonesian State Ministry for Research and
Technology (RISTEK), the Director General Departemen Kehutanan
Behav Ecol Sociobiol
 (PHKA), Departamen Dalam Negri, the local government in Central Ka-
limantan, the BKSDA Palangkaraya, the Bornean Orangutan Survival
Foundation (BOSF), and the MAWAS in Palangkaraya for their permis-
sion and support to conduct this research. We also thank the Fakultas
Biologi Universitas Nasional (UNAS) in Jakarta for their collaboration
and support for the Tuanan project and in particular Dr. Tatang Mitra
Setia. We are indebted to the Tuanan field team for their contribution to
data collection, in particular Pak Rahmatd, Pak Yandi, Tono, Idun,
Kumpo, Suwi, Abuk, and Wilhelm Osterman as well as many local and
foreign students and their financial supporters. For major financial sup-
port, we thank the University of Zurich, the A.H. Schultz Stiftung, Phil-
adelphia Zoo, as well as USAID (APS-497-11-000001 to E.R.V.). This
research complied with the current national laws of Indonesia. We also
thank the two anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback.
Compliance with ethical standards
All applicable international, na-
tional, and/or institutional guidelines for the care and use of animals were
followed. This article does not contain any studies with human partici-
pants performed by any of the authors.
Funding
This study was funded by the University of Zurich (grant
number not available), A.H. Schultz-Stiftung zur Förderung
Primatologischer Forschung (grant number not available), United States
Agency for International Development (USA) (APS-497-11-000001),
and Philadelphia Zoo (grant number not available).
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
References
Arora N, van Noordwijk MA, Ackermann C et al (2012) Parentage-based
pedigree reconstruction reveals female matrilineal clusters and male-
biased dispersal in nongregarious Asian great apes, the Bornean
orang-utans (Pongo pygmaeus). Mol Ecol 21:3352–3362
Ashbury A (2013) Not all who wander are lost: the socio-spatial dynam-
ics of home range establishment among young female orangutans
(Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii) at Tuanan. MSc Thesis, University of
Zurich
Ashbury AM, Posa MRC, Dunkel LP, Spillmann B, Utami Atmoko SS,
van Schaik CP, van Noordwijk MA (2015) Why do orangutans
leave the trees? Terrestrial behavior among wild Bornean orangutans
(Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii) at Tuanan, Central Kalimantan. Am J
Primatol 77:1216–1229
Campbell CJ (2006) Lethal intragroup aggression by adult male spider
monkeys (Ateles geoffroyi). Am J Primatol 68:1197–1201
Dunkel LP, Arora N, van Noordwijk MA, Utami Atmoko SS, Putra AP,
Krützen M, van Schaik CP (2013) Variation in developmental arrest
among male orangutans: a comparison between a Sumatran and a
Bornean population. Front Zool 10:12
Edwards SD, Snowdon CT (1980) Social behavior of captive, group-
living orangutans. Int J Primatol 1:39–62
Fox EA (2002) Female tactics to reduce sexual harassment in the
Sumatran orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus abelii). Behav Ecol
Sociobiol 52:93–101
Goodall J (1986) The chimpanzees of gombe. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge
Gouzoules H (1980) A description of genealogical rank changes in a
troop of Japanese monkeys (Macaca fuscata). Primates 21:262–267
Gros-Louis J, Perry S, Manson J (2003) Violent coalitionary attacks and
intraspecific killing in wild white-faced capuchin monkeys (Cebus
capucinus). Primates 44:341–346
Husson SJ, Wich SA, Marshall AJ et al (2009) Orangutan distribution,
density, abundance and impacts of disturbance. In: Wich SA, Utami
Atmoko SS, Mitra Setia T, van Schaik CP (eds) Orangutans: geo-
graphic variation in behavioral ecology and conservation. Oxford
University Press, New York, pp 77–96
Knott CD (1998) Orangutans in the wild. National Geographic, http://
ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2008/11/orangutans/knott-text.
Accessed 14 Aug 2015
Knott CD, Beaudrot L, Snaith T, White S, Tschauner H, Planansky G
(2008) Female-female competition in Bornean orangutans. Int J
Primatol 29:975–997
Knott CD, Thompson E, Stumpf MR, McIntyre MH (2010) Female re-
productive strategies in orangutans, evidence for female choice and
counterstrategies to infanticide in a species with frequent sexual
coercion. Proc R Soc Lond B 277:105–113
Kunz JA (2015) Ontogeny and variability of play behaviour in wild,
immature Bornean (Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii) and Sumatran
orangutans (Pongo abelii). MSc Thesis, University of Zurich
Lewis RJ (2002) Beyond dominance: the importance of leverage. Q Rev
Biol 77:149–164
Marty PR, Cadilek M, Dunkel LP, Agil M, Heistermann M, Willems EP,
van Noordwijk MA, Weingrill T (2015) Endocrinological
morrelates of male bimaturism in wild Bornean orangutans. Am J
Primatol 77:1170–1178
Miller L (1998) Fatal attack among wedge-capped bapuchins. Folia
Primatol 69:89–92
Mitani JC, Watts DP, Amsler SJ (2010) Lethal intergroup aggression
leads to territorial expansion in wild chimpanzees. Curr Biol 20:
R507–R508
Mitra Setia T, Delgado RA, Utami Atmoko SS, Singleton I, van Schaik
CP (2009) Social organization and male-female relationships. In:
Wich SA, Utami Atmoko SS, Mitra Setia T, van Schaik CP (eds)
Orangutans: geographic variation in behavioral ecology and conser-
vation. Oxford University Press, New York, pp 235–244
Morrogh-Bernard H, Morf N, Chivers D, Krützen M (2011) Dispersal
patterns of orang-utans (Pongo spp.) in a Bornean peat-swamp for-
est. Int J Primatol 32:362–376
Palombit RA (1993) Lethal territorial aggression in a white-handed gib-
bon. Am J Primatol 31:311–318
Scarry CJ, Tujague MP (2012) Consequences of lethal intragroup aggres-
sion and alpha male replacement on intergroup relations and home
range use in tufted capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella nigritus). Am J
Primatol 74:804–810
Seyfarth RM (1978) Social relationships among adult male and female
baboons. I. Behaviour during sexual consortship. Behaviour 64:
204–226
Singleton I, van Schaik CP (2002) The social organisation of a population
of Sumatran orang-utans. Folia Primatol 73:1–20
Starin ED (1994) Philopatry and affiliation among red colobus.
Behaviour 130:253–270
Tajima T, Kurotori H (2010) Nonaggressive interventions by third parties
in conflicts among captive Bornean orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus).
Primates 51:179–182
Talebi MG, Beltrão-Mendes R, Lee PC (2009) Intra-community
coalitionary lethal attack of an adult male southern muriqui
(Brachyteles arachnoides). Am J Primatol 71:860–867
Utami Atmoko SS, Singleton I, van Noordwijk MA, van Schaik CP,
Mitra Setia T (2009) Male-male relationships in orangutans. In:
Wich SA, Utami Atmoko SS, Mitra Setia T, van Schaik CP
(eds) Orangutans: geographic variation in behavioral ecology
and conservation. Oxford University Press, New York, pp 225–
233
Behav Ecol Sociobiol
 Valero A, Schaffner CM, Vick LG, Aureli F, Ramos-Fernandez G (2006)
Intragroup lethal aggression in wild spider monkeys. Am J Primatol
68:732–737
van Noordwijk MA, van Schaik CP (2009) Intersexual food transfer
among orangutans: do females test males for coercive tendency?
Behav Ecol Sociobiol 63:883–890
van Noordwijk MA, Arora N, Willems EP, Dunkel LP, Amda RN,
Mardianah N, Ackermann C, Krützen M, Schaik CP (2012)
Female philopatry and its social benefits among Bornean orangu-
tans. Behav Ecol Sociobiol 66:823–834
van Noordwijk MA, Willems EP, Utami Atmoko SS, Kuzawa C, van
Schaik CP (2013) Multi-year lactation and its consequences in
Bornean orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus wurmbii). Behav Ecol
Sociobiol 67:805–814
van Schaik CP (1999) The socioecology of fission-fusion sociality in
orangutans. Primates 40:69–86
van Schaik CP (2000) Infanticide by male primates: the sexual selection
hypothesis revisited. In: van Schaik CP, Janson CH (eds) Infanticide
by males and its implications. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp 27–60
van Schaik CP, Wich SA, Utami SS, Odom K (2005) A simple alternative
to line transects of nests for estimating orangutan densities. Primates
46:249–254
Wartmann FM, Purves RS, van Schaik CP (2010) Modelling ranging
behaviour of female orang-utans: a case study in Tuanan, Central
Kalimantan, Indonesia. Primates 51:119–130
Wich S, Sterck E (2007) Familiarity and threat of opponents deter-
mine variation in Thomas langur (Presbytis thomasi) male be-
haviour during between-group encounters. Behaviour 144:
1583–1598
Wich SA, de Vries H, Ancrenaz M, Perkins L, Shumaker RW, Suzuki A,
van Schaik CP (2009) Orangutan life history variation. In: Wich SA,
Utami Atmoko SS, Mitra Setia T, van Schaik CP (eds) Orangutans:
geographic variation in behavioral ecology and conservation.
Oxford University Press, New York, pp 65–75
Wilson EO (1975) Sociobiology. Belknap, Cambridge
Wilson ML, Boesch C, Fruth B et al (2014) Lethal aggression in Pan is
better explained by adaptive strategies than human impacts. Nature
513:414–417
Wrangham RW (1999) Evolution of coalitionary killing. Yearb Phys
Anthropol 42:1–30
Wrangham RW, Glowacki L (2012) Intergroup aggression in chimpan-
zees and war in Nomadic hunter-gatherers. Evaluating the chimpan-
zee model. Hum Nat 23:5–29
Zucker EL (1987) Control of intragroup aggression by a captive male
orangutan. Zoo Biol 6:219–223
Behav Ecol Sociobiol
