 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23 
607
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The term “chronic Lyme disease” is used by some health care 
providers as a diagnosis for various constitutional, musculo-
skeletal, and neuropsychiatric symptoms (1,2). Patients with a 
diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease have been provided a wide 
range of medications as treatment, including long courses of 
intravenous (IV) antibiotics (3,4). Studies have not shown that 
such treatments lead to substantial long-term improvement for 
patients, and they can be harmful (1,5). This report describes 
cases of septic shock, osteomyelitis, Clostridium difficile colitis, 
and paraspinal abscess resulting from treatments for chronic 
Lyme disease. Patients, clinicians, and public health practitio-
ners should be aware that treatments for chronic Lyme disease 
can carry serious risks.
Lyme disease is a well-known condition caused by infection 
with the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato. Features of 
early infection include erythema migrans (an erythematous 
skin lesion with a bull’s-eye or homogeneous appearance), 
fever, headache, and fatigue. If left untreated, the spirochete can 
disseminate throughout the body to cause meningitis, carditis, 
neuropathy, or arthritis (5,6). The recommended treatment for 
Lyme disease is generally a 2–4-week course of antibiotics (5). 
Chronic Lyme disease, on the other hand, is a diagnosis 
that some health care providers use to describe patients with 
a variety of conditions such as fatigue, generalized pain, and 
neurologic disorders. Many of these patients have experienced 
significant debilitation from their symptoms and have not 
found relief after consultation with conventional medical 
practitioners. As a result, some seek treatment from practitio-
ners who might identify themselves as Lyme disease specialists 
(“Lyme literate” doctors) or from complementary and alterna-
tive medicine clinics, where they receive a diagnosis of chronic 
Lyme disease (3,7). 
A diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease might be based solely 
on clinical judgment and without laboratory evidence of 
B. burgdorferi infection, objective signs of infection, or a 
history of possible tick exposure in an area with endemic 
Lyme disease (1,7). There is a belief among persons who 
support the diagnosis and treatment of chronic Lyme disease 
that B. burgdorferi can cause disabling symptoms even when 
standard testing is negative, despite evidence that the recom-
mended two-tiered serologic testing is actually more sensitive 
the longer B. burgdorferi infection has been present (6). Some 
practitioners use tests or testing criteria that have not been 
validated for the diagnosis of Lyme disease (1). A significant 
concern is that after the diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease is 
made, the actual cause of a patient’s symptoms might remain 
undiagnosed and untreated (3,8).
Patients given a diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease have been 
prescribed various treatments for which there is often no evi-
dence of effectiveness, including extended courses of antibiotics 
(lasting months to years), IV infusions of hydrogen peroxide, 
immunoglobulin therapy, hyperbaric oxygen therapy, electro-
magnetic frequency treatments, garlic supplements, colloidal 
silver, and stem cell transplants (1,3). At least five randomized, 
placebo-controlled studies have shown that prolonged courses 
of IV antibiotics in particular do not substantially improve long-
term outcome for patients with a diagnosis of chronic Lyme 
disease and can result in serious harm, including death (1,5,9).*
Clinicians and state health departments periodically contact 
CDC concerning patients who have acquired serious bacterial 
infections during treatments for chronic Lyme disease. Five 
illustrative cases described to CDC over the past several years 
are presented.
Patient A
A woman in her late 30s with fatigue and joint pain received 
a diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease, babesiosis, and Bartonella 
infection by a local physician. Despite multiple courses of 
oral antibiotics, her symptoms worsened, and a peripherally 
inserted central catheter (PICC) was placed for initiation 
of IV antibiotic treatment. After 3 weeks of treatment with 
IV ceftriaxone and cefotaxime, the patient’s joint pain contin-
ued, and she developed fever and rash. She became hypotensive 
and tachycardic and was hospitalized in an intensive care unit, 
where she was treated with broad spectrum IV antibiotics and 
required mechanical ventilation and vasopressors. Despite 
maximal medical support, she continued to worsen and even-
tually died. The patient’s death was attributed to septic shock 
related to central venous catheter–associated bacteremia.
Patient B
An adolescent girl sought medical advice regarding years of 
muscle and joint pain, backaches, headaches, and lethargy. 
She had received a diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome, 
Serious Bacterial Infections Acquired During Treatment of Patients Given a 
Diagnosis of Chronic Lyme Disease — United States
Natalie S. Marzec, MD1; Christina Nelson, MD2; Paul Ravi Waldron, MD3; Brian G. Blackburn, MD4; Syed Hosain, MD5; Tara Greenhow, MD6;  
Gary M. Green, MD6; Catherine Lomen-Hoerth, MD, PhD7; Marjorie Golden, MD8; Paul S. Mead, MD2
* https://www.cdc.gov/lyme/treatment/prolonged/index.html.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
608 
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
but sought a second opinion from an alternative medicine 
clinic and was told she had chronic Lyme disease. The patient 
was treated with oral antibiotics, including rifampin, trime-
thoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and doxycycline, for 3 months; 
these were discontinued because of abnormal liver enzyme test 
results Three months later, a PICC was placed to administer 
IV antibiotics, including ceftriaxone. After receiving both IV 
and oral antibiotic therapy for 5 months without improve-
ment, the antibiotics were discontinued, but the PICC was 
not removed.
One week after antibiotics had been discontinued, 
the patient developed pallor, chills, and fever to 102.9°F 
(39.4°C); after consultation with the alternative medicine 
clinic, she was given another dose of ceftriaxone through 
the PICC. Later that day she was evaluated in an emergency 
department with fever to 105.3°F (40.7°C), hypotension, and 
tachycardia consistent with septic shock. Blood and PICC 
tip cultures grew Acinetobacter spp. She was hospitalized in 
an intensive care unit and required vasopressors as well as 
broad-spectrum antibiotics to treat the infection. The PICC 
was removed, and the patient was eventually discharged after 
several weeks of hospitalization.
Patient C
A woman in her late 40s received multiple arthropod bites and 
subsequently developed a flu-like illness with pain in her arms, 
legs, and back. One year after her symptoms began, she received 
a diagnosis of Lyme disease using the recommended two-tiered 
serologic test (positive enzyme immunoassay test result followed 
by positive immunoglobulin G Western immunoblot). She was 
treated with two 4-week courses of oral doxycycline.
The patient developed fatigue, cognitive difficulties, and 
poor exercise tolerance, and 2 years after her initial diagnosis 
she received a diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease based on the 
results of unvalidated tests. She was treated with intramuscular 
penicillin for approximately 5 weeks without improvement, 
then IV ceftriaxone for 4 months, followed by IV azithromycin 
for 6 months administered via a tunneled IV catheter.
One year later, she received additional IV ceftriaxone via a 
new IV catheter, plus oral doxycycline, tinidazole (an antipara-
sitic medication), and azithromycin for approximately 4 weeks. 
The patient developed back pain, shortness of breath, and 
malaise, and was hospitalized. The catheter was removed, and 
blood and catheter tip cultures yielded Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
She was treated with aztreonam for 4 weeks; however, her back 
pain worsened, and she was readmitted to the hospital. A com-
puted tomography scan indicated destruction of both the 9th 
and 10th thoracic vertebrae, and magnetic resonance imaging 
of her spine confirmed osteodiscitis. A bone biopsy and culture 
grew P
. aeruginosa with the same antibiotic susceptibility profile 
as her previously diagnosed bacteremia. She was treated for 
osteodiscitis, and her back pain eventually improved.
Patient D
A woman in her 50s developed progressive weakness, swell-
ing, and tingling in her extremities and received a tentative 
diagnosis of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneu-
ropathy. Despite various treatments over a 5-year period, her 
symptoms did not substantially improve, and a diagnosis of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis was made.
The patient was subsequently evaluated by another physi-
cian and was told she had chronic Lyme disease, babesiosis, and 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Initial treatment with herbs 
and homeopathic remedies had no effect. She was treated with 
IV ceftriaxone and oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, acy-
clovir, fluconazole, and tinidazole. After 7 months of intensive 
antimicrobial treatment, her pain improved, but the weak-
ness worsened. She discontinued treatment after developing 
C. difficile colitis that caused severe abdominal cramps and 
diarrhea. The C. difficile infection became intractable, and 
her symptoms persisted for over 2 years, requiring prolonged 
treatment. The patient subsequently died from complications 
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Patient E
A woman in her 60s with autoimmune neutropenia, mixed 
connective tissue disease, and degenerative arthritis received a 
diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease neuropathy, for which she 
received IV immunoglobulin every 3 weeks via a tunneled 
venous catheter with an implanted subcutaneous port. After 
undergoing treatments for >10 years, she developed fevers and 
neck pain and was hospitalized; the catheter was removed, and 
blood and catheter tip cultures yielded methicillin-sensitive 
Staphylococcus aureus. She was treated with IV antibiotics via 
a newly placed PICC. Although the patient was advised to 
have the PICC removed once the antibiotic course finished, 
she chose to keep it for further IV immunoglobulin therapy.
Two months later, she was readmitted for recurrent fevers. 
The PICC was removed, and cultures of the tip grew coagulase-
negative Staphylococcus; blood cultures were negative. She was 
treated with IV antibiotics and discharged.
The patient subsequently received a new implanted subcu-
taneous venous catheter and restarted IV immunoglobulin 
therapy, after which she was readmitted for fever and back pain. 
Blood cultures were positive for methicillin-sensitive S. aureus, 
and magnetic resonance imaging indicated inflammation of 
the lumbar facet joints, epidural space, and paraspinal muscles, 
consistent with infection. Despite appropriate antibiotic 
treatment, her back pain worsened, and she required surgical 
drainage of a paraspinal abscess.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / June 16, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 23 
609
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Discussion
Antibiotics and immunoglobulin therapies are effective and 
necessary treatments for many conditions; however, unneces-
sary antibiotic and immunoglobulin use provides no benefit to 
patients while putting them at risk for adverse events. When used 
for extended periods, the risks associated with these treatments 
increase, so it is important that they be used appropriately.
These cases highlight the severity and scope of adverse 
effects that can be caused by the use of unproven treatments 
for chronic Lyme disease. In addition to the dangers associ-
ated with inappropriate antibiotic use, such as selection of 
antibiotic-resistant bacteria, these treatments can lead to 
injuries related to unnecessary procedures, bacteremia and 
resulting metastatic infection, venous thromboses, and missed 
opportunities to diagnose and treat the actual underlying cause 
of the patient’s symptoms (8,10).†,§ Patients and their health 
care providers need to be aware of the risks associated with 
treatments for chronic Lyme disease.
The number of persons who undergo treatments for chronic 
Lyme disease is unknown, as is the number of complications 
that result from such treatments. Systematic investigations 
would be useful to understand the scope and consequences 
of adverse effects resulting from treatment of persons with a 
diagnosis of chronic Lyme disease. Data sources to consider 
include clinician surveys, administrative claims databases, or 
implementation of state or local reporting systems for adverse 
outcomes related to these treatments.
Acknowledgment
Stan Deresinski, Stanford University Hospital, Stanford, California.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 1Preventive Medicine Residency, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado; 
2Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, National Center for Emerging and 
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 3Kaiser Permanente, San Jose, California; 
4Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, California; 5LifeBridge Health, Westminster, 
Maryland; 6Kaiser Permanente, Santa Rosa, California; 7University of 
California, San Francisco, California; 8Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut.
Corresponding author: Natalie Marzec, natalie.marzec@ucdenver.edu, 
303-692-6314.
References
 1. Feder HM Jr, Johnson BJ, O’Connell S, Shapiro ED, Steere AC, 
Wormser GP; Ad Hoc International Lyme Disease Group. A critical 
appraisal of “chronic Lyme disease”. N Engl J Med 2007;357:1422–30. 
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra072023
 2. Patrick DM, Miller RR, Gardy JL, et al.; Complex Chronic Disease 
Study Group. Lyme disease diagnosed by alternative methods: a 
phenotype similar to that of chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Infect Dis 
2015;61:1084–91. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ470
 3. Lantos PM, Shapiro ED, Auwaerter PG, et al. Unorthodox alternative 
therapies marketed to treat Lyme disease. Clin Infect Dis 2015;60:1776–82. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ186
 4. Tseng YJ, Cami A, Goldmann DA, DeMaria A Jr, Mandl KD. Incidence 
and patterns of extended-course antibiotic therapy in patients evaluated 
for Lyme disease. Clin Infect Dis 2015;61:1536–42. https://doi.
org/10.1093/cid/civ636
 5. Wormser GP
, Dattwyler RJ, Shapiro ED, et al. The clinical assessment, 
treatment, and prevention of Lyme disease, human granulocytic 
anaplasmosis, and babesiosis: clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2006;43:1089–134. https://
doi.org/10.1086/508667
 6. Stanek G, Wormser GP
, Gray J, Strle F. Lyme borreliosis. Lancet 
2012;379:461–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60103-7
 7. Lantos PM. Chronic Lyme disease. Infect Dis Clin North Am 
2015;29:325–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idc.2015.02.006
 8. Nelson C, Elmendorf S, Mead P
. Neoplasms misdiagnosed as “chronic 
Lyme disease”. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:132–3. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.5426
 9. Berende A, ter Hofstede HJ, Vos FJ, et al. Randomized trial of longer-
term therapy for symptoms attributed to Lyme disease. N Engl J Med 
2016;374:1209–20. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1505425
 
10. Shehab N, Patel PR, Srinivasan A, Budnitz DS. Emergency department 
visits for antibiotic-associated adverse events. Clin Infect Dis 
2008;47:735–43. https://doi.org/10.1086/591126  
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
“Chronic Lyme disease” is a nonspecific diagnosis without a 
consistent definition that has been given to patients with 
various symptoms. Treatments offered for chronic Lyme disease, 
such as prolonged antibiotic or immunoglobulin therapy, lack 
data supporting effectiveness and are not recommended.
What is added by this report?
Clinicians, health departments, and patients have contacted 
CDC with reports of serious bacterial infections resulting from 
treatment of persons who have received a diagnosis of chronic 
Lyme disease. Five of these cases are described to illustrate 
complications resulting from unproven treatments, including 
septic shock, Clostridium difficile colitis, osteodiscitis, abscess, 
and death.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Clinicians, public health practitioners, and patients should be 
aware that treatments for chronic Lyme disease lack proof of 
effectiveness and can result in serious complications. Systematic 
investigation into the scope and effects of these complications, 
including the rate and extent of infections and the pathogens 
associated with these infections, would be helpful to inform 
clinical practice and fully characterize the risks associated with 
treatments for chronic Lyme disease.
† https://www.cdc.gov/features/getsmart/.
§ https://www.cdc.gov/hai/bsi/bsi.html.
