 MEDICAL IMAGING—PICTORIAL ESSAY
MRp: Inside the meat pie
John Massie,1,2,3
Michael Kean,1 Tim Cain2,3,4 from the Society for the Advancement of Humour in
Medicine
1 Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
2 Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
3 Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
4 Department of Radiology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
J Massie MBBS FRACP PhD; M Kean BSc;
T Cain MBBS FRANZCR.
Correspondence
Associate Professor John Massie, Department
of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Children’s
Hospital, 50 Flemington Road, Parkville, Vic.
3052, Australia.
Email: John.massie@rch.org.au
Conflict of interest: None.
Submitted 22 March 2018; accepted 6 April
2018.
doi:10.1111/1754-9485.12740
Summary
Meat pies have been adopted as one of Australia’s favourite foods, and consid-
ered an icon by many. The hand-held convenience of the pie has made them
a culinary necessity while watching sport, also beloved in Australia. An endur-
ing question about the meat pie is what exactly is inside. This can be difficult
to ascertain by digital, ocular or oral exploration. In this study we use MR
imaging to study the contents of some of Australia’s best loved pies.
Key words: paediatric imaging.
Introduction
Meat pies are an Aussie institution and a distinctively
Australian cuisine [1]. It is quite possible that the pie was
invented by First Australians who lived on this continent
from 65,0000 years ago, but a lack of written or drawn
evidence makes this claim hard to substantiate [2]. This
is a pity, because the X-ray art of First Australians might
have solved this enduring puzzle well before now.
The Egyptians are credited with the proto-pie, their
bakers incorporating nuts, honey and fruit in a bread
dough [3]. Credit for the invention of the meat pie (and
curiously p) goes to the Greeks who made a pie-like dish
of meat (probably lamb) wrapped in pastry. Perhaps all
the plates had been broken and the pastry casing made
a handy serving vessel. The Romans took home this pie
recipe as a spoil of war, typically copying Greek culture
and claiming it as their own. This just adds weight to the
well-known criticism of ancient Rome, ‘What have the
Romans ever done for us?’ Pies are said to have spread
through Europe along the ancient Roman roads, so per-
haps we do have something to be grateful to the Romans
for after all. Pies were popular dishes in England through
the Middle Ages. While many meats were used, magpie
was a favourite and is likely to be the etymological origin
of the name, ‘pie’.
It is very likely meat pies were brought to Australia
with the First Fleet. One of the earliest records of pie
selling in the colony of NSW is English migrant William
King (the ‘Flying Pieman’) who sold pies to ferry passen-
gers at Circular Quay [4]. The precise origin of commer-
cial meat pie production in Australia is contested. This is
an important thing for Australians to argue about, and
not surprisingly claims fall along state lines. Pie manu-
facturer Sargent (Sydney, NSW) is recorded making a
pie from 1891 [5]. Balfour’s (South Australia) opened in
1853,
but
the
precise
time
of
pie
making
remains
unclear, but claimed ‘for over 100 years’ [6]. In Victoria
it is well established that that L.T. McClure produced an
Aussie pie at his small bakery in Bendigo in 1947 [1].
These were the forerunners of the now iconic Four
‘N’Twenty pies. It would be positively un’Strayan not to
eat one of these at a sporting gathering. To cope with
the multicultural diversity of modern Australia vegetar-
ian and Halal versions of pies are available, although
whether a Kosher version is available remans unclear.
The hand held convenience of the meat pie has been
part of its enduring appeal and more recently there have
been
moves
to
elevate
the
humble
meat
pie
from
merely food to cuisine. Leaving the modern adaptions
aside, an enduring question about meat pies that has
fuelled much speculation and ended in many unsavoury
© 2018 The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists
Journal of Medical Imaging and Radiation Oncology 62 (2018) 361–363
361
Journal of Medical Imaging and Radiation Oncology
 disagreements, is what exactly is inside an Aussie meat
pie?
To answer this question and reduce the workload of
Emergency
Departments
after
a
sporting
match
we
returned to the First Australian concept of X-ray vision
and decided to look inside the great Aussie meat pie
using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technology.
Methods
We selected two meat pies that have become popular
across Australia (Four n’Twenty, Bocastle) and a regular
winner of the Australian meat pie competition (The Roll-
ing Pin, Ocean Grove Victoria). To determine the charac-
teristics
of
the
contents
inside
the
pies,
we
used
magnetic
resonance
imaging
(MRI)
(Siemans,
Mel-
bourne, Vic., Australia). To maintain anonymity we ran-
domly
assigned
a
study
number
to
each
pie.
Pie
demographics (circumference and area measured at the
mid plane) were recorded from MR measurements. We
looked for the presence of chunky pieces and graded
these on a ‘Like-it’ scale of 0 (none) to 3 (big). The qual-
ity of meat was assessed by the presence of muscle
fibres detected in the chunks. We measured the diameter
of the chunky pieces. To understand the effect of tomato
sauce on top we performed T(omato)-weighted images
of each pie. To standardize sauce application we used an
individual
‘squeezy’
tomato
sauce
dispenser
by
one
researcher (MK).
The study was not approved by an institutional ethics
committee. The human research ethics committee did
not consider a pie to be human so felt this project did
not fall under their jurisdiction. Tellingly, the animal
research ethics committee was of similar opinion (i.e.
the meat pie had nothing to do with animals!). We
offered a cut of the pie to the chair of each group but
they were immune to our inducements. This was a fortu-
nate development as we estimated that the time taken
to develop the study, perform the scans, analyse the
data and write the manuscript would be about 1/10th
the time for an ethics application, which is about stan-
dard for modern research. No seriously ill children had to
wait very long for a scan while the research was con-
ducted. No pies were harmed during the research.
Funding for the study was shamelessly solicited from
each company manufacturing the pies, but unsuccessful.
The pies were purchased from loose coins taken from
the pockets of children attending our institution for MRI
scans. This was done for their safety and to teach them
the value of donating to medical research.
Results
The images of each pie are shown in Figures 1–3. The
results of the pie analysis are presented in the Table 1.
Owing to the limitations of MRI technology, it was not
possible to accurately distinguish the elements of the
Fig. 1. This demonstrates large chunky pieces which appear to be of
animal muscle origin given the striations.
Fig. 2. This demonstrates a pie with a homogeneous appearance with
small pieces and no muscle fibres visible.
Fig. 3. This demonstrates medium size chunky pieces, but there are no
muscle fibres visible.
© 2018 The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists
J Massie et al.
362
 non-chunky pieces in the pie. We were hoping to present
a meat:gravy ratio, but subjectivity of such an analysis
rendered this unscientific. Similarly it was not possible to
determine fat from meat using MR signals. The pastry
encasing could be seen, but it was not possible to mea-
sure the thickness with certainty.
Discussion
We have shown that the meat content of the Aussie meat
pie varies greatly. Some pies have large, obviously ani-
mal muscle derived pieces, whereas for others there are
smaller pieces of less distinct origin. There was also con-
siderable variation in the size of the pies that were all
sold as individual use items. All of the pies were encased
in pastry of similar consistency, but MRI did not allow for
measurement of thickness with sufficient scientific rigour
to report in this journal. The tomato sauce formed a
pleasing blob on the top of the pie, without seeming to
penetrate the pastry. Standard medical MRI was not
helpful in determining the characteristics of the non-solid
meat contents of the pies.
Magnetic resonance imaging has been used by the
food industry to investigate the conditions required for
producing pork pie jellies with different properties [7].
This work may be of relevance to those living in the Aus-
tralian Capital Territory where pork pies are more com-
monly peddled.
Magnetic resonance imaging has also been used to
create artistic images of fruit [8]. While appreciating the
artistic merits of such images, we cannot condone such a
frivolous use of expensive MRI technology that has lim-
ited availability to people with medical illness. Such mis-
use of resource is unethical and should be deplored.
Magnetic resonance imaging was also used to create
an image of the 70th birthday cake of the inventor of
medical magnetic resonance technology, Dr PC Lauterbur
[9]. Individual banana and peach slices were clearly visi-
ble, but the nature of the material between (presumably
cake mix) was not. This just goes to show what we all
know about radiologists; they want to have their images
and eat them too.
There are some limitations of our study. Owing to
resource limitations (we had $26.65 raided from chil-
dren’s pockets) we could only afford to purchase three
varieties of Aussie meat pie. The MRI signals could not
be used to distinguish the non-meat characteristics of
the pie contents. This turns out to be a fortunate limita-
tion of the technology as the pies can be consumed with-
out having to worry about fat content. Similarly, MRI
proved somewhat flakey when it came to measuring pas-
try thickness.
Having established the utility of MRI in determining
some useful characteristics of the contents of the iconic
Aussie meat pie it would be good to use MRI to study
other Australian icons. MRI could be used to identify the
contents of the football (all codes) and the kangaroo
(just as soon as we can tie one down). Owing to a com-
bination of manufacturing moving offsite and metal con-
tent, we would not be able to use MRI on Holden cars.
References
1.
Wikipedia. Meat Pie (Australia and New Zealand). [Cited
3 August 2017.] Available from URL: http://en.wikiped
ia.org/wiki/Meat_pie_(Australia_and_New_Zealand);
2.
Clarkson C, Jacobs Z, Marwick B et al. Human
occupation of northern Australia by 65,000 years ago.
Nature 2017; 547: 306–10.
3.
A History of Meat Pies. [Cited 24 June 2017.] Available
from URL: http://ww.puckles.com.au.
4.
Barr E. Meat pies are Australia’s national fast food
choice, with Australians eating 270 million every year.
Daily Telegraph 2015. [Cited 3 August 2017.] Available
from URL: http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au.
5.
Australia NMo. Defining Moments in Australian History.
Meat Pies. [Cited 3 August 2017.] Available from URL:
http://www.nma.gov.au.
6.
Balfours. Our History. Available from URL: https://balf
ours.com.au
7.
Gaunt AP, Morris RH, Newton MI. Magnetic resonance
imaging: a tool for pork pie development. Foods (Basel,
Switzerland) 2013; 2: 393–400.
8.
Ellison A. Inside Insides. Magnetic Resonance Imaging
of Foods. [Cited 3 August 2017.] Available from URL:
http//:insidesinsides.blogspot.com.au.
9.
Maxton C, Frahm J. MRI of PC Lauterbur’s Birthday cake.
Bananas, peaches and susceptibilities. Proc Intl Soc
Magn Reson Med 2000; 8: 1528–34.
Table 1. Magnetic resonance imaging characteristics of Aussie Meat Pies
Pie characteristic
Pie A
Pie B
Pie C
Area (mm2)
3005
2338
1723
Perimeter (mm)
256
234
202
Visible chunks
✔✔✔
✔
✔✔
Maximum size of meat chunk (mm)
36.4
7.2
18.9
Muscle fibre identifiable
✔
✖
✖
© 2018 The Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists
MRp
363
