 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Overlapping signatures of chronic 
pain in the DNA methylation 
landscape of prefrontal cortex and 
peripheral T cells
Renaud Massart1, Sergiy Dymov1, Magali Millecamps2, Matthew Suderman1, 
Stephanie Gregoire2, Kevin Koenigs1, Sebastian Alvarado1, Maral Tajerian2, Laura S. Stone2 & 
Moshe Szyf1
We tested the hypothesis that epigenetic mechanisms in the brain and the immune system are 
associated with chronic pain. Genome-wide DNA methylation assessed in 9 months post nerve-injury 
(SNI) and Sham rats, in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) as well as in T cells revealed a vast difference in the 
DNA methylation landscape in the brain between the groups and a remarkable overlap (72%) between 
differentially methylated probes in T cells and prefrontal cortex. DNA methylation states in the PFC 
showed robust correlation with pain score of animals in several genes involved in pain. Finally, only 11 
differentially methylated probes in T cells were sufficient to distinguish SNI or Sham individual rats. This 
study supports the plausibility of DNA methylation involvement in chronic pain and demonstrates the 
potential feasibility of DNA methylation markers in T cells as noninvasive biomarkers of chronic pain 
susceptibility.
Chronic pain is one of the most common causes for disability worldwide, with significant global impact on patient 
quality of life. Despite enormous efforts to find new therapeutic strategies, effective treatments for chronic pain 
continue to be elusive1. There are also no effective ways to predict susceptibility to developing chronic pain in 
response to injury, which is essential for developing prevention strategies.
Peripheral nerve injury is associated with persistent functional and morphological reorganization of the 
brain2–5. Among the brain structures implicated in chronic pain conditions, the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is of 
critical importance in both the affective and sensory components of chronic pain. Changes in this brain area 
have been reported across many chronic pain conditions as well as in pain-related co-morbidities such as anxiety, 
depression and cognition6,7. In rodent models, previous studies by others and ourselves demonstrate the existence 
of cognitive/emotional deficits many months following nerve-injury5,8,9. However, the mechanisms mediating the 
long-term effects of injury that result in chronic pain are unknown.
DNA methylation, a covalent modification of the DNA molecule, is involved in stable programming of gene 
expression during embryogenesis and in mediating the long term effects of experience on genome function and 
behavioral and physical phenotypes at different time points in life10–13. We therefore hypothesized that changes in 
DNA methylation are involved in mediating the effects of peripheral nerve injury on chronic pain.
In support of this hypothesis we previously demonstrated that changes in DNA methylation within the 
periphery can regulate long-term gene transcription in murine models of back pain and humans suffering from 
chronic back pain14. Additionally, we have shown peripheral nerve injury is associated with transcriptome-wide 
changes in PFC15, decreased global DNA methylation in the PFC and amygdala in mice8 and can drive the tran-
scription of synaptotagmin within the PFC16. Interestingly, environmental enrichment reversed not only nerve 
injury-induced hypersensitivity but also the global epigenetic reorganization of the rodent brain17. However, the 
genomic landscape of these changes and the particular genes and networks that are involved remains unknown. 
1Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
2Faculty of Dentistry, Alan Edwards Centre for Research on Pain, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to L.S. (email: laura.s.stone@mcgill.ca) or M.S. 
(email: moshe.szyf@mcgill.ca)
Received: 18 February 2015
Accepted: 16 October 2015
Published: 28 January 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
Identifying targets of DNA methylation changes in chronic pain is critical for establishing the plausibility of our 
hypothesis as well as for identification of potential candidates for diagnosis and treatment of chronic pain.
A critical question that has implications for further development of therapeutic approaches and diagnostics 
and predictive markers of chronic pain is whether chronic pain has a systemic manifestation, particularly in 
the peripheral immune system. Several reports have identified strong links between pain and transcriptional or 
epigenetic changes in the blood18–20. We have previously reported that behavioral experiences that are primarily 
targeted to the brain, such as maternal care, altered DNA in peripheral T cells11,21,22. We therefore examined here 
whether DNA methylation changes in T cells are associated with chronic pain and whether these overlap with 
changes in DNA methylation in the brain.
To address these questions we used a rat model of chronic neuropathic pain induced by peripheral nerve 
injury (spared nerve injury, SNI) and delineated genome-wide promoter methylation profiles in the prefrontal 
cortex and in T cells from these animals 9 months post-nerve injury. Our analysis revealed altered DNA meth-
ylation levels in thousands of promoters in the PFC between nerve-injured and sham-surgery animals; many of 
these changes were correlated with the severity of neuropathic pain. Moreover, DNA methylation changes were 
also associated with neuropathic pain in circulating T cells and strikingly, the majority of the promoters identified 
as differentially methylated in T cells 9 months post-nerve injury were also affected in the brain. Furthermore, we 
identified a subset of 11 promoters in T cells that were sufficient to predict rat chronic pain with 80% accuracy and 
two genes whose methylation levels predicted the intensity of pain-related behavioral changes with a goodness of 
fit of 0.99. The dramatic changes in the landscape of DNA methylation in the PFC and the functional properties 
of genes involved support the hypothesis that DNA methylation is a long-term mediator of chronic pain. The 
striking overlap between the changes in DNA methylation in T cells and PFC supports the feasibility of DNA 
methylation biomarkers of chronic pain.
Results
Peripheral nerve injury-induced changes in DNA methylation in the prefrontal cortex. 
DNA 
methylation at all annotated promoters in the rat genome and a sample of fully covered genes was determined 
using methylated DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) followed by hybridization to microarrays and bioinfor-
matics analyses as described in the supplementary methods. Peripheral nerve injury was associated with dif-
ferential methylation in the PFC of a large number of probes (23,386 out of 400,000) as compared to sham rats 
(FDR < 
 0.01), corresponding to 3,946 promoters (defined as − 
2000/+ 
1000 base pairs from the transcription 
start site). A heatmap showing unsupervised clustering of all brain samples based on the promoters state of meth-
ylation (FDR < 
 0.01) illustrates the pervasive effect of SNI on the methylation profiles across all the rat brains 
sampled (Fig. 1a). Among the probes, methylation was decreased in 14,298 probes and increased in 9,088 in SNI 
animals. Decreasing the level of statistical stringency revealed a staggering number of differentially methylated 
probes (FDR < 
 0.1: 44,376 probes associated with 10,483 genes; FDR < 
 0.2: 50,189 probes associated with 12,643 
genes) (Fig. 1b). A number of these differentially methylated regions were validated by qPCR, and the results 
are consistent with DNA methylation levels estimated by the genome-wide microarrays (Fig. 1c). Analysis of 
mRNA expression revealed differences in mRNA expression of five genes (KCNAB3, KCNC4, ID4, DNMT1, 
NFKB1) in opposite directions to the changes in methylation, compatible with a role for these differentially meth-
ylated regions in regulating gene expression (Fig. 1d). Four other differentially methylated genes, as assessed 
by MeDIP-array, did not show differences in expression. This result reflects the complex relationship between 
DNA methylation and steady-state mRNA levels regulated by various transcription initiation, termination and 
post-transcriptional processes23,24.
Functional organization of the DNA methylation landscape in the prefrontal cortex in response 
to nerve injury. 
In order to gain insight into the functional organization of gene networks and pathways 
whose state of DNA methylation is altered in PFC in chronic neuropathic pain, three different analyses were 
conducted. First, gene set enrichment analysis was performed, using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and 
Genomatix softwares, on the genes whose methylation levels at promoters were the most significantly affected by 
SNI (FDR < 
 0.01). IPA revealed significant dysregulation of multiple biological functions including “Cell death” 
and “Cellular homeostasis”
, consistent with elevated cellular stress in the PFC of SNI rats (Fig. 1e, Part I - Table 
S1). The enrichment in genes related to “Neuritogenesis” and “Long-term potentiation” point to a large impact 
of peripheral nerve injury on cortical neurotransmission including the dysregulation of dopaminergic, glutama-
tergic, opioid and serotoninergic systems. Genomatix analysis revealed high enrichments in conditions related 
to stress and cognitive/emotional deficits such as “Stress” (p = 
 5.49E-9, 254 genes), “Psychological dependence” 
(p = 
 1.61E-7, 11 genes), “Depression adverse event” (p = 
 6.63E-7, 82 genes), “
Anhedonia” (p = 
 9.03E-6, 15 genes) 
and “Intellectual disability” (p = 
 1.32E-5, 100 genes).
In order to uncover relationship structures among differentially methylated genes, weighted gene 
co-methylation network analysis (WGCNA)25,26, was applied to differentially methylated gene promoters 
(FDR < 
 0.2; 50,189 probes associated with 12,643 genes, see supplementary methods). This analysis identified 82 
modules of co-methylated genes across all individual rats whose methylation levels are associated with chronic 
pain (Fig. 2a, S1) and 81 of them, which comprised 12,526 genes, were significantly associated with nerve injury 
and with hypersensitivity to mechanical stimuli (Tables S2–3). This result shows that genes are organized in 
co-methylation modules, which are dependent on the Sham or SNI status. For example, the module arbitrarily 
named “brown module” was the most significantly associated with the SNI condition (p = 
 3.07E-10) and the 
co-methylation profiles of its genes varied in the same range within groups and at a different level between the 
two groups (Fig. S2). Among these modules, the “brown, orange, blue and dark orange” modules (2319 genes 
– “meta-module M1”) were positively correlated with the SNI condition and exhibited similar co-methylation 
profiles, indicating that genes of these four modules could be functionally related and relevant for pain (Fig. S3). 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
Figure 1. Changes in DNA methylation landscape in PFC in SNI rats. (a) Heatmap (row distance metric: 
Pearson correlation, average linkage) depicting the clustering of the average normalized intensities for each 
promoter of the microarray probes that were differentially methylated (q < 
 0.01) between SNI and Sham rats 
in the PFC. Rows correspond to promoters and columns to animals. Red indicates higher methylation in a 
row and blue indicates lower methylation. (b) Number of probes differentially methylated and of promoters, 
with at least one probe differentially methylated, at different FDR, between SNI and Sham rats in the PFC. (c) 
QPCR validations of MeDIP-arrays. Each bar plot shows average methylation levels (+ 
/− 
SEM). Unpaired t 
test were performed *p < 
 0.05, ***p < 
 0.001, ****p < 
 0.0001. Welch’s correction was applied when variances 
between groups were significantly different. (d) QPCR measurements of relative mRNA expression differences 
at genes differentially methylated (+ 
/− 
SEM). Unpaired t test were performed *p < 
 0.05. Welch’s correction 
was applied when variances between groups were significantly different. (e) Examples of canonical pathways 
(blue) or biological functions (red) associated with (I) genes differentially methylated (q < 
 0.01) between SNI 
and Sham rats in the PFC, (II) genes of metamodule M1 (WGCNA analysis, see supplementary methods) 
whose methylation levels covary across animals in the brain and that are positively correlated with the SNI 
condition, (III) genes differentially methylated (q < 
 0.2) in the brain between sham and SNI rats and with a 
degree of at least 5 (“hubs”) (NetworkAnalyzer, see supplementary methods). The numbers on the right of the 
bars indicate either the number of differentially methylated genes associated with a biological function or the 
number of genes of the metamodule M1 or “hubs” genes associated with a canonical pathway over the number 
of genes known to be related to the pathway. (f) Networks of interconnection between “hubs” obtained using 
NetworkAnalyzer.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
Figure 2. Correlation between DNA methylation states in PFC and mechanical sensitivity. (a) Differences 
in mechanical sensitivity between SNI and Sham rats measured using von Frey filaments. (b–d) Spearman 
correlation between mechanical sensitivity of Sham and SNI rats and average DNA methylation levels, 
measured using microarrays, of differentially methylated probes (q < 
 0.2) at promoters of (b) inflammatory 
genes, (c) epigenetic regulators, (d) neurotransmission factors. (e) Expanded views from the UCSC genome 
browser of dnmt1 and nfkb1 genes. For each gene, the first track shows average methylation probe fold 
differences (Log2) between SNI and Sham rats, the second track shows regions significantly differentially 
methylated (q < 
 0.2) and the third track show Pearson correlation coefficients between probe methylation levels 
and mechanical sensitivity of the rats measured using von Frey filaments. The last track shows exons and introns 
taken from the rat Ensembl RNA reference sequences collection.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
Moreover, the meta-module M1 was enriched in genes (821-p = 
 6.65E-7, Fisher’s exact test) highly associated 
with the SNI condition; i.e. with a highly significant probe (FDR < 
 0.01) detected in the promoter. Therefore, a 
gene set enrichment analysis of the co-methylated genes of the meta-module M1 was performed (Fig. 1e, Part II 
and Table S4). This analysis revealed enrichments in genes encoding receptors of the glutamatergic, serotonin-
ergic and cannabinoid systems, in genes associated with the ERK/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways as well as in 
EIF2 signaling pathways involved in protein synthesis.
In the third analysis strategy, genes with at least one significantly differentiated probe (FDR < 
 0.2) were ana-
lyzed using the Cytoscape environment27 and the NetworkAnalyzer28 plugin in order to understand how they 
interact with other proteins (see supplementary methods). We focused on 2548 genes for which protein-protein 
interactions data were available in the BioGrid database29 and calculated the degree of each in the network, that 
is the number of interacting partners in the network (Table S5). High degree often indicates that a protein plays a 
central role in a key cellular function such as signal amplification (kinases)30, signal turnover (small GTPases), or 
gene expression (transcription factors). A total of 409 genes, out of the 2,548 genes mapped on the interactome, 
have a degree of at least 5 (72% of the genes have a degree ≤ 
 2). This is consistent with a scale-free organization 
of cellular networks, in which most of the genes have a few interactions, but a few genes function as “regulatory 
hubs”31. Interestingly, some differentially methylated genes with the highest degrees (e.g. ubc, hdac1, grin1) are 
part of systems already associated with neuropathic pain15,32,33 supporting an important role for DNA methyl-
ation in chronic pain. Moreover, differentially methylated genes with a degree ≥ 
 5 were highly interconnected 
(Illustrated in Fig. 1f), indicating they are probably functionally related. Indeed, these genes were found to be 
enriched in canonical pathways such as PI3K/AKT signaling, the NfkB pathway and in biological functions such 
as “Cell death” and “Memory” (Fig. 1d, Part III – S4 and Table S4). Finally, 79 genes of the 409 interconnected 
regulatory “hubs” (degree ≥ 
 5) were part of the WGCNA meta-module M1 that was most strongly associated 
with the pain condition. These 79 genes include, for example, the glucocorticoid receptor nr3c1, the immune and 
inflammation regulators nfkb2, ikbkb and the cAMP response regulator creb1.
Taken together, our results show that during the nine months after the induction of neuropathic pain in rats, 
there was a reorganization of the landscape of DNA methylation in prefrontal cortex, including in cellular path-
ways and biological functions highly relevant to chronic pain.
Correlation between pain intensity and gene DNA methylation level in the PFC. 
We now 
addressed whether the DNA methylation changes triggered by injury in the PFC are associated with behavioural 
measures of pain. We therefore determined whether inter-individual differences in DNA methylation in sites that 
discriminate between the injured and control groups correlate with inter-individual differences in sensitivity to 
pain across the 16 animals. The persistence of nerve injury-induced hypersensitivity to mechanical stimulation 
was confirmed using von Frey filaments nine months following SNI surgery (Fig. 2a).
First, the average methylation levels of probes significantly affected at each promoter (FDR < 
 0.2) were used 
to calculate correlations between methylation levels of these probes and the mechanical hypersensitivity in vivo. 
Differences in genes involved in NFKB signaling such as nfkb1 and nfkb2, some epigenetic regulators (dnmt1, 
mecp2, mbd1, hdac1) as well as neurotransmission, e.g. opioidergic, glutamatergic and dopaminergic receptors 
were the most correlated with the pain thresholds (Fig. 2b–d). Table S6 provides additional examples of correla-
tions for a few candidate genes that may be involved in neuropathic pain.
Second, regression analysis revealed that 106,371 probes (FDR < 
 0.01), corresponding to 7,662 promoters, 
were significantly correlated with the intensity of mechanical hypersensitivity. Among these significant probes, 
22,000 presented a FDR < 
 10E-4 (Fig. 2e). In addition to promoter regions, the entire loci of several genes were 
also tiled on the custom microarrays (see Methods). Our DNA methylation analysis showed correlations between 
changes in DNA methylation and mechanical sensitivity throughout the span of these genes: exons, introns, pro-
moters, intergenic regions and at the 3′ 
 extremities (Fig. 2e). Interestingly, the direction of changes in methylation 
in promoters is opposite to the changes occurring in the body of the genes, which is consistent with the fact that 
while methylation in promoters silences gene expression34 methylation in body of genes is associated with gene 
activity35.
Peripheral nerve injury is associated with DNA methylation changes in T cells. 
It has been known 
for decades that DNA methylation patterns are tissue specific36, it is therefore common wisdom that DNA methyl-
ation associated with chronic pain should be limited to the brain. However, since there is a very well documented 
inflammatory component to pain37, we therefore examined T cell methylation patterns as well (see supplementary 
methods) and identified 3,982 probes with FDR < 
 0.2 (2,402 hypomethylated and 1580 hypermethylated in SNI), 
corresponding to 2,109 promoters (Fig. 3a). At FDR < 
0.1,1492 probes corresponding to 679 promoters were 
differentially methylated, and 111 probes corresponding to 34 promoters at FDR < 
 0.01 (Fig. 3b).
Gene set enrichment analysis on differentially methylated genes (FDR < 
 0.2) revealed enrichments in path-
ways including “Cancer” and “Cell death” consistent with cellular stress (Table S7). Moreover, analysis of the T cell 
array data identified pro- and anti-inflammatory molecules, such as TNF (p = 
 1.49E-5), IL1β (p = 
 2.38E-5) and 
TGFB1 (p = 
 7.22E-4) that have previously been linked to chronic pain38–41. As in the PFC, differential methylation 
is not only a response to nerve injury but there is a linear correlation between the extent of differential methyla-
tion states in T cell and mechanical hypersensitivity (2882 probes at a FDR < 
 0.01) (Fig. 3c).
Overlapping DNA methylation changes in prefrontal cortex and T cells. 
Previous studies have 
suggested that environmental influences that alter DNA methylation in the brain also impact T cells at similar 
genomic regions11,22. We therefore examined the overlap between genes targeted in prefrontal cortex and T cells 
in response to SNI. We compared the lists of differentially methylated probes (FDR < 
 0.2) and promoters with at 
least one significantly differentially methylated probe in the promoter (FDR < 
 0.2) in SNI vs. sham across the two 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
tissues. A total of 1524 promoters corresponding to 72% of the genes affected in T cells were also differentially 
methylated in PFC (p = 
 5.9E-186) (Fig. 4a). 814 identical probes within these promoters (20% of all probes dif-
ferentially methylated in T cells) were differentially methylated in both tissues (p = 
 2.15E-13). Clustering analysis 
of the differentially methylated promoters in both T cells and brain after SNI grouped the samples by tissue as 
expected42 as well as by Sham or SNI status (Fig. 4a).
Consistent with the anticipated tissue specific differences in DNA methylation and the different physiological 
roles of the immune system and prefrontal cortex in chronic pain, only a portion of the promoters were dysreg-
ulated in the same direction in both tissues (43.8% promoters; 44.6% probes). For example, while the differential 
Figure 3. Changes in DNA methylation landscape in T cells in SNI rats. (a) Heatmap (row distance metric: 
Pearson correlation, average linkage) depicting the clustering of the average normalized intensities for each 
promoter of the microarray probes that were differentially methylated (q < 
 0.2) between SNI and Sham rats 
in T cells. Rows correspond to promoters and columns to animals. Red indicates higher methylation in a row 
and blue indicates lower methylation. (b) Number of probes differentially methylated and of promoters, with at 
least one probe differentially methylated, at different FDR, between SNI and Sham rats in T cells. (c) Heatmap 
(row distance metric: Pearson correlation, average linkage) depicting the clustering of the DNA methylation 
normalized intensities of the 500 microarray probes that were the most significantly correlated in T cells 
with the mechanical sensitivity measured using von Frey filaments. Rows correspond to probes and columns 
to animals. Red indicates higher methylation in a row and green indicates lower methylation. A blue/red 
horizontal scale indicates the mechanical sensitivity of the rats.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
methylation of Pak1 was in the same direction in both tissues, Pax6, Clip3 were differentially methylated in oppo-
site directions, suggesting different roles for the same genes in the systemic response to SNI (Fig. 4b).
Gene set enrichment analysis of the genes affected in both tissues revealed enrichments in pathways includ-
ing EIF2, calcium and MAPK signaling (P = 
 1.67E-3, 1.05E-2 and 1.26E-2, respectively) and also in genes with 
potential upstream regulators such as the pro-inflammatory molecules IL1B (p = 
 6.06E-4) and TNF (P = 
 1.7E-
3). A WGCNA analysis (see supplementary methods) was applied to the promoters commonly affected in both 
tissues in order to identify modules of co-methylated genes associated with neuropathic pain in PFC and T cells 
(Fig. S5a). Among the six co-methylation modules identified in the two tissues, four (corresponding to 447 genes) 
were significantly associated with SNI and 78% of the genes in these four modules had their levels of methyla-
tion affected in the same direction in the brain and T cells by SNI (Fig. S5b). IPA analysis on genes of the green 
module (Fig. 4c), which is the most significantly associated with SNI revealed enrichments in genes involved in 
glutamatergic signaling, such as grin2a, slc1a2, in inflammatory processes, such as icam1 and il21r, and in calcium 
signaling, such as kcnip3 (Table S8). Some of these genes have previously been associated with pain43,44. This result 
shows that genes found in co-methylation modules in response to SNI in both tissues are functionally related and 
are of particular relevance for the neuropathic condition.
DNA methylation states in T-cells are “predictors” of chronic pain. 
Using penalized logistic regres-
sion (see methods section), a prediction model was built based on the list of differentially methylated genes in 
T cells (FDR < 
 0.2); this model identified 11 genes that together were sufficient to discriminate SNI from Sham 
samples. Based on these 11 genes, the prediction for each sample to be a member of the SNI or Sham group is 
represented in Fig. 5a (0 = 
 Sham; 1 = 
 SNI). Methylation differences for these 11 genes detected by MeDIP-arrays 
between SNI and Ctrl rats are shown in Fig. 5c. Methylation differences measured by QMeDIP for 8 gene predic-
tors are displayed in Fig. 5c. Not only is the analysis of 11 genes sufficient to distinguish between an SNI or Sham 
rat, the methylation level of only 2 genes (srp54a and xpo4), were sufficient to predict hypersensitivity to mechani-
cal stimuli in SNI animals. Correlations between these predictions and the actual mechanical thresholds obtained 
Figure 4. Overlap between differential methylation states in T cells and PFC in SNI rats. (a) The Venn 
diagram shows the overlap between genes with at least one probe differentially methylated (q < 
 0.2) between 
SNI and Sham rats in promoters in PFC and T cells. The heatmap (row distance metric: Pearson correlation, 
average linkage) depicts the clustering of the average normalized intensities for each promoter of the microarray 
probes that were differentially methylated (q < 
 0.2) between SNI and Sham rats in T cells and PFC. Rows 
correspond to promoters and columns to animals. Red indicates higher methylation in a row and blue indicates 
lower methylation. (b) QPCR validations of MeDIP-arrays. Each bar plot shows average methylation levels 
(+ 
/− 
SEM). Unpaired t test were performed *p < 
 0.05, **p < 
 0.01. Welch’s correction was applied when 
variances between groups were significantly different. (c) Top canonical pathways associated with the genes of 
the green WGCA module (i.e. genes whose DNA methylation levels covaried across animals in both T cells and 
the PFC and were positively associated with the SNI condition.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
using the von Frey test were nearly perfect (Pearson’s R = 
 0.99 with p > 
 0.0001) (Fig. 5d). These data show that 
DNA methylation markers in T cells could serve as “predictors” of pain sensitivity and potentially chronic pain.
Figure 5. DNA methylation biomarkers predictors of chronic pain in T cells. (a) Prediction of rats 
memberships to SNI or Sham groups based on a likelihood cross-validated penalized logistic regression 
analysis (see methods section) using averaged methylation levels of differentially methylated probes (q < 
 0.2) 
for each promoter in T cells. (b) Relative DNA methylation enrichment levels in SNI and Sham rat T cells of 
differentially methylated probes (q < 
 0.2) at promoters of genes used for the prediction using the penalized 
logistic regression (a). Unpaired t tests with Bonferroni correction were performed *p < 
 0.05, ****p < 
 0.0001 
were performed. (c) QPCR validations of MeDIP-arrays. Each bar plot shows average methylation levels 
(+ 
/− 
SEM). Unpaired t test were performed #p < 
 0.1, *p < 
 0.05. Welch’s correction was applied when variances 
between groups were significantly different. (d) Prediction of rat mechanical sensitivity based on a likelihood 
cross-validated penalized linear regression analysis using averaged methylation levels of differentially 
methylated probes (q < 
 0.2) for each promoter in T cells (y axis) and the mechanical sensitivity determined 
using von Frey filaments (x axis).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
Discussion
Chronic pain triggered by peripheral nerve injury can persist long after the initial injury. What are the mecha-
nisms that mediate the long lasting effect of nerve damage? In our model of chronic pain rats exhibit mechanical 
hypersensitivity nine months after spared nerve injury. DNA methylation is a mechanism that can stably alter 
gene regulation in response to a transient signal45. We have previously demonstrated changes in global DNA 
methylation8 and extensive dysregulation of mRNA expression in the prefrontal cortex15 in mice with chronic 
peripheral nerve injury. Alterations in DNA methylation could be just a stochastic footprint downstream of 
pain-related brain pathology. Our current study strongly argues for the critical involvement of DNA methylation 
in chronic pain. First, we show that in the PFC, a brain region strongly implicated in chronic pain6,7, a stunning 
number of promoters are differentially methylated 9 months after injury (> 
12,000 individual gene promoters 
corresponding to more than 50,000 probes, at a FDR > 
 0.2). These changes are distant both in time and space 
from the original injury. Second, the changes in DNA methylation are highly organized in functional pathways 
that have been implicated in pain such as dysregulation of dopaminergic, glutamatergic, opioid and serotonin-
ergic systems and important signaling and inflammatory pathways that include NF kappa B and CREB (Table 
S1). Third, there is a high coordination of methylation dynamics across many genes across individual animals in 
several well defined co-methylated modules as determined by a weighted gene co-methylation network analysis 
(WGCNA) (Fig. S1–2). Fourth, differentially methylated genes encode “regulatory hubs”
, which are likely to have 
a central role in pain such as glucocorticoid and NFkappa B signaling46–49, the ubiquitin–proteasome system33 
and the dopaminergic, glutamatergic and opioidergic systems50,51. We show that several of these changes in DNA 
methylation in promoters are inversely correlated with mRNA levels (Fig. 1d).
A possible criticism of implicating these highly organized changes in the methylome in chronic pain is that 
they might reflect a general response to injury rather than chronic pain. However, we demonstrate that differ-
ential methylation not only differentiates the injured from the non-injured group but that there is a correlation 
between the extent of DNA methylation changes and quantitative measures of pain severity in thousands of 
probes in individual animals. Examples of genes correlated with pain severity included major epigenetic reg-
ulators dnmt1 and dnmt3a, histone deacetylases hdac1 and hdac5, as well as mu and delta opioid receptors19,52, 
ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate receptors and dopamine receptors50,51. Interestingly, changes in DNA 
methylation in the mu opioid receptor were previously associated with chronic intake of opioids in humans who 
suffered from clinical pain19. 81 out of 82 modules were affected by the pain condition; the average methylation 
levels of the genes in each module was either increased or decreased as a function of the severity of the pain (Fig. 
S2-B). Moreover, coordinated correlation of the extent of methylation change with pain sensitivity levels in indi-
vidual rats is observed across numerous probes covering entire spans of gene loci as is illustrated for dnmt1 and 
nfkb1 (Fig. 2e).
The correlations between pain sensitivity and changes in DNA methylation in PFC are consistent with clinical 
studies reporting that both pain duration and intensity are related to changes in PFC structure and function5,53. 
To ensure that the impact of chronic pain on the central nervous and immune systems had time to fully develop, 
rats were evaluated 9 months post-injury, representing a significant proportion of their total lifespan. Additional 
studies are needed to determine the time course of injury-induced changes in DNA methylation and their rela-
tionship to behavior and development of cognitive impairment.
Many of the dysregulated genes and pathways identified have been associated with the negative impact of 
chronic pain on anxiety, depression and cognition. Gene set analysis revealed enrichments in conditions includ-
ing depression, anhedonia and long-term potentiation. Furthermore, many of the genes highlighted in Fig. 2 that 
are correlated with pain sensitivity are also implicated in depression and anhedonia, including the dopamine D2 
receptor and the mu- and delta-opioid receptors, and inhibition of HDAC activity in the PFC has anti-depressant 
actions54. Finally, we highlight GRIN1, a subunit of the NMDA receptor, which has a central role in neuroplas-
ticity throughout the CNS. We therefore propose that pain-related changes in DNA methylation are an impor-
tant mechanism underlying the widespread changes in cortical structure and function observed in many human 
chronic pain conditions.
Our results implicate wide networks and gene pathways in chronic pain and for the first time show correlation 
between severity of pain and methylation states of numerous genes in multigenic nodes. While some of the meth-
ylation changes may be consequential to other upstream methylation changes, it is highly plausible that many of 
the changes play a causal role in chronic pain. We therefore hypothesize that the changes in methylation of the 
genes within networks of interrelated genes will impact the activity of cellular pathways associated with those 
genes and we speculate that the activity of these cellular pathways may contribute to pain severity. This complex 
landscape of changes poises challenges for establishing causality as well as for designing therapeutics that could 
reverse chronic pain. How do we target such a complex network to demonstrate causation and intervention ? One 
possibility might be designing therapeutic combinations that target entire pathways by acting on “hub” proteins 
rather than a single or few candidate genes. Our study delineates the pathways and hubs that might be targeted in 
future experiments. It is interesting to note in this context that examples of ”hub” proteins are the two important 
DNA methylation enzymes dnmt1 and dnmt3a, which showed gene wide DNA methylation differences that cor-
relate with pain sensitivity. Alterations in activity of these genes might explain the widespread loss in methylation 
seen in the chronic pain brain: 61% of the probes at promoters (FDR < 
 0.2) were less methylated in SNI rats. 
hdac1 and hdac5 which are differentially methylated are similarly important in regulating histone acetylation 
across many genes. These genes might play an upstream role in the hierarchy of epigenetic events involved in 
chronic pain and might be targets for reversing the “chronic pain” DNA methylation landscape. The changes in 
DNA methylation in nodal epigenetic regulators strongly implicate epigenetic processes in chronic pain. Our pre-
viously work showing that the effects of chronic pain could be reversed by environmental enrichment17 support 
the hypothesis that reversible epigenetic processes such as DNA methylation play a causal role in the chronic pain 
phenotype and that epigenetic therapy is a potential approach for treating chronic pain.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
The utility of DNA methylation biomarkers in neurology and psychiatry is dependent on whether informative 
changes could be found in peripheral tissues such as saliva or blood. There is a long ongoing discussion on the 
relevance of changes in DNA methylation in peripheral tissues to phenotypes that are brain-driven because of 
the inherent tissue specificity of the DNA methylation pattern. One rationale for looking for such markers is the 
idea that there might be stochastic or experience-driven changes in DNA methylation early in development in 
common precursors of the neuroendocrine lineage that are maintained through embryogenesis and later in life. 
Alternatively, it was proposed that the DNA methylation response to experience and the environment, including 
brain-centered experiences, could target multiple tissues and that the resulting changes in DNA methylation 
reflect the different physiological roles of particular tissues in the response to the challenge11,22,55.
A major finding of our study is that genome-wide DNA methylation modifications of T cells are also associ-
ated with nerve injury, strongly supporting the hypothesis that experience could drive DNA methylation changes 
in multiple tissues even in adults. This is consistent with the wide range of clinical symptoms associated with 
peripheral neuropathy including in the immune system and has broad implications37.
T cell infiltration has been described in the peripheral and central nervous system following nerve injury, the 
absence of T cells results in reduced hypersensitivity and differential methylation patterns in whole blood samples 
from humans is associated with altered pain sensitivity20,38,56. The cellular pathways and their potential upstream 
regulators (e.g. TNF, IL1B, TGFB1) associated with differentially methylated genes in T cells are involved in the 
maladaptive changes associated with allodynia and hyperalgesia as well as in pain chronicity38,40,41.
Body of evidence demonstrating that life experience results in broad changes in DNA methylation in blood 
cells is growing rapidly. For example, social economic position in humans57, maternal deprivation in rhesus mon-
keys11, maternal prenatal stress12,22,58, maternal depression21 and a history of childhood physical aggression are 
associated with broad DNA methylation signatures in blood57 or T-cells59 and brain21,22. The changes observed 
in the current study may not only contribute to chronic pain but also reflect the unrelenting stress of living 
with chronic pain. Therefore, the long-term changes in DNA methylation in T cells may play an active role in 
the pathophysiology of peripheral neuropathies by embedding the transient and chronic exposures to cytokines 
released after nerve injury in addition to serving as biomarkers of chronic pain.
Most of the promoters (72%) identified as differentially methylated in T cells after nerve injury were also 
affected in the brain. We identified modules of genes that co-vary in the two tissues. While the methylation 
profiles in some of these modules were affected in the same direction in the brain and the T cells, others went in 
opposite direction. This is consistent with the idea that the brain and the immune system play different roles in 
chronic pain. It is interesting nevertheless that in spite of the different physiological roles, common genes are tar-
geted in both tissues and many genes show similar DNA methylation changes. The changes in DNA methylation 
in T cells like in the PFC are not just a general consequence of injury since in both tissues the differences in DNA 
methylation correlate with differences in mechanical hypersensitivity.
Computational prediction models (penalized logistic and linear regressions) run on differentially methylated 
genes in T cells (FDR < 
 0.2) identified a set of 11 genes able to differentiate neuropathic animals from controls 
and a pair of two genes able to predict the mechanical hypersensitivity thresholds in both neuropathic animals 
and controls. These results suggest that T cell DNA methylation differences might be used in the future as bio-
markers not only for the diagnosis and treatment of chronic pain but also for early prediction of high suscepti-
bility to developing chronic pain. It is important to note in this context that discordance in pain sensitivity in 
identical twins was correlated with DNA methylation differences, including in the TRPA1 promoter, in white 
blood cells20.
In conclusion, these data suggest that persistent pain is associated with broad and highly organized 
organism-wide changes in DNA methylation, including two critical biological systems: the central nervous and 
immune systems. These findings reveal potential new avenues for the development of novel therapeutics directed 
at either the molecular regulation of methylation or at key genes or pathways dysregulated in chronic pain. This 
work also provides a possible mechanistic explanation for commonly observed comorbidities observed in chronic 
pain (i.e anxiety, depression). Finally, the sheer magnitude of the impact of chronic pain, particularly in the pre-
frontal cortex, illustrates the profound impact that living with chronic pain exerts on an individual. Beyond the 
example of chronic pain, the robust and highly organized DNA methylation changes seen here in response to 
nerve injury provides some of the strongest evidence to date that experience effects DNA methylation landscapes 
at large distances in time and space.
Methods
Detailed methods could be found in supplementary materials and methods online.
Animals and Spared Nerve Injury (SNI). 
Sixteen male Sprague-Dawley rats (Charles River, St-Constant, 
QC, Canada) weighing 180 g at their arrival were used for all experiments. They were housed 2 per cages, under 
standard conditions (fresh filtered liter, 12-hour light/dark cycle, temperature: 21 ± 
 2 °C, humidity: 40–60%). 
All experiments were performed blind to treatment group. All experiments were approved by the Animal Care 
Committee at McGill University and conformed to the ethical guidelines of the Canadian Council on Animal 
Care and the guidelines of the International Association for the Study of Pain Committee for Research and Ethical 
Issues60. Following a one-week habituation period, the spared nerve injury (SNI) model of neuropathic pain (or 
sham surgery controls) was induced on the left leg (n = 
 8) under isoflurane anesthesia61. Mechanical hypersen-
sitivity was tested nine months after surgery on plantar surface of both hind paws using von Frey filaments as 
previously described62.
Isolation of PFC and CD3+ T Cells and tissue extraction. 
The rat PFC was dissected following isoflu-
rane anesthesia and decapitation and was defined as Bregma + 
2.5 to + 
4.2, + 
2 mm on either side of the midline 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
and a depth of 5 to 6 mm from the dorsal surface of the cortex. This region, corresponding to the rat mPFC, 
encompasses the prelimbic and infralimbic subregions and is the closest functional equivalent of the human 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex63. Brain imaging studies have demonstrated that chronic pain is associated with 
altered structure, function and connectivity of the human DLPFC4,65. T cells were isolated from the PBMCs 
by immunomagnetic isolation using CD3+ Dynabeads (Life Technologies, Burlington, ON, Canada) as previ-
ously described11. CD3 polypeptides play pivotal role in intracellular assembly, surface expression, and signal 
transduction via the pre-T-cell receptor (pre-TCR) and TCR complexes. CD3 chains are required for thymocyte 
differentiation and are expressed in virtually all-mature T cells66. T-cell and brain DNA and RNA were extracted 
using the AllPrep DNA/RNA Qiagen kit (Hilden, Germany) and were quantified using the Qubit system (Life 
Technologies, Burlington, ON, Canada).
Analysis of genome-wide promoter DNA methylation. 
The procedure used for MeDIP analysis was 
adapted from previously published protocols11,22. A detailed description of the analysis and bioinformatics meth-
ods used can be found in supplementary methods. Custom 400K promoter tiling array designs were used for this 
study (Agilent technologies). Microarray probe sequences were selected to tile at 100 bp spacing all gene promoter 
regions defined as the genomic interval from − 
1000 bp upstream to + 
250 bp downstream of each transcription 
start site as defined for the rat genome by the Ensembl database (version 60.34b) (http://www.ensembl.org). In 
addition, several candidate genes were tiled from − 
50 Kb of the transcription start site to + 
 50Kb after the tran-
scription end site. These genes included: Arc, Cdk5, Creb1, Crebbp, Ddr1, Dlg4, Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Drd1a, Drd2, 
Ehmt2, Fos, Fosb, Gabrd, Gdnf, Gpr156, Gria2, Grin1, Grin2a, Grin2b, Grm2, Grm3, Grm5, Hdac1, Hdac5, 
Homer1, Homer2, Igf2, LOC367858, LOC691178, Mapk1, Mapk3/4/6/9/10/11/12/13/14/15, Nfkb1, Ntrk2, 
Q1LZ51, Rac1, Sirt1, Sirt2.
Gene-specific validation of DNA methylation & mRNA expression analysis. 
Gene-specific 
real-time PCR validation of MeDIP-microarray results were performed on the amplified and input bound frac-
tions. Relative enrichment was determined after normalizing from the input fraction in each sample. For QPCR 
on mRNA, cDNA synthesis was performed using random hexamer primers (Invitrogen) according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions. Tubuline beta 5 was used as the reference gene. The list of primers is available in Table S9.
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) on differentially methylated genes. 
For biological function 
analyses, selected genes were overlaid on the global molecular network developed from information contained 
in the Ingenuity Pathway knowledge base (www.ingenuity.com) or Genomatix (https://www.genomatix.de). The 
significance of the association between the datasets and biological functions, canonical pathway or diseases is 
scored using a p-value calculation (Fisher Exact Test).
Weighted gene co-methylation network analyze (WGCNA) and module identification. 
The 
average methylation level of differentially methylated probes per promoter was first calculated. WGCNA and 
module identification were performed as described in reference26. The modules were then assessed for enrich-
ment in biological functions and canonical pathways using Ingenuity Pathway analysis software.
Identification of interaction pathways (Cytoscape environment). 
Lists of differentially methyl-
ated genes (FDR < 
 0.2) were analyzed using Cytoscape, an open source software27, to visualize the interactions 
between different pathways and the NetworkAnalyzer28 plug in installed in Cytoscape to determine degrees for 
proteins corresponding to the differentially methylated genes30.
Identification of “predictors” of pain severity. 
Predictors of pain severity were generated and tested 
using L1-penalized regression67 as implemented in the R package ‘penalized’68. Methylation input to the regres-
sion models were promoter level summaries obtained by taking the average probe intensity across each promoter.
References
1. Moulin, D. et al. Pharmacological management of chronic neuropathic pain: Revised consensus statement from the Canadian Pain 
Society. Pain research & management: the journal of the Canadian Pain Society = 
 journal de la societe canadienne pour le traitement 
de la douleur 19, 328–335 (2014).
2. Baliki, M. N., Chang, P. C., Baria, A. T., Centeno, M. V. & Apkarian, A. V. Resting-sate functional reorganization of the rat limbic 
system following neuropathic injury. Scientific reports 4, 6186 (2014).
3. Jensen, M. P., Chodroff, M. J. & Dworkin, R. H. The impact of neuropathic pain on health-related quality of life: review and 
implications. Neurology 68, 1178–1182 (2007).
4. Schweinhardt, P. & Bushnell, M. C. Pain imaging in health and disease--how far have we come ? The Journal of clinical investigation 
120, 3788–3797 (2010).
5. Seminowicz, D. A. et al. MRI structural brain changes associated with sensory and emotional function in a rat model of long-term 
neuropathic pain. Neuroimage 47, 1007–1014 (2009).
6. Krishnan, K. R. et al. Chronic pain and depression. II. Symptoms of anxiety in chronic low back pain patients and their relationship 
to subtypes of depression. Pain 22, 289–294 (1985).
7. Krishnan, K. R. et al. Chronic pain and depression. I. Classification of depression in chronic low back pain patients. Pain 22, 
279–287 (1985).
8. Tajerian, M. et al. Peripheral nerve injury is associated with chronic, reversible changes in global DNA methylation in the mouse 
prefrontal cortex. PloS one 8, e55259 (2013).
9. Low, L. A. et al. Nerve injury causes long-term attentional deficits in rats. Neuroscience letters 529, 103–107 (2012).
10. Suderman, M. et al. Conserved epigenetic sensitivity to early life experience in the rat and human hippocampus. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109 Suppl 2, 17266–17272 (2012).
11. Provencal, N. et al. The Signature of Maternal Rearing in the Methylome in Rhesus Macaque Prefrontal Cortex and T Cells. J 
Neurosci 32, 15626–15642 (2012).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
12. Cao-Lei, L. et al. DNA methylation signatures triggered by prenatal maternal stress exposure to a natural disaster: project ice storm. 
PLoS One 9, e107653 (2014).
13. Guillemin, C. et al. DNA methylation signature of childhood chronic physical aggression in T cells of both men and women. PloS 
one 9, e86822 (2014).
14. Tajerian, M. et al. DNA methylation of SPARC and chronic low back pain. Mol Pain 7, 65 (2011).
15. Alvarado, S. et al. Peripheral nerve injury is accompanied by chronic transcriptome-wide changes in the mouse prefrontal cortex. 
Molecular pain 9, 21 (2013).
16. Alvarado, S. et al. An epigenetic hypothesis for the genomic memory of pain. Front Cell Neurosci 9, doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00088 
(2015).
17. Vachon, P. et al. Alleviation of chronic neuropathic pain by environmental enrichment in mice well after the establishment of 
chronic pain. Behavioral and brain functions 9, 22 (2013).
18. Grace, P. M. et al. Harnessing pain heterogeneity and RNA transcriptome to identify blood-based pain biomarkers: a novel 
correlational study design and bioinformatics approach in a graded chronic constriction injury model. Journal of neurochemistry 
122, 976–994 (2012).
19. Doehring, A., Oertel, B. G., Sittl, R. & Lotsch, J. Chronic opioid use is associated with increased DNA methylation correlating with 
increased clinical pain. Pain 154, 15–23 (2013).
20. Bell, J. T. et al. Differential methylation of the TRPA1 promoter in pain sensitivity. Nature communications 5, 2978 (2014).
21. Nemoda, Z. et al. Maternal depression is associated with DNA methylation changes in cord blood T lymphocytes and adult 
hippocampi. Translational psychiatry 5, e545 (2015).
22. Nieratschker, V. et al. MORC1 exhibits cross-species differential methylation in association with early life stress as well as genome-
wide association with MDD. Transl Psychiatry 4, e429 (2014).
23. Kulis, M., Queiros, A. C., Beekman, R. & Martin-Subero, J. I. Intragenic DNA methylation in transcriptional regulation, normal 
differentiation and cancer. Biochimica et biophysica acta 1829, 1161–1174 (2013).
24. Coleman-Derr, D. & Zilberman, D. DNA Methylation, H2A.Z, and the Regulation of Constitutive Expression. Cold Spring Harbor 
symposia on quantitative biology. 77, 147–154 (2012).
25. Langfelder, P. & Horvath, S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network analysis. BMC bioinformatics 9, 559 (2008).
26. Zhang, B. & Horvath, S. A general framework for weighted gene co-expression network analysis. Statistical applications in genetics 
and molecular biology 4, Article17 (2005).
27. Shannon, P. et al. Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome research 
13, 2498–2504 (2003).
28. Assenov, Y., Ramirez, F., Schelhorn, S. E., Lengauer, T. & Albrecht, M. Computing topological parameters of biological networks. 
Bioinformatics 24, 282–284 (2008).
29. Breitkreutz, B. J., Stark, C. & Tyers, M. The GRID: the General Repository for Interaction Datasets. Genome biology 4, R23 (2003).
30. Jeong, H., Mason, S. P., Barabasi, A. L. & Oltvai, Z. N. Lethality and centrality in protein networks. Nature 411, 41–42 (2001).
31. Barabasi, A. L. & Oltvai, Z. N. Network biology: understanding the cell’s functional organization. Nature reviews. Genetics 5, 
101–113 (2004).
32. Denk, F. et al. HDAC inhibitors attenuate the development of hypersensitivity in models of neuropathic pain. Pain 154, 1668–1679 
(2013).
33. Moss, A. et al. A role of the ubiquitin-proteasome system in neuropathic pain. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the 
Society for Neuroscience 22, 1363–1372 (2002).
34. Vardimon, L., Kressmann, A., Cedar, H., Maechler, M. & Doerfler, W. Expression of a cloned adenovirus gene is inhibited by in vitro 
methylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 79, 1073–1077 (1982).
35. Yang, X. et al. Gene body methylation can alter gene expression and is a therapeutic target in cancer. Cancer Cell 26, 577–590, doi: 
10.1016/j.ccr.2014.07.028 (2014).
36. Razin, A. & Szyf, M. DNA methylation patterns. Formation and function. Biochim Biophys Acta 782, 331–342 (1984).
37. Ji, R. R., Xu, Z. Z. & Gao, Y. J. Emerging targets in neuroinflammation-driven chronic pain. Nature reviews 13, 533–548 (2014).
38. Austin, P. J. & Moalem-Taylor, G. The neuro-immune balance in neuropathic pain: involvement of inflammatory immune cells, 
immune-like glial cells and cytokines. Journal of neuroimmunology 229, 26–50 (2010).
39. Marchand, F., Perretti, M. & McMahon, S. B. Role of the immune system in chronic pain. Nature reviews. Neuroscience 6, 521–532 
(2005).
40. Sacerdote, P. et al. Cytokine modulation is necessary for efficacious treatment of experimental neuropathic pain. Journal of 
neuroimmune pharmacology: the official journal of the Society on NeuroImmune Pharmacology 8, 202–211 (2013).
41. Lantero, A., Tramullas, M., Diaz, A. & Hurle, M. A. Transforming growth factor-beta in normal nociceptive processing and 
pathological pain models. Molecular neurobiology 45, 76–86 (2012).
42. Lokk, K. et al. DNA methylome profiling of human tissues identifies global and tissue-specific methylation patterns. Genome biology 
15, r54 (2014).
43. Cheng, H. Y. & Penninger, J. M. When the DREAM is gone: from basic science to future prospectives in pain management and 
beyond. Expert opinion on therapeutic targets 7, 249–263 (2003).
44. Nakagawa, T. & Kaneko, S. SLC1 glutamate transporters and diseases: psychiatric diseases and pathological pain. Current molecular 
pharmacology 6, 66–73 (2013).
45. Szyf, M. How do environments talk to genes? Nat Neurosci 16, 2–4 (2013).
46. Alexander, J. K., DeVries, A. C., Kigerl, K. A., Dahlman, J. M. & Popovich, P. G. Stress exacerbates neuropathic pain via 
glucocorticoid and NMDA receptor activation. Brain, behavior, and immunity 23, 851–860 (2009).
47. Wang, S. et al. Central glucocorticoid receptors modulate the expression and function of spinal NMDA receptors after peripheral 
nerve injury. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 25, 488–495 (2005).
48. Wang, S. et al. Expression of central glucocorticoid receptors after peripheral nerve injury contributes to neuropathic pain behaviors 
in rats. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 24, 8595–8605 (2004).
49. Chu, L. W. et al. Neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory activities of atorvastatin in a rat chronic constriction injury model. 
International journal of immunopathology and pharmacology 25, 219–230 (2012).
50. Cardoso-Cruz, H., Dourado, M., Monteiro, C., Matos, M. R. & Galhardo, V. Activation of dopaminergic D2/D3 receptors modulates 
dorsoventral connectivity in the hippocampus and reverses the impairment of working memory after nerve injury. The Journal of 
neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 34, 5861–5873 (2014).
51. Zhuo, M. Long-term potentiation in the anterior cingulate cortex and chronic pain. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of 
London. Series B, Biological sciences 369, 20130146 (2014).
52. Walter, C., Doehring, A., Oertel, B. G. & Lotsch, J. micro-opioid receptor gene variant OPRM1 118 A > 
 G: a summary of its 
molecular and clinical consequences for pain. Pharmacogenomics 14, 1915–1925 (2013).
53. Rodriguez-Raecke, R., Niemeier, A., Ihle, K., Ruether, W. & May, A. Brain gray matter decrease in chronic pain is the consequence 
and not the cause of pain. The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 29, 13746–13750 (2009).
54. Covington, H. E. 3rd, Maze, I., Vialou, V. & Nestler, E. J. Antidepressant action of HDAC inhibition in the prefrontal cortex. 
Neuroscience 298, 329–335 (2015).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
13
Scientific RepoRts | 6:19615 | DOI: 10.1038/srep19615
55. Szyf, M. The genome- and system-wide response of DNA methylation to early life adversity and its implication on mental health. 
Canadian journal of psychiatry. Revue canadienne de psychiatrie 58, 697–704 (2013).
56. Calvo, M., Dawes, J. M. & Bennett, D. L. The role of the immune system in the generation of neuropathic pain. Lancet Neurol 11, 
629–642 (2012).
57. Borghol, N. et al. Associations with early-life socio-economic position in adult DNA methylation. International journal of 
epidemiology 41, 62–74 (2012).
58. Cao-Lei, L. et al. Pregnant women’s cognitive appraisal of a natural disaster affects DNA methylation in their children 13 years later: 
Project Ice Storm. Translational psychiatry 5, e515 (2015).
59. Provencal, N. et al. Association of childhood chronic physical aggression with a DNA methylation signature in adult human T cells. 
PloS one 9, e89839 (2014).
60. Zimmermann, M. Ethical guidelines for investigations of experimental pain in conscious animals. Pain 16, 109–110 (1983).
61. Decosterd, I. & Woolf, C. J. Spared nerve injury: an animal model of persistent peripheral neuropathic pain. Pain 87, 149–158 
(2000).
62. Chaplan, S. R., Bach, F. W., Pogrel, J. W., Chung, J. M. & Yaksh, T. L. Quantitative assessment of tactile allodynia in the rat paw. 
Journal of neuroscience methods 53, 55–63 (1994).
63. Farovik, A., Dupont, L. M., Arce, M. & Eichenbaum, H. Medial prefrontal cortex supports recollection, but not familiarity, in the rat. 
The Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 28, 13428–13434 (2008).
64. Ceko, M. et al. Partial recovery of abnormal insula and dorsolateral prefrontal connectivity to cognitive networks in chronic low 
back pain after treatment. Human brain mapping 36, 2075–2092 (2015).
65. Seminowicz, D. A. et al. Effective treatment of chronic low back pain in humans reverses abnormal brain anatomy and function. The 
Journal of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 31, 7540–7550 (2011).
66. Dave, V. P. Hierarchical role of CD3 chains in thymocyte development. Immunological reviews 232, 22–33 (2009).
67. Tibshirani, R. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. J Royal Statist Soc B 58, 267–288 (1996).
68. Goeman, J. J. L1 penalized estimation in the Cox proportional hazards model. Biometrical journal. Biometrische Zeitschrift 52, 70–84 
(2010).
Acknowledgements
This study was funded by a grant from the Canadian Institute of Health Research (MOP-42411) and the Sackler 
program in epigenetics and psychobiology at McGill University to MS and a Pfizer Canada Neuropathic Pain 
Research Award to MS and LSS.
Author Contributions
“R.M., M.Su., S.G., L.S. and M.Sz. wrote the main manuscript text; R.M., S.D., M.M. and K.K. performed 
experiments, R.M. and M.Su. performed bioinformatics analysis. All authors reviewed the manuscript”
.
Additional Information
Accession codes: MeDIP and transcription arrays were deposited in GEO accession number GSE70008.
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Massart, R. et al. Overlapping signatures of chronic pain in the DNA methylation 
landscape of prefrontal cortex and peripheral T cells. Sci. Rep. 6, 19615; doi: 10.1038/srep19615 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons 
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy 
of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
