 OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Secreted αKlotho isoform protects against age-dependent
memory deficits
A Massó1, A Sánchez1,2, A Bosch1,2,3, L Giménez-Llort2,4 and M Chillón1,2,5,6
αKlotho is a gene regulator of aging, increasing life expectancy when overexpressed and accelerating the development of aging
phenotypes when inhibited. In mice, expression levels of the secreted isoform Klotho (s-KL) are very high in the brain, suggesting
that s-KL activity may have an important role in the nervous system. Here we study the functional relevance at behavioural level of
modifying s-KL levels in the aging brain. We used AAVrh10 vectors to deliver and sustained expression of s-KL in 6- and 12-month-
old wild-type C57BL/6J males. This study demonstrates for we believe the first time in vivo that 6 months after a single injection of
s-KL into the central nervous system, long-lasting and quantifiable enhancement of learning and memory capabilities are found.
More importantly, cognitive improvement is also observable in 18-month-old mice treated once, at 12 months of age. These
findings demonstrate the therapeutic potential of s-KL as a treatment for cognitive decline associated with aging.
Molecular Psychiatry advance online publication, 31 October 2017; doi:10.1038/mp.2017.211
INTRODUCTION
In the late 90's, a study in mice revealed that mutation of a single
gene (αKlotho) causes rapid aging with typical symptoms such as
atherosclerosis, osteoporosis and ectopic calcification in different
tissues, leading to a short average life expectancy of 2 months.1,2 In
brain,
kl−/kl−
mice
have
neuronal
degeneration
in
the
hippocampus;3 hypomyelination;4 decreased levels of related
synapse proteins;3 defective axonal transport;5 and deficits in
memory processing.6 Consistent with these findings, a recent article
by Dubal et al.7 demonstrates that elevating Klotho levels have
beneficial effects on synaptic and cognitive functions through a
mechanism involving the GluN2B subunit of the NMDA receptor
(NMDAR). Further, chronic administration of ligustilide prevents the
development of Alzheimer's disease-like neuropathologies and
memory impairment via klotho upregulation.8 Moreover, studies in
three independent human cohorts showed that human carriers of
the klotho KL-VS allele, which increases secretion of Klotho in vitro,
obtained better results in various cognitive tests.9
To date, all studies have focused on the transmembrane and the
processed forms of Klotho (named m-KL and p-KL by Foster et al.10).
In pioneering work, Masso et al.11 have recently demonstrated that
alternative splicing of Klotho (s-KL) produces a stable truncated
isoform, which can be detected directly in mouse protein extracts.
This work also shows a strong correlation between high expression
levels of the two klotho transcripts in brain and healthy status while
aging. Significantly, the secreted s-KL isoform is almost exclusively
(490%) found in brain, while m-KL is mostly expressed in kidney and
to a lesser extent in brain. This suggests s-KL may have an important
role in brain.11 More detailed study revealed that the s-KL protein
could be detected in different murine brain regions involved in
learning and memory processes, such as prefrontal cortex, motor
cortex and hippocampus. Conceivably both isoforms may have similar
roles, but as they are transcribed differently, they may have distinct
functions. Here we study the role of s-KL in cognitive processes. We
hypothesise it is a neuroprotective protein involved in the onset and/
or progression of cognitive deficits associated with aging. To explore
its effects, we modified s-KL levels in the brains of adult wild-type
C57Bl/6J male mice using AAVrh10 gene therapy vectors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
C57Bl/6J
mice
(Harlan
Laboratories)
were
housed
under
standard
laboratory conditions (food and water ad lib, 22 ± 2 °C, 12 h light:dark
starting at 08:00 hours). This study was carried out in strict accordance with
the current National regulations (Generalitat de Catalunya Decret 214/97,
30 July 1997). The Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of the
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona approved all procedures described in
this study (protocol number: CEEAH 2196/DMAH 7370).
Viral vector production and purification
AAVrh10 vectors (Null, s-KL, shRNA-sKL, shRNA-scrambled) were produced,
purified in the biosafety level 2 facilities of the Unitat Mixta UAB-VHIR and
the Vector Production Unit (VPU) (http://sct.uab.cat/upv/). Briefly, vectors
were generated using the triple transfection system in HEK293 cells. After
48 h, AAV vectors were harvested, treated with benzonase, purified in an
iodixanol gradient, and titred using the Picogreen system.12 In all cases,
transgene expression was driven by a CMV promoter.
In vivo administration of AAV vectors
Mice
were
anaesthetised
by
intraperitoneal
injection
of
ketamine
(10 mg kg − 1; Imalgene 500; Rhone-Merieux, Barcelona, Spain) and xylazine
(1 mg kg − 1; Rompun; Bayer, Barcelona, Spain). Deeply anaesthetised
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Universitat Autònoma Barcelona 5th level, Edifici H, Institut Neurociencies, Campus UAB, Bellaterra, Spain; 2Institute de
Neurociènces (INc), Universitat Autònoma Barcelona, Campus UAB, Bellaterra, Spain; 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre enfermedades Neurodegenerativas
(CIBERNED), Instituto Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; 4Department of Psychiatry and Forensic Medicine, School of Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB, Bellaterra,
Spain; 5Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Research Group on Gene Therapy at Nervous System, Passeig de la Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain and 6Institució Catalana de
Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. Correspondence: Dr M Chillon, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Universitat Autonoma Barcelona 5th
level, Edifici H, Institut Neurociencies, Campus UAB, Bellaterra 08193, Spain, or Dr L Giménez-Llort, Department of Psychiatry and Forensic Medicine, School of Medicine,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Campus UAB, Bellaterra, Spain.
E-mail: miguel.chillon@uab.es or lidia.gimenez@uab.cat
Received 9 May 2017; revised 24 July 2017; accepted 28 July 2017
Molecular Psychiatry (2018) 23, 1937–1947
www.nature.com/mp
 animals were placed in a stereotactic frame and injected with 10E10vg of
vector at a speed of 0.5 μl min − 1 using an ultramicropump (World
Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL, USA). Injected volume was of 3 μl in a
single dose for intraventicular administration, or two doses–one per
hemisphere–of 1.5 μl each for hippocampal administration. AAV vectors
were administered using known coordinates: intracerebroventricular
(anteroposterior: − 0.22 mm; Lateral: 1.0 mm; Depth: 2.5 mm) and intra-
hippocampal (anteroposterior: − 2.46 mm; Mediolateral: 1.5 mm; Depth:
2.0 mm).
Physical status: body weight and sensorimotor function
The body weight of animals was monitored once a month while
sensorimotor function was measured only once, at the beginning of the
behavioural battery of tests. Reflexes (visual reflex and posterior legs
extension reflex tests) were measured by triplicate by holding the animal
by his tail and slowly lowering it onto a black surface. The motor
coordination and equilibrium were assessed by the distance covered and
the latency to fall off a horizontal wooden rod (1.3 cm wide) on two
consecutive 20 s trials, respectively. Prehensility and motor coordination
were measured as the distance covered on the wire hang test, which
consisted in allowing the animal to cling from the middle of a horizontal
wire (diameter: 2 mm, length: 40 cm, divided into eight 5 cm segments)
with its forepaws for two trials of 5 s and a third 60 s trial. Muscle strength
was measured as the time until falling off the wire in the 60 s trial. All the
apparatus was suspended 40 cm above a padded table.
Behavioural and cognition assessment
Open field test.
Mice were placed in the centre of the apparatus (home-
made, wooden, white, 55 × 55 × 25 cm high) and observed for 5 min. The
latency of the sequence of the behavioural events (latency to leave the
centre, to arrive to the periphery, to perform the first rearing) was
recorded. Horizontal (locomotion) and vertical (rearings) activities were
also recorded. Self-grooming behaviour (latency and number of episodes)
and defecation were measured as emotional behaviours.
T-maze.
The
spontaneous
exploratory
behaviour
was
tested
in
a
T-shaped maze (arms, length 25 cm) by determining the time elapsed
until the animal crossed (four-paw criteria) the intersection of the three
arms. The working memory paradigm consisted in two consecutive trials:
one forced choice and one free choice, with a 90 s intertrial interval. In the
forced choice, only one of the arms according to a random order
(contrabalanced in each group) was accessible. After spending 20 s
exploring the accessible arm (learning criterion), the animal was put back
into the home cage-starting box. In the free choice trial, both arms were
accessible. The arm chosen by the mouse and the time spent in each arm,
as well as the time spent to complete the exploration of the three arms
were recorded. The choice of the already visited arm in the previous trial
before exploring the arm that was inaccessible was considered as an error.
The olfactory trails were removed by cleaning the surface of the maze
during the intertrial intervals.13
Morris water maze.
Animals were tested in four paradigms in the
Morris water maze (MWM)14 consisting of one cue task for visual
perceptual learning, 4 days of place task for spatial reference learning
and memory followed by two probe trials for short-term (2 h) and long-
term (24 h) memories. In the place learning task, mice were trained to
locate a platform (7 cm diameter, 1.5 cm below the water surface, position
indicated by a visible 5 × 8 cm striped flag) in a circular pool (Intex
Recreation, Long Beach, CA, USA; 91 cm diameter, 40 cm height, 25 °C
opaque water) located in a test room with distal visual cues. This required
four platform trial sessions per day with trials spaced 15 min apart. In each
trial, the mouse was gently released (facing the wall) from one randomly
selected starting point (N, S, E or W) and allowed to swim until escaping
onto the platform (always in the middle of the SE quadrant). Mice that
failed to find the platform within 60 s were placed on it for 20 s, the same
period as was allowed for the successful animals. Two hours after the
fourth trial of place learning, the platform was removed from the maze and
the mice performed a probe trial test of 60 s. Twenty-four hours after the
last cued platform trial, animals were tested for the cue learning of a visual
platform consisting of four hidden platform trials (20 min apart). The
platform was hidden 1.5 cm below the water surface, with its new position
(NW) indicated by a visible striped flag (5 × 8 cm), and the distal cues were
removed. During each trial, the escape latency, the distance travelled and
the mean speed were measured by means of a computerised tracking
system (SMART, Panlab, Barcelona, Spain).
Analysis of mRNA levels by qPCR
Total RNA was extracted from the tissue samples using QIAzol Lysis
Reagent (Qiagen, Madrid, Spain), then quantified on a NanoDrop spectro-
photometer (Thermo Scientific, Madrid, Spain), and reverse transcribed
into complimentary DNA (cDNA) with iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad,
El Prat de Llobregat, Spain). Gene-specific primers used for the quantitative
PCR (qPCR) analysis of messenger RNA (mRNA) s-KL levels were: s-KL Fwd:
5′-TGGCTTTCCTCCTTTACCTG-3′;
s-KL
Rv:
5′-GCCGACACTGGGTTTTGT-3′;
m36B4 Fwd: 5′-ATGGGTACAAGCGCGTCCTG-3′; m36B4 Rv: 5′-AGCCGCAAA
TGCAGATGGATC-3′; CMV Fwd: 5′-TCCCGGTGTCTTCTATGGAGG-3′; CMV Rv:
5′-CAACTCCGCCCCATTGACGCA-3′. Quantitative qPCR was performed as
previously described by Masso et al.,11 on a Bio-Rad CFX-384 PCR machine
at the Analysis and Photodocumentation Service of the Universitat
Autonoma Barcelona using iTaqTM Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-
Rad). The analysis of qPCR output data followed the manufacturer-
suggested ΔCt method. Cycle thresholds (Ct) were measured, and the
relative expression of genes was calculated by comparison of Ct values.
Melt-curve analysis was used to confirm the production of a single
amplicon for each gene tested. On the basis of the RT-qPCR assay
efficiency, gene amplification at a level higher than 35 cycles was
considered to have no expression. A ‘no template control’ was also
included in each run.
Western blot analysis
Protein extracts (15–25 μg per sample) from tissue samples were run in
denaturing
acrylamide
gels,
and
then
electrotransferred
to
PDVF
membranes (GE Healthcare, Barcelona, Spain). Membranes were blocked
with TBS-T (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2% Tween-20)
containing 5% skimmed milk, and incubated with the primary K113
antibody. Detection was performed with an appropriate horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (EZBiolab, Carmel, IN, USA) and
enhanced chemiluminiscence reagent (GE Healthcare). The K113 antibody
was used at 1/5000 dilution; polyclonal rabbit anti-actin antibody (Sigma
A2066, Madrid, Spain) at 1/1000; and secondary rabbit HRP-anti-Ig
antibody (DakoCytomation, P0399, Madrid, Spain) at 1/10 000. Band pixel
intensities were quantified using ImageJ (Wayne Rasband National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA) and normalised to actin levels.
Statistical analysis
Values are presented as mean values ± s.e.m. Statistical analyses and
calculations were performed using the G-Stat version 2.0 (GSK, Middlesex,
UK) and Prism 5.04, La Jolla, CA, USA) programs. Statistical analysis
between individual groups was performed by two-tailed unpaired
Student's t-test or one-way of variance analysis of variance followed by
Tukey post hoc test. In all cases, differences in means were considered
statistically significant if Po0.05.
RESULTS
Experimental design in old adult mice (12–418 months setting)
Long-term effects of klotho overexpression in the aging central
nervous system (CNS) were evaluated in C57Bl/6 mice injected at
12 months of age (middle-aged, N = 10), and tested 6 months
later, when they reached old age (18 months), through a battery
of tests for behavioural assessment and functional analysis
(Figure 1a). The study was performed using male mice because
the oestrous cycle of middle-aged rodents is not disrupted like in
humans. Thus, male mice provided a biological scenario free from
sexual hormonal cycles (especially estrogens) known to interact
with cognitive processes. In addition, Kuro-o and collaborators15
have also found greater effects on male animals when over-
expressing KL compared to female mice, suggesting that the male
sex hormones may have synergistic effects with Klotho, or that
female hormone has negative effects with Klotho.
The control group was injected with an AAVrh10 vector (AAV-
Null) carrying a non-codifying DNA sequence and the treated
group with an AAVrh10 vector encoding the secreted (s-KL) Klotho
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1938
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
 Figure 1.
In vivo study in 12-month-old C57Bl/6J male mice. (a) Experimental design. Mice (n = 10 per group) were injected at 12 months of
age with AAVrh10 vectors, and analysed 6 months later by a battery of behavioural tests. (b) Evolution of body weight. Represented as
percentage (%) of initial weight (Control: AAVrh10/null); s-KL: AAVrh10/s-KL. (c) Evaluation of sensory–motor skills: visual reflex, balance and
motor coordination (latencies to fall). Mean ± s.e.m. (d–g) Open field test 12–418 months setting. Tests were performed 6 months after
administration of the viral vectors. Mice (n = 10 per group). (d) Horizontal activity measured as total distance travelled (cm). (e) Vertical activity,
measured as the number of rearings. (f) Horizontal activity at different time points (min). (g) Parameters of spontaneous exploratory activity
mean ± s.e.m. (Student’s t-test: **Po0.01 vs Control).
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1939
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
 isoform. AAV vectors were injected intracerebroventricularly (icv)
to mimic the endogenous production system, in which Klotho
produced in the CNS is released into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
and distributed throughout the brain.
Overexpression of s-KL in the CNS does not affect body weight or
sensorimotor skills in old mice
Behavioural assessment of treated animals started with the
evaluation of putative effects of s-KL in physical status, namely
body weight and reflexes as well as basic sensorimotor functions
such
as
balance,
coordination,
prehensility,
strength
and
resistance. These measures allow detecting possible differences
between groups that could subsequently affect results depending
on motor performance. As observed in Figure 1b, there are no
significant differences in the mean weight between both groups
of animals (P = 0.48). However, s-KL-treated mice had a relatively
stable body weight throughout the 6 months post injection, while
the null-treated group’s weight progressively increased during
middle age and decreased in old age. The results also show a
similar sensorimotor function in s-KL-treated and control groups
as measured by the visual placing and hindlimb reflexes test,
the wood and metal rod tests; and the hanger tests (Figure 1c).
Figure 2.
Quantitative analysis of working memory and learning tasks. Tests were performed 6 months after administration of the viral vectors.
Mice (n = 10 per group). (a) Forced choice in T-maze. (b) Working memory test in T-maze. Morris water maze test: (c) mean latency (s), (d) mean
speed (cm s − 1) and (e) mean distance travelled (cm) to locate the platform. Percentage of travelled distance in training quadrant of the pool,
where the platform was previously located (P), and in the other three quadrants, as opposed to the platform (O), adjacent right (AR) and
adjacent left (AL): (f) probe trial at 2 h, (g) probe trial at 24 h. Mean ± s.e.m. (Student’s t-test: *Po0.05, **Po0.01, ***Po0.001 vs Control,
†Po0.05, ††Po0.01, PT1 s-KL vs PT4 s-KL; ‡‡‡Po0.001 PT1 Control vs PT4 Control).
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1940
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
 We therefore, assume that all animals were in similar physical
conditions when analysed in subsequent behavioural tests.
s-KL overexpression in the CNS ameliorates age-related motor
decline without affecting anxiety-like behaviours in old mice
Because locomotion and exploratory behaviours decrease with
age,16 we first sought to determine whether overexpression of the
secreted Klotho isoform in the CNS could affect locomotor/
exploratory behaviour in injected mice compared to controls
using the open field test. This test was developed to study
neophobia and anxiety-like behaviours, and is most often used in
rodents to qualitatively and quantitatively measure general
locomotor activity (horizontal and vertical activities) and will-
ingness to explore (mostly shown by the vertical activity).17 Open
field activity, including total distance travelled, rearing exploratory
behaviour, latency of behavioural events, self-grooming behaviour
and defecations, were examined in order to determine whether
sKL overexpression in the aged mice brain elicited changes in
locomotion,
exploratory
activity,
emotional
and
anxiety-like
behaviours. As shown in Figure 1d, when tested at the age of
18–19 months, mice previously icv administered at 12 months
with s-KL travelled a greater total distance compared to control
mice (P = 0.0054), while no changes in vertical exploratory activity
were found (Figure 1e). Interestingly, the greater locomotor
activity observed in s-KL-treated mice does not appear to be
related to anxiety, since differences in the distance travelled were
not observed in the first 3 min of the test (Figure 1f). This is in
agreement with the other parameters measured, such as the
sequence of behavioural events and the number of defecations,
which indicate similar levels of neophobia and emotionality in
both groups of animals when confronting the open arena
(Figure 1g). Only, a reduction in the number of groomings
(P = 0.0032) in treated animals was statistically significant.
CNS s-KL overexpression improves cognitive performance in old
mice
In order to study the possible long-lasting neuroprotective effect
of Klotho in the CNS, animal’s cognitive skills were evaluated in
two learning and memory tests: T-maze and MWM. As shown in
Figure 2a, in the forced choice tasks in the T-maze all groups met
the criteria similarly, although not all animals were able to
complete the task. Subsequently, only those animals that met the
criteria were administered a second trial, the memory task. Results
show that the increase in s-KL expression in the CNS in aged mice
significantly improved their memory score compared to the
control group. This is demonstrated by significantly less errors in
choosing the maze path (P = 0.0018). Moreover, this ability was
sustained over 3 consecutive days (Figure 2b).
Further analysis of cognitive abilities in treated animals was
performed
in
the
MWM.
Notably
swimming
speeds
were
significantly higher in the group treated with s-KL (Figure 2d).
This is in agreement with the increased horizontal locomotor
activity observed in these same animals in the open field test. We
therefore considered distance was a more accurate variable than
latencies or speed to evaluate learning and memory skills in these
animals. Indeed when the distance travelled to get to the platform
was analysed (Figure 2e), the effect of s-KL seen in latency
(Figure 2c) disappeared. Importantly, despite their age, both
groups demonstrated learning over the 4 training days since there
was a gradual reduction in the distance covered to solve the task
(Figure 2e, Po0.01 for Control; Po0.001 for s-KL). Finally, the
acquisition of spatial learning was similar, regardless of the group.
This indicates that before the memory tests, all animals were equal
when facing the task.
Two hours after the end of the last session on the fourth day,
the platform was removed in order to evaluate short-term
memory
retention
(probe
trial
2 h).
Given
the
significant
differences
in
speed
found
between
groups
(Control:
20.64 ± 0.83 cm s − 1; s-KL: 28 ± 1.68 cm s − 1) the distance covered
was analysed as the most accurate measure. As illustrated in
Figure 2f, both groups showed preference for the training
quadrant,
while
distance
covered
in
other
quadrants
was
equivalent to random (~25%). Finally, 24 h after the last session
of acquisition (probe trial 24 h), aged control mice had a poorer
performance in the long-term memory trial. They showed less
preference for the training quadrant than they displayed in
the short-term memory trial. In contrast, the s-KL-treated group
had a clear preference for the training quadrant, statistically
significant from the control (Po0.01; Figure 2 g). These results
indicate that the cognitive effects of increased levels of s-KL in the
CNS are connected with selective improvement in long-term
memory.
Quantification of viral genomes in the CNS of injected mice
Following the behavioural assessment, specific neuroanatomical
regions involved in cognitive processes (prefrontal cortex, cerebral
cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum) were dissected from mouse
brains, and viral genomes were quantified. Figure 3a shows AAV
genomes were detected by qPCR in all injected animals, AAV-s-KL
distributed similarly to AAV-Null control. Thus 6 months after
intraventricular administration, AAVrh10 vector was still present in
the CNS of 18-month-old mice. However, there was certain
variability in virus distribution between the different brain regions
studied, probably due to the route of administration, since the
release of the vector in the CSF permits a wide, random
distribution of viral particles through the brain parenchyma. More
importantly, s-KL expression was increased in all the brain areas
analysed (by qPCR on s-KL mRNA), ranging from two times higher
in cerebellum to four times in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus
(Figure 3b).
Figure 3.
Analysis of s-KL in different brain areas after intraven-
tricular injection of AAVrh10 vectors. (a) Quantification of viral
genomes per ng tissue. (b) Quantification of s-KL mRNA levels.
Mean ± s.e.m. (Student’s t-test: *Po0.05, **Po0.01 vs Control). CB,
cerebellum; CX, cortex; HC, hippocampus; mRNA, messenger RNA;
PfCx, prefrontal cortex.
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1941
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
 Figure 4.
In vivo study in 6-month-old C57Bl/6J male mice. (a) Experimental design. Mice were injected at 6 months of age with AAVrh10 vectors,
and analysed 6 months later by a battery of behavioural tests. Control: AAVrh10/scrambled and AAVrh10/shRNA-sKL groups with n=11; AAVrh10/s-
KL group with n=14. (b) Evolution of body weight. Represented as percentage (%) of initial weight. Mean±s.e.m. (c–f) Open field test in 6–
412 months setting. Tests were performed 6 months after administration of the viral vectors. Control: AAVrh10/scrambled and AAVrh10/shRNA-sKL
groups with n=11; AAVrh10/s-KL group with n=14. (c) Horizontal activity measured as total distance travelled (cm). (d) Vertical activity, measured
as the number of rearings. (e) Horizontal activity at different time points (min). (f) Parameters of spontaneous exploratory activity Mean ±s.e.m.
(Student’s t-test: **Po0.01 vs Control; ***Po0.001 vs. Control; ††Po0.01 vs shRNA-sKL).
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1942
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
 Experimental design in middle-aged adult mice (6–412 months
setting)
In order to study whether long-term expression of s-KL could
improve the physical, non-cognitive and cognitive status of
middle-aged animals, a second set of mice (n = 11–14) was
treated at 6 months of age. They were then assessed at 12 months
by the same battery of tests (Figure 4a). There is a much lower
efficiency of AAV transduction in older compared to younger
brains (R Castro, personal communication). By testing a group of
relatively younger adult animals, we could avoid this limitation. In
addition, for this experiment AAV was specifically injected into the
hippocampus. The main reasons were (i) the klotho gene is
abundantly expressed in hippocampus; (ii) hippocampus is
involved in learning and memory processes; and (iii) in mice, the
Figure 5.
Quantitative analysis of working memory and learning tasks in 6–412 months setting. Tests were performed 6 months after
administration of the viral vectors. Control: AAVrh10/scrambled and AAVrh10/shRNA-sKL groups with n = 11; AAVrh10/s-KL group with n = 14.
(a) Forced choice in T-maze. Morris water maze test: (b) mean latency (s), (c) mean speed (cm s − 1) and (d) mean distance (cm) to find the
platform. Percentage of travelled distance in training quadrant of the pool, where the platform was previously located (P), and the other three
quadrants, as opposed to the platform (O), adjacent right (AR) and adjacent left (AL). (e) Probe trial at 2 h, (f) Probe trial at 24 h. Mean ± s.e.m.
(Student’s t-test: *Po0.05, **Po0.01, ***Po0.001 vs Control; †††Po0.001 vs AAVrh10/shRNA-sKL).
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1943
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
 hippocampus develops structurally until 12 months of age,
later undergoing age-dependent functional decline. Actually,
there are other brain regions where klotho is also highly expressed
(for example, choroid plexus and cerebellum). However, we
were interested to see if specifically enhancing s-KL in the
hippocampus during a period of plasticity would improve
hippocampal-dependent learning and memory processes, and
thereby reduce the future impact of functional decline.
In the same experimental design, we also compared whether
s-KL inhibition worsened cognitive deficits in naive mice, with
respect to control-treated and s-KL treated animals. To achieve
specific inhibition of the secreted Klotho isoform, we administered
AAV vectors carrying short hairpin RNA (shRNA) against s-KL. The
shRNA sequence was designed against the extra sequence in the
tail of s-KL not present in m-KL. An AAV carrying a shRNA-
scrambled sequence was used as a control.
Each animal received a bilateral injection with a total of 5 × 10E9
vg per mouse. Animal body weight was measured at the
beginning of the experiment (6 months) at 9 and 12 months of
age. As shown in Figure 4b, from 6 to 12 months of age, sustained
overexpression or inhibition of s-KL over time had no significant
effect and all groups showed a steady, similar weight gain.
Likewise, in the previous experiment with older animals, the
reflexes and sensorimotor skills of all groups were not affected
(data not shown).
Hippocampal s-KL overexpression results in an increase in
horizontal activity and has a mild anxiolytic effect in middle-aged
adult mice
Consistent with our previous results in aged mice, modification of
s-KL levels by gene therapy approaches was able to change
horizontal locomotor activity (Figure 4c), but not the vertical
activity (Figure 4d) of mice in the open field test. Thus, when s-KL
cDNA was overexpressed in hippocampus, the total distance
travelled by mice was significantly higher than in the other two
groups (Po0.0001) (Control: 1365 ± 14 cm; s-KL: 1734 ± 8 cm;
shRNA/s-KL: 1259 ± 27 cm). The higher locomotor activity in s-KL-
treated
mice
was
observed
thoroughout
the
experiment
(Figure 4e) suggesting mild hyperactive behaviour in these
animals. On the other hand, during the first minute of the test,
some control animals froze for a while, which is a direct measure
of increased anxiety. In the case of mice overexpressing s-KL, a
shorter latency to leave the central area was recorded although
this difference was only statistically significant with respect to
shRNA-sKL-injected mice (P = 0.0008) (Figure 4f). No differences
were detected between the groups in the other variables
analysed.
Hippocampal s-KL overexpression improves cognitive
performance in middle-aged adult mice, while s-KL inhibition
impairs it
Working memory in animals with modified brain s-KL levels was
assessed by the T-maze test. Results are presented as the mean
values obtained for each of the 3 test days. First, in the forced
choice trial, all control animals and those overexpressing s-KL
were able to meet the criteria. On the contrary, about 10% of
shRNA-sKL-treated animals did not meet the criteria, and therefore
were discarded. In addition, in the first trial, mice overexpressing
s-KL needed less time to reach the intersection point of the maze
compared to mice injected with shRNA-sKL (P = 0.009) (Figure 5a).
Thereafter, in the free choice trial, all animals met all the
established
criteria,
but
differences
between
groups
were
observed in terms of efficiency in choosing the correct path.
The control group solved the task with an error rate of 36.36%.
This score was improved in the s-KL overexpression group with an
error rate of 21.42%. In contrast, silencing s-KL increased the
percentage of error up to 40% (Figure 5a).
Visual perceptual learning and spatial reference learning and
memory were assessed in the MWM, following the same protocol
as used previously. In the place learning task (PT) all groups
showed the capacity to learn the task, reflected by the gradual
reduction in latency to reach the platform (Figure 5b) and in
distance travelled to it (Figure 5c). No significant differences
between
groups
were
detected
in
the
swimming
speed
(Figure 5d). Finally, a memory probe test performed 2 and 24 h
after last training session allowed us to assess the effects of
s-KL in short- and long-term memory in 12 months old mice.
Figure 5e shows the group overexpressing s-KL had a significantly
higher preference for the training quadrant as compared to the
control group (P = 0.039) and the shRNA-s-KL group (Po0.0001).
In contrast, the shRNA-sKL-treated animals travelled less distance
in the platform quadrant as compared to the control group
(P = 0.009). As seen in Figure 5f, the profile for long-term memory
was similar to results at 2 h. Thus, animals overexpressing
s-KL show a greater preference for the training quadrant
(P = 0.0003 vs Control and Po0.0001 vs shRNA-sKL). As before,
Figure 6.
Analysis of s-KL levels in hippocampus after injection of AAVrh10 vectors. (a) Quantification of s-KL and m-KL messenger RNA
(mRNA) levels. (b) Quantification of s-KL protein levels and western blot of representative samples. Mean ± s.e.m. (Student’s t-test: ***Po0.001
vs Control; †††Po0.001 vs s-KL).
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1944
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
 shRNA-sKL-treated animals showed the lowest preference for the
training quadrant and random preference for the other quadrants
(Po0.0001 vs control animals). We therefore conclude that, as in
aged animals, elevation of s-KL levels enhances the ability to
discriminate the quadrants, especially at long-term. Furthermore,
silencing s-KL worsens the animals’ performance, confirming it has
a role in cognitive functions.
Finally, s-KL levels were quantified in the hippocampus of
treated animals to determine whether the effects observed in
cognition were induced by s-KL overexpression and/or s-KL
inhibition. Hence, mRNA levels of s-KL in the AAV/s-KL-injected
group were increased 7.25 ± 2.0 times with respect to animals
injected with AAV-Control (P = 0.035), while in AAV/shRNA-sKL
animals, s-KL expression levels were reduced by 13.6 ± 2.5 times
(P = 0.007) (Figure 6a). These changes were specific to the secreted
Klotho isoform since expression of the m-KL transmembrane
isoform was not affected either by s-KL overexpression (1.15 ± 1.1
times vs control), or by specific s-KL inhibition (−1.24 ± 0.27 times
vs control). Accordingly, western blot using the s-KL antibody
K113 (ref. 11) showed opposite changes in hippocampal s-KL
levels with a 1.65 ± 0.30-fold increase in AAV/s-KL-injected animals
(P = 0.09), and a − 1.90 ± 0.22-fold reduction in AAV/shRNA-sKL-
treated animals compared to control AAV/null mice (P = 0.013)
(Figure 6b).
DISCUSSION
Klotho is a gene regulator of aging that when overexpressed
increases life expectancy in mice15 and when inhibited, accel-
erates the development of aging phenotypes.1 In brain, klotho is
expressed abundantly in different cell types, and it appears to be a
key element in the changes observed during aging in the white
matter of primate brains.18 Our group has previously reported that
expression levels of the isoform s-KL in mice are very high in brain
but contrary to m-KL, much lower in kidney, suggesting that s-KL
activity might be particularly important in the nervous system.
However, the specific function of s-KL still is unknown, and
therefore new studies focused on the role of s-KL are needed.
To date, studies on the functions of Klotho have been made
in two transgenic mice: mice overexpressing klotho,19–21 and
kl −/kl−mice, which are hypomorphs with very low αklotho
expression.15,22,23 Our approach, however, is to not alter natural
Klotho levels from the birth of the animal, until key stages in the
aging process are reached. Then levels are specifically modified in
the brain through administration of AAVrh10 vectors with
neuronal tropism. In exploratory studies, gene therapy vectors
carrying the klotho gene have been used as delivery tools to
modify Klotho levels in vivo. Thus, intravenous administration of
an Adenovirus-Klotho vector increased removal of creatinine,
decreased protein excretion in urine and improved the histo-
pathological damage induced by angiotensin II.24 In addition,
intravenous
administration
of
AAV2-Klotho
in
a
model
of
spontaneous hypertensive rats showed an improvement in the
progression of hypertension and renal damage.25
In this report, we first evaluated the neuroprotective effect of
s-KL in old wild-type mice (12–418 months setting). When
working with old mice, several considerations must be taken into
account: (a) high mortality rate between 15 and 18 months of age;
(b) aging is a process that affects the whole body, and therefore it
can affect many variables in addition to cognition, such as muscle
coordination, strength, speed, exploratory behaviour or habitua-
tion capacity to new stimuli;26,27 and (c) deficits shown in learning
and memory tests may be due to alterations of other cognitive
processes such as attention and perception.28 Since recently
Dubal et al.20 reported Klotho also stimulated cognition in young
and middle-aged animals, we decided to include mice in a
6–412 months’ setting in order to provide information about a
younger adult group, at the same time avoiding the inevitable
limitations of working with older animals. Overall, despite
differences in the design of certain experiments, such as the age
of the animal and the route of administration (intraventricular vs
intrahipocampal), the results of the tests are consistent and
robust, demonstrating that s-KL overexpression in the CNS causes
significant effects in some of the measured variables, especially
those related to cognition and anxiety.
Before assessing cognitive function, we examined the physical
conditions of treated animals. First, we found no significant
differences in the body weight between the control group and the
groups treated with s-KL or shRNA-sKL. Similarly, although Klotho
is associated with the decrease in tissue homoeostasis during
aging,29 we did not observe differences in the sensorimotor skills
between the control animals and animals expressing s-KL or
shRNA-sKL, indicating that within the same experiment, all animals
were in equal physical conditions and therefore, the results of
subsequent behavioural tests are not influenced by them. This is
consistent with results reported by Abramovitz et al.,30 who also
detect no changes in body weight nor in general health
parameters after daily intraperitoneal injection of recombinant
Klotho protein. However, other studies suggest a close relation-
ship between Klotho levels and body weight, especially in patients
with obesity or anorexia nervosa.31,32 Some possible hypotheses
to explain such contrasting results could be: (i) the local
administration in the CNS in our study, rather than systemic
intravenous administration, (ii) 6 months of klotho overexpression
is not enough time to observe general physical effects; and/or (iii)
the vector dose injected is not sufficient to increase Klotho levels
in plasma up to concentrations affecting the skeletal muscle.
The open field test was used to study whether s-KL is able to
affect locomotion, exploratory activity, emotionality, neophobia
and anxiety-like behaviours. Briefly, we found that regardless of
age, the animals overexpressing s-KL show mild hyperactivity, an
increased locomotor activity when compared to control animals,
and therefore, that the administration of s-KL in the CNS seems to
reverse, at least partially, the gradual decline in locomotor activity
observed around 12 months of age.33 In addition, the latencies of
movement (an indicator of behavioural inhibition as a result of
neophobia or anxiety) tended to be shorter in s-KL-treated
animals, indicating a higher disinhibition, although this effect
reached statistical significance only in middle-age animals (6–412
setting), but not in old animals (12–418 setting). Consistently, the
inhibition of s-KL expression mediated by shRNA-sKL had an
opposite effect. Thus, some animals of the shRNA-sKL group
exhibited behavioural inhibition at the start of the test, showing
freezing or petrification, and latencies in leaving the central area
far superior to mice overexpressing s-KL. This concords with the
hypoactivity associated to low levels of Klotho described by Kuro-
o et al.,1 in which 6-week-old kl−/kl− mice showed a very low rate
of spontaneous activity in the open field test as compared to
controls.
On the other hand, it has been reported that reduced klotho
levels are expected to alter blood pressure,34–36 which in turn may
affect the overall health and behaviour in tests. Since blood
pressure was not measured in these animals, its effects in some of
the changes observed in locomotor activity cannot be entirely
excluded. However, since klotho levels were increased instead of
reduced, plus mild hyperactivity and/or anxiety were observed in
klotho-treated vs control-treated animals, the increase in locomo-
tor activity is unlikely to be related with long-term changes in
blood pressure, but rather with long-term klotho overexpression.
Next, to evaluate the effect of s-KL overexpression on the
working memory we used the T-maze test. Again, the results show
that administration of s-KL, regardless of age, improves cognitive
abilities since s-KL-treated mice make less errors in solving the
task as compared to control animals. These results concur with
the increase in s-KL levels found in the prefrontal cortex of the
(12–418 months setting) animals. Given that in mice, deficits in
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1945
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
 working memory appear around 24 months of age,37 Klotho
seems to be acting as an enhancer of cognitive functions.
Interestingly, Dubal et al.,20 have reported that increased levels of
Klotho
improved
working
memory
in young
mice
in the
Y-maze test.
Finally, the MWM test was used to assess the effect of s-KL
overexpression/inhibition
on
visual
perceptual
learning
and
memory and learning abilities. The results from both experiments
showed again that s-KL-treated mice are more efficient in solving
the task and they learn faster than the control animals, indicating
that s-KL significantly improves long-term memory in mice. In
contrast, animals injected with shRNA-sKL showed problems in
learning the task and swam a greater distance to reach the
platform. Moreover, these opposite effects were also observed in
the final memory tests (24 h after the last training). Animals
overexpressing s-KL prioritised the search in the quadrant where
the platform was previously located, while shRNA-sKL-treated
animals showed no particular preference for the training quadrant,
suggesting memory and/or learning problems. As expected, when
compared to controls, quantification of s-KL levels 6 months after
treatment (both mRNA and protein) showed a very strong positive
correlation with cognitive capacities, being statistically higher
in AAV/s-KL-treated mice and lower in AAV/shRNA-sKL-treated
mice. This pattern was observed regardless of whether animals
were injected in adulthood (6–412 months setting) or middle age
(12–418 months setting).
In summary, our study provides new evidence indicating an
important role for s-KL in cognitive functions, with reduced levels in
hippocampus being associated with low cognitive performance. The
study also demonstrates that a single icv injection of s-KL into the
CNS has great potential as a long-lasting and quantificable agent to
stimulate cognitive skills, even, protecting age-dependent cognitive
decline when mice were treated at old ages. To our knowledge,
these are the first data obtained in vivo, in which the action of only
the secreted Klotho protein improves the learning and memory
capabilities of old animals when treated in adulthood. Furthermore,
taking into account that these experiments were performed in naive
aged animals, our results suggest s-KL may have therapeutic
potential for dementia. This opens up a promising new field of
study with evident implications for neurodegenerative disorders such
as Alzheimer's disease or multiple sclerosis among others.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Portions of this work are the subject of a provisional patent application held by the
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona (Spain).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank M Puig and M Cañete for technical assistance. This project was supported
by the ‘Plan Nacional I+D+I 2013–2016, Instituto de Salud Carlos III-Subdirección
General de Evaluación y Fomento de la Investigación, cofinanced by Fondos FEDER
(the European Regional Development Fund)’ (grant numbers ISC-III PI15–01270 and
ISC-III PI10–00283) and the ‘Ajuts de Suport als Grups de Recerca de Catalunya’,
which is sponsored by the ‘Agència de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca’
(AGAUR) of the Generalitat de Catalunya, Spain (grant number SGR2014–1354). AS
has been recipient of an FPU-Ministerio de Educación fellowship.
REFERENCES
1 Kuro-o M, Matsumura Y, Aizawa H, Kawaguchi H, Suga T, Utsugi T et al. Mutation of the
mouse klotho gene leads to a syndrome resembling ageing. Nature 1997; 390: 45–51.
2 Wang Y, Sun Z. Current understanding of klotho. Ageing Res Rev 2009; 8: 43–51.
3 Shiozaki M, Yoshimura K, Shibata M, Koike M, Matsuura N, Uchiyama Y et al.
Morphological and biochemical signs of age-related neurodegenerative changes
in klotho mutant mice. Neuroscience 2008; 152: 924–941.
4 Chen CD, Sloane JA, Li H, Aytan N, Giannaris EL, Zeldich E et al. The antiaging
protein Klotho enhances oligodendrocyte maturation and myelination of the CNS.
J Neurosci 2013; 33: 1927–1939.
5 Uchida A, Komiya Y, Tashiro T, Yorifuji H, Kishimoto T, Nabeshima Y et al. Neu-
rofilaments of Klotho, the mutant mouse prematurely displaying symptoms
resembling human aging. J Neurosci Res 2001; 64: 364–370.
6 Nagai T, Yamada K, Kim HC, Kim YS, Noda Y, Imura A et al. Cognition impairment
in the genetic model of aging klotho gene mutant mice: a role of oxidative stress.
FASEB J 2003; 17: 50–52.
7 Dubal DB, Zhu L, Sanchez PE, Worden K, Broestl L, Johnson E et al. Life extension
factor klotho prevents mortality and enhances cognition in hAPP transgenic mice.
J Neurosci 2015; 35: 2358–2371.
8 Kuang X, Chen YS, Wang LF, Li YJ, Liu K, Zhang MX et al. Klotho upregulation
contributes to the neuroprotection of ligustilide in an Alzheimer's disease
mouse model. Neurobiol Aging 2014; 35: 169–178.
9 Di Bona D, Accardi G, Virruso C, Candore G, Caruso C. Association of Klotho
polymorphisms with healthy aging: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Rejuvenation Res 2014; 17: 212–216.
10 Forster RE, Jurutka PW, Hsieh JC, Haussler CA, Lowmiller CL, Kaneko I et al. Vitamin
D receptor controls expression of the anti-aging klotho gene in mouse and
human renal cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2011; 414: 557–562.
11 Masso A, Sanchez A, Gimenez-Llort L, Lizcano JM, Canete M, Garcia B et al.
Secreted and transmembrane alphaKlotho isoforms have different spatio-
temporal profiles in the brain during aging and Alzheimer's disease progres-
sion. PLoS ONE 2015; 10: e0143623.
12 Piedra J, Ontiveros M, Miravet S, Penalva C, Monfar M, Chillon M. Development of
a rapid, robust, and universal picogreen-based method to titer adeno-associated
vectors. Hum Gene Ther Methods 2015; 26: 35–42.
13 Olton DS, Papas BC. Spatial memory and hippocampal function. Neuropsychologia
1979; 17: 669–682.
14 Gimenez-Llort L, Blazquez G, Canete T, Johansson B, Oddo S, Tobena A et al.
Modeling behavioral and neuronal symptoms of Alzheimer's disease in mice: a
role for intraneuronal amyloid. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2007; 31: 125–147.
15 Kurosu H, Yamamoto M, Clark JD, Pastor JV, Nandi A, Gurnani P et al. Suppression
of aging in mice by the hormone Klotho. Science 2005; 309: 1829–1833.
16 Fahlstrom A, Yu Q, Ulfhake B. Behavioral changes in aging female C57BL/6 mice.
Neurobiol Aging 2011; 32: 1868–1880.
17 Stanford SC. The open field test: reinventing the wheel. J Psychopharmacol 2007;
21: 134–135.
18 Duce JA, Podvin S, Hollander W, Kipling D, Rosene DL, Abraham CR. Gene profile
analysis implicates Klotho as an important contributor to aging changes in brain
white matter of the rhesus monkey. Glia 2008; 56: 106–117.
19 Bartke A. Long-lived Klotho mice: new insights into the roles of IGF-1 and insulin
in aging. Trends Endocrinol Metab 2006; 17: 33–35.
20 Dubal DB, Yokoyama JS, Zhu L, Broestl L, Worden K, Wang D et al. Life extension
factor klotho enhances cognition. Cell Rep 2014; 7: 1065–1076.
21 Nagasu H, Satoh M, Kuwabara A, Yorimitsu D, Kidokoro K, Nishi Y et al. Over-
expression of klotho protein modulates uninephrectomy-induced compensatory
renal hypertrophy by suppressing IGF-I signals. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2011; 407: 39–43.
22 Liu H, Fergusson MM, Castilho RM, Liu J, Cao L, Chen J et al. Augmented Wnt
signaling in a mammalian model of accelerated aging. Science 2007; 317:
803–806.
23 Masuda H, Chikuda H, Suga T, Kawaguchi H, Kuro-o M. Regulation of multiple
ageing-like
phenotypes
by
inducible
klotho
gene
expression
in
klotho
mutant mice. Mech Ageing Dev 2005; 126: 1274–1283.
24 Mitani H, Ishizaka N, Aizawa T, Ohno M, Usui S, Suzuki T et al. In vivo klotho gene
transfer ameliorates angiotensin II-induced renal damage. Hypertension 2002; 39:
838–843.
25 Wang Y, Sun Z. Klotho gene delivery prevents the progression of spontaneous
hypertension and renal damage. Hypertension 2009; 54: 810–817.
26 Barnes CA, Markowska AL, Ingram DK, Kametani H, Spangler EL, Lemken VJ et al.
Acetyl-1-carnitine. 2: effects on learning and memory performance of aged rats in
simple and complex mazes. Neurobiol Aging 1990; 11: 499–506.
27 Markowska AL, Ingram DK, Barnes CA, Spangler EL, Lemken VJ, Kametani H et al.
Acetyl-1-carnitine. 1: effects on mortality, pathology and sensory-motor perfor-
mance in aging rats. Neurobiol Aging 1990; 11: 491–498.
28 Rodefer JS, Baxter MG. Neuropsychology of cognitive aging in rodents. In: Brain
Aging: Models, Methods, and Mechanisms. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor &
Francis, 2007.
29 Phelps M, Pettan-Brewer C, Ladiges W, Yablonka-Reuveni Z. Decline in muscle
strength and running endurance in klotho deficient C57BL/6 mice. Biogerontology
2013; 14: 729–739.
30 Abramovitz L, Rubinek T, Ligumsky H, Bose S, Barshack I, Avivi C et al. KL1
internal repeat mediates klotho tumor suppressor activities and inhibits
bFGF and IGF-I signaling in pancreatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2011; 17:
4254–4266.
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1946
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
 31 Amitani M, Asakawa A, Amitani H, Kaimoto K, Sameshima N, Koyama KI et al.
Plasma klotho levels decrease in both anorexia nervosa and obesity. Nutrition
2013; 29: 1106–1109.
32 Wolf I, Stein D, Shahmoon S, Ziv SI, Hemi R, Kanety H et al. Alteration in serum
klotho levels in anorexia nervosa patients. Clin Nutr 2016; 35: 958–962.
33 Lhotellier L, Cohen-Salmon C. Genetics and senescence. I. Age-related changes in
activity and exploration in three inbred strains of mice. Physiol Behav 1989; 45:
491–493.
34 Chen LJ, Cheng MF, Ku PM, Cheng JT. Cerebral klotho protein as a humoral factor
for maintenance of baroreflex. Horm Metab Res 2015; 47: 125–132.
35 Chen LJ, Cheng MF, Ku PM, Lin JW. Rosiglitazone increases cerebral klotho
expression to reverse baroreflex in type 1-like diabetic rats. Biomed Res Int 2014;
2014: 309151.
36 Wang X, Sun Z. RNAi silencing of brain klotho potentiates cold-induced elevation of
blood pressure via the endothelin pathway. Physiol Genomics 2010; 41: 120–126.
37 Frick KM, Burlingame LA, Arters JA, Berger-Sweeney J. Reference memory, anxiety
and estrous cyclicity in C57BL/6NIA mice are affected by age and sex. Neu-
roscience 2000; 95: 293–307.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International License. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under
the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license
holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
© The Author(s) 2017
Klotho protects against memory deficits
A Massó et al
1947
Molecular Psychiatry (2018), 1937 – 1947
