 SPECIAL ARTICLE
A framework to rank genomic alterations as targets
for cancer precision medicine: the ESMO Scale for
Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets (ESCAT)
J. Mateo1, D. Chakravarty2, R. Dienstmann1, S. Jezdic3, A. Gonzalez-Perez4, N. Lopez-Bigas4,5,
C. K. Y. Ng6, P. L. Bedard7, G. Tortora8,9, J.-Y. Douillard3, E. M. Van Allen10, N. Schultz2, C. Swanton11,
F. Andre
´12* & L. Pusztai13
1Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain; 2Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, USA; 3European Society for Medical Oncology,
Lugano, Switzerland; 4Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Barcelona; 5Institucio
´ Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avanc
¸ats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain; 6University
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; 7Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada; 8University of Verona, Verona; 9Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A.
Gemelli, IRCCS, Rome, Italy; 10Harvard Medical School Dana-Farber Cancer Center and Broad Institute, Boston, USA; 11The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK;
12Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; 13Yale Cancer Center, New Haven, USA
*Correspondence to: Prof. Fabrice Andre
´, ESMO Head Office – Scientific and Medical Division, Via Ginevra 4, Lugano CH-6962, Switzerland. Tel: þ41-91-973-1999;
Fax: þ41-91-973-1902; E-mail: education@esmo.org
Background: In order to facilitate implementation of precision medicine in clinical management of cancer, there is a need to
harmonise and standardise the reporting and interpretation of clinically relevant genomics data.
Methods: The European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group
(TR and PM WG) launched a collaborative project to propose a classification system for molecular aberrations based on the
evidence available supporting their value as clinical targets. A group of experts from several institutions was assembled to
review available evidence, reach a consensus on grading criteria and present a classification system. This was then reviewed,
amended and finally approved by the ESMO TR and PM WG and the ESMO leadership.
Results: This first version of the ESMO Scale of Clinical Actionability for molecular Targets (ESCAT) defines six levels of clinical
evidence for molecular targets according to the implications for patient management: tier I, targets ready for implementation in
routine clinical decisions; tier II, investigational targets that likely define a patient population that benefits from a targeted drug
but additional data are needed; tier III, clinical benefit previously demonstrated in other tumour types or for similar molecular
targets; tier IV, preclinical evidence of actionability; tier V, evidence supporting co-targeting approaches; and tier X, lack of
evidence for actionability.
Conclusions: The ESCAT defines clinical evidence-based criteria to prioritise genomic alterations as markers to select patients
for targeted therapies. This classification system aims to offer a common language for all the relevant stakeholders in cancer
medicine and drug development.
Key words: precision medicine, targeted therapies, biomarkers, genomics, next-generation sequencing, classification system
Introduction
As our understanding of the cancer biology evolves, and the ac-
cessibility to tumour genomic sequencing technologies increases,
genome-driven cancer treatment emerges as a promising strategy
[1]. Consequently, more and more patients undergo multigene
sequencing of their cancer in the hope of finding genomic altera-
tions that could effectively be targeted with matched drugs [2].
With the decreasing cost and increasing ease of performing broad
gene panel or whole exome sequencing rather than focused hot-
spot analysis of a few clinically validated targets, come the chal-
lenges of interpretation of complex sequencing readouts of both
somatic and germline events in daily clinical practice. Several
papers have recently highlighted the risks of overestimating the
potential benefits of therapies tailored to the individual cancer
V
C The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Annals of Oncology 29: 1895–1902, 2018
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy263
Published online 21 August 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/9/1895/5076792 by guest on 01 June 2019
 genome [3, 4]. Adjusting physician and patient expectations to
clinical reality is critical for maintaining trust in clinical research
and providing the best care.
A major challenge for oncologists in the clinic is to distinguish
between findings that represent proven clinical value or potential
value based on preliminary clinical or preclinical evidence, from
hypothetical gene–drug matches and findings that are currently
irrelevant for clinical practice. Almost all commercial and aca-
demic laboratories that provide multigene panel sequencing of
patient tumour samples report ‘actionable’ mutations that can
fall into any of the above categories. Most multigene sequencing
reporting systems do not prioritise alterations, nor do they use a
standardised clinical utility-based ranking system. This lack of
harmonisation in terminology and utility-based ranking creates a
potential threat to precision medicine since patients could be rec-
ommended ineffective drugs matched to hypothetical (i.e. clinic-
ally unproven) targets, while alterations with proved clinical
value could be missed due to lack of clear prioritisation.
The European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO) initiated
a project to propose a unified framework to classify targets for
precision cancer medicine based on clinical evidence of utility.
The primary aim is to aid oncologists to prioritise potential tar-
gets for clinical use when receiving reports of broad gene
sequencing panels. This classification system would provide a
common language that could be adopted by all the cancer medi-
cine and drug development stakeholders to place targets within
their clinical context. We recognise that as evidence is generated
from clinical studies, targets will move from one tier to another.
Also, a given molecular alteration can be supported by different
levels of evidence in different cancer types and therefore it can fall
into different clinical utility classes depending on disease context.
Several institutions and organisations have proposed clinical clas-
sification systems for molecular alterations detected in cancer
based on clinical relevance, as summarised in Table 1 [5–9].
These classifications are only partially overlapping, with greatest
overlap in the top tiers, and none of them have been broadly
implemented in clinical practice. Top tier designation in each sys-
tem is often based on regulatory approval status in their geo-
graphic regions that introduces bias in the context of global
cancer research. In lower tiers, each schema uses different princi-
ples to weigh the evidence available and therefore different classi-
fications may assign the same alteration into discordant clinical
utility categories. The vocabulary to define utility categories are
also variable from system to system making it difficult to use a
common terminology across reports and studies.
Understanding these limitations, ESMO has assembled a dedicated
project group within its Translational Research and Precision
Medicine Working Group (TR and PM WG), including authors
from some of the earlier classification schemas, to propose guiding
principles for a single classification system that could be used globally.
The ESMO Scale of Clinical Actionability for
molecular Targets
• ESMO Scale of Clinical Actionability for molecular Targets
(ESCAT) Tier I: target suitable for routine use and recom-
mend specific drug when specific molecular alteration is
detected (Table 2).
Randomised trials provide the highest level of clinical evidence
in drug development, but novel trial designs may be occasionally
needed to validate the clinical relevance of infrequent molecular
alterations where randomised trials are difficult to conduct.
We consider a target ‘tier I-A’, if prospective, randomised clin-
ical trial data in a given tumour type has demonstrated clinically
meaningful improvement of a survival end point in patients with
the molecular alteration treated with a matching drug. Hallmark
examples include the anti-HER2 antibody, trastuzumab, for
ERBB2 (HER2) amplified breast cancer [10–12] and EGFR inhib-
itors for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harbouring EGFR
activating mutation [13, 14].
‘Tier I-B’ targets are supported by data from prospective,
non-randomised clinical trials that, while unable to provide
evidence for survival improvement, have demonstrated clinic-
ally meaningful benefit as defined by the ESMO Magnitude of
Clinical Benefit Scale (MCBS) 1.1 [15] in a biomarker selected
sub-population. Examples of tier I-B targets include ROS1-
rearrangement in NSCLC that defines eligibility for crizotinib
or ceritinib therapy. Both of these compounds inhibit the ana-
plastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) and previously demonstrated
improved survival in patients with NSCLC harbouring ALK
rearrangements in randomised clinical trials (which qualifies
ALK as tier I-A target for these drugs in lung cancer) [16–18].
However, crizotinib and ceritinib also inhibit the ROS receptor
tyrosine kinase (ROS1) that is rearranged in 1%–2% of NSCLC
through gene fusions leading to its constitutive activation.
High objective tumour response rates were demonstrated with
these drugs in ROS1-rearranged NSCLC in a series of single
arm studies [19, 20]. Considering the rarity of this genomic al-
teration, conducting a large randomised trial in a timely man-
ner to demonstrate improved survival would not have been
feasible and the large clinical benefit observed in the single-arm
studies was sufficient for endorsement of routine clinical use of
these drugs in this rare molecularly defined subset of lung
cancer.
Targets are designated ‘tier I-C’ if clinical trials in multiple tu-
mour types, or basket clinical trials, have demonstrated a clinic-
ally meaningful benefit for the target–drug pair with similar
magnitude of benefit across the different tumour types. In this
scenario, the clinical value of a target–drug match can be
accepted across cancers that harbour the target abnormality. An
example is larotrectinib, an inhibitor of the neurotrophic recep-
tor tyrosine kinase (a.k.a. tropomyosine receptor kinase, TRK)
family showed substantial antitumour activity in cancers of di-
verse histological tumour type sharing activating fusions in
TRK genes [21]. Similarly, the anti-PD1 checkpoint inhibitor
pembrolizumab has shown broad, histology independent
activity in mismatch repair deficient cancers [22]. It is import-
ant to remember that in basket trials, the number of
patients with a given cancer type are often low; therefore, the
confidence intervals around the estimated benefit in small tu-
mour subsets is broad, consequently the true drug activity
remains uncertain.
• ESCAT Tier II: Investigational targets that likely define a
patient population that benefits from a targeted drug but
additional data are needed.
Special article
Annals of Oncology
1896 | Mateo et al.
Volume 29 | Issue 9 | 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/9/1895/5076792 by guest on 01 June 2019
 ‘Tier II-A’ targets are supported by data from retrospective
studies that demonstrate clinically meaningful benefit with a tar-
geted drug in patients with a molecularly defined sub-population
of a specific tumour type.
The phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase (PI3K)—
Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog (PTEN) pathway is an onco-
genic signalling network commonly deregulated in many cancers,
either by aberrant activation of the pro-oncogenic genes
(PIK3CA, PIK3CB, PIK3CD or AKT1) or through loss-of-
function of the tumour suppressor PTEN. This latter event occurs
in �40% of advanced prostate cancers. Drugs targeting this path-
way by inhibiting AKT have been extensively tested in different
tumour types. In a randomised phase II clinical trial, patients
with advanced prostate cancer were given the pan-AKT inhibitor
ipatasertib (GDC0068) or placebo combined with abiraterone
acetate and steroids. While the addition of ipatasertib failed to
prolong progression-free survival in the general trial population,
a retrospective analysis showed a significant reduction of radio-
logical progression risk in the sub-group of patients presenting
tumours harbouring loss of PTEN protein expression [23]. This
retrospective observation has led to the design of an ongoing val-
idation phase III trial. This randomised study is now stratifying
patients based on the presence or the absence of PTEN protein
expression in the tumour (NCT03072238). These data may even-
tually provide evidence to move this target to tier I or relegate it
accordingly.
We consider a target ‘tier II-B’ if at least one prospective clinic-
al trial demonstrated higher tumour response rates in patients
with a target molecular alteration but there is no definitive data
available on improvement of the more important survival end
points. An example includes a recently presented basket trial that
showed strong association between the presence of activating
Table 1. Comparison of previous classification schemas that assign clinical utility to molecular alterations used to select targeted therapies in cancer
Data type and classifica-
tion variable
Andre et al., Ann Oncol
2014
Van Allen et al., Nat Med
2014
Meric-Bernstam et al., JNCI
2015
Chakravarty et al.,
JCOPO 2017 (OncoKB)
Data have been generated
in randomised clinical
trials
Yes, but allow into the same
level of evidence targets
supported by multiple non-
randomised trials
Does not discriminate be-
tween clinical data gener-
ated by randomised versus
non-randomised trials
Does not discriminate be-
tween clinical data gener-
ated by randomised versus
non-randomised trials
Does not discriminate
between clinical data
generated by rando-
mised versus non-
randomised trials
Data come from prospect-
ive clinical trials
Does not discriminate pro-
spective versus retrospect-
ive clinical studies
Not specifically considered
Data from prospective versus
retrospective study are
assigned different levels of
evidence
Not specified, refers to
‘compelling clinical
data’
Regulatory approval (FDA/
EMA) for the drug
Not specifically considered
FDA approval is the principal
variable to assign category
FDA approval is the criteria for
top evidence level (1A)
assignment
FDA approval is the
principal variable to
assign category
Validation of the assay used
for biomarker detection
Not specifically considered
Not specifically considered
Not specifically considered
Accounts for FDA rec-
ognition of the bio-
marker under
consideration
Clinical data have been
generated in same or dif-
ferent tumour types
Includes specific category IC
for level I supportive data
generated in a different tu-
mour type, recommending
treatment different tumour
type in the context of clin-
ical trials
Use different categories de-
pending on supportive
data generated in the same
or different tumour types
Use different categories based
on data generated in the
same or different tumour
types
Categories 2 and 3 are
subdivided based on
whether data were
generated in same or
different tumour
types
Considers magnitude of
benefit (OS, PFS, RR)
Not specifically considered
Not specifically considered
Not specifically considered
Not specifically
considered
Considers preclinical data
Includes specific category for
predictions of actionability
based on preclinical data
Includes specific category for
predictions of actionability
based on preclinical data
Includes specific category for
predictions of actionability
based on preclinical data
Includes specific cat-
egory for predictions
of actionability based
on preclinical data
Considers if clinical efficacy
is known for the bio-
marker negative
population
Yes, but effect in marker-
negative group does not
impact clinical
recommendation
Not specifically considered
Not specifically considered
Not specifically
considered
Other comments
Considers predictive versus
prognostics versus diag-
nostic value evidence
Considers data coming from
case reports as level 3A
Includes grading of evi-
dence for resistance
biomarkers
Annals of Oncology
Special article
Volume 29 | Issue 9 | 2018
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy263 | 1897
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/9/1895/5076792 by guest on 01 June 2019
 mutations in the AKT1 gene (E17K) and tumour response to the
AKT inhibitor AZD5363 [24, 25]. Further trial data are now ne-
cessary to assess how this increased responsiveness translates to
improved patient outcome.
In target–drug matches that we consider as tier II, further in-
vestigation in clinical trials or through prospective registries is
necessary before incorporating the target–drug match to routine
care.
Table 2. The ESCAT
ESCAT evidence tier
Required level of evidence
Clinical value class
Clinical implication
Ready for rou-
tine use
I: Alteration-drug
match is associated
with improved out-
come in clinical
trials
I-A: prospective, randomised clinical trials show
the alteration-drug match in a specific tumour
type results in a clinically meaningful improve-
ment of a survival end point
I-B: prospective, non-randomised clinical trials
show that the alteration-drug match in a spe-
cific tumour type, results in clinically meaning-
ful benefit as defined by ESMO MCBS 1.1
I-C: clinical trials across tumour types or basket
clinical trials show clinical benefit associated
with the alteration-drug match, with similar
benefit observed across tumour types
Drug administered to patients
with the specific molecular
alteration has led to
improved clinical outcome
in prospective clinical
trial(s)
Access to the treatment
should be considered
standard of care
Investigational
II: alteration-drug
match is associated
with antitumour ac-
tivity, but magni-
tude of benefit is
unknown
II-A: retrospective studies show patients with the
specific alteration in a specific tumour type ex-
perience clinically meaningful benefit with
matched drug compared with alteration-nega-
tive patients
II-B: prospective clinical trial(s) show the alter-
ation-drug match in a specific tumour type
results in increased responsiveness when
treated with a matched drug, however, no
data currently available on survival end points
Drug administered to a mo-
lecularly defined patient
population is likely to result
in clinical benefit in a given
tumour type, but additional
data are needed
Treatment to be consid-
ered ‘preferable’ in
the context of evi-
dence collection ei-
ther as a prospective
registry or as a pro-
spective clinical trial
Hypothetical
target
III: alteration-drug
match suspected to
improve outcome
based on clinical
trial data in other
tumour type(s) or
with similar mo-
lecular alteration
III-A: clinical benefit demonstrated in patients
with the specific alteration (as tiers I and II
above) but in a different tumour type. Limited/
absence of clinical evidence available for the
patient-specific cancer type or broadly across
cancer types
III-B: an alteration that has a similar predicted
functional impact as an already studied tier I
abnormality in the same gene or pathway, but
does not have associated supportive clinical
data
Drug previously shown to
benefit the molecularly
defined subset in another
tumour type (or with a dif-
ferent mutation in the
same gene), efficacy there-
fore is anticipated for but
not proved
Clinical trials to be dis-
cussed with patients
IV: pre-clinical evi-
dence of
actionability
IV-A: evidence that the alteration or a functional-
ly similar alteration influences drug sensitivity
in preclinical in vitro or in vivo models
IV-B: actionability predicted in silico
Actionability is predicted
based on preclinical stud-
ies, no conclusive clinical
data available
Treatment should ‘only
be considered’ in the
context of early clin-
ical trials. Lack of clin-
ical data should be
stressed to patients
Combination
development
V: alteration-drug
match is associated
with objective re-
sponse, but without
clinically meaning-
ful benefit
Prospective studies show that targeted therapy
is associated with objective responses, but this
does not lead to improved outcome
Drug is active but does not
prolong PFS or OS, prob-
ably in part due to mecha-
nisms of adaptation
Clinical trials assessing
drug combination
strategies could be
considered
X: lack of evidence for
actionability
No evidence that the genomic alteration is thera-
peutically actionable
There is no evidence, clinical
or preclinical, that a gen-
omic alteration is a poten-
tial therapeutic target
The finding should not
be taken into ac-
count for clinical
decision
Special article
Annals of Oncology
1898 | Mateo et al.
Volume 29 | Issue 9 | 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/9/1895/5076792 by guest on 01 June 2019
 • ESCAT Tier III: clinical benefit previously demonstrated
in other tumour types or for related molecular targets.
‘Tier III-A’ targets include alterations that define a patient
population with proven benefit from a targeting agent in a specif-
ic tumour type, but the alteration is now detected in a different,
previously not studied, tumour type. Therefore, while a strong ra-
tionale exists to try the targeted therapy in these patients, there is
limited or no clinical evidence for efficacy in these other tumour
types. These clinical scenarios are an ideal setting for prospective
studies.
Vemurafenib is a B-Raf enzyme inhibitor, and significantly
extends survival of patients with metastatic melanomas that har-
bour the tier I-A target BRAF V600E mutation [26]. The same
mutation is also present in rare instances of other cancers types,
Table 3. Most relevant databases and public data resources for interrogating tumour genomics and clinical actionability data
Resource
Declared aim
Focus alterations
(if applicable)
Interface
Annotation process
URL
Cancer Genome
Interpreter (CGI)
The CGI is a web platform dedi-
cated to the interpretation of
variants identified in patient’s
tumours
Point mutations and
structural variants
Browser, download,
API
Interactive reports are
provided as a result
of analysis of a
patient’s tumour
Semi-automated annota-
tion and manual cur-
ation of literature.
Oncologists’ review of
biomarkers. In house
tools
cancergenome
interpreter.org
cBioPortal
Resource collecting alterations
observed across patients’
tumours (probed at whole-
exome, whole-genome or
gene panel level)
Point mutations and
structural variants
Browser, download,
API
Automated annotation
and analysis of tumour
alterations data
www.cbioportal.org/
Catalog of somatic mu-
tation in cancer
(COSMIC)
Resource collecting alterations
observed across patients’
tumours (probed at whole-
exome, whole-genome or
gene panel level) and cancer
cell lines
Point mutations and
structural variants
Browser, download,
API
Automated annotation
and analysis of tumour
alterations data
cancer.sanger.ac.uk/
cosmic
Clinical Interpretation
of Variants in
Cancer (CiVIC)
Clinical relevance of variants in
cancer
Point mutations and
structural variants
Browser and API
Community-driven anno-
tation and curation.
Experts review
civicdb.org/
Database of Curated
Mutations(DoCM)
Database of known, disease-caus-
ing mutations with direct links
to source citations
Point mutations (SNVs
and short indels)
Browser, download
Manual curation of
literature
http://docm.info/
Jackson Laboratory
Database cataloguing cancer
alterations and biomarkers
Point mutations and
structural variants
Browser
Semi-automated annota-
tion and manual cur-
ation of literature
ckb.jax.org
MyCancerGenome
Database of validated driver alter-
ations in a list of cancer genes
and their influence on the re-
sponse to a range of thera-
peutic agents, with links to
clinical trials
Point mutations and
structural variants
Browser
Manual curation of
literature
www.mycancer
genome.org
Precision medicine
knowledgebase
(PMKB)
Information (including clinical
relevance) about cancer
variants
Point mutations and
structural variants
Browser
Community-driven anno-
tation and curation.
Review by cancer
pathologists
pmkb.weill.
cornell.edu/
OncoKB
Information about the effects and
treatment implications of spe-
cific cancer gene alterations
Point mutations and
structural variants
Browser, download,
API
Manually curated by a
network of clinical fel-
lows, research fellows,
and faculty members at
MSK from resources
and literature
oncokb.org/
T-Quest
Open source platform to link mo-
lecular abnormalities to poten-
tial therapies
Point mutations and
structural variants
Browser, download,
API
Automated text search of
clinicaltials.gov data-
base and public
databases
http://tquest.us/
Annals of Oncology
Special article
Volume 29 | Issue 9 | 2018
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy263 | 1899
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/9/1895/5076792 by guest on 01 June 2019
 but in contrast to the examples of tier I-C discussed above, the
antitumour activity of vemurafenib in V600E mutated cancer has
been shown to differ significantly from one tumour type to an-
other. The most relevant example is the limited activity of vemur-
afenib
in
BRAF-mutated
colorectal
cancers
[27].
Hence,
identification of a BRAF V600E mutation will need to be inter-
preted in a tumour type-specific manner, not qualifying it broad-
ly as a tier I-C target.
‘Tier III-B’ alterations have a predicted functional impact simi-
lar to an already studied tier I abnormality in the same gene, or in
a gene with similar function, but lack sufficient supportive clinic-
al data.
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors were tested
in clinical trials in BRCA1 or BRCA2 loss-of-function germline
mutated breast and ovarian cancers under the premise of synthet-
ic lethality [i.e. two events that are not lethal separately (i.e. PARP
inhibition and loss of BRCA function) become lethal when occur
simultaneously] [28–30]. These trials demonstrated improved
outcome and therefore germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations are
tier I targets in these diseases [31, 32]. Moreover, preliminary
clinical data suggest antitumour activity in a subset of prostate
and pancreatic cancers also carrying BRCA1/2 loss-of-function
alterations [33–36]. The BRCA1/2 genes are members of a large
functionally related gene group that mediate homologous recom-
bination during DNA repair. For example, PALB2 (Partner and
localizer of BRCA2, a.k.a. FANCN) is a protein that interacts with
BRCA2, and PALB2 loss impairs DNA repair through a similar
mechanism as BRCA2 loss-of-function [37]. Hence, testing
PARP inhibitors in clinical trials in patients with PALB2-
deficient tumours is conceptually reasonable and qualifies PALB2
loss-of-function mutations as tier III-B.
• ESCAT Tier IV: Preclinical evidence of actionability.
‘Tier IV-A’ targets represent potential drug targets that are
only supported by preclinical evidence showing that the alter-
ation influences drug sensitivity in vitro or in vivo cancer models.
‘Tier IV-B’ targets represent pathway alterations at different mo-
lecular levels that are predicted to alter drug sensitivity based on
in silico bioinformatic predictions. Tier IV targets are hypothetic-
al and are best considered as qualifying evidence for future clinic-
al testing. They may also be appropriate for enrichment of
patients in early phase clinical trials that test new molecular enti-
ties targeting the affected pathway. Patients being considered for
these studies need to be carefully informed of the lack of clinical
evidence and the preliminary nature of the data available for such
compounds, both from the safety and efficacy perspective, the
potential risks involved and the alternative therapeutic options.
• ESCAT Tier V: Evidence of relevant antitumour activity, not
resulting in clinical meaningful benefit as single treatment
but supporting development of co-targeting approaches.
Tier V targets include alterations associated with responses to a
matched targeted drug that do not translate into prolonged out-
come; however, these could be suitable targets for combination
therapy strategies. For example, over one-third of estrogen recep-
tor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancers have activating muta-
tions of PIK3CA. Clinical trials demonstrated that targeting PI3K
leads to objective responses in patients with activating PIK3CA
mutations. However, the responses did not impact outcome [38].
This may be explained by the upregulation of compensatory
pathways in response to PI3K inhibition due to complex feedback
mechanisms [39]. Understanding the mechanisms of adaptation
to PI3K inhibitors could further lead to test effective double or
triple combinations.
• ESCAT Tier X: Lack of evidence for actionability.
Tier X alterations would be those for which there is no clinical
or preclinical evidence supporting their hypothetical utility as
therapeutic target. These alterations should not be taken into ac-
count for clinical decisions.
Data repositories and bioinformatic tools
for interpretation of genomic variants
The ESCAT provides a framework and a common terminology to
assign current and future therapeutic targets into tiers that reflect
their clinical utility for selecting patients for treatment with ap-
propriate targeted therapies. The scale uses the strength of evi-
dence from clinical studies as the basis to assign tiers to a target.
As evidence accumulates, we expect that some targets will move
from one tier to another. Evaluating the technical aspects of vari-
ous platforms that are used for tumour genomic profiling are not
the main focus of this document, but we recognise the critical im-
portance of analytical validity for any test used in the clinic.
The development of reproducible bioinformatic tools to inter-
pret the cancer genome is critical for successful implementation
of precision medicine. The recent proliferation of software tools
that function as molecular decision aids underscores the need for
external validation and clinical testing of these new resources be-
fore endorsing them for clinical use.
To predict the functional relevance of new findings is a con-
tinuous challenge. Furthermore, as sequencing breadth and
depth increases and as sequencing becomes cheaper and more
common longitudinally through the disease course, the clinician
will have to contend with the interpretation of sub-clonal driver
events within or between metastatic or primary lesions.
Validating the true clinical relevance and actionability of such
events will prove challenging.
Multiplexed sequencing assays have dramatically changed the
premise of ‘one biomarker-one drug’ under which precision
medicine strategies were developed in the last two decades.
Before, there was only a limited and pre-specified range of
potential results arising from a molecular test whereas now, with
next-generation sequencing technologies, previously unreported
variants are routinely found. Regulatory agencies are aware of the
complexities of interpreting genomic testing and the need for
novel approximations to the regulatory approval process for tu-
mour sequencing assays [40]. Only very few of the somatic muta-
tions found in cancer genes (2% across �7000 tumours of a 28-
cancer type cohort) [41] are known oncogenic events. For a small
fraction of the others, there will be sufficient evidence for accept-
ing them as not clinically relevant events, but most findings rep-
resent variants that are less studied, or even unique to a patient,
for which the impact in cancer progression and potential implica-
tions for treatment selection are unknown. The establishment
and application of the levels of evidence described above must be
accompanied by the development and validation of tools
Special article
Annals of Oncology
1900 | Mateo et al.
Volume 29 | Issue 9 | 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/9/1895/5076792 by guest on 01 June 2019
 supporting the interpretation of variants identified in each
patient’s tumour. In the clinical setting, this interpretation
focuses on identifying predictive biomarkers of drug response.
Databases that collect and catalogue genomic abnormalities
detected in human cancer are fundamental to accumulating evi-
dence of the biological and clinical relevance of those findings.
Some of the most prominent examples of such resources are
listed in Table 3. These tools would primarily focus in annotating
validated oncogenic mutations and/or accumulating evidence for
variants of unknown impact. An important effort was recently
launched by the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (www.
ga4gh.org) to provide standards that allow users to simultaneous-
ly query several of these data repositories.
Finally, resources that collect tumour alterations and categorise
them according to correlative clinical data available as prognostic
of patient outcome and/or predictive biomarkers of response to
specific therapies are critical. Accurate and harmonised annota-
tion of clinical outcome data into these repositories is still partial-
ly an unmet need. Initiatives such as the AACR Project GENIE,
that provide access to cancer genomic data with clinical outcome
annotation for tens of thousands of cancer patients treated at
multiple institutions worldwide, aim to accelerate translation of
research findings to clinical benefit [42].
Conclusions
The ESCAT aims to define clinical evidence-based criteria to pri-
oritise cancer genomic abnormalities as markers to select patients
for targeted therapies. We also offer a terminology that can be
broadly applicable and help clinicians to therapeutically prioritise
genomic alterations described in a tumour profiling report. Clear
terminology regarding clinical utility should decrease the chance
for misinterpretation of results that could lead to missed oppor-
tunities for effective treatment or over-interpretation of hypo-
thetical targets. This clinical benefit-centred classification system
offers a common language for all the actors involved in clinical
cancer drug development. Its implementation in sequencing
reports, tumour boards and scientific communication, can en-
able precise treatment decisions and facilitate discussions with
patients about novel therapeutic options.
Acknowledgements
The ESCAT is a project initiated by the ESMO Translational
Research and Precision Medicine Working Group. We would
also like to thank the ESMO President Josep Tabernero, ESMO
President-Elect Solange Peters, ESMO Past President Fortunato
Ciardiello, and ESMO Educational Committee Chair Andre
´s
Cervantes for their support in this manuscript.
Funding
The Scale of Actionability and its supporting framework for
ranking genomic alterations as targets for cancer precision
medicine is a project funded by European Society for Medical
Oncology (no grant number applies).
Disclosure
JM is supported by a Prostate Cancer Foundation YI Award and
funding from ‘la Caixa’ Foundation; PB reported research fund-
ing
to
institution
from
Bristol-Myers
Squibb,
Sanofi,
AstraZeneca, Genentech/Roche, SERVIER, GlaxoSmithKline,
Novartis,
SignalChem,
PTC
Therapeutics, Nektar,
Merck,
Seattle Genetics; GT is supported by AIRC grant no. 18599;
EVA provides consulting/advisory to Tango Therapeutics,
Genome Medical, Invitae, Foresite and receives research support
from Novartis, BMS; CS is supported by The Francis Crick
Institute
(FC001169,
FC001202),
UK,
MRC
(FC001169,
FC001202), the Wellcome Trust (FC001169, FC001202), Cancer
Research UK (TRACERx and CRUK Cancer Immunotherapy
Catalyst
Network),
the
CRUK
Lung
Cancer
Centre
of
Excellence, Stand Up 2 Cancer (SU2C), the Rosetrees and
Stoneygate Trusts, NovoNordisk Foundation (16584), the
NIHR BRC at University College London Hospitals, and the
CRUK
University
College
London
Experimental
Cancer
Medicine Centre, and in part by the Breast Cancer Research
Foundation, he reports grant support from Cancer Research
UK, UCLH Biomedical Research Council, and Rosetrees Trust,
AstraZeneca,
personal
fees
from
Boehringer
Ingelheim,
Novartis, Eli Lilly, Roche Ventana, GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer,
Genentech, and Celgene, stock options in GRAIL, APOGEN
Biotechnologies, and EPIC Bioscience and has stock options
and is co-founder of Achilles Therapeutics; LP receives clinical
trial research funding from AstraZeneca, Merck, Genentech,
Seattle Genetics, and honorarium for consultations from
Novartis,
AstraZeneca,
Merck,
Seattle
Genetics,
Almac,
Immunomedics, Syndax. All remaining authors have declared
no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Hyman DM, Taylor BS, Baselga J. Implementing genome-driven oncol-
ogy. Cell 2017; 168(4): 584–599.
2. Zehir A, Benayed R, Shah RH et al. Mutational landscape of metastatic
cancer revealed from prospective clinical sequencing of 10, 000 patients.
Nat Med 2017; 23(6): 703–713.
3. Tannock IF, Hickman JA. Limits to personalized cancer medicine.
N Engl J Med 2016; 375(13): 1289–1294.
4. Marketing personalized cancer treatments requires careful language.
Nature 2018; 558(7708): 5–6.
5. Andre F, Mardis E, Salm M et al. Prioritizing targets for precision cancer
medicine. Ann Oncol 2014; 25(12): 2295–2303.
6. Van Allen EM, Wagle N, Stojanov P et al. Whole-exome sequencing and
clinical interpretation of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor sam-
ples to guide precision cancer medicine. Nat Med 2014; 20(6): 682–688.
7. Meric-Bernstam F, Johnson A, Holla V et al. A decision support frame-
work for genomically informed investigational cancer therapy. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2015; 107(7). pii: djv098.
8. Chakravarty D, Gao J, Phillips SM et al. OncoKB: a precision oncology
knowledge base. JCO Precis Oncol 2017; 2017(1): 1.
9. Li MM, Datto M, Duncavage EJ et al. Standards and guidelines for the in-
terpretation and reporting of sequence variants in cancer: a Joint
Consensus
Recommendation
of
the
Association
for
Molecular
Pathology, American Society of Clinical Oncology, and College of
American Pathologists. J Mol Diagn 2017; 19(1): 4–23.
10. Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Procter M, Leyland-Jones B et al. Trastuzumab after
adjuvant chemotherapy in HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med
2005; 353(16): 1659–1672.
Annals of Oncology
Special article
Volume 29 | Issue 9 | 2018
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdy263 | 1901
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/9/1895/5076792 by guest on 01 June 2019
 11. Romond EH, Perez EA, Bryant J et al. Trastuzumab plus adjuvant
chemotherapy for operable HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med
2005; 353(16): 1673–1684.
12. Slamon DJ, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S et al. Use of chemotherapy plus a
monoclonal antibody against HER2 for metastatic breast cancer that
overexpresses HER2. N Engl J Med 2001; 344(11): 783–792.
13. Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R et al. Activating mutations in the epider-
mal growth factor receptor underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell
lung cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J Med 2004; 350(21): 2129–2139.
14. Rosell R, Carcereny E, Gervais R et al. Erlotinib versus standard chemo-
therapy as first-line treatment for European patients with advanced
EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (EURTAC): a multi-
centre, open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13(3):
239–246.
15. Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J et al. ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical
Benefit Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol 2017; 28(10): 2340–2366.
16. Soria JC, Tan DSW, Chiari R et al. First-line ceritinib versus platinum-
based chemotherapy in advanced ALK-rearranged non-small-cell lung
cancer (ASCEND-4): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study. Lancet
2017; 389(10072): 917–929.
17. Shaw AT, Kim TM, Crino L et al. Ceritinib versus chemotherapy in
patients with ALK-rearranged non-small-cell lung cancer previously
given chemotherapy and crizotinib (ASCEND-5): a randomised,
controlled, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2017; 18(7):
874–886.
18. Solomon BJ, Mok T, Kim DW et al. First-line crizotinib versus chemo-
therapy in ALK-positive lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2014; 371(23):
2167–2177.
19. Lim SM, Kim HR, Lee JS et al. Open-label, multicenter, phase II study of
ceritinib in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer harboring ROS1 re-
arrangement. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35(23): 2613–2618.
20. Shaw AT, Ou SH, Bang YJ et al. Crizotinib in ROS1-rearranged non-
small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med 2014; 371(21): 1963–1971.
21. Drilon A, Laetsch TW, Kummar S et al. Efficacy of larotrectinib in TRK
fusion-positive cancers in adults and children. N Engl J Med 2018;
378(8): 731–739.
22. Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H et al. PD-1 blockade in tumors
with mismatch-repair deficiency. N Engl J Med 2015; 372(26):
2509–2520.
23. De Bono J, De Giorgi U, Nava Rodrigues D et al. Randomized phase II
study of Akt blockade with or without ipatasertib in abiraterone-treated
patients with metastatic prostate cancer with and without PTEN loss.
Clin
Cancer
Res
2018
Jul
23
[Epub
ahead
of
print],
doi:
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-0981.
24. Banerji U, Dean EJ, Perez-Fidalgo JA et al. A phase I open-label study to
identify a dosing regimen of the Pan-AKT inhibitor AZD5363 for evalu-
ation in solid tumors and in PIK3CA-mutated breast and gynecologic
cancers. Clin Cancer Res 2018; 24(9): 2050–2059.
25. Hyman DM, Smyth LM, Donoghue MTA et al. AKT inhibition in solid
tumors with AKT1 mutations. J Clin Oncol 2017; 35(20): 2251–2259.
26. Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C et al. Improved survival with
vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. N Engl J Med
2011; 364(26): 2507–2516.
27. Hyman DM, Puzanov I, Subbiah V et al. Vemurafenib in multiple non-
melanoma cancers with BRAF V600 mutations. N Engl J Med 2015;
373(8): 726–736.
28. Farmer H, McCabe N, Lord CJ et al. Targeting the DNA repair defect in
BRCA mutant cells as a therapeutic strategy. Nature 2005; 434(7035):
917–921.
29. Bryant HE, Schultz N, Thomas HD et al. Specific killing of BRCA2-
deficient tumours with inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase.
Nature 2005; 434(7035): 913–917.
30. Fong PC, Boss DS, Yap TA et al. Inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) poly-
merase in tumors from BRCA mutation carriers. N Engl J Med 2009;
361(2): 123–134.
31. Mirza MR, Monk BJ, Herrstedt J et al. Niraparib maintenance therapy in
platinum-sensitive, recurrent ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med 2016;
375(22): 2154–2164.
32. Ledermann J, Harter P, Gourley C et al. Olaparib maintenance therapy
in patients with platinum-sensitive relapsed serous ovarian cancer: a pre-
planned retrospective analysis of outcomes by BRCA status in a rando-
mised phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15(8): 852–861.
33. Robinson D, Van Allen EM, Wu YM et al. Integrative clinical genomics
of advanced prostate cancer. Cell 2015; 162(2): 454.
34. Mateo J, Carreira S, Sandhu S et al. DNA-repair defects and olaparib in
metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 2015; 373(18): 1697–1708.
35. Aguirre AJ, Nowak JA, Camarda ND et al. Real-time genomic character-
ization of advanced pancreatic cancer to enable precision medicine.
Cancer Discov 2018; 8(1): 14.
36. de Bono J, Ramanathan RK, Mina L et al. Phase I, dose-escalation, two-
part trial of the PARP inhibitor talazoparib in patients with advanced
germline BRCA1/2 mutations and selected sporadic cancers. Cancer
Discov 2017; 7(6): 620–629.
37. Buisson R, Dion-Cote AM, Coulombe Y et al. Cooperation of breast can-
cer proteins PALB2 and piccolo BRCA2 in stimulating homologous re-
combination. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2010; 17(10): 1247–1254.
38. Janku F, Yap TA, Meric-Bernstam F. Targeting the PI3K pathway in can-
cer: are we making headway? Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2018; 15(5): 273–291.
39. Toska E, Osmanbeyoglu HU, Castel P et al. PI3K pathway regulates ER-
dependent transcription in breast cancer through the epigenetic regula-
tor KMT2D. Science 2017; 355(6331): 1324–1330.
40. Evans BJ, Burke W, Jarvik GP. The FDA and genomic tests–getting regu-
lation right. N Engl J Med 2015; 372(23): 2258–2264.
41. Tamborero D, Rubio-Perez C, Deu-Pons J et al. Cancer genome inter-
preter annotates the biological and clinical relevance of tumor altera-
tions. Genome Med 2018; 10(1): 25.
42. Consortium APG. AACR Project GENIE: powering precision medicine
through an International Consortium. Cancer Discov 2017; 7(8):
818–831.
Special article
Annals of Oncology
1902 | Mateo et al.
Volume 29 | Issue 9 | 2018
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/annonc/article-abstract/29/9/1895/5076792 by guest on 01 June 2019
