 Anti–PD-1 antitumor immunity is enhanced by local and 
abrogated by systemic chemotherapy in GBM
Dimitrios Mathios1,*, Jennifer E. Kim1,*, Antonella Mangraviti1, Jillian Phallen1,2, Chul-Kee 
Park1,3, Christopher M. Jackson1, Tomas Garzon-Muvdi1, Eileen Kim1, Debebe Theodros1, 
Magdalena Polanczyk4, Allison M. Martin2, Ian Suk1, Xiaobu Ye1, Betty Tyler1, Chetan 
Bettegowda1, Henry Brem1, Drew M. Pardoll4, and Michael Lim1,†
1Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21287, USA
2Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, 
USA
3Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-744, 
South Korea
4Department of Cancer Immunology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD 21287, USA
Abstract
†Corresponding author. mlim3@jhmi.edu.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/8/370/370ra180/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Effects of LC, SC, and anti–PD-1 on BM myeloid cell subpopulations.
Fig. S2. Progression of intracranially implanted GL261 tumors for all treatment groups measured by bioluminescent imaging.
Fig. S3. Lymphopenia in the DLNs and PBLs after treatment with SC.
Fig. S4. Flow cytometric analysis of tumor-infiltrating immune cells in mice receiving chemotherapy, anti–PD-1, or combination 
therapy.
Fig. S5. Effect of adoptive transfer of CD8+ cells from LC + anti–PD-1 R to SC + anti–PD-1 R mice on tumor growth.
Fig. S6. Gating strategy of flow cytometric analysis of peripheral lymphocytes and TILs.
References (18–21)
Author contributions: D.M. participated in the conception and design of the study, performed experiments and flow cytometry 
experiments, analyzed the data, performed statistics, and wrote the manuscript. J.E.K. participated in the design of the study, 
performed animal experiments and flow cytometry experiments, analyzed the data, performed statistics, and wrote the manuscript. 
A.M. performed animal experiments, analyzed the data, performed statistics, and participated in writing the manuscript. J.P. 
participated in the design of the study, performed animal experiments, analyzed the data, performed statistics, and participated in 
writing the manuscript. C.-K.P. and M.P. performed animal experiments, analyzed the data, and participated in writing the manuscript. 
C.M.J. participated in the design of the study, analyzed the data, and participated in writing the manuscript. A.M.M. participated in the 
design of the study and in writing the manuscript. T.G.-M., E.K., and D.T. participated in performing animal experiments and flow 
cytometry experiments and participated in writing the manuscript. I.S. performed figure design and participated in writing the 
manuscript. X.Y. participated in study design, analyzed the data, performed statistics, and participated in writing the manuscript. B.T., 
C.B., and H.B. participated in study design and in writing the manuscript. D.M.P. and M.L. participated in the conception and study 
design, analysis of data, and writing the manuscript.
Competing interests: This project was funded by Arbor Pharmaceuticals. M.L. is receiving research support from Arbor, Agenus, 
Altor, BMS, Immunocellular, Celldex, and Accuray and is a consultant for Agenus, BMS, Merck, Oncorus, Accuray, and Stryker. H.B. 
and B.T. have equity in Accelerating Combination Therapies company and hold registered trademark for Gliadel wafer. D.M., D.M.P., 
H.B., B.T., and M.L. are inventors on patent applications (P13490-02 and P13490-03) held/submitted by the Johns Hopkins University 
that cover the concept of combining LC and immunotherapy.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Published in final edited form as:
Sci Transl Med. 2016 December 21; 8(370): 370ra180. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aag2942.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The immunosuppressive effects of chemotherapy present a challenge for designing effective 
cancer immunotherapy strategies. We hypothesized that although systemic chemotherapy (SC) 
exhibits negative immunologic effects, local chemotherapy (LC) can potentiate an antitumor 
immune response. We show that LC combined with anti–programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) 
facilitates an antitumor immune response and improves survival (P < 0.001) in glioblastoma. LC-
treated mice had increased infiltration of tumor-associated dendritic cells and clonal expansion of 
antigen-specific T effector cells. In comparison, SC resulted in systemic and intratumoral 
lymphodepletion, with decreased immune memory in long-term survivors. Furthermore, adoptive 
transfer of CD8+ cells from LC-treated mice partially rescued SC-treated mice after tumor 
rechallenge. Last, the timing of chemo- and immunotherapy had differential effects on anti–PD-1 
efficacy. This study suggests that both mode of delivery and timing have distinct effects on the 
efficacy of anti–PD-1. The results of this work could help guide the selection and scheduling of 
combination treatment for patients with glioblastoma and other tumor types.
INTRODUCTION
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and aggressive primary brain tumor in adults, 
with an expected survival of less than 2 years despite multimodal interventions (1). Although 
GBM rarely metastasizes, these tumors and their treatment have systemic sequelae, 
including severe immunosuppression (2, 3). Current standard of care includes surgery, 
systemic temozolomide (TMZ), and radiation. Systemic chemotherapy (SC) is thought to 
damage the bone marrow (BM) and subsequently affect the number and activation state of 
resident immune cells (4), raising concerns for potential antagonistic interactions between 
SC and immunotherapy.
Anti–programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have emerged 
as a promising therapeutic strategy against a number of solid tumors (5, 6). These mAbs 
target PD-1, a receptor expressed on the membrane of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) 
that, once activated, results in decreased survival and proliferation of CD8+ T cells, reduced 
cytokine production, and T cell exhaustion. Blocking the interaction between PD-1 and its 
ligands (PD-L1 and PD-L2) restores T cell function to promote an antitumor immune 
response (7). However, effective implementation of immunotherapy alongside conventional 
cancer therapies requires careful study of the potential synergistic or antagonistic effects of 
concomitant modalities. The potential for the lymphodepleting effects of chemotherapy to 
blunt the activity of immunotherapeutic agents is of particular concern (8, 9).
We hypothesized that local chemotherapy (LC)—unlike SC—mitigates chemotherapy-
associated immunosuppression and potentiates an antitumor immune response (9). The 
preclinical studies described here compare the effects of SC and LC on anti–PD-1 efficacy 
and give insight into the effect of timing chemotherapy in relation to immunotherapy.
Mathios et al.
Page 2
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RESULTS
SC is immunosuppressive
For the experiments currently presented in the manuscript, we used the following schedules: 
Carmustine [bis-chloroethylnitrosurea (BCNU)] was given by intraperitoneal injection at 
varying doses (5, 15, and 30 mg/kg) after anti–PD-1 treatment. A dose of 30 mg/kg was also 
given before anti–PD-1 treatment in a separate cohort. LC used in this study consisted of 
polymers impregnated with chemotherapy that allow for a constant but not linear release of 
chemotherapy in the tumor microenvironment for at least 2 weeks. The majority of 
chemotherapy was delivered during the first week, with slower release of chemotherapy on 
the second week [see detailed kinetics in the study by Fleming et al. (10)].
To evaluate the immunological response of tumor-bearing mice to chemotherapy, we 
quantified the number of lymphocytes recovered from brain as well as blood, lymph nodes, 
and BM at various time points (Fig. 1). Mice treated with SC showed a decreased number of 
CD3+ lymphocytes compared to controls at the end of the first week of treatment, and this 
trend persisted over the course of treatment. At the end of the therapeutic regimen (day 30), 
SC-treated mice were severely lymphodepleted for at least 10 days after the end of treatment 
(LC versus SC, P = 0.003) (Fig. 1, day 41). The same lymphodepleting pattern was observed 
in the draining lymph nodes (DLNs). The SC group exhibited myelotoxicity, with lower 
overall cellularity of the BM as well as leukocytes (as measured by CD45) compared to the 
control (Fig. 1 and fig. S1). However, LC did not affect the number of TILs or lymphocytes 
in the peripheral lymphoid organs. Instead, we observed an increase in the number of TILs 
at a late time point (day 30) compared to SC or control mice (Fig. 1).
A small percentage of mice treated with SC or LC (30% versus 20%) were cured of disease 
and followed for 4 months after initial tumor implantation. Mice treated with high-dose SC 
showed a decreased number of recovered lymphocytes from lymph nodes (P = 0.01) and 
blood (P = 0.07) compared to untreated or LC-treated mice, even at the 4-month mark (Fig. 
1).
The use of SC is inferior compared to combined LC and anti–PD-1 treatment
The delivery method of chemotherapy in tumor-bearing mice had a marked effect on 
immune function. SC produced severe lymphopenia in the peripheral lymphoid organs and 
the tumor microenvironment, whereas LC did not. In light of these findings, we evaluated 
whether LC or SC (BCNU) is superior in combination with anti–PD-1. LC alone increased 
survival compared to the empty polymer (EP; wafer without chemotherapeutic agent) group 
(P = 0.028). No difference in survival was seen in SC compared to LC (P = 0.41). The 
combination of SC + anti–PD-1 resulted in similar survival compared to anti–PD-1 alone (P 
= 0.4). LC + anti–PD-1 had the greatest survival benefit, when compared to anti–PD-1 alone 
(P = 0.03), and was superior to LC alone (P < 0.001) (Fig. 2A). In a large cohort of mice (15 
mice per group), LC + anti–PD-1 exhibited higher survival rates compared to SC + anti–
PD-1 (P = 0.03) (Fig. 2A, bottom). IVIS imaging of the mice in this cohort (fig. S2) showed 
that mice treated with anti–PD-1 had a quick tumor regression, unlike the mice treated with 
SC, which had persistent tumor for up to 60 days before they died.
Mathios et al.
Page 3
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The concomitant use of high-dose systemic TMZ with anti–PD-1 failed to show synergism; 
combination of systemic TMZ with anti–PD-1 was inferior to the combination of high-dose 
local TMZ with anti–PD-1 (P = 0.009). The use of high-dose LC was synergistic in 
combination with anti–PD-1 treatment (LC versus LC + anti–PD-1, P = 0.0049; anti–PD-1 
versus LC + anti–PD-1, P < 0.001; Fig. 2B).
Addition of SC to anti–PD-1 treatment results in severe lymphodepletion
LC-treated mice showed an increased number of CD3+ lymphocytes compared to the control 
group in the peripheral blood (day 30; Fig. 3A), or to anti–PD-1 (fig. S3A). The combination 
of SC + anti–PD-1 exhibited a similar lymphodepleting profile to SC treatment alone: CD3+ 
blood lymphocytes started decreasing at day 21 (P < 0.001; Fig. 3A and fig. S3A) and 
reached the same levels as mice treated with SC alone (P = 0.9; Fig. 3). Mice treated with 
the combination of LC + anti–PD-1 maintained a high number of circulating lymphocytes 
compared to the nontreated mice (P = 0.5; Fig. 3A and fig. S3).
Flow cytometric analysis of the DLNs confirmed lymphodepletion of both CD3+ cells and 
CD8+IFN-γ+ cells in the SC and SC + anti–PD-1 groups. Anti–PD-1, LC, and combination 
of LC + anti–PD-1 groups had higher numbers of CD3+ and higher percentages of 
CD8+IFN-γ+ cells compared to the control. The combination treatment resulted in a higher 
percentage of CD8+IFN-γ+ cells compared to monotherapies (anti–PD-1 versus LC + anti–
PD-1, P = 0.02; LC versus LC + anti–PD-1, P = 0.03; fig. S3B). The percentage of 
CD4+FoxP3+ cells decreased in all treatment groups compared to the control, including the 
groups treated with SC.
Additionally, we found that mice in the SC group showed a significant decrease in the 
cellularity of the BM (P = 0.0185) on the basis of viability dye staining. The addition of 
anti–PD-1 failed to reconstitute the cellularity of the BM (P = 0.0079). The analysis of 
CD45+ BM cells (leukocytes) from the SC and SC + anti–PD-1 groups revealed decreased 
live cell numbers compared to the control, LC, or LC + anti–PD-1 groups (P = 0.03) (fig. S1, 
A and B). A more detailed analysis of the BM cell subpopulations indicated that SC + anti–
PD-1 exhibited an increased percentage of granulocytic cells (fig. S1, B and C).
Addition of SC to anti–PD-1 treatment results in severe depletion of TILs
Mice were sacrificed at days 21 and 30, and TILs were analyzed to assess the effects of each 
treatment regimen on lymphocytes present in the tumor microenvironment. The percentage 
and number of CD4+FoxP3+ regulatory cells were higher in SC compared to the control 
(53.6% versus 29.3%, P = 0.02). LC moderately increased the percentage of Treg cells (40%) 
versus EP. Animals treated with anti–PD-1 had the same percentage of Treg cells as the 
control (P = 0.96). The addition of anti–PD-1 to LC moderately decreased the number of 
CD4+FoxP3+ cells (34.2%), close to the number in control mice (Fig. 3, B and C), but did 
not significantly decrease the percentage of Treg cells in combination with SC (47.6%, P = 
0.64) (Fig. 3, B and C).
At day 21, 51.7% of the CD8+ cells recovered from control mice produced interferon-γ 
(IFN-γ). The LC and SC groups exhibited a similar percentage of CD8+IFN-γ+ cells, with 
44 and 34% of the recovered CD8+ cells producing IFN-γ, respectively (P = 0.5 and P = 
Mathios et al.
Page 4
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 0.15). The addition of anti–PD-1 antibody to LC treatment increased the percentage of 
CD8+IFN-γ–producing cells to 71% (P = 0.03), which was similar to anti–PD-1 alone (P = 
0.87; Fig. 3, B and D).
At day 30 after tumor implantation, the density of CD3+ TILs (normalized to tumor volume) 
in the SC group was significantly less than the control (40 cells versus 140 cells, P < 0.001). 
LC enhanced the percentage and number of CD8+IFN-γ–producing cells (42%, 80 cells) 
compared to the control (15%, 30 cells; P < 0.001). LC + anti–PD-1 had a higher percentage 
of CD8+IFN-γ–producing cells (38%) compared to the control (15%, P < 0.001) but similar 
percentage compared to LC (42%, P = 0.38) or anti–PD-1 alone (38%, P = 0.75). The 
percentage of CD4+FoxP3+ cells was similar at day 30 among control (31.6%), EP (32.4%), 
and anti–PD-1 (26%) groups. LC continued to have a higher percentage of Treg cells 
(53.6%) compared to EP (32.4%, P = 0.02), but the combination of LC + anti–PD-1 restored 
the percentage of CD4+FoxP3+ cells (37%) to that of the control (P = 0.1) (Fig. 3, B and C).
LC enriches tumor-infiltrating dendritic cells without affecting microglia and tumor-
associated macrophages
Resident microglia were identified as CD11b+CD45[low], infiltrating macrophages-
monocytes as CD11b+CD45[high], and TILs as CD11b−CD45[high] cells. The relative 
percentages of lymphocytes, microglia, and monocytes exhibited variability among groups, 
with no distinct pattern for any specific group (fig. S4, A and B). However, the lymphocyte/
microglia ratio strongly correlated with tumor size (P = 0.003, r2= 0.79) (fig. S4C). Further 
analysis of the tumor-infiltrating macrophages showed no distinct pattern among different 
groups; however, a positive correlation existed between tumor size and monocyte/
granulocyte ratio (P = 0.046, r2= 0.5; fig. S5C).
Tumor-infiltrating dendritic cells, defined as CD11b+CD11c+ cells gated from the 
population of CD45+ cells, showed an increased percentage in the LC and LC + anti–PD-1 
groups compared to the EP or anti–PD-1 groups (Fig. 3E). This result suggests that LC 
promoted infiltration of the tumor microenvironment with peripheral dendritic cells.
Reversing the sequence of SC and immunotherapy abrogates survival benefit of 
immunotherapy
To investigate whether the sequence of immunotherapy and chemotherapy affects survival, 
we delivered chemotherapy before immuno-therapy. Again, we observed that LC mice 
trended toward a longer survival compared to EP (P = 0.07). Despite the use of 
chemotherapy (LC or SC) at an earlier time point (day 7) (Fig. 4A), the median and long-
term survival did not change compared to results seen in the initial experiments, where 
immunotherapy was delivered before chemotherapy (day 14) (Fig. 4B). The order of 
treatment similarly did not change outcomes, and LC before or after anti–PD-1 
administration generated similar survival data (90% versus 80% LTS) (Fig. 4, A and B). 
However, when combining anti–PD-1 with SC, the survival benefit of anti–PD-1 was 
abrogated by giving chemotherapy first (30% versus 50% LTS) (Fig. 4A). These results are 
in contrast to our first round of experiments (SC given after anti–PD-1), where SC + anti–
PD-1 exhibited similar survival as anti–PD-1 alone (55% versus 50% LTS; Fig. 4B). 
Mathios et al.
Page 5
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Furthermore, the combination of anti–PD-1 and LC showed a significantly better survival (P 
= 0.03) compared to anti–PD-1 and SC, consistent with our observations from the previous 
experiment, where chemotherapy was given after the end of immu-notherapy (Fig. 4, A and 
B).
SC lacks synergism with anti–PD-1 treatment independent of treatment dose
We titrated the dose of systemic BCNU to assess whether low-dose (5 mg/kg), intermediate-
dose (15 mg/kg), or high-dose (30 mg/kg) SC can be effectively combined with anti–PD-1. 
All BCNU regimens failed to show synergism with anti–PD-1. Specifically, low dose (5 
mg/kg) + anti–PD-1 showed no difference in overall survival compared to anti–PD-1 alone 
(P = 0.37) (Fig. 4C). The intermediate dose (15 mg/kg) + anti–PD-1 also failed to show any 
difference in overall survival compared to anti–PD-1 (P = 0.92); it furthermore exhibited 
decreased LTS (36.3%) compared to anti–PD-1 (Fig. 4C). Last, the high-dose (30 mg/kg) 
treatment showed lack of synergism (P = 0.64) with anti–PD-1 and decreased LTS in the 
high dose (30 mg/kg) + anti–PD-1 group (30%) compared to anti–PD-1 (Fig. 4A). Flow 
cytometry of the peripheral blood drawn on days 20, 26, and 36 after implantation 
demonstrated a considerable decrease in the total number of circulating CD3 cells in the 
high-dose (30 mg/kg) BCNU group and a transient decrease in the low-dose (5 mg/kg) and 
intermediate-dose (15 mg/kg) groups on day 26 (Fig. 4D). Of note, there was no significant 
difference among the three treatment groups in the percentage of lymphodepletion across the 
experimental time points [two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (P = 0.4 for treatment 
groups, P = 0.001 for time variable)].
LC and anti–PD-1 increase homing of tumor antigen-specific T cells in tumor compared to 
SC
We intracranially implanted mice with GL261 OVA cells and adoptively transferred 
lymphocytes from OT-I mice modified to express a T cell receptor with high affinity for the 
ovalbumin residues 257 to 264 in the context of H2Kb MHC-I (H-2Kb major 
histocompatibility complex class I) peptide. Four days after adoptive transfer and 3 days 
after initiation of chemotherapy, we harvested DLNs and brains of animals implanted with 
GL261 OVA tumors. Flow analysis with CD3 and CD45.2 markers showed that LC + anti–
PD-1 increased the percentage and number of adoptively transferred OVA-specific (CD45.2) 
T cells residing in the DLNs and the tumor microenvironment compared to SC or anti–PD-1 
(Fig. 5). These profiles were more exaggerated within the tumor microenvironment 
compared to the DLNs; mice treated with LC + anti–PD-1 had a significantly higher 
percentage of CD3+CD45.2+ cells in the tumor microenvironment compared to anti–PD-1 
(23% versus 8%, P = 0.0343) as well as to SC + anti–PD-1 (23% versus 6%, P = 0.026) 
treatment. Furthermore, LC had a significantly higher percentage of CD3+CD45.2+ cells 
compared to SC (P = 0.0329). These data suggest that LC indeed increases antigen-specific 
immune activity in the tumor.
LC preserves memory response against rechallenge, whereas SC abrogates memory 
response
To assess memory response, mice with LTS were rechallenged with GL261 cells, and naïve 
mice were challenged in parallel. No tumor growth occurred in the anti–PD-1, LC, and LC + 
Mathios et al.
Page 6
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 anti–PD-1 groups, indicating a memory response upon tumor antigen recognition. In 
contrast, naïve mice developed large, progressively growing tumors. LTS in the SC or SC + 
anti–PD-1 groups also developed large, progressively growing tumors after tumor 
rechallenge (Fig. 6, A and B).
Twenty days after intracranial tumor rechallenge, mice with LTS were assessed for the 
presence of memory cells. CD3+CD8+CD44[high]CD62L[low] cells were considered T 
effector memory (TEM) cells, and CD3+CD8+CD44[low]CD62L[high] as T central memory 
(TCM) cells. Whereas mice treated with anti–PD-1, SC, or LC + anti–PD-1 exhibited 
similar percentages of CD4+ or CD8+ TCM and TEM cells, the TEM cells from the SC 
group were dysfunctional. IFN-γ production after stimulation with phorbol 12-myristate 13-
acetate/ionomycin in TEM cells isolated from DLNs, spleen, or peripheral blood was lower 
in SC than in anti–PD-1 or LC + anti–PD-1 (Fig. 6, C and D).
The abovementioned data indicate that the immune memory response to anti–PD-1 
treatment was abrogated by adding high-dose SC (Fig. 6, A to C). In Fig. 6E, we show that 
moderate dose of systemic BCNU also abrogates memory immune response. More 
specifically, nine of nine mice treated with BCNU (30 mg/kg) + anti–PD-1 redeveloped 
tumor after tumor rechallenge and died from it; one of one mouse treated with BCNU (15 
mg/kg) redeveloped the tumor and died from it; and three of three mice treated with BCNU 
(15 mg/kg) + anti–PD-1 developed the tumor (two of three died from it).
To identify whether the presence of intact CD8 memory cells could allow SC + anti–PD-1 
mice to regain their ability to reject the tumor after rechallenge, we harvested CD8 cells 
from spleens of mice treated with LC + anti–PD-1 and adoptively transferred them into mice 
treated with SC + anti–PD-1 and rechallenged with tumor, as described in fig. S5A. As 
mentioned, mice treated with SC + anti–PD-1 and rechallenged with tumor failed to reject 
the tumor and quickly grew large tumors. These tumors were well established when CD8 
cells were adoptively transferred (day 12). Two of the four recipient mice (50%) showed a 
transient decrease in the bioluminescent signal after adoptive transfer of CD8 cells (fig. S5, 
A and B). We observed that adoptively transferred effector CD8 cells were able to slow the 
progression of the tumor but not completely eradicate recurrent tumors. This suggests that 
adoptive transfer of memory CD8 cells is not adequate to maintain a durable immune 
response.
In separate experiments, mice with LTS from the SC group were rechallenged with tumor 
(SC R) and treated with anti–PD-1. Control mice implanted with primary tumor and treated 
with anti–PD-1 exhibited 50% LTS as expected, whereas mice originally treated with SC for 
their primary tumor and treated with anti–PD-1 for their rechallenged tumor (SC R + 
postrechallenge anti–PD-1) failed to respond to anti–PD-1 (Fig. 7A). Additionally, the rate 
of tumor progression in the SC R + postrechallenge anti–PD-1 group, as measured by 
bioluminescent imaging, was similar to the rate in tumor-bearing mice that did not receive 
treatment (Fig. 7A). Harvested peripheral blood and brain of these rechallenged mice 
confirmed that T memory cells from the SC + anti–PD-1 mice exhibited dysfunctional IFN-
γ production (Fig. 7, B and C) compared to the LC + anti–PD-1 mice. Furthermore, we 
observed that anti–PD-1 in the SC R mice did not restore the functionality of memory T 
Mathios et al.
Page 7
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cells. More specifically, T memory cells in the brain parenchyma of mice treated with LC + 
anti–PD-1 showed markedly higher IFN-γ production compared to SC R and rescue anti–
PD-1 (70% versus 20%, P = 0.02). The same patterns of IFN-γ production from T memory 
cells were observed in peripheral blood, with LC and anti–PD-1 exhibiting the highest T 
memory–associated IFN-γ production (Fig. 7, B and C). After performing necropsies on 
these mice on experimental day 104, we observed that the size of the spleen in the SC-
treated mice was significantly decreased compared to the mice treated with LC + anti–PD-1 
(P = 0.003; Fig. 7D). Figure 7D shows visual proof of tumor regrowth in the SC-treated 
groups and absence of tumor regrowth in the LC + anti–PD-1 group.
DISCUSSION
Although chemotherapy and immunotherapy have been widely used and validated 
independently, combination therapy has been controversial because of known 
immunosuppressive effects of chemotherapy. Recently, efforts have been undertaken to 
identify conditions under which chemotherapy can potentiate the use of immunotherapy. The 
doses, delivery methods, and types of chemotherapy and immunotherapy can drastically 
alter outcomes (11). Certain chemotherapies seem to have differential effects on specific 
lymphoid subsets, as in the case of cyclophosphamide, which preferentially depletes Treg 
cells in low doses (12). The type of cell death may also affect immune stimulation. It has 
been hypothesized that treatments resulting in apoptosis are less effective in inducing a 
robust immune response because apoptosis abrogates tumor antigen presentation, whereas 
necrosis results in antigen release (8).
The experiments described here serve as evidence that LC in the form of controlled-release 
BCNU or TMZ polymers is superior to SC in potentiating anti–PD-1–mediated antitumor 
immune response. This regimen provides a robust survival benefit as well as increased 
tumor-infiltrating immune cells and memory cells necessary to resist tumor rechallenge (Fig. 
8). These results highlight the importance of rigorously testing the effects of order, timing, 
and delivery method in implementing combination chemotherapy/immunotherapy regimens.
We found that LC not only allowed for retained activity of anti–PD-1 but also boosted 
immune response. One potential mechanism may be increased antigen presentation as tumor 
cells die in response to chemotherapy. This hypothesis is supported by the increased 
percentage of dendritic cells present in the LC groups compared to the control or anti–PD-1 
groups. Tumor-infiltrating dendritic cells are potent antigen-presenting cells (13, 14). By 
implanting GL261 OVA cells in mice and adoptively transferring OT-I lymphocytes, we 
observed that LC allowed for greater expansion of the adoptively transferred OVA-specific 
lymphocytes in the brain compared to mice treated with anti–PD-1 alone or SC + anti–PD-1. 
These results support the hypothesis that LC-induced cell death attracts more dendritic cells 
that take up released antigens, allowing for greater antigen presentation and further clonal 
activation of tumor-specific T cell responses. In contrast, the use of SC seems to abrogate 
antitumor antigen-specific T cell responses. The effect of LC versus SC on tumor-infiltrating 
dendritic cells will require future characterization. Establishing the exact mechanism of 
increased antigen presentation after LC will require additional experiments because 
increased antigen-specific tumor responses can result from LC effects on multiple levels 
Mathios et al.
Page 8
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (cellular, antigen-processing machinery, and antigen affinity). Furthermore, LC did not seem 
to increase tumor-specific T cells in the DLNs, unlike in the tumor microenvironment where 
it enhanced T cell expansion more than anti–PD-1 alone. We hypothesize that this difference 
in T cell expansion in the tumor microenvironment but not DLNs could be a result of antigen 
presentation occurring in the tumor more than in the DLNs or possibly due to disruption of 
the blood-brain barrier by LC and further infiltration of T cells in the tumor. We realize, 
though, that our results only show a snapshot of these events and that future more detailed 
experiments are required to identify the location of antigen presentation.
These immunologic findings are consistent with our survival data. Combination LC and 
anti–PD-1 exhibited the most robust survival benefit compared to control and monotherapy. 
Furthermore, these data show that SC does not work synergistically with anti–PD-1. These 
results are independent of the chemotherapy agent, concentration of local or SC, and the 
timing of SC in relation to immunotherapy. The use of SC alone or in combination with 
anti–PD-1 resulted in delayed tumor progression compared to control or anti–PD-1, 
respectively; however, the tumors recurred, resulting in late mortality. Consistent with these 
data are the results of the survival experiment where SC was given before immunotherapy; 
addition of SC to anti–PD-1 did not provide a survival benefit and was inferior to PD-1 
monotherapy.
The combination of LC and anti–PD-1 enhanced antitumor immune response within the 
tumor microenvironment, further supporting the utility of combining chemotherapy and 
immunotherapy. Mice treated with LC + anti–PD-1 showed a decreased number of 
CD4+FoxP3+ cells and an increase in CD8+IFN-γ–producing cells compared to mice in 
monotherapy or control groups. Immune infiltration of CD8+IFN-γ–producing cells was 
seen at day 30, but not day 21, which could indicate the local cytoreductive effect of BCNU 
giving way to immune activation. The interaction between LC and anti–PD-1 treatment and 
its effect on immune infiltration likely occur on two fronts: the cytoreductive effect of 
BCNU is concentrated within the first week after polymer implantation (days 14 to 21 after 
implantation) because of the kinetics of BCNU release from polymer (10). The presence of 
BCNU in the tumor microenvironment causes cell death and decreased proliferation of 
immune cells infiltrating the microenvironment at day 21, as seen with other 
chemotherapeutic agents (11, 15). Persistent antigen stimulation resulting from 
chemotherapy-induced tumor cell death at the first week of polymer implantation continues 
to attract effector T cells into the tumor; the decreased concentration of BCNU on the 
second week after polymer implantation allows for effector T cells to exert their antitumor 
function. Both LC and SC increased the percentage of Treg cells at days 21 and 30. The 
addition of anti–PD-1 to LC (unlike SC) decreased the percentage of Treg cells at days 21 
and 30, resulting in an increased Teff/Treg ratio in the LC + anti–PD-1 group at day 30. As 
expected, the anti–PD-1 monotherapy group exhibited increased infiltration of TILs, with 
increased CD8+IFN-γ–producing cells and decreased CD4+FoxP3+ cells (16), whereas LC 
increased the CD4+FoxP3+ cells and provided an initial (day 21) moderate decrease of 
CD8+IFN-γ–producing cells. However, LC enriched the tumor microenvironment for 
CD8+IFN-γ–producing cells at day 30 compared to control.
Mathios et al.
Page 9
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The immune profile in the peripheral blood and lymphoid organs reflected the changes in the 
tumor microenvironment. SC depleted CD3+ cells in DLNs and peripheral blood and caused 
myelotoxicity. Although SC did not affect the percentage of CD8+IFN-γ–producing cells, it 
greatly depleted the number of cells present in the peripheral organs.
The rechallenge experiments show that anti–PD-1 therapy generates immunologic memory 
against tumor antigens, resulting in tumor rejection upon rechallenge. SC abrogated this 
effect. LC, however, allowed for persistent immunologic memory generated by anti–PD-1 
therapy. Flow cytometric analysis of rechallenged mice supports the hypothesis that SC 
disrupts memory T cell function. Analysis of TEM cells from the peripheral lymphoid 
organs (DLNs, peripheral blood, and spleen) showed that cells from SC mice exhibit 
dysfunctional IFN-γ production compared to the anti–PD-1 or LC + anti–PD-1 groups. 
Furthermore, the lack of a complete anti-tumor response in mice rechallenged with SC + 
anti–PD-1 after adoptive transfer of CD8 cells from LC + anti–PD-1 mice that rejected the 
tumor upon rechallenge implies that CD8 memory cells alone are not sufficient to produce a 
rapid and complete antitumor response. By putting the results of the survival data and the 
rechallenge-memory response together, we postulate that the late recurrence after SC could 
be attributed to two factors: (i) acquired mutations of the tumor after use of DNA-damaging 
agents and (ii) the lack of effector memory cells that can eliminate tumor clones encountered 
in the past but not successfully eliminated at that time. Additionally, SC + postrechallenge 
anti–PD-1 mice did not show survival or immunologic response to anti–PD-1 treatment as 
we would expect in chemotherapy-naïve anti–PD-1–treated mice. Our results suggest the 
need to optimize chemotherapy strategies for the treatment of newly diagnosed and recurrent 
GBM.
The current standard of care includes chemotherapy and radiation for newly diagnosed and 
recurrent GBM. Our results suggest that locally delivered chemotherapy can enhance the 
effects of immunotherapy. We therefore propose that the current approach to chemotherapy 
should be reassessed. Rather than viewing chemotherapy as a definitive therapy, we should 
consider chemotherapy as an initiator of a definitive immune-based therapy. Because 
BCNU-eluting polymers are currently approved for use in recurrent and newly diagnosed 
GBM, this strategy may be readily translated into clinical trials. We have also demonstrated 
that the timing of chemotherapy can affect the efficacy of immunotherapy. Currently, 
immunotherapy is typically administered after patients have failed their initial chemotherapy 
regimen. Our data suggest that administering SC before immunotherapy could inhibit the 
ability of the immune system to generate an effective antitumor immune response. This 
study suggests alternative therapeutic strategies to circumvent the negative immunologic 
profile of chemotherapy and optimize the combination of chemotherapy and immunotherapy 
for GBM.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
The objective of this study was to evaluate the optimal conditions under which 
chemotherapy and immunotherapy can synergize for the treatment of GBM. BCNU as well 
as TMZ were used as chemotherapy drugs of choice, either in the form of LC or SC at 
Mathios et al.
Page 10
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 varying doses. Anti–PD-1 mAb was used as the immunotherapy of interest. Anti–PD-1 was 
used either before or after chemotherapy. Mice from varying treatment groups were followed 
to create survival curves, imaged to assess tumor progression, and rechallenged with tumor 
to assess immune memory. Mice were euthanized to assess the phenotype of the peripheral 
immune system as well as the tumor microenvironment at various time points. Although no 
power analysis was performed before the initiation of the experiments, we used a standard 
number of mice based on our previous experience with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Mice 
were randomized to different treatment groups on the basis of bioluminescent imaging to 
make sure that all treatment groups were starting with similar tumor sizes. The studies 
reported here were not blinded. All experiments were run in triplicates, except if specified 
otherwise.
Tumor model
Female C57BL/6J mice, 6 to 8 weeks old, were implanted (day 0) with GL261 LUC cells to 
establish intracranial gliomas, as previously described (16). Briefly, mice were anesthetized 
with ketamine (100 mg/kg)/ xylazine (10 mg/kg), and a small midline incision was made to 
expose the skull. A burr hole was drilled directly over the striatum, and 130,000 GL261 
LUC cells were implanted at a depth of 3 mm from the cortical surface. The tumor take rate 
was 100%. On day 7 after implantation, mice were imaged to assess tumor growth using an 
IVIS platform (In Vivo Imaging System, Caliper Life Sciences). Mice were stratified into 
experimental treatment groups based on luminescence. Each treatment group had 5 to 15 
mice in survival experiments. The treatment groups were as follows: control [3% ethanol in 
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), administered intraperitoneally], EP, anti–PD-1, LC, SC 
(3% ethanol in PBS), SC + anti–PD-1, and LC + anti–PD-1. All experiments were repeated 
at least three times unless otherwise stated.
For the SC groups, intraperitoneal BCNU was used in the following doses: 5, 15, and 30 
mg/kg. TMZ was used in the following dose: 66 mg/ kg daily from days 10 to 14. Anti–
PD-1 was administered intraperitoneally at a dose of 200 μg on days 10, 12, and 14. Mice 
were euthanized at humane end points (severe neurological deficit that does not permit the 
mice to feed themselves, head tilt, or cachexia), as designated by our Institutional Animal 
Care and Use Committee.
Drugs
BCNU and TMZ were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and dissolved in 100% ethanol in 
preparation for the intraperitoneal injection. The doses used were equivalent to human 
clinical doses. For more details on preparation, see the Supplementary Materials and 
Methods.
Surgical procedure: Polymer implantation
Mice in the LC or EP treatment groups were anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg)/
xylazine (10 mg/kg). The skin was prepared with alcohol swabs, a midline skin incision was 
opened, and the burr hole created for tumor implantation was identified. The burr hole was 
redrilled to allow for the polymer to enter the cranial cavity. The tumor mass was identified, 
and the polymer was placed directly on top of the tumor and pushed under the skull. The 
Mathios et al.
Page 11
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 skin incision was closed with staples. Mice were monitored for a period of 30 min after 
recovery from anesthesia for signs of neurological deficits.
Anti–PD-1 mAb
Hamster anti-murine PD-1 mAb–producing hybridoma (G4) was used to produce antibody 
as previously described (17). Hamster immunoglobulin isotype (Rockland 
Immunochemicals Inc.) antibody was administered to animals receiving either BCNU 
polymers alone or intraperitoneal BCNU alone.
Statistics
Survival was plotted using Kaplan-Meier curves and analyzed with the log-rank Mantel-Cox 
test in GraphPad Prism software. For comparison of cell numbers and percentages between 
treatment groups in flow cytometry experiments, a two-tailed unpaired t test was used. P 
values <0.05 were considered significant. Figure 2(B and E) was created after combining 
two separate experiments with similar survival to assume enough power to detect 
statistically significant values.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank A. Tam and R. L. Blosser from the Flow Cytometry Core Facility, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, for assistance on flow cytometry data analysis. We thank S. H. Bookman for assistance with animal 
experiments. We thank M. Olin from the University of Minessota for providing the GL261 OVA LUC cell line. We 
thank C. Drake’s laboratory from Johns Hopkins University for providing RAG−/− OT-I CD45.2 transgenic mice.
Funding: This study was funded by Arbor Pharmaceuticals as well as philanthropy from S. Mitchell, Mr. and Mrs. 
J. Fidler, and H. Rincon Family.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. Stupp R, Hegi ME, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Taphoorn MJB, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, Allgeier 
A, Fisher B, Belanger K, Hau P, Brandes AA, Gijtenbeek J, Marosi C, Vecht CJ, Mokhtari K, 
Wesseling P, Villa S, Eisenhauer E, Gorlia T, Weller M, Lacombe D, Cairncross JG, Mirimanoff R-
O. European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer Brain Tumour and Radiation 
Oncology Groups, National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. Effects of 
radiotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide versus radiotherapy alone on survival in 
glioblastoma in a randomised phase III study: 5-Year analysis of the EORTC-NCIC trial. Lancet 
Oncol. 2009; 10:459–466. [PubMed: 19269895] 
2. Brooks WH, Netsky MG, Normansell DE, Horwitz DA. Depressed cell-mediated immunity in 
patients with primary intracranial tumors. Characterization of a humoral immunosuppressive factor. 
J Exp Med. 1972; 136:1631–1647. [PubMed: 4345108] 
3. Grossman SA, Ye X, Lesser G, Sloan A, Carraway H, Desideri S, Piantadosi S. NABTT CNS 
Consortium. Immunosuppression in patients with high-grade gliomas treated with radiation and 
temozolomide. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:5473–5480. [PubMed: 21737504] 
4. Lombardi G, Rumiato E, Bertorelle R, Saggioro D, Farina P, Della Puppa A, Zustovich F, Berti F, 
Sacchetto V, Marcato R, Amadori A, Zagonel V. Clinical and genetic factors associated with severe 
hematological toxicity in glioblastoma patients during radiation plus temozolomide treatment: A 
prospective study. Am J Clin Oncol. 2013; 38:514–519.
Mathios et al.
Page 12
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 5. Brahmer JR, Hammers H, Lipson EJ. Nivolumab: Targeting PD-1 to bolster antitumor immunity. 
Future Oncol. 2015; 11:1307–1326. [PubMed: 25798726] 
6. Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN, Smith DC, McDermott DF, Powderly JD, 
Carvajal RD, Sosman JA, Atkins MB, Leming PD, Spigel DR, Antonia SJ, Horn L, Drake CG, 
Pardoll DM, Chen L, Sharfman WH, Anders RA, Taube JM, McMiller TL, Xu H, Korman AJ, Jure-
Kunkel M, Agrawal S, McDonald D, Kollia GD, Gupta A, Wigginton JM, Sznol M. Safety, activity, 
and immune correlates of anti–PD-1 antibody in cancer. N Engl J Med. 2012; 366:2443–2454. 
[PubMed: 22658127] 
7. Pardoll DM. The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 
12:252–264. [PubMed: 22437870] 
8. van der Most RG, Robinson BW, Lake RA. Combining immunotherapy with chemotherapy to treat 
cancer. Discov Med. 2005; 5:265–270. [PubMed: 20704886] 
9. Jackson C, Ruzevick J, Brem H, Lim M. Vaccine strategies for glioblastoma: Progress and future 
directions. Immunotherapy. 2013; 5:155–167. [PubMed: 23413907] 
10. Fleming AB, Saltzman WM. Pharmacokinetics of the carmustine implant. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2002; 41:403–419. [PubMed: 12074689] 
11. Litterman AJ, Dudek AZ, Largaespada DA. Alkylating chemotherapy may exert a uniquely 
deleterious effect upon neoantigen-targeting anticancer vaccination. Oncoimmunology. 2013; 
2:e26294. [PubMed: 24251080] 
12. Le DT, Jaffee EM. Regulatory T-cell modulation using cyclophosphamide in vaccine approaches: 
A current perspective. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:3439–3444. [PubMed: 22761338] 
13. Hailemichael Y, Overwijk WW. Cancer vaccines: Trafficking of tumor-specific T cells to tumor 
after therapeutic vaccination. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014; 53:46–50. [PubMed: 24796845] 
14. Preynat-Seauve O, Schuler P, Contassot E, Beermann F, Huard B, French LE. Tumor-infiltrating 
dendritic cells are potent antigen-presenting cells able to activate T cells and mediate tumor 
rejection. J Immunol. 2006; 176:61–67. [PubMed: 16365396] 
15. Litterman AJ, Zellmer DM, Grinnen KL, Hunt MA, Dudek AZ, Salazar AM, Ohlfest JR. Profound 
impairment of adaptive immune responses by alkylating chemotherapy. J Immunol. 2013; 
190:6259–6268. [PubMed: 23686484] 
16. Zeng J, See AP, Phallen J, Jackson CM, Belcaid Z, Ruzevick J, Durham N, Meyer C, Harris TJ, 
Albesiano E, Pradilla G, Ford E, Wong J, Hammers HJ, Mathios D, Tyler B, Brem H, Tran PT, 
Pardoll D, Drake CG, Lim M. Anti-PD-1 blockade and stereotactic radiation produce long-term 
survival in mice with intracranial gliomas. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013; 86:343–349. 
[PubMed: 23462419] 
17. Hirano F, Kaneko K, Tamura H, Dong H, Wang S, Ichikawa M, Rietz C, Flies DB, Lau JS, Zhu G, 
Tamada K, Chen L. Blockade of B7-H1 and PD-1 by monoclonal antibodies potentiates cancer 
therapeutic immunity. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:1089–1096. [PubMed: 15705911] 
18. Ohlfest JR, Andersen BM, Litterman AJ, Xia J, Pennell CA, Swier LE, Salazar AM, Olin MR. 
Vaccine injection site matters: Qualitative and quantitative defects in CD8 T cells primed as a 
function of proximity to the tumor in a murine glioma model. J Immunol. 2013; 190:613–620. 
[PubMed: 23248259] 
19. Reithmeier T, Graf E, Piroth T, Trippel M, Pinsker MO, Nikkhah G. BCNU for recurrent 
glioblastoma multiforme: Efficacy, toxicity and prognostic factors. BMC Cancer. 2010; 10:30. 
[PubMed: 20122270] 
20. Tamargo RJ, Myseros JS, Epstein JI, Yang MB, Chasin M, Brem H. Interstitial chemotherapy of 
the 9L gliosarcoma: Controlled release polymers for drug delivery in the brain. Cancer Res. 1993; 
53:329–333. [PubMed: 8417826] 
21. Affronti ML, Heery CR, Herndon JE II, Rich JN, Reardon DA, Desjardins A, Vredenburgh JJ, 
Friedman AH, Bigner DD, Friedman HS. Overall survival of newly diagnosed glioblastoma 
patients receiving carmustine wafers followed by radiation and concurrent temozolomide plus 
rotational multiagent chemotherapy. Cancer. 2009; 115:3501–3511. [PubMed: 19514083] 
Mathios et al.
Page 13
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. SC resulted in severe and persistent lymphodepletion, whereas LC left the immune cell 
populations intact
(A) Experimental schedule: Mice were treated with either SC (intraperitoneal BCNU) or LC 
(BCNU polymers) at day 14. Intraperitoneal BCNU was given three times a week for 2 
weeks. Flow analysis was performed for all groups for lymphocytes extracted from the 
brain, DLNs, and the peripheral blood at several time points (n = 3 for all graphs and all time 
points). Bar graphs show means ± 2 SD; P value was calculated by a two-sided Welch t test. 
LN, lymph node. (B) Early (days 21 and 26) lymphopenia and late (day 41) lymphopenia 
were observed in the peripheral blood of mice treated with SC. The same pattern was 
observed in the brain and the DLNs of mice treated with SC. SC-treated mice exhibited 
myelotoxicity (days 21 and 30), as indicated by the reduced BM cellularity and the reduced 
CD45+ (leukocytes) population. (C) Persistent and potentially irreversible lymphopenia is 
observed in mice receiving high-dose SC. The T lymphocyte counts (CD3+ cells) were 
decreased in the peripheral blood and the DLNs of mice [with long-term survival (LTS)] 
treated with SC compared to LC-treated mice or untreated (control) mice. PBL, peripheral 
blood lymphocyte.
Mathios et al.
Page 14
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. LC + anti–PD-1 exhibits superior survival profile compared to SC + anti–PD-1 or 
monotherapies alone
(A) In this set of experiments, systemic or local BCNU was given after anti–PD- 1 
treatment, as explained in the treatment scheme. (B) Systemic BCNU (30 mg/kg) was not 
synergistic with anti–PD-1 treatment (SC + anti–PD-1 versus anti–PD-1, P = 0.21). LC 
BCNU was successfully combined with anti–PD-1 treatment (anti–PD-1 versus LC + anti–
PD-1, P = 0.04; LC versus LC + anti–PD-1, P < 0.001) and eradicates GBM tumors in 80% 
of the animals. (C) In a separate set of experiments, LC + anti–PD-1 was found to be 
superior to systemic BCNU and anti–PD-1 (P = 0.02). ip, intraperitoneal. (D) In this set of 
experiments, systemic or local TMZ was given at the same time as anti–PD-1 treatment, as 
further explained in the treatment scheme. (E) Systemic TMZ (66 mg/kg) is not synergistic 
with anti–PD-1 treatment (SC-TMZ versus SC-TMZ + anti–PD-1, P = 0.07). LC TMZ is 
successfully combined with anti–PD-1 treatment (P < 0.001); this combination is superior to 
systemic TMZ and anti–PD-1 (P = 0.009).
Mathios et al.
Page 15
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. LC + anti–PD-1 elicits a robust immune response, whereas SC + anti–PD-1 abrogates 
immune activation the anti–PD-1 alone creates
(A) SC in combination with anti–PD-1 resulted in lymphopenia in the peripheral blood, 
whereas LC + anti–PD-1 maintained high lymphocyte counts at all time points (n = 3 for all 
treatment groups). Bar plots show means ± 2 SD. P values were calculated on the basis of 
two-tailed Welch test. (B to D) At day 21, LC + anti–PD-1 resulted in high numbers of TILs 
and increased percentage of T effector (Teff) cells compared to SC + anti–PD-1 or LC alone. 
At day 30, SC groups showed lymphodepletion and decreased Teff function (decreased IFN-
γ production). However, LC increased the Teff function, resulting in an increased ratio of 
Teff/T regulatory (Treg) cells. Flow cytometry plots show results from a single mouse for 
each group. (E) Box-and-whiskers plot and flow cytometry charts illustrating the percentage 
of tumor-infiltrating dendritic cells; gating on the CD45+ cells (leukocytes) infiltrating the 
brain and focusing on the CD11b+CD11c+ cells (dendritic cells). We observed an increased 
infiltration of dendritic cells in the LC-treated mice.
Mathios et al.
Page 16
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. SC given before anti–PD-1 treatment abrogates the survival benefit of anti–PD-1
(A) Timeline and survival curve of anti–PD-1 administration after chemotherapy (dose of 30 
mg/kg). The use of SC (day 7) before starting treatment with anti–PD-1 (day 10) resulted in 
a decreased LTS rate (30%) compared to anti–PD-1 treatment alone (50%). (B) Timeline and 
survival curve of anti–PD-1 before chemotherapy administration. When SC was given after 
anti–PD-1, it did not negatively affect LTS induced by anti–PD-1. In both sequencing 
scenarios, LC + anti–PD-1 was superior to SC + anti–PD-1 (chemotherapy after anti–PD-1 
treatment). (C) Timeline and survival curve for BCNU titration experiments: BCNU was 
given before treatment with anti–PD-1. Two different doses of systemic BCNU treatment 
failed to show synergism between SC and anti–PD-1 treatment. The use of low-dose BCNU 
(5 mg/kg) did not show survival differences compared to the untreated (No Tx) group. The 
use of intermediate-dose BCNU (15 mg/kg) showed survival benefit compared to the No Tx 
group (P < 0.001). However, both the BCNU (5 mg/kg) + anti–PD-1 and BCNU (15 mg/kg) 
+ anti–PD-1 groups showed no synergism with anti–PD-1 treatment. (D) Timeline and flow 
cytometric analysis of PBLs from the BCNU titration experiments. On day 20, no significant 
differences were observed in the number of lymphocytes among the BCNU groups and the 
control group. On day 26, 1 day after completion of the BCNU treatment course, all 
treatment groups exhibited a significantly (P = 0.01) lower number of PBLs compared to the 
control group. The difference in the number of PBLs was maintained on day 36, 11 days 
after the end of chemotherapy treatment, for the high-dose (30 mg/kg) group (P = 0.002) but 
not for the other chemotherapy groups. The figure shows means ± 2 SD values (n = 4) for 
each treatment group.
Mathios et al.
Page 17
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. The combination of LC + anti–PD-1 stimulated expansion of antigen-specific T cells 
intratumorally and in the DLNs
(A) B6 mice expressing the congenic marker CD45.1 were implanted with GL261 cells and 
were treated with anti–PD-1 (days 10 to 14) and SC or LC (starting at day 14). Spleen 
lymphocytes from OT-I mice expressing the congenic marker CD45.2 were adoptively 
transferred at day 13 into the tumor-bearing mice. At day 17 (4 days after adoptive transfer), 
CD45.2+ cells were recovered from recipient mice. (B) We observed an expansion of OT-I T 
cells in the LC + anti–PD-1 group compared to the anti–PD-1, SC, or SC + anti–PD-1 
groups. Graphs show means ± 2 SD, and P values were calculated with a two-tailed Welch 
test.
Mathios et al.
Page 18
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 6. SC abrogated the antitumor memory response in mice treated with anti–PD-1 and 
resulted in a functional impairment of T memory cells
(A) The treatment scheme shows the initial treatment schedule as well as the timing of the 
rechallenge. Mice with LTS from all groups were rechallenged; mice in the LC groups and 
the anti–PD-1 group had no tumor recurrence, whereas SC-treated mice failed to reject the 
rechallenged tumor and died. (B) The figure shows representative mice from each group 
(naïve, n = 5; anti–PD-1, n = 5; SC, n = 3; LC, n = 3; SC + anti–PD-1, n = 3; LC + anti–
PD-1, n = 5). Rechallenged mice were followed with bioluminescent imaging; the plot 
shows the tumor signal, as measured by photons per second. Mice treated with SC or SC + 
anti–PD-1 exhibited progressively increasing signal and eventually died of their tumor, as 
denoted by the asterisk at the end of the line for each mouse. Mice treated with anti–PD-1 
rejected the tumor right away, showing no tumor signal at any time point, whereas LC and 
LC + anti–PD-1 had a transient tumor signal at day 5 that was eliminated by day 7. (C and 
D) The percentage of effector CD8 memory cells producing IFN-γ was lower in the SC-
treated mice than in other groups across all peripheral tissues, including the spleen, 
peripheral blood, and DLNs. (E) Mice with LTS from the intermediate-dose (15 mg/kg) (n = 
1) and the intermediate-dose (15 mg/kg) + anti–PD-1 (n = 3) groups were rechallenged with 
GL261 LUC cells in the brain. As with the higher BCNU dose (30 mg/kg), the intermediate-
Mathios et al.
Page 19
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dose (15 mg/kg) groups failed to produce an immune memory response. The rechallenge 
experiment with the alternative doses of BCNU was run only once.
Mathios et al.
Page 20
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 7. Prior use of SC mutes antitumor immune response of anti–PD-1
(A) Mice from the SC group with recurrent tumor after rechallenge were treated with anti–
PD-1. Chemotherapy naïve mice were also treated with anti–PD-1. IVIS imaging after 
treatment shows tumor progression in both treatment groups. Rechallenged SC-treated mice 
received their last dose of SC more than 2 months before subsequent treatment with anti–
PD-1. All of the SC-treated mice developed recurrent tumors despite treatment with anti–
PD-1, whereas only 50% of the chemotherapy naïve mice developed tumor with anti–PD-1 
treatment. (B and C) After gating T cells for CD8+CD62L[low]CD44[high] to identify the 
TEM cells, we assessed their activation status by looking for IFN-γ production upon 
stimulation. TEM activation in mice treated with SC was decreased despite anti–PD-1 
treatment. (D) Upon necropsy, mice that had received SC and were later (after rechallenge) 
treated with anti–PD-1 or mice treated with SC + anti–PD-1 exhibited much smaller spleens 
than the untreated or LC + anti–PD-1 mice. Furthermore, mice treated with SC and then 
rechallenged with tumor on the contralateral hemisphere (right side) had large tumors, 
unlike the mice treated with LC and rechallenged with anti–PD-1 that exhibited no tumor 
recurrence.
Mathios et al.
Page 21
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 8. LC and SC have opposite effects on immunotherapy
Cartoon illustration of the concept of optimizing chemotherapy in the setting of 
immunotherapy: SC shows an indiscriminate toxicity toward cancer cells and the immune 
system, whereas LC enhances immunotherapy by destroying the tumor microenvironment 
and attracting activated immune cells toward the tumor area.
Mathios et al.
Page 22
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 11.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
