 Intermittent metabolic switching, neuroplasticity and brain 
health
Mark P. Mattson1,2, Keelin Moehl1, Nathaniel Ghena1, Maggie Schmaedick1, and Aiwu 
Cheng1
1Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research Program, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA
2Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 
21205, USA
Abstract
During evolution, individuals whose brains and bodies functioned well in a fasted state were 
successful in acquiring food, enabling their survival and reproduction. With fasting and extended 
exercise, liver glycogen stores are depleted and ketones are produced from adipose-cell-derived 
fatty acids. This metabolic switch in cellular fuel source is accompanied by cellular and molecular 
adaptations of neural networks in the brain that enhance their functionality and bolster their 
resistance to stress, injury and disease. Here, we consider how intermittent metabolic switching, 
repeating cycles of a metabolic challenge that induces ketosis (fasting and/or exercise) followed by 
a recovery period (eating, resting and sleeping), may optimize brain function and resilience 
throughout the lifespan, with a focus on the neuronal circuits involved in cognition and mood. 
Such metabolic switching impacts multiple signalling pathways that promote neuroplasticity and 
resistance of the brain to injury and disease.
Food scarcity has been a driving force for the evolution of nervous systems; indeed, even the 
most advanced capabilities of the human brain (imagination, creativity and language) arose 
via selection for individuals who were adept at cooperating to acquire and share food1–3. 
However, people in modern societies typically consume food three or more times each day. 
Every time they eat, the glycogen stores in their liver are replenished; liver glycogen 
provides 700–900 calories of glucose or energy, an amount that will last 10–14 hours in 
individuals who are not exercising. Subsequently, liver energy stores are depleted, 
circulating glucose levels remain low and adipose cells release fatty acids, which are 
converted in the liver to the ketone bodies β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) and acetoacetate 
Correspondence to M.P.M. mark.mattson@nih.gov. 
Author contributions
M.P.M., K.M., N.G., M.S. and A.C. researched data for the article, made a substantial contribution to the discussion of content and 
contributed to the writing, review and editing of the manuscript before submission’
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
Reviewer information
Nature Reviews Neuroscience thanks S. Cunnane, J. Rho and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review 
of this work.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2018 February ; 19(2): 63–80. doi:10.1038/nrn.2017.156.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (AcAc), which are released into the blood and are used as energy substrates by neurons4,5 
(FIG. 1). The transition from utilization of carbohydrates and glucose to fatty acids and 
ketones as the major cellular fuel source can be referred to as the ‘G-to-K switch’. Upon 
consumption of food after a fast, the major energy source for cells switches back to glucose 
(‘K-to-G switch’). Because exercise accelerates the depletion of liver glycogen stores, it 
hastens the onset of the G-to-K switch. For example, the metabolic switch may occur in 
someone who runs for 1 hour (during which time they use approximately 600 calories) 
beginning 4 hours after their most recent meal.
Beyond the switch in the major cellular fuel source, emerging findings are revealing 
remarkably complex and coordinated adaptations of the brain and body that enable the 
individual to maintain and even enhance their cognitive and physical performance for 
extended time periods in the fasted state6,7. In general, signalling pathways engaged when 
the G-to-K switch occurs serve to bolster cellular stress resistance and set the stage for 
subsequent cellular structural and functional plasticity that occurs after the K-to-G switch. 
We define intermittent metabolic switching (IMS) as scenarios in which an individual’s 
eating and exercise patterns result in periodic G-to-K switches. The most commonly 
employed IMS protocols in animals involve intermittent fasting (IF), including alternate-day 
fasting (ADF) and daily time-restricted feeding (TRF), and are described in BOX 1. Studies 
of animals and humans are revealing beneficial effects of IF on health beyond those resulting 
from caloric restriction (CR) without IMS8–11. Here, we review the molecular and cellular 
adaptations of neurons to IMS from the perspectives of brain evolution, neuroplasticity and 
resistance of the nervous system to injury and disease. We focus on brain regions involved in 
cognition, mood regulation and motor control; for those interested in the hypothalamus and 
neuroendocrine regulation of feeding behaviour and circadian rhythms, we refer readers to 
recent review articles12,13.
Box 1
Animal models of intermittent metabolic switching
Alternate-day fasting (ADF) and daily time-restricted feeding (TRF) are the most widely 
employed intermittent fasting (IF) approaches for controlled frequent intermittent 
metabolic switching (IMS) in mice and rats. In ADF, the animals are deprived of food for 
24 hours every other day8. For daily TRF, there are two different protocols: 1) animals 
are deprived of food for a specific time period each day (for example, 16 hours)9, and 2) 
animals are provided a daily allocation of an amount of food that is 30–40% less than 
their ad libitum consumption (that is, caloric restriction (CR)), in which case they 
typically consume all their food within 2 4 hours of their feeding time184–186. The figure 
shows depictions of food intake in rats or mice on 30–40% CR (TRF) during a 24-hour 
period (panel a) and the corresponding changes in plasma ketone and glucose 
concentrations (panel b; solid lines are ketone concentrations and dashed lines are 
glucose concentration). Animals on the CR diets consume all their daily food allotment 
within a 4 hour time window and therefore fast for 20 hours; during the last half of the 
fasting period, plasma ketone concentrations are elevated and the plasma glucose 
concentration remains low. The illustrations are based on data in several different studies, 
Mattson et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 including those in REFS 184–187. Although plasma β-hydroxybutyrate levels are rarely 
measured in exercise studies, there are data showing that bouts of vigorous exercise 
(running or swimming) do elevate circulating ketone levels in rodents188,189.
We suggest that switching between time periods of negative energy balance (short fasts 
and/or exercise) and positive energy balance (eating and resting) can optimize general health 
and brain health. Illustrative of the sustained health benefits of IMS are enhanced insulin 
sensitivity, reduced abdominal fat, maintenance of muscle mass and reduced resting heart 
rate and blood pressure7. It is important to note that the short-term IF discussed herein is in 
contrast with long-term fasts of a week or more, which may have detrimental effects on 
muscle mass. Because sedentary, overindulgent lifestyles can increase the risk of several 
neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders (see section on IMS and neurological disorders 
below), a better understanding of the neurobiology of IMS may lead to new approaches for 
improving brain health throughout the life course.
Neuronal adaptations to IMS
Behavioural adaptations
Experimental evidence supports the evolutionary principle that the brain and body perform 
at high levels in environments that demand IMS. Because many studies that have evaluated 
the effects of IF and exercise on cognition and mood did not include measurements of 
circulating ketones, we describe here only a few examples that either included ketone 
measurements or employed IF protocols known to involve IMS. Thirty years ago, Ingram et 
al. reported that mice maintained on a daily TRF schedule (40% CR; see BOX 1) beginning 
at weaning age exhibit no age-related learning and memory impairment and improved 
Mattson et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 locomotor performance in middle and old age compared with control mice fed ad libitum14. 
When fasting was initiated in 14-month-old mice, their spatial navigation, working memory, 
strength and coordination at 22–25 months of age were superior to those of control mice fed 
ad libitum. Whereas mice fed ad libitum develop age-related hippocampus-dependent spatial 
learning and memory deficits, mice maintained on daily TRF (40% CR) during their adult 
life do not experience a decrement in cognition15. Daily TRF also ameliorates age-related 
anxiety-like behaviours in mice16. Middle-aged mice fed a very-low-calorie diet for 4 
consecutive days every other week (during which ketones were elevated) for 7 months 
exhibited significantly better spatial learning and memory in the Barnes maze, and 
significantly higher recognition and working memory in the novel object recognition task 
and Y-maze, than mice continuously fed ad libitum17.
Evidence from human and animal studies has established that regular aerobic exercise can 
improve cognitive performance and can protect against anxiety and depression18,19. 
Cognitive challenges performed during exercise result in levels of enhancement of synaptic 
plasticity, as well as learning and memory, greater than either challenge alone20. However, in 
most studies of effects of exercise on the brain, ketone levels are not measured; therefore, it 
is not known whether IMS occurs. Nevertheless, from an evolutionary perspective, it is 
noteworthy that precise navigational decision-making (cognitive challenge) while rapidly 
traversing the landscape (running) in a food-deprived and/or fasted state would be critical for 
survival. Indeed, combining exercise with cognitive challenges and/or IF results in 
improvements in neuroplasticity and cognitive performance superior to those from the 
individual challenges alone21,22.
Neuronal network activity, synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis
Hippocrates wrote more than 2,400 years ago that fasting can prevent or lessen the severity 
of epilepsy, a disorder he called “the sacred disease” (REF. 23). During the past 50 years, it 
was established that ketones can constrain neuronal network activity and ketogenic diets can 
benefit many patients with epilepsy24. More recently, it was shown that rats maintained on 
ADF exhibit resistance to seizure-induced hippocampal damage and associated cognitive 
impairment25 and that IF can reduce seizure frequency in children who do not fully respond 
to a ketogenic diet26.
Although IMS elicited by IF and/or regular vigorous exercise can protect neuronal circuits 
against aberrant hyperexcitability, IMS also enhances structural and functional synaptic 
plasticity. Long-term potentiation (LTP) is an enduring activity-dependent increase in 
synaptic strength that occurs in response to repetitive stimulation of synapses and is believed 
to be a common cellular manifestation of learning and memory. Rats or mice that run or are 
fasted intermittently exhibit enhanced LTP at hippocampal synapses compared with 
sedentary animals fed ad libitum27–29. Daily TRF (22 hours of fasting every day) for 3 
weeks improves performance in the Barnes maze test and increases dendritic spine density 
and LTP in CA1 neurons in rats30. IMS can also prevent age-related deficits in LTP31,32. 
IMS regimens involving daily TRF (30% CR) alone, or in combination with running-wheel 
exercise, result in increased dendritic spine density in hippocampal dentate granule neurons 
in wild-type mice and in hyperphagic diabetic mice21. The latter study demonstrated 
Mattson et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 additive effects of dietary energy restriction and running on dentate neuron dendritic spine 
density, consistent with the notion that synaptic plasticity can be optimized by combining 
exercise with energy restriction.
New neurons are born continuously throughout adult life in the hippocampal dentate gyrus 
of mammals, including rodents, monkeys and humans. The newly generated neurons 
differentiate into granule neurons and receive synaptic inputs from other granule neurons, 
interneurons and neurons in the entorhinal cortex, basal forebrain (including the septum) and 
mammillary bodies33. Both running and IF can enhance neurogenesis, with running 
stimulating the proliferation of the stem cells33 and IF increasing the survival of the newly 
generated neurons34. Running also strengthens inputs of newly generated neurons from 
brain regions critical for spatial learning and memory, including the entorhinal cortex and 
basal forebrain (including the septum)35. However, the roles of the G-to-K switch in the 
effects of running and IF on neurogenesis remain to be determined.
Signalling pathways impacted by IMS
Neurotransmitters and neurotrophic factors
Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the CNS and, as such, is essential for 
all behaviours, including learning and memory, emotional responses, sensory input and 
integration and motor system activity. Glutamate receptor activation triggers Ca2+ influx into 
the post-synaptic neuron, which engages downstream pathways that mediate adaptive 
structural (dendritic spine growth and synaptogenesis) and functional (LTP and long-term 
depression) responses of neuronal circuits to environmental challenges. The downstream 
pathways involve Ca2+-responsive kinases such as calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinases 
and protein kinase C as well as transcription factors such as cAMP-responsive element-
binding protein (CREB) and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)36,37. In rats, 18 hours of fasting 
results in CREB activation in hippocampal and entorhinal cortex neurons38. Running-wheel 
exercise also triggers upregulation of CREB in hippocampal and cerebral cortical cells in 
mice39. This pathway is highly conserved because fasting enhances long-term memory 
formation in multiple tasks in Drosophila melanogaster by a mechanism requiring CREB 
activation in mushroom body neurons40. Ketones, particularly BHB, upregulate GABAergic 
tone, which can protect against seizures41,42, and may mediate adaptive responses of 
neuronal circuits to IMS. The monoamine neurotransmitters serotonin, noradrenaline and 
dopamine may also play important roles in the effects of IMS on neuronal network 
activity43,44.
A robust and readily discernible effect of IMS on a neurotransmitter system involves 
brainstem cholinergic neurons that innervate the heart. Endurance athletes exhibit low 
resting heart rates and blood pressure and high heart rate variability (HRV; the variation in 
time intervals between individual heartbeats) as a result of increased activity of the 
brainstem cardiovagal neurons45. Similar enhancement of parasympathetic tone and 
consequent reductions in resting heart rate and blood pressure, and increased HRV, occur in 
response to ADF or daily TRF46,47. Recordings of cardiovagal neuronal activity in brain-
derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) heterozygous knockout mice suggest that BDNF 
mediates the enhancement of parasympathetic tone in response to IMS48.
Mattson et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BDNF plays pivotal roles in synaptic plasticity (synaptogenesis and LTP), neurogenesis and 
neuronal stress resistance49. BDNF likely plays important roles in behavioural and neuronal 
network adaptations to IMS because BDNF expression in cells in multiple regions is 
induced by running and IF49, and ablation of TrkB tyrosine kinase (also known as 
BDNF/NT3 growth factor receptor (NTRK2)) in hippocampal neural stem cells abolishes 
the ability of IMS to enhance neuroplasticity50. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) 
signalling is also upregulated in response to IMS as demonstrated in studies of the effects of 
ketogenic diets, exercise and CR and/or IF on brain IGF1 signalling51–53. Two recent studies 
showed that BHB induces BDNF expression in hippocampal and cortical neurons in cell 
culture and in vivo54,55, suggesting that BHB is itself a signal that ‘alerts’ neurons in the 
brain that the metabolic switch has occurred.
Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) plays important roles in stimulating neural stem cell 
proliferation and regulating neurite outgrowth and cell survival during brain development56. 
FGF2 can also protect neurons against excitotoxic, metabolic and oxidative stress by 
mechanisms involving enhancement of cellular Ca2+ homeostasis and upregulation of 
antioxidant enzymes57,58. FGF2 levels increase in the cerebral cortex and striatum of mice in 
response to ADF59 and in the hippocampus in response to running-wheel exercise60. The 
formation and extinction of memories of fearful events have been reported to be mediated, in 
part, by FGF2, suggesting a role for FGF2 in the critical synaptic plasticity required for 
survival during periods of food scarcity61. However, whether and to what extent FGF2 
signalling is critical for the enhancement of cognition, synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis 
by IMS remains to be determined.
Mitochondrial biogenesis and cellular stress-resistance pathways
In response to intermittent bouts of exercise, the number of well-functioning mitochondria in 
muscle cells increases in a process called mitochondrial biogenesis, which is mediated by 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type IIγ 
(CaMKII), AMP kinase (AMPK; also known as 5′-activated protein kinase (PRKAA)) and 
NAD-dependent lysine deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) and the transcription factor peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1α (PGC1α; also known as PPARGC1A)62–64 
(FIG. 2). Emerging findings suggest that IMS stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis in 
neurons and that such mitochondrial biogenesis enables synaptic plasticity. When 
mitochondrial biogenesis is inhibited by knockdown of PGC-1α in developing hippocampal 
neurons, basal synapse formation is reduced and the ability of BDNF to induce 
synaptogenesis is abolished65. PGC1α is also essential for the long-term maintenance of 
dendritic spines of hippocampal dentate granule neurons in adult mice65. Because BDNF 
expression is upreg-ulated in response to the G-to-K switch and BHB54,55, BDNF signalling 
may stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis to provide the increased numbers of mitochondria 
required to support the function of newly formed and potentiated synapses (FIG. 2). 
Interestingly, PGC1α can enhance BDNF expression66, suggesting a positive feedback 
signalling mechanism whereby BDNF induces PGC1α and vice versa. The increased 
activity in neuronal circuits that occurs during exercise and fasting may also contribute to 
mitochondrial biogenesis via a Ca2+–CaMKII–CREB–PGC1α pathway6,67.
Mattson et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The metabolic efficiency and stress tolerance of neuronal mitochondria can be enhanced by 
IMS. To illustrate this point, we highlight the mitochondrial NAD+-dependent protein 
deacetylase SIRT3, which is emerging as a key mediator of adaptive responses of neurons to 
bioenergetic challenges68. SIRT3 expression is upregulated in the cerebral cortical and 
hippocampal neurons of mice in response to running-wheel exercise by a mechanism 
requiring activation of NMDA glutamate receptors69. Deletion of SIRT3 from neurons 
renders them vulnerable to excitotoxicity and mitochondrial stress, whereas overexpression 
of SIRT3 is neuroprotective69. SIRT3-mediated deacetylation of proteins in the electron 
transport chain and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle may enhance the efficiency of 
mitochondrial ATP production, whereas deacetylation of superoxide dismutase 2 reduces 
mitochondrial oxidative stress and deacetylation of cyclophilin D protects neurons against 
apoptosis69,70 (FIG. 2).
Mammalian target of rapamycin and autophagy
A highly conserved pathway by which cells regulate protein synthesis in response to 
fluctuations in nutrient availability (principally glucose and amino acids) involves a protein 
called mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR; also known as serine/threonine-protein 
kinase mTOR (MTOR) and mammalian target of rapamycin)71,72. In the fed state, activation 
of mTOR by upstream nutrient-sensing proteins activates ribosomal protein S6 kinase to 
increase general protein synthesis and activates sterol regulatory element-binding protein 
(SREBP1; also known as SREBF1) to increase lipid synthesis. Conversely, during fasting 
and extended exercise, when the metabolic switch is on, mTOR activity decreases. In 
essence, cells are in a ‘growth mode’ when mTOR is active and in a ‘conserve-resources 
mode’ when the mTOR pathway is inactive. During fasting and sustained exercise, the 
mTOR pathway is inhibited and autophagy is stimulated in a wide range of tissues, 
including those in the nervous system73,74. The metabolic shift to ketogenesis not only is 
associated with the conserve-resources mode of cells but may also be causally involved 
because BHB can stimulate autophagy75. Indeed, fasting or treatment of animals with the 
mTOR inhibitor rapamycin can extend lifespan and healthspan in several different 
organisms, including mice7,76. Conversely, lack of IMS may impair autophagy and increase 
the risk of neurodegenerative disorders77,78.
Autophagy is upregulated in cerebral cortical and cerebellar neurons in response to fasting73, 
and genetic and pharmacological manipulations of mTOR and autophagy alter synaptic 
plasticity and neurogenesis in ways consistent with the involvement of these pathways in 
neuronal network adaptations to IMS73. mTOR mediates the local synthesis of proteins in 
dendrites that is required for long-term changes in synaptic strength that are believed to be 
critical for learning and memory79–81, and mTOR is also involved in some forms of synaptic 
plasticity82–84. Because IF and exercise enhance synaptic plasticity and cognition, it will be 
important to establish the specific contributions of the regulation of mTOR and autophagy 
pathways to the underlying structural and functional adaptations of neuronal networks to 
IMS.
AMPK is a cellular energy status responsive enzyme (activated when the ratio of ATP to 
AMP and/or ADPdecreases) that mediates the downregulation of mTOR and upregulation of 
Mattson et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 autophagy in response to fasting and vigorous exercise in muscle cells85,86. Recent findings 
suggest that AMPK also mediates adaptive responses of neuronal networks to IMS. Daily 
treadmill training in rats results in activation of AMPK in hippocampal cells87, and 
pharmacological inhibition of AMPK enhances contextual fear memory in mice88. AMPK 
activity is increased in response to fasting and is required for fasting-induced dendritic spine 
formation and synaptic functional plasticity in hypothalamic arcuate nucleus neurons89. 
Mice treated with an AMPK agonist exhibit enhanced cognition and motor system function, 
consistent with roles for AMPK in the beneficial effects of IMS on neuroplasticity90. 
Although intermittent AMPK activation resulting from physiological bioenergetic 
challenges can enhance neuroplasticity, sustained AMPK activation can impair axonal and 
dendritic plasticity91, consistent with the importance of a recovery period for optimal 
neuroplasticity (FIG. 3).
IMS-associated peripheral signals
Multiple neuroactive signalling molecules are released into the blood from peripheral organs 
in response to the G-to-K metabolic switch. The ‘hunger hormone’ ghrelin is among the 
most intensively studied of such signals because of its effects on hypothalamic regulation of 
food intake. Ghrelin is produced in a subpopulation of cells in the gut from which it is 
released into the blood in response to fasting, whereas food intake inhibits its release. 
Ghrelin and the additional peripheral signals generated when the metabolic switch is on also 
affect the plasticity and resilience of neuronal circuits throughout the brain, including those 
involved in motivation and cognition92,93. Ghrelin enhances hippocampal synaptic plasticity, 
neurogenesis and hippocampus-dependent learning and memory by direct actions on 
hippocampal cells and by stimulating serotonergic neurons in the brainstem raphe nucleus, 
which innervate the hippocampus94. Ghrelin can also have an anxiolytic effect on mice95. 
However, it is unclear whether ghrelin mediates the beneficial effects of IMS on 
neuroplasticity and behaviour.
Several proteins released from skeletal muscle during exercise, so-called myokines, may 
contribute to the CNS adaptations associated with IMS27. Interleukin 6 (IL-6) is best known 
as a mediator of immune cell responses to infectious agents and tissue damage, but IL-6 is 
also produced in and released from muscle cells in response to vigorous exercise and fasting 
and increases the insulin sensitivity of muscle cells96,97. Studies of IL-6-knockout mice have 
revealed important roles for IL-6 in CNS neuroplasticity, including regulation of 
hippocampus-dependent learning and memory98. Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1) and 
fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) are two neurotrophic factors that can enhance 
neuroplasticity and protect neurons against metabolic and oxidative stress99,100. IGF1 and 
FGF2 are produced by neurons and astrocytes but are also myokines produced in response to 
fasting and exercise101,102. Although the effects of circulating FGF2 on neuroplasticity are 
unclear, studies in which circulating IGF1 is selectively neutralized suggest an important 
role for peripheral-organ-derived IGF1 in the beneficial effects of IMS on brain 
neuroplasticity. Running stimulates IGF1 transport from the blood into neurons in the brain, 
and this uptake is associated with running-induced increases of neuronal network activity 
and BDNF expression103. Neutralization of circulating IGF1 blocks the abilities of exercise 
to modulate hippocampal neuronal network activity and protect neurons against excito-
Mattson et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 toxicity104. Nevertheless, the involvement of peripheral-organ-derived IGF1 in the beneficial 
effects of metabolic switching on the brain is complex because although exercise increases 
circulating IGF1 levels, fasting reduces circulating IGF1 levels by reducing production of 
IGF1 in the liver. However, similar to the prominent decrease in circulating insulin levels 
and the associated increase in sensitivity of insulin receptors to insulin in response to IMS, it 
is possible that fasting increases the sensitivity of the IGF1 receptor signalling pathway to 
IGF1.
Originally touted for its ability to ‘brown’ white fat, thereby increasing its thermogenic 
potential, the protein irisin is released from muscle cells in response to exercise and has been 
reported to enter the brain and upregulate BDNF expression66. However, it remains to be 
determined whether irisin is particularly important in the enhancement of neuroplasticity and 
stress resistance conferred by IMS. A recent study provided evidence that the enzyme 
cathepsin B is an exercise-induced peripheral signal that contributes to the cognitive benefits 
of exercise105. Best known for its role as a lysosomal protease, plasma cathepsin B levels are 
increased in response to exercise in mice, monkeys and humans, and circulating cathepsin B 
levels are positively correlated with aerobic fitness and recall memory in humans105. 
Hippocampus-dependent spatial memory is impaired in cathepsin-B-deficient mice, and 
these mice also lack the normal exercise-induced enhancement of hippocampal neurogenesis 
and spatial memory105. The mechanism by which exercise induces cathepsin B release from 
muscle cells is unknown, but it might involve stimulation of autophagic flux.
Emerging findings are revealing that BHB regulates neuronal gene transcription in ways that 
promote synaptic plasticity and cellular stress resistance. BHB induces the expression of 
BDNF in cultured cerebral cortical neurons, an effect that occurs only when glucose levels 
are fairly low62. Running-wheel exercise increases circulating BHB levels in mice, and 
intraventricular infusion of BHB induces Bdnf gene transcription in hippocampal cells55. 
BHB may induce Bdnf gene transcription by inhibiting histone deacetylases (HDACs) that 
normally repress Bdnf expression55,106. Given that CR, fasting and exogenous ketone 
supplementation increase histone acetylation in peripheral mouse tissue and that exercise 
decreases histone deacetylation in the hippocampus, it is likely that the inhibitory effects of 
ketones on HDACs are amplified when exercise occurs in the fasted state107. In addition, via 
actions in the mitochondria, BHB triggers the activation of the cytoplasmic transcription 
factor NF-κB in neurons, which then translocates to the nucleus and induces Bdnf 
expression54. Such findings suggest that BHB is not only a biomarker of the metabolic 
switch and an energy source for neurons but is also a peripheral signal that activates 
neuronal signalling pathways that enhance synaptic plasticity, cognition and neuronal stress 
resistance. Indeed, it was reported that oral administration of a BHB ester to rats for 5 days 
improves their spatial learning and memory and enhances their endurance in a treadmill 
test108. In addition to their roles as energy substrates and signalling molecules, BHB and 
AcAc are also precursors to membrane lipids in brain cells, including neurons and, notably, 
the oligodendrocytes109, suggesting a benefit of IMS for axonal myelination.
Mattson et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 IMS and acute CNS injury
Epilepsy, stroke and traumatic brain and spinal cord injury are major causes of morbidity 
throughout the world. Excitotoxicity, metabolic failure and oxidative stress play prominent 
roles in these acute neurological insults110. Rats maintained on IF for several months before 
exposure to the seizure-inducing excitotoxin kainate exhibit reduced loss of hippocampal 
pyramidal neurons and improved performance in a hippocampus-dependent water maze test 
of spatial learning and memory compared with rats fed ad libitum25. A daily IF and/or CR 
diet that elevates circulating BHB levels also suppresses seizures in a genetic mouse model 
of epilepsy111. In models of focal ischaemic stroke, rats or mice maintained on IF (ADF) 
prior to cerebral vessel occlusion exhibit reduced death of cerebral cortical neurons and 
improved functional outcomes59,112. Compared with rats fed ad libitum, rats maintained on 
daily TRF (40% CR) beginning 3 months before, and continuing for 70 days after, global 
cerebral ischaemia exhibited recovery of spatial memory deficits113. IF initiated either 
before or after a contusion injury to the thoracic spinal cord significantly improves recovery 
of motor function in rats114, and similar beneficial effects of IF following injury are evident 
in a rat model of incomplete cervical spinal cord injury115. A single 24 hour fast following 
injury lessens brain damage and ameliorates cognitive deficits in a rat model of traumatic 
brain injury116. These findings demonstrate that IMS can protect neurons and enhance 
resilience following injury. In light of the lack of any effective drugs for acute CNS injury, it 
would seem prudent to evaluate IF interventions in randomized controlled trials in human 
patients who have suffered a stroke or traumatic CNS injury.
With regards to cellular and molecular mechanisms, IF upregulates pathways involved in 
resistance to proteotoxic stress, neurotrophic factor signalling, DNA repair, mitochondrial 
metabolism and bioenergetics, antioxidant defences and Ca2+ buffering and downregulates 
pro-inflammatory cytokines117–123. Targeted analyses of proteins in pathways of interest 
have revealed that IF upregulates expression of the protein chaperones heat shock 70-
kilodalton protein (HSP70; also known as HSPA) and 78-kilodalton glucose-regulated 
protein (HSPA5; also known as GRP78), the antioxidant enzyme haem oxygenase 1 and the 
neurotrophic factors BDNF and FGF2. IF reduces levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
(tumour necrosis factor (TNF), IL-1β and IL-6) in the uninjured brain and in ischaemic brain 
tissue in a mouse model of focal ischaemic stroke59. Similar to IF, exercise upregulates 
neurotrophic signalling and suppresses neuroinflammation120. The contribution of ketosis to 
the excitoprotective effects of IMS has not been established but could be tested in animal 
models in which ketone production or transport into neurons is genetically or 
pharmacologically disabled. Ketones may also mediate neuronal resistance to ischaemic and 
traumatic insults, as demonstrated in animal models in which BHB treatment lessened brain 
damage by mechanisms involving enhanced mitochondrial bioenergetics and stress 
resistance as well as suppression of neuroinflammation124–126. Indeed, BHB exerts anti-
inflammatory actions by activating hydroxy-carboxylic acid receptor 2 and inhibiting the 
NRLP3 (NACHT, LRR and PYD domains-containing protein 3) inflammasome127.
Mattson et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 IMS and neurological disorders
Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease (PD) are the two most common 
neurodegenerative disorders128,129. The major risk factor for both diseases is age, with 
symptom onset typically occurring in people older than 70 years of age. The number of 
elderly individuals afflicted with AD or PD is rising rapidly because life expectancy has 
increased as a result of medical advances that enable those who would have previously died 
at a younger age from cardiovascular disease, cancer or diabetes to live beyond the age of 70 
years130. Because there are no treatments that impact the disease progression in patients with 
AD or PD, lifelong diet and lifestyle interventions that retard ageing processes and thereby 
reduce disease risk may be of great value. In laboratory animals, IF (daily TRF or ADF) 
extends the average lifespan by up to 40% and protects against major chronic diseases, 
including cancer, diabetes and kidney disease7. Increasing evidence suggests that individuals 
with sedentary, overindulgent lifestyles are at increased risk of developing AD and PD, and 
animal studies support the notion that a chronic positive energy balance devoid of IMS 
renders the brain prone to AD and PD131,132. Conversely, exercise and moderation of energy 
intake reduce the risk of AD and PD133,134, and exercise intervention trials further suggest 
that IMS reduces clinical symptoms in many patients with AD and PD135,136.
The identification of genetic mutations that cause early-onset AD enabled the generation of 
transgenic mouse models that manifest some features of AD, including β-amyloid (Aβ) 
plaque and neurofibrillary tangle-like pathologies and cognitive impairment. Several studies 
have demonstrated that IMS regimens can counteract neuropathological and behavioural 
features in AD mouse models. For example, daily TRF (30% or 40% CR) reduced the 
accumulation of Aβ plaques in App-mutant mice137,138, and long-term (1-year) IF (ADF) 
and daily TRF prevented the development of cognitive impairment in 3xTg-AD mice that 
express beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 and tau mutations139. 
Interestingly, in the latter study, daily TRF lessened Aβ and tau pathologies, whereas ADF 
did not, suggesting that ADF protects neurons against synaptic dysfunction and cognitive 
deficits despite the presence of pathological Aβ and tau. As reviewed recently, aerobic 
exercise regimens counteract Aβ pathology and improve cognition in AD mouse models140.
Mechanisms by which IMS may lessen neuropathology and ameliorate cognitive deficits in 
AD mice include a reduction of amyloidogenic enzymatic processing of APP, suppression of 
inflammation, constraint of neuronal hyperexcitability and upregulation of adaptive neuronal 
stress-resistance pathways (for example, neurotrophic factors, antioxidant defences and 
nuclear and mitochondrial sirtuins)6,141,142. Ketones may counteract AD pathogenesis 
because a ketone ester diet that elevates BHB more than tenfold lessens Aβ and tau 
pathologies and ameliorates behavioural abnormalities in 3xTg-AD mice143. Moreover, 
Castellano et al. recently reported that a 3-month aerobic training (brisk walking) 
programme increased brain cell ketone utilization in patients with AD threefold without 
affecting cerebral glucose utilization144, which may be one reason that aerobic exercise can 
protect the brain against AD. That IF may be another approach for subjects at risk of or with 
AD is suggested by a study using 11C-acetoacetate positron emission tomography (PET) 
imaging that showed that within 48 hours of the onset of fasting, there is a sevenfold to 
eightfold increase in brain uptake of ketones4,145. Moreover, whereas brain cell uptake of 
Mattson et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glucose is severely impaired in patients with AD, the cells remain capable of utilizing 
ketones146.
Selective degeneration of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons, similar to that occurring in 
PD, can be induced by administration of mitochondrial toxins that selectively accumulate in 
dopaminergic neurons. When mice are maintained on an ADF IMS regimen before 
neurotoxin administration, their dopaminergic neurons are relatively resistant to 
degeneration and their motor deficits are reduced compared with mice fed ad libitum147. 
Daily TRF (30% CR) was also effective in reducing motor deficits and attenuating dopamine 
depletion in a unilateral 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) lesion rhesus 
macaque PD model148. Intermittent treadmill exercise is also beneficial in protecting 
dopaminergic neurons and promoting functional recovery in MPTP PD models149. 
Compared with neurotoxin models, the impact of IMS on neuropathology and functional 
deficits in transgenic PD animal models is largely unexplored. Transgenic mice expressing a 
mutant form of α-synuclein (A53T) that causes familial PD exhibit age-dependent 
accumulation of α-synuclein inclusions in neurons throughout the neuraxis develop 
progressive autonomic nervous system and motor dysfunction and die before they reach 1 
year of age. Autonomic dysfunction in these mice is ameliorated by ADF and exacerbated 
by excessive caloric intake150. Enhancing neurotrophic support (BDNF and glial-cell-line-
derived neurotrophic factor), induction of protein chaperones, ketogenesis and ghrelin 
signalling are among the neuroprotective mechanisms of action of IMS suggested from the 
experiments with PD animal models151–153.
Depression and anxiety disorders are major causes of morbidity, and their incidence has 
increased in parallel with increases in obesity and diabetes in many countries154. Data from 
human and animal studies suggest that sedentary, overindulgent lifestyles increase the risk of 
anxiety disorders and depression155 and that IMS effected by exercise or IF can improve 
mood and ameliorate anxiety and depression156–159. The ability of exercise to ameliorate 
symptoms of depression and anxiety is well known, and the underlying mechanisms have 
been elucidated, with upregulation of BDNF expression in neuronal circuits that regulate 
mood playing a role160–162. Increased activity within hippocampal and frontal cortical 
networks and enhanced noradrenergic input to those neurons may mediate upregulation of 
BDNF expression via activation of CREB by Ca2+-dependent and cAMP-dependent 
pathways163,164. Considerable evidence also suggests that BDNF signalling mediates the 
anxiolytic and antidepressant actions of the most commonly prescribed antidepressant drugs 
(serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors). Interestingly, selective ablation of the 
BDNF receptor TrkB in hippocampal neural stem cells abolishes the abilities of wheel 
running and anti-depressant drugs to ameliorate anxiety and depression in mice165. The 
recent finding that BHB induces BDNF expression in hippocampal and cortical neurons54,55 
suggests that ketones mediate the antidepressant effects of exercise and IF. Anxiolytic and 
antidepressant effects of IGF1 are suggested by data showing that peripheral administration 
of IGF1 exerts antidepressant actions, whereas peripheral IGF1-neutralizing antibodies 
attenuate the antidepressant effects of exercise in mice166,167. Similar experiments have not 
yet been performed to determine whether IGF1 also plays a role in the anxiolytic and 
antidepressant effects of IF.
Mattson et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 During the past 3 decades, there has been a rapid increase in the number of children 
diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder (ASD), which manifests, to varying extents, in 
social communication and language deficits, anxiety and repetitive behaviours168,169. The 
increase in autism tracks remarkably closely with the increase in childhood overweight or 
obesity during the same time period (data from autismspeaks.org and the US Centers for 
Disease Control), suggesting a causal link between lack of metabolic switching and autistic 
behaviours. In support of the latter possibility are data showing that nearly twice as many 
children diagnosed with ASD are overweight or obese as control children170. The underlying 
neurobiological mechanisms may include reduced BDNF expression and excessive mTOR 
pathway activation. Indeed, human adolescents with BDNF haploinsufficiency score higher 
on an autism clinical rating scale than age-matched control subjects171, and mTOR is 
hyperactivated in animal models of ASDs, which may result in aberrant dendritic 
spinogenesis and dysregulation of neuronal network activity172. Consistent with a potential 
benefit of IMS in ASD, exercise is effective in reducing behavioural issues in many children 
with ASD173. In the BTBR mouse model of ASD, a ketogenic diet improved symptoms by 
increasing sociability and decreasing self-directed repetitive behaviour174. It was recently 
reported that a ketogenic diet also improves symptoms in children with ASD175. As yet, 
trials of IF in ASD have not been performed.
IMS and optimization of brain health
It has become clear that sedentary overindulgent lifestyles in which IMS is lacking preclude 
optimal brain health. The rapid increase in overweight and obese individuals, including 
children, during the past 40 years is contributing to an emerging ‘epidemic’ of cognitive 
impairment and dementia that will intensify in coming decades. As reviewed elsewhere, 
evidence supporting the latter two statements is strong, and the mechanisms by which lack 
of IMS adversely affects neuroplasticity and risk of major brain disorders are becoming 
understood176,177. When rodents are maintained on an obesogenic diet (high fat and sugar) 
or are genetically defective in leptin signalling and therefore eat excessively, they perform 
more poorly on learning and memory tests than nonobese control animals178–180. Studies of 
the hippocampus have shown that deleterious effects of obesity on cognition involve 
impaired synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis, reduced expression of BDNF and local 
neuroinflammation176–180. IMS, triggered with running-wheel exercise and/or IF, can 
counteract the adverse effects of excessive energy intake on hippocampal plasticity6. 
Although a chronic positive energy balance is not optimal for brain health and may increase 
the risk of neurological disorders, including anxiety, depression, AD and PD, a chronic 
negative energy balance (starvation and/or excessive exercise) is also detrimental for health 
and survival. It therefore becomes important to establish parameters of IMS (frequency, 
duration and ‘intensity’) that promote optimal brain function and disease resistance.
Thus far, we have considered the metabolic and cell-signalling-mediated adaptations of the 
brain to IMS, with a focus on the events occurring during the period of metabolic challenge 
(during fasting and exercise). However, events occurring in the brain during the recovery 
period (eating after fasting, resting after exercise and sleep) are also important to understand 
when considering IMS and neuroplasticity (FIG. 3). In this regard, knowledge of how 
muscle cells respond to exercise and recovery cycles provides a general framework for 
Mattson et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 understanding how IMS affects brain cells. The cellular stress that muscle cells experience 
during exercise activates several key pathways of the conserve-resources mode, including 
inhibition of mTOR and overall protein synthesis, upregulation of autophagy and 
upregulation of genes encoding antioxidant enzymes, sirtuins, protein chaperones and 
lipolytic enzymes181. The latter genes are induced by Ca2+, ROS and an increase in the 
AMP:ATP ratio, which activate kinases (CaMKII and AMPK) and downstream transcription 
factors (nuclear regulatory factor 2 (NRF2; also known as NFE2L2), NRF1, peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and forkhead box protein O1 (FOXO1)). PGC1α is 
also rapidly upregulated to facilitate the mitochondrial biogenesis that occurs during the 
subsequent recovery period after exercise; muscle cells grow not during the exercise period 
but rather during the recovery period. The sequential upregulation of autophagy and stress-
resistance pathways during the exercise period and mitochondrial biogenesis and cell growth 
during the recovery period are both critical for the improvements in endurance and strength 
that result from intermittent exercise181.
We suggest that a generally similar scenario occurs at the cellular and molecular levels in 
response to IMS in many neuronal networks in the brain (FIG. 3). Neurons respond to the G-
to-K switch by downregulating mTOR and global protein synthesis while concomitantly 
upregulating cellular stress-resistance pathways and autophagy. Upstream triggers of the 
latter pathways include BHB, Ca2+ (CaMKII) and ROS, which activate transcription factors 
including CREB, NF-κB and PGC1α182. The latter pathways not only bolster cellular stress 
resistance but also set the stage for the structural and functional neuroplasticity that occur 
during the K-to-G recovery phase of IMS cycles. In this view, outgrowth of dendrites and 
axons, synaptogenesis and neurogenesis occur during the recovery phase, when the cells are 
in growth mode, with high levels of mTOR activity, protein synthesis and mitochondrial 
biogenesis. We envision that IMS involves alternating cycles of upregulation of neuronal 
autophagy and stress-response pathways when the switch is on and the expansion or 
adaptive remodelling of neuronal circuits when the switch is off (FIG. 3). This model does 
not preclude structural and functional adaptations (for example, dendritic spine formation or 
retraction, LTP and long-term depression) during periods of time when the switch is on. 
With regards to IMS and cognition, this hypothesis could be tested in experiments in which 
individual neurons are interrogated by time-lapse imaging and electrophysiological 
recordings during cycles of fasting and feeding. Experiments in which mTOR and PGC-1α 
are (genetically or pharmacologically) inhibited or upregulated during on and off phases of 
IMS cycles and synaptic plasticity, neurogenesis and cognition are evaluated would provide 
cause–effect data to support (or not) our working model.
Although IMS can enhance brain function and stress resistance, the question of what specific 
IMS regimen(s) is ideal for brain health throughout the life course remains unanswered. This 
could first be addressed in animal studies by systematically varying the duration of fasting 
and feeding periods (for example, ADF versus 16 hours daily TRF versus fasting 2 days per 
week) and evaluating behavioural, and the related electrophysiological and neurochemical, 
end points. Ideally, such experiments would be done in several strains of mice and/or rats 
and would include both males and females and ageing cohorts. To increase relevance to 
animals in the wild and human diet and lifestyle interventions, different exercise regimens 
could be incorporated into IF studies. Although an increasing number of studies have 
Mattson et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 demonstrated improvements in a range of peripheral health indicators when individuals who 
had previously eaten three or more meals every day change their eating pattern to an IF 
diet182, data on the impact of IMS on the human brain are sparse. However, a recent study 
showed that a 2-year multidomain intervention (diet, exercise, cognitive training and 
vascular risk monitoring) results in improved scores on cognitive tests in elderly subjects 
compared with a nonintervention control group183. Randomized controlled trials of IF and 
exercise regimens with neurological end points (psychological test batteries, functional brain 
imaging and molecular interrogation of cerebrospinal fluid) at baseline and at designated 
time points during the IMS period will be of great value. On the basis of the evidence from 
the animal studies reviewed in this article, one might predict that IMS will improve mood 
and cognition, change resting-state and task-related neuronal network activity, increase 
levels of neurotrophic factors and reduce markers of inflammation in cerebrospinal fluid. 
Performance of such IMS trials in subject populations at risk of a neurological disorder (for 
example, subjects with metabolic syndrome), in subjects who have suffered an acute 
neurological insult and in patients in the early stages of an age-related neurodegenerative 
disorder may eventually lead to prescriptions for IMS instead of or in conjunction with drugs 
that target a specific pathway.
Conclusions and future directions
The evidence reviewed in this article leads to several general conclusions regarding IMS and 
neuroplasticity. First, cognition, sensory–motor function and physical performance can be 
enhanced by IMS protocols involving IF and/or vigorous exercise. Second, by providing an 
alternative energy source and activating signalling pathways involved in neuroplasticity and 
cellular stress resistance, the ketone BHB plays a particularly important role in neuronal 
adaptations to fasting and exercise. Third, neurons respond to the G-to-K switch by engaging 
a ‘cell-preservation mode’ and adopt a ‘cell-growth mode’ by activation of certain signalling 
pathways when the switch is off (food, rest and sleep). Fourth, fasting and exercise 
upregulate neurotrophic factor signalling, antioxidant and DNA repair enzymes, protein 
deacetylases and autophagy, which protects neurons against stress and sets the stage for 
mitochondrial biogenesis and cell growth and plasticity during recovery periods (FIG. 3). 
Fifth, lifestyles characterized by little or no IMS (three meals per day plus snacks and 
negligible exercise) result in suboptimal brain functionality and increase the risk of major 
neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders. Sixth, many different IMS regimens are likely 
to improve brain health such that individuals may choose an approach that suits their 
particular daily and weekly schedules.
There are many gaps in our knowledge of the neurobiology of IMS and the application of 
such knowledge to the prevention and treatment of neurological disorders. Among the 
outstanding questions, we find the following particularly pressing. First, what adaptive 
responses of the nervous system to metabolic switching are mediated by and/or require 
ketones? This might be answered by studies in which the ketone-generating enzyme 3-
hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase (HMG-CoA lyase) or neuronal monocarboxylate 
transporter 2 (MCT2; also known as SLC16A7) is knocked down or out in mice and then 
neurological responses to fasting and exercise are evaluated. Because of the criticality of 
ketones for survival during fasting, such experiments will require ‘titration’ of circulating 
Mattson et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ketone levels by administration of exogenous ketones. Second, what are the contributions of 
intrinsic neuronal network signalling pathways and peripheral signals entering the brain 
from the circulation to IMS-induced neuroplasticity? Third, which pathways are common to 
the mechanisms of action of exercise, fasting and cognitive challenges, and which are unique 
to a specific metabolic challenge? Fourth, are there retrograde transneuronal signals from the 
peripheral nervous system to the CNS that mediate effects of IMS on CNS neuroplasticity 
and resistance to injury and disease? Fifth, are there roles for glial cells in adaptations of the 
CNS to IMS? Although IF and exercise can suppress microglia-mediated 
neuroinflammation, the underlying mechanisms remain to be established. The possible 
effects of IMS on astrocytes are also unexplored. Do IF and/or exercise stimulate 
neurotrophic factor production in astrocytes, and are ketones involved? Does IMS affect 
axonal myelination? Sixth, are there roles for cerebrovascular remodelling in the beneficial 
effects of IMS on cognition and stress resistance, and what are the underlying mechanisms? 
Seventh, does IF improve cognition in humans, and which cognitive domains are affected? 
Eigth, will there be clinical applications of IMS ‘prescriptions’ for a range of neurological 
disorders? Several randomized controlled trials of IF in subjects with or at high risk of a 
neurological disorder are in progress, and results will be forthcoming.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the US National Institute on Ageing.
Glossary
β-Hydroxybutyrate(BHB)
A ketone, generated from fatty acids during fasting and extended exercise, that functions as a 
cellular energy source and as a signalling molecule that induces the expression of brain-
derived neurotrophic factor.
Intermittent metabolic switching (IMS)
Repeating cycles of a metabolic challenge (fasting and/or exercise) sufficient to deplete liver 
glycogen stores and elevate circulating ketone levels, followed by a recovery period (eating, 
resting and sleeping).
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
A protein produced and released from neurons in response to synaptic activity, exercise and 
fasting that acts to enhance synaptic plasticity and cellular stress resistance.
Mitochondrial biogenesis
The proliferation of mitochondria in neurons in response to metabolic challenges and 
neurotrophic factors to produce new mitochondria that promote synaptic plasticity and 
cellular stress resistance.
Deacetylase
An enzyme that removes an acetyl group from lysine residues of substrate proteins; the 
sirtuins SIRT1 and SIRT3 are deacetylases that play particularly important roles in adaptive 
responses of neurons to metabolic challenges.
Mattson et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Mechanistic target of rapamycin
(mTOR; also known as serine/threonine-protein kinase mTOR (MTOR) and mammalian 
target of rapamycin). A kinase that plays a pivotal role in stimulating cellular protein 
synthesis and suppressing autophagy when nutrients (glucose and amino acids) are plentiful.
Autophagy
A complex process by which cells recognize damaged dysfunctional proteins and organelles, 
engulf them in a membrane and target them for enzymatic degradation in lysosomes to 
generate recyclable undamaged components (for example, amino acids and lipids).
Ketogenesis
The process by which spillover of acetyl CoA results from β-oxidation of fatty acids in the 
liver during fasting and extended exercise.
Myokines
Proteins and peptides released from muscle cells during exercise that can enter the brain and 
affect neuroplasticity; examples include interleukin-6, cathepsin B and irisin.
References
1. Mattson MP. Lifelong brain health is a lifelong challenge: from evolutionary principles to empirical 
evidence. Ageing Res Rev. 2015; 20:37–45. [PubMed: 25576651] 
2. Bramble DM, Lieberman DE. Endurance running and the evolution of Homo. Nature. 2004; 
432:345–352. [PubMed: 15549097] 
3. Mattson MP. Superior pattern processing is the essence of the evolved human brain. Front Neurosci. 
2014; 8:265. [PubMed: 25202234] 
4. Courchesne-Loyer A, et al. Inverse relationship between brain glucose and ketone metabolism in 
adults during short-term moderate dietary ketosis: a dual tracer quantitative positron emission 
tomography study. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2017; 37:2485–2493. [PubMed: 27629100] 
5. Camandola S, Mattson MP. Brain metabolism in health, aging, and neurodegeneration. EMBO J. 
2017; 36:1474–1492. [PubMed: 28438892] 
6. Mattson MP. Energy intake and exercise as determinants of brain health and vulnerability to injury 
and disease. Cell Metab. 2012; 16:706–722. [PubMed: 23168220] 
7. Longo VD, Mattson MP. Fasting: molecular mechanisms and clinical applications. Cell Metab. 
2014; 19:181–192. [PubMed: 24440038] 
8. Anson RM, et al. Intermittent fasting dissociates beneficial effects of dietary restriction on glucose 
metabolism and neuronal resistance to injury from calorie intake. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 
100:6216–6220. The data in this study provide the first evidence that IMS exerts beneficial effects 
on the brain that are independent of overall energy intake. [PubMed: 12724520] 
9. Hatori M, et al. Time-restricted feeding without reducing caloric intake prevents metabolic diseases 
in mice fed a high-fat diet. Cell Metab. 2012; 15:848–860. This study finds that 16 hours of fasting 
each day can prevent obesity and related metabolic morbidities in mice fed a high-fat diet. 
[PubMed: 22608008] 
10. Harvie MN, et al. The effects of intermittent or continuous energy restriction on weight loss and 
metabolic disease risk markers: a randomized trial in young overweight women. Int J Obes (Lond). 
2011; 35:714–727. [PubMed: 20921964] 
11. Harvie M, et al. The effect of intermittent energy and carbohydrate restriction v. daily energy 
restriction on weight loss and metabolic disease risk markers in overweight women. Br J Nutr. 
2013; 110:1534–1547. [PubMed: 23591120] 
12. Vanevski F, Xu B. Molecular and neural bases underlying roles of BDNF in the control of body 
weight. Front Neurosci. 2013; 7:37. [PubMed: 23519010] 
Mattson et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 13. Bechtold DA, Loudon AS. Hypothalamic clocks and rhythms in feeding behaviour. Trends 
Neurosci. 2013; 36:74–82. [PubMed: 23333345] 
14. Ingram DK, Weindruch R, Spangler EL, Freeman JR, Walford RL. Dietary restriction benefits 
learning and motor performance of aged mice. J Gerontol. 1987; 42:78–81. [PubMed: 3794202] 
15. Means LW, Higgins JL, Fernandez TJ. Mid-life onset of dietary restriction extends life and 
prolongs cognitive functioning. Physiol Behav. 1993; 54:503–508. [PubMed: 8415944] 
16. Parikh I, et al. Caloric restriction preserves memory and reduces anxiety of aging mice with early 
enhancement of neurovascular functions. Aging. 2016; 8:2814–2826. [PubMed: 27829242] 
17. Brandhorst S, et al. A periodic diet that mimics fasting promotes multi-system regeneration, 
enhanced cognitive performance, and healthspan. Cell Metab. 2015; 22:86–99. [PubMed: 
26094889] 
18. Stillman CM, Cohen J, Lehman ME, Erickson KI. Mediators of physical activity on neurocognitive 
function: a review at multiple levels of analysis. Front Hum Neurosci. 2016; 10:626. [PubMed: 
28018195] 
19. Cooper, C., Moon, HY., van Praag, H. On the run for hippocampal plasticity. Cold Spring Harb 
Perspect Med. 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a029736
20. Raichlen DA, Alexander GE. Adaptive capacity: an evolutionary neuroscience model linking 
exercise, cognition, and brain health. Trends Neurosci. 2017; 40:408–421. [PubMed: 28610948] 
21. Stranahan AM, et al. Voluntary exercise and caloric restriction enhance hippocampal dendritic 
spine density and BDNF levels in diabetic mice. Hippocampus. 2009; 19:951–961. [PubMed: 
19280661] 
22. Zhu X, Yin S, Lang M, He R, Li J. The more the better? A meta-analysis on effects of combined 
cognitive and physical intervention on cognition in healthy older adults. Ageing Res Rev. 2016; 
31:67–79. [PubMed: 27423932] 
23. Hippocrates. On the Sacred Disease. (400 BCE). English translation by F. Adams: http://
classics.mit.edu/Hippocrates/sacred.html
24. Ruskin DN, Masino SA. The nervous system and metabolic dysregulation: emerging evidence 
converges on ketogenic diet therapy. Front Neurosci. 2012; 6:33. [PubMed: 22470316] 
25. Bruce-Keller AJ, Umberger G, McFall R, Mattson MP. Food restriction reduces brain damage and 
improves behavioral outcome following excitotoxic and metabolic insults. Ann Neurol. 1999; 
45:8–15. [PubMed: 9894871] 
26. Hartman AL, Rubenstein JE, Kossoff EH. Intermittent fasting: a “new” historical strategy for 
controlling seizures? Epilepsy Res. 2013; 104:275–279. [PubMed: 23206889] 
27. van Praag H, Christie BR, Sejnowski TJ, Gage FH. Running enhances neurogenesis, learning, and 
long-term potentiation in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999; 96:13427–13431. [PubMed: 
10557337] 
28. Farmer J, et al. Effects of voluntary exercise on synaptic plasticity and gene expression in the 
dentate gyrus of adult male Sprague–Dawley rats in vivo. Neuroscience. 2004; 124:71–79. 
[PubMed: 14960340] 
29. O’Callaghan RM, Ohle R, Kelly AM. The effects of forced exercise on hippocampal plasticity in 
the rat: a comparison of LTP, spatial- and non-spatial learning. Behav Brain Res. 2007; 176:362–
366. [PubMed: 17113656] 
30. Talani G, et al. Enhanced glutamatergic synaptic plasticity in the hippocampal CA1 field of food-
restricted rats: involvement of CB1 receptors. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016; 41:1308–1318. 
[PubMed: 26354043] 
31. Eckles-Smith K, Clayton D, Bickford P, Browning MD. Caloric restriction prevents age-related 
deficits in LTP and in NMDA receptor expression. Mol Brain Res. 2000; 78:154–162. [PubMed: 
10891595] 
32. Hori N, Hirotsu I, Davis PJ, Carpenter DO. Long-term potentiation is lost in aged rats but 
preserved by calorie restriction. Neuroreport. 1992; 3:1085–1088. [PubMed: 1337284] 
33. Vivar C, et al. Monosynaptic inputs to new neurons in the dentate gyrus. Nat Commun. 2012; 
3:1107. [PubMed: 23033083] 
Mattson et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 34. Lee J, Duan W, Mattson MP. Evidence that brain-derived neurotrophic factor is required for basal 
neurogenesis and mediates, in part, the enhancement of neurogenesis by dietary restriction in the 
hippocampus of adult mice. J Neurochem. 2002; 82:1367–1375. [PubMed: 12354284] 
35. Vivar C, Peterson BD, van Praag H. Running rewires the neuronal network of adult-born dentate 
granule cells. Neuroimage. 2016; 131:29–41. [PubMed: 26589333] 
36. Cohen SM, Li B, Tsien RW, Ma H. Evolutionary and functional perspectives on signaling from 
neuronal surface to nucleus. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015; 460:88–99. [PubMed: 
25998737] 
37. Mattson MP, Meffert MK. Roles for NF-kappaB in nerve cell survival, plasticity, and disease. Cell 
Death Differ. 2006; 13:852–860. [PubMed: 16397579] 
38. Estrada NM, Isokawa M. Metabolic demand stimulates CREB signaling in the limbic cortex: 
implication for the induction of hippocampal synaptic plasticity by intrinsic stimulus for survival. 
Front Syst Neurosci. 2009; 3:5. [PubMed: 19543539] 
39. Yang JL, Lin YT, Chuang PC, Bohr VA, Mattson MP. BDNF and exercise enhance neuronal DNA 
repair by stimulating CREB-mediated production of apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1. 
Neuromolecular Med. 2014; 16:161–174. [PubMed: 24114393] 
40. Hirano Y, et al. Fasting launches CRTC to facilitate long-term memory formation in Drosophila. 
Science. 2013; 339:443–446. [PubMed: 23349290] 
41. Rogawski MA, Löscher W, Rho JM. Mechanisms of action of antiseizure drugs and the ketogenic 
diet. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2016; 6:a022780. [PubMed: 26801895] 
42. Li J, O’Leary EI, Tanner GR. The ketogenic diet metabolite beta-hydroxybutyrate (β-HB) reduces 
incidence of seizure-like activity (SLA) in a Katp- and GABAb-dependent manner in a whole-
animal Drosophila melanogaster model. Epilepsy Res. 2017; 133:6–9. [PubMed: 28395176] 
43. Blier P, El Mansari M. Serotonin and beyond: therapeutics for major depression. Phil Trans R Soc 
B Biol Sci. 2013; 368:20120536.
44. Kondo M, Nakamura Y, Ishida Y, Shimada S. The 5-HT3 receptor is essential for exercise-induced 
hippocampal neurogenesis and antidepressant effects. Mol Psychiatry. 2015; 20:1428–1437. 
[PubMed: 25403840] 
45. Billman GE, et al. Exercise training-induced bradycardia: evidence for enhanced parasympathetic 
regulation without changes in intrinsic sinoatrial node function. J Appl Physiol. 2015; 118:1344–
1355. [PubMed: 25749448] 
46. Wan R, Camandola S, Mattson MP. Intermittent food deprivation improves cardiovascular and 
neuroendocrine responses to stress in rats. J Nutr. 2003; 133:1921–1929. [PubMed: 12771340] 
47. Mager DE, et al. Caloric restriction and intermittent fasting alter spectral measures of heart rate 
and blood pressure variability in rats. FASEB J. 2006; 20:631–637. This study establishes that IF 
lowers blood pressure and heart rate and increases heart rate variability by a mechanism involving 
enhancement of parasympathetic tone. [PubMed: 16581971] 
48. Wan R, et al. Evidence that BDNF regulates heart rate by a mechanism involving increased 
brainstem parasympathetic neuron excitability. J Neurochem. 2014; 129:573–580. [PubMed: 
24475741] 
49. Marosi K, Mattson MP. BDNF mediates adaptive brain and body responses to energetic challenges. 
Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2014; 25:89–98. [PubMed: 24361004] 
50. Li Y, et al. TrkB regulates hippocampal neurogenesis and governs sensitivity to antidepressive 
treatment. Neuron. 2008; 59:399–412. [PubMed: 18701066] 
51. Cheng CM, et al. A ketogenic diet increases brain insulin-like growth factor receptor and glucose 
transporter gene expression. Endocrinology. 2003; 144:2676–2682. [PubMed: 12746332] 
52. Bohannon NJ, et al. Characterization of insulin-like growth factor I receptors in the median 
eminence of the brain and their modulation by food restriction. Endocrinology. 1988; 122:1940–
1947. [PubMed: 2966061] 
53. Llorens-Martín M, Torres-Alemán I, Trejo JL. Mechanisms mediating brain plasticity: IGF1 and 
adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Neuroscientist. 2009; 15:134–148. [PubMed: 19307421] 
54. Marosi K, et al. 3-Hydroxybutyrate regulates energy metabolism and induces BDNF expression in 
cerebral cortical neurons. J Neurochem. 2016; 139:769–781. This study shows that the ketone 
Mattson et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BHB can act directly on neurons to induce transcription of the gene encoding BDNF by a 
mechanism involving NF-κB. [PubMed: 27739595] 
55. Sleiman SF, et al. Exercise promotes the expression of brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 
through the action of the ketone body β-hydroxybutyrate. eLife. 2016; 5:e1509. This study finds 
that the ketone BHB can induce Bdnf gene expression in the hippocampus in vivo. 
56. Zechel S, Werner S, Unsicker K, von Bohlen und Halbach O. Expression and functions of 
fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) in hippocampal formation. Neuroscientist. 2010; 16:357–373. 
[PubMed: 20581332] 
57. Mattson MP, Murrain M, Guthrie PB, Kater SB. Fibroblast growth factor and glutamate: opposing 
roles in the generation and degeneration of hippocampal neuroarchitecture. J Neurosci. 1989; 
9:3728–3740. [PubMed: 2585052] 
58. Mark RJ, Keller JN, Kruman I, Mattson MP. Basic FGF attenuates amyloid beta-peptide-induced 
oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and impairment of Na+/K+-ATPase activity in 
hippocampal neurons. Brain Res. 1997; 756:205–214. [PubMed: 9187334] 
59. Arumugam TV, et al. Age and energy intake interact to modify cell stress pathways and stroke 
outcome. Ann Neurol. 2010; 67:41–52. [PubMed: 20186857] 
60. Gómez-Pinilla F, Dao L, So V. Physical exercise induces FGF-2 and its mRNA in the 
hippocampus. Brain Res. 1997; 764:1–8. [PubMed: 9295187] 
61. Graham BM, Richardson R. Memory of fearful events; the role of fibroblast growth factor-2 in fear 
acquisition and extinction. Neuroscience. 2011; 189:156–169. [PubMed: 21624434] 
62. Hood DA, Tryon LD, Carter HN, Kim Y, Chen CC. Unravelling the mechanisms regulating muscle 
mitochondrial biogenesis. Biochem J. 2016; 473:2295–2314. [PubMed: 27470593] 
63. Kerr JS, et al. Mitophagy and Alzheimer’s disease: cellular and molecular mechanisms. Trends 
Neurosci. 2017; 40:151–166. [PubMed: 28190529] 
64. Hepple RT. Why eating less keeps mitochondria working in aged skeletal muscle. Exerc Sport Sci 
Rev. 2009; 37:23–28. [PubMed: 19098521] 
65. Cheng A, et al. Involvement of PGC-1α in the formation and maintenance of neuronal dendritic 
spines. Nat Commun. 2012; 3:1250. [PubMed: 23212379] 
66. Wrann CD, et al. Exercise induces hippocampal BDNF through a PGC-1α/FNDC5 pathway. Cell 
Metab. 2013; 18:649–659. [PubMed: 24120943] 
67. Fusco S, et al. A role for neuronal cAMP responsive-element binding (CREB)-1 in brain responses 
to calorie restriction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2012; 109:621–626. [PubMed: 22190495] 
68. van de Ven RAH, Santos D, Haigis MC. Mitochondrial sirtuins and molecular mechanisms of 
aging. Trends Mol Med. 2017; 23:320–331. [PubMed: 28285806] 
69. Cheng A, et al. Mitochondrial SIRT3 mediates adaptive responses of neurons to exercise and 
metabolic and excitatory challenges. Cell Metab. 2016; 23:128–142. This study shows that the 
mitochondrial deacetylase SIRT3 is upregulated in response to exercise and excitatory synaptic 
activity and that SIRT3 protects neurons against excitotoxic and metabolic stress. [PubMed: 
26698917] 
70. Zhang X, et al. PGC-1α/ERRα-Sirt3 pathway regulates DAergic neuronal death by directly 
deacetylating SOD2 and ATP synthase β. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2016; 24:312–328. [PubMed: 
26421366] 
71. Johnson SC, Rabinovitch PS, Kaeberlein M. mTOR is a key modulator of ageing and age-related 
disease. Nature. 2013; 493:338–345. [PubMed: 23325216] 
72. Bockaert J, Marin P. mTOR in brain physiology and pathologies. Physiol Rev. 2015; 95:1157–
1187. [PubMed: 26269525] 
73. Alirezaei M, et al. Short-term fasting induces profound neuronal autophagy. Autophagy. 2010; 
6:702–710. [PubMed: 20534972] 
74. He C, Sumpter R Jr, Levine B. Exercise induces autophagy in peripheral tissues and in the brain. 
Autophagy. 2012; 8:1548–1551. [PubMed: 22892563] 
75. Finn PF, Dice JF. Ketone bodies stimulate chaperone-mediated autophagy. J Biol Chem. 2005; 
280:25864–25870. [PubMed: 15883160] 
Mattson et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 76. Saxton RA, Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling in growth, metabolism, and disease. Cell. 2017; 
168:960–976. [PubMed: 28283069] 
77. Nixon RA. The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease. Nat Med. 2013; 19:983–997. 
[PubMed: 23921753] 
78. Harrison DE, et al. Rapamycin fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice. 
Nature. 2009; 460:392–395. [PubMed: 19587680] 
79. Tang SJ, et al. A rapamycin-sensitive signaling pathway contributes to long-term synaptic plasticity 
in the hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002; 99:467–472. This study demonstrates a role 
for the nutrient-sensing mTOR pathway in hippocampal synaptic plasticity. [PubMed: 11756682] 
80. Cammalleri M, et al. Time-restricted role for dendritic activation of the mTOR-p70S6K pathway in 
the induction of late-phase long-term potentiation in the CA1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 
100:14368–14373. [PubMed: 14623952] 
81. Hoeffer CA, et al. Removal of FKBP12 enhances mTOR-Raptor interactions, LTP, memory, and 
perseverative/repetitive behavior. Neuron. 2008; 60:832–845. [PubMed: 19081378] 
82. Weston MC, Chen H, Swann JW. Multiple roles for mammalian target of rapamycin signaling in 
both glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic transmission. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:11441–11452. 
[PubMed: 22895726] 
83. Shehata M, Matsumura H, Okubo-Suzuki R, Ohkawa N, Inokuchi K. Neuronal stimulation induces 
autophagy in hippocampal neurons that is involved in AMPA receptor degradation after chemical 
long-term depression. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:10413–10422. [PubMed: 22836274] 
84. Hernandez D, et al. Regulation of presynaptic neurotransmission by macroautophagy. Neuron. 
2012; 74:277–284. [PubMed: 22542182] 
85. Palacios OM, et al. Diet and exercise signals regulate SIRT3 and activate AMPK and PGC-1alpha 
in skeletal muscle. Aging. 2009; 1:771–783. [PubMed: 20157566] 
86. Mounier R, Théret M, Lantier L, Foretz M, Viollet B. Expanding roles for AMPK in skeletal 
muscle plasticity. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2015; 26:275–286. [PubMed: 25818360] 
87. Marosi K, et al. Long-term exercise treatment reduces oxidative stress in the hippocampus of aging 
rats. Neuroscience. 2012; 226:21–28. [PubMed: 22982624] 
88. Han Y, et al. AMPK signaling in the dorsal hippocampus negatively regulates contextual fear 
memory formation. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016; 41:1849–1864. [PubMed: 26647974] 
89. Kong D, et al. A postsynaptic AMPK — p21-activated kinase pathway drives fasting-induced 
synaptic plasticity in AgRP neurons. Neuron. 2016; 91:25–33. [PubMed: 27321921] 
90. Kobilo T, et al. AMPK agonist AICAR improves cognition and motor coordination in young and 
aged mice. Learn Mem. 2014; 21:119–126. [PubMed: 24443745] 
91. Ramamurthy S, Chang E, Cao Y, Zhu J, Ronnett GV. AMPK activation regulates neuronal structure 
in developing hippocampal neurons. Neuroscience. 2014; 259:13–24. [PubMed: 24295634] 
92. Ferrario CR, et al. Homeostasis meets motivation in the battle to control food intake. J Neurosci. 
2016; 36:11469–11481. [PubMed: 27911750] 
93. Andrews ZB. The extra-hypothalamic actions of ghrelin on neuronal function. Trends Neurosci. 
2011; 34:31–40. [PubMed: 21035199] 
94. Kim Y, et al. Ghrelin is required for dietary restriction-induced enhancement of hippocampal 
neurogenesis: lessons from ghrelin knockout mice. Endocr J. 2015; 62:269–275. [PubMed: 
25735661] 
95. Jensen M, et al. Anxiolytic-like effects of increased ghrelin receptor signaling in the amygdala. Int 
J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016; 19:pyv123. [PubMed: 26578081] 
96. Wallenius V, et al. Interleukin-6-deficient mice develop mature-onset obesity. Nat Med. 2002; 
8:75–79. [PubMed: 11786910] 
97. Wueest S, et al. Interleukin-6 contributes to early fasting-induced free fatty acid mobilization in 
mice. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2014; 306:R861–R867. [PubMed: 24694381] 
98. Baier PC, May U, Scheller J, Rose-John S, Schiffelholz T. Impaired hippocampus-dependent and -
independent learning in IL-6 deficient mice. Behav Brain Res. 2009; 200:192–196. [PubMed: 
19378383] 
Mattson et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 99. Mattson MP, Murrain M, Guthrie PB, Kater SB. Fibroblast growth factor and glutamate: opposing 
roles in the generation and degeneration of hippocampal neuroarchitecture. J Neurosci. 1989; 
9:3728–3740. [PubMed: 2585052] 
100. Mattson MP, Maudsley S, Martin B. A neural signaling triumvirate that influences ageing and 
age-related disease: insulin/IGF-1, BDNF and serotonin. Ageing Res Rev. 2004; 3:445–464. 
[PubMed: 15541711] 
101. Vendelbo MH, et al. Exercise and fasting activate growth hormone-dependent myocellular signal 
transducer and activator of transcription-5b phosphorylation and insulin-like growth factor-I 
messenger ribonucleic acid expression in humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010; 95:E64–68. 
[PubMed: 20534752] 
102. Pedersen BK, Febbraio MA. Muscles, exercise and obesity: skeletal muscle as a secretory organ. 
Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2012; 8:457–465. [PubMed: 22473333] 
103. Carro E, Nuñez A, Busiguina S, Torres-Aleman I. Circulating insulin-like growth factor I 
mediates effects of exercise on the brain. J Neurosci. 2000; 20:2926–2933. [PubMed: 10751445] 
104. Carro E, Trejo JL, Busiguina S, Torres-Aleman I. Circulating insulin-like growth factor I mediates 
the protective effects of physical exercise against brain insults of different etiology and anatomy. 
J Neurosci. 2001; 21:5678–5684. The authors of this study use an IGF1-blocking antibody to 
demonstrate a role for circulating IGF1 in the neuroprotective actions of exercise in mouse 
models of excitotoxic neuronal degeneration. [PubMed: 11466439] 
105. Moon HY, et al. Running-induced systemic cathepsin B secretion is associated with memory 
function. Cell Metab. 2016; 24:332–340. [PubMed: 27345423] 
106. Newman JC, Verdin E. Ketone bodies as signaling metabolites. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2014; 
25:42–52. [PubMed: 24140022] 
107. Shimazu T, et al. Suppression of oxidative stress by β-hydroxybutyrate, an endogenous histone 
deacetylase inhibitor. Science. 2013; 339:211–214. [PubMed: 23223453] 
108. Murray AJ, et al. Novel ketone diet enhances physical and cognitive performance. FASEB J. 
2016; 30:4021–4032. [PubMed: 27528626] 
109. Webber RJ, Edmond J. The in vivo utilization of acetoacetate, D-(–)-3-hydroxybutyrate, and 
glucose for lipid synthesis in brain in the 18-day-old rat. Evidence for an acetyl-CoA bypass for 
sterol synthesis. J Biol Chem. 1979; 254:3912–3920. [PubMed: 438167] 
110. Chamorro Á, Dirnagl U, Urra X, Planas AM. Neuroprotection in acute stroke: targeting 
excitotoxicity, oxidative and nitrosative stress, and inflammation. Lancet Neurol. 2016; 15:869–
881. [PubMed: 27180033] 
111. Greene AE, Todorova MT, McGowan R, Seyfried TN. Caloric restriction inhibits seizure 
susceptibility in epileptic EL mice by reducing blood glucose. Epilepsia. 2001; 42:1371–1378. 
[PubMed: 11879337] 
112. Yu ZF, Mattson MP. Dietary restriction and 2-deoxyglucose administration reduce focal ischemic 
brain damage and improve behavioral outcome: evidence for a preconditioning mechanism. J 
Neurosci Res. 1999; 57:830–839. [PubMed: 10467254] 
113. Roberge MC, Messier C, Staines WA, Plamondon H. Food restriction induces long-lasting 
recovery of spatial memory deficits following global ischemia in delayed matching and non-
matching-to-sample radial arm maze tasks. Neuroscience. 2008; 156:11–29. [PubMed: 
18672030] 
114. Jeong MA, et al. Intermittent fasting improves functional recovery after rat thoracic contusion 
spinal cord injury. J Neurotrauma. 2011; 28:479–492. [PubMed: 21219083] 
115. Plunet WT, et al. Dietary restriction started after spinal cord injury improves functional recovery. 
Exp Neurol. 2008; 213:28–35. [PubMed: 18585708] 
116. Davis LM, Pauly JR, Readnower RD, Rho JM, Sullivan PG. Fasting is neuroprotective following 
traumatic brain injury. J Neurosci Res. 2008; 86:1812–1822. This study shows that when initiated 
after traumatic brain injury, fasting and ketone administration reduce neuronal loss in rats. 
[PubMed: 18241053] 
117. Lee CK, Weindruch R, Prolla TA. Gene-expression profile of the ageing brain in mice. Nat Genet. 
2000; 25:294–297. [PubMed: 10888876] 
Mattson et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 118. Xu X, et al. Gene expression atlas of the mouse central nervous system: impact and interactions 
of age, energy intake and gender. Genome Biol. 2007; 8:R234. [PubMed: 17988385] 
119. Schafer MJ, Dolgalev I, Alldred MJ, Heguy A, Ginsberg SD. Calorie restriction suppresses age-
dependent hippocampal transcriptional signatures. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10:e0133923. [PubMed: 
26221964] 
120. Di Benedetto S, Müller L, Wenger E, Düzel S, Pawelec G. Contribution of neuroinflammation 
and immunity to brain aging and the mitigating effects of physical and cognitive interventions. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2017; 75:114–128. [PubMed: 28161508] 
121. Kiprianova I, et al. Enlarged infarct volume and loss of BDNF mRNA induction following brain 
ischemia in mice lacking FGF-2. Exp Neurol. 2004; 189:252–260. [PubMed: 15380477] 
122. Bo H, et al. Exercise-induced neuroprotection of hippocampus in APP/PS1 transgenic mice via 
upregulation of mitochondrial 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2014; 
2014:834502. [PubMed: 25538817] 
123. Yang JL, Lin YT, Chuang PC, Bohr VA, Mattson MP. BDNF and exercise enhance neuronal DNA 
repair by stimulating CREB-mediated production of apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1. 
Neuromolecular Med. 2014; 16:161–174. [PubMed: 24114393] 
124. Prins ML, Lee SM, Fujima LS, Hovda DA. Increased cerebral uptake and oxidation of exogenous 
betaHB improves ATP following traumatic brain injury in adult rats. J Neurochem. 2004; 
90:666–672. [PubMed: 15255945] 
125. Rahman M, et al. The β-hydroxybutyrate receptor HCA2 activates a neuroprotective subset of 
macrophages. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:3944. [PubMed: 24845831] 
126. Yin J, Han P, Tang Z, Liu Q, Shi J. Sirtuin 3 mediates neuroprotection of ketones against ischemic 
stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015; 35:1783–1789. [PubMed: 26058697] 
127. Simeone TA, Simeone KA, Rho JM. Ketone bodies as anti-seizure agents. Neurochem Res. 2017; 
42:2011–2018. [PubMed: 28397070] 
128. Mattson MP. Pathways towards and away from Alzheimer’s disease. Nature. 2004; 430:631–639. 
[PubMed: 15295589] 
129. Poewe W, et al. Parkinson disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017; 3:17013. [PubMed: 28332488] 
130. Kontis V, et al. Future life expectancy in 35 industrialised countries: projections with a Bayesian 
model ensemble. Lancet. 2017; 389:1323–1335. [PubMed: 28236464] 
131. Frisardi V, et al. Metabolic-cognitive syndrome: a crosstalk between metabolic syndrome and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Ageing Res Rev. 2010; 9:399–417. [PubMed: 20444434] 
132. Lee EB, Mattson MP. The neuropathology of obesity: insights from human disease. Acta 
Neuropathol. 2014; 127:3–28. [PubMed: 24096619] 
133. Baumgart M, et al. Summary of the evidence on modifiable risk factors for cognitive decline and 
dementia: a population-based perspective. Alzheimers Dement. 2015; 11:718–726. [PubMed: 
26045020] 
134. LaHue SC, Comella CL, Tanner CM. The best medicine? The influence of physical activity and 
inactivity on Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord. 2016; 31:1444–1454. [PubMed: 27477046] 
135. Groot C, et al. The effect of physical activity on cognitive function in patients with dementia: a 
meta-analysis of randomized control trials. Ageing Res Rev. 2016; 25:13–23. [PubMed: 
26607411] 
136. Uhrbrand A, Stenager E, Pedersen MS, Dalgas U. Parkinson’s disease and intensive exercise 
therapy — a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Neurol Sci. 
2015; 353:9–19. [PubMed: 25936252] 
137. Wang J, et al. Caloric restriction attenuates beta-amyloid neuropathology in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J. 2005; 19:659–661. [PubMed: 15650008] 
138. Patel NV, et al. Caloric restriction attenuates a beta-deposition in Alzheimer transgenic models. 
Neurobiol Aging. 2005; 26:995–1000. [PubMed: 15748777] 
139. Halagappa VK, et al. Intermittent fasting and caloric restriction ameliorate age-related behavioral 
deficits in the triple-transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Dis. 2007; 
26:212–220. [PubMed: 17306982] 
Mattson et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 140. Ryan SM, Kelly ÁM. Exercise as a pro-cognitive, pro-neurogenic and anti inflammatory 
intervention in transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. Ageing Res Rev. 2016; 27:77–
92. [PubMed: 27039886] 
141. Qin W, et al. Neuronal SIRT1 activation as a novel mechanism underlying the prevention of 
Alzheimer disease amyloid neuropathology by calorie restriction. J Biol Chem. 2006; 
281:21745–21754. [PubMed: 16751189] 
142. Zilberter M, et al. Dietary energy substrates reverse early neuronal hyperactivity in a mouse 
model of Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem. 2013; 125:157–171. [PubMed: 23241062] 
143. Kashiwaya Y, et al. A ketone ester diet exhibits anxiolytic and cognition-sparing properties, and 
lessens amyloid and tau pathologies in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 
2013; 34:1530–1539. This study shows that dietary supplementation with a ketone (BHB) ester 
ameliorates behavioural deficits and lessens amyloid and tau pathologies in a triple transgenic 
mouse model of AD. [PubMed: 23276384] 
144. Castellano CA, et al. A 3-month aerobic training program improves brain energy metabolism in 
mild Alzheimer’s disease: preliminary results from a neuroimaging study. J Alzheimers Dis. 
2017; 56:1459–1468. [PubMed: 28157102] 
145. Bentourkia M, et al. PET study of 11C-acetoacetate kinetics in rat brain during dietary treatments 
affecting ketosis. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009; 296:E796–E801. [PubMed: 19176356] 
146. Croteau, E., et al. A cross-sectional comparison of brain glucose and ketone metabolism in 
cognitively healthy older adults, mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease. Exp 
Gerontol. 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.exger.2017.07.004Employing PET imaging with 
radiotracers for glucose and the ketone AcAc, the authors of this study provide evidence that 
although cerebral glucose utilization is impaired in patients with AD, their neurons remain 
capable of utilizing ketones
147. Duan W, Mattson MP. Dietary restriction and 2-deoxyglucose administration improve behavioral 
outcome and reduce degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in models of Parkinson’s disease. J 
Neurosci Res. 1999; 57:195–206. [PubMed: 10398297] 
148. Maswood N, et al. Caloric restriction increases neurotrophic factor levels and attenuates 
neurochemical and behavioral deficits in a primate model of Parkinson’s disease. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci USA. 2004; 101:18171–18176. This study demonstrates that daily CR lessens motor deficits 
and dopamine depletion and elevates striatal levels of glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor 
in a nonhuman primate model of PD. [PubMed: 15604149] 
149. Petzinger GM, et al. Effects of treadmill exercise on dopaminergic transmission in the 1-
methyl-4-phenyl-1,2 ,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-lesioned mouse model of basal ganglia injury. J 
Neurosci. 2007; 27:5291–5300. [PubMed: 17507552] 
150. Griffioen KJ, et al. Dietary energy intake modifies brainstem autonomic dysfunction caused by 
mutant α-synuclein. Neurobiol Aging. 2013; 34:928–935. [PubMed: 22883907] 
151. Gerecke KM, Jiao Y, Pagala V, Smeyne RJ. Exercise does not protect against MPTP-induced 
neurotoxicity in BDNF haploinsufficient mice. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e43250. [PubMed: 
22912838] 
152. Bayliss JA, et al. Ghrelin-AMPK signaling mediates the neuroprotective effects of calorie 
restriction in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci. 2016; 36:3049–3063. [PubMed: 26961958] 
153. Tieu K, et al. D-Beta-hydroxybutyrate rescues mitochondrial respiration and mitigates features of 
Parkinson disease. J Clin Invest. 2003; 112:892–901. [PubMed: 12975474] 
154. Ferrari AJ. Burden of depressive disorders by country, sex, age, and year: findings from the global 
burden of disease study 2010. PLoS Med. 2013; 10:e1001547. [PubMed: 24223526] 
155. Hryhorczuk C, Sharma S, Fulton SE. Metabolic disturbances connecting obesity and depression. 
Front Neurosci. 2013; 7:177. [PubMed: 24109426] 
156. Hallgren M, et al. Exercise, physical activity, and sedentary behavior in the treatment of 
depression: broadening the scientific perspectives and clinical opportunities. Front Psychiatry. 
2016; 7:36. [PubMed: 27014101] 
157. Johnson JB, et al. Alternate day calorie restriction improves clinical findings and reduces markers 
of oxidative stress and inflammation in overweight adults with moderate asthma. Free Radic Biol 
Med. 2007; 42:665–674. [PubMed: 17291990] 
Mattson et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 158. Archer T, Josefsson T, Lindwall M. Effects of physical exercise on depressive symptoms and 
biomarkers in depression. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2014; 13:1640–1653. [PubMed: 
25470398] 
159. Patki G, et al. Novel mechanistic insights into treadmill exercise based rescue of social defeat-
induced anxiety-like behavior and memory impairment in rats. Physiol Behav. 2014; 130:135–
144. [PubMed: 24732411] 
160. Adlard PA, Cotman CW. Voluntary exercise protects against stress-induced decreases in brain-
derived neurotrophic factor protein expression. Neuroscience. 2004; 124:985–992. [PubMed: 
15026138] 
161. Siuciak JA, Lewis DR, Wiegand SJ, Lindsay RM. Antidepressant-like effect of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF). Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1997; 56:131–137. [PubMed: 8981620] 
162. Taliaz D, et al. Resilience to chronic stress is mediated by hippocampal brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:4475–4483. [PubMed: 21430148] 
163. Garcia C, Chen MJ, Garza AA, Cotman CW, Russo-Neustadt A. The influence of specific 
noradrenergic and serotonergic lesions on the expression of hippocampal brain-derived 
neurotrophic factortranscripts following voluntary physical activity. Neuroscience. 2003; 
119:721–732. [PubMed: 12809693] 
164. Aguiar AS, et al. Effects of exercise on mitochondrial function, neuroplasticity and anxio-
depressive behavior of mice. Neuroscience. 2014; 271:56–63. [PubMed: 24780767] 
165. Li Y, et al. TrkB regulates hippocampal neurogenesis and governs sensitivity to antidepressive 
treatment. Neuron. 2008; 59:399–412. [PubMed: 18701066] 
166. Glasper ER, Llorens-Martin MV, Leuner B, Gould E, Trejo JL. Blockade of insulin-like growth 
factor-I has complex effects on structural plasticity in the hippocampus. Hippocampus. 2010; 
20:706–712. [PubMed: 19603528] 
167. Duman CH, et al. Peripheral insulin-like growth factor-I produces antidepressant-like behavior 
and contributes to the effect of exercise. Behav Brain Res. 2009; 198:366–371. [PubMed: 
19056428] 
168. Zipfel S, Giel KE, Bulik CM, Hay P, Schmidt U. Anorexia nervosa: aetiology, assessment, and 
treatment. Lancet Psychiatry. 2015; 2:1099–1111. [PubMed: 26514083] 
169. Devlin B, Scherer SW. Genetic architecture in autism spectrum disorder. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 
2012; 22:229–237. [PubMed: 22463983] 
170. Criado, KK., et al. Overweight and obese status in children with autism spectrum disorder and 
disruptive behavior. Autism. 2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1362361316683888
171. Han JC, et al. Association of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) haploinsufficiency with 
lower adaptive behaviour and reduced cognitive functioning in WAGR/11p13 deletion syndrome. 
Cortex. 2013; 49:2700–2710. [PubMed: 23517654] 
172. Huber KM, Klann E, Costa-Mattioli M, Zukin RS. Dysregulation of mammalian target of 
rapamycin signaling in mouse models of autism. J Neurosci. 2015; 35:13836–13842. [PubMed: 
26468183] 
173. Bremer E, Crozier M, Lloyd M. A systematic review of the behavioral outcomes following 
exercise interventions for children and youth with autism spectrum disorder. Autism. 2016; 
20:899–915. [PubMed: 26823546] 
174. Ruskin DN, et al. Ketogenic diet improves core symptoms of autism in BTBR mice. PLoS ONE. 
2013; 8:e65021. [PubMed: 23755170] 
175. El-Rashidy O, et al. Ketogenic diet versus gluten free casein free diet in autistic children: a case-
control study. Metab Brain Dis. 2017; 32:1935–1941. [PubMed: 28808808] 
176. Stranahan AM. Models and mechanisms for hippocampal dysfunction in obesity and diabetes. 
Neuroscience. 2015; 309:125–139. [PubMed: 25934036] 
177. O’Brien PD, Hinder LM, Callaghan BC, Feldman EL. Neurological consequences of obesity. 
Lancet Neurol. 2017; 16:465–477. [PubMed: 28504110] 
178. Lindqvist A, et al. High-fat diet impairs hippocampal neurogenesis in male rats. Eur J Neurol. 
2006; 13:1385–1388. [PubMed: 17116226] 
179. Stranahan AM, et al. Diabetes impairs hippocampal function through glucocorticoid-mediated 
effects on new and mature neurons. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11:309–317. [PubMed: 18278039] 
Mattson et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 180. Stranahan AM, et al. Diet-induced insulin resistance impairs hippocampal synaptic plasticity and 
cognition in middle-aged rats. Hippocampus. 2008; 18:1085–1088. [PubMed: 18651634] 
181. MacInnis MJ, Gibala MJ. Physiological adaptations to interval training and the role of exercise 
intensity. J Physiol. 2017; 595:2915–2930. [PubMed: 27748956] 
182. Mattson MP, Longo VD, Harvie M. Impact of intermittent fasting on health and disease 
processes. Ageing Res Rev. 2017; 39:46–58. [PubMed: 27810402] 
183. Ngandu T, et al. A 2 year multidomain intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive training, and 
vascular risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive decline in at-risk elderly people 
(FINGER): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015; 385:2255–2263. [PubMed: 25771249] 
184. Duffy PH, Feuers R, Nakamura KD, Leakey J, Hart J. Effect of chronic caloric restriction on the 
synchronization of various physiological measures in old female Fischer 344 rats. Chronobiol Int. 
1990; 7:113–124. [PubMed: 2242505] 
185. Duffy PH, Feuers RJ, Hart RW. Effect of chronic caloric restriction on the circadian regulation of 
physiological and behavioral variables in old male B6C3F1 mice. Chronobiol Int. 1990; 7:291–
303. [PubMed: 2085870] 
186. Acosta-Rodríguez VA, de Groot MHM, Rijo-Ferreira F, Green CB, Takahashi JS. Mice under 
caloric restriction self-impose a temporal restriction of food intake as revealed by an automated 
feeder system. Cell Metab. 2017; 26:267–277. [PubMed: 28683292] 
187. Schupp M, et al. Metabolite and transcriptome analysis during fasting suggest a role for the p53-
Ddit4 axis in major metabolic tissues. BMC Genomics. 2013; 14:758. [PubMed: 24191950] 
188. Askew EW, Dohm GL, Huston RL. Fatty acid and ketone body metabolism in the rat: response to 
diet and exercise. J Nutr. 1975; 105:1422–1432. [PubMed: 475] 
189. Raja G, Bräu L, Palmer TN, Fournier PA. Repeated bouts of high-intensity exercise and muscle 
glycogen sparing in the rat. J Exp Biol. 2003; 206:2159–2166. [PubMed: 12771165] 
Mattson et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Biochemical pathways involved in the metabolic switch
During fasting and sustained exercise, liver glycogen stores are depleted and lipolysis of 
triacylglycerols and diacylglycerols in adipocytes generates free fatty acids (FFAs), which 
are then released into the blood. The FFAs are transported into hepatocytes, where they are 
metabolized via β-oxidation to acetyl CoA, which is then used to generate the ketones 
acetone, acetoacetate (AcAc) and β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB). BHB and AcAc are transported 
from the blood into the brain and then into neurons via monocarboxylic acid transporters 
(MCTs) in the membranes of vascular endothelial cells and neurons. Within neurons, BHB 
and AcAc are metabolized to acetyl CoA, which then enters the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) 
cycle in mitochondria, resulting in the production of ATP and the reducing agents that 
transfer electrons to the electron transport chain. BHB can also upregulate the expression of 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and may thereby promote mitochondrial 
biogenesis, synaptic plasticity and cellular stress resistance. In addition to blood-borne 
ketones, astrocytes are capable of ketogenesis, which may provide an important local source 
of BHB for neurons. Intermittent metabolic switching also increases insulin sensitivity, 
thereby enhancing uptake and utilization of glucose by neurons. Upon refeeding, ingested 
carbohydrates (CHO) and glucose stimulate release into the blood of the incretin hormone 
glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) from enteroendocrine cells in the gut. GLP1 enhances 
clearance of glucose from the blood by stimulating insulin release from the pancreas and 
increases the insulin sensitivity of cells. GLP1 crosses the blood–brain barrier and can act 
directly on neurons to promote synaptic plasticity, enhance cognition and bolster cellular 
stress resistance. HMG-CoA, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA; GT, glucose transporter.
Mattson et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Signalling pathways by which neurons respond to the metabolic switch during fasting 
and exercise
Increased excitatory synaptic activity triggers Ca2+ influx through plasma membrane 
channels, resulting in the activation of multiple kinases, including calcium/calmodulin-
dependent kinases (Ca2+/CaMK) and mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), nitric 
oxide synthase (NOS) and the protein phosphatase calcineurin. Neurotrophic factor 
signalling pathways are also engaged in response to fasting and exercise, resulting in the 
activation of signalling pathways involving phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), RACα 
serine/threonine-protein kinase (AKT) and MAPKs. These activity-dependent and 
neurotrophic-factor-dependent signalling pathways converge on transcription factors, 
including cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB), nuclear regulatory factor 2 
(NRF2; also known as NFE2L2), nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and myocyte-specific enhancer 
factor 2 (MEF2), which induce the expression of many different genes that encode proteins 
involved in cellular stress adaptation. Three genes that may be particularly important in the 
enhancement of neuroplasticity and stress resistance in response to intermittent metabolic 
switching are those encoding brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), NAD-dependent 
protein deacetylase sirtuin 3 (SIRT3) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ 
coactivator 1α (PGC1α). SIRT3 localizes to the mitochondria, where it deacetylates 
proteins involved in antioxidant defence (superoxide dismutase [Mn], mitochondrial 
(SOD2)), energy production (isocitrate dehydrogenase [NADP], mitochondrial (IDH2); 
acetyl CoA synthase 2 (AceCS2; also known as ACSS1); and electron transport chain (ETC) 
proteins) and protection against apoptosis (cyclophilin D). PGC1 α is a key transcriptional 
regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis that acts, in part, by upregulating NRF1 and 
Mattson et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), which, in turn, upregulate oxidative 
phosphorylation, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication and transcription and 
mitochondrial protein import. CREB, NRF2 and NF-κB induce the expression of 
antioxidant enzymes, DNA repair enzymes, anti-apoptotic proteins and protein chaperones 
and Ca2+-handling proteins. The ketone β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), which is elevated during 
fasting and extended exercise, provides an energy substrate for neurons and induces the 
expression of BDNF. The reduction in availability of glucose and amino acids during fasting 
and exercise results in a reduction in the AMP:ATP ratio, which activates AMP kinase 
(AMPK) and, in turn, stimulates autophagy. The reduction in glucose and amino acid 
availability also reduces activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and further 
enhances the AMPK-driven autophagy pathway. AMPK activates the serine/threonine-
protein kinase ULK1 (ULK1) complex, which stimulates engulfment of damaged proteins 
and organelles in autophagosomes, which, in turn, fuse with lysosomes. Collectively, 
activation of these different pathways in response to the metabolic switch bolsters neuronal 
bioenergetics, improves Ca2+ handling and protects against oxidative, excitotoxic and 
proteotoxic stress. AC, acetyl group; LC3-PE, light chain 3– phosphatidylethanolamine; 
NAM, nicotinamide adenine mononucleotide; OXPHOS, ETC complexes involved in 
oxidative phosphorylation.
Mattson et al.
Page 29
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Model for how intermittent metabolic switching may optimize brain performance and 
increase resistance to injury and disease
Intermittent metabolic switching (IMS) involves repeating time periods of a bioenergetic 
challenge (fasting and/or exercise) when the metabolic switch is on (that is, liver glycogen 
stores are depleted and ketones are produced) and recovery periods (eating, resting and 
sleeping) when the metabolic switch is off. When the metabolic switch is on, levels of 
circulating ketones, ghrelin and myokines are elevated, whereas levels of glucose, leptin, 
insulin and pro-inflammatory cytokines are maintained at low levels. Adaptive responses of 
neurons to fasting and exercise include utilization of ketones as an energy substrate; 
increased expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and fibroblast growth 
factor 2 (FGF2); activation of the transcription factors cAMP-responsive element-binding 
protein (CREB) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1α (PGC1α), 
which induce the expression of genes involved in synaptic plasticity, neurogenesis and 
mitochondrial biogenesis; and upregulation of autophagy and DNA repair pathways. During 
the bioenergetic challenge, activity of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR; also 
known as serine/threonine-protein kinase mTOR (MTOR) and mechanistic target of 
rapamycin) pathway and global protein synthesis are reduced in neurons, and levels of pro-
inflammatory cytokines in the brain are reduced. Collectively, the pathways activated when 
the metabolic switch is on enhance neuronal stress resistance and bolster repair and 
recycling of damaged molecules. When the metabolic switch is off, circulating levels of 
glucose, leptin, insulin and pro-inflammatory cytokines increase, whereas levels of ketones, 
ghrelin and myokines decrease. In brain cells, the mTOR pathway is active, protein 
synthesis increases and mitochondrial biogenesis occurs during the recovery period. The 
activation state of neurotrophic signalling and adaptive cellular stress-response pathways 
may decrease when the metabolic switch is off. Cycles of IMS may optimize brain health by 
promoting synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis, improving cognition, mood, motor 
performance and autonomic nervous system (ANS) function and bolstering resistance of 
Mattson et al.
Page 30
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neurons to injury and neurodegenerative disease. SIRT, NAD-dependent protein deacetylase 
sirtuin.
Mattson et al.
Page 31
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 24.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
