 IOC Consensus Statement: Dietary Supplements
and the High-Performance Athlete
Ronald J. Maughan
St Andrews University
Louise M. Burke
Australian Institute of Sport and
Mary MacKillop Institute
for Health Research
Jiri Dvorak
Schulthess Clinic
D. Enette Larson-Meyer
University of Wyoming
Peter Peeling
University of Western Australia and
Western Australian Institute of Sport
Stuart M. Phillips
McMaster University
Eric S. Rawson
Messiah College
Neil P. Walsh
Bangor University
Ina Garthe
Norwegian Olympic and Paralympic
Committee and Confederation of Sport
Hans Geyer
German Sport University
Romain Meeusen
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Luc van Loon
Mary MacKillop Institute
for Health Research and
Maastricht University Medical Centre
Susan M. Shirreffs
St Andrews University
Lawrence L. Spriet
University of Guelph
Mark Stuart
BMJ, London
Alan Vernec
World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA)
Kevin Currell
English Institute of Sport,
Loughborough
Vidya M. Ali and
Richard G.M. Budgett
International Olympic Committee
Arne Ljungqvist
Anti-Doping Foundation
Margo Mountjoy
University of Guelph
Yannis Pitsiladis,
Torbjørn Soligard, U˘
gur Erdener,
and Lars Engebretsen
International Olympic Committee
Nutrition usually makes a small but potentially valuable contribution to successful performance in elite athletes, and dietary
supplements can make a minor contribution to this nutrition program. Nonetheless, supplement use is widespread at all levels of
sport. Products described as supplements target different issues, including the management of micronutrient deficiencies, supply
of convenient forms of energy and macronutrients, and provision of direct benefits to performance or indirect benefits such as
Note. This article is co-published with the British Journal of Sports Medicine (April 2018, Vol. 52, Issue 7; doi:10.1136/bjsports-2018-099027). Maughan and Shirreffs are
with St Andrews University, St Andrews, UK. Burke is with the Australian Institute of Sport, Canberra, Australia. Burke and van Loon are with the Mary MacKillop Institute
for Health Research, Melbourne, Australia. Dvorak is with Schulthess Clinic, Zurich, Switzerland. Larson-Meyer is with the University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY. Peeling
is with The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia, and with the Western Australian Institute of Sport, Mt Claremont, Australia. Phillips is with McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. Rawson is with Messiah College, Mechanicsburg, PA. Walsh is with Bangor University, Bangor, United Kingdom. Garthe is with the
Norwegian Olympic and Paralympic Committee and Confederation of Sport, Oslo, Norway. Geyer is with German Sport University, Cologne, Germany. Meeusen is with
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. van Loon is also with Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands. Spriet is with the University of
Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada. Stuart is with BMJ, London, United Kingdom. Vernec is with the World Anti-Doping Agency, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Currell is with
the English Institute of Sport, Loughborough, United Kingdom. Ali, Budgett, Pitsiladis, Soligard, Erdener, and Engebretsen are with the International Olympic Committee,
Lausanne, Switzerland. Ljungqvist is with the The Professor Arne Ljungqvist Anti-Doping Foundation, Stockholm, Sweden. Mountjoy is with the University of Guelph,
Guelph, Ontario, Canada. Address author correspondence to Susan M. Shirreffs at s.shirreffs@st-andrews.ac.uk.
104
International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism, 2018, 28, 104-125
https://doi.org/10.1123/ijsnem.2018-0020
© 2018 Human Kinetics, Inc.
CONSENSUS STATEMENT
 supporting intense training regimens. The appropriate use of some supplements can offer benefits to the athlete, but others may be
harmful to the athlete’s health, performance, and/or livelihood and reputation if an anti-doping rule violation results. A complete
nutritional assessment should be undertaken before decisions regarding supplement use are made. Supplements claiming to directly
or indirectly enhance performance are typically the largest group of products marketed to athletes, but only a few (including caffeine,
creatine, specific buffering agents and nitrate) have good evidence of benefits. However, responses are affected by the scenario of
use and may vary widely between individuals because of factors that include genetics, the microbiome, and habitual diet.
Supplements intended to enhance performance should be thoroughly trialed in training or simulated competition before
implementation in competition. Inadvertent ingestion of substances prohibited under the anti-doping codes that govern elite sport
is a known risk of taking some supplements. Protection of the athlete’s health and awareness of the potential for harm must be
paramount, and expert professional opinion and assistance is strongly advised before embarking on supplement use.
Keywords: banned substance, ergogenic aid, performance, sport nutrition
Dietary supplements are used by athletes at all levels of sport,
reflecting the prevalence of their use in the wider society. About
half of the adult US population uses some form of dietary supple-
ments (Bailey et al., 2011) and, though there are regional, cultural,
and economic differences, a similar prevalence is likely in many
other countries. Athletes describe a range of different reasons for
their supplement choices (Fennell, 2004), and products that fit the
description of “supplement” can target various roles within the
athlete’s performance plan. These include the maintenance of good
health by contributing to the required intake of specific nutrients,
the management of micronutrient deficiencies, and the provision of
energy and macronutrient needs that might be difficult to achieve
through food intake alone. Other specific uses of supplements
reported by athletes include direct performance enhancement or the
indirect benefits that arise from the provision of support for hard
training, the manipulation of physique, the alleviation of musculo-
skeletal pain, rapid recovery from injury, and enhancement
of mood.
Some sporting bodies now support the pragmatic use of
supplements that have passed a risk-vs.-benefit analysis of being
effective, safe, and permitted for use, while also being appropriate
to the athlete’s age and maturation in their sport. This review
summarizes the issues faced by high-performance athletes and their
support team (coach, trainer, nutritionist, physician) when consid-
ering the use of supplements, with the goal of providing informa-
tion to assist them to make informed decisions.
What is a Supplement?
There is no single definition, either legal or within nutritional
science, of what constitutes a dietary supplement. The US Con-
gress, for example, in framing the 1994 Dietary Supplements
Health and Education Act (DSHEA), described a dietary supple-
ment as: “. . . a product, other than tobacco, which is used in
conjunction with a healthy diet and contains one or more of the
following dietary ingredients: a vitamin, mineral, herb or other
botanical, an amino acid, a dietary substance for use by man to
supplement the diet by increasing the total daily intake, or a
concentrate, metabolite, constituent, extract, or combinations of
these ingredients” (Office of Dietary Supplements, National
Institutes of Health, 1994).
This definition is unsatisfactory, as it depends on whether or
not a “healthy diet” is consumed. For the purposes of this overview,
we define a dietary supplement as: A food, food component,
nutrient, or nonfood compound that is purposefully ingested in
addition to the habitually-consumed diet with the aim of achieving
a specific health and/or performance benefit.
Furthermore, we recognize that dietary supplements come in
many forms, including:
(a) Functional foods: foods enriched with additional nutrients or
components outside their typical nutrient composition (e.g.,
mineral- and vitamin-fortified, as well as nutrient-enriched
foods)
(b) Formulated foods and sports foods: products providing
energy and nutrients in a more convenient form than normal
foods for general nutrition support (e.g., liquid meal replace-
ments) or for targeted use around exercise (e.g., sports drinks,
gels, bars)
(c) Single nutrients and other components of foods or herbal
products provided in isolated or concentrated forms
(d) Multi-ingredient products containing various combinations
of those products described above that target similar
outcomes
Prevalence of, and Rationale for,
Use by Athletes
With such widespread use of supplements in the general population
and with the specific focus of athletes on achieving peak
performance, it is not surprising that a high prevalence of supple-
ment use is reported in most surveys of athletes (Maughan et al.,
2007). Comparisons between surveys are confounded by numerous
factors. These include differences in the definition of what
constitutes a dietary supplement; ability to capture irregular
use; inappropriate sample selection; and the use of nonvalidated
and nonstandardized survey instruments (Garthe & Maughan,
2018). Nevertheless, surveys generally suggest that supple-
ment use:
(a) Varies across different sports and activities
(b) Increases with level of training/performance
(c) Increases with age
(d) Is higher in men than in women
(e) Is strongly influenced by perceived cultural norms (both
sporting and nonsporting)
Although athletes often consume supplements to take advan-
tage of intended/claimed effects or benefits, a range of motives
underpins supplement use (Garthe & Maughan, 2018). For exam-
ple, athletes use supplements:
(a) To correct or prevent nutrient deficiencies that may impair
health or performance
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
105
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 (b) For convenient provision of energy and nutrients around an
exercise session
(c) To achieve a specific and direct performance benefit in
competition
(d) To gain a performance improvement indirectly accrued from
outcomes such as allowing more effective training (i.e.,
higher intensity, greater volume), better recovery from train-
ing sessions, optimizing mass and body composition, or
reducing risks of injury and illness
(e) For financial gain (sponsorship) or because products are
provided free of charge
(f) As a “just in case” insurance policy
(g) Because they know or believe that other athletes/competitors
are using the supplement(s)
Some supplements may be used for multiple functions. Zinc,
for example, may be taken with the aim of promoting wound
healing and tissue repair (Prasad, 2014) or reducing the severity
and duration of the symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection
(Solomons, 1998). Carbohydrate supplements are used to enhance
performance in many events via the provision of fuel substrate
(Stellingwerff & Cox, 2014), to support the immune system
(Peake et al., 2017), or to improve bioavailability of other supple-
ments (e.g., creatine; Steenge et al., 2000). Similarly, creatine
supplementation may directly enhance performance in strength
and power events, and can assist in training harder, gaining lean
body mass, or maintaining lean mass during periods of immobili-
zation after injury (Branch, 2003; Gualano et al., 2012; Heaton
et al., 2017). Decisions on supplement use therefore need to
consider both the context of use and the specific protocol
employed.
Assessing the Evidence Base
for Supplement Use
Supplements target a range of scenarios of use, so different
approaches are needed to assess their effectiveness. Supplements
aimed at correcting nutrient deficiencies need to be judged on their
ability to prevent or treat suboptimal nutrient status, with the benefit
accruing from the removal of the associated impairment of health,
training capacity, or performance. The effectiveness of sports foods
might be hard to isolate when they are used within the general diet
to meet everyday energy needs and nutrient targets. However,
benefits may be more easily detected when they are specifically
consumed before, during, or after an event or training session to
provide nutrients that are limiting for performance (e.g., to provide
fuel for the muscle or brain) or to defend homeostasis (e.g., by
replacing water and salt losses). Performance-enhancing supple-
ments which are claimed to achieve direct or indirect benefits pose
a greater challenge in terms of a sound evidence base. With only a
few exceptions, there is a scarcity of research, and many of the
available studies are not of sufficient quality to warrant their
application to elite athletes.
Substantiating the claims made about performance supple-
ments and sports foods is difficult (Burke & Peeling, 2018). To
various audiences, “proof” comes in different forms. Figure 1
provides a proposed hierarchical model of the relative strength
of the evidence provided by different information sources. How-
ever, most of the information around supplement efficacy in sport
comes from models with the lowest rigor: anecdotes/observations
from athletes and scientific or mechanistic hypotheses that explain
how a supplement might target a critical/limiting factor in perfor-
mance, but with little to no evidence. Systematic reviews and
Figure 1 — Hierarchy of evidence used to establish good practice. Adapted from Burke and Peeling (2018).
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
106
Maughan et al.
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 meta-analyses, which synthesize the outputs of many studies to
yield a conclusive statement of efficacy in a broad sense, are at the
top of the evidence hierarchy. While these summaries help to
provide information about the general use of performance supple-
ments, scientific trials that are properly controlled and well-
conducted provide the basis for these reviews, as well as an
opportunity to address more specific questions about supplement
applications. Thus, meta-analyses are a reflection only of the
quality and quantity of the studies that are available for review,
and may also be influenced by the inclusion and exclusion criteria
applied to the available data.
The gold standard for investigating the effects of supple-
ments on sports performance is the prospective, randomized,
controlled scientific trial, in which subjects are randomly allo-
cated to receive either an experimental or placebo treatment
(ideally in a double-blind manner) or crossed over to receive
both treatments in counterbalanced order, under standardized
conditions. Practical issues may cause some variations to ideal
design, but sports scientists are encouraged, if they wish their
results to be applicable to athletes in competition, to ensure that
their studies include:
(a) An adequate sample size and appropriate participant char-
acteristics (e.g., event, training status, caliber) to allow the
results to have statistical power and to be applicable to high-
performance athletes
(b) Mimicking, as far as possible, the conditions (e.g., environ-
ment, nutrition preparation, event strategies) that exist in
real-life competition
(c) Standardization, to the extent that is possible, of variables
that might influence the results (e.g., pretrial exercise and
diet, environmental conditions, external encouragement or
distraction). It is recognized that this conflicts to some extent
with (b) above, and will limit the situations in which the
results can be applied.
(d) Use of a protocol of supplement use (e.g., specific product,
dose, and timing of intake) that is likely to optimize any
effects
(e) An independent verification of the contents of the supple-
ment under investigation to ensure that the product is truly
unadulterated, both to ensure the integrity of the study and
to avoid inadvertent doping positives if the subjects are
athletes
(f) Verification that the supplement was taken and induced a
biological response (e.g., via muscle, blood, urine, or saliva
sampling)
(g) A performance protocol that is valid and sufficiently reliable
to detect small but potentially meaningful changes/differ-
ences in performance outcomes.
(h) Interpretation of results in light of the limitations of the study
design and the change that would be meaningful to real-
life sport
Given the specificity of the information that is required by
some athletes and their support staff to assess the effectiveness
of a supplement (e.g., related to a targeted event and its conditions,
the specific individual, the combination with other performance
strategies), it is unreasonable to expect that definitive evidence
will always be available. Issues that are particularly under-
researched and should be considered of high priority include
measurement of performance in the field or under “real-life”
conditions, investigation of the combined use of a number of
supplements, and the repeated use of supplements as might occur
in multi-day competition or when heats and finals occur close
together. Scenarios that fall outside the scope of the available
literature or practical research design may need to be interrogated
by individual or small group case studies. Recommended meth-
odologies for these studies include repeated baseline performances
before the introduction of the supplement, or an alternating series
of presentation and absence of the supplement (Burke &
Peeling, 2018).
For the purposes of this overview, we rely primarily on studies
of healthy adults that are relevant to athletes. We recognize that
data from studies of elite athletes are almost entirely absent. We
also recognize that mechanistic studies on animal and cell culture
models are useful in identifying mechanisms, but a mechanism is
not necessary to demonstrate an effect that may be meaningful to an
athlete. What we think today to be the mechanism by which
enhancement of performance or health occurs might be proved
wrong by later studies. It must also be recognized that an indivi-
dual’s habitual diet can affect gene expression and their microbiota,
and these, in turn, can affect response to supplementation. While
the variation in the genome between individuals is less than 0.01%,
the variation in microbiota is significant (80–90%), and emerging
data suggests that both these factors could affect athletic perfor-
mance (Clark & Mach, 2017; Ribeiro et al., 2013). The following
sections present an overview of the use of supplements to address
different roles in sports nutrition, first by identifying the principles
of use and then by examining some of the specific products that
have a good or emerging evidence base to support this situation-
specific use by athletes.
Supplements Used to Prevent or Treat
Nutrient Deficiencies
Many micronutrients play an important role in the regulation of
processes that underpin sports performance, ranging from energy
production to the manufacture of new cells and proteins. A frank
deficiency of one or more of these nutrients may lead to a
measurable impairment of sports performance, either directly or
by reducing the athlete’s ability to train effectively (e.g., iron
deficiency anemia) or to stay free from illness or injury (e.g.,
impact of vitamin D deficiency on bone health). Athletes are not
immune to the inadequate eating practices or the increased nutri-
ent loss/requirements found in some members of the general
population and may even be at greater risk of deficiencies because
of increased nutrient turnover or increased losses. A further
challenge is the occurrence of subclinical deficiencies that may
be both hard to assess (i.e., they lack a clear metric or universal
threshold of what is “adequate”) as well as subject to debate about
whether there is an “optimal” level for performance that differs
from the usual classification systems of nutrient status (deficiency/
subclinical, deficiency/normal). When suboptimal nutritional
status is diagnosed, the use of a nutrient supplement to reverse
or prevent further deficiencies can contribute to the overall
treatment plan.
Nutritional assessment of an athlete involves systematic pro-
tocols that obtain, verify, and interpret evidence of nutrition-related
problems, as well as their causes and significance. A complete
assessment should ideally include a detailed medical and
nutritional history, diet evaluation, anthropometry and body com-
position analysis, and biochemical testing (Larson-Meyer et al.,
2018). Unlike the ad hoc use of nutrient supplements taken by
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
107
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 athletes as an insurance policy, this nutritional assessment should
ensure that the athlete:
(a) Can address the factors that led to the nutrient deficiency,
including ensuring that the athlete’s nutrition plan is adequate
in energy, macronutrients, and micronutrients
(b) Would benefit from an acute or chronic period of supple-
mentation to correct and/or prevent a nutrient deficiency and
can understand the appropriate supplementation protocol
(c) Is not at risk for health issues associated with supplement use,
including interactions with prescription or over-the-counter
medications
(d) Has a baseline assessment against which future measures to
assess progress can be compared
Nutrients that often need to be supplemented under these
circumstances include iron, calcium, and vitamin D (Table 1). Iodine
(for those living in areas with low levels of iodine in foods or not
using iodized salt), folate (for women who might become pregnant),
and vitamin B12 (for those following a vegan or near-vegan diet)
supplementation may be warranted in these population groups, but
these considerations do not apply specifically to athletes.
Supplements (Sports Foods) Used
to Provide a Practical Form
of Energy and Nutrients
Sports nutrition guidelines provide clear recommendations for
targeted intake of energy and nutrients in a variety of contexts.
In some situations, it is impractical for an athlete to consume
“everyday” or normal foods to meet their nutrition goals due to
issues around preparation or storage, ease of consuming the foods
due to training schedules, gut comfort, or the challenge of meeting
nutrient targets within the available energy budget. In these cases,
sports foods can provide a convenient, albeit usually more expen-
sive, alternative option for meeting these nutrient goals. Table 2
provides an overview of products that fit this description and their
more common evidence-based uses.
Table 1
Examples of Micronutrients Often Requiring Supplementation in Athletes*
Micronutrient
Overview
Diagnosis and Outcomes of
Insufficiency
Protocols and Outcomes of
Supplementation
Vitamin D
Important in regulation of gene tran-
scription in most tissues so insufficiency/
deficiency affects many body systems
(Hossein-nezhad et al., 2013); many
athletes are at risk of insufficiency at
various times throughout the year
(Larson-Meyer & Willis, 2010)
No consensus over the serum
25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration (the
marker of vitamin D status) that defines
deficiency, insufficiency, sufficiency,
and a tolerable UL; the need to
supplement depends on UVB exposure
and skin type
Supplementation of between 800 IU
and 1,000–2,000 IU/day is recom-
mended to maintain status for the gen-
eral population. Supplementation
guidelines are not yet established in
athletes. Short-term, high-dose supple-
mentation, which includes 50,000 IU/
week for 8–16 weeks or 10,000 IU/day
for several weeks, may be appropriate
for restoring status in deficient athletes.
Careful monitoring is necessary to
avoid toxicity (Heaney, 2008).
Iron
Suboptimal iron status may result from
limited iron intake, poor bioavailability
and/or inadequate energy intake, or
excess iron need due to rapid growth,
high-altitude training, menstrual blood
loss, foot-strike hemolysis, or excess
losses in sweat, urine, or feces (Thomas
et al., 2016)
Several measures performed
simultaneously provide the best
assessment and determine the stage of
deficiency; recommended measures:
serum ferritin, transferrin saturation,
serum iron, transferrin receptor, zinc
protoporphyrin, hemoglobin,
hematocrit, mean corpuscular volume
(Gibson, 2005)
Athletes who do not maintain adequate
iron status may need supplemental
iron at doses greater than their RDA
(i.e., >18 mg/day for women and
>8 mg/day for men). Athletes with iron
deficiency require clinical follow-up
which may include supplementation
with larger doses of oral iron supple-
mentation along with improved dietary
iron intake (Thomas et al., 2016).
Numerous oral iron preparations are
available and most are equally effective
as long as they are taken (Schrier &
Auerbach, 2017). High-dose iron
supplements, however, should be not
taken unless iron deficiency is present.
Calcium
Avoidance of dairy products and other
calcium-rich foods, restricted energy
intake, and/or disordered eating in-
creases risk of suboptimal calcium status
(Thomas et al., 2016)
No appropriate indicator of calcium
status; bone mineral density scan may be
indicative of chronic low calcium intake
but other factors including suboptimal
vitamin D status and disordered eating
are also important
Calcium intakes of 1,500 mg/day and
1,500 to 2,000 IU vitamin D are
recommended to optimize bone health
in athletes with low energy availability
or menstrual dysfunction (Thomas
et al., 2016).
Abbreviations: RDA = recommended dietary allowance; UL = upper limit; UVB = ultraviolet B.
* See Larson-Meyer et al. (2018) for additional information.
Note. Indiscriminate supplementation with any of the above nutrients is not recommended. Deficiencies should first be identified through nutritional assessment, which
includes dietary intake and the appropriate blood or urinary marker, if available (Larson-Meyer et al., 2018).
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
108
Maughan et al.
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 Supplements That Directly Improve
Sports Performance
A few performance-enhancing supplements might, at the present
time, be considered to have an adequate level of support to
suggest that marginal performance gains may be possible. These
supplements include: caffeine, creatine (in the form of creatine
monohydrate), nitrate, sodium bicarbonate, and possibly also
β-alanine. The mechanisms of action, typical dose, potential
performance benefits, and known side-effects of each of these
supplements are summarized in Table 3. Performance-enhancing
supplements should be considered only where a strong evidence-
base supports their use as safe, legal, and effective, and, ideally,
after adequacy of sports nutrition dietary practices is ensured.
Whenever possible, supplements should be trialed thoroughly
by the athlete in training that mimics the competition milieu as
closely as possible before committing to use in a competition
setting. Athletes should do a careful risk analysis to see if the
marginal gains would outweigh the risk of inadvertent doping due
to contamination.
Table 2
Summary of Common Sports Foods and Functional Foods Used by Athletes
Sports Food
Form
Typical Composition
Common Sports-Related Use
Sports drink
Powder or ready to drink liquid
5–8% CHO, 10–35 mmol/L sodium,
3–5 mmol/L potassium
Simultaneous delivery of fluid + CHO
during exercise; postexercise
rehydration and refueling
Energy drink
Ready to drink liquid or
concentrated shot
Carbohydrate, especially in typical ready
to drink varieties, caffeine
Note: May contain taurine, B vitamins,
and other ingredients with variable
supporting evidence and some level of
concern
Preexercise caffeine supplement;
carbohydrate and caffeine intake during
exercise
Sports gel or sports
confectionery
Gel: 30–40 g sachets
Confectionery: Jelly–type
confectionary (generally in pouch
of ∼40–50 g)
∼25 g CHO per sachet; ∼5 g CHO per
confectionery piece (some contain
caffeine or electrolytes)
Carbohydrate intake during exercise
Electrolyte replacement
supplements
Powder sachets or tablets
50–60 mmol/L sodium, 10–20 mmol/L
potassium, typically low CHO
(2–4 g/100 mL)
Rapid rehydration following dehydra-
tion undertaken for weight-making;
replacement of large sodium losses
during ultra-endurance activities; rapid
postexercise rehydration following
moderate to large fluid and sodium
deficits
Protein supplement
Powder (mix with water or milk)
or ready-to-drink liquid; protein-
rich bar, usually low in CHO
Provides 20–50 g protein in a single
serve from high-quality types of animal
(whey, casein, milk, egg) or vegetable
(e.g., soy) origin
Note: May contain other ingredients,
some of which are not evidence based
and may increase the risk of
contamination
Postexercise recovery following key
training sessions or events where
adaptation requiring protein synthesis is
desired; achievement of increase in lean
mass during growth or response to
resistance training; portable nutrition
for busy schedule or travel
Liquid meal supplement
Powder (mix with water or milk)
or ready-to-drink liquid
1–1.5 kcal/mL: 15–20% protein and
50–70% CHO; low to moderate fat;
vitamins/minerals: 500–1000 mL
supplies RDI/RDAs
Supplement high-energy diet (espe-
cially during heavy training/competi-
tion or weight gain); low-bulk meal
replacement (especially preevent meal);
postexercise recovery (CHO and
protein); portable nutrition for busy
schedule or travel
Sports bar
Bar
40–50 g CHO, 5–10 g protein; usually
low in fat and fiber; vitamins/minerals:
50–100% of RDA/RDIs
Note: May contain other ingredients,
some of which are not evidence-based
and may increase the risk of
contamination
CHO source during exercise; post-
exercise recovery (provides CHO,
protein, and micronutrients); portable
nutrition for busy schedule or travel
Protein-enhanced food
Milk, yogurt, ice cream, cereal
bars, and other food forms
Increased protein content from normal
food variety achieved by adding protein
sources or filtration of water from
product; typically allows normal portion
to provide ∼20 g protein to meet sports
nutrition target
Value added food able to achieve
protein target for postexercise use or to
improve protein content of other meals
and snacks in athlete’s diet
Abbreviations: CHO = carbohydrate; RDA = recommended dietary allowance; RDI = reference daily intake.
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
109
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 Table 3
Supplements With Good to Strong Evidence of Achieving Benefits to Performance When Used in Specific
Scenarios (see Peeling et al., 2018 for further details)
Caffeine
Overview
Caffeine is a stimulant that possesses well-established benefits for athletic performance across endurance-based situations, and
short-term, supramaximal, and/or repeated sprint tasks.
Mechanism
Adenosine receptor antagonism; increased endorphin release; improved neuromuscular function; improved vigilance and
alertness; reduce perception of exertion during exercise (Burke, 2008; Spriet, 2014)
Protocol of use
3–6 mg/kg of BM, in the form of anhydrous caffeine (i.e., pill or powder form), consumed ∼60 min prior to exercise (Ganio
et al., 2009). Lower caffeine doses (<3 mg/kg BM, ∼200 mg), provided both before and during exercise; consumed with a CHO
source (Spriet, 2014).
Performance impact
Improved endurance capacity such as exercise time to fatigue (French et al., 1991), and endurance-based TT activities of varying
duration (5–150 min), across numerous exercise modalities (i.e., cycling, running, rowing, and others; Ganio et al., 2009). Low-
doses of caffeine (100–300 mg) consumed during endurance exercise (after 15–80 min of activity) may enhance cycling TT
performance by 3–7% (Paton et al., 2015; Talanian & Spriet, 2016). During short-term, supramaximal, and repeated sprint tasks,
3–6 mg/kg BM of caffeine taken 50–60 min before exercise results in performance gains of >3% for task completion time, mean
power output, and peak power output during anaerobic activities of 1–2 min in duration (Wiles et al., 2006), and of 1–8% for total
work output and repeat sprint performances during intermittent team game activity (Schneiker et al., 2006; Wellington et al., 2017).
Further considerations
and potential side effects
Larger caffeine doses (≥9 mg/kg BM) do not appear to increase the performance benefit (Bruce et al., 2000), and are more likely
to increase the risk of negative side effects, including nausea, anxiety, insomnia, and restlessness (Burke, 2008). Lower caffeine
doses, variations in the timing of intake before and/or during exercise, and the need for (or lack thereof) a caffeine withdrawal
period should be trialed in training prior to competition use. Caffeine consumption during activity should be considered
concurrent with CHO intake for improved efficacy (Talanian & Spriet, 2016). Caffeine is a diuretic, promoting increased urine
flow, but this effect is small at the doses that have been shown to enhance performance (Maughan & Griffin, 2003).
Creatine
Overview
Creatine loading can acutely enhance the performance of sports involving repeated high-intensity exercise (e.g., team sports),
as well as the chronic outcomes of training programs based on these characteristics (e.g., resistance or interval training), leading
to greater gains in lean mass and muscular strength and power (Rawson & Persky, 2007; Volek & Rawson, 2004).
Mechanism
Supplementation increases muscle creatine stores, augmenting the rate of PCr resynthesis, thereby enhancing short-term, high-
intensity exercise capacity (Buford et al., 2007) and the ability to perform repeated bouts of high-intensity effort.
Protocol of use
Loading-phase: ∼20 g/day (divided into 4 equal daily doses), for 5–7 days (Lanhers et al., 2017)
Maintenance-phase: 3–5 g/day (single dose) for the duration of the supplementation period (Hultman et al., 1996).
Note: Concurrent consumption with a mixed protein/CHO source (∼50 g of protein and CHO) may enhance muscle creatine
uptake via insulin stimulation (Steenge et al., 2000).
Performance impact
Enhanced maximum isometric strength (Maganaris & Maughan, 1998) and the acute performance of single and repeated bouts
of high-intensity exercise (<150 s duration); most pronounced effects evident during tasks <30 s (Branch, 2003; Lanhers et al.,
2017). Chronic training adaptations include lean mass gains and improvements to muscular strength and power (Rawson &
Persky, 2007; Volek & Rawson, 2004). Less common: Enhanced endurance performance resulting from increased/improved
protein synthesis, glycogen storage, and thermoregulation (Cooper et al., 2012; Kreider et al., 2017). Potential anti-
inflammatory and anti-oxidant effects are noted (Deminice et al., 2013).
Further considerations
and potential side effects
No negative health effects are noted with long-term use (up to 4 years) when appropriate loading protocols are followed
(Schilling et al., 2001). A potential 1–2 kg BM increase after creatine loading (primarily as a result of water retention; Deminice
et al., 2013; Powers et al., 2003), may be detrimental for endurance performance or in events where the BM must be moved
against gravity (e.g., high jump, pole vault) or where athletes must achieve a specific BM target.
Nitrate
Overview
Dietary nitrate (NO3–) is a popular supplement that has been commonly investigated to assess any benefits for prolonged submaximal
exercise (Bailey et al., 2009) and high-intensity, intermittent, short-duration efforts (Thompson et al., 2015; Wylie et al., 2016).
Mechanism
Enhances nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability via the NO3-nitrite-NO pathway, playing an important role in the modulation of
skeletal muscle function (Jones, 2014a). Nitrate augments exercise performance via an enhanced function of type II muscle
fibers (Bailey et al., 2015); a reduced ATP cost of muscle force production; an increased efficiency of mitochondrial respiration;
an increased blood flow to the muscle; a decrease in blood flow to VO2 heterogeneities (Bailey et al., 2010).
Protocol of use
High nitrate containing foods include leafy green and root vegetables, including spinach, rocket salad, celery, and beetroot.
Acute performance benefits are generally seen within 2–3 hr following a NO3– bolus of 5–9 mmol (310–560 mg) (Hoon et al.,
2014). Prolonged periods of NO3– intake (>3 days) also appears beneficial to performance (Thompson et al., 2015, 2016), and
may be a positive strategy for highly-trained athletes, where performance gains from NO3– supplementation appear harder to
obtain (Jones, 2014b).
Performance impact
Supplementation has been associated with improvements of 4–25% in exercise time to exhaustion and of 1–3% in sport-
specific TT performances lasting <40 min in duration (Bailey et al., 2015; McMahon et al., 2016). Supplementation is proposed
to enhance type II muscle fiber function (Bailey et al., 2015), resulting in the improvement (3–5%) of high-intensity,
intermittent, team-sport exercise of 12–40 min in duration (Thompson et al., 2015; Wylie et al., 2016). Evidence is equivocal
for any benefit to exercise tasks lasting <12 min (Reynolds et al., 2016; Thompson et al., 2016).
(continued)
110
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 Supplements That Improve Performance
Indirectly
Many dietary supplements claim to enhance performance indirectly
by supporting the athlete’s health, body composition, and their
ability to train hard, recover quickly, adapt optimally, avoid or
recover from injury, and tolerate pain or soreness. Illness is a major
problem for athletes if it interrupts training or occurs at a critical
time, such as during a selection event or a major competition.
Susceptibility to illness is increased in situations where athletes are
involved in a high volume of training or competition and either
intentionally or unintentionally experience deficits in energy intake
(e.g., weight-loss diets), macronutrient intake (e.g. train-low or
sleep-low-carbohydrate), and micronutrient status (e.g., vitamin D
insufficiency in the winter) (Bermon et al., 2017). Athletes might
benefit from nutritional supplements to support immunity in these
scenarios and at other times when they are either susceptible to
infection (e.g., during the common cold season and after long-haul
travel) or suffering from an infection. Table 4 summarizes evidence
for some of the commonly promoted “immune supportive”
supplements, noting that the most promising candidates to assist
in the prevention or treatment of upper respiratory symptoms are
vitamin D and probiotics. Vitamin C during periods of heavy
exertion and zinc lozenges at the onset of symptoms may be useful,
but high doses of single antioxidants, particularly vitamin C and E,
may blunt exercise-induced training adaptations (Nikolaidis et al.,
2012; Paulsen et al., 2014; Powers et al., 2011). Probiotic supple-
mentation may reduce the incidence of travelers’ diarrhea and
gastrointestinal infection. Cochrane reviews have noted the low
quality of many studies on nutritional supplements that are claimed
to support immunity; specifically, small samples, poor controls,
and unclear procedures for randomization and blinding were
commonplace (Hao et al., 2015; Singh & Das, 2013). Clearly,
there is a pressing need for randomized controlled trials in high-
level athletes with sufficient participant numbers, rigorous controls
and procedures, appropriate supplementation regimens, and clini-
cally meaningful measures of immunity.
Supplements that assist an athlete to train harder, recover more
quickly, and prevent injury or accelerate return to play when injury
does occur can obviously enhance the athlete’s preparation and,
indirectly, their competition outcomes. Many products claim to
Table 3
(continued)
Further considerations
and potential side
effects
The available evidence suggests there appears to be few side effects or limitations to nitrate supplementation. There may exist
the potential for GI upset in susceptible athletes, and should therefore be thoroughly trialed in training. There appears to be an
upper limit to the benefits of consumption (i.e., no greater benefit from 16.8 mmol [1,041 mg] vs. 8.4 mmol [521 mg]; Wylie
et al., 2013). Performance gains appear harder to obtain in highly-trained athletes (Jones, 2014b).
Beta-Alanine
Overview
Beta-alanine augments intracellular buffering capacity, having potential beneficial effects on sustained high-intensity exercise
performance.
Mechanism
A rate-limiting precursor to the endogenous intracellular (muscle) buffer, carnosine; the immediate defense against proton
accumulation in the contracting musculature during exercise (Lancha Junior et al., 2015). Chronic, daily supplementation of
beta-alanine increases skeletal muscle carnosine content (Saunders et al., 2016).
Protocol of use
Daily consumption of ∼65 mg/kg BM, ingested via a split-dose regimen (i.e., 0.8–1.6 g every 3–4 hr) over an extended
supplement time frame of 10–12 weeks (Saunders et al., 2016).
Performance Impact
Small but potentially meaningful performance benefits (∼0.2–3%) during both continuous and intermittent exercise tasks of
30 s to 10 min in duration (Baguet et al., 2010; Chung et al., 2012; Saunders et al., 2016).
Further considerations
and potential side effects
A positive correlation between the magnitude of muscle carnosine change and performance benefit remains to be established
(Saunders et al., 2016). Large interindividual variations in muscle carnosine synthesis have been reported (Nassis et al., 2016).
The supplement effectiveness appears harder to realize in well-trained athletes (Bellinger, 2014). There is a need for further
investigation to establish the practical use in various sport-specific situations (Hobson et al., 2012; Saunders et al., 2016).
Possible negative side effects include skin rashes and/or transient paresthesia.
Sodium Bicarbonate
Overview
Sodium bicarbonate augments extracellular buffering capacity, having potential beneficial effects on sustained high-intensity
exercise performance.
Mechanism
Acts as an extracellular (blood) buffer, aiding intracellular pH regulation by raising the extracellular pH, and HCO3-
concentrations (Katz et al., 1984; Lancha Junior et al., 2015). The resultant pH gradient between the intracellular and
extracellular environments leads to efflux of H+ and La- from the exercising muscle (Katz et al., 1984; Mainwood et al., 1975).
Protocol of use
Single acute NaHCO3 dose of 0.2–0.4 g/kg BM, consumed 60–150 min prior to exercise (Carr et al., 2011b; Siegler et al.,
2012) Alternative strategies include: split doses (i.e., several smaller doses giving the same total intake) taken over a
30–180 min time period (Lambert et al., 1993); serial-loading with 3–4 smaller doses per day for 2–4 consecutive days prior to
an event (Burke, 2013; Douroudos et al., 2006; Mc Naughton & Thompson, 2001).
Performance impact
Enhanced performance (∼2%) of short-term, high-intensity sprints lasting ∼60 s in duration, with a reduced efficacy as the effort
duration exceeds 10 min (Carr et al., 2011b).
Further considerations
and potential side
effects
Well-established GI distress may be associated with this supplement. Strategies to minimize GI upset include: co-ingestion
with a small, carbohydrate-rich meal (∼1.5 g/kg BM carbohydrates) (Carr et al., 2011c); the use of sodium citrate as an
alternative (Requena et al., 2005); split-dose or stacking strategies (Burke, 2013; Douroudos et al., 2006; Mc Naughton &
Thompson, 2001). Given the high potential for GI distress, thorough investigation into the best individualized strategy is
recommended prior to use in a competition setting.
Abbreviations: ATP = adenosine triphosphate; BM = body mass; CHO = carbohydrate; GI = gastrointestinal; TT = time trial.
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
111
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 Table 4
Nutritional Supplements for Immune Health in Athletes: Proposed Mechanism of Action and Evidence
for Efficacy
Supplement
Proposed Mechanism of Action
Evidence for Efficacy
Vitamin D
An essential fat-soluble vitamin known to influence several
aspects of immunity, particularly innate immunity (e.g.,
expression of antimicrobial proteins). Skin exposure to
sunlight accounts for 90% of the source of vitamin D.
Moderate support. Evidence for deficiency in some athletes and
soldiers, particularly in the winter (decreased skin sunlight
exposure). Deficiency has been associated with increased URS.
Recommend 1,000 IU/day D3 autumn–spring to maintain
sufficiency. Further support required (He et al., 2016).
Probiotics
Probiotics are live microorganisms which, when adminis-
tered orally for several weeks, can increase the numbers of
beneficial bacteria in the gut. This has been associated with a
range of potential benefits to gut health, as well as modulation
of immune function.
Moderate support in athletes with daily dose of ∼1010 live bacteria;
Cochrane review of 12 studies (n = 3,720) shows ∼50% decrease in
URS incidence and ∼2 day shortening of URS; minor side effects.
More evidence is required supporting efficacy to reduce gastro-
intestinal distress and infection (e.g., in a traveling athlete; Gleeson
et al., 2011; Hao et al., 2015).
Vitamin C
An essential water-soluble antioxidant vitamin that quenches
ROS and augments immunity. Reduces interleukin-6 and
cortisol responses to exercise in humans.
Moderate support for preventing URS. Cochrane review of 5
studies in heavy exercisers (n = 598) shows ∼50% decrease in URS
taking vitamin C (0.25–1.0 g/day). Further support required.
Unclear if antioxidants blunt adaptation in well-trained. Relatively
small effects on cortisol compared with carbohydrate; immune
measures no different from placebo. No support for treating URS.
Cochrane reviews show no benefit of initiating vitamin C
supplementation (>200 mg/day) after onset of URS (Hemila &
Chalker, 2013; Nieman et al., 2002).
Carbohydrate
(drinks, gels)
Maintains blood glucose during exercise, lowers stress
hormones, and thus counters immune dysfunction.
Low-moderate support. Ingestion of carbohydrate (30–60 g/hr)
attenuates stress hormone and some, but not all, immune pertur-
bations during exercise. Very limited evidence that this modifies
infection risk in athletes (Bermon et al., 2017; Walsh et al., 2011).
Bovine colostrum
First milk of the cow that contains antibodies, growth factors,
and cytokines. Claimed to improve mucosal immunity and
increase resistance to infection.
Low-moderate support that bovine colostrum blunts the decrease in
saliva antimicrobial proteins after heavy exercise. Some evidence
in small numbers of participants that bovine colostrum decreases
URS. Further support required (Brinkworth & Buckley, 2003;
Davison & Diment, 2010).
Polyphenols
(e.g., Quercetin)
Plant flavonoids. In vitro studies show strong anti-
inflammatory, anti-oxidant, and anti-pathogenic effects.
Animal data indicate an increase in mitochondrial biogenesis
and endurance performance.
Low-moderate support. Human studies show some reduction in
URS during short periods of intensified training and mild stimu-
lation of mitochondrial biogenesis and endurance performance,
albeit in small numbers of untrained subjects. Limited influence on
markers of immunity. Putative anti-viral effect for Quercetin.
Further support required (Gleeson, 2016; Nieman et al., 2007).
Zinc
An essential mineral that is claimed to reduce incidence and
duration of colds. Zinc is required for DNA synthesis and as
an enzyme cofactor for immune cells. Zinc deficiency results
in impaired immunity (e.g., lymphoid atrophy), and zinc
deficiency is not uncommon in athletes.
No support for preventing URS. High doses of zinc can decrease
immune function and should be avoided. Moderate support for
treating URS. Cochrane review shows benefit of zinc acetate
lozenges (75 mg) to decrease duration of URS; however, zinc must
be taken <24 hr after onset of URS for duration of cold only. Side
effects include bad taste and nausea (Singh & Das, 2013).
Glutamine
Nonessential amino acid that is an important energy substrate
for immune cells, particularly lymphocytes. Circulating
glutamine is lowered after prolonged exercise and very heavy
training.
Limited support. Supplementation before and after exercise does
not alter immune perturbations. Some evidence of a reduction in
URS after endurance events in competitors receiving glutamine
supplementation (2 × 5 g). Mechanism for therapeutic effect
requires investigation (Castell et al., 1996; Walsh et al., 1998).
Caffeine
Stimulant found in a variety of foods and drinks (e.g., coffee
and sports drinks). Caffeine is an adenosine receptor
antagonist and immune cells express adenosine receptors.
Limited support. Evidence that caffeine supplementation activates
lymphocytes and attenuates the fall in neutrophil function after
exercise. Efficacy for altering URS in athletes remains unknown
(Dulson & Bishop, 2016; Walker et al., 2007).
Echinacea
Herbal extract claimed to enhance immunity via stimulatory
effects on macrophages. There is some in vitro evidence for
this.
Limited support. Early human studies indicated possible beneficial
effects but more recent, larger scale, and better controlled studies
indicate no effect of Echinacea on infection incidence or cold
symptom severity (Karsch-Volk et al., 2015; Linde et al., 2006).
Omega-3 PUFAs
Found in fish oil. May influence immune function by acting
as a fuel, in their role as membrane constituents or by
regulating eicosanoid formation (e.g., prostaglandin).
Prostaglandin is immunosuppressive. Claimed to exert
anti-inflammatory effects postexercise.
Limited support for blunting inflammation and functional changes
after muscle-damaging eccentric exercise in humans and no
evidence of reducing URS in athletes (Jakeman et al., 2017;
Mickleborough, 2013).
(continued)
112
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 provide benefits of this nature. Table 5 summarizes the evidence for
some of the most popular compounds. Finally, the manipulation of
body composition, including gaining lean (muscle) mass and
reducing body fat levels, can contribute to performance in many
events. This explains the large number of “weight gainers” and “fat
burners” in the general and sports supplement market, though many
of these are prohibited in sport. Protein is considered to be the
premier ingredient in weight-gain-promoting supplements and
evidence-based reviews conclude that protein is effective at pro-
moting lean mass gain when combined with resistive exercise
(Hector & Philips, 2018). Evidence of efficacy for “fat burning”
supplements is far from conclusive, however, and there is a
complete absence of evidence for the effectiveness of the vast
majority of supplements marketed in this category. Table 6 sum-
marizes the evidence for some of the most common ingredients or
products of this type (Hector & Philips, 2018).
Adverse Effects
Adverse effects from the use of supplements may arise from a
number of factors, including the safety and composition of the
product per se and inappropriate patterns of use by athletes. Poor
practices by athletes include the indiscriminate mixing and match-
ing of many products without regard to total doses of some
ingredients or problematic interactions between ingredients. Even
commonly-used products may have negative side effects, especially
when used outside the optimal protocol. For example, iron supple-
mentation in those with already adequate iron stores can result in
symptoms that may begin with vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal
pain, and develop to haemochromatosis and liver failure (Mettler &
Zimmermann, 2010). Bicarbonate may cause gastrointestinal dis-
tress when ingested in amounts sufficient to enhance performance;
this can impair rather than improve performance and may counteract
the benefits of other supplements taken at the same time (Carr et al.,
2011a). The “more is better” philosophy, when applied to caffeine,
may result in side effects, including nausea, anxiety, accelerated
heart rate, and insomnia, which outweigh the performance benefits
(Peeling et al., 2018). Unwanted outcomes become more common
with caffeine doses ≥9 mg/kg body mass, but maximal benefits are
usually achieved with intakes of 3–6 mg/kg (Burke, 2008). The
possibility of more serious outcomes is illustrated by adverse, and
potentially fatal, responses in two separate incidents in which very
large doses (up to 30 grams) of caffeine were administered to healthy
volunteers participating in laboratory studies (Bodkin, 2017).
These incidents were due to errors in the dose calculation—if this
can happen in a university research environment with supposed
oversight by experienced staff, the potential clearly exists for similar
errors by athletes and coaches.
Athletes and members of their support team should be aware of
the regulations that govern the manufacture and marketing of
supplements. According to the Dietary Supplements Health and
Education Act 1994 (DSHEA) passed by US Congress, nutritional
supplements sold in the United States that do not claim to diagnose,
prevent, or cure disease are not subject to regulation by the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA). Similar regulations apply in most
other countries, where supplements are regulated in the same way
as food ingredients and are therefore not subject to the stringent
regulations that are applied to the pharmaceutical industry. This
means that there is no requirement to prove claimed benefits, no
requirement to show safety with acute or chronic administration, no
quality assurance of content, and no liberal labeling requirements.
It is well recognized that there are problems with some of the
dietary supplements on sale, but the options open to those respon-
sible for food safety are limited by the legislation that applies. The
FDA regularly uses its powers to recall products in breach of the
regulations, though they fully admit that their resources are insuf-
ficient for comprehensive monitoring, and recalls generally occur
only after many people are harmed (https://www.fda.gov/food/
recallsoutbreaksemergencies/recalls/default.htm). The FDA have
recently recalled supplement products containing excessive doses
of vitamins A, D, B6, and selenium because of potentially toxic
levels of these components. Examples of product complaints have
included the presence of impurities, including lead, broken glass,
and metal fragments, because of the failure of the producers to
observe good manufacturing practice. The risk of gastrointestinal
upset because of poor hygiene during the production and storage of
products is also of concern. Although this may seem a minor
inconvenience, and of similarity to food safety issues, the coinci-
dence of problems around a crucial training period or competitive
event may significantly interfere with an athlete’s performance
goals. It should be noted, though, that all of these problems are also
regularly reported in normal foods.
Some supplements may actually cause harm to health, but
these can be difficult to identify, and products are usually with-
drawn only after a significant number of adverse events have
occurred. For example, a range of products containing hydroxy-
citric acid were withdrawn from sale, but only after they were
linked with the death of one consumer and with a substantial
number
of
other
cases
of
liver
toxicity,
cardiovascular
problems,
and
seizures
(https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/
PublicHealthFocus/ucm155817.htm). The extent of the problem
is illustrated by the fact that, in the United States in 2015,
approximately 23,000 emergency department visits annually are
reported to be associated with dietary supplement use (Geller et al.,
2015). This figure can be viewed as substantial, or it can be seen as
small compared to the total number of adverse responses associated
with the use of medications (Maughan et al., 2018). However,
Table 4
(continued)
Supplement
Proposed Mechanism of Action
Evidence for Efficacy
Vitamin E
An essential fat-soluble antioxidant vitamin that quenches
exercise-induced ROS and augments immunity.
No support. Immune-enhancing effects in the frail elderly but no
benefit in young, healthy humans. One study actually showed that
vitamin E supplementation increased URS in those under heavy
exertion. High doses may be pro-oxidative (Hemila et al., 2003;
Meydani et al., 2004).
β-glucans
Polysaccharides derived from the cell walls of yeast, fungi,
algae, and oats that stimulate innate immunity.
No support in humans. Effective in mice inoculated with influenza
virus; however, human studies with athletes show no benefits
(Nieman et al., 2008; Volman et al., 2008).
Abbreviations: PUFA = polyunsaturated fatty acids; ROS = reactive oxygen species; URS = upper respiratory symptoms.
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
113
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 Table 5
Supplements That May Assist With Training Capacity, Recovery, Muscle Soreness, and Injury Management
(see Rawson et al., 2018 for further details)
Supplement
Proposed Mechanism of Action
Evidence for Efficacy
Creatine monohydrate:
Creatine is a naturally occurring
nutrient, consumed in the diet,
and synthesized in the body.
Recommended supplement dose
is 20 g/day for 5 days, followed
by 3 to 5 g/day to increase and
maintain elevated body creatine
levels (Harris et al., 1992;
Hultman et al., 1996).
Enhanced adaptive response to
exercise via increased growth factor/
gene expression, increased intracel-
lular water; reduced symptoms of or
enhanced recovery from muscle-
damaging exercise (e.g., DOMS);
enhanced recovery from disuse or
immobilization/ extreme inactivity;
improved cognitive processing;
decreased risk/enhanced recovery
from mTBI
Many studies demonstrate improved training adaptations, such as
increased lean mass or strength, indicating an enhanced adaptive response
to exercise (Branch, 2003; Heaton et al., 2017; Rawson & Volek, 2003).
Reduced symptoms of, or enhanced recovery from, muscle-damaging
exercise (e.g., DOMS) have been reported in some, but not all studies
(reviewed in (Rawson et al., 2017). Enhanced recovery from disuse or
immobilization/extreme inactivity has been reported in some, but not all
studies (reviewed in Heaton et al., 2017). Improved cognitive processing
is reported in most studies, especially when volunteers were fatigued by
sleep deprivation or mental/physical tasks (reviewed in Gualano et al.,
2012; 2016; Rae & Broer, 2015; Rawson & Venezia, 2011). The effects in
athletes have not been well characterized, and only one group attempted to
translate these effects into to athletic performance, albeit with a positive
result. (Cook et al., 2011). Decreased damage and enhanced recovery from
mTBI is supported by open label trials in children (Sakellaris et al., 2006,
2008) and using animal models (Sullivan et al., 2000). These data are not
conclusive and more research is warranted. However, athletes at risk for
concussion, who already ingest creatine supplements for performance or
muscular benefits, may receive important brain benefits as well. A small
increase in body mass is common with supplementation. This may be
relevant for sports with weight classes/restrictions or where increased
body mass may decrease performance.
Beta-hydroxy beta-
methylbutyrate (HMB): HMB
is a metabolite of the amino acid
leucine. Manufacturer recom-
mended dosage is 3 g/day.
Enhanced adaptive response to
exercise via decreased protein
breakdown increased protein
synthesis; increased cholesterol
synthesis, increased growth hormone
and IGF I mRNA, increased
proliferation and differentiation of
satellite cells, and inhibited apoptosis
(reviewed in (Szczesniak et al.,
2015).
Beneficial effects of HMB on strength and fat free mass are small, while
the effects on muscle damage are unclear (Rowlands & Thomson, 2009).
Recent reports of “steroid-like” gains in strength, power, and fat free mass,
and reductions in muscle damage from HMB-free acid (HMB-FA)
supplementation (Lowery et al., 2016; Wilson et al., 2013, 2014) have not
been reproduced and seem unlikely (Phillips et al., 2017). Potential use for
HMB during extreme inactivity/disuse or recovery from injury, but these
effects have only been described in older adults following 10 days of bed
rest (Deutz et al., 2013). Benefits of HMB supplementation could most
likely be obtained from normal dietary protein or whole protein sup-
plements (Wilkinson et al., 2013), so HMB supplements may not be more
effective than adhering to the current protein intake recommendations
Omega 3-fatty acids
(about 2 g/day)
Improved cognitive processing;
decreased risk/enhanced recovery
from mTBI; increased muscle protein
synthesis; reduced symptoms of or
enhanced recovery from muscle-
damaging exercise (e.g., DOMS).
Improved cognitive processing following omega 3-fatty acid supple-
mentation shown in healthy older adults those with mild or severe
cognitive impairment (reviewed in Barrett et al., 2014). It is not known if
these benefits would occur in young, healthy athletes, or how this would
translate to athletic performance. Animal data show that the structural
damage and cognitive decline associated with mTBI are reduced/atten-
uated with omega-3 fatty acid supplementation when ingested either
before or after the injury (reviewed in Barrett et al., 2014; Erdman et al.,
2011; Tipton, 2015). Two case studies support these findings (Lewis et al.,
2013; Roberts et al., 2008) and large, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trials are currently under way (clinicaltrials.gov NCT101903525,
NCT01814527). In muscle, omega-3 fatty acid supplementation can
increase muscle protein synthesis (Smith et al., 2011a, 2011b), but this
may not occur when protein is ingested after exercise in recommended
amounts (Smith et al., 2011a, 2011b). Anti-inflammatory effects of
omega-3 fatty acid intake may reduce muscle damage or enhance recovery
from intense, eccentric exercise (e.g., decrease DOMS), but this is not a
consistent finding (Gray et al., 2014; Jouris et al., 2011). No indication that
decreased omega 3-fatty acids in the body impair performance, and high-
dose supplements can cause some adverse effects (reviewed in (Erdman
et al., 2011; Mickleborough, 2013), so the best recommendation may be to
include rich sources of omega-3 fatty acids, such as fatty fish, in the diet
instead of supplements. Low risk but unclear if supplementation should be
pursued by athletes, in lieu of including fatty fish in the diet as a source of
omega-3 fatty acids. Fish oil or omega-3 fatty acid supplement con-
sumption could include heavy metal contaminants, or cause bleeding,
digestive problems, and/ or increased LDL.
(continued)
114
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 minor problems that do not require acute medical aid may still be
sufficient to interrupt training or prevent participation, so this
statistic probably underestimates the risk for athletes.
The biggest concern for athletes who compete under an anti-
doping code (usually the World Anti-Doping Code, as published
by the World Anti-Doping Agency [WADA]) is that supplements
can contain prohibited substances that result in an anti-doping rule
violation (ADRV). Athletes—and their support teams—may be at
risk for an ADRV if there is evidence that they have used or
attempted to use products containing ingredients on the Prohibited
List (www.wada.ama.org). A common problem is the recording of
an adverse analytical finding (AAF) of a prohibited substance in a
urine sample (“positive drug test”) as a result of supplement use
(Maughan, 2005). Millions of athletes may be subject to anti-
doping testing, although these are mostly professional-, national-,
or international-level athletes. For these athletes in particular, even
if the ingestion of the prohibited substance was unintentional, the
rules of strict liability within the World Anti-Doping Code mean
that an AAF will be recorded, and may mean the loss of medals
won or records set, as well as financial sanctions and/or temporary
or permanent suspension from competition. It also damages the
athlete’s reputation and may lead to loss of employment and
income through failed sponsorship opportunities. Where there
has been deliberate cheating or benefit accrued from the use of
a prohibited substance, these penalties seem entirely appropriate,
but it is undoubtedly true that some ADRVs can be attributed to the
innocent ingestion of prohibited substances in dietary supplements,
with catastrophic results for the athlete.
One cause of an AAF arising from supplement use relates to an
athlete’s failure to read product labels to recognize the presence of
prohibited substances. Many athletes consider supplements to be
“natural” or “regulated” and therefore safe. Other athletes are
confused by the number of chemical names for some prohibited
substances and thus fail to recognize them on the product label.
However, the most worrying cause of an inadvertent AAF is the use
of supplements that contain prohibited substances as an undeclared
ingredient or contaminant. Since the publication of the seminal
study on the presence of undeclared prohibited substances in
supplements (Geyer et al., 2004), there have been numerous reports
of supplement contamination (Maughan, 2005). Recent reviews
suggest that this problem remains (LGC, 2017; Martinez-Sanz
et al., 2017). It is difficult to gain a perspective of the true
prevalence of supplement contamination. Although the original
study reported that ∼15% of more than 600 products acquired from
around the world contained undeclared prohormones (Geyer et al.,
2004), this and other investigations rarely include a truly random
sample of the supplements and sports foods used by athletes.
Some individual products or categories of products can be
considered inherently more at risk of contamination due to the
country of origin, the manufacturer, the type of product, and the
range of declared ingredients (https://www.usada.org/substances/
supplement-411/). Nevertheless, it should also be recognized that
common supplements, including vitamin C, multivitamins, and
minerals, have also been found, albeit rarely, to contain prohibited
substances (Geyer et al., 2008). The range of prohibited substances
found as undeclared ingredients in supplements now includes
products from many sections of the WADA’s List of Prohibited
Substances and Methods, including stimulants, anabolic agents,
selective androgen receptor modulators, diuretics, anorectics, and
β2 agonists (Martinez-Sanz et al., 2017).
Table 5
(continued)
Supplement
Proposed Mechanism of Action
Evidence for Efficacy
Vitamin D: An essential fat-
soluble vitamin. Skin exposure
to sunlight normally accounts for
90% of the source of vitamin D.
Enhanced adaptive response to
exercise; decreased stress fractures
Data on the effects of vitamin D supplementation on muscle function and
recovery are equivocal, with discrepancies likely explained by differences
in baseline vitamin D concentrations prior to supplementation (Close
et al., 2013, 2016; Owens et al., 2014, 2015). Collectively, these data
strongly suggest a role for adequate vitamin D in the adaptive process to
stressful exercise. Low vitamin D status is associated with a 3.6×higher
stress fracture risk in Finnish military recruits (Ruohola et al., 2006). US
Naval recruits supplemented with 800 IU/day of vitamin D3 and 2,000 mg
calcium reduced stress fracture incidence by 20% (Lappe et al., 2008).
More data are needed, but it appears that vitamin D status, relates to stress
fracture risk, and supplementation, when warranted, may reduce this risk.
Gelatin and vitamin C/
collagen: Recommended dose is
5 to 15 g gelatin with 50 mg
vitamin C (Shaw et al., 2017).
Collagen hydrolysate dose is
about 10 g/day (Clark et al.,
2008; McAlindon et al., 2011)
Increased collagen production;
thickened cartilage; decreased joint
pain
Gelatin and collagen supplements appear to be low risk. Few data
available (Clark et al., 2008; McAlindon et al., 2011; Shaw et al., 2017)
but increased collagen production and decreased pain seem possible.
Functional benefits, recovery from injury, and effects in elite athletes are
not known.
Anti-inflammatory supple-
ments: Curcumin (a constituent
of the spice turmeric) is often
ingested for anti-inflammatory
effects at a dose of about 5 g/day.
Tart cherry juice at a dose of
about 250–350 mL (30 mL if
concentrate) twice daily for 4 to
5 day before an athletic event or
for 2 to 3 days afterwards to
promote recovery.
Anti-inflammatory effects; reduced
symptoms of or enhanced recovery
from muscle-damaging exercise
(e.g., DOMS)
Decreases in inflammatory cytokines and/or indirect markers of muscle
damage with anti-inflammatory supplements such as curcumin (McFarlin
et al., 2016; Nicol et al., 2015; Sciberras et al., 2015) and tart cherry juice
(reviewed in Bell et al., 2014; Coelho Rabello Lima et al., 2015) have been
reported. Anti-inflammatory effects may be beneficial, although benefits
may be sport/training specific. More research is needed before these
compounds can be recommended to athletes.
Abbreviations: DOMS = delayed onset muscle soreness; mTBI = mild traumatic brain injury (concussion).
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
115
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 In some cases, the amount of the prohibited substance in a
supplement may be high, even higher than the normal therapeutic
dose. For example, Geyer et al. (2002) reported the analysis of
metandienone (commonly known as methandrostenolone or Dia-
nabol) in high amounts in a “body building” supplement from
England. The recommended amount of the supplement would have
supplied a dose of 10–43 mg; in comparison, the typical therapeutic
dose of this drug was 2.5–5 mg/day (Goodman & Gilman, 1975),
though its medical use has been discontinued in most countries for
many years. This amount would certainly have a potent anabolic
effect, but would likely produce serious side effects, including
psychiatric and behavioral effects and significant damage to a range
of body systems including the liver (Solimini et al., 2017). Unlike
many of the earlier cases involving steroids related to nandrolone
and testosterone, this is not a trivial level of contamination and
raises the possibility of deliberate adulteration of the product with
the intention of producing a measurable effect on muscle strength
and muscle mass. Most reports of adverse health outcomes result-
ing from supplement use have focused on liver problems of varying
degrees of severity, but other organs are also affected. One
epidemiological case-control study (Li et al., 2015) examined
the association between use of muscle-building supplements and
testicular germ cell cancer (TGCC) risk, with 356 TGCC cases and
513 controls from the Eastern United States. The odds ratio (OR)
for the use of muscle-building supplements in relation to risk of
TGCC was elevated (OR = 1.65, 95% confidence interval [CI]:
1.11–2.46), with significantly stronger associations for early users
and longer periods of use.
Ironically, supplements that are contaminated with extremely
small amounts of prohibited substances (too low to have any
physiological effect) may still cause a positive doping outcome.
For instance, ingestion of 19-norandrostenedione, a precursor of
nandrolone, will result in the appearance in the urine of
19-norandrosterone, the diagnostic metabolite for nandrolone. If
the urinary concentration of 19-norandrosterone exceeds 2 ng/mL,
an AAF is recorded (Baume et al., 2004). The addition of as little as
2.5 μg of 19-norandrostenedione to a supplement can result in a
urinary concentration of 19-norandrosterone that exceeds this
Table 6
Supplements Promoted to Assist With Physique Changes: Gain in Lean Mass and Loss of Body Fat Mass
(see Hector & Phillips, 2018 for further details)
Supplement
Proposed Mechanism of Action
Evidence for Efficacy
Gaining lean body mass*
Protein
Usually comprised of isolated proteins from
various sources (whey and soy most common)
Recommended daily dose: 1.6 g protein/kg/day
optimal (up to 2.2 g/kg/day with no adverse
effects)
Recommended per-meal doses: 0.3–0.5 g
protein/kg (3–4 times per day and in close
temporal proximity to exercise, with postex-
ercise being consistently shown to be
effective)
Enhances lean mass gains when ingested
during programs of resistance training
due to increased provision of building
blocks (amino acids) and leucine as a
trigger for a rise in muscle protein syn-
thesis and suppression of muscle protein
breakdown
Meta-analyses focusing on younger and older
participants have shown positive effects
enhancing gains in muscle mass (Cermak
et al., 2012; Morton et al., 2017), but effects
are not large
Leucine
Stimulates muscle protein synthesis and
suppresses protein breakdown (possibly
through insulin)
Short-term mechanistic data available
(Wilkinson et al., 2013), but no long-term trials
showing efficacy (Aguiar et al., 2017)
Losing fat mass**
Protein
From increased dietary sources or supple-
mental isolated proteins
Enhance fat mass loss and promotes
retention of lean mass
Meta-analyses confirm small but significant
effects of greater dietary protein in weight loss
to enhance fat mass loss and promote lean
mass retention (Krieger et al., 2006;
Wycherley et al., 2012)
Pyruvate
No data
Small-to-trivial effect (Onakpoya et al., 2014a)
Chromium
Potentiates biological actions of insulin
No effect (Tian et al., 2013)
Green tea (polyphenol catechins and caffeine)
Thermogenic agent and/or lipolytic-
enhancing agent
Small-to-trivial effect (Jurgens et al., 2012)
α-Lipoic acid
No clear role, but possible antioxidant
Small-to-trivial effect (Kucukgoncu et al.,
2017)
Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA)
Changes membrane fluidity favoring
enhanced fat oxidation
Small-to-trivial effect (Onakpoya et al., 2012)
Konjac fiber (glucomannan)
Water-soluble polysaccharide—dietary
fiber
Small-to-trivial effect (Onakpoya et al., 2014b)
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
No clear role, but possible appetite
suppression, improved blood flow, and/
or modulator of gene expression
Small-to-trivial effect (Zhang et al., 2017)
Chitosan
Lipid-binding agent to reduce lipid
absorption
Small-to-trivial effect (Jull et al., 2008)
*In combination with progressive resistance exercise programs. **In combination with an exercise- and/or diet-induced energy deficit.
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
116
Maughan et al.
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 threshold (Watson et al., 2009). These amounts are close to the limits
of detection of the analytical methods currently applied to the analysis
of dietary supplements, and are far below the levels of contamination
deemed acceptable from a health and safety perspective.
Various efforts are being made to address the problems,
including the use of third-party auditing activities to identify
products that athletes may consider to be at “low risk” of containing
prohibited substances. There can be no absolute guarantee that any
Figure 2 — Flow chart to guide informed decision making and reducing risk of ADRV during nutritional supplement use.
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
117
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 product is entirely safe, but these schemes do help the athlete
to manage the risk. Athletes contemplating the use of dietary
supplements should consider very carefully whether the possible
benefits outweigh the risks of a doping offense that might end their
career.
Practical Implications and Decision Tree
Dietary supplements are an established part of the landscape of
modern sport and are likely to remain so. Athletes who take
Figure 3 — Flow chart to guide informed decision making and reducing risk of ADRV during ergogenic supplement use.
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
118
Maughan et al.
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 supplements often have no clear understanding of the potential
effects of supplements they are using, but supplements should be
used only after a careful cost-benefit analysis has been conducted.
On one side of the decision tree are the rewards, the most obvious
of which are correction of nutrient deficiencies, achievement of
nutritional goals, or enhancement of one or another physiological/
biochemical function to directly or indirectly improve perfor-
mance. On the other side lie the costs—the possibility of using
an ineffective supplement, the possible risks to health, and the
potential for an ADRV. A flow of questions that could be posed in
reaching an informed decision is shown in Figures 2 and 3.
In deciding whether to use a supplement, athletes should
consider all aspects of their maturation in, and preparation for,
their event to ensure that the supplement under consideration
provides an advantage that no other strategy can address. Whether
the supplement is practical to use should also be assessed: Is the
product available, affordable, tolerated, and compatible with the
athlete’s other goals? The input of the athlete’s coaching team and
medical/science support network is important. Athletes who do not
have regular access to such a network should consider decisions
around supplement use as an important reason to consult an
independent sports nutrition expert as well as a physician. Analysis
of the evidence around the effectiveness of supplements and their
safety is often difficult. A complete nutritional assessment may
provide an appropriate justification for the specific use of nutri-
tional supplements and sports foods. For a small number of sports
supplements, there is good evidence of a performance effect or
indirect benefit for some athletes in some specific situations with
little or no risk of adverse outcomes (Peeling et al., 2018; Rawson
et al., 2018). Professional advice is often important in ensuring that
the athlete is sufficiently knowledgeable about the appropriate
protocol for use of these supplements, but individual athletes
may respond very differently to a given supplement, with some
exhibiting a markedly beneficial effect while others experience no
benefit or even a negative effect on performance. Furthermore, the
situation in which the athlete wishes to use the supplement may
differ in important ways from its substantiated use. Repeated trials
may be necessary to establish whether a true effect, rather than just
random variation, is seen in response to use of any novel interven-
tion. Some trial and error may also be involved in fine tuning the
supplement protocol to suit the needs of the specific situation of use
or the individual athlete.
Evidence to support the effectiveness and safety of many of the
supplements targeted at athletes, however, is largely absent. There
seems to be little incentive for those selling supplements to invest
the substantial sums needed to undertake detailed scientific evalu-
ation of their products. Even where some evidence does exist, it
may not be relevant to the high-performance athletes because of
limitations in the study design (such as the specificity of the
exercise tests), the study population, or the context of use. Failure
to verify the composition of the supplements used may also give
misleading results. It seems sensible to exercise caution when using
supplements, as any compound that has the potential to enhance
health or exercise performance by altering physiological function
must also have the potential for adverse effects in some individuals.
Athletes should see good evidence of a performance or other
benefit, and should be confident that it will not be harmful to
health, before accepting the financial cost and the health or
performance risks associated with any supplement. Finally, the
athlete should be sure, if supplements or sports foods are to be used,
that they have undertaken due diligence to source products that are
at low risk of containing prohibited substances.
Conclusion
Dietary supplements can play a small role in an athlete’s sports
nutrition plan, with products that include essential micronutrients,
sports foods, performance supplements, and health supplements all
potentially providing benefits. Some supplements, when used
appropriately, may help athletes to meet sports nutrition goals,
train hard, and stay healthy and injury free. A few supplements can
directly enhance competition performance. However, it takes
considerable effort and expert knowledge to identify which pro-
ducts are appropriate, how to integrate them into the athlete’s sports
nutrition plan, and how to ensure that any benefits outweigh the
possible negative side effects, including the potential for an ADRV.
A strict risk-benefit analysis involving a decision tree approach to
the effectiveness, safety, and risks should identify the small number
of products that may benefit the athlete. Such an analysis requires
the input of a well-informed sports nutrition professional.
References
Aguiar, A.F., Grala, A.P., da Silva, R.A., Soares-Caldeira, L.F., Pacagnelli,
F.L., Ribeiro, A.S., . . . Balvedi, M.C.W. (2017). Free leucine supple-
mentation during an 8-week resistance training program does not increase
muscle mass and strength in untrained young adult subjects. Amino
Acids, 49(7), 1255–1262. PubMed doi:10.1007/s00726-017-2427-0
Baguet, A., Bourgois, J., Vanhee, L., Achten, E., & Derave, W. (2010).
Important role of muscle carnosine in rowing performance. Journal of
Applied
Physiology
(1985),
109(4),
1096–1101.
doi:10.1152/
japplphysiol.00141.2010
Bailey, R.L., Gahche, J.J., Lentino, C.V., Dwyer, J.T., Engel, J.S.,
Thomas, P.R., . . . Picciano, M.F. (2011). Dietary supplement use
in the United States, 2003–2006. The Journal of Nutrition, 141(2),
261–266. doi:10.3945/jn.110.133025
Bailey, S.J., Fulford, J., Vanhatalo, A., Winyard, P.G., Blackwell, J.R.,
DiMenna, F.J., . . . Jones, A.M. (2010). Dietary nitrate supplementa-
tion enhances muscle contractile efficiency during knee-extensor
exercise in humans. Journal of Applied Physiology (1985), 109(1),
135–148. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00046.2010
Bailey, S.J., Varnham, R.L., DiMenna, F.J., Breese, B.C., Wylie, L.J., &
Jones, A.M. (2015). Inorganic nitrate supplementation improves
muscle oxygenation, O(2) uptake kinetics, and exercise tolerance
at high but not low pedal rates. Journal of Applied Physiology (1985),
118(11), 1396–1405. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01141.2014
Bailey, S.J., Winyard, P., Vanhatalo, A., Blackwell, J.R., Dimenna, F.J.,
Wilkerson, D.P., . . . Jones, A.M. (2009). Dietary nitrate supplemen-
tation reduces the O2 cost of low-intensity exercise and enhances
tolerance to high-intensity exercise in humans. Journal of Applied
Physiology (1985), 107(4), 1144–1155. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.
00722.2009
Barrett, E.C., McBurney, M.I., & Ciappio, E.D. (2014). Omega-3 fatty
acid supplementation as a potential therapeutic aid for the recovery
from mild traumatic brain injury/concussion. Advances in Nutrition,
5(3), 268–277. doi:10.3945/an.113.005280
Baume, N., Avois, L., Schweizer, C., Cardis, C., Dvorak, J., Cauderay,
M., . . . Saugy, M. (2004). [13C]Nandrolone excretion in trained
athletes: Interindividual variability in metabolism. Clinical Chemis-
try, 50(2), 355–364. doi:10.1373/clinchem.2003.022848
Bell, P.G., McHugh, M.P., Stevenson, E., & Howatson, G. (2014). The role
of cherries in exercise and health. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine &
Sciences in Sports, 24(3), 477–490. doi:10.1111/sms.12085
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
119
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 Bellinger, P.M. (2014). beta-Alanine supplementation for athletic perfor-
mance: An update. Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research,
28(6), 1751–1770. doi:10.1519/JSC.0000000000000327
Bermon, S., Castell, L.M., Calder, P.C., Bishop, N.C., Blomstrand, E.,
Mooren, F.C., . . . Nagatomi, R. (2017). Consensus statement
immunonutrition and exercise. Exercise Immunology Review, 23,
8–50. PubMed
Bodkin, H. (2017). Students left fighting for lives after taking enough
caffeine for 300 cups of coffee in botched university experiment. The
Telegraph. Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/01/
25/university-fined-400k-students-taking-part-caffeine-experiment/
Branch, J.D. (2003). Effect of creatine supplementation on body compo-
sition and performance: A meta-analysis. International Journal of
Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism, 13(2), 198–226.
Brinkworth, G.D., & Buckley, J.D. (2003). Concentrated bovine colostrum
protein supplementation reduces the incidence of self-reported symp-
toms of upper respiratory tract infection in adult males. European
Journal of Nutrition, 42(4), 228–232. doi:10.1007/s00394-003-0410-x
Bruce, C.R., Anderson, M.E., Fraser, S.F., Stepto, N.K., Klein, R.,
Hopkins, W.G., & Hawley, J.A. (2000). Enhancement of 2000-m
rowing performance after caffeine ingestion. Medicine & Science in
Sports & Exercise, 32(11), 1958–1963.
Buford, T.W., Kreider, R.B., Stout, J.R., Greenwood, M., Campbell, B.,
Spano, M., . . . Antonio, J. (2007). International Society of Sports
Nutrition position stand: Creatine supplementation and exercise.
Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition, 4, 6.
PubMed doi:10.1186/1550-2783-4-6
Burke, L.M. (2008). Caffeine and sports performance. Applied Physiology,
Nutrition, and Metabolism, 33(6), 1319–1334. doi:10.1139/H08-130
Burke, L.M. (2013). Practical considerations for bicarbonate loading and
sports performance. Nestle Nutrition Institute Workshop Series, 75,
15–26. doi:10.1159/000345814
Burke, L.M., & Peeling, P. (2018). Methodologies for investigating
performance changes with supplement use. International Journal
of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism, 28(2). doi:10.1123/
ijsnem.2017-0325
Carr, A.J., Gore, C.J., & Dawson, B. (2011a). Induced alkalosis and
caffeine supplementation: Effects on 2,000-m rowing performance.
International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism,
21(5), 357–364.
Carr, A.J., Hopkins, W.G., & Gore, C.J. (2011b). Effects of acute alkalosis
and acidosis on performance: A meta-analysis. Sports Medicine, 41.
doi:10.2165/11591440-000000000-00000
Carr, A.J., Slater, G.J., Gore, C.J., Dawson, B., & Burke, L.M. (2011c).
Effect of sodium bicarbonate on [HCO3−], pH, and gastrointestinal
symptoms. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise
Metabolism, 21(3), 189–194.
Castell, L.M., Poortmans, J.R., & Newsholme, E.A. (1996). Does gluta-
mine have a role in reducing infections in athletes? European Journal
of Applied Physiology, 73(5), 488–490.
Cermak, N.M., Res, P.T., de Groot, L.C., Saris, W.H., & van Loon, L.J.
(2012). Protein supplementation augments the adaptive response of
skeletal muscle to resistance-type exercise training: A meta-analysis.
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 96(6), 1454–1464.
PubMed
Chung, W., Shaw, G., Anderson, M.E., Pyne, D.B., Saunders, P.U., Bishop,
D.J., & Burke, L.M. (2012). Effect of 10 week beta-alanine supple-
mentation on competition and training performance in elite swimmers.
Nutrients, 4(10), 1441–1453. PubMed doi:10.3390/nu4101441
Clark, A., & Mach, N. (2017). The crosstalk between the gut microbiota
and mitochondria during exercise. Frontiers in Physiology, 8, 319.
doi:10.3389/fphys.2017.00319
Clark, K.L., Sebastianelli, W., Flechsenhar, K.R., Aukermann, D.F., Meza,
F., Millard, R.L., . . . Albert, A. (2008). 24-Week study on the use of
collagen hydrolysate as a dietary supplement in athletes with activity-
related joint pain. Current Medical Research and Opinion, 24(5),
1485–1496. PubMed doi:10.1185/030079908X291967
Close, G.L., Hamilton, D.L., Philp, A., Burke, L.M., & Morton, J.P.
(2016). New strategies in sport nutrition to increase exercise perfor-
mance. Free Radical Biology & Medicine, 98, 144–158. doi:10.1016/
j.freeradbiomed.2016.01.016
Close, G.L., Russell, J., Cobley, J.N., Owens, D.J., Wilson, G., Gregson,
W., . . . Morton, J.P. (2013). Assessment of vitamin D concentration
in non-supplemented professional athletes and healthy adults during
the winter months in the UK: Implications for skeletal muscle
function. Journal of Sports Sciences, 31(4), 344–353. doi:10.1080/
02640414.2012.733822
Coelho Rabello Lima, L., Oliveira Assumpcao, C., Prestes, J., & Sergio
Denadai, B. (2015). Consumption of cherries as a strategy to attenuate
exercise-induced muscle damage and inflammation in humans. Nu-
tricion Hospitalaria, 32(5), 1885–1893. PubMed doi:10.3305/nh.
2015.32.5.9709
Cook, C.J., Crewther, B.T., Kilduff, L.P., Drawer, S., & Gaviglio, C.M.
(2011). Skill execution and sleep deprivation: Effects of acute
caffeine or creatine supplementation - a randomized placebo-
controlled trial. Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutri-
tion, 8, 2. PubMed doi:10.1186/1550-2783-8-2
Cooper, R., Naclerio, F., Allgrove, J., & Jimenez, A. (2012). Creatine
supplementation with specific view to exercise/sports performance:
An update. Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition,
9(1), 33. PubMed doi:10.1186/1550-2783-9-33
Davison, G., & Diment, B.C. (2010). Bovine colostrum supplementation
attenuates the decrease of salivary lysozyme and enhances the
recovery of neutrophil function after prolonged exercise. British
Journal of Nutrition, 103(10), 1425–1432. PubMed doi:10.1017/
S0007114509993503
Deminice, R., Rosa, F.T., Franco, G.S., Jordao, A.A., & de Freitas, E.C.
(2013). Effects of creatine supplementation on oxidative stress and
inflammatory markers after repeated-sprint exercise in humans.
Nutrition, 29(9), 1127–1132. PubMed doi:10.1016/j.nut.2013.03.003
Deutz, N.E., Pereira, S.L., Hays, N.P., Oliver, J.S., Edens, N.K., Evans,
C.M.,
&
Wolfe,
R.R.
(2013).
Effect
of
beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate (HMB) on lean body mass during 10 days of bed
rest in older adults. Clinical Nutrition, 32(5), 704–712. doi:10.1016/
j.clnu.2013.02.011
Douroudos, I.I., Fatouros, I.G., Gourgoulis, V., Jamurtas, A.Z., Tsitsios,
T., & Hatzinikolaou, A. (2006). Dose-related effects of prolonged
NaHCO3 ingestion during high-intensity exercise. Medicine & Sci-
ence in Sports & Exercise, 38(10), 1746–1753. doi:10.1249/01.mss.
0000230210.60957.67
Dulson, D.K., & Bishop, N.C. (2016). Effect of a high and low dose of
caffeine on human lymphocyte activation in response to antigen
stimulation. Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism, 41(2),
224–227. doi:10.1139/apnm-2015-0456
Erdman, J., Oria, M., & Pillsbury, L. (2011). Nutrition and traumatic brain
injury: Improving acute and subacute health coutcomes in military
personnel. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Fennell, D. (2004). Determinants of supplement usage. Preventive
Medicine, 39(5), 932–939. PubMed doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2004.03.
031
French, C., McNaughton, L., Davies, P., & Tristram, S. (1991). Caffeine
ingestion during exercise to exhaustion in elite distance runners.
Revision. The Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness,
31(3), 425–432.
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
120
Maughan et al.
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 Ganio, M.S., Klau, J.F., Casa, D.J., Armstrong, L.E., & Maresh, C.M.
(2009). Effect of caffeine on sport-specific endurance performance: A
systematic review. The Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research,
23(1), 315–324. PubMed doi:10.1519/JSC.0b013e31818b979a
Garthe, I., & Maughan, R.J. (2018). Athletes and supplements: Prevalance
and perspectives. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exer-
cise Metabolism, 28(2). doi:10.1123/ijsnem.2017-0429
Geller, A.I., Shehab, N., Weidle, N.J., Lovegrove, M.C., Wolpert, B.J.,
Timbo, B.B., . . . Budnitz, D.S. (2015). Emergency department visits
for adverse events related to dietary supplements. The New England
Journal of Medicine, 373(16), 1531–1540. PubMed doi:10.1056/
NEJMsa1504267
Geyer, H., Bredehoft, M., Marek, U., Parr, M.K., & Schanzer, W. (2002).
Hohe Dosen des Anabolikums Metandienon in Nahrungserganzungs-
mitteln. Deutsche Apotheke Zeitung, 142, 29.
Geyer, H., Parr, M.K., Koehler, K., Mareck, U., Schanzer, W., & Thevis,
M. (2008). Nutritional supplements cross-contaminated and faked
with doping substances. Journal of Mass Spectrometry, 43(7), 892–
902. PubMed doi:10.1002/jms.1452
Geyer, H., Parr, M.K., Mareck, U., Reinhart, U., Schrader, Y., & Schanzer,
W. (2004). Analysis of non-hormonal nutritional supplements for
anabolic-androgenic steroids - results of an international study.
International
Journal
of
Sports
Medicine,
25(2),
124–129.
PubMed doi:10.1055/s-2004-819955
Gibson, R.S. (2005). Principles of nutritional assessment (2nd ed.). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Gleeson, M. (2016). Immunological aspects of sport nutrition. Immunol-
ogy and Cell Biology, 94, 117–123. PubMed doi:10.1038/icb.2015.
109
Gleeson, M., Bishop, N.C., Oliveira, M., & Tauler, P. (2011). Daily
probiotic’s (Lactobacillus casei Shirota) reduction of infection inci-
dence in athletes. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and
Exercise Metabolism, 21(1), 55–64.
Goodman, L.S., & Gilman, A. (1975). Pharmacological basis of thera-
peutics (5th ed., p. 1462). London/Toronto: Macmillan Publishing
Co.
Gray, P., Chappell, A., Jenkinson, A.M., Thies, F., & Gray, S.R. (2014).
Fish oil supplementation reduces markers of oxidative stress but not
muscle soreness after eccentric exercise. International Journal of
Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism, 24(2), 206–214. doi:10.
1123/ijsnem.2013-0081
Gualano, B., Rawson, E.S., Candow, D.G., & Chilibeck, P.D. (2016).
Creatine supplementation in the aging population: Effects on skeletal
muscle, bone and brain. Amino Acids, 48(8), 1793–1805. PubMed
doi:10.1007/s00726-016-2239-7
Gualano, B., Roschel, H., Lancha, A.H., Jr., Brightbill, C.E., & Rawson,
E.S. (2012). In sickness and in health: The widespread application of
creatine supplementation. Amino Acids, 43(2), 519–529. PubMed
doi:10.1007/s00726-011-1132-7
Hao, Q., Dong, B.R., & Wu, T. (2015). Probiotics for preventing
acute upper respiratory tract infections. The Cochrane Database of
Systematic
Reviews,
(2),
CD006895.
doi:10.1002/14651858.
CD006895.pub3
Harris, R.C., Söderlund, K., & Hultman, E. (1992). Elevation of creatine in
resting and exercised muscle of normal subjects by creatine supple-
mentation. Clinical Sciences (Lond), 83(3), 367–374.
He, C.S., Aw Yong, X.H., Walsh, N.P., & Gleeson, M. (2016). Is there an
optimal vitamin D status for immunity in athletes and military
personnel? Exercise Immunology Review, 22, 42–64.
Heaney, R.P. (2008). Vitamin D: Criteria for safety and efficacy. Nutrition
Reviews, 66(10 Suppl. 2), S178–S181. PubMed doi:10.1111/j.1753-
4887.2008.00102.x
Heaton, L.E., Davis, J.K., Rawson, E.S., Nuccio, R.P., Witard, O.C.,
Halson, S.L., . . . Carter, J.M. (2017). In season nutritional strategies
to enhance recovery for team sport athletes. Sports Medicine, 47(11),
2201–2218. PubMed
Hector, A.J., & Philips, S.M. (2018). Protein recommendations for weight
loss in elite athletes: A focus on body composition and performance.
International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism,
28(2). doi:10.1123/ijsnem.2017-0273
Hemila, H., & Chalker, E. (2013). Vitamin C for preventing and treating
the common cold. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
(1), CD000980. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000980.pub4
Hemila, H., Virtamo, J., Albanes, D., & Kaprio, J. (2003). Physical activity
and the common cold in men administered vitamin E and beta-
carotene. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 35(11), 1815–
1820. PubMed doi:10.1249/01.MSS.0000093616.60899.92
Hobson, R.M., Saunders, B., Ball, G., Harris, R.C., & Sale, C. (2012).
Effects of beta-alanine supplementation on exercise performance: A
meta-analysis. Amino Acids, 43(1), 25–37. PubMed doi:10.1007/
s00726-011-1200-z
Hoon, M.W., Jones, A.M., Johnson, N.A., Blackwell, J.R., Broad, E.M.,
Lundy, B., . . . Burke, L.M. (2014). The effect of variable doses of
inorganic nitrate-rich beetroot juice on simulated 2, 000-m rowing
performance in trained athletes. International Journal of Sports
Physiology and Performance, 9(4), 615–620. PubMed doi:10.
1123/ijspp.2013-0207
Hossein-Nezhad, A., & Holick, M.F. (2013). Vitamin D for health: A
global perspective. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 88(7), 720–755.
PubMed doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2013.05.011
Hultman, E., Soderlund, K., Timmons, J.A., Cederblad, G., & Greenhaff,
P.L. (1996). Muscle creatine loading in men. Journal of Applied
Physiology (1985), 81(1), 232–237.
Jakeman, J.R., Lambrick, D.M., Wooley, B., Babraj, J.A., & Faulkner, J.A.
(2017). Effect of an acute dose of omega-3 fish oil following exercise-
induced muscle damage. European Journal of Applied Physiology,
117(3), 575–582. doi:10.1007/s00421-017-3543-y
Jones, A.M. (2014a). Dietary nitrate supplementation and exercise perfor-
mance. Sports Medicine, 44(Suppl. 1), S35–S45.
Jones, A.M. (2014b). Influence of dietary nitrate on the physiological
determinants of exercise performance: A critical review. Applied
Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism, 39(9), 1019–1028.
Jouris, K.B., McDaniel, J.L., & Weiss, E.P. (2011). The effect of omega-3
fatty acid supplementation on the inflammatory response to eccentric
strength exercise. Journal of Sports Sciences Medicine, 10(3),
432–438.
Jull, A.B., Ni Mhurchu, C., Bennett, D.A., Dunshea-Mooij, C.A., &
Rodgers, A. (2008). Chitosan for overweight or obesity. The
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, (3), Cd003892. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD003892.pub3
Jurgens, T.M., Whelan, A.M., Killian, L., Doucette, S., Kirk, S., & Foy, E.
(2012). Green tea for weight loss and weight maintenance in
overweight or obese adults. The Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, (12), CD008650. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD008650.pub2
Karsch-Volk, M., Barrett, B., & Linde, K. (2015). Echinacea for prevent-
ing and treating the common cold. JAMA, 313(6), 618–619. PubMed
doi:10.1001/jama.2014.17145
Katz, A., Costill, D.L., King, D.S., Hargreaves, M., & Fink, W.J. (1984).
Maximal exercise tolerance after induced alkalosis. International
Journal of Sports Medicine, 5(2), 107–110. PubMed doi:10.1055/
s-2008-1025890
Kreider, R.B., Kalman, D.S., Antonio, J., Ziegenfuss, T.N., Wildman, R.,
Collins, R., . . . Lopez, H.L. (2017). International Society of
Sports Nutrition position stand: Safety and efficacy of creatine
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
121
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 supplementation in exercise, sport, and medicine. Journal of the
International Society of Sports Nutrition, 14, 18. PubMed doi:10.
1186/s12970-017-0173-z
Krieger, J.W., Sitren, H.S., Daniels, M.J., & Langkamp-Henken, B.
(2006). Effects of variation in protein and carbohydrate intake on
body mass and composition during energy restriction: A meta-
regression. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 83(2), 260–
274. PubMed
Kucukgoncu, S., Zhou, E., Lucas, K.B., & Tek, C. (2017). Alpha-lipoic
acid (ALA) as a supplementation for weight loss: Results from a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obesity Reviews,
18(5), 594–601. PubMed doi:10.1111/obr.12528
Lambert, C.P., Greenhaff, P.L., Ball, D., & Maughan, R.J. (1993).
Influence of sodium bicarbonate ingestion on plasma ammonia
accumulation during incremental exercise in man. European Journal
of Applied Physiology and Occupational Physiology, 66(1), 49–54.
PubMed
Lancha Junior, A.H., Painelli Vde, S., Saunders, B., & Artioli, G.G.
(2015). Nutritional strategies to modulate intracellular and extra-
cellular buffering capacity during high-intensity exercise. Sports
Medicine, 45(Suppl. 1), S71–S81. PubMed doi:10.1007/s40279-
015-0397-5
Lanhers, C., Pereira, B., Naughton, G., Trousselard, M., Lesage, F.X., &
Dutheil, F. (2017). Creatine supplementation and upper limb strength
performance: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Medi-
cine, 47(1), 163–173. PubMed doi:10.1007/s40279-016-0571-4
Lappe, J., Cullen, D., Haynatzki, G., Recker, R., Ahlf, R., & Thompson, K.
(2008). Calcium and vitamin D supplementation decreases incidence
of stress fractures in female navy recruits. Journal of Bone and
Mineral Research, 23(5), 741–749. doi:10.1359/jbmr.080102
Larson-Meyer, D.E.,Woolf, K., & Burke, L.M., (2018). Assessment of
nutrient status in athletes and the need for supplementation. Interna-
tional Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism, 28(2).
doi:10.1123/ijsnem.2017-0338
Larson-Meyer, D.E., & Willis, K.S. (2010). Vitamin D and athletes.
Current Sports Medicine Reports, 9(4), 220–226. PubMed
Lewis, M., Ghassemi, P., & Hibbeln, J. (2013). Therapeutic use of omega-
3 fatty acids in severe head trauma. American Journal of Emergency
Medicine, 31(1), 273.e5–273.e8. doi:10.1016/j.ajem.2012.05.014
LGC. (2017). Australian supplement survey summary. Retrieved from
http://www2.lgcgroup.com/australiansupplementsurvey
Li, N., Hauser, R., Holford, T., Zhu, Y., Zhang, Y., Bassig, B.A., . . .
Zheng, T. (2015). Muscle-building supplement use and increased risk
of testicular germ cell cancer in men from Connecticut and Massa-
chusetts. British Journal of Cancer, 112(7), 1247–1250. PubMed
doi:10.1038/bjc.2015.26
Linde, K., Barrett, B., Wolkart, K., Bauer, R., & Melchart, D. (2006).
Echinacea for preventing and treating the common cold. The
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, (1), CD000530. doi:10.
1002/14651858.CD000530.pub2
Lowery, R.P., Joy, J.M., Rathmacher, J.A., Baier, S.M., Fuller, J.C., Jr.,
Shelley, M.C., . . . Wilson, J.M. (2016). Interaction of beta-hydroxy-
beta-methylbutyrate free acid and adenosine triphosphate on muscle
mass, strength, and power in resistance trained individuals. The
Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research, 30(7), 1843–1854.
PubMed
Maganaris, C.N., & Maughan, R.J. (1998). Creatine supplementation
enhances maximum voluntary isometric force and endurance capacity
in resistance trained men. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, 163(3),
279–287. PubMed doi:10.1046/j.1365-201x.1998.00395.x
Mainwood, G.W., & Worsley-Brown, P. (1975). The effects of extra-
cellular pH and buffer concentration on the efflux of lactate from
frog sartorius muscle. The Journal of Physiology, 250(1), 1–22.
PubMed
Martinez-Sanz, J.M., Sospedra, I., Ortiz, C.M., Baladia, E., Gil-Izquierdo,
A., & Ortiz-Moncada, R. (2017). Intended or unintended doping? A
review of the presence of doping substances in dietary supplements
used in sports. Nutrients, 9(10). doi:10.3390/nu9101093
Maughan, R.J. (2005). Contamination of dietary supplements and positive
drug tests in sport. Journal of Sports Sciences, 23(9), 883–889. doi:
10.1080/02640410400023258
Maughan, R.J., Depiesse, F., & Geyer, H. (2007). The use of dietary
supplements by athletes. Journal of Sports Sciences, 25(Suppl. 1),
S103–S113. doi:10.1080/02640410701607395
Maughan, R.J., & Griffin, J. (2003). Caffeine ingestion and fluid balance:
A review. Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 16(6), 411–420.
PubMed
Maughan, R.J., Shirreffs, S.M., & Vernec, A. (2018). Making decisions
about supplement use. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and
Exercise Metabolism, 28(2). doi:10.1123/ijsnem.2018-0009
McAlindon, T.E., Nuite, M., Krishnan, N., Ruthazer, R., Price, L.L.,
Burstein, D., . . . Flechsenhar, K. (2011). Change in knee osteoar-
thritis cartilage detected by delayed gadolinium enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging following treatment with collagen hydrolysate:
A pilot randomized controlled trial. Osteoarthritis Cartilage, 19(4),
399–405. PubMed doi:10.1016/j.joca.2011.01.001
McFarlin, B.K., Venable, A.S., Henning, A.L., Sampson, J.N., Pennel, K.,
Vingren, J.L., & Hill, D.W. (2016). Reduced inflammatory and
muscle damage biomarkers following oral supplementation with
bioavailable curcumin. BBA Clinical, 5, 72–78. PubMed doi:10.
1016/j.bbacli.2016.02.003
McMahon, N.F., Leveritt, M.D., & Pavey, T.G. (2016). The effect of
dietary nitrate supplementation on endurance exercise performance
in healthy adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports
Medicine, 47(4), 735–756. doi:10.1007/s40279-016-0617-7
Mc Naughton, L., & Thompson, D. (2001). Acute versus chronic sodium
bicarbonate ingestion and anaerobic work and power output. The
Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness, 41(4), 456–462.
PubMed
Mettler, S., & Zimmermann, M.B. (2010). Iron excess in recreational
marathon runners. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 64(5),
490–494. PubMed doi:10.1038/ejcn.2010.16
Meydani, S.N., Han, S.N., & Hamer, D.H. (2004). Vitamin E and
respiratory infection in the elderly. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 1031, 214–222. PubMed doi:10.1196/annals.1331.021
Mickleborough, T.D. (2013). Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in
physical performance optimization. International Journal of Sport
Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism, 23(1), 83–96. PubMed
Morton,
R.W., Murphy,
K.T.,
McKellar,
S.R.,
Schoenfeld,
B.J.,
Henselmans, M., Helms, E., . . . Phillips, S.M. (2017). A systematic
review, meta-analysis and meta-regression of the effect of protein
supplementation on resistance training-induced gains in muscle mass
and strength in healthy adults. British Journal of Sports Medicine.
doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097608
Nassis, G.P., Sporer, B., & Stathis, C.G. (2016). Beta-alanine efficacy for
sports performance improvement: From science to practice. British
Journal of Sports Medicine. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097038
Nicol, L.M., Rowlands, D.S., Fazakerly, R., & Kellett, J. (2015).
Curcumin supplementation likely attenuates delayed onset muscle
soreness (DOMS). European Journal of Applied Physiology, 115(8),
1769–1777. doi:10.1007/s00421-015-3152-6
Nieman, D.C., Henson, D.A., Gross, S.J., Jenkins, D.P., Davis, J.M.,
Murphy, E.A., . . . Mayer, E.P. (2007). Quercetin reduces ill-
ness
but
not
immune
perturbations
after
intensive
exercise.
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
122
Maughan et al.
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 39(9), 1561–1569. doi:10.
1249/mss.0b013e318076b566
Nieman, D.C., Henson, D.A., McAnulty, S.R., McAnulty, L., Swick, N.S.,
Utter, A.C., . . . Morrow, J.D. (2002). Influence of vitamin C
supplementation on oxidative and immune changes after an ultra-
marathon. Journal of Applied Physiology, 92(5), 1970–1977. doi:10.
1152/japplphysiol.00961.2001
Nieman, D.C., Henson, D.A., McMahon, M., Wrieden, J.L., Davis, J.M.,
Murphy, E.A., . . . Dumke, C.L. (2008). Beta-glucan, immune
function, and upper respiratory tract infections in athletes. Medicine
& Science in Sports & Exercise, 40(8), 1463–1471. doi:10.1249/
MSS.0b013e31817057c2
Nikolaidis, M.G., Kerksick, C.M., Lamprecht, M., & McAnulty, S.R.
(2012). Does vitamin C and E supplementation impair the favorable
adaptations of regular exercise? Oxidative Medicine and Cellular
Longevity, 2012, 707941. PubMed doi:10.1155/2012/707941
Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health. (1994). Dietary
supplement health and education act of 1994. Retrieved from https://
ods.od.nih.gov/About/DSHEA_Wording.aspx
Onakpoya, I., Hunt, K., Wider, B., & Ernst, E. (2014a). Pyruvate supple-
mentation for weight loss: A systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized clinical trials. Critical Reviews in Food Science and
Nutrition, 54(1), 17–23. doi:10.1080/10408398.2011.565890
Onakpoya, I., Posadzki, P., & Ernst, E. (2014b). The efficacy of gluco-
mannan supplementation in overweight and obesity: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. The Journal of
the American College of Nutrition, 33(1), 70–78. doi:10.1080/
07315724.2014.870013
Onakpoya, I.J., Posadzki, P.P., Watson, L.K., Davies, L.A., & Ernst, E.
(2012). The efficacy of long-term conjugated linoleic acid (CLA)
supplementation on body composition in overweight and obese
individuals: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
clinical trials. European Journal of Nutrition, 51(2), 127–134. doi:
10.1007/s00394-011-0253-9
Owens, D.J., Sharples, A.P., Polydorou, I., Alwan, N., Donovan, T.,
Tang, J., . . . Close, G.L. (2015). A systems-based investigation
into vitamin D and skeletal muscle repair, regeneration, and hyper-
trophy. American Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology and Metab-
olism, 309(12), E1019–E1031. PubMed doi:10.1152/ajpendo.00375.
2015
Owens, D.J., Webber, D., Impey, S.G., Tang, J., Donovan, T.F., Fraser,
W.D., . . . Close, G.L. (2014). Vitamin D supplementation does not
improve human skeletal muscle contractile properties in insufficient
young males. European Journal of Applied Physiology, 114(6),
1309–1320. doi:10.1007/s00421-014-2865-2
Paton, C., Costa, V., & Guglielmo, L. (2015). Effects of caffeine chewing
gum on race performance and physiology in male and female cyclists.
Journal of Sports Sciences, 33(10), 1076–1083. doi:10.1080/
02640414.2014.984752
Paulsen, G., Cumming, K.T., Holden, G., Hallen, J., Ronnestad, B.R.,
Sveen, O., . . . Raastad, T. (2014). Vitamin C and E supplementation
hampers cellular adaptation to endurance training in humans: A
double-blind, randomised, controlled trial. Journal of Physiology,
592(8), 1887–1901. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2013.267419
Peake, J.M., Neubauer, O., Walsh, N.P., & Simpson, R.J. (2017). Recov-
ery of the immune system after exercise. Journal of Applied Physiol-
ogy (1985), 122(5), 1077–1087. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00622.
2016
Peeling, P., Binnie, M., Goods, P.S.R., Sim, M., & Burke, L.M. (2018).
Evidence-based supplements for the enhancement of athletic perfor-
mance. International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metab-
olism, 28(2). doi:10.1123/ijsnem.2017-0343
Phillips, S.M., Aragon, A.A., Arciero, P.J., Arent, S.M., Close, G.L.,
Hamilton, D.L., . . . Willoughby, D.S. (2017). Changes in body
composition and performance with supplemental HMB-FA + ATP.
Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research, 31(5):e71–e72. doi:10.
1519/jsc.0000000000001760
Powers, M.E., Arnold, B.L., Weltman, A.L., Perrin, D.H., Mistry, D.,
Kahler, D.M., . . . Volek, J. (2003). Creatine supplementation
increases total body water without altering fluid distribution. Journal
of Athletic Training, 38(1), 44–50. PubMed
Powers, S.K., Nelson, W.B., & Larson-Meyer, E. (2011). Antioxidant and
Vitamin D supplements for athletes:sense or nonsense? Journal of
Sports Sciences, 29(Suppl.1), S47–S55. doi:10.1080/02640414.2011.
602098
Prasad, A.S. (2014). Zinc is an antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agent: Its
role in human health. Frontiers in Nutrition, 1, 14. doi:10.3389/fnut.
2014.00014
Rae, C.D., & Broer, S. (2015). Creatine as a booster for human brain
function. How might it work? Neurochemistry International, 89,
249–259. doi:10.1016/j.neuint.2015.08.010
Rawson, E.S., Clarkson, P.M., & Tarnopolsky, M.A. (2017). Perspectives
on Exertional Rhabdomyolysis. Sports Medicine, 47(Suppl.1),
33–49. doi:10.1007/s40279-017-0689-z
Rawson, E.S., Miles, M.P., & Larson-Meyer, D.E. (2018). Dietary supple-
ments for health, adaptation, and recovery in athletes. International
Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism, 28(2). doi:10.
1123/ijsnem.2017-0340
Rawson, E.S., & Persky, A.M. (2007). Mechanisms of muscular adapta-
tions to creatine supplementation: Review article. International
SportMed Journal, 8(2), 43–53.
Rawson, E.S., & Venezia, A.C. (2011). Use of creatine in the elderly and
evidence for effects on cognitive function in young and old. Amino
Acids, 40(5), 1349–1362. PubMed
Rawson, E.S., & Volek, J.S. (2003). Effects of creatine supplementation
and resistance training on muscle strength and weightlifting perfor-
mance. Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research, 17(4), 822–
831.
Requena,
B.,
Zabala,
M.,
Padial,
P.,
&
Feriche,
B.
(2005).
Sodium bicarbonate and sodium citrate: Ergogenic aids? Journal
of Strength & Conditioning Research, 19(1), 213–224. doi:10.1519/
13733.1
Reynolds, C., Halpenny, C., Hughes, C., Jordan, S., Quinn, A., & Egan, B.
(2016). Acute ingestion of beetroot juice does not improve repeated
sprint performance in male team sport athletes. Proceedings of the
Nutrition Society, 75(OCE3), E97. doi:10.1017/S0029665116001129
Ribeiro, I.F., Miranda-Vilela, A.L., Klautau-Guimaraes Mde, N., &
Grisolia, C.K. (2013). The influence of erythropoietin (EPO T –> G)
and alpha-actinin-3 (ACTN3 R577X) polymorphisms on runners’
responses to the dietary ingestion of antioxidant supplementation
based on pequi oil (Caryocar brasiliense Camb.): A before-after
study. Journal of Nutrigenetics and Nutrigenomics, 6(6), 283–304.
doi:10.1159/000357947
Roberts, L., Bailes, J., Dedhia, H., Zikos, A., Singh, A., McDowell, D., . . .
Carpenter, J. (2008). Surviving a mine explosion. Journal of the
American College of Surgeons, 207(2), 276–283. doi:10.1016/
j.jamcollsurg.2008.02.015
Rowlands, D.S., & Thomson, J.S. (2009). Effects of beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate
supplementation
during
resistance
training
on
strength, body composition, and muscle damage in trained and
untrained young men: A meta-analysis. Journal of Strength &
Conditioning Research, 23(3), 836–846.
Ruohola, J.P., Laaksi, I., Ylikomi, T., Haataja, R., Mattila, V.M., Sahi,
T., . . . Pihlajamaki, H. (2006). Association between serum 25(OH)D
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
123
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 concentrations and bone stress fractures in Finnish young men.
Journal of Bone and Mineral Research, 21(9), 1483–1488. doi:10.
1359/jbmr.060607
Sakellaris, G., Kotsiou, M., Tamiolaki, M., Kalostos, G., Tsapaki, E.,
Spanaki, M., . . . Evangeliou, A. (2006). Prevention of complications
related to traumatic brain injury in children and adolescents with
creatine administration: An open label randomized pilot study. The
Journal of Trauma, 61(2), 322–329. doi:10.1097/01.ta.0000230269.
46108.d5
Sakellaris, G., Nasis, G., Kotsiou, M., Tamiolaki, M., Charissis, G., &
Evangeliou, A. (2008). Prevention of traumatic headache, dizziness
and fatigue with creatine administration. A pilot study. Acta
Paediatrica, 97(1), 31–34. PubMed doi:10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.
00529.x
Saunders, B., Elliott-Sale, K., Artioli, G.G., Swinton, P.A., Dolan, E.,
Roschel, H., . . . Gualano, B. (2016). Beta-alanine supplementation to
improve exercise capacity and performance: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. British Journal of Sports Medicine. doi:10.1136/
bjsports-2016-096396
Schilling, B.K., Stone, M.H., Utter, A., Kearney, J.T., Johnson, M.,
Coglianese, R., . . . Stone, M.E. (2001). Creatine supplementation
and health variables: A retrospective study. Medicine & Science in
Sports & Exercise, 33(2), 183–188.
Schneiker, K.T., Bishop, D., Dawson, B., & Hackett, L.P. (2006). Effects
of caffeine on prolonged intermittent-sprint ability in team-sport
athletes. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 38(3), 578–
585. doi:10.1249/01.mss.0000188449.18968.62
Schrier, S.L., & Auerbach, M. (2017). Treatment of iron deficiency anemia
in
adults.
Retrieved
from
https://www.uptodate.com/contents/
treatment-of-iron-deficiency-anemia-in-adults
Sciberras, J.N., Galloway, S.D., Fenech, A., Grech, G., Farrugia, C., Duca,
D., & Mifsud, J. (2015). The effect of turmeric (Curcumin) supple-
mentation on cytokine and inflammatory marker responses following
2 hours of endurance cycling. Journal of the International Society of
Sports Nutrition, 12(1), 5. doi:10.1186/s12970-014-0066-3
Shaw, G., Lee-Barthel, A., Ross, M.L., Wang, B., & Baar, K. (2017).
Vitamin C-enriched gelatin supplementation before intermittent
activity augments collagen synthesis. The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 105(1), 136–143. doi:10.3945/ajcn.116.138594
Siegler, J.C., Marshall, P.W.M., Bray, J., & Towlson, C. (2012). Sodium
bicarbonate supplementation and ingestion timing: Does it matter?
Journal of Strength & Conditioning Research, 26, 1953–1958. doi:10.
1519/JSC.0b013e3182392960
Singh, M., & Das, R.R. (2013). Zinc for the common cold. The Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, (6), CD001364. doi:10.1002/
14651858.CD001364.pub4
Smith, G.I., Atherton, P., Reeds, D.N., Mohammed, B.S., Rankin, D.,
Rennie, M.J., & Mittendorfer, B. (2011a). Dietary omega-3 fatty acid
supplementation increases the rate of muscle protein synthesis in
older adults: A randomized controlled trial. The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 93(2), 402–412. doi:10.3945/ajcn.110.005611
Smith, G.I., Atherton, P., Reeds, D.N., Mohammed, B.S., Rankin, D.,
Rennie, M.J., & Mittendorfer, B. (2011b). Omega-3 polyunsaturated
fatty acids augment the muscle protein anabolic response to
hyperinsulinaemia-hyperaminoacidaemia
in
healthy
young
and
middle-aged men and women. Clinical Science (Lond), 121(6),
267–278.
Solimini, R., Rotolo, M.C., Mastrobattista, L., Mortali, C., Minutillo, A.,
Pichini, S., . . . Palmi, I. (2017). Hepatotoxicity associated with
illicit use of anabolic androgenic steroids in doping. European Review
for Medical and Pharmacological Sciences, 21(Suppl. 1), 7–16.
PubMed
Solomons, N.W. (1998). Mild human zinc deficiency produces an imbal-
ance between cell-mediated and humoral immunity. Nutrition Re-
views, 56(1 Pt 1), 27–28.
Spriet, L.L. (2014). Exercise and sport performance with low doses of
caffeine. Sports Medicine, 44(Suppl. 2), S175–S184. doi:10.1007/
s40279-014-0257-8
Steenge, G.R., Simpson, E.J., & Greenhaff, P.L. (2000). Protein- and
carbohydrate-induced augmentation of whole body creatine retention
in humans. Journal of Applied Physiology (1985), 89(3), 1165–1171.
Stellingwerff, T., & Cox, G.R. (2014). Systematic review: Carbohydrate
supplementation on exercise performance or capacity of varying
durations. Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism, 39(9),
998–1011. doi:10.1139/apnm-2014-0027
Sullivan, P.G., Geiger, J.D., Mattson, M.P., & Scheff, S.W. (2000).
Dietary supplement creatine protects against traumatic brain injury.
Annals of Neurology, 48(5), 723–729. PubMed
Szczesniak, K.A., Ostaszewski, P., Fuller, J.C., Jr., Ciecierska, A., &
Sadkowski, T. (2015). Dietary supplementation of beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate in animals – a review. Journal of Animal Physiology
and Animal Nutrition (Berl), 99(3), 405–417. doi:10.1111/jpn.12234
Talanian, J.L., & Spriet, L.L. (2016). Low and moderate doses of caffeine
late in exercise improve performance in trained cyclists. Applied
Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism, 41(8), 850–855. doi:10.
1139/apnm-2016-0053
Thomas, D.T., Erdman, K.A., & Burke, L.M. (2016). American College of
Sports Medicine Joint Position Statement. Nutrition and Athletic
Performance. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise, 48(3),
543–568. doi:10.1249/MSS.0000000000000852
Thompson, C., Vanhatalo, A., Jell, H., Fulford, J., Carter, J., Nyman, L., . . .
Jones, A.M. (2016). Dietary nitrate supplementation improves sprint
and high-intensity intermittent running performance. Nitric Oxide, 61,
55–61. PubMed doi:10.1016/j.niox.2016.10.006
Thompson, C., Wylie, L.J., Fulford, J., Kelly, J., Black, M.I., McDonagh,
S.T., . . . Jones, A.M. (2015). Dietary nitrate improves sprint per-
formance and cognitive function during prolonged intermittent exer-
cise. European Journal of Applied Physiology, 115(9), 1825–1834.
doi:10.1007/s00421-015-3166-0
Tian, H., Guo, X., Wang, X., He, Z., Sun, R., Ge, S., & Zhang, Z. (2013).
Chromium picolinate supplementation for overweight or obese
adults. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, (11),
CD010063. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD010063.pub2
Tipton, K.D. (2015). Nutritional support for exercise-induced injuries.
Sports Medicine, 45(Suppl. 1), S93–S104. doi:10.1007/s40279-015-
0398-4
Volek, J.S., & Rawson, E.S. (2004). Scientific basis and practical aspects
of creatine supplementation for athletes. Nutrition, 20(7–8), 609–614.
PubMed doi:10.1016/j.nut.2004.04.014
Volman, J.J., Ramakers, J.D., & Plat, J. (2008). Dietary modulation of
immune function by beta-glucans. Physiology & Behavior, 94(2),
276–284. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.11.045
Walker, G.J., Finlay, O., Griffiths, H., Sylvester, J., Williams, M., &
Bishop, N.C. (2007). Immunoendocrine response to cycling follow-
ing ingestion of caffeine and carbohydrate. Medicine & Science
in
Sports
&
Exercise,
39(9),
1554–1560.
doi:10.1249/mss.
0b013e3180a74228
Walsh, N.P., Blannin, A.K., Robson, P.J., & Gleeson, M. (1998). Gluta-
mine, exercise and immune function. Links and possible mechanisms.
Sports Medicine, 26(3), 177–191. PubMed
Walsh, N.P., Gleeson, M., Shephard, R.J., Gleeson, M., Woods, J.A.,
Bishop, N.C., . . . Simon, P. (2011). Position statement. Part one:
Immune function and exercise. Exercise Immunology Review, 17,
6–63.
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
124
Maughan et al.
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
 Watson, P., Judkins, C., Houghton, E., Russell, C., & Maughan, R.J.
(2009). Urinary nandrolone metabolite detection after ingestion of a
nandrolone precursor. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise,
41(4), 766–772. doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e31818edaeb
Wellington, B.M., Leveritt, M.D., & Kelly, V.G. (2017). The effect of
caffeine on repeat high intensity effort performance in rugby league
players. International Journal of Sports Physiology and Perfor-
mance, 12(2), 206–210. doi:10.1123/ijspp.2015-0689
Wiles, J.D., Coleman, D., Tegerdine, M., & Swaine, I.L. (2006).
The effects of caffeine ingestion on performance time, speed
and power during a laboratory-based 1 km cycling time-trial.
Journal of Sports Sciences, 24(11), 1165–1171. doi:10.1080/
02640410500457687
Wilkinson, D.J., Hossain, T., Hill, D.S., Phillips, B.E., Crossland, H.,
Williams, J., . . . Atherton, P.J. (2013). Effects of leucine and its
metabolite beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate on human skeletal
muscle protein metabolism. The Journal of Physiology, 591(Pt 11),
2911–2923.
Wilson, J.M., Lowery, R.P., Joy, J.M., Andersen, J.C., Wilson, S.M.,
Stout, J.R., . . . Rathmacher, J. (2014). The effects of 12 weeks
of beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate free acid supplementation on
muscle mass, strength, and power in resistance-trained individuals:
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. European
Journal of Applied Physiology, 114(6), 1217–1227.
Wilson, J.M., Lowery, R.P., Joy, J.M., Walters, J.A., Baier, S.M., Fuller,
J.C., Jr., . . . Rathmacher, J. (2013). Beta-Hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate
free acid reduces markers of exercise-induced muscle damage and
improves recovery in resistance-trained men. The British Journal of
Nutrition, 110(3), 538–544.
Wycherley, T.P., Moran, L.J., Clifton, P.M., Noakes, M., & Brinkworth,
G.D. (2012). Effects of energy-restricted high-protein, low-fat
compared with standard-protein, low-fat diets: A meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 96(6), 1281–1298.
Wylie, L.J., Bailey, S.J., Kelly, J., Blackwell, J.R., Vanhatalo, A., & Jones,
A.M. (2016). Influence of beetroot juice supplementation on inter-
mittent exercise performance. European Journal of Applied Physiol-
ogy, 116(2), 415–425. doi:10.1007/s00421-015-3296-4
Wylie, L.J., Kelly, J., Bailey, S.J., Blackwell, J.R., Skiba, P.F., Winyard,
P.G., . . . Jones, A.M. (2013). Beetroot juice and exercise: Pharma-
codynamic and dose-response relationships. Journal of Applied
Physiology (1985), 115(3), 325–336. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.
00372.2013
Zhang, Y.Y., Liu, W., Zhao, T.Y., & Tian, H.M. (2017). Efficacy of
omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids supplementation in managing
overweight and obesity: A meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials.
The Journal of Nutrition, Health & Aging, 21(2), 187–192. doi:
10.1007/s12603-016-0755-5
IJSNEM Vol. 28, No. 2, 2018
Supplements and the High-Performance Athlete
125
Downloaded by on 06/02/19
