                           
Mayr, G., Pittman, M., Saitta, E., Kaye, T., & Vinther, J. (2016). Structure
and Homology of Psittacosaurus Tail Bristles. Palaeontology, 59(6).
https://doi.org/10.1111/pala.12257
Peer reviewed version
License (if available):
CC BY-NC
Link to published version (if available):
10.1111/pala.12257
Link to publication record in Explore Bristol Research
PDF-document
This is the author accepted manuscript (AAM). The final published version (version of record) is available online
via Wiley at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/pala.12257/abstract. Please refer to any applicable terms
of use of the publisher.
University of Bristol - Explore Bristol Research
General rights
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite only the published
version using the reference above. Full terms of use are available:
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/pure/about/ebr-terms
 1 
ON THE STRUCTURE AND HOMOLOGY OF THE TAIL BRISTLES OF 
PSITTACOSAURUS 
 
by GERALD MAYR1*, MICHAEL PITTMAN2, EVAN SAITTA3, THOMAS G. KAYE4 and 
JAKOB VINTHER3  
 
1Senckenberg Research Institute and Natural History Museum Frankfurt, Ornithological 
Section, Senckenberganlage 25, D-60325 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, email: 
Gerald.Mayr@senckenberg.de 
2Vertebrate Palaeontology Laboratory, Department of Earth Sciences, University of Hong 
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China 
3School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Life Sciences Building, 24 Tyndall 
Avenue, Bristol, BS8 1TQ, UK 
4Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture, Seattle, Washington, USA 
 
*Corresponding author 
 
 
Abstract: We examined bristle-like appendages on the tail of the Early Cretaceous basal 
ceratopsian dinosaur Psittacosaurus with laser-stimulated fluorescence imaging. Our study 
reveals previously unknown details of these structures and confirms their identification as 
integumentary appendages. For the first time, we show that most bristles appear to be 
arranged in bundles and that they exhibit a pulp that widens towards the bristle base. We 
consider it likely that the psittacosaur bristles are structurally and developmentally 
homologous to similar filamentous appendages of other dinosaurs, namely the basal 
heterodontosaurid Tianyulong and the basal therizinosauroid theropod Beipiaosaurus, and 
attribute the greater robustness of the bristles of Psittacosaurus to a higher degree of 
cornification and calcification of its integument (both skin and bristles). Although the 
psittacosaur bristles are probably homologous to avian feathers in their origin from discrete 
cell populations, it is uncertain whether they developed from a follicle, one of the 
developmental hallmarks of true feathers. In particular, we note a striking resemblance 
between the psittacosaur bristles and the cornified spine on the head of the Horned Screamer, 
Anhima cornuta, an extant anseriform bird. Similar, albeit thinner keratinous filaments of 
extant birds are the “beard” of the Turkey, Meleagris gallopavo, and the crown of the Congo 
 2 
Peafowl, Afropavo congensis. All of these structures of extant birds are distinct from true 
feathers, and because at least the turkey beard does not develop from follicles, detailed future 
studies of their development would be invaluable towards deepening our understanding of 
dinosaur filamentous integumentary structures.  
 
Running Head: Psittacosaur tail bristles 
 
Key words: ceratopsian dinosaur, feather evolution, laser-stimulated fluorescence imaging, 
Psittacosaurus, tail bristles 
 
 
DINOSAURIA comprises two major clades, Saurischia and Ornithischia, with birds being 
nested in the saurischian subclade Theropoda. In the past two decades, filament-like 
integumentary appendages were reported from a variety of non-avian dinosaurs. Many of 
these structures stem from theropods, so that homology with avian feather precursors 
(“protofeathers”) is likely (e.g., Chen et al. 1998; Xu et al. 1999a, b, 2012, 2014). A number 
of specimens with unusual integumentary structures are, however, also known from 
dinosaurian groups that are only distantly related to birds.  
One of the most remarkable instances concerns a fossil of the basal ceratopsian 
ornithischian Psittacosaurus from the Early Cretaceous Jehol Biota of China in the collection 
of the Senckenberg Research Institute. This specimen preserves most of the skin in 
exceptional detail and is most unique because of long bristle-like appendages on the proximal 
portion of the tail (Fig. 1). This psittacosaur fossil represents one of the first non-avian 
dinosaurs, for which integumentary appendages have been reported (Mayr et al. 2002), and it 
was the first ornithischian, for which integumentary structures other than scales were 
described. 
Mayr et al. (2002) noted differences between the psittacosaur bristles and the filamentous 
theropod “protofeathers” known at that time and cautioned against considering them to be 
homologous. Filamentous integumentary appendages were subsequently reported from two 
other ornithischian taxa, the Early Cretaceous basal heterodontosaurid Tianyulong (Zheng et 
al. 2009) and the Middle-Late Jurassic basal neornithischian Kulindadromeus (Godefroit et al. 
2014; Alifanov and Saveliev 2014). The hypothesis that these structures are homologous to 
avian feathers has been put forward by multiple authors (Xu et al. 2009; Godefroit et al. 
 3 
2014), but most recently it was suggested that that filamentous integumentary appendages 
might have evolved independently in theropods and ornithischians (Barrett et al. 2015). 
The psittacosaur bristles shown here are arguably amongst the best preserved 
integumentary appendages of any non-avian dinosaur, but they have only been briefly 
described and their significance has yet to be fully appreciated. This fossil has therefore been 
restudied with laser-stimulated fluorescence (LSF) imaging, a powerful tool for the analysis 
of fossil soft tissue (Kaye et al. 2015). The results for the skin will be described elsewhere 
(Vinther et al. in press) and here we focus on a detailed description of the tail bristles.  
Given that the named species of Psittacosaurus mainly differ in skull proportions, which 
are difficult to evaluate in the crushed Senckenberg specimen, and that the taxonomy is 
currently in flux with various species being synonymized (Hedrick and Dodson 2013), we 
refrain from identifying the fossil at the species level. Three species of Psittacosaurus have 
been described from the Lujiatun Beds of the Yixian Formation (You et al. 2003; Zhou et al. 
2006; Lü et al. 2007). These are now considered to be growth stages of the same species, for 
which Psittacosaurus houi has nomenclatural priority (Hedrick and Dodson 2013). Although 
the exact provenance of the Senckenberg psittacosaur is unknown, the sedimentology of the 
matrix, which consists of a finely laminated mudstone, indicates that it is not from the 
tuffaceous Lujiatun Beds (contra Sereno 2010: 22), but from the Dawangzhangzi or 
Jiangshou beds of the Yixian Formation, or even from the overlying Jiufotang Formation, so 
that an identity with P. houi (“P. lujiatunensis” sensu Sereno 2010: 28) is anything but 
certain. 
 
MATERIAL AND METHODS  
 
The psittacosaur fossil is on public display at the Senckenberg Natural History Museum, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany (SMF), where it is catalogued under the number SMF R 4970. 
LSF imaging was performed with a custom device (KayeT Scanner 3.0). A 405 nanometer, 
500 milliwatt violet laser was interfaced with a Powel line lens, which projected an even 
vertical line across the specimen that was scanned horizontally by a motor assembly. Photos 
were taken with a Nikon D810 camera, with a 425 nanometer long pass filter in front of lens 
that blocked the laser light. Images were post processed and the bright fluorescence of dust 
particles embedded in the specimen’s lacquer coating was removed by specific colour 
subtraction during conversion from the NEF image.  
 
 4 
RESULTS 
 
Most bristles extend beyond the margin of the fossil slab and lack their tips, with the bristle 
tuft having therefore been larger than what is preserved (Fig. 2B). The LSF images allow 
most of the individual bristles to be traced such that the bases of 91 bristles can be 
distinguished, which is probably a slightly underestimated number given that not all bristle 
bases are clearly discernible. The fluorescent colour of the bristles matches that of the skin 
remains (see also Vinther et al. in press: Fig. S3). 
 
For the first time, we note that the bristles are not evenly distributed along the dorsum of 
the tail, and many are arranged in clusters of 3-6 individual bristles, which appear to have 
been tightly grouped at their bases (Fig. 2). Most bristles have a width of about 1 mm at their 
bases, but the bristles in the distal tail section are thinner than the more proximal ones. Some 
thinner bristles also occur in the proximal section of the tail, and these are more strongly bent 
or erupted from the skin at a lower angle (Figs 2, 3D, E). These narrow bristles are fairly 
evenly distributed over the proximal bristle section, with most bristle bundles containing 2-3 
narrow bristles. Many of the narrow bristles are short and may represent growing bristles. 
However, there are also several very long and narrow bristles, some of which have an equal 
width throughout their length, whereas others become gradually wider towards the base. The 
preserved bristle tips seem to have been blunt rather than sharply pointed. 
In their initial description, Mayr et al. (2002) reported midline stripes in some bristles, 
which were considered to differ in width, but the authors did not adequately distinguish 
between what appear to be three different origins and preservation modes of these stripes. The 
LSF images of SMF R 4970 reveal that a lighter-fluorescing midline stripe is an attribute of 
most bristles. This midline stripe becomes wider towards the bristle base and suggests a pulp, 
that is, a bristle lumen (Figs 3B-D, 4E, F), which may have been filled with connective tissue 
as in the spine of the extant Horned Screamer (see discussion and Fig. 4D). In some bristles, 
the midline stripe is furthermore defined by dark, organic material visible under natural light 
(Figs 3E, 4F; Mayr et al. 2002: fig. 3), which appears to be due to infilling with recalcitrant 
organic material. These midline stripes, which seem to be a property of all bristles, are to be 
distinguished from broad dark stripes, which extend over most of the bristle width in a few 
bristles (Fig. 3F). These broad dark stripes do not fluoresce under LSF, and here we 
hypothesize that they represent melanin deposits within the keratin matrix, similar to those 
found on the integumentary scales in the same specimen.  
 5 
Three bristles in the most proximal area of the tail extend well into the preserved 
integument and reach the vertebral bodies (Fig. 3G), and Mayr et al. (2002) posited that they 
may have been anchored deeply in the skin. However, the skin on the dorsal side of the tail 
does not follow the course of the neural spines and the fossilized integument probably does 
not reflect the exact tail outline of the animal (Fig. 2). Because the skin covered the skeleton 
after the decay of the muscular soft tissue, it is likely to have been displaced relative to the 
original body contour. In addition, the fossil appears to have been compacted in an oblique 
embedded position. A skin flap may therefore conceal the bristle bases in the proximal tail 
section, which, even in comparison with modern feathers, would be anchored unusually deep 
in the skin. Here, we consider it uncertain how deeply the psittacosaur tail bristles extended 
into the skin if at all.  
We furthermore note that preparation after the initial description of the specimen revealed 
soft tissue remains next to the jugal horn, which are suggestive of a keratinous sheath (Fig. 
3H). The presence of such a sheath in the living animal can be deduced from numerous 
vascular grooves on the surface of the jugal horn (Sereno 2010). However, although the dark 
soft tissue structure that is now situated underneath the jugal horn of SMF R 4970 matches the 
presumed shape of a keratinous sheath, it is significantly larger than the jugal horn itself. 
Moreover, these soft tissue remains do not cover the bony jugal horn but are situated beneath 
(i.e., anatomically dorsal) and rostrally of it, so that the keratinous sheath must have slipped 
off the bony core, if it fully enclosed the jugal horn. Given the otherwise reasonably 
undistorted nature of the skeleton, a removal of the sheath from the jugal horn is difficult to 
explain, as keratinous sheaths – like teeth - are rigidly attached to bone via Sharpey’s Fibers, 
which are mostly collagen-based (e.g., Horner and Goodwin 2009). However, protein decay 
of such fibers combined with cracking of the sheath as a result of keratin degradation could 
have led to a split jugal horn sheath that no longer attached to the bone.  
 
DISCUSSION 
 
LSF imaging confirms that the fluorescent colour of the bristles matches that of the skin 
remains. Given that laser-stimulated fluorescence closely reflects the geochemistry of the 
involved structures (Kaye et al. 2015), we conclude that the fossilized bristles and the skin 
have a similar geochemical composition. The skin of the specimen shows an equal 
fluorescence across the body (Vinther et al. in press: Fig. S3), and we consider it more likely 
that the preserved soft tissue remains represent remains of the keratinous epidermis rather 
 6 
than collagen fibers of the dermis (contra Feduccia et al. 2005). This assumption is also 
supported by the fact that in many cases clearly defined scales are visible (Vinther et al. in 
press: Fig. S3). Unlike chemically more stable polysaccharids (e.g., chitin and cellulose) and 
lipids (e.g., waxes), keratins of the vertebrate integument are proteins, meaning they have a 
low fossilization potential (Briggs and Summons 2014). We therefore hypothesize that 
preservation of the psittacosaur integument, in both the scales and bristles, is potentially due 
to calcium phosphate residues from embedded mineral salts, which are commonly found in 
vertebrate epidermis (Pautard 1964). Collagen fibers, by contrast, are unlikely to calcify 
across the entire integument, and no preservational mechanisms are known to us that would 
result in an extensive preservation of collagen in the absence of other protein-based soft tissue 
structures, such as internal organs.  
A strongly calcified epidermal integument would not only account for the exceptional 
preservation of the skin in this psittacosaur specimen and others from the Jehol Biota (Ji and 
Bo 1998), but also for its distinct fluorescence under LSF. Claw sheaths are similarly 
preserved in many specimens of Archaeopteryx (Wellnhofer 2009) and Confuciusornis 
(Chiappe et al. 1999), which is also true for the rachises of feathers of some fossil birds 
(Bergmann et al. 2010). By contrast, most dark soft tissue traces seen under naturally 
occurring light in the psittacosaur fossil that do not fluoresce under LSF are carbonaceous 
residues derived from melanin pigmentation (Vinther et al. in press). 
The soft tissue remains of the jugal horn show no fluorescence under LSF, which indicates 
that they exhibit a different geochemistry than the skin and bristles. Possibly, the calcium 
phosphate residues of the keratinous sheath are masked by layers of non-fluorescing melanin, 
although we currently cannot exclude the possibility that the soft tissue remains preserved 
underneath and next to the jugal horn are remains of a skin flap, which was situated dorsal of 
the jugal horn. 
Our study therefore confirms previous hypotheses that the tail bristles of Psittacosaurus 
were epidermal appendages. The fact that some bristles are very thin and most appear to be 
arranged in bundles would make them poor support structures of a membranous frill for 
which we find no preserved evidence (contra Lingham-Soliar 2010).  
Compared with the known integumentary appendages of other non-avian dinosaurs, the 
bristles of SMF R 4970 most closely resemble the “elongated broad filamentous feathers” of 
the basal therizinosauroid Beipiaosaurus (Xu et al. 2009) in their shape and presumed 
rigidity. In Beipiaosaurus, these structures are, however, more widely distributed over the 
body surface, occurring along the dorsal and ventral sides of the neck, as well as on the back 
 7 
of the animal and in the distal tail section. Greatly elongated filament-like appendages were 
also found in the basal heterodontosaurid Tianyulong (Zheng et al. 2009). The filaments of 
Tianyulong are somewhat narrower than most psittacosaur bristles and appear to have been 
less rigid, but like many of the Psittacosaurus bristles, they exhibit a dark melanized midline 
stripe (Zheng et al. 2009: fig. 2d) and are particularly long in the proximal section of the tail, 
with filaments being absent on the distal portion of the Tianyulong tail. Unlike in 
Psittacosaurus, shorter filamentous appendages are also found along the ventral and dorsal 
sides of the neck of Tianyulong. As noted by Godefroit et al. (2014), the monofilamentous 
integumentary structures associated with the ornithischian Kulindadromeus are shorter and 
thinner than those of Psittacosaurus.  
A distinctive feature of the Psittacosaurus tail bristles is their thickness and apparent 
rigidity. This unusual robustness is likely to be correlated with a high overall degree of 
cornification of the skin of psittacosaurs, which seems to have been very thick (Feduccia et al. 
2005). The presumed high degree of calcification of the keratin probably also accounts for the 
preservation of the light brown bristles of SMF R 4970 as structures with some degree of 
preserved topography, whereas the darker integumentary appendages of Beipiaosaurus, 
Tianyulong, and other dinosaurs from the Jehol Biota usually represent very thin layers of 
melanin residues (Li et al. 2010; Zhang et al. 2010), which show very little to no fluorescence 
under LSF.  
Psittacosaur fossils are not uncommon in the Jehol Biota, but tail appendages have so far 
only been reported from SMF R 4970. With a skull length of about 18 cm, this specimen is 
one of the largest psittacosaurs known from the Jehol Biota, and long bristles may therefore 
have been a feature of mature animals. Because of their restriction to only a small part of the 
body, we consider it unlikely that the psittacosaur bristles fulfilled the same function as 
maniraptoran “protofeathers”, which seem to have covered the entire body and may have 
served to insulate the body of these animals. Mayr et al. (2002) assumed a possible display or 
signaling function of the psittacosaur tail bristles, but did not elaborate this hypothesis further. 
An origin for display has subsequently also been assumed for filamentous integumentary 
structures in other non-avian dinosaurs (e.g., Xu et al. 2009). Our interpretation of the wide 
dark stripes along some of the bristles (Fig. 3F) as probable melanin residues indicates a 
former colour pattern and corroborates the hypothesis of a display function, which was also 
assumed for the similar appendages of Beipiaosaurus (Xu et al. 2009). If the psittacosaur 
bristles evolved for display, these structures could have served for silhouette enlargement of 
the animal, similar to the mane on the back of many mammals or the scale-derived dorsal 
 8 
spines of various squamates, such as the Green Iguana (Iguana iguana) and the Marine Iguana 
(Amblyrhynchus cristatus; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 2008). Mammalian manes usually have an 
intraspecific signaling function (e.g., Nagel et al. 2003; Yamaguchi et al. 2004) and either 
increase male attractiveness to females, or are found in social species that engage in territorial 
or courtship combats (e.g., hyenas and many artiodactyls). Psittacosaurs were gregarious 
animals (Zhao et al. 2007) and intraspecific combats appear to have been common in 
ceratopsians (Farlow and Dodson 1975), so that a display or signaling function of the 
psittacosaur bristles remains a viable hypothesis. The occurrence of elongated filaments in the 
same tail regions of the ornithischian taxa Psittacosaurus and Tianyulong is remarkable and 
may indicate that a pronouncement of the dorsal ridge of the tail base played a role in the 
social or sexual behavior of these animals.  
Some earlier authors already hypothesized that avian feathers developed from 
monofilamentous integumentary appendages (e.g., Schorger 1957), and after discovery of 
such filaments in maniraptoran theropods, detailed evolutionary models for the origin of 
feathers from monofilamentous structures were proposed (Prum and Brush 2002). Genetic 
studies furthermore showed that most regulatory elements associated with feather 
development appear to have been present in non-avian dinosaurs (Lowe et al. 2014), although 
some of the feather β-keratins occurred late in avian evolution (Greenwold and Sawyer 2011). 
Therefore, the integument of the last common ancestor of psittacosaurs, heterodontosaurids, 
and therizinosauroids – at the node Dinosauria – most likely had the potential to produce 
filamentous or bristle-like appendages, which are homologous to avian feathers in their 
developmental origin from discrete cell populations. This is so much the more true, if 
“reptilian” scales, mammalian hair, and avian feathers indeed have a common developmental 
origin, as has recently been proposed (Di-Poï and Milinkovitch 2016). Still, the psittacosaur 
bristles are much longer and more rigid than the integumentary appendages of maniraptoran 
theropods. Because the integument of some extant birds produces filament-like appendages 
which are structurally and developmentally different from feathers (see below), we 
recommend reservation in calling the appendages of Psittacosaurus and other ornithischians 
“feathers” (pro Barrett et al. 2015; contra, e.g., Xu and Guo 2009; Godefroit et al. 2014). 
Sawyer et al. (2003a) noted that the filamentous integumentary appendages found in non-
avian dinosaurs show a resemblance to the “beard” in the breast region of turkeys (Meleagris 
gallopavo) (Fig. 4A). Unlike feathers, these bundles of keratinous filaments do not develop 
from follicles, but from epidermal papillae (Schorger 1957; Lucas and Stettenheim 1972). The 
bristles of the turkey beard exhibit a lumen (which can be filled with connective tissue), are 
 9 
devoid of barbs, and are tightly connected at their bases, which are features shared with the 
integumentary appendages of psittacosaurs. We consider it probable that, like the turkey 
beard, the psittacosaur bristles were continuously growing, whereas feathers have a 
terminated growth phase. Filamentous integumentary appendages resembling the turkey beard 
also occur on the head of the male Congo Peafowl, Afropavo congensis (Fig. 4C), with these 
rigid and unbranched bristles being different from the feather crown of the Indian Peafowl 
(Pavo cristatus) and other pheasants. The psittacosaur bristles are proportionally much wider 
than the filaments of the turkey beard and the crown of the Congo Peafowl, but, as noted 
above, their unusual thickness may be the result of a strong cornification and calcification of 
the psittacosaur skin.  
With regard to their thickness, the psittacosaur bristles are a closer match to the cornified 
spine on the head of another bird, the Horned Screamer, Anhima cornuta (Fig. 4B). This 
epidermal outgrowth is sometimes erroneously considered to be a modified feather shaft 
(Carboneras 1992), but unlike feathers the Anhima spine shows continuous growth and is a 
brittle structure (Stettenheim 2000). The Anhima spine furthermore has a pulp, which, unlike 
the pulp of true feathers, is infilled with dense connective tissue (Fig. 4D). Ontogenetic data 
on its development seem to be lacking, but even in chicks, it forms a cylindrical structure that 
is clearly distinguished from the surrounding feathers (GM, pers. obs.). 
The exact evolutionary transition of dinosaurian filaments into true feathers is poorly 
known, not least because data on the ontogenetic development of these structures in fossil 
taxa is lacking. In particular, it is unknown, when a follicle evolved, which is one of the major 
developmental characteristics of feathers. In Prum and Brush’s (2002) model of feather 
evolution it is assumed that follicles, that is, invaginated epidermis surrounding early 
ontogenetic feather filaments, were already present in the initial, filament-like stages of 
feather evolution. However, as exemplified by the turkey beard, follicles are not requisite for 
the development of filamentous integumentary appendages, and it is possible that their origin 
coincides with that of barb ridges, which are a key characteristic of modern-type, branched 
feathers. This hypothesis corresponds with ontogenetic evidence that “[d]eveloping feathers 
of modern birds first produce an embryonic feather filament […] prior to making a follicle” 
(Sawyer et al. 2003b: 20).  
It is notable that, amongst extant birds, filamentous structures that are not highly modified 
feathers (such as eyelashes and filoplumes) only occur in the basally diverging clade 
Galloanseres. Although their ontogenetic development deserves future scrutiny, we consider it 
possible that they develop through a heterochronic process from feather primordia before 
 10 
invagination of a follicle occurs (Yu et al. 2004), which is certainly the case for the turkey 
beard (as noted above, developmental data on the Anhima spine and the Afropavo crown are 
lacking). Similarly, monofilamentous structures in non-avian dinosaurs may go back to 
filament primordia before the evolutionary origin of follicles, in which case they would not be 
“feathers” sensu Prum and Brush (2002).  
While recent fossil finds and developmental studies suggest an evolutionary origin of 
integumentary appendages homologous to feathers deep within Dinosauria, the potential 
resemblance of the psittacosaur bristles to non-feather integumentary structures in extant birds 
may indicate that these structures were still fundamentally different from true feathers. That 
the genetic pathways for integument formation in ornithischians substantially differed from 
those of theropods is suggested by the fact that the trunk skin of ornithischians can form both 
filaments and scales. In birds and non-avian maniraptoran theropods, by contrast, scales only 
occur on the feet (e.g., Foth et al. 2014), whereas the trunk is entirely clad in filaments or 
feathers.  
Here we posit that the turkey “beard”, the crown of Afropavo, and the cornified spine of 
Anhima are the closest integumentary equivalents of the psittacosaur bristles among extant 
vertebrates. The turkey beard has previously been compared with the integumentary 
appendages of non-avian dinosaurs, albeit not with those of Psittacosaurus (Sawyer et al. 
2003a), and its histology and ontogenetic development has been studied in detail (Schorger 
1957; Lucas and Stettenheim 1972). Our identification of the Afropavo crown and the Anhima 
spine as possible developmental homologues to the psittacosaur bristles is novel, but 
unfortunately no data on the ontogenetic development of these structures are currently 
available. As such, future studies of both these structures would be invaluable towards 
deepening our understanding of dinosaur filamentous integumentary structures.  
 
Acknowledgements. We thank Rainer Brocke and Gunnar Riedel for access to the specimen, 
as well as Olaf Vogel and Rolf Spitz for assistance during LSF imaging. The pictures of the 
extant comparative material were taken by Sven Tränkner. MP and TGK were supported by 
The Faculty of Science of the University of Hong Kong and the Dr. Stephen S.F. Hui Trust 
Fund (201403173007). Finally, we thank the two reviewers, Daniel Field and Paul Barrett, for 
comments that improved the manuscript.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
 11 
ALIFANOV, V. R. and SAVELIEV, S. V. 2014. Two new ornithischian dinosaurs 
(Hypsilophodontia, Ornithopoda) from the Late Jurassic of Russia. Paleontological 
Journal, 48, 414–425. 
BARRETT, P. M., EVANS, D. C. and CAMPIONE, N. E. 2015. Evolution of dinosaur 
epidermal structures. Biology Letters, 11, 20150229. 
BERGMANN, U., MORTON, R. W., MANNING, P. L., SELLERS, W. I., FARRAR, S., 
HUNTLEY, K. G., WOGELIUS, R. A. and LARSON, P. 2010. Archaeopteryx feathers 
and bone chemistry fully revealed via synchrotron imaging. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 107, 9060–9065. 
BRIGGS, D. E. and SUMMONS, R. E. 2014. Ancient biomolecules: their origins, 
fossilization, and role in revealing the history of life. BioEssays, 36, 482–490. 
CARBONERAS, C. 1992. Family Anhimidae (Screamers). 528–535 In DEL HOYO, J., 
ELLIOTT, A. and SARGATAL, J. (eds). Handbook of the Birds of the World, volume 1. 
Lnyx Edicions, Barcelona, 696 pp. 
CHEN, P. J., DONG, Z. M. and ZHEN, S. N. 1998. An exceptionally well-preserved theropod 
dinosaur from the Yixian Formation of China. Nature, 391, 147–152.  
CHIAPPE, L. M., JI, S.-A., JI, Q. and NORELL, M. A. 1999. Anatomy and systematics of the 
Confuciusornithidae (Theropoda, Aves) from the late Mesozoic of northeastern China. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History, 242, 1–89. 
DI-POÏ, N. AND MILINKOVITCH, M. C. 2016. The anatomical placode in reptile scale 
morphogenesis indicates shared ancestry among skin appendages in amniotes. Science 
Advances, 2, e1600708. 
EIBL-EIBESFELDT, I. 2008. The fighting behaviour of marine iguanas. Iguana, 15, 49–50. 
FARLOW, J. O. and DODSON, P. 1975. The behavioral significance of frill and horn 
morphology in ceratopsian dinosaurs. Evolution, 29, 353–361. 
FEDUCCIA, A., LINGHAM-SOLIAR, T. and HINCHLIFFE, J. R. 2005. Do feathered 
dinosaurs exist? Testing the hypothesis on neontological and paleontological evidence. 
Journal of Morphology, 266, 125–166. 
FOTH, C., TISCHLINGER, H. and RAUHUT, O. W. 2014. New specimen of Archaeopteryx 
provides insights into the evolution of pennaceous feathers. Nature, 511, 79–82. 
GODEFROIT, P., SINITSA, S. M., DHOUAILLY, D., BOLOTSKY, Y. L., SIZOV, A. V., 
MCNAMARA, M. E., BENTON, M. J. and SPAGNA, P. 2014. A Jurassic ornithischian 
dinosaur from Siberia with both feathers and scales. Science, 345, 451–455. 
 12 
GREENWOLD, M. J. and SAWYER, R. H. 2011. Linking the molecular evolution of avian 
beta (B) keratins to the evolution of feathers. Journal of Experimental Zoology, Part B: 
Molecular and Developmental Evolution, 316B, 609–616. 
HEDRICK, B. P. and DODSON, P. 2013. Lujiatun psittacosaurids: understanding individual 
and taphonomic variation using 3D geometric morphometrics. PloS One, 8, e69265. 
HORNER, J. R. and GOODWIN, M. B. 2009. Extreme cranial ontogeny in the Upper 
Cretaceous dinosaur Pachycephalosaurus. PLoS One, 4, e7626. 
JI, S.-A. and BO, H.-C. 1998. Discovery of the psittacosaurid skin impressions and its 
significance. Geological Review, 44, 603–606. 
KAYE, T. G., FALK, A. R., PITTMAN, M., SERENO, P. C., MARTIN, L. D., BURNHAM, 
D. A., GONG, E., XU, X. and WANG, Y. 2015. Laser-stimulated fluorescence in 
paleontology. PloS One, 10, e0125923. 
LI, Q., GAO, K. Q., VINTHER, J., SHAWKEY, M. D., CLARKE, J. A., D’ALBA, L., 
MENG, Q., BRIGGS, D. E. G. and PRUM, R. O. 2010. Plumage color patterns of an 
extinct dinosaur. Science, 327, 1369–1372. 
LINGHAM-SOLIAR, T. 2010. Dinosaur protofeathers: pushing back the origin of feathers 
into the Middle Triassic?. Journal of Ornithology, 151, 193–200. 
LOWE, C. B., CLARKE, J. A., BAKER. A. J., HAUSSLER, D. and EDWARDS, S. V. 2014. 
Feather development genes and associated regulatory innovation predate the origin of 
Dinosauria. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 32, 23–28.  
LUCAS, A. M. and STETTENHEIM, P. R. 1972. Avian anatomy: integument, part 2. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Washington DC, 750 pp. 
LÜ, J., KOBAYASHI, Y., LEE, Y. N. and JI, Q. 2007. A new Psittacosaurus (Dinosauria: 
Ceratopsia) specimen from the Yixian Formation of western Liaoning, China: the first 
pathological psittacosaurid. Cretaceous Research, 28, 272–276. 
MAYR, G., PETERS, D. S., PLODOWSKI, G. and VOGEL, O. 2002. Bristle-like 
integumentary structures at the tail of the horned dinosaur Psittacosaurus. 
Naturwissenschaften, 89, 361–365. 
NAGEL, D., HILSBERG, S., BENESCH, A. and SCHOLZ, J. 2003. Functional morphology 
and fur patterns in recent and fossil Panthera species. Scripta Geologica, 126, 227–239. 
PAUTARD, F. G. E. 1964. Calcification of keratin. 227–240. In ROOK, A. and 
CHAMPION, H. (ed.). Progress in the biological sciences in relation to dermatology, 
volume 2. Cambridge University Press, London, 499 pp. 
 13 
PRUM, R. O. and BRUSH, A. H. 2002. The evolutionary origin and diversification of 
feathers. The Quarterly Review of Biology, 77, 261–295. 
SAWYER, R. H., WASHINGTON, L. D., SALVATORE, B. A., GLENN, T. C. and KNAPP, 
L. W. 2003a. Origin of archosaurian integumentary appendages: The bristles of the wild 
turkey beard express feather‐type β keratins. Journal of Experimental Zoology, Part B: 
Molecular and Developmental Evolution, 297B, 27–34. 
SAWYER, R. H., SALVATORE, B. A., POTYLICKI, T.-T. F, FRENCH, J. O., GLENN, T. 
C. and KNAPP, L. W. 2003b. Origin of feathers: Feather beta (β) keratins are expressed in 
discrete epidermal cell populations of embryonic scutate scales. Journal of Experimental 
Zoology, Part B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution, 295B, 12–24. 
SCHORGER, A. W. 1957. The beard of the wild turkey. The Auk, 74, 441–446. 
SERENO, P. C. 2010. Taxonomy, cranial morphology, and relationships of parrot-beaked 
dinosaurs (Ceratopsia: Psittacosaurus). 21–58. In RYAN, M. J., CHINNERY-ALLGEIER, 
B. J. and EBERTH, D. A. (eds). New Perspectives on Horned Dinosaurs: The Royal 
Tyrrell Museum Ceratopsian Symposium. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 624 pp. 
STETTENHEIM, P. R. 2000. The integumentary morphology of modern birds - an overview. 
American Zoologist, 40, 461–477. 
VINTHER, J., NICHOLLS, R., LAUTENSCHLAGER, S., PITTMAN, M., KAYE, T. G., 
RAYFIELD, E., MAYR, G. and CUTHILL, I. C. in press. 3D camouflage in an 
ornithischian dinosaur. Current Biology. 
WELLNHOFER, P. 2009. Archaeopteryx. The Icon of Evolution. Friedrich Pfeil, München, 
208 pp. 
XU, X. AND GUO, Y. 2009. The origin and early evolution of feathers: insights from recent 
paleontological and neontological data. Vertebrata PalAsiatica, 47, 311–329. 
XU, X., TANG, Z. L. and WANG, X. L. 1999a. A therizinosauroid dinosaur with 
integumentary structures from China. Nature, 399, 350–354. 
XU, X., WANG, X. L. and WU, X. C. 1999b. A dromaeosaurid dinosaur with a filamentous 
integument from the Yixian Formation of China. Nature, 401, 262–266. 
XU, X., ZHENG, X. and YOU, H. 2009. A new feather type in a nonavian theropod and the 
early evolution of feathers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 832–
834. 
XU, X., WANG, K., ZHANG, K., MA, Q., XING, L., SULLIVAN, C., HU, D., CHENG, S. 
and WANG, S. 2012. A gigantic feathered dinosaur from the Lower Cretaceous of China. 
Nature, 484, 92–95. 
 14 
XU, X., ZHOU, Z., DUDLEY, R., MACKEM, S., CHUONG, C.-M., ERICKSON, G. M. and 
VARRICCHIO, D. J. 2014. An integrative approach to understanding bird origins. Science, 
346, 1253293. 
YAMAGUCHI, N., COOPER, A., WERDELIN, L. and MACDONALD, D. W. 2004. 
Evolution of the mane and group-living in the lion (Panthera leo): a review. Journal of 
Zoology, 263, 329–342. 
YOU, H., XU, X. and WANG, X. 2003. A new genus of Psittacosauridae (Dinosauria: 
Ornithopoda) and the origin and early evolution of marginocephalian dinosaurs. Acta 
Geologica Sinica, 77, 15–20. 
YU, M., YUE, Z., WU, P., WU, D. Y., MAYER, J. A., MEDINA, M., WIDELITZ, R. B., 
JIANG, T.X. and CHUONG, C. M. 2004. The developmental biology of feather follicles. 
The International Journal of Developmental Biology, 48, 181–191. 
ZHANG, F., KEARNS, S. L., ORR, P. J., BENTON, M. J., ZHOU, Z., JOHNSON, D., XU, 
X. and WANG, X. 2010. Fossilized melanosomes and the colour of Cretaceous dinosaurs 
and birds. Nature, 463, 1075–1078. 
ZHAO, Q., BARRETT, P. M. and EBERTH, D. A. 2007. Social behaviour and mass 
mortality in the basal ceratopsian dinosaur Psittacosaurus (Early Cretaceous, People's 
Republic of China). Palaeontology, 50, 1023–1029. 
ZHENG, X. T., YOU, H. L., XU, X. and DONG, Z. M. 2009. An Early Cretaceous 
heterodontosaurid dinosaur with filamentous integumentary structures. Nature, 458, 333–
336. 
ZHOU, C. F., GAO, K. Q., FOX, R. C. and CHEN, S. H. 2006. A new species of 
Psittacosaurus (Dinosauria: Ceratopsia) from the Early Cretaceous Yixian Formation, 
Liaoning, China. Palaeoworld, 15, 100–114. 
 
 
 15 
 
Figure captions 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Psittacosaurus sp. from the Early Cretaceous Jehol Biota of China (SMF R 4970). A, 
Overview of specimen. B, Detail of tail section with bristles. The scale bars represent 10 
cm. 
 
 16 
 
 
Fig. 2. A, LSF image of the Psittacosaurus tail section (SMF R 4970). Areas that were 
restored with artificial resin show a turquoise blue fluorescence. B, Interpretive and 
schematic drawing of the bristles. Presumed bristles bundles are coloured, whereas 
individual bristles and those that could not be unambiguously traced are shown in white. 
The dashed lines reconstruct the missing bristle portions, with their hypothetical lengths 
having been deduced from those of the complete bristles in the distal tail section. The 
arrows point to three bristle bases that appear to extend deeply into the integument (also 
shown in Fig. 3G). The scale bars represent 10 cm. 
 17 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. LSF images of details of the Psittacosaurus integument (SMF R 4970). A, Bristle 
section of tail, with white frames indicating the position of the details shown in B-G. B-D, 
Bases of bristle clusters, with bristles featuring bright, fluorescing midline stripes (arrows), 
which are here considered to be indicative of a pulp. E, Bristle section with bristles 
showing dark (i.e., non-fluorescing) midline stripes interpreted to be organic infillings of 
the pulp (arrows). F, Bristle section with bristles showing wide dark stripes interpreted to 
be melanin (arrows). G, Three bristle bases that extend into the preserved integument 
(dashed circles). H, Dark soft tissue remains preserved beneath and next to the jugal horn. 
The scale bar represents 10 cm for A and 10 mm for B-H. 
 
 18 
 
 
Fig. 4. A, The “beard” of the Turkey, Meleagris gallopavo (Galliformes; uncatalogued 
mounted specimen on display in Senckenberg Natural History Museum). B, The spine on 
the head of the Horned Screamer, Anhima cornuta (Anseriformes; uncatalogued mounted 
specimen on display in the Senckenberg Natural History Museum). C, Bristles on the head 
of the Congo Peafowl, Afropavo congensis (Galliformes; uncatalogued mounted specimen 
on display in Senckenberg Natural History Museum). D, Detail of longitudinal section 
through the base of an Anhima spine attached to a macerated skull (SMF 2479) to show the 
pulp, which is infilled with dense connective tissue; the tip of this spine is broken. E, F, 
Detail of two psittacosaur bristles with pulp indicated by dashed lines in the greyscale 
images to the right. The scale bars represent 10 mm. 
 
