 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
NeuroImage: Clinical
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynicl
EEG oscillations during word processing predict MCI conversion to
Alzheimer's disease
Ali Mazaheria,b,⁎,1, Katrien Segaerta,b,⁎,1, John Olichneyc, Jin-Chen Yangc, Yu-Qiong Niuc,
Kim Shapiroa,b, Howard Bowmana,b,d
a School of Psychology, University of Birmingham, United Kingdom
b Centre for Human Brain Health, University of Birmingham, United Kingdom
c Center for Mind and Brain and Neurology Department, University of California, Davis, CA, United States
d School of Computing, University of Kent, United Kingdom
A B S T R A C T
Only a subset of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients progress to develop a form of dementia. A prominent
feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive decline in language. We investigated if subtle anomalies in
EEG activity of MCI patients during a word comprehension task could provide insight into the likelihood of
conversion to AD. We studied 25 amnestic MCI patients, a subset of whom developed AD within 3-years, and 11
elderly controls. In the task, auditory category descriptions (e.g., ‘a type of wood’) were followed by a single
visual target word either semantically congruent (i.e., oak) or incongruent with the preceding category. We
found that the MCI convertors group (i.e. patients that would go on to convert to AD in 3-years) had a diminished
early posterior-parietal theta (3–5 Hz) activity induced by first presentation of the target word (i.e., access to
lexico-syntactic properties of the word), compared to MCI non-convertors and controls. Moreover, MCI con-
vertors exhibited oscillatory signatures for processing the semantically congruent words that were different from
non-convertors and controls. MCI convertors thus showed basic anomalies for lexical and meaning processing. In
addition, both MCI groups showed anomalous oscillatory signatures for the verbal learning/memory of repeated
words: later alpha suppression (9–11 Hz), which followed first presentation of the target word, was attenuated
for the second and third repetition in controls, but not in either MCI group. Our findings suggest that a subtle
breakdown in the brain network subserving language comprehension can be foretelling of conversion to AD.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a syndrome characterized by
cognitive decline that although not interfering with daily life, is greater
than expected given an individual's age. Roughly 60% of the individuals
diagnosed with MCI progress to develop dementia within 5 years of
MCI diagnosis (Gauthier et al., 2006; Portet et al., 2006). Identifying
factors that predict conversion of MCI to dementia will lead the way to
early pharmacological intervention, as well as secondary prevention by
controlling risk factors such as blood pressure, inactivity, diet and
cholesterol levels (Brookmeyer et al., 2016; Sjogren et al., 2006;
Wiesmann et al., 2015).
The most prevalent underlying cause of dementia is Alzheimer's
disease (AD). A prominent feature of AD symptomatology is a pro-
gressive cognitive decline in faculties such as learning and memory,
executive control, and language (Ferris and Farlow, 2013; Vestal et al.,
2006). The deterioration of language abilities has been proposed to be
of particular clinical relevance in terms of tracking the progression from
moderate to severe stages of AD (Ferris and Farlow, 2013). The ob-
jective of the current study was to investigate if neuronal activity of
MCI patients during a word comprehension task provides insight into
the likelihood of conversion to AD dementia.
We examined the electroencephalogram (EEG) of MCI patients, a
subset of whom developed dementia within 3 years, and healthy con-
trols, while they performed a language comprehension task. In this task,
patients and controls heard auditory phrases describing a category (e.g.
`a type of wood’, `a breakfast food’), each of which was followed by the
visual presentation of a single target word, which either fit (congruent,
i.e. oak, pancake) or did not fit (incongruent nouns) with the preceding
category statement.
The lexical processing of a target word requires the reader to access a
range of different kinds of information about the word in the mental
lexicon, including phonological, morphological and syntactic informa-
tion, as well as the word's semantic meaning. Early changes in EEG
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2017.10.009
Received 13 June 2017; Received in revised form 15 September 2017; Accepted 8 October 2017
⁎ Corresponding authors.
1 Shared first author, alphabetical order.
E-mail addresses: a.mazaheri@bham.ac.uk (A. Mazaheri), K.segaert@bham.ac.uk (K. Segaert).
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
Available online 09 October 2017
2213-1582/ © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).
MARK
 induced by target word presentation, irrespective of whether the word
is congruent or not, have been suggested to be indicative of lexical
processing (Huang et al., 2014; Ledoux et al., 2007). Lexical processing
can be facilitated by repeated word presentation due to implicit memory
for properties of the earlier presented word. Throughout the experiment
we presented target words once, twice or three times. Changes in the
EEG for congruent compared to incongruent target words are indicative
of semantic or meaning processing. For congruent words, properties of the
target word's meaning have been pre-activated and can be integrated
with the preceding phrase, facilitating meaning processing.
The data used in the current investigation was part of a previously
published study (Olichney et al., 2008) using the N400 and P600 event
related potentials (ERPs) to investigate memory encoding and retrieval
processing deficits as predictors for conversion to AD dementia.
We focused our investigation on induced power changes in oscilla-
tory activity generated by the onset of the target word. We examined
oscillatory activity in theta (3–5 Hz), alpha (~10 Hz) and beta
(15–20 Hz) frequency ranges given that prior studies have implicated
these bands in various aspects of language processing, including lexical
and semantic processing (Bastiaansen et al., 2005; Bastiaansen et al.,
2008; Davidson and Indefrey, 2007; Hagoort et al., 2004; Hermes et al.,
2014; Lam et al., 2016), as well as access to stored information and
integration of information (Klimesch, 2012; Obleser and Weisz, 2012;
Strauss et al., 2014; Weiss and Mueller, 2012). Finally, given that lan-
guage comprehension involves the interaction of different brain regions
across the cortex (Hagoort, 2013; Hermes et al., 2014), we also ex-
amined cross-frequency interactions of power across different brain
areas during word comprehension (Mazaheri et al., 2009; Mazaheri
et al., 2010; Mazaheri et al., 2014a).
1. Methods and materials
1.1. Participants
We examined the EEG recordings of 25 patients with amnestic MCI
(mean age 73.2 years, range 55–84) and 11 normal elderly controls
(mean age 74.1 years, range 57–79), who were all part of a previously
published study (Olichney et al., 2008) in which the patients were
tested annually with a semantic judgment task that has been found to
reliability elicit the N400 and P600 components (Olichney et al., 2008).
In the present analyses, we focus on the initial baseline EEG session
obtained after the MCI diagnosis in order to investigate patterns of
responses that could be predictive of dementia conversion in the fol-
lowing 3 years. The MCI patients were recruited primarily through the
Shiely-Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC) at the
University of California, San Diego. All participants were screened for
treatable causes of cognitive impairment (e.g., vitamin B12 deficiency,
thyroid dysfunction) and underwent a brain scan (generally MRI) prior
to enrolment. The exclusion criteria included stroke, epilepsy, psy-
chiatric conditions, as well as CNS-active medications. At the initial
baseline EEG recording session, the patients all met the Petersen Cri-
teria for MCI (Petersen, 2004), but not for dementia (American
Psychiatric Association, 2000). Conversion to AD was defined ac-
cording to the criteria set out by the National Institute of Neurological
and Communicative Disorders and Stroke–Alzheimer's Disease and
Related Disorders Association (McKhann et al., 1984). Fifteen patients
of the 25 with MCI subsequently converted to AD within 3 years of their
initial
baseline
EEG
recordings
(mean
number
of
years
1.62 ± 0.7 years). For more specific information of participant de-
mographics, and neurocognitive testing of participants please refer to
Olichney et al. (Olichney et al., 2008).
1.2. Semantic judgment task and study design
Our focus in this paper was purely on the encoding phase of the
experiment. At encoding, participants were presented with an auditory
phrase describing a category (e.g., ‘a type of wood’, ‘a breakfast food’)
followed 1 s later by a single visual target word (300 ms, visual angle
~0.4°) that was either congruent (i.e., oak, pancake) or incongruent
(i.e. nouns matched on word frequency and length) with the preceding
category phrase. The probability of congruent versus incongruent target
words was 0.5. The congruent target words were medium typicality
exemplars of the selected category. The incongruent target words were
incongruent with the category set by the preceding phrase but matched
for frequency of usage and word length to the congruent targets. In
addition, 2/3rds of the target words were repeated in a pseudorandom
fashion between ~10 and 140 s later. These repeated target words al-
ways followed the same uniquely associated category statement as on
the first presentation (congruent or incongruent). The participants were
instructed to wait ~3-s after the onset of the word, then read the word
aloud and state if it fit the preceding category with a “yes” or a “no”
decision. Further details of this experimental paradigm have been
published previously (Olichney et al., 2000; Olichney et al., 2008).
There were no differences between conditions and groups with re-
spect to the behavioural accuracy of performing this task, as all parti-
cipants performed near ceiling (Olichney et al., 2008). Healthy controls
and patients were given as much time as required and reaction time was
not recorded.
For our analyses of lexical processing associated with the pre-
sentation of the target word (Section 2.1 in the Results section), as well
as for our analyses of semantic congruency (Section 2.3 in the Results
section), we include only the first presentation of the target words, thus
excluding target words that have been primed previously. For our
analyses of the facilitatory effects of repeated word presentation on
lexical processing (Section 2.2 in the Results section), we analysed the
repeated target words that occurred on 1st, 2nd and 3rd presentations
within the experiment.
1.3. EEG recordings
19 to 32 channel EEG was recorded at 250 Hz, band passed 0.016 to
100 Hz, and re-referenced off-line to linked mastoids. The pre-proces-
sing of the EEG data was performed using EEGLAB (Delorme and
Makeig, 2004). Fieldtrip (Oostenveld et al., 2011) EEG epochs were
locked to the onset of the visual target words and manually inspected
for non-physiological artefacts. Independent component analysis was
then applied to remove eye movement artefacts (Jung et al., 2001). Our
classifications of frequency bands into alpha (9–11 Hz), theta (3–5 Hz)
and beta (15–20 Hz) were based on prior literature (Bauer et al., 2014;
Mazaheri et al., 2014b; Slagter et al., 2016; Van Diepen et al., 2015)
and word-induced changes in power irrespective of the condition or
participant group.
1.4. Oscillatory analyses
Time-frequency representations (TFRs) of power were calculated for
each trial (1 s prior to word onset, and 1.5 s after) using sliding Hanning
tapers having a varying time window of three cycles for each frequency
(ΔT = 3/f). This approach has been used in a number of previous stu-
dies (Bengson et al., 2012; Van Diepen et al., 2015). Word presentation
induced changes in the power of oscillatory activity, which was as-
sessed in terms of change scores from baseline (ΔP) using the following
formula:
=
−
P
P
P
P
Δ
(
)/
t
r
r
where Pr was the mean power during the baseline period 500 ms to
100 ms before the onset of the word and Pt was the power at each
specific time point.
1.5. Cross-frequency coupling between theta and alpha/beta
Language comprehension involves the interaction between different
A. Mazaheri et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
189
 brain regions across the cortex. Our goal is to capture these interactions
in the healthy and MCI groups by examining the cross-frequency con-
nectivity between theta and alpha/beta power changes following word
onset. Investigating connectivity between brain regions using EEG has
been difficult due to problems associated with volume conduction,
namely that nearby electrodes pick up activity from the same sources.
Here, we attempt to circumvent this issue by focusing on trial-by-trial
negative correlations (De Lange et al., 2008; Mazaheri et al., 2009;
Mazaheri et al., 2010; Mazaheri et al., 2014a), given that it is unlikely
that a common source generates a simultaneous increase and decrease
in power of different frequencies at distant electrode sites. Across par-
ticipants, the amplitude envelope of the theta and alpha/beta oscilla-
tions at distant electrodes of interest were correlated on a trial-by-trial
basis for each condition. For each participant, the correlation coeffi-
cients were converted to z values using Fischer's r-to-z transform to
obtain a normally distributed variable (Bengson et al., 2012; Mazaheri
et al., 2010; Mazaheri et al., 2014a). The analysis of these correlations
was assessed within groups, between groups, and between conditions,
using a one-sample t-test of the Fisher r-to-z transformed correlations.
1.6. Statistical analysis
We used a-priori defined latencies of interest and selection of elec-
trodes for our statistical tests, which were guided by previous literature
looking at oscillatory changes in EEG/MEG activity induced by word
onset (Bastiaansen et al., 2005; Bastiaansen et al., 2008; Hagoort et al.,
2004), as well as by the aggregated grand average data of conditions
and participant groups collapsed (Brooks et al., 2017).
Repeated-measures ANOVAs were used to analyze the event-related
changes in theta and alpha/beta between conditions. F-ratios were
tested using degrees of freedom adjusted by the Greenhouse–Geisser
procedure. Post hoc comparisons were Bonferroni corrected for mul-
tiple-comparisons.
The factors used were Word type (congruous, incongruous), Group
(control, MCI non-convertors, MCI convertors) and Time window
(0–500 ms or 400–500 ms, and 500–1000 ms). For analyses of the ef-
fects of repeated word presentation we also used Word repetition, by
contrasting the 1st, 2nd and 3rd presentations. Frequency ranges as
well as time windows were guided by previous research (Bastiaansen
et al., 2005; Hagoort et al., 2004; Kielar et al., 2014; Strauss et al.,
2014).
The justification for time windows and frequency ranges of interest
can be found in each individual section of the results. In addition to
using pre-defined electrodes and time windows of interest, we also used
a complementary approach where we assessed the difference in oscil-
latory theta power related to lexical and semantic processing between
MCI convertors and non-convertors across all electrodes and time
points between 0 and 1 s after the onset of words. The multiple com-
parison issue here (multiple time points and electrodes) was cir-
cumvented by obtaining probability values through whole-volume non-
parametric permutation testing (Maris and Oostenveld, 2007). In this
procedure, first a two-tailed independent t-test (MCI convertors versus
non-convertors) was computed for each individual channel-time pairs
and thresholded at a 5% significance level. Significant pairs were
clustered by direction of effect and spatial proximity using the ‘dis-
tance’-method (which defines neighbouring sensors based on proxi-
mity). A probability value of this electrode-time cluster was obtained
through the Monte Carlo estimate of the permutation p-value of the
cluster by randomly swapping the group label 1000 times and calcu-
lating the maximum cluster-level test statistic across the whole volume.
A similar procedure has been used in a number of previous studies (Van
Diepen et al., 2015; van Diepen et al., 2016; Van Diepen and Mazaheri,
2017).
It should be noted that these two analysis approaches are com-
plementary, with the first being guided by previous research (i.e. prior
precedent), while the second is data driven, but controls false positive
rates by inferring maximum clusters under the null across the entire
volume. To foreshadow our results, findings from the two approaches
converge.
2. Results
2.1. Lexical processing
Firstly, we will focus on the oscillatory changes in the EEG asso-
ciated with the lexical processing of the first presentation of single
target words. During lexical processing, a reader accesses a range of
different kinds of information about each word in the mental lexicon,
including phonological information (e.g., segmental and metrical
structure), morphological information (e.g. stems and affixes), syntactic
information (e.g. grammatical class), and the word's semantic meaning.
The onset of a word previously has been found to induce an early
increase in theta activity over posterior regions, related to the proces-
sing of word form (Bastiaansen et al., 2005; Bastiaansen et al., 2008;
Hagoort et al., 2004). Later alpha suppression at posterior sites has been
associated with further post-perceptual processing of sensory informa-
tion (Pfurtscheller, 2001) and allocation of resources according to
processing demands (Foxe et al., 1998). We were guided by the lit-
erature in our analysis approach, and analysed oscillatory changes at
Pz, in the theta (3–5 Hz) and alpha (9–11 Hz) range, respectively
0–500 ms and 500–1000 ms following the onset of the target word. Of
particular interest are any effects of Group.
2.1.1. Theta power increase related to lexical processing was attenuated in
MCI convertors
The onset of the word induced an increase in theta activity across all
three groups, peaking at around 0.25 s after word onset and maximal
over the midline-parietal electrode Pz (Fig. 1A and B). For this early
theta increase, we found a main effect of Group (F(2,33) = 6.8,
p = 0.003). MCI convertors had a significantly diminished theta in-
crease compared to the MCI non-convertors (convertors: 22% increase
vs non-convertors 50% increase, p = 0.046) and compared to the
healthy elderly control group (MCI convertors: 22% increase vs con-
trols: 59% increase, p = 0.004) (Fig. 1A).
The theta increase was followed by alpha activity suppression 0.5 to
1 s after word onset (blue in Fig. 1A). The alpha suppression effect did
not differ between groups (F(2,33) = 0.24 p = 0.78).
2.2. Facilitatory effects of lexical processing due to repeated word
presentation
Repeated word presentation facilitates lexical processing, since
there is implicit memory for properties of the word that are activated
upon first presentation (Schacter et al., 1993). Thus we compared 1st to
2nd and 3rd presentations of the target words (collapsing congruent
and incongruent words).
As discussed in Section 1, lexical processing is associated with an
early (0–500 ms) theta increase (3–5 Hz) and a late (500–1000 ms)
alpha suppression effect (9–11 Hz) at Pz. This guided our decision to
examine both oscillatory signatures for the effects of word repetition.
It should be noted that we are protected here from criticisms of
double dipping (Kriegeskorte et al., 2009), since under the null hy-
pothesis, effects of repetition would be orthogonal to effects on first
presentation, and the basic lexical processing effects identified in
Section 1 were indeed on first presentations (Friston et al., 2006).
2.2.1. Alpha suppression attenuates with each word repetition, but only for
healthy controls and not for either MCI patient group
We did not observe any significant changes in the early theta in-
crease as a result of word repetition (not shown). However for the alpha
suppression, there was a Word Repetition by Group interaction
(F(4,66) = 4.2, p = 0.005) (Fig. 2). In the healthy elderly group, the
A. Mazaheri et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
190
 alpha suppression diminished with each repetition of the word
(F(2,20) = 24.1, p < 0.001; simple effects: 1st vs 2nd word presenta-
tion: p = 0.008; 2nd vs 3rd word presentation: p = 0.072; 1st vs 3rd
word presentation: p < 0.001). There was no word repetition effect in
either the MCI non-convertors (F(2,18) = 0.45, p = 0.61) or the MCI
convertors (F(2,28) = 0.24, p = 0.76).
2.3. Semantic or meaning processing
We now focus on differential oscillatory changes in the EEG for
congruous versus incongruous target words. For congruous words, the
preceding category description has pre-activated the category exemplar
information, facilitating access to meaning information for the con-
gruous target words. Moreover, it is likely that participants semanti-
cally integrate the target's word meaning with the preceding phrase.
Previous research has found modulation of central theta associated
with semantic processing in the classic N400 time window (note that
this is distinct from the earlier and more posterior theta peaking at
around 250 associated with lexical processing, as discussed above)
(Hagoort et al., 2004; Lam et al., 2016). The N400 is an ERP indicative
of semantic processing of single words, as well as the meaning in-
tegration of these words into context. This context can be with pre-
ceding words as well as with semantic knowledge about the world
(Kutas and Federmeier, 2011). The N400 is attenuated for words con-
gruous with the context. For the changes in theta power (3–5 Hz) re-
lated to semantic processing, we focused our analyses at Cz in the N400
time window (400–500 ms). We also investigated modulations of late
alpha (9–11 Hz) at Cz 500–1000 ms following word onset, since later
occurring alpha activity over central regions has been suggested to fa-
cilitate access to stored information and be related to semantic pro-
cessing demands (Klimesch, 2012). Additionally, changes in beta over
left inferior frontal gyrus has been associated with integration of in-
formation (Wang et al., 2012) guiding us to analyze beta activity
(15–20 Hz) at Cz 500–1000 ms following word onset.
Fig. 1. An attenuation of theta activity associated with lexical processing of the target word in the group of MCI patients who would go on to convert to Alzheimer's disease. (A) The time-
frequency spectra are locked to word onset at the midline-parietal Pz electrode. There is a theta increase 0 to 0.5 s after the onset of the word, for the healthy controls and for the MCI
patients who did not convert to Alzheimer's disease. This theta increase was significantly attenuated in MCI patients who would later convert to Alzheimer's disease. For all groups, target
word presentation is followed by an alpha suppression effect (0.5 to 1 s) (B) The power envelope of the theta activity during the 1 s time-period following word onset, normalized as
percentage change from a baseline period −0.5 to −0.1 s prior to word onset. The shaded areas represent standard error around the mean. This illustrates the time period in which the
theta power pattern is discernibly attenuated for the MCI to Alzheimer convertors compared to the other two groups. (C) The theta modulation in all the individuals across the three
participant groups, at the midline-parietal electrode Pz, averaged within the 0 to 0.5 s time window after the onset of the word. This illustrates that the attenuated theta can be observed
not only at the group-level, but also at the level of individual patients. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure, the reader is referred to the online version of this
chapter.)
A. Mazaheri et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
191
 2.3.1. MCI convertors show an attenuated central theta increase at 400 ms
and a late beta suppression related to processing of semantic congruency
For the differential effect between congruent and incongruent words
at Cz, we found a transient increase in theta activity 400–500 ms fol-
lowing word onset (F(1,33) = 17.36, p < 0.001) (Fig. 3). This con-
gruency effect differed between the groups (Word Type x Group in-
teraction: F(2,33) = 4.8, p = 0.014). The theta congruency effect for the
MCI non-convertors significantly differed from the MCI convertors (MCI
non-convertors: 37% vs MCI convertors: 1%, p = 0.014). For the
healthy elderly control and MCI convertor groups, a similar theta
congruency difference was revealed but was not statistically significant
(healthy controls: 23% vs MCI convertors: 1%, p = 0.205). There was
no difference in the theta congruency effect between the MCI non-
convertors
and
healthy
elderly
controls
(p = 0.82).
For
alpha
(9–11 Hz), the effect of semantic congruency did not differ between
groups (Word Type × Group interaction: F(2,33) = 0.855, p = 0.44).
There was a suppression of beta activity at Cz for congruent com-
pared to incongruent words, occurring 0.5 s after word onset and
lasting until 1 s post onset (Fig. 3). While the degree of beta suppression
(15–20 Hz) was not significantly different for congruent vs. incongruent
words over all groups (F(1,33) = 1.37, p = 0.250), there was a clear
Word Type by Group interaction (F(2,33) = 5.58, p = 0.008). Post-hoc
analysis revealed that MCI convertors had significantly more beta
suppression to congruent than incongruent words, unlike the MCI non-
convertors (MCI convertors: −10% vs MCI non-convertors: 3%,
p = 0.017) or the healthy controls (MCI convertors: −10% vs controls:
1%, p = 0.038).
2.3.2. Cross-frequency interactions for congruent words are only present for
the healthy elderly controls, not for either MCI patient group
As mentioned above, one interpretation of the semantic congruency
effect is that the meaning of the target word is integrated with the
meaning established by the preceding phrase. Previous research has
found the suppression of beta activity localized over the frontal cortices
to be involved in semantic unification (i.e. integration) operations, with
the to-be-integrated information retrieved from temporal regions (as-
sociated with modulations of theta). The dynamic interaction between
unification of information (frontal regions) and lexical retrieval pro-
cesses (temporal regions) is thought to be critical during language
comprehension (Hagoort, 2013; Wang et al., 2012).
Using repeated measures ANOVA with the factors of word-type and
group, we determined if there was a difference between congruent and
incongruent words with regards to the theta and alpha/beta coupling,
Fig. 2. The effect of word repetition times on alpha suppression (0.5–1 s) reveals less
alpha suppression upon 2nd and 3rd presentation of the word for the healthy controls, but
not for either of the MCI patient groups. Illustrated is the % change in alpha activity
(9–11 Hz at Pz; 0.5–1 s after word presentation compared to baseline −0.5 to −0.1 s),
contrasting 1st, 2nd and 3rd presentation in each group. Shaded area represents standard
error. There is an effect of word repetition for the healthy controls: the alpha suppression
effect diminishes with each following word presentation, such that there is less alpha
suppression for 2nd compared to 1st presentation and less alpha suppression for 3rd
compared to 2nd presentation. No significant effects of word repeats are observed for
either the MCI non-convertors or the MCI convertors to AD.
Fig. 3. An attenuation of theta activity and a late beta
suppression effect associated with word congruency are
both
markers
of
imminent
conversion
from
MCI
to
Alzheimer's disease. (A) Illustrated is the difference in time-
frequency spectra between congruent and incongruent
words at the central electrode Cz. (B) There was a late in-
crease in theta activity (0.4 to 0.5 s) to congruent words
(relative to incongruent) at Cz for the healthy controls and
for the MCI patients who did not convert to Alzheimer's
disease. This late theta increase was attenuated in MCI pa-
tients who converted to Alzheimer's disease, also at the level
of individual patients. (C) Only for the MCI convertors to
Alzheimer's disease group was there a beta suppression at
Cz (15–20 Hz, 0.5 to 1 s) following congruent words (re-
lative to incongruent), which was significantly more pro-
nounced than the healthy controls and MCI non-convertors,
also at the individual-patient level.
A. Mazaheri et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
192
 and if this difference was observed in each group. In addition, rather
than just testing for differences in cross-frequency correlations between
condition and groups, we directly tested if the correlations were sig-
nificant within each groups. This approach for looking at differences in
cross-frequency interactions between patient populations and control
groups has previously been successfully used (Mazaheri et al., 2014a).
The power of the theta activity 0.4–0.5 s after word onset, at elec-
trode
Pz
was
correlated
(Spearman)
with
the
late
alpha/beta
(10–20 Hz) power suppression at frontal electrode Fz on a trial-by-trial
basis and converted to z-values with Fischer's r-to-z transform. Here we
chose to combine the alpha and beta frequency ranges. The rationale
was to reduce the likelihood of harmonic frequencies inducing spurious
positive correlations between the power of the two frequency ranges. In
addition, we chose to examine theta at Pz and alpha/beta at Fz (which
are distant on the scalp) as locations for our cross-frequency interac-
tions to reduce possible contamination and spurious correlations arising
from volume conduction.
We found a Word Type by Group interaction (F(2,33) = 4.55,
p = 0.018) (Fig. 4). Consequently, we tested the significance of the
correlation within each condition in each group. For the healthy elderly
participants, there was a strong negative-correlation (i.e. anti-correla-
tion) between theta and alpha/beta but only following congruent words
(t(10) = −4.07, p = 0.002). This anti-correlation emerging in response
to semantically congruent words was not significant for MCI non-con-
vertors (t(9) = −0.7409), p = 0.48) and absent (i.e. a positive corre-
lation) for the MCI convertors (t(14) = 1.77, p = 0.098). Furthermore,
the anti-correlation did not emerge in response to incongruent words in
any of the three group (all p's > 0.10). We also directly compared the
correlation in congruous versus incongruous conditions: for healthy
elderly individuals, congruent words induced a significantly larger anti-
correlation than incongruent words (−0.62 vs 0.31, t(10) = −3.81
p = 0.003). There were no significant differences in correlation values
between congruent and incongruent words for MCI non-convertors or
convertors (p's > 0.2).
One could argue that any correlation emerging between the theta
and alpha/beta could simply be due to certain trials being more
arousing/stimulating, rather than the result of cognitive induced neural
interactions. However, given that we observed a stark difference in the
pattern of these correlations between congruous and incongruous
words (both of which induced a theta increase and alpha suppression)
we believe it is unlikely that trial-by-trial variations in arousal could
account for the cross-frequency amplitude correlations observed.
2.4. Word onset induces mostly non-phase-locked increases in theta activity
Obtaining time-frequency representations of power in each EEG
epoch captures both non-phase locked (i.e., induced) activity as well as
the spectral representation of the word locked ERP. It is therefore
possible that the increase in oscillatory activity observed after word
onset could simply be due to ERPs locked to word onset. One approach
used in previous work (Cacace and McFarland, 2003) has been to re-
move the spectral components of the averaged ERP, from the ‘total’
spectra measured in each single trial. This approach is not without
caveats (Mazaheri and Picton, 2005) with one being that the latency
variability in the ERP can underestimate the spectrum of the ERP on a
single trial. Nonetheless, we performed this subtraction (Fig. 5) and
found that the majority of the theta increase in the 0–0.5 s window after
word onset is non-phase-locked. Thus, it is unlikely that ERP differences
for the early word responses can account for the oscillatory differences
we observed between the healthy and patient groups.
Fig. 4. The trial-by-trial cross-frequency coupling between the late theta increase (at the
central parietal electrode Pz) and the late alpha/beta suppression (at Fz following con-
gruent versus incongruent words) distinguishes healthy controls from both MCI con-
vertors to Alzheimer's disease and non-convertors. We correlated (Spearman) the theta
power (3–5 Hz, 0.4 to 0.5 s) at Pz with the alpha/beta (10–20 Hz, 0.5–1.0 s) power at
frontal electrode Fz on a trial-by-trial basis, and then converted to z-values with Fischer's
r-to-z transform. The correlation of theta and alpha/beta in each individual is illustrated,
separately for congruous and incongruous words. For the healthy participants, there was
an anti-correlation (i.e. below zero) between the late theta increase and late alpha/beta
suppression following the congruous words which was not present to incongruous words.
There was no anti-correlation for congruous words in either MCI group, nor was there a
significant difference in correlation values between congruous and incongruous words in
either MCI group. The thick coloured lines represent the difference in mean cross-fre-
quency correlation between the congruent and incongruent words, whereas the dots and
thin lines represent individual participants. (For interpretation of the references to color
in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the online version of this chapter.)
Fig.
5. Word
onset
induces
mostly
non-phase-locked
changes in theta activity. The amplitude envelope of the
‘total’ theta activity locked to onset of the word (obtained at
a single trial level and averaged) is represented in the dark-
line. The amplitude envelope of the phase-locked theta
activity measured through the time-frequency transforma-
tion of the ERP locked to the onset of word is represented as
the grey-line. The subtraction of the phase-locked theta
activity from the total theta activity shown in the red-line
should consist of primarily non-phase-locked change (al-
though see Mazaheri and Picton, 2005, for caveats of this
assumption). We thus found the majority of the increased
theta activity in the 0–0.5 s window after word onset to be
primarily non-phase locked (compare the red vs grey lines).
A. Mazaheri et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
193
 2.5. Investigating word onset differences in theta activity between MCI
groups at all time points and electrodes
In addition to using a-priori defined electrode locations and time
intervals of interest, we also utilized a mass-univariate data driven
approach looking at all electrodes and time points from 0 to 1 s after
word onset (while correcting for multiple comparisons, i.e. controlling
familywise error rates). This was to ensure that we were not over-
looking any other differences between MCI convertors and MCI non-
convertors, or biasing our results through our a-priori choices. For
lexical processing (congruent and incongruent words collapsed), theta
activity between 0.252 s and 0.752 s after word onset was significantly
attenuated in the MCI convertor group relative to the non-convertor
group in a cluster of electrodes consisting of: T5, O1, O2, Pz, and Cz
(Monto Carlo estimated p < 0.009, Fig. 6A). For semantic processing
(congruent minus incongruent words) theta activity between 0.35 s and
0.548 s after word onset was attenuated in the MCI convertors group
relative to MCI non-convertors in a cluster of electrodes consisting of:
T5, O1, Pz, Cz, and Fz (Monto Carlo estimated p < 0.013 Fig. 6B).
These results taken together suggest that not only are we not biasing
our results by selecting individual electrodes or choosing time intervals,
the lexical and semantic theta attenuation we observe in the MCI
convertors are not restricted to just electrodes Pz and Cz.
2.6. Associations between EEG measures and language and verbal memory
abilities (assessed by neuropsychological testing)
In exploratory analyses across all subjects, we found that the late
theta increase to either congruent or incongruent words correlated
significantly with performance on the animal fluency test, in which
participants named as many different animals as possible within one
minute (Table 1A). Boston Naming Test (BNT) scores tended to corre-
late with the early lexical theta activity (rho = 0.33, uncorrected
p = 0.048). Two EEG oscillatory measures were strongly correlated
with learning and memory on the California Verbal Learning Test
(CVLT (Delis et al., 1987)). Both the change in the alpha suppression
from 1st to 3rd presentation, as well as the strength of the anti-corre-
lation between late parietal theta and frontal alpha-beta power, were
correlated with learning, Delayed Recall and Recognition (Table 1B).
2.7. Classification analysis
In practice, biomarkers need to be applied at the individual level.
Accordingly, we performed a leave-one-out classification to assess dis-
crimination accuracy. Importantly, criticisms of over-fitting can be le-
velled even if cross-validation is applied, since one can effectively fish
in the choice of classifier or classifier hyper-parameters (Skocik et al.,
2016). To guard against such problems, we just applied two very
standard
classifiers:
Linear
Discriminant
Analysis
(LDA)
(Balakrishnama and Ganapathiraju, 1998) and Support Vector Machine
with Gaussian kernels, i.e. radial-basis functions (SVMrbf) (Suykens and
Vandewalle, 1999). Linear Discriminant Analysis is probably the most
basic classifier one could use, which places a single hyperplane in the
data space. We also wanted to have the capacity to classify in the
presence of linear inseparability, and the most standard classifier to do
this is a Support Vector Machine with Gaussian kernels.
We trained both LDA and SVMrbf classifiers to distinguish MCI to
Alzheimer's convertors from the other two groups – MCI stable and
Fig. 6. Investigating differences in lexical and semantic processing between MCI con-
vertors and non-convertors across all electrodes and time points (0–1 s) after word onset.
(A) For lexical processing (congruent and incongruent words collapsed) theta activity
between 0.252 s and 0.752 s after word onset was significantly attenuated in the MCI
convertor group relative to the non-convertor group in a cluster of electrodes (high-
lighted with ‘*’) consisting of: T5, O1, O2, Pz, and Cz (Monto Carlo estimated
p < 0.009). (B) For semantic processing (congruent minus incongruent words), theta
activity between 0.35 s and 0.548 s in a cluster (high-lighted with ‘*’) consisting of left
temporal, left occipital as well as midline electrodes (T5, O1, Pz, Cz, and Fz) was atte-
nuated in the MCI convertors group relative to MCI non-convertors (Monto Carlo esti-
mated p < 0.0129).
Table 1A
Spearman correlations between EEG and language measures across all subjects.
Lexical theta (Pz,
0–500 ms)
Semantic theta (Cz,
congruent,
400–500 ms)
Semantic theta (Cz,
incongruent,
400–500 ms)
rho
p
rho
p
rho
p
Animal fluency
0.30
0.078
0.44
0.007⁎
0.43
0.009⁎
Boston naming
test (BNT)
0.33
0.048#
0.21
0.22
0.21
0.23
⁎ p < 0.01.
# p < 0.05.
Table 1B
Spearman correlations between EEG and verbal memory measures across all subjects.
Alpha suppression
(3rd–1st presentation, Pz,
500–1000 ms)
Theta (Pz) and alpha/
beta (Fz) coupling
rho
p
rho
p
CVLT list A 1–5
0.51
0.001⁎
−0.53
0.0008⁎
CVLT long delay cued recall
0.56
0.0004⁎
−0.49
0.002⁎
CVLT discrminability
0.48
0.003⁎
−0.64
0.0000-
2⁎
CVLT = California Verbal Learning Test (Delis et al., 1987).
⁎ p < 0.01.
A. Mazaheri et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
194
 controls. We did this on each relevant variable in our data set, and on
combinations of these variables. The relevant variables were theta
power during lexical retrieval (window from 0 to 0.5 s after word onset)
at electrode Pz for the Congruent and Incongruent words separately, as
well as theta power during semantic processing at Cz (0.4–0.5 s after
word onset) for Congruent and Incongruent words.
We will present results for all four condition-electrode combinations
in order to assess how classification performance changes across vari-
ables. Note, we did also explore classifying with combinations of vari-
ables, i.e. multiple predictors. However, there was no apparent im-
provement in classification performance. We report sensitivity (i.e. hit
rate), specificity (i.e. correct reject rate) and d-prime (i.e. overall dis-
criminability).
The results of our classification analyses at the individual level are
outlined in Table 2. Discriminability varies considerably across condi-
tion. However, the electrode-condition combination that has the most
prior precedent in the literature is Cz incongruent. For example,
Hagoort et al. (2004) identified high theta at Cz for a semantically in-
congruent condition. Consistent with this, it is the incongruent condi-
tion at Cz at which we obtain the greatest discriminability, with the
highest linear discriminant d-prime of 1.752 and the highest support
vector machine d-prime of 2.51. Interestingly, both the LDA and SVM
have very high specificity for this condition (both 0.952) and the in-
crease in d-prime gained with the SVM arises from a large increase in
sensitivity (from 0.533 to 0.8). The practical implication of this is that
the MCI-convertor group may contain two subgroups with different
patterns. This will be the subject of future investigations.
3. Discussion
In the current study, we investigated the neurophysiological dif-
ferences during a language comprehension task among MCI patients
who later go on to convert to Alzheimer's disease (AD) within 3 years
(MCI convertors), MCI patients who remained stable (MCI non-con-
vertors) and healthy elderly controls. We focused on the oscillatory
changes in the EEG induced by the visual presentation of words, for
which the semantic context was established by preceding category
descriptions. Two critical features of language comprehension are the
rapid access to the form and meaning of words (i.e., lexical processing),
and the rapid integration of this information with meaning set up by the
preceding linguistic context and world knowledge (i.e. semantic, or
meaning, integration) (Hagoort et al., 2004). In addition, lexical pro-
cessing is facilitated when words are repeatedly presented via learning
and implicit memory.
We found that lexical retrieval (i.e., lexical and semantic access)
during a word processing task in individuals with MCI who progressed
to Alzheimer's disease elicited significantly diminished theta activity
(3–5 Hz) relative to healthy controls and MCI non-converters. Theta
attenuation thus provides an oscillatory signature for distinguishing
those who will convert from MCI to AD. Furthermore, individuals with
more severe attenuation in this lexical theta activity tended to have
poorer lexical retrieval abilities as measured by the BNT score.
Additional analyses reveal that later alpha suppression (9–11 Hz),
which also followed first presentation of the target words, was atte-
nuated for the second and even more so for the third repetition in
healthy elderly controls, but not for either of the MCI groups. Thus
alpha suppression attenuation provides a useful oscillatory signature for
both the MCI convertors and MCI non-convertors alike, distinguishing
both MCI patient groups from controls. This loss of the normal at-
tenuation of alpha suppression as words repeat, may reflect an im-
pairment in both implicit and explicit memory processes. The degree of
alpha suppression attenuation was strongly correlated with CVLT
measures of learning and declarative memory in this study, arguing that
it reflects or is important for declarative memory.
MCI convertors to Alzheimer's disease also revealed a different os-
cillatory signature for processing semantically congruent words. We
found that, whereas a central theta increase associated with word
congruency was attenuated in MCI convertors, this group exhibited a
more pronounced late beta suppression over the frontal cortex.
However, we did not observe any significant cross-frequency con-
nectivity between theta and alpha/beta power changes in the MCI
convertors, or in the MCI non-convertors. This coupling, indicative of
the complex interplay between retrieving linguistic information and
binding linguistic information, was only present for congruous words in
the healthy controls, and also demonstrated robust correlations with
verbal learning and memory on the CVLT. We discuss each of these
findings in more detail below.
During lexical processing, a reader accesses a range of different
kinds of information about the word in the mental lexicon, including
phonological, morphological and syntactic information, and the word's
semantic meaning The onset of a word has previously been found to
induce an early increase in theta activity over posterior and temporal
regions, related to the process of lexical retrieval (Bastiaansen et al.,
2005; Bastiaansen et al., 2008; Hagoort et al., 2004). In our study,
changes in the theta band associated with the lexical processing of
single words served as a conversion marker for MCI patients, suggesting
MCI convertors have difficulties with this basic aspect of language
comprehension.
Repeated presentation of words typically results in facilitated lexical
processing, given that implicit memory (and possibly also declarative
memory) are activated upon first presentation of that word (Schacter
et al., 1993). We observed in the healthy elderly group that a late alpha
suppression diminished with each repetition of the word. This repeti-
tion effect was absent in both MCI groups. Later alpha suppression at
posterior sites has been associated with active processing of sensory
information (Pfurtscheller, 2001) and allocation of resources according
to processing demands (Foxe et al., 1998). The reduction in the amount
of alpha suppression after each word repetition in the healthy controls
suggests the emergence of implicit and/or explicit memory processes,
which translates to less resource allocation required after each sub-
sequent presentation. The absence of such memory processing sig-
natures for repeated words in both MCI groups could represent a
mediating factor of their impairments in verbal learning and memory.
For semantic processing, previous research has found modulations
of central theta activity in the classic N400 time window (Hagoort
et al., 2004; Lam et al., 2016). This increase in theta activity has been
interpreted
as
indexing
the
retrieval
of
semantic
information
(Bastiaansen et al., 2005; Bastiaansen et al., 2008). Attenuation of this
central theta in the MCI convertors may reflect a breakdown in the
brain networks involved in semantic processing. Our correlational
analyses, which found that induced central theta activity to either
congruent or incongruent words were both predictive of higher se-
mantic fluency, provides even stronger evidence that central theta ac-
tivity is a critical neurophysiological substrate for semantic processes
(cf., (Brickman et al., 2005).
MCI convertors also showed an increased beta suppression (15-
Table 2
Results of leave-one-out classification analysis, to assess discriminability at the single
participant level. Each row is a classification of individual's theta power during the lexical
(Pz, 0–0.5 s after word onset) and semantic stage (Cz, 0.4–0.5 s) of word processing
(congruent or incongruent) words for a particular classifier (Linear Discriminant Analysis
(LDA) or Support Vector Machine (SVM)).
Sensitivity
Specificity
d prime
Pz cong LDA
0.67
0.81
1.30
Pz incong LDA
0.6
0.81
1.13
Cz cong LDA
0.73
0.86
1.69
Cz incong LDA
0.53
0.95
1.75
Pz cong SVM
0.6
0.81
1.13
Pz incong SVM
0.6
0.76
0.96
Cz cong SVM
0.6
0.90
1.56
Cz incong SVM
0.8
0.95
2.51
A. Mazaheri et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
195
 20 Hz) for semantic congruency. Beta oscillations have been linked to
binding of linguistic information, or unification (Wang et al., 2012), see
review (Weiss and Mueller, 2012). In the current language compre-
hension task, we assume that the meaning of the target word is in-
tegrated with the meaning set-up by the preceding phrase. Following
this assumption, one would expect that the suppression of beta activity
(often found to be localized over the frontal cortices) is involved in
semantic unification operations, with the to-be-integrated information
retrieved from temporal regions (associated with modulations of theta).
Whereas we did not observe any differences in beta suppression be-
tween congruent vs. incongruent words in the healthy elderly group
and MCI non-convertors, we did find that MCI convertors had sig-
nificantly more beta suppression to congruent words. We do not believe
however that we should interpret this finding for the MCI convertors as
an index of successful binding of semantic information, given the clear
deficits in the initial retrieval of lexical and semantic information, and
our cross-frequency connectivity findings across the groups, which we
will discuss next.
The dynamic interaction between unification of information (frontal
regions) and lexical retrieval processes (temporal regions) which is so
important to language comprehension can be captured by examining
the cross-frequency connectivity between theta (i.e., retrieval of in-
formation) and alpha/beta power changes (i.e., binding of informa-
tion). In the healthy control group, semantic processing of congruent
words induced significant coupling between the posterior theta increase
and frontal alpha/beta suppression, which we interpret as reflecting
communication between brain regions to obtain an integrated meaning
representation of the target with the preceding semantically congruent
linguistic context in memory. Although the MCI non-convertors showed
intact oscillatory signatures of retrieving lexical and semantic in-
formation, the coupling effect was absent in this MCI group, suggesting
intact retrieval processing but a breakdown in the binding process.
Moreover, the MCI convertors did not show this coupling, which, taken
together with the anomalous oscillatory signatures of retrieval of in-
formation, suggest that the MCI convertors have difficulties with the
retrieval of single word meaning as well as binding multiple words. Our
finding that the strength of coupling between parietal theta and frontal
alpha-beta is strongly correlated with learning and delayed memory on
the CVLT suggests there may be a fundamental neurophysiological
mechanism for memory ‘binding’ and integration of a complex event
into a single representation and/or memory trace. We also found sig-
nificant correlations with verbal learning and memory for both the
changes in the alpha suppression from 1st to 3rd presentation. Both of
these EEG abnormalities may be responsible for the memory deficits
that characterize amnestic MCI. Further replication in other cohorts is
recommended and future studies would benefit from a focus on the
degree to which these oscillatory changes predict trial-by-trial learning.
We should note that posterior theta oscillations do not have a role
tied exclusively to language processes, but also to memory recollection
(Addante et al., 2011). A future investigation is needed to examine how
the aberrant pattern of theta activity in the MCI patients corresponds to
performance domains other than word processing. We hypothesise that
the attenuated theta response we observe during the various stages of
word processing is not solely tied to the language domain, and likely
reflects the subtle breakdown of the neural architecture involved in
several
domains
of
cognitive
processing,
including
recollective
memory. Interestingly, work by Addante et al. (2011) has found that
theta activity prior to the onset of a stimulus played a critical role in
predisposing memory recollection. While in the current study, we fo-
cused on the post-word change in theta activity, theta activity is also
present in the EEG signal at rest. One future endeavour could be in-
vestigating if the pre-stimulus theta, particularly its variability in time,
could be another factor accounting for variance in MCI conversion to
dementia.
A number of previous studies have investigated word processing in
amnesic patients using event-related potentials (Addante et al., 2012;
Addante, 2015). The (time-domain) event related averaging approach
(i.e. ERPs) is only sensitive to brain activity that is both time-locked and
consistently phase-locked to the onset of an experimental event, such as
a word. In contrast to this time-domain event-related averaging ap-
proach, looking at the spectral changes in the EEG with respect to ex-
perimental events affords the possibility to look at brain activity that is
time-locked, but not necessarily phased locked to an experimental
event. In addition, the neurophysiological origins of oscillatory activity
might be better defined than the event-related potentials, particularly
for the late occurring sustained potentials often linked to higher cog-
nitive processes such as semantic processing and working memory
(please refer to (Mazaheri and Jensen, 2008) for discussion on this).
In summary, our findings suggest that MCI patients who progress to
Alzheimer's disease, as a group, have subtle deficits in language com-
prehension that are revealed by oscillatory changes in the EEG during
word processing. Our results suggest that the breakdown of the brain
network subserving language comprehension could be foretelling of the
emergence of AD as well as the underlying memory failures observed in
these patients in the prodromal stage of the disease. Additionally, our
leave-one-out classification analysis, with a highest d-prime of 2.51,
suggests that our findings may contain a workable early-stage bio-
marker for individuals facing impending conversion from MCI to AD.
Future work with larger sample sizes will need to be undertaken to fully
assess the effectiveness of our findings in providing individual-level
markers. Another potential direction for future research would be to
determine if such anomalies are also present in MCI individuals who
later convert to other forms of dementia (e.g., Vascular, Frontotemporal
or Lewy Body), testing if these EEG findings enable stratification for
other forms of dementia.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by a National Institutes of Health Grant
(R01-AG048252 to J.O.). We thank Professor David Salmon for the
neuropsychological characterization of the participants and the Shiley-
Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center (ADRC) at University of
California, San Diego. We would also like to thank Dr. Tom Campbell
for writing the program “Rawhide” to convert the EEG data in binary
format to a format readable by EEGLab.
Conflicts of interest
All the authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
Addante, R.J., 2015. A critical role of the human hippocampus in an electrophysiological
measure of implicit memory. NeuroImage 109, 515–528. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuroimage.2014.12.069 [doi].
Addante, R.J., Watrous, A.J., Yonelinas, A.P., Ekstrom, A.D., Ranganath, C., 2011.
Prestimulus theta activity predicts correct source memory retrieval. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 108 (26), 10702–10707. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1014528108
[doi].
Addante, R.J., Ranganath, C., Yonelinas, A.P., 2012. Examining ERP correlates of re-
cognition memory: evidence of accurate source recognition without recollection.
NeuroImage 62 (1), 439–450. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.031
[doi].
American Psychiatric Association, 2000. In: In American Psychiatric Association (Ed.),
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed. .
Balakrishnama, S., Ganapathiraju, A., 1998. Linear Discriminant Analysis: A Brief
Tutorial. pp. 11.
Bastiaansen, M.C., van der Linden, M., Ter Keurs, M., Dijkstra, T., Hagoort, P., 2005.
Theta responses are involved in lexical-semantic retrieval during language proces-
sing. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 17 (3), 530–541. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/
0898929053279469 [doi].
Bastiaansen, M.C., Oostenveld, R., Jensen, O., Hagoort, P., 2008. I see what you mean:
theta power increases are involved in the retrieval of lexical semantic information.
Brain Lang. 106 (1), 15–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2007.10.006 [doi].
Bauer, M., Stenner, M.P., Friston, K.J., Dolan, R.J., 2014. Attentional modulation of
alpha/beta and gamma oscillations reflect functionally distinct processes. The
Journal of Neuroscience 34 (48), 16117–16125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1523/
A. Mazaheri et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
196
 JNEUROSCI.3474-13.2014 [doi].
Bengson, J.J., Mangun, G.R., Mazaheri, A., 2012. The neural markers of an imminent
failure of response inhibition. NeuroImage 59 (2), 1534–1539. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.neuroimage.2011.08.034 [doi].
Brickman, A.M., Paul, R.H., Cohen, R.A., Williams, L.M., MacGregor, K.L., Jefferson, A.L.,
Gordon, E., 2005. Category and letter verbal fluency across the adult lifespan: re-
lationship to EEG theta power. Arch. Clin. Neuropsychol. 20 (5), 561–573
(doi:S0887-6177(05)00009-0 [pii]).
Brookmeyer, R., Kawas, C.H., Abdallah, N., Paganini-Hill, A., Kim, R.C., Corrada, M.M.,
2016. Impact of interventions to reduce Alzheimer's disease pathology on the pre-
valence of dementia in the oldest-old. Alzheimers Dement. 12 (3), 225–232. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2016.01.004 [doi].
Brooks, J.L., Zoumpoulaki, A., Bowman, H., 2017. Data-driven region-of-interest selection
without inflating Type I error rate. Psychophysiology 54 (1), 100–113.
Cacace, A.T., McFarland, D.J., 2003. Spectral dynamics of electroencephalographic ac-
tivity during auditory information processing. Hear. Res. 176 (1–2), 25–41
(doi:S0378595502007153 [pii).
Davidson, D.J., Indefrey, P., 2007. An inverse relation between event-related and time-
frequency violation responses in sentence processing. Brain Res. 1158, 81–92
(doi:S0006-8993(07)01025-6 [pii).
De Lange, F.P., Jensen, O., Bauer, M., Toni, I., 2008. Interactions between posterior
gamma and frontal alpha/beta oscillations during imagined actions. Front. Hum.
Neurosci. 2, 7. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/neuro.09.007.2008 [doi].
Delis, D.C., Kramer, J.H., Kaplan, E., Ober, B.A., 1987. CVLT, California verbal learning
test: adult version: manual. In: Psychological Corporation.
Delorme, A., Makeig, S., 2004. EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial
EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. J. Neurosci. Methods 134
(1), 9–21. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009 [doi].
Ferris, S.H., Farlow, M., 2013. Language impairment in Alzheimer's disease and benefits
of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. Clin. Interv. Aging 8, 1007–1014. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2147/CIA.S39959 [doi].
Foxe, J.J., Simpson, G.V., Ahlfors, S.P., 1998. Parieto-occipital approximately 10 Hz ac-
tivity reflects anticipatory state of visual attention mechanisms. Neuroreport 9 (17),
3929–3933.
Friston, K.J., Rotshtein, P., Geng, J.J., Sterzer, P., Henson, R.N., 2006. A critique of
functional localisers. NeuroImage 30 (4), 1077–1087 (doi:S1053-8119(05)00602-6
[pii]).
Gauthier, S., Reisberg, B., Zaudig, M., Petersen, R.C., Ritchie, K., Broich, K., Winblad, B.,
2006. Mild cognitive impairment. Lancet 367 (9518), 1262–1270. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68542-5.
Hagoort, P., 2013. MUC (memory, unification, control) and beyond. Front. Psychol. 4,
416. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00416.
Hagoort, P., Hald, L., Bastiaansen, M., Petersson, K.M., 2004. Integration of word
meaning and world knowledge in language comprehension. Science (New York, N.Y.)
304 (5669), 438–441. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1095455.
Hermes, D., Miller, K.J., Vansteensel, M.J., Edwards, E., Ferrier, C.H., Bleichner, M.G.,
Ramsey, N.F., 2014. Cortical theta wanes for language. NeuroImage 85 (2), 738–748.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.07.029.
Huang, Y.T., Hopfinger, J., Gordon, P.C., 2014. Distinguishing lexical- versus discourse-
level processing using event-related potentials. Mem. Cogn. 42 (2), 275–291. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3758/s13421-013-0356-z.
Jung, T.P., Makeig, S., McKeown, M.J., Bell, A.J., Lee, T.W., Sejnowski, T.J., 2001.
Imaging brain dynamics using independent component analysis. Proc. IEEE 89 (7),
1107–1122. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/5.939827.
Kielar, A., Meltzer, J.A., Moreno, S., Alain, C., Bialystok, E., 2014. Oscillatory responses to
semantic and syntactic violations. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 26 (12), 2840–2862. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00670 [doi].
Klimesch, W., 2012. Alpha-band oscillations, attention, and controlled access to stored
information. Trends Cogn. Sci. 16 (12), 606–617. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.
2012.10.007.
Kriegeskorte, N., Simmons, W.K., Bellgowan, P.S., Baker, C.I., 2009. Circular analysis in
systems neuroscience: the dangers of double dipping. Nat. Neurosci. 12 (5), 535–540.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn.2303.
Kutas, M., Federmeier, K.D., 2011. Thirty years and counting: finding meaning in the
N400 component of the event-related brain potential (ERP). Annu. Rev. Psychol. 62,
621–647. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.093008.131123.
Lam, N.H., Schoffelen, J.M., Udden, J., Hulten, A., Hagoort, P., 2016. Neural activity
during sentence processing as reflected in theta, alpha, beta, and gamma oscillations.
NeuroImage (doi:S1053-8119(16)00203-2 [pii]).
Ledoux, K., Gordon, P.C., Camblin, C.C., Swaab, T.Y., 2007. Coreference and lexical re-
petition: Mechanisms of discourse integration. Mem. Cogn. 35 (4), 801–815.
Maris, E., Oostenveld, R., 2007. Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG- and MEG-data.
J. Neurosci. Methods 164 (1), 177–190 (doi:S0165-0270(07)00170-7 [pii]).
Mazaheri, A., Jensen, O., 2008. Asymmetric amplitude modulations of brain oscillations
generate slow evoked responses. J. Neurosci. 28 (31), 7781–7787. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1631-08.2008.
Mazaheri, A., & Picton, T. W. (2005). EEG spectral dynamics during discrimination of
auditory and visual targets. Brain Res. Cogn. Brain Res., 24(1), 81–96. (doi:S0926-
6410(04)00351-9 [pii]).
Mazaheri, A., Nieuwenhuis, I.L., van Dijk, H., Jensen, O., 2009. Prestimulus alpha and mu
activity predicts failure to inhibit motor responses. Hum. Brain Mapp. 30 (6),
1791–1800. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20763 [doi].
Mazaheri, A., Coffey-Corina, S., Mangun, G.R., Bekker, E.M., Berry, A.S., Corbett, B.A.,
2010. Functional disconnection of frontal cortex and visual cortex in attention-def-
icit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 67 (7), 617–623. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.biopsych.2009.11.022.
Mazaheri, A., Fassbender, C., Coffey-Corina, S., Hartanto, T.A., Schweitzer, J.B., Mangun,
G.R., 2014a. Differential oscillatory electroencephalogram between attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder subtypes and typically developing adolescents. Biol.
Psychiatry 76 (5), 422–429. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.08.023.
Mazaheri, A., van Schouwenburg, M.R., Dimitrijevic, A., Denys, D., Cools, R., Jensen, O.,
2014b. Region-specific modulations in oscillatory alpha activity serve to facilitate
processing in the visual and auditory modalities. NeuroImage 87, 356–362. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.10.052.
McKhann, G., Drachman, D., Folstein, M., Katzman, R., Price, D., Stadlan, E.M., 1984.
Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: report of the NINCDS-ADRDA work group
under the auspices of department of health and human services task force on alz-
heimer's disease. Neurology 34 (7), 939–944.
Obleser, J., Weisz, N., 2012. Suppressed alpha oscillations predict intelligibility of speech
and its acoustic details. Cereb. Cortex 22 (11), 2466–2477. New York, N.Y.: 1991.
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr325.
Olichney, J.M., Van Petten, C., Paller, K.A., Salmon, D.P., Iragui, V.J., Kutas, M., 2000.
Word repetition in amnesia. electrophysiological measures of impaired and spared
memory. Brain : A Journal of Neurology 123 (Pt 9), 1948–1963.
Olichney, J.M., Taylor, J.R., Gatherwright, J., Salmon, D.P., Bressler, A.J., Kutas, M.,
Iragui-Madoz, V.J., 2008. Patients with MCI and N400 or P600 abnormalities are at
very high risk for conversion to dementia. Neurology 70 (19 Pt 2), 1763–1770
(doi:01.wnl.0000281689.28759.ab [pii]).
Oostenveld, R., Fries, P., Maris, E., Schoffelen, J.M., 2011. FieldTrip: Open source soft-
ware for advanced analysis of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data.
Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2011, 156869. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1155/2011/156869.
Petersen, R.C., 2004. Mild cognitive impairment as a diagnostic entity. J. Intern. Med.
256 (3), 183–194. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01388.x.
Pfurtscheller, G., 2001. Functional brain imaging based on ERD/ERS. Vis. Res. 41
(10−11), 1257–1260 (doi:S0042-6989(00)00235-2 [pii]).
Portet, F., Ousset, P.J., Visser, P.J., Frisoni, G.B., Nobili, F., Scheltens, P., ... MCI Working
Group of the European Consortium on Alzheimer's Disease (EADC), 2006. Mild
cognitive impairment (MCI) in medical practice: a critical review of the concept and
new diagnostic procedure. Report of the MCI working group of the European con-
sortium on Alzheimer's disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 77 (6), 714–718
(doi:jnnp.2005.085332 [pii]).
Schacter, D.L., Chiu, C.Y., Ochsner, K.N., 1993. Implicit memory: a selective review.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 159–182. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ne.16.
030193.001111 [doi].
Sjogren, M., Mielke, M., Gustafson, D., Zandi, P., Skoog, I., 2006. Cholesterol and
Alzheimer's disease—is there a relation? Mech. Ageing Dev. 127 (2), 138–147
(doi:S0047-6374(05)00238-1 [pii]).
Skocik, M., Collins, J., Callahan-Flintoft, C., Bowman, H., Wyble, B., 2016. I tried a bunch
of things: the dangers of unexpected overfitting in classification. bioRxiv. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1101/078816.
Slagter, H.A., Prinssen, S., Reteig, L.C., Mazaheri, A., 2016. Facilitation and inhibition in
attention: functional dissociation of pre-stimulus alpha activity, P1, and N1 compo-
nents. NeuroImage 125, 25–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.09.
058.
Strauss, A., Kotz, S.A., Scharinger, M., Obleser, J., 2014. Alpha and theta brain oscilla-
tions index dissociable processes in spoken word recognition. NeuroImage 97,
387–395. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.04.005.
Suykens, J.A.K., Vandewalle, J., 1999. Least squares support vector machine classifiers.
Neural. Process. Lett. 9 (3), 293–300. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1018628609742.
Van Diepen, R.M., Mazaheri, A., 2017. Cross-sensory modulation of alpha oscillatory
activity: suppression, idling, and default resource allocation. Eur. J. Neurosci. 45
(11), 1431–1438. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ejn.13570.
Van Diepen, R.M., Cohen, M.X., Denys, D., Mazaheri, A., 2015. Attention and temporal
expectations modulate power, not phase, of ongoing alpha oscillations. J. Cogn.
Neurosci. 27 (8), 1573–1586. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00803.
van Diepen, R.M., Miller, L.M., Mazaheri, A., Geng, J.J., 2016. The role of alpha activity
in spatial and feature-based attention. eNeuro 3 (5) ENEURO.0204-16.2016.
eCollection 2016 Sep–Oct. (doi:ENEURO.0204-16.2016 [pii]).
Vestal, L., Smith-Olinde, L., Hicks, G., Hutton, T., & Hart, J.,Jr. (2006). Efficacy of lan-
guage assessment in Alzheimer's disease: comparing in-person examination and tel-
emedicine. Clin. Interv. Aging, 1(4), 467–471.
Wang, L., Jensen, O., van den Brink, D., Weder, N., Schoffelen, J.M., Magyari, L.,
Bastiaansen, M., 2012. Beta oscillations relate to the N400m during language com-
prehension. Hum. Brain Mapp. 33 (12), 2898–2912. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.
21410.
Weiss, S., Mueller, H.M., 2012. “Too many betas do not spoil the broth”: the role of beta
brain oscillations in language processing. Front. Psychol. 3, 201. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00201.
Wiesmann, M., Capone, C., Zerbi, V., Mellendijk, L., Heerschap, A., Claassen, J.A.,
Kiliaan, A.J., 2015. Hypertension impairs cerebral blood flow in a mouse model for
Alzheimer's disease. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 12 (10), 914–922 (doi:CAR-EPUB-71320
[pii]).
A. Mazaheri et al.
NeuroImage: Clinical 17 (2018) 188–197
197
