 Current Biology
Minireview
Genes and Odors Underlying the Recent Evolution of
Mosquito Preference for Humans
Carolyn S. McBride
Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
Correspondence: csm7@princeton.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.11.032
Mosquito species that specialize in biting humans are few but dangerous. They include the African malaria
vectors Anopheles gambiae and Anopheles coluzzii, as well as Aedes aegypti, the cosmopolitan vector of
dengue, chikungunya, and yellow fever. These mosquitoes have evolved a remarkable innate preference
for human odor that helps them find and bite us. Here I review what is known about this important evolu-
tionary adaptation, from its historical documentation to its chemical and molecular basis.
Introduction
The majority of the 3000+ mosquito species that exist worldwide
are opportunistic [1]. They tend to bite the vertebrate animals
that are most readily available in their environment. Limits exist,
of course, but mosquitoes usually restrict themselves to broad
taxonomic groups, such as mammals or birds, rather than nar-
row host species, genera, or families.
It is, therefore, exceptional that a handful of mosquito species
have evolved to specialize in biting humans. By no coincidence,
these human specialists are also some of the most efficient and
deadly vectors of human disease. Anopheles gambiae and
Anopheles coluzzii are the primary vectors of malaria in Africa,
while Aedes aegypti is the primary vector of dengue, chikungu-
nya, and yellow fever worldwide. Together they account for
hundreds of thousands of deaths and hundreds of millions of
non-lethal cases of disease each year [2].
The enormous impact of these vector species on humans has
made them the subject of intense study since the early 1900s.
Initial comparisons with close relatives that do not specialize
highlighted the fascinating array of adaptations that help
mosquitoes find and bite humans [3,4]. More recent work has
begun to dissect the chemical and molecular basis of one such
adaptation in particular — a strong innate preference for human
odor. These historical and contemporary studies are the focus of
this review.
Parallel Evolution of Preference for Human Odor in
Aedes and Anopheles
Aedes and Anopheles mosquitoes are only distantly related, last
sharing a common ancestor 150–200 million years ago [5].
Nevertheless, both genera include species that have indepen-
dently evolved from opportunists into human-biting specialists,
presumably since humans began forming dense, stable commu-
nities 10–15,000 years ago [6]. One of the key behaviors that
helps these specialists selectively target humans is their strong
preference for human odor over that of other animals. This pref-
erence is displayed by females, who need the nutrients from a
blood meal to synthesize eggs, and can most clearly be seen
by comparing the specialists with their close opportunistic
relatives.
For example, Aedes aegypti comprises two ecologically
distinct subspecies (Figure 1A). The derived Ae. aegypti aegypti
is the human specialist. The ancestral Ae. aegypti formosus is
ecologically variable and is often still found living in forests and
feeding on a variety of mammals, and even reptiles [3,7]. Ana-
lyses of blood found in the gut of field-collected females reveal
their distinct biting habits (Figure 1A). Biting, however, is heavily
influenced by host availability and thus is not a reliable indicator
of innate preference. Innate responses to host odor can be
measured in the field using odor-baited entry traps, or in the lab-
oratory using wind tunnels and olfactometers. Initial olfactom-
eter studies from the 1970s documented striking divergence in
preference between the subspecies where they co-occur along
the coast of East Africa, with Ae. aegypti aegypti showing much
stronger
attraction
to,
and
preference
for,
human
odor
(Figure 1B) [8,9]. This was true when humans were pitted against
such diverse hosts as guinea pigs, rats, and chickens [9] and per-
sists to the present day [10].
An. gambiae and An. coluzzii are closely related incipient
species, formerly known as the ‘S’ and ‘M’ forms of An. gam-
biae. They belong to a larger complex of morphologically iden-
tical sibling species that have partially overlapping distributions
across sub-Saharan Africa and vary widely in biting patterns
[4,11]. At one extreme, An. gambiae and coluzzii specialize in
biting humans, while at the other, An. quadriannulatus feeds
almost exclusively on animals. The remaining species, including
the widespread An. arabiensis, are more or less opportunistic.
Blood-meal analyses suggest that both An. gambiae and
An. coluzzii strongly prefer biting humans [11], but innate
odor-based preferences have only been studied in a single
strain of An. coluzzii originating in Liberia. This strain is strongly
attracted to human odor and averse to cow odor in no-choice
trials [12,13], and clearly prefers human odor in choice trials
[13]. An. quadriannulatus, in contrast, is averse to human
odor but not cow odor in an olfactometer [12] and responds
more strongly to pure carbon dioxide than to a live human in
the field [14].
Odorants and Odorant Blends Underlying Preference for
Humans
What characteristics of human odor attract specialists and help
them distinguish us from other animals? This question has
been addressed over the past several decades by testing the
response of female mosquitoes to odors in a variety of laboratory
Current Biology 26, R41–R46, January 11, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
R41
 and field settings. Despite the diversity of approaches, several
key principles have emerged.
First, carbon dioxide is a very important activator of mosquito
host-seeking behavior and instantly sensitizes An. gambiae/
coluzzii and Ae. aegypti aegypti females to other host-derived
stimuli [15,16]. Its ubiquitous presence in animal breath, howev-
er, provides little information to help specialists distinguish
between host species, and some have suggested that it is a
stronger directional attractant for opportunistic mosquitoes
[14,17]. Ae. aegypti aegypti females will certainly navigate up tur-
bulent plumes of carbon dioxide, but not when given the option
of following a human odor plume instead ([18] and references
therein).
Compounds known to be enriched in human odor, in contrast,
clearly play a key role in attracting specialists (Table 1). Lactic
acid is 10–100 times more abundant in the skin residues of hu-
mans than those of other animals, including other primates
[19]. In a pioneering study published in 1968, Acree and col-
leagues identified lactic acid as the active component in a frac-
tion of human arm washings that attracted Ae. aegypti aegypti
[20]. Females responded to lactic acid in substantial numbers
when carbon dioxide was present. Subsequent work replicated
the original finding and further suggested that lactic acid is a
signature human odorant for this mosquito. Attractive human
odor extracts can be rendered unattractive by enzymatic
removal of lactic acid [21], while unattractive animal-odor ex-
tracts can become attractive by its addition [22]. Results are
more mixed for An. coluzzii, which neither responds to lactic
acid in the presence of carbon dioxide nor requires it to show
attraction to a human odor extract [19,23]. Nevertheless, typi-
cally unattractive cow odor was rendered attractive to An. coluz-
zii by supplementation with lactic acid [19]. Ammonia is also
abundant in human sweat and may be as important to An. gam-
biae/coluzzii as lactic acid is to Ae. aegypti aegypti. Ammonia
attracts the former species, but not the latter, with or without car-
bon dioxide, across a range of doses (Table 1) [23–25].
Apart from lactic acid and ammonia, no other human odorants
have proven consistently attractive to human-preferring mosqui-
toes when presented singly or with carbon dioxide. Olfaction is
highly contextual, however, and a compound that is neutral or re-
pellent when presented alone may be attractive when mixed with
other compounds. This type of synergism is critical for special-
ists. Ammonia enhances the attractiveness of lactic acid to
Ae. aegypti aegypti [25] and, vice versa, lactic acid enhances
the attractiveness of ammonia to An. coluzzii [24]. Acetone and
an array of carboxylic acids also attract the two species when
added to blends [26–28]. Remarkably, An. coluzzii responds to
the mix of carboxylic acids given off by Limburger cheese — a
food item that shares both its pungent aroma and characteristic
bacteria with human feet [28]. Recognizing the importance
of synergism among human odorants, several groups have
worked to develop synthetic blends containing between three
and fifteen compounds mixed in precise proportions that attract
as many, or sometimes even more, mosquitoes than human odor
itself [29–31].
Finally, research to date has focused almost exclusively on
attraction in no-choice assays, rather than preference in a choice
context. There are conceptual and empirical reasons to believe
that the chemical bases of these behavioral responses are not
identical. A mosquito may be attracted to an odor blend, yet still
discriminate against it when presented with an alternative option.
Indeed, the synthetic blends that attract as many or more
mosquitoes than human odor in no-choice trials perform poorly
when pitted directly against human odor in a choice setting
0
25
50
% Response
50
25
0
50
25
0
25
50
% Response
Choice
No-choice
A
B
Ae. aegypti aegypti
Ae. aegypti formosus
  (or mixed population)
Human
Non-human
Subspecies aegypti
Subspecies formosus
Current Biology
Figure 1. Aedes aegypti aegypti has
evolved a strong preference for human
body odor.
(A) Map showing approximate distribution of the
human-adapted Ae. aegypti aegypti (grey) and
opportunistic Ae. aegypti formosus (black). The
green oval marks the area along the coast of
East Africa where the two subspecies coexist.
Pie charts illustrate the results of ten published
blood-meal analyses: field-collected blood-fed
females were scored as having fed on a human or a
non-human animal. Locations and references for
subspecies aegypti (top row): Hawaii, USA [42];
Florida, USA [43]; Pate, Kenya [44]; Andaman/
Nicobar Islands [45]; rural Thailand [46,47]. Refer-
ences for subspecies formosus and mixed pop-
ulations
(bottom
row):
Entebbe,
Uganda
[7];
Mombasa, Kenya [48]; Ganda, Kenya [7]. (B) An
early example of host attraction and preference
assays from 1973 in a two-port olfactometer [8].
Females are exposed to streams of air that
have passed through a chamber that is empty or
contains an odor source such as a live host.
Mosquitoes flying upwind in either stream enter a
trap from which they cannot escape. No-choice
tests measure attraction to each host in isolation
while choice tests measure preference. The two
types of behaviors are related, yet distinct. For
example, three strains of subspecies aegypti
(grey bars) showed moderate attraction to a guinea
pig in isolation, but strongly preferred a human
when given a choice. All strains originated in coastal East Africa and were tested in the early 1970s. Bars show total percent response of 400 females tested
in four separate trials of 100 each. Data for replicates were not provided, precluding statistical comparison.
R42
Current Biology 26, R41–R46, January 11, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
Current Biology
Minireview
 [29–31]. Likewise, adding lactic acid to an animal odor blend can
rescue attraction by human-preferring mosquitoes [22], but can
it fool them into choosing the animal? This test has not been
done, but the answer is likely ‘no’. There is clearly still work to
be done to fully understand the nature of preference for humans
at the chemical level.
Genetic and Neural Changes Underlying Preference for
Humans
What genetic and neural changes underlie the evolution of prefer-
ence for human odor? Potential answers to this question fall into
two broad categories corresponding to changes in odor detec-
tion by peripheral sensory neurons (Figure 2A) versus changes
in integration by central circuits in the brain. Up to now,
research has focused solely on odor detection at the periphery.
The results suggest, at minimum, that evolution has ‘tuned’
olfactory sensory neurons to important human odorants via
changes in the expression and sensitivity of olfactory receptors.
Insect olfactory receptors include members of three large
gene families: the odorant receptors (ORs), ionotropic receptors
(IRs), and gustatory receptors (GRs) [32]. These receptors, along
with other olfactory genes such as odorant-binding proteins
(OBPs), determine the tuning of the sensory neurons in which
they are expressed (Figure 2A). ORs recognize diverse com-
pounds such as esters, alcohols, and ketones, while antennal
IRs are more narrowly focused on the recognition of amines
and organic acids, and three highly conserved mosquito GRs
recognize carbon dioxide ([32] and references therein). Most of
the key attractants and synergists for specialists, including
ammonia, lactic acid, and carboxylic acids, are known or pre-
sumed IR ligands (Table 1). One might therefore predict that
the genetic changes important for preference will have occurred
at IR loci or genes affecting the IR pathway. This possibility has
yet to be thoroughly explored. Interestingly, however, recent
work has clearly shown that ORs are important in the determina-
tion of preference.
DeGennaro and colleagues [33] examined the behavior of
Ae. aegypti aegypti females in which the function of all ORs had
been eliminated via a mutation in their obligate co-receptor
orco. As long as carbon dioxide was present, these females
responded as strongly as wild-type females to human odor in
no-choice trials, yet had significantly reduced preference for hu-
mans over guinea pigs in choice trials. The authors suggested
that IR and GR ligands are sufficient to drive attraction, while the
OR pathway specializes in host discrimination. Further work by
McBride and colleagues [10] identified important evolutionary
changes in the OR family as a whole (Figure 2B) and in a specific
OR named AaegOr4. In the two Ae. aegypti subspecies and their
hybrids, preference for humans was tightly correlated with natu-
rally occurring AaegOr4 variants that were more highly expressed
and more sensitive to a component of human odor called sulca-
tone.Thepattern suggeststhatanincreaseinsensitivitytothishu-
man-enriched compound contributes to preference for humans.
At face value, this result is at odds with previous work identi-
fying sulcatone as a repellent that may help steer mosquitoes
away from individual humans whose odor contains naturally
high levels (Table 1) [34–36]. Why would increased sensitivity
to a repellent compound in human odor confer preference for
that odor? For one, the behavioral effects of sulcatone may be
dependent on context or concentration. Perhaps sulcatone
would enhance attraction if added in small quantities to a blend
that does not already contain the compound rather than to real
human odor that has a significant amount. Alternatively, the
Ae. aegypti genome may contain multiple sulcatone-sensitive re-
ceptors mediating distinct behavioral effects. An increase in the
sensitivity of AaegOr4 could help counteract repellent effects
mediated by other ORs. This interesting controversy highlights
the potential complexity of the push–pull context from which
preference emerges.
OR evolution may also contribute to preference in Anopheles,
despite independent specialization on humans in this genus and
near complete lack of orthology at OR loci [37]. Rinker and
colleagues [38] compared the OR, IR, and OBP families in
An. gambiae/coluzzii to those in the zoophilic An. quadriannula-
tus, revealing widespread sequence and transcriptional diver-
gence. Such divergence, in and of itself, does not prove a link
to preference — the differences may have accumulated by
chance or mediate other behaviors. Nevertheless, further
analysis of OR expression in female antennae revealed a
suggestive pattern. Odorants whose cognate receptors were
upregulated (on average) in An. coluzzii relative to An. quadrian-
nulatus were more likely to be associated with humans than
odorants whose receptors were downregulated (Figure 2C). It
is important to note that this analysis assumes conservation of
odor-binding profiles in OR orthologs from the two species.
Finally, an electrophysiological study also suggests that
specialization in Anopheles may have involved changes in
the peripheral olfactory system. In recordings from 20–50
antennal sensory neurons in each of three related species,
more neurons were excited by human-associated carboxylic
Table 1. Select human odorants and their behavioral effects on
Ae. aegypti aegypti and An. gambiae/coluzzii.
Compound1
Receptors
Primary
effect
Aedes
references3
Anopheles
references3
Carbon
dioxide
GRs
Activator/
attractant
[16,18]
[15,17]
Lactic acid
IRs2
Attractant/
synergist
[20–22,25,27]
[19,24]
Ammonia
IRs
Attractant/
synergist
[25]
[23,24,50]
Carboxylic
acids
IRs2
Synergist
[26]
[24,28,50]
Acetone
ORs
Synergist
[27]
[17]
Sulcatone
ORs
Repellent
[34,35]
[35,36]
Attractants are defined as compounds that attract mosquitoes on their
own or in combination with carbon dioxide. Synergists enhance attrac-
tion to odor blends, while repellents reduce attraction. As an activator,
carbon dioxide promotes flight and increases mosquito sensitivity to
other host stimuli. Many compounds have variable effects dependent
on context, concentration, or the individual compound within the listed
class. Effects listed are those most relevant in the context of response
to human odor.
1List of compounds is not exhaustive.
2Receptors for lactic acid and other carboxylic acids have not yet been
identified, but are presumed to be IRs.
3Emphasis is given to seminal and/or recent studies.
Current Biology 26, R41–R46, January 11, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
R43
Current Biology
Minireview
 acids in An. coluzzii than in the animal-preferring An. quadriannu-
latus or even the opportunistic An. arabiensis [39]. The receptors
and/or accessory proteins that mediate these responses are not
known. Recent large-scale deorphanization studies have identi-
fied ligands for many An. gambiae/coluzzii ORs [40,41], but we
know much less about IRs and OBPs in Anopheles, let alone
any of these gene families in Aedes. Furthermore, no receptors
or accessory proteins have been mapped to specific sensory
neurons or hairs on the antennae of mosquitoes in either genus.
Filling these gaps would greatly facilitate further study of the pe-
ripheral changes underlying preference for human odor.
Conclusions
In 2004, Besansky and colleagues argued that the time was right
for unraveling the molecular genetic basis of preference for hu-
mans in disease-vectoring mosquitoes, with comparisons be-
tween closely related species providing powerful aides in this
process [6]. Ten years later, this approach is starting to bear fruit.
Several recent studies suggest that changes in the tuning and
expression of peripheral receptors have sensitized the antennae
of Ae. aegypti and An. gambiae/coluzzii to human odorants. The
OR family clearly plays a role in this process, despite the fact that
most known attractants in human odor are not OR ligands. This
finding suggests that many of the compounds mosquitoes use to
discriminate humans from other animals have yet to be appreci-
ated as such. It also highlights the distinction between attraction
and preference — two properties of mosquito host-seeking
behavior that likely have different, if overlapping, genetic and
chemical bases. Future studies may also reveal important
changes in IRs or other peripheral olfactory genes.
Beyond the peripheral olfactory system, the critical role of syn-
ergism in mosquito host-seeking behavior makes central olfac-
tory circuits a potentially fruitful and fascinating area for future
work. Responsible for integrating signals mediated by different
receptors, these circuits may have experienced changes confer-
ring preference for the specific blend of compounds that define
the way we smell.
REFERENCES
1. Clements, A.N. (1999). The Biology of Mosquitoes, First Edition (CABI
Publishing).
2. World Health Organization j Fact sheets. WHO. Available at: http://www.
who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/en/.
3. Mattingly, P.F. (1957). Genetical aspects of the Aedes aegypti problem.
I: Taxonomy and bionomics. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol. 51, 392–408.
4. White, B.J., Collins, F.H., and Besansky, N.J. (2011). Evolution of Anoph-
eles gambiae in relation to humans and malaria. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol.
Syst. 42, 111–132.
5. Krzywinski, J., Grushko, O.G., and Besansky, N.J. (2006). Analysis of the
complete mitochondrial DNA from Anopheles funestus: an improved
dipteran mitochondrial genome annotation and a temporal dimension of
mosquito evolution. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 39, 417–423.
Maxillary
palp
All antennal
genes
Subspecies
F2 hybrids
Both
ORs
IRs
OBPs
Other
12
40
1
103
11,929
31
34
22*
5*
2*
922
10*
5
Genes differentially expressed in...
B
Human
Not
human
Odorant
Expression
of cognate ORs 
10
13
6
29
C
A
*Significantly overrepresented
OR neuron
IR neuron
GR neuron
OBPs
Capitate peg
Antenna
Trichoid
Grooved peg
Current Biology
Figure 2. Changes in peripheral olfactory
genes associated with preference for
humans.
(A) Schematic of peripheral olfactory system. The
mosquito antenna, maxillary palp, and tip of pro-
boscis (not shown) are covered with sensory hairs
called sensilla (insets) that house olfactory sensory
neurons. The tuning of individual neurons is
determined by the binding specificity of several
different types of proteins [32]. Odorant-binding
proteins
(OBPs)
carry
odorants
through
the
aqueous lymph within each hair to the neuronal
membrane, where odorant receptors (ORs), iono-
tropic receptors (IRs), or gustatory receptors (GRs)
recognize them and cause the neuron to fire. In-
dividual receptors and OBPs recognize only a
subset of odorants and therefore confer specificity
to the neurons or sensory hairs in which they are
found.
Other
accessory
proteins
may
also
contribute. There are three major morphological
types of olfactory sensilla (insets). Capitate pegs
on the maxillary palp house one neuron expressing
carbon-dioxide-sensitive GRs and two neurons
expressing
select
ORs
([32]
and
references
therein). Trichoid and grooved-peg sensilla on
the antenna house neurons that likely express
ORs
and
IRs,
respectively,
based
on
odor-
response profiling [49]. Evolutionary changes in the
sequence or expression of peripheral olfactory
genes may contribute to host preference by
making the mosquito more or less sensitive to
specific human and animal odorants. (B) The
number of all antennal genes or differentially ex-
pressed antennal genes in Ae. aegypti that belong
to the OR, IR, and OBP families [10]. ORs, but not
OBPs and to a lesser extent IRs, were enriched
among genes differentially expressed in human-
preferring compared with animal-preferring subspecies and F2 hybrids. Asterisks indicate significant enrichment at the p < 0.0001 level. (C) The number of human
and non-human odorants for which cognate An. gambiae/coluzzii ORs were upregulated or downregulated by at least 10% (on average) relative to those of the
animal-preferring An. quadriannulatus [38]. Fisher’s exact test p = 0.04.
R44
Current Biology 26, R41–R46, January 11, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
Current Biology
Minireview
 6. Besansky, N., Hill, C., and Costantini, C. (2004). No accounting for taste:
host preference in malaria vectors. Trends Parasitol. 20, 249–251.
7. McClelland, G., and Weitz, B. (1963). Serological identification of natural
hosts of Aedes aegypti (L.) and some other mosquitoes (Diptera, Culicidae)
caught resting in vegetation in Kenya and Uganda. Ann. Trop. Med. Para-
sitol. 57, 214–224.
8. McKenna, J. (1973). Attraction of seven strains of Aedes aegypti to man
and guinea pig in the laboratory. Ph.D. thesis in Entomology, University
of California, Davis.
9. Gouck, H. (1972). Host preferences of various strains of Aedes aegypti and
Aedes simpsoni as determined by an olfactometer. Bull. World Health Org.
47, 680–683.
10. McBride, C.S., Baier, F., Omondi, A.B., Spitzer, S.A., Lutomiah, J., Sang,
R., Ignell, R., and Vosshall, L.B. (2014). Evolution of mosquito preference
for humans linked to an odorant receptor. Nature 515, 222–227.
11. Takken, W., and Verhulst, N.O. (2013). Host preferences of blood-feeding
mosquitoes. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 58, 433–453.
12. Dekker, T., Takken, W., and Braks, M.A. (2001). Innate preference for host-
odor blends modulates degree of anthropophagy of Anopheles gambiae
sensu lato (Diptera: Culicidae). J. Med. Entomol. 38, 868–871.
13. Pates, H.V., Takken, W., Stuke, K., and Curtis, C.F. (2001). Differential
behaviour of Anopheles gambiae sensu stricto (Diptera: Culicidae) to hu-
man and cow odours in the laboratory. Bull. Entomol. Res. 91, 289–296.
14. Dekker, T., and Takken, W. (1998). Differential responses of mosquito sib-
ling species Anopheles arabiensis and An. quadriannulatus to carbon diox-
ide, a man or a calf. Med. Vet. Entomol. 12, 136–140.
15. Healy, T.P., and Copland, M.J. (1995). Activation of Anopheles gambiae
mosquitoes by carbon dioxide and human breath. Med. Vet. Entomol. 9,
331–336.
16. Dekker, T., Geier, M., and Carde
´ , R.T. (2005). Carbon dioxide instantly
sensitizes female yellow fever mosquitoes to human skin odours. J. Exp.
Biol. 208, 2963–2972.
17. Takken, W., Dekker, T., and Wijnholds, Y.G. (1997). Odor-mediated flight
behavior of Anopheles gambiae Giles sensu stricto and An. stephensi Lis-
ton in response to CO2, acetone, and 1-octen-3-ol (Diptera: Culicidae).
J. Insect Behav. 10, 395–407.
18. Lacey, E.S., Ray, A., and Carde
´ , R.T. (2014). Close encounters: contribu-
tions of carbon dioxide and human skin odour to finding and landing on a
host in Aedes aegypti. Physiol. Entomol. 39, 60–68.
19. Dekker, T., Steib, B., Carde
´ , R.T., and Geier, M. (2002). L-lactic acid: a hu-
man-signifying host cue for the anthropophilic mosquito Anopheles gam-
biae. Med. Vet. Entomol. 16, 91–98.
20. Acree, F., Turner, R.B., Gouck, H.K., Beroza, M., and Smith, N. (1968).
L-Lactic acid: a mosquito attractant isolated from humans. Science 161,
1346–1347.
21. Geier, M., Sass, H., and Boeckh, J. (1996). A search for components in hu-
man body odour that attract females of Aedes aegypti. In Olfaction in Mos-
quito Host Interactions, G.R. Bock, and G. Cardew, eds. (New York: John
Wiley & Sons), pp. 132–148.
22. Steib, B.M., Geier, M., and Boeckh, J. (2001). The effect of lactic acid on
odour-related host preference of yellow fever mosquitoes. Chem. Sens.
26, 523–528.
23. Braks, M.A.H., Meijerink, J., and Takken, W. (2001). The response of the
malaria mosquito, Anopheles gambiae, to two components of human
sweat, ammonia and l-lactic acid, in an olfactometer. Physiol. Entomol.
26, 142–148.
24. Smallegange, R.C., Qiu, Y.T., van Loon, J.J.A., and Takken, W. (2005).
Synergism between ammonia, lactic acid and carboxylic acids as kairo-
mones in the host-seeking behaviour of the malaria mosquito Anopheles
gambiae sensu stricto (Diptera: Culicidae). Chem. Sens. 30, 145–152.
25. Geier, M., Bosch, O.J., and Boeckh, J. (1999). Ammonia as an attractive
component of host odour for the yellow fever mosquito, Aedes aegypti.
Chem. Sens. 24, 647–653.
26. Bosch, O.J., Geier, M., and Boeckh, J. (2000). Contribution of fatty acids to
olfactory host finding of female Aedes aegypti. Chem. Sens. 25, 323–330.
27. Bernier, U.R., Kline, D.L., Posey, K.H., Booth, M.M., Yost, R.A., and Bar-
nard, D.R. (2003). Synergistic attraction of Aedes aegypti (L.) to binary
blends of l-lactic acid and acetone, dichloromethane, or dimethyl disul-
fide. J. Med. Entomol. 40, 653–656.
28. Knols, B.G.J., van Loon, J.J.A., Cork, A., Robinson, R.D., Adam, W., Mei-
jerink, J., Jong, R.D., and Takken, W. (1997). Behavioural and electrophys-
iological responses of the female malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae
(Diptera: Culicidae) to Limburger cheese volatiles. Bull. Entomol. Res.
87, 151–159.
29. Bernier, U.R., Kline, D.L., Allan, S.A., and Barnard, D.R. (2007). Laboratory
comparison of Aedes aegypti attraction to human odors and to synthetic
human odor compounds and blends. J. Am. Mosquito Control Assoc.
23, 288–293.
30. Okumu, F.O., Killeen, G.F., Ogoma, S., Biswaro, L., Smallegange, R.C.,
Mbeyela, E., Titus, E., Munk, C., Ngonyani, H., Takken, W., et al. (2010).
Development and field evaluation of a synthetic mosquito lure that is
more attractive than humans. PLoS One 5, e8951.
31. Smallegange, R.C., Knols, B.G.J., and Takken, W. (2010). Effectiveness of
synthetic versus natural human volatiles as attractants for Anopheles gam-
biae (Diptera: Culicidae) sensu stricto. J. Med. Entomol. 47, 338–344.
32. Suh, E., Bohbot, J., and Zwiebel, L.J. (2014). Peripheral olfactory signaling
in insects. Curr. Opin. Insect Sci. 6, 86–92.
33. DeGennaro, M., McBride, C.S., Seeholzer, L., Nakagawa, T., Dennis, E.J.,
Goldman, C., Jasinskiene, N., James, A.A., and Vosshall, L.B. (2013). orco
mutant mosquitoes lose strong preference for humans and are not
repelled by volatile DEET. Nature 498, 487–491.
34. Logan, J.G., Birkett, M.A., Clark, S.J., Powers, S., Seal, N.J., Wadhams,
L.J., Mordue Luntz, A.J., and Pickett, J.A. (2008). Identification of hu-
man-derived volatile chemicals that interfere with attraction of Aedes ae-
gypti mosquitoes. J. Chem. Ecol. 34, 308–322.
35. Logan, J.G., Stanczyk, N.M., Hassanali, A., Kemei, J., Santana, A.E.G., Ri-
beiro, K.A.L., Pickett, J.A., and Mordue Luntz, A.J. (2010). Arm-in-cage
testing of natural human-derived mosquito repellents. Malar. J. 9, 239.
36. Menger, D.J., van Loon, J.J.A., and Takken, W. (2014). Assessing the ef-
ficacy of candidate mosquito repellents against the background of an
attractive source that mimics a human host. Med. Vet. Entomol. 28,
407–413.
37. Bohbot, J., Pitts, R.J., Kwon, H.-W., Ru
¨ tzler, M., Robertson, H.M., and
Zwiebel, L.J. (2007). Molecular characterization of the Aedes aegypti
odorant receptor gene family. Insect Mol. Biol. 16, 525–537.
38. Rinker, D.C., Zhou, X., Pitts, R.J., The AGC Consortium, Rokas, A., and
Zwiebel, L.J. (2013). Antennal transcriptome profiles of anopheline
mosquitoes reveal human host olfactory specialization in Anopheles gam-
biae. BMC Genomics 14, 749.
39. van den Broek, I.V., and den Otter, C.J. (1999). Olfactory sensitivities of
mosquitoes with different host preferences (Anopheles gambiae s.s.,
An. arabiensis, An. quadriannulatus, An. m. atroparvus) to synthetic host
odours. J. Insect Physiol. 45, 1001–1010.
40. Carey, A.F., Wang, G., Su, C.-Y., Zwiebel, L.J., and Carlson, J.R. (2010).
Odorant reception in the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae. Nature
464, 66–71.
41. Wang, G., Carey, A.F., Carlson, J.R., and Zwiebel, L.J. (2010). Molecular
basis of odor coding in the malaria vector mosquito Anopheles gambiae.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 4418–4423.
42. Tempelis, C.H., Hayes, R.O., Hess, A.D., and Reeves, W.C. (1970). Blood-
feeding habits of four species of mosquito found in Hawaii. Am. J. Trop.
Med. Hyg. 19, 335–341.
43. Tempelis, C. (1975). Host-feeding patterns of mosquitoes, with a review of
advances in analysis of blood meals by serology. J. Med. Entomol. 11,
635–653.
44. Heisch, R.B., Nelson, G.S., and Furlong, M. (1959). Studies in filariasis in
East Africa 1. Filariasis on the island of Pate, Kenya. Trans. R. Soc.
Trop. Med. Hyg. 53, 41–53.
Current Biology 26, R41–R46, January 11, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
R45
Current Biology
Minireview
 45. Sivan, A., Shriram, A.N., Sunish, I.P., and Vidhya, P.T. (2015). Host-feeding
pattern of Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus (Diptera: Culicidae) in het-
erogeneous landscapes of South Andaman, Andaman and Nicobar
Islands, India. Parasitol. Res. 114, 3539–3546.
46. Ponlawat, A., and Harrington, L. (2005). Blood feeding patterns of
Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus in Thailand. J. Med. Entomol. 42,
844–849.
47. Scott, T.W., Chow, E., Strickman, D., Kittayapong, P., Wirtz, R.A., Lorenz,
L.H., and Edman, J.D. (1993). Blood-feeding patterns of Aedes aegypti
(Diptera: Culicidae) collected in a rural Thai village. J. Med. Entomol. 30,
922–927.
48. Teesdale, C. (1956). Studies on the bionomics of Aedes aegypti (L.) in its
natural habitats in a coastal region of Kenya. Bull. Entomol. Res. 56,
711–742.
49. Qiu, Y.T., and van Loon, J.J.A. (2010). Olfactory physiology of blood-
feeding vector mosquitoes. In Olfaction in Vector-Host Interactions, W.
Takken, and B.G.J. Knols, eds. (The Netherlands: Wageningen Academic
Publishers), pp. 39–61.
50. Smallegange, R.C., Qiu, Y.T., Bukovinszkine
´ -Kiss, G., van Loon, J.J.A.,
and Takken, W. (2009). The effect of aliphatic carboxylic acids on olfac-
tion-based host-seeking of the malaria mosquito Anopheles gambiae
sensu stricto. J. Chem. Ecol. 35, 933–943.
R46
Current Biology 26, R41–R46, January 11, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved
Current Biology
Minireview
