 Neuroimmunology and neuroepigenetics in the establishment of 
sex differences in the brain
Margaret M. McCarthy1, Bridget M. Nugent2, and Kathryn M. Lenz3
1Department of Pharmacology and Program in Neuroscience, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, 655W. Baltimore St., Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA
2University of Pennsylvania, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, 
380S. University Ave, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
3Department of Psychology and Program in Neuroscience, 1835 Neill Ave, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA
Abstract
The study of sex differences in the brain is a topic of neuroscientific study that has broad reaching 
implications for culture, society and biomedical science. Recent research in rodent models has led 
to dramatic shifts in our views of the mechanisms underlying the sexual differentiation of the 
brain. These include the surprising discoveries of a role for immune cells and inflammatory 
mediators in brain masculinization and a role for epigenetic suppression in brain feminization. 
How and to what degree these findings will translate to human brain development will be 
questions of central importance in future research in this field.
Historically, the study of sex differences in brain and behaviour was not considered to be 
broadly important to neuroscience but was instead walled off under the rubric ‘reproductive 
endocrinology’. This niche area focused on the neurophysiology of ovulation and lactation 
and the essential behaviours of mating and parenting. Nevertheless, there were persistent 
reports of males and females differing in non-reproductive parameters, such as performance 
on learning tasks1–4, and associated neurophysiological correlates like hippocampal long-
term potentiation (LTP)2 and cortical synapse number5.
Parallel to animal studies was the advent of functional MRI, which allowed for assessment 
of human brain activity in real time and provided the opportunity to revisit the ageless 
question ‘do men and women think differently?’ Functional MRI studies revealing such 
differences have involved tasks assessing verbal recall, spatial learning, non-verbal 
reasoning, emotional face reading, fear and anxiety, and responses to sexually explicit 
stimuli, as well as the impact of stress on most of these tasks (for a review, see REF. 6). 
Correspondence to M.M.M. mmccarthy@som.umaryland.edu. 
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
FURTHER INFORMATION
World Health Organization definition of gender: http://www.who.int/gender-equity-rights/understanding/gender-definition/en/
ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2017 August ; 18(8): 471–484. doi:10.1038/nrn.2017.61.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Similarly, the emergence of diffusion tensor imaging revealed sex differences in the 
connectome: girls and young women were found to have stronger interhemispheric 
connections, whereas boys and young men had greater intrahemispheric connections7. In a 
follow-up study in a subset of individuals, a male bias in performance in sensorimotor tasks 
was found to correlate with a higher degree of connectivity between motor and sensory 
cortex nodes, whereas a female bias in performance in tasks involving social cognition and 
non-verbal reasoning corresponded to greater connectivity across the hemispheres of 
subcortical regions8. However, the authors of this study themselves noted the apparent 
‘playing to stereotype’ of these findings, as have others9, who have cautioned that a 
correlation in measures is not indicative of causation.
Arguments about the validity of using imaging to determine sex differences in humans 
continue to this day and are likely to persist for some time. This is particularly apparent 
when the confound of gender is considered8,10. Gender is a uniquely human construct that 
combines self and societal awareness of one’s sex, thereby including the influence of 
cultural norms, implicit bias and parental expectations (according to the World Health 
Organization definition of gender; see Further Information). This makes it difficult, if not 
impossible, to isolate a purely biological contribution to sex differences in human brain and 
behaviour. Indeed, some would argue that we should not even try as there is potential to do 
real harm by lending scientific credence to well-entrenched stereotypes10.
Despite these legitimate concerns, there are two reasons that an understanding of such a 
biological contribution continues to be sought. The first is that animal research 
unequivocally demonstrates that sex is a crucial variable that modulates fundamental 
neurobiological processes that range from rates of neurogenesis to synaptic physiology 
(TABLE 1). The second is that clinical research unequivocally demonstrates a gender bias in 
the relative frequency and severity of neuropsychiatric, neurological and neurodegenerative 
disorders (TABLE 2). This gender bias shifts markedly across the lifespan, with boys being 
much more likely to suffer adverse outcomes as a result of these disorders in early life than 
girls, whereas women disproportionately suffer in adulthood. This coherent pattern obliges 
us to explore how the biology of males and females contributes to disease risk based on 
gender, as well as the developmental events that lead to these biological differences.
The goal of this Review is to highlight recent findings that provide new investigative avenues 
for identifying the sources of gender-biased vulnerability and resilience. Sex differences in 
the brain are found at the macro and micro level: entire brain regions can vary in size 
according to sex, or a small subnucleus might exhibit a robust sex difference in the number 
and type of synapses found therein. The numbers of specific cell types can vary, as can the 
magnitude of projections between and within brain regions. Even the signal transduction 
pathways invoked following neuronal activation can be markedly different in males versus 
females (for a review, see REF. 11). Connecting these sex differences to specific behaviours 
and physiological responses is most easily achieved for those directly tied to reproduction, 
with the neural circuits controlling luteinizing hormone release from the anterior pituitary 
and sexual behaviour being the best characterized. Although these reproductive end points 
might seem far removed from neuropsychiatric, neurological and neurodegenerative 
disorders, we argue that discovery of the fundamental mechanisms establishing those sex 
McCarthy et al.
Page 2
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 differences are providing important insights into the sources of gender biases in vulnerability 
and resilience.
Mechanisms of sexual differentiation
Gonadal hormones and early life programming
The reproductive behaviour of adult males and females has long been known to be 
dependent on the gonadal steroid hormone milieu, which is unique to each sex. Males have 
higher circulating levels of testosterone derived from the testis, whereas females have a 
cyclic pattern of oestrogens and progestins arising from the ovary. In the ideal conditions of 
the laboratory (that is, in the presence of continuous food, water, light and shelter), males are 
always sexually active, but females will only readily engage in mating at or around the time 
of ovulation. What was not initially obvious is that the concordance of adult hormonal 
milieu and mating behaviour actually depends on early life programming, a concept that has 
been historically referred to as the organizational hypothesis12.
In rodents, this programming is initiated prenatally in males when the fetal testes produce 
androgens that gain access to the brain, are converted to oestrogens in large amounts and 
initiate brain masculinization. Both male and female fetuses express high levels of the 
steroid-binding globulin α-fetoprotein, which sequesters the maternal oestrogens that are 
present in fetal circulation and thus protects the brain from the influence of maternal 
steroids. As the female fetal ovary remains quiescent, this sequestration of maternal 
oestrogens means that only males experience high intracerebral oestrogen levels (as a result 
of the aromatization of testicular androgens). If α-fetoprotein is ablated, maternal oestradiol 
penetrates the fetal brain during the critical period, and females are subsequently 
masculinized13.
The processes of brain masculinization and feminization both occur during a critical period 
(FIG. 1). In rodents, the critical period begins prenatally at the time of the surge in male fetal 
androgen production. The end of the critical period is defined as the time at which the 
female phenotype can no longer be diverted to male by treatment with exogenous steroid 
hormones, which, in rats and mice, is one week to 10 days after birth. The existence of this 
critical window provides a tool for studying the process of masculinization. Injecting female 
rat or mouse pups with testosterone or its aromatized metabolite, oestradiol, for 1 or 2 days 
immediately after birth initiates many (although not necessarily all) of the same gene 
expression profiles and cell signalling cascades that occur normally in males in utero (for a 
review, see REF. 11). Although this is not a perfect model of masculinization, it provides an 
excellent means to interrogate both the short-term processes and long-term consequences of 
brain sexual differentiation by comparing males, females and masculinized females. There is 
an apparently separate sensitive period for rodent brain feminization that occurs weeks after 
birth; however, this remains less well characterized than the critical window for 
masculinization14.
In addition to the adult consequences of the effects of gonadal hormones on brain 
development (known as ‘organizational’ effects), many sex differences in adult animals (and 
probably in humans too) are the result of the markedly different gonadal hormonal milieus 
McCarthy et al.
Page 3
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that each experiences in adulthood. These are often referred to as ‘activational’ hormonal 
effects and may or may not depend on prior organizational hormonal effects.
Chromosome complement: XX versus XY matters too
Not all hormonal effects in adults are preordained developmentally, and not all sex 
differences are due to hormones. Besides its influence on gonadal differentiation and steroid 
hormone production, chromosome complement is an additional contributing variable to sex 
differences in brain and behaviour15,16 (FIG. 2). The potential for direct sex chromosome 
effects was evident in a comparison of embryonic neural stem cells derived from male and 
female mouse embryos. When compared before the onset of gonadal steroid production, 
more than 100 transcripts were differentially expressed between female (XX) and male (XY) 
stem cells. Intriguingly, stem cells of both sexes were responsive to testosterone treatment 
but not in the same way: thousands more transcripts varied in response to testosterone in XX 
stem cells than in XY stem cells17.
The SRY gene on the Y chromosome is best known for its role as the essential driver of 
testis development18 but also promotes catecholamine production by dopaminergic neurons 
of the substantia nigra of the mouse19 and by human NT2 cells differentiated to be 
dopaminergic. As only males carry the SRY gene, this is a true sex dimorphism and is 
speculated to contribute to the higher susceptibility of males to dopamine disorders such as 
Parkinson disease and schizophrenia20.
A genetically modified mouse line in which Sry has been translocated from the Y 
chromosome to an autosome allows for generation of XX individuals with testis and XY 
individuals with ovaries, thereby separating sex genotype and gonadal phenotype21. This 
powerful tool is called the four-core genotype and has shown that multiple sex differences in 
brain and behaviour can be attributed to chromosome complement rather than gonadal 
phenotype. These include differences in the incidence of neural tube defects22, pain 
perception23 and many additional phenotypes (for a review, see REF. 24).
The four-core genotype was also exploited to dissect the sources of increased vulnerability 
of females to auto-immune disorders, focusing on multiple sclerosis (which is easily 
modelled in rodents in a paradigm referred to as experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis). The severity of symptoms and degree of myelination were greater in XX 
mice compared with XY, regardless of gonadal phenotype25, suggesting a genetic origin of 
disease vulnerability. However, it is important to note that the four-core genotype involves 
every cell in the body, preventing the dissociation of effects in the periphery from those in 
the CNS. This conundrum was addressed by the use of bone marrow transplantation to 
generate subjects with an XX nervous system and XY peripheral immune system and vice 
versa, thereby revealing that an XY nervous system was more sensitive to injury than an XX 
one26. The opposing effects of sex chromosome complement on the peripheral immune 
system and CNS, when combined with the sex-specific modulatory effects of gonadal 
steroids (for a review, see REF. 27), reveal the enormous complexity of gender bias in 
disease and the importance of determining the contribution of sex as a biological variable.
McCarthy et al.
Page 4
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Neuroimmunity and brain sex differences
Steroid hormones largely exert their effects by binding to intracellular receptors, which 
dimerize and dock at hormone response elements on gene promoters to regulate gene 
transcription28–30. Surprisingly, however, relatively few genes have been identified that are 
directly induced by steroid hormones and mediate masculinization. Instead, over the past 
decade, immune mediators have been strongly implicated as drivers of the masculinization 
process.
The brain is considered to be protected from systemic immune responses and pathogens by 
the blood–brain barrier. However, this does not mean that the brain is immunodeficient. 
Instead, the brain receives information from the periphery about immune status from various 
sources, including the vagal nerve, humoral signalling and cytokine transport into the brain, 
as well as meningeal and epithelial signalling across the blood–brain barrier31–33. The brain 
is also populated by resident immunocompetent cells, known as microglia, that engage in 
immune surveillance. These cells produce a host of neuroinflammatory mediators that are 
crucial regulators of brain development and homeostasis, including cytokines, prostanoids, 
purines and reactive oxygen species. Many of these neuroimmune mediators act in a manner 
that is indistinguishable from the functions of neuromodulators or neurohormones34–36.
Microglia seed the brain early in fetal development, beginning at around 4.5 gestational 
weeks in humans and embryonic day 8–9.5 in mice and rats37–40. Microglia derive from 
yolk-sac progenitor cells, colonize the brain before the blood–brain barrier is formed and 
then locally proliferate across the remainder of fetal development and into the early 
postnatal period41. This process differs in males and females. On embryonic day 17, just 
before the fetal androgen surge in males, male and female rats have the same number of 
microglia in the brain. One week later, males have significantly more microglia than females 
in several brain regions, including the parietal cortex, hippocampus, amygdala and 
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus42. Similarly, in the developing medial preoptic 
area (mPOA), male rats have significantly more microglia than females in the early postnatal 
period and twice as many microglia that are in an activated state (based on their ameboid-
like morphology)43. Treating newborn females with a masculinizing dose of oestradiol 
increases both microglia number and activational state to male levels.
In recent years, the functional significance of these sex differences in neuroimmune 
signalling and microglial number has become apparent (FIG. 3). The mPOA is a crucial 
brain region for expression of male sexual behaviour. Olfactory cues from sexually receptive 
females are detected by the male olfactory system and projected to the amygdala, which in 
turn projects to the mPOA. From there, signals are integrated with the neural circuits of 
motivation and reward, as well as projected to the hypothalamus and midbrain for execution 
of mating behaviour44. Dendrites of mPOA neurons are studded with dendritic spines, and, 
in males, the density of these spines is twofold higher than in females, resulting in greater 
excitation in response to olfactory input45. A crucial molecular driver of the sex difference in 
the density of dendritic spine synapses in the rodent mPOA is the prostanoid prostaglandin 
E2 (PGE2). The surge in oestradiol levels in the male brain46 during the critical period 
triggers an upregulation in the expression of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2), the enzyme that 
leads to prostaglandin synthesis47,48. Elevated COX2 leads to increased PGE2 in the mPOA, 
McCarthy et al.
Page 5
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 which is necessary for the induction of both dendritic spine patterning and male typical 
copulatory behaviour in adulthood48. The spinogenic effect of PGE2 involves activation of 
the prostanoid receptors EP2 and EP4 (REF. 49), which are linked to protein kinase A 
activation50, resulting in phosphorylation and mobilization of AMPA-type glutamate 
receptors to the membrane of both neurons and astrocytes51, and glutamate-dependent 
formation of dendritic spines50,51.
We now know that microglia are crucial for the PGE2-mediated induction of male-typical 
synaptic patterning in the mPOA of rats and the resultant male- typical copulatory behaviour 
in adulthood. Treating females with oestradiol increases ameboid microglia numbers to 
male-typical levels, as well as the number of dendritic spine-like protrusions on mPOA 
neurons. Oestradiol or PGE2 treatment will also masculinize POA neurons in a dish, as 
indicated by an increased density of spine-like processes. However, this response does not 
occur if the culture is deprived of microglia43. In vivo, oestradiol-induced release of PGE2 in 
the mPOA is blunted by minocycline, an antibiotic known to inhibit microglia activity, 
confirming the requirement for microglia in the inflammatory signalling that is responsible 
for male-typical synaptic patterning. Furthermore, masculinization of copulatory behaviour 
in females by neonatal oestradiol treatment can be prevented by co-treatment with 
minocycline43. Even brief microglial ablation from the neonatal brain of males leads to 
complete loss of male typical copulatory behaviour in adulthood52, along with other sex-
specific effects53.
In the nearby anteroventral periventricular nucleus (AVPV) of the POA, a parallel process of 
sexual differentiation is underway during the sensitive period. In this region, oestradiol 
increases cell death in males, significantly reducing the size of the AVPV in comparison to 
that of females54. Once again, sex differences in inflammatory signalling are responsible for 
masculinization. An unbiased screen of AVPV gene expression revealed that several 
members of the tumour necrosis family of cytokines — tumour necrosis factor (TNF), TNF 
receptor 2 (TNFR2; also known as TNFRSF1B) and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) — are 
constitutively active in neurons of the female AVPV, but this activity is blocked in males by 
testosterone-induced expression of E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase TRAIP, which allows 
apoptosis to proceed55,56.
Resident immune cells may not be the only immune players in the sexual differentiation 
process. Indirect evidence supports a role for immune cells derived from the bone marrow 
and thymus. T cells from the thymus reside in the meninges, and recent studies have found 
that T cell-deficient mice have impairments in adult behaviours, including spatial learning 
and social behaviour57,58. A separate study examined the role of T cells on brain 
development59. In adulthood, the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), a brain region 
that is contiguous with the POA and is both highly sexually dimorphic and sexually 
differentiated by steroid hormones during development60, was masculinized, that is, 
increased in size, in female mice congenitally lacking T cells. The BNST is necessary for 
sociosexual behaviours, including territoriality and olfactory investigation, as well as mood- 
related behaviours. The T cell-deficient females showed a decrease in anxiety behaviour that 
may or may not be a result of the increased volume of the BNST. Social and sexual 
behaviours have not been investigated in these animals to date but certainly warrant future 
McCarthy et al.
Page 6
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 inquiry. Overall, this study suggests T cells are active participants in brain feminization, but 
the mechanism by which they influence physiology in the CNS remains unclear.
Mast cells are granulocytes of myeloid lineage derived from the bone marrow and are 
distributed throughout the body, including the brain61,62. Some mast cells synthesize 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone63, a peptide crucial for the control of the anterior pituitary 
and gonadal function. Mast cell numbers increase in specific brain regions in both male and 
female rodents when exposed to sexually receptive stimuli of the other sex63,64. 
Furthermore, the transcriptome of peripheral mast cells is markedly different in males and 
females65. Mast cells have not yet been implicated directly in brain sexual differentiation, 
but, given their involvement in reproductive responses, the potential for such a role is high.
Neuroepigenetics and brain sex differences
The term ‘epigenetics’ describes modifications (epigenetic marks) to the DNA or associated 
histones that do not involve alterations of nucleotide sequences but have an impact on levels 
of gene expression in the long term. Canonical epigenetic modifications are methylation of 
the 5′ carbon of cytosines that are proximal to guanines (CpG) and post-translational 
modifications of histone tails, the most prevalent of which are acetylation and methylation. 
Epigenetic mechanisms also include additional sites of DNA methylation and other 
modifications of histones along with the actions of non-coding RNAs and the generation of a 
constellation of epigenetic marks that inactivate the X chromosome. The observation that 
epigenetic modifications in the nervous system happen rapidly and are reversible within a 
lifespan has led to a re-synthesis of the traditional view of cell fate determination and is 
aptly named neuroepigenetics66.
A neuroepigenetic contribution to sex differences is at once obvious and mysterious. For 
example, every cell in the female nervous system has one epigenetically inactivated X 
chromosome, but how that contributes to functional sex differences remains obscure. As 
mentioned above, it is obvious that sex chromosome composition is a contributing variable 
to sex differences in the brain16,67, but it is not clear whether X-chromosome genes that 
escape X inactivation in females drive these differences or whether the effect is due to the 
heterochromatic ‘sink’ that is created when large amounts of epigenetic regulatory proteins 
are required to maintain silencing of the second X chromosome: that is, the reduction in 
available epigenetic modifiers in cells with two X chromosomes may dilute the capacity for 
other forms of epigenetic regulation. It is also important not to forget the potential direct 
effects of Y chromosome genes (see above).
When contemplating an early life programming event that only manifests in adulthood, such 
as hormone- mediated sexual differentiation, it seems to be obvious that some form of 
cellular ‘memory’ must be established. Steroids bind to nuclear transcription factors (which 
interact directly with DNA), as well as to larger transcriptional complexes that include 
histone-modifying enzymes68,69, thereby increasing the likelihood that epigenetics is 
involved. Indeed the early life programming scenario outlined above predicts that 
masculinization is driven by direct transcriptional regulation of a set of masculinizing genes 
that are turned on early (and possibly continuously), thereby differentiating the male brain. 
There are hints that this is true, to at least some degree, in the developing rat amygdala. Male 
McCarthy et al.
Page 7
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adult rats have more vasopressin mRNA in their amygdala than females, a sex difference 
that is determined developmentally by higher androgen levels in males70,71. It has been 
shown that an experimentally induced transient reduction in the levels of the DNA methyl-
binding protein methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) during the sensitive period for 
sexual differentiation in males can permanently reduce amygdala vasopressin expression to 
the level of females, suggesting that an epigenetic modification (DNA methylation and the 
subsequent binding of MeCP2) establishes and maintains the sex difference in amygdala 
vasopressin levels72 (FIG. 4). The amygdala is a site of multiple neuroanatomical sex 
differences and is central to the control of multiple behaviours that differ in males and 
females, including juvenile social play (which is displayed at higher levels by males across a 
wide range of species)73.
Epigenetic regulation of vasopressin and MeCP2 expression is presumed to be downstream 
of steroid hormone action, but what about regulation of the steroid receptors themselves? 
Direct modulation of these transcription factor genes should provide a wide ranging and 
enduring regulation of hormonal responsiveness in adulthood. There have been studies of 
promoter methylation of both isoforms of the oestrogen receptor and the progesterone 
receptor in rats74,75. However, there is little agreement about the existence, direction and 
magnitude of any sex differences in promoter methylation76,77. In the few instances in which 
more than one time point was measured, sex-specific epigenetic patterns established early in 
life were replaced by different but still sex-specific patterns later in life75. This was most 
dramatically seen in a genome-wide analysis of genomic areas that are highly methylated. 
When comparing male mice, female mice and female mice treated with testosterone at birth 
to induce masculinization, the investigators found relatively few genes for which 
methylation levels were different in newborn males and females or that were modified by 
testosterone treatment of females. But, when animals treated the same way were assessed in 
adulthood, there were hundreds of genes that were differentially methylated by the 
testosterone treatment78. Among the challenges to epigenetic research is the inability to 
comprehensively assess DNA methylation and histone modifications at the same time on the 
same gene, and — even more importantly — to do so retrospectively. Thus, when an 
epigenetic modification is observed, it is impossible to know if it happened long ago and 
endured until now or was placed there just yesterday. Instead, we are limited to a single 
snapshot in time of a single end point. Nevertheless, these studies suggest that the epigenetic 
impacts of early life hormone exposure are enduring, but dynamic, generating an epigenetic 
‘echo’ that grows and distorts across the lifespan but retains aspects of its original form.
As noted above, steroid-mediated transcription is an obvious means by which males could 
be differentiated from females. In addition, a recent study79 showed that DNA 
methyltransferase (DNMT) activity in the POA of female rats was higher than that in males 
and that treating females with a masculinizing dose of steroid reduced enzymatic activity to 
that of males. This sex difference lasted for only the first few days after birth. DNA isolated 
from the female mPOA had more global methylation and a higher number of 100% 
methylated CpG sites than that isolated from both males and masculinized females, 
consistent with higher DNMT activity. But is this differential methylation important? RNA-
sequencing analyses of the transcriptome from neonatal males and females with and without 
treatment that reduces DNA methylation was employed to explore this question. As 
McCarthy et al.
Page 8
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expected, reducing DNA methylation increased the number of genes upregulated in females 
more than it did in males. More interestingly, when the transcriptome of males and females 
was directly compared, a surprisingly small number of genes (70) were differentially 
expressed. Furthermore, about half were expressed at higher levels in males, whereas half 
were higher in females. This is surprising because a scenario in which steroid receptor-
induced transcription differentiates males from females would predict increased gene 
expression in males. Moreover, most sex differences in differential gene expression were 
reversed in animals in which DNA methylation was reduced, confirming that epigenetics 
was the basis for the sex-specific transcriptomes. Further proof was found in the reversal of 
sex differences in mPOA neuron synaptic density and adult mating behaviour in females 
subject to reduced DNA methylation as neonates. The mechanism by which steroids reduce 
DNMT activity is not known, but the capacity is lost by the end of the first week of life, 
coincident with the closing of the critical period. However, if females are treated with a 
demethylating agent at the normal end of the critical period, the critical period remains open 
and females are masculinized. Thus, DNA methylation seems to be essential to both the 
initiation and maintenance of sexual differentiation of the mPOA.
In contrast to the effects of DNA methylation (which prevent masculinization), histone 
deacetylation- mediated repression of gene expression is required for masculinization80. 
This is again surprising, as DNA methylation and histone deacetylation usually work in 
concert to suppress gene expression. Even more interestingly, there is evidence that these 
two opposing forces are at work in the same general brain region. As described above, the 
BNST is larger in males than in females because more cells die in females. This sex 
difference can be reversed by giving females a masculinizing dose of steroid during the 
critical period, indicating that steroids support survival60. It takes several days for the pro-
survival effects of steroids to manifest, suggesting that an epigenetic change is induced by 
the steroids that then protects the cells from a subsequent apoptotic programme. Treatment 
of neonatal mouse pups with a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor increased histone 
acetylation and prevented the masculinization of the BNST, suggesting that pro-death genes 
that are normally suppressed in males were activated81. A functional impact of neonatal 
HDAC inhibition is evident in the impaired sexual ability of adult males80, an effect that is 
attributed at least in part to dysregulation of the Cyp19a1 gene, which encodes the enzyme 
aromatase, responsible for converting testosterone to oestradiol.
There are two approaches to discover sex differences in the epigenome. One is the use of 
broad based surveys that assay most or all potential targets. The second approach is to focus 
on specific candidate genes or epigenetic marks. An advantage of broad survey approaches 
is that intragenic regions, promoters, regulatory elements and reading frames of genes are all 
included in the analyses. Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing analysis of the neonatal POA 
demonstrated that most sex differences in DNA methylation levels are in the intergenic 
region, the functional significance of which remains a mystery79. A more focused view was 
gained by analysing an epigenetic mark known to cluster at transcription start sites, histone 
H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), which is generally permissive of gene expression82. 
Chromatin immunoprecipiation followed by sequencing (CHIP–seq) established that most 
genes of males and females exhibited the same number of H3K4me3 marks but that ~200 
genes differed in the number of H3K4me3 marks carried (most of them being higher in 
McCarthy et al.
Page 9
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 females)83. Thirteen genes were confirmed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction to be 
differentially expressed at the moment of assay, and two of these were located on the X 
chromosome, where they escape X inactivation. Together, these findings highlight the 
importance of considering the ‘sexome’ — the constellation of gene expression changes 
related to sex — rather than sex differences in individual genes84.
Intersection of neuroimmunity and neuroepigenetics
Given the findings outlined above, it is natural to question whether there is crosstalk 
between neuroimmune and neuroepigenetic mechanisms of sex differentiation. The X 
chromosome has the highest concentration of immune-related genes of any chromosome85. 
Thus, X-chromosome inactivation in females is crucial to keeping overexpression of these 
immune-related genes repressed, and dysregulated X-chromosome silencing is proposed as a 
possible reason that females suffer more auto-inflammatory conditions85.
Gene ontology analyses of the genes regulated by DNA methylation in the POA showed an 
almost fourfold enrichment of immune-related genes in female rat pups treated with a 
DNMT inhibitor (FIG. 3). These included cytokines, chemokines and their receptors, 
microglia- specific and/or macrophage-specific genes, genes related to phagocytosis, 
complement-related proteins and antigen presentation and receptor genes79. There were also 
many gene isoforms differentially expressed in males and females. Among these were many 
immune-related genes, including intriguingly a mast cell protease79, implicating this non-
neuronal cell type in the process of sexual differentiation.
A complementary possibility is that immunocompetent cells possess sexually differentiated 
epigenetic tags. Exposure to early life stress via neonatal handling of rat pups induces 
microglial-specific decreases in methylation of the anti-inflammatory immune gene 
interleukin-10, resulting in long-term increases in cytokine levels and subsequent resilience 
to morphine-induced conditioned place preference86. Although no sex differences were 
reported in this study, future exploration of immune cell-specific sex differences in the 
methylome or histone modifications would answer the question of whether the epigenetic 
regulation of these cells contributes to or maintains sexual differentiation of the brain.
Gender biased human neuropathology
A diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is 4–5 times more common in males than in 
females87–89 and is greater in individuals exposed to higher levels of fetal testosterone as a 
result of maternal conditions such as polycystic ovarian syndrome90,91. Higher levels of 
several steroid hormones present in amniotic fluid during pregnancy, including cortisol, 
progesterone and testosterone, predict higher rates of autism diagnosis92. Low maternal 
levels of the oestrogen oestriol and both low and high levels of the placental hormone human 
chorionic gonadotropin during pregnancy have been associated with a higher risk of autism 
in male, but not female, offspring93. Thus, too much exposure to hormones involved in 
sexual differentiation may lead to ASD and possibly contribute to the male bias in autism 
risk. However, the role of these alterations in sex hormone signalling in brain processes 
associated with autism is not known.
McCarthy et al.
Page 10
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The centrality of gonadal steroids to the developmental process of brain masculinization was 
the basis for the ‘extreme male brain’ theory of autism94; however, in the absence of a 
thorough understanding of the cellular mechanisms by which steroids masculinize the brain, 
it is difficult to evaluate what is ‘extreme’. As reviewed above, neuroinflammatory mediators 
direct many sex differences in the brains of rodents. New analysis of existing gene 
expression profiles from post-mortem human cerebral cortex95,96 reveals that many markers 
associated with activated astrocytes and microglia are higher in developing males than in 
females, suggesting that these cells have a role in normal human brain masculinization97. 
More interestingly, when the gene expression profile of post-mortem tissue of adult males 
with ASD is compared with that of neurotypical males, neuroimmune genes are expressed at 
even higher levels in those with ASD97. The paucity of females with a diagnosis of ASD 
precludes analyses of sex differences among affected individuals at this time but is an 
important future goal. Nonetheless, these data make a persuasive case that the normal 
biology of male-typical brain development seen in rodents also applies to humans and 
interacts with autism risk genes or environmental factors to make males more vulnerable.
Schizophrenia too is diagnosed more often in males than in females (in the order of 1.5 male 
diagnoses:1 female diagnosis)98, with an earlier onset and greater severity in males that 
include more positive and negative symptoms99. By contrast, females tend towards more 
affective symptoms and a spike in psychosis around menopause, which has been 
hypothesized to depend on loss of the antipsychotic and antidepressant properties of 
oestrogens100. Neuroimaging indicates that regions of the cerebral cortex that exhibit sex 
differences in neurotypical individuals also show the largest abnormalities in individuals 
with schizophrenia101, suggesting that sexual differentiation of the brain is disrupted in 
individuals that go on to develop schizophrenia.
Behavioural disorders that begin in childhood, including attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder102, stuttering103, 
dyslexia104,105 and Tourette syndrome106, are also more common in males. Of these 
disorders, ADHD has been the most extensively studied in terms of sex differences. As with 
schizophrenia, males and females show phenotypic differences in presentation, with girls 
showing less impulsivity, hyperactivity and externalizing relative to boys, as well as more 
mood disturbances and inattention107,108. Neuroimaging reveals sex differences, with 
ADHD diagnosed females having a smaller prefrontal cortex and ADHD males having a 
smaller premotor cortex109, as well as significant sex differences in white matter tracts110. 
Certain ADHD risk alleles, such as catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT), an enzyme that 
helps to degrade neurotransmitters such as dopamine and noradrenaline, seem to play a 
stronger part in ADHD incidence in males than in females (others alleles, including 
monoamine oxidase type A (MAOA) and sodium-dependent serotonin transporter (SERT; 
also known as SLC6A4) seem to have a greater role in female ADHD)111. As of yet, the role 
of these genes in normal sex-specific brain development or risk of ADHD has not been well 
studied in animal models.
The only neurodevelopmental disorder diagnosed more often in females than in males is 
Rett syndrome, an X-linked genetic disorder that is embryonically lethal in males112 (thus 
explaining its sex bias). This highlights a very important caveat to any discussion of sex 
McCarthy et al.
Page 11
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 differences in neurodevelopmental disorders: it is important to note that the measured 
incidence of a particular disorder does not account for cases in which the disrupted 
development underlying the disorder is embryonically fatal. Thus, it must be considered that 
any disorder that seems to be more biased towards males may be the result of more males 
exposed to a particular genetic or environmental risk surviving through fetal development 
than females.
Conclusions
The impact of sex and gender on health and disease is complex, multifactorial and pervasive. 
Discriminating biological origins of sex differences in disease susceptibility is one tool 
among many for improving the diagnosis and treatment of conditions that affect both men 
and women. Dissociating the many variables contributing to sex differences in brain and 
behaviour is particularly challenging, but animal models are uniquely powerful in this 
regard. Recent discoveries hint at novel biological sources of sex differences in the brain that 
involve use of inflammatory mediators as natural agents for differentiation between males 
and females. Divergent neuroepigenetic profiles in males and females seem to partner with 
differences in neuroinflammation, and, although the rules of engagement remain elusive, 
they surely warrant further study.
Acknowledgments
M.M.M. is supported by US National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant R01MH052716-19, R01DA039062 and 
R01MH091424. K.M.L. is supported by NIH grants F32NS076327 and R21MH105826, and NARSAD Young 
Investigator Award 2382.
Glossary
Functional MRI
The detection of changes in regional brain activity through their effects on blood flow and 
blood oxygenation that in turn affect the brightness of magnetic resonance images.
Diffusion tensor imaging
An MRI technique that provides a three-dimensional image of water diffusion in the brain. 
As water diffuses more readily along the axis of myelinated nerve fibre tracts, this method 
can be used to obtain a non-invasive estimate of anatomical connectivity between brain 
areas.
Connectome
A comprehensive map of neural connections within the nervous system of an organism.
Steroid hormone
A signalling molecule that is synthesized from cholesterol and is released into the circulation 
from endocrine glands including the gonads and adrenals. It binds to nuclear transcription 
factor receptors and can directly and indirectly modify gene expression.
Early life programming
McCarthy et al.
Page 12
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The phenomenon whereby events during development, such as stress, altered nutrition or 
endogenous hormone exposure, exert enduring influences on the nervous system in 
anticipation of the adult environment and experiences.
Critical period
A developmental window during which specific cellular events must occur or will be forever 
precluded. Sexual differentiation of the brain mediated by steroid hormones occurs during a 
perinatal critical period in the rodent and prenatally in humans.
Hormone response elements
Sequences of DNA in promoter regions that are recognized and bound to by steroid hormone 
receptors after binding of hormone, thereby promoting transcription.
Humoral signalling
Signalling molecules released into the blood stream that then act at a distance, such as 
steroid hormones.
Cytokine
Originally defined as an immune system protein that modifies biological responses; 
cytokines are now known to be released by most cells and are important in regulating 
intercellular communication, cell function and cell survival.
Immune surveillance
The hypothesized process by which the immune system constantly monitors the body for 
both invading pathogens and aberrant cell pathology, such as that seen in cancer.
Neuromodulators
Endogenous chemical substances that change the intrinsic properties of a neuron and the 
dynamics and strength of neurotransmission. Neuromodulators can modify neuronal 
responses to synaptic inputs on potentially long timescales.
Neurohormones
Steroid hormones that are further modified in the brain or synthesized de novo from 
cholesterol in the brain and are thus distinguished from those synthesized in the endocrine 
glands. Other neurohormones are peptides synthesized in the brain and released into the 
periphery such as oxytocin and vasopressin.
T cells
Lymphocytes produced by the thymus gland that actively participate in the immune 
response.
Mast cells
Multigranular cells that function as stores for several key inflammatory and/or pain 
mediators (including nerve growth factor, tumour necrosis factor, chemokines and 
histamine) and that originate in bone marrow but have a resident population in the brain.
Epigenetic marks
McCarthy et al.
Page 13
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Modifications to the genome that do not change the nucleotide sequence but have an impact 
on gene regulation. Methylation groups added to cytosine nucleotides or histones on the 
chromatin, along with other chemical groups, are examples of epigenetic marks.
Chemokines
A subfamily of inflammatory molecules that were initially described as regulators of the 
chemotaxis of inflammatory cells but that also have important roles in other processes, such 
as cell growth and differentiation.
References
1. Griew S. Age and sex differences in probability learning of rats in a swimming T-maze. 
Gerontologia. 1968; 14:197–203. [PubMed: 5760519] 
2. Maren S, De Oca B, Fanselow MS. Sex differences in hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP) 
and Pavlovian fear conditioning in rats: positive correlation between LTP and contextual learning. 
Brain Res. 1994; 661:25–34. [PubMed: 7834376] 
3. Perrot-Sinal TS. Sex differences in performance in the Morris water maze and the effects of initial 
nonstationary hidden platform training. Behav Neurosci. 1996; 110:1309–1320. [PubMed: 
8986334] 
4. Roof RL. Neonatal exogenous testosterone modifies sex difference in radial arm and Morris water 
maze perfromance in prebubescent and adult rats. Behav Brain Res. 1993; 53:1–10. [PubMed: 
8466654] 
5. Munoz-Cueto JA, Garcia-Segura LM, Ruiz-Marcos A. Developmental sex differences and effect of 
ovariectomy on the number of cortical pyramidal cell dendritic spines. Brain Res. 1990; 515:64–68. 
[PubMed: 2357578] 
6. Sacher J, Neumann J, Okon-Singer H, Gotowiec S, Villringer A. Sexual dimorphism in the human 
brain: evidence from neuroimaging. Magn Reson Imaging. 2013; 31:366–375. [PubMed: 22921939] 
7. Ingalhalikar M, et al. Sex differences in the structural connectome of the human brain. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:823–828. In this study, diffusion tensory imaging of nearly 1,000 human 
brains reveals sex differences in intra-hemispheric versus inter-hemispheric connectivity. [PubMed: 
24297904] 
8. Tunc B, et al. Establishing a link between sex-related differences in the structural connectome and 
behaviour. Phil Trans R Soc B. 2016; 371:20150111. [PubMed: 26833832] 
9. Joel D, Tarrasch R. On the mis-presentation and misinterpretation of gender-related data: the case of 
Ingalhalikar’s human connectome study. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014; 111:E637. [PubMed: 
24477693] 
10. Joel D, Fausto-Sterling A. Beyond sex differences: new approaches for thinking about variation in 
brain structure and function. Phil Trans R Soc B. 2016; 371:20150451. [PubMed: 26833844] 
11. McCarthy, M., De Vries, G., Forger, N. Hormones, Brain and Behavior. Pfaff, DW., Joëls, M., 
editors. Elsevier; 2017. p. 3-32.
12. Phoenix CH, Goy RW, Gerall AA, Young WC. Organizing action of prenatally administered 
testosterone proprionate on the tissues mediating mating behavior in the female guinea pig. 
Endocrinology. 1959; 65:369–382. [PubMed: 14432658] 
13. Bakker J, et al. Alpha-fetoprotein protects the developing female mouse brain from masculinization 
and defeminization by estrogens. Nat Neurosci. 2006; 9:220–226. [PubMed: 16388309] 
14. Bakker J, Baum MJ. Role for estradiol in female-typical brain and behavioral sexual 
differentiation. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2008; 29:1–16. [PubMed: 17720235] 
15. Arnold AP, Chen X. What does the “four core genotypes” mouse model tell us about sex 
differences in the brain and other tissues? Front Neuroendocrinol. 2009; 30:1–9. [PubMed: 
19028515] 
16. Arnold AP, et al. The importance of having two X chromosomes. Phil Trans R Soc B. 2016; 
371:20150113. [PubMed: 26833834] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 14
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. Bramble MS, et al. Sex-specific effects of testosterone on the sexually dimorphic transcriptome 
and epigenome of embryonic neural stem/progenitor cells. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:36916. This study 
shows that, in mouse embryonic stem cells, the transcriptional response to testosterone exposure is 
different in males versus females in both expression levels and numbers of genes responding. 
[PubMed: 27845378] 
18. Goodfellow PN, Lovell-Badge R. SRY and sex determination in mammals. Annu Rev Genet. 1993; 
27:71–92. [PubMed: 8122913] 
19. Dewing P, et al. Direct regulation of adult brain function by the male-specific factor SRY. Curr 
Biol. 2006; 16:415–420. [PubMed: 16488877] 
20. Czech DP, et al. The human testis-determining factor SRY localizes in midbrain dopamine neurons 
and regulates multiple components of catecholamine synthesis and metabolism. J Neurochem. 
2012; 122:260–271. [PubMed: 22568433] 
21. De Vries GJ, et al. A model system for study of sex chromosome effects on sexually dimorphic 
neural and behavioral traits. J Neurosci. 2002; 22:9005–9014. [PubMed: 12388607] 
22. Chen X, et al. Sex difference in neural tube defects in p53-null mice is caused by differences in the 
complement of X not Y genes. Dev Neurobiol. 2008; 68:265–273. [PubMed: 18004765] 
23. Gioiosa L, Chen X, Watkins R, Umeda EA, Arnold AP. Sex chromosome complement affects 
nociception and analgesia in newborn mice. J Pain. 2008; 9:962–969. [PubMed: 18635401] 
24. Arnold AP, et al. Minireview: sex chromosomes and brain sexual differentiation. Endocrinology. 
2004; 145:1057–1062. [PubMed: 14670983] 
25. Smith-Bouvier DL, et al. A role for sex chromosome complement in the female bias in 
autoimmune disease. J Exp Med. 2008; 205:1099–1108. [PubMed: 18443225] 
26. Du S, et al. XY sex chromosome complement, compared with XX, in the CNS confers greater 
neurodegeneration during experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 
2014; 111:2806–2811. This study shows that the impact of chromosome complement on disease 
progression in an animal model of multiple sclerosis is opposite in peripheral versus central 
nervous system tissues. [PubMed: 24550311] 
27. Voskuhl R. Preclinical studies of sex differences: a clinical perspective. Biol Sex Differ. 2016; 7:7. 
[PubMed: 26807212] 
28. Grimm SL, Hartig SM, Edwards DP. Progesterone receptor signaling mechanisms. J Mol Biol. 
2016; 428:3831–3849. [PubMed: 27380738] 
29. Stanisic V, Lonard DM, O’Malley BW. Modulation of steroid hormone receptor activity. Prog 
Brain Res. 2010; 181:153–176. [PubMed: 20478437] 
30. Katzenellenbogen BS, et al. Structure-function relationships in estrogen receptors and the 
characterization of novel selective estrogen receptor modulators with unique pharmacological 
profiles. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2001; 949:6–15. [PubMed: 11795381] 
31. Quan N, Banks WA. Brain-immune communication pathways. Brain Behav Immun. 2007; 21:727–
735. [PubMed: 17604598] 
32. McAllister AK, van de Water J. Breaking boundaries in neural–immune interactions. Neuron. 
2009; 64:9–12. [PubMed: 19840540] 
33. Kipnis J. Multifaceted interactions between adaptive immunity and the central nervous system. 
Science. 2016; 353:766–771. [PubMed: 27540163] 
34. Vezzani A, Viviani B. Neuromodulatory properties of inflammatory cytokines and their impact on 
neuronal excitability. Neuropharmacology. 2015; 96:70–82. [PubMed: 25445483] 
35. Rostene W, Kitabgi P, Parsadaniantz SM. Chemokines: a new class of neuromodulator? Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2007; 8:895–903. [PubMed: 17948033] 
36. Rivest S. Regulation of innate immune responses in the brain. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009; 9:429–439. 
[PubMed: 19461673] 
37. Alliot F, Godin I, Pessac B. Microglia derive from progenitors, originating from the yolk sac, and 
which proliferate in the brain. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1999; 117:145–152. [PubMed: 10567732] 
38. Ginhoux F, et al. Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive 
macrophages. Science. 2010; 330:841–845. [PubMed: 20966214] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 15
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 39. Cuadros MA, Navascues J. The origin and differentiation of microglial cells during development. 
Prog Neurobiol. 1998; 56:173–189. [PubMed: 9760700] 
40. Verney C, Monier A, Fallet-Bianco C, Gressens P. Early microglial colonization of the human 
forebrain and possible involvement in periventricular white-matter injury of preterm infants. J 
Anat. 2010; 217:436–448. [PubMed: 20557401] 
41. Ajami B, Bennett JL, Krieger C, Tetzlaff W, Rossi FM. Local self-renewal can sustain CNS 
microglia maintenance and function throughout adult life. Nat Neurosci. 2007; 10:1538–1543. 
[PubMed: 18026097] 
42. Schwarz J, Sholar PW, Bilbo SD. Sex differences in microglial colonization of the developing rat 
brain. J Neurochem. 2012; 120:948–963. This is the first report of a sex difference in microglia, 
showing that males have higher numbers of microglia that are more activated at early stages and 
that there is a switch to female preponderance around puberty. [PubMed: 22182318] 
43. Lenz KM, Nugent BM, Haliyur R, McCarthy MM. Microglia are essential to masculinization of 
brain and behavior. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:2761–2772. This study establishes a functional role for 
more activated microglia in the developing POA mediating masculinization of synaptic profile and 
adult copulatory behaviour. [PubMed: 23407936] 
44. Hull EM, Dominguez JM. Sexual behavior in male rodents. Horm Behav. 2007; 52:45–55. 
[PubMed: 17499249] 
45. Keller M, Baum MJ, Brock O, Brennan PA, Bakker J. The main and the accessory olfactory 
systems interact in the control of mate recognition and sexual behavior. Behav Brain Res. 2009; 
200:268–276. [PubMed: 19374011] 
46. Amateau SK, Alt JJ, Stamps CL, McCarthy MM. Brain estradiol content in newborn rats: sex 
differences, regional heterogeneity, and possible de novo synthesis by the female telencephalon. 
Endocrinology. 2004; 145:2906–2917. [PubMed: 14988386] 
47. Amateau SK, McCarthy MM. A novel mechanism of dendritic spine plasticity involving estradiol 
induction of prostglandin-E2. J Neurosci. 2002; 22:8586–8596. [PubMed: 12351732] 
48. Amateau SK, McCarthy MM. Induction of PGE2 by estradiol mediates developmental 
masculinization of sex behavior. Nat Neurosci. 2004; 7:643–650. This study identifies a 
prostaglandin as both necessary and sufficient for masculinizing the synaptic profile of POA 
neurons and adult copulatory behaviour. [PubMed: 15156148] 
49. Wright CL, Burks SR, McCarthy MM. Identification of prostaglandin E2 receptors mediating 
perinatal masculinization of adult sex behavior and neuroanatomical correlates. Dev Neurobiol. 
2008; 68:1406–1419. [PubMed: 18726914] 
50. Wright CL, McCarthy MM. Prostaglandin E2-induced masculinization of brain and behavior 
requires protein kinase A, AMPA/kainate, and metabotropic glutamate receptor signaling. J 
Neurosci. 2009; 29:13274–13282. [PubMed: 19846715] 
51. Lenz KM, Wright CL, Martin RC, McCarthy MM. Prostaglandin E regulates AMPA receptor 
phosphorylation and promotes membrane insertion in preoptic area neurons and glia during sexual 
differentiation. PLoS ONE. 2011; 6:e18500. [PubMed: 21490976] 
52. VanRyzin, JW., Yu, SJ., Perez-Pouchoulen, M., McCarthy, MM. Temporary depletion of microglia 
during the early postnatal period induces lasting sex-dependent and sex-independent effects on 
behavior in rats. eNeuro. 2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0297-16.2016
53. Nelson LH, Lenz KM. Microglia depletion in early life programs persistent changes in social, 
mood-related, and locomotor behavior in male and female rats. Behav Brain Res. 2017; 316:279–
293. [PubMed: 27613230] 
54. Waters EM, Simerly RB. Estrogen induces caspase-dependent cell death during hypothalamic 
development. J Neurosci. 2009; 29:9714–9718. [PubMed: 19657024] 
55. Krishnan S, Intlekofer KA, Aggison LK, Petersen SL. Central role of TRAF-interacting protein in 
a new model of brain sexual differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106:16692–16697. 
This study shows that the higher cell death in the developing male AVPV is mediated by the 
suppression of the TNF receptor-associated cell survival pathway. [PubMed: 19805359] 
56. Petersen SL, Krishnan S, Aggison LK, Intlekofer KA, Moura PJ. Sexual differentiation of the 
gonadotropin surge release mechanism: a new role for the canonical NfκB signaling pathway. 
Front Neuroendocrinol. 2012; 33:36–44. [PubMed: 21741397] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 16
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 57. Radjavi A, Smirnov I, Kipnis J. Brain antigen-reactive CD4+ T cells are sufficient to support 
learning behavior in mice with limited T cell repertoire. Brain Behav Immun. 2014; 35:58–63. 
[PubMed: 24012647] 
58. Filiano AJ, et al. Unexpected role of interferon-gamma in regulating neuronal connectivity and 
social behaviour. Nature. 2016; 535:425–429. [PubMed: 27409813] 
59. Rilett KC, et al. Loss of T cells influences sex differences in behavior and brain structure. Brain 
Behav Immun. 2015; 46:249–260. In this study, null mutations in T-cell receptors both reveal and 
eliminate sex differences in brain and behaviour in mice. [PubMed: 25725160] 
60. del Abril A, Segovia S, Guillamon A. The bed nucleus of the stria terminalis in the rat: regional sex 
differences controlled by gonadal steroids early after birth. Dev Brain Res. 1987; 32:295–300.
61. Okayama Y, Kawakami T. Development, migration, and survival of mast cells. Immunol Res. 
2006; 34:97–115. [PubMed: 16760571] 
62. Silver R, Curley JP. Mast cells on the mind: new insights and opportunities. Trends Neurosci. 2013; 
36:513–521. [PubMed: 23845731] 
63. Khalil MH, Silverman AJ, Silver R. Mast cells in the rat brain synthesize gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone. J Neurobiol. 2003; 56:113–124. [PubMed: 12838577] 
64. Kriegsfeld LJ, et al. Brain mast cells are influenced by chemosensory cues associated with estrus 
induction in female prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster). Horm Behav. 2003; 44:377–384. 
[PubMed: 14644631] 
65. Mackey E, et al. Sexual dimorphism in the mast cell transcriptome and the pathophysiological 
responses to immunological and psychological stress. Biol Sex Differ. 2016; 7:60. [PubMed: 
27895892] 
66. Sweatt JD. The emerging field of neuroepigenetics. Neuron. 2013; 80:624–632. [PubMed: 
24183015] 
67. Reardon PK, et al. An allometric analysis of sex and sex chromosome dosage effects on subcortical 
anatomy in humans. J Neurosci. 2016; 36:2438–2448. This study reveals that sex differences in the 
size of two subcortical structures are further modified by sex chromosome aneuploidies in both 
men and women. [PubMed: 26911691] 
68. Torchia J, Glass C, Rosenfeld MG. Co-activators and co-repressors in the integration of 
transcriptional responses. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 1998; 10:373–383. [PubMed: 9640539] 
69. Klinge CM. Estrogen receptor interaction with co-activators and co-repressors. Steroids. 2000; 
65:227–251. [PubMed: 10751636] 
70. De Vries GJ, et al. Sexual differentiation of vasopressin innervation of the brain: cell death versus 
phenotypic differentiation. Endocrinology. 2008; 149:4632–4637. [PubMed: 18499746] 
71. Wang Z, De Vries GJ. Androgen and estrogen effects on vasopressin messenger RNA expression in 
the medial amygdaloid nucleus in male and female rats. J Neuroendocrinol. 1995; 7:827–831. 
[PubMed: 8748118] 
72. Forbes-Lorman RM, Rautio JJ, Kurian JR, Auger AP, Auger CJ. Neonatal MeCP2 is important for 
the organization of sex differences in vasopressin expression. Epigenetics. 2012; 7:230–238. In 
this study, a transient reduction in MeCP2 early in life permanently removed the sex difference in 
medial amygdala vasopressin expression by reducing it in males to female levels. [PubMed: 
22430799] 
73. Argue KJ, McCarthy MM. Characterization of juvenile play in rats: importance of sex of self and 
sex of partner. Biol Sex Differ. 2015; 6:16. [PubMed: 26361539] 
74. Kurian JR, Olesen KM, Auger AP. Sex differences in epigenetic regulation of the estrogen 
receptor-alpha promoter within the developing preoptic area. Endocrinology. 2010; 151:2297–
2305. [PubMed: 20237133] 
75. Schwarz JM, Nugent BM, McCarthy MM. Developmental and hormone-induced epigenetic 
changes to estrogen and progesterone receptor genes in brain are dynamic across the life span. 
Endocrinology. 2010; 151:4871–4881. [PubMed: 20702577] 
76. Nugent BM, McCarthy MM. Epigenetic underpinnings of developmental sex differences in the 
brain. Neuroendocrinology. 2011; 93:150–158. [PubMed: 21411982] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 17
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 77. Nugent BM, Schwarz JM, McCarthy MM. Hormonally mediated epigenetic changes to steroid 
receptors in the developing brain: implications for sexual differentiation. Horm Behav. 2010; 
59:338–344. [PubMed: 20800064] 
78. Ghahramani NM, et al. The effects of perinatal testosterone exposure on the DNA methylome of 
the mouse brain are late-emerging. Biol Sex Differ. 2014; 5:8. In this study, the short-term effects 
of neonatal hormone treatment were modest, but the number of genes with altered methylation 
increased by 20-fold in adulthood. [PubMed: 24976947] 
79. Nugent BM, et al. Brain feminization requires active repression of masculinization via DNA 
methylation. Nat Neurosci. 2015; 18:690–697. This study demonstrates that higher levels of DNA 
methylation in the POA of females repress the gene expression programme that is required for 
normal masculinization, an effect that can be reversed by hormone treatment and is dependent on 
DNMT activity. [PubMed: 25821913] 
80. Matsuda KI, et al. Histone deacetylation during brain development is essential for permanent 
masculinization of sexual behavior. Endocrinology. 2011; 152:2760–2767. This study shows that 
inhibition of HDAC2 and HDAC4 early in development prevents normal male sex behaviour in 
adulthood, perhaps in part by modifying sex-specific patterns of acetylation of oestrogen receptor-
α and aromatase promoter regions. [PubMed: 21586557] 
81. Murray EK, Hien A, de Vries GJ, Forger NG. Epigenetic control of sexual differentiation of the 
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Endocrinology. 2009; 150:4241–4247. In this study, treatment 
with the HDAC inhibitor valproic acid prevented the increased cell survival that normally occurs in 
males resulting in a BNST volume similar to that of females. [PubMed: 19497973] 
82. Berger SL. The complex language of chromatin regulation during transcription. Nature. 2007; 
447:407–412. [PubMed: 17522673] 
83. Shen EY, et al. Epigenetics and sex differences in the brain: a genome-wide comparison of 
histone-3 lysine-4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) in male and female mice. Exp Neurol. 2015; 
268:21–29. [PubMed: 25131640] 
84. Arnold AP, Lusis AJ. Understanding the sexome: measuring and reporting sex differences in gene 
systems. Endocrinology. 2012; 153:2551–2555. [PubMed: 22434084] 
85. Bianchi I, Lleo A, Gershwin ME, Invernizzi P. The X chromosome and immune associated genes. J 
Autoimmun. 2012; 38:J187–J192. [PubMed: 22178198] 
86. Schwarz JM, Hutchinson MR, Bilbo SD. Early-life experience decreases drug-induced 
reinstatement of morphine CPP in adulthood via microglial-specific epigenetic programming of 
anti-inflammatory IL-10 expression. J Neurosci. 2011; 31:17835–17847. [PubMed: 22159099] 
87. Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network Surveillance Year 2010 Principal Investigators. 
Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder among children aged 8 years — autism and developmental 
disabilities monitoring network, 11 sites, United States, 2010. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2014; 
63:1–21.
88. Halladay AK, et al. Sex and gender differences in autism spectrum disorder: summarizing evidence 
gaps and identifying emerging areas of priority. Mol Autism. 2015; 6:36. [PubMed: 26075049] 
89. Werling DM, Geschwind DH. Sex differences in autism spectrum disorders. Curr Opin Neurol. 
2013; 26:146–153. [PubMed: 23406909] 
90. Kosidou K, et al. Maternal polycystic ovary syndrome and the risk of autism spectrum disorders in 
the offspring: a population-based nationwide study in Sweden. Mol Psychiatry. 2016; 21:1441–
1448. [PubMed: 26643539] 
91. Ingudomnukul E, Baron-Cohen S, Wheelwright S, Knickmeyer R. Elevated rates of testosterone-
related disorders in women with autism spectrum conditions. Horm Behav. 2007; 51:597–604. 
[PubMed: 17462645] 
92. Baron-Cohen S, et al. Elevated fetal steroidogenic activity in autism. Mol Psychiatry. 2015; 
20:369–376. [PubMed: 24888361] 
93. Windham GC, Lyall K, Anderson M, Kharrazi M. Autism spectrum disorder risk in relation to 
maternal mid-pregnancy serum hormone and protein markers from prenatal screening in 
California. J Autism Dev Disord. 2016; 46:478–488. [PubMed: 26370672] 
94. Baron-Cohen S. The extreme male brain theory of autism. Trends Cogn Sci. 2002; 6:248–254. 
[PubMed: 12039606] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 18
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 95. Voineagu I, et al. Transcriptomic analysis of autistic brain reveals convergent molecular pathology. 
Nature. 2011; 474:380–384. [PubMed: 21614001] 
96. Gupta S, et al. Transcriptome analysis reveals dysregulation of innate immune response genes and 
neuronal activity-dependent genes in autism. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:5748. [PubMed: 25494366] 
97. Werling DM, Parikshak NN, Geschwind DH. Gene expression in human brain implicates sexually 
dimorphic pathways in autism spectrum disorders. Nat Commun. 2016; 7:10717. Re-analyses of 
existing transcriptomic data sets reveal sex differences in the fetal brain, including an increase in 
microglia-associated and activated astrocyte-associated genes in males. The same pattern was 
observed in adult males with ASD compared to neurotypic males. [PubMed: 26892004] 
98. Aleman A, Kahn RS, Selten JP. Sex differences in the risk of schizophrenia: evidence from meta-
analysis. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2003; 60:565–571. [PubMed: 12796219] 
99. Castle DJ, Murray RM. The neurodevelopmental basis of sex differences in schizophrenia. Psychol 
Med. 1991; 21:565–575. [PubMed: 1946845] 
100. Goldstein JM. Sex, hormones and affective arousal circuitry dysfunction in schizophrenia. Horm 
Behav. 2006; 50:612–622. [PubMed: 16876167] 
101. Goldstein JM, et al. Impact of normal sexual dimorphisms on sex differences in structural brain 
abnormalities in schizophrenia assessed by magnetic resonance imaging. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2002; 59:154–164. [PubMed: 11825137] 
102. Moffitt TE, Caspi A. Childhood predictors differentiate life-course persistent and adolescence-
limited antisocial pathways among males and females. Dev Psychopathol. 2001; 13:355–375. 
[PubMed: 11393651] 
103. Craig A, Hancock K, Tran Y, Craig M, Peters K. Epidemiology of stuttering in the community 
across the entire life span. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2002; 45:1097–1105. [PubMed: 12546480] 
104. Rutter M, et al. Sex differences in developmental reading disability: new findings from 4 
epidemiological studies. JAMA. 2004; 291:2007–2012. [PubMed: 15113820] 
105. Quinn JM, Wagner RK. Gender differences in reading impairment and in the identification of 
impaired readers: results from a large-scale study of at-risk readers. J Learn Disabil. 2015; 
48:433–445. [PubMed: 24153403] 
106. Wang HS, Kuo MF. Tourette’s syndrome in Taiwan: an epidemiological study of tic disorders in 
an elementary school at Taipei County. Brain Dev. 2003; 25(Suppl 1):S29–S31. [PubMed: 
14980369] 
107. Biederman J, et al. Influence of gender on attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children 
referred to a psychiatric clinic. Am J Psychiatry. 2002; 159:36–42. [PubMed: 11772687] 
108. Gershon J. A meta-analytic review of gender differences in ADHD. J Atten Disord. 2002; 5:143–
154. [PubMed: 11911007] 
109. Dirlikov B, et al. Distinct frontal lobe morphology in girls and boys with ADHD. Neuroimage 
Clin. 2015; 7:222–229. [PubMed: 25610784] 
110. Jacobson LA, et al. Sex-based dissociation of white matter microstructure in children with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2015; 54:938–946. 
[PubMed: 26506584] 
111. Biederman J, et al. Sexually dimorphic effects of four genes (COMT, SLC6A2, MAOA, SLC6A4) 
in genetic associations of ADHD: a preliminary study. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 
2008; 147B:1511–1518. [PubMed: 18937309] 
112. Amir RE, et al. Rett syndrome is caused by mutations in X-linked MECP2, encoding methyl-
CpG-binding protein 2. Nat Genet. 1999; 23:185–188. [PubMed: 10508514] 
113. Berletch JB, Yang F, Xu J, Carrel L, Disteche CM. Genes that escape from X inactivation. Hum 
Genet. 2011; 130:237–245. [PubMed: 21614513] 
114. Simerly RB. Wired for reproduction: organization and development of sexually dimorphic circuits 
in the mammalian forebrain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2002; 25:507–536. [PubMed: 12052919] 
115. Xu J, Deng X, Disteche CM. Sex-specific expression of the X-linked histone demethylase gene 
Jarid1c in brain. PLoS ONE. 2008; 3:e2553. [PubMed: 18596936] 
116. Xu J, Deng X, Watkins R, Disteche CM. Sex-specific differences in expression of histone 
demethylases Utx and Uty in mouse brain and neurons. J Neurosci. 2008; 28:4521–4527. This 
McCarthy et al.
Page 19
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 study shows that sex chromosome paralogue genes that escape X inactivation are differentially 
expressed in males and females in a brain region-specific manner. [PubMed: 18434530] 
117. Gorski RA, Gordon JH, Shryne JE, Southam AM. Evidence for a morphological sex difference 
within the medial preoptic area of the rat brain. Brain Res. 1978; 148:333–346. [PubMed: 
656937] 
118. Matsumoto A, Arai Y. Sex difference in volume of the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus 
in the rat. Endocrinol Jpn. 1983; 30:227–280.
119. Reid SNM, Juraska JM. Sex differences in the neuron number in binocular area of rat visual 
cortex. J Comp Neurol. 1992; 321:448–455. [PubMed: 1506480] 
120. Mizukami S, Nishizuka M, Arai Y. Sexual difference in nuclear volume and its ontogeny in the rat 
amygdala. Exp Neurol. 1983; 79:569–575. [PubMed: 6822281] 
121. Van Eden CG, Uylings HB, Van Pelt J. Sex-difference and left-right asymmetries in the prefrontal 
cortex during postnatal development in the rat. Brain Res. 1984; 314:146–153. [PubMed: 
6697252] 
122. Davis EC, Shryne JE, Gorski RA. Structural sexual dimorphisms in the anteroventral 
periventricular nucleus of the rat hypothalamus are sensitive to gonadal steroids perinatally, but 
develop peripubertally. Neuroendocrinology. 1996; 63:142–148. [PubMed: 9053778] 
123. Guillamon A, de Blas MR, Segovia S. Effects of sex steroids on the development of the locus 
coeruleus in the rat. Brain Res. 1988; 468:306–310. [PubMed: 3382961] 
124. Cooke BM, Tabibnia G, Breedlove SM. A brain sexual dimorphism controlled by adult 
circulating androgens. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999; 96:7538–7540. [PubMed: 10377450] 
125. De Vries GJ, Buds MR, Swaab DF. Ontogeny of vassopressinergic neurons of the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus and their extrahypothalamic projections in the rat brain — presence of a 
sex difference in the lateral septum. Brain Res. 1981; 218:67–78. [PubMed: 7023607] 
126. Simerly RB, Swanson LW, Gorski RA. Reversal of the sexually dimorphic distribution of 
serotonin-immunoreactive fibers in the medial preoptic nucleus by treatment with perinatal 
androgen. Brain Res. 1985; 340:91–98. [PubMed: 4040790] 
127. Miller MA, Vician L, Clifton DK, Dorsa DM. Sex differences in vassopressin neurons in the bed 
nucleus of the stria terminalis by in situ hybridization. Peptides. 1989; 10:615–619. [PubMed: 
2780420] 
128. Clarkson J, Herbison AE. Postnatal development of kisspeptin neurons in mouse hypothalamus; 
sexual dimorphism and projections to gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Endocrinology. 
2006; 147:5817–5825. [PubMed: 16959837] 
129. Raisman G, Field PM. Sexual dimorphism in the preoptic area of the rat. Science. 1971; 173:731–
733. [PubMed: 5568506] 
130. Raisman G, Field PM. Sexual dimorphism in the neuropil of the preoptic area of the rat and its 
dependence on neonatal androgen. Brain Res. 1973; 54:1–29. [PubMed: 4122682] 
131. Gould E, Westlind-Danielsson A, Frankfurt M, McEwen BS. Sex differences and thyroid 
hormone sensitivity of hippocampal pyramidal neurons. J Neurosci. 1990; 10:996–1003. 
[PubMed: 2319308] 
132. Matsumoto A, Arai Y. Sexual dimorphism in ‘wiring pattern’ in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus 
and its modification by neonatal hormonal environment. Brain Res. 1980; 19:238–242.
133. Matsumoto A, Arai Y. Male-female differences in synaptic organization of the ventromedial 
nucleus of the hypothalamus in the rat. Neuroendocrinolgy. 1986; 42:232–236.
134. Mong JA, Glaser E, McCarthy MM. Gonadal steroids promote glial differentiation and alter 
neuronal morphology in the developing hypothalamus in a regionally specific manner. J 
Neurosci. 1999; 19:1464–1472. [PubMed: 9952422] 
135. Shors TJ, Chua C, Falduto J. Sex differences and opposite effects of stress on dendritic spine 
density in the male versus female hippocampus. J Neurosci. 2001; 21:6292–6297. [PubMed: 
11487652] 
136. Galea LAM, et al. Sex differences in dendrtic atrophy of CA3 pyramidal neurons in response to 
chronic restraint stress. Neuroscience. 1997; 81:689–697. [PubMed: 9316021] 
137. Kolb B, Stewart J. Sex-related differences in dendritic branching of cells in prefrontal cortex of 
rats. J Neuroendocrinol. 1991; 3:95–99. [PubMed: 19215453] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 20
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 138. Schwarz JM, Liang SL, Thompson SM, McCarthy MM. Estradiol induces hypothalamic dendritic 
spines by enhancing glutamate release: a mechanism for organizational sex differences. Neuron. 
2008; 58:584–598. [PubMed: 18498739] 
139. Juraska JM, Fitch JM, Henderson C, Rivers N. Sex differences in the dendritic branching of 
dentate granule cells following differential experience. Brain Res. 1985; 29:73–80.
140. Verhovshek T, Buckley KE, Sergent MA, Sengelaub DR. Testosterone metabolites differentially 
maintain adult morphology in a sexually dimorphic neuromuscular system. Dev Neurobiol. 2010; 
70:206–221. [PubMed: 20024940] 
141. Han TM, De Vries GJ. Organizational effects of testosterone, estradiol, and dihydrotestosterone 
on vasopressin mRNA expression in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. J Neurobiol. 2003; 
54:502–510. [PubMed: 12532400] 
142. Shah NM, et al. Visualizing sexual dimorphism in the brain. Neuron. 2004; 43:313–319. 
[PubMed: 15294140] 
143. Yokosuka M, Okamura H, Hayashi S. Postnatal development and sex difference in neurons 
containing estrogen receptor-alpha immunoreactivity in the preoptic brain, the diencephalon, and 
the amygdala in the rat. J Comp Neurol. 1997; 389:81–93. [PubMed: 9390761] 
144. Kauffman AS, et al. Sexual differentiation of Kiss1 expression in the brain of the rat. 
Endocrinology. 2006; 148:1774–1783.
145. Carlsson M, Svensson K, Eriksson E, Carlsson A. Rat brain serotonin: biochemical and functional 
evidence for a sex difference. J Neural Transm. 1985; 63:297–313. [PubMed: 2415675] 
146. Roselli CE, Resko JA. Aromatase activity in the rat brain: hormonal regulation and sex 
differences. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1993; 44:499–508. [PubMed: 8476764] 
147. Yang CF, et al. Sexually dimorphic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus govern mating in 
both sexes and aggression in males. Cell. 2013; 153:896–909. This study demonstrates that 
progesterone receptor-expressing neurons subserve distinct but related roles in males and 
females. [PubMed: 23663785] 
148. Quadros PS, Pfau JL, Goldstein AY, De Vries GJ, Wagner CK. Sex differences in progesterone 
receptor expression: a potential mechanism for estradiol-mediated sexual differentiation. 
Endocrinology. 2002; 143:3727–3739. [PubMed: 12239082] 
149. Garcia-Segura LM, et al. The distribution of glial fibrillary acidic protein in the adult rat brain is 
influenced by the neonatal levels of sex steroids. Brain Res. 1988; 456:357–363. [PubMed: 
3061565] 
150. Johnson RT, Breedlove SM, Jordan CL. Sex differences and laterality in astrocyte number and 
complexity in the adult rat medial amygdala. J Comp Neurol. 2008; 511:599–609. [PubMed: 
18853427] 
151. Tobet SA, Fox TO. Sex- and hormone-dependent antigen immunoreactivity in developing rat 
hypothalamus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1989; 86:382–386. [PubMed: 2911582] 
152. Marin-Husstega M, Muggironi M, Raban D, Skoff RP, Casacia-Bonnefil P. Oligodendrocyte 
progenitor proliferation and maturation is differentially regulated by male and female sex steroid 
hormones. Dev Neurosci. 2004; 26:245–254. [PubMed: 15711064] 
153. Pfau DR, Hobbs NJ, Breedlove SM, Jordan CL. Sex and laterality differences in medial amygdala 
neurons and astrocytes of adult mice. J Comp Neurol. 2016; 524:2492–2502. [PubMed: 
26780286] 
154. Nunez JL, McCarthy MM. Evidence for an extended duration of GABA-mediated excitation in 
the developing male versus female hippocampus. Dev Neurobiol. 2007; 67:1879–1890. 
[PubMed: 17823921] 
155. Diaz S, et al. Sex differences in the cannabinoid modulation of appetite, body temperature and 
neurotransmission at POMC synapses. Neuroendocrinology. 2009; 89:424–440. [PubMed: 
19136814] 
156. Becker JB, Beer ME. The influence of estrogen on nigrostriatal dopamine activity: behavioral and 
neurochemical evidence for both pre- and postsynaptic components. Behav Brain Res. 1986; 
19:27–33. [PubMed: 3954864] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 21
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 157. Zhang JM, Konkle ATM, Zup SL, McCarthy MM. Impact of sex and hormones on new cells in 
the developing rat hippocampus: a novel source of sex dimorphism? Eur J Neurosci. 2008; 
27:791–800. [PubMed: 18333959] 
158. Bowers JM, Waddell J, McCarthy MM. A developmental sex difference in hippocampal 
neurogenesis is mediated by endogenous oestradiol. Biol Sex Differ. 2010; 1:8. This is the first 
report of a sex difference in cell genesis and its modulation by endogenous possibly locally 
synthesized oestradiol. [PubMed: 21208470] 
159. Krebs-Kraft DL, Hill MN, Hillard CJ, McCarthy MM. Sex difference in cell proliferation in 
developing rat amygdala mediated by endocannabinoids has implications for social behavior. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:20535–20540. [PubMed: 21059913] 
160. Pinos H, et al. The development of sex differences in the locus coeruleus of the rat. Brain Res 
Bull. 2001; 56:73–78. [PubMed: 11604252] 
161. Ahmed EI, et al. Pubertal hormones modulate the addition of new cells to sexually dimorphic 
brain regions. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11:995–997. This study shows that volumetric sex differences 
in three brain regions seem to be actively maintained by the addition of new cells during the 
peripubertal period. [PubMed: 19160494] 
162. Gillberg C, Cederlund M, Lamberg K, Zeijlon L. Brief report: “the autism epidemic”. The 
registered prevalence of autism in a Swedish urban area. J Autism Dev Disord. 2006; 36:429–
435. [PubMed: 16568356] 
163. Fombonne E. Epidemiology of pervasive developmental disorders. Pediatr Res. 2009; 65:591–
598. [PubMed: 19218885] 
164. Loeber R, Burke JD, Lahey BB, Winters A, Zera M. Oppositional defiant and conduct disorder: a 
review of the past 10 years, part I. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2000; 39:1468–1484. 
[PubMed: 11128323] 
165. Trepat E, Ezpeleta L. Sex differences in oppositional defiant disorder. Psicothema. 2011; 23:666–
671. [PubMed: 22047856] 
166. Gaub M, Carlson CL. Gender differences in ADHD: a meta-analysis and critical review. J Am 
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 1997; 36:1036–1045. [PubMed: 9256583] 
167. Arcia E, Conners CK. Gender differences in ADHD? J Dev Behav Pediatr. 1998; 19:77–83. 
[PubMed: 9584935] 
168. Bergen SE, et al. Genetic modifiers and subtypes in schizophrenia: investigations of age at onset, 
severity, sex and family history. Schizophr Res. 2014; 154:48–53. [PubMed: 24581549] 
169. Walder DJ, et al. Sex differences in language dysfunction in schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry. 
2006; 163:470–477. [PubMed: 16513869] 
170. Castle DJ, Abel K, Takei N, Murray RM. Gender differences in schizophrenia: hormonal effect or 
subtypes. Schizophr Bull. 1995; 21:1–12. [PubMed: 7770731] 
171. Cyranowski JM, Frank E, Young E, Shear MK. Adolescent onset of the gender difference in 
lifetime rates of major depression: a theoretical model. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2000; 57:21–27. 
[PubMed: 10632229] 
172. Weissman MM, et al. Sex differences in rates of depression: cross-national perspectives. J Affect 
Disord. 1993; 29:77–84. [PubMed: 8300980] 
173. Weissman MM, Klerman GL. Sex differences and the epidemiology of depression. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 1977; 34:98–111. [PubMed: 319772] 
174. Alonso J, et al. Prevalence of mental disorders in Europe: results from the European Study of the 
Epidemiology of Mental Disorders (ESEMeD) project. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl. 2004; 
109:21–27.
175. Kessler RC. Epidemiology of women and depression. J Affect Disord. 2003; 74:5–13. [PubMed: 
12646294] 
176. Robb JC, Young LT, Cooke RG, Joffe RT. Gender differences in patients with bipolar disorder 
influence outcome in the medical outcomes survey (SF-20) subscale scores. J Affect Disord. 
1998; 49:189–193. [PubMed: 9629948] 
177. Leibenluft E. Women with bipolar illness: clinical and research issues. Am J Psychiatry. 1996; 
153:163–173. [PubMed: 8561195] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 22
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 178. Arnold LM. Gender differences in bipolar disorder. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2003; 26:595–620. 
[PubMed: 14563100] 
179. Dao DT, et al. Mood disorder susceptibility gene CACNA1C modifies mood-related behaviors in 
mice and interacts with sex to influence behavior in mice and diagnosis in humans. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2010; 68:801–810. [PubMed: 20723887] 
180. McLean CP, Asnaani A, Litz BT, Hofmann SG. Gender differences in anxiety disorders: 
prevalence, course of illness, comorbidity and burden of illness. J Psychiatr Res. 2011; 45:1027–
1035. [PubMed: 21439576] 
181. Kessler RC, et al. Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the 
United States. Results from the National Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1994; 51:8–
19. [PubMed: 8279933] 
182. Breslau N, Schultz L, Peterson E. Sex differences in depression: a role for preexisting anxiety. 
Psychiatry Res. 1995; 58:1–12. [PubMed: 8539307] 
183. Bogetto F, Venturello S, Albert U, Maina G, Ravizza L. Gender-related clinical differences in 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Eur Psychiatry. 1999; 14:434–441. [PubMed: 10683629] 
184. Kessler RC, Sonnega A, Bromet E, Hughes M, Nelson CB. Posttraumatic stress disorder in the 
National Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1995; 52:1048–1060. [PubMed: 7492257] 
185. Breslau N, Davis GC, Andreski P, Peterson EL, Schultz LR. Sex differences in posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1997; 54:1044–1048. [PubMed: 9366662] 
186. Hudson JI, Hiripi E, Pope HG Jr, Kessler RC. The prevalence and correlates of eating disorders in 
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biol Psychiatry. 2007; 61:348–358. [PubMed: 
16815322] 
187. Raevuori A, Keski-Rahkonen A, Hoek HW. A review of eating disorders in males. Curr Opin 
Psychiatry. 2014; 27:426–430. [PubMed: 25226158] 
188. Bulik CM, et al. Prevalence, heritability, and prospective risk factors for anorexia nervosa. Arch 
Gen Psychiatry. 2006; 63:305–312. [PubMed: 16520436] 
189. Woodside DB, et al. Comparisons of men with full or partial eating disorders, men without eating 
disorders, and women with eating disorders in the community. Am J Psychiatry. 2001; 158:570–
574. [PubMed: 11282690] 
190. Ceylan-Isik AF, McBride SM, Ren J. Sex difference in alcoholism: who is at a greater risk for 
development of alcoholic complication? Life Sci. 2010; 87:133–138. [PubMed: 20598716] 
191. Lipton RB, Stewart WF, Diamond S, Diamond ML, Reed M. Prevalence and burden of migraine 
in the United States: data from the American Migraine Study II. Headache. 2001; 41:646–657. 
[PubMed: 11554952] 
192. Buse DC, et al. Sex differences in the prevalence, symptoms, and associated features of migraine, 
probable migraine and other severe headache: results of the American Migraine Prevalence and 
Prevention (AMPP) Study. Headache. 2013; 53:1278–1299. [PubMed: 23808666] 
193. Petrea RE, et al. Gender differences in stroke incidence and poststroke disability in the 
Framingham Heart Study. Stroke. 2009; 40:1032–1037. [PubMed: 19211484] 
194. Persky RW, Turtzo LC, McCullough LD. Stroke in women: disparities and outcomes. Curr 
Cardiol Rep. 2010; 12:6–13. [PubMed: 20425178] 
195. Orton SM, et al. Sex ratio of multiple sclerosis in Canada: a longitudinal study. Lancet Neurol. 
2006; 5:932–936. [PubMed: 17052660] 
196. Whitacre CC. Sex differences in autoimmune disease. Nat Immunol. 2001; 2:777–780. [PubMed: 
11526384] 
197. Beeson PB. Age and sex associations of 40 autoimmune diseases. Am J Med. 1994; 96:457–462. 
[PubMed: 8192178] 
198. Fratiglioni L, et al. Very old women at highest risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: 
incidence data from the Kungsholmen Project, Stockholm. Neurology. 1997; 48:132–138. 
[PubMed: 9008508] 
199. Ott A, Breteler MM, van Harskamp F, Stijnen T, Hofman A. Incidence and risk of dementia. The 
Rotterdam Study. Am J Epidemiol. 1998; 147:574–580. [PubMed: 9521184] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 23
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 200. Di Carlo A, et al. Incidence of dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular dementia in Italy. The 
ILSA Study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002; 50:41–48. [PubMed: 12028245] 
201. Barnes LL, et al. Sex differences in the clinical manifestations of Alzheimer disease pathology. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005; 62:685–692. [PubMed: 15939846] 
202. Haaxma CA, et al. Gender differences in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2007; 78:819–824. [PubMed: 17098842] 
203. McCombe PA, Henderson RD. Effects of gender in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Gend Med. 
2010; 7:557–570. [PubMed: 21195356] 
McCarthy et al.
Page 24
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Early life programming of adult sex differences
The role of hormones in the establishment of sex differences in brain and behaviour can be 
broadly divided into three stages. In the rodent, early life programming occurs during a 
perinatal sensitive period (the critical window) that is marked by the onset of gonadal steroid 
production in males. This occurs prenatally and around birth, a period during which there is 
no corresponding steroidogenesis in females. During this sensitive period, numerous 
neuroanatomical end points are differentiated in males versus females in a region-specific 
manner. In some areas, there are sex differences in apoptosis, in others, there are differences 
in synaptogenesis or neurogenesis. The juvenile hiatus begins shortly after birth and extends 
until puberty. It is characterized by low to non-existent steroid levels; however, during this 
time, social play behaviour is more frequent among males than among females, a 
behavioural sex difference that is organized during early life programming. The adult period 
is characterized by sex-specific hormonal milieus with males having high and steady levels 
of testosterone (with some daily and annual variations), whereas females undergo cyclic 
changes in hormone levels that are associated with ovulation. The steroid milieu of each sex 
activates the neural circuits of mating that were organized during the perinatal period. In this 
way, the gonadal phenotype and neural phenotype controlling mating behaviour are 
synchronized. Non-reproductive behaviours such as stress and anxiety, spatial learning, 
locomotion and social affiliation are also modulated by steroids in adulthood, and this 
modulation may or may not depend on earlier programming effects during the sensitive 
period.
McCarthy et al.
Page 25
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Sex chromosomes affect brain development directly and indirectly
The differentiation of the bipotential gonad into a testis versus an ovary depends on the SRY 
gene, which is located on the Y chromosome. If present, the gonad will become a testis, and, 
if not, it will become an ovary18. Testosterone and its aromatized end product oestradiol 
produced by the embryonic testis bind to their cognate receptors, which regulate gene 
transcription and exert an organizing influence on cells in the developing brain. Ovarian and 
testicular steroids also activate sex-specific physiology and behaviour in adulthood. 
Moreover, every cell in the brain is XY in male mammals and XX in female mammals. 
Genes on the X chromosome may be expressed at different levels in males and females (in 
cases in which they escape from X inactivation in females)113, whereas genes on the Y 
chromosome (such asSRY) are expressed only in the brain of males20. In females, the 
presence of a second X chromosome could create a heterochromatic sink by monopolizing 
the cellular machinery used for epigenetic regulation and thus alter the expression of other 
genes in a manner that is distinct from males. Thus, the sex chromosomes can exert both 
specific and broad influences on the developing brain. ER, oestrogen receptor.
McCarthy et al.
Page 26
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Neuroepigenetic and neuroinflammatory contributions to sex differences in the 
preoptic area
The rodent preoptic area (POA) is robustly sexually dimorphic and is therefore an ideal 
model system to understand the role of neuroepigenetics and neuroinflammation in sexual 
differentiation. The activity of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) enzymes is higher in the 
developing POA of female rats than in that of males. This is because it is reduced in males, 
through unknown mechanisms, by the elevated oestradiol levels that are present owing to the 
aromatization of testosterone made in the testis. As a result, males have less DNA 
methylation (in the figure, indicated by ‘Me’) in POA cells79. Indirect evidence suggests that 
the lower DNA methylation in males releases immune response genes from epigenetic 
repression, resulting in elevation of inflammatory signalling molecules such as prostaglandin 
E2 (PGE2), histamine and cytokines79. PGE2 in particular is known to activate a signal 
transduction cascade that results in the formation of dendritic spine synapses on the 
dendrites of POA neurons. This process requires the participation of both astrocytes, as a 
putative source of glutamate, and neighbouring microglia, which provide much of the 
prostaglandin. In females, immune response genes are epigenetically silenced by higher 
levels of DNA methylation. PGE2 levels are therefore low, and both microglia and astrocytes 
are in a non-reactive state. As a result, females have half the density of dendritic spine 
synapses in the POA compared with males. These neuroanatomical sex differences 
undergird sex-specific reproductive behaviours, including male copulatory behaviour (both 
motivation to copulate and actual sexual performance), social scent marking, female 
oestrous cycling and maternal behaviour (for reviews, see REFS 44,114).
McCarthy et al.
Page 27
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Epigenetic sources of brain sex differences
a | Several crucial epigenetic mediators are X chromosome and Y chromosome linked. 
These include the histone lysine demethylases KDM6A (also known as UTX) and KDM5C, 
which escape X inactivation and are thus expressed at higher levels in the female 
brain115,116. The Y-linked homologue of KDM6A, KDM6C (also known as UTY), is 
expressed at higher levels in the male brain116. Sex-specific expression of epigenetic 
modifiers such as these has the potential to establish widespread sex differences in the 
chromatin landscape and gene expression and thus to drive structural and functional sex 
differences in the brain. X-linked chromatin-binding proteins, such as methyl CpG binding 
protein 2 (MeCP2), have also been shown to be important for establishment of brain sex 
differences. b | Several epigenetic mediators are regulated by sex specific gonadal hormones. 
For example, male gonadal hormones reduce the expression of MeCP2 in the amygdala72, 
reduce DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity and methylation genome-wide in the 
preoptic area (POA)79, and alter methylation on specific promoters related to brain 
masculinization such as the oestrogen and progesterone receptors74,75. Hormonal 
modulation at the level of histone methylation and acetylation has also been demonstrated in 
the POA and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BNST), potentially mediating both active 
and repressive chromatin states80,83. HDACs, histone deacetylases.
McCarthy et al.
Page 28
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
McCarthy et al.
Page 29
Table 1
Examples of neuroanatomical, neurochemical and physiological sex differences in the brains of rodents
End point measured
Measurements displaying male 
bias
Measurements displaying female 
bias
Measurements displaying 
context-, age- or region-specific 
biases
Volume
•
mPOA117
•
VMN118
•
BNST60
•
Binocular area of 
the visual cortex119
•
Amygdala120
•
Dorsal agranular insular 
subarea (orbital 
prefrontal cortex)121
•
AVPV of the 
hypothalamus122
•
LC123
Differences in medial amygdala 
volume are dependent on 
circulating testosterone in adult 
males124
Fibre density
•
Lateral septum 
(vasopressin 
neurons)125
•
Medial preoptic 
nucleus 
(serotonergic 
fibres)126
•
BNST (vasopressin 
neurons)127
AVPV (kisspeptin fibres)128
None known
Synapses
•
Excitatory synapses 
in the 
mPOA47,48,129,130
•
Hippocampal CA3 
primary dendrites 
and spines131
•
Axosomatic 
synapses in the 
arcuate nucleus132
•
Axodendritic 
synapses in the 
VMN133,134
Axodendritic synapses in the arcuate 
nucleus132
•
Hippocampus 
dendritic spine 
density (female > 
male, but this 
reverses following 
stress)135
•
CA3 dendritic 
atrophy (male > 
female, but this 
reverses following 
stress)136
Branching
•
Length of glial 
processes in the 
arcuate nucleus134
•
Dendritic branching 
in prefrontal cortex 
cingulate areas137
•
Dendritic branching 
in the VMN138
Dendritic branching in the agranular 
insular cortex137
•
Differences in 
dendritic branching 
in dentate granule 
cells following 
environmental 
enrichment139
•
Difference in 
dendritic branching 
and soma size of 
spinal nucleus 
bulbocavernosus is 
maintained by 
testosterone in 
males140
Neurochemical phenotype
•
Vasopressin cells in 
the BNST141
•
Androgen receptor-
expressing cells in 
the mPOA and 
BNST142
•
Oestrogen receptor-α 
immunoreactive cells in 
the median preoptic 
nucleus and VMN143
•
Kisspeptin-expressing 
cells in the AVPV144
Differences in aromatase activity 
and progesterone receptor 
expression are region 
specific146–148
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
McCarthy et al.
Page 30
End point measured
Measurements displaying male 
bias
Measurements displaying female 
bias
Measurements displaying 
context-, age- or region-specific 
biases
•
Dopamine neurons in 
the AVPV54
•
Whole-brain levels of 
serotonin and its 
metabolites145
Cell number
•
Activated microglia 
in neonatal mPOA43
•
Glia in visual 
cortex119
•
Glia in the globus 
pallidus and CA1 
(REF. 149)
•
Astrocytes in the 
posterodorsal 
medial amygdala150
•
Radial glia in the 
mPOA and 
hypothalamus151
•
Oligodendrocyte 
precursors152
•
Biases in brain-
wide microglia 
counts in neonates 
and adult depend 
on age42
•
Sex difference in 
astrocyte number 
in the medial 
amygdala only 
occurs in the left 
hemisphere153
Activational state
Duration of developmental 
excitatory actions of GABA154
•
Hippocampal long-term 
potentiation, excitatory 
postsynaptic potential 
slope, burst 
depolarization2
•
Hypothalamic 
proopiomelanocortin-
expressing neurons and 
cannabinoid receptor 
type 1 mediated 
miniature inhibitory 
postsynaptic current 
frequency155
Hormonal control of nigrostriatal 
dopamine system156
Cell genesis
Neurogenesis in CA1 and dentate 
gyrus157,158
•
Cell genesis in the 
medial amygdala159
•
Neurogenesis in the 
LC160
Addition of new cells to sexually 
dimorphic AVPV and medial 
amygdala at puberty depends on 
gonadal steroids161
The categorization of sex differences in the rodent brain for over 40 years makes a comprehensive list unwieldy. Here, we note some examples of 
the range of types of sex differences that are found throughout the brain. AVPV, anteroventral periventricular nucleus; BNST, bed nucleus of the 
stria terminalis; LC, locus coeruleus; mPOA, medial preoptic area; VMN, ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus.
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
McCarthy et al.
Page 31
Table 2
Sex differences in neuropsychiatric, neurological and neurodegenerative conditions
Condition
Sex differences in prevalence
Sex differences in 
onset
Sex differences in 
phenotype
Refs
Neuropsychiatric conditions with origins in development
Autism spectrum disorder
Four to five times higher in males 
than in females
None
More social impairment in 
males; more affective 
symptoms in females
87,88, 162,163
Conduct disorder oppositional 
defiance disorder
Three times higher in males than 
in females
Earlier onset in 
males
More externalizing 
symptoms in males; more 
affective symptoms in 
females
164,165
ADHD
Two to three times higher in males 
than in females
None
More hyperactivity, 
externalizing and 
impulsivity in males; more 
internalizing, inattention 
and intellectual 
impairment in females
166,167
Schizophrenia
1.42 times higher in males than in 
females
Earlier onset in 
males than in 
females (early onset 
is more likely in 
males; late onset is 
more likely in 
females)
More language disruption, 
positive symptoms and 
severe course of illness in 
males; more affective 
symptoms in females
98,99, 168–170
Neurological developmental conditions
Dyslexia and/or reading 
impairment
Two to three times higher in males 
than in females
None
None known
104,105
Stuttering
2.3 times higher in males than in 
females
Adolescent onset 
four times higher in 
males than females
None known
103
Tourette syndrome
Three to four times higher in 
males than in females
Earlier onset in 
males
Greater tic severity in 
adulthood in females
106
Adult onset neuropsychiatric conditions
Major depression
None before puberty; two times 
higher in females than in males 
post-puberty
None
None known
171–175
Bipolar disorder
None for bipolar I; bipolar II 
higher in females than in males
Earlier onset in 
males
Sex by genotype 
interaction
176–179
Generalized anxiety
Two times higher in females than 
in males
None
Higher chronicity and 
comorbidity with major 
depression in females
174, 180–182
Panic disorder
2.5 times higher in females than in 
males
None
None known
180
OCD
1.5 times higher in females than in 
males
None
None known
183
PTSD
Two times higher in females than 
in males
None
More likely in females 
than in males following 
childhood trauma
184,185
Anorexia nervosa
Three times higher in females than 
in males
Unknown
None known
186–189
Bulimia
Three to four times higher in 
females than in males
Unknown
None known
186–189
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
McCarthy et al.
Page 32
Condition
Sex differences in prevalence
Sex differences in 
onset
Sex differences in 
phenotype
Refs
Alcoholism or substance abuse
Higher in males than in females
Earlier in females 
than males
Females progress to 
addiction more quickly 
than males
190
Adult neurological conditions
Migraine
None pre-puberty, but three times 
higher in females than males post-
puberty
None
None known
191,192
Stroke
Higher in males than females 
before age 85, but higher in 
females than males after age 85
Males 4 years before 
females
None known
193,194
Neurodegenerative disease
MS (with exception of primary 
progressive MS)
Two times higher in females than 
males
Earlier onset in 
females
More severe in males
195–197
Alzheimer disease
1.5–2 times higher in females than 
males, especially in those over 80 
years
Earlier onset in 
females
More tangles and global 
pathology in females; 
pathology more highly 
correlated with clinical 
score in females
198–201
Parkinson disease
1.5 times higher in males than 
females
Males 2 years before 
females
None known
202
ALS
Three times higher in males than 
females
Earlier onset in 
males
None known
197,203
Myasthenia gravis
Four times higher in females than 
males
Earlier onset in 
females
None known
196
ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; Bipolar I, bipolar spectrum disorder characterized by at least 
one manic or mixed episode; Bipolar II, bipolar spectrum disorder characterized by at least one episode of major depression lasting two or more 
weeks and at least one hypomanic episode; MS, multiple sclerosis; OCD, obsessive compulsive disorder; PTSD, post-traumatic stress disorder.
Nat Rev Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 17.
