 :AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY
DOCUMENTS
Official American Thoracic Society/Japanese Respiratory Society
Clinical Practice Guidelines: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Diagnosis
and Management
Francis X. McCormack, Nishant Gupta, Geraldine R. Finlay, Lisa R. Young, Angelo M. Taveira-DaSilva,
Connie G. Glasgow, Wendy K. Steagall, Simon R. Johnson, Steven A. Sahn, Jay H. Ryu, Charlie Strange,
Kuniaki Seyama, Eugene J. Sullivan, Robert M. Kotloff, Gregory P. Downey, Jeffrey T. Chapman, MeiLan K. Han,
Jeanine M. D’Armiento, Yoshikazu Inoue, Elizabeth P. Henske, John J. Bissler, Thomas V. Colby, Brent W. Kinder,
Kathryn A. Wikenheiser-Brokamp, Kevin K. Brown, Jean F. Cordier, Cristopher Meyer, Vincent Cottin, Jan L. Brozek,
Karen Smith, Kevin C. Wilson, and Joel Moss; on behalf of the ATS/JRS Committee on Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
THIS OFFICIAL CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE OF THE AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY (ATS) AND JAPANESE RESPIRATORY SOCIETY (JRS) WAS APPROVED BY THE ATS
BOARD OF DIRECTORS, MAY 2016, AND BY THE JRS, MAY 2016
THIS CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE WAS ENDORSED BY THE LYMPHANGIOLEIOMYOMATOSIS FOUNDATION, MAY 2016
Background: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare cystic
lung disease that primarily affects women. The purpose of these
guidelines is to provide recommendations for the diagnosis and
treatment of LAM.
Methods: Systematic reviews were performed to summarize
evidence pertinent to our questions. The evidence was summarized
and discussed by a multidisciplinary panel. Evidence-based
recommendations were then formulated, written, and graded using
the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and
Evaluation approach.
Results: After considering the panel’s confidence in the estimated
effects,thebalanceofdesirable(i.e.,benefits)andundesirable(i.e.,harms
andburdens)consequencesoftreatment,patientvaluesandpreferences,
cost, and feasibility, recommendations were formulated for or against
specific interventions. These included recommendations for sirolimus
treatment and vascular endothelial growth factor D testing and
recommendations against doxycycline and hormonal therapy.
Conclusions: Evidence-based recommendations for the diagnosis
and treatment of patients with LAM are provided. Frequent
reassessment and updating will be needed.
Overview
This guideline synthesizes the evidence
for emerging advancements in
lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) and
then uses that evidence to formulate
recommendations pertaining to the
diagnosis and treatment of patients with
LAM. The intent of the guideline is to
empower clinicians to apply the
recommendations in the context of the
values and preferences of individual
patients and to tailor their decisions to the
clinical situation at hand. The guideline
panel’s recommendations (Table 1) are as
follows:
d For patients with LAM with
abnormal/declining lung function, we
recommend treatment with sirolimus
rather than observation (strong
recommendation based on moderate-
quality evidence).
d For selected patients with LAM with
problematic chylous effusions, we
suggest treatment with sirolimus before
invasive management (conditional
recommendation based on very
low-quality evidence).
d We suggest NOT using doxycycline as
treatment for LAM (conditional
recommendation based on low-quality
evidence).
d We suggest NOT using hormonal therapy
as treatment for LAM (conditional
recommendation based on very low-
quality evidence). Hormonal therapies
include progestins, gonadotrophin-
releasing hormone agonists, selective
estrogen receptor modulators like
tamoxifen, and oophorectomy.
ORCID ID: 0000-0001-7168-9464 (F.X.M.).
Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to Francis X. McCormack, M.D., Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine,
University of Cincinnati, 231 Albert Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0564. E-mail: frank.mccormack@uc.edu
Am J Respir Crit Care Med Vol 194, Iss 6, pp 748–761, Sep 15, 2016
Copyright © 2016 by the American Thoracic Society
DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201607-1384ST
Internet address: www.atsjournals.org
748
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 194 Number 6 | September 15 2016
 Contents
Overview
Introduction
Methods
Committee Composition
Conflict-of-Interest Management
Guideline Panel Meetings
Formulating Questions and
Outcomes
Literature Search and Study
Selection
Evidence Synthesis
Development of Recommendations
Manuscript Preparation
Updating
Question 1: Should Patients with LAM Be
Treated with Sirolimus?
Background
Summary of the Evidence
Benefits
Harms
Other Considerations
Recommendation 1a
Recommendation 1b
Values and Preferences
Research Opportunities
Question 2: Should Patients with LAM Be
Treated with Doxycycline?
Background
Summary of the Evidence
Benefits
Harms
Other Considerations
Recommendation 2
Values and Preferences
Research Opportunities
Question 3: Should Patients with LAM Be
Treated with Hormonal Therapy?
Background
Summary of the Evidence
Benefits
Harms
Other Considerations
Recommendation 3
Values and Preferences
Research Opportunities
Question 4: Should VEGF-D Be Used to
Confirm the Diagnosis of LAM in Women
with Compatible Cystic Change on
Computed Tomography of the Chest?
Background
Summary of the Evidence
Benefits
Harms
Other Considerations
Recommendation 4
Values and Preferences
Research Opportunities
Conclusions
Future Directions
d For patients whose computed
tomography scan shows cystic
abnormalities characteristic of LAM,
but who have no other confirmatory
clinical or extrapulmonary radiologic
features of LAM, we recommend
vascular endothelial growth factor D
testing to establish the diagnosis of
LAM before consideration of
proceeding to diagnostic lung biopsy
(strong recommendation based on
moderate-quality evidence). The
purpose of vascular endothelial
growth factor D testing is noninvasive
diagnostic confirmation of LAM.
Other confirmatory features of LAM
include tuberous sclerosis complex,
angiomyolipomas, chylous pleural
effusions or ascites, and cystic
lymphangioleiomyomas.
Other questions pertaining to the
management of LAM, such as issues
regarding pregnancy, safety of air travel,
pleural interventions, and use of
bronchodilators, were deferred until the
next version of the guideline.
Introduction
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a
rare, systemic neoplastic disease that is
associated with cystic lung destruction,
chylous fluid accumulations, and abdominal
tumors, including angiomyolipomas and
lymphangioleiomyomas (1, 2). LAM occurs
Table 1. Summary of the Recommendations Provided in This Guideline
Context
Recommendation
Strength of
Recommendation
Confidence in
Estimates of Effect
Treatment with mTOR
inhibitors
For patients with LAM with abnormal/declining
lung function, we recommend treatment with
sirolimus rather than observation.
Strong
Moderate
For selected patients with LAM with problematic
chylous effusions, we suggest treatment with
sirolimus before invasive management.
Conditional
Very low
Treatment with doxycycline
We suggest NOT using doxycycline as treatment for LAM.
Conditional
Low
Treatment with hormonal
therapy
We suggest NOT using hormonal therapy as treatment
for LAM. (“Hormonal therapy” includes the progestins,
GnRH agonists, selective estrogen receptor modulators
like tamoxifen, and oophorectomy.)
Conditional
Very low
VEGF-D as a diagnostic
test
For patients whose CT scan shows cystic abnormalities
characteristic of LAM but have no confirmatory clinical
or extrapulmonary radiologic features of LAM, we
recommend VEGF-D testing before consideration of
proceeding to diagnostic lung biopsy. (“Confirmatory
features of LAM” include tuberous sclerosis complex,
angiomyolipomas, chylous pleural effusions or ascites,
and cystic lymphangioleiomyomas.)
Strong
Moderate
Definition of abbreviations: CT = computed tomography; GnRH = gonadotrophin-releasing hormone; LAM = lymphangioleiomyomatosis;
mTOR = mechanistic target of rapamycin; VEGF-D = vascular endothelial growth factor D.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
749
 almost exclusively in adult women,
affecting approximately five per million (3),
but has also been reported in adult men
(4–7) and children (8). LAM occurs both
sporadically and in patients with tuberous
sclerosis complex (TSC), an inherited
neoplastic syndrome associated with seizures,
cognitive impairment, and tumor formation in
multiple organs (9). Lung function declines
at rates that can exceed typical age-related
decline by two to four times or more (10–12).
Dyspnea with daily activities, recurrent
pneumothoraces, and hypoxia requiring
supplemental oxygen develop in most patients
within 10 years of symptom onset (13).
LAM has been reported to recur in
transplanted lungs, consistent with a
metastatic mechanism for the disease
(14, 15), but has not been reported to cause
graft failure or to jeopardize eligibility for
transplant. Genetic studies have revealed
clonal origins for neoplastic cells harvested
from pulmonary and extrapulmonary
lesions of individual patients (16, 17). The
neoplastic cells that infiltrate the lung in
patients with LAM have smooth muscle
characteristics and a benign histological
appearance (18), arise from an unknown
source, circulate in the blood and lymphatic
fluids (19, 20), and harbor inactivating
TSC1 or 2 gene mutations (17). The
resulting loss of TSC gene function
constitutively activates the mechanistic
target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling
pathway, which regulates multiple cellular
functions, including growth, motility, and
survival (21). LAM cells also express the
lymphangiogenic growth factor, vascular
endothelial growth factor D (VEGF-D),
which likely facilitates access to lymphatic
channels and metastatic spread (22, 23).
Only a fraction of cells within the LAM
lesion contain mutations in tuberous
sclerosis genes, suggesting that robust
recruitment of stromal cells plays an
important role in disease pathogenesis (24).
The purpose of these guidelines is to
provide recommendations for the diagnosis
and treatment of LAM that reflect the
progress that has been made during the
5 years since the European Respiratory
Society LAM Guidelines were published
(25). The guidelines are not intended to
impose a standard of care. They provide
the basis for rational decisions in the
diagnosis and treatment of LAM.
Clinicians, patients, third-party payers,
institutional review committees, other
stakeholders, or the courts should never
view these recommendations as dictates.
No guidelines or recommendations can
take into account all the often compelling
unique individual clinical circumstances
that guide clinical decision making.
Therefore, no one charged with
evaluating clinicians’ actions should
attempt to apply the recommendations
from these guidelines by rote or in a blanket
fashion. Statements about the underlying
values and preferences, as well as
qualifying remarks, accompanying each
recommendation are integral parts and
serve to facilitate more accurate
interpretation; they should never be
omitted when quoting or translating
recommendations from these guidelines.
Methods
Committee Composition
These guidelines represent a collaborative
effort between the American Thoracic
Society (ATS) and the Japanese
Respiratory Society (JRS). The guideline
development panel was co-chaired by
F.X.M. and J.M. and consisted of clinicians
and researchers with recognized expertise
in LAM, including 22 pulmonologists,
two pathologists, one radiologist, one
nephrologist, and one molecular biologist.
The pulmonologist panel consisted of
experts in LAM (n = 14), interstitial and
rare lung disease specialists (n = 3), general
pulmonologists (n = 1), transplant
pulmonologists (n = 3), and pleural
disease specialists (n = 1). Two
methodologists (J.L.B. and K.C.W.) with
expertise in the guideline development
process and application of the Grading
of Recommendations, Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE)
approach (26) were also members. Patient
perspectives on the questions to be
addressed by the Committee were provided
through questionnaires distributed to the
LAM community by the LAM Foundation.
Conflict-of-Interest Management
Guideline panelists disclosed all potential
conflicts of interest according to ATS
policies. The ATS conflict-of-interest and
documents departments reviewed the
disclosures and categorized potential
panelists as having no conflicts, manageable
conflicts, or disqualifying conflicts. Panelists
with no conflicts were allowed to participate
in all aspects of guideline development.
Panelists with manageable conflicts were
allowed to discuss evidence but were recused
from formulating, writing, and grading
recommendations related to their conflicts.
Panelists with disqualifying conflicts were
not allowed to participate. At least one
co-chair and more than half of the panelists
had to be completely free from all conflicts.
The methodologists did not participate in
the formulation of recommendations.
Guideline Panel Meetings
Several face-to-face meetings were held
between 2008 and 2015, coinciding with
the ATS annual conference, the LAM
Foundation conference, and the American
College of Chest Physicians conference, during
which the guideline development panel
discussed the scope of the document, the
questions to be addressed, and the evidence.
Multiple conference calls were held and frequent
email correspondence was used to discuss issues
requiring the input from all panelists.
The cosponsoring societies (the ATS
and JRS) provided financial support for the
meetings and conference calls as well as
travel expenses. Additional support for
travel of panelists to meetings was provided
by the not-for-profit LAM Foundation and
LAM Treatment Alliance. The ATS, JRS,
and foundations had no influence on
question selection, evidence synthesis, or
recommendations.
Formulating Questions and Outcomes
The guideline development panel was
divided into six groups: (1) natural history,
modifiers, and prognosis; (2) nomenclature
and diagnosis; (3) lifestyle; (4) treatment; (5)
management; and (6) future directions.
Clinical questions were developed, circulated
among the panelists, and rated according to
clinical relevance, with the goal of addressing
the top 10 to 20 questions. Patient-
important outcomes were selected a priori
for each question and categorized as critical,
important, or not important (27).
Literature Search and Study Selection
In collaboration with an ATS methodologist
(J.L.B.), a search strategy was designed using
medical subject heading keywords and text
words. The searches were limited to human
studies and articles in English or in any
language with English abstracts. A librarian
from the National Institute of Health (K.S.)
performed the initial literature search in 2009.
Four databases were searched: MEDLINE,
EMBASE, Web of Science, and Scopus.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
750
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 194 Number 6 | September 15 2016
 European Respiratory Society
guidelines on LAM (25) were published in
2010, so the decision was made to
temporarily halt the project to allow the
evidence base to evolve. The project
eventually reconvened with a smaller
writing group of eight panelists (F.X.M.,
G.R.F., L.R.Y., N.G., V.C., S.R.J., K.C.W.,
and J.M.), narrowing the scope to four
questions and then updating the literature
searches for those questions. The same
principals regarding management and
adjudication of conflicts that were
described for the larger Committee were
applied to the writing group. The writing
group circulated all questions and
recommendations to all Committee
members and incorporated modifications
and suggestions before initial submission
and after the initial review was complete.
The literature searches were updated in
July 2014 and July 2015, which included
studies published before May 2015. Committee
members were also queried for any additional
studies not identified by the search. The
search results were placed into a reference
management software database (EndNote) and
distributed to selected panelists.
Prespecified criteria were used to select
relevant studies using a two-step process. The
first step involved excluding or including
studies on the basis of title and abstract alone.
The second step involved excluding or
including studies on the basis of a full text
review. An independent reviewer verified all
study selections; disagreements were resolved
by discussion and consensus.
Evidence Synthesis
The body of evidence for each question was
summarized in collaboration with one of the
methodologists (K.C.W.). Extraction of
crude data followed by pooling via
metaanalysis to derive a single estimate of
effect was planned; however, the studies
identified were not amenable to pooling
because outcomes were variably reported
by different studies or, in some cases,
incompletely reported. The strategy was then
changed to a qualitative evidence synthesis
rather than a quantitative evidence synthesis.
The quality of the body of evidence was
rated using the GRADE approach (28). The
quality of evidence indicates the panel’s
confidence in the estimated effects. It was
based on systematic consideration of the
following criteria: study design, risk of bias,
precision, consistency, directness of the
evidence, risk for publication bias, presence
of dose–effect relationship, magnitude of
effect, and assessment of the effect of
plausible residual confounding or bias. On
the basis of these criteria, the quality of
evidence was categorized as high, moderate,
low, or very low.
All panelists reviewed the evidence
summary and the quality of evidence rating.
Feedback was provided and revisions were
made if deemed appropriate. Disagreements
were resolved by discussion and consensus.
Development of Recommendations
The guideline development panel
formulated recommendations on
the basis of the evidence synthesis.
Recommendations were based on the
following: the balance of desirable
consequences (i.e., benefits) and undesirable
consequences (i.e., harms, burdens, and
costs) compared with alternative
management options, the quality of the
evidence, patient values and preferences,
and resource use. Recommendations were
formulated by discussion and consensus;
none of the recommendations required
voting. The recommendations were worded
using the GRADE approach. The final
recommendations were drafted by the
writing group and were reviewed and
approved by the larger Committee.
The recommendations were rated as
strong or conditional in accordance
with the GRADE approach. The words
“we recommend” indicate that the
recommendation is strong, whereas the
words “we suggest” indicate that the
recommendation is conditional. Table 2
describes the interpretation of strong
and conditional recommendations by
patients, clinicians, and health care policy
makers.
Manuscript Preparation
The working group (F.X.M., G.R.F., L.R.Y.,
N.G., V.C., S.R.J., K.C.W., and J.M.)
drafted the final guideline document. The
manuscript was then reviewed by the entire
guideline development panel, and their
feedback was incorporated into the final draft.
Updating
To remain useful, guidelines need to be
updated regularly as new knowledge
accumulates. These guidelines addressed
a limited number of selected questions,
which will require periodic additions and
revisions. In addition, there exist numerous
clinically important questions that were
not addressed in these guidelines that should
be addressed in future versions. The
guideline development panel hopes to
update these guidelines within the next
5 years.
Table 2. Interpretation of Strong and Conditional Recommendations for Stakeholders
Implications for
Strong Recommendation
Conditional Recommendation
Patients
Most individuals in this situation would want the
recommended course of action and only a small
proportion would not.
The majority of individuals in this situation would want
the suggested course of action, but many would not.
Clinicians
Most individuals should receive the intervention.
Adherence to this recommendation according to
the guideline could be used as a quality criterion or
performance indicator. Formal decision aids are not
likely to be needed to help individuals make
decisions consistent with their values and
preferences.
Recognize that different choices will be appropriate for
individual patients and that you must help each
patient arrive at a management decision consistent
with his or her values and preferences. Decision aids
may be useful in helping individuals to make
decisions consistent with their values and
preferences.
Policy makers
The recommendation can be adopted as policy
in most situations.
Policy making will require substantial debate and
involvement of various stakeholders.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
751
 Question 1: Should Patients
with LAM Be Treated with
Sirolimus?
Background
Sporadic and TSC-associated forms of LAM
are both caused by inactivating mutations in
one of the TSC genes. Defective TSC genes
lead to loss of tuberin-hamartin protein
complex function, resulting in constitutive
activation of the mTOR pathway. Activated
mTOR, in turn, causes perturbations in
multiple cellular processes, including growth,
motility, and survival (29). Sirolimus is an
exquisitely targeted small molecule that
forms a complex with FKBP12, which then
binds to mTOR and blocks activation of
downstream kinases, restoring homeostasis
in cells with defective TSC function (21).
Sirolimus shrinks tumors in TSC animal
models (30, 31).
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified two
uncontrolled trials (32, 33) and one
randomized trial (34) that evaluated the
effects of sirolimus on angiomyolipoma
size, lung function, quality of life, functional
performance, and/or adverse effects in
patients with LAM.
The initial trial was an open-label,
uncontrolled trial in which 25 patients with
TSC or LAM were treated with escalating
doses of sirolimus for 12 months, followed
by an observation period of 1 year (33). The
angiomyolipoma (AML) volume decreased
from a least-square mean of 71.6 ml (95%
confidence interval [CI], 24.9–118.2 ml) at
baseline to 36.5 ml (95% CI, 210.2 to
83.2 ml) after 12 months of sirolimus
therapy, a statistically significant volume
reduction of 53.2% (95% CI, 46.3–60.2%).
Eleven patients with LAM also had their
pulmonary function assessed, which
demonstrated improvement in the FVC
(least-square mean increase of 390 ml; 95%
CI, 180–600 ml) and a trend toward
improvement in the FEV1 (least-square
mean increase of 120 ml; 95% CI, 210 to
240 ml). There was also a decrease in the
residual volume (least-square mean
decrease of 440 ml, 95% CI, 290 to
2790 ml) but no changes in the total lung
capacity, diffusion capacity, or 6-minute-
walking distance. Ten serious adverse
events occurred during the trial, six of
which were considered probably or possibly
related to the sirolimus (diarrhea,
infections, stomatitis, and an AML
hemorrhage). Preliminary results from a
similar open-label, uncontrolled trial of six
patients with LAM and seven patients with
TSC who were being treated with sirolimus
for 2 years were also published (32). An
interim assessment after 1 year of therapy
revealed that all of the patients had a
reduction in the size of their AMLs (the
mean reduction in the sum of the longest
diameters was 26.1%). However, in the four
patients with LAM with data available
at 1 year, no change in lung function
was reported. All of the patients had
adverse events, including mouth ulcers,
hyperlipidemia, and peripheral edema. The
results of these trials, combined with the
preclinical data and the need for assessment
of the benefits and risks of sirolimus with
potential confounders minimized, provided
the rationale for conducting a randomized
controlled trial for LAM.
The MILES (Multicenter International
LAM Efficacy of Sirolimus) Trial was a
double-blind, randomized, parallel group
trial in which 89 patients with LAM and
moderate lung impairment (defined as
FEV1 , 70% predicted) were randomly
assigned to receive treatment with sirolimus
or placebo for 12 months, followed by
12 months of observation (34). Sirolimus
treatment resulted in stabilization of lung
function decline compared with placebo
(1 6 2 vs. 212 6 2 ml/mo, respectively;
P , 0.001). Patients who received sirolimus
had improvement in their FVC, whereas
those who received placebo had ongoing
worsening of their FVC (8 6 3 vs. 211 6
3 ml/mo, respectively; P , 0.001). Quality
of life measured by the EuroQOL scale
improved in the sirolimus group and
declined in the placebo group (0.39 6 0.19
vs. 20.21 6 0.20 units/mo, respectively;
P = 0.03), and a trend toward better daily
functioning was observed using the
Functional Performance Inventory
(0.005 6 0.004 vs. 20.009 6 0.004
units/mo, respectively; P = 0.03). During
the subsequent observation year in which
sirolimus and placebo were withdrawn, the
lung function decline resumed in the
sirolimus group and paralleled that of
the placebo group. Adverse effects due
to sirolimus were common; however,
serious adverse effects were similar in
both groups. The most common adverse
events were mucositis, diarrhea, nausea,
hypercholesterolemia, acneiform rash, and
swelling in the lower extremities.
In addition to the progressive cystic
destruction of lung parenchyma, patients
with LAM can develop chylous
complications secondary to infiltration
of lymphatic channels, lymph nodes, or
the thoracic duct by migrating LAM cells
(35). The most common lymphatic
manifestations of LAM include formation
of lymphangioleiomyomas and collection of
chylous fluid in the pleural and peritoneal
cavities (35, 36).
Our systematic review identified one
open-label, uncontrolled trial (37) and six
case reports (38–43) that addressed the
role of sirolimus in the management of
chylous effusions. Patients with chylous
pleural effusions and other lymphatic
manifestations of LAM were enrolled in an
open-label, uncontrolled trial (37). Twelve
patients with chylous fluid accumulations
(pleural effusions and/or chylous ascites)
were treated with sirolimus. All of the
patients had complete or near-complete
resolution of their chylous fluid
accumulations. Adverse effects related to
sirolimus were common, but manageable,
and did not lead to drug discontinuation
(37). Several case series have also supported
the effectiveness of sirolimus in the
management of chylous effusions (38–43).
Benefits
Sirolimus treatment improved lung function
(as measured by the FEV1 and FVC),
functional performance, and quality of life
in patients with LAM. It also reduced
the volume of angiomyolipomas,
lymphangioleiomyomas, and chylous
accumulations.
Harms
In general, sirolimus was well tolerated, and
adverse effects were mild. The most
common adverse events were mucositis,
diarrhea, nausea, hypercholesterolemia,
acneiform rash, and swelling in the lower
extremities. Additional toxicities that are
encountered with mTOR inhibitors include
ovarian cyst formation, dysmenorrhea,
proteinuria, elevated liver function tests,
drug-induced pneumonitis, and the risk
of infections due to immunosuppression.
Other Considerations
The guideline panel’s judgments regarding
the effects of sirolimus in patients with
LAM who have impaired lung function
were informed primarily by a single
randomized trial (the MILES trial) with
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
752
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 194 Number 6 | September 15 2016
 imprecise estimated effects due to the small
number of patients; this constitutes
moderate-quality evidence. The guideline
panel’s judgments regarding the effects of
sirolimus in patients with LAM who have
chylous fluid accumulations were informed
by one small, uncontrolled trial and
multiple case reports, which constitute very
low-quality evidence.
Recommendation 1a
For patients with LAM with
abnormal/declining lung function, we
recommend treatment with sirolimus
rather than observation (strong
recommendation based on moderate-
quality evidence).
Remarks. Abnormal lung function is
defined as an FEV1 less than 70% predicted.
The goals of sirolimus therapy are to
stabilize lung function, improve functional
performance, and improve overall quality
of life.
Recommendation 1b
For patients with LAM with symptomatic
chylous fluid accumulations, we suggest
treatment with sirolimus before invasive
management (conditional recommendation
based on very low-quality evidence).
Remarks. Chylous fluid accumulations
include chylous effusions and chylous
ascites. Invasive management refers to
interventions such as intermittent
percutaneous drainage and insertion of
indwelling drainage devices. Importantly,
chylous fluid accumulations may require
several months to respond to mTOR
inhibitors and can recur after treatment
cessation.
Values and Preferences
These recommendations place a high value
on the potential benefits of therapy and
lower value on the adverse effects and costs
associated with sirolimus treatment.
Research Opportunities
There exist potential practice-changing
research opportunities involving dosing,
patient selection, agent selection, the timing
of initiation of therapy, and duration of
therapy. With respect to dosing, the
sirolimus dose was adjusted during the
MILES trial to maintain a serum trough
between 5 and 15 ng/ml. More recent
retrospective data suggest that treatment
with low-dose sirolimus (serum trough
level , 5 ng/ml) may also be effective in
stabilizing lung function (42). Reducing the
dose has the potential to reduce adverse
effects related to the drug and may enhance
the safety of long-term treatment with
sirolimus.
With respect to patient selection,
reduced FEV1 has been used to define
abnormal lung function in trials, and the
recommendations above have been
formulated based on that parameter.
However, some patients with LAM present
with normal or near-normal pulmonary
spirometry but an elevated residual volume
(.120% predicted), reduced diffusing
capacity (,80% predicted), exercise-
induced desaturation (,90% predicted
with walking), or resting hypoxemia
(PaO2 , 70 mm Hg). In clinical practice,
several of the guideline panelists have
interpreted these changes to represent a
significant disease burden due to LAM,
especially in patients who are symptomatic,
and have offered sirolimus treatment on a
case-by-case basis, in situations where the
benefits of therapy outweigh the risks.
A prospective trial will be required to
establish the safety and efficacy of this
approach.
When selecting therapy in patients with
normal lung function, many of the guideline
panelists consider factors including rate of
FEV1 decline and the patients’ menopausal
status. In patients with LAM who have
normal spirometry, several of the panelists
have offered sirolimus therapy to those who
have estimated annual loss of FEV1 of
90 ml/yr or greater. Although there are no
prospective data available to support this
arbitrary benchmark, the rationale is that it
represents a rate of decline that is at least
threefold greater than the normal rate of
FEV1 loss (approximately 30 ml/yr). The
same principles may be applied to the
patient with TSC-LAM, because the rate of
lung function decline is similar in both
sporadic LAM and TSC-LAM when
matched for baseline severity (44, 45) and
to postmenopausal patients, a population in
whom the rate of lung function decline is
typically slower (37, 46, 47). Given the
inherent variation in the measurement of
FEV1, the panelists emphasized that in
practice it is important to base decisions on
at least three measurements over at least
6 months and preferably on three or
more measurements made over 12 to
18 months.
With respect to selecting an agent,
everolimus has been reported to stabilize
lung function in a small, open-label,
uncontrolled trial (48). Additional studies
are necessary to confirm and better
delineate the risks and benefits of
everolimus; however, several of the
guideline panelists have offered
everolimus as an alternative choice.
Combination therapies with sirolimus or
everolimus and other drugs targeting
signaling pathways important in disease
pathogenesis also need to be explored.
With respect to timing the initiation
of therapy, the need for continuous
treatment for sustained benefit and the
understudied long-term safety profile of
sirolimus in patients with LAM emphasize
the importance of acquiring a better
understanding of the differences in
outcomes among patients in whom
treatment is initiated early versus those
who are carefully monitored initially
and then treated later. Prospective
trials are needed to help fill these
knowledge gaps.
Finally, with respect to optimal
duration of therapy, less than 5 years has
passed since the MILES trial was published,
and data on the risks and benefits of long-
term sirolimus treatment in LAM remain
incomplete. Because mTOR treatment in
LAM is suppressive, durable benefit requires
continuous treatment. However, the rate of
lung function decline is known to slow after
menopause, and in clinical practice many of
the guideline panelists incorporate this
knowledge into decision making regarding
duration of therapy. The longest reported
follow up of patients with LAM treated with
sirolimus to date demonstrates durable
safety and efficacy over 3.5 years (49). A
study of the long-term safety and efficacy
of sirolimus in this patient population is
being addressed by establishment of a
registry of patients with LAM who are on
treatment or being considered for treatment
with mTOR inhibitors (clinicaltrials.gov,
NCT02432560).
Question 2: Should Patients
with LAM Be Treated with
Doxycycline?
Background
Degradation of the extracellular matrix
by proteolytic enzymes such as matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) likely
contributes to cyst formation in patients
with LAM (50). MMP-2 and MMP-9 are
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
753
 overexpressed in the serum as well as
lung tissue adjacent to cystic areas in
patients with LAM (50–52). Doxycycline
is a tetracycline antibiotic that inhibits
the production and activity of several
MMPs, including MMP-2 and
MMP-9 (53).
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified a case
report (54), two uncontrolled trials (55, 56),
and one randomized trial (57) that
evaluated the effects of doxycycline in
patients with LAM. The case report was the
first publication to suggest a potential
benefit from doxycycline therapy (54). It
described a patient with LAM who had
severe pulmonary impairment; treatment
with doxycycline was accompanied by an
improvement in gas exchange, functional
performance, and lung function (FEV1
increased from 0.48 L [21% predicted] to
0.91 L [35% predicted], and baseline to
peak exertion oxyhemoglobin desaturation
decreased from approximately 14 to 4%).
On the basis of these improvements,
the patient was reportedly removed from
the lung transplantation list. This
publication led to an increase in off-label
use of doxycycline in patients with
LAM (58).
The scientific rationale and promising
case report led to two open-label,
uncontrolled trials of doxycycline in patients
with LAM. In one trial, 41 patients with
LAM were prescribed doxycycline in a dose-
escalating manner for a total of 6 months,
with serial measurements of serum and
urine MMPs. Doxycycline treatment led to a
reduction in serum and urinary MMPs and
was well tolerated in most patients (55).
Nausea, diarrhea, and epigastric pain were
the most frequent side effects, but most
were self-limited, and only one patient
discontinued therapy due to the side effects.
Clinical outcomes other than adverse effects
were not measured. In the other trial,
31 patients were treated with 12 months of
doxycycline (56). MMP levels were reduced
by treatment in all patients, but the mean
FEV1 declined at a rate of 70 ml/yr. The
patients appeared to fall into two groups,
doxycycline responders (n = 13) and
nonresponders (n = 18). The responders
had a higher baseline FEV1 (84% predicted)
and a median FEV1 increase of 70 ml over
1 year, and the nonresponders had a lower
baseline FEV1 (75% predicted) and a
median FEV1 decrease of 140 ml over the
same period. The differential effects may
have been due to greater doxycycline
efficacy in patients with mild disease or,
alternatively, due to responders and
nonresponders having a differential rate of
lung function decline due to variable
baseline disease severities. A follow-up
analysis supported the latter, demonstrating
that most of the “doxycycline responders”
continued to decline at a constant rate
that was similar to the nonresponders (59).
A single-center, randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial of
doxycycline in 23 women with LAM and
moderate lung function impairment (mean
FEV1, 58% predicted) followed the
uncontrolled trials (57). Twelve patients
were treated with doxycycline and 11
patients were treated with placebo for
24 months. The trial detected no differences
between doxycycline and placebo groups in
the rate of FEV1 decline (233.5 vs. 239.6 ml/yr,
respectively; 95% CI, 267 to 79 ml/yr),
shuttle walk distance (4 vs. 21 m,
respectively; 95% CI, 2207 to 197 m),
diffusion capacity (0.04 vs. 0.08 mmol/kPa-min,
respectively; 95% CI, 20.47 to 0.69 mmol/
kPa-min, respectively), or quality of
life. More adverse effects were reported
by the doxycycline group, but only
dyspepsia and photosensitivity were
attributed to the drug.
Benefits
No beneficial effects due to doxycycline
therapy were confirmed in patients with
LAM who had respiratory impairment.
Harms
Potential adverse effects due to doxycycline
include dyspepsia, photosensitivity, and
possibly also nausea and diarrhea.
Other Considerations
The guideline panel’s judgments regarding
the effects of doxycycline in patients with
LAM who have impaired lung function
were informed primarily by a single
randomized trial, whose estimated effects
were imprecise due to the small number of
patients and failure to meet enrollment
targets required for adequate power. This
constitutes low-quality evidence.
Recommendation 2
We suggest NOT using doxycycline
as treatment for LAM (conditional
recommendation based on low-quality
evidence).
Values and Preferences
This recommendation places a high value on
avoiding the risks and costs associated with
a treatment that has not been proven to
improve outcomes.
Research Opportunities
The effects of doxycycline on clinical
outcomes when used in combination with
other treatment modalities like mTOR
inhibitors (e.g., sirolimus) or hormonal
therapy (e.g., progestins, gonadotrophin-
releasing hormone [GnRH] agonists,
selective estrogen receptor modulators
(SERMs) like tamoxifen, and
oophorectomy) have not been
evaluated in patients with LAM.
Question 3: Should Patients
with LAM Be Treated with
Hormonal Therapy?
Background
Hormonal factors have long been believed to
play a role in the pathogenesis of LAM.
Evidence behind this notion arises from the
following observations: symptomatic LAM
occurs almost exclusively in women (29);
there are reports of disease worsening
in a cyclical pattern associated with the
menstrual cycle (60), during pregnancy
(61, 62), and after exposure to estrogen-
containing drugs (63, 64); LAM cells are
known to express both estrogen and
progesterone receptors (65); and there is a
relative stabilization of the disease course in
postmenopausal women with LAM (11).
On the basis of these observations,
hormonal manipulation with various
agents, especially progesterone, has been
used for off-label treatment of patients with
LAM for decades.
Summary of the Evidence
Our literature search identified a published
systematic review (66) that included 30 case
reports and case series related to the
treatment of LAM with hormonal therapy.
Once the studies included in the published
systematic review were combined with those
that we detected via our own systematic
review, there were 37 relevant studies
available to inform the guideline panel.
These included eight case reports and case
series that evaluated oophorectomy (67–74),
four case reports and case series that
evaluated anti-estrogen therapies (75–78),
one case report that evaluated androgen
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
754
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 194 Number 6 | September 15 2016
 therapy (79), six case reports and case series
that evaluated progesterone therapy (80–85),
two controlled observational studies that
evaluated progesterone therapy (11, 12), two
case series that evaluated GnRH agonists
(86, 87), and 14 case reports and case
series that evaluated multiple therapies
or various combinations of therapies
(88–100).
Our synthesis of the evidence did not
consider the case reports because of the high
risk of publication bias (i.e., patients with
successful outcomes are more likely to be
submitted by clinicians as case reports).
Instead, we used the controlled
observational studies and case series to
inform the guideline panel’s judgments.
Generally speaking, the reported effects
of various hormonal therapies were
inconsistent both within reports and across
reports.
Oophorectomy. Oophorectomy was the
subject of a small case series, consisting
of three patients with LAM who had
radiographic abnormalities, progressive
dyspnea, and abnormal lung function (68).
All three patients underwent oophorectomy.
One patient improved dramatically after
surgery (FVC improved from 58 to 88%
predicted), another patient had modest
improvement (FVC improved from 49 to
68% predicted), and the third patient
stabilized (FVC remained at 79%
predicted).
Serum estrogen response modulators.
Tamoxifen was the subject of a small case
series, consisting of three patients with LAM
who had both pulmonary and abdominal
manifestations (76). Two of the patients
died from progressive pulmonary disease
despite 4 months of tamoxifen therapy. The
third patient stabilized before beginning
tamoxifen and remained stable during the
subsequent 5.5 years that she received
tamoxifen. A randomized, controlled trial
comparing an aromatase inhibitor,
letrozole, with placebo in postmenopausal
patients with LAM has been completed, but
the results have not yet been published
(NCT01353209).
Progesterone. In a retrospective cohort
study of 275 patients with LAM, the rate of
decline in the diffusion capacity was higher
among those who received progesterone
than among those who did not receive
progesterone (2.8% predicted for
intramuscular progesterone, 3.6% predicted
for oral progesterone, and 1.6% predicted
for no progesterone); however, there was no
difference in the yearly rate of decline of
FEV1 (1.9% predicted for intramuscular
progesterone, 2% predicted for oral
progesterone, and 0.5% predicted for no
progesterone [12]). These findings were
contradicted by another retrospective
cohort study of 43 English patients with
LAM that similarly compared those who
received progesterone with those who did
not receive progesterone (11). Progesterone
use in the British study was associated with
a significantly decreased rate of FEV1
decline among premenopausal patients
(mean difference, 104 ml/yr; 95% CI,
7–201 ml/yr, respectively), a significantly
decreased rate of diffusion capacity decline
among premenopausal patients (mean
difference, 1.96 ml/min/mm Hg/yr; 95% CI,
0.54–3.38 ml/min/mm Hg/yr, respectively),
and a trend toward a lower rate of FEV1
decline among all patients (mean
difference, 123 ml/year; 95% CI, 223 to
1269 ml/yr, respectively).
GnRH agonists. A case series of nine
patients with LAM who were treated with the
GnRH agonist goserelin revealed that
treatment was associated with increases in
the FEV1 and FVC of 80 and 130 ml,
respectively (87). In contrast, another case
series evaluated the effects of the GnRH
agonist triptorelin in 11 patients with LAM
and found no evidence of benefit as
spirometry, lung volumes, diffusion capacity,
and exercise capacity all remained
unchanged and oxygenation worsened
over a 3-year period (86). Therapy
was associated with loss of bone mineral
density.
Combination therapy. Several case
series evaluated more than one therapy
and/or combination therapy (10, 88, 92).
A case series described 16 patients with
LAM who had undergone oophorectomy,
9 patients who had been treated with
tamoxifen, and 19 patients who had been
treated with progesterone (88). Among
those who underwent oophorectomy, none
improved, 4 (25%) remained stable, 11
(69%) worsened, and 1 was lost to follow
up. Among those treated with tamoxifen,
none improved, three (33%) remained
stable, and six (67%) deteriorated.
Finally, among those treated with
medroxyprogesterone, 2 (11%) improved,
6 (32%) remained stable, and 11 (58%)
deteriorated. Another case series evaluated
69 patients with LAM, among whom
57 (82.6%) had been treated with
progesterone, tamoxifen, oophorectomy,
or a GnRH agonist, alone or in
combination. Only four patients (7%) had
an improvement in their lung function
while on hormonal therapy (10).
Benefits
No beneficial outcomes were consistently
demonstrated in patients with LAM who
received hormonal therapy.
Harms
Most studies did not report adverse effects,
with the exception of one report of
decreased bone density associated with
therapy. However, the side effects of
hormonal therapy are well known, and there
is no reason to expect that they would occur
less often in patients with LAM.
Other Considerations
The guideline panel’s judgments regarding
the effects of progesterone in patients with
LAM were informed by two observational
studies that provided inconsistent results.
Its judgment regarding all other hormonal
therapies was informed by small case series
and case reports. This constitutes very low-
quality evidence, which provides little
confidence in the estimated effects of
hormonal therapy.
Recommendation 3
We suggest NOT using hormonal
therapy as treatment for LAM (conditional
recommendation based on very low-quality
evidence).
Remarks. Hormonal therapies include
progestins, GnRH agonists, SERMs like
tamoxifen, and oophorectomy. For patients
who are already using hormonal therapy for
nonpulmonary reasons, the guideline panel
advocates discontinuing therapies with
estrogen agonist properties, such as SERMs.
We do not necessarily discourage the use of
GnRh agonists or progestins in patients who
are already on treatment with these agents
for nonpulmonary indications or the use of
low-dose, drug-eluting intravaginal or
intrauterine devices (IUDs) that are believed
to be safe for use in patients with other sex
steroid–responsive tumors, such as breast
or ovarian cancers.
Values and Preferences
This recommendation places a high value on
the adverse effects and costs of treatment
with hormonal therapy and a lower value
on the sporadic benefits supported by very
low-quality evidence.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
755
 Research Opportunities
Although the current evidence does not
suggest a beneficial role of hormonal therapy
in patients with LAM, there may be subgroups
of patients with LAM who might benefit, such
as premenopausal women with disease
manifestations (such as dyspnea or
pneumothorax) that vary with the menstrual
cycle. In addition, progestins may be
acceptable for use as contraceptives for
patients with LAM. Randomized controlled
trials of hormonal agents, either alone or
in combination with mTOR inhibitors,
are needed to better assess the impact of
hormonal manipulation on the course of
LAM.
Question 4: Should VEGF-D
Be Used to Confirm the
Diagnosis of LAM in Women
with Compatible Cystic
Change on Computed
Tomography of the Chest?
Background
The diagnosis of LAM should be
accomplished using the least invasive means
possible. Although the accuracy of LAM
diagnosis on the basis of high-resolution
computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest
is high for experts in LAM (101), basing the
diagnosis on HRCT alone is inadvisable for
many clinical decisions. A confident
clinical diagnosis of LAM can be
established when cystic change on
HRCT is typical for LAM (e.g., diffuse,
thin-walled, round) and accompanied by
any of the following clinical features:
TSC, renal angiomyolipoma, cystic
lymphangioleiomyoma, or chylous pleural
effusions in the chest and/or abdomen (25).
In cases where none of these diagnostic
criteria are met, or absolute certainty is
required, a pathological diagnosis of LAM
is most commonly obtained from biopsy of
the lung by video-assisted thoracoscopy or
by transbronchial biopsy (102, 103). Less
commonly, tissue for histopathology can
be obtained by thoracotomy, biopsy of
abdominal or pelvic lesions, or cytological
examination of aspirates from chylous fluids
or lymph nodes (104). Serum VEGF-D
has been proposed as a diagnostic biomarker
that obviates the need for invasive
procedures to establish the diagnosis of
LAM in the subset (z70%) of patients with
cystic lung disease who have elevated levels
(>800 pg/ml).
Summary of the Evidence
Our systematic review identified seven
studies that evaluated serum VEGF-D as a
potential noninvasive diagnostic test for
LAM (105–111). Serum VEGF-D levels
were elevated in a majority of women with
LAM but were normal in women with other
cystic lung diseases, including pulmonary
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, emphysema,
follicular bronchiolitis, lymphoid interstitial
pneumonia, and Birt-Hogg-Dub´
e
syndrome. The optimal threshold for
discriminating cystic lung disease due to
LAM from cystic lung disease due to
another cause varied across studies, ranging
from 332 pg/ml (111) to 850 pg/ml (110),
with most estimates falling between 600
and 800 pg/ml.
The guideline panel made an a priori
decision to recommend serum VEGF-D as
a diagnostic test if the evidence synthesis
showed that it predicts LAM with a
sensitivity greater than 70% and a
specificity greater than 90%. The rationale
was to minimize false-positive results
(i.e., achieve high specificity), because an
incorrect diagnosis of LAM will lead to
missed opportunities to treat the correct
disease, as well as the adverse effects and
costs of inappropriate treatment of LAM.
The guideline panel understood that
minimizing false-positive results may come
at the expense of more false-negative results
(i.e., lower sensitivity), but this was deemed
acceptable because the likely consequence
of a false-negative result is that the patient
will proceed to a lung biopsy, which would
have been the usual next diagnostic test if
the patient had not undergone VEGF-D
testing.
Three diagnostic accuracy studies
reported the test characteristics of serum
VEGF-D (105, 106, 108). One study
determined that, using a diagnostic
threshold of 600 pg/ml, serum VEGF-D
detected LAM with a sensitivity and
specificity of 84 and 98%, respectively, in
48 patients with cystic lung disease of
unknown etiology (106). The sensitivity
and specificity changed to 73 and 100%,
respectively, when the diagnostic threshold
was increased to 800 pg/ml. A similar study
enrolled 75 patients with cystic lung disease
of unknown etiology and reported that
serum VEGF-D identified LAM with a
sensitivity and specificity of 87 and 90%,
respectively, using 468 pg/ml as the
diagnostic threshold (108). Finally, a study
that included 38 patients with LAM,
29 healthy control subjects, and 27 patients
with other cystic diseases demonstrated the
serum VEGF-D identified LAM with a
sensitivity and specificity of 86 and 91%,
respectively, using 574 pg/ml as the
diagnostic threshold, and with a
sensitivity and specificity of 76 and 98%,
respectively, using 750 pg/ml as the
diagnostic threshold (105). Thus, all
three studies found sensitivities and
specificities that exceeded the guideline
panel’s a priori threshold for
recommending testing.
We recommend that the higher VEGF-D
threshold of 800 pg/ml be used (106).
Assuming that 30% of patients who present
with cystic lung disease of unknown
etiology have LAM, and that the sensitivity
and specificity of serum VEGF-D testing
are 73 and 99% (a blended average of the
two VEGF-D studies above that had higher
thresholds), respectively, then for every
1,000 patients who undergo serum VEGF-D
testing, 219 patients with LAM will be
spared an invasive lung biopsy for diagnostic
confirmation (true-positive results),
81 patients with LAM will proceed to lung
biopsy for diagnostic confirmation (false-
negative results), and 10 patients will be
incorrectly diagnosed as having LAM (false-
positive results). The true false-positive rate
may be less than this, because the only study
that established the 800 pg/ml diagnostic
threshold reported 100% specificity at
that level and used sample processing
methods currently in use in the
College of American Pathologists/Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Amendments
laboratory (106).
Serum VEGF-D levels appear to vary
according to the disease manifestations. As
examples, one study reported higher levels
among patients with LAM with lymphatic
involvement than in those without
lymphatic involvement (107), whereas
another study in patients with tuberous
sclerosis complex reported that a serum
VEGF-D level of 800 pg/ml effectively
discriminated between patients with and
without cystic changes on CT scan of the
chest (105, 106).
Serum VEGF-D has also been
evaluated as a potential prognostic and
predictive biomarker. In the MILES trial,
median serum VEGF-D concentrations
were similar at baseline in the sirolimus and
placebo groups but over the treatment year
declined in the sirolimus group while
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
756
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 194 Number 6 | September 15 2016
 remaining stable in the placebo group.
Moreover, a higher baseline VEGF-D level
was associated with both better lung
function response in the sirolimus group
and more rapid lung function decline in the
placebo group. Each one-unit increase in
baseline log (VEGF-D) was associated with a
between-group difference in baseline-to–12-
month FEV1 change of 134 ml (P = 0.0007)
(112). In another study, a serum VEGF-D
greater than 800 pg/ml was associated with
a faster rate of decline of FEV1 (120 ml/yr)
compared to patients with a serum VEGF-D
less than 800 pg/ml (50 ml/yr) (113).
Benefits
Serum VEGF-D testing had a low false-
positive rate and a high false-negative rate,
indicating that a positive result can be used
to confirm LAM but a negative result should
not be used to exclude LAM. In addition,
serum VEGF-D testing frequently
eliminated the need for an invasive lung
biopsy in patients who presented with cystic
lung disease that lacked confirmatory
features of LAM.
Harms
Although uncommon, false-positive results
may lead to missed opportunities to treat the
correct disease as well as the adverse effects
and costs of inappropriate treatment of
LAM.
Other Considerations
Diagnostic accuracy studies provide high
confidence in the estimated test
characteristics if they enroll consecutive
patients with legitimate diagnostic
uncertainty and compare the results to a
well-established reference standard. In this
case, several studies estimated the test
characteristics using populations that
included patients with known LAM
(i.e., there was not diagnostic uncertainty).
This has the potential to bias the test
characteristic and, therefore, decreases the
confidence in the estimates.
Recommendation 4
For patients whose CT scan shows cystic
abnormalities characteristic of LAM, but
who have no confirmatory clinical or
extrapulmonary radiologic features of LAM,
we recommend VEGF-D testing to establish
the diagnosis of LAM before consideration
of proceeding to diagnostic lung biopsy
(strong recommendation based on
moderate-quality evidence).
Remarks. The purpose of VEGF-D
testing is noninvasive diagnostic
confirmation of LAM. In cases where the
HRCT is compatible with LAM, but the
clinical context is inconclusive and VEGF-D
is unavailable or uninformative, biopsy
is appropriate. “Confirmatory features
of LAM” include tuberous sclerosis
complex, angiomyolipomas, chylous
pleural effusions or ascites, and cystic
lymphangioleiomyomas.
Values and Preferences
This recommendation places a high value on
the risk reduction and cost savings of
noninvasive diagnostic approaches in LAM
and a lower value on the logistical
considerations of obtaining a specialized test
that is available in only a limited number of
commercial laboratories.
Research Opportunities
The role of serum VEGF-D as a prognostic
biomarker needs further validation. If
confirmed in future studies, serum VEGF-D
may become a useful adjunct for making
treatment decisions, particularly in patients
with limited data about the rate of
progression of LAM from prior pulmonary
function tests or those who cannot perform
pulmonary function tests, such as
cognitively impaired patients with TSC.
Conclusions
Significant advances have been made in the
clinical management of LAM in the past
decade. A useful diagnostic biomarker that
can obviate the need for biopsy in some
patients has become available, and an
effective therapy was developed, both of
which received strong recommendations for
their use. The guideline development panel
also recommended against therapy with
doxycycline and antihormonal agents due to
a lack of clear evidence of a consistent
benefit. Clinicians faced with making
management recommendation for patients
with LAM must individualize their
treatment plans, however, because the
evidence base generally provided low
confidence in the estimated effects of
many interventions.
Future Directions
Additional studies are required to determine
the long-term safety and efficacy of
treatment with mTOR inhibitors in LAM
and to evaluate the risks and benefits of
early, low-dose prophylactic therapy in
patients with normal lung function. The use
of serum VEGF-D as a prognostic and
predictive biomarker appears to be
promising, and studies to determine if early
changes in VEGF-D might serve as a
surrogate for improvement in lung function
over time are warranted. New remission-
inducing agents capable of killing LAM
cells are needed, either alone or in
combination with mTOR inhibitors.
Although the use of hormonal therapies
was not recommended, the evidence
for the influence of hormonal fluxes on
LAM progression is compelling. It is
possible that future trials will demonstrate a
benefit of other hormonal therapeutic
approaches in patients with LAM.
Development of additional biomarkers will
reduce the need for surgical biopsy, assist
patients and clinicians with treatment
decisions, accelerate the conduct of trials,
and facilitate the personalization of
therapies. n
This clinical practice guideline was prepared by an ad hoc guideline development committee of the Clinical Practice Committee.
Members of the guideline development
committee are as follows:
FRANCIS X. MCCORMACK,* M.D. (Co-Chair)
NISHANT GUPTA,* M.D.
GERALDINE R. FINLAY,* M.B., CH.B.
LISA R. YOUNG,* M.D.
ANGELO M. TAVEIRA-DASILVA, M.D., PH.D.
CONNIE G. GLASGOW, B.Sc.
WENDY K. STEAGALL, PH.D.
SIMON R. JOHNSON,* M.D.
STEVEN A. SAHN, M.D.
JAY H. RYU, M.D.
CHARLIE STRANGE, M.D.
KUNIAKI SEYAMA, M.D., PH.D.
EUGENE J. SULLIVAN, M.D.
ROBERT M. KOTLOFF, M.D.
GREGORY P. DOWNEY, M.D.
JEFFREY T. CHAPMAN, M.D.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
757
 MEILAN K. HAN, M.D., M.S.
JEANINE M. D’ARMIENTO, M.D., PH.D.
YOSHIKAZU INOUE, M.D., PH.D.
ELIZABETH P. HENSKE, M.D.
JOHN J. BISSLER, M.D.
THOMAS V. COLBY, M.D.
BRENT W. KINDER, M.D.
KATHRYN A. WIKENHEISER-BROKAMP, M.D., PH.D.
KEVIN K. BROWN, M.D.
JEAN F. CORDIER, M.D.
CRISTOPHER MEYER, M.D.
VINCENT COTTIN,* M.D., PH.D.
JAN L. BROZEK, M.D., PH.D.
KAREN SMITH, M.L.S.
KEVIN C. WILSON,* M.D.
JOEL MOSS,* M.D., PH.D. (Co-Chair)
*These members were also members of the
writing committee.
Author Disclosures: F.X.M. serves as a
consultant for LAM Therapeutics and on a data
and safety monitoring board for Takeda. S.R.J.
served as a speaker for Novartis. S.A.S. served
on a steering committee for InterMune Inc. and
as a clinical investigator for Actelion, Arresto,
Celgene, and Gilead. C.S. serves as a
consultant for AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals
LP; as a consultant and on a data and safety
monitoring board for Uptake Medical; and as a
consultant for BTG International Inc., CSL
Behring, Abeona, and Grifols Therapeutics
Inc.; receives research support from BTG
International Inc., CSL Behring, and Grifols
Therapeutics Inc., Actelion Pharmaceuticals
US Inc., Baxalta, and Pulmonx Corp.; served
as a consultant for Boehringer Ingelheim
Pharmaceuticals Inc.; and owns stocks, stock
options, or other ownership interests in
Abeona. E.J.S. served as a consultant for LAM
Therapeutics. M.K.H. serves as a consultant
for Boehringer Ingelheim International GmbH,
GlaxoSmithKline LLC, and Novartis Pharma
AG. E.P.H. served as a consultant for LAM
Therapeutics. K.K.B. serves on an advisory
committee for Actelion, Altitude Pharma,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Fibrogen, Gilead,
Moerae, Promedior, and Veracyte; as a
consultant for Almirall, AstraZeneca, Bristol-
Myers Squibb, GeNO, Genoa, Immuneworkx,
Mesoblast, and Sanofi-Aventis; as a consultant
and on a data and safety monitoring board for
Biogen; on an advisory committee for Galecto;
and as a consultant and on the advisory
committee for Medimmune; receives research
support from Eisai; served as a consultant for
Bayer Schering Pharma, Genentech, Novartis,
and Pfizer; and on an advisory committee for
Centocor; and owns stocks or options in
Galecto. N.G., G.R.F., L.R.Y., A.M.T.-D., C.G.G.,
W.K.S., J.H.R., K.S., R.M.K., G.P.D., J.T.C.,
J.M.D., Y.I., J.J.B., T.V.C., B.W.K., K.A.W.-B.,
J.F.C., C.M., V.C., J.L.B., K.S., K.C.W., and
J.M. report no relevant commercial interests.
References
1. Henske EP, McCormack FX. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis: a wolf in
sheep’s clothing. J Clin Invest 2012;122:3807–3816.
2. Travis WD, Brambilla E, Nicholson AG, Yatabe Y, Austin JH, Beasley MB,
Chirieac LR, Dacic S, Duhig E, Flieder DB, et al.; WHO Panel. The
2015 World Health Organization classification of lung tumors: impact
of genetic, clinical and radiologic advances since the 2004
classification. J Thorac Oncol 2015;10:1243–1260.
3. Harknett EC, Chang WY, Byrnes S, Johnson J, Lazor R, Cohen MM,
Gray B, Geiling S, Telford H, Tattersfield AE, et al. Use of variability
in national and regional data to estimate the prevalence of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. QJM 2011;104:971–979.
4. Muzykewicz DA, Sharma A, Muse V, Numis AL, Rajagopal J, Thiele EA.
TSC1 and TSC2 mutations in patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis
and tuberous sclerosis complex. J Med Genet 2009;46:465–468.
5. Aubry MC, Myers JL, Ryu JH, Henske EP, Logginidou H, Jalal SM,
Tazelaar HD. Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis in a man. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:749–752.
6. Adriaensen ME, Schaefer-Prokop CM, Duyndam DA, Zonnenberg BA,
Prokop M. Radiological evidence of lymphangioleiomyomatosis in
female and male patients with tuberous sclerosis complex. Clin Radiol
2011;66:625–628.
7. Schiavina M, Di Scioscio V, Contini P, Cavazza A, Fabiani A, Barberis M,
Bini A, Altimari A, Cooke RM, Grigioni WF, et al. Pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis in a karyotypically normal man without
tuberous sclerosis complex. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007;176:
96–98.
8. Nagy B, N ´
abr ´
ady Z, Nemes Z. Pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis in a
preadolescent girl. N Engl J Med 1998;338:473–474.
9. Crino PB, Nathanson KL, Henske EP. The tuberous sclerosis complex.
N Engl J Med 2006;355:1345–1356.
10. Urban T, Lazor R, Lacronique J, Murris M, Labrune S, Valeyre D,
Cordier JF. Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis: a study of 69
patients. Groupe d’Etudes et de Recherche sur les Maladies
“Orphelines” Pulmonaires (GERM“O”P). Medicine (Baltimore) 1999;
78:321–337.
11. Johnson SR, Tattersfield AE. Decline in lung function in
lymphangioleiomyomatosis: relation to menopause and progesterone
treatment. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;160:628–633.
12. Taveira-DaSilva AM, Stylianou MP, Hedin CJ, Hathaway O, Moss J.
Decline in lung function in patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis
treated with or without progesterone. Chest 2004;126:1867–1874.
13. Johnson SR, Whale CI, Hubbard RB, Lewis SA, Tattersfield AE.
Survival and disease progression in UK patients with
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Thorax 2004;59:800–803.
14. Karbowniczek M, Astrinidis A, Balsara BR, Testa JR, Lium JH,
Colby TV, McCormack FX, Henske EP. Recurrent
lymphangiomyomatosis after transplantation: genetic analyses
reveal a metastatic mechanism. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;
167:976–982.
15. Bittmann I, Rolf B, Amann G, L ¨
ohrs U. Recurrence of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis after single lung transplantation: new
insights into pathogenesis. Hum Pathol 2003;34:95–98.
16. Smolarek TA, Wessner LL, McCormack FX, Mylet JC, Menon AG,
Henske EP. Evidence that lymphangiomyomatosis is
caused by TSC2 mutations: chromosome 16p13 loss of
heterozygosity in angiomyolipomas and lymph nodes from
women with lymphangiomyomatosis. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:
810–815.
17. Carsillo T, Astrinidis A, Henske EP. Mutations in the tuberous sclerosis
complex gene TSC2 are a cause of sporadic pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:
6085–6090.
18. Henske EP. Metastasis of benign tumor cells in tuberous sclerosis
complex. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2003;38:376–381.
19. Cai X, Pacheco-Rodriguez G, Fan QY, Haughey M, Samsel L,
El-Chemaly S, Wu HP, McCoy JP, Steagall WK, Lin JP, et al.
Phenotypic characterization of disseminated cells with TSC2 loss
of heterozygosity in patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2010;182:1410–1418.
20. Crooks DM, Pacheco-Rodriguez G, DeCastro RM, McCoy JP Jr, Wang
JA, Kumaki F, Darling T, Moss J. Molecular and genetic analysis
of disseminated neoplastic cells in lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:17462–17467.
21. Sengupta S, Peterson TR, Sabatini DM. Regulation of the mTOR
complex 1 pathway by nutrients, growth factors, and stress. Mol Cell
2010;40:310–322.
22. Kumasaka T, Seyama K, Mitani K, Souma S, Kashiwagi S, Hebisawa A,
Sato T, Kubo H, Gomi K, Shibuya K, et al. Lymphangiogenesis-
mediated shedding of LAM cell clusters as a mechanism for
dissemination in lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Am J Surg Pathol
2005;29:1356–1366.
23. Kumasaka T, Seyama K, Mitani K, Sato T, Souma S, Kondo T, Hayashi
S, Minami M, Uekusa T, Fukuchi Y, et al. Lymphangiogenesis in
lymphangioleiomyomatosis: its implication in the progression of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Am J Surg Pathol 2004;28:1007–1016.
24. Badri KR, Gao L, Hyjek E, Schuger N, Schuger L, Qin W, Chekaluk Y,
Kwiatkowski DJ, Zhe X. Exonic mutations of TSC2/TSC1 are
common but not seen in all sporadic pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013;187:
663–665.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
758
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 194 Number 6 | September 15 2016
 25. Johnson SR, Cordier JF, Lazor R, Cottin V, Costabel U, Harari S,
Reynaud-Gaubert M, Boehler A, Brauner M, Popper H, et al.;
Review Panel of the ERS LAM Task Force. European Respiratory
Society guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Eur Respir J 2010;35:14–26.
26. Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, Kunz R, Vist G, Brozek J, Norris S,
Falck-Ytter Y, Glasziou P, DeBeer H, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1.
Introduction-GRADE evidence profiles and summary of findings
tables. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64:383–394.
27. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Atkins D, Brozek J, Vist G, Alderson P,
Glasziou P, Falck-Ytter Y, Sch ¨
unemann HJ. GRADE guidelines: 2.
Framing the question and deciding on important outcomes. J Clin
Epidemiol 2011;64:395–400.
28. Balshem H, Helfand M, Sch ¨
unemann HJ, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Brozek J,
Vist GE, Falck-Ytter Y, Meerpohl J, Norris S, et al. GRADE guidelines:
3. Rating the quality of evidence. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64:401–406.
29. Gupta N, Vassallo R, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, McCormack FX.
Diffuse cystic lung disease: part I. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2015;
191:1354–1366.
30. Kwiatkowski DJ, Zhang H, Bandura JL, Heiberger KM, Glogauer M,
el-Hashemite N, Onda H. A mouse model of TSC1 reveals sex-
dependent lethality from liver hemangiomas, and up-regulation of
p70S6 kinase activity in Tsc1 null cells. Hum Mol Genet 2002;11:
525–534.
31. Lee L, Sudentas P, Donohue B, Asrican K, Worku A, Walker V, Sun Y,
Schmidt K, Albert MS, El-Hashemite N, et al. Efficacy of a rapamycin
analog (CCI-779) and IFN-gamma in tuberous sclerosis mouse
models. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2005;42:213–227.
32. Davies DM, Johnson SR, Tattersfield AE, Kingswood JC, Cox JA,
McCartney DL, Doyle T, Elmslie F, Saggar A, de Vries PJ,
et al. Sirolimus therapy in tuberous sclerosis or sporadic
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. N Engl J Med 2008;358:200–203.
33. Bissler JJ, McCormack FX, Young LR, Elwing JM, Chuck G, Leonard
JM, Schmithorst VJ, Laor T, Brody AS, Bean J, et al. Sirolimus
for angiomyolipoma in tuberous sclerosis complex or
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. N Engl J Med 2008;358:140–151.
34. McCormack FX, Inoue Y, Moss J, Singer LG, Strange C, Nakata K,
Barker AF, Chapman JT, Brantly ML, Stocks JM, et al.;
National Institutes of Health Rare Lung Diseases Consortium;
MILES Trial Group. Efficacy and safety of sirolimus in
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. N Engl J Med 2011;364:1595–1606.
35. Gupta R, Kitaichi M, Inoue Y, Kotloff R, McCormack FX. Lymphatic
manifestations of lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Lymphology 2014;47:
106–117.
36. Almoosa KF, McCormack FX, Sahn SA. Pleural disease in
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Clin Chest Med 2006;27:355–368.
37. Taveira-DaSilva AM, Hathaway O, Stylianou M, Moss J. Changes
in lung function and chylous effusions in patients with
lymphangioleiomyomatosis treated with sirolimus. Ann Intern Med
2011;154:797–805, W-292-293.
38. Barrera P, Simons SO, Luijk B, Wessels MJ, Heijdra YF. Efficacy of
sirolimus therapy for chylous effusions in lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Ann Am Thorac Soc 2013;10:408–409.
39. Chachaj A, Drozdz K, Chabowski M, Dziegiel P, Grzegorek I, Wojnar A,
Jazwiec P, Szuba A. Chyloperitoneum, chylothorax and lower extremity
lymphedema in woman with sporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis
successfully treated with sirolimus: a case report. Lymphology 2012;45:
53–57.
40. Ellender CM, Williams TJ, Gooi J, Snell GI, Whitford HM. Management
of refractory chylothorax in pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Respirol Case Rep 2015;3:72–74.
41. Ohara T, Oto T, Miyoshi K, Tao H, Yamane M, Toyooka S, Okazaki M,
Date H, Sano Y. Sirolimus ameliorated post lung transplant
chylothorax in lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Ann Thorac Surg 2008;
86:e7–e8.
42. Ando K, Kurihara M, Kataoka H, Ueyama M, Togo S, Sato T, Doi T,
Iwakami S, Takahashi K, Seyama K, et al. Efficacy and safety of low-
dose sirolimus for treatment of lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Respir
Investig 2013;51:175–183.
43. Rozenberg D, Thenganatt J. Dramatic response to sirolimus in
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Can Respir J 2013;20:413–414.
44. Krueger DA, Northrup H; International Tuberous Sclerosis Complex
Consensus Group. Tuberous sclerosis complex surveillance and
management: recommendations of the 2012 International Tuberous
Sclerosis Complex Consensus Conference. Pediatr Neurol 2013;49:
255–265.
45. Taveira-DaSilva AM, Jones AM, Julien-Williams P, Yao J,
Stylianou M, Moss J. Severity and outcome of cystic lung disease in
women with tuberous sclerosis complex. Eur Respir J 2015;45:
171–180.
46. Neurohr C, Hoffmann AL, Huppmann P, Herrera VA, Ihle F, Leuschner
S, von Wulffen W, Meis T, Baezner C, Leuchte H, et al. Is sirolimus a
therapeutic option for patients with progressive pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis? Respir Res 2011;12:66.
47. Casanova A, Mar´
ıa Gir ´
on R, Acosta O, Barr ´
on M, Valenzuela C,
Ancochea J. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis treatment with sirolimus.
Arch Bronconeumol 2011;47:470–472.
48. Goldberg HJ, Harari S, Cottin V, Rosas IO, Peters E, Biswal S, Cheng Y,
Khindri S, Kovarik JM, Ma S, et al. Everolimus for the treatment of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis: a phase II study. Eur Respir J 2015;46:
783–794.
49. Yao J, Taveira-DaSilva AM, Jones AM, Julien-Williams P, Stylianou M,
Moss J. Sustained effects of sirolimus on lung function and cystic
lung lesions in lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2014;190:1273–1282.
50. Matsui K, Takeda K, Yu ZX, Travis WD, Moss J, Ferrans VJ. Role for
activation of matrix metalloproteinases in the pathogenesis of
pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2000;
124:267–275.
51. Odajima N, Betsuyaku T, Nasuhara Y, Inoue H, Seyama K, Nishimura
M. Matrix metalloproteinases in blood from patients with LAM.
Respir Med 2009;103:124–129.
52. Hayashi T, Fleming MV, Stetler-Stevenson WG, Liotta LA, Moss J,
Ferrans VJ, Travis WD. Immunohistochemical study of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) in
pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM). Hum Pathol 1997;28:
1071–1078.
53. Bendeck MP, Conte M, Zhang M, Nili N, Strauss BH, Farwell SM.
Doxycycline modulates smooth muscle cell growth, migration, and
matrix remodeling after arterial injury. Am J Pathol 2002;160:1089–1095.
54. Moses MA, Harper J, Folkman J. Doxycycline treatment for
lymphangioleiomyomatosis with urinary monitoring for MMPs.
N Engl J Med 2006;354:2621–2622.
55. Pimenta SP, Baldi BG, Acencio MM, Kairalla RA, Carvalho CR.
Doxycycline use in patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis: safety
and efficacy in metalloproteinase blockade. J Bras Pneumol 2011;37:
424–430.
56. Pimenta SP, Baldi BG, Kairalla RA, Carvalho CR. Doxycycline use in
patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis: biomarkers and pulmonary
function response. J Bras Pneumol 2013;39:5–15.
57. Chang WY, Cane JL, Kumaran M, Lewis S, Tattersfield AE, Johnson
SR. A 2-year randomised placebo-controlled trial of doxycycline for
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Eur Respir J 2014;43:1114–1123.
58. McCormack FX. The way forward in lymphangioleiomyomatosis: a trial
for every patient, every patient in a trial. J Bras Pneumol 2011;37:
422–423.
59. Baldi BG, Ribeiro Carvalho CR. Doxycycline in lymphangioleiomyomatosis:
not all questions are answered. Eur Respir J 2014;43:1536–1537.
60. Sandrini A, Silverstone E, Yates DH. Menstrual cycle variation of
retroperitoneal lymphangioleiomyomas in lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Intern Med J 2011;41:832–835.
61. Brunelli A, Catalini G, Fianchini A. Pregnancy exacerbating
unsuspected mediastinal lymphangioleiomyomatosis and
chylothorax. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1996;52:289–290.
62. Yockey CC, Riepe RE, Ryan K. Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis
complicated by pregnancy. Kans Med 1986;87:277–278, 293.
63. Yano S. Exacerbation of pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis by
exogenous oestrogen used for infertility treatment. Thorax 2002;57:
1085–1086.
64. Shen A, Iseman MD, Waldron JA, King TE. Exacerbation of pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis by exogenous estrogens. Chest 1987;
91:782–785.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
759
 65. Gao L, Yue MM, Davis J, Hyjek E, Schuger L. In pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis expression of progesterone receptor is
frequently higher than that of estrogen receptor. Virchows Arch 2014;
464:495–503.
66. Eliasson AH, Phillips YY, Tenholder MF. Treatment of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis: a meta-analysis. Chest 1989;96:
1352–1355.
67. Enterline HT, Roberts B. Lymphangiopericytoma; case report of a
previously undescribed tumor type. Cancer 1955;8:582–587.
68. Banner AS, Carrington CB, Emory WB, Kittle F, Leonard G, Ringus J,
Taylor P, Addington WW. Efficacy of oophorectomy in
lymphangioleiomyomatosis and benign metastasizing leiomyoma.
N Engl J Med 1981;305:204–209.
69. Logan RF, Fawcett IW. Oophorectomy for pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis: a case report. Br J Dis Chest 1985;79:
98–100.
70. Fukuda H, Saitoh K, Hirabayashi Y, Mitsuhata H, Kasuda H,
Akazawa S, Shimizu R. Spinal anesthesia for oophorectomy in a
patient with pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis accompanied by
hypochondriasis[in Japanese]. Masui 1995;44:563–565.
71. Nakajima J, Kotsuka Y, Yagyuu K, Takeshita M, Furuse A, Oka T.
Pulmonary hamartoangiomyomatosis (lymphangiomyomatosis) in
tuberous sclerosis: a case in which clinical course had been modified
by previous surgical intervention [in Japanese]. Nihon Kyobu Shikkan
Gakkai Zasshi 1995;33:80–84.
72. Kitzsteiner KA, Mallen RG. Pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis:
treatment with castration. Cancer 1980;46:2248–2249.
73. Shuman RL, Engelman R, Kittle CF. Pulmonary
lymphangiomyomatosis. Ann Thorac Surg 1979;27:70–75.
74. Bradley SL, Dines DE, Soule EH, Muhm JR. Pulmonary
lymphangiomyomatosis. Lung 1980;158:69–80.
75. Luna CM, Gen ´
e R, Jolly EC, Nahmod N, Defranchi HA, Patiño G, Elsner
B. Pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis associated with tuberous
sclerosis: treatment with tamoxifen and tetracycline-pleurodesis.
Chest 1985;88:473–475.
76. Clemm C, Jehn U, Wolf-Hornung B, Siemon G, Walter G.
Lymphangiomyomatosis: a report of three cases treated with
tamoxifen. Klin Wochenschr 1987;65:391–393.
77. Millward MJ, Cantwell BM. Development of breast cancer during long-
term tamoxifen therapy for lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Eur J Cancer
1991;27:806.
78. Tomasian A, Greenberg MS, Rumerman H. Tamoxifen
for lymphangioleiomyomatosis. N Engl J Med 1982;306:
745–746.
79. Bush JK, McLean RL, Sieker HO. Diffuse lung disease due to
lymphangiomyoma. Am J Med 1969;46:645–654.
80. McCarty KS Jr, Mossler JA, McLelland R, Sieker HO. Pulmonary
lymphangiomyomatosis responsive to progesterone. N Engl J Med
1980;303:1461–1465.
81. Sawicka EH, Morris AJ. A report of two long-surviving cases of
pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis and the response to
progesterone therapy. Br J Dis Chest 1985;79:400–406.
82. Bevelaqua FA, Epstein H. Pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis:
long-term survival in a patient with poor response to
medroxyprogesterone. Chest 1985;87:552–553.
83. Brentani MM, Carvalho CR, Saldiva PH, Pacheco MM, Oshima CT.
Steroid receptors in pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis. Chest 1984;
85:96–99.
84. Lipton JH, Fong TC, Burgess KR. Miliary pattern as presentation of
leiomyomatosis of the lung. Chest 1987;91:781–782.
85. Dishner W, Cordasco EM, Blackburn J, Demeter S, Levin H,
Carey WD. Pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis. Chest 1984;85:
796–799.
86. Harari S, Cassandro R, Chiodini I, Taveira-DaSilva AM, Moss J.
Effect of a gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogue on
lung function in lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Chest 2008;133:
448–454.
87. Baldi BG, Medeiros Junior P, Pimenta SP, Lopes RI, Kairalla RA,
Carvalho CR. Evolution of pulmonary function after treatment with
goserelin in patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis. J Bras
Pneumol 2011;37:375–379.
88. Taylor JR, Ryu J, Colby TV, Raffin TA. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis:
clinical course in 32 patients. N Engl J Med 1990;323:1254–1260.
89. Adamson D, Heinrichs WL, Raybin DM, Raffin TA. Successful treatment
of pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis with oophorectomy and
progesterone. Am Rev Respir Dis 1985;132:916–921.
90. Kuwabara H, Biyazima S, Osaka T, Yasuhara F, Chizimatsu Y, Inatomi
K, Washizaki M, Homma H, Saeki S, Yamanaka A. A case of
pulmonary lymphangiomyomatosis diagnosed by TBLB and treated
with progesterone and oophorectomy [in Japanese]. Nihon Kyobu
Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi 1984;22:795–799.
91. Itoi K, Kuwabara M, Okubo K, Matsuoka K. A case of pulmonary
lymphangiomyomatosis treated with bilateral oophorectomy and
methyl-progesterone-acetate [in Japanese]. Nihon Kyobu Shikkan
Gakkai Zasshi 1993;31:1146–1150.
92. Kitaichi M, Nishimura K, Itoh H, Izumi T. Pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis: a report of 46 patients including a
clinicopathologic study of prognostic factors. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1995;151:527–533.
93. Svendsen TL, Viskum K, Hansborg N, Thorpe SM, Nielsen NC.
Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis: a case of progesterone
receptor positive lymphangioleiomyomatosis treated with
medroxyprogesterone, oophorectomy and tamoxifen. Br J Dis Chest
1984;78:264–271.
94. Brock ET, Votto JJ. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis: treatment with
hormonal manipulation. N Y State J Med 1986;86:533–536.
95. Anker N, Francis D, Viskum K. 2 cases of lymphangioleiomyomatosis
treated by hormonal manipulation [in Danish]. Ugeskr Laeger 1993;
155:2354–2356.
96. Baldi BG, Freitas CS, Araujo MS, Dias OM, Pereira DA, Pimenta SP,
Kairalla RA, Carvalho CR. Clinical course and characterisation of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis in a Brazilian reference centre.
Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung Dis 2014;31:129–135.
97. Katakami N, Sakamoto H, Lee E, Ishihara K, Iwasaki H, Umeda B, Nakai
H, Shirane H, Ota H, Ishii A. An autopsy case of pulmonary
lymphangiomyomatosis unresponsive to various anti-estrogen
therapies [in Japanese]. Nihon Kyobu Shikkan Gakkai Zasshi 1988;
26:179–184.
98. Khalife WI, Mahmoud F, Larson E, Hardie R. Pulmonary
lymphangioleiomyomatosis in a postmenopausal woman: case
report with review of literature. S D J Med 2005;58:139–143.
99. Klein M, Krieger O, Ruckser R, Rosen A, Waldner R, Preis P, Beck A.
Treatment of lymphangioleiomyomatosis by ovariectomy, interferon
alpha 2b and tamoxifen: a case report. Arch Gynecol Obstet 1992;
252:99–102.
100. van Milligen de Wit AW, Meilof-Planteydt MN. Successful treatment of
pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis with oophorectomy and
medroxyprogesterone-acetate: report of a case and brief review of
the literature. Neth J Med 1990;36:246–251.
101. Gupta N, Meraj R, Tanase D, James LE, Seyama K, Lynch DA, Akira
M, Meyer CA, Ruoss SJ, Burger CD, et al. Accuracy of chest high-
resolution computed tomography in diagnosing diffuse cystic lung
diseases. Eur Respir J 2015;46:1196–1199.
102. Meraj R, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, Young LR, Byrnes S, McCormack
FX. Utility of transbronchial biopsy in the diagnosis of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Front Med 2012;6:395–405.
103. Harari S, Torre O, Cassandro R, Taveira-DaSilva AM, Moss J.
Bronchoscopic diagnosis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis and
lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Respir Med 2012;106:1286–1292.
104. Mitani K, Kumasaka T, Takemura H, Hayashi T, Gunji Y, Kunogi M,
Akiyoshi T, Takahashi K, Suda K, Seyama K. Cytologic,
immunocytochemical and ultrastructural characterization of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis cell clusters in chylous effusions
of patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Acta Cytol 2009;53:
402–409.
105. Young LR, Inoue Y, McCormack FX. Diagnostic potential of serum
VEGF-D for lymphangioleiomyomatosis. N Engl J Med 2008;358:
199–200.
106. Young LR, Vandyke R, Gulleman PM, Inoue Y, Brown KK, Schmidt LS,
Linehan WM, Hajjar F, Kinder BW, Trapnell BC, et al. Serum
vascular endothelial growth factor-D prospectively distinguishes
lymphangioleiomyomatosis from other diseases. Chest 2010;138:
674–681.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
760
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 194 Number 6 | September 15 2016
 107. Glasgow CG, Avila NA, Lin JP, Stylianou MP, Moss J. Serum
vascular endothelial growth factor-D levels in patients with
lymphangioleiomyomatosis reflect lymphatic involvement. Chest
2009;135:1293–1300.
108. Radzikowska E, Jagu´
s P, Skoczylas A, Sobiecka M, Chorostowska-
Wynimko J, Wiatr E, Ku´
s J, Roszkowski- ´
Sliż K. Role of serum
vascular endothelial growth factor D in discrimination of patients with
polycystic lung diseases. Pol Arch Med Wewn 2013;123:533–538.
109. Seyama K, Kumasaka T, Souma S, Sato T, Kurihara M, Mitani K,
Tominaga S, Fukuchi Y. Vascular endothelial growth factor-D is
increased in serum of patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Lymphat Res Biol 2006;4:143–152.
110. Xu KF, Zhang P, Tian X, Ma A, Li X, Zhou J, Zeng N, Gui YS, Guo Z,
Feng R, et al. The role of vascular endothelial growth factor-D in
diagnosis of lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM). Respir Med 2013;
107:263–268.
111. Chang WY, Cane JL, Blakey JD, Kumaran M, Pointon KS,
Johnson SR. Clinical utility of diagnostic guidelines and
putative biomarkers in lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Respir Res
2012;13:34.
112. Young L, Lee HS, Inoue Y, Moss J, Singer LG, Strange C, Nakata K,
Barker AF, Chapman JT, Brantly ML, et al.; MILES Trial Group.
Serum VEGF-D a concentration as a biomarker of
lymphangioleiomyomatosis severity and treatment response: a
prospective analysis of the Multicenter International
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Efficacy of Sirolimus (MILES) trial.
Lancet Respir Med 2013;1:445–452.
113. Radzikowska E, Jagu´
s P, Sobiecka M, Chorostowska-Wynimko J,
Wiatr E, Ku´
s J, Roszkowski- ´
Sliż K. Correlation of serum vascular
endothelial growth factor-D concentration with clinical presentation
and course of lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Respir Med 2015;109:
1469–1475.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents
761
