 CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
e927
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
BACKGROUND: Kawasaki disease is an acute vasculitis of childhood 
that leads to coronary artery aneurysms in ≈25% of untreated cases. It 
has been reported worldwide and is the leading cause of acquired heart 
disease in children in developed countries.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To revise the previous American Heart 
Association guidelines, a multidisciplinary writing group of experts was 
convened to review and appraise available evidence and practice-based 
opinion, as well as to provide updated recommendations for diagnosis, 
treatment of the acute illness, and long-term management. Although the 
cause remains unknown, discussion sections highlight new insights into the 
epidemiology, genetics, pathogenesis, pathology, natural history, and long-
term outcomes. Prompt diagnosis is essential, and an updated algorithm 
defines supplemental information to be used to assist the diagnosis when 
classic clinical criteria are incomplete. Although intravenous immune 
globulin is the mainstay of initial treatment, the role for additional primary 
therapy in selected patients is discussed. Approximately 10% to 20% 
of patients do not respond to initial intravenous immune globulin, and 
recommendations for additional therapies are provided. Careful initial 
management of evolving coronary artery abnormalities is essential, 
necessitating an increased frequency of assessments and escalation of 
thromboprophylaxis. Risk stratification for long-term management is based 
primarily on maximal coronary artery luminal dimensions, normalized as 
Z scores, and is calibrated to both past and current involvement. Patients 
with aneurysms require life-long and uninterrupted cardiology follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: These recommendations provide updated and best 
evidence-based guidance to healthcare providers who diagnose and 
manage Kawasaki disease, but clinical decision making should be 
individualized to specific patient circumstances.
Brian W. McCrindle, MD, 
MPH, FAHA, Chair 
Anne H. Rowley, MD
Jane W. Newburger, MD, 
MPH, FAHA
Jane C. Burns, MD
Anne F. Bolger, MD, FAHA
Michael Gewitz, MD, FAHA
Annette L. Baker, MSN, 
RN, CPNP
Mary Anne Jackson, MD
Masato Takahashi, MD, 
FAHA
Pinak B. Shah, MD
Tohru Kobayashi, MD, PhD
Mei-Hwan Wu, MD, PhD
Tsutomu T. Saji, MD, FAHA
Elfriede Pahl, MD, FAHA, 
Co-Chair
On behalf of the Ameri-
can Heart Association 
Rheumatic Fever, Endo-
carditis, and Kawasaki 
Disease Committee of 
the Council on Cardio-
vascular Disease in the 
Young; Council on Car-
diovascular and Stroke 
Nursing; Council on Car-
diovascular Surgery and 
Anesthesia; and Council 
on Epidemiology and 
Prevention
Diagnosis, Treatment, and Long-Term Management 
of Kawasaki Disease
A Scientific Statement for Health Professionals From the American Heart 
 
Association
© 2017 American Heart 
Association, Inc.
Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ aneurysm  
◼ arteritis ◼ coronary vessels  
◼ immunoglobulins, intravenous  
◼ Kawasaki syndrome ◼ thrombosis 
◼ vasculitis
AHA SCIENTIFIC STATEMENT
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e928
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
K
awasaki disease (KD) is an acute, self-limited fe-
brile illness of unknown cause that predominantly 
affects children <5 years of age. When initially 
described, the potential for coronary artery complica-
tions was not appreciated. KD is now the most common 
cause of acquired heart disease in children in developed 
countries. In the absence of pathognomonic tests, the 
diagnosis continues to rest on the identification of prin-
cipal clinical findings and the exclusion of other clinically 
similar entities with known causes. Timely initiation of 
treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) has 
reduced the incidence of coronary artery aneurysms 
defined from absolute luminal dimensions from 25% to 
≈4%. Ongoing studies with additional therapies have not 
substantially reduced this residual risk. The long-term 
prognosis is determined by the initial and current level 
of coronary artery involvement. Certain subsets of pa-
tients are at risk for myocardial ischemia from coronary 
artery thrombosis and stenoses. Medical management 
of such patients hinges on judicious use of thrombopro-
phylaxis and vigilance to identify evolving stenoses. Inva-
sive revascularization procedures might be required for 
selected patients.
In 2004, the American Heart Association (AHA) pub-
lished guidelines for the diagnosis, treatment, and long-
term management of KD.1 The current scientific state-
ment incorporates new evidence regarding underlying 
pathological processes, an algorithm to ensure capture 
of incomplete KD during the effective window of therapy, 
improved management of the acute illness that includes 
the use of additional therapies for IVIG-refractory pa-
tients, greater use of Z scores for classifying coronary 
artery involvement, greater specification of long-term 
management based on both initial and current coronary 
artery involvement, and acknowledgment of the care 
needs of a growing population of adults with a previous 
history of KD and coronary artery aneurysms. The cur-
rent scientific statement incorporates recommendation 
statements that reflect the associated grade and level 
of evidence.
The writing group included content experts from all 
disciplines related to KD (pediatric and adult cardiolo-
gy, infectious disease, pathology, rheumatology, immu-
nology, and nursing). The group also included experts 
from Taiwan and Japan, where the incidence of KD is 
3- to 15-fold higher than in North America. All poten-
tial conflicts of interest were reported, vetted, tracked, 
and recorded and updated throughout the guideline de-
velopment, review, and publication process. After draft-
ing a detailed outline and performing a careful review of 
the 2004 AHA scientific statement, as well as existing 
guidelines, assigned writing group members carefully 
reviewed published literature, focusing on reports pub-
lished since the last guidelines. Background sections 
were drafted to provide context for recommendations. 
The methodology outlined in Methodologies and Policies 
from the American College of Cardiology/AHA Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines was followed.2,3 Recom-
mendations were generated as stand-alone statements 
and graded by the class of the recommendation and 
the level of evidence as outlined in Table 1. This clas-
sification determined the wording of recommendation 
statements. All recommendation statements were re-
viewed by the entire writing group and approved be-
fore submission for peer review and again before final 
publication.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In the past, the illness may have masqueraded in various 
guises, and old reports on infantile polyarteritis nodosa 
in Western countries describe pathological findings iden-
tical to those of fatal KD.4–8 First described in Japan, 
KD has now been described worldwide.9–17 However, the 
disease is markedly more prevalent in children in Japan, 
where the annual incidence was 243.1 per 100 
000 chil-
dren <5 years of age in 2011 and 264.8 per 100 
000 in 
2012. The greater susceptibility of children of Japanese 
ancestry to KD is also evidenced by epidemiological data 
from Hawaii, where children of Japanese descent had 
the highest incidence (210.5 per 100 
000 children <5 
years of age); white children had the lowest incidence 
(13.7 per 100 
000 children <5 years of age).18 In the 
continental United States, the incidence of KD has been 
best estimated from hospital discharge data at ≈25 per 
100 
000 children <5 years of age.19–21 An estimated 
5523 hospitalizations associated with KD occurred in 
the United States in 2006, at a mean age of 3 years, 
for an annual incidence of 20.8 per 100 
000 children 
<5 years of age.21 The incidence was highest among 
Asians and Pacific Islanders (30.3 per 100 
000 children 
<5 years of age) and in boys versus girls (24.2 versus 
16.8, respectively).21 Epidemiological comparisons be-
tween countries and regions should be viewed in light 
of often differing methods and completeness of case 
ascertainment and reporting.
Rates of recurrence and familial occurrence of KD are 
best documented in literature from Japan; recurrence 
rates could be lower in other races and ethnicities. In 
Japan, the recurrence rate of KD has been reported to 
be ≈3% in one study,22 and in a review of 4560 patients, 
it was noted to be 5.21 episodes per 1000 patient-years 
of follow-up, highest in the first 2 years after the index 
episode.23 From the nationwide surveys in Japan, the 
recurrence rate was reported to be 6.89 episodes per 
1000 patient-years of follow-up.24 A comparison of sur-
veillance data from the United States (1984–2008) and 
Japan (2001–2002) showed a rate of 1.7% in the United 
States, which increased to 3.5% in Asians and Pacific Is-
landers, which was similar to the rate of 3.5% in Japan.25 
In Canada, a review of 1010 patients showed a recur-
rence rate of 2.9 episodes per 1000 patient-years of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e929
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
follow-up, with recurrences occurring at a median of 1.5 
years after the index episode and with similar features 
and outcomes.26 However, Nakamura et al27 reported a 
higher risk of developing coronary artery sequelae with 
the recurrent episode, regardless of the sequelae devel-
oped with the index episode. The proportion of cases 
with a positive family history is ≈1%.22,24 Within 1 year 
after the onset of the first case in a family, the rate in 
a sibling is 2.1%, a relative risk of ≈10-fold compared 
with the Japanese population in general; approximately 
half of the second cases develop within 10 days of the 
first case.28 The risk of concordance in identical twins is 
≈13%.28–30 Higher rates of KD in siblings of index cases 
and twins are consistent with a genetic predisposition 
that interacts with exposure to the pathogenic agent or 
agents in the environment.28,29,31,32 The reported occur-
rence of KD in children of parents who themselves had 
the illness in childhood also supports the contribution of 
genetic factors.33–36
In the continental United States, KD is more common 
during the winter and early spring, boys with the disease 
outnumber girls by ≈1.5–1.7:1, and 76% of affected chil-
Table 1. Applying Classification of Recommendations and Level of Evidence
 
A recommendation with Level of Evidence B or C does not imply that the recommendation is weak. Many important clinical questions addressed in 
the guidelines do not lend themselves to clinical trials. Although randomized trials are unavailable, there may be a very clear clinical consensus that a 
particular test or therapy is useful or effective.
*Data available from clinical trials or registries about the usefulness/efficacy in different subpopulations such as sex, age, history of diabetes mellitus, 
history of prior myocardial infarction, history of heart failure, and prior aspirin use.
†For comparative effectiveness recommendations (Class I and IIa; Level of Evidence A and B only), studies that support the use of comparator verbs 
should involve direct comparisons of the treatments or strategies being evaluated.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e930
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
dren are <5 years of age.19,20,25 From a global perspec-
tive, regions in the extratropical northern hemisphere 
have seasonal peaks in the winter, with low numbers of 
cases in the late summer and fall.37 A lack of a seasonal 
cycle has been noted in the tropics and the extratropical 
southern hemisphere.
Epidemiological studies demonstrating that KD is as-
sociated with antecedent respiratory illness and expo-
sure to carpet cleaning have not been consistently con-
firmed.38–44 Other factors reportedly associated with KD 
include eczema,45 humidifier use,44 and residence near 
a standing body of water.46 Recent epidemiological stud-
ies have pointed to some potential environmental risk 
factors for KD. Although the findings have not been repli-
cated, a study in the state of Washington suggested that 
the risk for KD might be linked to perinatal exposures, 
including older maternal age, maternal group B strepto-
coccal colonization, and hospitalization in early infancy 
for a bacterial illness, which was associated with a 2.8-
fold higher risk.47 Epidemiological analyses have corre-
lated the incidence of KD cases in Japan, Hawaii, and 
San Diego with tropospheric wind currents originating 
in northeastern China, which suggests that a wind-borne 
agent could trigger the illness.48,49
The case fatality rate in KD in Japan is 0.015% (4 
deaths in 26 
691 patients from 2011 to 2012).22,50 The 
standardized mortality ratio (SMR; the observed number 
of deaths divided by the expected number of deaths 
based on vital statistics in Japan) in patients diagnosed 
between 1982 and 1992 was higher than normal only 
for males with coronary artery aneurysms (SMR, 2.55; 
95% confidence interval, 1.23–4.70).51 A more recent 
study from Japan showed that the SMR beyond the acute 
illness was elevated for all patients with cardiac sequel-
ae (SMR, 1.86; 95% confidence interval, 1.02–3.13), 
thus, stressing the importance of long-term surveillance 
for this subgroup of patients.52 Patients without cardiac 
sequelae after the acute phase had a lower mortality 
relative to the general population (SMR, 0.65; 95% con-
fidence interval, 0.41–0.96). In the continental United 
States, using administrative data that could include re-
admissions for coronary disease, the in-hospital mortal-
ity rate is ≈0.17%.53 Virtually all deaths in patients with 
KD result from its cardiac sequelae.54 The peak mortal-
ity occurs 15 to 45 days after onset of fever, during 
which time well-established coronary artery vasculitis oc-
curs concomitantly with marked elevation of the platelet 
count and a hypercoagulable state.55 However, sudden 
death of myocardial infarction (MI) can occur many years 
later in children and adults with coronary artery aneu-
rysms and stenoses. Many cases of fatal and nonfatal MI 
in young adults have now been attributed to “missed” KD 
in childhood.56 Indeed, among adults <40 years of age 
with suspected myocardial ischemia who underwent cor-
onary angiography in San Diego, CA, ≈5% had lesions 
consistent with late sequelae of KD.57
Key Points: Epidemiology
• The cause is unknown.
• The estimated incidence in North America is ≈25 
cases per 100 
000 children <5 years of age per 
year.
• The highest relative risk is in Asian children, espe-
cially of Japanese ancestry.
• The ratio of males to females is ≈1.5:1.
• KD affects predominantly, but not exclusively, 
young children.
• It is most common in winter and early spring in 
North America.
• Predisposing 
factors 
have 
been 
reported 
inconsistently.
• Nonspecific symptoms are common in the 10 
days before diagnosis.
• In Japan, the recurrence rate is ≈3%, and the rela-
tive risk in siblings is 10-fold higher.
• The case fatality rate is <0.1% in Japan.
• Coronary artery aneurysms from KD account for 
5% of acute coronary syndromes (ACS) in adults 
<40 years of age.
GENETICS
Evidence for a genetic component to KD susceptibility in-
cludes the observation of an increased incidence among 
Japanese children and among children of Japanese de-
scent residing outside of Japan, the increased incidence 
of a history of KD among the parents of a KD patient, and 
the increased incidence among siblings and extended 
family members of an index case.18,35,58–60 Family linkage 
studies and genome-wide association studies with sub-
sequent validation studies have implicated single-nucleo-
tide polymorphisms in 6 genes or gene regions: FcγR2a, 
caspase 3 (CASP3), human leukocyte antigen class II, B-
cell lymphoid kinase (BLK), inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
kinase-C (ITPKC), and CD40 (Table 2). Variants in genes 
in the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling path-
way (TGFβ2, TGFβR2, and SMAD3) were associated with 
increased risk of aneurysm formation in patients of Eu-
ropean descent by use of a case-control study design 
and the transmission disequilibrium test, which assesses 
transmission of candidate risk alleles from heterozygous 
parents to their affected offspring.64,65 A genome-wide 
association study in Japan identified a human leukocyte 
antigen determinant that influenced susceptibility among 
Japanese and Taiwanese children but not children of Eu-
ropean descent.59 Taken together, these results suggest 
that KD susceptibility and disease outcome, including an-
eurysm formation and response to IVIG, are influenced 
by variants in several different genes and signaling path-
ways. These polymorphisms likely vary across popula-
tions, and when the sum total of genetic influences for 
KD are eventually described, it is predicted that there 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e931
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
will be important differences in allele frequency that will 
explain the increased incidence of disease among Asian 
populations. The preliminary understanding of genetic 
influences on disease susceptibility have already led to 
clinical trials of cyclosporine to interrupt the calcineurin-
NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells) pathway and to 
trials of statins to block downstream effects of the TGF-β 
signaling pathway on myofibroblast formation and matrix 
metalloproteinase secretion.
CAUSES AND PATHOGENESIS
Despite 4 decades of investigation, the cause of KD re-
mains unknown. Current understanding of the immune 
response suggests response to a classic antigen that is 
protective against future exposure in most patients.66 An 
impressive list of candidate pathogens has been tested 
and discarded. One line of investigation suggests infec-
tion with a novel RNA virus that enters through the upper 
respiratory tract.67,68 Intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies 
in bronchial epithelial cells and multiple other cell types 
throughout the body appear to contain RNA and could 
be linked to the KD agent. Efforts to characterize the 
molecular details of these inclusion bodies have been 
hampered by the paucity of autopsy tissues available for 
study. The study of relevant tissues (eg, coronary arter-
ies) in surviving patients treated for KD is not feasible 
except in the case of cardiac explantation at transplanta-
tion, and polyclonal B-cell activation makes serological 
studies challenging. Another line of evidence links the 
seasonality of KD to tropospheric wind patterns, which 
suggests the transport of an agent that, when inhaled 
by genetically susceptible children, triggers the immuno-
logic cascade of KD.
Although early studies provided evidence for an im-
mune response triggered by a superantigen, subsequent 
studies favored a canonical response to a conventional 
antigen. Activation of the innate immune system is an 
early event, with high numbers of activated, circulating 
neutrophils and evidence for activation of the interleukin 
(IL) 1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling 
pathways.69 Study of the adaptive immune response 
demonstrated that both proinflammatory and regulatory 
T cells can be found in the circulation in the first week 
after fever onset.66 Expansion of the regulatory T-cell 
population after IVIG administration is associated with 
cessation of fever and clinical improvement.70 The self-
limited nature of the disease coupled with a low rate of 
recurrence suggests emergence of T- and B-cell memory 
that is protective against future encounters with the KD 
agent.
PATHOLOGY
Although inflammation of the coronary arteries results in 
the most important clinical outcomes, KD is character-
ized by systemic inflammation in all the medium-sized 
arteries and in multiple organs and tissues during the 
acute febrile phase,71 leading to associated clinical find-
ings: liver (hepatitis), lung (interstitial pneumonitis), gas-
trointestinal tract (abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, 
gallbladder hydrops), meninges (aseptic meningitis, ir-
Table 2. Genes Implicated in Susceptibility to KD With Replication in Independent Cohorts
Gene
Chromosome 
Location
Genetic Methods
Validation Populations
Potential Significance
Reference and 
Year
FCGR2A
1q23
GWAS
European descent, 
Taiwanese, Koreans, Han 
Chinese
Low-affinity receptor for Fc 
fragment of IgG; risk allele has 
lower binding affinity
Khor et al61 2011
CASP3
4q34-35
Linkage analysis
Candidate gene study
Japanese, Taiwanese, 
Koreans, Chinese, Euro-
Americans
Mediates apoptosis in immune 
cells and cardiomyocytes
Risk allele decreases gene 
transcription
Onouchi et al62 
2010
HLA class II
6p21.3
GWAS
Japanese, Taiwanese, 
Koreans
Activation marker for immune 
cells; antigen presentation
Onouchi et al63 
2012
BLK
8p23-22
GWAS
Japanese, Taiwanese, 
Koreans
B-cell receptor signal 
transduction
Onouchi et al63 
2012
IPTKC
19q13.2
Linkage analysis
TDT
Japanese, Taiwanese, 
Koreans, Chinese, Euro- 
Americans
Negative regulator of calcineurin-
NFAT signaling pathway; risk 
allele increases signaling
Onouchi et al64 
2008
CD40
20q12-13.2
GWAS
Japanese, Taiwanese, 
Koreans
Risk alleles associated with 
increased translation
Onouchi et al63 
2012
BLK indicates B-cell lymphoid kinase; CASP3, caspase 3; FCGR, Fcγ receptor; GWAS, genome-wide association study; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; 
IgG, immunoglobulin G; ITPKC, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate kinase-C; KD, Kawasaki disease; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; and TDT, transmission 
disequilibrium test.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e932
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
ritability), heart (myocarditis, pericarditis, valvulitis), uri-
nary tract (pyuria), pancreas (pancreatitis), and lymph 
nodes (lymphadenopathy). Unfortunately, lymph node 
pathology is nonspecific and nondiagnostic. Intracyto-
plasmic inclusion bodies are commonly observed in cili-
ated bronchial epithelial cells in autopsied cases.67,68,72
A recently proposed model of KD arteriopathy identi-
fied 3 pathological processes. The first is a necrotizing 
arteritis that consists of a synchronized neutrophilic pro-
cess complete within 2 weeks after fever onset. It is the 
only self-limited process and progressively destroys the 
arterial wall into the adventitia, causing aneurysms. The 
second process is a subacute/chronic vasculitis charac-
terized by an asynchronous infiltration of lymphocytes, 
plasma cells, and eosinophils with fewer macrophages 
that begins in the first 2 weeks after fever onset but 
can continue for months to years in a small subset of 
patients and is closely linked to the third process. The 
third process is luminal myofibroblastic proliferation 
(LMP), which is characterized by a unique medial smooth 
muscle cell–derived myofibroblastic process that begins 
in the first 2 weeks and persists for months to years, 
with the potential to cause progressive arterial steno-
sis. LMP is composed of myofibroblasts and their matrix 
products accompanied by subacute or chronic inflam-
matory cells (Figure 1).73 This model, based on careful 
study of arterial tissues from 41 KD patients, includes 
pathological features described in prior reports.54,74–77 
The model goes further to demonstrate the distinct na-
tures of neutrophilic necrotizing arteritis and subacute/
chronic arteritis, the persistence of subacute/chronic ar-
teritis for months to years after onset in a small subset 
of patients, and the electron microscopic evidence that 
LMP is an active proliferative process (rather than scar) 
that begins in the first few weeks after onset and is itself 
a key component of KD arteritis, with the potential to 
cause progressive arterial stenosis in KD patients with 
coronary artery abnormalities.
Pathological outcomes of coronary artery damage de-
pend on the severity of the lesions. Very mildly dilated 
and inflamed arteries may be able to return to normal. 
Large saccular aneurysms have lost their intima, media, 
and elastica, which cannot be regenerated. The rim of 
remaining adventitia can rupture or undergo sequential 
thrombosis that can organize, recanalize, and calcify. 
Fusiform aneurysms with partially preserved media can 
thrombose or develop progressive stenosis from LMP. 
Large aneurysms can appear to “resolve” when the lumen 
size decreases because of layered mural thrombi or LMP. 
The largest aneurysms (“giant aneurysms”) have generally 
lost virtually all of the media, with only a rim of adventitia 
remaining. These aneurysms develop successive layers 
of thrombi, with organization and calcification of the old-
est thrombi closest to the remaining adventitia. Giant an-
eurysms can rupture in the first 2 to 3 weeks after fever 
onset but rarely do so thereafter. MI can occur from acute 
or progressive thrombosis or from stenosis caused by 
LMP.73 A recent study of pediatric vasculitis fatalities over 
the past 50 years from Japan indicated that the vast ma-
jority of such deaths were the result of KD and that fatality 
rates markedly decreased around the time IVIG therapy 
was introduced, in the mid to late 1980s.78
Key Points: Pathology
• KD vasculopathy primarily involves muscular arter-
ies and is characterized by 3 linked processes: (1) 
necrotizing arteritis; (2) subacute/chronic vasculi-
tis; and (3) LMP.
• Large or giant coronary artery aneurysms ≥8 mm 
in diameter or with a Z score ≥10 do not “resolve,” 
“regress,” or “remodel.” They rarely rupture and 
Figure 1. Epicardial coronary 
artery (right) and epicardial 
vein (left) from a 19-month-old 
child who died 10 months after 
Kawasaki disease onset.  
The epicardial vein contains blood 
and shows mild thickening of the 
wall, while the coronary artery shows 
almost complete occlusion by luminal 
myofibroblastic proliferation with a 
fine slit-like lumen.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e933
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
virtually always contain thrombi (the oldest of 
which may calcify) that can become occlusive.
• Aneurysms with markedly damaged but partially 
preserved media may develop decreases in lumen 
diameter over time as the result of LMP or thrombi 
and can become progressively stenotic.
• Atherosclerotic features are not characteristic of 
KD vasculopathy even in late deaths or transplants.
• Pericarditis and myocarditis result from subacute/
chronic inflammation, which is usually concen-
trated around coronary arteries.
DIAGNOSIS
Clinical criteria are used to diagnose KD.1,79 Table 3 de-
scribes the clinical features that constitute the epidemiolog-
ical case definition, as well as other clinical and laboratory 
findings. Patients who meet the case definition based on 
principal clinical findings are said to have complete KD (also 
sometimes referred to as typical or classic KD). Patients 
who do not have sufficient principal clinical findings may be 
diagnosed with incomplete KD (also sometimes referred to 
as atypical KD). In the absence of a specific diagnostic test, 
other clinical, laboratory, and echocardiographic findings 
can support the diagnosis of incomplete KD in a patient 
whose clinical presentation suggests KD but whose clinical 
features do not meet the epidemiological case definition.
Principal Clinical Findings
The diagnosis of classic KD is based on the presence of 
≥5 days of fever (first calendar day of fever is illness day 
1) and the presence of ≥4 of the 5 principal clinical fea-
tures (Table 3, Figure 2).1 In the presence of >4 principal 
clinical criteria, particularly when redness and swelling 
of the hands and feet are present, the diagnosis may be 
made with only 4 days of fever. Similarly, experienced 
clinicians who have treated many KD patients may make 
the diagnosis in rare instances with only 3 days of fever 
in the presence of a classic clinical presentation. Typical-
ly the clinical features are not all present at a single point 
in time, and it is generally not possible to establish the 
diagnosis very early in the course. Similarly, some clini-
cal features may have abated in patients who present 
after 1 to 2 weeks of fever, and a careful review of prior 
signs and symptoms can help establish the diagnosis.
Fever 
Fever is typically high spiking (>39°C to 40°C) and remit-
tent. In the absence of appropriate therapy, fever con-
tinues for 1 to 3 weeks. The spontaneous resolution of 
fever after 7 days should not be regarded as evidence 
that the diagnosis of KD has been excluded. Fever usu-
ally resolves within 36 hours after IVIG infusion has been 
completed; if not, the patient is considered to have resis-
tance to IVIG, and further therapy is required.
Extremity Changes
Changes in the extremities are distinctive. Erythema of 
the palms and soles and firm and sometimes painful in-
duration of the hands or feet often occur in the acute 
phase. Desquamation of the fingers and toes usually be-
gins in the periungual region within 2 to 3 weeks after 
the onset of fever and may extend to involve the palms 
and soles. At 1 to 2 months after fever onset, deep 
transverse grooves across the nails (Beau’s lines) may 
be noted.
Rash
An erythematous rash usually appears within 5 days of 
fever onset. Most commonly, this is a diffuse maculo-
papular eruption. Scarlatiniform erythroderma and ery-
thema multiforme-like rashes are also common. Less 
commonly, urticarial or fine micropustular eruptions are 
observed. The rash is usually extensive, primarily involv-
ing the trunk and extremities, and accentuation in the 
groin with early desquamation is a characteristic fea-
ture. An unusually severe form of psoriasis with plaques 
and pustular features can rarely occur during or after 
the acute KD illness.80 Patients may also experience a 
flare of new-onset atopic dermatitis during the subacute 
phase. Bullous, vesicular, and petechial rashes are not 
consistent with KD and should prompt a search for an 
alternative diagnosis.
Conjunctivitis 
Bilateral bulbar nonexudative conjunctival injection usu-
ally begins shortly after fever onset and often spares 
the limbus, an avascular zone around the iris. Anterior 
uveitis is often observed by slit-lamp examination during 
the first week of fever.81,82 Subconjunctival hemorrhage 
and punctate keratitis are occasionally observed.82,83
Oral Changes
Changes of the lips and oral cavity include (1) erythema, 
dryness, fissuring, peeling, cracking, and bleeding of 
the lips; (2) a “strawberry tongue,” with erythema and 
prominent fungiform papillae; and (3) diffuse erythema of 
the oropharyngeal mucosa. Oral ulcers and pharyngeal 
exudates are not consistent with KD.
Cervical Lymphadenopathy
Cervical lymphadenopathy is the least common of the 
principal clinical features. Lymph node swelling is usually 
unilateral, ≥1.5 cm in diameter, and confined to the ante-
rior cervical triangle. In a small subset of patients, lymph 
node findings may be the most notable and sometimes 
only initial clinical finding, prompting a clinical diagno-
sis of bacterial lymphadenitis and significantly delaying 
KD diagnosis.84 In such cases, fever persists, and other 
typical KD features, such as rash and conjunctival injec-
tion, will follow. Imaging studies including ultrasound and 
computed tomography (CT) can be helpful in differentiat-
ing KD lymphadenopathy from bacterial lymphadenitis. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e934
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
In KD, multiple lymph nodes are enlarged, and retropha-
ryngeal edema or phlegmon is common. In contrast, 
bacterial lymphadenitis is most frequently associated 
with a single node with a hypoechoic core.84 It has been 
increasingly recognized that cervical lymphadenopathy 
can be associated with deep neck inflammation leading 
to parapharyngeal and retropharyngeal edema and non-
suppurative phlegmon.84,85
Other Illnesses With Similar Features
Other illnesses with similar clinical features (Table 3) 
should be considered before the diagnosis of KD is 
made, because the principal clinical findings that fulfill 
the diagnostic criteria are not specific. The presence 
of exudative conjunctivitis, exudative pharyngitis, oral 
ulcerations, splenomegaly, and vesiculobullous or pe-
techial rashes should prompt consideration of another 
diagnosis.46 Measles shares many clinical features with 
KD and should be considered in the differential diag-
nosis in any unimmunized infant or child. KD occurs 
more commonly in the winter and spring in nontemper-
ate climates, when many respiratory viruses circulate, 
 Nervous system
  Extreme irritability
  Aseptic meningitis (pleocytosis of cerebrospinal fluid)
  Facial nerve palsy
  Sensorineural hearing loss
 Genitourinary
  Urethritis/meatitis, hydrocele
 Other
  Desquamating rash in groin
  Retropharyngeal phlegmon
  Anterior uveitis by slit lamp examination
  Erythema and induration at BCG inoculation site
The differential diagnosis includes other infectious and noninfectious 
conditions, including the following:
 Measles
 Other viral infections (eg, adenovirus, enterovirus)
  
Staphylococcal and streptococcal toxin-mediated diseases  
(eg, scarlet fever and toxic shock syndrome)
  
Drug hypersensitivity reactions, including Stevens Johnson 
syndrome
 Systemic onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis
 With epidemiologic risk factors:
  Rocky Mountain spotted fever or other rickettsial infections
  Leptospirosis
BCG indicates bacillus Calmette-Guérin; CXR, chest radiography; and 
KD, Kawasaki disease.
Table 3. Continued
Table 3. Diagnosis of Classic KD
Classic KD is diagnosed in the presence of fever for at least 5 d (the 
day of fever onset is taken to be the first day of fever) together with at 
least 4 of the 5 following principal clinical features. In the presence of 
≥4 principal clinical features, particularly when redness and swelling 
of the hands and feet are present, the diagnosis of KD can be made 
with 4 d of fever, although experienced clinicians who have treated 
many patients with KD may establish the diagnosis with 3 d of fever in 
rare cases (Figure 2):
 1.  
Erythema and cracking of lips, strawberry tongue, and/or 
erythema of oral and pharyngeal mucosa
 2. Bilateral bulbar conjunctival injection without exudate
 3.  
Rash: maculopapular, diffuse erythroderma, or erythema 
multiforme-like
 4.  
Erythema and edema of the hands and feet in acute phase  
and/or periungual desquamation in subacute phase
 5.  
Cervical lymphadenopathy (≥1.5 cm diameter), usually 
unilateral
A careful history may reveal that ≥1 principal clinical features 
were present during the illness but resolved by the time of 
presentation.
Patients who lack full clinical features of classic KD are often 
evaluated for incomplete KD (Figure 3). If coronary artery 
abnormalities are detected, the diagnosis of KD is considered 
confirmed in most cases.
Laboratory tests typically reveal normal or elevated white blood 
cell count with neutrophil predominance and elevated acute 
phase reactants such as C-reactive protein and erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate during the acute phase. Low serum sodium and 
albumin levels, elevated serum liver enzymes, and sterile pyuria can 
be present. In the second week after fever onset, thrombocytosis is 
common.
Other clinical findings may include the following:
 Cardiovascular
  Myocarditis, pericarditis, valvular regurgitation, shock
  Coronary artery abnormalities
  Aneurysms of medium-sized noncoronary arteries
  Peripheral gangrene
  Aortic root enlargement
 Respiratory
  Peribronchial and interstitial infiltrates on CXR
  Pulmonary nodules
 Musculoskeletal
  Arthritis, arthralgia (pleocytosis of synovial fluid)
 Gastrointestinal
  Diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain
  Hepatitis, jaundice
  Gallbladder hydrops
  Pancreatitis
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e935
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
Figure 2. Clinical features of classic Kawasaki disease.  
A, Rash: Maculopapular, diffuse erythroderma, or erythema multiforme-like. B, Conjunctivitis: Bulbar conjunctival injection 
without exudate; bilateral. C, Oral changes: Erythema and cracking of lips (cheilitis); strawberry tongue; erythema of oral and 
pharyngeal mucosa. D and E, Palmar and plantar erythema: Usually accompanied by swelling; resolves with subsequent periun-
gual desquamation in the subacute phase. F, Cervical adenopathy: Usually unilateral, node ≥1.5 cm in diameter. (Continued 
)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e936
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
and a child with KD may have concurrent infection with 
a respiratory viral pathogen. In a child with clinical find-
ings compatible with classic KD, the detection of respi-
ratory viruses such as respiratory syncytial virus, meta-
pneumovirus, coronaviruses, parainfluenza viruses, or 
influenza viruses does not exclude the diagnosis of 
KD.86–88 The detection of adenovirus in a nasopharyn-
geal sample from a patient with suspected KD poses a 
particular challenge, because the illnesses have some 
similar clinical features.89 Adenoviruses (particularly 
species C) can persist in tonsil or adenoid tissue, po-
tentially confusing diagnosis of a subsequent febrile ill-
ness.90 In a patient with fever, exudative pharyngitis, 
exudative conjunctivitis, and a nasopharyngeal sample 
positive for adenovirus by respiratory polymerase chain 
reaction assay, KD is extremely unlikely; however, the 
diagnosis of KD should still be considered if adenovi-
rus is detected in a patient with nonexudative pharyn-
gitis. Other diagnostic features of KD not commonly 
observed in adenovirus infection include erythema and 
swelling of the hands and feet, strawberry tongue, and 
a desquamating groin rash.91 In children with some clini-
cal features of KD and a positive rapid test or culture 
for group A streptococcus who do not improve after 
24 to 48 hours of effective antibiotic therapy (strepto-
coccal carriers), the diagnosis of KD should be again 
considered.
Incomplete (Atypical) KD
Although the presence of fever for ≥4 days with 4 of 
the 5 other principal clinical findings establishes the 
diagnosis of complete KD, these criteria unfortunately 
do not identify all children with the illness. KD should be 
considered in the differential diagnosis of prolonged un-
explained fever in childhood associated with any of the 
principal clinical features of the disease, and the diag-
nosis can be considered confirmed when coronary ar-
tery aneurysms are identified in such patients by echo-
cardiography. However, coronary artery dilatation is 
generally not detected by echocardiography until after 
the first week of illness, and a normal echocardiogram 
in the first week of illness does not rule out the diag-
nosis of KD. Patients with incomplete KD, particularly 
those <6 months of age and those lacking eye or oral 
mucosal changes, may experience significant delays 
in diagnosis.92 Studies evaluating the incomplete KD 
diagnostic algorithm first proposed in the 2004 guide-
lines1 suggest its usefulness in identifying patients who 
require treatment and in preventing coronary artery 
aneurysms.93,94 Incomplete KD occurs most commonly 
in infants, who are at substantial risk of developing 
coronary artery abnormalities and who may have pro-
longed fever as the sole clinical finding or have subtle 
or fleeting clinical signs in addition to fever. Laboratory 
findings and cardiovascular sequelae in incomplete and 
complete cases appear the same. Although there are 
no pathognomonic laboratory findings, the presence of 
certain laboratory features may raise the clinical sus-
picion of KD. The finding of coronary artery Z scores 
(based on body surface area [BSA]) of ≥2.5 for the 
left anterior descending (LAD) or right coronary artery 
(RCA) branches lacks sensitivity but has a very high 
specificity for the diagnosis.95,96
Diagnosis of Incomplete KD
The diagnosis of incomplete (sometimes referred to as 
atypical) KD should be considered in any infant or child 
with prolonged unexplained fever, fewer than 4 of the 
principal clinical findings, and compatible laboratory or 
echocardiographic findings (Figure 3).
Common Pitfalls in Diagnosis
A high index of suspicion for the diagnosis is particu-
larly important in certain clinical situations. In the infant 
<6 months of age, prolonged fever and irritability may 
be the only clinical manifestations of KD, and these 
children are at high risk of developing coronary artery 
abnormalities. Delayed diagnosis is common in older 
children and adolescents with KD, and they appear to 
have a high prevalence of coronary artery abnormali-
ties.97 The presence of fever and pyuria in an infant or 
young child can be mistakenly attributed to a urinary 
tract infection, and subsequent development of rash, 
red eyes, and red lips to an antibiotic reaction. Like-
wise, irritability and a culture-negative pleocytosis of 
the cerebrospinal fluid in an infant with prolonged fever 
suggestive of aseptic meningitis (or if antibiotics have 
been given, partially treated meningitis) may cause a 
diagnosis of KD to be overlooked. Patients with cervi-
cal lymphadenitis as the primary clinical manifestation 
can be misdiagnosed as having bacterial adenitis, and 
many such patients will have concurrent retropharyn-
geal phlegmon that is attributed to bacterial infection.84 
Patients with prominent gastrointestinal symptoms are 
sometimes admitted to a surgical service, and other 
physical findings of KD can be overlooked. Patients 
who present with shock may be misdiagnosed as hav-
Figure 2 Continued. G, Coronary artery aneurysms: Magnetic resonance image of the left ventricular outflow tract showing 
a giant right coronary artery (RCA) aneurysm with nonocclusive thrombus (yellow arrow) and a giant left main coronary artery 
(LMCA) aneurysm. Ao indicates aorta; AoV, aortic valve; LV, left ventricle; and RV, right ventricle. H, Peripheral artery aneurysms: 
Magnetic resonance image showing aneurysms in the axillary and subclavian arteries and the iliac and femoral arteries (yellow 
arrows). Patient photographs used with permission from the Kawasaki Disease Foundation, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e937
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
ing bacterial sepsis or staphylococcal or streptococ-
cal toxic shock syndrome. In these clinical scenarios, 
consultation with an expert in the diagnosis of KD can 
be useful.
Key Points: Consider KD in the Differential 
Diagnosis of Certain Infants or Children
• Infants <6 months old with prolonged fever and 
irritability
• Infants with prolonged fever and unexplained asep-
tic meningitis
• Infants or children with prolonged fever and unex-
plained or culture-negative shock
• Infants or children with prolonged fever and cer-
vical lymphadenitis unresponsive to antibiotic 
therapy
• Infants or children with prolonged fever and ret-
ropharyngeal or parapharyngeal phlegmon unre-
sponsive to antibiotic therapy
Other Clinical and Laboratory Findings
Other Clinical Findings
Although important long-term sequelae are confined to 
the arterial tree (in particular, the coronary arteries), 
multiple other organs and tissues are inflamed during 
the acute illness and cause clinical symptoms. Common 
neurological findings include extreme irritability exceed-
ing that observed in other febrile illnesses and aseptic 
meningitis in those children who undergo lumbar punc-
ture.98 Transient unilateral, and rarely bilateral, peripheral 
facial nerve palsy has been noted in rare case reports.99 
Profound sensorineural hearing loss is a rare but serious 
complication.100,101 Common gastrointestinal findings 
include hepatitis, diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain, 
and gallbladder hydrops; pancreatitis and jaundice are 
less common. Genitourinary findings include urethritis, 
which is common, and hydrocele and phimosis, which 
are less common. Musculoskeletal findings include ar-
thralgia and arthritis, involving multiple small interphalan-
geal joints and large weight-bearing joints during the first 
Figure 3. Evaluation of suspected incomplete Kawasaki disease.  
(1) In the absence of a “gold standard” for diagnosis, this algorithm cannot be evidence based but rather represents the 
informed opinion of the expert committee. Consultation with an expert should be sought any time assistance is needed. (2) 
Clinical findings of Kawasaki disease are listed in Table 3. Characteristics suggesting that another diagnosis should be consid-
ered include exudative conjunctivitis, exudative pharyngitis, ulcerative intraoral lesions, bullous or vesicular rash, generalized 
adenopathy, or splenomegaly. (3) Infants ≤6 months of age are the most likely to develop prolonged fever without other clinical 
criteria for Kawasaki disease; these infants are at particularly high risk of developing coronary artery abnormalities. (4) Echocar-
diography is considered positive for purposes of this algorithm if any of 3 conditions are met: Z score of left anterior descending 
coronary artery or right coronary artery ≥2.5; coronary artery aneurysm is observed; or ≥3 other suggestive features exist, 
including decreased left ventricular function, mitral regurgitation, pericardial effusion, or Z scores in left anterior descending 
coronary artery or right coronary artery of 2 to 2.5. (5) If the echocardiogram is positive, treatment should be given within 10 
days of fever onset or after the tenth day of fever in the presence of clinical and laboratory signs (C-reactive protein [CRP], eryth-
rocyte sedimentation rate [ESR]) of ongoing inflammation. (6) Typical peeling begins under the nail beds of fingers and toes. ALT 
indicates alanine transaminase; and WBC, white blood cells.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e938
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
week of illness and predominantly large weight-bearing 
joints, especially the knees and ankles, in the second to 
third week of illness.102,103 Respiratory findings include 
peribronchial and interstitial infiltrates on chest radiog-
raphy; nodular infiltrates occur rarely. Erythema and in-
duration at the site of a previous vaccination with bacille 
Calmette-Guérin is common in children with KD born in 
countries where it is used widely.104 Macrophage activa-
tion syndrome occurs rarely and is often associated with 
IVIG resistance.105
Laboratory Findings 
Laboratory tests, although nonspecific, provide support 
for a diagnosis of KD in patients with nonclassic but sug-
gestive clinical features. Clinical experience suggests 
that KD is unlikely if the erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and platelet count are 
normal after day 7 of illness. In addition, low white blood 
cell count and lymphocyte predominance suggest an al-
ternative diagnosis.
The evolution of the laboratory findings during and af-
ter the acute KD illness was summarized recently.106 Leu-
kocytosis is typical during the acute stage of illness, with 
a predominance of immature and mature granulocytes. 
Leukopenia and lymphocyte predominance suggest an 
alternative diagnosis. Anemia occurs commonly, is nor-
mochromic and normocytic, and resolves with resolution 
of inflammation. Elevation of acute-phase reactants such 
as ESR and CRP is nearly universal; the degree of el-
evation of ESR and CRP may be discrepant. The CRP 
normalizes more quickly than the ESR during resolution 
of inflammation. Moreover, the ESR is elevated by IVIG 
therapy, and therefore, a decreased ESR during follow-
up should not be used to assess response to treatment 
with IVIG. The CRP is more useful as a marker of inflam-
mation after treatment of the acute illness. Finding of a 
minimally elevated ESR in the setting of severe clinical 
disease should prompt investigation for disseminated in-
travascular coagulation.55
Thrombocytosis is a characteristic feature of KD but 
generally does not occur until the second week, peaking 
in the third week (mean ≈700 
000 per mm3) and normal-
izing by 4 to 6 weeks after onset in most cases. Throm-
bocytopenia is rare but may occur in the first 1 to 2 
weeks of illness. Thrombocytopenia can be a sign of dis-
seminated intravascular coagulation and is a risk factor 
for the development of coronary artery abnormalities. 
In patients with arthritis, arthrocentesis typically yields 
purulent-appearing fluid with a white blood cell count of 
125 
000 to 300 
000 per mm3, a normal glucose level, 
and negative Gram stain and cultures.
Mild to moderate elevations in serum transaminas-
es or gammaglutamyl transpeptidase occur in 40% to 
60% of patients, and mild hyperbilirubinemia occurs in 
≈10%.106,107 Hypoalbuminemia is common and associat-
ed with more severe and more prolonged acute disease. 
Urinalysis may show pyuria in up to 80% of children, al-
though this finding lacks specificity for KD.108 In children 
who undergo lumbar puncture, ≈30% demonstrate pleo-
cytosis with a mononuclear cell predominance, normal 
glucose levels, and generally normal protein levels.98
In the absence of a diagnostic test, identification of 
serum or urine biomarkers of KD is an active area of re-
search, but no biomarkers presently available have been 
demonstrated to be superior to elevated CRP or ESR. 
N-terminal moiety of B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proB-
NP), likely indicative of myocardial involvement, may be 
elevated in some patients with KD, but this biomarker 
may not have sufficient discriminative ability to differenti-
ate KD, and cut-point values for a positive result have not 
been clearly defined.109,110
Cardiovascular Findings
Cardiovascular manifestations and complications repre-
sent the major contributors to morbidity and mortality 
related to KD, both during the acute illness and in the 
long-term. Prompt and accurate recognition and man-
agement are essential.
Clinical Findings
Cardiovascular manifestations can be prominent during 
the acute KD episode and are the leading cause of long-
term morbidity and mortality. The pericardium, myocar-
dium, endocardium including valves, and the coronary 
arteries all may be inflamed. Clinical findings during the 
acute illness may include a hyperdynamic precordium 
and tachycardia. Innocent systolic flow murmurs may be 
accentuated, and a gallop rhythm suggesting decreased 
compliance (diastolic dysfunction) of the ventricle sec-
ondary to myocardial inflammation and edema may be 
present. The presence of a pericardial rub, or clinical 
signs of pericardial tamponade, is very rare, although 
echocardiographic findings of small pericardial effu-
sions are common. Valvar dysfunction occurs in ≈25% 
of patients regardless of coronary artery involvement 
and most often involves the mitral valve.111 Children with 
clinically important mitral regurgitation (MR) may have a 
pansystolic murmur heard best between the low left ster-
nal border and the apex. A diastolic murmur associated 
with important aortic regurgitation (AR) is rare.
Electrocardiographic Changes
During the acute illness, electrocardiography may show 
arrhythmia, including sinus node and atrioventricular 
node functional abnormalities, with prolonged PR inter-
val and nonspecific ST and T-wave changes or low volt-
age if there is myocardial or pericardial involvement.112 
Increased QT dispersion, abnormalities of ventricular re-
polarization, and electrocardiographic signs suggestive 
of left ventricular (LV) dilation have been reported.113,114 
Rarely, malignant ventricular arrhythmias may be seen in 
the setting of myocarditis or myocardial ischemia.115,116
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e939
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
Cardiovascular Collapse
Approximately 5% of children with KD in the continental 
United States present with cardiovascular collapse and 
hypotension requiring the initiation of volume expanders, 
the infusion of vasoactive agents, or transfer to the inten-
sive care unit. The presence of thrombocytopenia and 
coagulopathy in such cases is notable, and a diagnosis 
of bacterial sepsis is frequently suspected at the outset. 
In such cases, when bacterial cultures are negative and 
fever persists, the diagnosis of KD should be considered. 
Children with shock presentation appear to be at higher 
risk of IVIG resistance, coronary artery abnormalities, 
MR, and prolonged myocardial dysfunction.117–119
Myocardial Dysfunction
Myocarditis occurs frequently in acute KD. Reports of 
myocardial biopsies performed early in the disease 
course suggested a nearly universal incidence.120 More 
recent data indicate that myocardial inflammation can be 
documented in 50% to 70% of patients using gallium ci-
trate Ga 67 scans and technetium Tc 99m–labeled white 
blood cell scans.121 Recently, it has been demonstrated 
that myocardial inflammatory changes in KD occur be-
fore coronary artery abnormalities and that without con-
current ischemic damage, there is myocardial edema 
but little associated permanent cellular disruption or cell 
loss.122 Thus, most often, myocarditis in KD develops 
early, and acute LV dysfunction is generally transient 
and responds readily to anti-inflammatory treatment.111 
The rapid improvement in LV function differs from that 
observed in other causes of myocarditis. Myocarditis in 
KD likely improves rapidly as the inflammatory process 
subsides because it results from interstitial edema and 
inflammation and only rarely from myocardial cell necro-
sis.73,122 Infrequently, acute myocardial inflammation is 
associated with overt ventricular ectopy, although re-
cent information indicates more common repolarization 
impact than may be clinically apparent (see Long-Term 
Management, Arrhythmias). The exception to the more 
typical short-term impact of mild myocarditis in KD is the 
KD shock syndrome.
Valvular and Aortic Abnormalities
Early studies in KD found wide variability in the incidence 
of MR depending on techniques of diagnosis and vari-
ability of inclusion and exclusion criteria.123,124 However, 
other clinical studies, including a contemporary mul-
ticenter US study,111 have demonstrated a more con-
sistent incidence of MR of 23% to 27% acutely. When 
detected early, the preponderance of MR as assessed 
with echocardiography is in the mild to moderate range 
of severity and does not appear to persist on follow-up. 
MR has been correlated with other laboratory markers of 
inflammation early in the course of KD, and it has been 
postulated to result from a pancarditis, or a “shared in-
flammatory mechanism” with other KD changes during 
the acute illness.
AR is much less common at presentation (1% of pa-
tients).111 AR in KD is usually associated with aortic root 
dilation and becomes apparent early in the course of 
the disease. It is associated with coronary artery dila-
tion as well.111,125 Aortic root dilation (as indicated by 
an increased ascending aortic Z-score measurement) 
has been reported in ≈10% of patients during the acute 
illness.111
Coronary Artery Abnormalities
The pathophysiology and pathology of coronary artery 
abnormalities are described in previous sections. Clini-
cally, coronary artery abnormalities have been detected 
and defined based on luminal dimensions, as assessed 
with echocardiography or angiography. The presence of 
coronary artery abnormalities is considered a specific 
criterion supportive of the diagnosis of KD, particularly 
for those patients who do not meet the full clinical crite-
ria for a diagnosis of complete KD. The coronary artery 
abnormalities associated with KD can be differentiated 
from lesser degrees of dilation that may be rarely pres-
ent with other febrile illnesses.95 The prevalence of coro-
nary artery abnormalities in a clinical trial of initial treat-
ment was 23% at 4 weeks after enrollment, reduced to 
8% with 4 infusions of low-dose IVIG.126 In a subsequent 
trial of single high-dose IVIG, this was further reduced to 
≈4%.127 These trials used absolute luminal dimensions 
and Japanese Ministry of Health cut points to define ab-
normalities and did not exclude patients with abnormali-
ties at baseline.
Coronary artery abnormalities during the acute illness 
range from dilation only to aneurysms of various num-
bers, sizes, and characteristics, with the involvement 
occurring first in proximal segments and then extending 
distally. It is very rare to have distal involvement without 
some abnormalities being evident in proximal segments. 
In up to 80% of those patients who have significant dila-
tion or aneurysms as noted on later echocardiograms, 
some abnormality is evident on the initial baseline echo-
cardiogram obtained in the first 10 days of illness.128 
The largest proportion of patients with coronary artery 
abnormalities will have dilation only, characterized by lu-
minal measurements outside the normal range but with a 
maximal Z score of <2.5. Dilation resolves within 4 to 8 
weeks in the majority. Some patients will have coronary 
artery dimensions always within the normal range but 
with serial measurements will demonstrate reductions 
in luminal dimensions suggestive of dilation, using the 
patient as his or her own control.129,130 The prevalence 
of these patients may range from 32% to 50%, which 
may indicate that coronary artery dilation may be more 
common than previously thought. However, it is unclear 
whether such reductions in dimensions represent reso-
lution of inflammatory changes in the arterial walls or 
hemodynamic or functional factors related to fever and 
circulating inflammatory mediators.95,96
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e940
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
Patients with severe coronary artery involvement (ex-
tensive or large/giant aneurysms) do not have cardiac 
symptoms unless myocardial ischemia develops sec-
ondary to severe coronary artery flow disturbances or 
thromboses. Symptoms and signs of myocardial isch-
emia/infarction may be atypical and nonspecific, par-
ticularly in infants. There have been rare case reports of 
rupture of a coronary artery aneurysm with subsequent 
myocardial ischemia and pericardial tamponade. This 
usually occurs during the acute illness, when aneurysms 
may be rapidly enlarging.
Other Arterial Abnormalities
Patients with severe coronary artery involvement may 
also develop aneurysms of other medium-sized arteries, 
with rare occurrences of thromboses or rupture at these 
sites.73,131 Common sites include the axillary, subclavian, 
brachial, femoral, iliac, splanchnic, and mesenteric ar-
teries, usually near or at branching points. These may 
present clinically as pulsatile masses and bruits. The 
pathology is probably similar to that of coronary artery 
involvement, with a similar natural history that can lead 
to thromboses and stenoses, although often not associ-
ated with clinical symptoms, signs, or sequelae during 
childhood, because collateralization is common. Another 
rare but important complication is peripheral gangrene, 
often with resulting loss of digits.132,133
Evaluation for Cardiovascular Abnormalities
Echocardiography
Echocardiography is the primary imaging modality for 
cardiac assessment because it is noninvasive and has 
a high sensitivity and specificity for the detection of ab-
normalities of the proximal coronary artery segments.134 
The initial echocardiogram should be performed as soon 
as the diagnosis is suspected, but initiation of treatment 
should not be delayed by the timing of the study. Be-
cause detailed echocardiographic imaging is compro-
mised if a child is uncooperative, sedation is frequently 
needed for those <3 years of age and may also be re-
quired in older, irritable children.135 If a poor-quality initial 
echocardiogram is obtained because sedation was not 
administered, a sedated study should be repeated as 
soon as possible within the 48 hours after diagnosis and 
initial treatment. This initial study establishes a baseline 
for longitudinal follow-up monitoring of coronary artery 
morphology, LV wall motion, valvular regurgitation, and 
pericardial effusion. An initial echocardiogram in the first 
week of illness is typically normal and does not rule out 
the diagnosis.
Imaging Standards 
Echocardiography should be performed with equipment 
with appropriate transducers and should be supervised 
by an experienced pediatric echocardiographer. The 2-di-
mensional (2D) imaging should be performed with the 
highest-frequency transducer possible, even for older 
children, because these probes allow for high-resolution 
detailed evaluation of the coronary arteries. Studies 
should be recorded in a dynamic video or digital cine 
format that enables future review and comparison with 
subsequent studies. In addition to standard anatomic 
and physiological imaging from parasternal, apical, sub-
costal, and suprasternal notch windows, 2D echocardio-
graphic evaluation of patients with suspected KD should 
focus on imaging the left main coronary artery (LMCA), 
LAD, left circumflex, RCA (proximal, middle, and distal 
segments), and posterior descending coronary arteries. 
Multiple imaging planes and transducer positions are re-
quired for the optimal visualization of all major coronary 
segments (Table 4).136 Maximal efforts should be made to 
visualize all major coronary artery segments. In order of 
highest to lowest frequency of occurrence, typical sites 
of coronary artery aneurysms include the proximal LAD 
and proximal RCA, followed by the LMCA, left circumflex, 
distal RCA and, least often, the junction between the RCA 
and posterior descending coronary artery.
Table 4. Echocardiographic Views of Coronary 
Arteries in Patients With KD
LMCA
  
Precordial short axis at level of aortic valve; precordial long axis of 
left ventricle (superior tangential); subcostal ventricular long axis
LAD coronary artery
  
Precordial short axis at level of aortic valve; precordial superior 
tangential long axis of left ventricle; precordial short axis of left 
ventricle
Left circumflex branch
  
Precordial short axis at level of aortic valve; apical 4-chamber
RCA, proximal segment
  
Precordial short axis at level of aortic valve; precordial long axis 
(inferior tangential) of left ventricle; subcostal coronal projection 
of right ventricular outflow tract; subcostal short axis at level of 
atrioventricular groove
RCA, middle segment
  
Precordial long axis of left ventricle (inferior tangential); apical 
4-chamber; subcostal left ventricular long axis; subcostal short axis 
at level of atrioventricular groove; RCA proximal (#1) and mid (#2) 
are observed in the atrioventricular groove from the third intercostal 
space at the left and right sternal border
RCA, distal segment
  
Apical 4-chamber (inferior); subcostal atrial long axis (inferior)
Posterior descending coronary artery
  
Apical 4-chamber (inferior); subcostal atrial long axis (inferior); 
precordial long axis (inferior tangential) imaging; posterior 
interventricular groove
KD indicates Kawasaki disease; LAD, left anterior descending; LMCA, 
left main coronary artery; and RCA, right coronary artery.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e941
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
Qualitative and Quantitative Assessment
Echocardiographic evaluation of the coronary arteries 
should include quantitative assessment of the internal 
vessel diameters. Measurements should be made from 
inner edge to inner edge and should exclude points of 
branching, which may have normal focal dilation. Excep-
tion should be made for some patients who develop a 
small aneurysm at the bifurcation or trifurcation of the 
LMCA, which may cause blunting of the sharp angula-
tions that are usually found between the LAD, left cir-
cumflex, and sometimes a diagonal branch (so-called 
webbing). The number and location of aneurysms and 
the presence or absence of intraluminal thrombi and ste-
notic lesions should also be assessed, although thrombi 
and stenotic lesions may not be fully elucidated by stan-
dard transthoracic echocardiography.
If the patient has risk factors for intracoronary throm-
bosis (ie, giant aneurysms), part of the examination 
should be performed with a wider gray scale to capture 
freshly formed thrombus. Aneurysms are classified as 
saccular if axial and lateral diameters are nearly equal or 
as fusiform if symmetrical dilation with gradual proximal 
and distal tapering is seen. Sometimes aneurysms oc-
cur in series with interposing narrow segments. When 
a coronary artery is dilated without a segmental aneu-
rysm, the vessel is considered ectatic. Care must be 
taken in making the diagnosis of ectasia because of con-
siderable normal variation in coronary artery distribution 
and dominance. Enlargement of the LMCA caused by KD 
does not involve the orifice and rarely occurs without 
associated dilation either of the LAD, the left circumflex, 
or both arteries.
Quantitative assessment of luminal dimensions al-
lows for more accurate classification of coronary artery 
abnormalities. The Japanese guidelines classify coro-
nary arteries by absolute or relative internal lumen di-
ameter.137 Dilation or small aneurysms are defined as a 
localized dilation of the internal lumen diameter but <4 
mm, or if the child is ≥5 years of age, dilation but with 
an internal diameter of a segment measuring ≤1.5 times 
that of an adjacent segment. Medium aneurysms are de-
fined as an internal lumen diameter >4 mm but ≤8 mm, 
or if the child is ≥5 years of age, an internal diameter 
of a segment measuring 1.5 to 4 times that of an adja-
cent segment. Large or giant aneurysms are defined as 
those with an internal lumen diameter >8 mm, or if the 
child is >5 years of age, an internal diameter of a seg-
ment measuring >4 times that of an adjacent segment. 
These criteria do not account for patient size, which can 
substantially affect normal coronary artery dimensions, 
potentially leading to underdiagnosis and underestima-
tion of the true prevalence of coronary artery dilation.138
Normalization of dimensions for BSA as Z scores (stan-
dard deviation units from the mean) based on regression 
equations allows for standardization as a continuous mea-
sure,139 as well as within a classification scheme,140 and 
allows for comparisons across time and populations.141 
Several different formulas for calculating Z scores have 
been derived (Table 5).138,139,142–146 These systems differ 
regarding the number, age range, and race of the nor-
mal subjects, the formula used to calculate BSA, and the 
regression method used for analysis. The previous AHA 
guidelines provided nomograms for generating Z scores 
but did not specify the source of the normative data, the 
method of calculating BSA, and the regression method 
used for analysis.1 The most rigorous systems, based on 
larger populations and with careful statistical modeling, 
are those reported for Japanese subjects by  Kobayashi 
et al145 using a lambda-mu-sigma method for regression 
analysis of BSA and those reported for Canadian subjects 
by Dallaire et al146 using a square root function of BSA. 
Both systems used the Du Bois147 and Haycock148 formu-
las for estimating BSA, although the report by Dallaire 
et al146 further employed the Mosteller149 formula. These 
systems also have the advantage of providing norma-
tive data for the left circumflex branch. These 2 systems 
were shown to perform equally well when the Canadian 
system was applied to a Japanese population and when 
the Japanese system was applied to the US population, 
with the Canadian system defining a higher proportion of 
abnormalities.141 In addition to the use of these available 
regression equations and tables, online calculators are 
Table 5. Z-Score Methods for Normalizing Coronary Artery Luminal Dimensions From Echocardiography
 
De Zorzi  
et al138
Kurotobi  
et al142
Tan  
et al143*
McCrindle  
et al139
Olivieri  
et al144
Kobayashi  
et al145
Dallaire  
et al146
Year of publication
1998
2002
2003
2007
2009
2009
2011
Number of subjects
89
71
390
221
432
5344
1036
Country
USA
Japan
Singapore
USA
USA
Japan
Canada
Regression method for 
model fitting of BSA
Linear
Linear
Linear
Exponential
Logarithmic
LMS
Square root
BSA calculation method
NS
NS
NS
NS
Dubois
Dubois
Haycock
Values for left circumflex
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
BSA indicates body surface area; LMS, lambda-mu-sigma; NS, not stated; and USA, United States of America.
*Age range limited to 2 months to 8 years; also provided for age, sex, and to the aortic annulus.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e942
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
available. The use of different Z-score systems can yield 
variation in Z scores for a given luminal dimension and 
BSA, with the differences being greater with larger aneu-
rysm dimensions.150
Definition of Abnormality
As a mathematical construct, a Z score ≥2.5 in 1 coro-
nary artery branch would be expected to occur in ≈0.6% 
of the normal afebrile population, and a Z score ≥3.0 in 
≈0.1%. Having a coronary artery Z score ≥2.5 in both 
the proximal RCA and LAD branches would be very un-
common in the general population. Anatomic variations 
are frequent in the LMCA, where the Z score must be 
interpreted with caution. Other anatomic variations oc-
cur, such as a dominant left or right coronary artery sys-
tem, which is not associated with luminal irregularities 
and usually becomes evident when serial measurements 
do not show a decrease in luminal diameter over several 
months. Another limitation of normal values is that they 
are not uniformly provided for the left circumflex branch 
in different Z-score systems. Z-score measurements also 
only reflect normal values for proximal segments. Addi-
tional use of a criterion of a dimension >1.5 times the 
surrounding segments could be useful for defining abnor-
malities for distal segments. It might also be useful for 
defining involvement in other noncoronary arterial beds.
Impact of Fever
Normative measurements from which coronary artery Z 
scores are derived are based on assessment of popu-
lations of healthy afebrile children. Of note, coronary 
artery enlargement has been reported in patients with 
other inflammatory, genetic, and infectious diseases.151 
Recently, 2 studies have more systematically assessed 
coronary dimensions in children with febrile illnesses 
other than KD. Muniz et al95 reported that coronary artery 
dimensions in patients with febrile illnesses other than 
KD were significantly larger than in the afebrile normative 
population but smaller than in KD patients. Two of 43 
patients had coronary artery Z scores >2.0. One of these 
patients had osteomyelitis with an LAD Z score of 2.8, 
which resolved over time. Of note, febrile non-KD patients 
had lower white blood cell counts and ESR than KD pa-
tients. No febrile patients reported by Bratincsak et al96 
had a coronary artery Z score >2.5, but their duration of 
fever and degree of systemic inflammation were not de-
scribed. Taken together, these studies suggest that cut 
points between 2.0 and 2.5 might reliably differentiate 
coronary artery involvement secondary to KD, with a Z 
score ≥2.5 differentiating KD with a 98% specificity.
Classification of Coronary Artery Abnormalities
The previous 2004 AHA scientific statement1 used a Z-
score cut point of ≥2.5 to define abnormality but clas-
sified aneurysms on the basis of absolute dimensions, 
similar to the 2008 guidelines from Japan.137 In long-term 
follow-up studies, this classification did have a relation-
ship with thromboses, stenoses, and cardiovascular 
events and presumably reflects the more severe vascu-
lar pathology underlying an increasing size of the lumen. 
However, this classification fails to account for body size. 
For example, a 5-mm aneurysm in a 3-month-old patient 
represents much greater severity and a higher risk of 
thrombosis than a 5-mm aneurysm in a 14-year-old pa-
tient. The use of Z scores better allows for evaluation 
of the severity of coronary artery dilation by correcting 
for BSA. Manlhiot et al proposed a classification scheme 
based solely on Z scores using the formulas provided 
in the study from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute Pediatric Heart Network.139,140 One potential 
limitation of this study is that regression formulas for the 
LAD were used to derive Z scores for the left circumflex 
branch (normal values for the circumflex are not available 
with the Z-score system that was used). A classification 
scheme based solely on Z scores was proposed, which 
has been adapted and recommended in these guidelines:
Z-Score Classification
1. No involvement: Always <2
2. Dilation only: 2 to <2.5; or if initially <2, a 
decrease in Z score during follow-up ≥1
3. Small aneurysm: ≥2.5 to <5
4. Medium aneurysm: ≥5 to <10, and absolute 
dimension <8 mm
5. Large or giant aneurysm: ≥10, or absolute 
dimension ≥8 mm
One caveat to be considered when using Z scores 
is that a small error in measurement of the coronary 
artery diameter can translate into a larger difference 
in Z scores, such that the patient’s risk category might 
change. In addition, accurate measurement of weight 
and particularly height is important to enable calcula-
tion of an accurate BSA. For irritable young infants and 
toddlers, measurement of height might need to be re-
checked if it was initially obtained under less than ideal 
circumstances.
Limitations of Echocardiography for Coronary Artery 
Assessment
It is important to recognize the limitations of echocar-
diography in the evaluation and follow-up of patients with 
KD. Although echocardiographic detection of thrombi 
and coronary artery stenosis has been reported, the sen-
sitivity and specificity of echocardiography for identifying 
these abnormalities is unclear. In addition, the visualiza-
tion of coronary arteries becomes progressively more 
difficult as a child grows and body size increases. This 
also impacts visualization of more distal segments. For 
assessment of aneurysms in the long term, dystrophic 
calcification in the coronary arterial walls can also hinder 
clear visualization of the lumen. It is reasonable to ob-
tain advanced imaging studies such as computed tomo-
graphic angiography (CTA), cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging (CMRI), or invasive angiography on patients with 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e943
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
severe proximal coronary artery abnormalities in the 
acute phase when management decisions depend on vi-
sualization of distal segments that are not well seen by 
echocardiography. Of note, cardiac catheterization in the 
acute phase of KD has been associated with a greater in-
cidence of adverse vascular events at the site of an arte-
rial access vessel potentially affected by KD vasculitis.152
Assessment of Ventricular Form and Function
Although the echocardiographic examination of patients 
with KD is focused on the coronary arteries, other informa-
tion must also be obtained. Myocardial involvement with LV 
dysfunction is present in 20% of patients at diagnosis and 
is associated with coronary artery dilation.111 Therefore, 
assessment of ventricular systolic and diastolic function 
should be a part of the echocardiographic evaluation of 
all patients with suspected KD. LV end-diastolic and end-
systolic dimensions and a shortening fraction should be 
measured, usually from standard M-mode tracings. Addi-
tional apical imaging allows estimation of LV end-diastolic 
and end-systolic volumes and ejection fraction. Evaluation 
of regional wall motion can also be useful, especially in 
children with coronary artery abnormalities.
Assessment of the Aortic Root
The aortic root also should be imaged, measured, and 
compared with references for BSA. Aortic root Z scores 
>2 have been reported for 10% of KD patients.111
Assessment of Pericardial Effusion
Pericarditis can be associated with the vasculitis and 
myocarditis seen in patients with KD, and the presence 
and severity of a pericardial effusion should be noted. 
Hemodynamically important pericardial effusions are 
very rare.
Valvular Regurgitation
Standard pulsed and color flow Doppler interrogation 
should be performed to assess the presence and de-
gree of valvular regurgitation (in particular for mitral and 
aortic valves). Color flow Doppler with a low Nyquist limit 
setting should be used to demonstrate coronary artery 
flow in the proximal right and left coronary artery lumens.
Other Cardiovascular Imaging Modalities
Transesophageal echocardiography, invasive angiogra-
phy, CMRI, and CTA can be of value in the assessment of 
selected patients but are not routinely indicated for diagno-
sis and management of the acute illness. Invasive angiog-
raphy is rarely performed during the acute illness. Trans-
esophageal echocardiography, CTA, and CMRI can be 
useful for the evaluation of older children and adolescents 
in whom visualization of the coronary arteries with trans-
thoracic echocardiography is inadequate.153,154 Evaluation 
of potential aneurysmal involvement in other arterial beds 
can be assessed with CMRI, CTA, and, rarely, invasive angi-
ography, but such assessment is best performed after re-
covery from the acute illness, and usually for patients with 
severe coronary artery involvement or symptoms or signs, 
such as the presence of a pulsatile axillary mass.155,156
Recommendations for Cardiovascular 
Assessment for Diagnosis and Monitoring During 
the Acute Illness
1. Echocardiography should be performed 
when the diagnosis of KD is considered, 
but unavailability or technical limitations 
should not delay treatment (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B).
2. Coronary arteries should be imaged, and 
quantitative assessment of luminal dimen-
sions, normalized as Z scores adjusted for 
body surface, should be performed (Class I; 
Level of Evidence B).
3. For uncomplicated patients, echocardiog-
raphy should be repeated both within 1 to 
2 weeks and 4 to 6 weeks after treatment 
(Class I; Level of Evidence B).
4. For patients with important and evolving 
coronary artery abnormalities (Z score >2.5) 
detected during the acute illness, more fre-
quent echocardiography (at least twice per 
week) should be performed until luminal 
dimensions have stopped progressing to 
determine the risk for and presence of throm-
bosis (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
5. To detect coronary artery thrombosis, it may 
be reasonable to perform echocardiography 
for patients with expanding large or giant 
aneurysms twice per week while dimensions 
are expanding rapidly and at least once 
weekly in the first 45 days of illness, and then 
monthly until the third month after illness 
onset, because the failure to escalate throm-
boprophylaxis in time with the rapid expansion 
of aneurysms is a primary cause of morbidity 
and mortality (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
TREATMENT OF THE ACUTE ILLNESS
Initial Treatment of KD
The goal of therapy in the acute phase is to reduce in-
flammation and arterial damage and to prevent throm-
bosis in those with coronary artery abnormalities. The 
original guidelines for diagnosis of KD were created 
by a committee appointed by the Japanese Ministry of 
Health in 1970, at which time the coronary artery com-
plications of KD were not yet appreciated and there was 
neither effective treatment nor a noninvasive method 
of assessing coronary artery abnormalities. The case 
definition was created, therefore, for epidemiological 
surveillance and has evolved over time. The mainstay 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e944
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
of initial treatment for both complete and incomplete 
KD is a single high dose of IVIG together with acetyl-
salicylic acid (ASA), which is supported by clinical trial 
evidence.127,157
This section covers treatment from onset of the acute 
illness until resolution of acute systemic inflammation 
and when coronary artery luminal dimensions have stabi-
lized and are no longer expanding.
Patient Selection for Treatment
All patients meeting the AHA diagnostic criteria for KD 
(Table 3) should be treated as soon in the course of ill-
ness as the diagnosis can be established.
Although the current case definition provides a spe-
cific tool for epidemiological surveillance, it might not be 
optimal for aiding clinicians in the recognition of children 
with a systemic vasculitis that requires prompt treat-
ment. An algorithm to aid the clinician in deciding which 
patients with fever and fewer than 4 classic criteria, that 
is, suspected incomplete KD, should be treated is sum-
marized in Figure 3. Use of the algorithm appears to 
be largely successful in ensuring that children at highest 
risk are treated with IVIG.93,94 In view of the low risks 
associated with IVIG administration and the high risks of 
coronary artery aneurysms among children who do not 
receive timely treatment, the current algorithm should 
be applied to the child with suspected incomplete KD un-
til an evidence-based algorithm or a specific diagnostic 
test for KD becomes available.
IVIG should be instituted as early as possible within 
the first 10 days of illness onset of fever, that is, as 
soon as the diagnosis can be established. Patients with 
a delayed diagnosis of KD (ie, later than day 10 of fever) 
may still be candidates for treatment. IVIG should also 
be administered to children presenting after the tenth 
day of illness (ie, in whom the diagnosis was missed ear-
lier) if they have ongoing systemic inflammation as man-
ifested by elevation of ESR or CRP (CRP >3.0 mg/dL) 
together with either persistent fever without other expla-
nation or coronary artery aneurysms (luminal dimension 
Z score >2.5). Those in whom fever has resolved and 
laboratory values have normalized and whose echocar-
diograms are normal do not require IVIG treatment. Pa-
tients with recurrent KD, defined as a repeat episode of 
complete or incomplete KD after complete resolution of 
the previous episode, should receive standard therapy 
with IVIG and ASA.
Primary Treatment
Intravenous Immunoglobulin
The efficacy of IVIG administered in the acute phase of 
KD is well established to reduce the prevalence of cor-
onary artery abnormalities.126,158,159 Meta-analyses of 
IVIG compared with placebo have shown a conclusive 
decrease in new coronary artery abnormalities among 
IVIG-treated patients.157,160 The mechanism of action of 
IVIG in treatment of KD is unknown. IVIG appears to 
have a generalized anti-inflammatory effect. Possible 
mechanisms of action include modulation of cytokine 
production, neutralization of toxins or other pathogenic 
agents, augmentation of regulatory T-cell activity, sup-
pression of antibody synthesis, and provision of anti-
idiotypic antibodies.161
Patients should be treated with IVIG 2 g/kg as a single 
infusion, usually given over 10 to 12 hours, together with 
ASA.160 A variety of dose regimens have been used in 
Japan and the United States in the past. Two meta-anal-
yses have demonstrated a dose-response effect, with 
higher doses given in a single infusion having the great-
est efficacy.126,158,159,162 Furthermore, peak adjusted se-
rum immunoglobulin G levels are lower among patients 
who subsequently develop coronary artery abnormalities 
and are inversely related to fever duration and labora-
tory indices of acute inflammation.126,163 The association 
of lower peak immunoglobulin G levels with worse out-
comes lends further support to the concept of a relation-
ship between serum immunoglobulin G concentration 
and therapeutic effectiveness.
IVIG is a biological product made from pooled donor 
plasma, and potentially important product manufacturing 
differences exist. Perhaps for this reason, adverse ef-
fects appear to vary considerably among products.164–166 
Recently, Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia complicat-
ing IVIG administration has been reported, especially in 
individuals with AB blood type.167–169 Aseptic meningitis 
can occur as a result of IVIG infusion, but it resolves 
quickly without neurological sequelae.170 Clinical stud-
ies comparing the efficacy of different immune globulin 
products have been conflicting.171–173
Measles, mumps, and varicella immunizations 
should be deferred for 11 months after receiving high-
dose IVIG.174 However, children in whom risk of expo-
sure to measles is high may receive vaccination earlier 
and then be re-immunized at least 11 months after IVIG 
administration if they have an inadequate serological 
response.
Even when treated with high-dose IVIG regimens 
within the first 10 days of illness, 20% of children will 
develop transient coronary artery dilation in the proximal 
LAD or proximal RCA by Z-score criteria, 5% will develop 
coronary artery aneurysms (Z >2.5), and 1% will develop 
giant aneurysms according to the Japanese Ministry of 
Health Criteria.158,159,175 An even greater percentage of 
patients (30%) will be classified as having coronary ar-
tery dilation when a Z-score cut point of 2.0 is used to 
define dilation.111,140,176
Additional therapies of potential benefit are discussed 
below, but optimal treatment awaits delineation of the 
specific agent(s)/trigger(s) and pathogenesis of KD.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e945
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
Acetylsalicylic Acid
ASA has been used in treatment of KD for many years. 
Although ASA has important anti-inflammatory activity (at 
high doses) and antiplatelet activity (at low doses), it does 
not appear to lower the frequency of development of cor-
onary abnormalities.177 During the acute phase of illness, 
ASA is administered every 6 hours, with a total daily dose 
of 80 to 100 mg·kg−1·d−1 in the United States and 30 to 
50 mg·kg−1·d−1 in Japan and Western Europe (see Reye 
Syndrome). There are no data to suggest that either dose 
of ASA is superior. Practices regarding duration of high-
dose ASA administration vary across institutions, with 
many centers reducing the ASA dose after the child has 
been afebrile for 48 to 72 hours. Other clinicians contin-
ue high-dose ASA until the 14th day of illness and at least 
48 to 72 hours after cessation of fever. When high-dose 
ASA is discontinued, low-dose ASA (3 to 5 mg·kg−1·d−1) 
is begun and continued until the patient has no evidence 
of coronary changes by 6 to 8 weeks after onset of ill-
ness. For children who develop coronary abnormalities, 
ASA may be continued indefinitely. Of note, concomitant 
use of ibuprofen antagonizes the irreversible platelet inhi-
bition induced by ASA178; thus, ibuprofen generally should 
be avoided in children with coronary artery aneurysms 
taking ASA for its antiplatelet effects.
Reye Syndrome
Reye syndrome is a risk in children who receive salicy-
lates while they are experiencing active infection with 
varicella or influenza and has also been reported in pa-
tients taking high-dose ASA for a prolonged period of 
time after KD.179–181 The low-dose therapy used for an-
tiplatelet effect has not been associated with the devel-
opment of Reye syndrome. In the patient who presents 
with influenza and KD, administration of high-dose IVIG 
without aspirin and use of alternative antipyretic drugs 
(ie, acetaminophen) as needed for fever should be con-
sidered. An alternative antiplatelet agent should be con-
sidered for a minimum of 2 weeks.
All children ≥6 months should receive a seasonal in-
fluenza vaccine, as should their family members. Only 
inactivated vaccine should be administered to children 
on aspirin therapy. Children with acute KD during influ-
enza season who have not yet been immunized should 
receive the inactivated influenza vaccine before leaving 
the hospital, as should any family members who have 
not yet been vaccinated for the season. Those who are 
taking chronic ASA therapy should receive an annual 
inactivated influenza vaccine.174 Although the vaccine 
manufacturer recommends that salicylates be avoided 
for 6 weeks after administration of varicella vaccine, 
physicians need to weigh the theoretical risks associ-
ated with varicella vaccine against the known risks of 
wild-type varicella in children receiving long-term salicy-
late therapy. Some physicians substitute another anti-
platelet medication for ASA during the 6-week period. 
Parents of children receiving chronic ASA therapy should 
be instructed to contact their child’s physician promptly 
if the child develops symptoms of or is exposed to either 
influenza or varicella.
Recommendations for Initial Treatment With  
IVIG and ASA
1. Patients with complete KD criteria and those 
who meet the algorithm criteria for incom-
plete KD should be treated with high-dose 
IVIG (2 g/kg given as a single intravenous 
infusion) within 10 days of illness onset but 
as soon as possible after diagnosis (Class I; 
Level of Evidence A).
2. It is reasonable to administer IVIG to children 
presenting after the 10th day of illness (ie, 
in whom the diagnosis was missed earlier) if 
they have either persistent fever without other 
explanation or coronary artery abnormalities 
together with ongoing systemic inflamma-
tion, as manifested by elevation of ESR or 
CRP (CRP >3.0 mg/dL) (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
3. Administration of moderate- (30–50 mg·kg−1·d−1) 
to high-dose (80–100 mg·kg−1·d−1) ASA 
is reasonable until the patient is afebrile, 
although there is no evidence that it reduces 
coronary artery aneurysms (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
4. IVIG generally should not be administered 
to patients beyond the tenth day of illness in 
the absence of fever, significant elevation of 
inflammatory markers, or coronary artery 
abnormalities (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
5. The ESR is accelerated by IVIG therapy and 
therefore should not be used to assess response 
to IVIG therapy. A persistently high ESR alone 
should not be interpreted as a sign of IVIG resis-
tance (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Adjunctive Therapies for Primary Treatment
Patients believed to be at high risk for development of 
coronary artery aneurysms may benefit from primary ad-
junctive therapy.
Corticosteroids
Although corticosteroids are the treatment of choice in 
other forms of vasculitis, their use has been controver-
sial for children with KD.182 Corticosteroids were used 
as the initial therapy for KD long before the first report 
of IVIG efficacy by Furusho et al in 1984,159 and studies 
have shown either no ill effects or possible benefit. In a 
randomized trial of high-dose intravenous methylpred-
nisolone plus heparin compared with heparin alone, Ki-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e946
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
jima et al183 found that steroid therapy was associated 
with a greater rate of improvement in coronary artery 
abnormalities. In a retrospective review, Shinohara et 
al184 found that treatment regimens that included pred-
nisolone were associated with significantly shorter 
fever duration and a lower prevalence of coronary ar-
tery aneurysms. In a prospective randomized trial in 
178 children treated with IVIG (1 g/kg for 2 consecu-
tive days) and ASA (30 mg·kg−1·d−1) plus intravenous 
prednisolone (2 mg·kg−1·d−1) followed by an oral taper, 
Inoue et al185 reported a lower incidence of coronary 
artery abnormalities and retreatment, shorter duration 
of fever, and more rapid decrease in CRP levels in the 
steroid group.
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute’s Pedi-
atric Heart Network conducted a randomized, double-
blinded, placebo-controlled trial to assess the efficacy of 
a single dose of pulsed intravenous methylprednisolone 
(30 mg/kg per dose) added to IVIG (2 g/kg for 1 day) 
and ASA (80–100 mg·kg−1·d−1).176 The trial showed simi-
lar coronary dimensions expressed as Z scores adjusted 
for BSA, absolute dimensions, and changes in dimen-
sions, although a post hoc subgroup analysis suggested 
that primary corticosteroid therapy might be beneficial 
in preventing coronary artery abnormalities in children at 
highest risk for resistance to initial IVIG.
In Japan, 3 clinical studies were conducted to assess 
the efficacy of steroid therapy for patients at high risk for 
nonresponse to IVIG defined by scoring systems. Okada 
et al186 reported a multicenter study to assess the ef-
fectiveness of pulse methylprednisolone (30 mg·kg−1·d−1 
for a single infusion) with IVIG (2 g/kg for a day) and aspi-
rin (30 mg·kg−1·d−1) as a primary treatment for high-risk 
patients defined by the Sano score. The steroid group 
had a lower incidence of coronary artery abnormalities 
and treatment failure compared with a historical con-
trol group. Egami et al187 and Ogata et al188 reported 
a single-center randomized trial to assess the efficacy 
of single-dose methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg per dose) 
with IVIG (2 g/kg for 1 day) and ASA (30 mg·kg−1·d−1) as 
a primary treatment for those predicted to be at high 
risk for resistance to IVIG treatment based on the Egami 
score. They noted that the steroid group had a lower 
incidence of coronary artery abnormalities defined by Z 
scores and treatment resistance. From a total of 248 pa-
tients predicted to be resistant to IVIG defined by the Ko-
bayashi score,189 the RAISE (Randomized Controlled Trial 
to Assess Immunoglobulin Plus Steroid Efficacy for Ka-
wasaki Disease) Study Group conducted a multicenter, 
prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end-points 
trial to assess the efficacy of IVIG (2 g/kg for 1 day) and 
ASA (30 mg·kg−1·d−1) plus intravenous prednisolone (2 
mg·kg−1·d−1) for 5 days followed by an oral taper over 
weeks.190 The steroid group had a lower incidence of 
coronary artery abnormalities and treatment resistance, 
lower coronary artery Z scores, and more rapid resolu-
tion of fever and decline in CRP levels. A recent meta-
analysis that included these trials, using different regi-
mens of steroids and different prediction scores, found 
that a combination of corticosteroid with standard-dose 
IVIG as an initial treatment in high-risk patients reduced 
the rate of coronary artery abnormalities.191 Thus, the 
addition of corticosteroid therapy to IVIG and ASA in the 
primary therapy of KD lowers the prevalence of coro-
nary artery abnormalities, duration of fever, and inflam-
mation among Japanese children at highest risk for IVIG 
resistance. However, the Japanese scoring systems for 
IVIG resistance and aneurysms have low sensitivity in 
North American populations.192 Further research is thus 
needed to develop predictive instruments or scores for 
reliable identification of high-risk children outside Japan 
and to test the efficacy of the RAISE steroid regimen in 
this population.
Infliximab
Early studies from Japan documented high levels of the 
proinflammatory cytokine TNF-α in the plasma of pa-
tients with acute KD.193 Levels were highest in patients 
who went on to develop coronary artery abnormalities.
Infliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody that binds 
with high affinity to TNF-α, was the first anti-TNF-α mono-
clonal antibody therapy to be approved for pediatric 
patients. Numerous case reports and small series de-
scribed successful use of infliximab to halt inflammation 
in highly resistant KD.194,195 In a study of 11 KD patients 
with IVIG resistance who were treated with infliximab as 
rescue therapy, there was an apparent clinical response. 
Proinflammatory cytokine levels fell after infliximab treat-
ment, but markers of vasculitis, including vascular endo-
thelial growth factor and the S100 proteins, remained 
elevated.196 This suggested the possibility that infliximab 
was effective in reducing systemic levels of inflammation 
but not in suppressing the vasculitis.
A 2-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial of infliximab plus IVIG for intensification of 
initial treatment enrolled 196 subjects.197 The study was 
powered for the primary outcome measure of reducing 
IVIG resistance from 20% to 5%. Secondary outcome 
measures included reduction of inflammatory param-
eters and the change in coronary artery Z scores. Al-
though the number of fever days was shortened and 
inflammatory parameters normalized more rapidly in the 
infliximab-treated subjects, the rates of IVIG resistance 
were identical between the 2 arms. A striking finding 
was the complete prevention of IVIG infusion reactions 
in children randomized to the infliximab arm compared 
with a 13% reaction rate in subjects who received pla-
cebo before their IVIG infusion. There was a significant 
decrease in Z score for the LAD in favor of infliximab. 
However, there was no difference in the rate of coro-
nary artery aneurysms between the groups, although the 
study was inadequately powered for this end point. On 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e947
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
the basis of current information, addition of infliximab 
to initial therapy with IVIG is safe but does not prevent 
recrudescent fever.
Etanercept
A more limited experience with etanercept (soluble TNF 
receptor) plus IVIG for intensification of initial therapy 
was reported recently.198 In this prospective, open-la-
bel study of 15 patients, etanercept was administered 
subcutaneously after IVIG infusion and again at 1 and 
2 weeks later. Most patients received 0.8 mg/kg per 
dose. The pharmacokinetics were similar to those re-
ported in older children, and there were no adverse re-
actions attributable to etanercept. On the basis of these 
results, a phase III randomized, placebo-controlled trial 
was initiated and is still enrolling subjects.199 Recom-
mendations for primary adjunctive treatment with etan-
ercept await publication of the results of this clinical 
trial. The potential advantage of etanercept might be 
the shorter half-life if secondary infections are of con-
cern. However, the soluble receptor only binds to circu-
lating and not cell-bound TNF-α, which could reduce the 
anti-inflammatory effect.
Recommendations for Adjunctive Therapies for 
Primary Treatment
1. Single-dose pulse methylprednisolone should 
not be administered with IVIG as routine pri-
mary therapy for patients with KD (Class III; 
Level of Evidence B).
2. Administration of a longer course of corti-
costeroids (eg, tapering over 2–3 weeks), 
together with IVIG 2 g/kg and ASA, may 
be considered for treatment of high-risk 
patients with acute KD, when such high risk 
can be identified in patients before initiation 
of treatment (Class IIb; Level of Evidence B).
IVIG Resistance
Approximately 10% to 20% of patients with KD develop 
recrudescent or persistent fever at least 36 hours after 
the end of their IVIG infusion and are termed IVIG resis-
tant.176,200,201 The immunologic basis of IVIG resistance 
is unknown, in part because the mechanism of action 
of IVIG is poorly understood. It is likely that host genetic 
factors, such as polymorphisms in the Fc gamma recep-
tors, play a role in both the response and resistance to 
IVIG.61,202,203
Risk Scores for Predicting Nonresponse to IVIG
Approximately 10% to 20% of patients with KD have per-
sistent or recurrent fever after primary therapy with IVIG 
plus ASA.204,205 Many studies have shown that patients 
who are resistant to initial IVIG are at increased risk of 
developing coronary artery abnormalities.171,206,207 Thus, 
scoring systems have been constructed to identify pa-
tients likely to be resistant to IVIG and who may benefit 
from more aggressive initial therapy. In 2006, 3 Japa-
nese groups devised scoring systems to predict resis-
tance to IVIG.187,189,208,209 However, currently available 
Table 6. Treatment Options for IVIG-Resistant KD Patients
Agent
Description
Dose
References
Most frequently administered
 IVIG: Second infusion
Pooled polyclonal IG
2 g/kg IV
211
 IVIG + prednisolone
IVIG + steroid
IVIG: 2 g/kg IV + prednisolone 2 mg·kg−1·d−1 IV divided 
every 8 h until afebrile, then prednisone orally until CRP 
normalized, then taper over 2–3 wk
212
 Infliximab
Monoclonal antibody against TNF-α
Single infusion: 5 mg/kg IV given over 2 h
194, 213, 214
Alternative treatments
 Cyclosporine
Inhibitor of calcineurin-NFAT pathway
IV: 3 mg·kg−1·d−1 divided every 12 h
PO: 4–8 mg·kg−1·d−1 divided every 12 h
Adjust dose to achieve trough 50–150 ng/mL; 2-h 
peak level 300–600 ng/mL
215, 216
 Anakinra
Recombinant IL-1β receptor antagonist
2–6 mg·kg−1·d−1 given by subcutaneous injection
217, 218
 Cyclophosphamide
Alkylating agent blocks DNA replication
2 mg·kg−1·d−1 IV
219
 Plasma exchange
Replaces plasma with albumin
Not applicable
220
IVIG resistance is defined as persistent or recrudescent fever at least 36 hours and <7 days after completion of first IVIG infusion. The top 3 treatments 
have been most commonly used, although no comparative effectiveness trial has been performed. Pulsed high-dose steroid treatment is not recommended. 
The alternative treatments have been used in a limited number of patients with KD.
CRP indicates C-reactive protein; IG, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; IV, intravenous; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin; KD, Kawasaki disease; NFAT, 
nuclear factor of activated T cells; PO, by mouth; and TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e948
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
risk prediction models for Asian populations are insuffi-
ciently accurate to be clinically useful in North American 
patients in predicting response to initial treatment with 
IVIG.192,210 Better predictive models, perhaps incorporat-
ing biomarkers or genetic variants, will need to be devel-
oped for use outside Japan.
Treatment of IVIG Resistance
There are no robust data from clinical trials to guide 
the clinician in the choice of therapeutic agents for the 
child with IVIG resistance. We summarize below the ex-
perience with different therapeutic approaches (Table 6). 
Cost-effectiveness comparisons between different ap-
proaches have not been reported.
IVIG Retreatment
Many experts recommend retreatment with IVIG 2 g/kg. 
 
The putative dose-response effect of IVIG forms the 
theoretical basis for this approach. Retrospective se-
ries have suggested efficacy, but IVIG retreatment has 
never been tested in an adequately powered random-
ized trial.171,211
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids have also been used to treat patients 
who have failed to respond to initial therapy for KD.182 
Several small case series and observational studies 
have described children with KD with recrudescent or 
persistent fever despite IVIG treatment in whom the ad-
ministration of steroid therapy was associated with an 
improvement in symptoms and the absence of an im-
portant progression in coronary artery abnormalities or 
adverse effects.219,221–225 In a study of first-line rescue 
therapy, Furukawa et al226 reported 63 IVIG-resistant pa-
tients, of whom 44 were then given intravenous methyl-
prednisolone (30 mg·kg−1·d−1 for 3 consecutive days) 
followed by oral methylprednisolone tapered over 7 
days; 19 patients were given a second infusion of IVIG. 
The incidence of coronary artery abnormalities and treat-
ment failure was similar between the 2 treatment groups, 
although power was limited by the small sample size. 
Fever tended to recur more frequently in the group treat-
ed with pulse steroids. Ogata et al227 compared the ef-
fectiveness of treatment strategies for 27 IVIG-resistant 
patients: 14 patients were treated with additional IVIG (2 
g/kg for 1 day), and 13 were treated with pulse intrave-
nous methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg for 3 consecutive 
days). Patients in the steroid group had shorter duration 
of fever and lower medical costs. Three patients (21%) 
treated with IVIG and no patients treated with steroids 
had coronary artery abnormalities. Again, the study was 
underpowered to show a significant difference between 
the groups. Teraguchi et al228 studied 41 IVIG-resistant 
patients and reported that intravenous methylpredniso-
lone (30 mg·kg−1·d−1 for 3 consecutive days) followed by 
prednisolone (1 mg·kg−1·d−1) for 7 days did not improve 
clinical or coronary artery outcomes compared with IVIG 
retreatment. Kobayashi et al212 reported a retrospective 
study to assess the efficacy of intravenous prednisolone 
followed by an oral taper (2 mg·kg−1·d−1 tapered over 2 
weeks after CRP normalized) using a database of 359 
consecutive IVIG-resistant patients. Patients treated with 
IVIG plus prednisolone had significantly lower rates of 
persistent or recrudescent fever and coronary artery 
abnormalities than the group that received IVIG mono-
therapy. It is hypothesized that the improved outcomes 
associated with the longer steroid course in the Japa-
nese studies might be attributed to suppression of per-
sistent vascular inflammation, although there have been 
no clinical trials comparing different steroid regimens for 
patients who do not respond to an initial or a second 
dose of IVIG. The optimal steroid regimen is therefore 
not known, and both pulsed and longer-term steroid 
therapy remain options. 
Infliximab
A phase I multicenter, randomized, open clinical trial of 
infliximab (5 mg/kg intravenously over 2 hours) versus a 
second infusion of IVIG (2 g/kg) was performed to deter-
mine the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of in-
fliximab for rescue therapy for patients who had fever at 
least 36 hours after the end of the initial IVIG infusion.195 
The study enrolled 24 subjects with IVIG-resistant KD and 
determined that infliximab was well tolerated in infants 
and children with KD and that the pharmacokinetics were 
similar to adults, with circulating levels of the monoclo-
nal antibody detected out to 10 weeks. In the Japanese 
trial, 20 KD patients resistant to 2 consecutive IVIG infu-
sions (2 g/kg each) were treated with infliximab (5 mg/
kg), and an apparent clinical response was achieved in 
18 (90%).229 The 2 unresponsive patients were treated 
with plasma exchange with resolution of their inflam-
mation. The coronary artery abnormalities detected by 
echocardiogram all subsequently resolved. There were 
no adverse reactions attributed to infliximab among the 
study subjects.
A retrospective review of 2 centers that consistently 
administered either a second dose of IVIG or infliximab to 
IVIG-resistant patients suggested that patients receiving 
infliximab had shorter hospitalization and fewer days of 
fever, but coronary artery outcomes and adverse events 
were similar.213 On the basis of these retrospective data, 
infliximab can be considered as an alternative to a sec-
ond infusion of IVIG for resistant patients.
Other Treatments
Highly inflamed patients who fail to respond to either a 
second infusion of IVIG, steroids, or infliximab require 
additional therapy to control inflammation.
Cyclosporine
Interest in the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine for KD 
patients grew out of 2 observations. First, immunohis-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e949
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
tochemical studies of coronary arteries from autopsies 
suggested that CD8+ T cells contribute to the inflamma-
tory process in the arterial wall.230 Second, genetic stud-
ies in children of Japanese or European descent have 
implicated activation of the NFAT-calcineurin calcium 
signaling pathway as a contributor to both disease sus-
ceptibility and coronary artery aneurysm formation.231,232 
Cyclosporine is a specific inhibitor of calcineurin, and 
a protocol for its administration and monitoring has 
been used successfully in a small number of highly re-
sistant patients.216 Dosing is provided in Table 6; levels 
are monitored to arrive at the appropriate dose but not 
monitored thereafter. Once the patient is afebrile and 
clinically improving and the CRP is ≤1.0 mg/dL, or after 
2 weeks of therapy, the dose can be tapered by 10% of 
the initial dose every 3 days and discontinued when the 
dose has reached 1 mg·kg−1·d−1. A small, open, single-
arm pilot trial in Japan studied cyclosporine treatment 
in 28 children who remained febrile after administration 
of 2 doses of IVIG.215 After receiving an oral dose of 4 
to 6 mg·kg−1·d−1, 18 patients (64%) were afebrile after 
3 days of therapy. Overall, 78% of patients responded. 
Nine patients developed hyperkalemia, but none had se-
rious adverse effects; however, cyclosporine levels were 
not monitored. Four patients had coronary artery aneu-
rysms, 2 before cyclosporine had been administered. 
In a separate report, the levels of soluble IL-6 and IL-2 
receptors dropped to control levels by 7 days after initia-
tion of cyclosporine.169 Randomized trials are needed to 
determine whether calcineurin inhibitors such as cyclo-
sporine or tacrolimus reduce the rate of coronary artery 
aneurysms; however, these small studies suggest that 
cyclosporine has few serious adverse events and is a 
well-tolerated option for treatment of highly refractory 
patients, although further study is needed.
Other Monoclonal Antibody Therapy
Two case reports describe the successful use of 
anakinra, a recombinant, nonglycosylated form of the 
human IL-1 receptor antagonist, for treatment of high-
ly refractory KD.217,218 Clinical trials are in progress to 
evaluate the efficacy of IL-1 blockade in children with 
acute KD.
Plasma Exchange
Plasma exchange has been reported in uncontrolled clin-
ical trials to be an effective therapy in patients who are 
refractory to IVIG and to lower the incidence of coronary 
artery aneurysms.220,233 Because of its risks, plasma 
exchange should be reserved for patients in whom all 
reasonable medical therapies have failed.
Cytotoxic Agents
Cytotoxic agents such as cyclophosphamide, in conjunc-
tion with oral steroids, have been used for exceptional 
patients with particularly refractory acute KD.219 This 
therapy is used widely to treat other severe vasculitides. 
There are insufficient studies of cyclophosphamide in KD 
to formulate recommendations for its use, but the risks 
of cytotoxic agents are such that its use should only be 
considered in the most severe cases, which are resis-
tant to other agents.
Recommendations for Additional Therapy in the 
IVIG-Resistant Patient
1. It is reasonable to administer a second dose 
of IVIG (2 g/kg) to patients with persistent or 
recrudescent fever at least 36 hours after the 
end of the first IVIG infusion (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence B).
2. Administration of high-dose pulse steroids 
(usually methylprednisolone 20–30 mg/kg 
intravenously for 3 days, with or without a 
subsequent course and taper of oral predni-
sone) may be considered as an alternative to 
a second infusion of IVIG or for retreatment 
of patients with KD who have had recurrent 
or recrudescent fever after additional IVIG 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence B).
3. Administration of a longer (eg, 2–3 weeks) 
tapering course of prednisolone or predni-
sone, together with IVIG 2 g/kg and ASA, may 
be considered in the retreatment of patients 
with KD who have had recurrent or recrudes-
cent fever after initial IVIG treatment (Class 
IIb; Level of Evidence B).
4. Administration of infliximab (5 mg/kg) may be 
considered as an alternative to a second infu-
sion of IVIG or corticosteroids for IVIG-resistant 
patients (Class IIb, Evidence Level C).
5. Administration of cyclosporine may be con-
sidered in patients with refractory KD in 
whom a second IVIG infusion, infliximab, or a 
course of steroids has failed (Class IIb; Level 
of Evidence C).
6. Administration of immunomodulatory mono-
clonal antibody therapy (except TNF-α block-
ers), cytotoxic agents, or (rarely) plasma 
exchange may be considered in highly refrac-
tory patients who have failed to respond to a 
second infusion of IVIG, an extended course 
of steroids, or infliximab (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
Treatment of Acute Myocardial Dysfunction/
Cardiovascular Collapse
As noted previously, myocarditis that consists of myo-
cardial interstitial edema, cellular infiltration (mainly 
monocytes, as well as neutrophils/macrophages), and 
(rarely) degeneration and necrosis of myocytes can oc-
cur during the acute stage of KD, even earlier than the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e950
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
occurrence of coronary arteritis.73,120,122,234 Because the 
myocardial cells are preserved in most of the patients, 
LV function usually normalizes promptly with IVIG thera-
py.111,235,236 However, severe myocarditis can still occur, 
can manifest as hemodynamic instability, and rarely can 
be a cause of death in the acute phase of KD.117–119,237 In 
most cases, the development of a shock syndrome more 
often reflects decreased peripheral vascular resistance, 
with a smaller contribution from decreased LV contractil-
ity. The incidence of KD shock syndrome (KDSS) is esti-
mated to be ≈7%.118,119 KDSS can be defined as the pres-
ence of hypotension and shock requiring the initiation of 
volume expanders, the infusion of vasoactive agents, or 
transfer to intensive care units. Shock in KDSS is often 
moderate, with low lactate values and the need for treat-
ment with inotropic and vasopressor agents.117 Although 
hemodynamic instability generally improves quickly once 
therapy with diuretic agents and vasopressor agents is 
initiated, a mild degree of ventricular diastolic dysfunc-
tion can persist after acute management.118 The causes 
of KDSS may involve the release of endogenous mol-
ecules that mediate a decrease in peripheral vascular re-
sistance, myocardial dysfunction from myocarditis with 
or without myocardial ischemia, and capillary leakage, 
but the exact underlying mechanisms remain unclear. 
KDSS is often associated with more severe laboratory 
markers of inflammation and higher risk of coronary ar-
terial dilation.111,118 Such cases are also more likely to 
be resistant to IVIG therapy and to require additional anti-
inflammatory treatment.111,118
Because KDSS can manifest before the diagnosis of 
KD becomes clear, it is critical to recognize the early 
signs of KD so that IVIG therapy can be initiated prompt-
ly. Treatment of the underlying inflammation is important 
in the resolution of KDSS. The shock in patients with 
KDSS can be cardiogenic, distributive, or mixed. The dis-
tributive component of shock might result from high lev-
els of circulating inflammatory cytokines. Of note, there 
are no clinical trials focusing on KDSS patients. In most 
of the published case series, management followed the 
guidelines for pediatric septic shock.238,239 The underly-
ing pathophysiology of KDSS appears to be similar to 
septic shock with pathological vasodilation, relative and 
absolute hypovolemia, myocardial dysfunction, and al-
tered distribution of blood volume. Because these pa-
tients have high circulating levels of vascular endothelial 
growth factor, they are susceptible to capillary leak, and 
vigorous volume replacement without concomitant anti-
inflammatory therapy can result in complications from 
interstitial fluid accumulation. Therefore, an important 
aspect of hemodynamic stabilization in these patients re-
mains administration of IVIG along with fluid and inotropic 
and vasoactive agents as necessary to support blood 
pressure. The inotropic support reported in case series 
has included dobutamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, 
and dopamine.117–119,237,240
The administration of IVIG after the diagnosis of KD has 
been shown to improve LV function, because it improves 
inflammation and systemic manifestations.111,235,236
Prevention and Treatment of Thrombosis in 
Patients With Coronary Artery Aneurysms
Other than rupture of a coronary artery aneurysm, which 
is rare, the most serious complication during the acute 
illness is thrombotic occlusion of a coronary artery an-
eurysm precipitating MI or sudden death. Contributing 
factors to thrombosis include the presence of thrombo-
cytosis and increased platelet adhesion, inflammation, 
and endothelial dysfunction, together with abnormal flow 
conditions through areas of severe dilation. For patients 
with evolving coronary artery aneurysms, follow-up as-
sessments with echocardiography should be performed 
frequently to monitor for increases in luminal dimensions 
and hence increasing thrombotic risk, as well as for the 
presence of thrombosis or signs of ventricular dysfunc-
tion. Failure to increase the intensity of antithrombotic 
therapy in the presence of rapidly expanding aneurysms 
is the most important contributor to sudden cardiovas-
cular events during the acute illness. MIs in young chil-
dren and infants are either silent or associated with non-
specific symptoms, such as unusual fussiness, vomiting, 
or shock. Sudden worsening in ventricular function or 
change in electrocardiographic findings should heighten 
suspicion for coronary artery thrombosis.
Prevention of Coronary Artery Thrombosis
To date, no randomized clinical trials have evaluated the 
safety and efficacy of antithrombotic regimens for pro-
phylaxis of coronary thrombosis in KD, in part because 
the power for such trials is limited by small patient num-
bers and few thrombotic events. For this reason, recom-
mendations for use of antithrombotic agents have relied 
on reasoning from first principles, retrospective studies, 
practices in atherosclerotic coronary artery disease 
(CAD), and expert consensus.
Antiplatelet agents are considered to be standard of 
care in the therapeutic armamentarium for patients with 
coronary artery aneurysms. For patients with small coro-
nary artery aneurysms, monotherapy with low-dose ASA 
therapy is sufficient for prophylaxis of thrombosis. In pa-
tients with moderate but not large or giant aneurysms, 
ASA therapy may be combined with a thienopyridine (eg, 
clopidogrel) to antagonize ADP-mediated platelet activa-
tion, a practice supported by the superior efficacy of 
such a regimen, compared with ASA alone, among adults 
with coronary artery or cerebrovascular disease.241–244 
Finally, ibuprofen and other nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drugs with known or potential involvement of the 
cyclooxygenase pathway interfere with the antiplatelet 
effect of ASA to prevent thrombosis. If nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs are needed for treatment of arthritis 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e951
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
in patients with coronary artery aneurysms who are tak-
ing ASA, alternative antiplatelet therapies (eg, thienopyri-
dines) should be considered.
Patients with large or giant aneurysms, that is, with 
an internal luminal diameter Z score ≥10 or absolute 
dimension ≥8 mm, are at particularly high risk for coro-
nary artery thrombosis. In affected arterial segments, 
coronary artery thrombosis is promoted by markedly 
abnormal flow conditions, with low wall sheer stress and 
stasis, together with activation of platelets, clotting fac-
tors, and the endothelium. Over time, stenoses often 
develop, causing activation of platelets and endothelial 
dysfunction from turbulence of flow when located proxi-
mally and occluding flow and worsening stasis when 
located distal to an aneurysm. Indeed, most giant an-
eurysms seen at postmortem examination are lined by 
chronic thrombus.73 Because both platelets and humoral 
clotting factors promote thrombus formation within giant 
aneurysms, patients are treated with a combination of 
antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy, most commonly 
low-dose ASA together with either warfarin, maintaining 
an international normalized ratio of 2.0. to 3.0, or low-
molecular-weight heparin (LMWH).245
Anticoagulation with therapeutic doses of LMWH is 
generally substituted for warfarin in infants and is also 
occasionally used in the older child in whom the interna-
tional normalized ratio cannot be adequately controlled. 
Transition from LMWH to warfarin may be considered 
once aneurysms have stopped expanding and the patient 
is stable. During the acute phase, the anti-inflammatory 
actions of the LMWH could be an added advantage. 
Transient low levels of antithrombin occur in more than 
half of KD patients during the acute illness, are related 
to increased antithrombin consumption, and can affect 
the antithrombotic action of LMWH.55 If patients fail to 
achieve the desired activated factor Xa level (0.5–1.0) on 
an appropriate dose (Table 7), then antithrombin levels 
should be measured. If deficient, fresh-frozen plasma or 
antithrombin supplementation may be given.
More aggressive regimens may be used in patients 
with exceptionally high risk for coronary artery thrombo-
sis. Infants and children who recently required thromboly-
sis for coronary artery thrombosis may be maintained 
for a limited time on 3 agents, that is, ASA, a thienopyri-
dine, and an anticoagulant. Because the risk of bleeding 
is greater with such a regimen, clinicians must consider 
its risk/benefit ratio on an individual basis. Newer oral di-
rect factor Xa inhibitors or direct thrombin inhibitors are 
not yet approved for use in pediatrics but could supplant 
warfarin and LMWH in the future.
Recommendations for Prevention of Thrombosis 
During the Acute Illness
1. Low-dose ASA (3–5 mg·kg−1·d−1) should be 
administered to patients without evidence 
of coronary artery changes until 4 to 6 
weeks after onset of illness (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
2. For patients with rapidly expanding coro-
nary artery aneurysms or a maximum Z 
score of ≥10, systemic anticoagulation with 
LMWH or warfarin (international normal-
ized ratio target 2.0–3.0) in addition to low-
dose ASA is reasonable (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
3. For patients at increased risk of thrombosis, 
for example, with large or giant aneurysms 
(≥8 mm or Z score ≥10) and a recent his-
tory of coronary artery thrombosis, “triple 
therapy” with ASA, a second antiplatelet 
agent, and anticoagulation with warfarin or 
LMWH may be considered (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
4. Ibuprofen and other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs with known or potential 
involvement of cyclooxygenase pathway 
may be harmful in patients taking ASA for 
its antiplatelet effects (Class III; Level of 
Evidence B).
Treatment of Coronary Artery Thrombosis
Because of its rarity, treatment of acute coronary throm-
bosis in KD patients has not been tested in randomized 
controlled trials. Rather, recommendations for therapy 
are based on guidelines in adults with ACS and small pe-
diatric case series, with goals of reestablishing coronary 
artery patency and flow, salvaging myocardium, and 
improving survival.247–249 Compared with coronary artery 
thrombosis in the adult with atherosclerotic CAD, throm-
bus mass in the KD patients is typically much greater. 
Furthermore, coronary artery thrombosis in the adult 
with CAD is most often caused by plaque rupture or in-
flammation, with exposure of lipids and extracellular ma-
trix to the coagulation system, whereas highly abnormal 
flow characteristics form the basis for coronary artery 
thrombosis in KD patients. Methods used to reestablish 
coronary artery perfusion can vary with the size of the 
patient and expertise of caregivers; the optimal treat-
ment is that which re-establishes blood flow most rapid-
ly. Coronary artery thrombosis with actual or impending 
occlusion of the arterial lumen should be treated with 
thrombolytic therapy or, in patients of sufficient size, by 
mechanical restoration of coronary artery blood flow at 
cardiac catheterization.
Thrombolytic therapy with tissue-type plasminogen 
activator (tPA) is the most commonly administered 
therapeutic regimen for occlusive or near-occlusive 
coronary artery thrombosis in infants and children 
 
(Table 7). A common regimen of tPA is 0.5 mg·kg−1·h−1 
over 6 hours.250 Of note, an alternative regimen of tPA, 
used in adult coronary artery thrombosis, is 0.2 mg/kg 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e952
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
Table 7. Antithrombotic and Fibrinolytic Therapy in KD246
Drug
Mechanism of Action
Indications
Dose
Target Range
Monitoring
Adverse Effects
Anticoagulants
 UFH
Potentiates the inhibition of 
factors XIIa, Xia, Xa, IXa, IIa 
by antithrombin
Hepatic and renal 
clearance; reversible with 
protamine sulfate
Treatment of acute coronary 
artery thrombosis, usually in 
conjunction with tPA; bridging 
for patients undergoing 
invasive procedures requiring 
reversal of anticoagulation
Age-dependent dosing:
<12 mo of age: 28 U·kg−1·h−1
≥12 mo of age: 20 U·kg−1·h−1
Low dose: commonly 10–15 
U·kg−1·h−1
Titrate to PTT target range
Given as continuous parenteral 
infusion
Anti–factor Xa 
0.35–0.70 U/mL
PTT 1.5–3 
times baseline 
PTT, depending 
on local 
laboratory 
values
Every 24 h at 
minimum
Bleeding, 
heparin-induced 
thrombocytopenia, 
association with 
bone mineral loss
 LMWH
Same as UFH but greater 
inhibition of factor Xa
Renal clearance; not fully 
reversible; hold for 24 h 
before invasive procedures
Chronic thromboprophylaxis 
option for patients with large 
or giant coronary artery 
aneurysms or previous 
thrombosis, particularly for 
young infants or those with 
expanding aneurysms early 
in the course of their illness; 
bridging for patients between 
UFH and warfarin
Age- and agent-dependent dosing
Anti–factor Xa 
level 0.5–1.0 
U/mL
Every month at 
minimum
Bleeding, 
bruising at 
injection sites
  Enoxaparin
 
Given every 12 h subcutaneously:
<2 mo of age: 1.5 mg/kg per dose
>2 mo of age: 1.0 mg/kg per dose
Higher doses may be needed in 
neonates; titrate to anti–factor Xa 
target range
 
Obtain levels 4–6 
h after dose
 
  Tinzaparin
 
Given every 24 h subcutaneously:
0–2 mo: 275 U/kg per dose
2–12 mo: 250 U/kg per dose
1–5 y: 240 U/kg per dose
5–10 y: 200 U/kg per dose
>10 y: 175 U/kg per dose
Titrate to anti–factor Xa target range
 
Age-dependent 
monitoring:
<5 y: 2 h after 
dose
≥5 y: 4 h after 
dose
 
  Warfarin
Inhibits the gamma-
carboxylation of the vitamin 
K–dependent factors II, VII, IX, 
and X and protein C, S, and Z
Hepatic metabolism; oral 
administration; many 
food, drug, and illness 
interactions; reversible with 
vitamin K administration
Long-term 
thromboprophylaxis for 
patients with large or giant 
coronary artery aneurysms or 
previous thrombosis
Load with 0.2 mg·kg−1·d−1, then 
0.1 mg·kg−1·d−1; titrate dose to 
INR target level
INR level 2–3
INR daily until 
in target range, 
thereafter 
minimum monthly 
testing; test 
INR with illness, 
medication, or 
diet change
Bleeding, 
tracheal 
calcification, hair 
loss, decreased 
bone mineral 
density
Antiplatelet therapy
  ASA
Inhibition of COX-1 and 
COX-2 activity
Irreversible platelet inhibition; 
some patients are ASA 
resistant; discontinue 7 d 
before invasive procedures; 
precaution for concomitant 
use of ibuprofen or 
other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory agents (usually 
given to treat arthritis/
arthralgias); risk of Reye 
syndrome with varicella and 
influenza infections (see 
Reye Syndrome section 
in Treatment of the Acute 
Illness), given orally
Thromboprophylaxis for all 
patients from the acute illness 
until 4–6 wk; continue long 
term for patients with ongoing 
coronary artery involvement 
(see Thromboprophylaxis 
section in Long-Term 
Management)
3–5 mg·kg−1·d−1, maximum 
81–325 mg/d
 
 
Bruising, 
confusion, 
vertigo, nausea, 
vomiting, tinnitus, 
abdominal 
pain, cramping, 
burning, fatigue, 
bleeding
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e953
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
 Clopidogrel
Inhibition of ADP-induced 
platelet aggregation, no 
effects on arachidonic acid 
metabolism
Renal clearance, hepatic 
metabolism; some patients 
fail to respond; given orally
Thromboprophylaxis together 
with ASA and anticoagulation 
(triple therapy) for selected 
patients with very severe/
complex coronary artery 
aneurysms at high risk of 
thrombosis or with evidence 
of previous thrombosis
Thromboprophylaxis together 
with ASA (dual antiplatelet 
therapy) for patients with 
moderate coronary artery 
aneurysms or large or giant 
aneurysms that have reduced 
to moderate size
Can be used in place of ASA 
for patients who are ASA 
resistant or allergic to ASA
0.2–1.0 mg·kg−1·d−1
 
 
Fatigue, vertigo, 
stomach upset 
or pain, bruising, 
bleeding, 
diarrhea
 Dipyridamole
Inhibits adenosine reuptake, 
increasing cAMP, and 
inhibits platelets
Usually used in place of ASA 
for patients who are taking 
ibuprofen, resistant or allergic 
to ASA, or at risk of Reye 
syndrome; not generally used for 
long-term thromboprophylaxis
1–5 mg·kg−1·d−1 given orally
 
 
Chest pain, 
angina pectoris, 
headache, 
abnormalities 
of ECG
 Abciximab
Inhibits glycoprotein IIb–IIIa, 
prevents binding of fibrinogen 
to von Willebrand factor, 
inhibiting platelet aggregation
Monoclonal antibody, renal 
excretion
Limited use, usually reserved 
for patients with coronary 
artery aneurysms who 
develop thrombosis (both 
occlusive and nonocclusive) 
and given as a single course
0.25 mg/kg bolus, then 0.125 
μg·kg−1·min−1 every 12 h
 
 
Bleeding, 
hypertension, 
nausea, vomiting, 
vertigo, irritation 
at injection site
Thrombolytic therapy
 Alteplase
tPA converts plasminogen 
into plasmin; plasmin 
degrades fibrin (crosslinked) 
and fibrinogen
Reversible with 
aminocaproic acid; 
contraindicated if active 
bleeding or recent surgery 
or trauma
Reserved for patients with 
coronary artery aneurysm 
thrombosis, particularly if 
occlusive
For coronary artery thrombosis, 
data are lacking
Dosing regimens that have been 
used include: 
  
0.1–0.6 (commonly 0.5) 
mg·kg−1·h−1 IV for 6 h 
  
As per adult guidelines, 0.2 
mg/kg IV bolus (maximum  
15 mg), then 0.75 mg/kg over 
30 min (maximum 50 mg),  
then 0.5 mg/kg over 60 min 
(maximum 35 mg), for a 
maximum total dose of 100 mg
  
Low-dose alteplase combined 
with abciximab
Administration: give fresh-
frozen plasma 10–20 mL/kg 
infusion before using alteplase 
as a plasminogen source; keep 
fibrinogen >100 mg/dL and 
platelets >50 000/mm3; continue 
UFH at an age-appropriate dose 
during administration of alteplase; 
alteplase may be given as an 
intermittent (recommended) or 
continuous usual or low-dose 
systemic infusion or directed 
locally toward the thrombus by 
catheters at a lower dose
 
Reassess 
thrombus with 
imaging at 
completion of 
the infusion; 
retreatment may 
be indicated 
once hematologic 
parameters are 
acceptable; 
careful patient 
observation 
is required, 
with prompt 
investigation 
if there is any 
suspicion of 
internal bleeding
Major and minor 
bleeding
ASA indicates acetylsalicylic acid; COX, cyclooxygenase; INR, international normalized ratio; IV, intravenous; KD, Kawasaki disease; LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin; PTT, partial 
thromboplastin time; tPA, tissue plasminogen activator; and UFH, unfractionated heparin.
Modified from Giglia et al.246 Copyright © 2013, American Heart Association, Inc.
Table 7. Continued
Drug
Mechanism of Action
Indications
Dose
Target Range
Monitoring
Adverse Effects
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e954
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
intravenously (maximum 15 mg), then 0.75 mg/kg over 
30 minutes (maximum 50 mg) followed by 0.5 mg/kg 
over 60 minutes (maximum 35 mg).137 It should be ad-
ministered together with low-dose ASA and low-dose in-
travenous heparin (10 U·kg−1·h−1) with careful monitoring 
of coagulation parameters to prevent bleeding, maintain-
ing the fibrinogen level >100 mg/dL and platelet count 
>50 
000/mm3.251 After completion of tPA, heparin dos-
age is increased as appropriate for age. The coronary 
artery thrombus should be reassessed with echocardio-
graphic imaging after completion of the tPA infusion.
The large thrombus burden in the KD patient with 
coronary artery thrombosis, as well as the tendency for 
rebound thrombosis in such patients, has led some clini-
cians to use reduced-dose thrombolytic therapy togeth-
er with a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor, such as the mono-
clonal antibody abciximab (0.25 mg/kg bolus over 30 
minutes, followed by an infusion of 0.125 μg·kg−1·min−1 
for 12 hours).252,253 In adults with ACS, inhibition of this 
receptor has been shown to improve outcomes, both 
with and without the use of thrombolytic drugs.254–256 It 
may be reasonable to treat coronary artery thrombosis 
with substantial thrombus burden and high risk of oc-
clusion with a reduced-dose thrombolytic therapy and 
abciximab. When echocardiographic surveillance in the 
first weeks of the illness reveals a small mural coronary 
artery thrombus that does not pose an urgent threat of 
occlusion, it may be reasonable to use abciximab rather 
than tPA to prevent clot extension.
Recommendations for Treatment of Coronary 
Artery Thrombosis*
1. Coronary artery thrombosis with actual or 
impending occlusion of the arterial lumen 
should be treated with thrombolytic therapy or, 
in patients of sufficient size, by mechanical res-
toration of coronary artery blood flow at cardiac 
catheterization (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Thrombolytic agents should be administered 
together with low-dose ASA and low-dose 
heparin, with careful monitoring for bleeding 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
3. Treatment of coronary artery thrombosis with 
substantial thrombus burden and high risk of 
occlusion with a combination of reduced-dose 
thrombolytic therapy and abciximab may be 
considered (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT
Long-term management begins at the end of the acute 
illness, usually at 4 to 6 weeks after fever onset, when 
symptoms and signs have resolved and the coronary 
artery involvement has reached its maximal extent and 
luminal dimensions. The goals of long-term management 
are to prevent thrombosis and myocardial ischemia while 
maintaining optimal cardiovascular health. There are no 
specific treatments that target the pathological process-
es of ongoing subacute/chronic vasculitis and LMP in 
those patients with coronary artery aneurysms, although 
there may be a potential role for statins in this setting.257 
Thromboprophylaxis and careful surveillance for coronary 
artery stenoses/obstructions and myocardial ischemia 
are the cornerstones of management. Selected patients 
with myocardial ischemia may be candidates for revascu-
larization with catheter interventions or coronary artery 
bypass surgery or, rarely, cardiac transplantation. Surviv-
al with optimal functional, psychosocial, and reproductive 
outcomes into adulthood will require the development of 
effective and collaborative programs between pediatric 
and adult cardiology providers to facilitate the transition 
process into adult-oriented care systems.
Long-Term Outcomes
Long-term outcomes are primarily driven by the conse-
quences of resolving and ongoing cardiovascular pathol-
ogy that contribute to morbidity, cardiovascular events, 
and mortality. Arterial pathology in noncoronary peripher-
al artery beds can cause ongoing morbidity in a small sub-
set of patients and is somewhat correlated with the extent 
of coronary artery pathology.131 However, the main culprit 
is the coronary arteries. The pathological process of nec-
rotizing arteritis during the acute illness, which results in 
destruction and weakening of the arterial wall leading to 
aneurysms, may be accompanied by subacute or chronic 
inflammation and luminal myofibroblastic proliferation. Su-
perimposed on these processes are the effects of acute 
and organized thrombus. The degree to which convention-
al atherosclerosis may contribute to chronic pathological 
changes is not known. These processes may lead to both 
acute (usually precipitated by thrombus or arrhythmia) 
and chronic (usually precipitated by occlusions or steno-
ses) cardiovascular morbidity and events. Although the 
chronic processes may result in normalization of the in-
ternal luminal dimension, the arterial wall architecture and 
function remain abnormal and may progress to stenosis 
or occlusion over time.73 Nonetheless, normalization of 
the luminal dimension does reduce abnormal flow charac-
teristics (low sheer stress, stasis) and hence thrombosis 
risk. The terms regression and resolution have been used 
to describe normalization of luminal dimensions; however, 
important abnormalities may remain, particularly with 
large or giant aneurysms, and these terms may give the 
false impression that the coronary arteries have healed 
and are normal. The natural history of coronary artery ab-
normalities is shown in Figure 4. These processes are the 
primary determinants of prognosis.
*See Diagnosis section for recommendations regarding echocardio-
graphic monitoring for thrombosis.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e955
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
Coronary Artery Abnormalities
Prevalence
The original descriptions of KD did not recognize the 
presence of coronary artery abnormalities until it was 
observed that 1% to 2% of patients died suddenly of 
cardiac complications.259 An angiographic study of 
1100 patients showed coronary artery lesions in 24%, 
with aneurysms in 8% and a number of patients with 
stenoses and occlusions.260 The early reports of the 
prevalence of abnormalities vary widely given the lack of 
uniformity in the timing of angiography and the definition 
of abnormalities, and they predate echocardiography 
and treatment with IVIG. The clinical trial of 4-day IVIG 
treatment with strict entry criteria (classic KD present-
ing within 10 days of fever onset) and using the 1984 
Japanese Ministry of Health criteria (based on absolute 
luminal dimensions) noted a prevalence of coronary ar-
tery abnormalities of 23% in the ASA-only group versus 
8% in the IVIG-plus-ASA group at 2 weeks, with a lower 
prevalence at 7 weeks.176 A similar subsequent trial of a 
single high dose of IVIG showed coronary artery abnor-
malities, again using Japanese Ministry of Health crite-
ria, at 2 weeks in 9.1% of those treated with 4-day IVIG 
treatment versus 4.6% in those treated with high-dose 
IVIG (further reduced to 2.4% when those with coronary 
artery abnormalities at presentation were excluded).127 
Using a cut point of a Z score of 2.5 together with the 
Japanese Ministry of Health criteria, a further trial of 
single-dose methylprednisolone in addition to high-dose 
IVIG showed a prevalence of coronary artery abnormali-
ties of 30% in both groups at 1 week.176 The incorpo-
ration of dilation into the definition results in a higher 
prevalence of coronary artery abnormalities. The prev-
alence of dilation is further increased if one includes 
those patients whose coronary artery Z scores were 
below the cut point for abnormality (<2) but decreased 
significantly during follow-up.129,130
These studies define the prevalence of coronary ar-
tery abnormalities in homogenous populations; however, 
some patients in clinical populations may have incom-
Figure 4. Natural history of coronary artery abnormalities.  
Modified from Kato258 with permission from Elsevier. Copyright © 2004, Elsevier. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e956
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
plete criteria, present late, have a missed diagnosis, or 
have not received appropriate treatment, all of which 
are risk factors for more severe coronary artery involve-
ment. In addition, some patients presenting within 10 
days of fever onset may have coronary artery abnormali-
ties at the time of initial echocardiogram and before or 
at the time that IVIG is given.261 Michihata et al262 showed 
that patient treatment that followed existing guidelines 
was associated with a 4.9% prevalence of aneurysms 
versus 9.9% if it did not. A classification system based 
on Z scores alone in a clinical population of 1356 pa-
tients with serial echocardiograms has been proposed 
and showed overlap in Z scores for classifications based 
on absolute dimensions only.140 An analysis of 1082 pa-
tients from centers in the United States and Japan used 
2 different sources of normal values for calculation of 
Z scores.141 Using the Z-score equations of Kobayashi 
et al,145 26% of US subjects and 39% of Japanese sub-
jects had a maximal Z score ≥2.5, with 4.1% and 3.1%, 
respectively, having a Z score ≥5. Using the Z-score 
equations of Dallaire et al,146 30% of US subjects and 
44% of Japanese subjects had a maximal Z score ≥2.5, 
with 5.8% and 6.2%, respectively, having a Z score ≥5. 
The higher Z scores in Japanese patients remained sig-
nificant after adjustment for younger age, male sex, late 
treatment, and failure to respond to initial IVIG. Thus, 
many factors need to be considered when determining 
and comparing the prevalence of coronary artery abnor-
malities, particularly the population and definitions.
Natural History and Cardiovascular Disease Events
Initial definition of the natural history of coronary artery 
abnormalities was determined from tracking luminal di-
mensions from serial angiography together with clinical 
follow-up for events. Kato et al263 reported outcomes in 
598 patients diagnosed from 1973 to 1983 and followed 
up for up to 10 to 21 years. Aneurysms were diagnosed 
in 25%, with 49% of these having reduced to a normal lu-
minal dimension 6 to 18 months later, increasing to 55% 
with ongoing follow-up. All aneurysms that reduced in 
size to a normal luminal dimension were originally small 
or moderate in size. Stenoses developed in 28 patients 
and showed a more constant risk over time. Coronary 
artery bypass surgery was performed in 7 patients, 2 
had interventional catheter procedures, and 16 required 
thrombolytic treatment. MI occurred in 11 patients (8 
with giant aneurysms), all with severe stenotic lesions 
in 2 or 3 branches. Patients without coronary artery ab-
normalities had no symptoms or events during follow-up. 
Akagi et al264 reported similar outcomes in a cohort of 
583 patients and showed that normalization of luminal 
dimensions occurred more frequently and more rapidly 
in those with smaller aneurysms and did not occur for gi-
ant aneurysms, with MI occurring only in those with giant 
aneurysms. This remained true in a subsequent study of 
1356 patients diagnosed from 1990 to 2007 and fol-
lowed up with serial echocardiograms for up to 15.7 
years.140 Coronary artery events (thrombosis, stenosis, 
intervention, MI, death) occurred in 1% of those with an 
aneurysm Z score <10 and an absolute dimension <8 
mm, in 29% of those with a Z score ≥10 but an absolute 
dimension <8 mm, and in 48% of those with both a Z 
score ≥10 and an absolute dimension ≥8 mm. Longitudi-
nal studies of outcomes based on Z-score classifications 
alone have yet to be performed.
Late development or increases in size of aneurysms 
have been reported in case reports.265–267 Tsuda et al268 
in an angiography study of 562 patients noted new di-
lated or expanding lesions in 15 patients. The new an-
eurysms occurred at sites where previous aneurysms 
had diminished in size but were all associated with a 
localized stenosis, although none were associated with 
cardiac events.
MI as a result of thrombotic occlusion of an aneurysm 
or the development of critical stenosis attributable to 
LMP occurs mainly in those patients with more severe 
coronary artery abnormalities and can cause sudden 
death. In young patients, it can be clinically silent or pres-
ent with atypical symptoms.263 The gradual progression 
of LMP and laminar thrombosis to obstructive lesions 
may be accompanied by the development of collateral 
vessels, particularly in the presence of segmental ste-
nosis and in younger patients, regardless of the occur-
rence of MI.269 Prompt and effective management of 
acute MI can improve outcomes, although the reported 
experience is limited.270 Myocardial dysfunction present 
shortly after MI can improve, although some patients will 
develop adverse ventricular remodeling and ventricular 
aneurysms if the damage is extensive.271 Patients who 
have had an MI are at further risk of subsequent MI, 
although the risk is reduced with effective revascular-
ization. Tsuda et al272 reported long-term outcomes up 
to 33 years after surviving MI in 60 patients. The 30-
year survival rate was 63%, and the 25-year ventricular 
tachycardia–free survival rate was 29%. Low post-MI LV 
ejection fraction was predictive of poor outcomes.
Subclinical Vascular Outcomes
Long-term changes in coronary artery structure and 
function precede clinical events and reflect chronic path-
ological vascular processes in areas that were acutely 
involved by KD. Arterial wall structure can be imaged 
noninvasively and has provided insights into the natural 
history. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) has been used to 
demonstrate symmetrical and asymmetrical wall thick-
ening in aneurysms, particularly in those aneurysmal 
segments that have progressed toward normal luminal 
dimensions.273,274 IVUS has also been used to charac-
terize wall elements, noting areas of fibrofatty changes, 
necrotic core, and dense calcification.275 More recently, 
these changes have been assessed with optical coher-
ence tomography (OCT).276 Studies have been more 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e957
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
equivocal as to whether or not wall thickening may be 
evident in coronary artery segments without previous 
dilation or aneurysm.
These structural findings are associated with functional 
abnormalities, with impaired dilation in response to nitro-
glycerin277 or adenosine,278 resulting in impaired coronary 
artery flow reserve. Iemura et al274 studied KD patients with 
various degrees of coronary artery involvement who had 
all progressed to a normal luminal dimension on angiogra-
phy. They noted that those segments that previously had 
large aneurysms showed paradoxical vasoconstriction in 
response to acetylcholine and diminished vasodilation in 
response to nitroglycerin. On positron emission tomogra-
phy (PET) imaging, sites of previous aneurysms showed 
both impaired vasodilation coupled with reduced myocar-
dial blood flow and flow reserve, particularly in segments 
with stenosis.279 In contrast, a small case-control study of 
KD patients with no history of coronary artery abnormali-
ties showed reduced myocardial flow reserve on PET.280 
PET has also been used to demonstrate persistent inflam-
mation in patients with aneurysms, which may be reduced 
with statin therapy.281 It would appear that long-term 
structural and functional coronary artery abnormalities 
are evident and associated with both maximal and current 
coronary artery status, with the greatest abnormalities in 
those with a history of large or giant aneurysms that have 
diminished to normal luminal dimensions. Whether or not 
long-term abnormalities occur in those patients who had 
no luminal abnormalities or only transient dilation remains 
a subject of debate, although the majority of evidence, 
including the absence of cardiovascular disease (CVD) 
events and lack of calcification on CT, suggests a normal 
long-term prognosis.
KD is a systemic vasculitis, and hence, the potential 
presence of generalized long-term abnormalities of sys-
temic arterial structure and function has been a subject 
of controversy. Abnormal brachial artery reactivity or 
abnormal flow-mediated dilation, reflective of endothelial 
dysfunction, after KD was initially reported by Dhillon et 
al282 in a case-control study. Since then, there have been 
many reports comparing noninvasive surrogate vascular 
markers, some additionally including measures of arte-
rial stiffness and intima-media thickness. A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of 30 studies showed impor-
tant heterogeneity between studies.283 Similar to stud-
ies of coronary artery structure and function, evidence 
for systemic arterial endothelial dysfunction was most 
commonly reported for KD patients in general but more 
consistently for those with aneurysms, whereas results 
for those without a history of coronary artery abnor-
malities were not consistent. Similar findings were noted 
for arterial stiffness, whereas increased mean carotid 
intima-media thickness was not noted for KD patients, 
although studies of maximal carotid intima-media thick-
ness were conflicting. The authors concluded that sur-
rogate vascular markers were abnormal only in KD pa-
tients with aneurysms. Serological evidence of ongoing 
systemic inflammation has been noted in those patients 
with persistent aneurysms, with higher serum amyloid A 
and IL-6284 and CRP,285 and imaging evidence has been 
suggested on PET scanning.286 Nonetheless, the clinical 
impact of these abnormalities has not been defined.
Valvular Regurgitation
When detected early, the preponderance of MR as as-
sessed with echocardiography is in the mild to moder-
ate range of severity and does not appear to persist 
on follow-up. MR can occur after the acute stage from 
myocardial ischemia. Late-onset valvulitis of the mitral 
and aortic valves can occur very rarely and may require 
valve replacement.263,287 MR that becomes severe or 
that persists into late phases of KD appears to occur 
with lower frequency and can result from persistent 
ischemia or, rarely, from more resistant inflammatory 
processes that result in fixed structural abnormalities of 
the valve apparatus.287,288 This circumstance indicates 
more serious valvular pathology and may require surgi-
cal intervention.
AR in KD is usually associated with aortic root dilation 
(as indicated by an increased aortic sinus Z score) and 
becomes apparent early in the course of the disease. 
AR is of lesser severity and appears to persist more 
consistently, and it is less reliably associated with other 
inflammatory markers. Nevertheless, progressive aortic 
valve dysfunction associated with severe AR has been re-
ported in a patient with recurrent KD,289 and aortic valve 
replacement was required.
Aortic Abnormalities
Patients after KD have been shown to have functional 
and anatomic abnormalities of the aorta. Assessment of 
aortic distensibility has been used in adults in the early 
screening of atherosclerosis. In a study that compared 
40 KD patients without coronary artery aneurysms to 
168 healthy children, aortic diameter was measured at 
both minimum diastolic pressure and maximum systolic 
pressure by 2D echocardiography; this study found that 
aortic distensibility varies with age in normal children.290 
It was low in infants, increased gradually to peak during 
the ages 10 to 15 years, and decreased with age there-
after. For KD patients, aortic stiffness was increased 
during the acute illness and was normal during conva-
lescence. In a more recent study, Oyamada et al291 dem-
onstrated that the aortas in 75 patients with a history 
of KD had altered elastic properties compared with 57 
control subjects. Specifically, LV mass index and aortic 
stiffness were significantly higher, whereas aortic disten-
sibility and strain were lower at 5 to 10 years of follow-
up in KD patients. Another study confirmed that in a KD 
cohort, aortic stiffness and elasticity were increased in 
57 patients with KD >1 year after onset of illness, of 
whom 12 had coronary artery sequelae.292 Both groups 
had altered elasticity and stiffness of the aorta.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e958
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
An unusual finding during the acute KD illness is the 
presence of retrograde holodiastolic flow in the abdomi-
nal aorta in the absence of AR. Mori et al293 described 
this finding in 15 of 21 children at the time of their acute 
KD episode, which resolved by 1 month. The abnormal 
flow pattern may be attributable to an increase in the 
distensibility of the descending aorta, which is associ-
ated with the acute inflammation. Additionally, it was 
proposed that this pattern may represent diastolic run-
off into dilated and dysfunctional peripheral arteries af-
fected by the vasculitis.
An aspect of the vasculitis/inflammation noted dur-
ing KD may lead to aortic root dilation. Ravekes et al125 
evaluated 100 children with history of KD from 1993 
to 1997 and noted that patients had a greater normal-
ized aortic root dimension that persisted at least to 
1-year follow-up. In addition, 4% of these patients also 
had AR, although this was not evident on auscultation 
in any patient. A study of 198 children with acute KD 
noted that aortic root dilatation was present in 8%, 
remained constant at 1 and 5 weeks after diagnosis, 
and was associated with larger coronary artery size at 
diagnosis111; however, aortic root size had little asso-
ciation with inflammatory markers. The long-term impli-
cations of these alterations in aortic size and properties 
are unknown.
Myocardial Abnormalities
Although myocarditis is common during the acute illness, 
complete resolution is expected. Early biopsy studies 
suggested the presence of myocardial abnormalities, 
but the relationship to the acute illness and coronary ar-
tery abnormalities was unclear.294–296 In a more recent 
study of 16 patients with giant aneurysms, initial biopsy 
samples showed myocyte degeneration, hypertrophy, 
and inflammatory cell infiltration, whereas follow-up bi-
opsy specimens showed myocyte disarray, interstitial fi-
brosis, and ongoing inflammatory cell infiltration.297 The 
pathogenesis of the abnormalities was not clear, but the 
sites of the aneurysms were not related to the biopsy 
findings. Subsequent studies of myocardial characteriza-
tion and function have reported variable findings.298–300 
Long-term myocardial dysfunction, resulting from prima-
ry myocardial insult at the time of acute KD and which is 
independent of long-term coronary artery abnormalities, 
may very rarely occur, although evidence-based reports 
are few. Whether the myocarditis that occurs with the 
acute illness leads to long-term myocardial pathology, 
such as fibrosis and myocyte dropout, independent of 
coronary artery abnormalities is not clear. Clinical expe-
rience indicates that myocardial function is normal, ex-
cept among patients with ischemic heart disease from 
coronary artery stenoses.153,236
Arrhythmias
Generally, the development of important rhythm changes 
in KD has been documented primarily in those patients 
manifesting more severe forms of myocardial dysfunc-
tion, including those patients with overt myocardial isch-
emia or infarction. Premature ventricular contractions 
and ventricular tachycardia have been taken as clinical 
markers of underlying myocardial damage and as poten-
tial predictors of long-term consequences, including late 
sudden death.272,301 In particular, after MI, the incidence 
of ventricular tachycardia can be increased. Patients 
who have sustained severe myocardial injury or infarction 
may benefit from extended rhythm surveillance (Holter 
or other long-term electrocardiographic monitoring) to 
best assess the need for specific antiarrhythmic thera-
py. However, other recent studies have demonstrated an 
electrophysiological impact from KD even in the absence 
of important ventricular dysfunction or of any coronary 
artery abnormalities. Ghelani et al302 found increased QT 
interval dispersion, indicating inhomogenous ventricular 
repolarization, in a group of KD patients from North In-
dia. Kuriki et al303 similarly described elevations in the QT 
variability index during acute KD that was correlated with 
serum inflammatory markers and that normalized as the 
disease regressed.
Although conduction abnormalities have not been 
characteristic of KD, sinus node and atrioventricular 
node dysfunction have been demonstrated in patients 
with moderate to severe coronary artery abnormalities, 
although only 1 patient among the 40 studied developed 
evidence of atrioventricular block.112
Risk Stratification
Clinical experience with KD has taught us that it is rea-
sonable to stratify patients according to their relative 
risk of myocardial ischemia, either related to coronary 
artery thrombosis or stenoses/occlusions. This stratifi-
cation allows for patient long-term management to be 
individualized regarding the frequency of clinical follow-
up and diagnostic testing, cardiovascular risk factor 
assessment and management, medical therapy, throm-
boprophylaxis, physical activity, and reproductive coun-
seling. With careful clinical follow-up 10 to 20 years after 
the onset of KD, patients with no coronary artery luminal 
changes at any stage of the illness appear to demon-
strate a risk for clinical cardiac events that is similar to 
that in the population without KD.263 For long-term prog-
nostication and management, the severity of coronary 
artery luminal abnormalities defines the risk category. 
The extent of maximal involvement, together with its evo-
lution over time, determines the risk of myocardial isch-
emia related to thrombosis and stenosis. The long-term 
management algorithm is applied after acute manage-
ment is completed, and generally when coronary artery 
luminal Z scores are stable and no longer enlarging. If 
the patient’s Z scores are still increasing after the end 
of the convalescent phase, then recommendations for 
assessment and follow-up for evolving coronary artery 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e959
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
involvement should be followed, as outlined at the end of 
the Diagnosis section.
Echocardiography is the primary modality used to 
assess coronary artery luminal dimensions, which are 
converted to Z scores adjusted for BSA as outlined in 
the Diagnosis section. The risk stratification first rests 
on the patient’s maximal Z score at any time point and in 
any branch. The risk stratification is further modified by 
the maximal Z score in any branch at the time of current 
assessment (Table 8). This allows clinicians to incorpo-
rate different risk levels based on the past and current 
coronary artery involvement, with changes in the risk of 
thrombosis and stenosis. Coronary artery involvement 
based on Z scores from echocardiographic assessment 
of luminal dimensions is classified into 5 categories as 
outlined in the section Diagnosis, Echocardiography, 
Classification of Coronary Artery Abnormalities. The cur-
rent guidelines diverge from previous guidelines, which 
primarily classified coronary artery involvement based 
on absolute dimensions, with little to no adjustment for 
body size.
Although the risk stratification scheme primarily rests 
on maximal and current coronary artery Z scores derived 
from echocardiography, other features of the coronary 
arteries and other noncoronary artery cardiac complica-
tions could also influence decisions regarding risk speci-
fication (Table 9). These additional features may further 
be derived from other imaging modalities.
Recommendations for Risk Stratification of 
Coronary Artery Abnormalities
1. It is reasonable to use echocardiographic 
coronary artery luminal dimensions converted 
to BSA-adjusted Z scores to determine risk 
stratification (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. It is reasonable to incorporate both maximal 
and current coronary artery involvement in 
risk stratification (as per Table 8) (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence C).
3. It is reasonable to incorporate the presence 
of additional features other than coronary 
artery luminal dimensions into decisions 
regarding risk stratification (as per Table 9) 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Long-Term Management of Coronary Artery 
Abnormalities
On the basis of the risk stratification scheme, specific 
recommendations are made regarding surveillance, car-
diovascular risk factor assessment and management, 
medical therapy, thromboprophylaxis, physical activity, 
and reproductive counseling for each category of past 
and current coronary artery involvement. The algorithm 
is depicted in Tables 10 and 11. The rationale for recom-
mendations in the algorithm is provided in the sections 
after the recommendation statements.
Risk-Stratified Recommendations for Long-Term 
Evaluation and Management
Note: Long-term status is taken to be when the patient 
is stable after the acute illness and the coronary artery 
luminal dimensions are not increasing, usually at 4 to 6 
Table 8. Risk Classification of Coronary Artery 
Abnormalities During Follow-up
Classification
Description
1
No involvement at any timepoint (Z score  
always <2)
2
Dilation only (Z score 2 to <2.5)
3
Small aneurysm (Z score ≥2.5 to <5)
 3.1 
Current or persistent
 3.2 
Decreased to dilation only or normal luminal 
dimension
4
Medium aneurysm (Z score ≥5 to <10, and 
absolute dimension <8 mm)
 4.1 
Current or persistent
 4.2 
Decreased to small aneurysm
 4.3 
Decreased to dilation only or normal luminal 
dimension
5
Large and giant aneurysm (Z score ≥10, or 
absolute dimension ≥8 mm)
 5.1 
Current or persistent
 5.2 
Decreased to medium aneurysm
 5.3 
Decreased to small aneurysm
 5.4 
Decreased to dilation only or normal luminal 
dimension
Table 9. Additional Clinical Features That May 
Increase the Long-Term Risk of Myocardial Ischemia
Greater length and distal location of aneurysms that increase the risk 
of flow stasis
Greater total number of aneurysms
Greater number of branches affected
Presence of luminal irregularities
Abnormal characterization of the vessel wall (calcification, luminal 
myofibroblastic proliferation)
Presence of functional abnormalities (impaired vasodilation, impaired 
flow reserve)
Absence or poor quality of collateral vessels
Previous revascularization performed
Previous coronary artery thrombosis
Previous myocardial infarction
Presence of ventricular dysfunction
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e960
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
Table 10. Long-Term Assessment and Counseling Algorithm
Risk Level
Frequency of 
Cardiology 
Assessment*
Assessment 
for Inducible 
Myocardial 
Ischemia†
Type and 
Frequency 
of Additional 
Cardiology 
Assessment
Cardiovascular 
Risk Factor 
Assessment and 
Management‡
Physical Activity 
Counseling§
Reproductive 
Counseling
1: No involvement
May discharge 
between 4 wk and 
12 mo
None
None
Assess at 1 y
Promotion counseling 
at every visit
Age-appropriate 
counseling without 
modification
2: Dilation only
May discharge 
after 1 y if normal; 
assess every 2–5 y if 
persists
None
None
Assess at 1 y
Promotion counseling 
at every visit
Age-appropriate 
counseling without 
modification
3.1: Small 
aneurysm, current 
or persistent
Assess at 6 mo, then 
yearly
Assess every 
2–3 y
May consider 
every 3–5 y
Assess at 1 y
Promotion counseling 
at every visit; restrict 
contact
Precautions for 
contraception and 
pregnancy
3.2: Small 
aneurysm, 
regressed to normal 
or dilation only
Assess every 
1–3 y (may omit 
echocardiography)
Assess every 
3–5 y
May consider if 
there is inducible 
ischemia
Assess at 1 y, then 
every 2 y
Promotion counseling 
at every visit
Age-appropriate 
counseling without 
modification
4.1: Medium 
aneurysm, current 
or persistent
Assess at 3, 6, and 
12 mo, then yearly
Assess every 
1–3 y
May consider 
every 2–5 y
Assess at 1 y
Promotion counseling 
at every visit; restrict 
contact; self-limit
Precautions for 
contraception and 
pregnancy
4.2: Medium 
aneurysm, 
regressed to small 
aneurysm
Assess yearly
Assess every 
2–3 y
May consider 
every 3–5 y
Assess yearly
Promotion counseling 
at every visit; restrict 
contact; self-limit
Precautions for 
contraception and 
pregnancy
4.3: Medium 
aneurysm, 
regressed to normal 
or dilation only
Assess every 
1–2 y (may omit 
echocardiography)
Assess every 
2–4 y
May consider if 
there is inducible 
ischemia
Assess every 2 y
Promotion counseling 
at every visit; restrict 
contact; self-limit
Precautions for 
contraception and 
pregnancy
5.1: Large or giant 
aneurysm, current 
or persistent
Assess at 3, 6, 9, and 
12 mo, then every 
3–6 mo
Assess every 
6–12 mo
Baseline within 
2–6 mo; may 
consider every 
1–5 y
Assess every 6–12 
mo
Promotion counseling 
at every visit; restrict 
contact; self-limit
Precautions for 
contraception and 
pregnancy
5.2: Large or 
giant aneurysms, 
regressed to 
medium aneurysm
Assess every 6–12 
mo
Assess 
yearly
May consider 
every 2–5 y
Assess yearly
Promotion counseling 
at every visit; restrict 
contact; self-limit
Precautions for 
contraception and 
pregnancy
5.3: Large or 
giant aneurysm, 
regressed to small 
aneurysm
Assess every 6–12 
mo
Assess every 
1–2 y
May consider 
every 2–5 y
Assess yearly
Promotion counseling 
at every visit; restrict 
contact; self-limit
Precautions for 
contraception and 
pregnancy
5.4: Large or 
giant aneurysm, 
regressed to normal 
or dilation only
Assess every 
1–2 y (may omit 
echocardiography)
Assess every 
2–3 y
May consider 
every 2–5 y
Assess every 2 y
Promotion counseling 
at every visit; restrict 
contact; self-limit
Precautions for 
contraception and 
pregnancy
Yellow indicates a Class IIa recommendation (it is reasonable to perform); orange indicates a Class IIb recommendation (may be considered).
*To include history and physical examination, echocardiography, and electrocardiography.
†May include stress echocardiography, stress electrocardiography, stress with magnetic resonance perfusion imaging, and stress with nuclear medicine 
perfusion imaging.
‡General healthy lifestyle counseling should be provided at every visit (may be performed by primary care provider).
§Restrictions for contact apply to patients on anticoagulation or dual antiplatelet therapy; self-limit refers to allowing patients to participate to their 
reasonable abilities without coercion or pressure to perform or overexert (self, parents, coaches). 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e961
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
weeks after the onset of fever. Until this point, patients 
should be managed in accordance with the recommen-
dations in the Acute Treatment section.
No Involvement (Z Score Always <2)
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. It is reasonable to discharge patients from 
cardiology care at 4 to 6 weeks after KD 
onset, although ongoing follow-up to 12 
months may be considered. Ongoing car-
diology follow-up is not indicated. Patients 
and families should be advised to remember 
that having had KD is part of the patient’s 
permanent medical history (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing):
1. It is reasonable that no additional cardiology 
assessment be performed (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and management:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may be provided by 
the primary care provider (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, fast-
ing lipid profile, body mass index (and plot), 
Table 11. Long-Term Thromboprophylaxis and Medical Therapy Algorithm
Risk Level
Low-Dose ASA
Anticoagulation 
(Warfarin or LMWH)
Dual Antiplatelet 
Therapy 
(ASA+Clopidogrel)
β-Blocker
Statin
1: No involvement
6–8 wk then 
discontinue
Not indicated
Not indicated
Not indicated
Not indicated
2: Dilation only
Continuation  
after 6–8 wk is 
reasonable
Not indicated
Not indicated
Not indicated
Not indicated
3.1: Small aneurysm, current or 
persistent
Continue
May be considered
May be considered 
as an alternative to 
anticoagulation
Not indicated
Empirical therapy may 
be considered
3.2: Small aneurysm, regressed to 
normal or dilation only
Continue, but 
discontinuation 
may also be 
considered
Not indicated
Not indicated
Not indicated
Empirical therapy may 
be considered
4.1: Medium aneurysm, current or 
persistent
Continue
May be considered
May be considered 
as an alternative to 
anticoagulation
Not indicated
Empirical therapy may 
be considered
4.2: Medium aneurysm, regressed 
to small aneurysm
Continue
Not indicated
May be considered
Not indicated
Empirical therapy may 
be considered
4.3: Medium aneurysm, regressed 
to normal or dilation only
Continue
Not indicated
May be considered
Not indicated
Empirical therapy may 
be considered
5.1: Large and giant aneurysm, 
current or persistent
Continue
Reasonably indicated
May be considered 
in addition to 
anticoagulation
May be 
considered
Empirical therapy may 
be considered
5.2: Large or giant aneurysm, 
regressed to medium aneurysm
Continue
Reasonably indicated
May be considered 
as an alternative to 
anticoagulation
May be 
considered
Empirical therapy may 
be considered
5.3: Large or giant aneurysm, 
regressed to small aneurysm
Continue
May be considered
May be considered 
as an alternative to 
anticoagulation
May be 
considered
Empirical therapy may 
be considered
5.4: Large or giant aneurysm, 
regressed to normal or dilation 
only
Continue
Not indicated
May be considered 
as an alternative to 
anticoagulation
Not indicated
Empirical therapy may 
be considered
ASA indicates acetylsalicylic acid or aspirin; and LMWH, low-molecular-weight heparin. Green indicates a Class I recommendation (should be performed); 
yellow indicates a Class IIa recommendation (it is reasonable to perform); orange indicates a Class IIb recommendation (may be considered); and red 
indicates a Class III recommendation (should not be performed).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e962
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
waist circumference, dietary and activity 
assessment, and smoking at least once and 
ideally at least 1 year from the episode of acute 
KD; this may be performed by the primary 
care provider (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, angiotensin-converting 
 
enzyme inhibitor [ACEI], statin):
1. No additional medical therapy should be 
given (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. It is reasonable to give low-dose ASA for up 
to 4 to 6 weeks after the episode of acute 
KD, which should be discontinued thereafter 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit with no restrictions 
or precautions at any time (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to provide age-appropriate 
counseling regarding contraception and 
pregnancy without modification (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence B).
Dilation Only (Z Score ≥2 but <2.5, or a Decrease  
in Z Score During Follow-up ≥1)†
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. If luminal dimensions have returned to normal 
by 4 to 6 weeks after KD onset, it is reason-
able to discharge the patient from cardiol-
ogy care, although ongoing follow-up to 12 
months may be considered (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
2. If dilation remains present at 4 to 6 weeks 
after KD onset, then it is reasonable to con-
tinue follow-up to 12 months. If the luminal 
dimensions return to normal before then, it 
is reasonable to discharge the patient from 
ongoing cardiology care (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Resolution is expected within 1 year. If dila-
tion persists at 1 year, consider whether this 
represents a dominant branch. If this is a 
probable explanation, then it is reasonable to 
discharge the patient from ongoing cardiol-
ogy care, although ongoing follow-up every 
2 to 5 years may be considered. Patients 
and families should be advised to remember 
that having had KD is part of the patient’s 
permanent medical history (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing):
1. It is reasonable that no additional cardiology 
assessment be performed (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and manage-
ment:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may be provided by 
the primary care provider (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, 
fasting lipid profile, body mass index (and 
plot), waist circumference, dietary and activ-
ity assessment, and smoking at least once 
and ideally at least 1 year from the episode 
of acute KD; this may be performed by the 
primary care provider (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, ACEI, statin):
1. No additional medical therapy should be 
given (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. It is reasonable to give low-dose ASA until 4 
to 6 weeks after the acute episode, which 
should be discontinued thereafter (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit with no restrictions 
or precautions at any time (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to provide age-appropriate 
counseling regarding contraception and preg-
nancy without modification (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
Small Aneurysms (Z Score ≥2.5 to <5)
Current or Persistent Small Aneurysms
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. Patients should be seen at 4 to 6 weeks after 
the acute KD episode, then it is reasonable to 
assess after 6 months and 1 year. Ongoing 
follow-up assessment every year thereafter is 
reasonable (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing):
1. It is reasonable to assess for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia (stress echocardiography, 
stress with magnetic resonance imaging [MRI], 
†Dilation has also been defined as an increased absolute luminal 
dimension up to 1.5 times the dimension of an adjacent segment and 
in those with a Z score <2 but who during follow-up demonstrate a 
decrease in Z score of ≥1.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e963
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
stress nuclear medicine [NM], positron emis-
sion tomography [PET]) every 2 to 3 years 
or if the patient has symptoms suggestive of 
ischemia or signs suggestive of ventricular 
dysfunction (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. Further imaging with angiography (CT, MRI, 
invasive) may be considered for periodic sur-
veillance every 3 to 5 years (Class IIb; Level 
of Evidence C).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and management:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may additionally be 
provided by the primary care provider (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, fast-
ing lipid profile, body mass index (and plot), 
waist circumference, dietary and activity 
assessment, and smoking at least once and 
ideally at least 1 year from the episode of acute 
KD; this may be performed by the primary care 
provider. It is reasonable to obtain a follow-up 
fasting lipid profile as per the Expert Panel 
guidelines304 (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, ACEI, statin):
1. Empirical statin therapy for non–lipid-lower-
ing (pleiotropic) effects may be considered 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. Empirical treatment with β-blockers is not 
indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. Patients should be treated with low-dose ASA 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Use of an alternative antiplatelet agent (eg, 
a thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) instead 
of ASA is reasonable if the patient is intol-
erant or resistant to ASA (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Anticoagulation or treatment with dual-anti-
platelet therapy is not indicated (Class III; 
Level of Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit with no restrictions 
or precautions at any time (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to provide age-appropriate 
counseling regarding contraception and 
pregnancy without modification (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence B).
Regression to Normal Z Score or Dilation Only
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. It is reasonable to assess every 1 to 3 years. 
It is reasonable not to perform echocardiogra-
phy unless there is evidence for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia or the patient has symptoms 
suggestive of ischemia or signs suggestive 
of ventricular dysfunction (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing):
1. It is reasonable to assess for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia (stress echocardiography, 
stress with MRI, stress NM perfusion imaging, 
PET) every 3 to 5 years or if the patient has 
symptoms suggestive of ischemia or signs 
suggestive of ventricular dysfunction (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. Further imaging with angiography (CT, MRI, 
invasive) may be considered only if there is 
evidence for inducible myocardial ischemia 
or ventricular dysfunction (Class IIb; Level of 
 
Evidence C).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and manage-
ment:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may additionally be 
provided by the primary care provider (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, 
fasting lipid profile, body mass index (and 
plot), waist circumference, dietary and activ-
ity assessment, and smoking every 2 years; 
this may be performed by the primary care 
provider. It is reasonable to obtain a follow-
up fasting lipid profile (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, ACEI, statin):
1. Empirical statin therapy for non–lipid-lower-
ing (pleiotropic) effects may be considered 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. Empirical treatment with β-blockers is not 
indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. Ongoing treatment with low-dose ASA may 
be considered, although it is reasonable to 
discontinue (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. Use of an alternative antiplatelet agent (eg, 
a thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) instead 
of ASA is reasonable if the patient is intol-
erant or resistant to ASA (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit with no restrictions 
or precautions at any time (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e964
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to provide age-appropriate 
counseling regarding contraception and 
pregnancy without modification (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence B).
Medium Aneurysms (Z Score ≥5 to <10, With an Absolute 
Luminal Dimension <8 mm)
Current or Persistent Medium Aneurysms
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. Patients should be seen at 4 to 6 weeks after 
the acute KD episode; then it is reasonable 
to assess after 3 months, 6 months, and 1 
year. Ongoing follow-up assessment every 6 
to 12 months thereafter is reasonable (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing):
1. It is reasonable to assess for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia (stress echocardiography, 
stress with MRI, stress NM perfusion imaging, 
PET) every 1 to 3 years or if the patient has 
symptoms suggestive of ischemia or signs 
suggestive of ventricular dysfunction (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. Further imaging with angiography (CT, MRI, 
invasive) may be considered for periodic sur-
veillance every 2 to 5 years (Class IIb; Level 
of Evidence C).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and manage-
ment:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may additionally be 
provided by the primary care provider (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, 
fasting lipid profile, body mass index (and 
plot), waist circumference, dietary and activ-
ity assessment, and smoking at least once 
and ideally at least 1 year from the episode 
of acute KD; this may be performed by the 
primary care provider. It is reasonable to 
obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, ACEI, statin):
1. Empirical statin therapy for non–lipid-lower-
ing (pleiotropic) effects may be considered 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. Empirical treatment with β-blockers is not 
indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. Patients should be treated with low-dose ASA 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Use of an alternative antiplatelet agent (eg, 
a thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) instead 
of ASA is reasonable if the patient is intoler-
ant or resistant to ASA (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Additional patient and coronary artery char-
acteristics (Table 9) may be considered in 
decision making regarding intensification 
of thromboprophylaxis (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
4. Dual-antiplatelet therapy with an additional 
antiplatelet agent (eg, a thienopyridine such 
as clopidogrel) may be considered (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C).
5. Use of anticoagulation (warfarin, LMWH) is 
not indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit without restrictions 
or precautions. Participation in competitive 
sports or high-intensity activities should be 
guided by results from testing for inducible 
myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced 
arrhythmias (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. For patients taking dual-antiplatelet therapy, 
activities involving a risk of bodily contact, 
trauma, or injury should be restricted or 
modified (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to discourage use of oral 
contraceptive drugs that increase thrombosis 
risk, to recommend that pregnancy be super-
vised by a multidisciplinary team including a 
cardiologist, and to alter thromboprophylaxis 
management during pregnancy and delivery 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Regression to Small Aneurysms
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. Ongoing follow-up assessment every year is 
reasonable (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing):
1. It is reasonable to assess for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia (stress echocardiography, 
stress with MRI, stress NM perfusion imaging, 
PET) every 2 to 3 years or if the patient has 
symptoms suggestive of ischemia or signs 
suggestive of ventricular dysfunction (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. Further imaging with angiography (CT, MRI, 
invasive) may be considered for periodic 
surveillance every 3 to 5 years (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e965
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and manage-
ment:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may additionally be 
provided by the primary care provider (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, 
fasting lipid profile, body mass index (and 
plot), waist circumference, dietary and activ-
ity assessment, and smoking every year; 
this may be performed by the primary care 
provider. It is reasonable to obtain a follow-
up fasting lipid profile (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, ACEI, statin):
1. Empirical statin therapy for non–lipid-lower-
ing (pleiotropic) effects may be considered 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. Empirical treatment with β-blockers is not 
indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. Patients should be treated with low-dose ASA 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Use of an alternative antiplatelet agent (eg, 
a thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) instead 
of ASA is reasonable if the patient is intol-
erant or resistant to ASA (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Dual-antiplatelet therapy with an additional 
antiplatelet agent (eg, a thienopyridine such 
as clopidogrel) may be considered (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C).
4. Use of anticoagulation is not indicated (Class 
III; Level of Evidence C).
5. Additional patient and coronary artery char-
acteristics (Table 9) may be considered in 
decision making regarding intensification or 
discontinuation of thromboprophylaxis (Class 
IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit without restrictions 
or precautions. Participation in competitive 
sports or high-intensity activities should be 
guided by results from testing for inducible 
myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced 
arrhythmias (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. For patients taking dual-antiplatelet therapy, 
activities involving a risk of bodily contact, 
trauma, or injury should be restricted or 
modified (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to discourage use of oral 
contraceptive drugs that increase thrombo-
sis risk, to recommend that pregnancy be 
supervised by a multidisciplinary team includ-
ing a cardiologist, and to alter thrombopro-
phylaxis management during pregnancy and 
delivery (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Regression to Normal Z Score or Dilation Only
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. Ongoing follow-up assessment every 1 to 2 
years is reasonable. Not performing routine 
2D echocardiography may be considered 
unless there is evidence for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia or the patient has symptoms 
suggestive of ischemia or signs suggestive of 
ventricular dysfunction (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence B).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing):
1. It is reasonable to assess for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia (stress echocardiography, 
stress with MRI, stress NM perfusion imag-
ing, PET) every 2 to 4 years or if the patient 
has symptoms suggestive of ischemia or 
signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. It is reasonable to perform no further imag-
ing with angiography (CT, MRI, invasive) 
in the absence of evidence of inducible 
myocardial ischemia (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and management:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may additionally be 
provided by the primary care provider (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, 
fasting lipid profile, body mass index (and 
plot), waist circumference, dietary and activ-
ity assessment, and smoking every 2 years; 
this may be performed by the primary care 
provider. It is reasonable to obtain a follow-
up fasting lipid profile (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, statin):
1. Empirical statin therapy for non–lipid-lower-
ing (pleiotropic) effects may be considered 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. Empirical treatment with β-blockers is not 
indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. It is reasonable to continue treatment with 
low-dose ASA (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. Use of an alternative antiplatelet agent (eg, 
a thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) instead 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e966
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
of ASA is reasonable if the patient is intol-
erant or resistant to ASA (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Use of anticoagulation (warfarin/LMWH) is 
not indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence 
C).
4. Use of an additional antiplatelet agent (eg, a 
thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) is not rec-
ommended except in the presence of induc-
ible myocardial ischemia (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
5. Additional patient and coronary artery char-
acteristics (Table 9) may be considered in 
decision making regarding intensification or 
discontinuation of thromboprophylaxis (Class 
IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit without restrictions 
or precautions. Participation in competitive 
sports or high-intensity activities should be 
guided by results from testing for inducible 
myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced 
arrhythmias (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to provide age-appropriate 
counseling regarding contraception and 
pregnancy without modification (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence B).
Large and Giant Aneurysms (Z Score ≥10 or Absolute 
Dimension ≥8 mm)
Note: Long-term status is taken to be when the patient is 
stable after the acute illness and the coronary artery lu-
minal dimensions are not increasing or progressing (usu-
ally within 15 to 45 days). Until this point, patients should 
be managed in accordance with the recommendations in 
the Acute Treatment section. Failure to follow up closely 
and to escalate thromboprophylaxis with progressing 
coronary artery aneurysms is a major contributor to un-
expected morbidity and mortality.
Current or Persistent Large and Giant Aneurysms
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. It is reasonable to assess patients at 1, 2, 3, 6, 
9, and 12 months after the episode of acute 
KD in the first year and every 3 to 6 months 
thereafter (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assess-
ment (other cardiology testing):
1. It is reasonable to assess for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia (stress echocardiography, 
stress with MRI, stress NM perfusion imaging, 
PET) every 6 to 12 months or if the patient 
has symptoms suggestive of ischemia or 
signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. Further imaging with angiography (CT, MRI, 
invasive) may be considered for diagnostic 
and prognostic purposes during the first year 
and may be considered for periodic surveil-
lance every 1 to 5 years thereafter (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and manage-
ment:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may additionally be 
provided by the primary care provider (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, body 
mass index (and plot), waist circumference, 
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking 
every 6 to 12 months; this may be performed 
by the primary care provider. It is reasonable 
to obtain a fasting lipid profile during follow-
up (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, ACEI, statin):
1. Empirical statin therapy for non–lipid-lower-
ing (pleiotropic) effects may be considered 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. Empirical treatment with β-blockers may be 
considered (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. Patients should be treated with low-dose ASA 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Use of an alternative antiplatelet agent (eg, 
a thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) instead 
of ASA is reasonable if the patient is intol-
erant or resistant to ASA (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Use of warfarin to achieve a target interna-
tional normalized ratio of 2 to 3 is reasonable 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
4. Use of LMWH to achieve target anti-factor Xa 
levels of 0.5 to 1.0 U/mL is reasonable as 
an alternative to warfarin (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
5. Use of an additional antiplatelet agent (eg, a 
thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) may be 
considered together with ASA and warfarin/
LMWH (triple therapy) for thromboprophy-
laxis in the setting of very extensive or distal 
coronary artery aneurysms, or if there is a 
history of coronary artery thrombosis (Table 
9) (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
6. Additional patient and coronary artery char-
acteristics (Table 9) may be considered in 
decision making regarding adjustments to 
strategy for thromboprophylaxis (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e967
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit without restrictions 
or precautions. Participation in competitive 
sports or high-intensity activities should be 
guided by results from testing for induc-
ible myocardial ischemia or exercise-
induced arrhythmias (Class IIa; Level of 
 
Evidence C).
2. Activities involving a risk of bodily contact, 
trauma, or injury should be restricted or 
modified if the patient is on dual-antiplatelet 
or anticoagulation therapy (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to discourage use of oral 
contraceptive drugs that increase thrombosis 
risk, to recommend that pregnancy be super-
vised by a multidisciplinary team including a 
cardiologist, and to alter thromboprophylaxis 
management during pregnancy and delivery 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Regression to Medium Aneurysms
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. It is reasonable to assess the patient every 6 
to 12 months (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing):
1. It is reasonable to assess for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia (stress echocardiography, 
stress 
with 
MRI, 
stress 
NM 
perfusion 
imaging, 
PET) every year or if the patient has symp-
toms suggestive of ischemia or signs sug-
gestive of ventricular dysfunction (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence B).
2. Further imaging with angiography (CT, MRI, 
invasive) may be considered for periodic sur-
veillance every 2 to 5 years (Class IIb; Level 
of Evidence C).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and manage-
ment:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may additionally be 
provided by the primary care provider (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, 
body mass index (and plot), waist circumfer-
ence, dietary and activity assessment, and 
smoking every year; this may be performed 
by the primary care provider. It is reason-
able to obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, ACEI, statin):
1. Empirical statin therapy for non–lipid-lower-
ing (pleiotropic) effects may be considered 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. Empirical treatment with β-blockers may be 
considered (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. Patients should be treated with low-dose ASA 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Use of an alternative antiplatelet agent (eg, 
a thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) instead 
of ASA is reasonable if the patient is intol-
erant or resistant to ASA (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Use of anticoagulation (warfarin, LMWH) is 
not indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
4. Discontinuation of anticoagulation (warfarin/
LMWH) and substitution with an additional 
antiplatelet agent (eg, a thienopyridine such 
as clopidogrel) is reasonable (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
5. Additional patient and coronary artery char-
acteristics (Table 9) may be considered in 
decision making regarding adjustments to 
strategy for thromboprophylaxis (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit without restrictions 
or precautions. Participation in competitive 
sports or high-intensity activities should be 
guided by results from testing for inducible 
myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced 
arrhythmias (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. Activities involving a risk of bodily contact, 
trauma, or injury should be restricted or 
modified for patients on dual-antiplatelet 
or anticoagulation therapy (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to discourage use of oral 
contraceptive drugs that increase thrombosis 
risk, to recommend that pregnancy be super-
vised by a multidisciplinary team including a 
cardiologist, and to alter thromboprophylaxis 
management during pregnancy and delivery 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Regression to Small Aneurysms
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. It is reasonable to assess the patient every 6 
to 12 months (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing):
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e968
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
1. It is reasonable to assess for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia (stress echocardiography, 
stress with MRI, stress NM perfusion imag-
ing, PET) every 1 to 2 years or if the patient 
has symptoms suggestive of ischemia or 
signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
2. Further imaging with angiography (CT, MRI, 
invasive) may be considered for periodic sur-
veillance every 2 to 5 years (Class IIb; Level 
of Evidence C).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and management:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may additionally be 
provided by the primary care provider (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, 
body mass index (and plot), waist circumfer-
ence, dietary and activity assessment, and 
smoking every year; this may be performed 
by the primary care provider. It is reason-
able to obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile 
(Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, ACEI, statin):
1. Empirical statin therapy for non–lipid-lower-
ing (pleiotropic) effects may be considered 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
2. Empirical treatment with β-blockers may be 
considered (Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
3. Discontinuation of additional medical ther-
apy may be considered (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. Patients should be treated with low-dose ASA 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
2. Use of an alternative antiplatelet agent (eg, 
a thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) instead 
of ASA is reasonable if the patient is intol-
erant or resistant to ASA (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Anticoagulation or dual-antiplatelet therapy is 
not indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
4. Additional patient and coronary artery char-
acteristics (Table 9) may be considered in 
decision making regarding adjustments to 
strategy for thromboprophylaxis (Class IIb; 
Level of Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit without restrictions 
or precautions. Participation in competitive 
sports or high-intensity activities should be 
guided by results from testing for inducible 
myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced 
arrhythmias (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. For patients on anticoagulation or dual-anti-
platelet therapy, activities involving a risk 
of bodily contact, trauma, or injury should 
be restricted or modified (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to provide age-appropri-
ate counseling regarding contraception. 
It is reasonable to recommend that preg-
nancy be supervised by a multidisciplinary 
team including a cardiologist and to alter 
thromboprophylaxis management during 
pregnancy and delivery (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence B).
Regression to Normal Z Score or Dilation Only
Frequency of cardiology assessment (to include history 
and physical examination, echocardiography, electrocar-
diography):
1. It is reasonable to assess the patient every 
1 to 2 years. Not performing routine 2D 
echocardiography may be considered unless 
there is evidence for inducible myocardial 
ischemia or the patient has symptoms sug-
gestive of ischemia or signs suggestive of 
ventricular dysfunction (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
Type and frequency of additional cardiology assessment 
(other cardiology testing)”
1. It is reasonable to assess for inducible myo-
cardial ischemia (stress echocardiography, 
stress with MRI, stress NM perfusion imaging, 
PET) every 2 to 5 years or if the patient has 
symptoms suggestive of ischemia or signs 
suggestive of ventricular dysfunction (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Cardiovascular risk factor assessment and management:
1. It is reasonable to provide general counseling 
regarding healthy lifestyle and activity pro-
motion at every visit; this may additionally be 
provided by the primary care provider (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. It is reasonable to assess blood pressure, 
body mass index (and plot), waist circumfer-
ence, dietary and activity assessment, and 
smoking every 2 years; this may be per-
formed by the primary care provider. It is 
reasonable to obtain a follow-up fasting lipid 
profile as per the Expert Panel guidelines.304 
Evaluation and management of identified 
abnormalities should follow the Expert Panel 
guidelines304 (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Medical therapy (β-blockers, ACEI, statin):
1. Empirical statin therapy for non–lipid-lower-
ing (pleiotropic) effects may be considered 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e969
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
2. Empirical treatment with β-blockers is not 
indicated (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Thromboprophylaxis:
1. It is reasonable to continue treatment with 
low-dose ASA (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. Use of an alternative antiplatelet agent (eg, 
a thienopyridine such as clopidogrel) instead 
of ASA is reasonable if the patient is intol-
erant or resistant to ASA (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Use of anticoagulation (warfarin/LMWH) or 
dual-antiplatelet therapy is not indicated 
(Class III; Level of Evidence C).
4. Additional patient and coronary artery char-
acteristics (Table 9) may be considered in 
decision making regarding intensification or 
discontinuation of thromboprophylaxis (Class 
IIb; Level of Evidence C).
Physical activity:
1. It is reasonable to provide physical activity 
counseling at every visit without restrictions 
or precautions. Participation in competitive 
sports or high-intensity activities should be 
guided by results from testing for inducible 
myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced 
arrhythmias (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
2. For patients on anticoagulation or dual-anti-
platelet therapy, activities involving a risk 
of bodily contact, trauma, or injury should 
be restricted or modified (Class I; Level of 
Evidence B).
Reproductive counseling:
1. It is reasonable to provide age-appropriate 
counseling regarding contraception. It is 
reasonable to recommend that pregnancy 
be supervised by a multidisciplinary team 
including a cardiologist and to alter thrombo-
prophylaxis management during pregnancy 
and delivery (Class IIa; Level of Evidence B).
Surveillance
Long-term management of sequelae of KD requires an 
approach to surveillance calibrated to the presence 
and severity of past and current coronary artery in-
volvement. Surveillance is aimed at defining changes 
in coronary artery involvement that either increase or 
decrease the risk of thrombosis, stenoses/obstruc-
tions, and myocardial ischemia, particularly those that 
require changes in surveillance or therapy. Surveillance 
also aims to detect and define changes in valvular func-
tion and myocardial abnormalities, particularly function, 
perfusion, and scar/fibrosis.
Frequency of Assessment
Standard assessment includes history and physical ex-
amination, electrocardiography, and echocardiography 
as previously outlined. For patients whose coronary 
arteries have consistently remained with a maximal Z 
score <2 and who are therefore defined as having no in-
volvement, discharge from cardiology care is reasonable 
at between 4 weeks and 12 months, provided that the 
recommended echocardiograms have been obtained 
at diagnosis and 1 and 4 to 6 weeks after acute treat-
ment.305 Previous studies have shown that if there are 
no echocardiographic abnormalities at a 4- to 6-week 
assessment, further follow-up is not cost-effective, and 
these patients are not at risk for new onset of abnormali-
ties.306–308 Likewise, it is reasonable to discharge patients 
classified as having dilation only with Z score <2.5 if the 
Z score is documented to have decreased to <2 by the 
4- to 6-week assessment. Otherwise, a further follow-up 
assessment is reasonable after 6 months to 1 year, or 
until the measurements are normal or an alternative ex-
planation (dominant coronary artery branch) is evident. 
Although systematic long-term data are not available, ev-
idence suggests that these patients are not at increased 
risk of late mortality attributable to CVD compared with 
the general population.309–313 The association with late 
events is limited to rare case reports.314,315
For patients defined as having an aneurysm of any 
size noted at any assessment, ongoing cardiology fol-
low-up is recommended. The frequency depends on the 
degree of maximal and current involvement, which can 
be modified by other characteristics (Table 9). For pa-
tients with small or medium aneurysms, the pathological 
progression toward normal luminal dimensions occurs 
most quickly during the first year after acute treatment, 
whereas for patients with large or giant aneurysms, this 
occurs at a slower and constant rate over a longer period 
of time, with far fewer patients ever achieving a normal 
luminal dimension. The frequency of follow-up is informed 
by the rate of change and risk. It is also noted that the 
initial degree of involvement influences the frequency of 
follow-up based on current involvement. For example, a 
patient with a persistent small aneurysm would be consid-
ered at lower risk of myocardial ischemia than a patient 
with a large or giant aneurysm that evolved to the size 
of a small aneurysm, and this is reflected in the recom-
mended frequency of follow-up. Ranges of recommended 
follow-up frequency represent the need to individualize 
follow-up, taking into account other factors as previously 
outlined that would increase risk.
For patients with aneurysms whose coronary artery 
luminal dimensions have reduced to normal or dilation 
only, it is reasonable to omit imaging of the coronary 
arteries with 2D echocardiography, although ongoing 
assessments for inducible myocardial ischemia are 
valuable.
Assessment for Inducible Ischemia
For patients with coronary artery aneurysms, the patho-
logical progression toward normal luminal dimension 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e970
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
(thrombosis, luminal myofibroblastic proliferation) in-
creases the risk of stenoses and obstructions. Hence, 
periodic surveillance for inducible myocardial ischemia 
is recommended, with timing of the first assessment 
and the subsequent testing frequency calibrated to the 
severity of maximal and current coronary artery abnor-
malities. In addition, patients with symptoms suggestive 
of myocardial ischemia should be evaluated for inducible 
ischemia in a timely manner. If inducible ischemia is pres-
ent, further imaging is suggested, usually with invasive 
angiography, to determine the presence of coronary ar-
tery stenoses and occlusions. Historically, patients with 
significant residual coronary artery abnormalities were 
followed by myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI) and 
serial coronary angiography; however, angiography is 
invasive, and both modalities expose the patient to re-
peated radiation, which is an important issue in children. 
Although MPI is useful, limitations include modest speci-
ficity, lengthy acquisition time, and necessity for seda-
tion in young children, and other modalities have gained 
preference. The selection of modality for surveillance 
for inducible myocardial ischemia should take into ac-
count the expertise of the institution, with preference for 
physiological stress with exercise over pharmacological 
stress, and minimizing the cumulative radiation dose and 
risks to the patient.
NM Scintigraphic Stress Imaging
MPI is used to detect myocardial ischemia in KD pa-
tients, particularly in those with abnormal coronary ar-
tery morphology.316,317 The presence of reversible perfu-
sion defects on dipyridamole-stress MPI has been shown 
to be a powerful predictor for cardiac events in patients 
using thallium 201–based and technetium (99mTc)-based 
radiopharmaceuticals.318 Kashyap et al319 reported a lon-
gitudinal study of 84 children with KD who underwent 
MPI, 20 of whom had coronary artery aneurysms or 
dilatation on echocardiography. There were 12 patients 
with abnormal MPI; however, only 2 of these patients 
had coronary artery abnormalities. These investigators 
concluded that perfusion deficits in patients with normal-
appearing coronary arteries might be attributable to 
endothelial dysfunction. Because of the challenges in 
performing treadmill exercise testing in small children, 
pharmacological stress (coronary vasodilators and car-
diac inotropic agents) is preferred by some clinicians 
to assess the presence of myocardial ischemia during 
stress MPI. However, exercise stress may be more suit-
able for evaluation of older patients. With MPI, there may 
be a high positive rate in patients who have anatomically 
normal coronary arteries.
Positron Emission Tomography 
PET can detect the attenuation of myocardial flow re-
serve and endothelial function and is therefore another 
potential tool to detect myocardial ischemia in KD pa-
tients.279 In the late follow-up of patients with a history 
of KD, myocardial flow reserve and endothelial function 
might still be impaired in regressed aneurysmal regions, 
despite coronary angiography demonstrating smooth, 
normal-appearing arteries.279,320 Although no perfusion 
deficits were found in patients with normal coronary ar-
teries and a history of KD 4 to 15 years before PET 
study, myocardial flow reserve was decreased and coro-
nary resistance was increased compared with a normal 
control group, which confirmed that these patients had 
abnormal coronary flow reserve.280 A recent study that 
used this tool to monitor treatment demonstrated that 
statins reduced persistent coronary arterial inflamma-
tion as evaluated by serial fluorodeoxyglucose (18F) PET 
imaging long after KD.281
Stress Echocardiography
Both dobutamine and exercise stress echocardiography 
have been used in children diagnosed with coronary ar-
tery abnormalities secondary to KD.321–324 Pahl et al321 
performed treadmill exercise stress echocardiographic 
studies in 28 children aged 6 to 16 years with a history 
of KD 1 to 10 years before the study and coronary ar-
tery abnormalities. They concluded that exercise stress 
echocardiography is a safe, noninvasive procedure and 
may identify children with myocardial ischemia that was 
not detected with exercise stress electrocardiographic 
testing alone. However, a major limitation to exercise 
stress echocardiography is rapid return of heart rates 
to normal in children, thus necessitating rapid imaging. 
Also, young children cannot perform on treadmills; thus, 
alternatives such as dobutamine stress echocardiogra-
phy (DSE) may be used instead.
Zilberman et al322 studied 47 patients after KD and 
found that DSE was useful to distinguish high-risk pa-
tients from other lower-risk categories. They concluded 
that DSE might have more sensitivity for perfusion abnor-
mality detection than standard exercise stress electro-
cardiographic testing, and they found positive wall-motion 
abnormalities in 2 of 4 patients with coronary artery ste-
noses; all others were negative. In an early large experi-
ence from Japan, Noto et al323 reported DSE using doses 
limited to 30 μg·kg−1·min−1 in 50 patients, of whom 26 
had residual coronary artery abnormalities. Although only 
40% of patients reached an ideal rate pressure product of 
20 
000, they found new wall-motion abnormalities in 19 
of 21 patients and did not find wall-motion abnormalities 
in the 24 patients with normal coronary arteries; the sen-
sitivity and specificity were 90% and 100%, respectively. 
This same group recently reported a long-term study of 
DSE with 15-year follow-up of these patients in which they 
found that DSE provided independent prognostic informa-
tion in adolescent KD survivors.324
Cardiac MRI
In adults, adenosine stress CMRI has been used in pa-
tients with coronary artery stenosis for risk stratification 
of major cardiac events. This tool could have potential 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e971
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
applications for patients with a history of KD; however, 
data are limited. In a case series of 14 asymptomatic 
patients with a history of KD and coronary involvement 
(5 residual coronary artery abnormalities), subjects un-
derwent adenosine-stress CMRI, with gadolinium also 
used to assess for fibrosis.325 Notably, 8 patients had 
anesthesia for this study. The authors demonstrated an 
inducible perfusion defect in 1 patient and a myocardial 
scar in another. Notably, the mean myocardial perfusion 
reserve was impaired in all patients compared with his-
torical control subjects, which suggests the presence of 
microvascular dysfunction. A second study in the Nether-
lands, which used comprehensive MRI both for anatomic 
imaging and stress, applied CMRI during follow-up of 63 
patients with KD using adenosine.326 They identified 23 
aneurysms in 15 patients, ischemia in 4, and scar in 5. 
In 6 of the 15 patients with aneurysms, the coronary 
artery abnormalities were not visualized with echocar-
diography, which suggests that comprehensive CMRI is 
a superior, noninvasive, and radiation-free imaging mo-
dality for long-term surveillance of these patients.
In summary, patients with a history of KD and coro-
nary artery abnormalities warrant risk stratification and 
surveillance for inducible ischemia and long-term follow-
up. Testing should include anatomic imaging of the coro-
nary arteries, as well as functional testing with exercise 
or pharmacological stress testing with echocardiogra-
phy or MPI, depending on institutional expertise and age 
of the child. Treadmill stress electrocardiographic test-
ing alone is not adequate to assess for inducible isch-
emia. PET has also been used with less conclusive data 
to detect perfusion defects, and myocardial stress CMRI 
is a promising new technique with limited published data 
in the KD cohort.
Recommendations for Testing for Inducible 
Ischemia
1. It is reasonable to use stress echocardiogra-
phy or CMRI, NM MPI, or PET for assessment 
of inducible myocardial ischemia (Class IIa; 
Level of Evidence B). Note: The general prin-
ciple is to minimize risk to the patient, particu-
larly cumulative radiation dose, and this should 
guide selection of testing modality based on 
patient and institutional characteristics.
2. Exercise treadmill electrocardiographic test-
ing alone should not be used for assessment 
for inducible myocardial ischemia (Class III; 
Level of Evidence C).
Recommendation for Assessment of Patients 
With Inducible Myocardial Ischemia
1. Patients with evidence of inducible myo-
cardial ischemia on testing should undergo 
invasive coronary angiography (Class I; Level 
of Evidence B).
The management of patients with evidence of inducible 
ischemia on testing who are noted to have important 
coronary artery stenoses or occlusions on advanced im-
aging is outlined in the Catheter and Surgical Coronary 
Artery Interventions sections.
Role of Advanced Cardiovascular Imaging and Functional 
Assessment
The long-term cardiovascular impact of KD may mani-
fest not only in distortion of coronary artery luminal 
geometry but also in changes in the structure and 
function of the arterial endothelium and wall, as well 
as the myocardium. Advanced imaging methods can 
be applied to characterize vascular remodeling, flow 
reserve, endothelial dysfunction, and myocardial fibro-
sis, any of which can influence the prognosis and risks 
of selected patients with important coronary artery in-
volvement. In the convalescent KD patient with coro-
nary artery aneurysms, long-term specialized follow-up 
is recommended.311
Invasive Angiography
The “gold standard” for coronary artery assessment, 
particularly in the adult patient, is invasive angiography. 
It provides a detailed image of the coronary artery lu-
men and is very useful in defining regional flow-limiting 
stenoses and assessing them for potential intervention. 
Fractional flow reserve, measured during angiography, 
is a common method for determining the ischemia-caus-
ing potential of atherosclerotic stenoses. Discrete coro-
nary artery stenosis in KD can also be assessed, with 
similar cut points as in adults with atherosclerosis.327 An 
additional insight from fractional flow reserve (FFR) in 
KD relates to the impact of coronary artery aneurysms 
on the arterial pressure. Turbulence-related pressure 
loss at dilated segments may create a drop in pressure 
along the artery, but FFR assessed in a small series of 
KD-associated aneurysms documented pressure drops 
that were smaller than threshold values used to predict 
pathophysiological importance.328
Intravascular Assessment
A more detailed assessment of the KD-related arterial 
wall abnormalities can be obtained with intravascular im-
aging. IVUS has been used to demonstrate vascular pa-
thology at the sites where coronary artery abnormalities 
were documented during the acute phase of KD. Ana-
tomic and functional vessel wall changes can be identi-
fied in patients with both current and regressed coronary 
artery aneurysms. Using IVUS-based “virtual histology” in 
convalescent KD patients, Mitani et al275 showed dense 
calcium, necrotic core, and fibrofatty areas at sites of 
important coronary artery stenosis compared with nor-
mal regions or sites of regressed aneurysms. Iemura et 
al274 found ongoing functional abnormalities in cases of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e972
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
regressed coronary artery aneurysms using IVUS plus 
acetylcholine infusion.
OCT is an invasive angiographic modality that uses 
light rather than ultrasound to provide high-resolution in-
travascular imaging of arterial wall abnormalities, which 
have been detected even when the coronary artery lu-
men is not distorted. The spatial resolution of OCT is 
higher than IVUS because of the shorter wavelengths, 
but the depth of penetration into the wall is less (2–3 mm 
versus 4–8 mm with IVUS). OCT has mostly been applied 
in adults. In a small series of children with a history of 
KD and angiographically normal luminal dimensions after 
regression of aneurysms, OCT was able to demonstrate 
important arterial wall abnormalities in all, including inti-
mal thickening, distortion of wall layers, thrombus, cal-
cification, and neovascularization with destruction of the 
internal elastic lamina.329
These invasive intravascular assessments can define 
the extent of coronary artery thrombus, calcification, 
and eccentricity; however, their utility for serial follow-
up of KD patients is currently limited by their invasive 
nature. Likewise, the routine use of invasive angiography 
is additionally limited by patient exposure to contrast 
agents and radiation.
Noninvasive Modalities
Less invasive approaches to visualization of the coro-
nary arteries have proven useful in the follow-up of KD 
patients. CMRI or magnetic resonance angiography stud-
ies, multislice spiral CT, and rapid CTA have become es-
tablished as preferred methodologies for surveillance.
CMRI is useful for the assessment of many aspects 
of KD patients in the long term and has the advantage 
of avoiding radiation exposure.330 Compared with CMRI 
angiography for aneurysm detection, CTA may be more 
sensitive to abnormalities in distal vessels and to the 
presence of thrombus.331 These differences may be min-
imized as increasing field strength and spatial resolution 
continue to improve coronary artery visualization with 
magnetic resonance angiography. CMRI also affords as-
sessment of ventricular function, myocardial perfusion, 
and scarring. CMRI of 60 patients at an average inter-
val of 11.6 years after acute KD did not demonstrate 
differences in right ventricular or LV sizes or function 
compared with control subjects.153 Delayed gadolinium 
enhancement, in a pattern consistent with MI, was iden-
tified in only 2 patients with persistent giant coronary 
artery aneurysms. Quantitative myocardial perfusion 
with CMRI identified abnormal perfusion reserve in KD 
convalescent patients that was independent of coronary 
artery status. This could make it a tool for identification 
of coronary microvascular dysfunction in KD patients.325 
Finally, CMRI can be used to detect myocardial edema 
with quantitative T2 mapping, scarring with delayed gad-
olinium enhancement, and fibrosis with T1 mapping.332 
Whether these multimodal features in isolation or com-
bination will correlate with outcomes or modify therapy 
remains to be determined.
CTA can provide 3-dimensional visualization of the 
coronary arterial tree and may identify regions of ste-
noses more optimally than current cardiac magnetic 
resonance techniques; however, the radiation involved, 
when serial studies are likely, could limit its use. Newer 
systems with lower levels of radiation exposure could 
increase the utility and safety of this modality.
Low-dose, noncontrast CT calcium scoring also has 
been demonstrated to be useful in KD patients to guide 
selection for further evaluation with coronary angiogra-
phy. In a series of patients with a history of KD (average 
time from acute illness, 14 years), coronary artery cal-
cification was not identified in convalescent KD patients 
who had never had coronary artery abnormalities. In 
contrast, coronary artery calcium was demonstrated in 
most subjects with a persistent aneurysm.333 This could 
be useful in guiding further evaluation of adults with prior 
KD when information about prior coronary artery abnor-
malities cannot be obtained.
CT performed in combination with PET can identify 
the presence of ongoing inflammation of the coronary 
artery, but insufficient data are available to define a role 
for this approach at present.334 In addition, this is associ-
ated with important radiation exposure.
Lifestyle and Cardiovascular Risk Factors
There continues to be debate about whether the long-term 
pathological vascular process in the arteries of patients 
after KD represents a distinct vasculopathy or has com-
mon features of atherosclerosis.335 Pathology suggests 
a distinct process characterized by thrombosis, chronic 
inflammation, and luminal myofibroblastic proliferation. 
However, studies in patients have variably noted the pres-
ence of endothelial dysfunction, increased intima-media 
thickness, and arterial stiffness. It is unknown whether 
atherosclerosis and atherosclerosis risk factors could in-
fluence the chronic processes of KD vasculopathy.
Nonetheless, KD patients have been classified as be-
ing at risk for CVD and targeted for evaluation and man-
agement of atherosclerotic CVD risk factors. In an AHA 
scientific statement on “Cardiovascular Risk Reduction in 
High-Risk Pediatric Patients” published in 2006, KD was 
classified as a risk condition, with patients having current 
coronary artery aneurysms believed to be at high risk, 
those with regressed aneurysms at moderate risk, and 
those without detected coronary artery involvement at 
low risk.336 This classification was incorporated into the 
2011 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute–commis-
sioned Expert Panel Integrated “Guidelines for Cardio-
vascular Health and Risk Reduction in Children and Ado-
lescents,” with patients having current aneurysms being 
designated as having a high-risk condition and those with 
regressed aneurysms as having a moderate-risk condi-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e973
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
tion.304 The reader is referred to these guidelines for de-
tailed recommendations regarding lifestyle management 
and detection and management of specific CVD risk fac-
tors applicable to both the general population and those 
after KD. Given that these patients already have CAD, 
it is important that CVD risk factors are assessed and 
managed.
Risk Factors in KD Patients
KD patients might have a different pattern or suscep-
tibility to CVD risk factors than the general population. 
Several reports have documented that high-density lipo-
protein (HDL) cholesterol levels are decreased acutely 
after KD, sometimes together with increases in triglyc-
erides and reduced levels of apolipoproteins AI and AII, 
with a variable relation to the extent of coronary artery 
involvement or inflammatory markers.337–340 Qualitative 
changes in HDL particles have also been noted and 
thought to be related to acute levels of serum amyloid 
A.341 Although they are improved after convalescence, 
lower HDL cholesterol levels can persist, particularly in 
those patients with severe and ongoing coronary artery 
aneurysms.338,342,343 HDL and inflammation are known 
to be interrelated, and chronic changes may reflect this 
relationship. Nuclear magnetic resonance lipoprotein 
particle analysis suggests that pediatric and adult pa-
tients with KD, regardless of their aneurysm status, are 
no more likely than age-similar, healthy control subjects 
to have lipid patterns associated with increased risk of 
atherosclerosis.344 Differences in blood pressure have 
been equivocal, with one study that used ambulatory 
blood pressure reporting reduced nighttime dipping345 
and others reporting no alterations in blood pressure 
regulation.342,346–348 KD patients may be predisposed to 
adiposity, most likely related to lifestyle factors, particu-
larly reduced levels of physical activity.349–351 A single 
study noted elevation of glycosylated hemoglobin rela-
tive to normal control subjects.345 It would appear that 
KD patients do not differ significantly from the general 
population with regard to CVD risk factors; however, 
their increased risk based on the presence of CAD mer-
its careful attention and more aggressive management 
of lifestyle and CVD risk factors.
Medical Therapy
Infective Endocarditis Prophylaxis
Guidelines from the AHA have provided recommenda-
tions for prevention of infective endocarditis.352 Patients 
with KD do not require antibiotic prophylaxis, regardless 
of the degree of past or current coronary artery involve-
ment, coronary artery revascularization including stent 
placement, or the presence of valvular regurgitation.
Medical Therapy for Myocardial Protection
Patients with coronary artery aneurysms after KD may 
merit medical therapy to minimize the risk for and the 
degree of myocardial ischemia. Myocardial ischemia in 
patients after KD may result from structural abnormali-
ties, including coronary artery stenoses or obstructions, 
and extreme sluggishness of flow through capacious 
aneurysms, particularly those in distal segments.328 It 
may also arise from functional abnormalities, including 
vasospasm, endothelial dysfunction, and impaired myo-
cardial flow reserve. KD patients with CAD may be as-
ymptomatic or may have stable symptoms of ischemic 
heart disease, such as exertional chest pain or dyspnea. 
In addition to compromised coronary artery perfusion, 
some KD patients may also have ventricular dysfunction 
resulting from prior MI, which increases their potential 
for myocardial ischemia, symptoms, and progression 
and can modify the choices of therapy.
The evidence base specific to KD patients is sparse, 
but data acquired from extensive experience with ath-
erosclerotic disease in adults identifies several effective 
approaches to myocardial protection in the setting of 
coronary obstruction. These interventions have been ad-
dressed in recent adult guidelines for the management 
of stable ischemic heart disease.353 Medical interven-
tions can be considered in 2 roles: first, of avoiding MI 
and death, and second, of controlling chest pain and 
other ischemic symptoms.
β-Blockers
β-Blockade decreases the risk of MI and death by re-
ducing myocardial oxygen demand. For atherosclerotic 
disease, β-blockers are a critical part of management, 
and their effects should extend to the pathophysiology 
of KD coronary disease as well. Use of β-blockade is 
a Class I indication for all adult patients who have had 
MI or ACS for the 3 years after the event, irrespective 
of LV function (Level of Evidence B), and indefinitely in 
patients with LV systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction 
<40%) with heart failure or prior MI, unless a contraindi-
cation exists (Level of Evidence A). β-Blockers may be 
considered for KD patients of all ages, particularly those 
at high risk of myocardial ischemia because of large or 
giant coronary artery aneurysms. Carvedilol, metoprolol 
succinate, or bisoprolol are the β-blocking agents that 
have been shown to reduce risk of death. The consid-
eration of β-blocking agents has been incorporated into 
the long-term management algorithm for KD patients 
with large or giant aneurysms that persist.
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone blocker therapy has also 
been shown to be protective against MI and death in 
atherosclerotic CVD, and similar protection may be an-
ticipated in KD patients with reduced ventricular func-
tion, although this has not been proven. ACEIs are rec-
ommended in all adult patients with atherosclerosis and 
stable ischemic heart disease who have the incremental 
risks of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, LV ejection frac-
tion ≤40%, or chronic kidney disease. In patients who 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e974
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
are intolerant of ACEIs, angiotensin receptor blockers 
are recommended.
Medical Therapy for Symptoms of Ischemia
For relief of symptoms of ischemia, β-blockers should 
be used as initial therapy (Class I, Level of Evidence 
B for atherosclerotic patients); if these are inadequate 
for symptom control, calcium channel blockers or long-
acting nitrates should be added or used instead of β-
blockers in intolerant patients. Sublingual nitroglycerine 
or nitroglycerine spray is recommended for immediate 
control of angina.
Empirical Use of Statins
Hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme-A reductase inhibitors 
(statins) are a cornerstone of therapy for the primary and 
secondary prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
events in adults.354 In addition to lowering low-density li-
poprotein cholesterol, statins have potentially beneficial 
pleiotropic effects on inflammation, endothelial function, 
oxidative stress, platelet aggregation, coagulation, and 
fibrinolysis. Although controversy continues concerning 
whether the vascular pathology of KD may have fea-
tures of atherosclerosis, statins could have a role in the 
long-term management. KD patients have been variably 
shown to have chronic inflammation and reduced HDL-
cholesterol levels. In addition, endothelial dysfunction, 
increased vascular stiffness, and intima-media thicken-
ing have been noted in both affected coronary arteries 
and in systemic arteries. In the setting of familial hy-
percholesterolemia, children and adolescents treated 
with statins showed normalized endothelial function and 
regression of carotid intima-media thickening.355,356 To 
date, these studies have included patients as young as 
6 years. Short-term small studies in KD patients with 
aneurysms treated with statins have shown reductions 
in high-sensitivity CRP and improved endothelial func-
tion.357–359 A review of empirical statin use in 20 KD pa-
tients as young as 8 months with aneurysms who were 
treated for a median of 2.5 years showed only transient 
laboratory abnormalities and no effect on growth.360 
Given this discussion, empirical treatment with low-dose 
statin may be considered for KD patients with past or 
current aneurysms, regardless of age or sex.
Thromboprophylaxis
Patients with important coronary artery aneurysms re-
main at chronic risk of thrombosis. Nonocclusive orga-
nized thrombus and recanalized occlusive thrombus both 
contribute to chronic pathological changes in the arterial 
wall and may be superimposed on chronic inflammation 
and luminal myofibroblastic proliferation. These changes 
may contribute not only to a reduction or normalization 
of luminal dimensions but also to the development of 
stenoses. The chronic risk of thrombosis is greatest 
in those with giant aneurysms and is attributable to re-
duced shear stress and flow disturbances (stagnation) 
as noted in rheological studies361,362 and flow simula-
tions.363,364 Other patient and aneurysm characteristics 
can also increase thrombosis risk (Table 9). The degree 
to which both local and systemic endothelial dysfunction 
and inflammation contribute to thrombosis risk is not 
completely known. Albisetti et al365 showed that patients 
with aneurysms had a decreased fibrinolytic response 
to venous occlusion as a marker of systemic endothelial 
dysfunction.
Prevention of thrombosis is therefore an important 
component of long-term management. Given that arte-
rial thrombi are believed to initiate with platelet activa-
tion, antiplatelet therapy is the mainstay of initial therapy. 
However, for patients with large or giant aneurysms, in 
which flow stasis is a prominent feature, activation of the 
clotting system may be an initiating factor, and hence, 
anticoagulation is added. For some patients with medi-
um aneurysms, or giant aneurysms that have reduced in 
size, dual-antiplatelet therapy may be considered as an 
alternative to the addition of an anticoagulant. The risk 
is largely driven by the size of the aneurysm and is high-
est in those with giant aneurysms. Also, flow stasis may 
increase in more distal aneurysms, particularly those 
distal to large proximal aneurysms. The relationship with 
luminal dimension in the chronic phase is largely driven 
by the current degree of involvement, although the pres-
ence of previous thrombosis also increases the risk. 
Hence, an approach to thromboprophylaxis must take 
into account both maximal and current luminal dimen-
sions, as well as other factors that could increase the 
risk of thrombosis.
For antiplatelet effects, low-dose ASA remains the 
mainstay. For those with resistance to ASA or ASA in-
tolerance or allergy, an alternative antiplatelet agent is 
used. For anticoagulation, warfarin continues to be the 
drug of choice in most circumstances. The use of antico-
agulation has been shown to reduce MI in those with giant 
aneurysms, to 1 of 19 patients treated with warfarin and 
ASA versus 16 of 49 patients treated with ASA alone (with 
7 sudden deaths in the ASA-only group).245 A further mul-
ticenter study of 83 patients with giant aneurysms, most 
of whom were treated with ASA and warfarin, showed a 
10-year freedom from cardiac events of 91%, or 2.9% 
per patient-year of follow-up, with a rate of hemorrhagic 
complications of 1.7% per patient-year.366 However, par-
ticularly for patients in whom dosing and maintenance 
of warfarin are problematic and achievement of a stable 
level of anticoagulation is essential, such as in young 
patients and in those early in the course of their disease, 
LMWH may be a useful alternative.367 LMWH has been 
shown to provide a similar freedom from thrombosis, 
with more minor but fewer major bleeding complications 
than with warfarin. In addition, a greater time spent in the 
therapeutic target range has been noted, with some evi-
dence of increased normalization of luminal dimensions. 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e975
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
The use of direct oral anticoagulant drugs has not been 
studied in children, or in patients with KD, although they 
do hold promise.
Physical Activity
Regular physical activity is important for healthy physical 
and psychosocial development for children and adoles-
cents. Conversely, there are important health risks asso-
ciated with inactivity. However, little is known of the activ-
ity levels of patients after KD, and there is no evidence to 
support aggressive activity restrictions. KD patients, re-
gardless of the extent of coronary artery abnormalities, 
have been shown to be <50% as active as their healthy 
peers, and this was associated with lower self-efficacy 
for physical activity and lower physical functioning.351 
Exercise capacity has been shown to be normal regard-
less of the extent of coronary artery involvement, even 
in the presence of inducible myocardial ischemia.368–370 
KD has been recognized as a high-risk cardiovascular 
condition, and physical activity should be promoted for 
everyone within the parameters defined by the risk of 
myocardial ischemia, arrhythmia, and bleeding associ-
ated with thromboprophylaxis.336
Guidelines exist regarding physical activity and exer-
cise for patients with congenital heart disease and can 
be adapted for the KD patient.371 In addition, the 36th 
Bethesda Conference regarding competitive athletes 
with cardiovascular abnormalities provides recommen-
dations specific to KD.372 These recommendations re-
garding participation in competitive sports emphasize 
the need for guidance based on testing for inducible 
myocardial ischemia or arrhythmia for those with past or 
current aneurysms, with a preference for lower-intensity 
competitive sports for those with persistent aneurysms.
Physical activity should be discussed and encouraged 
at every visit. If a precaution is indicated, the reason for 
the precaution should be discussed in detail and provided 
in writing to the patient and the patient’s providers. Fail-
ure to do so has been shown to result in uncertainties 
for patients and families, which leads to lack of participa-
tion and inactivity.373 Patients taking thromboprophylaxis 
that includes dual-antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy 
are restricted from activities involving a risk of bodily 
contact, trauma, or injury. If the risk can be effectively 
mitigated, such as with appropriate supervision and the 
use of a helmet and protective gear, participation may 
be considered. Patients at risk for myocardial ischemia 
or exercised-induced arrhythmia are restricted from ac-
tivities with a high dynamic or static component, and 
decisions should be guided by stress echocardiography 
or MPI, as well as the presence of exercise-induced ar-
rhythmias or symptoms. Patients should be instructed 
regarding symptoms and signs of myocardial ischemia 
and guidance for safe participation (lack of coercion, ad-
equate supervision, permission to self-limit, safe environ-
ment, and availability of a defibrillator and people capable 
of performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation). A 2013 
AHA scientific statement provides healthcare providers 
with best practices regarding physical activity promo-
tion.374 Additionally, the 2010 KD guidelines from Japan 
provide a school activity management table that gives 
clear direction to patients and schools regarding specific 
recommended activities and participation levels.137
Some KD patients at risk for myocardial ischemia or 
who have exercise intolerance and deconditioning could 
benefit from participation in a rehabilitation program. 
Rehabilitation programs are recognized as an important 
part of the care for adults with CVD375–377 and are begin-
ning to be conceptualized and adapted for children.378 
Most emerging programs have focused on exercise 
training interventions for patients with congenital heart 
disease that require important resources. Home-based 
activity programs might be a better option for children 
and families. The benefits of such programs have yet to 
be broadly studied. A small study of KD patients with an 
occluded coronary artery and stress-induced myocardial 
ischemia showed improved perfusion to collateral-de-
pendent areas after a 10-day exercise training program 
with heparin pretreatment.379 This further supports the 
concept that all KD patients should be allowed to benefit 
from physical activity within the context of any restric-
tions.
Reproductive Counseling
For female patients, reproductive counseling in terms of 
contraception and risks of pregnancy are part of long-
term management. Although specific recommendations 
for patients with KD are not available, guidelines are avail-
able for adults with congenital heart disease.380 Counsel-
ing should be age appropriate and begin at approximate-
ly the age of 10 years, and they should be incorporated 
into general health counseling. For those patients with 
important CAD, the issue of increasing thrombosis risk 
with certain types of oral contraceptive agents should be 
considered. In such circumstances, low-estrogen or pro-
gesterone-only oral contraceptives would be preferred. 
Appropriate referral or consultation with a specialist 
might be needed. For patients considering pregnancy 
or who have become pregnant, appropriate assessment 
of their current cardiac status is essential, including the 
risk of ischemia, deterioration in functional status, heart 
failure, arrhythmia, and thrombosis. Ideally, at-risk wom-
en who are considering pregnancy should be referred to 
a high-risk obstetric service for appropriate counseling 
before pregnancy. Comanagement of pregnancy with 
a high-risk obstetric service, including a maternal-fetal 
medicine specialist, and an adult cardiologist is needed. 
Thromboprophylaxis strategy might need to be adjust-
ed during pregnancy (warfarin should be discontinued; 
heparin or dual-antiplatelet therapy may be a suitable al-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e976
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
ternative) and delivery. Warfarin must be avoided during 
the first trimester because of its teratogenic effect. In 
addition, statins and ACEIs should be discontinued.
Outcomes of pregnancy have been reported in KD pa-
tients. Two patients with giant aneurysms had successful 
pregnancy and delivery after switching their warfarin to 
low-dose ASA and unfractionated heparin.381 A series of 
21 pregnancies in 10 women (6 normal, 4 with coronary 
artery aneurysms) showed no cardiovascular complica-
tions (although 2 of the 21 progeny subsequently devel-
oped KD).382 A study in Japan of 46 pregnancies in 30 
women also showed no cardiac events.383,384
Catheter and Surgical Coronary Artery 
Interventions
The recommendations outlined in this section are based 
on limited data and mostly reflect available observational 
data and consensus opinion from experts in the field. 
Decisions regarding the need for revascularization and 
the optimal mode of revascularization are often difficult 
and tailored to the patient’s clinical status, candidacy for 
different forms of revascularization, and preference. It 
is important to consult an adult interventional cardiolo-
gist and adult cardiothoracic surgeon with experience in 
revascularization of patients with KD when revasculariza-
tion is considered.
Acute Coronary Syndromes
ACS includes ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI), non–
STEMI, and unstable angina. Patients with KD may pres-
ent with STEMI in the setting of complete thrombosis of 
an aneurysm during the acute/subacute phase of the 
illness, thrombosis of a residual giant aneurysm later in 
the illness, or rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque that 
may have formed independently in an adult with a remote 
history of KD. STEMI is a medical emergency and re-
quires an attempt at prompt restoration of anterograde 
flow through the vessel.
In young patients in the acute/subacute phase of the 
illness, the optimal means of achieving restoration of cor-
onary flow is not known. In this setting, there is little ex-
perience with mechanical revascularization techniques, 
either with catheter-based techniques or with coronary 
artery bypass grafting (CABG) surgery. Systemic throm-
bolytic or intravenous antiplatelet therapy (ie, abciximab) 
may be the best option for these patients in potentially 
reducing thrombus burden and allowing for rapid recana-
lization of the acutely occluded vessel. Systemic and 
intracoronary thrombolytic therapy has been used suc-
cessfully to reduce aneurysmal thrombus burden in pa-
tients with more stable presentation.385,386 CABG should 
not be considered because of inherent delays in restor-
ing anterograde flow into the occluded vessel. Percuta-
neous coronary interventions (PCIs) can be considered, 
although there may be difficulties in successfully passing 
a coronary guidewire through an acutely occluded aneu-
rysm. If PCI is pursued, consideration should be given to 
the use of thrombectomy catheters to remove thrombus 
burden. Balloon angioplasty may not yield a durable re-
sult, and it is unlikely that a stent could be deployed in a 
stable fashion within an acutely occluded aneurysm with 
thrombus.
The adult with a known remote history of KD present-
ing with STEMI should be referred for emergency coro-
nary angiography and determination of the best mode 
of revascularization. Unlike the patient in the acute/
subacute phase of KD presenting with STEMI, the adult 
presenting with STEMI may have typical atherosclerotic 
disease as the cause of their STEMI, and standard PCI 
techniques may be appropriate. If the patient is found 
to have an acutely thrombosed aneurysm, then a judg-
ment decision will need to be made by the interventional 
cardiologist as to whether PCI should be attempted or a 
pharmacological strategy should be used.
Management of ACS in adult patients with remote 
KD can be particularly complicated when the initial di-
agnosis was missed in childhood or was not followed 
up after the transition to adult care. Given the high inci-
dence of ACS in the general population, such patients 
can surprise the adult interventional cardiologist and 
should be recognized as a clinical challenge unique 
from conventional atherosclerotic disease, and suspi-
cion of prior KD, particularly in young adults presenting 
with ACS and in the setting of unanticipated aneurysmal 
changes, should be maintained. A recent series in a US-
based population underscores the particular challenges 
of acute percutaneous interventions in this population, 
relating to the presence of coronary calcification and 
the potential for underestimation of true luminal dimen-
sions and the potential to miss underlying aneurysmal 
distortion.387 These factors emphasize the importance 
of IVUS to demonstrate true luminal dimensions, improve 
stent deployment, and inform potential modifications to 
postprocedural anticoagulation. Clinical follow-up strate-
gies in the patient after an ACS episode will include the 
previously listed recommendations for surveillance and 
management of CAD in adult KD patients.
Urgency for revascularization is less for patients with 
other forms of ACS (non-STEMI and unstable angina) pro-
vided the patient is stable from an ischemic and hemody-
namic standpoint. KD patients with non-STEMI/unstable 
angina may present because of nonocclusive thrombo-
sis of coronary aneurysms with distal embolization or 
progression of calcified stenoses later in the disease. 
Coronary CTA or CMRI may be helpful to understand the 
pathophysiology of the presentation and determine the 
appropriate next steps. For patients who present be-
cause of thrombosis of an aneurysm, consideration may 
be given to thrombolytic therapy and institution of long-
term anticoagulation. Mechanical revascularization is not 
likely to be of marginal benefit in these patients. For pa-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e977
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
tients presenting with progression of calcified stenoses 
as the cause of their presentation, cardiac catheteriza-
tion should be considered, and revascularization can be 
considered as discussed below.
KD patients with stable angina typically present well 
after the initial presentation with KD and often will pres-
ent in early adulthood. They generally have predict-
able angina with exertion. Symptoms tend to develop 
gradually, not suddenly as is typically seen with ACS. 
Stable angina is usually attributable to demand isch-
emia caused by progressive stenoses located at the 
inlet or outflow of coronary artery aneurysms that have 
mostly regressed and stabilized. Unlike typical athero-
sclerotic plaques seen in CAD, these stenoses tend to 
be circumferential rather than eccentric and are often 
heavily calcified.
KD patients with stable angina should undergo re-
vascularization for left main coronary artery involve-
ment, lifestyle-limiting angina despite maximal medical 
therapy, or high-risk features on noninvasive ischemia 
assessment. This practice would be in keeping with 
guidelines for adult patients with typical atherosclerotic 
CAD.388
Left main CAD, or disease that is equivalent to left 
main disease (ie, ostial/proximal LAD involvement and 
left circumflex involvement), represents anatomy that 
confers a high ischemic burden with activity. According 
to revascularization guidelines in adults with CAD, a left 
main stenosis of ≥50% should be considered for revas-
cularization in a patient with symptoms and documenta-
tion of ischemia. CABG is the mode of revascularization 
of choice, although PCI can be considered in selected 
patients.
There is growing evidence that patients with angina 
and without high-risk coronary artery anatomy can be 
safely managed with medical therapy without confer-
ring an increased risk of long-term mortality or MI. 
Although data are limited, this likely is true for KD pa-
tients with stable angina attributable to fixed obstruc-
tions within the coronary arteries. Therapies should be 
aimed at relieving angina, and this can be achieved 
with β-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and ni-
trates. However, if the angina cannot be successfully 
managed to the point of being acceptable for the pa-
tient, or the side effects of the antianginal medications 
cannot be tolerated, consideration should be given to 
revascularization.
Symptomatic KD patients with high-risk features on 
noninvasive imaging should also be considered for re-
vascularization. High-risk features include an early posi-
tive testing for inducible myocardial ischemia or exer-
cise-induced arrhythmias, or poor exercise tolerance 
(<3 MET [metabolic equivalent of task] units) because 
of symptoms (angina and dyspnea). The COURAGE (Clini-
cal Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive 
Drug Evaluation) study randomized adult patients with 
stable atherosclerotic coronary disease to receive op-
timal medical therapy versus revascularization with PCI 
and optimal medical therapy.389 Patients in the revas-
cularization group fared no better than patients in the 
optimal medical therapy group in terms of death and MI 
at follow-up. However, the nuclear substudy suggested 
a potential mortality benefit in patients who underwent 
revascularization for CAD that resulted in ≥10% of the 
myocardial muscle mass becoming ischemic.390 There-
fore, in symptomatic KD patients with this threshold of 
ischemic muscle mass, revascularization may be rea-
sonable.
Prior reports have suggested that symptomatic KD 
patients with coronary stenoses estimated to be ≥70% 
on coronary angiography should be considered for re-
vascularization independent of physiological assess-
ment of the lesion. However, revascularization based 
on lesion severity alone (the “oculostenotic reflex”) in 
stable patients has not proven to be of benefit. It would 
be reasonable to consider revascularization in patients if 
ischemia testing demonstrates ischemia in the myocar-
dial territory subtended by the lesion. In patients referred 
for cardiac catheterization without prior noninvasive test-
ing, measurement of FFR in the catheterization labora-
tory should be considered as a risk-stratification tool to 
determine need for revascularization. Patients with FFR 
>0.80 can safely be managed medically without an in-
creased risk of death, MI, or delayed need for target-
vessel revascularization. However, based on the results 
of the recent FAME II (Fractional Flow Reserve versus 
Angiography for Multivessel Evaluation 2) study, patients 
with FFR ≤0.80 may be at increased risk for urgent re-
admission for unstable angina and need for target-vessel 
revascularization.391 These patients may be considered 
for revascularization after FFR assessment.
Patients with silent ischemia (documented isch-
emia on noninvasive testing or FFR assessment in the 
absence of symptoms) represent a difficult subset of 
patients to manage because the optimal management 
of these patients is not certain. This holds true for pa-
tients with KD as well. Patients with silent ischemia are 
believed to have an altered warning system and do not 
sense angina in a typical fashion. In stable patients with 
obstructive coronary lesions, angina relief is the major 
benefit of coronary revascularization; however, whether 
revascularization positively affects outcomes of patients 
with silent ischemia is not well understood at this time. 
Revascularization should certainly be considered in KD 
patients with silent ischemia who have left main coronary 
artery involvement (or left main equivalent involvement) 
or who have high-risk features on noninvasive assess-
ments for ischemia. It would be reasonable to consider 
revascularization in KD patients with silent ischemia who 
have ≥10% of myocardial muscle mass that is ischemic 
on MPI. It would also be reasonable to consider revascu-
larization in patients with FFR ≤0.80.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e978
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
Recommendations for Indications for Mechanical 
Revascularization
1. Revascularization should be avoided in KD 
patients in the acute/subacute phase of 
the illness with STEMI attributable to acute 
thrombotic occlusion of an aneurysm (Class 
III; Level of Evidence C).
2. Adult patients with remote history of KD 
presenting with STEMI should be referred 
emergently for coronary angiography for 
determination of best means of flow resto-
ration in the culprit artery (Class I; Level of 
Evidence C).
3. Revascularization should be performed in KD 
patients with stable angina and high-risk coro-
nary anatomy including left main CAD, multi-
vessel coronary disease with reduction in LV 
function, multivessel coronary disease with 
diabetes mellitus, or high-risk noninvasive 
ischemia testing (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
4. Revascularization should be performed for 
patients with non–ST-segment elevation and 
coronary anatomy amenable to revascular-
ization on coronary angiography (Class I; 
Level of Evidence C).
5. Revascularization for patients with stable 
angina and symptoms refractory to maxi-
mal medical therapy is reasonable (Class 
IIa; Level of Evidence C).
6. Revascularization for KD patients with silent 
ischemia and ischemia involving >10% of LV 
mass may be considered (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting 
Once the decision to proceed with revascularization is 
made, the decision between CABG and PCI can often be 
difficult, and the risks and benefits of both procedures 
have to be weighed carefully before a route is selected.
There are several factors favoring CABG surgery over 
PCI. Patients with left main coronary involvement or mul-
tivessel coronary artery involvement will be better treat-
ed with CABG. It is likely that more complete revascular-
ization can be achieved with CABG, particularly if there is 
the presence of ≥1 chronic total occlusions. Patients with 
multivessel coronary artery involvement and reduced LV 
function (because of either prior MI or chronic ischemia) 
may also benefit more from CABG, again because of 
the greater likelihood for complete revascularization. A 
third subset of patients who may fare better with CABG 
are diabetic patients. The recently published FREEDOM 
trial (Future Revascularization Evaluation in Patients With 
Diabetes Mellitus: Optimal Management of Multivessel 
Disease) showed a survival benefit for diabetic patients 
treated with CABG versus multivessel PCI.392 Although 
these were all patients with typical atherosclerotic CAD, 
whether these findings would apply in a clinical trial of KD 
patients with diabetes mellitus is unknown. It stands to 
reason, however, that the conclusions would be similar. 
Patients with single-vessel disease requiring revascular-
ization but for whom prior PCI attempts have failed or for 
whom PCI is deemed unfeasible should also be consid-
ered for CABG. Finally, age plays an important role in the 
decision for CABG versus PCI. CABG is favored in older 
children and younger adults, although children in the first 
decade of life have been treated with CABG.
If CABG is deemed the optimal revascularization strat-
egy, every effort should be made to use both mammary 
arteries for conduits. Unlike saphenous vein grafts, the 
length and diameter of mammary artery grafts continues 
to grow as children grow. Furthermore, the patency of 
mammary artery grafts over the long-term is superior 
to that of saphenous vein grafts. In a Japanese survey 
of KD patients who underwent CABG since 1975 (the 
largest published series to date of KD patients who have 
undergone surgery), the patency rates for mammary ar-
tery grafts at 1, 5, and 15 years were 95%, 91%, and 
91%, respectively, when the operation was performed 
at >12 years of age.393 In patients for whom the opera-
tive age was ≤12 years, the patency rates were less at 
93%, 73%, and 65% at the same respective time points. 
The overall patency of saphenous vein grafts was 65%, 
53%, and 48%, respectively, at 5, 10, and 15 years after 
CABG in all patients. There are no published data regard-
ing the patency of radial artery or gastroepiploic artery 
grafts in patients with KD.
Although graft failure of mammary artery grafts is 
uncommon, particularly in older children, it is important 
to ensure that a mammary artery is used as a bypass 
conduit only for arteries with physiological stenoses. 
Mammary artery grafts for angiographically borderline 
lesions may fail to mature because of significant com-
petitive flow from the native circulation. If prior ischemia 
testing has failed to show ischemia in the territory sup-
plied by the lesion, strong consideration should be given 
to FFR assessment in the catheterization laboratory 
before grafting of the vessel with a mammary artery is 
considered.
Complications from CABG for KD are no different 
than for CABG for patients with CAD and include an 
aggregate risk of 1% to 2% for major complications, 
including death, MI, major bleeding, stroke, and renal 
failure. Patients with KD tend to be much younger than 
patients with CAD and do not have the diffuse athero-
sclerosis that contributes to major complications from 
CABG in adults.
The long-term clinical outcome of KD patients treat-
ed with CABG appears to be favorable. In the 244 
patients who were included in the survey, there were 
15 deaths (1 operative death, 12 late deaths, and 2 
noncardiac deaths).393 Fourteen patients required re-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e979
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
peat CABG operations, and another 17 patients re-
quired PCI for graft stenoses. As would be expected, 
patients with normal LV function experienced better 
long-term survival.
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention 
The factors that tend to favor PCI as the optimal revascu-
larization strategy include single-vessel disease, multives-
sel disease with focal and easily treated lesions, normal 
LV function, and absence of diabetes mellitus. Patients 
with coronary artery anatomy severe enough to warrant 
CABG but with significant medical comorbidities that make 
CABG too high of a risk can also be considered for PCI 
provided the lesions are technically amenable to PCI and 
the risk of PCI is acceptable. Finally, patients who refuse 
CABG can be considered for PCI as well, provided the 
risks and benefits of PCI compared with CABG are care-
fully discussed and the patients are aware of the potential 
long-term consequences of their decisions. Patients may 
wish to take the less invasive route to minimize the re-
covery time required, and in most cases, this would not 
preclude CABG in the future should it become necessary.
Most of the experience with PCI has been accumu-
lated in Japan, and at this time, there are very few large-
scale data to evaluate the long-term efficacy of PCI in pa-
tients with KD. PCI techniques that can be used to treat 
stenotic lesions in patients with KD include balloon angio-
plasty, with or without coronary stenting, and rotational 
atherectomy (RA) with or without coronary stenting.
Balloon angioplasty is a poor stand-alone technique 
for the treatment of stenotic lesions in KD. In the years 
after the acute illness, these lesions become heavily fi-
brotic and calcified, which renders them extremely dif-
ficult to expand with balloon angioplasty alone. If the 
lesion can be expanded, there is often significant recoil 
that limits the acute result. Furthermore, the high pres-
sures required to expand these lesions have been as-
sociated with the development of neoaneurysms at the 
site of dilation. There are no data or reports of the use 
of plaque-incising balloons in calcified stenotic lesions in 
KD, although their use can be considered.
For patients in whom moderate balloon inflations 
fail to expand the lesion, or in whom there is clear evi-
dence of heavy calcification at the lesion, consideration 
should be given to RA to debride the calcium and in-
crease the compliance of the lesion. RA has been used 
successfully to treat calcified lesions in KD394; however, 
the short-term and long-term outcomes have not been 
studied in a systematic fashion. RA also poses unique 
considerations in KD patients. For instance, it is likely 
the RA burr will need to traverse an aneurysm to ad-
dress the stenotic lesion. It is conceivable that high-
speed rotation of the burr in an aneurysm that is not 
completely thrombosed could lead to liberation and 
embolization of thrombotic material, although this com-
plication has not been reported.
Regardless of whether balloon angioplasty or RA is 
used for lesion modification, coronary stents should 
be used. Stenting after balloon angioplasty will reduce 
the impact of recoil on restenosis, a major limitation in 
densely fibrotic lesions. The largest routinely used RA 
burr is 2 mm in diameter. Although a burr this size would 
be sufficient to favorably alter the compliance of the le-
sion, the residual lumen of 2 mm may still be too small 
to allow for relief of ischemia under demand conditions. 
Coronary artery stenting provides a means of restoring 
lumen dimensions that are congruent with the native ves-
sel. RA followed by stenting has a success rate of >90% 
in a published Japanese series.395
When a stent is chosen for PCI, the choice of a bare-
metal stent versus a drug-eluting stent (DES) is an impor-
tant consideration. In patients with atherosclerotic CAD, 
numerous studies have shown that bare-metal stents are 
limited by a higher risk of in-stent restenosis than DESs; 
however, DESs may require longer to achieve complete 
endothelial coverage, and therefore, the time period of 
risk for stent thrombosis may be longer. At the present 
time, guidelines suggest that patients receiving bare-metal 
stents remain on dual-antiplatelet therapy (ASA and a thi-
enopyridine agent) for a minimum of 30 days, whereas 
patients receiving DESs should remain on dual-antiplate-
let therapy for a minimum of 1 year. The choice of stent 
will be highly individualized on the basis of the patient’s 
ability to take multiple antiplatelet/antithrombin agents if 
they require warfarin for prophylaxis in the setting of giant 
coronary aneurysm. The bleeding risk of 1 year of “triple 
therapy” may be excessive for some patients; however, if 
an anticoagulant is not required, a DES may be the better 
choice. At the present time, there are no reports regarding 
the long-term performance of DESs in patients with KD.
Concurrent use of intravascular imaging may be help-
ful in planning PCI procedures in patients with KD. IVUS 
is the imaging modality of choice and will provide qualita-
tive information regarding the extent of calcification of 
the lesion, as well as potentially providing information 
regarding the composition of any aneurysms. Quantita-
tive information that can be obtained includes reference 
vessel diameter, which would be helpful in the selection 
of appropriate stent sizes. There have been a few re-
ports describing the use of OCT in KD patients, although 
this technology may be limited in patients with coronary 
artery aneurysms, and there are difficulties in adequately 
displacing the blood pool during imaging.
Recommendations for Modes of 
Revascularization
1. CABG is preferred to PCI in KD patients with 
left main CAD, multivessel CAD with reduced 
LV function, multivessel CAD with lesions not 
amenable to PCI, and multivessel CAD in dia-
betic patients (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e980
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
2. CABG is preferred to PCI in older children 
and adults with KD and multivessel involve-
ment (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
3. CABG should be performed with bilateral 
internal thoracic arterial grafts where pos-
sible (Class I; Level of Evidence B).
4. PCI is preferred in patients with single-vessel 
or focal multivessel disease amenable to PCI 
(Class I; Level of Evidence C).
5. RA and stents should be used in PCI of calci-
fied lesions (Class I; Level of Evidence C).
6. The use of multivessel PCI is reasonable for 
KD patients with focal lesions amenable to 
PCI (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
7. The use of DESs during PCI is reasonable 
for KD patients who do not require long-
term anticoagulation (Class IIa; Level of 
Evidence C).
8. The use of IVUS is reasonably indicated dur-
ing PCI in KD patients to ensure adequate 
stent sizing and deployment (Class IIa; Level 
of Evidence C).
9. Multivessel PCI may be considered for 
patients who are acceptable CABG candi-
dates but prefer to avoid CABG, provided the 
risks and benefits of both approaches are 
discussed with and understood by the patient 
(Class IIb; Level of Evidence C).
10. The use of DESs during PCI may be con-
sidered for KD patients who require anti-
coagulation, provided the bleeding risk of 
the patient is acceptable (Class IIb; Level of 
Evidence C).
11. Stand-alone balloon angioplasty should not 
be used for PCI in KD patients with coronary 
obstructions (Class III; Level of Evidence C).
Cardiac Transplantation
A small number of pediatric and adult patients with KD 
have undergone cardiac transplantation for severe myo-
cardial dysfunction, severe ventricular arrhythmias, or 
severe coronary arterial lesions for which interventional 
catheterization or coronary artery bypass procedures 
were not feasible. The timing of transplantation after acute 
KD has ranged from a few weeks to as long as 19 years, 
and it has been performed in pediatric as well as adult pa-
tients. A review performed in 1997 from transplant regis-
tries and KD investigators documented that almost half of 
transplant patients had undergone previous bypass graft-
ing procedures.396 Reported cases include patients who 
developed severe heart failure after extensive MI from 
thrombosis of aneurysms but also from in-stent thrombo-
sis after percutaneous coronary stenting.397,398 Individual 
case reports of transplantation outcomes are insufficient 
to determine whether posttransplantation vasculopathy 
or rejection risk is higher in transplant patients with KD. 
Advanced pretransplantation care with ventricular assist 
devices used as a bridge to subsequent cardiac trans-
plantation has been successfully achieved in a child.399
Recommendation for Cardiac Transplantation
1. It is reasonable to consider cardiac trans-
plantation for patients with severe, irrevers-
ible myocardial dysfunction and coronary 
artery lesions for which interventional cath-
eterization procedures or CABG are not fea-
sible (Class IIa; Level of Evidence C).
Psychosocial Issues
After KD, nearly all children return to their usual baseline 
state of functional health. Reports of overall psychoso-
cial well-being provide reassurance that KD does not af-
fect long-term health-related quality of life in the majority 
of patients. Similarly, KD has not been shown to have 
long-term effects on cognitive development or academic 
performance.400,401 Patients with a history of KD have 
similar or better scores on physical and psychosocial 
health when questionnaires are completed by their par-
ents.402,403 The association of KD with behavior problems 
is controversial, with some studies describing increased 
behavioral concerns400,404,405 and others finding no evi-
dence of heightened behavior problems.401,405 Important-
ly, several studies have suggested that parents continue 
to worry long-term about their child’s health after KD re-
gardless of their child’s coronary artery status.402,406,407
Healthcare providers should provide accurate educa-
tion to families throughout the illness course. Patients 
and families face similar stressors during the acute ill-
ness, including hospitalization, medical procedures, and 
uncertainty about long-term outcome.406 Children who 
have coronary artery aneurysms face the challenges of 
adapting to a chronic, potentially important health condi-
tion that requires continued medical testing and medica-
tions and, for those on anticoagulation or with myocardial 
ischemia or arrhythmias, precautions about physical ac-
tivity. Additionally, both the patient and the patient’s family 
may have challenges coping with the uncertainty of the 
long-term prognosis.406 Caregivers should determine on 
an individual basis whether a patient or family would ben-
efit from the support of a psychologist or social worker.
Transition to Adult Care
The earliest patients with KD are now in their middle adult 
years, and many more patients reach adulthood every 
year. The ultimate goal of transition is to prevent lapses in 
care during and after transfer, which for KD patients with 
aneurysms can put them at increased risk of morbidity 
and mortality. Transition programs should be in place to 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e981
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
prepare these patients for transfer of care to adult cardi-
ology teams with expertise in the unique issues related 
to KD. Best practices have been developed regarding 
education, assessment of readiness for transition, and 
skills development for effective communication, self-ad-
vocacy, decision making, and self-care for patients with 
congenital and acquired heart disease.408,409 Therefore, 
transition encompasses more than the transfer of care 
to an appropriate and knowledgeable adult cardiology 
provider. Transition should be purposeful and planned, 
with the needs of the adolescent or young adult at the 
center while taking into account the perspectives of the 
families and care providers (Figure 5).
For patients who have never had coronary artery an-
eurysms, long-term cardiology care is not recommend-
ed, and hence, transition is not required. These patients 
can continue to receive health maintenance from their 
primary care providers. However, for patients with an-
eurysms, either persistent or decreased to a normal lu-
minal dimension, lifetime cardiology follow-up is recom-
mended. Adult KD patients would best be served by joint 
programs consisting of a selected group of adult cardi-
ology providers who are experts in CAD in consultation 
with pediatric cardiac teams who have expertise in the 
unique issues related to KD. At some centers, experts in 
adult congenital heart disease may have the appropriate 
combined training to follow these patients. Transfer from 
pediatric to adult cardiology care is recommended, with 
a flexible age of 18 to 21 years, and mechanisms should 
be in place to ensure uninterrupted financial coverage of 
care together with collaboration with an adult cardiology 
care team knowledgeable in KD. Flexibility in the age of 
transfer may reflect the fact that some patients may not 
be ready for or in a situation to facilitate transition. Some 
patients in this age group may be in living situations that 
are less permanent (attending college).
Because KD is an illness that typically occurs in young 
childhood, most of the early education is aimed at par-
ents. However, as the child becomes older, it is impor-
tant to educate him or her about the particular coronary 
artery or cardiac issues, starting as early as age 12 
years. Knowledge goals should include the following408:
• Specifics of KD history and complications, including 
cardiac events and procedures with dates or ages
• Importance of uninterrupted life-long cardiology care
• Names, doses, and reasons for taking all medica-
tions; requirements for monitoring
• Names and reasons for tests performed
• Specific symptoms or signs that warrant immedi-
ate medical attention
• Recommendations regarding physical activity
• Considerations regarding contraception, preg-
nancy, and recurrence of KD in offspring
• Expectations regarding long-term prognosis and 
health
• Importance of and strategies to achieve healthy 
lifestyle behaviors
Risk behaviors, such as the use of alcohol and its 
potential interactions with medications such as warfarin, 
should be discussed beginning in adolescent years. The 
use of illicit drugs should also be assessed at each visit, 
because certain drugs, such as cocaine, can be particu-
larly dangerous for patients with CAD.
In addition to education, it is important that the transi-
tioning patient assume increasing responsibility for their 
decision making and management in accordance with 
their readiness for transition. There are several tools 
and algorithms designed to assist in the assessment 
Figure 5. Stakeholder perspectives regarding transition from pediatric to adult cardiac care.  
Reprinted from Kovacs and McCrindle408 by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Copyright © 2013, Macmillan Publishers 
Limited.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e982
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
of readiness of a particular patient that can be used to 
guide skills development.408,410 Self-management skills 
that should be evident at the time of transfer include the 
following:
• Ability to contact healthcare providers; scheduling 
and attending appointments and tests; knowing 
when and how to access emergency care; under-
standing when and how to access mental health 
services
• Creating and using a portable health summary; 
maintaining health records
• Adhering to a medication regimen, including 
requesting prescription refills
• Communicating independently and effectively with 
healthcare providers
Recognizing the requirements for education and skills 
development in addition to the need for effective pro-
cesses for achieving and tracking transfer of care, both 
the pediatric and the adult cardiology program should 
collaborate to create an effective transition program. 
Programs should have a designated transition champion 
who partners with each patient and creates a planned 
and individualized process. The transition process and 
documented plan should also be shared with the pa-
tient’s primary care provider. The program should ben-
efit from shared best practices and resources with other 
centers. The prevention and prompt detection of lapses 
in care will ensure that the possibility exists to optimize 
long-term outcomes for these vulnerable patients.
SUMMARY
This statement provides updated discussion and recom-
mendations for the diagnosis, acute treatment, and long-
term management of KD. The ultimate goal is the preven-
tion of important coronary artery abnormalities. However, 
young adult patients continue to present with CAD or sud-
den death presumed to be secondary to complications of 
a remote episode of KD during childhood. Although the 
development of this statement relied on best-available evi-
dence and expert opinion, important evidence gaps were 
identified. Until the cause and pathogenesis are defined, 
an exact diagnostic test remains elusive, and acute treat-
ment remains somewhat empirical. In addition, we have 
no means to prevent KD. Despite best available empirical 
therapy, to which some patients do not respond, a small 
percentage of patients either present with or develop 
coronary artery aneurysms. The distinctive nature of KD-
related vasculopathy is beginning to be understood, but 
it has yet to completely inform strategies aimed at risk 
stratification and prevention of thromboses, occlusions, 
and stenoses, as well as their effective long-term manage-
ment, in young patients. Given the young age at the acute 
illness and the long-term and unpredictable consequences 
for those with aneurysms across the life span, effective 
care strategies to address psychosocial concerns and to 
ensure transition to uninterrupted expert adult cardiology 
care are essential to optimize health-related quality of life. 
It is hoped that the evidence gaps can be addressed in 
future iterations of this statement.
FOOTNOTES
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid 
any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a 
result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or 
business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, 
all members of the writing group are required to complete and 
submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships 
that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This statement was approved by the American Heart As-
sociation Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on 
September 8, 2016, and the American Heart Association 
Executive Committee on September 23, 2016. A copy of 
the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/
statements by using either “Search for Guidelines & State-
ments” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase addi-
tional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@
wolterskluwer.com.
The American Heart Association requests that this docu-
ment be cited as follows: McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, Newburg-
er JW, Burns JC, Bolger AF, Gewitz M, Baker AL, Jackson MA, 
Takahashi M, Shah PB, Kobayashi T, Wu M-H, Saji TT, Pahl E; 
on behalf of the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, 
Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee of the Council 
on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovas-
cular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Cardiovascular Surgery 
and Anesthesia; and Council on Epidemiology and Prevention. 
Diagnosis, treatment, and long-term management of Kawasaki 
disease: a scientific statement for health professionals from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135:e927–
e999. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is con-
ducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more 
on AHA statements and guidelines development, visit http://
professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & 
Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Devel-
opment.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhance-
ment, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted with-
out the express permission of the American Heart Association. 
Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.
heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-Guidelines_
UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions 
Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e983
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’  
Bureau/ 
Honoraria
Expert Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Brian W. 
McCrindle
The Hospital for 
Sick Children
NIH†
None
None
None
None
Janssen*; 
Aegerion*; 
Daichii 
Sankyo*
The Hospital 
for Sick 
Children†
Elfriede 
Pahl
Ann and Robert 
Lurie Children’s 
Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Annette L. 
Baker
Boston Children’s 
Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Ann F. 
Bolger
University of 
California, San 
Francisco
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Jane C. 
Burns
University of 
California, San 
Diego, School of 
Medicine
Novartis*; 
Bristol-Myers 
Squibb*
None
None
Represented 
plaintiff in case 
of death from 
Kawasaki disease*
None
None
None
Michael 
Gewitz
New York Medical 
College, Maria 
Fareri Children’s 
Hospital
None
None
None
Primary Children’s 
Hospital*
None
None
None
Mary Anne 
Jackson
Children’s Mercy 
Hospital and 
Clinics
NIH†; CDC†; 
Theravance*
None
None
None
None
None
AAP*; 
Society 
of Urgent 
Care*; 
Washington 
University 
Pediatric 
Update*
Tohru 
Kobayashi
National Center for 
Child Health and 
Development
None
None
Tohru Kobayashi*
None
None
None
None
Jane W. 
Newburger
Boston Children’s 
Hospital and Dept. 
of Pediatrics, 
Harvard Medical 
School
None
None
None
Expert reviewer 
for 2 cases—
neither has had 
deposition—just 
opinion for the 
defense*
None
Bristol-Myers 
Squibb*; 
Merck*
Dept. of 
Defense†; 
National 
Institutes 
of Health†; 
Bristol-Myers 
Squibb†; 
Pfizer/
Inventive*; 
Novartis*
Anne H. 
Rowley
Northwestern 
University, The 
Feinberg School of 
Medicine
NIH/NAID†
None
None
None
None
UpToDate*
None
Tsutomu T. 
Saji
Toho University 
Faculty of 
Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
DISCLOSURES
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e984
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
Reviewer Disclosures
Reviewer
Employment
Research Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’  
Bureau/ 
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/ 
Advisory  
Board
Other
Mary Glode
Children’s Hospital 
Colorado
NIH (phase 
I/2 trial of 
atorvastatin in 
children >2 years 
old with Kawasaki 
disease and 
CAA)*
None
Kawasaki disease 
talk at Milwaukee 
Children’s Hospital*
None
None
None
None
Gerard R. 
Martin
Children’s National 
Medical Center
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Stanford T. 
Shulman
Lurie Children’s 
Hospital, Children’s 
Memorial Hospital, 
Northwestern 
University Medical 
School
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Kei Takahashi
Toho University 
Ohashi Medical 
Center (Japan)
None
None
None
Expert 
witness for 
plaintiff*
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all reviewers are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person receives 
$10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or 
share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” 
under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
Pinak B. 
Shah
Brigham and 
Women’s 
Cardiovascular 
Division
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Masato 
Takahashi
Seattle Children’s 
Hospital Division of 
Cardiology
None
None
None
Expert witness  
for plaintiff*
None
None
None
Mei-Hwan 
Wu
National Taiwan 
University 
Children’s Hospital
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as 
reported on the Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be 
“significant” if (a) the person receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 
5% or more of the voting stock or share of the entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be 
“modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing 
Group 
Member
Employment
Research 
Grant
Other 
Research 
Support
Speakers’  
Bureau/ 
Honoraria
Expert Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory 
Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e985
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
REFERENCES
 1. Newburger JW, Takahashi M, Gerber MA, Gewitz MH, Tani LY, 
Burns JC, Shulman ST, Bolger AF, Ferrieri P, Baltimore RS, Wilson 
WR, Baddour LM, Levison ME, Pallasch TJ, Falace DA, Taubert KA. 
Diagnosis, treatment, and long-term management of Kawasaki 
disease: a statement for health professionals from the Committee 
on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis and Kawasaki Disease, Council 
on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, American Heart Asso-
ciation. Circulation. 2004;110:2747–2771. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000145143.19711.78.
 2. Gibbons RJ, Smith S, Antman E. American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association clinical practice guidelines: part I: 
where do they come from? Circulation. 2003;107:2979–2986. 
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000063682.20730.A5.
 3. Gibbons RJ, Smith SC Jr, Antman E. American College of Car-
diology/American Heart Association clinical practice guidelines: 
part II: evolutionary changes in a continuous quality improvement 
project. Circulation. 2003;107:3101–3107. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000079017.53579.9C.
 4. Kushner HI, Bastian JF, Turner CL, Burns JC. The two emergencies 
of Kawasaki syndrome and the implications for the developing 
world. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2008;27:377–383. doi: 10.1097/
INF.0b013e318166d795.
 5. Burns JC, Kushner HI, Bastian JF, Shike H, Shimizu C, Matsub-
ara T, Turner CL. Kawasaki disease: a brief history. Pediatrics. 
2000;106:E27.
 6. Gee SJ. Cases of morbid anatomy: aneurysms of coronary arter-
ies in a boy. St Bartholomews Hosp Rep. 1871;7:141–148.
 7. Landing BH, Larson EJ. Are infantile periarteritis nodosa with coro-
nary artery involvement and fatal mucocutaneous lymph node syn-
drome the same? Comparison of 20 patients from North America 
with patients from Hawaii and Japan. Pediatrics. 1977;59:651–
662.
 8. Yanagawa H, Yashiro M, Nakamura Y, Kawasaki T, Kato H. Results 
of 12 nationwide epidemiological incidence surveys of Kawasaki 
disease in Japan. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 1995;149:779–
783.
 9. Al-Ammouri I, Al-Wahsh S, Khuri-Bulos N. Kawasaki disease in Jor-
dan: demographics, presentation, and outcome. Cardiol Young. 
2012;22:390–395. doi: 10.1017/S1047951111001818.
 
10. Alexopoulos A, Vekiou A, Lycopoulou L, Tavena A, Lagona E, 
Kakourou T. Kawasaki disease in Greek children: a retrospective 
study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2013;27:580–588. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2012.04488.x.
 
11. Arkachaisri T. Pediatric rheumatology in Southeast Asia: in-
sights from the Singapore experience. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 
2011;13:117–122. doi: 10.1007/s11926-010-0159-1.
 
12. Bar-Meir M, Haklai Z, Dor M. Kawasaki disease in Israel. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011;30:589–592. doi: 10.1097/
INF.0b013e31820e3849.
 
13. Davaalkham D, Nakamura Y, Baigalmaa D, Davaa G, Chimedsuren 
O, Sumberzul N, Lkhagvasuren T, Uehara R, Yanagawa H, Kawasa-
ki T. Kawasaki disease in Mongolia: results from 2 nationwide ret-
rospective surveys, 1996-2008. J Epidemiol. 2011;21:293–298.
 
14. Huang SK, Lin MT, Chen HC, Huang SC, Wu MH. Epidemiology 
of Kawasaki disease: prevalence from national database and fu-
ture trends projection by system dynamics modeling. J Pediatr. 
2013;163:126–131.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2012.12.011.
 
15. Singh S, Aulakh R, Bhalla AK, Suri D, Manojkumar R, Narula N, 
Burns JC. Is Kawasaki disease incidence rising in Chandigarh, 
North India? Arch Dis Child. 2011;96:137–140. doi: 10.1136/
adc.2010.194001.
 
16. Uehara R, Belay ED. Epidemiology of Kawasaki disease in Asia, 
Europe, and the United States. J Epidemiol. 2012;22:79–85.
 
17. Salo E, Griffiths EP, Farstad T, Schiller B, Nakamura Y, Yashiro M, 
Uehara R, Best BM, Burns JC. Incidence of Kawasaki disease in 
northern European countries. Pediatr Int. 2012;54:770–772. doi: 
10.1111/j.1442-200X.2012.03692.x.
 
18. Holman RC, Christensen KY, Belay ED, Steiner CA, Effler PV, Mi-
yamura J, Forbes S, Schonberger LB, Melish M. Racial/ethnic dif-
ferences in the incidence of Kawasaki syndrome among children 
in Hawaii. Hawaii Med J. 2010;69:194–197.
 
19. Chang RK. The incidence of Kawasaki disease in the United 
States did not increase between 1988 and 1997. Pediatrics. 
2003;111(pt 1):1124–1125.
 
20. Holman RC, Curns AT, Belay ED, Steiner CA, Schonberger LB. 
Kawasaki syndrome hospitalizations in the United States, 1997 
and 2000. Pediatrics. 2003;112(pt 1):495–501.
 
21. Holman RC, Belay ED, Christensen KY, Folkema AM, Steiner 
CA, Schonberger LB. Hospitalizations for Kawasaki syn-
drome among children in the United States, 1997–2007. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2010;29:483–488. doi: 10.1097/INF. 
0b013e3181cf8705.
 
22. Yanagawa H, Nakamura Y, Yashiro M, Ojima T, Tanihara S, Oki 
I, Zhang T. Results of the nationwide epidemiologic survey 
of Kawasaki disease in 1995 and 1996 in Japan. Pediatrics. 
1998;102:E65.
 
23. Nakamura Y, Hirose K, Yanagawa H, Kato H, Kawasaki T. Inci-
dence rate of recurrent Kawasaki disease in Japan. Acta Paediatr. 
1994;83:1061–1064.
 
24. Hirata S, Nakamura Y, Yanagawa H. Incidence rate of recurrent 
Kawasaki disease and related risk factors: from the results of 
nationwide surveys of Kawasaki disease in Japan. Acta Paediatr. 
2001;90:40–44.
 
25. Maddox RA, Holman RC, Uehara R, Callinan LS, Guest JL, Schon-
berger LB, Nakamura Y, Yashiro M, Belay ED. Recurrent Kawasaki 
disease: USA and Japan. Pediatr Int. 2015;57:1116–1120. doi: 
10.1111/ped.12733.
 
26. Chahal N, Somji Z, Manlhiot C, Clarizia NA, Ashley J, Yeung RS, 
McCrindle BW. Rate, associated factors and outcomes of re-
currence of Kawasaki disease in Ontario, Canada. Pediatr Int. 
2012;54:383–387. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200X.2012.03628.x.
 
27. Nakamura Y, Oki I, Tanihara S, Ojima T, Yanagawa H. Cardiac 
sequelae in recurrent cases of Kawasaki disease: a comparison 
between the initial episode of the disease and a recurrence in the 
same patients. Pediatrics. 1998;102:E66.
 
28. Fujita Y, Nakamura Y, Sakata K, Hara N, Kobayashi M, Nagai M, 
Yanagawa H, Kawasaki T. Kawasaki disease in families. Pediat-
rics. 1989;84:666–669.
 
29. Harada F, Sada M, Kamiya T, Yanase Y, Kawasaki T, Sasazuki 
T. Genetic analysis of Kawasaki syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 
1986;39:537–539.
 
30. Kottek A, Shimizu C, Burns JC. Kawasaki disease in monozygotic 
twins. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011;30:1114–1116. doi: 10.1097/
INF.0b013e31822ac4ff.
 
31. Quasney MW, Bronstein DE, Cantor RM, Zhang Q, Stroupe C, Shike 
H, Bastian JF, Matsubara T, Fujiwara M, Akimoto K, Newburger JW, 
Burns JC. Increased frequency of alleles associated with elevated 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha levels in children with Kawasaki dis-
ease. Pediatr Res. 2001;49:686–690. doi: 10.1203/00006450-
200105000-00013.
 
32. Yanagawa H, Yashiro M, Nakamura Y, Kawasaki T, Kato H. Epi-
demiologic pictures of Kawasaki disease in Japan: from the 
nationwide incidence survey in 1991 and 1992. Pediatrics. 
1995;95:475–479.
 
33. Kaneko K, Obinata K, Katsumata K, Tawa T, Hosaka A, Yamashi-
ro Y. Kawasaki disease in a father and daughter. Acta Paediatr. 
1999;88:791–792.
 
34. Newburger JW, Taubert KA, Shulman ST, Rowley AH, Gewitz 
MH, Takahashi M, McCrindle BW. Summary and abstracts of the 
Seventh International Kawasaki Disease Symposium: December 
4-7, 2001, Hakone, Japan. Pediatr Res. 2003;53:153–157. doi: 
10.1203/00006450-200301000-00026.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e986
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
 
35. Uehara R, Yashiro M, Nakamura Y, Yanagawa H. Kawasaki disease 
in parents and children. Acta Paediatr. 2003;92:694–697.
 
36. Bruckheimer E, Bulbul Z, McCarthy P, Madri JA, Friedman AH, 
Hellenbrand WE. Images in cardiovascular medicine: Kawasaki 
disease: coronary aneurysms in mother and son. Circulation. 
1998;97:410–411.
 
37. Burns JC, Herzog L, Fabri O, Tremoulet AH, Rodó X, Uehara 
R, Burgner D, Bainto E, Pierce D, Tyree M, Cayan D; Kawasaki 
Disease Global Climate Consortium. Seasonality of Kawasaki 
disease: a global perspective. PLoS One. 2013;8:e74529. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0074529.
 
38. Patriarca PA, Rogers MF, Morens DM, Schonberger LB, Kaminski 
RM, Burns JC, Glode MP. Kawasaki syndrome: association with 
the application of rug shampoo. Lancet. 1982;2:578–580.
 
39. Bell DM, Brink EW, Nitzkin JL, Hall CB, Wulff H, Berkowitz ID, 
Feorino PM, Holman RC, Huntley CL, Meade RH 3rd, Anderson 
LJ, Cheeseman SH, Fiumara NJ, Gilfillan RF, Keim DE, Modlin JF. 
Kawasaki syndrome: description of two outbreaks in the United 
States. N Engl J Med. 1981;304:1568–1575. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM198106253042603.
 
40. Bronstein DE, Dille AN, Austin JP, Williams CM, Palinkas LA, Burns 
JC. Relationship of climate, ethnicity and socioeconomic status 
to Kawasaki disease in San Diego County, 1994 through 1998. 
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2000;19:1087–1091.
 
41. Davis RL, Waller PL, Mueller BA, Dykewicz CA, Schonberger LB. 
Kawasaki syndrome in Washington State: race-specific incidence 
rates and residential proximity to water. Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med. 1995;149:66–69.
 
42. Rauch AM. Kawasaki syndrome: review of new epidemiologic and 
laboratory developments. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1987;6:1016–
1021.
 
43. Rauch AM, Glode MP, Wiggins JW Jr, Rodriguez JG, Hopkins RS, 
Hurwitz ES, Schonberger LB. Outbreak of Kawasaki syndrome in 
Denver, Colorado: association with rug and carpet cleaning. Pedi-
atrics. 1991;87:663–669.
 
44. Treadwell TA, Maddox RA, Holman RC, Belay ED, Shahriari A, An-
derson MS, Burns J, Glodé MP, Hoffman RE, Schonberger LB. 
Investigation of Kawasaki syndrome risk factors in Colorado. Pe-
diatr Infect Dis J. 2002;21:976–978.
 
45. Brosius CL, Newburger JW, Burns JC, Hojnowski-Diaz P, Zierler S, 
Leung DY. Increased prevalence of atopic dermatitis in Kawasaki 
disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1988;7:863–866.
 
46. Burns JC, Mason WH, Glode MP, Shulman ST, Melish ME, Meissner 
C, Bastian J, Beiser AS, Meyerson HM, Newburger JW. Clinical and 
epidemiologic characteristics of patients referred for evaluation 
of possible Kawasaki disease: United States Multicenter Kawasaki 
Disease Study Group. J Pediatr. 1991;118:680–686.
 
47. Hayward K, Wallace CA, Koepsell T. Perinatal exposures and Ka-
wasaki disease in Washington State: a population-based, case-
control study. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2012;31:1027–1031. doi: 
10.1097/INF.0b013e31825eaed0.
 
48. Rodó X, Ballester J, Cayan D, Melish ME, Nakamura Y, Uehara R, 
Burns JC. Association of Kawasaki disease with tropospheric wind 
patterns. Sci Rep. 2011;1:152. doi: 10.1038/srep00152.
 
49. Rodo X, Curcoll R, Robinson M, Ballester J, Burns JC, Cayan DR, 
Lipkin WI, Williams BL, Couto-Rodriguez M, Nakamura Y, Uehara R, 
Tanimoto H, Morguí JA. Tropospheric winds from northeastern Chi-
na carry the etiologic agent of Kawasaki disease from its source 
to Japan. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111:7952–7957. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1400380111.
 
50. Makino N, Nakamura Y, Yashiro M, Ae R, Tsuboi S, Aoyama Y, Kojo 
T, Uehara R, Kotani K, Yanagawa H. Descriptive epidemiology of 
Kawasaki disease in Japan, 2011-2012: from the results of the 
22nd nationwide survey. J Epidemiol. 2015;25:239–245. doi: 
10.2188/jea.JE20140089.
 
51. Nakamura Y, Aso E, Yashiro M, Uehara R, Watanabe M, Oki I, 
Yanagawa H. Mortality among persons with a history of Kawasaki 
disease in Japan: mortality among males with cardiac sequelae 
is significantly higher than that of the general population. Circ J. 
2008;72:134–138.
 
52. Nakamura Y, Aso E, Yashiro M, Tsuboi S, Kojo T, Aoyama Y, Kotani 
K, Uehara R, Yanagawa H. Mortality among Japanese with a his-
tory of Kawasaki disease: results at the end of 2009. J Epidemiol. 
2013;23:429–434.
 
53. Chang RK. Hospitalizations for Kawasaki disease among children 
in the United States, 1988-1997. Pediatrics. 2002;109:e87.
 
54. Fujiwara H, Hamashima Y. Pathology of the heart in Kawasaki dis-
ease. Pediatrics. 1978;61:100–107.
 
55. Burns JC, Glode MP, Clarke SH, Wiggins J Jr, Hathaway WE. Co-
agulopathy and platelet activation in Kawasaki syndrome: identifi-
cation of patients at high risk for development of coronary artery 
aneurysms. J Pediatr. 1984;105:206–211.
 
56. Burns JC, Shike H, Gordon JB, Malhotra A, Schoenwetter M, Ka-
wasaki T. Sequelae of Kawasaki disease in adolescents and young 
adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;28:253–257.
 
57. Daniels LB, Tjajadi MS, Walford HH, Jimenez-Fernandez S, Trofi-
menko V, Fick DB Jr, Phan HA, Linz PE, Nayak K, Kahn AM, Burns 
JC, Gordon JB. Prevalence of Kawasaki disease in young adults with 
suspected myocardial ischemia. Circulation. 2012;125:2447–
2453. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.082107.
 
58. Dergun M, Kao A, Hauger SB, Newburger JW, Burns JC. Famil-
ial occurrence of Kawasaki syndrome in North America. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2005;159:876–881. doi: 10.1001/ 
archpedi.159.9.876.
 
59. Onouchi Y. Genetics of Kawasaki disease: what we know and don’t 
know. Circ J. 2012;76:1581–1586.
 
60. Uehara R, Yashiro M, Nakamura Y, Yanagawa H. Clinical features 
of patients with Kawasaki disease whose parents had the same 
disease. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2004;158:1166–1169. doi: 
10.1001/archpedi.158.12.1166.
 
61. Khor CC, Davila S, Shimizu C, Sheng S, Matsubara T, Suzuki Y, 
Newburger JW, Baker A, Burgner D, Breunis W, Kuijpers T, Wright 
VJ, Levin M, Hibberd ML, Burns JC; US and International Kawa-
saki Disease Genetics Consortia. Genome-wide linkage and as-
sociation mapping identify susceptibility alleles in ABCC4 for Ka-
wasaki disease. J Med Genet. 2011;48:467–472. doi: 10.1136/
jmg.2010.086611.
 
62. Onouchi Y, Ozaki K, Buns JC, Shimizu C, Hamada H, Honda T, 
Terai M, Honda A, Takeuchi T, Shibuta S, Suenaga T, Suzuki 
H, Higashi K, Yasukawa K, Suzuki Y, Sasago K, Kemmotsu Y, 
Takatsuki S, Saji T, Yoshikawa T, Nagai T, Hamamoto K, Kishi F, 
Ouchi K, Sato Y, Newburger JW, Baker AL, Shulman ST, Rowley 
AH, Yashiro M, Nakamura Y, Wakui K, Fukushima Y, Fujino A, 
Tsunoda T, Kawasaki T, Hata A, Nakamura Y, Tanaka T. Common 
variants in CASP3 confer susceptibility to Kawasaki disease. 
Hum Mol Genet. 2010;19:2898–2906. doi: 10.1093/hmg/
ddq176.
 
63. Onouchi Y, Ozaki K, Burns JC, Shimizu C, Terai M, Hamada H, 
Honda T, Suzuki H, Suenaga T, Takeuchi T, Yoshikawa N, Suzuki 
Y, Yasukawa K, Ebata R, Higashi K, Saji T, Kemmotsu Y, Takatsuki 
S, Ouchi K, Kishi F, Yoshikawa T, Nagai T, Hamamoto K, Sato Y, 
Honda A, Kobayashi H, Sato J, Shibuta S, Miyawaki M, Oishi K, Ya-
maga H, Aoyagi N, Iwahashi S, Miyashita R, Murata Y, Sasago K, 
Takahashi A, Kamatani N, Kubo M, Tsunoda T, Hata A, Nakamura 
Y, Tanaka T; Japan Kawasaki Disease Genome Consortium; US 
Kawasaki Disease Genetics Consortium. A genome-wide associa-
tion study identifies three new risk loci for Kawasaki disease. Nat 
Genet. 2012;44:517–521. doi: 10.1038/ng.2220.
 
64. Onouchi Y, Gunji T, Burns JC, Shimizu C, Newburger JW, Yashiro 
M, Nakamura Y, Yanagawa H, Wakui K, Fukushima Y, Kishi F, Ham-
amoto K, Terai M, Sato Y, Ouchi K, Saji T, Nariai A, Kaburagi Y, 
Yoshikawa T, Suzuki K, Tanaka T, Nagai T, Cho H, Fujino A, Sekine 
A, Nakamichi R, Tsunoda T, Kawasaki T, Nakamura Y, Hata A. IT-
PKC functional polymorphism associated with Kawasaki disease 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e987
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
susceptibility and formation of coronary artery aneurysms. Nat 
Genet. 2008;40:35–42. doi: 10.1038/ng.2007.59.
 
65. Shimizu C, Jain S, Davila S, Hibberd ML, Lin KO, Molkara D, 
Frazer JR, Sun S, Baker AL, Newburger JW, Rowley AH, Shul-
man ST, Burgner D, Breunis WB, Kuijpers TW, Wright VJ, Levin M, 
Eleftherohorinou H, Coin L, Popper SJ, Relman DA, Fury W, Lin C, 
Mellis S, Tremoulet AH, Burns JC. Transforming growth factor-be-
ta signaling pathway in patients with Kawasaki disease. Circ Car-
diovasc Genet. 2011;4:16–25. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS. 
110.940858.
 
66. Franco A, Shimizu C, Tremoulet AH, Burns JC. Memory T-
cells and characterization of peripheral T-cell clones in acute 
Kawasaki disease. Autoimmunity. 2010;43:317–324. doi: 
10.3109/08916930903405891.
 
67. Rowley AH, Baker SC, Shulman ST, Garcia FL, Fox LM, Kos 
IM, Crawford SE, Russo PA, Hammadeh R, Takahashi K, Oren-
stein JM. RNA-containing cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in cili-
ated bronchial epithelium months to years after acute Kawa-
saki disease. PLoS One. 2008;3:e1582. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0001582.
 
68. Rowley AH, Baker SC, Shulman ST, Rand KH, Tretiakova MS, Perl-
man EJ, Garcia FL, Tajuddin NF, Fox LM, Huang JH, Ralphe JC, 
Takahashi K, Flatow J, Lin S, Kalelkar MB, Soriano B, Orenstein 
JM. Ultrastructural, immunofluorescence, and RNA evidence sup-
port the hypothesis of a “new” virus associated with Kawasaki dis-
ease. J Infect Dis. 2011;203:1021–1030. doi: 10.1093/infdis/
jiq136.
 
69. Matsubara T, Ichiyama T, Furukawa S. Immunological profile of 
peripheral blood lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages in 
Kawasaki disease. Clin Exp Immunol. 2005;141:381–387. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2249.2005.02821.x.
 
70. Franco A, Touma R, Song Y, Shimizu C, Tremoulet AH, Kanegaye 
JT, Burns JC. Specificity of regulatory T cells that modulate 
vascular inflammation. Autoimmunity. 2014;47:95–104. doi: 
10.3109/08916934.2013.860524.
 
71. Amano S, Hazama F, Kubagawa H, Tasaka K, Haebara H, Hamashi-
ma Y. General pathology of Kawasaki disease: on the morphologi-
cal alterations corresponding to the clinical manifestations. Acta 
Pathol Jpn. 1980;30:681–694.
 
72. Rowley AH, Baker SC, Shulman ST, Fox LM, Takahashi K, Gar-
cia FL, Crawford SE, Chou P, Orenstein JM. Cytoplasmic inclu-
sion bodies are detected by synthetic antibody in ciliated bron-
chial epithelium during acute Kawasaki disease. J Infect Dis. 
2005;192:1757–1766. doi: 10.1086/497171.
 
73. Orenstein JM, Shulman ST, Fox LM, Baker SC, Takahashi M, Bhatti 
TR, Russo PA, Mierau GW, de Chadarévian JP, Perlman EJ, Trev-
enen C, Rotta AT, Kalelkar MB, Rowley AH. Three linked vasculo-
pathic processes characterize Kawasaki disease: a light and trans-
mission electron microscopic study. PLoS One. 2012;7:e38998. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038998.
 
74. Amano S, Hazama F, Hamashima Y. Pathology of Kawasaki dis-
ease: I: pathology and morphogenesis of the vascular changes. 
Jpn Circ J. 1979;43:633–643.
 
75. Naoe S, Takahashi K, Masuda H, Tanaka N. Kawasaki disease: 
with particular emphasis on arterial lesions. Acta Pathol Jpn. 
1991;41:785–797.
 
76. Landing BH, Larson EJ. Pathological features of Kawasaki disease 
(mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome). Am J Cardiovasc Pathol. 
1987;1:218–229.
 
77. Sasaguri Y, Kato H. Regression of aneurysms in Kawasaki dis-
ease: a pathological study. J Pediatr. 1982;100:225–231.
 
78. Takahashi K, Oharaseki T, Yokouchi Y, Yamada H, Shibuya K, 
Naoe S. A half-century of autopsy results–incidence of pediat-
ric vasculitis syndromes, especially Kawasaki disease. Circ J. 
2012;76:964–970.
 
79. Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Committee on 
Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease; American 
Heart Association. Diagnostic guidelines for Kawasaki disease. 
Circulation. 2001;103:335–336.
 
80. Eberhard BA, Sundel RP, Newburger JW, Baker A, Fuhlbrigge RC, 
Burns JC, Gellis SE. Psoriatic eruption in Kawasaki disease. J Pe-
diatr. 2000;137:578–580. doi: 10.1067/mpd.2000.107840.
 
81. Smith LB, Newburger JW, Burns JC. Kawasaki syndrome and the 
eye. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1989;8:116–118.
 
82. Burns JC, Joffe L, Sargent RA, Glode MP. Anterior uveitis associat-
ed with Kawasaki syndrome. Pediatr Infect Dis. 1985;4:258–261.
 
83. Ohno S, Miyajima T, Higuchi M, Yoshida A, Matsuda H, Saheki Y, 
Nagamatsu I, Togashi T, Matsumoto S. Ocular manifestations of 
Kawasaki’s disease (mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome). Am 
J Ophthalmol. 1982;93:713–717.
 
84. Kanegaye JT, Van Cott E, Tremoulet AH, Salgado A, Shimizu 
C, Kruk P, Hauschildt J, Sun X, Jain S, Burns JC. Lymph-
node-first presentation of Kawasaki disease compared 
with bacterial cervical adenitis and typical Kawasaki dis-
ease. J Pediatr. 2013;162:1259–1263.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpeds.2012.11.064.
 
85. Kato H, Kanematsu M, Kato Z, Teramoto T, Kondo N, Hoshi H. 
Computed tomographic findings of Kawasaki disease with cervi-
cal lymphadenopathy. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 2012;36:138–
142. doi: 10.1097/RCT.0b013e31823b4497.
 
86. Kim JH, Yu JJ, Lee J, Kim MN, Ko HK, Choi HS, Kim YH, Ko JK. 
Detection rate and clinical impact of respiratory viruses in children 
with Kawasaki disease. Korean J Pediatr. 2012;55:470–473. doi: 
10.3345/kjp.2012.55.12.470.
 
87. Benseler SM, McCrindle BW, Silverman ED, Tyrrell PN, Wong J, 
Yeung RS. Infections and Kawasaki disease: implications for coro-
nary artery outcome. Pediatrics. 2005;116:e760–e766.
 
88. Turnier JL, Anderson MS, Heizer HR, Jone PN, Glodé MP, 
Dominguez SR. Concurrent respiratory viruses and Kawasaki 
disease. Pediatrics. 2015;136:e609–e614. doi: 10.1542/
peds.2015-0950.
 
89. Jaggi P, Kajon AE, Mejias A, Ramilo O, Leber A. Human adenovi-
rus infection in Kawasaki disease: a confounding bystander? Clin 
Infect Dis. 2013;56:58–64. doi: 10.1093/cid/cis807.
 
90. Song E, Kajon AE, Wang H, Salamon D, Texter K, Ramilo O, Leber 
A, Jaggi P. Clinical and virologic characteristics may aid distinc-
tion of acute adenovirus disease from Kawasaki disease with inci-
dental adenovirus detection. J Pediatr. 2016;170:325–330. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2015.11.021.
 
91. Rowley AH, Shulman ST. Editorial commentary: missing the for-
est for the trees: respiratory viral assays in patients with Kawa-
saki disease. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;56:65–66. doi: 10.1093/cid/
cis811.
 
92. Minich LL, Sleeper LA, Atz AM, McCrindle BW, Lu M, Colan SD, 
Printz BF, Klein GL, Sundel RP, Takahashi M, Li JS, Vetter VL, New-
burger JW; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Delayed diag-
nosis of Kawasaki disease: what are the risk factors? Pediatrics. 
2007;120:e1434–e1440. doi: 10.1542/peds.2007-0815.
 
93. Yellen ES, Gauvreau K, Takahashi M, Burns JC, Shulman S, Baker 
AL, Innocentini N, Zambetti C, Pancheri JM, Ostrow A, Frazer JR, 
Sundel RP, Fulton DR, Newburger JW. Performance of 2004 Amer-
ican Heart Association recommendations for treatment of Kawa-
saki disease. Pediatrics. 2010;125:e234–e241. doi: 10.1542/
peds.2009-0606.
 
94. Heuclin T, Dubos F, Hue V, Godart F, Francart C, Vincent P,Martinot 
A; Hospital Network for Evaluating the Management of Common 
Childhood Diseases. Increased detection rate of Kawasaki dis-
ease using new diagnostic algorithm, including early use of echo-
cardiography. J Pediatr. 2009;155:695–699.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpeds.2009.04.058.
 
95. Muniz JC, Dummer K, Gauvreau K, Colan SD, Fulton DR, New-
burger JW. Coronary artery dimensions in febrile children without 
Kawasaki disease. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2013;6:239–244. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.112.000159.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e988
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
 96. Bratincsak A, Reddy VD, Purohit PJ, Tremoulet AH, Molkara 
DP, Frazer JR, Dyar D, Bush RA, Sim JY, Sang N, Burns JC, 
Melish MA. Coronary artery dilation in acute Kawasaki disease 
and acute illnesses associated with fever. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2012;31:924–926. doi: 10.1097/INF.0b013e31826252b3.
 97. Cai Z, Zuo R, Liu Y. Characteristics of Kawasaki disease in 
older children. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2011;50:952–956. doi: 
10.1177/0009922811409027.
 98. Dengler LD, Capparelli EV, Bastian JF, Bradley DJ, Glode MP, 
Santa S, Newburger JW, Baker AL, Matsubara T, Burns JC. 
Cerebrospinal fluid profile in patients with acute Kawasaki dis-
ease. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998;17:478–481.
 99. Poon LK, Lun KS, Ng YM. Facial nerve palsy and Kawasaki dis-
ease. Hong Kong Med J. 2000;6:224–226.
 
100. Knott PD, Orloff LA, Harris JP, Novak RE, Burns JC; Kawasaki 
Disease Multicenter Hearing Loss Study Group. Sensorineural 
hearing loss and Kawasaki disease: a prospective study. Am J 
Otolaryngol. 2001;22:343–348.
 
101. Alves NR, Magalhães CM, Almeida RdFR, Santos RC, Gandolfi 
L, Pratesi R. Prospective study of Kawasaki disease compli-
cations: review of 115 cases. Rev Assoc Med Bras (1992). 
2011;57:295–300.
 
102. Gong GW, McCrindle BW, Ching JC, Yeung RS. Arthritis pre-
senting during the acute phase of Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 
2006;148:800–805. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2006.01.039.
 
103. Baker AL, Lu M, Minich LL, Atz AM, Klein GL, Korsin R, Lambert 
L, Li JS, Mason W, Radojewski E, Vetter VL, Newburger JW; 
Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Associated symptoms in 
the ten days before diagnosis of Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 
2009;154:592–595.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2008.10.006.
 
104. Uehara R, Igarashi H, Yashiro M, Nakamura Y, Yanagawa H. 
Kawasaki disease patients with redness or crust formation at 
the Bacille Calmette-Guérin inoculation site. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2010;29:430–433. doi: 10.1097/INF.0b013e3181cacede.
 
105. Latino GA, Manlhiot C, Yeung RS, Chahal N, McCrindle BW. 
Macrophage activation syndrome in the acute phase of Kawasaki 
disease. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010;32:527–531. doi: 
10.1097/MPH.0b013e3181dccbf4.
 
106. Tremoulet AH, Jain S, Chandrasekar D, Sun X, Sato Y, Burns 
JC. Evolution of laboratory values in patients with Kawasaki dis-
ease. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011;30:1022–1026. doi: 10.1097/
INF.0b013e31822d4f56.
 
107. Eladawy M, Dominguez SR, Anderson MS, Glodé MP. Abnormal 
liver panel in acute Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2011;30:141–144. doi: 10.1097/INF.0b013e3181f6fe2a.
 
108. Shike H, Kanegaye JT, Best BM, Pancheri J, Burns JC. Pyuria 
associated with acute Kawasaki disease and fever from other 
causes. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2009;28:440–443. doi: 10.1097/
INF.0b013e318193ec8e.
 
109. Dahdah N, Siles A, Fournier A, Cousineau J, Delvin E, Saint-Cyr 
C, Spiegelblatt L, Bonny Y, Vartian M, Montigny M. Natriuretic 
peptide as an adjunctive diagnostic test in the acute phase of 
Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2009;30:810–817. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-009-9441-2.
 
110. Lin KH, Chang SS, Yu CW, Lin SC, Liu SC, Chao HY, Lee MT, Wu 
JY, Lee CC. Usefulness of natriuretic peptide for the diagnosis of 
Kawasaki disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 
Open. 2015;5:e006703. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-006703.
 
111. Printz BF, Sleeper LA, Newburger JW, Minich LL, Bradley T, 
Cohen MS, Frank D, Li JS, Margossian R, Shirali G, Takahashi M, 
Colan SD; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Noncoronary 
cardiac abnormalities are associated with coronary artery dila-
tion and with laboratory inflammatory markers in acute Kawasaki 
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:86–92. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2010.08.619.
 
112. Sumitomo N, Karasawa K, Taniguchi K, Ichikawa R, Fukuhara 
J, Abe O, Miyashita M, Kanamaru H, Ayusawa M, Harada K. 
Association of sinus node dysfunction, atrioventricular node 
conduction abnormality and ventricular arrhythmia in patients 
with Kawasaki disease and coronary involvement. Circ J. 
2008;72:274–280.
 
113. Crystal MA, Syan SK, Yeung RS, Dipchand AI, McCrindle 
BW. Echocardiographic and electrocardiographic trends 
in children with acute Kawasaki disease. Can J Cardiol. 
2008;24:776–780.
 
114. Fujino M, Hata T, Kuriki M, Horio K, Uchida H, Eryu Y, Boda H, 
Miyata M, Yoshikawa T. Inflammation aggravates heterogene-
ity of ventricular repolarization in children with Kawasaki dis-
ease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2014;35:1268–1272. doi: 10.1007/
s00246-014-0926-2.
 
115. Haney I, Beghetti M, McCrindle BW, Gow RM. Ventricular ar-
rhythmia complicating Kawasaki disease. Can J Cardiol. 
1995;11:931–933.
 
116. Yagi S, Tsuda E, Shimizu W, Kurita T, Seguchi O, Nonogi 
H, Kamakura S. Two adults requiring implantable defibrilla-
tors because of ventricular tachycardia and left ventricular 
dysfunction caused by presumed Kawasaki disease. Circ J. 
2005;69:870–874.
 
117. Gatterre P, Oualha M, Dupic L, Iserin F, Bodemer C, Lesage F, 
Hubert P. Kawasaki disease: an unexpected etiology of shock 
and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Intensive Care Med. 
2012;38:872–878. doi: 10.1007/s00134-012-2473-8.
 
118. Kanegaye JT, Wilder MS, Molkara D, Frazer JR, Pancheri J, 
Tremoulet AH, Watson VE, Best BM, Burns JC. Recognition of a 
Kawasaki disease shock syndrome. Pediatrics. 2009;123:e783–
e789. doi: 10.1542/peds.2008-1871.
 
119. Dominguez SR, Friedman K, Seewald R, Anderson MS, Willis L, 
Glodé MP. Kawasaki disease in a pediatric intensive care unit: 
a case-control study. Pediatrics. 2008;122:e786–e790. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2008-1275.
 
120. Yutani C, Go S, Kamiya T, Hirose O, Misawa H, Maeda H, Kozuka 
T, Onishi S. Cardiac biopsy of Kawasaki disease. Arch Pathol Lab 
Med. 1981;105:470–473.
 
121. Kao CH, Hsieh KS, Wang YL, Wang SJ, Yeh SH. The detection 
of ventricular dysfunction and carditis in children with Kawasaki 
disease using equilibrium multigated blood pooling ventriculog-
raphy and 99Tcm-HMPAO-labelled WBC heart scans. Nucl Med 
Commun. 1993;14:539–543.
 
122. Harada M, Yokouchi Y, Oharaseki T, Matsui K, Tobayama H, Tanaka 
N, Akimoto K, Takahashi K, Kishiro M, Shimizu T, Takahashi K. 
Histopathological characteristics of myocarditis in acute-phase 
Kawasaki disease. Histopathology. 2012;61:1156–1167. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2559.2012.04332.x.
 
123. Akagi T, Kato H, Inoue O, Sato N, Imamura K. Valvular heart dis-
ease in Kawasaki syndrome: incidence and natural history. Am 
Heart J. 1990;120:366–372.
 
124. Suzuki A, Kamiya T, Tsuchiya K, Sato I, Arakaki Y, Kohata T, 
Ono Y. Tricuspid and mitral regurgitation detected by color flow 
Doppler in the acute phase of Kawasaki disease. Am J Cardiol. 
1988;61:386–390.
 
125. Ravekes WJ, Colan SD, Gauvreau K, Baker AL, Sundel RP, van 
der Velde ME, Fulton DR, Newburger JW. Aortic root dilation in 
Kawasaki disease. Am J Cardiol. 2001;87:919–922.
 
126. Newburger JW, Takahashi M, Burns JC, Beiser AS, Chung KJ, 
Duffy CE, Glode MP, Mason WH, Reddy V, Sanders SP. The 
treatment of Kawasaki syndrome with intravenous gamma 
globulin. N Engl J Med. 1986;315:341–347. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM198608073150601.
 
127. Newburger JW, Takahashi M, Beiser AS, Burns JC, Bastian 
J, Chung KJ, Colan SD, Duffy CE, Fulton DR, Glode MP. A 
single intravenous infusion of gamma globulin as compared 
with four infusions in the treatment of acute Kawasaki syn-
drome. N Engl J Med. 1991;324:1633–1639. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM199106063242305.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e989
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
 
128. Dominguez SR, Anderson MS, El-Adawy M, Glodé MP. Preventing 
coronary artery abnormalities: a need for earlier diagno-
sis and treatment of Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2012;31:1217–1220. doi: 10.1097/INF.0b013e318266bcf9.
 
129. Crystal MA, Manlhiot C, Yeung RS, Smallhorn JF, McCrindle BW. 
Coronary artery dilation after Kawasaki disease for children 
within the normal range. Int J Cardiol. 2009;136:27–32. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.04.019.
 
130. Dallaire F, Fournier A, Breton J, Nguyen TD, Spigelblatt L, Dahdah 
N. Marked variations in serial coronary artery diameter measures 
in Kawasaki disease: a new indicator of coronary involvement. 
J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2012;25:859–865. doi: 10.1016/j.
echo.2012.05.019.
 
131. Hoshino S, Tsuda E, Yamada O. Characteristics and fate of 
systemic artery aneurysm after Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 
2015;167:108–112.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2015.04.036.
 
132. Tomita S, Chung K, Mas M, Gidding S, Shulman ST. Peripheral 
gangrene associated with Kawasaki disease. Clin Infect Dis. 
1992;14:121–126.
 
133. Gomez-Moyano E, Vera Casaño A, Camacho J, Sanz Trelles A, 
Crespo-Erchiga V. Kawasaki disease complicated by cutane-
ous vasculitis and peripheral gangrene. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2011;64:e74–e75. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2010.04.029.
 
134. Capannari TE, Daniels SR, Meyer RA, Schwartz DC, Kaplan 
S. Sensitivity, specificity and predictive value of two-dimen-
sional echocardiography in detecting coronary artery aneu-
rysms in patients with Kawasaki disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1986;7:355–360.
 
135. Margossian R, Lu M, Minich LL, Bradley TJ, Cohen MS, Li JS, 
Printz BF, Shirali GS, Sleeper LA, Newburger JW, Colan SD; 
Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Predictors of coronary 
artery visualization in Kawasaki disease. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 
2011;24:53–59. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2010.10.015.
 
136. Fuse S, Kobayashi T, Arakaki Y, Ogawa S, Katoh H, Sakamoto N, 
Hamaoka K, Saji T. Standard method for ultrasound imaging of 
coronary artery in children. Pediatr Int. 2010;52:876–882. doi: 
10.1111/j.1442-200X.2010.03252.x.
 
137. JCS Joint Working Group. Guidelines for diagnosis and man-
agement of cardiovascular sequelae in Kawasaki disease (JCS 
2008): digest version. Circ J. 2010;74:1989–2020.
 
138. de Zorzi A, Colan SD, Gauvreau K, Baker AL, Sundel RP, 
Newburger JW. Coronary artery dimensions may be misclassified 
as normal in Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 1998;133:254–258.
 
139. McCrindle BW, Li JS, Minich LL, Colan SD, Atz AM, Takahashi M, 
Vetter VL, Gersony WM, Mitchell PD, Newburger JW; Pediatric 
Heart Network Investigators. Coronary artery involvement in 
children with Kawasaki disease: risk factors from analysis of se-
rial normalized measurements. Circulation. 2007;116:174–179. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.690875.
 
140. Manlhiot C, Millar K, Golding F, McCrindle BW. Improved clas-
sification of coronary artery abnormalities based only on coro-
nary artery z-scores after Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2010;31:242–249. doi: 10.1007/s00246-009-9599-7.
 
141. Ogata S, Tremoulet AH, Sato Y, Ueda K, Shimizu C, Sun X, 
Jain S, Silverstein L, Baker AL, Tanaka N, Ogihara Y, Ikehara S, 
Takatsuki S, Sakamoto N, Kobayashi T, Fuse S, Matsubara T, Ishii 
M, Saji T, Newburger JW, Burns JC. Coronary artery outcomes 
among children with Kawasaki disease in the United States and 
Japan. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:3825–3828. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2013.06.027.
 
142. Kurotobi S, Nagai T, Kawakami N, Sano T. Coronary diameter 
in normal infants, children and patients with Kawasaki disease. 
Pediatr Int. 2002;44:1–4.
 
143. Tan TH, Wong KY, Cheng TK, Heng JT. Coronary normograms 
and the coronary-aorta index: objective determinants of coro-
nary artery dilatation. Pediatr Cardiol. 2003;24:328–335. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-002-0300-7.
 
144. Olivieri L, Arling B, Friberg M, Sable C. Coronary artery Z score 
regression equations and calculators derived from a large hetero-
geneous population of children undergoing echocardiography. 
J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2009;22:159–164. doi: 10.1016/j.
echo.2008.11.003.
 
145. Kobayashi T, Fuse S, Sakamoto N, Mikami M, Ogawa S, 
Hamaoka K, Arakaki Y, Nakamura T, Nagasawa H, Kato T, 
Jibiki T, Iwashima S, Yamakawa M, Ohkubo T, Shimoyama S, 
Aso K, Sato S, Saji T; Z Score Project Investigators. A new 
Z score curve of the coronary arterial internal diameter us-
ing the lambda-mu-sigma method in a pediatric population. J 
Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2016;29:794–801. doi: 10.1016/j.
echo.2016.03.017.
 
146. Dallaire F, Dahdah N. New equations and a critical appraisal of cor-
onary artery Z scores in healthy children. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 
2011;24:60–74. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2010.10.004.
 
147. Du Bois D, Du Bois EF. A formula to estimate the approximate 
surface area if height and weight be known: 1916. Nutrition. 
1989;5:303–311.
 
148. Haycock GB, Schwartz GJ, Wisotsky DH. Geometric method for 
measuring body surface area: a height-weight formula validated 
in infants, children, and adults. J Pediatr. 1978;93:62–66.
 
149. Mosteller RD. Simplified calculation of body-surface area. N Engl J 
Med. 1987;317:1098. doi: 10.1056/NEJM198710223171717.
 
150. Ronai C, Hamaoka-Okamoto A, Baker AL, de Ferranti SD, Colan 
SD, Newburger JW, Friedman KG. Coronary artery aneurysm 
measurement and Z score variability in Kawasaki disease. 
 
J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2016;29:150–157. doi: 10.1016/j.
echo.2015.08.013.
 
151. Binstadt BA, Levine JC, Nigrovic PA, Gauvreau K, Dedeoglu F, 
Fuhlbrigge RC, Weindling SN, Newburger JW, Sundel RP. Coronary 
artery dilation among patients presenting with systemic-onset ju-
venile idiopathic arthritis. Pediatrics. 2005;116:e89–e93. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2004-2190.
 
152. Gurofsky RC, Sabharwal T, Manlhiot C, Redington AN, Benson 
LN, Chahal N, McCrindle BW. Arterial complications associated 
with cardiac catheterization in pediatric patients with a previ-
ous history of Kawasaki disease. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2009;73:809–813. doi: 10.1002/ccd.21892.
 
153. Tacke CE, Romeih S, Kuipers IM, Spijkerboer AM, Groenink M, 
Kuijpers TW. Evaluation of cardiac function by magnetic reso-
nance imaging during the follow-up of patients with Kawasaki dis-
ease. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2013;6:67–73. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCIMAGING.112.976969.
 
154. Carbone I, Cannata D, Algeri E, Galea N, Napoli A, De Zorzi A, 
Bosco G, D’Agostino R, Menezes L, Catalano C, Passariello 
R, Francone M. Adolescent Kawasaki disease: usefulness 
of 64-slice CT coronary angiography for follow-up investiga-
tion. Pediatr Radiol. 2011;41:1165–1173. doi: 10.1007/
s00247-011-2141-0.
 
155. Chu WC, Mok GC, Lam WW, Yam MC, Sung RY. Assessment 
of coronary artery aneurysms in paediatric patients with 
Kawasaki disease by multidetector row CT angiography: feasibil-
ity and comparison with 2D echocardiography. Pediatr Radiol. 
2006;36:1148–1153. doi: 10.1007/s00247-006-0281-4.
 
156. Yu Y, Sun K, Wang R, Li Y, Xue H, Yu L, Chen S, Xi L. Comparison 
study of echocardiography and dual-source CT in diagnosis of 
coronary artery aneurysm due to Kawasaki disease: coronary 
artery disease. Echocardiography. 2011;28:1025–1034. doi: 
10.1111/j.1540-8175.2011.01486.x.
 
157. Mori M, Miyamae T, Imagawa T, Katakura S, Kimura K, Yokota 
S. Meta-analysis of the results of intravenous gamma globu-
lin treatment of coronary artery lesions in Kawasaki dis-
ease. Mod Rheumatol. 2004;14:361–366. doi: 10.1007/
s10165-004-0324-3.
 
158. Terai M, Shulman ST. Prevalence of coronary artery abnor-
malities in Kawasaki disease is highly dependent on gamma 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e990
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
globulin dose but independent of salicylate dose. J Pediatr. 
1997;131:888–893.
 
159. Furusho K, Kamiya T, Nakano H, Kiyosawa N, Shinomiya K, 
Hayashidera T, Tamura T, Hirose O, Manabe Y, Yokoyama T. High-
dose intravenous gammaglobulin for Kawasaki disease. Lancet. 
1984;2:1055–1058.
 
160. Oates-Whitehead RM, Baumer JH, Haines L, Love S, Maconochie 
IK, Gupta A, Roman K, Dua JS, Flynn I. Intravenous immunoglobu-
lin for the treatment of Kawasaki disease in children. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2003;(4):CD004000.
 
161. Burns JC, Franco A. The immunomodulatory effects of intrave-
nous immunoglobulin therapy in Kawasaki disease. Expert Rev 
Clin Immunol. 2015;11:819–825. doi: 10.1586/1744666X. 
2015.1044980.
 
162. Durongpisitkul K, Gururaj VJ, Park JM, Martin CF. The preven-
tion of coronary artery aneurysm in Kawasaki disease: a meta-
analysis on the efficacy of aspirin and immunoglobulin treatment. 
Pediatrics. 1995;96:1057–1061.
 
163. Sawaji Y, Haneda N, Yamaguchi S, Kajino Y, Kishida K, Seto S, 
Konishi N, Waki K, Baba K, Arisawa K, Kamiya T, Mori C. Coronary 
risk factors in acute Kawasaki disease: correlation of serum im-
munoglobulin levels with coronary complications. Acta Paediatr 
Jpn. 1998;40:218–225.
 
164. Rosenfeld EA, Shulman ST, Corydon KE, Mason W, Takahashi 
M, Kuroda C. Comparative safety and efficacy of two im-
mune globulin products in Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 
1995;126:1000–1003.
 
165. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Outbreak of 
hepatitis C associated with intravenous immunoglobulin adminis-
tration: United States, October 1993-June 1994. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 1994;43:505–509.
 
166. Abolhassani H, Asgardoon MH, Rezaei N, Hammarstrom L, 
Aghamohammadi A. Different brands of intravenous immu-
noglobulin for primary immunodeficiencies: how to choose 
the best option for the patient? Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 
2015;11:1229–1243.
 
167. Luban NL, Wong EC, Henrich Lobo R, Pary P, Duke S. Intravenous 
immunoglobulin-related hemolysis in patients treated for 
Kawasaki disease. Transfusion. 2015;55(suppl 2):S90–S94. doi: 
10.1111/trf.13089.
 
168. Padmore R. Possible mechanisms for intravenous immunoglob-
ulin-associated hemolysis: clues obtained from review of clinical 
case reports. Transfusion. 2015;55(suppl 2):S59–S64. doi: 
10.1111/trf.13090.
 
169. Hamada H, Suzuki H, Abe J, Suzuki Y, Suenaga T, Takeuchi T, 
Yoshikawa N, Shibuta S, Miyawaki M, Oishi K, Yamaga H, Aoyagi 
N, Iwahashi S, Miyashita R, Honda T, Onouchi Y, Terai M, Hata 
A. Inflammatory cytokine profiles during cyclosporin treat-
ment for immunoglobulin-resistant Kawasaki disease. Cytokine. 
2012;60:681–685.
 
170. Kemmotsu Y, Nakayama T, Matsuura H, Saji T. Clinical character-
istics of aseptic meningitis induced by intravenous immunoglobu-
lin in patients with Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 
2011;9:28. doi: 10.1186/1546-0096-9-28.
 
171. Burns JC, Capparelli EV, Brown JA, Newburger JW, Glode MP. 
Intravenous gamma-globulin treatment and retreatment in 
Kawasaki disease: US/Canadian Kawasaki Syndrome Study 
Group. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1998;17:1144–1148.
 
172. Tsai MH, Huang YC, Yen MH, Li CC, Chiu CH, Lin PY, Lin TY, 
Chang LY. Clinical responses of patients with Kawasaki disease 
to different brands of intravenous immunoglobulin. J Pediatr. 
2006;148:38–43. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2005.08.024.
 
173. Silverman ED, Huang C, Rose V, Boutin C, Smallhorn J, McCrindle 
BW, Laxer RM. IVGG treatment of Kawasaki disease: are all brands 
equal? In: Kato H, ed. Kawasaki Disease: Proceedings of the 5th 
International Kawasaki Disease Symposium, Fukuoka, Japan, 
22–25 May 1995. New York, NY: Elsevier; 1995:301–304.
 
174. Kawasaki disease. In: Red Book. 2015 Report of the Committee 
on Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove, IL: American Academy of 
Pediatrics; 2015:494–500.
 
175. Dajani AS, Taubert KA, Takahashi M, Bierman FZ, Freed MD, 
Ferrieri P, Gerber M, Shulman ST, Karchmer AW, Wilson W, 
Peter G, Durack DT, Rahimtoola SH. Guidelines for long-term 
management of patients with Kawasaki disease: report from 
the Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki 
Disease, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 1994;89:916–922.
 
176. Newburger JW, Sleeper LA, McCrindle BW, Minich LL, Gersony 
W, Vetter VL, Atz AM, Li JS, Takahashi M, Baker AL, Colan 
SD, Mitchell PD, Klein GL, Sundel RP; Pediatric Heart Network 
Investigators. Randomized trial of pulsed corticosteroid thera-
py for primary treatment of Kawasaki disease. N Engl J Med. 
2007;356:663–675. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa061235.
 
177. Baumer JH, Love SJ, Gupta A, Haines LC, Maconochie I, Dua 
JS. Salicylate for the treatment of Kawasaki disease in children. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;(4):CD004175.
 
178. Catella-Lawson F, Reilly MP, Kapoor SC, Cucchiara AJ, DeMarco 
S, Tournier B, Vyas SN, FitzGerald GA. Cyclooxygenase in-
hibitors and the antiplatelet effects of aspirin. N Engl J Med. 
2001;345:1809–1817. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa003199.
 
179. Lee JH, Hung HY, Huang FY. Kawasaki disease with Reye syn-
drome: report of one case. Zhonghua Min Guo Xiao Er Ke Yi Xue 
Hui Za Zhi. 1992;33:67–71.
 
180. Takahashi M, Mason W. Kawasaki syndrome, Reye syndrome, 
and aspirin. Pediatrics. 1986;77:616–617.
 
181. Takahashi M, Mason W, Thomas D, Sinatra F. Reye syndrome 
following Kawasaki syndrome confirmed by liver histopathol-
ogy. In: Kato H, ed. Kawasaki Disease: Proceedings of the 5th 
International Kawasaki Disease Symposium, Fukuoka, Japan, 
22–25 May 1995. New York, NY: Elsevier; 1995:436–444.
 
182. Shulman ST. Is there a role for corticosteroids in Kawasaki 
disease? J Pediatr. 2003;142:601–603. doi: 10.1067/mpd. 
2003.258.
 
183. Kijima Y, Kamiya T, Suzuki A, Hirose O, Manabe H. A trial pro-
cedure to prevent aneurysm formation of the coronary arter-
ies by steroid pulse therapy in Kawasaki disease. Jpn Circ J. 
1982;46:1239–1242.
 
184. Shinohara M, Sone K, Tomomasa T, Morikawa A. Corticosteroids 
in the treatment of the acute phase of Kawasaki disease. J 
Pediatr. 1999;135:465–469.
 
185. Inoue Y, Okada Y, Shinohara M, Kobayashi T, Kobayashi T, 
Tomomasa T, Takeuchi K, Morikawa A. A multicenter prospective 
randomized trial of corticosteroids in primary therapy for Kawasaki 
disease: clinical course and coronary artery outcome. J Pediatr. 
2006;149:336–341. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2006.05.025.
 
186. Okada K, Hara J, Maki I, Miki K, Matsuzaki K, Matsuoka T, 
Yamamoto T, Nishigaki T, Kurotobi S, Sano T; Osaka Kawasaki 
Disease Study Group. Pulse methylprednisolone with gamma-
globulin as an initial treatment for acute Kawasaki disease. 
Eur J Pediatr. 2009;168:181–185. doi: 10.1007/s00431- 
008-0727-9.
 
187. Egami K, Muta H, Ishii M, Suda K, Sugahara Y, Iemura M, 
Matsuishi T. Prediction of resistance to intravenous immuno-
globulin treatment in patients with Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 
2006;149:237–240. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2006.03.050.
 
188. Ogata S, Ogihara Y, Honda T, Kon S, Akiyama K, Ishii M. 
Corticosteroid pulse combination therapy for refractory Kawasaki 
disease: a randomized trial. Pediatrics. 2012;129:e17–e23. doi: 
10.1542/peds.2011-0148.
 
189. Kobayashi T, Inoue Y, Takeuchi K, Okada Y, Tamura K, Tomomasa 
T, Kobayashi T, Morikawa A. Prediction of intravenous im-
munoglobulin unresponsiveness in patients with Kawasaki 
disease. Circulation. 2006;113:2606–2612. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.105.592865.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e991
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
 
190. Kobayashi T, Saji T, Otani T, Takeuchi K, Nakamura T, Arakawa 
H, Kato T, Hara T, Hamaoka K, Ogawa S, Miura M, Nomura 
Y, Fuse S, Ichida F, Seki M, Fukazawa R, Ogawa C, Furuno K, 
Tokunaga H, Takatsuki S, Hara S, Morikawa A; RAISE study group 
investigators. Efficacy of immunoglobulin plus prednisolone for 
prevention of coronary artery abnormalities in severe Kawasaki 
disease (RAISE study): a randomised, open-label, blinded-
endpoints trial. Lancet. 2012;379:1613–1620. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(11)61930-2.
 
191. Chen S, Dong Y, Yin Y, Krucoff MW. Intravenous immunoglobulin 
plus corticosteroid to prevent coronary artery abnormalities in 
Kawasaki disease: a meta-analysis. Heart. 2013;99:76–82. doi: 
10.1136/heartjnl-2012-302126.
 
192. Sleeper LA, Minich LL, McCrindle BM, Li JS, Mason W, Colan 
SD, Atz AM, Printz BF, Baker A, Vetter VL, Newburger JW; 
Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Evaluation of Kawasaki 
disease risk-scoring systems for intravenous immunoglobulin 
resistance. J Pediatr. 2011;158:831–835.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpeds.2010.10.031.
 
193. Matsubara T, Furukawa S, Yabuta K. Serum levels of tumor ne-
crosis factor, interleukin 2 receptor, and interferon-gamma in 
Kawasaki disease involved coronary-artery lesions. Clin Immunol 
Immunopathol. 1990;56:29–36.
 
194. Weiss JE, Eberhard BA, Chowdhury D, Gottlieb BS. Infliximab as 
a novel therapy for refractory Kawasaki disease. J Rheumatol. 
2004;31:808–810.
 
195. Burns JC, Best BM, Mejias A, Mahony L, Fixler DE, Jafri HS, Melish 
ME, Jackson MA, Asmar BI, Lang DJ, Connor JD, Capparelli 
EV, Keen ML, Mamun K, Keenan GF, Ramilo O. Infliximab 
treatment of intravenous immunoglobulin-resistant Kawasaki 
 
disease. J Pediatr. 2008;153:833–838. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds. 
2008.06.011.
 
196. Hirono K, Kemmotsu Y, Wittkowski H, Foell D, Saito K, Ibuki 
K, Watanabe K, Watanabe S, Uese K, Kanegane H, Origasa 
H, Ichida F, Roth J, Miyawaki T, Saji T. Infliximab reduces the 
cytokine-mediated inflammation but does not suppress cel-
lular infiltration of the vessel wall in refractory Kawasaki dis-
ease. Pediatr Res. 2009;65:696–701. doi: 10.1203/PDR. 
0b013e31819ed68d.
 
197. Tremoulet AH, Jain S, Jaggi P, Jimenez-Fernandez S, Pancheri 
JM, Sun X, Kanegaye JT, Kovalchin JP, Printz BF, Ramilo O, 
Burns JC. Infliximab for intensification of primary therapy for 
Kawasaki disease: a phase 3 randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet. 2014;383:1731–1738. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(13)62298-9.
 
198. Choueiter NF, Olson AK, Shen DD, Portman MA. Prospective 
open-label trial of etanercept as adjunctive therapy for Kawasaki 
disease. J Pediatr. 2010;157:960–966.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpeds.2010.06.014.
 
199. Portman MA, Olson A, Soriano B, Dahdah N, Williams R, 
Kirkpatrick E. Etanercept as adjunctive treatment for acute 
Kawasaki disease: study design and rationale. Am Heart J. 
2011;161:494–499. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2010.12.003.
 
200. Tremoulet AH, Best BM, Song S, Wang S, Corinaldesi E, 
Eichenfield JR, Martin DD, Newburger JW, Burns JC. Resistance 
to intravenous immunoglobulin in children with Kawasaki dis-
ease. J Pediatr. 2008;153:117–121. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds. 
2007.12.021.
 
201. Bar-Meir M, Kalisky I, Schwartz A, Somekh E, Tasher D; Israeli 
Kawasaki Group. Prediction of resistance to intravenous immuno-
globulin in children with Kawasaki disease. J Pediatric Infect Dis 
Soc. 2017. pii: piw075. doi: 10.1093/jpids/piw075.
 
202. Shendre A, Wiener HW, Zhi D, Vazquez AI, Portman MA, Shrestha 
S. High-density genotyping of immune loci in Kawasaki disease 
and IVIG treatment response in European-American case-parent 
trio study. Genes Immun. 2014;15:534–542. doi: 10.1038/
gene.2014.47.
 
203. Shrestha S, Wiener HW, Olson AK, Edberg JC, Bowles NE, Patel 
H, Portman MA. Functional FCGR2B gene variants influence in-
travenous immunoglobulin response in patients with Kawasaki 
disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011;128:677–680. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2011.04.027.
 
204. Nakamura Y, Yashiro M, Uehara R, Oki I, Watanabe M, Yanagawa 
H. Epidemiologic features of Kawasaki disease in Japan: re-
sults from the nationwide survey in 2005-2006. J Epidemiol. 
2008;18:167–172.
 
205. Son MB, Gauvreau K, Ma L, Baker AL, Sundel RP, Fulton DR, 
Newburger JW. Treatment of Kawasaki disease: analysis of 
27 US pediatric hospitals from 2001 to 2006. Pediatrics. 
2009;124:1–8. doi: 10.1542/peds.2008-0730.
 
206. Durongpisitkul K, Soongswang J, Laohaprasitiporn D, Nana A, 
Prachuabmoh C, Kangkagate C. Immunoglobulin failure and re-
treatment in Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2003;24:145–
148. doi: 10.1007/s00246-002-0216-2.
 
207. Uehara R, Belay ED, Maddox RA, Holman RC, Nakamura Y, 
Yashiro M, Oki I, Ogino H, Schonberger LB, Yanagawa H. Analysis 
of potential risk factors associated with nonresponse to initial 
intravenous immunoglobulin treatment among Kawasaki disease 
patients in Japan. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2008;27:155–160.
 
208. Seki M, Kobayashi T, Kobayashi T, Morikawa A, Otani T, Takeuchi 
K, Ayusawa M, Tsuchiya K, Yasuda K, Suzuki T, Shimoyama S, 
Ikeda K, Ishii Y, Arakawa H. External validation of a risk score to 
predict intravenous immunoglobulin resistance in patients with 
Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011;30:145–147. doi: 
10.1097/INF.0b013e3181f386db.
 
209. Sano T, Kurotobi S, Matsuzaki K, Yamamoto T, Maki I, Miki K, 
Kogaki S, Hara J. Prediction of non-responsiveness to stan-
dard high-dose gamma-globulin therapy in patients with acute 
Kawasaki disease before starting initial treatment. Eur J Pediatr. 
2007;166:131–137. doi: 10.1007/s00431-006-0223-z.
 
210. Fu PP, Du ZD, Pan YS. Novel predictors of intravenous immu-
noglobulin resistance in Chinese children with Kawasaki dis-
ease. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2013;32:e319–e323. doi: 10.1097/
INF.0b013e31828e887f.
 
211. Sundel RP, Burns JC, Baker A, Beiser AS, Newburger JW. 
Gamma globulin re-treatment in Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 
1993;123:657–659.
 
212. Kobayashi T, Kobayashi T, Morikawa A, Ikeda K, Seki M, 
Shimoyama S, Ishii Y, Suzuki T, Nakajima K, Sakamoto N, 
Arakawa H. Efficacy of intravenous immunoglobulin combined 
with prednisolone following resistance to initial intravenous im-
munoglobulin treatment of acute Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 
2013;163:521–526. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2013.01.022.
 
213. Son MB, Gauvreau K, Burns JC, Corinaldesi E, Tremoulet AH, 
Watson VE, Baker A, Fulton DR, Sundel RP, Newburger JW. 
Infliximab for intravenous immunoglobulin resistance in Kawasaki 
disease: a retrospective study. J Pediatr. 2011;158:644–649.
e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.10.012.
 
214. Burns JC, Mason WH, Hauger SB, Janai H, Bastian JF, Wohrley 
JD, Balfour I, Shen CA, Michel ED, Shulman ST, Melish ME. 
Infliximab treatment for refractory Kawasaki syndrome. J Pediatr. 
2005;146:662–667.
 
215. Suzuki H, Terai M, Hamada H, Honda T, Suenaga T, Takeuchi 
T, Yoshikawa N, Shibuta S, Miyawaki M, Oishi K, Yamaga H, 
Aoyagi N, Iwahashi S, Miyashita R, Onouchi Y, Sasago K, Suzuki 
Y, Hata A. Cyclosporin A treatment for Kawasaki disease re-
fractory to initial and additional intravenous immunoglobu-
lin. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011;30:871–876. doi: 10.1097/
INF.0b013e318220c3cf.
 
216. Tremoulet AH, Pancoast P, Franco A, Bujold M, Shimizu C, 
Onouchi Y, Tamamoto A, Erdem G, Dodd D, Burns JC. Calcineurin 
inhibitor treatment of intravenous immunoglobulin-resistant 
Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2012;161:506–512.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2012.02.048.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e992
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
 
217. Shafferman A, Birmingham JD, Cron RQ. High dose Anakinra for 
treatment of severe neonatal Kawasaki disease: a case report. 
Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2014;12:26. doi: 10.1186/1546- 
0096-12-26.
 
218. Cohen S, Tacke CE, Straver B, Meijer N, Kuipers IM, Kuijpers 
TW. A child with severe relapsing Kawasaki disease rescued by 
IL-1 receptor blockade and extracorporeal membrane oxygen-
ation. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012;71:2059–2061. doi: 10.1136/
annrheumdis-2012-201658.
 
219. Wallace CA, French JW, Kahn SJ, Sherry DD. Initial intravenous 
gammaglobulin treatment failure in Kawasaki disease. Pediatrics. 
2000;105:E78.
 
220. Hokosaki T, Mori M, Nishizawa T, Nakamura T, Imagawa T, Iwamoto 
M, Yokota S. Long-term efficacy of plasma exchange treatment 
for refractory Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Int. 2012;54:99–103. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200X.2011.03487.x.
 
221. Wright DA, Newburger JW, Baker A, Sundel RP. Treatment of im-
mune globulin-resistant Kawasaki disease with pulsed doses of 
corticosteroids. J Pediatr. 1996;128:146–149.
 
222. Dale RC, Saleem MA, Daw S, Dillon MJ. Treatment of se-
vere complicated Kawasaki disease with oral prednisolone 
and aspirin. J Pediatr. 2000;137:723–726. doi: 10.1067/
mpd.2000.108444.
 
223. Lang BA, Yeung RS, Oen KG, Malleson PN, Huber AM, Riley M, 
Ebbeson R, Ramsey SE, Laxer RM, Silverman ED, McCrindle BW, 
Ratnapalan S, Feldman BM. Corticosteroid treatment of refrac-
tory Kawasaki disease. J Rheumatol. 2006;33:803–809.
 
224. Miura M, Tamame T, Naganuma T, Chinen S, Matsuoka M, Ohki 
H. Steroid pulse therapy for Kawasaki disease unresponsive 
to additional immunoglobulin therapy. Paediatr Child Health. 
2011;16:479–484.
 
225. Han RK, Sinclair B, Newman A, Silverman ED, Taylor GW, Walsh 
P, McCrindle BW. Recognition and management of Kawasaki dis-
ease. CMAJ. 2000;162:807–812.
 
226. Furukawa T, Kishiro M, Akimoto K, Nagata S, Shimizu T, 
Yamashiro Y. Effects of steroid pulse therapy on immunoglobulin-
resistant Kawasaki disease. Arch Dis Child. 2008;93:142–146. 
doi: 10.1136/adc.2007.126144.
 
227. Ogata S, Bando Y, Kimura S, Ando H, Nakahata Y, Ogihara Y, 
Kaneko T, Minoura K, Kaida M, Yokota Y, Furukawa S, Ishii M. The 
strategy of immune globulin resistant Kawasaki disease: a compar-
ative study of additional immune globulin and steroid pulse therapy. 
J Cardiol. 2009;53:15–19. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2008.08.002.
 
228. Teraguchi M, Ogino H, Yoshimura K, Taniuchi S, Kino M, Okazaki 
H, Kaneko K. Steroid pulse therapy for children with intravenous 
immunoglobulin therapy-resistant Kawasaki disease: a prospec-
tive study. Pediatr Cardiol. 2013;34:959–963. doi: 10.1007/
s00246-012-0589-9.
 
229. Sonoda K, Mori M, Hokosaki T, Yokota S. Infliximab plus plas-
ma exchange rescue therapy in Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 
2014;164:1128–1132.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.01.020.
 
230. Brown TJ, Crawford SE, Cornwall ML, Garcia F, Shulman ST, 
Rowley AH. CD8 T lymphocytes and macrophages infiltrate coro-
nary artery aneurysms in acute Kawasaki disease. J Infect Dis. 
2001;184:940–943. doi: 10.1086/323155.
 
231. Khor CC, Davila S, Breunis WB, Lee YC, Shimizu C, Wright VJ, 
Yeung RS, Tan DE, Sim KS, Wang JJ, Wong TY, Pang J, Mitchell 
P, Cimaz R, Dahdah N, Cheung YF, Huang GY, Yang W, Park 
IS, Lee JK, Wu JY, Levin M, Burns JC, Burgner D, Kuijpers TW, 
Hibberd ML; Hong Kong–Shanghai Kawasaki Disease Genetics 
Consortium; Korean Kawasaki Disease Genetics Consortium; 
Taiwan Kawasaki Disease Genetics Consortium; International 
Kawasaki Disease Genetics Consortium; US Kawasaki Disease 
Genetics Consortium; Blue Mountains Eye Study. Genome-wide 
association study identifies FCGR2A as a susceptibility locus 
for Kawasaki disease. Nat Genet. 2011;43:1241–1246. doi: 
10.1038/ng.981.
 
232. Shimizu C, Eleftherohorinou H, Wright VJ, Kim J, Alphonse MP, 
Perry JC, Cimaz R, Burgner D, Dahdah N, Hoang LT, Khor CC, 
Salgado A, Tremoulet AH, Davila S, Kuijpers TW, Hibberd ML, 
Johnson TA, Takahashi A, Tsunoda T, Kubo M, Tanaka T, Onouchi 
Y, Yeung RS, Coin LJ, Levin M, Burns JC; International Kawasaki 
Disease Genetics Consortium. Genetic variation in the SLC8A1 
calcium signaling pathway is associated with susceptibility 
to Kawasaki disease and coronary artery abnormalities. Circ 
Cardiovasc Genet. 2016;9:559–568.
 
233. Imagawa T, Mori M, Miyamae T, Ito S, Nakamura T, Yasui K, 
Kimura H, Yokota S. Plasma exchange for refractory Kawasaki 
disease. Eur J Pediatr. 2004;163:263–264. doi: 10.1007/
s00431-003-1267-y.
 
234. Yonesaka S, Nakada T, Sunagawa Y, Tomimoto K, Naka S, 
Takahashi T, Matubara T, Sekigami I. Endomyocardial bi-
opsy in children with Kawasaki disease. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 
1989;31:706–711.
 
235. Newburger JW, Sanders SP, Burns JC, Parness IA, Beiser AS, 
Colan SD. Left ventricular contractility and function in Kawasaki 
syndrome: effect of intravenous gamma-globulin. Circulation. 
1989;79:1237–1246.
 
236. Moran AM, Newburger JW, Sanders SP, Parness IA, Spevak 
PJ, Burns JC, Colan SD. Abnormal myocardial mechanics in 
Kawasaki disease: rapid response to gamma-globulin. Am Heart 
J. 2000;139(pt 1):217–223.
 
237. Natterer J, Perez MH, Di Bernardo S. Capillary leak lead-
ing to shock in Kawasaki disease without myocardial dys-
function. Cardiol Young. 2012;22:349–352. doi: 10.1017/
S1047951111001314.
 
238. Kissoon N, Orr RA, Carcillo JA. Updated American College 
of Critical Care Medicine–pediatric advanced life sup-
port guidelines for management of pediatric and neonatal 
septic shock: relevance to the emergency care clinician. 
Pediatr Emerg Care. 2010;26:867–869. doi: 10.1097/PEC. 
0b013e3181fb0dc0.
 
239. Dellinger RP. Steroid therapy of septic shock: the decision is in 
the eye of the beholder. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:1987–1989. 
doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31817d7ee4.
 
240. Thabet F, Bafaqih H, Al-Mohaimeed S, Al-Hilali M, Al-Sewairi 
W, Chehab M. Shock: an unusual presentation of Kawasaki 
disease. Eur J Pediatr. 2011;170:941–943. doi: 10.1007/
s00431-011-1426-5.
 
241. Mehta SR, Yusuf S; Clopidogrel in Unstable angina to prevent 
Recurrent Events (CURE) Study Investigators. The Clopidogrel 
in Unstable angina to prevent Recurrent Events (CURE) trial 
programme: rationale, design and baseline characteristics in-
cluding a meta-analysis of the effects of thienopyridines in vas-
cular disease. Eur Heart J. 2000;21:2033–2041. doi: 10.1053/
euhj.2000.2474.
 
242. Albers GW, Amarenco P. Combination therapy with clopidogrel 
and aspirin: can the CURE results be extrapolated to cerebrovas-
cular patients? Stroke. 2001;32:2948–2949.
 
243. Gerschutz GP, Bhatt DL; Clopidogrel in Unstable Angina to 
Prevent Recurrent Events study. The Clopidogrel in Unstable 
Angina to Prevent Recurrent Events (CURE) study: to what extent 
should the results be generalizable? Am Heart J. 2003;145:595–
601. doi: 10.1067/mhj.2003.180.
 
244. Peters RJ, Mehta SR, Fox KA, Zhao F, Lewis BS, Kopecky SL, Diaz 
R, Commerford PJ, Valentin V, Yusuf S; Clopidogrel in Unstable 
angina to prevent Recurrent Events (CURE) Trial Investigators. 
Effects of aspirin dose when used alone or in combination with 
clopidogrel in patients with acute coronary syndromes: ob-
servations from the Clopidogrel in Unstable angina to prevent 
Recurrent Events (CURE) study. Circulation. 2003;108:1682–
1687. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000091201.39590.CB.
 
245. Sugahara Y, Ishii M, Muta H, Iemura M, Matsuishi T, Kato H. 
Warfarin therapy for giant aneurysm prevents myocardial infarction 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e993
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
in Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2008;29:398–401. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-007-9132-9.
 
246. Giglia TM, Massicotte MP, Tweddell JS, Barst RJ, Bauman M, Erickson 
CC, Feltes TF, Foster E, Hinoki K, Ichord RN, Kreutzer J, McCrindle 
BW, Newburger JW, Tabbutt S, Todd JL, Webb CL; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Congenital Heart Defects Committee 
of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, Council on 
Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Epidemiology and 
Prevention, and Stroke Council. Prevention and treatment of throm-
bosis in pediatric and congenital heart disease: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association [published correction appears 
in Circulation. 2014;129:e23]. Circulation. 2013;128:2622–2703. 
 
doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000436140.77832.7a.
 
247. O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, Casey DE Jr, Chung MK, 
de Lemos JA, Ettinger SM, Fang JC, Fesmire FM, Franklin BA, 
Granger CB, Krumholz HM, Linderbaum JA, Morrow DA, Newby 
LK, Ornato JP, Ou N, Radford MJ, Tamis-Holland JE, Tommaso 
CL, Tracy CM, Woo YJ, Zhao DX. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for 
the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report 
of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines [published 
correction appears in Circulation. 2013;128:e481]. Circulation. 
2013;127:e362–e425. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e3182742cf6.
 
248. Lange RA, Hillis LD. Reperfusion therapy in acute myocardial 
infarction. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:954–955. doi: 10.1056/
NEJM200203283461302.
 
249. Task Force on the Management of ST-Segment Elevation Acute 
Myocardial Infarction of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC); 
Steg PG, James SK, Atar D, Badano LP, Blomstrom-Lundqvist 
C, Borger MA, Di Mario C, Dickstein K, Ducrocq G, Fernandez-
Aviles F, Gershlick AH, Giannuzzi P, Halvorsen S, Huber K, Juni P, 
Kastrati A, Knuuti J, Lenzen MJ, Mahaffey KW, Valgimigli M, van 
‘t Hof A, Widimsky P, Zahger D. ESC guidelines for the manage-
ment of acute myocardial infarction in patients presenting with 
ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2569–2619. doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehs215.
 
250. Monagle P, Chan AK, Goldenberg NA, Ichord RN, Journeycake JM, 
Nowak-Göttl U, Vesely SK; American College of Chest Physicians. 
Antithrombotic therapy in neonates and children: Antithrombotic 
Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College 
of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines 
[published corrections appear in Chest. 2014;146:1422 and 
Chest. 2014;146:1694]. Chest. 2012;141(suppl):e737S–801S. 
doi: 10.1378/chest.11-2308.
 
251. Gupta AA, Leaker M, Andrew M, Massicotte P, Liu L, Benson LN, 
McCrindle BW. Safety and outcomes of thrombolysis with tissue 
plasminogen activator for treatment of intravascular thrombo-
sis in children. J Pediatr. 2001;139:682–688. doi: 10.1067/
mpd.2001.118428.
 
252. Williams RV, Wilke VM, Tani LY, Minich LL. Does abciximab en-
hance regression of coronary aneurysms resulting from Kawasaki 
disease? Pediatrics. 2002;109:E4.
 
253. McCandless RT, Minich LL, Tani LY, Williams RV. Does abciximab 
promote coronary artery remodeling in patients with Kawasaki 
disease? Am J Cardiol. 2010;105:1625–1628. doi: 10.1016/j.
amjcard.2010.01.332.
 
254. Hellstrom HR. Platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors. Circulation. 
2003;107:E39–E39.
 
255. Ibbotson T, McGavin JK, Goa KL. Abciximab: an updated review 
of its therapeutic use in patients with ischaemic heart disease 
undergoing percutaneous coronary revascularisation. Drugs. 
2003;63:1121–1163.
 
256. Westerhout CM, Boersma E. Risk-benefit analysis of platelet gly-
coprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in acute coronary syndromes. Expert 
Opin Drug Saf. 2003;2:49–58.
 
257. Blankier S, McCrindle BW, Ito S, Yeung RS. The role of atorvastatin 
in regulating the immune response leading to vascular damage in 
a model of Kawasaki disease. Clin Exp Immunol. 2011;164:193–
201. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2011.04331.x.
 
258. Kato H. Cardiovascular complications in Kawasaki disease: coro-
nary artery lumen and long-term consequences. Prog Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2004;19:137–145.
 
259. Kato H, Koike S, Yamamoto M, Ito Y, Yano E. Coronary aneu-
rysms in infants and young children with acute febrile mucocuta-
neous lymph node syndrome. J Pediatr. 1975;86:892–898.
 
260. Suzuki A, Kamiya T, Kuwahara N, Ono Y, Kohata T, Takahashi 
O, Kimura K, Takamiya M. Coronary arterial lesions of Kawasaki 
disease: cardiac catheterization findings of 1100 cases. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 1986;7:3–9. doi: 10.1007/BF02315475.
 
261. Baer AZ, Rubin LG, Shapiro CA, Sood SK, Rajan S, Shapir Y, 
Romano A, Bierman FZ. Prevalence of coronary artery lesions 
on the initial echocardiogram in Kawasaki syndrome. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160:686–690. doi: 10.1001/
archpedi.160.7.686.
 
262. Michihata N, Matsui H, Fushimi K, Yasunaga H. Guideline-concordant 
treatment of Kawasaki disease with immunoglobulin and aspirin 
and the incidence of coronary artery aneurysm. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 
2015;54:1076–1080. doi: 10.1177/0009922814566932.
 
263. Kato H, Sugimura T, Akagi T, Sato N, Hashino K, Maeno Y, Kazue 
T, Eto G, Yamakawa R. Long-term consequences of Kawasaki 
disease: a 10- to 21-year follow-up study of 594 patients. 
Circulation. 1996;94:1379–1385.
 
264. Akagi T, Rose V, Benson LN, Newman A, Freedom RM. Outcome 
of coronary artery aneurysms after Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 
1992;121(pt 1):689–694.
 
265. Kobayashi T, Sone K, Shinohara M, Kosuda T, Kobayashi T. 
Images in cardiovascular medicine: giant coronary aneurysm 
of Kawasaki disease developing during postacute phase. 
Circulation. 1998;98:92–93.
 
266. Ozawa J, Suzuki H, Hasegawa S, Numano F, Haniu H, Watanabe 
K, Uchiyama M, Saitoh A. Two cases of new coronary aneu-
rysms that developed in the late period after Kawasaki dis-
ease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2013;34:1992–1995. doi: 10.1007/
s00246-012-0543-x.
 
267. Toyono M, Shimada S, Aoki-Okazaki M, Kubota H, Oyamada J, 
Tamura M, Takahashi T. Expanding coronary aneurysm in the late 
phase of Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Int. 2012;54:155–158. doi: 
10.1111/j.1442-200X.2011.03403.x.
 
268. Tsuda E, Kamiya T, Ono Y, Kimura K, Echigo S. Dilated coronary 
arterial lesions in the late period after Kawasaki disease. Heart. 
2005;91:177–182. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2003.025338.
 
269. Onouchi Z, Hamaoka K, Kamiya Y, Hayashi S, Ohmochi Y, Sakata 
K, Shiraishi I, Hayano T, Fukumochi H. Transformation of coro-
nary artery aneurysm to obstructive lesion and the role of col-
lateral vessels in myocardial perfusion in patients with Kawasaki 
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;21:158–162.
 
270. Paredes N, Mondal T, Brandão LR, Chan AK. Management 
of myocardial infarction in children with Kawasaki disease. 
Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2010;21:620–631. doi: 10.1097/
MBC.0b013e32833d6ec2.
 
271. Suzuki A, Kamiya T, Ono Y, Kohata T, Okuno M. Myocardial isch-
emia in Kawasaki disease: follow-up study by cardiac catheteriza-
tion and coronary angiography. Pediatr Cardiol. 1988;9:1–5. doi: 
10.1007/BF02279876.
 
272. Tsuda E, Hirata T, Matsuo O, Abe T, Sugiyama H, Yamada O. 
The 30-year outcome for patients after myocardial infarction due 
to coronary artery lesions caused by Kawasaki disease. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2011;32:176–182. doi: 10.1007/s00246-010-9838-y.
 
273. Sugimura T, Kato H, Inoue O, Fukuda T, Sato N, Ishii M, Takagi J, 
Akagi T, Maeno Y, Kawano T. Intravascular ultrasound of coronary 
arteries in children: assessment of the wall morphology and the 
lumen after Kawasaki disease. Circulation. 1994;89:258–265.
 
274. Iemura M, Ishii M, Sugimura T, Akagi T, Kato H. Long term con-
sequences of regressed coronary aneurysms after Kawasaki 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e994
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
disease: vascular wall morphology and function. Heart. 
2000;83:307–311.
 
275. Mitani Y, Ohashi H, Sawada H, Ikeyama Y, Hayakawa H, Takabayashi 
S, Maruyama K, Shimpo H, Komada Y. In vivo plaque composi-
tion and morphology in coronary artery lesions in adolescents 
and young adults long after Kawasaki disease: a virtual histology-
intravascular ultrasound study. Circulation. 2009;119:2829–
2836. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.818609.
 
276. Kakimoto N, Suzuki H, Kubo T, Suenaga T, Takeuchi T, Shibuta 
S, Ino Y, Akasaka T, Yoshikawa N. Evaluation of coronary arterial 
lesions due to Kawasaki disease using optical coherence tomog-
raphy. Can J Cardiol. 2014;30:956.e7–956.e9. doi: 10.1016/j.
cjca.2014.04.028.
 
277. Suzuki A, Yamagishi M, Kimura K, Sugiyama H, Arakaki Y, 
Kamiya T, Miyatake K. Functional behavior and morphology 
of the coronary artery wall in patients with Kawasaki disease 
assessed by intravascular ultrasound. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1996;27:291–296.
 
278. Noto N, Karasawa K, Kanamaru H, Ayusawa M, Sumitomo 
N, Okada T, Harada K. Non-invasive measurement of coro-
nary flow reserve in children with Kawasaki disease. Heart. 
2002;87:559–565.
 
279. Furuyama H, Odagawa Y, Katoh C, Iwado Y, Yoshinaga K, Ito 
Y, Noriyasu K, Mabuchi M, Kuge Y, Kobayashi K, Tamaki N. 
Assessment of coronary function in children with a history of 
Kawasaki disease using 15O-water positron emission tomogra-
phy. Circulation. 2002;105:2878–2884.
 
280. Muzik O, Paridon SM, Singh TP, Morrow WR, Dayanikli F, Di Carli 
MF. Quantification of myocardial blood flow and flow reserve in 
children with a history of Kawasaki disease and normal coronary 
arteries using positron emission tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1996;28:757–762.
 
281. Suda K, Tahara N, Honda A, Yoshimoto H, Kishimoto S, Kudo 
Y, Kaida H, Abe T, Ueno T, Fukumoto Y. Statin reduces persis-
tent coronary arterial inflammation evaluated by serial 18fluo-
rodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography imaging long 
after Kawasaki disease. Int J Cardiol. 2015;179:61–62. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.10.057.
 
282. Dhillon R, Clarkson P, Donald AE, Powe AJ, Nash M, Novelli 
V, Dillon MJ, Deanfield JE. Endothelial dysfunction late after 
Kawasaki disease. Circulation. 1996;94:2103–2106.
 
283. Dietz SM, Tacke CE, Hutten BA, Kuijpers TW. Peripheral endothe-
lial (dys)function, arterial stiffness and carotid intima-media thick-
ness in patients after Kawasaki disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analyses. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0130913. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0130913.
 
284. Mitani Y, Sawada H, Hayakawa H, Aoki K, Ohashi H, 
Matsumura M, Kuroe K, Shimpo H, Nakano M, Komada Y. 
Elevated levels of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and se-
rum amyloid-A late after Kawasaki disease: association be-
tween inflammation and late coronary sequelae in Kawasaki 
disease. Circulation. 2005;111:38–43. doi: 10.1161/01.
CIR.0000151311.38708.29.
 
285. Cheung YF, Ho MH, Tam SC, Yung TC. Increased high sensitiv-
ity C reactive protein concentrations and increased arterial 
stiffness in children with a history of Kawasaki disease. Heart. 
2004;90:1281–1285. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2003.018507.
 
286. Suda K, Tahara N, Honda A, Iemura M, Yoshimoto H, Kudo 
Y, Kaida H, Abe T, Sawada K, Akashi H, Tanaka H, Fukumoto 
Y. Persistent peripheral arteritis long after Kawasaki dis-
ease: another documentation of ongoing vascular inflamma-
tion. Int J Cardiol. 2015;180:88–90. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard. 
2014.11.205.
 
287. Gidding SS, Shulman ST, Ilbawi M, Crussi F, Duffy CE. 
Mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome (Kawasaki disease): de-
layed aortic and mitral insufficiency secondary to active valvulitis. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1986;7:894–897.
 
288. Mishima A, Asano M, Saito T, Yamamoto S, Ukai T, Yoshitomi H, 
Mastumoto K, Manabe T. Mitral regurgitation caused by ruptured 
chordae tendineae in Kawasaki disease. J Thorac Cardiovasc 
Surg. 1996;111:895–896.
 
289. Fuse S, Tomita H, Ohara T, Iida K, Takamuro M. Severely damaged 
aortic valve and cardiogenic shock in an infant with Kawasaki dis-
ease. Pediatr Int. 2003;45:110–113.
 
290. Okubo M, Ino T, Takahashi K, Kishiro M, Akimoto K, Yamashiro 
Y. Age dependency of stiffness of the abdominal aorta and 
the mechanical properties of the aorta in Kawasaki disease in 
children. Pediatr Cardiol. 2001;22:198–203. doi: 10.1007/
s002460010203.
 
291. Oyamada J, Toyono M, Shimada S, Aoki-Okazaki M, Takahashi 
T. Altered central aortic elastic properties in Kawasaki dis-
ease are related to changes in left ventricular geometry and 
coronary artery aneurysm formation. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 
2012;25:690–696. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2012.03.003.
 
292. Vaujois L, Dallaire F, Maurice RL, Fournier A, Houde C, Thérien J, 
Cartwright D, Dahdah N. The biophysical properties of the aorta 
are altered following Kawasaki disease. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 
2013;26:1388–1396. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2013.08.022.
 
293. Mori K, Hayabuchi Y, Kuroda Y, Nii M, Yuasa Y, Taguchi Y. 
Retrograde holodiastolic flow in the abdominal aorta detected 
by pulsed Doppler echocardiography in patients with Kawasaki 
disease. Eur J Pediatr. 2000;159:509–514.
 
294. Yutani C, Okano K, Kamiya T, Oguchi K, Kozuka T, Ota M, Onishi 
S. Histopathological study on right endomyocardial biopsy of 
Kawasaki disease. Br Heart J. 1980;43:589–592.
 
295. Yonesaka S, Takahashi T, Matubara T, Nakada T, Furukawa H, 
Tomimoto K, Oura H. Histopathological study on Kawasaki dis-
ease with special reference to the relation between the myocar-
dial sequelae and regional wall motion abnormalities of the left 
ventricle. Jpn Circ J. 1992;56:352–358.
 
296. Haneda N, Mori C. Histopathologic and coronary angiographic as-
sessment of effectiveness of aspirin or aspirin-and-gammaglobu-
lin in Kawasaki disease. Acta Paediatr Jpn. 1993;35:294–297.
 
297. Yonesaka S, Takahashi T, Eto S, Sato T, Otani K, Ueda T, Sato A, 
Kitagawa Y, Konno Y, Kinjo M. Biopsy-proven myocardial sequels in 
Kawasaki disease with giant coronary aneurysms. Cardiol Young. 
2010;20:602–609. doi: 10.1017/S1047951109991132.
 
298. Leonardi B, Giglio V, Sanders SP, Pasceri V, De Zorzi A. 
Ultrasound tissue characterization of the myocardium in patients 
after Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010;31:766–772. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-010-9694-9.
 
299. Takeuchi D, Saji T, Takatsuki S, Fujiwara M. Abnormal tissue 
Doppler images are associated with elevated plasma brain natri-
uretic peptide and increased oxidative stress in acute Kawasaki 
disease. Circ J. 2007;71:357–362.
 
300. Nagasawa H, Arakaki Y, Yamada O, Nakajima T, Kamiya T. 
Longitudinal observations of left ventricular end-diastolic di-
mension in children using echocardiography. Pediatr Cardiol. 
1996;17:169–174. doi: 10.1007/BF02505207.
 
301. Tsuda E, Arakaki Y, Shimizu T, Sakaguchi H, Yoshimura S, Yazaki 
S, Echigo S. Changes in causes of sudden deaths by decade 
in patients with coronary arterial lesions due to Kawasaki dis-
ease. Cardiol Young. 2005;15:481–488. doi: 10.1017/S1047 
951105001344.
 
302. Ghelani SJ, Singh S, Manojkumar R. QT interval dispersion in 
North Indian children with Kawasaki disease without overt coro-
nary artery abnormalities. Rheumatol Int. 2011;31:301–305. 
doi: 10.1007/s00296-009-1252-5.
 
303. Kuriki M, Fujino M, Tanaka K, Horio K, Kusuki H, Hosoi M, Eryu 
Y, Kato T, Yamazaki T, Hata T. Ventricular repolarization lability in 
children with Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2011;32:487–
491. doi: 10.1007/s00246-011-9908-9.
 
304. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health 
and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents; National Heart, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e995
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
Lung, and Blood Institute. Expert panel on integrated guidelines 
for cardiovascular health and risk reduction in children and 
adolescents: summary report. Pediatrics. 2011;128 (suppl 5): 
S213–S256.
 
305. Lowry AW, Knudson JD, Myones BL, Moodie DS, Han YS. 
Variability in delivery of care and echocardiogram surveillance 
of Kawasaki disease. Congenit Heart Dis. 2012;7:336–343. doi: 
10.1111/j.1747-0803.2012.00670.x.
 
306. Scott JS, Ettedgui JA, Neches WH. Cost-effective use of echo-
cardiography in children with Kawasaki disease. Pediatrics. 
1999;104:e57.
 
307. Lee MH, Dai ZK, Lee MS, Hsu JH, Chuang HY, Wu JR. The rec-
ommended frequency of echocardiography in follow-up evalua-
tion of patients with Kawasaki disease. Acta Paediatr Taiwan. 
2005;46:346–351.
 
308. McMorrow Tuohy AM, Tani LY, Cetta F, Lewin MB, Eidem BW, Van 
Buren P, Williams RV, Shaddy RE, Tuohy RP, Minich LL. How many 
echocardiograms are necessary for follow-up evaluation of pa-
tients with Kawasaki disease? Am J Cardiol. 2001;88:328–330.
 
309. Senzaki H. Long-term outcome of Kawasaki disease. Circulation. 
 
2008;118:2763–2772. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107. 
749515.
 
310. McCrindle BW. Kawasaki disease: a childhood disease with im-
portant consequences into adulthood. Circulation. 2009;120:6–
8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.874800.
 
311. Manlhiot C, Niedra E, McCrindle BW. Long-term manage-
ment of Kawasaki disease: implications for the adult patient. 
Pediatr Neonatol. 2013;54:12–21. doi: 10.1016/j.pedneo. 
2012.12.013.
 
312. Gersony WM. The adult after Kawasaki disease: the risks for late 
coronary events. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1921–1923. doi: 
10.1016/j.jacc.2009.06.057.
 
313. Holve TJ, Patel A, Chau Q, Marks AR, Meadows A, Zaroff JG. 
Long-term cardiovascular outcomes in survivors of Kawasaki 
disease. Pediatrics. 2014;133:e305–e311. doi: 10.1542/
peds.2013-1638.
 
314. Suzuki A, Miyagawa-Tomita S, Komatsu K, Nakazawa M, Fukaya 
T, Baba K, Yutani C. Immunohistochemical study of apparently 
intact coronary artery in a child after Kawasaki disease. Pediatr 
Int. 2004;46:590–596. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200x.2004. 
01943.x.
 
315. Gordon JB, Kahn AM, Burns JC. When children with Kawasaki 
disease grow up: myocardial and vascular complications in adult-
hood. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1911–1920. doi: 10.1016/j.
jacc.2009.04.102.
 
316. Ogawa S, Fukazawa R, Ohkubo T, Zhang J, Takechi N, Kuramochi 
Y, Hino Y, Jimbo O, Katsube Y, Kamisago M, Genma Y, Yamamoto 
M. Silent myocardial ischemia in Kawasaki disease: evaluation of 
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty by dobutamine 
stress testing. Circulation. 1997;96:3384–3389.
 
317. Zanon G, Zucchetta P, Varnier M, Vittadello F, Milanesi O, Zulian F. 
Do Kawasaki disease patients without coronary artery abnormali-
ties need a long-term follow-up? A myocardial single-photon emis-
sion computed tomography pilot study. J Paediatr Child Health. 
2009;45:419–424. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1754.2009.01531.x.
 
318. Miyagawa M, Mochizuki T, Murase K, Tanada S, Ikezoe J, Sekiya 
M, Hamamoto K, Matsumoto S, Niino M. Prognostic value of 
dipyridamole-thallium myocardial scintigraphy in patients with 
Kawasaki disease. Circulation. 1998;98:990–996.
 
319. Kashyap R, Mittal BR, Bhattacharya A, Manojkumar R, Singh 
S. Exercise myocardial perfusion imaging to evaluate inducible 
ischaemia in children with Kawasaki disease. Nucl Med Commun. 
2011;32:137–141. doi: 10.1097/MNM.0b013e3283411c67.
 
320. Hauser M, Bengel F, Kuehn A, Nekolla S, Kaemmerer H, 
Schwaiger M, Hess J. Myocardial blood flow and coronary flow 
reserve in children with “normal” epicardial coronary arteries af-
ter the onset of Kawasaki disease assessed by positron emission 
tomography. Pediatr Cardiol. 2004;25:108–112. doi: 10.1007/
s00246-003-0472-9.
 
321. Pahl E, Sehgal R, Chrystof D, Neches WH, Webb CL, Duffy CE, 
Shulman ST, Chaudhry FA. Feasibility of exercise stress echocar-
diography for the follow-up of children with coronary involvement 
secondary to Kawasaki disease. Circulation. 1995;91:122–128.
 
322. Zilberman MV, Goya G, Witt SA, Glascock B, Kimball TR. 
Dobutamine stress echocardiography in the evaluation of young 
patients with Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2003;24:338–
343. doi: 10.1007/s00246-002-0327-9.
 
323. Noto N, Ayusawa M, Karasawa K, Yamaguchi H, Sumitomo 
N, Okada T, Harada K. Dobutamine stress echocardiogra-
phy for detection of coronary artery stenosis in children with 
Kawasaki disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27:1251–1256. doi: 
10.1016/0735-1097(95)00570-6.
 
324. Noto N, Kamiyama H, Karasawa K, Ayusawa M, Sumitomo N, 
Okada T, Takahashi S. Long-term prognostic impact of dobuta-
mine stress echocardiography in patients with Kawasaki disease 
and coronary artery lesions: a 15-year follow-up study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2014;63:337–344. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.09.021.
 
325. Bratis K, Chiribiri A, Hussain T, Krasemann T, Henningsson M, 
Phinikaridou A, Mavrogeni S, Botnar R, Nagel E, Razavi R, Greil 
G. Abnormal myocardial perfusion in Kawasaki disease conva-
lescence. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015;8:106–108. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmg.2014.05.017.
 
326. Tacke CE, Kuipers IM, Groenink M, Spijkerboer AM, Kuijpers 
TW. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging for noninvasive as-
sessment of cardiovascular disease during the follow-up of 
patients with Kawasaki disease [published correction appears 
in Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;5:e10]. Circ Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2011;4:712–720. doi: 10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.111. 
965996.
 
327. Ogawa S, Ohkubo T, Fukazawa R, Kamisago M, Kuramochi Y, 
Uchikoba Y, Ikegami E, Watanabe M, Katsube Y. Estimation of 
myocardial hemodynamics before and after intervention in chil-
dren with Kawasaki disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;43:653–
661. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2003.10.032.
 
328. Murakami T, Tanaka N. The physiological significance of coronary 
aneurysms in Kawasaki disease. EuroIntervention. 2011;7:944–
947. doi: 10.4244/EIJV7I8A149.
 
329. Harris KC, Manouzi A, Fung AY, De Souza A, Bezerra HG, Potts 
JE, Hosking MC. Feasibility of optical coherence tomography in 
children with Kawasaki disease and pediatric heart transplant 
recipients. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014;7:671–678. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.113.001764.
 
330. Prsa M, Hussain T, McCrindle BW, Grosse-Wortmann L. 
Comprehensive evaluation of a patient with Kawasaki disease 
and giant coronary aneurysms with cardiac magnetic reso-
nance. Congenit Heart Dis. 2014;9:E195–E198. doi: 10.1111/
chd.12131.
 
331. Cantin L, Chartrand-Lefebvre C, Marcotte F, Pressacco J, 
Ducharme A, Lapierre C. Coronary artery noninvasive imaging 
in adult Kawasaki disease. Clin Imaging. 2009;33:181–187. doi: 
10.1016/j.clinimag.2008.09.008.
 
332. Mavrogeni S, Papadopoulos G, Hussain T, Chiribiri A, Botnar R, 
Greil GF. The emerging role of cardiovascular magnetic resonance 
in the evaluation of Kawasaki disease. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2013;29:1787–1798. doi: 10.1007/s10554-013-0276-9.
 
333. Kahn AM, Budoff MJ, Daniels LB, Jimenez-Fernandez S, Cox AS, 
Gordon JB, Burns JC. Calcium scoring in patients with a history of 
Kawasaki disease. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;5:264–272. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2011.12.010.
 
334. Suda K, Tahara N, Kudo Y, Yoshimoto H, Iemura M, Ueno T, 
Kaida H, Ishibashi M, Imaizumi T. Persistent coronary arte-
rial inflammation in a patient long after the onset of Kawasaki 
disease. Int J Cardiol. 2012;154:193–194. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijcard.2011.10.078.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e996
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
 
335. Fukazawa R. Long-term prognosis of Kawasaki disease: in-
creased cardiovascular risk? Curr Opin Pediatr. 2010;22:587–
592. doi: 10.1097/MOP.0b013e32833e12f7.
 
336. Kavey RE, Allada V, Daniels SR, Hayman LL, McCrindle BW, 
Newburger JW, Parekh RS, Steinberger J. Cardiovascular risk 
reduction in high-risk pediatric patients: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association Expert Panel on Population 
and Prevention Science; the Councils on Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young, Epidemiology and Prevention, Nutrition, Physical 
Activity and Metabolism, High Blood Pressure Research, 
Cardiovascular Nursing, and the Kidney in Heart Disease; and the 
Interdisciplinary Working Group on Quality of Care and Outcomes 
Research. Circulation. 2006;114:2710–2738. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.179568.
 
337. Okada T, Harada K, Okuni M. Serum HDL-cholesterol and lipopro-
tein fraction in Kawasaki disease (acute mucocutaneous lymph 
node syndrome). Jpn Circ J. 1982;46:1039–1044.
 
338. Newburger JW, Burns JC, Beiser AS, Loscalzo J. Altered lipid pro-
file after Kawasaki syndrome. Circulation. 1991;84:625–631.
 
339. Salo E, Pesonen E, Viikari J. Serum cholesterol levels during and 
after Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 1991;119:557–561.
 
340. Kim H, Yamaguchi H, Inamo K, Okada T, Harada K. Changes in 
apolipoproteins during the acute phase of Kawasaki disease. 
Acta Paediatr Jpn. 1995;37:672–676.
 
341. Cabana VG, Gidding SS, Getz GS, Chapman J, Shulman ST. Serum 
amyloid A and high density lipoprotein participate in the acute 
phase response of Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Res. 1997;42:651–
655. doi: 10.1203/00006450-199711000-00017.
 
342. Cheung YF, Yung TC, Tam SC, Ho MH, Chau AK. Novel and tra-
ditional cardiovascular risk factors in children after Kawasaki 
disease: implications for premature atherosclerosis. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2004;43:120–124.
 
343. Ou CY, Tseng YF, Lee CL, Chiou YH, Hsieh KS. Significant re-
lationship between serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, 
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and children with 
Kawasaki disease and coronary artery lesions. J Formos 
Med Assoc. 2009;108:719–724. doi: 10.1016/S0929- 
6646(09)60395-8.
 
344. Lin J, Jain S, Sun X, Liu V, Sato YZ, Jimenez-Fernandez S, Newfield 
RS, Pourfarzib R, Tremoulet AH, Gordon JB, Daniels LB, Burns 
JC. Lipoprotein particle concentrations in children and adults fol-
lowing Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2014;165:727–731. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.06.017.
 
345. McCrindle BW, McIntyre S, Kim C, Lin T, Adeli K. Are patients 
after Kawasaki disease at increased risk for accelerated athero-
sclerosis? J Pediatr. 2007;151:244–8, 248.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpeds.2007.03.056.
 
346. Dalla Pozza R, Bechtold S, Urschel S, Kozlik-Feldmann R, Netz 
H. Subclinical atherosclerosis, but normal autonomic function 
after Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2007;151:239–243. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.03.057.
 
347. Noto N, Okada T, Yamasuge M, Taniguchi K, Karasawa K, 
Ayusawa M, Sumitomo N, Harada K. Noninvasive assessment 
of the early progression of atherosclerosis in adolescents with 
Kawasaki disease and coronary artery lesions. Pediatrics. 
2001;107:1095–1099.
 
348. Gupta-Malhotra M, Gruber D, Abraham SS, Roman MJ, 
Zabriskie JB, Hudgins LC, Flynn PA, Levine DM, Okorie U, 
Baday A, Schiller MS, Maturi J, Meehan D, Dyme J, Parker TS, 
Wittkowski KM, Gersony WM, Cooper RS. Atherosclerosis in sur-
vivors of Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2009;155:572–577. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpeds.2009.04.054.
 
349. Silva AA, Maeno Y, Hashmi A, Smallhorn JF, Silverman ED, 
McCrindle BW. Cardiovascular risk factors after Kawasaki dis-
ease: a case-control study. J Pediatr. 2001;138:400–405.
 
350. Suthar R, Singh S, Bhalla AK, Attri SV. Pattern of subcutane-
ous fat during follow-up of a cohort of North Indian children 
with Kawasaki disease: a preliminary study. Int J Rheum Dis. 
2014;17:304–312. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12296.
 
351. Banks L, Lin YT, Chahal N, Manlhiot C, Yeung RS, McCrindle 
BW. Factors associated with low moderate-to-vigorous physi-
cal activity levels in pediatric patients with Kawasaki dis-
ease. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2012;51:828–834. doi: 10.1177/ 
0009922812441664.
 
352. Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, Lockhart PB, Baddour LM, 
Levison M, Bolger A, Cabell CH, Takahashi M, Baltimore RS, 
Newburger JW, Strom BL, Tani LY, Gerber M, Bonow RO, Pallasch 
T, Shulman ST, Rowley AH, Burns JC, Ferrieri P, Gardner T, Goff D, 
Durack DT. Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines from 
the American Heart Association: a guideline from the American 
Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki 
Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in 
the Young, and the Council on Clinical Cardiology, Council 
on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of 
Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group 
[published correction appears in Circulation. 2007;116:e376–
e377]. Circulation. 2007;116:1736–1754. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.183095.
 
353. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, Berra K, Blankenship JC, Dallas AP, 
Douglas PS, Foody JM, Gerber TC, Hinderliter AL, King SB 3rd, 
Kligfield PD, Krumholz HM, Kwong RY, Lim MJ, Linderbaum JA, 
Mack MJ, Munger MA, Prager RL, Sabik JF, Shaw LJ, Sikkema JD, 
Smith CR Jr, Smith SC Jr, Spertus JA, Williams SV. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association task force on practice guidelines, and the 
American College of Physicians, American Association for 
Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, 
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons [published correction appears in 
Circulation. 2014;129:e463]. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–
e471. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e318277d6a0.
 
354. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, Bairey Merz CN, Blum 
CB, Eckel RH, Goldberg AC, Gordon D, Levy D, Lloyd-Jones 
DM, McBride P, Schwartz JS, Shero ST, Smith SC Jr, Watson 
K, Wilson PW. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of 
blood cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
risk in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines 
[published corrections appear in Circulation. 2014;129(suppl 
2):S46–S48 and Circulation. 2015;132:e396]. Circulation. 
2014;129(suppl 2):S1–45. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000437738. 
63853.7a.
 
355. de Jongh S, Lilien MR, op’t Roodt J, Stroes ES, Bakker HD, 
Kastelein JJ. Early statin therapy restores endothelial function 
in children with familial hypercholesterolemia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2002;40:2117–2121.
 
356. Wiegman A, Hutten BA, de Groot E, Rodenburg J, Bakker HD, 
Büller HR, Sijbrands EJ, Kastelein JJ. Efficacy and safety of statin 
therapy in children with familial hypercholesterolemia: a random-
ized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;292:331–337. doi: 10.1001/
jama.292.3.331.
 
357. Huang SM, Weng KP, Chang JS, Lee WY, Huang SH, Hsieh KS. 
Effects of statin therapy in children complicated with coronary 
arterial abnormality late after Kawasaki disease: a pilot study. 
Circ J. 2008;72:1583–1587.
 
358. Hamaoka A, Hamaoka K, Yahata T, Fujii M, Ozawa S, Toiyama 
K, Nishida M, Itoi T. Effects of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors 
on continuous post-inflammatory vascular remodeling late after 
Kawasaki disease. J Cardiol. 2010;56:245–253. doi: 10.1016/j.
jjcc.2010.06.006.
 
359. Duan C, Du ZD, Wang Y, Jia LQ. Effect of pravastatin on endothelial 
dysfunction in children with medium to giant coronary aneurysms 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e997
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
due to Kawasaki disease. World J Pediatr. 2014;10:232–237. 
doi: 10.1007/s12519-014-0498-5.
 
360. Niedra E, Chahal N, Manlhiot C, Yeung RS, McCrindle BW. 
Atorvastatin safety in Kawasaki disease patients with coro-
nary artery aneurysms. Pediatr Cardiol. 2014;35:89–92. doi: 
10.1007/s00246-013-0746-9.
 
361. Kuramochi Y, Ohkubo T, Takechi N, Fukumi D, Uchikoba Y, 
Ogawa S. Hemodynamic factors of thrombus formation in coro-
nary aneurysms associated with Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Int. 
2000;42:470–475.
 
362. Ohkubo T, Fukazawa R, Ikegami E, Ogawa S. Reduced shear 
stress and disturbed flow may lead to coronary aneurysm 
and thrombus formations. Pediatr Int. 2007;49:1–7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1442-200X.2007.02312.x.
 
363. Sengupta D, Kahn AM, Burns JC, Sankaran S, Shadden SC, 
Marsden AL. Image-based modeling of hemodynamics in coro-
nary artery aneurysms caused by Kawasaki disease. Biomech 
Model 
Mechanobiol. 
2012;11:915–932. 
doi: 
10.1007/
s10237-011-0361-8.
 
364. Sengupta D, Kahn AM, Kung E, Esmaily Moghadam M, Shirinsky 
O, Lyskina GA, Burns JC, Marsden AL. Thrombotic risk strati-
fication using computational modeling in patients with coro-
nary artery aneurysms following Kawasaki disease. Biomech 
Model Mechanobiol. 2014;13:1261–1276. doi: 10.1007/
s10237-014-0570-z.
 
365. Albisetti M, Chan AK, McCrindle BW, Wong D, Vegh P, Adams 
M, Dinyari M, Monagle P, Andrew M. Fibrinolytic response to ve-
nous occlusion is decreased in patients after Kawasaki disease. 
Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2003;14:181–186. doi: 10.1097/01.
mbc.0000046185.72384.65.
 
366. Suda K, Kudo Y, Higaki T, Nomura Y, Miura M, Matsumura M, 
Ayusawa M, Ogawa S, Matsuishi T. Multicenter and retrospec-
tive case study of warfarin and aspirin combination therapy in 
patients with giant coronary aneurysms caused by Kawasaki dis-
ease. Circ J. 2009;73:1319–1323.
 
367. Manlhiot C, Brandão LR, Somji Z, Chesney AL, MacDonald C, 
Gurofsky RC, Sabharwal T, Chahal N, McCrindle BW. Long-term 
anticoagulation in Kawasaki disease: Initial use of low molecular 
weight heparin is a viable option for patients with severe coro-
nary artery abnormalities. Pediatr Cardiol. 2010;31:834–842. 
doi: 10.1007/s00246-010-9715-8.
 
368. Rhodes J, Hijazi ZM, Marx GR, Fulton DR. Aerobic exercise func-
tion of patients with persistent coronary artery aneurysms sec-
ondary to Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 1996;17:226–230. 
doi: 10.1007/BF02524798.
 
369. Paridon SM, Galioto FM, Vincent JA, Tomassoni TL, Sullivan NM, 
Bricker JT. Exercise capacity and incidence of myocardial perfu-
sion defects after Kawasaki disease in children and adolescents. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;25:1420–1424.
 
370. Allen SW, Shaffer EM, Harrigan LA, Wolfe RR, Glode MP, 
Wiggins JW. Maximal voluntary work and cardiorespiratory fit-
ness in patients who have had Kawasaki syndrome. J Pediatr. 
1992;121:221–225.
 
371. Takken T, Giardini A, Reybrouck T, Gewillig M, Hövels-
Gürich HH, Longmuir PE, McCrindle BW, Paridon SM, 
Hager A. Recommendations for physical activity, recreation 
sport, and exercise training in paediatric patients with con-
genital heart disease: a report from the Exercise, Basic & 
Translational Research Section of the European Association 
of Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation, the European 
Congenital Heart and Lung Exercise Group, and the Association for 
European Paediatric Cardiology. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2012;19: 
1034–1065.
 
372. Thompson PD, Myerburg RJ, Levine BD, Udelson JE, Kovacs RJ; 
on behalf of the American Heart Association Electrocardiography 
and Arrhythmias Committee of the Council on Clinical Cardiology, 
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in Young, Council on 
Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Functional 
Genomics and Translational Biology, and American College of 
Cardiology. Eligibility and disqualification recommendations 
for competitive athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities: 
Task Force 8: Coronary Artery Disease: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association and American College of 
Cardiology. Circulation. 2015;132:e310–e314. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000244.
 
373. Longmuir PE, McCrindle BW. Physical activity restrictions for 
children after the Fontan operation: disagreement between 
parent, cardiologist, and medical record reports. Am Heart J. 
2009;157:853–859. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2009.02.014.
 
374. Longmuir PE, Brothers JA, de Ferranti SD, Hayman LL, Van Hare 
GF, Matherne GP, Davis CK, Joy EA, McCrindle BW; on behalf 
of the American Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension 
and Obesity in Youth Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular 
Disease in the Young. Promotion of physical activity for children and 
adults with congenital heart disease: a scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;127:2147–
2159. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e318293688f.
 
375. Leon AS, Franklin BA, Costa F, Balady GJ, Berra KA, Stewart KJ, 
Thompson PD, Williams MA, Lauer MS. Cardiac rehabilitation and 
secondary prevention of coronary heart disease: an American 
Heart Association scientific statement from the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology (Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, 
and Prevention) and the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, 
and Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physical Activity), in collabo-
ration with the American Association of Cardiovascular and 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation [published correction appears in 
Circulation. 2005;111:1717]. Circulation. 2005;111:369–376. 
doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000151788.08740.5C.
 
376. Balady GJ, Williams MA, Ades PA, Bittner V, Comoss P, Foody JM, 
Franklin B, Sanderson B, Southard D. Core components of cardi-
ac rehabilitation/secondary prevention programs: 2007 update: a 
scientific statement from the American Heart Association Exercise, 
Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention Committee, the Council 
on Clinical Cardiology; the Councils on Cardiovascular Nursing, 
Epidemiology and Prevention, and Nutrition, Physical Activity, and 
Metabolism; and the American Association of Cardiovascular and 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation. Circulation. 2007;115:2675–2682. 
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.180945.
 
377. Stone JA, Arthur HM, Canadian Association of Cardiac 
Rehabilitation Guidelines Writing Group. Canadian guidelines 
for cardiac rehabilitation and cardiovascular disease preven-
tion, second edition, 2004: executive summary. Can J Cardiol. 
2005;21(suppl D):3D–19D.
 
378. Pieles GE, Horn R, Williams CA, Stuart AG. Paediatric ex-
ercise training in prevention and treatment. Arch Dis Child. 
2014;99:380–385. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2013-303826.
 
379. Tateno S, Terai M, Niwa K, Jibiki T, Hamada H, Yasukawa K, Honda 
T, Oana S, Kohno Y. Alleviation of myocardial ischemia after 
Kawasaki disease by heparin and exercise therapy. Circulation. 
2001;103:2591–2597.
 
380. Warnes CA, Williams RG, Bashore TM, Child JS, Connolly HM, 
Dearani JA, del Nido P, Fasules JW, Graham TP Jr, Hijazi ZM, 
Hunt SA, King ME, Landzberg MJ, Miner PD, Radford MJ, Walsh 
EP, Webb GD. ACC/AHA 2008 guidelines for the manage-
ment of adults with congenital heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop 
Guidelines on the Management of Adults With Congenital Heart 
Disease). Circulation. 2008;118:e714–e833. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.108.190690.
 
381. Arakawa K, Akita T, Nishizawa K, Kurita A, Nakamura H, Yoshida 
T, Kuroda K, Nagata I. Anticoagulant therapy during successful 
pregnancy and delivery in a Kawasaki disease patient with coro-
nary aneurysm: a case report. Jpn Circ J. 1997;61:197–200.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 McCrindle et al
e998
April 25, 2017 
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484
 
382. Gordon CT, Jimenez-Fernandez S, Daniels LB, Kahn AM, Tarsa 
M, Matsubara T, Shimizu C, Burns JC, Gordon JB. Pregnancy 
in women with a history of Kawasaki disease: management 
and outcomes. BJOG. 2014;121:1431–1438. doi: 10.1111/ 
1471-0528.12685.
 
383. Tsuda E, Kawamata K, Neki R, Echigo S, Chiba Y. Nationwide 
survey of pregnancy and delivery in patients with coronary arte-
rial lesions caused by Kawasaki disease in Japan. Cardiol Young. 
2006;16:173–178. doi: 10.1017/S1047951106000126.
 
384. Taniguchi K, Ono H, Sato A, Kinomoto S, Tagawa N, Umehara N, 
Kato H, Sago H. Strict management of a pregnant patient with gi-
ant coronary artery aneurysm due to Kawasaki disease. Pediatr 
Int. 2015;57:990–992. doi: 10.1111/ped.12679.
 
385. Ichinose E, Kato H, Inoue O, Hirata K, Eto Y, Yoshioka F. 
Intracoronary thrombolytic therapy in Kawasaki disease and the 
usefulness of two-dimensional echocardiography in detecting in-
tracoronary thrombi [in Japanese]. J Cardiogr. 1985;15:79–87.
 
386. Tsubata S, Ichida F, Hamamichi Y, Miyazaki A, Hashimoto I, Okada 
T. Successful thrombolytic therapy using tissue-type plasminogen 
activator in Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 1995;16:186–
189. doi: 10.1007/BF00794192.
 
387. Gordon JB, Daniels LB, Kahn AM, Jiminez-Fernandez S, Vejar 
M, Numato F and Burns JC. The spectrum of cardiovascular 
lesions requiring intervention in adults after Kawasaki disease. 
JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;9:687–696. doi: 10.1016/j.
jcin.2015.12.011.
 
388. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, Bailey SR, Bittl JA, Cercek 
B, Chambers CE, Ellis SG, Guyton RA, Hollenberg SM, Khot UN, 
Lange RA, Mauri L, Mehran R, Moussa ID, Mukherjee D, Nallamothu 
BK, Ting HH. 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutane-
ous coronary intervention: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines and the Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions. Circulation. 2011;124:e574–
e651. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0b013e31823ba622.
 
389. Boden WE, O’Rourke RA, Teo KK, Hartigan PM, Maron DJ, Kostuk 
WJ, Knudtson M, Dada M, Casperson P, Harris CL, Chaitman 
BR, Shaw L, Gosselin G, Nawaz S, Title LM, Gau G, Blaustein 
AS, Booth DC, Bates ER, Spertus JA, Berman DS, Mancini GB, 
Weintraub WS; COURAGE Trial Research Group. Optimal medical 
therapy with or without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J 
Med. 2007;356:1503–1516. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa070829.
 
390. Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Maron DJ, Mancini GB, Hayes SW, 
Hartigan PM, Weintraub WS, O’Rourke RA, Dada M, Spertus 
JA, Chaitman BR, Friedman J, Slomka P, Heller GV, Germano 
G, Gosselin G, Berger P, Kostuk WJ, Schwartz RG, Knudtson 
M, Veledar E, Bates ER, McCallister B, Teo KK, Boden WE; 
COURAGE Investigators. Optimal medical therapy with or without 
percutaneous coronary intervention to reduce ischemic burden: 
results from the Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization 
and Aggressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE) trial nuclear 
substudy. Circulation. 2008;117:1283–1291. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.107.743963.
 
391. De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, Kalesan B, Barbato E, Tonino PA, Piroth 
Z, Jagic N, Möbius-Winkler S, Mobius-Winckler S, Rioufol G, Witt 
N, Kala P, MacCarthy P, Engström T, Oldroyd KG, Mavromatis 
K, Manoharan G, Verlee P, Frobert O, Curzen N, Johnson JB, 
Jüni P, Fearon WF; FAME 2 Trial Investigators. Fractional 
flow reserve-guided PCI versus medical therapy in stable 
coronary disease [published correction appears in N Engl J 
Med. 2012;367:1768]. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:991–1001. 
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1205361.
 
392. Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, Siami FS, Dangas G, 
Mack M, Yang M, Cohen DJ, Rosenberg Y, Solomon SD, Desai 
AS, Gersh BJ, Magnuson EA, Lansky A, Boineau R, Weinberger 
J, Ramanathan K, Sousa JE, Rankin J, Bhargava B, Buse J, Hueb 
W, Smith CR, Muratov V, Bansilal S, King S 3rd, Bertrand M, 
Fuster V; FREEDOM Trial Investigators. Strategies for multives-
sel revascularization in patients with diabetes. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:2375–2384. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1211585.
 
393. Tsuda E, Kitamura S; Cooperative Study Group of Japan. National 
survey of coronary artery bypass grafting for coronary stenosis 
caused by Kawasaki disease in Japan. Circulation. 2004;110(sup-
pl 1):II61–II66. doi: 10.1161/01.CIR.0000138194.61225.10.
 
394. Akagi T, Ogawa S, Ino T, Echigo S, Kishida K, Baba K, Matsushima 
M, Hamaoka K, Tomita H, Ishii M, Kato H. Catheter intervention-
al treatment in Kawasaki disease: a report from the Japanese 
Pediatric Interventional Cardiology Investigation group. J Pediatr. 
2000;137:181–186.
 
395. Ishii M, Ueno T, Ikeda H, Iemura M, Sugimura T, Furui J, Sugahara 
Y, Muta H, Akagi T, Nomura Y, Homma T, Yokoi H, Nobuyoshi 
M, Matsuishi T, Kato H. Sequential follow-up results of catheter 
intervention for coronary artery lesions after Kawasaki disease: 
quantitative coronary artery angiography and intravascular ultra-
sound imaging study. Circulation. 2002;105:3004–3010.
 
396. Checchia PA, Pahl E, Shaddy RE, Shulman ST. Cardiac transplan-
tation for Kawasaki disease. Pediatrics. 1997;100:695–699.
 
397. McNeal-Davidson A, Fournier A, Scuccimarri R, Dancea A, Houde 
C, Bellavance M, Dahdah N. The fate and observed management of 
giant coronary artery aneurysms secondary to Kawasaki disease in 
the Province of Quebec: the complete series since 1976. Pediatr 
Cardiol. 2013;34:170–178. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0409-2.
 
398. Suda K, Iemura M, Nishiono H, Teramachi Y, Koteda Y, Kishimoto 
S, Kudo Y, Itoh S, Ishii H, Ueno T, Tashiro T, Nobuyoshi M, Kato 
H, Matsuishi T. Long-term prognosis of patients with Kawasaki 
disease complicated by giant coronary aneurysms: a single-
institution experience. Circulation. 2011;123:1836–1842. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.978213.
 
399. Schmitz C, Welz A, Dewald O, Kozlik-Feldmann R, Netz H, 
Reichart B. Switch from a BIVAD to a LVAD in a boy with Kawasaki 
disease. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000;69:1270–1271.
 
400. King WJ, Schlieper A, Birdi N, Cappelli M, Korneluk Y, Rowe PC. 
The effect of Kawasaki disease on cognition and behavior. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2000;154:463–468.
 
401. Nishad P, Singh S, Sidhu M, Malhi P. Cognitive and behaviour 
assessment following Kawasaki disease: a study from North 
India. Rheumatol Int. 2010;30:851–854. doi: 10.1007/
s00296-009-1078-1.
 
402. Baker AL, Gauvreau K, Newburger JW, Sundel RP, Fulton DR, 
Jenkins KJ. Physical and psychosocial health in children who have 
had Kawasaki disease. Pediatrics. 2003;111:579–583.
 
403. Muta H, Ishii M, Iemura M, Matsuishi T. Health-related quality of 
life in adolescents and young adults with a history of Kawasaki 
disease. J Pediatr. 2010;156:439–443. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpeds.2009.09.041.
 
404. Carlton-Conway D, Ahluwalia R, Henry L, Michie C, Wood L, Tulloh 
R. Behaviour sequelae following acute Kawasaki disease. BMC 
Pediatr. 2005;5:14. doi: 10.1186/1471-2431-5-14.
 
405. Tacke CE, Haverman L, Berk BM, van Rossum MA, Kuipers 
IM, Grootenhuis MA, Kuijpers TW. Quality of life and behavioral 
functioning in Dutch children with a history of Kawasaki dis-
ease. J Pediatr. 2012;161:314–9.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds. 
2012.01.071.
 
406. Chahal N, Clarizia NA, McCrindle BW, Boydell KM, Obadia M, 
Manlhiot C, Dillenburg R, Yeung RS. Parental anxiety associ-
ated with Kawasaki disease in previously healthy children. 
J Pediatr Health Care. 2010;24:250–257. doi: 10.1016/j.
pedhc.2009.07.002.
 
407. Ishikawa S, Inaba Y, Okuyama K, Asakura T, Kim YS, Sasa S. A 
study of psycho-social effects of chronic MCLS upon mothers. 
Prog Clin Biol Res. 1987;250:531–533.
 
408. Kovacs AH, McCrindle BW. So hard to say goodbye: transi-
tion from paediatric to adult cardiology care. Nat Rev Cardiol. 
2014;11:51–62. doi: 10.1038/nrcardio.2013.172.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
 Diagnosis, Treatment, and Management of Kawasaki Disease
e999
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000484 
April 25, 2017
 
409. Sable C, Foster E, Uzark K, Bjornsen K, Canobbio MM, Connolly 
HM, Graham TP, Gurvitz MZ, Kovacs A, Meadows AK, Reid GJ, 
Reiss JG, Rosenbaum KN, Sagerman PJ, Saidi A, Schonberg 
R, Shah S, Tong E, Williams RG; on behalf of the American 
Heart Association Congenital Heart Defects Committee of the 
Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, Council on 
Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on Clinical Cardiology, and 
Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. Best practices in man-
aging transition to adulthood for adolescents with congenital 
heart disease: the transition process and medical and psycho-
social issues: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2011;123:1454–1485. doi: 10.1161/
CIR.0b013e3182107c56.
 
410. Sawicki GS, Lukens-Bull K, Yin X, Demars N, Huang IC, Livingood 
W, Reiss J, Wood D. Measuring the transition readiness of youth 
with special healthcare needs: validation of the TRAQ–Transition 
Readiness Assessment Questionnaire. J Pediatr Psychol. 
2011;36:160–171. doi: 10.1093/jpepsy/jsp128.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 3, 2019
