 The belief that smoking alleviates anxiety, or stress as it is
commonly known in the general population (i.e. is anxiolytic),
is highly pervasive. Almost half the smokers in England cite stress
relief as one of the main reasons for smoking.1 This stands in
contrast to the evidence from numerous laboratory studies that
fail to detect mood enhancing effects of nicotine.2 Smoking
appears not to reduce stress in smokers who are not nicotine
deprived; instead, levels of stress in smokers after smoking are
similar to those of non-smokers.3 It has been suggested, therefore,
that the perceived beneficial effects of smoking upon stress are
actually a misattribution of withdrawal relief.4,5 There is further
research to suggest that smoking may actually be a risk factor
for the development of anxiety-related disorders.6 Findings such
as these suggest that smoking may actually cause stress, but fosters
the impression in smokers that it alleviates stress, due to nicotine’s
ability to quickly reverse the symptoms of withdrawal.7 The belief
that smoking relieves stress serves as a major barrier for smokers
to quit,8 and for health professionals to recommend quitting.
Health professionals also believe that smoking is anxiolytic
and that smoking cessation worsens mood.9,10 This belief is
particularly detrimental to those with psychiatric disorders, who
are less likely than other smokers to be offered cessation advice
and support11 despite having a life expectancy around 20 years
lower than people without such a disorder. Much of this loss is
attributed to cigarette smoking,12 which is more prevalent in this
group.13
Although it is well documented that anxiety tends to increase
in the first few days of a quit attempt due to withdrawal from
nicotine,14 it remains unclear what happens in the longer term
once the initial withdrawal phase has ended (normally after 2–4
weeks).14 Two studies report associations between prolonged
abstinence and reduced stress.7,15 These are limited, however, by
small sample sizes, lack of sample representativeness and lack of
validated measures of anxiety. Evidence in populations with
psychiatric disorders is even more limited, although indirect
evidence refutes assertions of a negative impact. A systematic
review of enforced smoking bans in in-patient psychiatric settings
found no evidence of increased aggression, use of seclusion,
discharge against medical advice or increased use of as-needed
medication following the ban,16 although the review did not
record whether in-patients actually stopped smoking or not.
The current paper aims to build on these findings using more
rigorous methods. The sample for the current study is drawn from
smokers from the general population and uses validated measures
of key outcomes (anxiety and smoking status) and hypothesised
moderators
(current
diagnosis
of
psychiatric
disorder
and
motivation to smoke for coping as opposed to pleasure). Further-
more, the study represents, to our knowledge, the first assessment
of the effect of quitting smoking on anxiety among those with a
current mental disorder and the first investigation into the long-
term consequences of failing to quit smoking on mental health.
This is important because most people who try to quit smoking
fail to achieve abstinence on any single quit attempt and require
multiple attempts. If failed attempts were harmful to mental
well-being, there would be even more imperative to ensure that
the chances of success were maximised with available effective
interventions. A recent study of people with a history of clinical
depression reported that both depression and anxiety scores
deteriorated in a quit attempt following relapse to smoking.17 This
may suggest a concern, but the follow-up was less than 3 months
and most results were not statistically significant. The data are
therefore inconclusive. The primary aim of this study was to assess
62
Change in anxiety following successful
and unsuccessful attempts at smoking
cessation: cohort study
Ma
´irtı
´n S. McDermott, Theresa M. Marteau, Gareth J. Hollands, Matthew Hankins
and Paul Aveyard
Background
Despite a lack of empirical evidence, many smokers and
health professionals believe that tobacco smoking reduces
anxiety, which may deter smoking cessation.
Aims
The study aim was to assess whether successful smoking
cessation or relapse to smoking after a quit attempt are
associated with changes in anxiety.
Method
A total of 491 smokers attending National Health Service
smoking cessation clinics in England were followed up 6
months after enrolment in a trial of pharmacogenetic
tailoring of nicotine replacement therapy (ISRCTN14352545).
Results
There was a points difference of 11.8 (95% CI 7.7–16.0) in
anxiety score 6 months after cessation between people who
relapsed to smoking and people who attained abstinence.
This reflected a three-point increase in anxiety from baseline
for participants who relapsed and a nine-point decrease for
participants who abstained. The increase in anxiety in those
who relapsed was largest for those with a current diagnosis
of psychiatric disorder and whose main reason for smoking
was to cope with stress. The decrease in anxiety on
abstinence was larger for these groups also.
Conclusions
People who achieve abstinence experience a marked
reduction in anxiety whereas those who fail to quit
experience a modest increase in the long term. These data
contradict the assumption that smoking is a stress reliever,
but suggest that failure of a quit attempt may generate
anxiety.
Declaration of interest
P.A. has done consultancy and research on smoking
cessation for pharmaceutical companies.
The British Journal of Psychiatry (2013)
202, 62–67. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.112.114389
 changes in smokers’ anxiety following a quit attempt in those who
succeeded in remaining abstinent and those who relapsed. We also
examine whether the changes associated with abstinence are
modified by the presence of a current diagnosis of psychiatric
disorder and by whether smoking for stress relief was a prime
motive for smoking.
Method
Study design
This was a prospective cohort study involving secondary analysis
of data from a smoking cessation trial (ISRCTN14352545, details
of the trial are published elsewhere).18,19 Ethical approval for the
trial was sought and obtained (Hertfordshire 1 Research Ethics
Committee, reference 06/Q0201/21; Medicine and Healthcare
Products Regulatory Authority, reference: 24570/0002/001-0001).
Recruitment
Participants were recruited from the practices of 29 primary care
physicians in two English cities to participate in an open-label,
parallel group, randomised controlled trial conducted in primary
care. Participants smoking at least 10 cigarettes a day, who wanted
to quit and were 18 years or older were eligible for inclusion.
Potentially eligible participants were identified from practice
registers and mailed a letter from their primary care physician
expressing concern about their smoking and offering assistance
to quit, with an invitation to participate in the trial. Informed
written consent was obtained from all participants involved in
the study. A total of 633 agreed to participate in the trial and were
randomised, of whom 491 provided data at both baseline and 6
months for the measure of state anxiety. Recruitment began in
June 2007 and all data collection was completed by September
2009.
Interventions
The trial took place in UK National Health Service (NHS)
smoking cessation clinics based in primary care. These provide a
combination
of
behavioural
support,
education
and
pharmacotherapy to assist smokers to quit. All participants were
prescribed a nicotine patch with the dose based on heaviness of
smoking. Those who smoked 15 or more cigarettes a day were
prescribed 21 mg patches and those smoking 10–14 cigarettes a
day were prescribed 14 mg patches. In addition, participants were
randomised to receive an additional oral nicotine replacement
therapy dose, based either on their genotype (genotype arm) or
nicotine dependence (phenotype arm), either of 6 mg or 12 mg
a day.
Procedure
Participants attended a total of 8 weekly clinic appointments with
a research nurse. In the first clinic session participants completed
baseline measures – including anxiety. Participants started their
quit attempts either immediately following the third clinic visit
or the following morning. At this appointment the rationale for
participants’ additional oral nicotine replacement therapy doses,
based on the group to which they had been randomised, was
given. All participants were contacted 6 months following their
quit
dates,
either
by
telephone
or
by
post.
Follow-up
questionnaires were completed and, in those indicating continued
abstinence,
a
salivary
sample was
requested by
post
and
subsequently analysed for cotinine.
Measures
Anxiety
Anxiety was measured using the six-item short form of the state
scale of the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI-6).20
This measure has high internal reliability (a = 0.89 and 0.75 for
baseline and 6 months respectively) and is a validated short form
of the original 20-item state scale of the STAI.21,22 Scores range
from 20 to 80 with a population norm of 35.
Smoking status
Prolonged abstinence from smoking at 6 months, defined as
sustained abstinence after an initial 2-week grace period, was
assessed
using
self-reported
behaviour
with
biochemical
validation as recommended for clinical trials.23 Participants were
considered to be prolonged abstinent if they reported that they
had smoked no more than five cigarettes since the start of the
abstinence period, and had a salivary cotinine level of less than
15 ng/ml. Initial abstinence from smoking at 4 weeks was assessed
as per usual clinic practice after quit date with self-reports of
abstinence validated by expired-breath carbon monoxide reading
assessed
using
a
Bedfont
Smokerlyzer
(Rochester,
UK).
Participants were considered to be abstinent if they reported not
smoking a single puff during the previous week and had a carbon
monoxide reading of 49 parts-per-million; all others were
considered as having relapsed. In each case, non-responders or
invalidated self-reports of behaviour were counted as smoking.
Motives for smoking
Motives for smoking were assessed at baseline by responses to a
single item ‘Do you smoke mainly for pleasure or because it helps
you to cope?’ Participants were asked for one of three possible
responses ‘mainly for pleasure’, ‘mainly to cope’ or ‘about equal’.
Those reporting smoking primarily for pleasure have been found
to be significantly more likely to achieve abstinence than those
reporting smoking primarily to cope.24
Current diagnosis of psychiatric disorder
At baseline, participants were asked to report their current
medical history and use of medication, including psychiatric
history. All those who reported being on medication were asked
to bring in the repeat medication ordering slip generated by their
general practitioner for verification. In the case of someone who
brought in a slip and gave a clear and consistent account of
their current and past history, no further checking was done.
If a participant was unclear about their medical history, or
forgot to bring their repeat medication ordering slip, we
consulted their primary care record. Records were not checked
for those who denied being on repeat medication. Reported
diagnoses
of
psychiatric
disorder
(n = 106)
were
primarily
mood (53%, 56/106) and anxiety (13%, 14/106) disorders. A
further 24% (25/106) reported multiple disorders. In total, 83%
(88/106) of those reporting a current psychiatric disorder were
on psychiatric medication.
In addition, baseline data were collected on demographic
characteristics
(age,
gender,
ethnicity,
socioeconomic
status
(assessed
using
educational
qualifications)
and
nicotine
dependence (assessed using the Fagerstro
¨m Test for Nicotine
Dependence (FTND)25).
Statistical analyses
We used linear regression to examine anxiety at follow-up in
relation to smoking status, classified as relapsed or abstained.
63
Anxiety and smoking cessation attempts
 McDermott et al
Baseline STAI-6 (anxiety) score was mean-centred. For ease of
interpretation, the anxiety score at follow-up was centred on the
baseline mean so that regression coefficients represented the
change in anxiety score. All other continuous variables were
mean-centred and all categorical variables entered as dummy-
coded variables. We conducted complete-case analyses, as rates
of missing data were low (Table 1).
In the initial model, only abstinence status and baseline
anxiety score were entered. Thereafter, potential confounders were
added; age, gender, ethnic group. In addition, variables that
appeared unbalanced between those who had abstained or
relapsed were also included; namely cigarettes per day, nicotine
dependence score, trial arm and dose of nicotine replacement
therapy used. We compared anxiety change score in those who
had relapsed or abstained (adjusted only for baseline rating) with
the fully adjusted estimates by calculating the latter using the
mean of the various other covariates.
We examined whether a current diagnosis of psychiatric
disorder or motive for smoking modified the association between
abstinence and change in anxiety score. To do so, we added both a
term representing a current diagnosis of psychiatric disorder (for
example) and its multiplicative interaction with abstinence and
reported the F-test for this step. Each term tests whether the
change in anxiety differs from all other individuals who have
relapsed or abstained.
People with a clinical diagnosis of anxiety disorder typically
have a score of 50 or higher on the original 20-item state scale
of the STAI.26 In order to create scores comparable with the larger
scale, participants’ raw scores on the STAI-6 (range 6–24) were
divided by 6 and multiplied by 20. Participants with scores 550
were classified as having high anxiety and the likelihood of
being in the high-anxiety group at follow-up, conditional upon
baseline group status, was computed using conditional logistic
regression.
Results
Participant characteristics
We followed up 491/633 trial participants (77.6%) at 6 months.
There was no difference in baseline anxiety between those who
were and those who were not followed up at 6 months (responders
mean 38.0 (s.d.= 12.5); non-responders mean 39.4 (s.d.= 13.5),
t(612) = 1.09, P= 0.28).
The participants were typical of smokers attending smoking
cessation clinics (Table 1). A total of 14% (n = 68/491) were
verified as prolonged abstinent at 6 months. We found that 15%
of those who abstained (n = 10/68) and 23% of continuing
smokers (n = 96/423) had a current diagnosis of psychiatric
disorder (Table 1). Mean baseline anxiety was within the normal
range for individuals who subsequently abstained or continued
smoking, respectively.
Association between change in anxiety
and abstinence status
Adjusted for baseline STAI score, there was a significant difference
of 12.3 (95% CI 8.2–16.5) points in the STAI score between people
who
relapsed
to
smoking
and
those
achieving
prolonged
abstinence. On further adjustment for age, dependence, cigarette
consumption and trial arm this difference was similar at 11.8
(95% CI 7.7–16.0) points. This equated to an increase of about
three points for those who did not achieve abstinence and a
decrease of nine points for those who did (both coefficients were
individually statistically significant) (Fig. 1).
There was reasonably strong evidence that adding terms that
allowed the change in anxiety to depend upon the presence or
absence of a current diagnosis of psychiatric disorder significantly
improved the fit of the model (Table 2). The increase in anxiety in
64
Table 1
Demographic characteristics, smoking-related variables, current psychiatric disorders, and motives for smoking
Abstinent participants (n = 68)
Relapsed participants (n = 423)
Gender, n (%)
Male
35 (51.5)
186 (44.0)
Ethnic group, n (%)
White
64 (94.1)
380 (89.8)
Educational attainment, n (%)
No qualifications
23 (33.8)
119 (28.1)
GCSE or equivalent
15 (22.1)
103 (24.3)
A-levels or equivalent
8 (11.8)
47 (11.1)
Further education
7 (10.3)
55 (13.0)
Degree or other higher education
7 (10.3)
73 (17.3)
Other
8 (11.8)
26 (6.1)
Trial arm, n (%)
Genotype
43 (63.2)
211 (49.9)
Nicotine replacement therapy dose, n (%)
21 mg patches
51 (75)
339 (80.1)
12 mg equivalent daily dosea
6 (8.8)
96 (22.7)
Cigarettes per day, mean (s.d.)
18.7 (7.8)
21.0 (8.9)
Fagerstro
¨ m Test for Nicotine Dependence, mean (s.d.)
4.8 (2.0)
5.7 (2.2)
Diagnosis of psychiatric disorder at baseline, n (%)
10 (14.7)
96 (22.7)
Psychiatric disorders
Mood disorders
5 (7.4)
51 (12.1)
Anxiety disorders
3 (4.4)
11 (2.6)
Other
2 (2.9)
34 (8.0)
Motives for smoking,b n (%)
Mainly for pleasure
19 (27.9)
85 (20.2)
Both
39 (57.4)
257 (61.2)
Mainly to cope
10 (14.7)
78 (18.6)
a. Equivalent daily dose is absorbed nicotine dose, for example 1262 mg gum gives about 12 mg absorbed dose
b. Data missing for three participants who relapsed.
 Anxiety and smoking cessation attempts
those without a current diagnosis was small (two points, Fig. 2)
but greater among those with a current diagnosis of psychiatric
disorder (seven points). The difference between these two groups
was statistically significant (Table 2). Although the improvement
in anxiety was greater among those with a current diagnosis of
psychiatric disorder at baseline, this was not significant (P = 0.19).
Change in anxiety was modified by motives for smoking, with
the model fit improving significantly (Table 2). In people who
relapsed, those smoking for enjoyment had no change in anxiety.
Those who relapsed who smoked either partly or mainly to cope
had increases in anxiety (Fig. 3). Likewise, in those who abstained
the decrease in anxiety in those smoking to cope was larger than
for the other two groups.
Sensitivity analysis
The increase in anxiety upon relapse was somewhat unexpected,
so we checked whether it might be as a result of the participant
having to declare relapse to researchers who had provided clinical
treatment to assist cessation. We split those who had relapsed into
those who relapsed during clinical treatment and therefore had
already reported this to the research team, and those who returned
to smoking after the end of treatment and were reporting relapse
for the first time at 6-month follow-up. In those who relapsed late
there was a small, non-significantly lower rise in anxiety at 1.6
(95% CI 74.7 to 1.5) points.
Association between abstinence
and case of anxiety disorder
At baseline 22.4% of participants were in the high-anxiety group
and at 6-months follow-up this had risen to 28.2%. People who
would achieve prolonged abstinence were less likely to be in the
high-anxiety group at baseline, with only 14.7% meeting the
definition, whereas 23.7% of people who would fail to quit were
in the group. At follow-up, the proportion of those in the high-
anxiety group among abstinent participants had fallen from 14.7
to 10.3%, whereas among continuing smokers it had risen from
23.7 to 31.0%. Considering the pairing, the odds ratio (OR) for
being in the high-anxiety group at 6 months among abstinent
smokers was 0.63 (95% CI 0.20–1.91), whereas for relapsed
smokers it was 1.58 (95% CI 1.12–2.24). The P-value for the
interaction between time and abstinence was 0.009. Three-way
interactions between time, abstinence, and the presence of a
current diagnosis of psychiatric disorder or smoking to cope failed
to converge on a solution because of sparse data.
Discussion
Main findings
Quitting smoking was associated with a moderate reduction in
anxiety, whereas relapse was associated with a small increase.
The decrease in anxiety on abstinence was somewhat larger for
people with a current diagnosis of psychiatric disorder at baseline
and also for people who smoked primarily to cope with stress,
although it was significant only for the latter. The increase in
anxiety was also larger for these groups, especially for the group
that smoked primarily to cope.
Strengths and limitations
This study had some strengths and limitations. Overall, the study
was a relatively large smoking cessation study and recruited a
representative sample of smokers seeking help to stop, without
excluding people with comorbid disorders. The frequent testing
of abstinence in the first weeks after quit day and biochemical
confirmation at each contact imply our key measure of exposure
was accurate and the outcome was measured with a clinically
relevant and validated scale. However, relatively few people
abstained from smoking, meaning that sample sizes in some
subgroups were low, limiting precision and ability to detect
associations. Another limitation is that we relied on physician
diagnosed disorder and it is possible that general practitioners
or psychiatrists may not have followed a coding system in
diagnosing these disorders. It is possible that some of those
65
15 –
10 –
5 –
0 –
75 –
710 –
715 –
Change in STAI-6 (adjusted)
Relapsed
Abstinent
Fig. 1
Adjusted change in anxiety from baseline to 6 months
in relapsed smokers and abstinent smokers overall.
Adjusted for baseline anxiety score, smoking status, age, gender, ethnic group,
educational status, trial arm and dose of nicotine replacement therapy, all coefficients
set to their means. STAI-6, Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory.
Table 2
Improvement in model fit and coefficients for difference in change in anxiety score between those with and without a
psychiatric disorder, or who smoke for enjoyment
F-test or improvement in model fita
Partially adjustedb
Fully adjustedc
F (d.f.)
P
Adjusted
coefficient
P
Adjusted
coefficient
P
Current diagnosis of psychiatric disorder
4.77 (2)
0.009
Relapsed
5.9
0.002
5.2
0.007
Abstinent
76.7
0.24
77.4
0.19
Smoking motives
5.85 (4)
50.001
Smoke for enjoyment and to cope, relapsed
5.1
0.009
5.4
0.006
Smoke for enjoyment and to cope, abstinent
73.6
0.46
73.2
0.50
Smoke to cope, relapsed
12.1
50.001
11.1
50.001
Smoke to cope, abstinent
713.1
0.047
713.6
0.037
a. For addition of terms representing the presence of the characteristic and its interaction with smoking abstinence.
b. Adjusted for baseline anxiety score and smoking status.
c. Adjusted for baseline anxiety score, smoking status, age, gender, ethnic group, educational status, trial arm and dose of nicotine replacement therapy.
 McDermott et al
diagnosed with psychiatric disorders did not in fact have a
disorder and it is likely that some of those who had no diagnosis
did have an undiagnosed psychiatric disorder. In our study, this
would have made the groups reporting and not reporting
psychiatric disorders more similar and undermined our ability
to
detect
differences
between
them.
The
most
important
limitation is that, like all observational studies, we cannot be sure
that the associations we observed were caused by the change in
smoking status. It would be practically difficult, and ethically
unacceptable, to randomise people to abstain or continue smoking
for 6 months. We therefore have to rely on data obtained from
non-experimental studies to establish causality.
Comparison with other findings
There is good evidence that stopping smoking is associated with
reduced anxiety from both the current study and elsewhere.7,15
In the current study the biggest predictor of anxiety at follow-up
was baseline anxiety, but the effect size for abstinence was similar
(betas 0.27 and 0.26 respectively). Furthermore, baseline anxiety
scores were similar between participants who abstained and
those who did not. Adjustment for a range of other potential
confounders
did
not
materially
alter
the
strength
of
the
associations. Although there are many reasons why anxiety might
change over 6 months and which were not measured and therefore
not controlled for, there is no reason to imagine that these would
be differentially associated with abstinence status. Another
explanation is reverse causation, namely that rising anxiety
undermined the success of the quit attempt. We measured anxiety
1 week after quit day and neither anxiety measured then nor the
change in anxiety at 6 months from baseline was associated with
the likelihood of achieving abstinence. We also found that
reporting relapse did not influence change in anxiety from
baseline. The evidence for causality also comes from the
consistency of these results with those from other studies7,15,17
with no studies to our knowledge producing contrary results.
Furthermore, there is a psychologically plausible mechanism –
the misattribution hypothesis. There were data in this study that
support this mechanism. Those experiencing the largest decrease
in anxiety on cessation were the participants with a current
diagnosis of psychiatric disorder and those who reported smoking
to cope. Both these groups were more likely to report smoking
66
15 –
10 –
5 –
0 –
75 –
710 –
715 –
No current
diagnosis
Current
diagnosis
No current
diagnosis
Current
diagnosis
Change in STAI-6 (adjusted)
Fig. 2
Adjusted change in anxiety from baseline to 6 months
in relapsed (light blue bars) and abstinent smokers (dark blue bars)
by subgroups defined by current diagnosis of psychiatric disorder.
Adjusted for baseline anxiety score, smoking status, age, gender, ethnic group,
educational status, trial arm and dose of nicotine replacement therapy, all coefficients
set to their means. STAI-6, Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory.
Change in STAI-6 (adjusted)
15 –
10 –
5 –
0 –
75 –
710 –
715 –
Smoke for
enjoyment
Smoke for
enjoyment
and to cope
Smoke
to cope
Smoke for
enjoyment
Smoke for
enjoyment
and to cope
Smoke
to cope
Fig. 3
Adjusted change in anxiety from baseline to 6 months in relapsed (light blue bars) and abstinent smokers (dark blue bars) by
subgroups defined by motives for smoking.
Adjusted for baseline anxiety score, smoking status, age, gender, ethnic group, educational status, trial arm and dose of nicotine replacement therapy, all coefficients set to their
means. STAI-6, Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory.
 Anxiety and smoking cessation attempts
within 5 min of waking (50% v. 39% and 50% v. 38%
respectively). This is a behavioural marker of being driven to
smoke to stave off withdrawal symptoms, which includes anxiety.
By stopping smoking and removing these repeated episodes of
anxiety, we might expect an overall reduction in reporting of
anxiety, as observed.
In contrast, there is less strong evidence that the increase in
anxiety on failure to quit smoking is caused by the change
in smoking status. There is only one other report of this to our
knowledge.17 There is no obvious causal mechanism other than
those who relapse feeling concern arising from the continuing
health risks of their smoking. However, we might expect this
concern to return to baseline levels relatively soon after relapse,
but there was no difference in 6-month increase in anxiety
in those who relapsed early and those who relapsed late.
Furthermore, almost all participants had tried to quit previously,
so failure to attain abstinence was not a new experience.
Nevertheless, there is no other obvious reason for the increase
in anxiety, and the increase seen in people who smoked to cope
was clinically significant. This finding therefore warrants further
attention given many smokers make repeated attempts to quit.
Implications
These findings have implications for public health messages about
smoking. The belief that smoking is stress relieving is pervasive,
but almost certainly wrong. The reverse is true: smoking is
probably anxiogenic and smokers deserve to know this and
understand how their own experience may be misleading. The
finding on the rise in anxiety in smokers who fail to quit has less
clear relevance for public health. It may be important for clinicians
helping patients to stop smoking, particularly those with a
current diagnosis of psychiatric disorder, who were more likely
to report smoking primarily to cope than people without such a
diagnosis.
In summary, stopping smoking probably reduces anxiety and
the effect is probably larger in those who have a psychiatric
disorder and who smoke to cope with stress. A failed quit attempt
may well increase anxiety to a modest degree, but perhaps to a
clinically relevant degree in people with a psychiatric disorder
and those who report smoking to cope. Clinicians should
reassure patients that stopping smoking is beneficial for their
mental health, but they may need to monitor for clinically
relevant increases in anxiety among people who fail to attain
abstinence.
Ma
´irtı
´n S. McDermott, PhD, Florence Nightingale School of Nursing and Midwifery,
King’s College London; Theresa M. Marteau, PhD, Gareth J. Hollands, PhD,
Psychology Department (at Guy’s), Health Psychology Section, King’s College London;
Matthew Hankins, PhD, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southampton;
Paul Aveyard, PhD, Primary Care Clinical Sciences, The University of Birmingham,
Edgbaston, UK.
Correspondence: Ma
´ irtı
´n S. McDermott, Florence Nightingale School of Nursing
and Midwifery, King’s College London, James Clerk Maxwell Building, 57 Waterloo
Road, London SE1 8WA, UK. Email: mairtin.mcdermott@gmail.com
First received 3 May 2012, final revision 7 Sep 2012, accepted 18 Oct 2012
Funding
This study was funded as part of a grant from the Medical Research Council, UK (Risk
communication in preventive medicine: Optimizing the impact of DNA risk information;
G0500274; principal investigator: T.M.M). M.S.M was funded by Cancer Research UK as part
of a Cancer Research UK Studentship (Ref: C4770/A7173). P.A is funded by a personal
award from the National Institute of Health Research UK Centre for Tobacco Control
Studies (UKCTCS). Funding from British Heart Foundation, Cancer Research UK, Economic
and Social Research Council, Medical Research Council, and the Department of Health,
under the auspices of the UK Clinical Research Collaboration, is gratefully acknowledged.
References
1 Fidler JA, West R. Self-perceived smoking motives and their correlates in a
general population sample. Nicotine Tob Res 2009; 11: 1182–8.
2 Royal College of Physicians. Nicotine Addiction in Britain: A Report of the
Tobacco Advisory Group of the Royal College of Physicians. Royal College
of Physicians, 2000.
3 Parrott A. Stress modulation over the day in cigarette smokers. Addiction
1995; 90: 233–44.
4 DiFranza JR, Wellman RJ. A sensitization–homeostasis model of nicotine
craving, withdrawal and tolerance: integrating the clinical and basic science
literature. Nicotine Tob Res 2005; 7: 9.
5 Parrott A. Does cigarette smoking cause stress? Am Psychol 1999; 54:
817–20.
6 Kassel JD, Stroud LR, Paronis CA. Smoking, stress and negative affect:
correlation, causation and context across stages of smoking. Psychol Bull
2003; 129: 270.
7 Hajek P, Taylor T, McRobbie H. The effect of stopping smoking on perceived
stress levels. Addiction 2010; 105: 1466–71.
8 Office of National Statistics. Opinions Survey Report No. 40: Smoking-Related
Behaviour and Attitudes, 2008/09. Office of National Statistics, 2009.
9 Dickens GL, Stubbs JH, Haw CM. Smoking and mental health nurses: a survey
of clinical staff in a psychiatric hospital. J Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs 2004;
11: 455–1.
10 Praveen KT, Kudlur SNC, Hanabe RP, Egbewunmi AT. Staff attitudes to
smoking and the smoking ban. Psychiatr Bull 2009; 33: 84–8.
11 Campion J, Checinski K, Nurse J, McNeill A. Smoking by people with mental
illness and benefits of smoke-free mental health services. Adv Psychiatr
Treat 2008; 14: 217–28.
12 Brown S, Barraclough B, Inskip H. Causes of the excess mortality of
schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry 2000; 177: 212–7.
13 Lawrence D, Mitrou F, Zubrick SR. Smoking and mental illness: results from
population surveys in Australia and the United States. BMC Public Health
2009; 9: 285.
14 Hughes JR. Effects of abstinence from tobacco: valid symptoms and time
course. Nicotine Tob Res 2007; 9: 315–27.
15 Cohen S, Lichtenstein E. Perceived stress, quitting smoking, and smoking
relapse. Health Psychol 1990; 9: 466–78.
16 Lawn S, Pols R. Smoking bans in psychiatric inpatient settings? A review of
the research. Aust NZ J Psychiatry 2005; 39: 866–85.
17 Berlin I, Chen H, Lirio C. Depressive mood, suicide ideation and anxiety in
smokers who do and smokers who do not manage to stop smoking after a
target quit day. Addiction 2010; 105: 2209–16.
18 Marteau TM, Munafo
` MR, Aveyard P, Hill C, Whitwell S, Willis TA, et al.
Trial protocol: using genotype to tailor prescribing of nicotine replacement
therapy: a randomised controlled trial assessing impact of communication
upon adherence. BMC Public Health 2010; 10: 680.
19 Marteau TM, Aveyard P, Munafo
` MR, Prevost AT, Hollands GJ, Armstrong D,
et al. Effect on adherence to nicotine replacement therapy of informing
smokers their dose is determined by their genotype: a randomised controlled
trial. PLoS ONE 2012; 7: e35249.
20 Marteau TM, Bekker H. The development of a six-item short-form of the state
scale of the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). Br J Clin Psychol
1992; 31: 301–6.
21 Court H, Greenland K, Margrain TH. Measuring patient anxiety in primary
care: Rasch analysis of the 6-item Spielberger State Anxiety Scale. Value
Health 2010; 13: 813–9.
22 Tluczek A, Henriques JB, Brown RL. Support for the reliability and validity of a
six-item state anxiety scale derived from the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory.
J Nurs Meas 2009; 17: 19–28.
23 Hughes JR, Keely JP, Niaura RS, Ossip-Klein DJ, Richmond RL, Swan GE.
Measures of abstinence in clinical trials: issues and recommendations.
Nicotine Tob Res 2003; 5: 13–25.
24 Ferguson J, Bauld L, Chesterman J, Judge K. The English smoking treatment
services: one-year outcomes. Addiction 2005; 100 (suppl 2): 59–69.
25 Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Fagerstrom KO. The Fagerstrom
Test for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance
Questionnaire. Br J Addict 1991; 86: 1119–27.
26 Spielberger CD. State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (Form Y). Consulting
Psychologists Press, 1983.
67
