 Clinical Infectious Diseases
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e1
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile 
Infection in Adults and Children: 2017 Update by the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society 
for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA)
L. Clifford McDonald,1 Dale N. Gerding,2 Stuart Johnson,2,3 Johan S. Bakken,4 Karen C. Carroll,5 Susan E. Coffin,6 Erik R. Dubberke,7  
Kevin W. Garey,8 Carolyn V. Gould,1 Ciaran Kelly,9 Vivian Loo,10 Julia Shaklee Sammons,6 Thomas J. Sandora,11 and Mark H. Wilcox12
1Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; 2Edward Hines Jr Veterans Administration Hospital, Hines, and 3Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, Illinois; 4St Luke’s 
Hospital, Duluth, Minnesota; 5Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; 6Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 7Washington University School of Medicine, 
St Louis, Missouri; 8University of Houston College of Pharmacy, Texas; 9Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; 10McGill University Health Centre, 
McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada; 11Boston Children’s Hospital, Massachusetts; and 12Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, United Kingdom
A panel of experts was convened by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of 
America (SHEA) to update the 2010 clinical practice guideline on Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in adults. The update, which 
has incorporated recommendations for children (following the adult recommendations for epidemiology, diagnosis, and treatment), 
includes significant changes in the management of this infection and reflects the evolving controversy over best methods for diag-
nosis. Clostridium difficile remains the most important cause of healthcare-associated diarrhea and has become the most commonly 
identified cause of healthcare-associated infection in adults in the United States. Moreover, C. difficile has established itself as an 
important community pathogen. Although the prevalence of the epidemic and virulent ribotype 027 strain has declined markedly 
along with overall CDI rates in parts of Europe, it remains one of the most commonly identified strains in the United States where 
it causes a sizable minority of CDIs, especially healthcare-associated CDIs. This guideline updates recommendations regarding epi-
demiology, diagnosis, treatment, infection prevention, and environmental management.
Keywords.  Clostridium difficile; Clostridioides difficile; Guidelines; CDI; CDAD.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Summarized below are recommendations intended to improve the 
diagnosis and management of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) 
in adults and children. CDI is defined by the presence of symp-
toms (usually diarrhea) and either a stool test positive for C. diffi-
cile toxins or detection of toxigenic C. difficile, or colonoscopic or 
histopathologic findings revealing pseudomembranous colitis. In 
addition to diagnosis and management, recommended methods of 
infection control and environmental management of the pathogen 
are presented. The panel followed a process used in the develop-
ment of other Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 
guidelines, which included a systematic weighting of the strength 
of recommendation and quality of evidence using the GRADE 
(Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and 
Evaluation) system (Figure 1). A detailed description of the meth-
ods, background, and evidence summaries that support each of 
the recommendations can be found in the full text of the guide-
lines. The extent to which these guidelines can be implemented 
is impacted by the size of the institution and the resources, both 
financial and laboratory, available in the particular clinical setting.
GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CLOSTRIDIUM 
DIFFICILE INFECTION
EPIDEMIOLOGY
I. How are CDI cases best defined?
Recommendation
1. To increase comparability between clinical settings, use available 
standardized case definitions for surveillance of (1) healthcare 
facility-onset (HO) CDI; (2) community-onset, healthcare facil-
ity–associated (CO-HCFA) CDI; and (3) community-associated 
(CA) CDI (good practice recommendation).
I D S A  G U I D E L I N E
© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix1085
Received 6 December 2017; editorial decision 8 December 2017; accepted 14 December 2017; 
published online February 15, 2018.
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual variation among 
patients. They are not intended to supplant physician judgment with respect to particular patients 
or special clinical situations. IDSA and SHEA consider adherence to the guidelines listed below 
to be voluntary, with the ultimate determination regarding their application to be made by the 
physician in the light of each patient’s individual circumstances. While IDSA makes every effort 
to present accurate and reliable information, the information provided in these guidelines is “as 
is” without any warranty of accuracy, reliability, or otherwise, either express or implied. Neither 
IDSA nor its officers, directors, members, employees, or agents will be liable for any loss, dam-
age, or claim with respect to any liabilities, including direct, special, indirect, or consequential 
damages, incurred in connection with these guidelines or reliance on the information presented.
Correspondence: L. C. McDonald, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton 
Road, MS A35, Atlanta, GA 30333 (cmcdonald1@cdc.gov).
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2018;66(7):e1–e48
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e2 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
II. What is the minimal surveillance recommendation for institu-
tions with limited resources?
Recommendation
1. At a minimum, conduct surveillance for HO-CDI in all in-
patient healthcare facilities to detect elevated rates or out-
breaks of CDI within the facility (weak recommendation, low 
quality of evidence).
III. What is the best way to express CDI incidence and rates?
Recommendation
1. Express the rate of HO-CDI as the number of cases per 10 000 
patient-days. Express the CO-HCFA prevalence rate as the 
number of cases per 1000 patient admissions (good practice 
recommendation).
IV. How should CDI surveillance be approached in settings of high 
endemic rates or outbreaks?
Recommendation
1. Stratify data by patient location to target control measures 
when CDI incidence is above national and/or facility reduc-
tion goals or if an outbreak is noted (weak recommendation, 
low quality of evidence).
EPIDEMIOLOGY (PEDIATRIC CONSIDERATIONS)
V. What is the recommended CDI surveillance strategy for pedi-
atric institutions?
Recommendations
1. Use the same standardized case definitions (HO, CO-HCFA, 
CA) and rate expression (cases per 10 000 patient-days for HO, 
Figure 1. Approach and implications to rating the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development 
and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology (unrestricted use of this figure granted by the US GRADE Network) [1–4].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e3
cases per 1000 patient admissions for CO-HCFA) in pedi-
atric patients as for adults (good practice recommendation).
2. Conduct surveillance for HO-CDI for inpatient pediatric 
facilities but do not include cases <2 years of age (weak rec-
ommendation, low quality of evidence).
3. Consider surveillance for CA-CDI to detect trends in the 
community (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
DIAGNOSIS
VI. What is the preferred population for C. difficile testing, and 
should efforts be made to achieve this target?
Recommendation
1. Patients with unexplained and new-onset ≥3 unformed stools 
in 24 hours are the preferred target population for testing for 
CDI (weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
VII. What is the best-performing method (ie, in use positive and 
negative predictive value) for detecting patients at increased risk 
for clinically significant C. difficile infection in commonly submit-
ted stool specimens?
Recommendation
1. Use a stool toxin test as part of a multistep algorithm (ie, glu-
tamate dehydrogenase [GDH] plus toxin; GDH plus toxin, 
arbitrated by nucleic acid amplification test [NAAT]; or 
NAAT plus toxin) rather than a NAAT alone for all speci-
mens received in the clinical laboratory when there are no 
preagreed institutional criteria for patient stool submission 
(Figure 2) (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
VIII. What is the most sensitive method of diagnosis of CDI in 
stool specimens from patients likely to have CDI based on clinical 
symptoms?
Recommendation
1. Use a NAAT alone or a multistep algorithm for testing (ie, 
GDH plus toxin; GDH plus toxin, arbitrated by NAAT; or 
NAAT plus toxin) rather than a toxin test alone when there 
are preagreed institutional criteria for patient stool sub-
mission (Figure 2) (weak recommendation, low quality of 
evidence).
IX. What is the role of repeat testing, if any? Are there asymptom-
atic patients in whom repeat testing should be allowed, including 
test of cure?
Recommendation
1. Do not perform repeat testing (within 7 days) during the 
same episode of diarrhea and do not test stool from asymp-
tomatic patients, except for epidemiological studies (strong 
 
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Figure 2. Clostridium difficile infection laboratory test recommendations based on preagreed institutional criteria for patient stool submission. Abbreviations: CDI, 
Clostridium difficile infection; EIA, enzyme immunoassay; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e4 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
X. Does detection of fecal lactoferrin or another biologic marker 
improve the diagnosis of CDI over and above the detection of toxi-
genic C. difficile Can such a subset predict a more ill cohort?
Recommendation
1. There are insufficient data to recommend use of biologic 
markers as an adjunct to diagnosis (no recommendation).
DIAGNOSIS (PEDIATRIC CONSIDERATIONS)
XI. When should a neonate or infant be tested for C. difficile?
Recommendations
1. Because of the high prevalence of asymptomatic carriage 
of toxigenic C. difficile in infants, testing for CDI should 
never be routinely recommended for neonates or infants 
≤12 months of age with diarrhea (strong recommendation, 
moderate quality of evidence).
XII. When should a toddler or older child be tested for C. difficile?
Recommendations
1. Clostridium difficile testing should not be routinely per-
formed in children with diarrhea who are 1–2 years of age 
unless other infectious or noninfectious causes have been 
excluded (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
2. In children ≥2 years of age, C. difficile testing is recom-
mended for patients with prolonged or worsening diarrhea 
and risk factors (eg, underlying inflammatory bowel disease 
or immunocompromising conditions) or relevant exposures 
(eg, contact with the healthcare system or recent antibiotics) 
(weak recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL
Isolation Measures for Patients With CDI
XIII. Should private rooms and/or dedicated toilet facilities be 
used for isolated patients with CDI?
Recommendations
1. Accommodate patients with CDI in a private room with a 
dedicated toilet to decrease transmission to other patients. 
If there is a limited number of private single rooms, priori-
tize patients with stool incontinence for placement in private 
rooms (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
2. If cohorting is required, it is recommended to cohort 
patients infected or colonized with the same organism(s)—
that is, do not cohort patients with CDI who are discordant 
for other multidrug-resistant organisms such as methicil-
lin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus or vancomycin-resistant 
Enterococcus (strong recommendation, moderate quality of 
evidence).
XIV. Should gloves and gowns be worn while caring for isolated 
CDI patients?
Recommendation
1. Healthcare personnel must use gloves (strong recommen-
dation, high quality of evidence) and gowns (strong rec-
ommendation, moderate quality of evidence) on entry to a 
room of a patient with CDI and while caring for patients 
with CDI.
XV. When should isolation be implemented?
Recommendation
1. Patients with suspected CDI should be placed on preemptive 
contact precautions pending the C. difficile test results if test 
results cannot be obtained on the same day (strong recom-
mendation, moderate quality of evidence).
XVI. How long should isolation be continued?
Recommendations
1. Continue contact precautions for at least 48 hours after 
diarrhea has resolved (weak recommendation, low quality of 
evidence).
2. Prolong contact precautions until discharge if CDI rates 
remain high despite implementation of standard infection 
control measures against CDI (weak recommendation, low 
quality of evidence).
XVII. What is the recommended hand hygiene method (assuming 
glove use) when caring for patients in isolation for CDI?
Recommendations
1. In routine or endemic settings, perform hand hygiene before 
and after contact of a patient with CDI and after removing 
gloves with either soap and water or an alcohol-based hand 
hygiene product (strong recommendation, moderate quality of 
evidence).
2. In CDI outbreaks or hyperendemic (sustained high rates) set-
tings, perform hand hygiene with soap and water preferen-
tially instead of alcohol-based hand hygiene products before 
and after caring for a patient with CDI given the increased 
efficacy of spore removal with soap and water (weak recom-
mendation, low quality of evidence).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e5
3. Handwashing with soap and water is preferred if there is 
direct contact with feces or an area where fecal contam-
ination is likely (eg, the perineal region) (good practice 
recommendation).
XVIII. Should patient bathing interventions be implemented to 
prevent CDI?
Recommendation
1. Encourage patients to wash hands and shower to re-
duce the burden of spores on the skin (good practice 
recommendation).
XIX. Should noncritical devices or equipment be dedicated to or 
specially cleaned after being used on the isolated patient with CDI?
Recommendation
1. Use disposable patient equipment when possible and en-
sure that reusable equipment is thoroughly cleaned and dis-
infected, preferentially with a sporicidal disinfectant that is 
equipment compatible (strong recommendation, moderate 
quality of evidence).
XX. What is the role of manual, terminal disinfection using a 
C. difficile sporicidal agent for patients in isolation for CDI?
Recommendation
1. Terminal room cleaning with a sporicidal agent should be 
considered in conjunction with other measures to prevent 
CDI during endemic high rates or outbreaks, or if there is 
evidence of repeated cases of CDI in the same room (weak 
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
XXI. Should cleaning adequacy be evaluated?
Recommendation
1. Incorporate measures of cleaning effectiveness to en-
sure quality of environmental cleaning (good practice 
recommendation).
XXII.What is the role of automated terminal disinfection using a 
method that is sporicidal against C. difficile?
Recommendation
1. There are limited data at this time to recommend use of auto-
mated, terminal disinfection using a sporicidal method for 
CDI prevention (no recommendation).
XXIII. What is the role of daily sporicidal disinfection?
Recommendation
1. Daily cleaning with a sporicidal agent should be considered 
in conjunction with other measures to prevent CDI during 
outbreaks or in hyperendemic (sustained high rates) settings, 
or if there is evidence of repeated cases of CDI in the same 
room (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
XXIV. Should asymptomatic carriers of C. difficile be identified and 
isolated if positive?
Recommendation
1. There are insufficient data to recommend screening for 
asymptomatic carriage and placing asymptomatic carriers on 
contact precautions (no recommendation).
XXV. What is the role of antibiotic stewardship in controlling 
CDI rates?
Recommendations
1. Minimize the frequency and duration of high-risk antibiotic 
therapy and the number of antibiotic agents prescribed, to reduce 
CDI risk (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
2. Implement an antibiotic stewardship program (good practice 
recommendation).
3. Antibiotics to be targeted should be based on the local epi-
demiology and the C. difficile strains present. Restriction of 
fluoroquinolones, clindamycin, and cephalosporins (except 
for surgical antibiotic prophylaxis) should be considered 
(strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
XXVI. What is the role of proton pump inhibitor restriction in 
controlling CDI rates?
Recommendation
1. Although there is an epidemiologic association between 
proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use and CDI, and unnecessary 
PPIs should always be discontinued, there is insufficient evi-
dence for discontinuation of PPIs as a measure for preventing 
CDI (no recommendation).
XXVII. What is the role of probiotics in primary prevention of CDI?
Recommendation
1. There are insufficient data at this time to recommend admin-
istration of probiotics for primary prevention of CDI outside 
of clinical trials (no recommendation).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e6 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
TREATMENT
XXVIII. What are important ancillary treatment strategies 
for CDI?
Recommendations
1. Discontinue therapy with the inciting antibiotic agent(s) 
as soon as possible, as this may influence the risk of CDI 
recurrence (strong recommendation, moderate quality of 
evidence).
2. Antibiotic therapy for CDI should be started empirically for 
situations where a substantial delay in laboratory confirm-
ation is expected, or for fulminant CDI (described in section 
XXX) (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence). 
XXIX. What are the best treatments of an initial CDI episode to 
ensure resolution of symptoms and sustained resolution 1 month 
after treatment?
Recommendations
1. Either vancomycin or fidaxomicin is recommended over 
metronidazole for an initial episode of CDI. The dosage is 
vancomycin 125 mg orally 4 times per day or fidaxomicin 
200 mg twice daily for 10 days (strong recommendation, high 
quality of evidence) (Table 1).
2. In settings where access to vancomycin or fidaxomicin is lim-
ited, we suggest using metronidazole for an initial episode 
of nonsevere CDI only (weak recommendation, high quality 
of evidence). The suggested dosage is metronidazole 500 mg 
orally 3 times per day for 10 days. Avoid repeated or prolonged 
courses due to risk of cumulative and potentially irreversible 
neurotoxicity (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evi-
dence). (See Treatment section for definition of CDI severity.)
XXX. What are the best treatments of fulminant CDI?
Recommendations
1. For fulminant CDI*, vancomycin administered orally is the 
regimen of choice (strong recommendation, moderate qual-
ity of evidence). If ileus is present, vancomycin can also be 
administered per rectum (weak recommendation, low quality 
of evidence). The vancomycin dosage is 500 mg orally 4 times 
per day and 500 mg in approximately 100 mL normal saline 
per rectum every 6 hours as a retention enema. Intravenously 
administered metronidazole should be administered together 
Table 1. Recommendations for the Treatment of Clostridium difficile Infection in Adults
Clinical Definition
Supportive Clinical Data
Recommended Treatmenta
Strength of Recommendation/ 
Quality of Evidence
Initial episode, 
non-severe
Leukocytosis with a white 
blood cell count of ≤15 
000 
cells/mL and a serum creati-
nine level <1.5 mg/dL
•  VAN 125 mg given 4 times daily for 10 days, OR
Strong/High
•  FDX 200 mg given twice daily for 10 days
Strong/High
•  Alternate if above agents are unavailable: metronidazole, 500 mg 3 times 
per day by mouth for 10 days
Weak/High
Initial episode, 
severeb
Leukocytosis with a white 
blood cell count of ≥15 
000 
cells/mL or a serum creati-
nine level >1.5 mg/dL
•  VAN, 125 mg 4 times per day by mouth for 10 days, OR
Strong/High
•  FDX 200 mg given twice daily for 10 days
Strong/High
Initial episode, 
fulminant
Hypotension or shock, ileus, 
megacolon
•  VAN, 500 mg 4 times per day by mouth or by nasogastric tube. If ileus, 
consider adding rectal instillation of VAN. Intravenously administered met-
ronidazole (500 mg every 8 hours) should be administered together with 
oral or rectal VAN, particularly if ileus is present.
Strong/Moderate (oral VAN); 
Weak/Low (rectal VAN); 
Strong/Moderate (intrave-
nous metronidazole)
First recurrence
…
•  VAN 125 mg given 4 times daily for 10 days if metronidazole was used for 
the initial episode, OR
Weak/Low
•  Use a prolonged tapered and pulsed VAN regimen if a standard reg-
imen was used for the initial episode (eg, 125 mg 4 times per day for 
10–14 days, 2 times per day for a week, once per day for a week, and 
then every 2 or 3 days for 2–8 weeks), OR
Weak/Low
•  FDX 200 mg given twice daily for 10 days if VAN was used for the initial 
episode
Weak/Moderate
Second or 
subsequent 
recurrence
…
•  VAN in a tapered and pulsed regimen, OR
Weak/Low
•  VAN, 125 mg 4 times per day by mouth for 10 days followed by rifaximin 
400 mg 3 times daily for 20 days, OR
Weak/Low
•  FDX 200 mg given twice daily for 10 days, OR
Weak/Low
•  Fecal microbiota transplantationc
Strong/Moderate
Abbreviations: FDX, fidaxomicin; VAN, vancomycin.
aAll randomized trials have compared 10-day treatment courses, but some patients (particularly those treated with metronidazole) may have delayed response to treatment and clinicians 
should consider extending treatment duration to 14 days in those circumstances.
bThe criteria proposed for defining severe or fulminant Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) are based on expert opinion. These may need to be reviewed in the future upon publication of pro-
spectively validated severity scores for patients with CDI.
cThe opinion of the panel is that appropriate antibiotic treatments for at least 2 recurrences (ie, 3 CDI episodes) should be tried prior to offering fecal microbiota transplantation.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e7
with oral or rectal vancomycin, particularly if ileus is pres-
ent (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence). 
The metronidazole dosage is 500 mg intravenously every 8 
hours.*
*Fulminant CDI, previously referred to as severe, complicated 
CDI, may be characterized by hypotension or shock, ileus, or 
megacolon.
2. If surgical management is necessary for severely ill patients, 
perform subtotal colectomy with preservation of the rec-
tum (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence). 
Diverting loop ileostomy with colonic lavage followed by 
antegrade vancomycin flushes is an alternative approach that 
may lead to improved outcomes (weak recommendation, low 
quality of evidence).
XXXI. What are the best treatments for recurrent CDI?
Recommendations
1. Treat a first recurrence of CDI with oral vancomycin as a 
tapered and pulsed regimen rather than a second standard 
10-day course of vancomycin (weak recommendation, low 
quality of evidence), OR
2. Treat a first recurrence of CDI with a 10-day course of 
fidaxomicin rather than a standard 10-day course of 
vancomycin (weak recommendation, moderate quality of 
evidence), OR
3. Treat a first recurrence of CDI with a standard 10-day course 
of vancomycin rather than a second course of metronidazole 
if metronidazole was used for the primary episode (weak rec-
ommendation, low quality of evidence).
4. Antibiotic treatment options for patients with >1 recur-
rence of CDI include oral vancomycin therapy using a 
tapered and pulsed regimen (weak recommendation, low 
quality of evidence), a standard course of oral vancomycin 
followed by rifaximin (weak recommendation, low quality 
of evidence), or fidaxomicin (weak recommendation, low 
quality of evidence).
5. Fecal microbiota transplantation is recommended for 
patients with multiple recurrences of CDI who have failed 
appropriate antibiotic treatments (strong recommendation, 
moderate quality of evidence).
6. There are insufficient data at this time to recommend 
extending the length of anti–C. difficile treatment beyond 
the recommended treatment course or restarting an 
anti–C. difficile agent empirically for patients who require 
continued antibiotic therapy directed against the underly-
ing infection or who require retreatment with antibiotics 
shortly after completion of CDI treatment, respectively (no 
recommendation).
TREATMENT (PEDIATRIC CONSIDERATIONS)
XXXII. What is the best treatment of an initial episode or first 
recurrence of nonsevere CDI in children?
Recommendation
1. Either metronidazole or vancomycin is recommended for 
the treatment of children with an initial episode or first 
recurrence of nonsevere CDI (see Pediatric treatment sec-
tion for dosing) (weak recommendation, low quality of evi-
dence) (Table 2).
Table 2. Recommendations for the Treatment of Clostridium difficile Infection in Children
Clinical Definition
Recommended Treatment
Pediatric Dose
Maximum Dose
Strength of 
Recommendation/ 
 Quality of Evidence
Initial episode, non-severe •  Metronidazole × 10 days (PO), OR
•  Vancomycin × 10 days (PO)
•  7
.5 mg/kg/dose tid or qid
•  10 mg/kg/dose qid
• 500 mg tid or qid
•  125 mg qid
Weak/Low
Weak/Low
Initial episode, severe/ 
fulminant
•  Vancomycin × 10 days (PO or 
PR) with or without metronidazole × 
10 days (IV)a
•  10 mg/kg/dose qid
•  10 mg/kg/dose tid
•  500 mg qid
•  500 mg tid
Strong/Moderate
Weak/Low
First recurrence, 
non-severe
•  Metronidazole × 10 days (PO), OR
•  Vancomycin × 10 days (PO)
•  7
.5 mg/kg/dose tid or qid
•  10 mg/kg/dose qid
•  500 mg tid or qid
•  125 mg qid
Weak/Low
Second or subsequent 
recurrence
•  Vancomycin in a tapered and pulsed 
regimenb, OR
•  Vancomycin for 10 days followed by 
rifaximinc for 20 days, OR
•  Fecal microbiota transplantation
•  10 mg/kg/dose qid
•  Vancomycin: 10 mg/kg/dose qid; 
rifaximin: no pediatric dosing
• … 
•  125 mg qid
•  Vancomycin: 500 mg qid; 
rifaximin: 400 mg tid
• … 
Weak/Low
Weak/Low
Weak/Very low
Abbreviations: IV, intravenous; PO, oral; PR, rectal; qid, 4 times daily; tid, 3 times daily.
aIn cases of severe or fulminant Clostridium difficile infection associated with critical illness, consider addition of intravenous metronidazole to oral vancomycin.
bTapered and pulsed regimen: vancomycin 10 mg/kg with max of 125 mg 4 times per day for 10–14 days, then 10 mg/kg with max of 125 mg 2 times per day for a week, then 10 mg/kg with 
max of 125 mg once per day for a week, and then 10 mg/kg with max of 125 mg every 2 or 3 days for 2–8 weeks.
cNo pediatric dosing for rifaximin; not approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for use in children <12 years of age.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e8 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
XXXIII. What is the best treatment of an initial episode of severe 
CDI in children?
Recommendation
1. For children with an initial episode of severe CDI, oral van-
comycin is recommended over metronidazole (strong recom-
mendation, moderate quality of evidence).
XXXIV. What are the best treatments for a second or greater epi-
sode of recurrent CDI in children?
Recommendation
1. For children with a second or greater episode of recurrent 
CDI, oral vancomycin is recommended over metronidazole 
(weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
XXXV. Is there a role for fecal microbiota transplantation in chil-
dren with recurrent CDI?
Recommendation
1. Consider fecal microbiota transplantation for pediatric 
patients with multiple recurrences of CDI following standard 
antibiotic treatments (weak recommendation, very low quality 
of evidence).
INTRODUCTION
Since publication of the 2010 Infectious Diseases Society of 
America (IDSA)/Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of 
America (SHEA) Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) clinical 
practice guideline, there has been continued expanding inter-
est in the epidemiology, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment 
of CDI. This reflects the ongoing magnitude of these infections 
impacting all aspects of healthcare delivery and reaching out into 
the community. Also new since the previous guidelines, quality 
of evidence and strength of recommendations was evaluated 
using GRADE methodology [1–4]. While there is evidence that 
CDI rates have declined remarkably in England and other parts 
of Europe since their peak before 2010, rates have plateaued at 
historic highs in the United States since about 2010 [5]. Recent 
estimates suggest the US burden of CDI is close to 500 000 infec-
tions annually, although the exact magnitude of burden is highly 
dependent upon the type of diagnostic tests used [6]. Depending 
upon the degree and method of attribution, CDI is associated 
with 15 000–30 000 US deaths [6, 7] and excess acute care inpa-
tient costs alone exceed $4.8 billion [5]. Due to this US burden 
of CDI, national efforts to control and prevent CDI have been 
put in place including incentives for public reporting of hos-
pital rates [8] and hospital “pay for performance” [9]. It is in 
this context of CDI remaining a major public health problem, 
undermining both patient safety and the efficiency and value 
of healthcare delivery, that the 2010 recommendations are now 
revised and updated. There are no updates in the clinical defin-
ition of CDI or the clinical manifestations of CDI. The reader 
is referred to the 2010 guideline for the definition, background 
information, and clinical manifestations of CDI.
Since completion of this guideline, a new therapeutic agent 
and a molecular diagnostic test platform have become available 
for CDI. Bezlotoxumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against 
toxin B produced by C. difficile, has been approved as adjunctive 
therapy for patients who are receiving antibiotic treatment for 
CDI and who are at high risk for recurrence [10]. Multiplex pol-
ymerase chain reaction (PCR) platforms that detect C. difficile 
as part of a panel of >20 different enteric pathogens have also 
become available [11]. These most recent innovations and other 
innovations that may become available in the near future will be 
covered in subsequent guideline updates.
METHODOLOGY
Practice Guidelines
“Clinical practice guidelines are statements that include recom-
mendations intended to optimize patient care that are informed 
by a systematic review of evidence and an assessment of the 
benefits and harms of alternative care options” [12].
Panel Composition
A panel of 14 multidisciplinary experts in the epidemiology, 
diagnosis, infection control, and clinical management of adult 
and pediatric patients with CDI was convened to develop these 
practice guidelines. A systematic evidence-based approach was 
adopted for the guideline questions and population, interven-
tion, comparator, outcome (PICO) formulations, the selection 
of patient-important outcomes, as well as the literature searches 
and screening of the uncovered citations and articles. The rat-
ing of the quality of evidence and strength of recommendation 
was supported by a Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) methodologist. In add-
ition to members of both IDSA and SHEA, representatives from 
the American Society for Health-Systems Pharmacists (ASHP), 
the Society of Infectious Diseases Pharmacists (SIDP), and the 
Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS) were included.
Literature Review and Analysis
For this 2017 guideline update, search strategies, in collabor-
ation with the guideline panel members, were developed and 
built by independent health sciences librarians from National 
Jewish Health (Denver, Colorado). Each strategy incorporated 
medical subject headings and text words for “Clostridium dif-
ficile,” limited to human studies or nonindexed citations. In 
addition, the strategies focused on articles published in English 
or in any language with available English abstracts. The Ovid 
platform was used to search 5 electronic evidence databases: 
Medline, Embase, Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e9
Trials, Health Technology Assessment, and the Database of 
Abstracts of Reviews of Effects.
To supplement the electronic search, reviewers also 
hand-searched relevant journals, conference proceedings, 
reference lists from manuscripts retained from electronic 
searches, and regulatory agency web sites for relevant arti-
cles. Literature searches were originally implemented on 
4 December 2012, updated on 3 March 2014, and further 
extended to 31 December 2016. The 2010 guideline used a 
search cutoff of 2009 and thus for this guideline, the litera-
ture review included a defined search period of 2009–2016. 
Separate, nondiscrete evidence libraries were created for 
adults and pediatrics. The result of the searching was 14 479 
citations being eligible at title and abstract phase of screen-
ing for the adult literature. As the 2010 guideline did not 
address pediatrics as part of any searching, a decision was 
made to reexamine the evidence landscape for pediatric-re-
lated studies that could inform the guideline. For this, the 
period of 1977–2016 was searched, yielding 3572 citations 
eligible at title and abstract phase. Those retained at the title 
and abstract phase of screening were then examined at the 
full-text phase.
Process Overview
To evaluate the initial search evidence for eligibility, the panel fol-
lowed a process consistent with other IDSA guidelines. The pro-
cess for evaluating the evidence was based on the IDSA Handbook 
on Clinical Practice Guideline Development and involved a sys-
tematic weighting of the quality of the evidence and the grade 
of recommendation using the GRADE system (Figure 1) [1–4].
Each author was asked to review the literature (based on 
screening examination of titles and abstracts and manuscript 
full-text examination, as well as abstraction of relevant variables/
data from eligible studies/reports), evaluate the evidence, and 
determine the strength of the recommendations along with an 
evidence summary supporting each recommendation. The panel 
reviewed all recommendations, their strength, and quality of evi-
dence. For recommendations in the category of good practice 
statements that should not be graded, we followed published 
principles by the GRADE working group on how to identify such 
recommendations and use appropriate wording choices [13]. 
Accordingly, a formal GRADE rating was not pursued for those 
statements as these statements would make it clear that they 
would do greater good than harm or greater harm than good, and 
thus a study would not be warranted to address such a question. 
Discrepancies were discussed and resolved, and all panel mem-
bers are in agreement with the final recommendations.
Consensus Development Based on Evidence
The panel met face-to-face on 3 occasions and conducted 
numerous monthly subgroup and full panel conference calls 
to complete the work of the guideline. The panel as a whole 
reviewed all individual sections. The guideline was reviewed 
and approved by the IDSA Standards and Practice Guidelines 
Committee (SPGC) and SHEA Guidelines Committee as well as 
both organizations’ respective Board of Directors (BOD). The 
guideline was endorsed by ASHP, SIDP, and PIDS.
Guidelines and Conflicts of Interest
All members of the expert panel complied with the IDSA 
policy on conflicts of interest, which requires disclosure of 
any financial, intellectual, or other interest that might be 
construed as constituting an actual, potential, or apparent 
conflict. To provide thorough transparency, IDSA requires 
full disclosure of all relationships, regardless of relevancy 
to the guideline topic [14]. Evaluation of such relation-
ships as potential conflicts of interest (COI) is determined 
by a review process that includes assessment by the SPGC 
chair, the SPGC liaison to the development panel, and the 
BOD liaison to the SPGC, and, if necessary, the COI Task 
Force of the Board. This assessment of disclosed relation-
ships for possible COI is based on the relative weight of the 
financial relationship (ie, monetary amount) and the rele-
vance of the relationship (ie, the degree to which an asso-
ciation might reasonably be interpreted by an independent 
observer as related to the topic or recommendation of con-
sideration). See Acknowledgments section for disclosures 
reported to IDSA.
Revision Dates
At annual intervals and more frequently if needed, IDSA 
and SHEA will determine the need for revisions to the 
guideline on the basis of an examination of the current 
literature and the likelihood that any new data will have 
an impact on the recommendations. If necessary, the 
entire expert panel will be reconvened to discuss potential 
changes. Any revision to the guideline will be submitted 
for review and approval to the appropriate Committees and 
Boards of IDSA and SHEA.
GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CLOSTRIDIUM 
DIFFICILE INFECTION
EPIDEMIOLOGY
I. How are CDI cases best defined?
Recommendation
1. To increase comparability between clinical settings, use 
available standardized case definitions for surveillance 
of (1) healthcare facility-onset (HO) CDI; (2) communi-
ty-onset, healthcare facility–associated (CO-HCFA) CDI; 
and (3) community-associated (CA) CDI (good practice 
recommendation).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e10 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
II. What is the minimal surveillance recommendation for institu-
tions with limited resources?
Recommendation
1. At a minimum, conduct surveillance for HO-CDI in all inpatient 
healthcare facilities to detect elevated rates or outbreaks of CDI 
within the facility (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
III. What is the best way to express CDI incidence and rates?
Recommendation
1. Express the rate of HO-CDI as the number of cases per 10 000 
patient-days. Express the CO-HCFA prevalence rate as the 
number of cases per 1000 patient admissions (good practice 
recommendation).
IV. How should CDI surveillance be approached in settings of high 
endemic rates or outbreaks?
Recommendation
1. Stratify data by patient location to target control measures 
when CDI incidence is above national and/or facility reduc-
tion goals or if an outbreak is noted (weak recommendation, 
low quality of evidence).
SUMMARY OF 
THE EVIDENCE
Surveillance
A recommended case definition for surveillance requires (1) 
the presence of diarrhea or evidence of megacolon or severe 
ileus and (2) either a positive laboratory diagnostic test result 
or evidence of pseudomembranes demonstrated by endoscopy 
or histopathology. An incident case is defined as a new primary 
episode of symptom onset (ie, no episode of symptom onset 
with positive result within the previous 8 weeks) and positive 
assay result (eg, toxin enzyme immunoassay [EIA] or nucleic 
acid amplification test [NAAT]). A recurrent case is defined as 
an episode of symptom onset and positive assay result following 
an episode with positive assay result in the previous 2–8 weeks. 
The minimum surveillance that should be performed by all 
healthcare facilities is tracking of healthcare facility–onset (HO) 
cases, which will allow for detection of elevated rates or an out-
break within the facility [15]. HO-CDI cases are defined by the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)’s National 
Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN) as Laboratory-Identified 
(LabID) Events collected >3 days after admission to the facility 
(ie, on or after day 4) [16]. Facilities may also monitor cases of 
CDI occurring within 28 days after discharge from a health-
care facility, which are considered community-onset, healthcare 
facility-associated (CO-HCFA) cases (ie, postdischarge cases).
Because the risk of CDI increases with the length of stay, the 
most appropriate denominator for HO-CDI rates is the number 
of patient-days. If a facility notes an increase in the incidence 
of CDI from the baseline rate, or if the incidence is higher than 
in comparable institutions or above national and/or facility re-
duction goals, surveillance data should be stratified by hospital 
location or clinical service to identify particular patient popu-
lations where infection prevention measures may be targeted. 
In addition, measures should be considered for tracking severe 
outcomes, such as colectomy, intensive care unit (ICU) admis-
sion, or death, attributable to CDI.
In the United States, CDI surveillance in healthcare facil-
ities is conducted via the CDC’s NHSN Multidrug-Resistant 
Organism and C. difficile Infection Module LabID Event 
Reporting [16]. To allow for risk-adjusted reporting of 
healthcare-associated infections (HAIs), CDC calculates the 
standardized infection ratio (SIR) by dividing the number 
of observed events by the number of predicted events. The 
number of predicted events is calculated using LabID proba-
bilities estimated from models constructed from NHSN data 
during a baseline time period, which represents a standard 
population [16]. These have been recently updated using a 
2015 baseline period with specific models developed for 
each of 4 facility types: acute care hospitals, long-term acute 
care hospitals, critical access hospitals (rural hospitals with 
≤25 acute care inpatient beds), and inpatient rehabilitation 
facilities [17]. Use of more sensitive tests (eg, NAATs) for 
C. difficile have been demonstrated to result in substantial 
increases in reported CDI incidence rates compared with 
those derived from toxin detection by enzyme immunoassay 
[18, 19]. Consistent with this, the impact of test type on facil-
ities’ reported rates is an independent predictor in each of 
the aforementioned NHSN risk adjustment models except 
that for critical access hospitals [17]. The prevalence of CO 
cases not associated with the facility (ie, defined in NHSN 
as present-on-admission with no discharge from the same 
facility within the previous 4 weeks) is also associated with 
HO-CDI [20, 21]. This likely reflects colonization pressure in 
the admitted patient population, and is an independent pre-
dictor in each of the NHSN risk adjustment models except for 
inpatient rehabilitation facilities [17].
Despite these attempts to risk-adjust based upon data 
that hospitals are already reporting to NHSN, there are lim-
itations. For example, adjustment by test type accounts for 
only the pooled mean impact on rates resulting from differ-
ences in sensitivity between major test categories (eg, NAAT, 
toxin EIA) and does not account for differences in sensitivity 
between individual test manufacturers, nor potential interac-
tion of C. difficile strain types on relative test sensitivity [22, 
23]. Similarly, there are inherent limitations in all surveillance 
adjusting for the disease risk in the surveyed population. For 
example, Thompson et al demonstrated how the Medicare 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e11
Case Mix Index, a summary metric calculated at the hospi-
tal level and reflecting clinical complexity and resource con-
sumption of patients within a hospital, could further explain 
variation across hospital CDI rates over and above the existing 
model [24]. However, any potential benefit to hospital perfor-
mance improvement from additional risk adjustment strate-
gies must be balanced by any increased data-reporting burden 
or impact on timeliness.
Prevalence, Incidence, Morbidity, and Mortality
Clostridium difficile is the most commonly recognized cause 
of infectious diarrhea in healthcare settings. Among 711 acute 
care hospitals in 28 states conducting facility-wide inpatient 
LabID-CDI event reporting to NHSN in 2010, the pooled rate 
of HO-CDI was 7.4 (median, 5.4) per 10 000 patient-days [25]. 
As these data were reported prior to development of the SIR, 
they were unadjusted; at that time, 35% of NHSN hospitals 
reported using NAATs. Based on data from the CDC’s Emerging 
Infections Program (EIP) [26] population-based surveillance 
system in 2011, the estimated number of incident CDI cases in 
the United States was 453 000 (95% confidence interval [CI], 
397 100–508 500), with an incidence of 147.2 (95% CI, 129.1–
165.3) cases/100 000 persons [6]. The incidence was highest 
among those aged ≥65 years (627.7) and was greater among 
females and whites. Of the total estimated 453 000 incident 
cases, 293 300 (64.7%) were considered to be healthcare-associ-
ated, of which 37% were HO, 36% had their onset in long-term 
care facilities (LTCFs), and 28% were CO healthcare-associated 
(ie, specimen collected in an outpatient setting or ≤3 calendar 
days after hospital admission and documented overnight stay 
in a healthcare facility in the prior 12 weeks). Of the estimated 
159 700 community-associated CDI cases (ie, no documented 
overnight stay in a healthcare facility in the prior 12 weeks), 
82% were associated with outpatient healthcare exposure; 
therefore, the overwhelming majority (94%) of all cases of CDI 
had a recent healthcare exposure [6, 27].
A multistate prevalence survey of HAIs conducted by EIP 
in 2011 found that C. difficile was the most common causative 
pathogen, accounting for 61 of 504 (12.1%) HAIs identified 
in 183 hospitals [28]. The increasing burden of CDI was also 
noted in a network of community hospitals in the southeast-
ern United States, where C. difficile surpassed methicillin-re-
sistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) as the most common 
cause of HAIs [29].
Recent hospital discharge data [30] indicate that the total 
number of hospital discharges with a diagnosis of CDI in the 
United States plateaued at historic highs between 2011 and 
2013. During this apparent plateau in hospital discharges, there 
has been an 8% decline in the risk-adjusted HO-CDI SIR of 
NHSN [31].
As most LTCFs do not report CDI data, limited data are avail-
able about the burden of CDI in these settings. LTCF residents 
are often elderly, have numerous comorbid conditions, and have 
been exposed to antibiotics, which are important risk factors 
for C. difficile colonization and infection [32, 33]. Data from 
the CDC EIP and other sources suggest that the burden is high; 
>20% of all CDIs identified in 2011 had onset in LTCFs [6]. 
Furthermore, in 2012 there were an estimated 112 800 cases 
of CDI with onset in LTCFs [34]; 57% of these patients were 
discharged from a hospital within 1 month. Conversely, 20% of 
HO-CDI cases were found to occur in patients who had been 
LTCF residents any time in the previous 12 weeks [5]. Using 
a multilevel longitudinal nested case-control study of Veterans 
Affairs LTCFs, all but 25% of the variability in LTCF rates could 
be explained by 2 factors: the importation of active or conva-
lescing cases with hospital-onset CDI in the previous 8 weeks, 
and LTCF antibiotic use as measured by antibiotic days per 
10 000 resident-days [35].
Severity of CDI has been reported to have increased coin-
cident with the increasing incidence during the outbreaks 
and emergence of the PCR ribotype 027 epidemic strain (also 
known as the North American pulsed field type 1 [NAP1] or 
restriction endonuclease analysis pattern “BI”) in the 2000s [36, 
37]. Severity of CDI has been variably defined based on labora-
tory data, physical examination findings, ICU stay, colectomy, 
and/or mortality. Reported colectomy rates in hospitalized 
patients with CDI during endemic periods range from 0.3% to 
1.3%, whereas during epidemic periods, colectomy rates range 
from 1.8% to 6.2% [38]. Other indicators of CDI morbidity 
include recurrent CDI, readmissions to the hospital, and dis-
charge to LTCFs. Overall, 0.8% of patients develop candidemia 
in the 120 days after CDI and both more severe CDI and treat-
ment with the combination of vancomycin and metronidazole 
are associated with increased candidemia risk [39]. After a first 
diagnosis of CDI, 10%–30% of patients develop at least 1 recur-
rent CDI episode, and the risk of recurrence increases with each 
successive recurrence [40, 41]. A national estimate of first CDI 
recurrences in 2011 was 83 000 (95% CI, 57 100–108 900) [6].
Prior to 2000, the attributable mortality of CDI was low, with 
death as a direct or indirect result of infection occurring in 
<2% of cases [42–45]. Since 2000, CDI-attributable mortality 
has been reported to be higher, both during endemic periods, 
where mortality ranges from 4.5% to 5.7%, and during epi-
demic periods, where mortality ranges from 6.9% to 16.7% 
[38]. However, a recent study in 6 Canadian hospitals evaluat-
ing CDI cases in 2006–2007 found an attributable mortality of 
1.7%, similar to historic data [46]. Based on 2011 EIP data, the 
estimated number of deaths within 30 days of the initial diag-
nosis of CDI in the United States was 29 300 (95% CI, 16 500 
to 42 100) [6]. After controlling for demographics, underlying 
severity of illness, and medications during an index hospital-
ization, recurrent CDI is associated with a 33% increased risk 
of mortality at 180 days relative to patients who do not suffer a 
recurrence [47].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e12 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
The attributable excess costs of CDI suggest a substan-
tial burden on the healthcare system. Studies adjusting for 
cost by propensity score matching have found that the CDI-
attributable cost for acute care hospitals is $3427–$9960 per 
episode (adjusted for 2012 US dollars) [38]. Extrapolating these 
estimates to the nation using 2012 Healthcare Cost Utilization 
Project data, the total annual US acute care cost attributable to 
CDI is estimated to be $1.2–$5.9 billion [38].
Strain Types and Changing Epidemiology
The emergence of the virulent, epidemic ribotype 027 strain 
was associated with increased incidence, severity, and mortality 
during the mid-2000s and resulted in outbreaks across North 
America [36, 48, 49], England [50, 51], parts of continental 
Europe [52, 53], and Asia [54]. The recent isolates of the 027 
strain are more highly resistant to fluoroquinolones compared 
to historic strains of the same type [48]. This, coupled with 
increasing use of the fluoroquinolones worldwide likely pro-
moted dissemination of a once uncommon strain [48].
Consistent with the presence of one or more molecular 
markers responsible for increased virulence, patients infected 
with the 027 epidemic strain in Montreal were shown to have 
more-severe disease than patients infected with other strains 
[36]. In a later Canadian multicenter study of hospitalized 
patients, the 027 strain was predominant among patients with 
CDI, whereas other strains were more common among asymp-
tomatically colonized patients [46]. Similarly, in a sample of iso-
lates and patient information collected from 10 CDC EIP sites 
between 2009 and 2011, ribotype 027 was the most prevalent 
strain (28.4%) and was associated with more severe disease, 
severe outcomes, and death than other strains, controlling for 
patient risk factors, healthcare exposure, and antibiotic use [55].
Since the emergence and spread of 027, recent data from 
Europe suggest that the prevalence of this strain is decreasing. 
England has seen a dramatic decrease in 027 prevalence since 
the establishment of a nationwide ribotyping network in 2007 
[56]. Ribotype 027 decreased significantly between 2007 and 
2010, dropping from 55% prevalence to 21%, coincident with 
significant decreases in reported CDI incidence and related 
mortality. The decrease in 027 prevalence was likely driven by 
significant reductions in fluoroquinolone use during this time 
period [56], although increase in awareness and improved 
infection control may also have impacted CDI incidence.
Continued molecular typing will enable detection of emerg-
ing C. difficile strains with novel virulence factors, risk factors, 
and antibiotic resistance patterns. For example, evidence of 
emergence of a virulent strain, ribotype 078, has been reported 
from the Netherlands [57]. The prevalence of ribotype 078 
increased between 2005 and 2008 and was associated with sim-
ilar severity compared to CDI cases due to ribotype 027, but 
was associated with a younger population and more CA CDI. 
There was also a high degree of genetic relatedness between 078 
isolates found in humans and pigs, an association also noted in 
the United States [58].
CDI in the Community and Special Populations at Increased Risk
In the context of the changing epidemiology of CDI in hospi-
tals in the mid-2000s, evidence suggested increasing incidence 
of CDI in the community, even in healthy people previously at 
low risk, including peripartum women [59–64]. The sources of 
and risk factors for CA CDI (ie, occurring in patients with no 
inpatient stay in the previous 12 weeks) are not well defined. An 
analysis of CA CDI cases identified during 2009–2011 in the 
CDC EIP surveillance found that the majority of cases (82%) 
had some kind of healthcare exposure in the 12 weeks prior to 
CDI diagnosis. A relatively large percentage (36%) of CA CDI 
cases did not report antibiotic exposure in the 12 weeks prior 
to infection, although medication exposures were self-reported 
and may have been subject to limitations in recall. Among 
patients without reported antibiotic exposure, 31% received 
proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) [27]. In another recent study, 
a predictive risk scoring system developed in one cohort in a 
capitated-payment healthcare system and validated in another 
cohort in the same system proved useful for differentiating CDI 
risk in patients following an outpatient healthcare visit [65]. 
Major components of the scoring system included age, recent 
inpatient stay, chronic conditions (eg, liver and kidney disease, 
inflammatory bowel disease [IBD], cancer), and antibiotics; the 
role of PPIs was not examined or otherwise not included.
Patients with IBD, especially ulcerative colitis, are at increased 
risk of not only primary CDI but also recurrent disease, as well 
as increased morbidity and mortality from CDI. The risk of 
CDI within 5 years of a diagnosis of ulcerative colitis may be 
>3% and worsens prognosis by increasing risk of colectomy, 
postoperative complications, and death [66]. Patients with IBD 
are 33% more likely to suffer recurrent CDI [67]. There is an 
increased colectomy risk from CDI occurrence in patients with 
IBD overall, especially patients with ulcerative colitis [68].
Other patient populations at increased risk include solid 
organ transplant recipients: With an overall prevalence of 7.4%, 
rates in this population are 5-fold greater than among general 
medicine patients, and cases are associated with remarkable 
increases in hospital days and costs [69, 70]. Risks are highest in 
multiple solid organ transplants, followed by lung, liver, intes-
tine, kidney, and pancreas with an overall prevalence of severe 
disease of 5.3% and risk of recurrence approximately 20% [70]. 
Patients with chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal dis-
ease have an approximately 2- to 2.5-fold increased risk of CDI 
and recurrence, a 1.5-fold increased risk of severe disease, and 
similarly increased mortality [71, 72]. Finally, hematopoietic 
stem cell transplant patients have a rate of CDI that is approxi-
mately 9 times greater than that in hospitalized patients overall; 
within this population, rates are about twice as high in allogen-
eic (vs autologous) transplants, where CDI occurs in about 1 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e13
in 10 transplants [73]. Most of this risk is during the peritrans-
plantation period (ie, first 100 days posttransplant).
Epidemiology of Colonization and Infection
Clostridium difficile transmission resulting in disease in the 
healthcare setting is most likely a result of person-to-person 
spread through the fecal–oral route or, alternatively, direct 
exposure to the contaminated environment. Studies have found 
that the prevalence of asymptomatic colonization with C. diffi-
cile is 3%–26% among adult inpatients in acute care hospitals 
[46, 74, 75] and is 5%–7% among elderly patients in LTCFs [33, 
76]. In contrast, the prevalence of C. difficile in the stool among 
asymptomatic adults without recent healthcare facility exposure 
is <2% [77, 78]. A recent meta-analysis found that the pooled 
colonization rate upon hospital admission across 19 studies 
(mostly since 2005 and through 2014) was 8.1% with the main 
risk factor for such colonization being a previous hospitaliza-
tion [79]. Notably, neither antibiotic use nor previous CDI was 
associated with colonization on hospital admission
The period between initial colonization with C. difficile and 
the occurrence of CDI (ie, incubation period) was estimated in 
3 earlier studies to be a median of 2–3 days [66, 68]. However, 
recent evidence suggests a longer incubation period, even >1 
week; Curry et al, in a study of asymptomatic C. difficile carriers, 
found 7 of 100 patients with CDI that tested positive for highly 
related C. difficile isolates 8–28 days prior to infection diagno-
sis [75]. Other early studies suggested that persons who remain 
asymptomatically colonized with C. difficile over longer periods 
of time are at decreased, rather than increased, risk for develop-
ment of CDI [74, 80–82]. In contrast, the aforementioned recent 
meta-analysis found that preceding colonization increased the 
risk of subsequent CDI 6-fold; however, neither the time course 
from first detection of colonization to symptom onset nor the 
impact of diagnostic methods on this risk were examined [79].
Thus it is likely that the daily risk of progression from col-
onization to infection is not static but decreases over time; if 
so, the protection afforded by more long-standing colonization 
may be mediated in part by the boosting of serum antibody 
levels against C. difficile toxins A and B [46, 80, 81]. It is also 
likely that as long as an individual is colonized by one strain 
they are protected from infection caused by another strain; 
there is evidence of protection from CDI in both humans and 
in animal models following colonization with nontoxigenic 
strains, suggesting competition for nutrients or access to the 
mucosal surface [82, 83].
Routes of Transmission
The hands of healthcare personnel, transiently contaminated 
with C. difficile spores [84], and environmental contamination 
[75, 85–88] are probably the main means by which the organ-
ism is spread within healthcare. Although occupying a room 
where a prior occupant had CDI is a significant risk factor for 
CDI acquisition, this accounts for approximately 10% of CDI 
cases, indicating other vectors are more common [89]. There 
have also been outbreaks in which particular high-risk fomites, 
such as electronic rectal thermometers or inadequately cleaned 
commodes or bedpans, were shared between patients and were 
found to contribute to transmission [90].
The potential role of asymptomatically colonized patients 
in transmission has recently been highlighted. Using mul-
tilocus variable number of tandem repeats analysis, Curry 
et al found that 29% of CDI cases in a hospital were asso-
ciated with asymptomatic carriers, compared to 30% that 
were associated with CDI patients [75]. Similarly, 2 studies 
of hospitalized patients in the United Kingdom found that 
only 25%–35% of CDI cases were genetically linked to previ-
ous CDI cases [91, 92], suggesting a role for other sources of 
transmission such as asymptomatic carriers and the environ-
ment. In the Curry et al study, environmental transmission 
may have occurred in 4 of 61 incident healthcare-associated 
CDI cases [75].
Two recent studies highlight how antibiotics may affect CDI 
risk in hospitalized patients through impacting the contagious-
ness of asymptomatically colonized patients. Through use of a 
multilevel model, ward-level antibiotic prescribing (ie, among 
both CDI and non-CDI patients, therefore including potential 
asymptomatic carriers) was found to be a risk factor for CDI 
that was independent of the risk from antibiotics and other fac-
tors in individual patients [93]. Meanwhile, the individual risk 
of symptomatic CDI was found to be higher in patients admit-
ted to a room where a previous patient without CDI was admin-
istered antibiotics, suggesting induced shedding of C. difficile 
from asymptomatic carriers [94].
Shedding of C. difficile spores is particularly high among 
patients recently treated for CDI, even after resolution of diar-
rhea [84, 95], suggesting a population of asymptomatic carri-
ers who might be more likely to transmit the organism. In one 
study, the frequency of skin contamination and environmental 
shedding remained high at the time of resolution of diarrhea 
(60% and 37%, respectively), decreased at the end of treatment, 
and increased again 1–4 weeks after treatment (58% and 50%, 
respectively) [95].
Risk Factors for Disease
Advanced age, potentially as a surrogate for severity of illness 
and comorbidities, is one of the most important risk factors 
for CDI [46, 96, 97], as is duration of hospitalization. The daily 
increase in the risk of C. difficile acquisition during hospitaliza-
tion suggests that duration of hospitalization may be a proxy for 
the duration and degree of exposure to the organism, likelihood 
of exposure to antibiotics, and severity of underlying illness [46, 
74, 98]. The most important modifiable risk factor for the devel-
opment of CDI is exposure to antibiotic agents. Virtually every 
antibiotic has been associated with CDI through the years, but 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e14 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
certain classes—third-/fourth-generation cephalosporins [99], 
fluoroquinolones [36, 37, 100], carbapenems [99], and clin-
damycin [101, 102]—have been found to be high risk. Receipt 
of antibiotics increases the risk of CDI because it suppresses 
the normal bowel microbiota, thereby providing a “niche” for 
C. difficile to flourish [103]. The relative risk of therapy with a 
given antibiotic agent and its association with CDI depends on 
the local prevalence of strains that are highly resistant to that 
particular antibiotic agent [101].
The disruption of the intestinal microbiota by antibiotics 
is long-lasting, and risk of CDI increases both during therapy 
and in the 3-month period following cessation of therapy. The 
highest risk of CDI (7- to 10-fold increase) appears to be dur-
ing and in the first month after antibiotic exposure [99]. Both 
longer exposure to antibiotics [100] and exposure to multiple 
antibiotics increase the risk for CDI [100]. Nonetheless, even 
very limited exposure, such as single-dose surgical antibiotic 
prophylaxis, increases a patient’s risk of C. difficile colonization 
and symptomatic disease [104]. However, as previously noted, 
asymptomatic colonization, at least as detected among patients 
commonly admitted to the hospital, may not be associated with 
prior antibiotics [79].
Cancer chemotherapy is another risk factor for CDI that is, at 
least in part, mediated by the antibiotic activity of several chem-
otherapeutic agents [105, 106] but could also be related to the 
immunosuppressive effects of neutropenia [107, 108]. Evidence 
suggests that C. difficile is an important pathogen causing bac-
terial diarrhea in US patients infected with human immunode-
ficiency virus, which suggests that these patients are at specific 
increased risk because of their underlying immunosuppression, 
exposure to antibiotics, exposure to healthcare settings, or 
some combination of those factors [109]. Other risk factors for 
CDI include gastrointestinal surgery [102] or manipulation of 
the gastrointestinal tract, including tube feeding [110]. Meta-
analyses of risk factors for recurrence identified many of those 
described above for initial CDI including advanced age, anti-
biotics during follow-up, PPIs, and strain type, as well previ-
ous exposure to fluoroquinolones [111, 112]. Meanwhile, risk 
factors for complicated disease include older age, leukocytosis, 
renal failure and comorbidities, while risk factors for mortality 
from CDI alone include age, comorbidities, hypoalbuminemia, 
leukocytosis, acute renal failure, and infection with ribotype 
027 [112]. Recent data confirm the role of humoral immu-
nity, primarily directed against toxin B, at least for protecting 
against recurrent disease [113]. There may be an important role 
for vitamin D in protecting against CDI, with low levels being 
an independent risk factor among both general patients with 
community-associated disease, older patients, and those with 
underlying inflammatory bowel disease [114, 115].
Breaches in the protective effect of stomach acid or the anti-
biotic activity of acid-suppressing medications, such as hista-
mine-2 blockers and PPIs, while a potential risk factor, remain 
controversial. Although a number of studies have suggested 
an epidemiologic association between use of stomach acid–
suppressing medications, primarily PPIs, and CDI [37, 60, 
116–119], results of other well-controlled studies suggest this 
association is the result of confounding with the underlying 
severity of illness, non-CDI diarrhea, and duration of hospital 
stay [36, 120, 121].
In a retrospective study of 754 patients with healthcare-associ-
ated CDI, continuous use of PPIs was independently associated 
with a 50% increased risk for recurrence, whereas reexposure to 
antibiotics was associated with only a 30% increased risk [122]. 
Moreover, long-term use of PPIs has been shown to decrease 
lower gastrointestinal microbial diversity [123]. However, 
whether as a risk factor for primary or recurrent disease, the 
choice of control group in such epidemiologic studies is im-
portant. PPIs and histamine-2 blockers may be associated with 
CDI when comparing cases to nontested controls but not when 
comparing cases to tested-negative controls [120]. This reflects 
why understanding the role of these drugs in the pathogenesis 
of CDI remains elusive; PPIs induce diarrhea on their own, 
making it more likely patients are tested for CDI. More careful 
assessment of confounding factors, symptoms, and criteria for 
testing for recurrence, as is typical in a prospective clinical trial, 
may then explain why PPIs were not associated with recurrence 
in clinical trials of fidaxomicin [121].
EPIDEMIOLOGY (PEDIATRIC CONSIDERATIONS)
V. What is the recommended CDI surveillance strategy for pediat-
ric institutions?
Recommendations
1. Use the same standardized case definitions (HO, CO-HCFA, 
CA) and rate expression (cases per 10 000 patient-days for HO, 
cases per 1000 patient admissions for CO-HCFA) in pediat-
ric patients as for adults (good practice recommendation).
2. Conduct surveillance for HO-CDI for inpatient pediatric 
facilities but do not include cases <2 years of age (weak rec-
ommendation, low quality of evidence).
3. Consider surveillance for CA-CDI to detect trends in the 
community (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Similar to the findings in adults, the incidence of CDI has risen 
in children since 2000 [124–129]. The majority of pediatric 
studies have evaluated the incidence of CDI-related hospital-
izations among multicenter cohorts of hospitalized children 
[126–128]. More recently, a population-based study of children 
residing in Olmsted County, Minnesota, between 1991 and 
2009 identified an increase in incidence of CDI among pediatric 
residents from 2.6 to 32.6 per 100 000 using standard surveil-
lance definitions [125].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e15
The incidence of CDI has increased overall, including 
increases in CDI among children in community and outpatient 
settings [124, 125, 130]. Using data from active population- and 
laboratory-based surveillance by the EIP, Wendt et al showed 
that 71% of pediatric CDI identified by positive C. difficile stool 
testing arose from the community [131]. These estimates are 
limited by reliance on laboratory surveillance methods, where 
differences in testing practices may undermine the accuracy of 
some longitudinal and interinstitutional comparisons of rates of 
CDI in children [132, 133]. Nonetheless, these data indicate an 
epidemiologic shift with increased disease in nonhospitalized 
children.
One important feature of the epidemiology of C. difficile in 
children is the presence of asymptomatic colonization with 
either toxigenic or nontoxigenic strains among many infants 
and young children, with the highest rates (which can exceed 
40%) in infants <12 months of age [134–141]. Nontoxigenic 
strains are more common than toxigenic strains among colo-
nized infants, but colonization is transient and different strains 
are found to colonize the same infant at different times [135, 
139, 142–144]. Colonization is less frequent among breastfed 
as compared with bottle-fed infants [140, 145–147]. Some evi-
dence implicates the hospital environment as a source of acqui-
sition of colonizing strains [134, 135, 138, 143, 148–150].
Colonization rates decrease with increasing age [140, 147, 
151, 152]. The prevalence of asymptomatic colonization with 
C. difficile is still elevated in the second year of life, although to 
a lesser degree than in infants [139, 153, 154]. Therefore, testing 
in this population should also be avoided unless other infec-
tious and noninfectious causes of diarrhea have been excluded. 
Consistent with the epidemiology of CDI in infants and young 
children, the NHSN does not permit reporting of CDI from 
newborn nurseries and neonatal ICU locations. Additionally, 
public reporting of cases in children <2 years of age is strongly 
discouraged. By 2–3 years of age, approximately 1%–3% of 
children are asymptomatic carriers of C. difficile (a rate similar 
to that observed in healthy adults). While young children are 
unlikely to have C. difficile infection, asymptomatically colo-
nized infants and children may serve as a source of transmis-
sion of the organism to adults, leading to C. difficile infection 
among adult contacts [27, 139, 155, 156].
Many of the risk factors for C. difficile infection in children 
mirror those for adults, including recent antibiotic exposure, 
hospitalization, and underlying complex chronic conditions 
such as malignancy, solid organ transplant, and inflammatory 
bowel disease [126, 127, 157–160]. In children, the presence 
of a gastrostomy or jejunostomy tube has been found to be an 
additional independent risk factor [158]. Recent studies suggest 
that acid-suppressing medications may also be an independent 
risk factor for CDI in children, although the association has 
been more consistently observed in children who receive hista-
mine-2 receptor antagonists than PPIs [161, 162].
Severe disease and complications due to CDI are less com-
mon in children [126, 158, 163] but have been described [164, 
165]. Among hospitalized children who are otherwise similar 
in important demographic and clinical characteristics, CDI has 
been associated with worse outcomes, including prolonged hos-
pital stay, increased total hospital costs, and higher mortality 
rates [127, 166].
DIAGNOSIS
VI. What is the preferred population for C. difficile testing, and 
should efforts be made to achieve this target?
Recommendation
1. Patients with unexplained and new-onset ≥3 unformed stools 
in 24 hours are the preferred target population for testing for 
CDI (weak recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Determining the optimal number of episodes of diarrhea that 
justifies the need for CDI testing depends on the likelihood 
of infection (high vs low CDI rates), potential confounders 
(underlying diseases and/or medical or surgical interventions 
that increase the chance of iatrogenic diarrhea), risk factors for 
CDI, and the chosen testing methods (high vs low specificity/
predictive value methods).
If a patient has diarrheal symptoms not clearly attributable 
to underlying conditions (IBD, and therapies such as enteral 
tube feeding, intensive cancer chemotherapy, or laxatives), then 
testing to determine if diarrhea is due to C. difficile is indicated. 
Alternatively, testing may be indicated if symptoms persist after 
stopping therapies to which diarrhea may be otherwise attrib-
uted (eg, laxatives). However, some of these conditions and 
interventions associated with diarrhea in their own right, such as 
IBD and enteral tube feeding, have been shown to have increased 
risk of CDI when compared with a matched cohort [110]. So, in 
practice it is difficult to exclude the possibility of CDI on clinical 
grounds alone in a patient with new-onset or worsened diarrhea.
The evidence base to optimize CDI testing is weak. Clinical 
criteria for the diagnosis of CDI have altered as awareness of 
CDI has increased. Notably, the number and frequency of diar-
rheal stools required to justify CDI testing have declined over 
the past 40 years. Tedesco et al defined diarrhea as >5 loose 
stools per day in 1974 [167]; Teasley et al as >6 loose stools 
over a period of 36 hours in 1983 [168]; Fekety et al as liq-
uid stools or >4 bowel movements per day for at least 3 days 
in 1989 [169]; and Johnson et al as ≥3 loose or watery bowel 
movements in 24 hours in 2013 [170]. Using the latter defin-
ition of diarrhea, Dubberke et al and Peterson et al (also using 
additional clinical criteria) have examined the frequency of 
these symptoms in patients whose stool is submitted for CDI 
testing [171, 172]. Peterson et al that found 39% of patients did 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e16 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
not meet the minimal diarrhea definition and were dropped 
from further analysis [172].
Dubberke et al used a clinical definition of ≥3 diarrheal bowel 
movements (type 6 or 7 stool on the Bristol Stool Chart) [173] 
in the 24 hours preceding stool collection, or diarrhea plus 
patient-reported abdominal pain or cramping. They found that 
36% of patients failed to meet the clinical definition but were 
retained in the study [171]. The authors caution that even in 
the presence of clinical diarrheal symptoms, there may be con-
founding clinical issues such as laxative use, which was found in 
19% within the previous 48 hours [171].
Clinicians can improve laboratory test relevance by only test-
ing patients likely to have C. difficile disease. This includes not 
routinely performing testing on stool from a patient who has 
received a laxative within the previous 48 hours. Laboratories 
can improve specificity by rejecting specimens that are not 
liquid or soft (ie, take the shape of the container). In addition, 
laboratories may wish to collaborate with available quality 
improvement teams such as infection prevention and control 
and antibiotic stewardship, to assess appropriateness of testing 
in the population from which samples are submitted. This may 
involve periodic chart review in a series of patients to assess for 
clinical risk factors, signs, and symptoms suggestive of CDI.
Laboratory Testing
Two diagnostic testing recommendations based on institutional 
and laboratory preagreed criteria for patient stool submission 
are prefaced by questions VII and VIII (Figure 2).
VII. What is the best-performing method (ie, in use positive and 
negative predictive value) for detecting patients at increased risk 
for clinically significant C. difficile infection in commonly submit-
ted stool specimens?
Recommendation
1. Use a stool toxin test as part of a multistep algorithm (ie, glu-
tamate dehydrogenase [GDH] plus toxin; GDH plus toxin, 
arbitrated by NAAT; or NAAT plus toxin) rather than a 
NAAT alone for all specimens received in the clinical labo-
ratory when there are no preagreed institutional criteria for 
patient stool submission (Figure 2) (weak recommendation, 
low quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
There is a variety of available options for laboratory testing to 
support the diagnosis of CDI, and these are well described in 
several recent reviews [174, 175]. In brief, these methods detect 
either the organism or one or both of its major toxins (A and 
B) directly in stool. Table 3 lists these methods in decreasing 
order of analytical sensitivity. Toxigenic culture (TC) uses a 
prereduced selective agar, cycloserine-cefoxitin-fructose agar 
or a variant of it, followed by anaerobic incubation for several 
days. Once there is growth, the organism is identified by several 
methods including matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization–
time of flight mass spectrometry, although the characteristic 
“horse barn odor” often heralds its presence. To enhance the 
recovery of the organism, a spore selection step, whether heat or 
alcohol shock, is applied to the stool prior to inoculating media. 
Once an organism is identified, a toxin test must be performed 
on the isolate to confirm its toxigenic potential. TC, although 
not standardized, has been one of the reference methods against 
which other methods are compared.
The other reference method is the cell cytotoxicity neu-
tralization assay (CCNA), which detects toxin directly in 
stool. This assay begins with preparation of a stool filtrate, 
which is applied to a monolayer of an appropriate cell line, 
such as Vero cells, or human fibroblasts, among others. 
Following incubation, the cells are observed for cytopathic 
effect (CPE); duplicate testing is usually carried out simul-
taneously with neutralizing antibodies to Clostridium sordel-
lii or C. difficile toxin, to ensure that the observed CPE is 
truly caused by C. difficile toxins and not by other substances 
in the stool. Incubation continues for up to 48 hours, but 
the majority of positives are detected after overnight incu-
bation. This method is cumbersome, time-consuming, and 
lacks standardization, although if optimized, it is one of the 
most sensitive and specific methods available for C. diffi-
cile toxin detection. As laboratories abandoned their viral 
cell culture facilities in favor of antigen and molecular tests, 
CCNA became less popular. Enzyme immunoassays, initially 
for toxin A detection alone, and later both toxins, became 
available and replaced the above reference methods for rou-
tine clinical testing in the late 1980s and early 1990s. EIAs 
use monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies to detect C. difficile 
toxins and there are numerous commercial assays available. 
Performance is variable and their overall poor performance 
sparked development of other methods such as GDH immu-
noassays and molecular tests for toxin gene detection [174, 
176, 177]. While toxin EIAs remain insensitive in the detec-
tion of toxigenic C. difficile when compared with these suc-
cessive technologies, sensitivities vary among available toxin 
EIA tests. Results across both sponsored and nonsponsored 
studies should be considered to select a relatively more sen-
sitive EIA for general use [174]. Also, there is some evidence 
that newer EIAs have improved sensitivity compared with 
those examined in older studies [178].
Glutamate dehydrogenase immunoassays detect the highly 
conserved metabolic enzyme (common antigen) present in 
high levels in all isolates of C. difficile. Since this antigen is pres-
ent in both toxigenic and nontoxigenic strains, GDH immu-
noassays lack specificity and must be combined with another 
(usually toxin) test. GDH testing is the initial screening step in 
2- and 3-step algorithms that combine it with a toxin test and/
or a molecular test for toxin gene detection. The combination 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e17
has allowed for rapid results and improved sensitivity com-
pared with toxin EIA testing alone, and can be economical 
[174, 176, 177].
Although NAATs for C. difficile detection in stool began to 
appear in the literature in the early 1990s, the first US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA)–cleared platform was not available 
in the United States until 2009 [174]. There are at least 12 avail-
able commercial platforms that detect a variety of gene targets 
including tcdA, tcdB, and 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA). These 
assays are more sensitive for C. difficile detection than toxin 
EIAs (and possibly than GDH EIAs) but less sensitive than TC. 
However, the positive predictive value of NAATs for CDI is low 
to moderate depending upon disease prevalence and the limit 
of detection of the assay.
The optimum method for laboratory diagnosis of CDI 
remains elusive as patients may harbor toxigenic strains and 
not have clinical disease, an observation that was made in early 
studies soon after the discovery of C. difficile [78, 179]. In add-
ition, diarrhea in hospitalized patients is common and C. dif-
ficile is the culprit in <30% and often in as little as 5%–10% 
of patients [179–181]. Consensus regarding the best laboratory 
testing method is lacking. Much of the literature on diagnos-
tic testing comparing laboratory methods is limited by use of 
an inappropriate comparative standard (ie, standards other 
than clinical disease) or a reference method that has never been 
standardized (ie, CCNA or the toxigenic component of TC) 
[182]. Furthermore, use of an inappropriate comparative ref-
erence method is a recurring issue (eg, using TC to assess the 
accuracy of a toxin test when the correct comparator is CCNA). 
In addition, comparative methods are often performed without 
knowledge of the prevalence of true disease in the population 
based on clinical presentation. There are very few studies that 
incorporate clinical assessment into analyses of test perfor-
mance. These are discussed below. Finally, much of the litera-
ture is derived from single centers and/or is underpowered to 
achieve definitive conclusions upon which to base recommen-
dations; thus, current GRADE methodology is not well adapted 
to gauging the strength of a recommendation using the type of 
evidence currently available for diagnostic tests.
Given these various conundrums and the paucity of large prospec-
tive studies, the recommendations, while strong in some instances, 
are based upon a very low to low quality of evidence (Table 4).
In 2011, Dubberke and colleagues performed an obser-
vational study of 150 patients to assess the impact of clinical 
symptoms (>3 diarrheal bowel movements in the 24 hours 
preceding stool collection, or diarrhea plus patient-reported 
abdominal pain or cramping) on interpretation of diagnos-
tic assays for CDI [171]. While the study is too small to draw 
definitive conclusions, it illustrates some important caveats 
about diagnostic evaluations. The authors evaluated 8 diagnos-
tic assays including 2 toxin EIAs, a test for GDH, a commer-
cial CCNA assay, and 3 NAATs [171]. TC was also performed 
for all specimens. Two reference standards were assessed, each 
with and without consideration of patient symptoms. The prev-
alence of true CDI based upon a gold standard of clinically sig-
nificant diarrhea and a positive TC was 11% [171]. However, 
this rate was determined only for the first 100 samples, and 
given the use of a relatively nonspecific (TC) testing method, 
it is likely to be an overestimation of the true CDI rate. As 
expected, given the choice of reference method (TC), the toxin 
tests detected fewer positive samples. Conversely, the GDH and 
NAATs detected the most positive samples. Compared with 
this TC gold standard, the least sensitive assays were the CCNA 
(62.9% sensitive, 95% CI, 46.3%–76.8%) and one of the toxin 
A/B EIA tests (80.0% sensitive; 95% CI, 64.1%–90.0%) [171]. 
The most sensitive methods (all >90%) were the GDH assay, all 
NAATs, and one of the EIAs performed on frozen stools. While 
all assays had a negative predictive value of > 95%, the posi-
tive predictive values (PPVs) for the GDH and NAATs were 
<50%, suggesting that they were positive in many patients who 
did not meet the clinical criteria for diarrhea [171]. By con-
trast, the TechLab toxin EIA PPV (notably when testing freeze-
thawed stools) was 59%. Other important observations from 
this study were that 19% of patients had received a laxative in 
the 48 hours prior to testing, and another 36% of patients who 
were tested did not have clinically significant diarrhea, indicat-
ing that improvements in validated criteria for deciding when 
to test patients are needed [171].
Kaltsas et al attempted to understand the clinical and epi-
demiological impact of transitioning from a 2-step algorithm, 
which involved screening with GDH followed by a CCNA, 
to NAAT for the diagnosis of CDI in a major cancer hospital 
[183]. Test performance for 128 samples was assessed in the 
context of symptoms, severity of illness, and patient outcomes. 
Table 3. Summary of Available Tests for Clostridium difficile Infection, in Decreasing Order of Sensitivity
Test
Sensitivity
Specificity
Substance Detected
Toxigenic culture
High
Lowa
Clostridium difficile vegetative cells or spores
Nucleic acid amplification tests
High
Low/moderate
C. difficile nucleic acid (toxin genes)
Glutamate dehydrogenase
High
Lowa
C. difficile common antigen
Cell culture cytotoxicity neutralization assay
High
High
Free toxins
Toxin A and B enzyme immunoassays
Low
Moderate
Free toxins
aMust be combined with a toxin test.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e18 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
Table 4. Evidence for Recommendations of Diagnostic Test Methods for Clostridium difficile
Use a stool toxin test as part of a multistep algorithm vs a NAAT alone for all specimens received in the clinical laboratory when there are no preagreed institutional criteria for patient stool submission
Evidence Supporting Diagnostic Tests
Design
No. of 
Subjects
Methodologic Limitations
Quality of Evidence 
(GRADEa)
Reference, First 
Author
GDH and NAATs had the highest sensitivity but poor PPV in patients 
with no symptoms; all tests had high NPV regardless of symptoms
Observational study, patient interviews, 
and ID physician assessment
150
Small sample size; only standard of 
care assay was tested in real time; 
others frozen
Dubberke [171]
Toxin-negative, NAAT-positive patients who were not treated did not 
have adverse outcomes. Recurrence of CDI was more common 
when both NAAT and toxin assays were positive than when NAAT 
alone was positive (31% vs 14%; P = .03)
Observational retrospective study
128
Small sample size
Kaltsas [183]
No difference in toxin EIA positivity between patients with mild vs se-
vere disease (49% vs 58%; P = .31)
Observational study, prospective testing, 
retrospective chart review
299
Single-center study
Humphries [187]
Complications were more common among patients positive by both 
NAAT and GDH/EIA/CCNA compared to NAAT alone (39% vs 3%; 
P < .001)
Prospective cohort study; observational
1321
Only some of the samples were tested 
using a gold standard
Longtin [184]
Patients who were CCNA positive or GDH/EIA positive had higher all-
cause mortality than patients who were NAAT or TC positive alone 
(P = .022)
Prospective, multicenter, observational 
study
12 
420
Limited clinical data
Planche [185]
Patients who were EIA toxin positive had longer median duration of 
diarrhea, more CDI-related complications, higher CDI-related mor-
tality than toxin negative/PCR positive patients (8.4% vs 0.6%; P 
=. 001)
Prospective, single-center observational 
cohort study
1416
Single-center study; differences in em-
piric treatment and risk allocation 
between groups
Polage [389]
Quality of evidence for diagnosis when the pretest probability is un-
known or low
⊕ ⊕ ⊖ ⊖ (Low)
Use a NAAT alone or multiple-step algorithm for testing (ie, GDH plus toxin; GDH plus toxin, arbitrated by NAAT, or NAAT plus toxin) vs a toxin test alone when there are preagreed institutional criteria 
for patient stool submission
Evidence Supporting Diagnostic Tests
Design
No. of 
Subjects
Methodologic Limitations
Quality of Evidence 
(GRADEa)
Reference, First 
Author
PCR was more sensitive (93.3%) than toxin EIA (73.3%; P < .05) and 
direct cytotoxin testing (76.7%) when applied to patients who met 
clinical criteria for C. difficile disease
Observational; prospective patient 
interviews
350
Small number of positive patients
Peterson [172]
Using clinical diagnosis as the reference standard, PCR was more 
sensitive than CCNA and GDH (99.1% vs 51% vs 83.8%). Close to 
double the number of patients were positive by PCR compared to 
CCNA and 91.5% of those were clinically confirmed.
Prospective performed at 2 centers
1051
Specimens were not consecutive; 
limited statistical analysis; limited pa-
tient follow-up
 Berry [190]
Quality of evidence for diagnosis when there is a high likelihood of 
CDI
⊕ ⊕ ⊖ ⊖ (Low)
Abbreviations: CCNA, cell cytotoxicity neutralization assay; CDI, Clostridium difficile infection; EIA, enzyme immunoassay; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation; ID, infectious 
disease; NAAT
, nucleic acid amplification test; NPV, negative predictive value; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PPV, positive predictive value; TC, toxigenic culture.
aFor GRADE interpretation, see Figure 1.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e19
Two time periods were evaluated: May to August 2008 and 
March to May 2010 [183]. For both time periods, CDI cases 
were defined as having clinical symptoms including diarrhea 
(84%), fever and abdominal pain (4%), nausea and vomiting 
(2%), abdominal pain, leukocytosis, or sepsis (2% each), and 
fever alone (1%) with a positive NAAT or a positive CCNA 
[183]. Different NAATs were used in the first compared with 
the second time period and no information was provided on 
overall test positivity or other indicators of the prevalence of 
CDI in the tested population. Testing for CDI was performed 
on diarrheal (84%) and nondiarrheal (16%) stool samples in 
patients in whom it may be very difficult to interpret the true 
clinical significance of diarrhea, namely cancer patients under-
going intensive chemotherapy [183]. There was no statistically 
significant difference in the clinical presentations at the onset 
of infection and severity of disease between patients positive by 
NAAT alone compared with those concordant for both NAAT 
and 2-step algorithm assays [183]. Among 23 toxin-nega-
tive, NAAT-positive patients who were not treated, the only 
possible adverse outcome was recurrence in 3 patients; how-
ever, only 15 (65%) had diarrhea on the day of testing [183]. 
Recurrence of CDI was more common in patients when both 
assays were positive than when NAAT alone was positive (31% 
vs 14%; P = .03). In summary, it is not clear what the results 
mean from this modestly sized cohort of difficult-to-interpret 
cases (patients with high frequency of multifactorial diarrhea), 
other than the impact of a 2-fold increase in reported C. diffi-
cile rates when transitioning to the more sensitive, but probably 
less specific NAAT method [183].
Longtin et al assessed the impact of diagnostic test meth-
ods on CDI rates and the occurrence of complications based 
upon the tests used to diagnose CDI [184]. This was a pro-
spective cohort study in Quebec over a 1-year period [184]. 
CDI was defined by documented diarrhea of ≥3 loose or liquid 
stools in <24 hours and symptoms lasting ≥24 hours in com-
bination with a positive test for toxin-producing C. difficile 
or clinical diagnosis based upon histopathology or presence 
of pseudomembranes on colonoscopy [184]. Structured data 
collection forms were used to collect information prospec-
tively regarding complications and whether patients with pos-
itive tests met the case definition. All samples submitted to 
the laboratory were tested by a NAAT that detected the toxin 
B gene and a 3-step algorithm that began with screening for 
GDH followed by toxin A/B EIA testing [184]. Samples pos-
itive by both methods (NAAT and 3-step algorithm) were 
considered positive for C. difficile. GDH-positive, toxin EIA-
negative samples were retested using a CCNA [184]. Only 
NAAT results were reported to clinicians and infection con-
trol. A total of 1321 stool specimens from 888 patients were 
assessed over the 1-year period, of which 17% were positive by 
NAAT and 12.3% were positive by the 3-step algorithm [184]. 
There were 85 cases of healthcare-associated CDI detected by 
NAAT whereas only 56 of these cases were diagnosed by EIA/
CCNA (P = .01). Complications (ie, 30-day mortality, colec-
tomy, ICU admission, or readmission for recurrence) were 
more common among patients positive by both test methods 
(NAAT and 3-step algorithm) compared with cases detected 
by NAAT alone (39% vs 3%, P < .001). The major limitation 
of this study was that it was performed at a single center and 
only some of the specimens were tested by a recognized gold 
standard method (ie, CCNA). That said, the results support the 
findings by Planche and colleagues discussed below [185].
Planche et al sought to validate the reference methods for 
C. difficile diagnosis, namely TC and CCNA testing according 
to clinical outcomes in an attempt to derive the optimal diag-
nostic laboratory method [185]. This was a large observational, 
multicenter study of 12 420 routinely submitted fecal samples. 
The authors examined the results of the 2 reference assays (TC 
and CCNA) along with 4 commercial methods—2 toxin A/B 
enzyme EIAs, GDH, and a NAAT [185]. Limited clinical data 
were collected (all patients had diarrhea but stool frequency was 
not known) and outcomes were assessed for 6522 inpatients who 
were stratified into 3 groups as follows: CCNA positive (group 
1; n = 435), TC positive but CCNA negative (group 2; n = 207), 
and negative by both methods (group 3; n = 5880). On univari-
ate analysis, leukocytosis was greater in group 1 than group 2 or 
3, and white blood cell (WBC) counts were similar in groups 2 
and 3. However, both groups 1 and 2 had similarly low serum 
albumin levels compared with group 3; group 2, but not group 1, 
had a higher mean rise in creatinine than group 3. Both groups 1 
and 2 had similarly longer mean lengths of stay (before and after 
testing) than group 3. All-cause 30-day mortality was markedly 
higher in group 1 (16.6%) than group 2 (9.7%) (P = .022). The 
mortality in group 2 was not significantly different from the con-
trol group (8.6%) [185]. When the analysis was performed using 
NAAT in place of TC, the findings were similar, with the abso-
lute difference in mortality between patients who were CCNA 
positive vs those with NAAT positive but CCNA negative of 
6.9% (P = .004). The combination of GDH immunoassay plus 
toxin EIA (TechLab assay) was almost identical in performance 
to CCNA. In a multivariate logistic regression model, group 1 
patients were older and had greater leukocytosis, serum creatin-
ine rise, depressed albumin, and 30-day mortality compared 
with group 3 [185]. Lengths of stay were not independently 
associated with group 1, and all other group multivariate com-
parisons, including mortality in group 1 vs 2, were not signifi-
cant. The failure to find a mortality difference in groups 1 vs 2 on 
multivariate analysis may be due to the much smaller number of 
patients in group 2 than in group 3. Another limitation was the 
relatively low prevalence of true disease in the tested population 
based upon the positivity rate of either the CCNA (5.9%) or TC 
(8.3%); this reflected national endemic rates of CDI at that time.
Clinical outcome data were available for 69% (143/206) of 
inpatients with discordant reference method results. Of these 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e20 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
patients, 75 (52%) who were TC positive but CCNA negative 
received no CDI treatment. Among the 4 of 75 cases that were 
TC positive and CCNA negative who died and did not receive 
CDI treatment, none had a diagnosis of this infection on their 
death certificate. Also, 64 of 143 (45%) patients with a discord-
ant reference method result did not have diarrhea recorded on 
their stool chart; for the remainder of the patients, the median 
duration of diarrhea was 2 days.
The authors concluded that patients with a positive toxin 
test should be treated and those who are positive by TC and/or 
NAAT alone could be considered “excretors” who may present 
an infection control risk but do not require treatment.
In the Planche et al study, based upon the assay comparison 
validation, the authors recommended using a multistep algo-
rithm such as screening with GDH and confirming positives with 
a “sensitive” toxin A/B enzyme immunoassay [185], and this has 
been national UK policy since 2012. The 2 toxin EIAs used in the 
study, the Meridian Tox A/B test and the TechLab assay, had sig-
nificantly differing sensitivities of 69.2% (95% CI, 64.3%–73.8%) 
and 82.3% (95% CI, 78.1%–85.9%), respectively [185].
Support for using the Meridian Tox A/B toxin testing alone 
instead of a NAAT alone to diagnose CDI is provided in a 
more recent study by Polage et al. In a large (n = 1416) pro-
spective, observational cohort study performed at a single aca-
demic medical center, the authors assessed the natural history 
and need for treatment of patients who were toxin EIA posi-
tive (assay in clinical use) compared with toxin negative/PCR 
positive (blindly tested) [186]. The toxin-positive/PCR-positive 
arm had 131 patients (9.3%), 162 patients were toxin negative/
PCR positive (11.4%), and 1123 patients were toxin negative/
PCR negative. Patient demographics were similar among all 3 
arms as were the proportions with leukopenia, renal insuffi-
ciency, and hypoalbuminemia. The toxin-positive/PCR-positive 
group had more diarrhea and longer duration of diarrhea, more 
prior antibiotic exposure, and more patients with leukocytosis. 
In the multivariable model, the frequency of CDI-related com-
plications was highest in the toxin-positive/PCR-positive group 
compared with the toxin-negative/PCR-positive and toxin-neg-
ative/PCR-negative patients (7.6% vs 0% vs 0.3%; P < .001). The 
rate of CDI-related complications was similar between the PCR-
positive/toxin-negative patients and patients who were negative 
by both tests (0% vs 0.3%; P > .99). In terms of mortality, simi-
lar observations were noted. There were 11 CDI-related deaths 
among the toxin-positive/PCR-positive patients, one death 
among the PCR alone cohort, and no deaths among the group 
with negative tests (P < .001). The authors also assessed repeat 
testing and treatment within 14 days of onset of symptoms as 
surrogates of ongoing clinical suspicion or empiric treatment 
for CDI in the toxin-negative/PCR-positive group, and again 
during the 15- to 30-day period following symptom onset to 
assess recurrent or prolonged CDI during the latter time period. 
Sixty-one toxin-negative/PCR-positive patients were retested 
(37.7%) and 8% had toxins detected. While none of the patients 
had CDI-related complications, one patient had CDI as a con-
tributing factor to death.
During the early period, only 21 patients (13%) received a 
full course of treatment and close to 60% received no treatment 
[186]. Likewise, in the later period (15–30 days after onset), 
most (78%) toxin-negative/PCR-positive patients received no 
treatment. During that period, patients who were toxin pos-
itive were twice as likely to have repeat testing and 3 times 
more likely to be positive compared with toxin-negative/PCR-
positive patients. The authors conclude that toxin EIA positivity 
was a better predictor of CDI-related complications and deaths, 
and outcomes in patients who were PCR positive alone were 
comparable with those in patients who were negative by both 
tests. The use of molecular tests alone is likely to lead to over-
diagnosis and overtreatment. There are several strengths of this 
study including the large number of patients assessed, the pro-
spective study design, and assessment of patient outcomes. The 
weaknesses include that fact it was a single-center study and 
risk allocation between the 2 groups was not equivalent. In add-
ition, empiric treatment may have affected outcomes in some 
patients in the toxin-negative/PCR-positive group.
Absence of toxin in stool may not be predictive of CDI sever-
ity. Investigators at the University of California, Los Angeles 
attempted to assess the significance of detecting C. difficile in 
patient samples in the absence of toxins, for example, in NAAT-
positive, EIA-negative situations [187]. The goal was to deter-
mine if patients who tested negative for C. difficile toxins by EIA 
but were positive by NAAT were more likely to have mild dis-
ease [187]. Retrospective chart review was performed follow-
ing completion of laboratory testing. Patients were selected on 
the basis of initial NAAT result, selecting one NAAT-negative 
patient for every NAAT-positive patient until a predicted nec-
essary sample size to test the above goal was reached. Thus, 296 
patients were enrolled in the study with 143 classified as true 
CDIs (48% of the cohort) based on multiple different results, 
some of which likely lacked specificity for CDI [187]. Among 
the 143 with CDI, there was no difference in toxin EIA positiv-
ity between patients with mild vs severe disease (49% vs 58%; 
P = .31) according to the criteria of Zar et al; however, patients 
with mild disease had a 2.7-fold lower all-cause mortality [187, 
188]. Although the toxin EIA–positive patients did have sig-
nificantly longer overall hospital stays, the authors concluded 
that, because of similarly low toxin EIA positivity in both less- 
and more-severe disease, NAAT-positive, EIA-negative results 
are clinically meaningful and therefore a NAAT should be used 
for the diagnosis of CDI [187]. This study is likely underpow-
ered and may suffer from bias based upon its retrospective 
design and suboptimal choice of the toxin EIA; also, the ref-
erence method used (toxigenic culture) for assessment of the 
toxin EIA results was not ideal as this would have underesti-
mated the sensitivity of the latter test.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e21
In summary, if laboratories have no clinical data and accept 
all unformed stools for testing, it is most appropriate to use a 
diagnostic approach that includes a test that is more specific for 
CDI, such as a relatively sensitive toxin test as part of a multi-
step algorithm.
VIII. What is the most sensitive method of diagnosis of CDI in 
stool specimens from patients likely to have CDI based on clinical 
symptoms?
Recommendation
1. Use a NAAT alone or a multistep algorithm for testing (ie, 
GDH plus toxin; GDH plus toxin, arbitrated by NAAT; or 
NAAT plus toxin) rather than a toxin test alone when there 
are preagreed institutional criteria for patient stool submission 
(Figure 2) (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
One of the first studies to incorporate clinical information in 
the validation of a molecular test was by Peterson et al [172]. 
This study was performed prior to the availability of the first 
FDA-cleared molecular assay using an in-house developed 
assay that detected the toxin B gene (tcdB). This real-time 
PCR test was compared with TC, a toxin EIA, and an in-house 
CCNA [172]. The authors performed 2 clinical evaluations. 
A checklist of validated clinical criteria for diagnosis of C. dif-
ficile disease was used for both the retrospective and prospec-
tive investigations [189]. Toxigenic culture was used as the 
reference method for other assay comparisons for the retro-
spective study and the reference method for the prospective 
study was diarrhea defined as ≥3 loose stools for at least 1 day 
and ≥2 positive test results [172]. For the initial investigation 
(retrospective clinical assessment), the authors observed that 
documentation was so poor that clinical criteria could not be 
used for correlation with test performance [172]. Compared 
with toxigenic culture, the toxin EIA had a sensitivity of 66.7% 
and specificity of 91.8% and the values for the PCR assay were 
94.4% and 96.8%, respectively [172]. For the second investiga-
tion, patients were interviewed prospectively and among the 
350 patients with 365 unique episodes of potential CDI, 39% 
did not have sufficient diarrhea to warrant testing and were 
not further analyzed [172]. There were 30 true-positive results 
in this analysis [172]. The PCR was more sensitive (93.3%) 
than toxin EIA (73.3%; P < .05) and direct cytotoxin test-
ing (76.7%). The authors concluded that PCR outperformed 
the other diagnostic test methods when applied to patients 
who meet clinical criteria for C. difficile disease. Overall, the 
design of this study was quite complex with varying reference 
methods for the 2 study arms, and despite the prospective 
design for the second investigation, limitations were the very 
small numbers of positive patients and the fact that it was a 
single-center study.
In a later publication, Berry et al assessed prospectively 
whether a rapid PCR assay correlated well and reliably with 
clinical CDI diagnosis [190]. The GeneXpert C. difficile assay 
was compared with CCNA and a GDH/Toxin A/B EIA algo-
rithm. Clinical diagnosis, adjudicated by an unblinded team 
of multidisciplinary experts, served as the reference for evalu-
ation of the different test performances (>1000 PCR and CCNA 
tests were performed). Sixty-two patients were both PCR and 
CCNA positive and an additional 59 specimens were PCR pos-
itive alone, among which 54 (91.5%) were in patients clinically 
diagnosed as having CDI. When the GDH screen was evalu-
ated, 16.2% of patients with clinical CDI would not have been 
detected. Combining GDH and EIA testing, 59.7% of patients 
with CDI would have been missed (GDH positive, toxin EIA 
negative). Patients who were CCNA positive/PCR positive 
had higher all-cause 30-day mortality compared with CCNA-
negative/PCR-positive patients. This study only presented 
results obtained after repeat testing of indeterminate results. 
The claimed PPV of 91.9%, using clinical diagnosis as the refer-
ence, is much higher than found elsewhere [186]. Patients were 
not followed long term to assess other clinical outcomes.
In summary, if patients are screened carefully for clin-
ical symptoms likely associated with CDI (at least 3 loose or 
unformed stools in ≤24 hours with history of antibiotic expos-
ure), then a highly sensitive test such as a NAAT alone or multi-
step algorithm (ie, GDH plus toxin; GDH plus toxin, arbitrated 
by NAAT; or NAAT plus toxin) may be best. A 2- or 3-stage 
approach increases the PPV vs one-stage testing.
IX. What is the role of repeat testing, if any? Are there asymptom-
atic patients in whom repeat testing should be allowed, including 
test of cure?
Recommendation
1. Do not perform repeat testing (within 7 days) during the 
same episode of diarrhea and do not test stool from asymp-
tomatic patients, except for epidemiological studies (strong 
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
The issue of if or when to retest for CDI is inherently linked to 
the accuracy of the employed routine testing method. Methods 
with suboptimal sensitivity for C. difficile (eg, stand-alone toxin 
EIAs) led to frequent retesting in some settings. Ironically, use of 
tests with suboptimal specificity means that multiple repeat test-
ing runs a high risk that false-positive results could eventually be 
generated. Ideally, in the absence of clear changes to the clinical 
presentation of suspected CDI (ie, change in character of diarrhea 
or new supporting clinical evidence), repeat testing should not be 
performed. This advice is based on the above-mentioned issues 
and also on studies that have shown that the diagnostic yield of 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e22 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
repeat testing within a 7-day period (with either toxin A/B EIA 
or NAAT) is approximately 2% [191, 192]. Furthermore, use of 
highly sensitive testing strategies (eg, 2-stage algorithms or stand-
alone NAATs) means that the single tests have very high negative 
predictive value (typically >99%) for CDI.
There may be more value of repeat testing in epidemic set-
tings where CDI acquisition is more frequent [193, 194]. For 
symptomatic patients with a high clinical suspicion of CDI 
but a negative CDI test, particularly those in whom symp-
toms worsen, repeat testing should be considered; this does 
not equate to routine retesting, given that the great majority of 
patients with suspected CDI do not have the disease.
Given that recurrent CDI occurs commonly, a recurrence 
of symptoms following successful treatment and diarrhea ces-
sation should be assessed by repeat testing. Testing for recur-
rent CDI should ideally include toxin detection, as persistence 
of toxigenic C. difficile can occur commonly after infection. 
Patients can have reduced health scores for months after CDI, 
and may experience altered bowel habits for prolonged periods. 
In one study in which all CDI patients with recurrent diarrhea 
were tested for toxin in stool, 35% were negative [195]. Empiric 
treatment, that is without confirmatory testing of suspected 
recurrence, is discouraged, as this may be unnecessary and 
indeed possibly harmful to microbiome restoration.
Last, there is no clinical value in repeat CDI testing to estab-
lish cure; >60% of patients may remain C. difficile positive even 
after successful treatment [196, 197].
X. Does detection of fecal lactoferrin or another biologic marker 
improve the diagnosis of CDI over and above the detection of toxi-
genic C. difficile? Can such a subset predict a more ill cohort?
Recommendation
1. There are insufficient data to recommend use of biologic 
markers as an adjunct to diagnosis (no recommendation).
Summary of the Evidence
A variety of fecal biomarkers to distinguish inflammatory causes 
of diarrhea from noninflammatory conditions, such as irri-
table bowel syndrome, have evolved over the last few decades. 
Lactoferrin is an iron binding glycoprotein found in neutrophils 
and its concentration in stool is proportional to the number of 
neutrophils present [198]. Calprotectin is a calcium binding 
protein found in the cytosol of neutrophils [198]. Secretion of 
cytokines in the intestines such as interleukin 8 and interleukin 
1β has also been evaluated [199–201]. While they have utility in 
diagnosing IBD, their usefulness in the diagnosis of CDI has not 
been established. Most of the published studies include small or 
moderate numbers of patients. There are few prospective stud-
ies. Interpretation of the literature is further complicated by the 
use of different methods of testing (latex agglutination vs EIA in 
the case of fecal lactoferrin), deviation from the manufacturers’ 
cutoffs for interpretation, and other confounding factors. Some 
of these biomarkers may be helpful in identifying patients at risk 
for severe disease. Given these limitations, no recommendations 
for their routine use can be made.
DIAGNOSIS (PEDIATRIC CONSIDERATIONS)
XI. When should a neonate or infant be tested for C. difficile?
Recommendations
1. Because of the high prevalence of asymptomatic carriage 
of toxigenic C. difficile in infants, testing for CDI should 
never be routinely recommended for neonates or infants 
≤12 months of age with diarrhea (strong recommendation, 
moderate quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
The rate of C. difficile colonization among asymptomatic 
infants can exceed 40% [136, 143, 154]. Colonization rates 
among hospitalized neonates are greater than observed 
for healthy infants [136]. Although the rate of colonization 
declines over the first year of life, intermittent detection 
of C. difficile toxin can persist throughout infancy [202]. 
Clostridium difficile toxin can still be detected in approxi-
mately 15% of 12-month-old infants [153]. Thus, there is a 
substantial risk of a biologic false positive when C. difficile 
diagnostic testing is performed in neonates and infants. 
Another challenge to defining when an infant with diarrhea 
should be tested for C. difficile is the absence of a validated 
definition of clinically significant diarrhea in this age group, 
where passage of frequent loose stools is common. Children 
<12 months of age should only be tested for C. difficile if they 
have evidence of pseudomembranous colitis or toxic megaco-
lon, or if they have clinically significant diarrhea and other 
causes of diarrhea have been excluded.
XII. When should a toddler or older child be tested for C. difficile?
Recommendations
1. Clostridium difficile testing should not be routinely per-
formed in children with diarrhea who are 1–2 years 
of age unless other infectious or noninfectious causes 
 
have been excluded (weak recommendation, low quality of 
evidence).
2. In children ≥2 years of age, C. difficile testing is recom-
mended for patients with prolonged or worsening diarrhea 
and risk factors (eg, underlying inflammatory bowel disease 
or immunocompromising conditions) or relevant exposures 
(eg, contact with the healthcare system or recent antibiotics) 
(weak recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e23
Summary of the Evidence
The prevalence of asymptomatic colonization with C. difficile is ele-
vated in the second year of life, although to a lesser degree than in 
infants [139, 153, 154]. Therefore, testing in this population should 
also be avoided unless other infectious and noninfectious causes of 
diarrhea have been excluded. However, by 2–3 years of age, approxi-
mately 1%–3% of children are asymptomatic carriers of C. difficile 
(a rate similar to that observed in healthy adults). Rarely, some con-
ditions such as Hirschprung disease may predispose young chil-
dren to CDI, and testing should be considered in this population 
[203, 204]. The role of C. difficile in community-onset diarrhea in 
otherwise healthy young children remains controversial. Studies of 
children hospitalized with acute gastroenteritis have documented 
that C. difficile can be isolated in >50% of children in whom an 
alternate gastrointestinal pathogen has been identified [205]. 
Additionally, one recently published study found that among 100 
children <2 years of age who were hospitalized with diarrhea and 
had C. difficile toxin detected; all had resolution of diarrhea regard-
less of whether C. difficile–specific therapy was administered [206]. 
 
Limited data suggest that identification of multiple enteric path-
ogens (including C. difficile) may predict more severe symptoms 
[205].
INFECTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL
Isolation Measures for Patients With CDI
XIII. Should private rooms and/or dedicated toilet facilities be 
used for isolated patients with CDI?
Recommendations
1. Accommodate patients with CDI in a private room with a 
dedicated toilet to decrease transmission to other patients. 
If there is a limited number of private single rooms, prior-
itize patients with stool incontinence for placement in private 
rooms (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
2. If cohorting is required, it is recommended to cohort patients 
infected or colonized with the same organism(s)—that is, do 
not cohort patients with CDI who are discordant for other 
multidrug-resistant organisms such as methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus or vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus 
(strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Isolation of patients with CDI or suspected CDI is a prevention 
measure used by most healthcare facilities regardless of local 
epidemiology; however, additional measures are often imple-
mented, particularly when CDI rates are high. An infection 
control “bundle” strategy has been used to successfully con-
trol major CDI outbreaks [207–211]. The “bundle” approach 
involves multifaceted interventions and includes hand hygiene, 
isolation measures, environmental disinfection, and antibiotic 
stewardship. However, it is often difficult to determine which 
interventions were the most effective in controlling the out-
break as they are implemented simultaneously.
Hospital room design and handwashing accessibility are essen-
tial elements in the prevention and control of CDI. Private rooms 
may facilitate better infection control practices. In a cohort study 
of healthcare-associated CDI acquisition, higher rates of CDI were 
demonstrated among patients housed in double rooms than in sin-
gle rooms (17% vs 7%; P = .08) and there was a significantly higher 
risk of acquisition after exposure to a roommate with a positive 
culture result [74]. The effect of private rooms on CDI and other 
bacterial acquisition rates was studied when an ICU was renovated 
to only private rooms with accessible handwashing facilities [212]. 
There was a significant reduction in CDI rates by 43%, although 
other potential confounders, such as antibiotic utilization, were not 
examined [212]. Private rooms may not be available and cohorting 
patients with CDI in a multibed room may be required. The risk 
of recurrence was examined among patients with CDI admitted 
to a cohort ward while adjusted for potential risk factors such as 
age, comorbidities, and continued antibiotic use [213]. Admission 
to a C. difficile cohort ward was shown to be an independent pre-
dictor for recurrence [213]. If cohorting is required, dedicated 
commodes should be provided to the patients to reduce further 
cross-transmission.
In conclusion, patients with CDI should be placed in a private 
room to decrease transmission to other patients. If there is a 
limited number of private single rooms, CDI patients with stool 
incontinence should be prioritized for placement in private 
rooms. If cohorting is required, it is recommended to cohort 
patients infected or colonized with the same organism(s) ie, do 
not cohort patients with CDI who are discordant for other mul-
tidrug-resistant organisms such as MRSA or vancomycin-re-
sistant Enterococcus (VRE).
XIV. Should gloves and gowns be worn while caring for isolated 
CDI patients?
Recommendation
1. Healthcare personnel must use gloves (strong recommen-
dation, high quality of evidence) and gowns (strong rec-
ommendation, moderate quality of evidence) on entry to a 
room of a patient with CDI and while caring for patients 
with CDI.
Summary of the Evidence
Additional isolation techniques (contact precautions, private 
rooms, and cohorting of patients with active CDI) have been used 
for control of outbreaks, with variable success [207, 214, 215]. 
Contact precautions include the donning of gowns and gloves 
when caring for patients with CDI. The hands of personnel can 
become contaminated with C. difficile spores, particularly when 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e24 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
gloves are not used and when exposed to fecal soiling [74, 216]. 
Wearing gloves in conjunction with hand hygiene should decrease 
the concentration of C. difficile organisms on the hands of health-
care personnel. A prospective controlled trial of vinyl glove use for 
handling body substances showed a significant decrease in CDI 
rates, from 7.7 cases per 1000 discharges before institution of glove 
use to 1.5 cases per 1000 discharges after institution of glove use 
(P=.015), but not on control wards that did not institute the glove 
intervention [217]. Care should also be taken to prevent contamin-
ation of hands when removing gloves.
Clostridium difficile has been detected on nursing uniforms, but 
there is no evidence that uniforms are a source of transmission to 
patients [218]. The use of gowns has been recommended because 
of potential soiling and contamination of the uniforms of health-
care personnel with C. difficile and high quality of evidence for 
reducing transmission of other enteric multidrug-resistant organ-
isms (ie, VRE) [219, 220]. In addition, the fact that gloves reduce 
transmission provides further indirect evidence for gowns.
XV. When should isolation be implemented?
Recommendation
1. Patients with suspected CDI should be placed on preemptive 
contact precautions pending the C. difficile test results if test 
results cannot be obtained on the same day (strong recom-
mendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
It is important to place patients suspected of having CDI on con-
tact precautions before diagnostic laboratory test confirmation 
if there will be a lag before test results are available. In a pro-
spective study of 100 patients suspected of CDI, skin contamin-
ation was evaluated as well as the average time for test results to 
become available [221]. The potential for healthcare personnel 
hand contamination was assessed by applying sterile gloved hands 
to frequently examined patient skin sites and then imprinting 
the gloves onto agar for C. difficile culture. Twenty of these 100 
patients (20%) were diagnosed with CDI but the test results were 
not available for 2.07 days. The frequency of C. difficile acquisition 
on gloved hands of healthcare personnel after skin contact with 
these patients was 69%. This study supports that patients with sus-
pected CDI should be placed on preemptive contact precautions 
pending the C. difficile test results if the results cannot be obtained 
the same day as when the specimen was collected.
XVI. How long should isolation be continued?
Recommendations
1. Continue contact precautions for at least 48 hours after 
diarrhea has resolved (weak recommendation, low quality of 
evidence).
2. Prolong contact precautions until discharge if CDI rates re-
main high despite implementation of standard infection 
control measures against CDI (weak recommendation, low 
quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
The CDC currently recommends that contact precautions be 
continued for the duration of the illness [222]. The UK guide-
lines recommend continuing contact precautions for at least 
48 hours after diarrhea resolves [223]. Clostridium difficile was 
suppressed to undetectable levels in stool samples from most 
patients by the time diarrhea resolved (mean, 4.2 days) in a pro-
spective study of 52 patients [95]. However, at the time of reso-
lution of diarrhea, skin and environmental contamination was 
high at 60% and 37%, respectively. In addition, stool detection of 
C. difficile was 56% at 1–4 weeks posttreatment. Continue con-
tact precautions for at least 48 hours after diarrhea has ceased. 
There are no studies that demonstrate further extending contact 
precautions results in reductions in CDI incidence. Prolonging 
contact precautions until discharge remains a special control 
measure if CDI rates remain high despite implementation of 
standard infection control measures against CDI [222].
XVII. What is the recommended hand hygiene method (assuming 
glove use) when caring for patients in isolation for CDI?
Recommendations
1. In routine or endemic settings, perform hand hygiene before 
and after contact of a patient with CDI and after removing 
gloves with either soap and water or an alcohol-based hand 
hygiene product (strong recommendation, moderate quality of 
evidence).
2. In CDI outbreaks or hyperendemic (sustained high rates) set-
tings, perform hand hygiene with soap and water preferen-
tially instead of alcohol-based hand hygiene products before 
and after caring for a patient with CDI given the increased 
efficacy of spore removal with soap and water (weak recom-
mendation, low quality of evidence).
3. Handwashing with soap and water is preferred if there is 
direct contact with feces or an area where fecal contam-
ination is likely (eg, the perineal region) (good practice 
recommendation).
Summary of the Evidence
Transmission of C. difficile strains commonly occurs via the 
hands of healthcare personnel. After caring for patients with 
CDI, the proportion of healthcare personnel with hand contam-
ination when gloves are not worn ranges from 14% to 59% [74, 
87, 216, 224]. Hand hygiene is considered to be one of the cor-
nerstones of prevention of transmission of C. difficile, as it is for 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e25
most other healthcare-associated infections. Many studies have 
documented low rates of handwashing by healthcare personnel, 
particularly when sinks are not readily accessible [225–228]. The 
introduction of alcohol-based hand antiseptics has been consid-
ered transformative for increasing hand hygiene compliance. 
Hand hygiene guidelines recommend the use of alcohol-based 
products, unless the hands have come into contact with body 
fluids or are visibly soiled, in which case handwashing with soap 
and water is recommended. These alcohol-based antiseptics 
are popular because of their ease of use at the point of care and 
their effectiveness in rapid killing of most vegetative bacteria 
and many viruses that contaminate hands. However, C. diffi-
cile spores are highly resistant to killing by alcohol. Indeed, the 
addition of ethanol to stool samples in the laboratory facilitates 
the culture of C. difficile from these specimens [229]. Therefore, 
healthcare personnel who do not wear gloves or whose hands 
become contaminated when doffing gloves may be merely redis-
tributing spores over the hand surface when using alcohol-based 
products. This could potentially increase the risk of transferring 
C. difficile to patients under their care, but numerous studies 
have not shown an association between the use of alcohol-based 
hand hygiene products and an increased incidence of CDI. The 
impact of using an alcohol-based hand hygiene product on rates 
of infection with MRSA, VRE, and CDI 3 years before and after 
its implementation was studied [230]. After implementation, 
the rates of MRSA and VRE infections decreased by 21% and 
41%, respectively, whereas the incidence of CDI was unchanged. 
This finding is consistent and has been reproduced in other 
studies [231–234]. A large prospective, ecological interrupted 
time series study was conducted from July 2004 to June 2008 
in England and Wales to evaluate the impact of the “cleanyour-
hands” campaign on the rates of hospital procurement of alcohol 
hand rub and soap and to investigate the association between the 
rates of MRSA bacteremia and CDI [235]. Procurement of these 
products was used as a proxy for hand hygiene compliance. This 
study demonstrated that increased soap procurement was signif-
icantly associated with a decline in CDI rates whereas increased 
alcohol hand rub procurement was significantly associated with 
a reduction in MRSA bacteremia rates.
The use of alcohol-based products has been compared with 
other methods of hand hygiene in removal of C. difficile spores 
[236, 237]. These studies evaluated the efficacy of different 
handwashing methods among volunteers for removal of spores 
of a nontoxigenic strain of C. difficile. Handwashing with soap 
and water, or with an antimicrobial soap and water, was found 
to be more effective at removing C. difficile spores than alco-
hol-based hand hygiene products. McFarland et al showed that 
chlorhexidine-containing antiseptic was more effective than 
plain soap for eliminating C. difficile from the hands of health-
care personnel [74]. Clostridium difficile was recovered from 
the hands of 88% of personnel (14 of 16) who had washed with 
plain soap. Washing with 4% chlorhexidine gluconate reduced 
the rate to 14% (1 of 7 personnel) [74]; in contrast, another 
study that conducted experimental hand seeding with C. diffi-
cile spores showed no difference between plain soap and chlor-
hexidine gluconate in removing C. difficile from hands [238].
In summary, there is a theoretical possibility for alcohol-based 
hand hygiene products to increase the incidence of CDI because 
of their inability to eliminate C. difficile spores from the hands. 
However, there have not been any clinical studies to support that 
the use of alcohol-based hand hygiene products results in an 
increased incidence of CDI. Therefore, before and after providing 
care for a patient with CDI, it is recommended to preferentially 
use soap and water over alcohol-based products alone for hand 
hygiene in CDI-hyperendemic (sustained high rates) or outbreak 
settings. It is important to confirm compliance with glove use and 
to use alcohol-based products in nonoutbreak or endemic settings.
XVIII. Should patient bathing interventions be implemented to 
prevent CDI?
Recommendation
1. Encourage patients to wash hands and shower to reduce the 
burden of spores on the skin (good practice recommendation).
Summary of the Evidence
The hands of patients can also become contaminated with 
C. difficile at a rate of 32% [239]. Potentially, these patients 
can transmit C. difficile to surfaces. In addition, this could be 
a factor in CDI recurrence when the spores are ingested from 
their contaminated hands. Patient bathing can also decrease 
skin contamination of C. difficile. Among 37 patients with CDI, 
showering was more effective than bed bathing in decreasing 
the rate of positive skin cultures [240]. Encouraging patients to 
wash hands and shower could be a useful strategy to reduce the 
burden of spores on the skin.
XIX. Should noncritical devices or equipment be dedicated to or 
specially cleaned after being used on the isolated patient with CDI?
Recommendation
1. Use disposable patient equipment when possible and ensure 
that reusable equipment is thoroughly cleaned and disin-
fected, preferentially with a sporicidal disinfectant that is 
equipment compatible (strong recommendation, moderate 
quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Single-use disposable equipment should be used to prevent 
CDI transmission. Nondisposable medical equipment should 
be dedicated to the patient’s room, and other equipment 
should be thoroughly cleaned after use in a patient with CDI. 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e26 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
Environmental contamination has been associated with the 
spread of C. difficile via contaminated commodes, blood pres-
sure cuffs, and oral and rectal electronic thermometers [74, 241, 
242]. Replacement of electronic thermometers with single-use 
disposable thermometers has been associated with significant 
decreases in CDI incidence [243]. During simulated routine 
physical examinations on patients with CDI, stethoscopes 
were found to acquire and transfer C. difficile spores as often 
as gloved hands [244]. These results support the recommenda-
tion to use disposable patient equipment when possible and to 
ensure that reusable equipment is cleaned and disinfected with 
a US Environmental Protection Agency–registered, sporicidal 
disinfectant, when possible. It is important to ensure that the 
responsibility and methods for cleaning and disinfection are 
clearly defined in standard operating procedures.
XX. What is the role of manual, terminal disinfection using a 
C. difficile sporicidal agent for patients in isolation for CDI?
Recommendation
1. Terminal room cleaning with a sporicidal agent should be 
considered in conjunction with other measures to prevent 
CDI during endemic high rates or outbreaks, or if there is 
evidence of repeated cases of CDI in the same room (weak 
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Clostridium difficile produces spores that are resistant to most 
standard hospital environmental disinfectants and can survive 
for months in the hospital environment [245]. Patients who 
are colonized with C. difficile shed spores and contaminate 
their local environment. These spores can serve as a source of 
transmission to other patients. Surfaces from which C. difficile 
spores have been cultured include toilets, commodes, floors, 
bed rails, call buttons, sinks, and over bed tables [87, 246]. 
Although some studies demonstrated that epidemic strains 
have increased capacity for sporulation, other studies have not 
[247]. Environmental contamination is lowest in rooms of cul-
ture-negative patients (<8% of rooms), intermediate in rooms 
of patients with asymptomatic C. difficile colonization (8%–30% 
of rooms), and highest in rooms of patients with CDI (9%–50% 
of rooms) [74, 87, 245, 248]. Samore et al found the degree of 
environmental contamination to correlate with the degree of 
healthcare personnel hand contamination [87]. Hand contam-
ination was 0%, 8%, and 26% when environmental contamin-
ation was 0–25%, 26%–50%, and >50%, respectively. Of note, 
this study was conducted prior to the routine use of contact 
precautions for patients with CDI, so regular use of gloves may 
decrease hand contamination if implemented.
Measuring the effect of environmental agents with sporicidal 
activity on the incidence of CDI is complicated by data that indicate 
that most patients with CDI do not directly acquire C. difficile from 
the environment, the existence of different methods to apply these 
agents, and the record of inconsistent impact of sporicidal agents 
on reducing CDI incidence in nonoutbreak settings. Several recent 
studies provide insight as to why this may be. Shaughnessy et al 
found admission to an ICU room that previously housed a patient 
with CDI to be a risk factor for CDI, but only 11% of patients who 
developed CDI had this risk factor [89]. Consistent with this find-
ing, a modeling study found that environmental contamination 
with C. difficile spores likely contributes to only 10% of new CDI 
cases [249]. In addition, studies using sequencing to characterize 
isolates found only 2%–7% of new CDI cases could be attributed 
to environmental contamination [75, 250]. Studies that have found 
a reduction in CDI after implementation of a sporicidal agent have 
mostly occurred in outbreak settings, with implementation of the 
sporicidal agent occurring concurrently with other interventions to 
prevent CDI [251–253]. However, sporicidal agents have not been 
associated with reductions in CDI in nonoutbreak settings [86, 88]. 
This is likely because in an endemic setting, in the absence of con-
secutive patients admitted to a room developing CDI, the degree 
of environmental contamination is not sufficient to cause transmis-
sion. In addition, C. difficile spores are physically removed when 
surfaces are wiped down. Other confounding variables in studies 
include the following: Several different products have been used 
including various dilutions of sodium hypochlorite, phenol-based 
agents, peroxide-based agents, and ultraviolet irradiation; applied 
by people or by automated systems; and with daily cleaning alone, 
daily cleaning and terminal cleaning, terminal cleaning alone, and 
periodic “deep cleaning.
”
In outbreak settings, terminal disinfection with a sporicidal 
agent in conjunction with other interventions to prevent CDI 
has been associated with reductions in CDI. However, terminal 
disinfection with a sporicidal agent has not been associated with 
consistent reductions in CDI in nonoutbreak settings. Therefore 
this remains most appropriate as a supplemental intervention 
for outbreaks, hyperendemic settings, and evidence of repeated 
cases of CDI in the same room.
If a sporicidal agent is implemented, compliance with thor-
oughness of cleaning has been associated with reductions in vi-
able C. difficile spores from the environment.
XXI. Should cleaning adequacy be evaluated?
Recommendation
1. Incorporate measures of cleaning effectiveness to en-
sure quality of environmental cleaning (good practice 
recommendation).
Summary of the Evidence
To decrease C. difficile spore contamination, one hospital found, 
over the course of several interventions that included terminal 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e27
disinfection with bleach, use of fluorescent markers to assess clean-
ing adequacy, use of an automated ultraviolet radiation device, 
and a dedicated team focused on daily cleaning of rooms housing 
patients with CDI, that the latter intervention was clearly the most 
effective at removing viable C. difficile spores from the environ-
ment [254]. Several methods have been used to assess thorough-
ness of cleaning, including fluorescent markers and adenosine 
triphosphate bioluminescence [254, 255]. These measures of clean-
ing adequacy are most effective when feedback is given in real time. 
Barriers to effective cleaning may be due to insufficient time for 
cleaning, inadequate cleaning supplies, inadequate education, and 
poor communication [222]. Just as, if not more, important than 
using markers and providing feedback is having environmental 
services staff dedicated to thorough cleaning [254].
XXII. What is the role of automated terminal disinfection using a 
method that is sporicidal against C. difficile?
Recommendation
1. There are limited data at this time to recommend use of auto-
mated, terminal disinfection using a sporicidal method for 
CDI prevention (no recommendation).
Summary of the Evidence
“No-touch” disinfection technologies have garnered much inter-
est of late. In general, these products use ultraviolet radiation or 
hydrogen peroxide vapor to disinfect the environment, and sev-
eral studies have found that these products are effective at reduc-
ing viable C. difficile spores from patient rooms [254, 256, 257]. 
No single methodology (“no-touch” or otherwise) appears to be 
superior in regard to reductions in CDI incidence. Automated, 
terminal disinfection using a sporicidal method has been associ-
ated with reductions in viable C. difficile spores from the environ-
ment. There have been several reports associating use of no-touch 
disinfection technologies and reductions in CDI, but all of these 
have at least one significant limitation. These include before–after 
study designs, inappropriate statistical methods to analyze the 
data, other concurrent interventions, high baseline incidence of 
CDI prior to implementation, reduction of CDI back to baseline 
prior to no-touch technology implementation, and reductions 
driven by results from single units without apparent impact on 
other units [256, 258–264]. Data are currently too limited to draw 
any conclusions as to whether/when these devices should be a 
component of a CDI prevention program.
XXIII. What is the role of daily sporicidal disinfection?
Recommendation
1. Daily cleaning with a sporicidal agent should be considered 
in conjunction with other measures to prevent CDI during 
outbreaks or in hyperendemic (sustained high rates) settings, 
or if there is evidence of repeated cases of CDI in the same 
room (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Daily sporicidal disinfection can be effective at reducing C. diffi-
cile environmental contamination and has been associated with 
reductions in CDI in outbreak settings in conjunction with other 
interventions to prevent CDI. Mayfield et al reported that the 
introduction of disinfection with a hypochlorite-based solution 
(5000 ppm available chlorine) was associated with reduced inci-
dence of CDI in a bone marrow transplant unit where there was 
a relatively high incidence of CDI [86]. Notably, the incidence 
of CDI increased almost to the baseline level after the reintro-
duction of the original quaternary ammonium compound as 
the principal cleaning agent. However, the environmental con-
tamination of C. difficile was not measured in this study, and 
the results were not reproducible on other units with low CDI 
incidence. Orenstein et al evaluated the use of daily disinfection 
with bleach wipes containing 0.55% active chlorine on the inci-
dence of HA-CDI in 2 units with hyperendemic rates [253]. The 
intervention successfully decreased the incidence by 85%. Daily 
disinfection of high-touch surfaces using a peracetic acid-based 
disinfectant was also shown to reduce contamination of health-
care workers’ hands [265]. In contrast to daily disinfection, Hacek 
et al conducted a study to examine the impact of only terminal 
room cleaning with hypochlorite containing solution and no 
change to the daily room cleaning with quaternary ammonium 
[266]. With this intervention, there was a statistically significant 
decrease of 48% in the incidence of CDI.
There have not been any head-to-head comparisons of daily 
vs terminal cleaning using only sporicidal disinfection.
XXIV. Should asymptomatic carriers of C. difficile be identified and 
isolated if positive?
Recommendation
1. There are insufficient data to recommend screening for 
asymptomatic carriage and placing asymptomatic carriers on 
contact precautions (no recommendation).
Summary of the Evidence
In institutions with higher rates of CDI (7.8–22.5 cases per 1000 
discharges), the number of asymptomatic carriers has been found 
to be considerably higher than the number with CDI [74, 87]. 
These asymptomatic carriers admitted to a ward could represent 
an important source of healthcare-associated spread of infection 
[92, 267, 268]. Results from mathematical modeling studies have 
suggested that reductions in CDI incidence by 10%–25% could 
be achieved by identifying and isolating carriers upon hospital 
admission [269, 270]. This novel approach was implemented by 
Longtin et al in an acute care hospital in Quebec that had high 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e28 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
endemic rates of CDI [271]. Using a quasi-experimental design 
and time series analysis, the effect of detecting and isolating 
asymptomatic carriers was evaluated. Potential confounders 
such as antibiotic and PPI utilization, hand hygiene compliance, 
and intensity of CDI testing were taken into consideration. The 
incidence of CDI decreased significantly after this intervention 
compared with the preintervention period and the lower inci-
dence was sustained for at least 1 year after the study terminated. 
This study provides the most compelling evidence to date for the 
significant effect of isolating carriers. However, several potential 
confounders were not assessed including compliance with isola-
tion precautions, effect of environmental cleaning, and knowl-
edge of C. difficile carrier status on the management of a patient. 
Ultimately, these promising results need to be reproduced in mul-
tiple centers prior to being considered for widespread adoption. 
If these findings are confirmed in various different hospital set-
tings, implementation of screening and isolation of asymptom-
atic carriers may be an important strategy to decrease CDI rates.
XXV. What is the role of antibiotic stewardship in controlling 
CDI rates?
Recommendations
1. Minimize the frequency and duration of high-risk antibiotic 
therapy and the number of antibiotic agents prescribed, to reduce 
CDI risk (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
2. Implement an antibiotic stewardship program (good practice 
recommendation).
3. Antibiotics to be targeted should be based on the local epi-
demiology and the C. difficile strains present. Restriction of 
fluoroquinolones, clindamycin, and cephalosporins (except 
for surgical antibiotic prophylaxis) should be considered 
(strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Antibiotic restriction may be one of the most useful control 
measures for a CDI outbreak. Fifteen quasi-experimental studies 
published between 1994 and 2013 were identified that evaluated 
the effectiveness of interventions to decrease antibiotic usage and 
changes in CDI rates [272–286]. Most studies were considered 
moderate (n = 13) or low (n = 2) quality. No randomized con-
trolled trials (RCTs) were identified. A summary of the published 
studies is shown in Table 5. Studies published during 1994–2014 
from hospitals (n = 13) or long-term care facilities (n = 2) were 
based in North America (n = 7) or the United Kingdom (n = 8). 
All studies but one were associated with an ongoing CDI epi-
demic (defined by most studies as a dramatic increase in rate 
of CDI) of which 7 studies demonstrated a clonal, epidemic 
strain. All studies used either a formulary restriction strategy 
(n = 11) or prospective audit and feedback (n = 4) as their pre-
dominant stewardship strategy. Targeted antibiotics included 
fluoroquinolones (n = 7 studies), cephalosporins (n = 10), clin-
damycin (n = 5), amoxicillin or amoxicillin-clavulanate (n = 3), 
other β-lactamase inhibitors, carbapenems, vancomycin, or 
aztreonam (n = 1 each). Many studies targeted more than one 
antibiotic (n = 6). Second- and third-generation cephalosporins 
were more likely targets of intervention from studies published 
in the 1990s to early 2000s with fluoroquinolones targeted more 
frequently in studies published after 2000. Antibiotics within the 
same class (eg, cephalosporins) may not have the same risk for 
CDI and studies usually targeted the antibiotic most likely caus-
ing the current epidemic (generally considered the most widely 
used antibiotic in the hospital). All interventions were highly 
effective at decreasing usage of the targeted antibiotic(s) with 
percentage reduction that ranged from 50% to >90%, indicative 
of a successful process implementation. When reported, a global 
decrease for all antibiotics was shown in 5 of 9 studies. Change of 
CDI incidence was recorded as number per 10 000 patient-days 
(10 studies), CDI cases per month (3 studies), or CDI cases per 
1000 discharges (2 studies). Three studies evaluated the change in 
incidence rate of CDI as a result of antibiotic change. Reduction 
in CDI incidence rates ranged from 33% to >90%, indicative of a 
successful outcome measure. After the intervention, rates of CDI 
ranged from 0.3–1.2 cases per 10 000 patient days.
The number and duration of antibiotics can also influence the 
development of CDI. Use of multiple antibiotics (mean number 
used, 4.2 vs 1.4 antibiotics) was found to be an important risk 
factor for developing CDI and the incidence of CDI increases 
with the number of antibiotics prescribed (relative risk, 1.49; 95% 
CI, 1.23–1.81) [102, 287]. A retrospective cohort of 241 patients 
examined the risk of development of CDI and cumulative anti-
biotic exposures. The risk of CDI was associated with increasing 
cumulative dose, number of antibiotics, and days of antibiotic 
exposure. For example, compared to patients who received only 
1 antibiotic, the adjusted hazard ratios (HRs) for those who 
received 2, 3 or 4, or ≥5 antibiotics were 2.5 (95% CI, 1.6–4.0), 
3.3 (95% CI, 2.2–5.2), and 9.6 (95% CI, 6.1–15.1), respectively 
[288]. Therefore, it is critical to avoid unnecessary antibiotics and 
to minimize the duration of use to reduce the risk of CDI.
Although many hospitals have implemented an antibiotic 
stewardship program (ASP), it is important to sustain the pro-
gram with the required resources. The benefits of ASP include 
improved patient outcomes, reduced adverse events (including 
CDI), improvement in rates of antibiotic susceptibilities, and 
optimization of resource utilization [289].
XXVI. What is the role of proton pump inhibitor restriction in 
controlling CDI rates?
Recommendation
1. Although there is an epidemiologic association between 
PPI use and CDI, and unnecessary PPIs should always be 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e29
Table 5. Quasi-experimental Studies on the Association Between Antibiotic Stewardship Interventions and Clostridium difficile Infection
Year 
[Reference]
Area
Time Frame
Setting (Bed Size)
Dominant 
Strain
Stewardship Method
Target
Targeted 
Antibiotics 
Decrease
Global Change 
in Hospital 
Antibiotic Use
CDI Rate 
Method
Pre- 
intervention
Post- 
intervention
Reduction 
in CDI 
Rates
1994 [272]
US
1990–1992
Hospital (168)
J7
Restrictive use
Clindamycin
>90%
NR
a
15.8
1.9
88%
1997 [273]
UK
1994–1995
Hospital (NR)
NR
Restrictive use
Cefuroxime
>90%
NR
b
5.3
2.3
57%
1998 [274]
US
1992–1996
Hospital (703)
Clonal strain A
Restrictive use
Clindamycin
>90%
No change
b
11.5
3.3
71%
2003 [275]
UK
1995–2000
Hospital (800)
NR
Restrictive use
Ceftriaxone
>90%
NR
c
14.6
3.4
77%
2003 [276]
US
1991–1998
Hospital (159)
NR
Prospective audit  
and feedback
Third-generation cephalosporins  
and aztreonam
75%
Decreased
c
2.2
0.3
86%
2004 [277]
UK
1997–2002
Hospital  
(24 ward beds)
NR
Restrictive use
Cefotaxime
83%
No change
a
46
22
52%
2004 [278]
US
2001–2003
LTCF (100)
A
Restrictive use
Gatifloxacin
>90%
No change
c
1.32
0.51
61%
2007 [279]
Canada 2003–2006
Hospital (683)
027
Restrictive use
High-risk antibiotics
80%
Decreased
c
2.03
0.82
60%
2007 [280]
UK
1999–2003
Hospital  
(78 ward beds)
NR
Prospective audit  
and feedback
Cephalosporins and  
amoxicillin-clavulanate
50%–75%
No change
b
NR
NR
65%
2011 [281]
UK
2005–2007
Hospital (495)
027
Restrictive use
High-risk antibiotics
50%–75%
No change
c
2.22
0.45
80%
2012 [282]
Canada 2008–2010
Hospital  
(48 ICU beds)
NR
Prospective audit  
and feedback
High-risk antibiotics
20%
Decreased
c
1.12
0.71
37%
2013 [283]
UK
2008–2011
Hospital (215)
NR
Restrictive use
Ceftriaxone and  
ciprofloxacin
70%–90%
NR
c
2.398
1.2
50%
2011 [284]
Ireland
2004–2009
Hospital (665)
027
Restrictive use
Quinolones
>90%
NR
c
0.8
0.746
d
2012 [285]
Ireland
2004–2010
Hospital (233)
NR
Restrictive use
High-risk antibiotics
70%–90%
Decreased
c
0.8
0.7
e
2012 [286]
US
2007–2010
LTCF (160)
NR
Prospective audit  
and feedback
High-risk antibiotics
25%–50%
Decreased
c
NR
NR
f
Abbreviations: CDI, Clostridium difficile infection; ICU, intensive care unit; LTCF
, long-term care facility; NR, not reported; UK, United Kingdom; US, United States.
aCDI cases per 1000 hospital discharges.
bCDI cases per month.
cCDI cases per 10 
000 patient-days.
dEach defined daily dose reduction in quinolone per 100 bed-days resulted in reduced incidence of CDI by 0.054 cases per 100 bed-days.
eCDI incidence rate decreased by 0.0047/100 bed-days per month. 8
fCDI rates reduced by 0.2 cases per 1000 patient-days.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e30 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
discontinued, there is insufficient evidence for discontinuation 
of PPIs as a measure for preventing CDI (no recommendation).
Summary of the Evidence
There is a clinical association between PPI use and CDI 
[290–293]. Three recent meta-analyses assessed the associ-
ation between PPI use and the risk for CDI using data from 
>47 studies containing >300 000 patients. All studies demon-
strated significant heterogeneity in the dataset, and 2 of 3 noted 
publication bias (the third did not perform this analysis due to 
underlying heterogeneity of data). Kwok et al assessed 42 total 
studies (30 case-control; 12 cohort) totaling 313 000 patients 
[290]. Summary odds ratios (ORs) were presented for incident 
cases of CDI (OR, 1.74; 95% CI, 1.47–2.85) as well as recur-
rent CDI (OR, 2.51; 95% CI, 1.16–5.44). Concomitant use of 
non–C. difficile antibiotics increased the risk of CDI with PPI 
usage (OR, 1.96; 95% CI, 1.03–3.70). Histamine type 2 recep-
tor antagonists had decreased risk of CDI compared to PPI 
use. Janarthan et al assessed 23 total studies (17 case-control 
and 6 cohort) totaling 288 620 patients [293]. Incidence of CDI 
increased with exposure to PPIs (OR, 1.69; 95% CI, 1.34–1.97). 
There was no difference in the summary OR if the analysis was 
limited to cohort (OR, 1.66; 95% CI, 1.23–2.24) or case-control 
studies (OR, 1.65; 95% CI, 1.38–1.98). Finally, Tleyjeh assessed 
47 total studies (37 case control and 14 cohort) [291]. Incidence 
of CDI increased with exposure to PPIs (OR, 1.69; 95% CI, 
1.34–1.97). Two studies assessed the number of cases likely 
to occur with the addition of PPI therapy. Number needed to 
harm was higher for the general population (range, 899–3925) 
compared with hospitalized patients not on concomitant anti-
biotics (range, 202–367), or hospitalized patients receiving 
concomitant antibiotics (range, 28–50). Despite clinical data 
showing consistently increased risk, heterogeneity of the data, 
role of unknown confounders, lack of dose–response relation-
ships, and other methodologic considerations are considerable 
limitations to the practical application of these data.
A number of further observational studies have investigated 
the association between PPI use and CDI after publication of 
these meta-analyses [27, 294–297]. A large, population surveil-
lance study of 984 patients with community-associated CDI 
showed that 31% of patients with CDI who did not receive 
antibiotics did receive a PPI [27]. Three studies investigated 
the association between PPI usage and recurrent CDI in 1627 
patients [294, 295, 297]. Two of the 3 studies did not show an 
association between PPI use and recurrent CDI. Finally, a study 
of 483 patients colonized with C. difficile showed that exposure 
to PPI increased the risk of developing CDI [296]. Thus, there 
appears to be a clinical association between PPI use and CDI, 
but the true causal relationship is unclear. No RCTs or qua-
si-experimental studies have studied the relationship between 
discontinuing or avoiding PPI use and risk of CDI. Thus, a rec-
ommendation to globally discontinue PPIs in patients at high 
risk for CDI or recurrent CDI regardless of need for PPI will 
require further causal proof. However, stewardship activities to 
discontinue unneeded PPIs are warranted.
XXVII. What is the role of probiotics in primary prevention 
of CDI?
Recommendation
1. There are insufficient data at this time to recommend admin-
istration of probiotics for primary prevention of CDI outside 
of clinical trials (no recommendation).
Summary of the Evidence
Several meta-analyses indicate probiotics may be effective at 
preventing CDI when given to patients on antibiotics who do 
not have a history of CDI [298–300]. The typical CDI incidence 
among hospitalized people >65 years of age on antibiotics with 
a length of stay >2 days is ≤3%, even during outbreaks of CDI 
[21, 36, 248]. The studies with the greatest influence on the 
results of the meta-analyses had a CDI incidence 7–20 times 
higher in the placebo arms than would otherwise be expected 
based on the patient population studied, potentially biasing the 
results to benefit of the probiotic [301, 302]. When these stud-
ies are excluded, a trend toward a reduction in CDI remains, 
but it is not as great as when these studies are included. Many 
limitations remain when the studies with extremely high CDI 
incidence are excluded, including differences in probiotic for-
mulations studied, duration of probiotic administration, defi-
nitions of CDI, duration of study follow-up, and inclusion of 
patients not typically considered at high risk for CDI. There 
is also the potential for organisms in probiotic formulations 
to cause infections in hospitalized patients [303–305]. Due to 
these issues, there are insufficient data to recommend adminis-
tration of probiotics for primary prevention of CDI.
TREATMENT
XXVIII. What are important ancillary treatment strategies 
for CDI?
Recommendations
1. Discontinue therapy with the inciting antibiotic agent(s) as 
soon as possible, as this may influence the risk of CDI recur-
rence (strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence).
2. Antibiotic therapy for CDI should be started empirically for 
situations where a substantial delay in laboratory confirm-
ation is expected, or for fulminant CDI (described in section 
XXX) (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence). 
Summary of the Evidence
Discontinuation of inciting antibiotic agent(s) as soon as possible 
should always be considered as their continued use has been shown 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e31
to decrease clinical response and increase recurrence rates [292, 
306]. Antibiotic therapy should be started empirically if a substan-
tial delay in laboratory confirmation is expected (eg, >48 hours) or 
if a patient presents with fulminant CDI. For other patients, anti-
biotic therapy should be started after diagnosis to limit overuse of 
antibiotics and associated toxicities including overgrowth of mul-
tidrug-resistant pathogens [307]. Historically, administering anti-
motility agents to patients with diarrhea without consideration or 
specific therapy for CDI has led to bad outcomes. Addition of an 
antimotility agent such as loperamide as an adjunct to specific anti-
bacterial therapy for CDI may be safe, although no prospective or 
randomized studies are available [308, 309].
XXIX. What are the best treatments of an initial CDI episode to 
ensure resolution of symptoms and sustained resolution 1 month 
after treatment?
Recommendations
1. Either vancomycin or fidaxomicin is recommended over 
metronidazole for an initial episode of CDI. The dosage is 
vancomycin 125 mg orally 4 times per day or fidaxomicin 
200 mg twice daily for 10 days (strong recommendation, high 
quality of evidence) (Table 1).
2. In settings where access to vancomycin or fidaxomicin is 
limited, we suggest using metronidazole for an initial epi-
sode of nonsevere CDI only (weak recommendation, high 
quality of evidence). The suggested dosage is metronidazole 
500 mg orally 3 times per day for 10 days. Avoid repeated or 
prolonged courses due to risk of cumulative and potentially 
irreversible neurotoxicity (strong recommendation, moderate 
quality of evidence). (See Treatment section for definition of 
CDI severity.)
Summary of the Evidence
For 30 years, metronidazole and oral vancomycin have been the 
main antibiotic agents used in the treatment of CDI. Consensus 
on optimal treatment of CDI is evolving with the availability of 
new data on established agents and introduction of a new, FDA-
approved drug, fidaxomicin. Two RCTs conducted in the 1980s 
and 1990s that compared metronidazole therapy and vanco-
mycin therapy found no difference in outcomes but included 
<50 patients per study arm [168, 310]. However, since 2000, 
additional randomized, placebo-controlled trials have shown 
that oral vancomycin was superior to metronidazole (Table 6) 
[170, 188]. The first study assessed clinical cure rates of 150 
patients with CDI given oral metronidazole 250 mg 4 times 
daily (n = 79) compared to oral vancomycin 125 mg 4 times 
daily (n = 71) [188]. Cure was superior for all patients given oral 
vancomycin (97%) compared to metronidazole (84%; P < .006). 
Clinical cure superiority was also observed in 69 patients with 
severe disease given vancomycin (97%) compared to metroni-
dazole (76%; P = .02). The second publication was a combined 
analysis of 2 multinational studies that compared the efficacy of 
tolevamer (n = 563), a toxin-binding polymer, with oral vanco-
mycin 125 mg 4 times daily (n = 266) and oral metronidazole 
250 mg 4 times daily (n = 289) [170]. Tolevamer was inferior to 
both metronidazole and vancomycin (P < .001). Metronidazole 
clinical response rates (72.7%) were also inferior to vancomycin 
(81.1%) response rates (P = .02). Combined, these RCTs pub-
lished since 2000 demonstrated that metronidazole was infe-
rior to oral vancomycin for clinical cure in patients with CDI 
(P = .002). These studies also demonstrated that metronida-
zole was inferior to oral vancomycin for resolution of diarrhea 
at end of treatment without CDI recurrence 21–30 days after 
treatment (P = .002). A recent retrospective study of hospital-
ized patients with mild-to-moderate CDI found that metroni-
dazole was inferior to vancomycin for treatment response in 
this population as well [311].
Nearly all randomized trials have compared 10-day reg-
imens of CDI treatment agents, and 10 days should be suffi-
cient to resolve symptoms in most patients. However, some 
patients may have delayed response to treatment, particularly 
those treated with metronidazole [309]. The recent randomized 
trial data (Table 6) [170, 188] have confirmed prior observa-
tional studies that demonstrated decreased effectiveness of oral 
metronidazole [312, 313]. If patients have improved, but have 
not had symptom resolution by 10 days, extension of the treat-
ment duration to 14 days should be considered [314]. Use of 
oral metronidazole, however, should be restricted to an initial 
episode of nonsevere CDI in cases where other therapies are 
contraindicated or not available (Tables 4 and 5), and treatment 
should be limited to one course due to case reports of neuro-
toxicity with prolonged or repeated use [315, 316]. Although 
cost and utilization analyses were not specifically addressed in 
these guidelines, compounding of the intravenous formulation 
of vancomycin for oral administration has been used as a less 
expensive alternative when barriers to use of the capsular form 
of vancomycin exist (Table 7).
The previous IDSA/SHEA guidelines used severity criteria to 
guide treatment decisions, and use of vancomycin in particu-
lar. The criteria used were based on expert opinion and had not 
been validated at the time. Subsequently, other severity criteria 
[188] have been used to document improved clinical response 
rates for patients with severe CDI who received vancomycin as 
opposed to metronidazole [317].
Several recent studies have evaluated potential factors for 
correlation with disease severity [318] or treatment outcome 
[319, 320]. The data base of the recent phase 3 fidaxomicin 
vs vancomycin treatment trials has been used to develop 
[319, 320] and validate [321] factors that might predict treat-
ment failure [319] or cure [320]. Bauer et al found that fever 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e32 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
(>38.5°C), WBC count >15 × 109/L, and creatinine >1.5 mg/
dL correlated with treatment failure and that timing of meas-
urement with respect to the positive stool C. difficile assay 
influenced the values of the variables [319]. Miller et al [320] 
measured 6 different factors individually and in various com-
binations to look for correlation with cure following treatment. 
WBC count was the only single factor that correlated with cure 
and a score based on a combination of age, treatment with 
non-CDI systemic antibiotics, leukocyte (WBC) count, albu-
min, and serum creatinine (ATLAS) was the most discrimin-
atory. The ATLAS score showed excellent predictive value in 
the validation cohort, although it was designed as a continuous 
variable and the optimal cutoff score was not clear. In addition, 
severely ill patients were not included and metronidazole treat-
ment response was not evaluated.
As a practical measure, we continue to recommend WBC 
count and serum creatinine as supportive clinical data for the 
diagnosis of severe CDI, but have changed the creatinine value 
to an absolute value as opposed to the previous comparison to 
baseline values, which are not always available [322] (Table 1). 
Further validation of these criteria is still needed, and these cri-
teria do not perform well for patients with underlying hemato-
logic malignancies [323] or renal insufficiency [322].
Two RCTs compared oral vancomycin to oral fidaxomicin for 
the treatment of CDI [321, 324]. Primary and secondary end-
points were resolution of diarrhea at the end of the 10-day treat-
ment course and resolution of diarrhea at the end of treatment 
without CDI recurrence 25 days after treatment, respectively. In 
total, 1105 patients were enrolled and eligible for the intention-
to-treat analysis. Resolution of diarrhea was similar in patients 
given fidaxomicin (88%) or vancomycin (86%) (RR, 1.0; 95% 
CI, .98–1.1). Resolution of diarrhea at end of treatment without 
recurrence 25 days after treatment (sustained clinical response) 
was superior for fidaxomicin (71%) compared to vancomycin 
Table 6. Evidence for Resolution of Symptoms and Sustained Resolution ~1 Month (21–30 Days) After Treatment for Specific Clostridium difficile Treatment 
Agents
Outcomes
No. of Participants
(No. of Studies)
Percentage 
Resolution
Relative Effecta
(95% CI)
P Value
Quality of Evidence 
(GRADE)b
Reference, First 
Author
Direct comparisons of metronidazole and vancomycin
 Resolution of diarrhea at end of 
(10 days) treatment
RCTs prior to 2000:
 156 (2)
RCTs since 2000:
 687c (3)
All RCTs:
843 (5)
95 (MTR)
98 (VAN)
75 (MTR)
85 (VAN)
78 (MTR)
87 (VAN)
RR, 0.97 (.91–1.03)
RR, 0.89 (.82–.96)
RR, 0.89 (.85–.96)
.4
.002
.0008
⊕⊕⊕⊕ High
Teasley [168]
Wenisch [310]
Zar [188]
Johnson [170]
 Resolution of diarrhea at end of 
treatment without CDI recur-
rence ~1 month after treatment
RCTs prior to 2000:
156 (2)
RCTs since 2000:
 687c (3)
All RCTs:
843 (5)
85 (MTR)
84 (VAN)
59 (MTR)
70 (VAN)
63 (MTR)
73 (VAN)
RR, 1.0 (.90–1.2)
RR, 0.84 (.74–.94)
RR, 0.87 (.79–.96)
1.0
.002
.003
⊕⊕⊕⊕ High
Teasley [168]
Wenisch [310]
Zar [188]
Johnson [170]
Direct comparisons of fidaxomicin and vancomycin
 Resolution of diarrhea at end of 
(10 days) treatment
1105d (2)
88 (FDX)
86 (VAN)
RR, 1.0 (.98–1.1)
.36
⊕⊕⊕⊕ High
Louie [321]
Cornely [324]
 Resolution of diarrhea at end of 
treatment without CDI recur-
rence ~1 month after treatment
1105d (2)
71 (FDX)
57 (VAN)
RR, 1.2 (1.1–1.4)
<.0001
⊕⊕⊕⊕ High
Louie [321]
Cornely [324]
Direct comparisons of FMT and vancomycin
 Resolution of diarrhea at end of 
treatment without CDI recur-
rence 56 days after treatment
29 (1)
81 (FMT)
31 (VANe)
RR, 2.6 (1.1, 6.2)
.01
⊕⊕⊕⊖ Moderate
van Nood [367]
Abbreviations: CDI, Clostridium difficile infection; CI, confidence interval; FDX, fidaxomicin; FMT
, fecal microbiota transplantation; GRADE, Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation; MTR, metronidazole; RCT
, randomized controlled trial; RR, relative risk; VAN, vancomycin.
aAll relative risks calculated using vancomycin as the comparator agent. An RR <1.0 represents results favoring the use of vancomycin; an RR >1.0 represents results favoring the comparator.
bFor GRADE interpretation, see Figure 1.
cFull analysis set. Population in the 2 phase 3 tolevamer trials published in the same journal article [170].
dModified intention-to-treat population (combined analysis of both phase 3 fidaxomicin trials [390]).
eA second control group of 13 patients who received a bowel lavage in addition to vancomycin was included in this study. The RR for this comparison (FMT vs VAN + lavage) was 3.5 (95% 
CI, 1.1–9.8).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e33
(57%) (RR, 1.2; 95% CI, 1.1–1.4). A post hoc exploratory time 
to event meta-analyses from the 2 studies investigated a com-
posite endpoint of persistent diarrhea or CDI recurrence or 
death over 40 days in patients given fidaxomicin or vancomy-
cin [325]. Fidaxomicin reduced the incidence of the composite 
endpoint by 40% compared to vancomycin (95% CI, 26%–51%; 
P < .001), primarily due to decreased recurrence in patients 
given fidaxomicin. Deaths within the first 12 days of therapy 
occurred in 7 of 572 patients given fidaxomicin and 17 of 592 
given vancomycin (P = .06). The effect of fidaxomicin com-
pared to vancomycin was reduced in patients infected with the 
epidemic BI strain (HR, 0.78; 95% CI, .51–1.19) compared to 
non-BI strains (HR, 0.30; 95% CI, .19–.46). Finally, a subanaly-
sis from the North American study demonstrated that patients 
treated with fidaxomicin were less likely to have acquisition and 
overgrowth of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus and Candida 
species [326]. However, subpopulations of VRE with elevated 
fidaxomicin minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were 
common, suggesting that this effect may change over time 
if enterococci resistance to fidaxomicin becomes common. 
Although these data were derived from 2 separate studies and 
patients with fulminant CDI were not included, both studies 
included the same treatment protocols and >1000 patients were 
randomized in a double-blinded manner. Based on these 2 large 
clinical trials and meta-analyses, fidaxomicin should be consid-
ered along with vancomycin as the drug of choice for an initial 
episode of CDI.
Additional treatment agents that are probably effect-
ive, but have less supportive evidence and which have not 
received FDA approval, include nitazoxanide and fusidic 
acid (Table 7). Additional agents with inadequate evidence 
to recommend treatment of an initial CDI episode include 
rifaximin, tigecycline, and bacitracin (Table 7). Rifaximin, 
however, has been more extensively studied as an adjunct-
ive postvancomycin treatment regimen in patients with 
recurrent CDI (see section XXXI). One potential concern 
for use of rifaximin is the potential for resistance. Isolates 
with high MICs (>256 µg/mL) and development of high 
MICs during treatment with rifaximin are well docu-
mented [327].
Table 7. Potential Treatment Agents for Treatment of the Primary Clostridium difficile infection Episode
Agent
Adult Dose
Costa
Initial  
Treatment 
Responseb
Recurrence 
Riskb
Resistance in Clinical 
Isolates
Adverse Events
Evidence Supporting Efficacy
Proven efficacy
 Vancomycin
125 mg PO qid × 
10 days
$$$$
$ (Liq)
+++
++
Not reported
Minimally 
absorbed
Multiple RCTs; US FDA approved
 Fidaxomicin
200 mg PO bid × 
10 days
$$$$
+++
+
One clinical isolate with 
increased MIC
Minimally 
absorbed
Two phase 3 RCT comparisons to 
vancomcyin; US FDA approved
 Metronidazole  500 mg PO tid × 
10 days
$
++
++
Increased MIC reported 
in some studies; 
hetero-resistance also 
reported
Neuropathy, 
nausea
Multiple RCTs
Probable efficacy
 Nitazoxanide
500 mg PO bid × 
10 days
$$
+++
++
Not reported
GI symptoms
Small RCT comparison to vanco-
mycin and a modest-sized RCT 
comparison to metronidazole
 Fusidic acid
250 mg PO tid × 
10 days
NA in United 
States
++
++
Reported to develop in 
vivo resistance
GI symptoms
Modest-sized RCT comparison to 
metronidazole and a small RCT 
comparison to vancomycin
Inadequate data to support efficacy
 Rifaximin
400 mg PO tid × 
10 days
$$$
++
+?
Potential for develop-
ment of high-level 
resistance
Minimally 
absorbed
1 small RCT comparison to 
vancomycin for primary treat-
ment; case series and 1 RCT 
pilot study show promise for 
use as a post-vancomycin, 
“chaser” strategy in manage-
ment of recurrent CDI
 Tigecycline
50 mg IV every bid × 
10 days
$$$$
++?
?
Not reported
GI symptoms
Case reports and small case 
series
 Bacitracin
25 
000 units PO qid × 
10 days
$$
+
+?
Increasing resistance 
noted
Minimally 
 
absorbed, 
poor taste
Two small RCT comparisons to 
vancomycin
Abbreviations: bid, twice daily; CDI, Clostridium difficile infection; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; GI, gastrointestinal; IV, intravenous; Liq, liquid formulation of vancomycin compounded 
from powder intended for intravenous administration; MIC, minimum inhibitory concentration; NA, not available; PO, oral; qid, 4 times daily; RCT
, randomized controlled trial; tid, 3 times daily.
aAll prices are estimated in US dollars as quoted from Red Book Online Search, Micromedex Solutions, last accessed on 10 March 2015 or approximated hospital pharmacy pricing (tigecy-
cline, bacitracin). $, $0–100; $$, $101–500; $$$, $501–1000; $$$$, >$1000.
b+, lowest; ++, intermediate; +++, highest; ?, unknown.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e34 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
XXX. What are the best treatments of fulminant CDI?
Recommendations
1. For fulminant CDI*, vancomycin administered orally is the 
regimen of choice (strong recommendation, moderate qual-
ity of evidence). If ileus is present, vancomycin can also be 
administered per rectum (weak recommendation, low quality 
of evidence). The vancomycin dosage is 500 mg orally 4 times 
per day and 500 mg in approximately 100 mL normal saline 
per rectum every 6 hours as a retention enema. Intravenously 
administered metronidazole should be administered together 
with oral or rectal vancomycin, particularly if ileus is present 
(strong recommendation, moderate quality of evidence). The 
metronidazole dosage is 500 mg intravenously every 8 hours.*
*Fulminant CDI, previously referred to as severe, complicated 
CDI, may be characterized by hypotension or shock, ileus, or 
megacolon.
2. If surgical management is necessary for severely ill patients, per-
form subtotal colectomy with preservation of the rectum (strong 
recommendation, moderate quality of evidence). Diverting loop 
ileostomy with colonic lavage followed by antegrade vancomy-
cin flushes is an alternative approach that may lead to improved 
outcomes (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Vancomycin, administered orally at high dosage, has been 
the historical recommendation for fulminant CDI and there 
remains a lack of high-quality evidence to support this recom-
mendation. If an ileus is present, then vancomycin can also be 
administered per rectum even though it is unclear whether a 
sufficient quantity of the drug reaches beyond the left colon 
[44, 328, 329]. Despite the lack of data, it seems prudent to 
administer vancomycin by oral and/or rectal routes at higher 
dosages for patients with fulminant CDI (500 mg 6 hourly by 
mouth and 500 mg in approximately 100 mL of normal saline 
by retention enema). Use of high doses of vancomycin is safe, 
but serum concentrations have been noted with high doses, 
prolonged exposure, renal failure, and disrupted intestinal 
epithelial integrity [330]. Hence, it may be appropriate to 
monitor trough serum concentration in such circumstances 
to rule out drug accumulation.
In fulminant CDI, intravenously administered metronidazole 
(500 mg every 8 hours) should be used in addition to vancomycin 
[331]. This is especially important if ileus is present as this may 
impair the delivery of orally administered vancomycin to the 
colon, but intravenously administered metronidazole is likely 
to achieve therapeutic concentrations in an inflamed colon. 
In patients not responding to vancomycin and metronidazole, 
intravenously administered tigecycline (loading dose of 100 mg 
followed by 50 mg 2 times per day) or passive immunotherapy 
with intravenous immunoglobulins (150–400 mg/kg) has been 
used, but no controlled trials have been performed [332–337]. 
Surgical intervention can be life-saving for selected patients 
[338]. A rising WBC count (≥25 000) or a rising lactate level 
(≥5 mmol/L) is associated with high mortality and may be 
helpful in identifying patients whose best hope for survival lies 
with early surgery [338]. Subtotal colectomy is the established 
surgical procedure for patients with megacolon, colonic perfo-
ration, an acute abdomen, or for patients with septic shock and 
associated organ failure (renal, respiratory, hepatic, or hemod-
ynamic compromise) [338, 339]. More recently, an alternative 
procedure has been proposed (loop ileostomy with antegrade 
vancomycin lavage) as a colon-preserving, less invasive (usually 
laparoscopic), and less morbid approach that warrants further 
investigation as it may lead to improved outcomes as well as 
colon salvage [340].
XXXI. What are the best treatments for recurrent CDI?
Recommendations
1. Treat a first recurrence of CDI with oral vancomycin as a 
tapered and pulsed regimen rather than a second standard 
10-day course of vancomycin (weak recommendation, low 
quality of evidence), or
2. Treat a first recurrence of CDI with a 10-day course of fidax-
omicin rather than a standard 10-day course of vancomycin 
(weak recommendation, moderate quality of evidence), or
3. Treat a first recurrence of CDI with a standard 10-day course 
of vancomycin rather than a second course of metronidazole 
if metronidazole was used for the primary episode (weak rec-
ommendation, low quality of evidence).
4. Antibiotic treatment options for patients with >1 recurrence 
of CDI include oral vancomycin therapy using a tapered and 
pulsed regimen (weak recommendation, low quality of evi-
dence), a standard course of oral vancomycin followed by 
rifaximin (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence), or 
fidaxomicin (weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
5. Fecal microbiota transplantation is recommended for 
patients with multiple recurrences of CDI who have failed 
appropriate antibiotic treatments (strong recommendation, 
moderate quality of evidence).
6. There are insufficient data at this time to recommend extend-
ing the length of anti–C. difficile treatment beyond the rec-
ommended treatment course or restarting an anti–C. difficile 
agent empirically for patients who require continued anti-
biotic therapy directed against the underlying infection or 
who require retreatment with antibiotics shortly after com-
pletion of CDI treatment, respectively (no recommendation).
Summary of the Evidence
The frequency of further episodes of CDI necessitating retreat-
ment remains a major concern. Approximately 25% of patients 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e35
treated for CDI with vancomycin can be expected to experience 
at least 1 additional episode [321, 324]. Recurrent CDI results 
from the same or a different C. difficile strain but, in clinical 
practice, it is impossible to distinguish these 2 mechanisms 
[341, 342]. Diagnosis and management do not differ between 
the former (relapse) or the latter (new infection). Recurrence 
rates are significantly lower following treatment of an initial 
CDI episode with fidaxomicin as compared to vancomycin 
[321, 322, 324]. Risk factors for CDI recurrence are the admin-
istration of other antibiotics during or after initial treatment of 
CDI, a defective humoral immune response against C. difficile 
toxins, advancing age, and increasingly severe underlying dis-
ease [81, 343]. Continued use of PPIs has also been associated 
with an increased risk of recurrence [344, 345].
A first recurrence of CDI may be treated with oral vanco-
mycin (particularly if metronidazole was used for the first epi-
sode), vancomycin followed by a tapered and pulsed regimen, 
or fidaxomicin. In a randomized, stratified substudy of patients 
with a first CDI recurrence, a subsequent, second recurrence 
was less common following therapy with fidaxomicin com-
pared to a standard 10-day course of vancomycin (19.7% vs 
35.5%; P = .045) [346]. Uncontrolled, postapproval experience 
with fidaxomicin suggests less efficacious responses in terms 
of cure and subsequent recurrence after treatment of patients 
with recurrent CDI, particularly ≥2 recurrences [347]. Oral 
vancomycin should be used as a tapered and pulsed-dose reg-
imen if a standard 10-day course of vancomycin was used for 
the initial episode. Various regimens have been used and are 
similar to this one: After the usual dosage of 125 mg 4 times 
per day for 10–14 days, vancomycin is administered at 125 mg 
2 times per day for a week, 125 mg once per day for a week, and 
then 125 mg every 2 or 3 days for 2–8 weeks, in the hope that 
C. difficile vegetative forms will be kept in check while allow-
ing restoration of the normal microbiota. Metronidazole is not 
recommended for treatment of recurrent CDI as initial and sus-
tained response rates are lower than for vancomycin (Table 7). 
Furthermore, metronidazole should not be used for long-term 
therapy because of the potential for cumulative neurotoxicity 
[348, 349].
Second or subsequent CDI recurrences may be treated with 
oral vancomycin as a tapered and pulsed-dose regimen as 
described above [350]. In a small RCT, patients received rifax-
imin 400 mg 3 times daily or placebo for 20 days immediately 
after completing standard therapy for CDI [195]. CDI recur-
rences occurred in 5 of 33 (15%) patients given rifaximin and 
in 11 of 35 (31%) patients given placebo (P = .11). Experience 
using fidaxomicin to treat multiply recurrent CDI is limited. 
There is little evidence that adding cholestyramine, colestipol, 
or rifampin to the treatment regimen decreases the risk of a fur-
ther recurrence [351].
Several probiotics including Saccharomyces boulardii and 
Lactobacillus species have shown promise for the prevention of 
CDI recurrence [352–354]. However, as yet, none has demon-
strated significant and reproducible efficacy in controlled clin-
ical trials.
Some patients need to receive other antibiotics during or 
shortly after the end of CDI therapy. These patients are at a 
higher risk of a recurrence and its attendant complications [81, 
306, 343]. Many clinicians prolong the duration of treatment 
of CDI in such cases, until after the other antibiotic regimens 
have been stopped. Lower doses may be sufficient to prevent 
recurrence (eg, vancomycin 125 mg once daily). Whether this 
approach reduces the risk of CDI recurrence is unknown, but 
one retrospective study suggested no benefit for extension of 
CDI treatment beyond 10–14 days [355]. A similar concern is 
encountered among patients who have successfully completed 
treatment for CDI but subsequently are administered sys-
temic antibiotics. Two retrospective cohort studies have been 
published looking at the risk of recurrent CDI in patients who 
received subsequent antibiotic exposure between those who 
were empirically treated with vancomycin during that exposure 
and those who were not [356, 357]. One of these studies looked 
at patients who received antibiotics within 90 days of the prior 
episode and one looked at patients who were rehospitalized 
(1–22 months later) and given systemic antibiotics. The vanco-
mycin dose and regimen varied considerably, but both studies 
showed a decreased risk of subsequent CDI for some patients 
treated empirically with vancomycin. One study showed a 
decreased risk for those whose previous CDI episode was itself 
a recurrent CDI episode, but not for those following a primary 
CDI episode [356]. The obvious bias in these studies was the 
unknown factors that dictated prescribing oral vancomycin 
prophylaxis. In addition, the long-term benefit is unknown. To 
date there are no prospective, randomized studies of secondary 
prophylaxis of CDI to guide recommendations, but if the deci-
sion is to institute CDI prevention agents, it may be prudent to 
administer low doses of vancomycin or fidaxomicin (eg, 125 mg 
or 200 mg, respectively, once daily) while systemic antibiotics 
are administered. Factors that might influence the decision to 
administer secondary prophylaxis include length of time from 
previous CDI treatment, and patient characteristics (number 
of previous CDI episodes, severity of previous episodes, and 
underlying frailty of the patient).
Patients who have failed to resolve recurrent CDI despite 
repeated antibiotic treatment attempts present a particularly 
difficult challenge. Clinical investigations of patients with 
recurrent CDI have shown significant disruption of the intes-
tinal microbiome diversity as well as relative bacterial popula-
tion numbers. Instillation of processed stool collected from a 
healthy donor into the intestinal tract of patients with recurrent 
CDI has been used with a high degree of success to correct the 
intestinal dysbiosis brought about by repeated courses of anti-
biotic administration [358–361]. Anecdotal treatment success 
rates of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) for recurrent 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e36 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
CDI have been high regardless of route of instillation of feces, 
and have ranged between 77% and 94% with administration via 
the proximal small bowel [358, 362]; the highest success rates 
(80%–100%) have been associated with instillation of feces 
via the colon [360, 363–366]. By March 2016, >1945 patients 
(reported as single case reports and larger case series) with 
recurrent CDI had been described in the peer-reviewed litera-
ture (J. S. Bakken, unpublished data).
Despite the large number of anecdotal reports that have 
consistently demonstrated high efficacy of FMT, the first pro-
spective randomized clinical trial that compared the outcome 
of standard antibiotic therapy to FMT was published in 2013 
[367]. In this unblinded trial, van Nood and collaborators ran-
domly assigned 43 patients with ≥2 recurrent episodes of CDI 
to receive either a standard 14-day course of oral vancomycin 
(13 patients), vancomycin with bowel lavage (13 patients), or 
a 4-day course of vancomycin followed by bowel lavage and 
subsequent FMT infusion administered through a nasoduo-
denal tube (17 patients) [367]. The primary endpoint was ini-
tial response without relapse for 10 weeks after completion of 
therapy. The investigation was terminated early after interim 
analysis, due to the marked difference in treatment outcomes. 
Thirteen of the 16 (81%) patients in the FMT arm had a sus-
tained resolution of diarrhea after the first fecal infusion; only 
7 of the 26 (27%) patients who were treated with vancomycin 
resolved their CDI (P < .001). Four additional randomized trials 
of FMT have been published through 2016 [368–371]. One of 
these trials compared FMT to antibiotic treatment [368] and 
the other 3 compared various refinements of the FMT product 
[370], delivery of the product [369], or FMT to autologous FMT 
[371]. In general, the reported efficacy of FMT is lower in most 
randomized trials than in nonrandomized reports. The largest 
of these randomized trials reported an efficacy of approximately 
50% for one FMT delivered by enema, which increased to 75% 
for 2 FMT administrations and approximately 90% for >2 FMT 
administrations. Patient selection, proximity to recurrent CDI 
episode, and antibiotic treatment prior to FMT all likely influ-
ence response to FMT.
FMT has been well accepted by patients and represents a 
viable alternative treatment approach to an increasing clinical 
problem. Judged by the published literature, FMT appears to be 
safe in the short term [359, 367, 372, 373] and mild to moderate 
posttreatment adverse events are for the most part self-limited 
[374]. A recent retrospective multicenter case series report of 
80 immunocompromised patients concluded that FMT was safe 
and well tolerated, although they included a heterogenous group 
of conditions [375]. Reported infectious complications directly 
attributed to the instillation of donor feces has so far been lim-
ited to 2 patients who developed norovirus gastroenteritis after 
FMT for treatment of CDI despite use of asymptomatic donors 
and lack of sick contacts [376]. Physical complications from the 
FMT instillation procedure (upper gastrointestinal bleed after 
nasogastric tube insertion, colon perforation during colonos-
copy) has been occasionally reported and may occur with the 
same frequency as when these procedures are performed for 
gastrointestinal illnesses other than recurrent CDI. Potential 
unintended long-term infectious and noninfectious conse-
quences of FMT are still unknown in the absence of large-scale 
controlled trials with sufficient follow-up.
Potential candidates for FMT include patients with multiple 
recurrences of CDI who have failed to resolve their infection 
despite treatment attempts with antibiotic agents targeting CDI. 
Although there are no data to indicate how many antibiotic 
treatments should be attempted before referral for FMT, the 
opinion of the panel is that appropriate antibiotic treatments for 
at least 2 recurrences (ie, 3 CDI episodes) should be tried. There 
are limited data on FMT administration in patients with severe, 
refractory CDI [377, 378]. FMT has also been used for treat-
ing recurrent CDI in patients with underlying IBD, although 
it appears to be less effective for this population compared to 
those without IBD [379], and flares of underlying disease activ-
ity have been reported following FMT for recurrent CDI in 
patients with IBD [379–381]. Once a patient has been found 
to be a candidate for FMT, an appropriate stool donor must be 
identified. Occult contagious pathogens may be present in the 
stool of a candidate FMT donor, which could potentially place 
the recipient at risk for a transmissible infection. Careful evalu-
ation and selection of all candidate stool donors is therefore 
important to minimize the risk for an iatrogenic infection and 
to maximize the likelihood for a successful treatment outcome. 
The designated stool donor should undergo screening of blood 
and feces prior to the stool donation in accordance with recom-
mendations recently published [372]. Detection of any trans-
missible microbial pathogen should disqualify the individual 
from donating stool. Individuals who have been treated with 
an antibiotic agent during the preceding 3 months of donating 
stool, and those with preexisting chronic medical conditions, 
such as IBD, malignant diseases, chronic infections, active 
autoimmune illnesses, or individuals who are receiving active 
treatment with immunosuppressive medication should also be 
disqualified from donating stool [372].
Most investigators have recommended that patients who 
are not receiving active antibiotic treatment prior to planned 
FMT should be placed on a brief “induction course” of oral 
vancomycin for 3–4 days prior to FMT administration to 
reduce the burden of vegetative C. difficile. The patient and the 
treating physician must also decide the route of FMT instil-
lation, taking into consideration individual preferences and 
recognizing that the rate of success varies with the route of 
instillation [373].
TREATMENT (PEDIATRIC CONSIDERATIONS)
XXXII. What is the best treatment of an initial episode or first re-
currence of nonsevere CDI in children?
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e37
Recommendation
1. Either metronidazole or vancomycin is recommended for the 
treatment of children with an initial episode or first recurrence 
of nonsevere CDI (see Pediatric treatment section for dosing) 
(weak recommendation, low quality of evidence) (Table 2). 
Summary of the Evidence
Robust data assessing the optimal approach for treating an 
initial episode of CDI in children are limited, and evidence 
of the comparative effectiveness of metronidazole and van-
comycin for treating pediatric CDI is lacking. There are no 
RCTs comparing the use of these agents in children. A few 
recent studies suggest that failure rates with metronidazole 
may be higher than traditionally reported, but these data 
have limitations. Kim et al [165] prospectively studied 82 
children with CDI, of whom 56 received metronidazole; 6 
(11%) of them had treatment failure, but half of these were 
children with severe disease. Khanna et al [125] performed 
a population-based cohort study of CDI epidemiology in 
children 0–18 years of age. Among 69 patients with com-
munity-acquired CDI, treatment failure rate was 18% for 
metronidazole and 0% for vancomycin, but these rates were 
not statistically different. In a survey of pediatric infec-
tious diseases physicians by Sammons et al [382], 100% 
of respondents reported using metronidazole for initial 
therapy in healthy children with mild CDI, but the pro-
portion fell to 41%–79% for treating mild CDI in children 
with underlying comorbidities. Schwenk et al [383] used 
a national administrative database to study vancomycin 
use for pediatric CDI and found that vancomycin use for 
initial therapy increased significantly between 2006 and 
2011, with substantial variability between children’s hospi-
tals. Complications and mortality from CDI in children are 
uncommon, regardless of severity of disease or choice of 
antibiotic for treatment [125, 126, 158, 345].
Treatment recommendations for pediatric CDI should bal-
ance the accumulated experience of good outcomes with met-
ronidazole for initial mild disease and emerging data in both 
adults and children, suggesting a possible difference in favor of 
vancomycin. At the current time there are insufficient pediatric 
data to recommend vancomycin over metronidazole as pre-
ferred treatment, so either metronidazole or vancomycin should 
be used for an initial episode or first recurrence of nonsevere 
CDI in children (Table 2). However, because oral vancomycin 
is not absorbed, the risk of side effects is lower than for met-
ronidazole. Nonetheless, studies have demonstrated that van-
comycin exposure promotes carriage of vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci in the intestinal flora of treated patients, although 
available data suggest that metronidazole use is also associated 
with this outcome [307, 384].
XXXIII. What is the best treatment of an initial episode of severe 
CDI in children?
Recommendation
1. For children with an initial episode of severe CDI, oral van-
comycin is recommended over metronidazole (strong recom-
mendation, moderate quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
There are no well-designed trials that examine the compara-
tive effectiveness of metronidazole and oral vancomycin for 
the initial treatment of children with severe CDI. As noted 
above, observational studies of hospitalized children with 
CDI suggest that the rate of treatment failure may be greater 
among children with severe disease as compared to those with 
nonsevere disease [345]. Although pediatric studies have not 
demonstrated conclusively that the therapeutic agent used to 
treat a child with severe CDI is associated with different out-
comes, evidence from adult RCTs has demonstrated improved 
outcomes in adult patients with severe CDI who are treated 
with oral vancomycin compared with those treated with 
oral metronidazole. Therefore, clinicians should use vanco-
mycin in children who present with severe or fulminant CDI 
(Table 2). Because fidaxomicin was not approved for use in 
patients <18 years of age, at the time of this writing, it is not 
recommended for routine use in the treatment of children 
with severe CDI, although a recent survey of pediatric in-
fectious disease physicians revealed that it had been used or 
recommended by 12% of respondents [382]. Of note, neither 
vancomycin nor fidaxomicin is significantly absorbed when 
orally administered; thus, there are few systemic adverse 
events associated with these drugs.
XXXIV.  What are the best treatments for a second or greater epi-
sode of recurrent CDI in children?
Recommendation
1. For children with a second or greater episode of recurrent 
CDI, oral vancomycin is recommended over metronidazole 
(weak recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
There are no well-designed trials that examine the effectiveness 
of various treatment regimens in children with multiply recur-
rent CDI. In addition, pediatric studies have not demonstrated 
conclusively that there is a difference in the risk of recurrence 
related to the therapeutic agent used to treat an initial epi-
sode [125, 165]. Thus, recommendations about the therapeu-
tic approach to children with multiply recurrent CDI must be 
guided by evidence drawn from the studies performed in adults 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e38 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
and an assessment of the theoretical benefits and harms asso-
ciated with various treatment regimens. As described above, 
evidence from adult studies supports the use of an extended 
course of oral vancomycin (tapered or pulse regimen), oral van-
comycin followed by rifaximin, or fidaxomicin in patients with 
multiply recurrent CDI. For children with a second recurrence 
of CDI who have been treated exclusively with metronidazole, a 
conventional course of oral vancomycin should be considered. 
For children with multiple recurrences of CDI despite conven-
tional courses of metronidazole and oral vancomycin, an alter-
nate therapeutic regimen should be used (Table 2).
Vancomycin, fidaxomicin, and rifaximin are not absorbed 
when orally administered; thus, there are few systemic adverse 
events associated with these drugs. Rifaximin has been approved 
by the FDA for the treatment of traveler’s diarrhea in children 
≥12 years of age but has been used in younger children with 
refractory IBDs [385] and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth 
[386] with few reports of adverse events. As noted above, fidax-
omicin was not approved for use in patients <18 years of age at the 
time of this writing. In contrast to vancomycin and fidaxomicin, 
repeated or prolonged exposure to metronidazole has been asso-
ciated with neuropathies. Additional concerns have been voiced 
about the risk of resistance associated with the use of rifaximin.
XXXV. Is there a role for fecal microbiota transplantation in chil-
dren with recurrent CDI?
Recommendation
1. Consider fecal microbiota transplantation for pediatric 
patients with multiple recurrences of CDI following standard 
antibiotic treatments (weak recommendation, very low quality 
of evidence).
Summary of the Evidence
Management of multiply recurrent CDI can be challenging. As 
detailed above, FMT restores gut microbiota diversity through 
instillation of donor stool into the gastrointestinal tract of 
patients with CDI. Good clinical response has been shown in 
adults with refractory or recurrent CDI with few reports of ad-
verse events. At present, robust data examining the effectiveness 
of FMT for pediatric patients are lacking. Thus, recommenda-
tions regarding the therapeutic approach to multiply recurrent 
CDI in children should be guided primarily by evidence from 
adult studies. Limited evidence from case reports and case 
series in pediatric patients suggests that FMT via nasogastric 
tube or colonoscopy can be effective in children with multiply 
recurrent CDI who have failed standard antibiotic therapy, with 
follow-up periods up to 16 months [387, 388]. In most reported 
cases, fecal sample donation was from the child’s mother or 
father [388]. Despite limited pediatric data, a survey of pediatric 
infectious diseases physicians revealed that 18% of respondents 
who reported using alternative therapies for CDI had recom-
mended FMT, most commonly for the treatment of a third or 
later recurrence [382]. Finally, the potential benefits of FMT 
must be balanced against theoretical risks.
As described above, instillation of donor stool typically 
requires use of nasogastric tube or colonoscopy, which may 
carry procedure-related risks. In addition, use of donor stool 
introduces the potential for transmission of resistant organisms 
and blood-borne pathogens, necessitating donor-screening 
protocols. There is a general concern that FMT might ulti-
mately lead to unexpected adverse events such as metabolic or 
immune-based disorders [359].
RESEARCH GAPS
The initial step in developing a rational clinical research agenda 
is the identification of gaps in information. The process of 
guideline development, as practiced by SHEA and the IDSA, 
serves as a natural means by which such gaps are identified. 
Clinical questions identified by the IDSA/SHEA Expert Panel 
and by members of the IDSA Research Committee that could 
inform a C. difficile research agenda are listed below.
Epidemiology
What is the epidemiology of CDI? What is the incubation period 
of C. difficile? What is the infectious dose of C. difficile? How 
should hospital rates be risk-adjusted for appropriate interhos-
pital comparisons? Does administration of PPIs increase the 
risk of CDI and, if so, what is the magnitude of risk? What are 
the sources for C. difficile transmission in the community? Is 
exposure to antibiotics (or equivalent agents, such as chemo-
therapy drugs) required for susceptibility to CDI? If not, what 
are the antibiotic surrogates or other factors that place patients 
at risk for CDI, particularly in the community? What is the role 
of asymptomatic carriers in transmission of C. difficile in the 
healthcare setting? What are the validated clinical predictors of 
severe CDI? Can clinical predictors of severe CDI in children be 
identified? At what age and to what degree is C. difficile patho-
genic among infants and young children? How should clinically 
significant diarrhea be defined in infants and children who are 
not continent of stool? How should pediatric healthcare facil-
ities conduct surveillance and report rates of C. difficile infec-
tion? Should data from infants <12 months of age be included 
in laboratory-based surveillance and reporting?
Diagnostics
What is the role and optimal sequence for multistep testing 
for CDI? Is GDH detection in stool sufficiently sensitive as a 
screening test for C. difficile colitis? How well does GDH cor-
relate with culture for toxigenic C. difficile? Which of the “gold 
standard” assays (culture for toxigenic C. difficile or cell culture 
cytotoxicity assay) is optimal as a reference test for diagnosis of 
CDI? Does screening by GDH test, coupled with confirmatory 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e39
testing for toxigenic C. difficile by cell culture cytotoxicity assay 
or NAAT for toxin genes, better identify patients with CDI than 
using NAAT alone? What should be done with patients who are 
positive by NAAT but toxin negative? What is the best diagnos-
tic method for hospital laboratories that do not have molecular 
technology available?
What is the role for NAAT in the diagnosis of CDI? Is molec-
ular testing for toxin genes too sensitive for clinical utility? 
Are there patient populations in whom a NAAT is method of 
choice?
Additional diagnostic research questions: Should infants 
and young children with diarrhea be tested for C. difficile? 
Which children in the ambulatory setting who present with 
diarrhea should be tested for C. difficile? Can new diagnostic 
tests be developed that will accurately distinguish colonization 
from infection? When should multiplex PCR test platforms for 
enteric pathogens be used for diagnosis of CDI? Should these 
platforms exclude C. difficile or should the C. difficile result be 
hidden given the availability of specific C. difficile diagnostics 
and the consideration of the different indications for testing (eg, 
traveler’s diarrhea, hospital onset, antibiotic-associated diar-
rhea)? Should testing for C. difficile be performed on patients 
with ileostomy/colostomy?
Treatment
What is the best treatment for recurrent CDI? What is the best 
method to prevent recurrent CDI? What is the best way to 
restore colonization resistance of intestinal microbiota? When 
should fecal transplant be considered? Should specific com-
mensal bacteria be administered in place of minimally screened 
fecal specimens from donors? What is the role of adjunct-
ive therapy as new agents become available (eg, monoclonal 
antibodies [bezlotoxumab, a monoclonal antibody that binds 
to toxin B, received FDA approval at the time this guideline 
was being finalized], nontoxigenic C. difficile, toxin-binding 
agents). What is the role for new anti–C. difficile antibiotics 
that are being developed? Does the in vitro spectrum of activ-
ity of new CDI treatment agents against gut commensal bac-
teria predict clinical outcome with respect to CDI recurrence 
in clinical trials with these agents? Assuming an effective vac-
cine is developed, what population should be targeted? What is 
the best approach to treatment of fulminant CDI? What are the 
criteria for colectomy in a patient with fulminant CDI? Should 
diverting loop ileostomy be the preferred procedure over colec-
tomy in this setting? What is the role of treatment with vanco-
mycin or other antibiotics alone or in combination, or FMT in 
fulminant infection? What is the role of treatment with passive 
antibodies (immunoglobulin or monoclonal antibody therapy) 
in fulminant infection?
Additional treatment research questions: When should van-
comycin be used to treat children with CDI? Is fidaxomicin 
safe and effective in children? How is a CDI episode best 
distinguished from an IBD flare in patient with ulcerative colitis 
or Crohn’s disease? What role does C. difficile play in IBD flares? 
How is CDI best managed in this population? Can postinfec-
tious irritable bowel syndrome be distinguished from recurrent 
CDI?
Prevention
What preventive measures can be taken to reduce the inci-
dence of CDI? What is the best method to identify patients 
at risk of primary or recurrent CDI? Can administration of 
probiotics or biotherapeutic agents effectively prevent CDI? 
What are the most effective antibiotic stewardship strate-
gies to prevent CDI? What are the most effective transmis-
sion prevention strategies (ie, environmental management 
and isolation) to prevent CDI in inpatient settings? What 
is the incremental impact of each? Is there a core “bundle” 
infection control strategy that can be used by a wide-range 
of healthcare facilities? Can vaccination effectively prevent 
CDI, and what would be the composition of the vaccine and 
the route of administration? What are systemic or mucosal 
serologic markers that predict protection against CDI? What 
is the role of anti-CDI agents in secondary CDI prevention 
of CDI (patients successfully treated for CDI but who receive 
subsequent oral, intravenous, or intramuscular antibiotics)? 
What drugs, dosages, and duration? What patient character-
istics should be considered for initiating secondary proph-
ylaxis (eg, age, number of previous CDI episodes, and time 
since previous CDI episode)? What is the effect of screening 
patients on admission for C. difficile carriage and isolating 
positive C. difficile carriers on the incidence of hospital-ac-
quired CDI?
Basic Research
What is the biology of C. difficile spores that leads to clinical 
infection? How do spores interact with the human gastroin-
testinal immune system? What are the triggers for sporulation 
and germination of C. difficile in the human gastrointestinal 
tract? Where does spore germination occur in the human gas-
trointestinal tract? What is the role of sporulation in recurrent 
C. difficile disease? What is the role of bile acid metabolism and 
the potential for using bile acid metabolites for CDI treatment 
intervention?
What is the basic relationship of C. difficile to the human gut 
mucosa and immune system? Where in the gut do C. difficile 
organisms reside? What enables C. difficile to colonize patients? 
What are the critical constituents of the microbiota that pro-
vide colonization resistance to C. difficile? Is there a C. difficile 
biofilm in the gastrointestinal tract? Is mucosal adherence nec-
essary for development of CDI? Is there a nutritional niche that 
allows C. difficile to establish colonization? What is the role of 
mucosal and systemic immunity in preventing clinical CDI? 
What causes C. difficile colonization to end? Do C. difficile 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e40 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
toxins enter the circulation during infection? What are the fac-
tors in infants and young children that influence susceptibility 
to C. difficile infection vs asymptomatic colonization?
Notes
Acknowledgments. The expert panel expresses its gratitude for thought-
ful reviews of an earlier version by Curtis Collins, PharmD of the ASHP, 
Christopher Ohl, MD, and Ellie Goldstein, MD. The panel greatly appreciates 
National Jewish Health for assistance with the literature searches and Valery 
Lavergne, MD, Paul Alexander, PhD, and Genet Demisashi of the IDSA for 
their assistance and support in the development of these guidelines.
Disclaimer. The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the 
author(s), and do not necessarily represent the official position of the CDC 
or the US Department of Veterans Affairs.
Financial support. Support for this guideline was provided by the 
IDSA and SHEA.
Potential conflicts of interest. The following list is a reflection of what 
has been reported to IDSA. To provide thorough transparency, IDSA 
requires full disclosure of all relationships, regardless of relevancy to the 
guideline topic. Evaluation of such relationships as potential conflicts of 
interest (COI) is determined by a review process that includes assessment 
by the Standards and Practice Guidelines Committee (SPGC) Chair, the 
SPGC liaison to the development Panel, the Board of Directors liaison to 
the SPGC, and, if necessary, the COI Task Force of the Board. This assess-
ment of disclosed relationships for possible COI will be based on the rel-
ative weight of the financial relationship (ie, monetary amount) and the 
relevance of the relationship (ie, the degree to which an association might 
reasonably be interpreted by an independent observer as related to the 
topic or recommendation of consideration). The reader of these guidelines 
should be mindful of this when the list of disclosures is reviewed. For activ-
ities outside of the submitted work, D. G. has served as board member for 
Rebiotix, Merck, Actelion, Summit, and DaVolterra; has served as a con-
sultant for Pfizer, Sanofi Pasteur, and MGB Pharma; received a grant from 
Seres Therapeutics; and holds patents and technology for nontoxigenic 
C. difficile for the treatment and prevention of CDI under NTCD, LLC. For 
activities outside of the submitted work, S. J. has served on the advisory 
board member for Bio-k+, Synthetic Biologics, Summit, Therapeutics, and 
CutisPharma; has served on Pfizer’s data and safety monitoring board for 
vaccine study; and has received payment for lectures from Merck. For activ-
ities outside of the submitted work, K. C. has received research grants from 
GenePOC, Accelerate, and BD Diagnostics; has received royalties from 
McGraw-Hill and ASM Press; and has received travel expenses as board 
member with ASM. For activities outside of the submitted work, S. C. has 
received payment as expert testimony for medical-legal consultation; has 
received research grants from the Agency for Health Research and Quality, 
CDC, and National Institutes of Health (NIH); and has received payment 
for lectures from IDSA, CDC, and American Academy of Pediatrics. For 
activities outside of the submitted work, E. R. D. has served as a consultant 
for Sanofi Pasteur, Nestle, Valneva, Pfizer, Rebiotix, GSK, and Merck; has 
received research grants from Sanofi Pasteur, Pfizer, Merck, and Rebiotix; 
and has received payment for lectures from Alere and Biofire. For activities 
outside of the submitted work, K. G. has received research grants from Merck 
& Co, Summit Pharmaceuticals, and Techlab, served as a consultant for 
bioMérieux, Merck & Co, and Summit Pharmaceuticals; and received pay-
ment for the development of educational presentation by bioMérieux and 
Merck & Co. For activities outside of the submitted work, C. K. has received 
research grants from the NIH, Institut Mérieux, and Aptalis; has received 
personal fees serving as scientific advisor for Facile Therapeutics, Summit 
(Oxford), Synthetic Biologics, Actelion, Artugen, First Light Diagnostics, 
Finch, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Seres Therapeutics, Summit, Vedanta, 
Celimmune, Cour Pharma, Takeda, Innovate, Valeant, and ImmunogenX; 
and has received payment for the development of educational presentations 
by Merck and Seres. For activities outside of the submitted work, V. L. has 
served as a consultant for Merck, and received payment for serving on the 
speaker’s bureau for Merck. For activities outside of the submitted work, 
J. S. has received grants from CDC Epicenters. For activities outside of the 
submitted work, M. W. has received research grants, consultancy/lecture 
fees from Actelion, Cubist, Astellas, Optimer, Sanofi Pasteur, Summit, Seres, 
bioMérieux, Da Volterra, Qiagen, and Pfizer; served as a consultant for 
Merck, Valneva, Alere, AstraZeneca, Durata, Nabriva, Pfizer, Roche, The 
Medicines Company, Abott, Basilea, and the European Tissue Symposium; 
and received research grants from Cerexa, Abbott, and the European Tissue 
Symposium. All other authors report no potential conflicts of interest. 
All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential 
Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the con-
tent of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE Working Group. Going from evi-
dence to recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:1049–51.
2. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE Working Group. Incorporating 
considerations of resources use into grading recommendations. BMJ 2008; 
336:1170–3.
3. Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P, et al; GRADE Working Group. Use of 
GRADE grid to reach decisions on clinical practice guidelines when consensus is 
elusive. BMJ 2008; 337:a744.
4. US GRADE Network. Approach and implications to rating the quality of evi-
dence and strength of recommendations using the GRADE methodology, 2015. 
Available at: http://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/. Accessed 1 July 2015.
5. Dubberke ER, Olsen MA. Burden of Clostridium difficile on the healthcare sys-
tem. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55(Suppl 2):S88–92.
6. Lessa FC, Mu Y, Bamberg WM, et al. Burden of Clostridium difficile infection in 
the United States. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:825–34.
7. Hall AJ, Curns AT, McDonald LC, Parashar UD, Lopman BA. The roles of 
Clostridium difficile and norovirus among gastroenteritis-associated deaths in the 
United States, 1999–2007. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:216–23.
8. US Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. CMS requirements: CMS 
resources for NHSN users 2015. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/cms/. 
Accessed 15 December 2015.
9. US Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Fiscal year (FY) 2016 results for 
the CMS hospital value-based purchasing program. 2015. Available at: https://
www.cms.gov/Newsroom/MediaReleaseDatabase/Fact-sheets/2015-Fact-sheets-
items/2015-10-26.html. Accessed 15 December 2015.
10. Wilcox MH, Gerding DN, Poxton IR, et al; MODIFY I and MODIFY II 
Investigators. Bezlotoxumab for prevention of recurrent Clostridium difficile 
infection. N Engl J Med 2017; 376:305–17.
11. Zhang H, Morrison S, Tang YW. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction tests for 
detection of pathogens associated with gastroenteritis. Clin Lab Med 2015; 
35:461–86.
12. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Clinical practice guidelines 
we can trust: standards for developing trustworthy clinical practice guidelines 
(CPGs). 2011. Available at: http://www.iom.edu/Reports/2011/Clinical-Practice-
Guidelines-We-Can-Trust.aspx. Accessed 1 March 2013.
13. Guyatt GH, Schünemann HJ, Djulbegovic B, Akl EA. Guideline panels should not 
GRADE good practice statements. J Clin Epidemiol 2015; 68:597–600.
14. Infectious Diseases Society of America. IDSA disclosure of interests policy for 
clinical practice guidelines. Handbook on clinical practice guideline development. 
2013. Available at: http://www.idsociety.org/uploadedFiles/IDSA/Guidelines-
Patient_Care/Guidelines_By_Others/IDSA%20Handbook%20on%20CPG%20
Development%20for%20Web%2010.13.pdf. Accessed 11 January 2018. 
15. Dubberke E, Butler A, Hota B, et al. Impact of community-onset infections on 
surveillance for Clostridium difficile infections: a multicenter study. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2009; 30:518–25.
16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Multidrug-resistant organism and 
Clostridium difficile infection (MDRO/CDI) module. 2016. Available at: http://
www.cdc.gov/nhsn/pdfs/pscmanual/12pscmdro_cdadcurrent.pdf. Accessed 9 
March 2016.
17. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The NHSN standardized infection 
ratio (SIR); a guide to the SIR. 2017. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/pdfs/
ps-analysis-resources/nhsn-sir-guide.pdf. Accessed 11 January 2018.
18. Gould CV, Edwards JR, Cohen J, et al; Clostridium difficile Infection Surveillance 
Investigators, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Effect of nucleic acid 
amplification testing on population-based incidence rates of Clostridium difficile 
infection. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:1304–7.
19. Moehring RW, Lofgren ET, Anderson DJ. Impact of change to molecular testing 
for Clostridium difficile infection on healthcare facility-associated incidence rates. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013; 34:1055–61.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e41
20. Zilberberg MD, Tabak YP, Sievert DM, et al. Using electronic health informa-
tion to risk-stratify rates of Clostridium difficile infection in US hospitals. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011; 32:649–55.
21. Dubberke ER, Butler AM, Yokoe DS, et al. Multicenter study of Clostridium dif-
ficile infection rates from 2000 to 2006. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010; 
31:1030–7.
22. Tenover FC, Novak-Weekley S, Woods CW, et al. Impact of strain type on detec-
tion of toxigenic Clostridium difficile: comparison of molecular diagnostic and 
enzyme immunoassay approaches. J Clin Microbiol 2010; 48:3719–24.
23. Lee Y, Kim M, Kim H, Lee K. Comparison of sensitivity of enzyme immunoassays 
for toxin A and B in different C. difficile PCR ribotypes. Ann Clin Lab Sci 2014; 
44:38–41.
24. Thompson ND, Edwards JR, Dudeck MA, Fridkin SK, Magill SS. Evaluating the 
use of the case mix index for risk adjustment of healthcare-associated infection 
data: an illustration using Clostridium difficile infection data from the National 
Healthcare Safety Network. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2016; 37:19–25.
25. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Vital signs: prevention Clostridium 
difficile infection. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2012. Available at: http://www.
cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6109a3.htm. Accessed 9 March 2016.
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Emerging Infections Program—
healthcare-associated infections projects. 2015. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/
hai/eip/index.html. Accessed 9 March 2016.
27. Chitnis AS, Holzbauer SM, Belflower RM, et al. Epidemiology of community-as-
sociated Clostridium difficile infection, 2009 through 2011. JAMA Intern Med 
2013; 173:1359–67.
28. Magill SS, Edwards JR, Bamberg W, et al; Emerging Infections Program 
Healthcare-Associated Infections and Antimicrobial Use Prevalence Survey 
Team. Multistate point-prevalence survey of health care-associated infections. N 
Engl J Med 2014; 370:1198–208.
29. Miller BA, Chen LF, Sexton DJ, Anderson DJ. Comparison of the burdens of 
hospital-onset, healthcare facility-associated Clostridium difficile infection and of 
healthcare-associated infection due to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
in community hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011; 32:387–90.
30. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Healthcare Cost and Utilization 
Project (HCUP). 2016. Available at: http://hcupnet.ahrq.gov/. Accessed 9 March 
2016.
31. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National and state healthcare-associ-
ated infections progress report. 2016. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/HAI/pdfs/
progress-report/hai-progress-report.pdf. Accessed 9 March 2016.
32. Simor AE, Bradley SF, Strausbaugh LJ, Crossley K, Nicolle LE; SHEA Long-Term-
Care Committee. Clostridium difficile in long-term-care facilities for the elderly. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002; 23:696–703.
33. Walker KJ, Gilliland SS, Vance-Bryan K, et al. Clostridium difficile colonization in 
residents of long-term care facilities: prevalence and risk factors. J Am Geriatr Soc 
1993; 41:940–6.
34. Hunter JC, Mu Y, Dumyati GK, et al. Burden of nursing home-onset Clostridium 
difficile infection in the United States: estimates of incidence and patient out-
comes. Open Forum Infect Dis 2016; 3:ofv196.
35. Brown KA, Jones M, Daneman N, et al. Importation, antibiotics, and Clostridium 
difficile infection in Veteran long-term care: a multilevel case-control study. Ann 
Intern Med 2016; 164:787–94.
36. Loo VG, Poirier L, Miller MA, et al. A predominantly clonal multi-institutional 
outbreak of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea with high morbidity and 
mortality. N Engl J Med 2005; 353:2442–9.
37. Muto CA, Pokrywka M, Shutt K, et al. A large outbreak of Clostridium difficile-as-
sociated disease with an unexpected proportion of deaths and colectomies at a 
teaching hospital following increased fluoroquinolone use. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 2005; 26:273–80.
38. Kwon JH, Olsen MA, Dubberke ER. The morbidity, mortality, and costs asso-
ciated with Clostridium difficile infection. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2015; 
29:123–34.
39. Vallabhaneni S, Almendares O, Farley MM, et al. Epidemiology and factors asso-
ciated with candidaemia following Clostridium difficile infection in adults within 
metropolitan Atlanta, 2009–2013. Epidemiol Infect 2016; 144:1440–4.
40. Fekety R, McFarland LV, Surawicz CM, Greenberg RN, Elmer GW, Mulligan ME. 
Recurrent Clostridium difficile diarrhea: characteristics of and risk factors for 
patients enrolled in a prospective, randomized, double-blinded trial. Clin Infect 
Dis 1997; 24:324–33.
41. McFarland LV, Surawicz CM, Rubin M, Fekety R, Elmer GW, Greenberg RN. 
Recurrent Clostridium difficile disease: epidemiology and clinical characteristics. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1999; 20:43–50.
42. Kyne L, Hamel MB, Polavaram R, Kelly CP. Health care costs and mortality asso-
ciated with nosocomial diarrhea due to Clostridium difficile. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 
34:346–53.
43. Miller MA, Hyland M, Ofner-Agostini M, Gourdeau M, Ishak M; Canadian 
Hospital Epidemiology Committee. Canadian Nosocomial Infection Surveillance 
Program. Morbidity, mortality, and healthcare burden of nosocomial Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea in Canadian hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2002; 23:137–40.
44. Olson MM, Shanholtzer CJ, Lee JT Jr., Gerding DN. Ten years of prospec-
tive Clostridium difficile-associated disease surveillance and treatment at the 
Minneapolis VA Medical Center, 1982–1991. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1994; 15:371–81.
45. Dallal RM, Harbrecht BG, Boujoukas AJ, et al. Fulminant Clostridium difficile: 
an underappreciated and increasing cause of death and complications. Ann Surg 
2002; 235:363–72.
46. Loo VG, Bourgault AM, Poirier L, et al. Host and pathogen factors for Clostridium 
difficile infection and colonization. N Engl J Med 2011; 365:1693–703.
47. Olsen MA, Yan Y, Reske KA, Zilberberg MD, Dubberke ER. Recurrent Clostridium 
difficile infection is associated with increased mortality. Clin Microbiol Infect 
2015; 21:164–70.
48. McDonald LC, Killgore GE, Thompson A, et al. An epidemic, toxin gene-variant 
strain of Clostridium difficile. N Engl J Med 2005; 353:2433–41.
49. Eggertson L. Quebec strain of C. difficile in 7 provinces. CMAJ 2006; 174:607–8.
50. Warny M, Pepin J, Fang A, et al. Toxin production by an emerging strain of 
Clostridium difficile associated with outbreaks of severe disease in North America 
and Europe. Lancet 2005; 366:1079–84.
51. Health Protection Agency. Outbreak of Clostridium difficile infection in a hospital 
in southeast England. CDR Wkly 2005; 15. 
52. Kuijper E, Barbut F, Brazier J, et al. Update of Clostridium difficile infection due to 
PCR ribotype 027 in Europe, 2008. Euro Surveill 2008; 13:18942.
53. Kuijper EJ, Debast SB, Van Kregten E, Vaessen N, Notermans DW, van den 
Broek PJ. Clostridium difficile ribotype 027, toxinotype III in The Netherlands [in 
Dutch]. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 2005; 149:2087–9.
54. Kato H, Ito Y, van den Berg R, Kuijper E, Arakawa Y. First isolation of Clostridium 
difficile 027 in Japan. Euro Surveill 2007; 12:EO70111.3.
55. See I, Mu Y, Cohen J, et al. NAP1 strain type predicts outcomes from Clostridium 
difficile infection. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 58:1394–400.
56. Wilcox MH, Shetty N, Fawley WN, et al. Changing epidemiology of Clostridium 
difficile infection following the introduction of a national ribotyping-based sur-
veillance scheme in England. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:1056–63.
57. Goorhuis A, Bakker D, Corver J, et al. Emergence of Clostridium difficile infection 
due to a new hypervirulent strain, polymerase chain reaction ribotype 078. Clin 
Infect Dis 2008; 47:1162–70.
58. Jhung MA, Thompson AD, Killgore GE, et al. Toxinotype V Clostridium difficile 
in humans and food animals. Emerg Infect Dis 2008; 14:1039–45.
59. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Severe Clostridium difficile-asso-
ciated disease in populations previously at low risk—four states, 2005. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005; 54:1201–5.
60. Dial S, Delaney JA, Barkun AN, Suissa S. Use of gastric acid-suppressive agents 
and the risk of community-acquired Clostridium difficile-associated disease. 
JAMA 2005; 294:2989–95.
61. James AH, Katz VL, Dotters DJ, Rogers RG. Clostridium difficile infection in ob-
stetric and gynecologic patients. South Med J 1997; 90:889–92.
62. Johal SS, Hammond J, Solomon K, James PD, Mahida YR. Clostridium difficile 
associated diarrhoea in hospitalised patients: onset in the community and hospi-
tal and role of flexible sigmoidoscopy. Gut 2004; 53:673–7.
63. Kyne L, Merry C, O’Connell B, Keane C, O’Neill D. Community-acquired 
Clostridium difficile infection. J Infect 1998; 36:287–8.
64. Terhes G, Urbán E, Sóki J, Hamid KA, Nagy E. Community-acquired Clostridium 
difficile diarrhea caused by binary toxin, toxin A, and toxin B gene-positive iso-
lates in Hungary. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42:4316–8.
65. Kuntz JL, Johnson ES, Raebel MA, et al. Predicting the risk of Clostridium difficile 
infection following an outpatient visit: development and external validation of a 
pragmatic, prognostic risk score. Clin Microbiol Infect 2015; 21:256–62.
66. Negrón ME, Rezaie A, Barkema HW, et al. Ulcerative colitis patients with 
Clostridium difficile are at increased risk of death, colectomy, and postoperative 
complications: a population-based inception cohort study. Am J Gastroenterol 
2016; 111:691–704.
67. Razik R, Rumman A, Bahreini Z, McGeer A, Nguyen GC. Recurrence of 
Clostridium difficile infection in patients with inflammatory bowel disease: the 
RECIDIVISM Study. Am J Gastroenterol 2016; 111:1141–6.
68. Peng JC, Shen J, Zhu Q, Ran ZH. The impact of Clostridum difficile on surgical 
rate among ulcerative colitis patients: a systemic review and meta-analysis. Saudi 
J Gastroenterol 2015; 21:208–12.
69. Donnelly JP, Wang HE, Locke JE, Mannon RB, Safford MM, Baddley JW. 
Hospital-onset Clostridium difficile infection among solid organ transplant recip-
ients. Am J Transplant 2015; 15:2970–7.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e42 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
70. Paudel S, Zacharioudakis IM, Zervou FN, Ziakas PD, Mylonakis E. Prevalence 
of Clostridium difficile infection among solid organ transplant recipients: a 
meta-analysis of published studies. PLoS One 2015; 10:e0124483.
71. Phatharacharukul P, Thongprayoon C, Cheungpasitporn W, Edmonds PJ, 
Mahaparn P, Bruminhent J. The risks of incident and recurrent Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea in chronic kidney disease and end-stage kidney 
disease patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Dig Dis Sci 2015; 
60:2913–22.
72. Thongprayoon C, Cheungpasitporn W, Phatharacharukul P, et al. Chronic kid-
ney disease and end-stage renal disease are risk factors for poor outcomes of 
Clostridium difficile infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Clin 
Pract 2015; 69:998–1006.
73. Zacharioudakis IM, Ziakas PD, Mylonakis E. Clostridium difficile infection in 
the hematopoietic unit: a meta-analysis of published studies. Biol Blood Marrow 
Transplant 2014; 20:1641–65.
74. McFarland LV, Mulligan ME, Kwok RY, Stamm WE. Nosocomial acquisition of 
Clostridium difficile infection. N Engl J Med 1989; 320:204–10.
75. Curry SR, Muto CA, Schlackman JL, et al. Use of multilocus variable number of 
tandem repeats analysis genotyping to determine the role of asymptomatic carri-
ers in Clostridium difficile transmission. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:1094–102.
76. Rivera EV, Woods S. Prevalence of asymptomatic Clostridium difficile coloniza-
tion in a nursing home population: a cross-sectional study. J Gend Specif Med 
2003; 6:27–30.
77. Aronsson B, Molby R, Nord C. Antimicrobial agents and Clostridium difficile in 
acute enteric disease: epidemiological data from Sweden, 1980–1982. J Infect Dis 
1985; 151:476–81.
78. Viscidi R, Willey S, Bartlett JG. Isolation rates and toxigenic potential of 
Clostridium difficile isolates from various patient populations. Gastroenterology 
1981; 81:5–9.
79. Zacharioudakis IM, Zervou FN, Pliakos EE, Ziakas PD, Mylonakis E. Colonization 
with toxinogenic C. difficile upon hospital admission, and risk of infection: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2015; 110:381–90; quiz 
391.
80. Kyne L, Warny M, Qamar A, Kelly CP. Asymptomatic carriage of Clostridium 
difficile and serum levels of IgG antibody against toxin A. N Engl J Med 2000; 
342:390–7.
81. Kyne L, Warny M, Qamar A, Kelly CP. Association between antibody response to 
toxin A and protection against recurrent Clostridium difficile diarrhoea. Lancet 
2001; 357:189–93.
82. Shim JK, Johnson S, Samore MH, Bliss DZ, Gerding DN. Primary symptomless 
colonisation by Clostridium difficile and decreased risk of subsequent diarrhoea. 
Lancet 1998; 351:633–6.
83. Sambol SP, Tang JK, Merrigan MM, Johnson S, Gerding DN. Infection of ham-
sters with epidemiologically important strains of Clostridium difficile. J Infect Dis 
2001; 183:1760–6.
84. Bobulsky GS, Al-Nassir WN, Riggs MM, Sethi AK, Donskey CJ. Clostridium diffi-
cile skin contamination in patients with C. difficile-associated disease. Clin Infect 
Dis 2008; 46:447–50.
85. Fawley WN, Wilcox MH. Molecular epidemiology of endemic Clostridium diffi-
cile infection. Epidemiol Infect 2001; 126:343–50.
86. Mayfield JL, Leet T, Miller J, Mundy LM. Environmental control to reduce trans-
mission of Clostridium difficile. Clin Infect Dis 2000; 31:995–1000.
87. Samore MH, Venkataraman L, DeGirolami PC, Arbeit RD, Karchmer AW. 
Clinical and molecular epidemiology of sporadic and clustered cases of nosoco-
mial Clostridium difficile diarrhea. Am J Med 1996; 100:32–40.
88. Wilcox MH, Fawley WN, Wigglesworth N, Parnell P, Verity P, Freeman J. 
Comparison of the effect of detergent versus hypochlorite cleaning on environ-
mental contamination and incidence of Clostridium difficile infection. J Hosp 
Infect 2003; 54:109–14.
89. Shaughnessy MK, Micielli RL, DePestel DD, et al. Evaluation of hospital room 
assignment and acquisition of Clostridium difficile infection. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 2011; 32:201–6.
90. Brooks SE, Veal RO, Kramer M, Dore L, Schupf N, Adachi M. Reduction in the 
incidence of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea in an acute care hospital and 
a skilled nursing facility following replacement of electronic thermometers with 
single-use disposables. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1992; 13:98–103.
91. Walker AS, Eyre DW, Wyllie DH, et al. Characterisation of Clostridium difficile 
hospital ward-based transmission using extensive epidemiological data and 
molecular typing. PLoS Med 2012; 9:e1001172.
92. Eyre DW, Cule ML, Wilson DJ, et al. Diverse sources of C. difficile infection iden-
tified on whole-genome sequencing. N Engl J Med 2013; 369:1195–205.
93. Brown K, Valenta K, Fisman D, Simor A, Daneman N. Hospital ward antibiotic 
prescribing and the risks of Clostridium difficile infection. JAMA Intern Med 
2015; 175:626–33.
94. Freedberg DE, Salmasian H, Cohen B, Abrams JA, Larson EL. Receipt of antibi-
otics in hospitalized patients and risk for Clostridium difficile infection in subse-
quent patients who occupy the same bed. JAMA Intern Med 2016; 176:1801–8.
95. Sethi AK, Al-Nassir WN, Nerandzic MM, Bobulsky GS, Donskey CJ. Persistence of 
skin contamination and environmental shedding of Clostridium difficile during and 
after treatment of C. difficile infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010; 31:21–7.
96. McDonald L, Owings M, Jernigan D. Clostridium difficile infection in patients 
discharged from US short-stay hospitals, 1996–2003. Emerg Infect Dis 2006; 
12:409–15.
97. Pepin J, Valiquette L, Alary M, et al. Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea in a 
region of Quebec from 1991 to 2003: a changing pattern of disease severity. CMAJ 
2004; 31:466–72.
98. Johnson S, Gerding DN. Clostridium difficile–associated diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 
1998; 26:1027–34; quiz 1035–6.
99. Hensgens MP, Goorhuis A, Dekkers OM, Kuijper EJ. Time interval of increased 
risk for Clostridium difficile infection after exposure to antibiotics. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2012; 67:742–8.
100. Pépin J, Saheb N, Coulombe MA, et al. Emergence of fluoroquinolones as the pre-
dominant risk factor for Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea: a cohort study 
during an epidemic in Quebec. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:1254–60.
101. Johnson S, Samore MH, Farrow KA, et al. Epidemics of diarrhea caused by a clin-
damycin-resistant strain of Clostridium difficile in four hospitals. N Engl J Med 
1999; 341:1645–51.
102. Thibault A, Miller MA, Gaese C. Risk factors for the development of Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea during a hospital outbreak. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 1991; 12:345–8.
103. Dethlefsen L, Huse S, Sogin ML, Relman DA. The pervasive effects of an anti-
biotic on the human gut microbiota, as revealed by deep 16S rRNA sequencing. 
PLoS Biol 2008; 6:e280.
104. Privitera G, Scarpellini P, Ortisi G, Nicastro G, Nicolin R, de Lalla F. Prospective 
study of Clostridium difficile intestinal colonization and disease following sin-
gle-dose antibiotic prophylaxis in surgery. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1991; 
35:208–10.
105. Anand A, Glatt AE. Clostridium difficile infection associated with antineoplastic 
chemotherapy: a review. Clin Infect Dis 1993; 17:109–13.
106. Morales Chamorro R, Serrano Blanch R, Méndez Vidal MJ, et al. 
Pseudomembranous colitis associated with chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil. 
Clin Transl Oncol 2005; 7:258–61.
107. Bilgrami S, Feingold JM, Dorsky D, et al. Incidence and outcome of Clostridium 
difficile infection following autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. 
Bone Marrow Transplant 1999; 23:1039–42.
108. Gorschlüter M, Glasmacher A, Hahn C, et al. Clostridium difficile infection in 
patients with neutropenia. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33:786–91.
109. Sanchez T, Brooks J, Sullivan P, et al. Bacterial diarrhea in persons with HIV infec-
tion, United States, 1992–2002. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:1621–7.
110. Bliss DZ, Johnson S, Savik K, Clabots CR, Willard K, Gerding DN. Acquisition of 
Clostridium difficile and Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea in hospitalized 
patients receiving tube feeding. Ann Intern Med 1998; 129:1012–9.
111. Deshpande A, Pasupuleti V, Thota P, et al. Risk factors for recurrent Clostridium 
difficile infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 2015; 36:452–60.
112. Abou Chakra CN, Pepin J, Sirard S, Valiquette L. Risk factors for recurrence, 
complications and mortality in Clostridium difficile infection: a systematic review. 
PLoS One 2014; 9:e98400.
113. Bauer MP, Nibbering PH, Poxton IR, Kuijper EJ, van Dissel JT. Humoral immune 
response as predictor of recurrence in Clostridium difficile infection. Clin 
Microbiol Infect 2014; 20:1323–8.
114. Sahay T, Ananthakrishnan AN. Vitamin D deficiency is associated with commu-
nity-acquired Clostridium difficile infection: a case-control study. BMC Infect Dis 
2014; 14:661.
115. Wang WJ, Gray S, Sison C, et al. Low vitamin D level is an independent pre-
dictor of poor outcomes in Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea. Therap Adv 
Gastroenterol 2014; 7:14–9.
116. Stevens V, Dumyati G, Brown J, Wijngaarden E. Differential risk of Clostridium 
difficile infection with proton pump inhibitor use by level of antibiotic exposure. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2011; 20:1035–42.
117. Howell MD, Novack V, Grgurich P, et al. Iatrogenic gastric acid suppression and 
the risk of nosocomial Clostridium difficile infection. Arch Intern Med 2010; 
170:784–90.
118. Cunningham R, Dale B, Undy B, Gaunt N. Proton pump inhibitors as a risk factor 
for Clostridium difficile diarrhoea. J Hosp Infect 2003; 54:243–5.
119. Dial S, Alrasadi K, Manoukian C, Huang A, Menzies D. Risk of Clostridium 
difficile diarrhea among hospital inpatients prescribed proton pump inhibitors: 
cohort and case-control studies. CMAJ 2004; 171:33–8.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e43
120. Novack L, Kogan S, Gimpelevich L, et al. Acid suppression therapy does not pre-
dispose to Clostridium difficile infection: the case of the potential bias. PLoS One 
2014; 9:e110790.
121. Weiss K, Louie T, Miller MA, Mullane K, Crook DW, Gorbach SL. Effects of pro-
ton pump inhibitors and histamine-2 receptor antagonists on response to fidax-
omicin or vancomycin in patients with Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhoea. 
BMJ Open Gastroenterol 2015; 2:e000028.
122. McDonald EG, Milligan J, Frenette C, Lee TC. Continuous proton pump inhibitor 
therapy and the associated risk of recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. JAMA 
Intern Med 2015; 175:784–91.
123. Seto CT, Jeraldo P, Orenstein R, Chia N, DiBaise JK. Prolonged use of a proton 
pump inhibitor reduces microbial diversity: implications for Clostridium difficile 
susceptibility. Microbiome 2014; 2:42.
124. Benson L, Song X, Campos J, Singh N. Changing epidemiology of Clostridium 
difficile-associated disease in children. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2007; 
28:1233–5.
125. Khanna S, Baddour LM, Huskins WC, et al. The epidemiology of Clostridium diffi-
cile infection in children: a population-based study. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 56:1401–6.
126. Kim J, Smathers SA, Prasad P, Leckerman KH, Coffin S, Zaoutis T. Epidemiological 
features of Clostridium difficile-associated disease among inpatients at children’s 
hospitals in the United States, 2001–2006. Pediatrics 2008; 122:1266–70.
127. Nylund CM, Goudie A, Garza JM, Fairbrother G, Cohen MB. Clostridium difficile 
infection in hospitalized children in the United States. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 
2011; 165:451–7.
128. Zilberberg MD, Shorr AF, Kollef MH. Increase in Clostridium difficile-related 
hospitalizations among infants in the United States, 2000–2005. Pediatr Infect Dis 
J 2008; 27:1111–3.
129. Zilberberg MD, Tillotson GS, McDonald C. Clostridium difficile infections 
among hospitalized children, United States, 1997–2006. Emerg Infect Dis 2010; 
16:604–9.
130. Baker SS, Faden H, Sayej W, Patel R, Baker RD. Increasing incidence of communi-
ty-associated atypical Clostridium difficile disease in children. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 
2010; 49:644–7.
131. Wendt JM, Cohen JA, Mu Y, et al. Clostridium difficile infection among children 
across diverse US geographic locations. Pediatrics 2014; 133:651–8.
132. Kociolek LK, Sandora TJ. National variability in surveillance, testing, and infec-
tion prevention for Clostridium difficile infection in pediatric populations. Am J 
Infect Control 2013; 41:933–5.
133. Kociolek LK, Patel SJ, Zheng X, Todd KM, Shulman ST, Gerding DN. Clinical and 
microbiologic assessment of cases of pediatric community-associated Clostridium 
difficile infection reveals opportunities for improved testing decisions. Pediatr 
Infect Dis J 2016; 35:157–61.
134. Bolton RP, Tait SK, Dear PR, Losowsky MS. Asymptomatic neonatal colonisation 
by Clostridium difficile. Arch Dis Child 1984; 59:466–72.
135. Delmée M, Verellen G, Avesani V, Francois G. Clostridium difficile in neonates: 
serogrouping and epidemiology. Eur J Pediatr 1988; 147:36–40.
136. Donta ST, Myers MG. Clostridium difficile toxin in asymptomatic neonates. J 
Pediatr 1982; 100:431–4.
137. Elstner CL, Lindsay AN, Book LS, Matsen JM. Lack of relationship of Clostridium 
difficile to antibiotic-associated diarrhea in children. Pediatr Infect Dis 1983; 
2:364–6.
138. Phua TJ, Rogers TR, Pallett AP. Prospective study of Clostridium difficile coloniza-
tion and paracresol detection in the stools of babies on a special care unit. J Hyg 
(Lond) 1984; 93:17–25.
139. Rousseau C, Lemée L, Le Monnier A, Poilane I, Pons JL, Collignon A. Prevalence 
and diversity of Clostridium difficile strains in infants. J Med Microbiol 2011; 
60:1112–8.
140. Tullus K, Aronsson B, Marcus S, Möllby R. Intestinal colonization with 
Clostridium difficile in infants up to 18 months of age. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect 
Dis 1989; 8:390–3.
141. Tvede M, Schiøtz PO, Krasilnikoff PA. Incidence of Clostridium difficile in hospi-
talized children. A prospective study. Acta Paediatr Scand 1990; 79:292–9.
142. Ellis ME, Mandal BK, Dunbar EM, Bundell KR. Clostridium difficile and its cyto-
toxin in infants admitted to hospital with infectious gastroenteritis. Br Med J 
(Clin Res Ed) 1984; 288:524–6.
143. Larson HE, Barclay FE, Honour P, Hill ID. Epidemiology of Clostridium difficile in 
infants. J Infect Dis 1982; 146:727–33.
144. Toma S, Lesiak G, Magus M, Lo HL, Delmée M. Serotyping of Clostridium diffi-
cile. J Clin Microbiol 1988; 26:426–8.
145. Emeruwa AC, Oguike JU. Incidence of cytotoxin producing isolates of Clostridium 
difficile in faeces of neonates and children in Nigeria. Microbiologica 1990; 
13:323–8.
146. Penders J, Stobberingh EE, van den Brandt PA, van Ree R, Thijs C. Toxigenic and 
non-toxigenic Clostridium difficile: determinants of intestinal colonisation and 
role in childhood atopic manifestations. Gut 2008; 57:1025–6.
147. Stark PL, Lee A. Clostridia isolated from the feces of infants during the first year 
of life. J Pediatr 1982; 100:362–5.
148. Bacon AE, Fekety R, Schaberg DR, Faix RG. Epidemiology of Clostridium difficile 
colonization in newborns: results using a bacteriophage and bacteriocin typing 
system. J Infect Dis 1988; 158:349–54.
149. Kato H, Kato N, Watanabe K, et al. Application of typing by pulsed-field gel elec-
trophoresis to the study of Clostridium difficile in a neonatal intensive care unit. J 
Clin Microbiol 1994; 32:2067–70.
150. Martirosian G, Kuipers S, Verbrugh H, van Belkum A, Meisel-Mikolajczyk F. PCR 
ribotyping and arbitrarily primed PCR for typing strains of Clostridium difficile 
from a Polish maternity hospital. J Clin Microbiol 1995; 33:2016–21.
151. Camorlinga M, Muñoz O, Guiscafré H, Torres J. Colonization by Clostridium dif-
ficile in hospitalized children: risk factors and typification of the isolated strains. 
Arch Invest Med (Mex) 1991; 22:19–26.
152. Matsuki S, Ozaki E, Shozu M, et al. Colonization by Clostridium difficile of 
neonates in a hospital, and infants and children in three day-care facilities of 
Kanazawa, Japan. Int Microbiol 2005; 8:43–8.
153. Jangi S, Lamont JT. Asymptomatic colonization by Clostridium difficile in infants: 
implications for disease in later life. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2010; 51:2–7.
154. Sherertz RJ, Sarubbi FA. The prevalence of Clostridium difficile and toxin in a 
nursery population: a comparison between patients with necrotizing enterocolitis 
and an asymptomatic group. J Pediatr 1982; 100:435–9.
155. Stoesser N, Crook DW, Fung R, et al. Molecular epidemiology of Clostridium dif-
ficile strains in children compared with that of strains circulating in adults with 
Clostridium difficile-associated infection. J Clin Microbiol 2011; 49:3994–6.
156. Wilcox MH, Mooney L, Bendall R, Settle CD, Fawley WN. A case-control study 
of community-associated Clostridium difficile infection. J Antimicrob Chemother 
2008; 62:388–96.
157. Pant C, Anderson MP, Deshpande A, et al. Health care burden of Clostridium 
difficile infection in hospitalized children with inflammatory bowel disease. 
Inflamm Bowel Dis 2013; 19:1080–5.
158. Sandora TJ, Fung M, Flaherty K, et al. Epidemiology and risk factors for 
Clostridium difficile infection in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2011; 30:580–4.
159. Tai E, Richardson LC, Townsend J, Howard E, Mcdonald LC. Clostridium difficile 
infection among children with cancer. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2011; 30:610–2.
160. Thompson CM Jr, Gilligan PH, Fisher MC, Long SS. Clostridium difficile cyto-
toxin in a pediatric population. Am J Dis Child 1983; 137:271–4.
161. Nylund CM, Eide M, Gorman GH. Association of Clostridium difficile infections 
with acid suppression medications in children. J Pediatr 2014; 165: 979–84.e1.
162. Brown KE, Knoderer CA, Nichols KR, Crumby AS. Acid-suppressing agents and 
risk for Clostridium difficile infection in pediatric patients. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 
2015; 54:1102–6.
163. Castagnola E, Battaglia T, Bandettini R, et al. Clostridium difficile-associated dis-
ease in children with solid tumors. Support Care Cancer 2009; 17:321–4.
164. Pokorn M, Radsel A, Cizman M, et al. Severe Clostridium difficile-associated dis-
ease in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2008; 27:944–6.
165. Kim J, Shaklee JF, Smathers S, et al. Risk factors and outcomes associated with 
severe Clostridium difficile infection in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2012; 
31:134–8.
166. Sammons JS, Localio R, Xiao R, Coffin SE, Zaoutis T. Clostridium difficile infec-
tion is associated with increased risk of death and prolonged hospitalization in 
children. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:1–8.
167. Tedesco FJ, Barton RW, Alpers DH. Clindamycin-associated colitis. A prospective 
study. Ann Intern Med 1974; 81:429–33.
168. Teasley DG, Gerding DN, Olson MM, et al. Prospective randomised trial of met-
ronidazole versus vancomycin for Clostridium-difficile-associated diarrhoea and 
colitis. Lancet 1983; 2:1043–6.
169. Fekety R, Silva J, Kauffman C, Buggy B, Deery HG. Treatment of antibiotic-asso-
ciated Clostridium difficile colitis with oral vancomycin: comparison of two dos-
age regimens. Am J Med 1989; 86:15–9.
170. Johnson S, Louie TJ, Gerding DN, et al; Polymer Alternative for CDI Treatment 
(PACT) Investigators. Vancomycin, metronidazole, or tolevamer for Clostridium 
difficile infection: results from two multinational, randomized, controlled trials. 
Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:345–54.
171. Dubberke ER, Han Z, Bobo L, et al. Impact of clinical symptoms on interpreta-
tion of diagnostic assays for Clostridium difficile infections. J Clin Microbiol 2011; 
49:2887–93.
172. Peterson LR, Manson RU, Paule SM, et al. Detection of toxigenic Clostridium dif-
ficile in stool samples by real-time polymerase chain reaction for the diagnosis of 
C. difficile-associated diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45:1152–60.
173. Lewis SJ, Heaton KW. Stool form scale as a useful guide to intestinal transit time. 
Scand J Gastroenterol 1997; 32:920–4.
174. Burnham CA, Carroll KC. Diagnosis of Clostridium difficile infection: an ongoing 
conundrum for clinicians and for clinical laboratories. Clin Microbiol Rev 2013; 
26:604–30.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e44 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
175. Wilcox MH. Overcoming barriers to effective recognition and diagnosis of 
Clostridium difficile infection. Clin Microbiol Infect 2012; 18(Suppl 6):13–20.
176. Eastwood K, Else P, Charlett A, Wilcox M. Comparison of nine commercially 
available Clostridium difficile toxin detection assays, a real-time PCR assay for 
C. difficile tcdB, and a glutamate dehydrogenase detection assay to cytotoxin test-
ing and cytotoxigenic culture methods. J Clin Microbiol 2009; 47:3211–7.
177. Planche T, Aghaizu A, Holliman R, et al. Diagnosis of Clostridium difficile 
infection by toxin detection kits: a systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis 2008; 
8:777–84.
178. Crobach MJ, Planche T, Eckert C, et al. European Society of Clinical Microbiology 
and Infectious Diseases: update of the diagnostic guidance document for 
Clostridium difficile infection. Clin Microbiol Infect 2016; 22(Suppl 4):S63–81.
179. Gerding DN, Olson MM, Peterson LR, et al. Clostridium difficile-associated diar-
rhea and colitis in adults. A prospective case-controlled epidemiologic study. 
Arch Intern Med 1986; 146:95–100.
180. Bauer MP
, Notermans DW
, van Benthem BH, et al; ECDIS Study Group. Clostridium 
difficile infection in Europe: a hospital-based survey. Lancet 2011; 377:63–73.
181. Garey KW, Graham G, Gerard L, et al. Prevalence of diarrhea at a university 
hospital and association with modifiable risk factors. Ann Pharmacother 2006; 
40:1030–4.
182. Planche T, Wilcox M. Reference assays for Clostridium difficile infection: one or 
two gold standards? J Clin Pathol 2011; 64:1–5.
183. Kaltsas A, Simon M, Unruh LH, et al. Clinical and laboratory characteristics of 
Clostridium difficile infection in patients with discordant diagnostic test results. J 
Clin Microbiol 2012; 50:1303–7.
184. Longtin Y, Trottier S, Brochu G, et al. Impact of the type of diagnostic assay on 
Clostridium difficile infection and complication rates in a mandatory reporting 
program. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 56:67–73.
185. Planche TD, Davies KA, Coen PG, et al. Differences in outcome according to 
Clostridium difficile testing method: a prospective multicentre diagnostic valida-
tion study of C difficile infection. Lancet Infect Dis 2013; 13:936–45.
186. Polage CR, Gyorke CE, Kennedy MA, et al. Overdiagnosis of Clostridium difficile 
infection in the molecular test era. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175:1792–801.
187. Humphries RM, Uslan DZ, Rubin Z. Performance of Clostridium difficile toxin 
enzyme immunoassay and nucleic acid amplification tests stratified by patient 
disease severity. J Clin Microbiol 2013; 51:869–73.
188. Zar FA, Bakkanagari SR, Moorthi KM, Davis MB. A comparison of vancomycin 
and metronidazole for the treatment of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea, 
stratified by disease severity. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45:302–7.
189. Katz DA, Lynch ME, Littenberg B. Clinical prediction rules to optimize cytotoxin 
testing for Clostridium difficile in hospitalized patients with diarrhea. Am J Med 
1996; 100:487–95.
190. Berry N, Sewell B, Jafri S, et al. Real-time polymerase chain reaction correlates 
well with clinical diagnosis of Clostridium difficile infection. J Hosp Infect 2014; 
87:109–14.
191. Aichinger E, Schleck CD, Harmsen WS, Nyre LM, Patel R. Nonutility of repeat 
laboratory testing for detection of Clostridium difficile by use of PCR or enzyme 
immunoassay. J Clin Microbiol 2008; 46:3795–7.
192. Cardona DM, Rand KH. Evaluation of repeat Clostridium difficile enzyme immu-
noassay testing. J Clin Microbiol 2008; 46:3686–9.
193. Debast SB, van Kregten E, Oskam KM, van den Berg T, Van den Berg RJ, Kuijper 
EJ. Effect on diagnostic yield of repeated stool testing during outbreaks of 
Clostridium difficile-associated disease. Clin Microbiol Infect 2008; 14:622–4.
194. Garimella PS, Agarwal R, Katz A. The utility of repeat enzyme immunoassay test-
ing for the diagnosis of Clostridium difficile infection: a systematic review of the 
literature. J Postgrad Med 2012; 58:194–8.
195. Garey KW, Ghantoji SS, Shah DN, et al. A randomized, double-blind, place-
bo-controlled pilot study to assess the ability of rifaximin to prevent recurrent 
diarrhoea in patients with Clostridium difficile infection. J Antimicrob Chemother 
2011; 66:2850–5.
196. Abujamel T, Cadnum JL, Jury LA, et al. Defining the vulnerable period for re-es-
tablishment of Clostridium difficile colonization after treatment of C. difficile 
infection with oral vancomycin or metronidazole. PLoS One 2013; 8:e76269.
197. Gerding DN, Meyer T, Lee C, et al. Administration of spores of nontoxigenic 
Clostridium difficile strain M3 for prevention of recurrent C. difficile infection: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2015; 313:1719–27.
198. Sherwood RA. Faecal markers of gastrointestinal inflammation. J Clin Pathol 
2012; 65:981–5.
199. El Feghaly RE, Stauber JL, Deych E, Gonzalez C, Tarr PI, Haslam DB. Markers of 
intestinal inflammation, not bacterial burden, correlate with clinical outcomes in 
Clostridium difficile infection. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 56:1713–21.
200. El Feghaly RE, Stauber JL, Tarr PI, Haslam DB. Intestinal inflammatory bio-
markers and outcome in pediatric Clostridium difficile infections. J Peds 2013; 
163:1697–704 e2.
201. Jiang ZD, DuPont HL, Garey K, et al. A common polymorphism in the inter-
leukin 8 gene promoter is associated with Clostridium difficile diarrhea. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2006; 101:1112–6.
202. Rousseau C, Poilane I, De Pontual L, Maherault AC, Le Monnier A, Collignon 
A. Clostridium difficile carriage in healthy infants in the community: a potential 
reservoir for pathogenic strains. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:1209–15.
203. Parsons SJ, Fenton E, Dargaville P. Clostridium difficile associated severe entero-
colitis: a feature of Hirschsprung’s disease in a neonate presenting late. J Paediatr 
Child Health 2005; 41:689–90.
204. Pozo F, Soler P, Ladrón de Guevara C. Pseudomembranous colitis associated with 
Hirschsprung’s disease. Clin Infect Dis 1994; 19:1160–1.
205. Valentini D, Vittucci AC, Grandin A, et al. Coinfection in acute gastroenteritis 
predicts a more severe clinical course in children. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 
2013; 32:909–15.
206. González-Del Vecchio M, Álvarez-Uria A, Marin M, et al. Clinical significance of 
Clostridium difficile in children less than 2 years old: a case-control study. Pediatr 
Infect Dis J 2016; 35:281–5.
207. Muto CA, Blank MK, Marsh JW, et al. Control of an outbreak of infection with 
the hypervirulent Clostridium difficile BI strain in a university hospital using a 
comprehensive “bundle” approach. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45:1266–73.
208. Weiss K, Boisvert A, Chagnon M, et al. Multipronged intervention strategy to 
control an outbreak of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) and its impact on the 
rates of CDI from 2002 to 2007. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2009; 30:156–62.
209. Evans ME, Kralovic SM, Simbartl LA, Jain R, Roselle GA. Effect of a Clostridium 
difficile infection prevention initiative in Veterans Affairs acute care facilities. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2016; 37:720–2.
210. Waqar S, Nigh K, Sisler L, et al. Multidisciplinary performance improvement 
team for reducing health care-associated Clostridium difficile infection. Am J 
Infect Control 2016; 44:352–4.
211. Koll BS, Ruiz RE, Calfee DP, et al. Prevention of hospital-onset Clostridium diffi-
cile infection in the New York metropolitan region using a collaborative interven-
tion model. J Healthc Qual 2014; 36:35–45.
212. Teltsch DY, Hanley J, Loo V, Goldberg P, Gursahaney A, Buckeridge DL. Infection 
acquisition following intensive care unit room privatization. Arch Intern Med 
2011; 171:32–8.
213. Islam J, Cheek E, Navani V, Rajkumar C, Cohen J, Llewelyn MJ. Influence of 
cohorting patients with Clostridium difficile infection on risk of symptomatic 
recurrence. J Hosp Infect 2013; 85:17–21.
214. Cartmill TD, Shrimpton SB, Panigrahi H, Khanna V, Brown R, Poxton IR. 
Nosocomial diarrhoea due to a single strain of Clostridium difficile: a prolonged 
outbreak in elderly patients. Age Ageing 1992; 21:245–9.
215. Salgado CD, Mauldin PD, Fogle PJ, Bosso JA. Analysis of an outbreak of 
Clostridium difficile infection controlled with enhanced infection control meas-
ures. Am J Infect Control 2009; 37:458–64.
216. Landelle C, Verachten M, Legrand P, et al. Contamination of healthcare workers’ 
hands with Clostridium difficile spores after caring for patients with C. difficile 
infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2014; 35:10–5.
217. Johnson S, Gerding DN, Olson MM, et al. Prospective, controlled study of vinyl 
glove use to interrupt Clostridium difficile nosocomial transmission. Am J Med 
1990; 88:137–40.
218. Perry C, Marshall R, Jones E. Bacterial contamination of uniforms. J Hosp Infect 
2001; 48:238–41.
219. Puzniak LA, Leet T, Mayfield J, Kollef M, Mundy LM. To gown or not to gown: the 
effect on acquisition of vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 
35:18–25.
220. Srinivasan A, Song X, Ross T, Merz W, Brower R, Perl TM. A prospective study 
to determine whether cover gowns in addition to gloves decrease nosocomial 
transmission of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in an intensive care unit. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002; 23:424–8.
221. Sunkesula VC, Kundrapu S, Jury LA, Deshpande A, Sethi AK, Donskey CJ. 
Potential for transmission of spores by patients awaiting laboratory testing to 
confirm suspected Clostridium difficile infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2013; 34:306–8.
222. Dubberke ER, Carling P, Carrico R, et al. Strategies to prevent Clostridium difficile 
infections in acute care hospitals: 2014 update. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2014; 35:628–45.
223. Public Health England and Department of Health. Clostridium difficile infection: 
how to deal with the problem. 2008. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/govern-
ment/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/340851/Clostridium_diffi-
cile_infection_how_to_deal_with_the_problem.pdf. Accessed 9 March 2016.
224. Guerrero DM, Nerandzic MM, Jury LA, Jinno S, Chang S, Donskey CJ. 
Acquisition of spores on gloved hands after contact with the skin of patients with 
Clostridium difficile infection and with environmental surfaces in their rooms. 
Am J Infect Control 2012; 40:556–8.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e45
225. Boyce JM. Using alcohol for hand antisepsis: dispelling old myths. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2000; 21:438–41.
226. Pittet D, Mourouga P, Perneger TV. Compliance with handwashing in a teaching 
hospital. Infection control program. Ann Intern Med 1999; 130:126–30.
227. Deyneko A, Cordeiro F, Berlin L, Ben-David D, Perna S, Longtin Y. Impact of 
sink location on hand hygiene compliance after care of patients with Clostridium 
difficile infection: a cross-sectional study. BMC Infect Dis 2016; 16:203.
228. Zellmer C, Blakney R, Van Hoof S, Safdar N. Impact of sink location on hand 
hygiene compliance for Clostridium difficile infection. Am J Infect Control 2015; 
43:387–9.
229. Clabots CR, Gerding SJ, Olson MM, Peterson LR, Gerding DN. Detection of 
asymptomatic Clostridium difficile carriage by an alcohol shock procedure. J Clin 
Microbiol 1989; 27:2386–7.
230. Gordin FM, Schultz ME, Huber RA, Gill JA. Reduction in nosocomial transmis-
sion of drug-resistant bacteria after introduction of an alcohol-based handrub. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005; 26:650–3.
231. Boyce JM, Ligi C, Kohan C, Dumigan D, Havill NL. Lack of association between 
the increased incidence of Clostridium difficile-associated disease and the 
increasing use of alcohol-based hand rubs. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2006; 
27:479–83.
232. Kaier K, Hagist C, Frank U, Conrad A, Meyer E. Two time-series analyses of 
the impact of antibiotic consumption and alcohol-based hand disinfection on 
the incidences of nosocomial methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infec-
tion and Clostridium difficile infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2009; 
30:346–53.
233. Knight N, Strait T, Anthony N, et al. Clostridium difficile colitis: a retrospective 
study of incidence and severity before and after institution of an alcohol-based 
hand rub policy. Am J Infect Control 2010; 38:523–8.
234. Vernaz N, Sax H, Pittet D, Bonnabry P, Schrenzel J, Harbarth S. Temporal effects 
of antibiotic use and hand rub consumption on the incidence of MRSA and 
Clostridium difficile. J Antimicrob Chemother 2008; 62:601–7.
235. Stone SP, Fuller C, Savage J, et al. Evaluation of the national Cleanyourhands 
campaign to reduce Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia and Clostridium difficile 
infection in hospitals in England and Wales by improved hand hygiene: four year, 
prospective, ecological, interrupted time series study. BMJ 2012; 344:e3005.
236. Oughton MT, Loo VG, Dendukuri N, Fenn S, Libman MD. Hand hygiene with 
soap and water is superior to alcohol rub and antiseptic wipes for removal of 
Clostridium difficile. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2009; 30:939–44.
237. Jabbar U, Leischner J, Kasper D, et al. Effectiveness of alcohol-based hand rubs 
for removal of Clostridium difficile spores from hands. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 2010; 31:565–70.
238. Edmonds SL, Zapka C, Kasper D, et al. Effectiveness of hand hygiene for removal 
of Clostridium difficile spores from hands. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013; 
34:302–5.
239. Kundrapu S, Sunkesula V, Sitzlar BM, Fertelli D, Deshpande A, Donskey CJ. 
More cleaning, less screening: evaluation of the time required for monitoring 
versus performing environmental cleaning. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2014; 
35:202–4.
240. Jury LA, Guerrero DM, Burant CJ, Cadnum JL, Donskey CJ. Effectiveness of 
routine patient bathing to decrease the burden of spores on the skin of patients 
with Clostridium difficile infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011; 
32:181–4.
241. Manian FA, Meyer L, Jenne J. Clostridium difficile contamination of blood pres-
sure cuffs: a call for a closer look at gloving practices in the era of universal pre-
cautions. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1996; 17:180–2.
242. Brooks S, Khan A, Stoica D, et al. Reduction in vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus 
and Clostridium difficile infections following change to tympanic thermometers. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998; 19:333–6.
243. Jernigan JA, Siegman-Igra Y, Guerrant RC, Farr BM. A randomized crossover 
study of disposable thermometers for prevention of Clostridium difficile and other 
nosocomial infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1998; 19:494–9.
244. Vajravelu RK, Guerrero DM, Jury LA, Donskey CJ. Evaluation of stethoscopes 
as vectors of Clostridium difficile and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:96–8.
245. Kim KH, Fekety R, Batts DH, et al. Isolation of Clostridium difficile from the 
environment and contacts of patients with antibiotic-associated colitis. J Infect 
Dis 1981; 143:42–50.
246. Dumford DM 3rd, Nerandzic MM, Eckstein BC, Donskey CJ. What is on that 
keyboard? Detecting hidden environmental reservoirs of Clostridium difficile 
during an outbreak associated with North American pulsed-field gel electrophor-
esis type 1 strains. Am J Infect Control 2009; 37:15–9.
247. Burns DA, Heeg D, Cartman ST, Minton NP. Reconsidering the sporulation char-
acteristics of hypervirulent Clostridium difficile BI/NAP1/027. PLoS One 2011; 
6:e24894.
248. Dubberke ER, Reske KA, Noble-Wang J, et al. Prevalence of Clostridium difficile 
environmental contamination and strain variability in multiple health care facili-
ties. Am J Infect Control 2007; 35:315–8.
249. Starr JM, Campbell A, Renshaw E, Poxton IR, Gibson GJ. Spatio-temporal sto-
chastic modelling of Clostridium difficile. J Hosp Infect 2009; 71:49–56.
250. Eyre DW, Griffiths D, Vaughan A, et al. Asymptomatic Clostridium difficile colon-
isation and onward transmission. PLoS One 2013; 8:e78445.
251. Kaatz GW, Gitlin SD, Schaberg DR, et al. Acquisition of Clostridium difficile from 
the hospital environment. Am J Epidemiol 1988; 127:1289–94.
252. McMullen KM, Zack J, Coopersmith CM, Kollef M, Dubberke E, Warren DK. 
Use of hypochlorite solution to decrease rates of Clostridium difficile-associated 
diarrhea. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2007; 28:205–7.
253. Orenstein R, Aronhalt KC, McManus JE Jr, Fedraw LA. A targeted strategy to 
wipe out Clostridium difficile. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011; 32:1137–9.
254. Sitzlar B, Deshpande A, Fertelli D, Kundrapu S, Sethi AK, Donskey CJ. An 
environmental disinfection odyssey: evaluation of sequential interventions to 
improve disinfection of Clostridium difficile isolation rooms. Infect Control Hosp 
Epidemiol 2013; 34:459–65.
255. Boyce JM, Havill NL, Dumigan DG, Golebiewski M, Balogun O, Rizvani R. 
Monitoring the effectiveness of hospital cleaning practices by use of an adenosine 
triphosphate bioluminescence assay. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2009; 30:678–84.
256. Boyce JM, Havill NL, Otter JA, et al. Impact of hydrogen peroxide vapor room 
decontamination on Clostridium difficile environmental contamination and 
transmission in a healthcare setting. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2008; 
29:723–9.
257. Barbut F, Menuet D, Verachten M, Girou E. Comparison of the efficacy of a 
hydrogen peroxide dry-mist disinfection system and sodium hypochlorite solu-
tion for eradication of Clostridium difficile spores. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2009; 30:507–14.
258. Vianna PG, Dale CR Jr, Simmons S, Stibich M, Licitra CM. Impact of pulsed 
xenon ultraviolet light on hospital-acquired infection rates in a community hos-
pital. Am J Infect Control 2016; 44:299–303.
259. Horn K, Otter JA. Hydrogen peroxide vapor room disinfection and hand hy-
giene improvements reduce Clostridium difficile infection, methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-resistant enterococci, and extended-spec-
trum β-lactamase. Am J Infect Control 2015; 43:1354–6.
260. Nagaraja A, Visintainer P, Haas JP, Menz J, Wormser GP, Montecalvo MA. 
Clostridium difficile infections before and during use of ultraviolet disinfection. 
Am J Infect Control 2015; 43:940–5.
261. Miller R, Simmons S, Dale C, Stachowiak J, Stibich M. Utilization and impact of 
a pulsed-xenon ultraviolet room disinfection system and multidisciplinary care 
team on Clostridium difficile in a long-term acute care facility. Am J Infect Control 
2015; 43:1350–3.
262. Haas JP, Menz J, Dusza S, Montecalvo MA. Implementation and impact of ultra-
violet environmental disinfection in an acute care setting. Am J Infect Control 
2014; 42:586–90.
263. Manian FA, Griesnauer S, Bryant A. Implementation of hospital-wide enhanced 
terminal cleaning of targeted patient rooms and its impact on endemic 
Clostridium difficile infection rates. Am J Infect Control 2013; 41:537–41.
264. Levin J, Riley LS, Parrish C, English D, Ahn S. The effect of portable pulsed xenon 
ultraviolet light after terminal cleaning on hospital-associated Clostridium difficile 
infection in a community hospital. Am J Infect Control 2013; 41:746–8.
265. Kundrapu S, Sunkesula V, Jury LA, Sitzlar BM, Donskey CJ. Daily disinfection 
of high-touch surfaces in isolation rooms to reduce contamination of healthcare 
workers’ hands. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:1039–42.
266. Hacek DM, Ogle AM, Fisher A, Robicsek A, Peterson LR. Significant impact of 
terminal room cleaning with bleach on reducing nosocomial Clostridium difficile. 
Am J Infect Control 2010; 38:350–3.
267. Clabots CR, Johnson S, Olson MM, Peterson LR, Gerding DN. Acquisition of 
Clostridium difficile by hospitalized patients: evidence for colonized new admis-
sions as a source of infection. J Infect Dis 1992; 166:561–7.
268. Riggs MM, Sethi AK, Zabarsky TF, Eckstein EC, Jump RL, Donskey CJ. 
Asymptomatic carriers are a potential source for transmission of epidemic and 
nonepidemic Clostridium difficile strains among long-term care facility residents. 
Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45:992–8.
269. Grigoras CA, Zervou FN, Zacharioudakis IM, Siettos CI, Mylonakis E. Isolation 
of C. difficile carriers alone and as part of a bundle approach for the prevention 
of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI): a mathematical model based on clinical 
study data. PLoS One 2016; 11:e0156577.
270. Lanzas C, Dubberke ER. Effectiveness of screening hospital admissions to detect 
asymptomatic carriers of Clostridium difficile: a modeling evaluation. Infect 
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2014; 35:1043–50.
271. Longtin Y, Paquet-Bolduc B, Gilca R, et al. Effect of detecting and isolat-
ing Clostridium difficile carriers at hospital admission on the incidence of C 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e46 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
difficile infections: a quasi-experimental controlled study. JAMA Intern Med 
2016; 176:796–804.
272. Pear SM, Williamson TH, Bettin KM, Gerding DN, Galgiani JN. Decrease in 
nosocomial Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea by restricting clindamycin 
use. Ann Intern Med 1994; 120:272–7.
273. McNulty C, Logan M, Donald IP, et al. Successful control of Clostridium difficile 
infection in an elderly care unit through use of a restrictive antibiotic policy. J 
Antimicrob Chemother 1997; 40:707–11.
274. Climo MW, Israel DS, Wong ES, Williams D, Coudron P, Markowitz SM. 
Hospital-wide restriction of clindamycin: effect on the incidence of Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea and cost. Ann Intern Med 1998; 128:989–95.
275. Khan R, Cheesbrough J. Impact of changes in antibiotic policy on Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhoea (CDAD) over a five-year period in a district general 
hospital. J Hosp Infect 2003; 54:104–8.
276. Carling P, Fung T, Killion A, Terrin N, Barza M. Favorable impact of a multidisci-
plinary antibiotic management program conducted during 7 years. Infect Control 
Hosp Epidemiol 2003; 24:699–706.
277. Wilcox MH, Freeman J, Fawley W, et al. Long-term surveillance of cefotaxime and 
piperacillin-tazobactam prescribing and incidence of Clostridium difficile diar-
rhoea. J Antimicrob Chemother 2004; 54:168–72.
278. Gaynes R, Rimland D, Killum E, et al. Outbreak of Clostridium difficile infection 
in a long-term care facility: association with gatifloxacin use. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 
38:640–5.
279. Valiquette L, Cossette B, Garant MP, Diab H, Pépin J. Impact of a reduction in 
the use of high-risk antibiotics on the course of an epidemic of Clostridium diffi-
cile-associated disease caused by the hypervirulent NAP1/027 strain. Clin Infect 
Dis 2007; 45(Suppl 2):S112–21.
280. Fowler S, Webber A, Cooper BS, et al. Successful use of feedback to improve anti-
biotic prescribing and reduce Clostridium difficile infection: a controlled inter-
rupted time series. J Antimicrob Chemother 2007; 59:990–5.
281. Talpaert MJ, Gopal Rao G, Cooper BS, Wade P. Impact of guidelines and enhanced 
antibiotic stewardship on reducing broad-spectrum antibiotic usage and its effect 
on incidence of Clostridium difficile infection. J Antimicrob Chemother 2011; 
66:2168–74.
282. Elligsen M, Walker SA, Pinto R, et al. Audit and feedback to reduce broad-spec-
trum antibiotic use among intensive care unit patients: a controlled interrupted 
time series analysis. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:354–61.
283. Dancer SJ, Kirkpatrick P, Corcoran DS, Christison F, Farmer D, Robertson C. 
Approaching zero: temporal effects of a restrictive antibiotic policy on hospi-
tal-acquired Clostridium difficile, extended-spectrum β-lactamase-producing 
coliforms and meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Int J Antimicrob Agents 
2013; 41:137–42.
284. Aldeyab MA, Devine MJ, Flanagan P, et al. Multihospital outbreak of Clostridium 
difficile ribotype 027 infection: epidemiology and analysis of control measures. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011; 32:210–9.
285. Aldeyab MA, Kearney MP, Scott MG, et al. An evaluation of the impact of anti-
biotic stewardship on reducing the use of high-risk antibiotics and its effect on 
the incidence of Clostridium difficile infection in hospital settings. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2012; 67:2988–96.
286. Jump RL, Olds DM, Seifi N, et al. Effective antimicrobial stewardship in a long-
term care facility through an infectious disease consultation service: keeping a 
LID on antibiotic use. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:1185–92.
287. Chang VT, Nelson K. The role of physical proximity in nosocomial diarrhea. Clin 
Infect Dis 2000; 31:717–22.
288. Stevens V, Dumyati G, Fine LS, Fisher SG, van Wijngaarden E. Cumulative anti-
biotic exposures over time and the risk of Clostridium difficile infection. Clin 
Infect Dis 2011; 53:42–8.
289. Barlam TF, Cosgrove SE, Abbo LM, et al. Executive summary: implementing an 
antibiotic stewardship program: guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America and the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. Clin Infect Dis 
2016; 62:1197–202.
290. Kwok CS, Arthur AK, Anibueze CI, Singh S, Cavallazzi R, Loke YK. Risk of 
Clostridium difficile infection with acid suppressing drugs and antibiotics: 
meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2012; 107:1011–9.
291. Tleyjeh I, Bin Abdulhak A, Riaz M, et al. Association between acid-suppression 
therapy and Clostridium difficile infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Clin Microbiol Infect 2012; 18:113.
292. Garey KW, Sethi S, Yadav Y, DuPont HL. Meta-analysis to assess risk factors for 
recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. J Hosp Infect 2008; 70:298–304.
293. Janarthanan S, Ditah I, Adler DG, Ehrinpreis MN. Clostridium difficile-associated 
diarrhea and proton pump inhibitor therapy: a meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 
2012; 107:1001–10.
294. Freedberg DE, Salmasian H, Friedman C, Abrams JA. Proton pump inhibitors 
and risk for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection among inpatients. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2013; 108:1794–801.
295. Rodríguez-Pardo D, Almirante B, Bartolomé RM, et al; Barcelona Clostridium dif-
ficile Study Group. Epidemiology of Clostridium difficile infection and risk factors 
for unfavorable clinical outcomes: results of a hospital-based study in Barcelona, 
Spain. J Clin Microbiol 2013; 51:1465–73.
296. Lin HJ, Hung YP, Liu HC, et al. Risk factors for Clostridium difficile-associated 
diarrhea among hospitalized adults with fecal toxigenic C. difficile colonization. J 
Microbiol Immunol Infect 2015; 48:183–9.
297. Khanna S, Aronson SL, Kammer PP, Baddour LM, Pardi DS. Gastric acid suppres-
sion and outcomes in Clostridium difficile infection: a population-based study. 
Mayo Clinic Proceedings 2012; 87:636–42.
298. Pattani R, Palda VA, Hwang SW, Shah PS. Probiotics for the prevention of anti-
biotic-associated diarrhea and Clostridium difficile infection among hospitalized 
patients: systematic review and meta-analysis. Open Med 2013; 7:e56–67.
299. Goldenberg JZ, Ma SS, Saxton JD, et al. Probiotics for the prevention of Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea in adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2013; 5:CD006095.
300. Johnson S, Maziade PJ, McFarland LV, et al. Is primary prevention of Clostridium 
difficile infection possible with specific probiotics? Int J Infect Dis 2012; 
16:e786–92.
301. Gao XW, Mubasher M, Fang CY, Reifer C, Miller LE. Dose-response efficacy 
of a proprietary probiotic formula of Lactobacillus acidophilus CL1285 and 
Lactobacillus casei LBC80R for antibiotic-associated diarrhea and Clostridium dif-
ficile-associated diarrhea prophylaxis in adult patients. Am J Gastroenterol 2010; 
105:1636–41.
302. Kotowska M, Albrecht P, Szajewska H. Saccharomyces boulardii in the prevention 
of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea in children: a randomized double-blind place-
bo-controlled trial. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2005; 21:583–90.
303. Enache-Angoulvant A, Hennequin C. Invasive Saccharomyces infection: a com-
prehensive review. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:1559–68.
304. Hennequin C, Kauffmann-Lacroix C, Jobert A, et al. Possible role of catheters 
in Saccharomyces boulardii fungemia. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2000; 
19:16–20.
305. Gouriet F, Million M, Henri M, Fournier PE, Raoult D. Lactobacillus rhamno-
sus bacteremia: an emerging clinical entity. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2012; 
31:2469–80.
306. Mullane KM, Miller MA, Weiss K, et al. Efficacy of fidaxomicin versus vancomy-
cin as therapy for Clostridium difficile infection in individuals taking concomitant 
antibiotics for other concurrent infections. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 53:440–7.
307. Al-Nassir WN, Sethi AK, Li Y, Pultz MJ, Riggs MM, Donskey CJ. Both oral metro-
nidazole and oral vancomycin promote persistent overgrowth of vancomycin-re-
sistant enterococci during treatment of Clostridium difficile-associated disease. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008; 52:2403–6.
308. Koo HL, Koo DC, Musher DM, DuPont HL. Antimotility agents for the treatment 
of Clostridium difficile diarrhea and colitis. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:598–605.
309. Wilcox MH, Howe R. Diarrhoea caused by Clostridium difficile: response time for 
treatment with metronidazole and vancomycin. J Antimicrob Chemother 1995; 
36:673–9.
310. Wenisch C, Parschalk B, Hasenhündl M, Hirschl AM, Graninger W. Comparison 
of vancomycin, teicoplanin, metronidazole, and fusidic acid for the treatment of 
Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 1996; 22:813–8.
311. Siegfried J, Dubrovskaya Y, Flagiello T, et al. Initial therapy for mild to moderate 
Clostridium difficile infection. Infect Dis Clin Pract 2016; 24:210–6.
312. Musher DM, Aslam S, Logan N, et al. Relatively poor outcome after treatment of 
Clostridium difficile colitis with metronidazole. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40:1586–90.
313. Pepin J, Alary ME, Valiquette L, et al. Increasing risk of relapse after treatment of 
Clostridium difficile colitis in Quebec, Canada. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40:1591–7.
314. Cohen SH, Gerding DN, Johnson S, et al; Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of 
America; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clinical practice guidelines for 
Clostridium difficile infection in adults: 2010 update by the Society for Healthcare 
Epidemiology of America (SHEA) and the Infectious Diseases Society of America 
(IDSA). Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2010; 31:431–55.
315. Yamamoto T, Abe K, Anjiki H, Ishii T, Kuyama Y. Metronidazole-induced neuro-
toxicity developed in liver cirrhosis. J Clin Med Res 2012; 4:295–8.
316. Knorr JP, Javed I, Sahni N, Cankurtaran CZ, Ortiz JA. Metronidazole-induced 
encephalopathy in a patient with end-stage liver disease. Case Reports Hepatol 
2012; 2012:209258.
317. Jardin CG, Palmer HR, Shah DN, et al. Assessment of treatment patterns and 
patient outcomes before vs after implementation of a severity-based Clostridium 
difficile infection treatment policy. J Hosp Infect 2013; 85:28–32.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clostridium difficile Infection • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • e47
318. Lungulescu OA, Cao W, Gatskevich E, Tlhabano L, Stratidis JG. CSI: a severity 
index for Clostridium difficile infection at the time of admission. J Hosp Infect 
2011; 79:151–4.
319. Bauer MP, Hensgens MP, Miller MA, et al. Renal failure and leukocytosis are pre-
dictors of a complicated course of Clostridium difficile infection if measured on 
day of diagnosis. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55(Suppl 2):S149–53.
320. Miller MA, Louie T, Mullane K, et al. Derivation and validation of a simple clin-
ical bedside score (ATLAS) for Clostridium difficile infection which predicts 
response to therapy. BMC Infect Dis 2013; 13:148.
321. Louie TJ, Miller MA, Mullane KM, et al; OPT-80-003 Clinical Study Group. 
Fidaxomicin versus vancomycin for Clostridium difficile infection. N Engl J Med 
2011; 364:422–31.
322. Shah DN, Bhatt NS, Welch JK, Koo HL, Garey KW. Defining acute renal dys-
function as a criterion for the severity of Clostridium difficile infection in 
patients with community-onset vs hospital-onset infection. J Hosp Infect 2013; 
83:294–9.
323. Wang MS, Evans CT, Rodriguez T, Gerding DN, Johnson S. Clostridium difficile 
infection and limitations of markers for severity in patients with hematologic 
malignancy. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2013; 34:127–32.
324. Cornely OA, Crook DW, Esposito R, et al; OPT-80-004 Clinical Study Group. 
Fidaxomicin versus vancomycin for infection with Clostridium difficile in Europe, 
Canada, and the USA: a double-blind, non-inferiority, randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2012; 12:281–9.
325. Crook DW, Walker AS, Kean Y, et al; Study 3/4 Teams. Fidaxomicin versus van-
comycin for Clostridium difficile infection: meta-analysis of pivotal randomized 
controlled trials. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55(Suppl 2):S93–103.
326. Nerandzic MM, Mullane K, Miller MA, Babakhani F, Donskey CJ. Reduced 
acquisition and overgrowth of vancomycin-resistant enterococci and Candida 
species in patients treated with fidaxomicin versus vancomycin for Clostridium 
difficile infection. Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55 Suppl 2:S121–6.
327. O’Connor JR, Galang MA, Sambol SP
, et al. Rifampin and rifaximin resistance in clin-
ical isolates of Clostridium difficile. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008; 52:2813–7.
328. Apisarnthanarak A, Razavi B, Mundy LM. Adjunctive intracolonic vancomycin 
for severe Clostridium difficile colitis: case series and review of the literature. Clin 
Infect Dis 2002; 35:690–6.
329. Malamood M, Nellis E, Ehrlich AC, Friedenberg FK. Vancomycin enemas as 
adjunctive therapy for Clostridium difficile infection. J Clin Med Res 2015; 
7:422–7.
330. Pettit NN, DePestel DD, Fohl AL, Eyler R, Carver PL. Risk factors for systemic 
vancomycin exposure following administration of oral vancomycin for the treat-
ment of Clostridium difficile infection. Pharmacotherapy 2015; 35:119–26.
331. Rokas KE, Johnson JW, Beardsley JR, Ohl CA, Luther VP, Williamson JC. The 
Addition of intravenous metronidazole to oral vancomycin is associated with 
improved mortality in critically ill patients with Clostridium difficile infection. 
Clin Infect Dis 2015; 61:934–41.
332. McPherson S, Rees CJ, Ellis R, Soo S, Panter SJ. Intravenous immunoglobulin for 
the treatment of severe, refractory, and recurrent Clostridium difficile diarrhea. 
Dis Colon Rectum 2006; 49:640–5.
333. Leung DY, Kelly CP, Boguniewicz M, Pothoulakis C, LaMont JT, Flores A. 
Treatment with intravenously administered gamma globulin of chronic 
relapsing colitis induced by Clostridium difficile toxin. J Pediatr 1991; 
118:633–7.
334. Salcedo J, Keates S, Pothoulakis C, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy for 
severe Clostridium difficile colitis. Gut 1997; 41:366–70.
335. Wilcox MH. Descriptive study of intravenous immunoglobulin for the treat-
ment of recurrent Clostridium difficile diarrhoea. J Antimicrob Chemother 2004; 
53:882–4.
336. Larson KC, Belliveau PP, Spooner LM. Tigecycline for the treatment of severe 
Clostridium difficile infection. Ann Pharmacother 2011; 45:1005–10.
337. Herpers BL, Vlaminckx B, Burkhardt O, et al. Intravenous tigecycline as ad-
junctive or alternative therapy for severe refractory Clostridium difficile infection. 
Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48:1732–5.
338. Lamontagne F, Labbé AC, Haeck O, et al. Impact of emergency colectomy on 
survival of patients with fulminant Clostridium difficile colitis during an epidemic 
caused by a hypervirulent strain. Ann Surg 2007; 245:267–72.
339. Longo WE, Mazuski JE, Virgo KS, Lee P, Bahadursingh AN, Johnson FE. 
Outcome after colectomy for Clostridium difficile colitis. Dis Colon Rectum 2004; 
47:1620–6.
340. Neal MD, Alverdy JC, Hall DE, Simmons RL, Zuckerbraun BS. Diverting loop 
ileostomy and colonic lavage: an alternative to total abdominal colectomy for the 
treatment of severe, complicated Clostridium difficile associated disease. Ann Surg 
2011; 254:423–7; discussion 427–9.
341. Barbut F, Richard A, Hamadi K, Chomette V, Burghoffer B, Petit JC. Epidemiology 
of recurrences or reinfections of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea. J Clin 
Microbiol 2000; 38:2386–8.
342. Johnson S, Adelmann A, Clabots CR, Peterson LR, Gerding DN. Recurrences 
of Clostridium difficile diarrhea not caused by the original infecting organism. J 
Infect Dis 1989; 159:340–3.
343. Nair S, Yadav D, Corpuz M, Pitchumoni CS. Clostridium difficile colitis: fac-
tors influencing treatment failure and relapse—a prospective evaluation. Am J 
Gastroenterol 1998; 93:1873–6.
344. Linsky A, Gupta K, Lawler EV, Fonda JR, Hermos JA. Proton pump inhibitors 
and risk for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. Arch Intern Med 2010; 
170:772–8.
345. Kim YG, Graham DY, Jang BI. Proton pump inhibitor use and recurrent 
Clostridium difficile-associated disease: a case-control analysis matched by pro-
pensity score. J Clin Gastroenterol 2012; 46:397–400.
346. Cornely OA, Miller MA, Louie TJ, Crook DW, Gorbach SL. Treatment of first 
recurrence of Clostridium difficile infection: fidaxomicin versus vancomycin. Clin 
Infect Dis 2012; 55(Suppl 2):S154–61.
347. Spiceland CM, Khanna S, Pardi DS. Outcomes with fidaxomicin therapy 
in Clostridium difficile infection. J Clin Gastroenterol 2016. doi:10.1097/
MCG.0000000000000769.
348. Kapoor K, Chandra M, Nag D, Paliwal JK, Gupta RC, Saxena RC. Evaluation 
of metronidazole toxicity: a prospective study. Int J Clin Pharmacol Res 1999; 
19:83–8.
349. Kuriyama A, Jackson JL, Doi A, Kamiya T. Metronidazole-induced central nerv-
ous system toxicity: a systematic review. Clin Neuropharmacol 2011; 34:241–7.
350. McFarland LV, Elmer GW, Surawicz CM. Breaking the cycle: treatment strategies 
for 163 cases of recurrent Clostridium difficile disease. Am J Gastroenterol 2002; 
97:1769–75.
351. Lagrotteria D, Holmes S, Smieja M, Smaill F, Lee C. Prospective, randomized 
inpatient study of oral metronidazole versus oral metronidazole and rifampin 
for treatment of primary episode of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea. Clin 
Infect Dis 2006; 43:547–52.
352. Surawicz CM, McFarland LV, Greenberg RN, et al. The search for a better treat-
ment for recurrent Clostridium difficile disease: use of high-dose vancomycin 
combined with Saccharomyces boulardii. Clin Infect Dis 2000; 31:1012–7.
353. McFarland LV, Surawicz CM, Greenberg RN, et al. A randomized placebo-con-
trolled trial of Saccharomyces boulardii in combination with standard antibiotics 
for Clostridium difficile disease. JAMA 1994; 271:1913–8.
354. Wullt M, Hagslätt ML, Odenholt I. Lactobacillus plantarum 299v for the treat-
ment of recurrent Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhoea: a double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled trial. Scand J Infect Dis 2003; 35:365–7.
355. Kaki R, Brooks A, Main C, Jayaratne P, Mertz D. Does extending Clostridium dif-
ficile treatment in patients who are receiving concomitant antibiotics reduce the 
rate of relapse? Internet J Infect Dis 2016; 15:1–5.
356. Carignan A, Poulin S, Martin P, et al. Efficacy of secondary prophylaxis with 
vancomycin for preventing recurrent Clostridium difficile infections. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2016; 111:1834–40.
357. Van Hise NW, Bryant AM, Hennessey EK, Crannage AJ, Khoury JA, Manian FA. 
Efficacy of oral vancomycin in preventing recurrent Clostridium difficile infec-
tion in patients treated with systemic antimicrobial agents. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 
63:651–3.
358. Aas J, Gessert CE, Bakken JS. Recurrent Clostridium difficile colitis: case series 
involving 18 patients treated with donor stool administered via a nasogastric tube. 
Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36:580–5.
359. Bakken JS. Fecal bacteriotherapy for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. 
Anaerobe 2009; 15:285–9.
360. Gough E, Shaikh H, Manges AR. Systematic review of intestinal microbiota trans-
plantation (fecal bacteriotherapy) for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. 
Clin Infect Dis 2011; 53:994–1002.
361. Guo B, Harstall C, Louie T, Veldhuyzen van Zanten S, Dieleman LA. Systematic 
review: faecal transplantation for the treatment of Clostridium difficile-associated 
disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2012; 35:865–75.
362. MacConnachie AA, Fox R, Kennedy DR, Seaton RA. Faecal transplant for recur-
rent Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhoea: a UK case series. QJM 2009; 
102:781–4.
363. Brandt LJ, Aroniadis OC, Mellow M, et al. Long-term follow-up of colonoscopic 
fecal microbiota transplant for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2012; 107:1079–87.
364. Hamilton MJ, Weingarden AR, Sadowsky MJ, Khoruts A. Standardized frozen 
preparation for transplantation of fecal microbiota for recurrent Clostridium diffi-
cile infection. Am J Gastroenterol 2012; 107:761–7.
365. Jorup-Rönström C, Håkanson A, Sandell S, et al. Fecal transplant against relaps-
ing Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea in 32 patients. Scand J Gastroenterol 
2012; 47:548–52.
366. Mattila E, Uusitalo-Seppälä R, Wuorela M, et al. Fecal transplantation, through 
colonoscopy, is effective therapy for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. 
Gastroenterology 2012; 142:490–6.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
 e48 • CID 2018:66 (1 April) • McDonald et al
367. van Nood E, Vrieze A, Nieuwdorp M, et al. Duodenal infusion of donor feces for 
recurrent Clostridium difficile. N Engl J Med 2013; 368:407–15.
368. Cammarota G, Masucci L, Ianiro G, et al. Randomised clinical trial: faecal micro-
biota transplantation by colonoscopy vs. vancomycin for the treatment of recur-
rent Clostridium difficile infection. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015; 41:835–43.
369. Youngster I, Sauk J, Pindar C, et al. Fecal microbiota transplant for relapsing 
Clostridium difficile infection using a frozen inoculum from unrelated donors: a 
randomized, open-label, controlled pilot study. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 58:1515–22.
370. Lee CH, Steiner T, Petrof EO, et al. Frozen vs fresh fecal microbiota trans-
plantation and clinical resolution of diarrhea in patients with recurrent 
Clostridium difficile infection: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 2016; 
315:142–9.
371. Kelly CR, Khoruts A, Staley C, et al. Effect of fecal microbiota transplantation 
on recurrence in multiply recurrent Clostridium difficile infection: a randomized 
trial. Ann Intern Med 2016; 165:609–16.
372. Bakken JS, Borody T, Brandt LJ, et al; Fecal Microbiota Transplantation 
Workgroup. Treating Clostridium difficile infection with fecal microbiota trans-
plantation. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2011; 9:1044–9.
373. Rubin TA, Gessert CE, Aas J, Bakken JS. Fecal microbiome transplantation for recur-
rent Clostridium difficile infection: report on a case series. Anaerobe 2013; 19:22–6.
374. Wang S, Xu M, Wang W, et al. Systematic review: adverse events of fecal 
Microbiota transplantation. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0161174.
375. Kelly CR, Ihunnah C, Fischer M, et al. Fecal microbiota transplant for treat-
ment of Clostridium difficile infection in immunocompromised patients. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2014; 109:1065–71.
376. Schwartz M, Gluck M, Koon S. Norovirus gastroenteritis after fecal microbiota 
transplantation for treatment of Clostridium difficile infection despite asymptom-
atic donors and lack of sick contacts. Am J Gastroenterol 2013; 108:1367.
377. Weingarden AR, Hamilton MJ, Sadowsky MJ, Khoruts A. Resolution of severe 
Clostridium difficile infection following sequential fecal microbiota transplanta-
tion. J Clin Gastroenterol 2013; 47:735–7.
378. Fischer M, Sipe BW, Rogers NA, et al. Faecal microbiota transplantation plus 
selected use of vancomycin for severe-complicated Clostridium difficile infection: 
description of a protocol with high success rate. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015; 
42:470–6.
379. Khoruts A, Rank KM, Newman KM, et al. Inflammatory bowel disease affects 
the outcome of fecal microbiota transplantation for recurrent Clostridium difficile 
infection. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016; 14:1433–8.
380. De Leon LM, Watson JB, Kelly CR. Transient flare of ulcerative colitis after fecal 
microbiota transplantation for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013; 11:1036–8.
381. Fischer M, Kao D, Kelly C, et al. Fecal microbiota transplantation is safe and effi-
cacious for recurrent or refractory Clostridium difficile infection in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2016; 22:2402–9.
382. Sammons JS, Gerber JS, Tamma PD, et al. Diagnosis and management of 
Clostridium difficile infection by pediatric infectious diseases physicians. J 
Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 2014; 3:43–8.
383. Schwenk HT, Graham DA, Sharma TS, Sandora TJ. Vancomycin use for pediatric 
Clostridium difficile infection is increasing and associated with specific patient 
characteristics. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2013; 57:4307–13.
384. Gerding DN. Is there a relationship between vancomycin-resistant enterococ-
cal infection and Clostridium difficile infection? Clin Infect Dis 1997; 25(Suppl 
2):S206–10.
385. Muniyappa P, Gulati R, Mohr F, Hupertz V. Use and safety of rifaximin in children 
with inflammatory bowel disease. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2009; 49:400–4.
386. Scarpellini E, Giorgio V, Gabrielli M, et al. Rifaximin treatment for small intesti-
nal bacterial overgrowth in children with irritable bowel syndrome. Eur Rev Med 
Pharmacol Sci 2013; 17:1314–20.
387. Russell G, Kaplan J, Ferraro M, Michelow IC. Fecal bacteriotherapy for relapsing 
Clostridium difficile infection in a child: a proposed treatment protocol. Pediatrics 
2010; 126:e239–42.
388. Walia R, Garg S, Song Y, et al. Efficacy of fecal microbiota transplantation 
in 2 children with recurrent Clostridium difficile infection and its impact 
on their growth and gut microbiome. J Ped Gastroenterol Nutr 2014; 
59:565–70.
389. Polage CR, Gyorke CE, Kennedy MA, et al. Overdiagnosis of Clostridium difficile i 
nfection in the molecular test era. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175:1792–801.
390. Johnson S, Gerding DN, Louie TJ, Ruiz NM, Gorbach SL. Sustained clinical 
response as an endpoint in treatment trials of Clostridium difficile-associated diar-
rhea. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2012; 56:4043–5.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/66/7/e1/4855916 by guest on 01 June 2019
