 Archived version from NCDOCKS Institutional Repository http://libres.uncg.edu/ir/asu/ 
The Physical Sacrifice Of Thinking: Investigating The 
Relationship Between Thinking And Physical 
Activity In Everyday Life
By: Todd McElroy, David L. Dickinson, Nathan Stroh, and Christopher A. Dickinson
Abstract
Physical activity level is an important contributor to overall human health and obesity. Research has shown that humans 
possess a number of traits that influence their physical activity level including social cognition. We examined whether 
the trait of “need for cognition” was associated with daily physical activity levels. We recruited individuals who were 
high or low in need for cognition and measured their physical activity level in 30-second epochs over a 1-week period. 
The overall findings showed that low-need-for-cognition individuals were more physically active, but this difference was 
most pronounced during the 5-day work week and lessened during the weekend.
McElroy, T., et al. (2015). "The physical sacrifice of thinking: Investigating the relationship between thinking and physical 
activity in everyday life." Journal of Health Psychology 21(8): 1750-1757. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359105314565827. 
Publisher version of record available at: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/1359105314565827
 It has been clear for some time that physical 
activity level is an important contributor to human 
health (e.g. Pate et al., 1995) and is especially 
influential in overall quality of life (Bize et al., 
2007). The importance of physical activity has 
recently garnered a great deal of attention because 
of the pandemic rise in obesity (Wang et al., 
2011) and negative health effects (Kohl et al., 
2012) associated with low activity levels. Perhaps 
more striking is that many people believe they 
can overcome their lack of physical activity by 
taking a quick run through the gym. While this is 
likely helpful, its effects on overall human health 
are minimal compared to the impact of a person’s 
overall daily activity level (Levine et al., 1999). 
Maintaining a proper balance of physical activity 
to promote good health and quality of life is a 
centerpiece of the American College of Sports 
Medicine (ACSM) and has been shown to sup-
port mental well-being (Fox, 1999) and good 
mental health (Paluska and Schwenk, 2000). 
Aside from physical activity, another domain in 
which people vary is how much they like to think, 
and one of the most widely used measures of dif-
ferences in thinking propensity is “need for cog-
nition” (NFC). NFC is defined as a tendency to 
engage in and enjoy effortful cognitive endeavors 
(Cacioppo and Petty, 1982). NFC is an individual 
The physical sacrifice of thinking: 
Investigating the relationship 
between thinking and physical 
activity in everyday life
Todd McElroy1, David L Dickinson2, Nathan 
Stroh2 and Christopher A Dickinson2
Abstract
Physical activity level is an important contributor to overall human health and obesity. Research has shown 
that humans possess a number of traits that influence their physical activity level including social cognition. 
We examined whether the trait of “need for cognition” was associated with daily physical activity levels. 
We recruited individuals who were high or low in need for cognition and measured their physical activity 
level in 30-second epochs over a 1-week period. The overall findings showed that low-need-for-cognition 
individuals were more physically active, but this difference was most pronounced during the 5-day work 
week and lessened during the weekend.
Keywords
cognition, decision, obesity, physical activity, risk
1Florida Gulf Coast University, USA
2Appalachian State University, USA
Corresponding author:
Todd McElroy, Department of Psychology, Florida Gulf 
Coast University, 10501 FGCU Blvd, South Fort Myers, 
FL 33965, USA. 
Email: toddmcelroyfgcu@gmail.com
 difference measure of thinking that allows 
researchers to study thinking without placing 
demands on cognitive resources. Furthermore, 
NFC is driven by intrinsic motivation and is rela-
tively stable across a person’s lifetime (Cacioppo 
et al., 1996). Researchers have used this measure 
for over 30 years to examine the relationship 
between enjoyment of effortful cognitive endeav-
ors and other variables related to cognition 
(Cacioppo et al., 1996).
For example, research has shown that indi-
viduals high in NFC appear to perform better on 
memory tasks (Boehm, 1994; Cacioppo et al., 
1983), are generally more positive toward cog-
nitively difficult tasks (Cacioppo et al., 1996), 
spend more effort when making decisions 
(Verplanken et al., 1992) and can make better 
ones (Levin et al., 2000). Low-NFC individuals 
have been shown to rely more on peripheral 
information (Cacioppo and Petty, 1982) and 
contextual cues such as attractiveness or a per-
son’s mood (Cacioppo et al., 1996) when think-
ing and forming attitudes.
Overall, these types of studies depict a psy-
chometric tool that reveals an important force 
behind human cognition and its effects on eve-
ryday life. In the current investigation, we 
explore how NFC may be associated with daily 
physical activity levels. Although previous 
research has not specifically examined such a 
connection, related research suggests that it 
may exist.
Cognition and physical activity
The relationship between cognition and physi-
cal activity is important for health concerns, but 
it also speaks to a more fundamental question of 
how cognition interacts with the physical body 
across the human lifespan. Research looking at 
children and adolescents has shown many cog-
nitive variables that are related to physical 
activity, 
including 
preferences, 
intentions 
(Sallis et al., 2000), and self-efficacy (Strauss 
et al., 2001). There is also evidence that neuro-
anatomical and neurochemical differences are 
linked to more pervasive behavioral disorders 
such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD) (Swanson et al., 1998) and anxiety 
(Fride and Weinstock, 1988). Similarly, research 
looking at older adults has also consistently 
shown a relationship between physical activity 
and cognitive decline (Laurin et al., 2001; 
Weuve et al., 2004). Thus, the relationship 
between cognition and physical activity is an 
important question for the human experience, 
and the interaction likely extends across the 
lifespan (e.g. Heyn et al., 2004; Kramer and 
Erickson, 2007).
Research has also revealed a number of indi-
vidual difference variables that appear to be 
associated with physical activity levels. For 
example, intention to perform a physical activ-
ity (e.g. Petty et al., 2013) is associated with 
physical behavior. Individual difference varia-
bles such as approach/avoidance motivation 
(Hevey and Dolan, 2014), “Health Types” 
(McGinty et al., 2012), sensation seeking in 
adolescents (Sallis et al., 2000) and some com-
ponents of the Big Five personality traits 
(Rhodes and Smith, 2006) influence the likeli-
hood of a person performing certain types of 
physical activities. Second, there is strong evi-
dence that cognition is related to physical activ-
ity in daily life. This idea is highlighted in a 
large-scale study by Godin et al., (2010). In this 
study, Godin et al. tested the effects of several 
variables on physical activity. These variables 
were grouped by either social structure, which 
represents a person’s hierarchical status, or 
social cognition, which involves the processing 
of social information. The findings revealed 
that social structure had only a small effect on 
physical activity, whereas social cognition was 
determined to be the key factor in predicting 
physical activity level.
Thus, existing research supports the view 
that cognition and physical activity level are 
associated, yet an important question is whether 
individual preference toward cognitive endeav-
ors is associated with more or less physical 
activity. While research has not directly exam-
ined this question, our search identified studies 
that provide differing clues for how this rela-
tionship may unfold, and they provide a basis 
for our investigation.
 First, it is possible that high- and low-NFC 
individuals may be engaging in different strate-
gies that ultimately affect their physical behavior. 
Specifically, it could be that an associative– 
dissociative attentional strategy (Masters and 
Ogles, 1998) dichotomy may be at play such that 
low-NFC individuals engaged in more physical 
activity because they are better able to dissociate 
themselves from cues related to physical exertion 
(e.g. Stanley et al., 2007). In other words, this dis-
sociation would make physical activity seem 
easier to these individuals. Some support for this 
can be found in a study by Watt and Blanchard 
(1994). In this study, low-NFC individuals dem-
onstrated a greater propensity toward boredom 
and more strongly experienced its associated 
negative effect. High-NFC individuals appear to 
avoid this because of their ability to provide their 
own mental stimulation. Thus, high-NFC indi-
viduals seem more content to “entertain them-
selves” mentally, whereas low-NFC individuals 
quickly experience boredom and experience it 
more negatively.
In another study that involved a limited 
behavioral task, participants were charged with 
observing directionality of dots on a computer 
monitor. The findings showed that low-NFC 
individuals performed better individually than 
collectively, and they tended to outperform 
high-NFC persons during individual perfor-
mance (Smith et al., 2001). This suggests that 
low-NFC individuals may “loaf” more in groups 
but may be more active at the individual level.
While these studies seem to suggest that low 
NFC will be associated with more physical 
activity, another set of findings seems to sug-
gest an opposite relationship. For example, a 
study by Hess et al. (2011) looked at longitudi-
nal effects of cognitive motivation across a 
wide age range. They combined Personal Need 
for Structure (PNS) with NFC scores to create a 
composite measure of cognitive motivation. 
Their results showed that this cognitive motiva-
tion measure was positively associated with 
social activities and interactions. Thus, this 
study would seem to suggest that high-NFC 
individuals may be more physically active in 
their daily lives. This finding is consistent with 
research showing that high-NFC individuals 
have a stronger tendency to seek out informa-
tion (Verplanken et al., 1992), and they appear 
more motivated (Cacioppo et al., 1983).
Summary and predictions
Our review of the literature reveals good evi-
dence that individual differences as well as cog-
nition appear to be associated with physical 
activity. However, the direction of this relation-
ship is not clear. One set of findings seems to 
suggest a tradeoff of sorts between cognitive and 
physical activity. Because high-NFC individuals 
are more content and eager to be involved in cog-
nitive activities, the natural outcome is that they 
may be less physically active. On the other hand, 
another set of findings seems to suggest that high 
NFC may reflect an overall increase in motiva-
tion level that could lead to greater exploration of 
the environment and social activities. Thus, 
because our assessment of findings in the litera-
ture appears to present a contradictory picture, 
we designed the current investigation as a way to 
test this relationship and determine whether a 
person’s level of cognitive activity is associated 
with more or less physical activity.
Method
Participants and design
The participants in this study were 30 high- and 
30 low-NFC individuals; 45 of the participants 
were female.1 The conditions were roughly equal 
in regard to gender; 20 females were in the high-
NFC condition and 25 in the low-NFC condition. 
All participants were undergraduate students at 
Appalachian State University. The experiment 
utilized a one-way factorial design. The inde-
pendent variable in this study was NFC level 
(high or low), and the dependent variable was the 
participant’s activity levels across 1 week.
Procedure
The primary screening procedure was conducted 
through an online survey using the SONA 
 software system. This selection method was 
necessary for several reasons: the relative scar-
city of low-NFC individuals in our sample pop-
ulation, the week-long sampling period, and the 
monetary expense associated with compensat-
ing each participant. In this initial session, par-
ticipants were informed about the nature of the 
study, including the potential for participation in 
the second stage. They were then asked to com-
plete the NFC scale (Cacioppo et al., 1984). 
After completing the NFC scale, participants 
were awarded credit for their participation in 
this initial screening stage.
Next, we established criteria for discerning 
individuals who were high or low in NFC. 
Relying on our initial NFC screening as a sample 
population, we used the upper and lower 10 per-
cent of our distribution as the criteria for deter-
mining our maximum and minimum scores for 
categorizing high and low NFC. Participants who 
were eligible to take part in the study were con-
tacted via recruitment email; those who responded 
affirmatively were scheduled for an initial lab 
meeting. As a result of this recruitment classifica-
tion method, high-NFC participants had NFC 
scores in the range of (4–62), whereas the range 
for low-NFC participants was (−11 to −39).
The observation weeks were arranged ahead 
of time so that they occurred during the semester 
and did not include holidays. Participants were 
contacted via email to set up the initial lab meet-
ing. Prior to the initial lab meeting, actigraphy 
devices (described below) were configured and 
assigned to each participant. During the initial 
lab meeting, participants were informed about 
the study and how to wear the device. Participants 
were instructed to carry out their typical daily 
routines. They were then assigned a follow-up 
lab meeting time. The follow-up lab meeting 
took place approximately 1 week later; schedul-
ing was based on participants’ availability. We 
chose a 1-week observational period because 
prior research has shown this to be the desirable 
time period for assessing variability in activity 
patterns (Matthews et al., 2002).
In the final lab meeting, participants returned 
their actigraphy devices, and they were compen-
sated US$10.00 each for participation and return 
of the device. They were given an overview of 
the nature of the study and also offered an output 
of their daily activity level data, which we prom-
ised to send them after the study concluded, and 
the data were scored. At the end of the final lab 
meeting, participants were asked several sets of 
questions unrelated to this study. Data from the 
actigraphy devices were downloaded using the 
manufacturer’s software. Time periods when the 
device was removed, which were rare, were 
cleared from the dataset to avoid miscounting 
them as periods of zero activity. Sleep episodes 
were also removed from the data. The 1-week 
period of measurement yielded ~20,000 activity 
measurements per participant.
Materials
To assess participants’ level of NFC, we used 
the NFC scale (Cacioppo et al., 1984). This 
scale consists of 18 items; half have positive 
orientations and half contain negative orienta-
tions. Participants indicated how much they 
agreed or disagreed with each item on a 9-point 
scale ranging from very strong disagreement 
(−4) to very strong agreement (+4). Total scores 
on this scale range from 72 to −72.
To measure participants’ activity levels, we 
used an actigraphy device. The device is an 
accelerometer worn on the non-dominant wrist 
as a common means for measuring gross motor 
activity (Ancoli-Israel et al., 2003). This device 
resembles a common wrist watch and can be 
conveniently worn by participants. Measurement 
is made by internal accelerometers with sensi-
tivity of .05 g-force. This sensitivity generates 
“activity counts” of varying strength and fre-
quency during each time epoch used for data 
collection. We set the data sampling for the 
device to occur at epoch lengths of 30 seconds. 
The device is impact resistant, waterproof to 
1-m depth for 30 minutes, and can be worn 
24 hours a day with few exceptions.
Results
After completion of the study, daily activity 
counts were obtained by averaging the 30-second 
 epoch readings across all waking hours for each 
individual participant. There was a malfunction 
with the actigraphy for 1 day of a low-NFC par-
ticipant’s data, and so that day was not obtainable 
and excluded from the analysis. With this excep-
tion, the daily activity counts for each participant 
were combined within each of the 7 days; subse-
quent analyses relied on the entire daily activity 
counts within each individual day.
Because the one-way analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) F-test and t-test produce statistically 
identical outcomes, we relied on the ANOVA 
because the analysis yields more variance infor-
mation. First, to test whether a person’s level of 
NFC was associated with his or her physical 
activity levels, we performed an ANOVA with 
NFC level as our independent variable and over-
all daily activity level as our dependent variable. 
The results from this analysis revealed that think-
ing does seem to be associated with less physical 
activity. As shown in Figure 1, the difference 
between high- and low-NFC individuals in over-
all weekly physical activity level was highly sig-
nificant (F(1, 58) = 7.4, p < .009, η2 = .113) such 
that high-NFC individuals were far less active 
overall than low-NFC participants.
Prior research directed toward measuring 
daily differences in physical activity levels has 
shown that weekday activity levels (Monday–
Friday) differ substantially from weekend lev-
els (Matthews et al., 2002). To test whether this 
weekend effect might be present in this study, 
we first performed an analysis of the weekday 
activity levels comparing high- and low-NFC 
individuals for Monday–Friday activity levels 
(see Figure 1), and, as suspected, they differed 
greatly across the 5-day typical work week 
(F(1, 58) = 9.94, p < .003, η2 = .146). Next, we 
tested whether this effect remained for the 
weekend days. Collapsing across the weekend 
days, we see that activity levels for high- and 
low-NFC individuals did not differ significantly 
(F(1, 58) = 2.53, p < .117, η2 = .042) on the 
weekend. The results revealed that this lack of a 
statistical difference in activity levels is true for 
Saturday data (F(1, 58) = 2.4, p < .127, η2 = .04) 
and even more so for Sunday data (F(1,58) = .21, 
p > .65, η2 = .004).2
Figure 1. Average daily physical activity level for high-NFC individuals and low-NFC individuals as 
measured in 30-second epochs and based on .05 
g-force sensitivity. These data include the average daily 
physical activity level for each group across the 1-week period. Error bars indicate the standard error of 
the mean.
 Discussion
In this study, we tested whether people who pre-
fer to think more will be less physically active 
in their daily lives than people who do not pre-
fer to think. Our findings build upon prior 
research (e.g. Godin et al., 2010) and provide 
support for our hypothesis by revealing robust 
physical activity level differences during the 
5-day work week and attenuated differences 
over the weekend. Furthermore, it is important 
to note that these differences were found using 
a robust measure of physical activity over a 
1-week period. This type of objective measure 
has been called for to help validate other types 
of self-report measures (see Godin et al., 2010). 
However, the sampling method used in our 
study created potential limitations that should 
be noted.
First, it is important to note that part of the 
“weekend effect” in our study may be due to 
our sample population, which consisted of col-
lege students. Although college students are a 
standard participant pool in the vast majority of 
experimental psychology studies, their behav-
ior and habits may be more indicative of young 
adult behavior than adult behavior in general. It 
is reasonable to assume that this “weekend 
effect” may change as people progress through 
different life stages, which is a question that 
future researchers may want to consider. A sim-
ilar limitation with our methodology was that 
the participants were all involved in course-
work, a time in their lives that should revolve 
around cognitively focused events. While this 
was true for both high- and low-NFC partici-
pants, it may limit the external validity of this 
study to cognitively oriented life situations. In 
conclusion, it seems noteworthy to point out 
that if this association between physical activ-
ity and cognition leads to health issues such as 
obesity, it may be prudent for more thoughtful 
individuals to consider lifestyle changes as 
countermeasures to the negative health out-
comes associated with their lower activity lev-
els. For example, research has shown that 
simply being active in mundane behaviors such 
as moving about, fidgeting, or even walking to 
the bathroom increases non-exercise activity 
thermogenesis (NEAT). These types of activi-
ties have been shown to expend excess energy 
the body has taken in, which will help avoid fat 
storage and promote leanness (Levine et al., 
1999). An example of a more dramatic counter-
measure would be to replace one’s workstation 
with a walking treadmill desk. These have been 
shown to increase energy expenditure of 
100 kcal/hour in the neighborhood, which can 
result in substantial benefits (Levine and 
Miller, 2007). Ultimately, an important factor 
that may help more thoughtful individuals 
combat their lower average activity levels is 
awareness. Awareness of their tendency to be 
less active, coupled with an awareness of the 
cost associated with inactivity, more thoughtful 
individuals may then choose to become more 
active throughout the day.
Acknowledgements
Special thanks to Sarah Pollard for her devoted assis-
tance with the early data gathering in the project. The 
data set of daily averages as well as the entire set of 
daily activity measurements is available from the 
first author.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest 
with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
 
publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following 
financial support for the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article: Partial support for this 
research was provided by the National Science 
Foundation (NSF Grant number: 1229067) and the 
Division of Research and Sponsored Programs, 
Appalachian State University. Some subject pay-
ments were funded by a grant from the Office of 
Student Research, Appalachian State University.
Notes
1.
The study was approved by the University’s
Institutional Review Board (IRB No. 11-0067),
which is governed by the Office of Research
Protections. Written consent was obtained from
all participants.
 2.
We performed an additional analysis by collaps-
ing weekdays and weekends into two separate
variables. We then performed a repeated meas-
ures analysis with these two new variables as a
within factor and NFC level as a between factor. 
This approach to treat our data as a mixed design 
yielded a marginally significant main effect for
NFC; F(1, 58) = 3.59, p < .07, a non-significant 
main effect for the weekday/weekend variable;
F < 1 and a non-significant interaction F < 1.
References
Ancoli-Israel S, Cole R, Alessi C, et al. (2003) The 
role of actigraphy in the study of sleep and cir-
cadian rhythms. American Academy of Sleep 
Medicine Review Paper. Sleep 26: 342–392.
Bize R, Johnson JA and Plotnikoff RC (2007) 
Physical activity level and health related quality 
of life in the general adult population: A system-
atic review. Preventive Medicine 45: 401–415.
Boehm LE (1994) The validity effect: A search for 
mediating variables. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin 20: 285–293.
Cacioppo JT and Petty RE (1982) The need for 
cognition. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology 42(1): 116–131.
Cacioppo JT, Petty RE and Kao CF (1984) The effi-
cient assessment of need for cognition. Journal 
of Personality Assessment 48(3): 306–307.
Cacioppo JT, Petty RE and Morris KJ (1983) Effects 
of need for cognition on message evaluation, 
recall, and persuasion. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 45: 805–818.
Cacioppo JT, Petty RE, Feinstein JA, et al. (1996) 
Dispositional differences in cognitive motiva-
tion: The life and times of individuals vary-
ing in NFC. Psychological Bulletin 119(2): 
197–253.
Fox KR (1999) The influence of physical activity on 
mental well-being. Public Health Nutrition 2: 
411–418.
Fride E and Weinstock M (1988). Prenatal stress 
increases anxiety related behavior and alters 
cerebral lateralization of dopamine activity. Life 
Science 42: 1059–1065.
Godin G, Sheeran P, Conner M, et al. (2010) Social 
structure, social cognition, and physical activ-
ity: A test of four models. British Journal of 
Health Psychology 15: 79–95.
Hess TM, Emery L and Neupert SD (2011) 
Longitudinal relationships between resources, 
motivation, and functioning. The Journals of 
Gerontology, Series B: Psychological Sciences 
and Social Sciences 67: 299–308.
Hevey D and Dolan M (2014) Approach/avoidance 
motivation, message framing and skin cancer 
prevention: A test of the congruency hypothesis. 
Journal of Health Psychology 19: 1003–1012.
Heyn P, Abreu BC and Ottenbacher KJ (2004) The 
effects of exercise training on elderly persons 
with cognitive impairment and dementia: A 
meta-analysis. Archives of Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation 85: 1694–1704.
Kohl HW, Craig CL, Lambert EV, et al. (2012) The 
pandemic of physical inactivity: Global action 
for public health. The Lancet 380: 294–305.
Kramer AF and Erickson KI (2007) Capitalizing on 
cortical plasticity: Influence of physical activ-
ity on cognition and brain function. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 11: 342–348.
Laurin D, Verreault R, Lindsay J, et al. (2001) 
Physical activity and risk of cognitive impair-
ment and dementia in elderly persons. Archives 
of Neurology 58: 498–504.
Levin IP, Huneke ME and Jasper JD (2000) 
Information processing at successive stages of 
decision making: Need for cognition and inclu-
sion-exclusion effects. Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes 82: 171–193.
Levine JA, Eberhardt NL and Jensen MD (1999) 
Role of nonexercise activity thermogenesis in 
resistance to fat gain in humans. Science 283: 
212–214.
Levine JA and Miller JM (2007) The energy expend-
iture of using a “walk-and-work” desk for office 
workers with obesity. British Journal of Sports 
Medicine 41: 558–561.
McGinty H, Dark-Freudeman A and West RL (2012) 
Health hopes and fears for the future in relation 
to health behavior and current health status. 
Journal of Health Psychology 18: 1509–1518.
Masters KS and Ogles BM (1998) Associative and 
dissociative cognitive strategies in exercise and 
running: 20 years later, what do we know? Sport 
Psychologist 12: 253–270.
Matthews CE, Ainsworth BE, Thompson RW, et al. 
(2002) Sources of variance in daily physical 
activity levels as measured by an accelerometer. 
Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 
34: 1376–1381.
Paluska SA and Schwenk TL (2000) Physical activ-
ity and mental health: Current concepts. Sports 
Medicine 29: 167–180.
 Pate RR, Pratt M, Blair SN, et al. (1995) Physical 
activity and public health: A recommenda-
tion from the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention and the American College of Sports 
Medicine. JAMA: The Journal of the American 
Medical Association 273: 402–407.
Petty KN, Knee CR and Joseph AK (2013) Sunscreen 
use among recreational cyclists: How intentions 
predict reported behavior. Journal of Health 
Psychology 18(3): 439–447.
Rhodes RE and Smith NEI (2006) Personality cor-
relates of physical activity: A review and meta-
analysis. British Journal of Sports Medicine 40: 
958–965.
Sallis J, Prochaska JJ and Taylor WC (2000) A 
review of correlates of physical activity of chil-
dren and adolescents. Medicine and Science in 
Sports and Exercise 32: 963–975.
Smith BN, Kerr NA, Markus MJ, et al. (2001) 
Individual differences in social loafing: Need 
for cognition as a motivator in collective perfor-
mance. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, & 
Practice 5: 150–158.
Stanley C, Pargman D and Tenenbaum G (2007) 
The effect of attentional coping strategies on 
perceived exertion in a cycling task. Journal of 
Applied Sport Psychology 19: 352–363.
Strauss RS, Rodzilsky D, Burack G, et al. (2001) 
Psychosocial correlates of physical activity 
in healthy children. Archives of Pediatrics & 
Adolescent Medicine 155: 897–902.
Swanson J, Castellanos FX, Murias M, et al. (1998) 
Cognitive neuroscience of attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder and hyperkinetic disorder. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 8: 263–271.
Verplanken B, Hazenberg PT and Palenéwen GR 
(1992) Need for cognition and external infor-
mation search effort. Journal of Research in 
Personality 26: 128–136.
Wang YC, McPherson K, Marsh T, et al. (2011) 
Health and economic burden of the projected 
obesity trends in the USA and the UK. Lancet 
378: 815–825.
Watt JD and Blanchard MJ (1994) Boredom prone-
ness and the need for cognition. Journal of 
Research in Personality 28: 44–51.
Weuve J, Kang JH, Manson JE, et al. (2004) Physical 
activity including walking and cognitive 
function in older women. The Journal of the 
American Medical Association 292: 1454–1461.
